Title: Texts and Studies: Contributions to Biblical and Patristic Literature, Vol. I, No. 1: The Apology of Aristides on behalf of the Christians, from a Syriac MS. preserved on Mount Sinai (second edition)
Creator: Aristides of Athens (2nd century); J. Rendel Harris (editor and translator of the Syriac); J. Armitage Robinson (series editor, with the appended Greek text and notes)
Publisher: Cambridge: at the University Press, 1893 (title page 'SECOND EDITION ... CAMBRIDGE AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 1893'; the OCR gives the year as '18938'); first edition 1891
Publication Date: 1893
Rights: Public Domain (pre-1930 publication); the item record's possible-copyright-status is NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT
Source: Internet Archive item apologyofaristid00arisrich, full-text OCR file apologyofaristid00arisrich_djvu.txt, fetched directly by the library/source-research thread (Claude), 2026-09-29. The item record marks possible-copyright-status NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT (contributor University of California Libraries; the copy is from the library of Konrad Burdach). Title page read in the OCR: 'TEXTS AND STUDIES ... VOL. I. No. 1. THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES SECOND EDITION CAMBRIDGE AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 1893 ... THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES ON BEHALF OF THE CHRISTIANS FROM A SYRIAC MS. PRESERVED ON MOUNT SINAI EDITED WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND TRANSLATION BY J. RENDEL HARRIS'. (Three other archive.org items of the same title, apologyaristide00harrgoog, apologyaristide01harrgoog and apologyaristide00robigoog, are the Google scans of the same book and were not checked further.)
Provenance note: Header prepended by the library thread; the OCR text follows unchanged, apart from this header. Rights basis: the 1893 title-page date clears this registry's public-domain-by-date rule; the host's NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT tag agrees. OCR artifacts, running heads, line numbers and apparatus left as found; nothing was corrected, re-spaced or retyped. Measured on the OCR before vendoring: 0 Greek-script characters.
Content note: This is the edition in which the Syriac Aristides was first published with a translation, and it carries Robinson's Greek text of the Apology (from the Barlaam and Josaphat romance) as an appendix. Measured: zero Syriac-script characters in the OCR (the Syriac is lost from the text layer) and zero Greek-script characters (the Greek is rendered as Latin-letter approximations such as 'kat dia todto hevyer'). So this file gives Harris's English translation and English scholarship, plus a degraded Greek layer. It is NOT a usable Syriac or Greek witness and the English is a nineteenth-century translation, so treat the file as SECOND WITNESS ONLY: a route to the edition's own apparatus and its collation of the Syriac against the Greek.

---




























=S>= 


1 || 
|| -FROM-THE-LIBRARY-OF - | 
|| “KONRAD-BURDACH- 









































Wat 


CP 
Per or) ie ee io 


AER 


= See 


















































i 
ar 


oR: - , 
ite ‘* 


aie 





Digitized 'by the Internet Archive 
in 2007 with funding from - 
Microsoft Corporation — 


htto://www.archive.org/details/apologyofaristid0Oarisrich 





Sin arenecas rralia 
Ra BALCH 
he. ctasdn : 


COD. SINAIT. SYR. XVI. 


Aa 19— tA 22 nostrae editionis 


PeeTS AND STUDIES 


CONTRIBUTIONS TO 
BIBLICAL AND PATRISTIC LITERATURE 


EDITED BY 


J. ARMITAGE ROBINSON B.D. 


FELLOW OF CHRIST’S COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE 


VOL. I. 


No. 1. THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES 


SECOND EDITION 


CAMBRIDGE 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
18938 


London: C. J. CLAY anp SONS, 
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, 
AVE MARIA LANE. 





Cambritge: DEIGHTON, BELL AND CO. 
Leipsig: F. A. BROCKHAUS. 
ew Work: MACMILLAN AND CO. 


THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES 


ON BEHALF OF THE CHRISTIANS 


FROM A SYRIAC MS. PRESERVED ON MOUNT SINAI 


EDITED 


WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND TRANSLATION BY 


J. RENDEL HARRIS M.A. 


FELLOW OF CLARE COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE 
AND UNIVERSITY LECTURER IN PALAEOGRAPHY 


WITH AN APPENDIX 
CONTAINING THE MAIN PORTION OF 


THE ORIGINAL GREEK TEXT 


BY 


J. ARMITAGE ROBINSON B.D. 


FELLOW AND ASSISTANT TUTOR OF CHRIST’S COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE 


SECOND EDITION 


CAMBRIDGE 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
1893 


[All Rights reserved] 


Cambridge: 
PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A. AND SONS, 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 


BURDACH 


PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION. 


HE first part of this tract contains the Syriac text of the lost 
Apology of Aristides, accompanied by such comments and 
elucidations as I have been able to give to the subject. It is my 
first venture in Syriac, and I am thankful to my learned friends 
who have from time to time assisted me with suggestions and 
criticisms for the elimination of some of the more glaring errors. 
Amongst them I may mention especially Professor Bensly, of 
Cambridge, and Professor Isaac A. Hall, of New York. In the 
attempt to give the Armenian fragments of the Apology, in such 
a form as may make them accessible for critical use, I have had 
the valuable aid of Mr Conybeare, of Oxford, who placed at my 
disposal the results of his own work at Edschmiazin. 

When the pages were almost through the printer’s hands, my 
friend Mr J. A. Robinson, of. Christ’s College, by one of those 
happy accidents, as we call them, upon which progress depends, 
discovered that substantially the whole of the Greek text was 
extant, and had been incorporated in that charming half-Greek 
and half-Oriental story, the Lives of Barlaam and Joasaph. Of 
course this means that, for the greater part of the Apology of 
Aristides, we have copies and versions in good number (Greek, 
Latin, Ethiopic, Arabic, Old French, etc.). This opens quite a new 
field before the student of Christian Apologetics. Need I say how 
gladly I make way for him in the Appendix, which will really 
be the text itself; and that I say in the language of the Acts 
of St Perpetua: “Hic ordinem totum Apologiae iam hinc ipse 
narrabit...manu sua et suo sensu.” 


J. RENDEL HARRIS, 


PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION. 


HE First Edition of the Apology of Aristides having been 
exhausted with unexpected rapidity, it has seemed better 

to reprint the book as it stands, rather than to attempt to recast 
it before there has been a full opportunity for such substantial 
criticism as will, it is to be hoped, throw new light upon the 
subject. Accordingly the Second Edition is a reprint of the First 
with a few verbal corrections. The only change to which atten- 
tion need be called is the substitution of a fresh literal translation 
of a few lines of the Armenian Version cited on p. 78. This I 
have introduced with a view of shewing how much more closely 
the Armenian follows the Greek at certain points than might be 
supposed when it is read only through the medium of translations 
made before the Greek had been discovered. No future edition of 
the Apology can be considered complete which does not contain the 
text of the Armenian fragment with a closely literal translation. 


J. A. R. 


Curist’s CoLLEGE, 
August, 1892. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION 
Description of the Syriac MS. 
Aristides and Eusebius 
Celsus and Aristides : 
The Symbol of the Faith in the time of » Aristides 
The Armenian Fragment of the Apology 
An additional Armenian Fragment of Aristides 
TRANSLATION OF THE SYRIAC -VERSION 
NOTES ON THE SYRIAC VERSION 


APPENDIX : 
The original Greek of the ia of Aristides 
The Greek text of ‘Barlaam and Josaphat’ . 
The bearing of the Apology on the Canon 
The Apology and the Didaché 
The Apology and the Preaching of Peter 
The Greek text edited from three MSS. 
Index of Greek words 
Index of subject matter . 


THE SYRIAC TEXT OF THE APOLOGY 


30-51 
52-64 
65-118 
67 

80 

82 

84 

86 
100 
113 
117 


WA— 


NOTE. 


WitH the aid of the photographs taken by Prof. Harris the 
Syriac text has been carefully revised by Prof. Bensly, who has 
taken special pains with the reproduction of the punctuation of 
the MS. There seems occasionally to be some deviation from the 
ordinary system in the use of the diacritical points: but as it is 
impossible to tell from the photographs to what date the punc- 
tuation belongs, it has seemed better to reproduce it without 
attempting to mend it. 

The English translation was in the first instance made by 
Prof. Harris: but the discovery of the Greek made it necessary 
that it should undergo a complete revision, in order that scholars 
who do not read Syriac might be able to form a better estimate of 
the relation of the Syriac to the Greek, than could be given by 
a translation made without any reference to the latter. Moreover 
in several places the Greek cast new light upon the Syriac where 
it was obscure before. The task of revision would have been 
entirely beyond my power, but for the kind patience of Prof. 
Bensly, who allowed me to read the whole piece through with 
him. At his suggestion too I have added, within brackets, a few 
notes in addition to those made by Prof. Harris. 

The Facsimile of a page of the Syriac MS. has been made 
from one of Prof. Harris’s photographs. It corresponds with 
as 19— ya 22 of this edition. | 


J. A. R. 


INTRODUCTION. 


THE present volume contains one of the earliest of the 
Apologies made to the Roman Emperors on behalf of the 
Christians, that, namely, which was said to have been presented 
to the Emperor Hadrian by an Athenian philosopher of the 
name of Aristides. Our information concerning this Apology has 
hitherto been of the scantiest kind, depending chiefly upon certain 
allusions of Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History and in his’ 
Chronicon; as Eusebius did not, however, preserve any extracts 
from the book and presents only a most obscure figure in a 
philosopher’s garb as its author, while subsequent writers have 
added little or nothing to what they found in Eusebius, it must 
be admitted that our ideas as to the character and scope of one 
of the earliest apologetic treatises on Christianity were about as 
vague as it was possible for them to be. It is true that there was 
a suspicion abroad which came from Jerome that the lost work 
of Aristides had been imitated by Justin in his Apology, and 
Jerome had also ventured the opinion that the Apology was 
woven out of materials derived from the philosophers: but it 
was almost impossible to put any faith in Jerome’s statements, 
which are usually mere editorial expansions and colourings of 
what he found in the pages of Eusebius. Not that there was any 
d priort improbability in the opinion that one Christian Apologist 
had imitated another, for almost all the Apologies that are known 
to us are painfully alike, and it would not be difficult to maintain 
of any two of them selected at random that one of them had 
borrowed from or imitated the other. The difficulty lay in the 
want of literary faith in statements made by Jerome; but even if 


H, A. i 


2 THE APOLOGY 


this confidence had not been wanting, we should not have been 
very much the wiser. 

In the case of a companion Apology to that of Aristides, 
we were more happily placed for forming an opinion; since 
Eusebius not only describes an Apology presented to the Emperor 
Hadrian by a certain Quadratus, at the time of one of the imperial 
visits to Athens, but gives us also some striking and powerful 
sentences, just enough to convince one that the document was 
marked by argumentative force and spiritual insight, and could 
not have been a mere conventional tirade against paganism. 
Until recent times, then, all that could be said on the subject 
of these lost Apologies was that we had Eusebian tradition for 
their existence, Eusebian authority for their date, and a Eusebian 
extract from one of them as a specimen of sub-apostolic defence, 
a mere brick from a vanished house. 

The mist, however, lifted some time ago, when the learned 
Armenians of the Lazarist monastery at Venice added to the 
obligations under which they have so often laid the scholarly and 
Christian world, by publishing an Armenian translation of the 
opening chapters of the lost Apology of Aristides; and although 
their document was received in some quarters’ with incredulity, 
it will be seen, by what we have presently to bring forward, that 
the fragment which they printed was rightly entitled, and that 
they had at least made the way for a satisfactory conception of - 


1 Especially by M. Renan, who in his Origines de Christianisme, vol. v1. p. Vi., 
says: ‘‘Le présent volume était imprimé quand j’ai eu connaissance d’une 
publication des mékhitaristes de Venise contenant en Arménien, avec traduction 
Latine, deux morceaux, dont l’un serait l’Apologie adressée par Aristide 4 Adrien. 
L’authenticité de cette piéce ne soutient pas examen. C’est une composition 
plate, qui répondrait bien mal 4 ce que Eusébe et S. Jérome disent du talent 
de V’auteur et surtout 4 cette particularité que l’ouvrage était contextum philoso- 
phorum sententiis. L’écrit Arménien ne présente pas une seule citation d’auteur 
profane. La théologie qu’on y trouve, en ce qui concerne la Trinité, l’incarnation, 
la qualité de mére de Dieu attribuée 4 Marie, est postérieure au tv® siécle. 
L’érudition historique ou plutdt mythologique est aussi bien indigne d’un écrivain 
du 1° siécle. Le second ‘sermon’ publié par les mékhitaristes a encore moins 
de droit 4 étre attribué au philosophe Chrétien d’Athénes: le manuscrit porte 
Aristaeus: ¢’est une homélie insignificable sur le bon larron.” 

M. Renan was rightly opposed in this sweeping negation of authenticity by 
Doulcet, who pointed out relations between Aristides and the Timaeus as a 
justification of the philosophical character of the work. Unfortunately Doulcet 


OF ARISTIDES. 3 


the dogmatics which underlay the apologetics. This was a great 
gain. Moreover their published fragment shewed traces of an 
interesting originality of method in the classification of the 
religious beliefs of the time. 

Our contribution to the subject consists of a Syriac translation 
of the whole, or substantially the whole, of the missing Apology. 
We were so happy as to discover this text in a volume of Syriac 
extracts preserved in the library of the convent of St Catharine, 
upon Mount Sinai, during a delightful visit which we paid to 
those majestic solitudes and silences in the spring of 1889. Our 
copy has suffered somewhat in the course of time from suc- 
cessive transcriptions, and needs occasionally the hand of the 
critical corrector. The language and thought of the writer are, 
however, so simple and straightforward that the limits of error are 
much narrower than they would be in a document where the struc- 
ture was more highly complicated; the unintelligible sentences 
which accumulate in a translation so much more rapidly than 
in the copying of an original document, are almost entirely 
absent. In fact the writer is more of a child than a philosopher, 
a child well-trained in creed and well-practised in ethics, rather 
than either a dogmatist defending a new system or an iconoclast 
destroying an old one: but this simplicity of treatment, so far 
from being a weakness, adds often greatly to the natural im- 
pressiveness of the subject and gives the work a place by the 
side of the best Christian writing of his age. But, before going 
further, it will be best to describe a little more closely the volume 
from which our text is taken. 


Description of the MS. 


The MS. from which we have copied is numbered 16 amongst 
the Syriac MSS. of the Sinaitic convent. The MS. may be 


went too far, by trying to identify Aristides with the author of the Epistle to 
Diognetus. 

Harnack (Theol. LZ. 1879, no. 16, col. 375 f.) was very favourable to the 
genuineness of the fragment, and made some excellent points in its defence. 

M. Renan will now have the opportunity of verifying for himself that the term 
Theotokos, to which he objected so strongly as savouring of the fourth century, is 
not in the Syriac text. | 


1—2 


4 THE APOLOGY 


referred to the 7th century, and is written in two columns to 
the page. The book is made up of a number of separate treatises 
and extracts, almost all of which are ethical in character. Thus 
on fol. 1 6 we have . 


mals So sI5 Whaorcs Xizax Ana Wduazh 


rts tac\ 
or, the history of the Lives of the Fathers, translated from Greek 
into Syriac. 
On fol. 2 b 


hiss asalox am plssds Aw 


Apparently we have here the Lwber Paradisi or Lives of 
the Holy Fathers of the Desert, of which many copies exist 
in Gréek, though it may be doubted whether there is any critical 
edition. Some portions of this Syriac version were published at 
Upsala by Tullberg and his disciples, in 1851, from MSS. in the 
Vatican and in the British Museum. In our MS. the current 
heading of the pages is 

MaTed res tased edhusrh 
or, History of the Egyptian Hermits. 
After fol. 86 b two leaves appear to have been cut away. 
Fol. 87 b bears the heading 


rs Rasrs walas Mw IONX 


Of the holy Nilus the Solitary. 
At the foot of fol. 93 a begins the Apology of Aristides. 
On fol. 105 a begins 


i zd WANT aM La wastwlaaa le 
massziso> 


or, A discourse of Plutarch on the subject of a man’s being 
assisted by his enemy. 


At the foot of fol. 112 a 
wai laa mlax ezitaxn Ans eta fo al 


or, A second discourse of the same Plutarch epi adoxnoeas. 
Apparently this is the tract published by Lagarde in his Ana- 
lecta, pp. 177—186, and translated by Gildemeister and Biicheler. 


or 


OF ARISTIDES. 


On fol. 1216 watA dua Stas 
A discourse of Pythagoras, 
probably the same as is published in Lagarde’s Analecta, pp. 195 
—201. 
On fol. 126a wdsays Ana waast\iaan Stam 


A discourse of Plutarch, on Anger, for which see Lagarde, 
Analecta Syriaca, pp. 186—195. 
On fol. 132 b 


Asosx wha wis AS wassals Kimem sah 
azaet As cota dawn 
A discourse of Lucius (Lucianus), that we should not receive 
slander against our friends: epi Tod un padiws miaTtevewv SiaBor7g. 
Apparently the same as is given in Sachau, Jnedita, pp. 1—16. 
On fol. 1404 ) 
wzoas An Saamlial paws Mts sah 
A discourse made by a philosopher, De Anima: 
probably the same as is given in Sachau, Jnedita, as Philosophorum 


de anima sententiae. 
On fol. 143 4 


WAIAKGUA dust Whaawla Sachs waalan 


or, the Counsel of Theano, a female philosopher of the school 
of Pythagoras: see Sachau, Lnedita, pp. 7T0—75, as Theano: 
Sententiae’. 
On fol. 1450 a collection of Sayings of the Philosophers, 
beginning with 
Tow sttw 2 alla, (Plato the Wise said). 
On fol. 151 6 


etal maxx dimasr warad Mam Ktown 
ical, aat\ anh hal oq’ pide 


A first discourse in explanation of Ecclesiastes, made by Mar 
John the Solitary for the blessed Theognis. See Wright’s Cat. of 
the Syr. MSS. in the Brit. Mus. p. 996. 


1 See Wright’s Catalogue, p. 1160. The general contents of this MS. (Brit, 
Mus. 987) should be compared with those of the MS. here described: it contains 
e.g. the Apology of Melito and the Hypomnemata of Ambrose, and various 
Philosophical treatises. 


6 THE APOLOGY 


And from fol. 214a@ onward the volume is occupied with 
translations from the Homilies of Chrysostom on Matthew. 

The above description will shew something of the value of the 
MS. It will also suggest that it was the ethical character of the 
Apology of Aristides that secured its incorporation with the 
volume. Let us now pass on to discuss the effect which this 
recovered document has upon our estimate of the Eusebian 
statements concerning the earliest Church Apologists. 


Aristides and Eusebius. 


According to the Chronicon of Eusebius we have the following 
date for the Apologies of Quadratus and Aristides : 


1, The Armenian version of the Chronicon gives under the 
year 124 A.D. as follows: 


Ol. A. Abr. Imp. Rom. 
“226 82140 8° q Adrianus Eleusinarum rerum gnarus 
fuit multaque (dona) Atheniensium 
largitus est. 


* Romanorum ecclesiae episcopatum 
excepit septimus Telesphorus an- 
nis XL 


Codratus apostolorum auditor et Aristides nostri dogmatis 
(nostrae rei) philosophus Atheniensis Adriano supplicationes 
dedere apologeticas (apologiae, responsionis) ob mandatum. 
Acceperat tamen et a Serennio (s. Serenno) splendido praeside 
(iudice) scriptum de Christianis, quod nempe iniquum sit occidere 
eos solo rumore sine inquisitione, neque ulla accusatione. Scribit 
Armonicus Fundius (Phundius) proconsuli Asianorum ut sine ullo 
damno et incusatione non damnarentur; et exemplar edicti eius 
hucusque circumfertur. 

One of the Armenian MSS. (Cod. N) transfers this notice 
about the Apologists to the following year, and it is believed 
that this represents more exactly the time of Hadrian’s first 
visit to Athens (125—126 A.D.). With this agrees the dating 
of the Latin version of Jerome. We may say then that it is 
the intention of Eusebius to refer the presentation of both these 


OF ARISTIDES. 7 


Apologies to the time when Hadrian was spending his first winter 
in Athens; and to make them the reason for the Imperial rescript 
to Minucius Fundanus which we find attached to the first Apology 
of Justin Martyr. And since Minucius Fundanus and his pre- 
decessor Granianus were consuls suffect in the years 106 and 
107, it is not unreasonable to suppose that they held the Asian 
pro-consulate in the years A.D. 123 and 124, or 124 and 125. If 
then Aristides and Quadratus presented apologies to Hadrian, it is 
reasonable to connect these Apologies with his first Athenian 
winter and not with the second (A.D. 129—130). 

“But here we begin to meet with difficulties; for, in the first 
place, much doubt has been thrown on the genuineness of the 
rescript of the emperor to Minucius Fundanus; in the second 
place there is a suspicious resemblance between Quadratus the 
Apologist and another Quadratus who was bishop of Athens in the 
reign of Antoninus Pius, succeeding to Publius whom Jerome 
affrms to have been martyred; and in the third place our 
newly-recovered document cannot by any possibility be referred 
to the period suggested by Eusebius, and there is only the barest 
possibility of its having been presented to the Emperor Hadrian 
at all. Let us examine this last point carefully, in order to answer, 
as far as our means will permit, the question as to the time of 
presentation of the Apology of Aristides and the person or persons 
to whom it was addressed. 

The Armenian fragment is headed as follows: 


To the Emperor Hadrian Caesar, from Aristides, philosopher 
of Athens. 


There is nothing, at first sight, to lead us to believe that this 
is the original heading; such a summary merely reflects the 
Kusebian tradition and might be immediately derived from it. 

When we turn to the Syriac Version, we find a somewhat 
similar preface, to the following effect. 


Apology made by Aristides the Philosopher before Hadrianus 
the King, concerning the worship of Almighty God. 


But this, which seems to be a mere literary heading, proper, 
shall we say, for one out of a collection of apologies, is immediately 


8 THE APOLOGY 


followed by another introduction which cannot be anything else 
than a part of the primitive apology. It runs as follows: 


...Caesar Titus Hadrianus Antoninus, Worshipful and Clement, 
from Marcianus Aristides, philosopher of Athens. 


The additional information which we derive from this sentence 
is a sufficient guarantee of its genuineness; we have the first 
name of the philosopher given, as Marcianus; and we have the 
name of the emperor addressed given at length. To our astonish- 
ment this is not Hadrian, but his successor Antoninus Pius, who 
bears the name of Hadrian by adoption from Publius Aelius 
Hadrianus. Unless therefore we can shew that there is an error 
or a deficiency in the opening sentence of the Apology we shall 
be obliged to refer it to the time of the emperor Antoninus Pius, 
and to say that Eusebius has made a mistake in reading the title 
of the Apology, or has followed some one who had made the 
mistake before him. And it seems tolerably clear that if an 
error exist at all in such a precise statement as ours, it must be 
of the nature of an omission. Let us see what can be urged in 
favour of this theory. We will imagine that the original title 
contained the names both of Hadrian and of Antoninus Pius, 
his adviser and companion, much in the same way as Justin opens 
his first Apology with the words, “to the Emperor Titus Aelius 
Hadrianus Antoninus Pius Augustus Caesar and to his son Veris- 
simus the Philosopher, and to Lucius the Philosopher, natural son 
of Caesar and adopted son of Pius....I Justin...have written the 
following appeal and supplication.” In support of this theory we 
might urge the apparent dislocation of the opening sentence of 
our Apology. The Syriac version is clearly wrong in its punctua- 
tion, for example, since it transfers the expression Na sag 
(Almighty) to Caesar, by placing a colon after the word ecole 
(God). This is clearly impossible, for that the writer did not 
attempt to translate, say, avtoxpatwp as if it were mavToxpatwp 
will be evident from his correct use of the Divine attribute later 
on in his work. But even if the translator had been guilty of 
such a mistake, the case would not have been bettered, because 
Antonine would now have been styled Emperor as well as Caesar. 

But let us imagine if we please that the term Caesar or 


OF ARISTIDES. 9 


Emperor Caesar belongs to a previous name which has dropped 
out and supply the connective necessary, so as to read, “To the 
Emperor Aclius Hadrianus Augustus Caesar and to Titus Hadria- 
nus Antoninus.” In support of this we may urge that the 
adjectives which follow are marked in the Syriac with the sign 
of the plural, as if the writer imagined himself to be addressing 
more persons than one. Supposing then that this is the case 
we should still have to face the question as to the name given 
to Antonine; if he is called Hadrian, this must mean that the 
Apology is presented at some time subsequent to his adoption, 
which is generally understood to have taken place in the year 
A.D. 138, only a little while before Hadrian’s death. So that in 
any case we should be prohibited by our document from dating 
the Apology in question either in the first visit of Hadrian to 
Athens or in the second visit, and we should only have the 
barest possibility that it was presented to Hadrian at all. It 
would have, so to speak, to be read to him on his death-bed at 
Baiae. Seeing then the extreme difficulty of maintaining the 
Hadrianic or Eusebian hypothesis, we are driven to refer the 
Apology to the reign of Antoninus Pius, and to affirm that 
Eusebius made a mistake in reading or quoting the title of the 
book, in which mistake he has been followed by a host of other 
and later writers. If he followed a text which had the heading as 
in the Syriac, he has misunderstood the person spoken of as Hadrian 
the king ; and if on the other hand he takes the opening sentences 
as his guide, he has made a superficial reference, which a closer 
reading would have corrected. All that is necessary to make the 
Syriac MS. intelligible is the introduction of a simple prepositional 
prefix before the imperial name, and the deletion of the ribbui 
points in the adjectives. 

Nor is this all; for there can be no doubt that the two 
adjectives in question (rmaDasst-sI0 rna\ ~) are intended to 
represent two of the final titles of Antoninus: eas\ qm standing 


for the Greek YeBacrds, which again is the equivalent of the 
Latin Augustus; and sx saysyzs being the equivalent of the 
title Pius which the Roman Senate gave to Antoninus shortly 
after his accession and which the Greeks render by evoeBns. 
And it is precisely in this order that the titles are usually found, 


10 THE APOLOGY 


viz. Augustus Pius, which the Syriac has treated as adjectives, 
and connected by a conjunction. Moreover this translation of 
evoeByns on the part of the Syriac interpreter shews that the 
meaning of the title is ‘clement’ or ‘compassionate, rather than 
that of mere filial duty, which agrees with what we find in a 
letter of Marcus Aurelius to Faustina; “haec (clementia) patrem 
tuum imprimis Pii nomine ornavit’*.” 

Now how will this conclusion react upon the companion 
Apology of Quadratus? We could, no doubt, maintain that 
it leaves the question where it found it. The mistake made 
by Eusebius need not have been a double error, and the correct 
reference to Hadrian for Quadratus’s Apology would have furnished 
a starting-point for the incorrect reasoning with regard to Aristides. 
On this supposition we should simply erase the reference to Aristides 
from Eusebius and his imitators. 

But there is one difficulty to be faced, and that is the fact 
that we were in confusion over Quadratus before we reached any 
conclusion about Aristides. And our investigation has not helped 
to any elucidation of the confusion. Read for example the language 
in which Eusebius (H. /. Iv. 3) describes the presentation of the 
Apology. 

Aiduos “ASpiavos dvadéxyetar THY nyewoviav’ TovT@ Kodpatos 
NOyov tpochwvyncas avadidwow, aTodoyiay cuvtd—as brép Ths 
Kal’ npas OcoceBetias” 
and compare it with the Greek of the Chronicon as preserved b 
Syncellus, 

Kodpatos 0 iepos Tov atroatoAwv axovaTns Aidio ‘ASpiave TO 
avToKpaTopt AOyous atroXoyias UTép Xpiotiavev edwxev’ 
and we naturally suspect with Harnack’ that the title must have 
been something like the following, 

AOYyos atroAoyias Umrép THs TOV Xpiotiavady OeocePBelas, 
and we are confirmed in this belief by finding that the Aristides 
Apology was also headed 

atroroyia vmrép THs YeoceBeias’ 
at least its literary heading must have been very like this. 
1 Quoted by Eckhel, Doctrina vii. Pt. 1. p. 36. This would seem to resolve the 
perplexity of Spartianus as to the origin of the name. 


2 Die griechischen Apologeten p.101. I need not say how much I am indebted to 
Harnack’s investigations. It will be apparent throughout these pages. 


OF ARISTIDES. 11 


May we not also infer that the opening sentences of the 
Quadratus-Apology must have contained the dedication AiAi@ 
‘Adpiavé which we find suggested above? But when we have 
made these suppositions the similarity between the two apologies 
in the titles is very great, for Aelius Hadrianus is also a part 
of the adopted name of the emperor Antoninus. 

And let us look at the matter from another point of view. 
One of our early sources of information about Quadratus, the 
bishop of Athens, is found in a passage of a letter of Dionysius 
of Corinth preserved by Eusebius, and certainly Dionysius of 
Corinth ought to be good authority for Athenian religious history 
of the time immediately preceding his own. Eusebius does not 
actually quote the letter which Dionysius wrote to the church at 
Athens, but he tells us its scope and makes it easy to divine 
its contents: his language is as follows: 

» 5€ (émvctonrn) mpos ‘AOnvaiovs SueyeptiKy wictews Kal THs 
KATA TO EevayyédLov TrodTElas’ HS OLywpHnoaVTas édéyyel, ws av 
puxpod Sety atrootayvtas Tov NOyou, éE ovUTEP TOY TPOETTOTA AUTOV 
Tlovmov paptuphoat Kata Tovs TOTE cUVEBN Siwypovs. Kodparou 
d€ weTa Tov paptupyacavtTa Llov@dov KatacTayTos avTa@Y émicKo- 
Tov méuyntar émiysaptupev, ws av dia THs avTov atrovdns émi- 
cuvaxyévtwr, kal THs TicTews avalwTruipynaw ciAnyoTov. 

From this it would naturally be inferred that the Quadratus 
mentioned in the letter. was a contemporary of Dionysius of 
Corinth ; for the latter writes to the Athenians at once convicting 
them of slackness in the faith, and congratulating them on their 
happy revival under the ministration of Quadratus. And since 
Dionysius writes letters also to Soter, the bishop of Rome, who 
belongs to the early years of Marcus Aurelius, we should probably 
say that Quadratus was not very much earlier than this, which 
would place him in the reign of Antoninus Pius. And the 
persecution at Athens which ended in the martyrdom of “Publius 
must therefore fall in the same reign. Now Jerome (de Virr. ill. 
§ 19) identifies this Quadratus, the bishop of Athens, with the 
Apologist’, and consequently pushes back the persecution into the 

1“ Quadratus apostolorum discipulus, Publio Athenarum episcopo ob Christi 


fidem martyrio coronato, in locum eius substituitur et ecclesiam grandi terrore 
dispersam fide et industria sua congregat. Cumque Hadrianus Athenis exegisset 


12 THE APOLOGY 


reign of Hadrian. We do not indeed attach any especial weight 
to Jerome’s statement as to the time of the persecution, which is 
simply a combination made up out of passages from Eusebius 
concerning Quadratus and Dionysius with slight amplifications. 
He can hardly be right in placing the persecution under the reign 
of Hadrian, for, as Lightfoot points out’, Eusebius, from whom 
he draws his facts, knows nothing about it: moreover we have 
information from Melito’ that Antoninus Pius did actually write 
to Athens to suppress a persecution of the Christians. But, on 
the other hand, may he not be right after all in his identification 
of the bishop Quadratus with the Apologist, and do not the 
circumstances of the persecution suggested by Melito and testified 
to by Dionysius exactly suit the presentation of the Apology to 
the emperor ? 

While then we would readily admit that, as long as the 
Apology of Aristides was held to belong to the time of an 
Athenian visit of Hadrian, the Apology of Quadratus naturally 
remained with it, yet on the other hand when the Hadrian 
hypothesis is untenable for Aristides, will not the Quadratus- 
bishop and Quadratus-apologist naturally run together, and be 
one and the same person? Or is there anything to prevent the 
identification? The words ‘apostolorum discipulus, used by 
Jerome, and the corresponding words of Eusebius, avocrod\wv 
axovotns, can hardly be held to militate seriously against this 
hypothesis, for they are evident deductions from the passage which 
Eusebius quotes from the Apology of Quadratus about the sick 
people healed by the Lord, ‘some of whom continued down to our 
times. Jerome says boldly that Quadratus had seen very many 
of the subjects of our Lord’s miracles ; which is in any case a gross 
exaggeration. But if such persons, either many or few, had really 
lived into the age of Quadratus, it would be very difficult to place 


hiemem, invisens Eleusinam, et omnibus paene Graeciae sacris initiatus dedisset 
occasionem his, qui Christianos oderant, absque praecepto imperatoris vexare 
credentes, porrexit ei librum &c.”’ 

1 Lightfoot, Ignatius, ed. ii. 11. 541. 

2 Euseb. H. EF. 1v. 26, ex apologia Melitonis, 6 6¢ marnp cov kal cot ra cUuravTa 
Sioxodvros adT@, Tals moAeot mepl TOD udev vewTeplfew wept judy eypayev" év ois Kai 
mpos Aapiooatous kal mpos Oecoadonxeis Kal "AOnvatous kal mpos mdvras “EAAnvas. This 
certainly looks like an outbreak of persecution in Greece. 


OF ARISTIDES. 13 


the Apologist in the reign of Antoninus Pius. Unless, therefore, 
it can be maintained that the language quoted by Eusebius from 
Quadratus is an exaggeration or a misunderstanding we can 
hardly identify the bishop with the apologist. This is the furthest 
point to which the evidence carries the argument. 

And now let us return to Aristides and see whether we can 
determine anything further concerning the time and manner of 
presentation of the Apology. 

And first of all we may say that the simplicity of the style 
of the Apology is in favour of an early date. The religious ideas 
and practices are of an antique cast. The ethics shew a remarkable 
continuity with Jewish ethics: the care for the stranger and the 
friendless, the burial of the dead and the like, are given as 
characteristic virtues both of Judaism and of Christianity. Indeed 
we may say that one of the surprising things about the Apology 
is the friendly tone in which the Jews are spoken of: one certainly 
would not suspect that the chasm between the Church and the 
Synagogue had become as practically impassable as we find it in 
the middle of the second century. There is no sign of the hostile 
tone which we find towards the Jews in the martyrdom of Polycarp, 
and nothing like the severity of contempt which we find in the 
Epistle to Diognetus. If the Church is not in the writer's time 
any longer under the wing of the Synagogue, it has apparently 
no objection to taking the Synagogue occasionally under its own 
wing. 

Such a consideration seems to be a mark of antiquity, and one 
would, therefore, prefer to believe, if it were possible, that the 
Apology was earlier than the Jewish revolt under Bar-Cochab. 
But since we have shewn that view to be untenable (and yet how 
attractive if we could place Aristides in the second visit of Hadrian 
to Athens, and Quadratus in the first !) we must content ourselves 
with seeking as early a date as is consistent with the super- 
scriptions. 

‘Another point that seems ancient about our Apology is that 
it contains traces, and very interesting traces, of the use of 
a creed, very similar to the Apostolic Symbol, but involving 
certain notable points of difference. We shall discuss the question 
more at length by and by; but at present it will be interesting 


14 THE APOLOGY 


to notice, especially in view of the obviously friendly attitude of 
the writer towards the Jews, that his creed contained a clause to 
the effect that 


‘He was crucified by the Jews, 


perhaps without the clause that was current in later times, ‘ under 
Pontius Pilate.’ Now I am aware that there are some persons 
to whom this will seem an argument for a later date; for example 
M. Renan, Origines VI. p. 277, says “les Chrétiens commengaient 
& faire retomber sur l’ensemble de la nation juive un reproche 
que stirement ni Pierre ni Jacques ni l’auteur de |’Apocalypse 
ne songeaient a lui adresser, celui d’avoir crucifié Jésus.” It 
would be interesting however to compare this statement of 
M. Renan with the language of Peter in Acts ii. 36, “Whom ye 
crucified ;” of James in Ep. v. 6, “ye murdered the Just;” or 
with the writer of the Apocalypse where he describes Jerusalem 
as the spiritual Sodom and Egypt, “where also our Lord was 
crucified.” 

The very same charge is made by Justin in his dialogue with 
Trypho', who uses language very similar to that of the Epistle of 
James, and in discussing the miseries which have befallen the 
Jewish race, says pointedly “Fairly and justly have these things 
come upon you; for Ye slew the Just One.” Why should we 
assume such a sentiment to be a mark of late date ? 

These references do not, however, suggest that the sentence 
in question was in the Creed. To prove that, we should have to 
go much farther afield, for the known forms of early creeds do 
not seem to contain it: if, however, we were to examine the 
Apocryphal Christian Literature of the early centuries, we should, 
no doubt, find many traces of the lost sentence. For example, it 
comes over and over in the Apocryphal Acts of John, a Gnostic 
document which Wright edited and translated from the Syriac. 
Here we find the sentence frequently in the very connexion which. 
it would have with other Christian dogmatic statements if it had 
been incorporated with some actual form of the Symbol of Faith. 
When we find that these Acts give us as the staple of Apostolic 
teaching that 


1 Dial. 16, 


OF ARISTIDES. 15 


“The Jews crucified Him on the tree, 
And He died 
_ And rose after three days, 
And He is God, 
And He ascended to Heaven 
And is at the right hand of His Father” 


we must admit that the sequence of ideas, and probably the very 
words are from a Creed. 
The same thing is true when we find the Apostle speaking, 
and saying 
“In the name of Jesus the Messiah, God, 

Whom the Jews crucified and killed in Jerusalem ; 

And He died and was buried 

And rose after three days: 

And lo! He is above in Heaven 

At the right hand of His Father.” 


At all events we may maintain that there is evidence for the 
diffusion of the Creed in early times under a slightly different 
form to that generally received, and if so, we may call it a mark 
of antiquity to have the Apology of Aristides expressing itself to 
that effect; for certainly no such sentence in the generally re- 
ceived Creed existed in later times, however widely the sentiment 
against the Jews may have been diffused. 

It is interesting also to compare the custom of the early Chris- 
tians in the matter of fasting, that they might relieve by their 
self-denial the necessities of the poor. This is precisely what we 
find described so fully in the Similitudes of Hermas (Sim. v. 
3), where the directions are given that on the day when we fast 
we are ourselves to eat only bread and water, and calculate the 
amount saved thereby and bestow it on the poor. Now very many 
of the later fathers teach the same doctrine, that fasting and alms 
are conjoined in duty and merit, and that it is proper, under cer- 
tain circumstances, for the church to call for such an expression of 
religion. But what makes for the antiquity of the Apology is that 
the whole church fasts, not merely one day, but two or three days, 
and that not by direction or rule, but because they are poor and 
have no other way of meeting the needs of those who are poorer 


16 THE APOLOGY 


than themselves. It is a spontaneous, rather than a commanded 
charity, dictated at once by love and necessity. Can such a prac- 
tice in such a form be other than early? But if the Apology is 
early in its doctrines and practices, where shall we place it? Must 
it not be at least as early as the first years of the reign of 
Antoninus Pius ? 

But here we are in difficulty again, for, if we assume that the 
Apology was presented to Antoninus Pius in person, we have no 
satisfactory evidence that Antoninus was ever in the East, or in 
Greece after his accession, and even the suspicions as to an Eastern 
visit belong to a later period of his reign, say A.D. 154. Did 
Aristides present the Apology at Rome or elsewhere? May we 
infer from his calling himself Marcianus Aristides, Philosopher of 
Athens, that he was in some city not his own natural dwelling- 
place? For that he came from Athens is deducible not only from 
his own statement but also from the fact to which we have 
already alluded that Antoninus wrote to Athens to suppress a 
persecution of the Christians. But this almost implies that 
Antoninus was not in Athens when he received the Apology, or 
where would be the need of writing a letter at all? He must 
have been out of Greece. 

Only two solutions seem to present themselves, (1) that Aristides 
journeyed to Rome to present his apology; (ii) that Antoninus 
made some unrecorded visit to the East. 

Now with regard to the second of these suppositions there is 
reason, outside of our argument and its necessities, to believe that 
some such visit must have taken place, and that Antoninus held 
court at Smyrna, some time after his accession to the throne. 

In the celebrated letter of Irenaeus to Florinus (written pro- 
bably later than A.D. 189) the writer speaks of having seen Florinus 
when he lived in lower Asia with Polycarp, when he was at the 
royal court, and rising in esteem there; he, Irenaeus, being at that 
time a boy. Now this seems to imply some kind of royal residence 
at Smyrna; but it has always been difficult to determine what is 
meant by such a royal residence. The problem is discussed by 
Lightfoot in his Ignatius (ed. ii. vol. 1. p. 449). It cannot be 
Hadrian’s visit in A.D. 129, which would be too early; and Light- 
foot thinks that although there is some reason for believing 


OF ARISTIDES. 17 


Antoninus Pius to have been in Syria, and presumably also in Asia 
Minor, somewhere about A.D. 154, 155, this date is too late, on 
account of the mention of Polycarp. Accordingly Lightfoot frames, 
with some hesitation, the following hypothesis: “About the year 
136 T. Aurelius Fulvus was proconsul of Asia. Within two or 
three years of his proconsulate he was raised to the imperial throne, 
and is known as Antoninus Pius. Even during his proconsulate 
omens marked him as the future occupant of the imperial throne. 
...Florinus may have belonged to his suite, and Irenaeus in after 
years might well call the proconsul’s retinue the ‘royal Court’ 
by anticipation, especially if Florinus accompanied him to 
Rome, &c.” 

This ingenious hypothesis only fails to meet our requirement 
on one point, viz. that the name given to Antoninus in the Apology 
is the name given him after adoption, and so is subsequent to 
Feb. 25, A.D. 138. 

But suppose we imagine a visit of Antoninus to Asia Minor 
some years later than this, we could find then some support for 
the theory that Aristides presented his Apology to the Emperor at 
Smyrna. 

For we might say that the name of Marcianus is a conspicuous 
one in the Church at Smyrna. When the Church of the Smyrnaeans 
wrote for the Church of Philomelium the account of the martyrdom 
of Polycarp, they employed to compose the narrative a person 
whom they characterise as our brother Marcianus'. Now it is 
worthy of note that this person must have been conspicuous in the 
Church of Smyrna, for he is probably the same person to whom 
Irenaeus, whose relations with the Church at Smyrna are so intimate, 
dedicated one of his treatises. Moreover the relations of the 
- Church to the Emperor through Florinus would have been favour- 
able for the presentation of the Apology. 

Let us then say, in recapitulation, that we have found it difficult 
to assign the Apology to any other period than the early years of 
the reign of Antoninus Pius; and it is at least conceivable that it 
may have been presented to the Emperor, along with other Chris- 
tian writings, during an unrecorded visit of his to his ancient seat 
of government in Smyrna. 

1 Mart. Polyc. 20. 2 Euseb, H. E. v. 26. 


18 THE APOLOGY 


There are a few later references to Aristides to which we 
have drawn no attention hitherto, because it seemed to be impos- 
sible to extract any trustworthy data from them: they are as 
follows: 


(1) A passage in a letter of Jerome to Magnus, “ Aristides 
philosophus, vir eloquentissimus, eidem principi (Hadriano) Apolo- 
geticum pro Christianis obtulit, contextum philosophorum senten- 
tiis, quem imitatus postea Justinus, et ipse philosophus.” This is 
simply a réchauffé of the Eusebian data, with reflections thereupon. 
Justin being a philosopher, his Apology naturally imitates the 
philosophical treatise which has preceded his own. 


(2) Martyrologium Vetus Romanum’ ad v. Nonas Octobris. 

“ Athenis Dionysii Areopagitae sub Hadriano diversis tormen- 
tis passi, ut Aristides testis est in opere quod de Christiana 
religione composuit ; hoc opus apud Athenienses inter antiquorum 
memorias clarissimum tenetur.” Aristides himself is commemo- 
rated on 11. Kal. Septr. and it is said that in his treatise he main- 
tained “quod Christus Jesus solus esset Deus.” 

It would be very interesting to determine how the Martyro- 
logies arrived at these statements. Our Syriac Apology certainly 
contains no trace of an allusion to Dionysius the Areopagite; on 
the other hand it fairly enough teaches the Divinity of Christ. 
We would dismiss the statements at once as archeological fictions 
if it had not been that evidence has been produced for the exist- 
ence of a Latin version of Aristides. Harnack’s attention was 
drawn by the pastor Kawerau to the following letter of Witzel to 
Beatus Rhenanus, dated Bartholomew’s day 1534. “ Dedisti nobis 
EKusebium, praeterea Tertullianum. Restat ut pari nitore des 
Justinum Martyrem, Papiam et Ignatium graece excusum. Amabo, 
per Bibliothecas oberrare, venaturus si quid scripsit Quadratus, 
si praeter epistolam alia Polycarpus, si nonnihil praeter Apologeti- 
con Aristides. Despice, si quae supersunt Cornelii et tanta bono- 
rum librorum panolethria. Plures sunt Dionysii scriptores, sed 
omnes praeter unum Areopagitem desyderamus, qui utinam sua 
quoque in lingua extaret. Utinam exorirentur Stromata Clemen- 
tis, breviter quicquid est xpoviov. Tineae pascuntur libris, quibus 


1 Migne, Patr. Lat. cxxitt, 


OF ARISTIDES. 19 


homines pasci debebamus We.” I have given the extract from 
Harnack’s copy’, not having access to the original letter. 

It seems to me that Witzel’s language almost implies that the 
Apology was already in print in Latin. Is it conceivable that some 
portion of the Apology may have found its way into print before 
the year 1534 and remained unnoticed in later times ? 

But even if it existed in manuscript, we must leave it an open 
question whether it may not have contained some matter which is 
wanting in the Syriac; nevertheless it is & priori extremely impro- 
bable that the story about the martyrdom of Dionysius the Areo- 
pagite can belong here. 


Celsus and Aristides. 


It may be worth while to point to a possible connexion between 
the True Word of Celsus and the Apology of Aristides. 

1. Celsus is undoubtedly very nearly contemporary with 
Aristides; although it is difficult to determine his date exactly 
(and even Origen was doubtful as to his identity), we may probably 
say with a good assurance of safety that he was at the zenith 
of his influence and fame under the reign of Antoninus Pius. 

2. It is peculiarly difficult to determine what Christian 
books had come into the hands of Celsus, whether gospels or 
other literature. We know however for certain that he had read 
the dialogue between Jason and Papiscus, a work of Aristo of 
Pella, written not long after the close of the Jewish war under 
Hadrian, and so at a period very near to the one in which we are > 
interested. Now if he were reading contemporary Christian 
literature he could hardly miss Aristides. 

3. And since we find more and closer parallels between the 
fragments preserved by Origen from the great work of Celsus 
and our Apology than between most of the other books of the 
century, it is at least a fair question whether Aristides was not 
one of the persons to whom Celsus undertook to reply. 


1 Die griechischen Apologeten, p. 107 note. I cannot find it in Briefwechsel des 
Beatus Rhenanus by Horawitz and Hartfelder, Leipzig, 1886. I understand, how- 
ever, from Prof. Kawerau, that it may be found in Epistolarum G. Wicelii libri 
tres, Lipsiae, 1537. 


2—2 


20 THE APOLOGY 


One of the. leading beliefs in Aristides is that God made 
all things for the sake of man. This doctrine he repeats in 
various forms, shewing that the separate elements, the earth, 
the air, the fire, and the water together with the sun, moon 
and stars, are his ministers. Now Celsus seems to have been 
particularly opposed to this doctrine and to have discussed it 
at length: it was one of the points of contact between the 
Stoic philosophy and the Jewish and Christian faiths, and Celsus 
was, no doubt, well prepared to be diffuse on the subject by 
many previous philosophical encounters. 

He draws ridiculous pictures of the philosophy of the frogs in 
the swamp, of the ants in their ant-hill, and of bevies of bats, 
discussing the to them obvious proposition that the world has 
been made solely for their benefit. Accordingly Origen remarks, 
TapaTAnaiovs nas Tot cKornks dicKxovow St. Oeos éatw, 
eita meT Exelvoy Huels UT avTOD yeyovdTes TaVTH, GwoLot TO Dew: 
Kal hpiv TavTa VTOBEBANTAL, yh} Kal Ddwp Kal anp Kai doTpa, 
Kal Huov eveka TaYTa Kal nuiv Sovrevew Tétaxtat'. In which 
sentence he has pretty well covered the argument from Providence 
as stated by Aristides. Were the elements and the stars, says he, 
made for the self-congratulation and self-exaltation of the bat, the 
frog, or—the man ? 

But he carries out the argument in detail: a providence over 
man is as reasonable as a providence over beasts and vegetables, 
which can be proved from the same data. Ad rodrov 8 é€Fs 
éyxarel piv ws TO avOpon@ dacKovor TavTa TeToNnKévar TOV 
@cdv, kal Bovrerar éx THs Tepl taHv Ewowv iotopias Kal Ths 
éuhawvouéevns adtois ayxwotas Sevxvivat, ovdév waddov avOpdrrav 
} Tov adoyov Céov evexev yeyovévas ta travra*. Indeed, accord- 
ing to Celsus, Providence is more apparent in the case of ants and 
bees and the like, which obtain their food without labour or with 
much less labour than happens in the case of man. He will not 
hear of such a statement as that the sun and stars serve man, 
much less what Aristides affirms, that the sun was created to serve 
the multiplicity of human need. Do not, says he, quote me verses 
from Euripides about sunshine and shade serving man; how do 
they serve him any more than the ants or the flies, which sleep 

1 Origen c. Celsum, lib, tv. 23. 2 lib. rv. 74. 


OF ARISTIDES. 21 


and wake much as we do? ef dé cai T0,“” HXvos pev vE Te Sovrever 
Bporois,” ti warXov nuiv } Tots wUppnks Kal Tais pviacs’; 

Now of course we do not mean to suggest that Aristides 
invented the argument from Providence or that Celsus was the 
first to heap easy scorn upon it. The argument and the reply are 
commonplaces. Celsus’s question as to whether the world was 
created for the sake of vegetables will be found discussed in 
Cicero, de Natura Deorum u. 133. “Cuiusnam causa tantarum 
rerum molitio sit? Arborumne et herbarum? quae quamquam 
sine sensu sunt, tamen a natura sustinentur. At id quidem 
absurdum est. An bestiarum? Nihilo probabilius, deos mutorum 
et nihil intelligentium causa tantum laborasse....Ita fit credibile 
deorum et hominum causa factum esse mundum, quaeque in eo 
sint omnia,” 

It is easy to see how both the Jewish and Christian teachers, 
starting from the same text, the first verse in the book of Genesis, 
and formulating the same statement of faith, that the Almighty 
was ‘Maker of Heaven and Earth,’ found themselves fighting 
in the ranks with the Stoics against the Epicureans, and so 
exposed from time to time to the infinite raillery which seemed 
to the latter school to be proper to the situation. As we have 
said, Aristides does not stand alone in the statement. Justin 
Martyr takes the same ground and implies that it is a part of 
the regular Christian teaching. “We are taught,” says he, “that 
God in His goodness created all things in the beginning from 
formless matter, for the sake of man’;” and the unknown writer of 
the Epistle to Diognetus affirms that “God loved men, for whom 
He made the world, to whom He subjected all things that are in 
the earth*.” | 

It is however worthy of notice that in Aristides the argument 
is repeated over and over, and that Celsus answers it, as Origen 
thought, at unnecessary length. It is not therefore inconceivable 
that Aristides may have drawn the Epicurean fire upon himself 
(and in this matter we may certainly count Celsus with the Epi- 
cureans) by the stress which he laid on the point in his Apology. 

Let us pass on to another point upon which Aristides is 


1 lib. 1v. 77. 2 Justin Apol. 1. c. 10. 
3 Ep. ad Diogn. 10. 


22 THE APOLOGY 


somewhat original, viz. the doctrine of the races of the world 
and of their origin. 

Aristides divides the world into four races, the Barbarian, the 
Greek, the Jew, the Christian. The last two races are curiously 
described; the Jews derive their origin from Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob: they went down from Syria into Egypt; they came back 
from Egypt into Syria. As for the Christians, the new race, they 
derive their origin from Jesus the Messiah, and He is called the 
Son of God Most High. 

Now in the first book against Celsus, Origen remarks as 
follows: “Celsus promises that he will speak on the subject 
of the Jews later on, and he begins his discourse concerning 
our Saviour, as being the leader of our generation in so far as 
we are Christians’, and he goes on to say that he was the leader of 
this teaching, a few years ago, being regarded by the Christians as 
the Son of God.” th 

Now it is worthy of note that if Celsus is handling any written 
document, that document proceeded from the discussion of the 
Jews to the Christians, affirmed Christ to be the head of the new 
race, and declared that His followers regarded Him as the Son 
of God. The agreement at this point with Aristides is certainl 
striking. : 

When moreover we come to the discussion of the Jews, Celsus 
breaks out that the ‘Jews were mere Egyptian runaways, and that 
this darling people of God had never done anything worth remem- 
bering’, just as if he had passed over the names of the Patriarchs 
and fastened on the admission that the Jews had come out of 
Egypt. Accordingly Origen replies that it is universally agreed 
that the Jews reckon their genealogy from Abraham, Isaac and 
Jacob; cadés 81) Ste Kal yevearoyodvras lovdaiot amo THY TpLOV 
matépwv tov ABpadp cat Tod “Ioadx Kal Tod ‘laxwB. 

When Aristides deals with the beliefs of the Jews he expresses 
the remarkable opinion that the Jewish ritual is rather an adoration 
of angels than a worship of God. The expression is the more 
remarkable, because Aristides affects to reason throughout as the 


1 Orig. c. Cels. 1. 26 ws ‘yevouévou “Ipyeudvos Th Ka0d Xpicriavol éopev yevéres 
nav. 
2 Orig. c. Cels. Iv. 32. 


OF ARISTIDES. 23 


philosopher rather than the Christian, and he forgets himself and 
introduces the angels without even an explanation to the emperor, 
as to what beings are intended. What shall we say then when we 
find Celsus affirming that the Jews worship angels’? Néyav adrods 
aéBew ayyédous Kal yonteia mpocKeicBat js 0 Maions adtois 
yéyovev €Enynrys. And Origen is so puzzled as to ask ‘where 
in the world did Celsus find in the Mosaic writings instruction 
in the worship of angels?’ It is certainly curious that we find 
the missing link supplied by the Apology of Aristides. 

No doubt further analogies might be traced: for example, 
Celsus is especially irate with the Christians for their ridicule 
of Egyptian superstitions’, they see nothing except ephemeral 
animals, instead of grasping eternal ideas. Now there is no 
doubt that it is a very common subject of Christian merriment, 
but perhaps no one of the early Christian writers has laughed 
so much in detail about it as Aristides. We will not however 
press the matter further: there are always numerous points of 
contact and necessary collisions between the attack and the 
defence of given religions: suffice it to say that we have shewn 
it to be by no means an inconceivable proposition that Celsus had 
read the Apology of Aristides before he penned his "AAO Aoyos. 


The Symbol of the Faith in the time of Aristides. 


Aristides the Philosopher is a Christian who has preserved 
the philosophic manner, and probably the philosophic dress, with 
a view to future service in the gospel. It seems to have been the 
practice of not a few of the famous second-century Christians to 
attract an audience in this way. Justin certainly did so, and 
almost as surely Tatian; and if these why not Aristides? But as 
we have already said, the professedly dispassionate presentation 
of the Christian case, the endeavour to talk reasonably on all sides 
successively, soon breaks down; the man throws off his disguise 
and gives the note of challenge: Christianus sum ; nihil Christi- 
anum alienum ame puto. He talks of angels as though all men 
knew them, dashes through the dogmatic statements of the 
Church as though they were perfectly familiar, and without a 

1 Orig. c. Cels. 1. 26. 2 Orig. c. Cels, 111. 19. 


24 THE APOLOGY 


word of preliminary explanation of terms, makes a peroration of 
the impending judgment-day. And so the philosopher with an 
imperial audience turns out to be another illustration of the 
Christian city that is set on a hill and cannot be hid. 

It is especially interesting to observe that in the time of 
Aristides the Church already had a Symbol of the Faith: and we 
may reconstruct a good many of its sentences. Of course in such 
matters we proceed from the things that are practically certain to 
those which are less demonstrable; we should not start by saying 
that the words “Maker of heaven and earth” were proof of the 
existence of an approximately fixed symbol. But if we can 
establish other sentences with good confidence, there is no reason 
to omit these words from the reconstructed formula. 

The certain passage from which we proceed is in the words: 

“He was pierced (crucified) by the Jews; 
“He died and was buried ;” 
“and they say that 
after three days He rose, 
and ascended into Heaven.” 

It may be taken for granted that these words represent a part 
of the Symbolum Fidei as known to Aristides. 

What else may we say was contained in his creed? We may 
add words which must have stood respectively at the beginning 
and ending of the Creed: viz. that God was the Maker of 
Heaven and Earth; and that Jesus Christ was to come to judge 
the world. 

Whether we can go further is a more difficult question: but 
there is at least a strong suspicion that the creed contained the 
clause “He was born of the Virgin Mary;” for in Aristides’ 
statement the language about the ‘ Hebrew virgin’ precedes the 
account of the Crucifixion; moreover, here also, we find Aristides 
is most pronounced in the enunciation of the doctrine, and Celsus 
is emphatically scornful in the rejection of it. Accordingly Celsus 
brings forward the story of the infidelity of Mary, affirming that 
the father of Jesus was in reality a soldier whose name was 
Panthera’. The same story appears in the Talmud under the 
name Pandera, which is a transliteration of the foregoing. 

1 Orig. c. Cels. 1. 32, 


OF ARISTIDES. 25 


Indeed it has been generally held that the legend was invented 
by the Jews, through the difficulty of accounting for our Lord’s 
birth ; apparently, therefore, the Jews were in search of a more 
_ tenable hypothesis than the paternity of Joseph; and it is not 
unreasonable to refer to an early Jewish scandal the story which 
we find in the Talmud and in Celsus. 

But if the story be Jewish in origin, it was certainly Greek 
in manufacture. Some persons have tried to explain the Greek 
name Panthera by regarding it as a symbol of violent and 
unrestrained lust. They are, however, mistaken: the name is 
simply a Greek anagram on the word ‘Parthenos, by which the 
Blessed Virgin was commonly known. Those who are familiar 
with the literary tricks of that time, its anagrams, acrostics, 
isopsephics, and the like, will have not the least difficulty in 
seeing that this is the true solution. The inventor has only 
changed the order of the letters and slightly altered the ending of 
the word. Everything that we know of the dogmatics of the 
early part of the second century agrees with the belief that at 
that period the Virginity of Mary was a part of the formulated 
Christian belief. Nor need we hesitate, in view of the antiquity 
of the Panthera-fable, to give the doctrine a place in the creed of 


Aristides. 


We restore the fragments of Aristides’ creed, then, as follows: 
We believe in one God, Almighty 


Maker of Heaven and Earth: 
And in Jesus Christ His Son 


% % % % % 
Born of the Virgin Mary: 
* * * * * 


He was pierced by the Jews: 
He died and was buried: 
The third day He rose again: 
He ascended into Heaven; 

* * * * * 


He is about to come to judge. 
* * * * * 


26 THE APOLOGY 


The Armenian Fragment of the Apology. 


We give, later. on, the Latin translation of the Armenian 
fragment, as published by the Venetian editors. The passage has 
also been translated into German by von Himpel’, and this 
translation will be found in Harnack’s Griechische Apologeten, 
pp. 110—112. Von Himpel rightly affirms the Armenian text to 
have been made from the Greek: it will be observed, however, 
that the Armenian text has the same lacuna as the Syriac in 
the discourse on the four elements and the powers to which they 
are respectively subject. This lacuna would seem to be an early 
feature of the Greek text. 

There are one or two points in which we may get some 
authority from the Armenian for the original text. For instance 
inc. i. where the Syriac reads that the origin of the Greeks 
is to be traced through “Danaus the Egyptian, and through 
Kadmus, and through Dionysus.” Here the Armenian reads 
“Danaus the Egyptian and Kadmus the Sidonian and Dionysus 
the Theban,” and I am disposed to believe the words added in the 
Armenian belong there: for instance, we may compare Tatian’s 
language’, “ Dionysus is. absolute sovereign over the Thebans.” 
In a similar manner something seems to have dropped in the 
Syriac after the statement that in God there is no distinction 
of male or female; for the Armenian text adds the reason 
“quia cupiditatibus agitatur qui huic est distinctioni obnoxius.” 
Again in the opening sentences of the Apology the Armenian 
text has the words, “Kum autem qui rector atque creator est 
omnium, investigare perdifficile est” We recognize at once in 
these words the ring of the characteristic Christian quotation from 
the Timaeus, which is usually employed to shew the superior 
illuminating power of Christian grace over philosophic research, 
but seems here to be taken in the Platonic sense. The Armenian 
is perhaps a little nearer to the Platonic language than the 
Syriac; both versions however will claim the passage from the 
Timaeus as a parallel. 

1 Tiib. Theol. Quartalschrift, 1877, 1. p. 289, f. 1880, 1. p. 109—127. 
2 Cohortatio, ¢. VII. 


3 Plato, Timaeus, 28 co, rdv perv ody mwoinrnv kal warépa Tovde Tod mavros evpety 
re Epyov kal etpdvra els mavras ddvvarov hé-yew. 


OF ARISTIDES. 27 


Allowing then for the occasional preservation of a passage in 
greater purity by the Armenian fragment, we shall find that the 
Armenian translator has often made changes, and added glosses, 
and epitomized sentences. For example, in the summary of the 
Christian Faith, he describes the Son as the Logos, His mother as 
the Theotokos. When the disciples are sent forth, in order that a 
certain oixovoyuia may be fulfilled, the Armenian translator calls it 
a dispensation of illuminating truth; the preaching too is with 
‘signs following,’ ‘comitantibus prodigiis, which seems to come 
from Mark xvi. 20 and would be, if genuine, one of the earliest 
illustrations of that text. It will be seen how large an element of 
paraphrase is found in the Armenian text. 


The Armenian Fragment 
(from the Venice edition). 


IMPERATORI CAHSARI HADRIANO, 
ARISTIDES, 
PHILOSOPHUS ATHENIENSIS. 


Ego, O Rex, Dei providentia creatus, hunc mundum ingressus 
sum, et caelis, terra ac mari, sole, luna et stellis, caeterisque 
omnibus creaturis conspectis, huius mundi constitutionem ad- 
mirans miratus sum, atque conscius factus sum mihi, quoniam 
omnia quae sunt in mundo necessitate ac vi diriguntur, omnium 
creatorem et rectorem esse Deum: quia iis omnibus quae reguntur 
atque moventur, fortior est creator et rector. 

Kum autem, qui rector atque creator est omnium, investigare 
perdifficile atque in immensum pertinens mihi videtur: penitus 
vero eum et certa ratione describere, quum inexplicabilis et 
ineffabilis sit, impossibile et sine ulla prorsus utilitate. Deus 
enim naturam habet infinitam, imperscrutabilem et creaturis 
omnibus incomprehensibilem. Hoc unum scire necesse est, qui 
creaturas universas Providentia sua gubernat, ipsum esse Dominum 
Deum et creatorem omnium: quia visibilia omnia creavit bonitate 
sua, eaque humano generi donavit. Quapropter Illum solum, ut- 
pote unum Deum, nos adorare et glorificare oportet: unumquem- 
que autem nostrum proximum suum sicut semetipsum diligere. 


28 THE APOLOGY 


Verumtamen de Deo saltem sciendum est, Eum ab alio factum 
non fuisse, neque semetipsum fecisse, atque, a nullo circumscriptum, 
omnia comprehendere. Ex se ipsomet est’. Ipse sapientia immor- 
talis, principio et fine carens, immortalis atque aeternus, perfectus, 
nulli necessitati obnoxius, et necessitatibus omnium  satisfaciens, 
nullo indigens et indigentiis omnium ipse magnificus opitulator. 

Ipse est principio carens, quia, qui habet principium, habet 
et finem. Ipse sine nomine, quod quicumque nomine appellatur, 
creatus est factusque ab alio. Ei neque colores sunt neque forma: 
quod, quicumque his praeditus est, mensurabilis est, limitibusque 
cogitur. Hius naturae nulla inest maris et feminae distinctio, 
quia cupiditatibus agitatur qui huic est distinctioni obnoxius. 
Ipse sub caelis incomprehensibilis est, quia caelos excedit: nec 
caeli caelorum Ilo maiores sunt, quia caeli caelorum et creaturae 
omnes quae sub caelis sunt, ab [llo comprehenduntur. 

Ipsi nemo contrarius. neque adversarius: quod si quis Ei 
contrarius et adversarius esse posset, eidem compar fieri videretur. 

Ipse immobilis est atque praeter quemcumque terminum et 
circuitum: quia ubi et unde moveri possit locus deest. Ipse 
neque mensura comprehendi, neque circumdari potest, quia Ipse 
omnia replet, atque est ultra omnes visibiles et invisibiles creaturas. 
Ipse neque ira, neque indignatione movetur, quia nulla caecitate 
afficitur, quum omnino et absolute sit intellectualis. Propterea 
hisce omnibus miraculis variis omnibusque beneficiis Ipse omnia 
creavit. Sacrificiis, oblationibus et hostiis Ipse non indiget, neque, 
ulla in re, visibilibus creaturis opus habet ; quia omnia replet, et 
omnium egestatibus satisfacit, Ipse numquam indigens ac semper 
gloriosus. | 

De Deo sapienter loqui ab ipso Deo mihi datum est, et pro 
meis viribus locutus sum, quin tamen altitudinem imperscrutabilis 
magnitudinis Ejus comprehendere possem. Sola fide vero Illum 
glorificans adoro. 

Nunc igitur ad genus humanum veniamus et quinam praefatas 
veritates secuti fuerint videbimus, et quinam ab eis erraverint. 
Compertum est nobis, o Rex, quatuor esse humani generis stirpes, 
quae sunt Barbarorum, Graecorum, Hebraeorum atque Christian- 
orum. Ethnici et Barbari genus suum ducunt a Belo, Crono et 

1 Sensus dubius: armeniaca verba idem sonant ac graeca atroyeves eldos. 


OF ARISTIDES. 29 


Hiera, aliisque suis Divis pluribus. Graeci vero a Jove, qui Zeus 
vel Jupiter dicitur, originem trahunt, per Helenum, Xuthum, 
aliosque eorum descendentes, nempe Helladem, Inacum, Phoro- 
neum, ac demum Danaum Aegyptium, Cadmum Sidonium, ac 
Dionysium Thebanum. Hebraei autem genus suum ducunt ex 
Abrahamo, Isaaco, Jacobo, et duodecim Jacobi filiis, qui e Syria 
in Aegyptum se receperunt, et a legislatore suo Hebraei nuncupati 
fuerunt, inde vero terram promissionis ingressi, Judaei sunt appel- 
lati. Christianorum tandem genus a Domino Jesu Christo oritur. 

Ipse Dei altissimi est Filius, et una cum Spiritu Sancto 
revelatus est nobis: de caelis descendit ex Hebraea Virgine natus, 
ex Virgine carnem assumpsit, assumptaque humana natura, semet- 
ipsum Dei filium revelavit. Qui Evangelio suo vivificante mundum 
universum, consolatoria sua bonitate, sibi captivum fecit. 

Ipse est Verbum, qui ex progenie Hebraica, secundum carnem, 
ex Maria virgine Deipara natus est. Ipse est qui Apostolos 
duodecim inter suos discipulos elegit, ut mundum  universum 
dispensatione illuminantis Veritatis suae institueret. Ipse ab 
Hebraeis crucifixus est: a mortuis resurrexit et ad caelos ascendit : 
in mundum universum discipulos suos mittens, qui divino et 
admirabili lumine suo, comitantibus prodigiis, omnes gentes 
sapientiam docerent. Quorum praedicatio in hune usque diem 
germinat atque fructificat, orbem universum vocans ad lucem. 

Quatuor ergo nationes, O Rex, ostendi tibi: Barbaros, Graecos, 


Hebraeos atque Christianos, 
PI Mo i Me Pe elas Mine 


Divinitati spiritualis natura propria est, Angelis ignea, dae- 
moniis aquosa, generique humano terrestris. 

* * * # % * * % * * 

We have now reprinted all that is known of the Armenian 
translation of the Apology; it is out of our limit and beyond our 
measure to think of reprinting the actual Armenian text. For 
the purpose of comparison we add, however, another copy of the 
same Armenian fragment, taken from a MS. at Edschmiazin, and 
translated into English by Mr F. C. Conybeare, of Oxford, for 
whose kindly aid we are very grateful. According to the infurma- 
tion which he has supplied, the MS. at Edschmiazin was written 
on paper, and is much worn by age. The date was certainly not 


30 THE APOLOGY 


later than the eleventh century. The fragment from the Apology 
which it contains was followed by the fragment from the Homily 
on the Penitent Thief. Here and there the text was illegible, and 
in these cases the missing words have been supplied from the 
Venice text, as reprinted by Pitra. The two texts in question are 
moreover in very close agreement, except for the occasional addi- 
tion of a word or two by the Edschmiazin MS. The rendering is 
designedly a literal one. 


The Armenan Fragment 
(from the Edschmiazin MS.). 


TO THE AUTOCRATIC CAESAR ADRIANOS 
FROM ARISTIDES, ATHENIAN PHILOSOPHER. 


I, O Ruler, who was by the providence of God created and 
fashioned man in the world, and who have beheld the heaven and 
the earth and the sea, the sun and the moon and the stars and all 
creatures, wondered and was amazed at the eternal’ order thereof. 
I also by reflection learned that the world and all that is therein 
is by necessity and force guided and moved and of the whole God 
is controuler and orderer: for that which controuls is more power- 
ful than that which is controuled and moved. To enquire about 
Him who is guardian and controuls all things seems to me to 
quite exceed the comprehension and to be most difficult, and to 
speak accurately concerning Him is beyond compass of thought 
and of speech, and bringeth no advantage; for His nature is 
infinite and unsearchable, and imperceptible,’ and inaccessible to 
all creatures. We can only know that He who governs by His 
providence all created things, He is Lord and God and creator of 
all, who ordered all things visible in His beneficence, and gra- 
ciously bestowed them on the race of man. Now it is meet that 
we serve and glorify Him alone as God, and love one another as 
ourselves. But this much alone can we know concerning God, 

1 Here there is a copyist’s error in the Edschmiazin text. 


2 Here the Edschmiazin text adds a word which means ‘not to be observed or 
looked at.’ ; 


OF ARISTIDES. 31 


that He was not generated from any source, and did not Himself 
make Himself, and is not contained by aught, but Himself contains 
all. Avroyevés efSos! and wisdom immortal, without beginning or 
end, not passing away and undying, He is complete and wanteth 
nothing, while He fulfilleth all wants. In Himself He wanteth 
nought, but gives to and fulfils the needs of all. In Himself He 
is without beginning, for He is beginning of everything whatever, 
and is perfect. In Himself He is nameless, for whatever is named 
is fashioned out of something else’ and created. Colour and form 
of Him there is not, for that falls under measure and limit, unto 
whatsoever colour and form belong. Male and female in that 
nature there is not, for that is subject to particular passions, in 
whatsoever that distinction exists. Within the heavens He is not 
contained, for He is beyond’ the heavens; neither are the heavens 
greater than He, for the heavens and all creation are contained in 
Him. Counter to Him and opposed there is no one: if any one be 
found counter to Him, it appears that that one becometh associate 
with Him. He is unmoved and unmeasured and ineffable; for 
there is no place whence or with which He could move; and He 
is not, by being measured, contained or environed on any side, for 
it is Himself that filleth all, and He transcends all things visible 
and invisible. Wrath and anger there is not in Him, for there is 
not in Him blindness, but He is wholly and entirely rational, and 
on that account He established creation with divers wonders and 
entire beneficence. Need hath He none of victims and oblations 
and sacrifices, and of all that is in the visible creation He wanteth 
nought. For He fulfilleth the wants of all and completeth them, 
and being in need of nothing He is glorified unto all time. 

Now by the grace of God it was given me to speak wisely 
concerning Him. So far as I have received the faculty I will 
speak, yet not according to the measure of the inscrutability of 
His greatness shall I be able to do so, but by faith alone do I 
glorify and adore Him. 

Let us next come to the race of man, and see who are capable 


1 adroyevés (or av’royévynrov) efdos is the Greek that answers to the Armenian 
texts. ‘Ex se ipsomet est’ does not give the sense. I give the Greek, for I really 
hardly know how to render it in English. 

2 Or ‘‘ by another.” 3 éméxewa. 


32 THE APOLOGY 


of receiving the truth of these sayings, and who are gone astray. 
It is manifest?, O Ruler, for there are four tribes? of the human 
race. There are barbarians, and some are Greeks and others 
Hebrews, and there are who are Christians. But the heathens 
and barbarians count their descent from Baal, and from 
Cronos, and from Hera, and from many others of their gods. 
But the Greeks say Zeus (who is Dios) is their founder*, and 
reckon their descent from Helenos and Xuthos, and one after 
another from Hellas, Inachos and Phoroneus, and also finally from 
Danaus the Egyptian, and from Cadmus the Sidonian, and 
Dionysius the Theban. 

But the Jews reckon their race from Abraham, and Abraham’s 
son they say was Isaac, and from Isaac Jacob, and from Jacob the 
twelve who migrated from Assyria into Egypt and were there 
named the tribes of the Hebrews by their lawgiver, and having 
come into the land of recompence, were named...... ‘ the tribes of 
the Jews. 

But the Christians reckon their race from the Lord Jesus 
Christ. He is Himself Son of God on high, who was manifested 
of the Holy Spirit, came down from heaven, and being born of a 
Hebrew virgin took on His flesh from the virgin, and was mani- 
fested in the nature of humanity the Son of God: who sought to 
win the entire world to His eternal goodness by His life-giving 
preaching’. He it is who was according to the flesh born of the 
race of the Hebrews, by the God-bearing‘ virgin Miriam. He chose 
the twelve disciples, and He by his illuminating truth, dispensing 


1 So it stands in the Venice text: but in the Edschmiazin copy, for ‘ manifest’ 
there is a word which means ‘ the name’ followed by a lacuna of a few letters, as if 
the scribe had intended to read ‘I will recount the names, O Ruler,’ or something 
of that kind. 

2 The word answers to the Greek gudai or Sfuor. In the same sense at the end 
of the fragment another word is used, answering rather to yévy. 

3 These three words are added to make sense, the whole passage being gram- 
matically much confused. 

4 Here the Edschmiazin MS. was unreadable from age. ‘The printed text 
has no lacuna and gives no hint of the word whatever it was which was read in 
the Edschmiazin text, 

> ebayyéuov. 

8 The word OQeoréxos is implied. 


OF ARISTIDES. 33 


it’, taught all the world, and was nailed on the cross by the Jews. 
Who rose from the dead and ascended into heaven, and sent forth 
His disciples into the whole world’, and taught all with divinely 
miraculous and profoundly wise wonders. Their preaching until 
this day blossoms and bears fruit, and summons all the world to 
receive the light. 

These are the four tribes, whom we set before thee, O Ruler, 
Barbarians, Greeks, Jews and Christians. But to the Deity is 
appointed the spiritual, and to angels the fiery, and to devils the 
watery, and to the race of men the earth. 

* + * + # + + “ + 


An additional Armenian Fragment of Aristides. 


Over and above the fragments of the lost Apology of Aristides, 
and the homily de Latrone, there is a scrap printed by Pitra in his 
Spicilegium Solesmense which professes to come from an epistle 
of Aristides to all Philosophers. It is, as far as we can judge, in 
the form in which we have it presented to us, a theological 
product of the time of the Monophysite controversy. But we 
must bear in mind what we have learned from the Armenian 
fragment of the Apology, that an Armenian translation is made 
up out of the matter of the original writer plus the terms and 
definitions of the translator, as for instance we see to have hap- 
pened in the ascription of the term @eordxos to the Blessed 
Virgin. And the question is whether under the amplified folds of 
the theology of this fragment printed by Pitra there may be 
hidden the more scanty terms of a theologian of the second 
century, and if so, whether the writer be our Aristides, and the 
work quoted be the Apology or some other work. In order to 
test this point, we will give a rendering of the fragment into 
Greek, for which again I am indebted to the kindness of Mr 
Conybeare. 


1 Olxovoysxds is here rendered. Perhaps it should be taken as an epithet of 
‘truth,’ for in the original it precedes the word ‘ illuminating.’ 
2 Olkoupéryy. 


H, A. 3 


34 THE APOLOGY 


Armenian Fragment. 


(Frag. iii. of Pitra.) 


FROM AN EPISTLE OF ARISTIDES TO 
ALL PHILOSOPHERS. 


Tlav7’ érabe ra€jpyata adnOw@ obv adtod cémati, 6 Oedjpatt 
Kupiov xai tod dyiov Ivevpartos Sefapevos, iyvwoe thy capKa’ 
éavt@® Thy Tapa’ TrapBévov ‘EBpaixhs tis ayias Mapiap appnt@ 
Kal GTOM@ EVvOTHTI. | 

Now with reference to the foregoing passage, we may say at 
once that the concluding terms are not second-century language 
at all. On the other hand, the reference to the “ Hebrew virgin” 
is precisely the language of the Apology. Further, the opening 
words of the fragment, with their allusion to a real passion of 
a real body, are certainly anti-Docetic, and therefore may be taken 
as second-century theology. We may compare with them the 
sentiments of the Ignatian epistles, as for example the letter to 
the Smyrnaeans (ec. i1.), where we read :—- 

Tadta yap wavta éradev Ss Huds’ nal adrnOds érader, ws xal 
adrnOas avéotnoev Eavtov’ ovy wWoTEp ATLoTOL TIVES AéyoUTLY TO 
Soxeiv avtoyv merrovOévat. 

It does not, therefore, seem as if these words in the opening of 
the fragment were a translator's invention or addition. They have 
a second-century rmg about them. If so, then the extract is 
either a translation of a paragraph of the Apology, or of some other 
tract by the same writer, and probably the latter. We have, 
however, no means of discriminating further the original form of 
the sentence from the later accretions. It is, however, by no 
means impossible that the heading may be correct; that Aristides 
may have written an epistle or address to Philosophers on the 
subject of the Christian religion in general, or of the Incarnation 
in particular. | 

1 The same word is used by the translator to render Gua and odpé. 
2 More exactly éavrod: an additional word being necessary in the Armenian in 


order to give the sense ‘ conjunxit sibi’: but the sense seems to require éaurd. 
3 Or éx. 


OF ARISTIDES. 35 


THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES, TRANSLATED 
FROM THE SYRIAC. 


Again, the apology which Aristides the philosopher made w 
before Hadrian the king concerning the worship of God. 

[To the Emperor] Caesar Titus Hadrianus Antoninus Augustus 
Pius, from Marcianus Aristides, a philosopher of Athens. 

I. I, O king, by the grace of God came into this world; and 5 
having contemplated the heavens and the earth and the seas, 
and beheld the sun and the rest of the orderly creation, I was 
amazed at the arrangement of the world; and I comprehended 
that the world and all that is therein are moved by the impulse 
of another, and I understood that he that moveth them is God, 
who is hidden in them and concealed from them: and this is 
well known, that that which moveth is more powerful than that 
_ which is moved. And that I should investigate concerning this 
Mover of all, as to how He exists—for this is evident to me, for 
He is incomprehensible in His nature—and that I should dispute 
concerning the stedfastness of His government, so as to compre- 
hend it fully, is not profitable for me; for no one is able perfectly 
to comprehend it. But I say concerning the Mover of the world, 
that He is God of all, who made all for the sake of man; and it = 
is evident to me that this is expedient, that one should fear God, 20 
and not grieve man. 3 

Now I say that God is not begotten, not made; a constant 
nature, without beginning and without end; immortal, complete, 
and incomprehensible: and in saying that He is complete, I mean 
this; that there is no deficiency in Him, and /He stands in need 25 
of nought, but everything stands in need of Him: and in saying 
that He is without beginning, I mean this; that everything which 
has a beginning has also an end; and that which has an end is 
dissoluble. He has no name; for everything that has a namie is 
associated with the created; He has no likeness, nor composition 30 
of members; for he who possesses this is associated with things 


3—2 


el 


o 


- 


5 


36. THE APOLOGY? 


fashioned. He is not male, nor is He female: the heavens do 
not contain Him; but the heavens and all things visible and 
invisible are contained in Him. Adversary He has none; for 
there is none that is more powerful than He; anger and wrath 
He possesses not, for there is nothing that can stand against 5 
Him. Error and forgetfulness are not in His nature, for He is 
altogether wisdom and understanding, and in Him consists all 
that consists. He asks no sacrifice and no libation, nor any of 
the things that are visible; He asks not anything from anyone; 
but all ask from Him. 10 

II. Since then it has been spoken to you by us concerning 
’ God, as far as our mind was capable of discoursing concerning Him, \_ 
let us now come to the race of men, in order that we may know 
which of them hold any part of that truth concerning which we 
have spoken, and which of them are in error therefrom. Sag 

This is plain to you, O king, that there are four races of men 
~ in this world; Barbarians and Greeks, Jews and Christians. 

Now the Barbarians reckon the head of the race of their religion 
from Kronos and from Rhea and the rest of their gods: but the 
Greeks from Helenus, who is said to be from Zeus; and from 20 
Helenus was born Aeolus and Xythus, and the rest of the family 
- from Inachus and Phoroneus, and -last of all from Danaus the 
Egyptian and from Kadmus and from Dionysus. 

Moreover the Jews reckon the head of their race from 
Abraham, who begat Isaac, from whom was born Jacob, who 25 
begat twelve sons who removed from Syria and settled in Egypt, 
~ and there were called the race of the Hebrews by their law- 
giver: but at last they were named Jews. | 

The Christians, then, reckon the beginning of their religion 
from Jesus Christ, who is named the Son of God most High; 30 
and it is said that God came down from heaven, and from a 
> Hebrew virgin took and clad Himself with flesh, and in a daughter 
of man. there dwelt the Son of God. This is taught from that x 
Gospel which a little while ago was spoken among them as being 
preached; wherein if ye also will read, ye will comprehend 35 
the. power that is upon it. This Jesus, then, was born of 
the tribe of the Hebrews; and He had twelve disciples, in order 
that a certain dispensation of His might be fulfilled) He was 


OF ARISTIDES. 37 


pierced by the Jews; and He died and was buried; and they say 
that after three days He rose and ascended to heaven; and then 
these twelve disciples went forth into the known parts of the 
world, and taught concerning His greatness with. all humility and 
sobriety ; and on this account those also who to-day believe in this 5 
preaching are called Christians, who are: well known. ‘here are 
then four races of mankind, as I said before, Barbarians and 
Greeks, Jews and Christians. 

To God then ministers wind, and to angels fire; but to demons 
water, and to men earth. - 10 
III. Let us then begin with the Barbarians, and by degrees we 

will proceed to the rest of the peoples, in order that we may under- 
stand which of them hold the truth concerning God, and which of 
them error. | 
The Barbarians then, inasmuch as they did not comprehend 15 

God, erred with the elements; and they began to serve created 
things instead of the Creator of them’, and on this account they 
made likenesses and they enclosed them in temples; and lo! 
they worship them and guard them with great precaution, that 
their gods may not be stolen by robbers; and the Barbarians 
have not understood that whatsoever watches must be greater 
than that which is watched; and that whatsoever creates must 
be greater than that whatever is created: if so be then that their 
gods are too weak for their own salvation, how will they furnish 
salvation to mankind? The Barbarians then have erred with a 25 
great error in worshipping dead images which profit them not. 
_ And it comes to me to wonder also, O king, at their philosophers, 
how they too have erred and have named gods those likenesses 
which have been made in honour of the elements; and the wise 
-- men have not understood that these very elements are corruptible 30 

and dissoluble; for if-a little part of. the element be dissolved 
- or corrupted, all of it is dissolved and corrupted. If then these 
elements are dissolved and corrupted, and compelled to be subject: 
to another harder than ‘themselves, and are not in their nature 
- gods, how can they call gods those likenesses which are made 35 
in their honour? Great then is the error which their philosophers 
have brought upon their followers, 


1 Rom. i. 25, 


38 ‘THE APOLOGY 


IV. Let us turn then, O king, to the elements themselves, 
in order that we may shew concerning them that they are not 
gods, but a creation, corruptible and changeable, which is in the 
likeness of man*.. But God is incorrup‘ible and unchangeable and a 
invisible, while seeing, turning and changing all things. 5 

Those therefore who think concerning earth that it is God have 
already erred, since it is digged and planted and delved; and since 
it receives the defilement of the excrement of men and of beasts 
and of cattle: and since sometimes it becomes what is useless; 
for if it be burned it becomes dead, for from baked clay there 10 
springs nothing: and again, if water be collected on it, it becomes 
corrupted along with its fruits: and lo! it is trodden on by men 
and beasts, and it receives the impurity of the blood of the 
slain; and it is digged and filled with the dead and becomes a 
repository for bodies: none of which things can that holy and 15 
venerable and blessed and incorruptible nature receive. And 
from this we have perceived that the earth is not God but a 
creature of God. 

VY. And in like manner again have those erred who have 
thought concerning water that it is God. For water was created 20 
for the use of man and in many ways it is made subject to him. 
For it is changed, and receives defilement, and is corrupted, and 
loses its own nature when cooked with many things, and receives 
colours which are not its own; being moreover hardened by the cold 
and mixed and mingled with the excrement of men and beasts 25 
and with the blood of the slain: and it is compelled by workmen, 
by means of the compulsion of channels, to flow and be conducted 1 
against its own will, and to come into gardens and other places, 
so as to cleanse and carry out all the filth of men, and wash 
away all defilement, and supply man’s need of itself. Wherefore 30 
it is impossible that water should be God, but it is a work of 
God and a part of the world. 

So too those have erred not a little who thought concerning 
fire that it is God: for it too was created for the need of men: 
and in many ways it is made subject to them, in the service of 35 
food and in the preparation of ornaments and the other things of 


1 Rom, ‘ 23.- 


OF ARISTIDES. 39 


which your majesty is aware: whilst in many ways it is extin- 
guished and destroyed. 

And again those who have thought concerning the blast of 
winds that it is God, these also have erred: and this is evident 
to us, that these winds are subject to another, since sometimes 5 
their blast is increased and sometimes it is diminished and ceases, 
according to the commandment of Him who subjects them. Since 
for the sake of man they were created by God, in order that 
they might fulfil the needs of trees and fruits and seeds, and 
that they might transport ships upon the sea; those ships which 10 
bring to men their necessary things, from a place where they 
are found to a place where they are not found; and furnish the 
different parts of the world. Since then this wind is sometimes 
increased and sometimes diminished, there is one place in which 
it does good and another where it does harm, according to the .ss 
nod of Him who rules it: and even men are able by means of 
well-known instruments to catch and coerce it that it may fulfil 
for them the necessities which they demand of it: and over itself 
it has no power at all; wherefore it is not possible that winds 
should be called gods, but a work of God. 20 

VI. So too those have erred who have thought concerning the 
sun that he is God. For lo! we see him, that by the necessity of 
another he is moved and turned and runs his course; and he 
proceeds from degree to degree, rising and setting every day, in 
order that he may warm the shoots of plants and shrubs, and 25 
may bring forth in the air which is mingled with him every herb 
which is on the earth. And in calculation the sun has a part 
with the rest of the stars in his course, and although he is one 
in his nature, he is mixed with many parts, according to the 
advantage of the needs of men: and that not according to his own 30 
will, but according to the will of Him that ruleth him.. Where- 
fore it is not possible that the sun should be God, but a work 
of God; and in like manner also the moon and stars. 

VII. But those who have thought concerning men of old, that 
some of them are gods, these have greatly erred: as thou, even 35 
thou, O king, art aware, that man. consists of the four elements 
and of soul and spirit, and therefore is he even called World, A, 
and apart from any one of these parts he does not exist. He has 


40 THE APOLOGY 


beginning and end, and he is born and also suffers corruption: 

- But God, as I have said, has none of this in His nature, but 
He is unmade and incorruptible. On this account, then, it is 
impossible that. we should represent him as God who is man by 
‘nature, one to whom sometimes, when he looketh for joy, grief 5 
happens; and for laughter, and weeping befals him; one that is 
passionate and jealous, envious and regretful, along with the 
rest of the other defects: and in many ways more seg apy than 
the elements or even than the beasts. 

And thence, O king, it is right for us to understand the 10 
error of the Barbarians, that, whereas they have not investigated 
concerning the true God, they have fallen away from the truth 
and have gone after the desire of their own mind, in serving 
elements subject to dissolution, and dead images: and on account 
of their error they do not perceive who is the true God. 15 

VIII. Let us return now to the Greeks in order that we may 
know what opinion they have concerning the true God. 

The Greeks then because they are wiser than the Barbarians 
have erred even more than the Barbarians, in that they have 
introduced many gods that are made; and some of them they have zo 
represented as male and some of them as female; and in such a 
way that some of their gods were found to be adulterers and » 
murderers, and jealous and envious, and angry and passionate, 
and murderers of fathers, and thieves and plunderers, And they 
say that some of them were lame and maimed; and some of them 25 
wizards, and some of them utterly mad; and some of them played 
on harps; and some of them wandered on mountains: and some 
of them died outright; and some were struck by lightning, and 
some were made subject to men, and some went off in flight, and 
some were stolen by men; and lo! some of them were wept and 30 
bewailed by men; and some, they say, went down to Hades; and 
some were sorely wounded, and some were changed into the like- 
ness of beasts in order that they might commit adultery with the 
race of mortal women; and some of them have been reviled for 
sleeping with males: and some of them, they say, were in wedlock 35 
with their mothers and sisters and daughters; and they say of 
their gods that they committed adultery with the daughters of 
men, and from them was born a certain race which was also 


OF ARISTIDES. 4b: 


mortal. And of some of their goddesses they say that they con- 
tended about beauty and came for judgment before men. The 
Greeks, then, O king, have brought forward what is wicked, 
ridiculous and foolish concerning their gods and themselves; in 
-that they called such like persons gods, who are no gods: and rts 
hence men have taken occasion to commit adultery and fornica- 
tion, and to plunder and do everything that is wicked and 
hateful and abominable. For if those who are called their gods 
have done all those things that are written above, how much 
more shall men do them who believe in those who have done 10 
these things! and from the wickedness of this error, lo! there 
have happened to men frequent wars and mighty famines, and bitter 
captivity and deprivation of all things: and lo! they endure them, 
and all these things befal them from this cause alone: and when 
they endure them they do not perceive in their conscience that 
because of their error these things happen to them. 

IX. Now let us come to the history of these their gods in 
order that we may prove accurately concerning all those things 
which we have said above. 

Before everything else the Greeks introduce as a god Kronos, 20 
which is interpreted Chiun ; and the worshippers of this deity sacri- 
fice to him their children: and some of them they burn while yet 
living. Concerning him they say that he took him Rhea to wife ; 
and from her he begat many sons; from whom he begat also Dios, 
who is called Zeus; and at the last he went mad and, for fear of 25 
an oracle which was told him, began to eat his children. And 
from him Zeus was stolen away, and he did not perceive it: and 
at the last Zeus bound him and cut off his genitals and cast them 
in the sea; whence, as they say in the fable, was born Aphrodite, 
who is called Astera: and he cast Kronos bound into darkness. as 
Great then is the error and scorn which the Greeks have intro- 
duced concerning the head of their gods, in that they have said 
all these things about him, O king. It is.not possible that God 
should be bound or amputated ; otherwise it is a great misfortune. 

And after Kronos they introduce another god, Zeus; and they 35 
say concerning this one, that he received the headship and became 
king of all the gods; and they say concerning him that he was 
changed into cattle and everything else, in order that he might 


-_ 


5 


42 THE APOLOGY 


commit adultery with mortal women, and might raise up to him- 
self children from them. Since at one time they say he was 
changed into a bull on account of his passion for Europa and for 
Pasiphae ; and again he was changed into the likeness of gold on 
account of his passion for Danae: and into a swan, through his 5 
passion for Leda; and into a man through his passion for Antiope ; 
and into lightning on account of his passion for the Moon: so 
that from these he begat many children: for they say that from 
Antiope he begat Zethus and Amphion; and from the Moon, 
Dionysus; from Alkmena, Herakles; and from Leto, Apollo and 10 
Artemis; and from Danae, Perseus; and from Leda, Castor and 
Polydeuces and Helene; and from Mnemosyne he begat nine 
daughters, those whom he called the Muses; and from Europa, 
Minos and Rhadamanthus and Sarpedon. But last of all he was 
changed into the likeness of an eagle on account of his passion for 15 
Ganymede the shepherd. 

Because of these stories, O king, much evil has befallen the 
race of men who are at this present day, since they imitate their 
gods, and commit adultery, and are defiled with their mothers 
and sisters, and in sleeping with males: and some of them have 20 
dared to kill even their fathers. For if he, who is said to be 
the head and king of their gods, has done these things, how 
much more shall his worshippers imitate him! And great is 
the madness which the Greeks have introduced into their history 
concerning him: for it is not possible that a god should commit 25 
adultery or fornication, or should approach to sleep with males, 
or that he should be a parricide; otherwise he is much worse 
than a destructive demon. 

X. And again they introduce another god, Hephaestus; and 
they say of him that he is lame and wearing a cap on his head, and 30 
holding in his hand tongs and hammer; and working in brass 
in order that therefrom he may find his needed sustenance. Is 
then this god so much in need? . Whereas it is impossible for a 
god to be needy or lame: otherwise he is very weak. 

And again they introduce another god and call him Hermes; 35 
and they say that he is a thief, loving avarice and coveting gains, xs 
and a magician and maimed and an athlete and an interpreter of 
words: whereas it is impossible for a god to be a magician, or 


OF ARISTIDES: 43 


avaricious, or maimed, or coveting anything that is not his, or an 
athlete: and if it be found to be otherwise, he is of no use. 

And after him they introduce another god, Asclepius; and 
they say that he is a physician and prepares medicines and * 
bandages in order that he may satisfy his need of sustenance. Is 5 
then this god in need? And he at last was struck by lightning 
by Zeus, on account of Tyndareus the Lacedemonian; and so 
he died. If then Asclepius was a god, and when struck by light- 
ning was unable to help himself, how is it that he was able to help 
others? Whereas it is an impossible thing that the divine nature 10 
should be in need, or that it should be struck by lightning. 

_ And again they introduce another god and call him Ares, and 
they say that he is a warrior and jealous, and covets sheep and 
things which do not belong to him, and acquires possessions 
through his weapons; and of him they say that at last he com- 
mitted adultery with Aphrodite and was bound by a tiny boy 


— 


5 


Eros, and by Hephaestus the husband of Aphrodite: whereas it is os 


impossible that a god should be a warrior or a prisoner or an 
adulterer. 

And again they say of Dionysus that he too is a god, who 20 
celebrates festivals by night and teaches drunkenness, and carries 
off women that do not belong to him: and at the last they say 
that he went mad and left his female attendants and fled to 
the wilderness; and in this madness of his he ate serpents; and 
at the last he was killed by Titan. If then Dionysus was a god, 25 
and when slain was not able to help himself; how is it that he 
was able to help others ? 

Herakles, too, they introduce, and they say of him that he is 
a god, a hater of things hateful, a tyrant and a warrior, and a 
slayer of the wicked: and of him they say that at the last he 30 
went mad and slew his children and cast himself into the fire 
and died. If therefore Herakles be a god and in all these evils 
was unable to stand up for himself, how was it that others were 
asking help from him? Whereas it is impossible that a god should 
be mad or drunken or a slayer of his children, or destroyed by 35 
fire. 

XI. And after him they introduce another god and call him 
Apollo: and they say of him that he is jealous and changeable; and 


44 THE APOLOGY 


sometimes he holds a bow and a quiver, and sometimes a lyre and 

a plectrum; and he gives oracles to men, in order that he may 
receive a reward from them. Is then this god in need of reward? as 
Whereas it is disgraceful that all these things should be found 
In a god. 5 

And after him they introduce Artemis a goddess, the sister 
of Apollo; and they say that she was a huntress; and she carried 
a bow and arrows, and went about on mountains leading dogs, 
either to hunt the deer or the wild boars. Whereas it is disgraceful 
that a maid should go about by herself on mountains and follow 19 
the chase of beasts. And therefore it is not ma that Artemis 
should be a goddess. 

Again they say of Aphrodite that she forsooth is a goddess; 
and sometimes forsooth she dwells with their gods, and sometimes 
she commits adultery with men; and sometimes she has Ares for 15 
her lover and sometimes Adonis, who is Tammuz: and sometimes 
forsooth Aphrodite is wailing and weeping for the death of 
Tammuz: and they say that she went down to Hades in order 
that she might ransom Adonis from Persephone, who was the 
daughter of Hades. If then Aphrodite be a goddess and was 20 
unable to help her lover in his death, how is she able to help 
others? And this is a thing impossible to be listened to, that the 
divine nature should come to weeping and wailing and adultery. 

And again they say of Tammuz that he is a god; and he is 
forsooth a hunter and an adulterer; and they say that he was killed 25 
by a blow from a wild boar, and was not able to help himself. * 
And if he was not able to help himself, how is he able to take 
care of the human race? And this is impossible, that’ a god 
should be an adulterer or a hunter or that he should have died by. 

-- violence. , 30 
And again they say of Rhea that she forsooth is the mother of 
their gods; and they say of her that she had at one time a lover 
Atys, and she was rejoicing in corruptible men; and at the last 
she established lamentations, and was bewailing her lover Atys. 

_ If then the mother of their gods was not able to help her lover 35 
and rescue him from death, how is it possible that she should 
help others? It is disgraceful then that a goddess should lament 
and weep, and that she should have joy over corruptible beings. 


OF ARISTIDES. 45 


Again they bring forward Kore; and they say that she was a 
goddess and that she was carried off by Pluto and was not able to 
help herself. If then she is a goddess and was not able to help 
herself, how is she able to help others? For a goddess who is 
- carried off is extremely weak. 5 

All these things, then, O king, the Greeks have introduced 
about their gods, and have invented and said concerning them: 
whence all men have taken occasion to do all wicked and impure: 

things: and thereby the whole earth has been corrupted. 

oz XII. Now the Egyptians, because they are more evil and esas 
ignorant than all peoples upon the earth, have erred more than 
all men. For the worship of the Barbarians and the Greeks did 
not suffice them, but they introduced also the nature of beasts, and 
said concerning it that they were gods: and also of the creeping 
things which are found on the dry land and in the waters, and of 15 
the plants and herbs they have said that some of them are gods, 
and they have become corrupt in all madness and impurity more 
than all peoples that are upon the earth. For of old time they 
worshipped Isis; and they say that she forsooth is a goddess, 
who had forsooth a husband Osiris, her brother; but when forsooth 20 
Osiris was killed by his brother Typhon, Isis fled with her son 
Horus to Byblos in Syria and was there for a certain time until 
that her son was grown: and he contended with his uncle Typhon 
and killed him, and thereupon Isis returned and went about with 
her son Horus, and was seeking for the body of Osiris her lord, 25 
and bitterly bewailing his death. If therefore Isis be a goddess, 
and was not able to help Osiris her brother and lord, how is it 
possible that she should help others? Whereas it is impossible 
that the divine nature should be afraid and flee, or weep and 
wail. Otherwise it is a great misfortune. 30 

But of Osiris they say that he is a god, a beneficent one; 
and he was killed by Typhon and could not help himself; and it is 
evident that this cannot be said of Deity. 

And again they say of Typhon, his brother, that he is a god, A 
a fratricide, and slain by his brother’s son and wife since he was 35 
unable to help himself. And how can one who does not help 
himself be a god ? 

Now because the Egyptians are more ignorant than the rest of 


46 THE APOLOGY 


the peoples, these and the like gods did not suffice them, but 
they also put the name of gods on the beasts which are merely 
soulless. For some men among them worship the sheep, and 
others the calf; and some of them the pig, and others the shad- 
fish; and some of them the crocodile, and the hawk, and the ; 
cormorant, and the kite, and the vulture, and the eagle, and the 
crow; some of them worship the cat, and others the fish Shibbuta; 
some of them the dog, and some of them the serpent, and some 
the asp, and others the lion, and others garlic, and onions, and 
thorns, and others the leopard, and the like. . 10 

And the poor wretches do not perceive with regard to all these 
things that they are nought; while every day they look upon 
their gods, who are eaten and destroyed by men, yea even by their 
own fellows; and some of them being burned, and some of them 
dying and putrifying and becoming refuse ; and they do not under- 
stand that they are destroyed in many ways. 

And accordingly the Egyptians have not understood that the 
like of these are not gods, since their salvation is not within their 
own power; and if they are too weak for their own salvation, 
then as regards the salvation of their worshippers pray whence will 20 
they have the power to help them ? 

XIII. The Egyptians then have erred with a great error, «& 
above all peoples that are upon the face of the earth. But it 
is a matter of wonder, O king, concerning the Greeks, whereas 
they excel all the rest of the peoples in their manners and in 25 
their reason, how thus they have gone astray after dead idols 
and senseless images: while they see their gods sawn and polished 
by their makers, and curtailed and cut and burnt and shaped 
and transformed into every shape by them. And when they 
are grown old and fail by the length of time, and are melted 30 
and broken in pieces, how is it that they do not understand 
concerning them that they are not gods? And those who have 
not ability for their own preservation, how will they be able to 
take care of men? But even the poets and philosophers among 
them being in error have introduced concerning them that they 35 
are gods, things like these which are made for the honour of God 
Almighty; and being in error they seek to make them like to 
God as to whom no man has ever seen to whom He is like; nor is 


Lal 


5 


OF ARISTIDES. 47 


he able to see Him’; and together with these things they intro- 
duce concerning Deity as if it were that deficiency were found 
with it; in that they say that He accepts sacrifice and asks for 
burnt-offering and libation and murders of men and temples. But 
God is not needy, and none of these things is sought for by Him: 5 
and it is clear that men are in error in those things that they 
imagine. But their poets and philosophers introduce and say, 4% 
that the nature of all their gods is one; but they have not under- 
stood of God our Lord, that while He is one, He is yet in all. They, 
then, are in error; for if, while the body of man is many in its to 
parts, no member is afraid of its fellow, but whilst it is a com- 
posite body, all is on an equality with all: so also God who is one 
in His nature has a single essence proper to Him, and He is 
equal in His nature and His essence, nor is He afraid of Himself. 
If therefore the nature of the gods is one, it is not proper that 
a god should persecute a god, nor kill nor do him that which is 
evil. | 

If then gods were persecuted and transfixed by gods, and some 
of them were carried off and some were struck by lightning; it is 
clear that the nature of their gods is not one, and hence it is clear, 20 
O king, that that is an error which they speculate about the 
nature of their gods, and that they reduce them to one nature. 
If then it is proper that we should admire a god who is visible 
and does not see, how much more is this worthy of admiration 
that a man should believe in a nature which is invisible and 25 
all-seeing! and if again it is right that a man should investigate 
the works of an artificer, how much more is it right that he 
should praise the Maker of the artificer! For behold! while the 
Greeks have established laws, they have not understood that by 
their laws they were condemning their gods; for if their laws are aa 
just, their gods are unjust, who have committed transgression in 
killing one another and practising sorcery, committing adultery, 
plundering, stealing and sleeping with males, along with the rest 
of their other doings. But if their gods excellently and as they 
describe have done all these things, then the laws of the Greeks 35 
are unjust; and they are not laid down according to the will of 
the gods; and in this the whole world has erred. 


1 1 Tim. vi. 16. 


~“ 


5 


48 THE APOLOGY: 


For as for the histories of their gods, some of them are myths, 
some of them physical, and some hymns and songs: the hymns and 
songs, then, are empty words and sound; and as to the physical, if 
they were done as they say, then they are not gods, since they 
have done these things and suffered and endured these things: Z 
and these myths are flimsy words, altogether devoid of force. 

XIV. Let us come now, O king, also to the history of the Jews 
and let us see what sort of opinion they have concerning God. 
The Jews then say that God is one, Creator of all and almighty: 

. and that it is not proper for us that anything else should be wor- 10 
shipped, but this God only: and in this they/ appear to be much 
nearer to the truth than all the peoples, in that they worship God 
more exceedingly and not His works; and they imitate God by 
reason of the love which they have for man; for they have compas- 
sion on the poor and ransom the captive and bury the dead, and 15 
do things of a similar nature to these: things which are acceptable 
to God and are well-pleasing also to men, things which they have 
received from their fathers of old. Nevertheless they too have , 
gone astray from accurate knowledge, and they suppose in their 
minds that they are serving God, but in the methods of their 20 
actions their service is to angels and not to God, in that they 
observe sabbaths and new moons and the passover and the great 
fast, and the fast, and circumcision, and cleanness of meats: which 
things not even thus have they perfectly observed. 

XV. Now the Christians, O king, by going about and seeking 25 
have found the truth, and as we have comprehended from their 
writings they are nearer to the truth and to exact knowledge than 
the rest of the peoples. For they know and believe in God, the 
Maker of heaven and earth, in whom are all things and from whom 
are all things: He who has no other god as His fellow: from whom 30 
they have received those commandments which they have engraved 
on their minds, which they keep in the hope and expectation of 
the world to come; so that on this account they do not commit 
adultery nor fornication, they do not bear false witness, they do not 
deny a deposit, nor covet what is not theirs: they honour father 35 
and mother; they do good to those who are their neighbours, and 
when they are judges they judge uprightly; and they do not 
worship idols in the form of man; and whatever they do not 


OF ARISTIDES. 49 


wish that others should do to them, they do not practise towards 
any one’, and they do not eat of the meats of idol sacrifices, for 
they are undefiled: and those who grieve them they comfort, and %4& 
make them their friends; and they do good to their enemies: 
and their wives, O king, are pure as virgins, and their daughters 5 
modest: and their men abstain from all unlawful wedlock and 
from all impurity, in the hope of the recompense that is to come 
in another world: but as for their servants or handmaids, or their 
children if any of them have any, they persuade them to become 
Christians for the love that they have towards them; and when !° 
they have become so, they call them without distinction brethren : 
they do not worship strange gods: and they walk in all humility 
and kindness, and falsehood is not found among them, and they 
love one another: and from the widows they do not turn away 
their countenance: and they rescue the orphan from him who does 
him violence: and he who has gives to him who has not, with- 
out grudging ; and when they see the stranger they bring him to 
their dwellings, and rejoice over him as over a true brother; for 
they do not call brothers those who are after the flesh, but those 
who are in the spirit and in God: but when one of their poor 20 
passes away from the world, and any of them sees him, then he 
provides for his burial according to his ability; and if they hear 
that any of their number is imprisoned or oppressed for the name 
of their Messiah, all of them provide for his needs, and if it is 
possible that he may be delivered, they deliver him. 25 

And if there is among them a man that is poor and needy, and 
they have not an abundance of necessaries, they fast two or three 
days that they may supply the needy with their necessary food. 
And they observe scrupulously the commandments of their 
Messiah: they live honestly and soberly, as the Lord their God «ss 
commanded them: every morning and at all hours on account of 
the goodnesses of God toward them they praise and laud Him: 
and over their food and over their drink they render Him thanks. 
And if any righteous person of their number passes away from the 
world they rejoice and give thanks to God, and they follow his 35 
body, as if he were moving from one place to another: and when a 
child is born to any one of them, they praise God, and if again 

1 Cf. Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, ec. 1—4. 
H. A, . 4 


_ 


5 


50 THE APOLOGY 


it chance to die in its infancy, they praise God mightily, as for 
one who has passed through the world without sins. And if 
again they see that one of their number has died in his iniquity 
or in his sins, over this one they weep bitterly and sigh, as over 
one who is about to go to punishment: such is the ordinance of 5 
the law of the Christians, O king, and such their conduct. 

XVI. As men who know God, they ask from Him petitions 
which are proper for Him to give and for them to receive: and 
thus they accomplish the course of their lives. And because they 
acknowledge the goodnesses of God towards them, lo! on account 
of them there flows forth the beauty that is in the world. And 
truly they are of the number of those that have found the truth 
by going about and seeking it, and as far as we have compre- 
hended, we have understood that they only are near to the know- 
ledge of the truth. 15 

But the good deeds which they do, they do not proclaim in the 
ears of the multitude, and they take care that no one shall perceive 
them, and hide their gift, as he who has found a treasure and 
hides it*." And they labour to become righteous as those that © 
expect to see their Messiah and receive from Him the promises 20 
made to them with great glory. 

But their sayings and their ordinances, O king, and the glory 
of their service, and the expectation of their recompense of reward, 
according to the doing of each one of them, which they expect 
in another world, thou art able to know from their writings. It 25 
sufficeth for us that we have briefly made known to your majesty 
concerning the conversation and the truth of the Christians. For 
truly great and wonderful is their teaching to him that is willing 
to examine and understand it. And truly this people is a new 
people, and there is something divine mingled with it. Take now 30 
their writings and read in them, and lo! ye will find that not of 
myself have I brought these things forward nor as their advocate 
have I said them, but as I have read in their writings, these things 
I firmly believe, and those things also that are to come. And 
therefore I was constrained to set forth the truth to them that 35 
take pleasure therein and seek after the world to come. 

And I have no doubt that the world stands by reason of 

1 Matt. xiii. 44, 


_ 


oO 


OF ARISTIDES. 51 


the intercession of Christians. But the rest of the peoples are 
deceived and deceivers, rolling themselves before the elements of 
the world, according as the sight of their understanding is un- 
willing to pass by them; and they grope as if in the dark, because 
they are unwilling to know the truth, and like drunken men they 5 
stagger and thrust one another and fall down. 

XVII. Thus far, O king, it is I that have spoken. For as to 
what remains, as was said above, there are found in their other t& 
writings words which are difficult to speak, or that one should 
repeat them; things which are not only said, but actually done. 10 

The Greeks, then, O king, because they practise foul things 
in sleeping with males, and with mother and sister and daughter, 
turn the ridicule of their foulness upon the Christians; but the 
Christians are honest and pious, and the truth is set before their 
eyes, and they are long-suffering ; and therefore while they know 
their error and are buffeted by them, they endure and _ suffer 
them: and more exceedingly do they pity them as men who are 
destitute of knowledge: and in their behalf they offer up prayers 
that they may turn from their error. And when it chances that 
one of them turns, he is ashamed before the Christians of the 20 
deeds that are done by him: and he confesses to God, saying, 
In ignorance I did these things: and he cleanses his heart, and 
his sins are forgiven him, because he did them in ignorance in 
former time, when he was blaspheming and reviling the true 
knowledge of the Christians. And truly blessed is the race of the 25 
Christians, more than all men that are upon the face of the earth. 

Let the tongues of those now be silenced who talk vanity, and 
who oppress the Christians, and let them now speak the truth. ya 
For it is better that they should worship the true God rather | 
than that they should worship a sound without intelligence; and 30 
truly divine is that which is spoken by the mouth of the Christians, 
and their teaching is the gateway of light. Let all those then 
approach thereunto who do not know God, and let them receive 
incorruptible words, those which are so always and from eternity: 
let them, therefore, anticipate the dread judgment which is to 35 
come by Jesus the Messiah upon the whole race of men. 


The Apology of Aristides the Philosopher is ended. 


La! 


5 


4—2 


NOTES ON THE SYRIAC VERSION. 


p. 35, 1. 4 (<3). We have given in the introductory remarks the reasons 
for believing that the words RRa\w and PADAsst-7 are a part of 
the name of the emperor addressed. Both of these words, however, might 
have been used generally, as royal adjectives. For example, in the recently 
published Acta Mar Kardaghi of Abbeloos p. 87 they occur as titles of the 
king of Persia : ' 


walsn wim eStaX\ 00 Ans MAIAYK sAviz3 wia 


which Abbeloos renders by “contra adorabilem regem regum.” 
722 Mimst walsa nin (rex regum clemens jussit). 


[The plural points in these two titles, though obviously wrong, have been 
retained in our text, in accordance with the principle of reproducing the 
punctuation of the MS. exactly as it stands. In the first sentence the MS. 


has a slight stop after onl re, while there is no stop after As sas. 


Almighty’ can only be retained as an epithet of the Deity : but possibly 
there has been some confusion of the original, which may have run: epi 
OeooeBeias* adroxparopt, k.T.A. | 

l. 7 (ew 7). The demonstration of Divine Providence from the contem- 
plation of the heavenly bodies is common to all forms of Theistic teaching: 
consequently it occurs freely in Christian Apologetics. We may compare 
the following passages : 

Melito, Oration to Antoninus Caesar (Cureton, Spice. Syr. p. 46). ‘He hath 
set before thee the heavens, and He has placed in them the stars. He hath 
set before thee the sun and the moon, and they every day fulfil their course 
therein...He hath set before thee the clouds which by ordinance bring water 
from above and satisfy the earth: that from these things thou mightest 
understand, that He who moveth these is greater than they all, 


[.aco tedu ponlas rte picaa 03] 
and that thou mightest accept the goodness of Him who hath given to thee a 


mind by which thou mayest distinguish these things.” 


Origen, De Principiis, 1.1.5. “But that we may believe on the authority 
of Holy Scripture, that such is the case, hear how in the books of Maccabees, 


NOTES ON THE SYRIAC VERSION. 53 


where the mother of the seven martyrs exhorts her son to endure torture, this 
truth is confirmed: for she says, ‘I ask of thee, my son, to look at the heaven 
and earth, and at all things which are in them, and beholding them, to know 
that God made all these things when they did not exist.’” [2 Mace. vii. 28.] 

Id. tv. 1. 7. - “The artistic plan of a providential Ruler is not so evident 
in matters belonging to the earth, as in the case of the sun, moon and 
stars.” 

1. 11 (ew 11). Cf. Melito, Oration p. 50. ‘He made the lights that His 
works might behold one another, and He concealeth Himself in His might 
from all His works.” 

[l. 11 (p13). mamsdiena. If this reading be correct, the Ethpa. 
seems to be here used in the sense of ‘sibi investigare,’ of which only one 
example is cited in the Thes. Syr., viz. from the unpublished Hexaem. of Bar 
Cephas. The context however of the quotation shews that there at least such 
a meaning is inadmissible. The words (kindly supplied by Dr Zotenberg) 


are: rac See <A camls oats hs BAK ale 
em ~aam phar wo cl cas six’ aml 
wails set pansdma aam pdual durctiuson dusdia 
PIAA om 2 aaw paxad wi Stara ica .-_acals 

-e_acals wauls 5 ASA palwa 


Il. 14, 15 (ef 14, 15). A comparison with the Armenian suggests that 


something has fallen out here. The Syriac cannot be translated as it stands. 
The Greek unfortunately fails us at this point. | 

l. 19 (19). The early Christian teachers emphasised strongly this 
belief that the world was made for the sake of man: consequently we must 
not assume, if we find the same statement in Justin Martyr, that the idea 
was borrowed from Aristides, for it is a part of the regular second-century 
teaching. The following parallels may be quoted : 

Justin, Apol. 1.10. kai mdvra tiv dpxnv ayabov ovra Snurovpynoa avrov &é 
apophov vAns dv avOperovs dedidaypeOa. 

Dial. 41. iva dpa re edxapiotaGpev TG Oe@ Uap Te Tov Tov KOGpoV exTiKEvat 
avy raat Tois ev avt@ dia Tov dvOpwrov. 

Ps. Justin, Hp. ad Diogn. 10. 6 yap Oeds rods avOpwmous Hydmyoe, d¢ ovs 
emoinge Tov KOTpOY, ois UmeTake TavTa, KTE. 

1. 23 (= 5). Cf. Philo, Fragments, p. 70: ev Oe@ povov to Tédevoy Kal 
avevdeés, ev S€ avOpar@ TO émidees Kat aredés. 

Id. de Fortitudine § 3. ‘O omovdaios dAvyodens, aOavdrov Kai Ovntis picews 
peOopuos. 


54, THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 


Acta Mar Kardaghi (ed. Abbeloos, p. 30) : 

mnie . KO .. Od orion dure wr 
Qin Maden AW 2. air’ 

1. 28 (= 8). The same philosophical opinion will be found almost in 
the same words in Eustathius contra Arianos quoted in John of Damascus, 
Parallels th 314, 

nav thy apxnv éxov, Kat TéAos emidéxeTar’ TO dé TéAos emidexXopevor, sid 
éori Sextixov. 

1. 30 (9 10). We may compare the following passages from Justin and 
from the Epistle to Diognetus, in view of Jerome’s statement that Justin 
imitated Aristides, and the modern theory of Doulcet as to the authorship 
of the anonymous epiitis: to a 

Justin, Apol. 1.9. ov yap rovadrny yyovpeba Tov Oedv exew THY poppy, Hv 
baci ties eis Tiny pepipno Oat. 

Justin, Apol. 11. 6. dvoua dé TG wavrwv rarpi Oerov, dyevjT@ GvtL, oVK EoTLV" 
@ yap av kal dvoud Te mpocayopeinra, mpeaBurepov exer Tov Bépevov TO Gvopa. 

Justin, Dial. 4. noi yap WAdrev, jv & eye, adrd rodrov eivar To Tov vod 
Supa Kai mpods Torro Hiv ded0c0a, ds SivacOa Kabopav adits éxcivo TO by eidixpuvet 
aitT@ éxeiv@, 6 TGV vonTay amdvT@y eat alrioy, ov Xp@pa Exov, OV TXHpa, ov 
peéyebos, ovde ovdev av opOadpos Bréret. 

Justin, Apol. 1.10. dAd ovdé déecOa tis map avOporeav vrAuKijs mpoopopas 
mpooeAnpapev Tov Oeov, avTov mapéxovra TavTa OperrTes. 

Ep. ad Diogn. 3. 6 yap mowoas tov odpavov Kal thy yhv Kat mdvra Ta ev 
avrois, kal maow juiv xopnyav av mpocdeopeba, ovdevos Gv avtos mpoadéorTo 
ToUT@v av Tois oiopevors SiSovae mapéxet avTos. 

[p. 36, 1. 13 (A2). iepev Gr. (p. 100, 1. 16) Arm., etSopev Syr. A com- 
parison between the Gr. and Syr. shews a like variation in 3 18 (Gr. p. 101, 


1. 8) and A, 18 Gr. p. 104, 1. 1). 

1.18 (AX 8). ‘The head of the race of their religion.’ This seems to be 
a conflation of the two phrases which occur lower down: ‘the head of their 
race, and ‘the beginning of their religion.’ It should be simply ‘the head of 
their race,’ as we see from the Greek. | 

1, 23 (A183). The Armenian has ‘ Kadmus the Sidonian and Dionysus 
the Theban.’ Of. Herod. 11. 91 rov yap Aavaoy kai rov Avyxéa eovras Xeppiras 
exm\aoat és Thy ‘EAAdda, and I. 49 mapa Kadpou te rod Tupiov Kai trav avy 
airé éx owixns. But Kadmus is a Sidonian in Eur. Bacch, 171 and Ovid, 
Met, tv. 571. 

[l. 27 (AQ17). The statement that the people received the name of 
‘Hebrews’ from Moses is peculiar to the Syr. and Arm. translations.] 

1 29 (X20). The writer not only deduces the name of the Christians 
from the title of their founder, but he is also ready, like Justin and other 


NOTES ON THE SYRIAC VERSION. a5 


fathers, to compare the name with the Greek word ypnoros, as we shall see 
in the closing chapter. The following parallels may be noted in Justin. 

Justin, Apol. 1.12. "Incots Xpicros, ad’ ob kal rd xpioriavol errovopater Gat 
eax Kaper. | 

Dial. 63. rip exxdnoia rh €& dvoparos adrod yevopevy Kal perarxoven Tov 
dvoparos avTOU, xptoTiavol yap mdvres Kadovpeba. 

Ibid. 138. 6 yap xpurrds, mpwrdroxos maons Kticews ay, Kal apy maduy 
GdXov yévous yéyovey, Tov dvayevynbevros Um’ avtrov d¢ Vdaros Kal miotews Kal 
EvAov, ToU TO pvaTHpLoy Tod G@TavpoU ExovTOS, dv TpoTov Kal 6 Ne kTé. 

1, 32 (23). With the closing words of this sentence we may compare 
the Syriac Acts of John (ed. Wright), p. 37, 


wWwam aman ms Mwhojas “las I. aaa 
where we should correct the text so as to read “and when formed as a child 
in the womb He was with His Father.” 
1. 34 (31). The Gospel is clearly a written one, and not the general 


message (evayyeAiov). Inc. xvi. we again find Aristides offering the Emperor 
the Christian Scriptures. 


[l. 38 (3 5). The Greek text has kai reAéoas tHv Oavpaotiy avrod oixovopiar. 
Cf. Justin, Dial. 103, and Otto’s note on that passage, where the use of oiko- 
vonia is illustrated. In the Syriac jax is unsatisfactory. It can hardly 


be intended to represent (oikovopiav) teva. Possibly it is a corruption of some 
word which corresponded to éavpacrnyv. | 


p- 37, 1. 1 (3 6). Another instance of the formula ‘He was crucified by 


the Jews,’ beyond those to which we have already drawn attention, may be 
found in a fragment of Melito preserved by Anastasius Sinaita ; 


‘O Ocos mémovOev ind SeEvas “IopanXiriwos, 


for which the Syriac rendering is given by Cureton, Spic. Syr. = a 


miasos oo cuss Lirjasr’s wala Abs cole 
woul yar 


In later times we may expect to find similar language, though the expres- 
sion itself disappears from the Creed. In Acta Mar Kardaghi p. 37 we have 
the following (loquitur Satanas), 


dlina whoaara a> dlX 5 rascal 
mans mmsalh whias aes aw ths 


J plzitads onade pias agaist aco 
and again in p. 74 
Mstams smasoait ac wit Saras dunarca 
The idea of the Jews being the special agents of Satan in the Crucifixion 


56 THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 


comes out also in an unpublished ’AvriAoyia between the Devil and Christ, 
which is preserved in a MS. at Jerusalem (Cod. 66, 8. Sep.), where we read 

Kal 6 duaBodos éyer’ Tlopevoopat mpos” Avvay kal Kaiddav robs apxvepeis Tous 
enous "lovdaious* Kal roiujow avrovs iva o€ cravpeca@dt. | 

[Compare also the Letter of Pilate in the Acts of Peter and Paul § 42 
(Tisch. Acta Apocr., Lips. 1851, p. 17): of d€ éoratp@oar avrov, Kai tapévros 
avrov dvAakas Katéotncay én’ avrov. | 

1, 20 (x 25). The injunction to have a care that your gods be not stolen 
is not uncommon with the early Christians, and it is not improbable that 
they were able to refer to special and notable cases of violation of temples 
and mutilation of images. We may refer, at all events, to the following 
parallels : 

Justin, Apol. 1. 9. kai trav iepdv évba avaribevra, pvdaxas Tovovrous Kabiord- 
vat, (41) Tvvopovras aOéutrov Kal TO voeiv 7 Aéyew avOpwrovs Gedy evar idAakas. 

Ep. ad Diogn. 2. rods pév ALbivovs kat dorpakivors oéBovres dbvAdkrovs, 
tous O€ dpyupovs Kal xpucods éykAelovres Tais vuél Kal Tais nuépas pddaxas 
mapaxaOioravtes iva pt) KAaTeow. 

1. 26 (ea 5). Compare c. vi. From the “Teaching of the Apostles” 
(c. vi. 3) onwards, idolatry is known as a ‘worship of dead gods’: e.g. Melito, 
Oration p. 43, “But I affirm that also the Sibyl has said respecting them, 
that it is the images of kings, who are dead, they worship.” 

p. 38, lL. 1 (e9 19). The writer now proceeds to discuss the views of those 
who either sought the First Principle in one of the elements or imagined it 
to be located in one of the heavenly bodies. And it is common for the early 
Christian writers to demolish the philosophic schools in detail according as 
they found them referring the origin of all things to water, as Thales; or air, as 
Anaximenes; or fire, as Heraclitus ; or earth, as Pherecydes and Xenophanes. 
We may compare Plutarch De placitis philosophorum 1. 3, and then notice how 
the Christian apologists deal with the matter. The writer of the Epistle to | 
Diognetus thinks that, if a god is to be found amongst the elements, one 
element or created thing is as good as another: 

Lp. ad Diogn. 8. vi pev mip epacav civa tov bedv (od péARover Xophoew 
avroi, ToUTO Kadovat Oedv)* of Se Vap* of & GAXo te TeV oTOLXElwv TAY exTiTpEvaVv 
v0 Oeod" Kairovye, et Tis TovT@y Tay Adywv GmddeKTos ott, SivatT’ av Kal TOY 
Aowrav Kricpar@v ev Exaorov duoiws aropaiverbar Oedr. 

Melito deals even more shortly with the matter, and in a rude common- 
Sense manner says that we may call a creature God without making it to be 
divine : 

Oration, p. 42. “ And if, therefore, a man...say that there is another God, 
it is found from his own words that he calleth some created thing God. 
For if a man call fire God, it is not God, because it is fire; and if a man 
call the waters God, they are not God, because they are waters; and if this 
earth which we tread upon, and if those heavens which are seen by us, and 
if the sun, or the moon, or one of those stars which run their course by 


NOTES ON THE SYRIAC VERSION. 57 


ordinance and rest. not, nor proceed by their own will—and if a man call 
gold and silver gods: are not these things that we use as we please ?” 

It will be seen that their treatment of the subject was superficial, no other 
treatment being, in fact, necessary. Aristides, however, takes the matter 
more seriously and examines each case in detail by the light of his previously 
stated axioms concerning the divine nature. 

[1.1 (e919). Adwpev Gr., éravéeAOwpev Syr. Comp. also a 18 (Gr. p. 104, 
is 1). 

1L8(05). Shoda (so Cod.) = Chowas cf. 1. 22. 


L 36 (410). FewFaaa, Probably for FAO, examples of which 
are given under way in the Thes. Syr. 

p. 39, 1. 1 (4 11). ~_ashaalsr. This phrase, ‘your majesty,’ does 
not in any way suggest that more than one person is addressed. 

1, 11 (\ 20). A probable emendation is has get re drsaxs0. 


]. 27 (.a9 13). © cal dur dusa. This slight emendation brings the 
Syr. into more literal accordance with the Gk. The expression pepicpov 
€xovra seems also to have suggested the next sentence in the Syriac, where it 
is combined with the preceding words «is ypjow trav avOperev. 

l, 37 (A 1). Similar language is applied to the heaven in a paragraph 
found only in the Gr. (p. 101, 1. 30) cai ék modA@y ouvertara* bid Kal Koopos 
kadeira. Where the reference is to man, we should have expected puxpos 
kiopos. See Suicer, Zhes. 11. 369 (1728). A treatise was written on this 
subject (rw Jas. woals rmzit2a) by Ahudhemmeh ({ A.D. 575). 
See Bibl. Or. 111. 1. 194. 

p- 40, ll. 22 ff. (2 2-12). In this classification of the gods of the Greeks the 
principal points in which the Syr. differs from the Gr. are : (1) ddeAdoxrovous 
(p. 104, 1. 7) is not represented. It is absent also from the Pemb. Coll. MS. of 
the Greek. (2) After pawvopevous two clauses are inserted, the one taken from 
the description of Apollo (ers 21, 22), and the other from that of Artemis 
(Qs 5). (3) An additional clause is inserted after cai guyadas yevopévous. 
(4) Two additional clauses, the one taken from the description of Aphrodite 
(Qs 15), the other probably from that of Tammuz (Qa 23), are inserted after 
the words kai komrropévous kal Opnvovpevous. 

It may be remarked that the Greek participles just quoted are both ren- 
dered as passives (‘wept and lamented by men’) by the Syr. translator. The 
Latin version omits them: the translation of Billyus is: ‘ nonnullos vulnera 
accepisse, ac lamenta edidisse.”] 

1. 25 ( 7). He is referring to Apollo, Poseidon and Asklepios: cf. 
Tertullian, Apol. 14, Hic Apollinem Admeto regi pascendis pecoribus addicit, 
ille Neptuni structorias operas Laomedonti locat. Est et illis de lyricis 


58 THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 


(Pindarum dico) qui Aescolapium canit avaritiae merito, quia medicinam 
nocenter exercebat, fulmine iudicatum. 


[]. 33 (2 12). «© AtsNI3. The Pah. and Aph. of TAK _= moechari 
are not given in the Lexicons. The use of the former is however a marked 
feature in the language of our translator. It occurs again Ou» 9 with 


A; Ww 12, absol.; ss 20 and Gs 11, with =. Compare jn, Targ. 
Job xxxvi. 20. We have an instance of the Aph. in Mat. v. 32 (Cur.) 
cal BY AsQQd = moet avTny porxevOjva. 


1, 34 ( 13). Arsh ot so MS. Prof. Néldeke happily suggests 


atssh re verunreinigten sich, comparing waco is as verunreinigt 
werden. ae 11. 103 D and Thain = Unreinhert Lag. Anal. 43. 27. 


p. 41, 1. 20 (pts 14. Gr. p. 104, 1. 22). The Syr. supports neither das 
nor 6 mperos.| ) 

1, 21 (pe 15). The translator gives the Syriac name for Saturn, ¢ AA. 
In the Classical Review for June 1890, p. 259,. Prof. Margoliouth reviewing 
Budge’s Pseudo-Callisthenes remarks as follows, “On p. 9 after the name of 
each planet we are told what the Persian for it is: surely this implies that 
the book which the translator had before him was in Persian. I will quote 
one of these, because Mr Budge has by accident missed the truth. The name 


of Saturn is omitted from the list, but instead we read, the colour a _A\_ 
of a black stone, and the horoscopus of helanit which is called in Persian Farnig’. 
Mr Budge would emend Farnig’, but it is a Persian word signifying Saturn...... 
Hence Ee colour’ must stand for a word signifying Satwrn; and this 
will be the Persian lees which the translator has read ese colour’.” 


It would seem to be a more direct process simply to emend the Syriac 
= _AK_ into o_as : 

[l. 28 (w% 22). eohataiX_ Cod. Prof. Néldeke proposes een, 

p. 42, 1.2 (as 10). The amours of the gods are, as might have been 
expected, the staple of early Christian apologetics. A few references may 
be given in illustration of the scornful summary of Olympic history given by 
Aristides. 

Justin, Apol. 1. 21. mocovs yap viois ddoKxovor tov Aros of map’ vpiv 
Ti@pevor cvyypaheis, emictacbe* “Epuny pév, Noyov Tov EpunvevTiKov Kat TayToV 
diSdoKkadov, "AckAnmioy dé, kai Oeparevtny yevopevov, Kepavvwbevra avednrvbévat 
eis ovpavor, Avsvucoy S€ diaomapaybévra, ‘Hpaxdéa S¢ puy_ movev éavtov mupi 
ddvra, Tos ex Andas Sé AtoocKovpous, Kal tov éx Aavans epoéa,... 

Justin, Apol. 1.25. Oe@ 5€ rO adyevyntr@ Kal drabei Eavrods dveOjKapev, ov 
ovte én’ Avridmnv Kal Tas GAXas cpoiws ovde ext Tavupndny Se oiotpov eAnArvOevar — 
meOopuea. 


NOTES ON THE SYRIAC VERSION. 59 


Recog. Clement. x. 22. ‘‘ Antiopen Nyctei versus in Satyrum corrupit: ex 
qua nascuntur Amphion et Zethus; Alcmenam, mutatus in virum eius 
Amphitryonem; ex qua nascitur Hercules: Aeginam Asopi, mutatus in 
aquilam, ex qua nascitur Aeacus. Sed et Ganymedem Dardani mutatus 
nihilominus in aquilam stuprat; Mantheam Phoci, mutatus in ursum; ex 
qua nascitur Arctos: Danaen Acrisii, mutatus in aurum; ex qua nascitur 
Perseus: Europen Phoenicis, mutatus in taurum; ex qua nascitur Minos, et 
Rhadamanthus Sarpedonque: Eurymedusam Achelai, mutatus in formicam ; 
ex qua nascitur Myrmidon: Thaliam Aetnam nympham, mutatus in vulturem ; 
ex qua nascuntur apud Siciliam Palixi: Imandram Geneani apud Rhodum, 
mutatus in imbrem: Cassiopiam, mutatus in virum eius Phoenicem; ex qua 
nascitur Anchinos: Ledam Thesti, mutatus in cyecnum; ex qua nascitur 
Helena: et iterum eandem, mutatus in stellam; ex qua nascuntur Castor et 
Pollux: Lamiam, mutatus in upupam: Mnemosynen, mutatus in pastorem ; 
ex qua nascuntur Musae novem: Nemesin, mutatus in anserem: Semelen 
Cadmiam mutatus in ignem; ex qua nascitur Dionysus,” etc. 

See also Ps. Justin, Oratio ad Gentiles = Ambrose, Hypomnemata (Cure- 
ton, Spice. Syr. pp. 63, 64) for a similar sketch to that of Aristides. 


[l. 4 (.2a2 11). Pasiphae is an erroneous insertion in the Syriac. 
L 6 (as 13). T>A\_seems to be an attempt to render garvpov. In the 
Syriac of Ambrose (Spic. Syr. ut 16) the Greek word is transliterated. 


1.7 (asa 14). &3eM~@R. Our translator seems to have read SEAHNH® 
for SEMEAHS. 


1. 11 (ae 19). wanalaa wala .warsarlaa walws, 


‘Castor and Polydeuces and Helene (rl) and Paludus.’ This last word 
is a vox nihili; and the confusion has arisen in the following manner. The 
Greek has ‘Castor and Helene and Polydeuces.’ The Syriac scribe has written 
Polydeuces in its more obvious position immediately after Castor, and then 
the second Polydeuces has suffered corruption. 


1, 18 (Ae 6. Gr. p. 105, 1.15). rédv dedv avrav Codd. AW. Syr. 


1. 30 (Ae 16). mmy> ws >a5 Jasa@a in the Syr. alone. Comp. 
‘cum pilleo Vulcanus et malleo,” Arnob. adv. nat. vi. 12.] 

1. 31 (Se 17). For the ornaments made by Hephaestus, and sarcastic 
Christian remarks thereon, we may cite 

Tatian, Oratio ad Giraecos, c. VIII. ‘O yap apduyunets, os cikos, 0 mopmas 
kal yvapmras €Atkas Snurovpyey Trois Kopokocpiots HraTnoe THY GunTopa maida Kal 
opharny (sc. "AOnvav). 

[l. 37 (me 2). eter, ‘maimed.’ The Greek has kvAddv: but it is 
an impossible epithet for Hermes. The corruption however must have been a 
very early one. The Pembroke College MS. has dddiov as a suggestion in 
the margin; but this is merely a conjectural emendation of the seventeenth 


60 THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 


century. The Latin version has ‘uersipellem.’ Probably xvdddv has slipped 
in from the description of Hephaestus just above. It may be noted however 
that ‘versipellis’ = M1211) Prov. xiv. 25, Vulg., where the LXX. has ddduos, 
which is elsewhere used as an epithet of Hermes. If therefore the Latin 
really represents a Greek word, and is not a mere guess, déAcov would seem to 
be appropriate, and it is not very unlike kuvAddp. 

WITIA (‘and an athlete’). An addition in the Syr., referring to Hermes 
as the inventor of the palaestra. Comp. ‘curat Mercurius ceromas, pugillati- 
bus et luctationibus praeest,’ Arnob. adv. nat. 11. 23. 

p. 48, 1. 7 (ma 11). The Syr. read Aaxedaiyova or Aaxedaipdviov and omitted 
viov. , 

1, 25 (oa 7). vd rev Tirravov. Comp. Arnob. adv. nat. 1. 41, v. 19. The 
Syr. has the singular. ’ 


1. 29 (eae 12). , wal 12. AID SIM. Peculiar to the Syriac. 
Comp. ta 7 éxOpa puceiv, Eur. Herc. Fur. 586. 

p. 44, 1 1 (ens 21, 22), Meania <tdap, lit. ‘a cithara, and a 
striker’ (cf. « 5). This last word might mean the ‘plectrum’; or it might 
mean another musical instrument. Cf. Arnob. adv. nat. vi. 12, ‘cum plectro 
et fidibus Delius’ 

The Greek has xiOdpav cai éravOida (or éravOida, or éravdida). The emen- 
dations mAnxrida and mpyxrida have little to commend them. The Latin ver- 
sion has ‘ tibiam.’] 

1, 31 (ya 5). [The paragraph on Rhea and the following one on Proserpine 
are not in the Greek.] The Fathers not infrequently allude to the myth of 
Rhea and Atys. [Cf. Tatian, ad Graecos, 8, ‘Péa pév ydp, hv of dro Tév Spvyiov 
dpav KuBéAnv hacir,.. dia rov épapevov radtns “Arr. | 

The story is apparently Phrygian in origin, though very similar in its 
details to forms from the further East. Lucian (De dea Syra, 33) de- 
scribing the three images in the temple at Hierapolis says that the first 
two are Zeus and Hera, and the third xadéerar S€ onpniuv kai vm atrov 
*"Agovpiov ovd€ tt dvopa idtov avt@ eOevro. Baethgen (Beitriige zur Semitischen 
Religionsgeschichte) p. 73 most ingeniously conjectures this to be a mis- 
understanding of Lucian’s ; onpetoyv=SNN=NNY which last stands for Att? or 
Atys: the name appearing in a variety of forms, sometimes alone, sometimes 
combined with other deities, and sometimes as a factor in proper names: e.g. 
in Bardesanes De Fato we are told that the men of Edessa down to the time 
of Abgar used to sacrifice their foreskins to Tharatha: this seems to be a 
late form NNYINY=INWY+NNY or Istar + Atta, 

As to the establishment of dances in honour of Atys, these are a cha- 
racteristic feature of Semitic orgiastic worship. One of the best illustrations 
is the temple of Baal-Marcod, which stands on a spur of the Lebanon above 
Beyrout, and where there are many inscriptions from the ancient temple 


NOTES ON THE SYRIAC VERSION. 61 


built into the walls of a modern convent. The name implies Lord of Dances 
and in one inscription given by Waddington (Inscr. Syr. No. 1855) is directly 
paraphrased as koipave kdpor. 

~ fp. 45,1. 11 (age 2). IX As dus in the Syriac alone, taken 
from the formula in 1. 9.] 

1, 22 (.gxe 13). According to our apologist Isis fled to Byblos in Syria; 
and this agrees with Plutarch De Jside et Osiride, that Byblos was a sanc- 
tuary of Isis; now we know from Lucian De Dea Syra c.6 that the great 
sanctuary at Byblos was a sanctuary of Aphrodite BuBdéy (cf. Strabo Xvi. 2, 
p. 362 BuBdros="Adardos tepd). We should therefore have to assume that 
Byblos was the centre at once of an Isis-cult and an Aphrodite-cult which is 
the same thing as an Astarte-cult, for our apologist tells us to equate the 
Greek Aphrodite to the Syrian Astera. We must then assume either that 
the two forms of worship existed side by side, or that there had been a fusion 
of the two cults, the latter hypothesis being favoured by the similarity be- 
tween the case of Aphrodite weeping for Tammuz and Isis lamenting Osiris. 
Moreover the confusion extends to the personalities of Osiris and Adonis: 
and Movers quotes from Stephanus of Byzantium as follows: ’ApaOods odus 
Kimpov dpxyaorarn, ev 7 "Adous "Oorpis érysaro by Alyimriv ovra Kvrpuot kal 
Poivxes iStoro.ovvto. 

Whether, then, we pay attention to the dead gods or the wailing goddesses, 
there is a.great similarity in the matter of the two religions. And we have 
suggested that in the sanctuary at Byblos the two cults may have been 
carried on side by side. One other question suggests itself, viz. whether they 
may not both be modifications of some earlier worship. We have some 
reason for believing that the original Byblos-worship was that of the Assyrian 
Baaltis, for Philo Byblius says that this city was the gift of Cronos to 
Baaltis. Now this Baaltis, the Assyrian mother of the gods, appears in the 
west in a Greek form, first under the name of Mylitta by a common change 
in the pronunciation of 6 and m. But this Mylitta is affirmed by Herodotus 
to be capable of equation with Aphrodite (1. 131 xadéovor d€ ’"Acovpioe rv 
’"Adpodirny MvArra) and this would lead us to recognize in the sanctuary 
at Byblos an original sanctuary of Mylitta. 


[p. 46, 1. 2 (As 6). We should probably read W235 and transfer 
Tasx\5 to the preceding clause. ] 


1 3 (Ao 7). The local variation in the Egyptian worship appears in 
Herodotus and is alluded to by the Christian fathers: 


Herod. 11. 69. roiow pev 87 tav Alyumtioy ipoi eict of KpoxddeiAor, Toto Se 
ov, GAdAa Gre troAepious trepterrovct. 

Justin, Apol. 1.24. GddX@v dAdaxod kai dévdpa ceBouévav Kai rorapods Kal 
pus Kai aihovpous kal Kpoxodeihovs Kal Tay ahoyov Cawv Ta ToAAa. 

Recog. Clement. v. 20. “Nam alii eorum bovem qui Apis dicitur colendum 
tradidere, alii hircum ; alii gattas; nonnulli ibin; quidam serpentem; piscem 


62 THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 


quoque, et caepas et cloacas, crepitus ventris, pro numinibus habendos esse 
docuerunt: et alia innumerabilia quae pudet etiam nominare.” 

[See Mayor’s notes to Juv. Sat. xv., for a storehouse of references on this 
point. | 

Of the objects of worship mentioned by Aristides, some are rather diffi- 
cult to identify. The first question that arises is with regard to the animal 


denoted by esa%z.. In the Dublin MS. of the Fables of Syntipas, Fable 
45, we find 


Mido dusaatf 30am 


The word therefore stands for a cat. The fable to which we have referred is 
No. 40 in Landsberger’s Fabeln des Sophos. The Syriac reference is due to 
Prof. Bensly. 


[ raat. == atNouvpos occurs in Lagarde’s Geop. 116. 19 (Gr. xiv. 4), and 


the form mItAxL in Geop. 114. 22 (Gr. xtv. 15).] 

Twice there is an allusion to sacred fish, once in a general manner, 
where we should perhaps correct IAI to IAs, thus placing the dove 
with the rest of the sacred birds; and once in a special manner, where the 
name of the fish is given as Shibbuta. What fish is this? Is it the same as 
the Aemidords of Herodotus (11. 72) ? 

vouifovat dé Kai trav iyOv@v rov Kadedpevov AemiBordv ipdv eivar Kal THY 
eyxedvv. it 

The name of the fish is found in the Arabic Lexicons as roads : and in 
Freytag it is described as being like a shad (alosa) but three times larger, and 
is said to be exported from the Euphrates to Aleppo. Cf. Levy, Veuhebriiisches 
und Chaldiisches Worterbuch, tv. pp. 496, 678. 

For a similar account of this fish we may refer to a note by Kosegarten in 
Z. D. M. G. tv. 249. Kosegarten merely quotes the Kamus and Freytag, but 
an editorial note adds that the fish in question is the Latin rhombus, i.e. the 
turbot. 


[w alo , ‘silurus,’ ‘the shad-fish’ (cf. Mayor’s note on Juv. Sat. Iv. 32). 


This comes in somewhat inappropriately: and it may have arisen from a 
misreading of aidovpos. ‘The cat’ however is represented lower down by 
rmIAT.. 

mia, ‘the fish,’ is evidently out of place here in the midst of the birds, 
and indeed it is repeated later on, ‘the fish Shibbuta.’ It would be easy 
to emend ra, ‘the dove’; but all the birds are of the ravenous type. 
There is just a possibility that mas wiz may have been the original 
word. It occurs in the Pesh. Vers. of Levit. xi. 17, where the corresponding 
word in the A. V. is ‘the cormorant.’ 

1,14 (Ae 18). -_amadaas rm. The Syriac translator read éraipwr 
for érépov.| 


NOTES ON THE SYRIAC VERSION. 63 


1. 27 (.& 6). Here the language may be illustrated by a reference 
to Justin, Apol. 1. 9, ri yap Sei cidoow tpiv éeyew @ Thy VAny of TexviraL 
diariOéacr E€ovres Kai Téuvovres Kal yovevovres kal rumrortes ; and Hp. ad Diogn. 
2, ody 5 pev adrav AWokdos, 6 dé yadrkeds, 0 5€ dpyvpoKdmos, 6 Sé Kepapeds 
emAacev ;sx 

[p. 47, 1. 20 (wm 15, 16). Our translator has evidently taken ryy trav 
Oedv vowdoyiay in the sense of ‘the counting of the natures of the gods.’] 

p. 49, 1. 1 (NS 21). The description given of the Christians in this 
chapter recalls in many points the “Teaching of the Apostles.” To begin 
with, we have the golden rule in a negative form, which may be compared 
with the first chapter of the Teaching, and with a similar Syriac sentence 
given as a saying of Menander in Land, Anecdota 1, 69, from Cod. Mus. 
Britt. 14658, fol. 166 7, as follows: 


eaeh wl age dur . tio walsa aac Ls 


which is a very different rendering from that of Aristides, and may be sus- 
pected from its ascription to Menander to be a translation of some metrical 
form of the golden rule. 

The version in Aristides, from its setting in the text of the Apology, 
between two precepts against idolatry, viz. idols in the form of man, and 
meats offered to idols, reminds one of the Codex Bezae which completes the 
rule of the Council at Jerusalem (Acts xv. 29) by adding the words 

kal doa ph Oédere Eavrois yeiverOa, éErépw py Troveiv. 
But whether the sentence stood in this connexion in the primitive Didascalia, 
we cannot say. 

Other parallels will suggest themselves, as when Aristides describes 
Christian practice in words that seem to answer to 

ov po.xyevoets, od mopvevcets, ov Wevdopaptupyaets, ovK amoaTepyaets, OK 
emOupnoes Ta TOU mAnoior, 
which does not differ much from c. 11. of the Teaching. The parallelisms, 
however, are only just sufficient to suggest an acquaintance with the Teaching 
on the part of Aristides; and his whole presentation of Christian ethics is 
vastly superior to anything in the Didaché, and can only be paralleled for 
beauty and spirituality in the pages of Tertullian. [See further, pp. 84 ff] 

[3 ("A 1). gertasisa, ‘they comfort.’ This is a mistranslation of 


the Greek word zapaxadovew, which in this place clearly means not ‘to com- 
fort,’ but ‘to exhort.’] 

p- 50, 1.37(a& 17). The belief that the world stands by reason of the 
Christians occurs also in the following passages : 

Justin, Apol. 1. 45. ws av...cuvrehéoOn 6 apiOpos Trav mpoeyvacpévor avT@ 
dyabay ywopever kai évapérar, dt ods kal pyndér@ Thy emxipoow Teroinrat. 

Justin, Apol. 11. 7. d0ev kai emipever 6 Beds rHv cvyxvow Kai KaTadvow Tod 


64 THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 


mavTos Koopov py ToLnoat...dva TO OTEeppa TAY xploTLAVaeY, 6 yweoKe: ev TH HioeEL 
Ott airiov ear. 

Ep. ad Diogn. 6. ypiotiavol KaréxovTat pev ws ev Ppovps TO KOOH®, avTol 
d€ wuvéxovat Tov KOTpOV. 

The extract from the Epistle to Diognetus is nearer to the idea of 
Aristides than the passages quoted from Justin. 


[LST (ARTs! 20% ala - whaXla ai dula. An instance of 


the so-called pleonastic negative retained from the Greek. Cf. Plato Hip. 
min. 369 D éyd rot ovk dudio Byte py ovyi o€ eivar copsrepov 7) epé.| 

p. 51, 1.2 (aa 19). The expression elt ts din which we have ren- 
dered “rolling themselves,” occurs again in Melito, Oration (Cureton, Spic. 


Syr. p. Aga, 25), 


bum panda Cath As bur Mare wis 
eXin wis whas \ 


(“Why rollest thou thyself upon the earth, and offerest supplication to things 
which are without perception ?”) 


fl. 13 (ys 7). MAWAY , ‘ridicule, ‘scorn. This word seems often 


to be confused with IAXY , ‘horror, which occurs as a variant for it, 


2. Pet. ii. 18 (compare the Urmi edition of 1846 and the New York edition of 
1886): cf. 4 Macc. 14. 1.] 

1, 32 («sa 4). For the expression “gateway of light” cf. Barnab. 18, 
‘Odi dvo ciciv didayns Kai eovaias, 7 Te Tod doris Kai 7) TOU oKdrovs, and 
Justin, Dial. 7, exov 5€ cor mpo mavtav ghwtds dvorxOjvar midas* od yap 
avvorra ovdé ovvvonra maclv eotwy, ci py T@ Geos dG curtevar Kal 6 xpiotos adrod. 

1, 36 («sa& 8). The concluding words may be compared with Justin, Dial. 
58, ev ymep peAXder kpioer Sia TOU Kupiov pov “Inoov Xpicrod 6 moinTHs Tov dv 
beds rroveio Oat. . 

It will be seen that we have given especial attention to the illustrations 
furnished to the text of our author by the undoubted writings of Justin and 
by the Epistle to Diognetus. We have not, however, been able to agree with 
the opinion of Doulcet in reference to the latter writing, nor with the 
tradition of Jerome in reference to Justin’s imitation of Aristides. It may, 
however, be taken for granted, from the parallels adduced, that Justin and 
Aristides are nearly contemporary. 


APPHNDIX 


THE REMAINS OF THE ORIGINAL GREEK 


OF 


THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES 


BY 


J. ARMITAGE ROBINSON B.D. 


FELLOW AND ASSISTANT TUTOR OF CHRIST’S COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE 












hia we “a 


A oa 


aa 


po Henegs 
- a 


ist Me iit i a bite oe won 











Piste ease Ye a Ba ee 
s —" ae : 





e ary ht 





ait — ia fons 








* ye 4 
=) ae a — P42) 
= j i ; . es + % A, 0 tt . Ps pial yey 
| eiciane a oe ad ie. 9 } i en bg ie & Bie E _ Sey a ne “6 FSI) ¥ ee eet oe 





ie #3 it SE spite: is wee NRL: See vote ee 






rs. ai oe a Ee ie Sota a Agtheret Bol as re 
a hi pe a she ae eel pee i a es oe eT, re 
§ > iS ae i be ee oa: Lia Be pron ¥ a 


a Wes a 4 secel again Aes 











THE ORIGINAL GREEK OF THE APOLOGY 
OF ARISTIDES. 


- WuitE Mr Harris was passing the preceding pages through 
the press, he kindly allowed me to read the proof-sheets of his 
translation of the Syriac. Shortly afterwards as I was turning 
over Latin Passionals at Vienna in a fruitless search for a lost MS. 
of the Passion of S. Perpetua, I happened to be reading portions 
of the Latin Version of the ‘Life of Barlaam and Josaphat,’ and 
presently I stumbled across words which recalled the manner and 
the thought of Aristides. Turning back to the beginning of a 
long speech, I found the words: ‘ Ego, rex, providentia Dei veni 
in mundum; et considerans celum et terram, mare et solem et 
lunam, et cetera, admiratus sum ornatum eorum. The Greek text 
of ‘Barlaam and Josaphat’ is printed in Migne’s edition of the 
works of 8. John of Damascus: and it was not long before I was 
reading the actual words of the Apologist himself: "Eyo, Bacrd, 
mpovoia Oeod 7AOov eis TOV KOopoV: Kal Jewpnoas TOV ovpavoY Kal 
ynv Kal Odraccav, HrLOv TE Kal GEANVHY Kal TA AoLTA, COaipaca 
thy Swakdopynow tovtwv. It was with some impatience that I 
waited for my return to Cambridge, in order to examine the 
proof-sheets again, and so to discover by a comparison of the 
Syriac Version how much of our author was really in our hands 
in the original tongue. 

To what extent then does the Greek speech in ‘ Barlaam and 
Josaphat’ correspond to the Syriac Version of the Apology of 
Aristides? In other words: How far may we claim to have 
recovered the original Apology in the language in which it was 
written ? 

. The circumstances under which the Greek has been preserved 
at all demand first a brief notice. ‘The Life of Barlaam and 


5—2 


68 THE ORIGINAL GREEK 


Joasaph (or Josaphat)’ is the title of a religious romance, which, 
by a tradition dating at the latest from the 11th century, has been 
connected with the name of S. John of Damascus. It is true 
that SS. Barlaam and Josaphat find a place in the Calendars of 
both the Eastern and Western Churches: but it has long been 
recognised that their ‘ Life’ is a working up of the Indian legend 
of Sakya Mouni, or Buddha; and a number of the apologues scat- 
tered over the piece have also been identified as Eastern stories 
of a very early date. 

The popularity of the book has rarely been equalled in the 
history of literature. Before the 13th century it had been trans- 
lated into almost every known language of the world; an Icelandic 
Version was made about the year 1200 by the order of a Norwegian 
king; and there is an early English rendering in metre. 

It has lately been argued, and I think with success, by 
Zotenberg’, that the book is much earlier than the time of 8. John 
of Damascus; and that the matter which it has in common with 
several of his works is drawn from previous writers such as 
Gregory Nazianzen and Nemesius. This being so, it may well go 
back to the 6th century, or perhaps earlier still. 

The outline of the story is as follows. An Eastern king, named 
Abenner, persecutes the Christians, and especially the monks, 
whom he expels from India. He is childless; but at length the 
young prince Josaphat is born, and the astrologers, as in 
the case of Buddha, predict for him an extraordinary greatness. 
They add however that he will become a Christian. This his 
father determines to prevent. He encloses him in a magnificent 
palace ; allows none but young and beautiful attendants to approach 
him; and forbids the mention of sorrow, disease and death, and 
above all of Christianity. When the prince is grown to man’s 
estate he asks his father to give him liberty. His entreaties are 
at length successful, as it seems that otherwise his life will be 
saddened, and the first step will have been taken towards his 
reception of the forbidden faith. He is allowed to drive out, but 
the way is carefully prepared beforehand, and guarded from the 


1 Notice sur le livre de Barlaam et Joasaph, Paris, 1886. A useful summary of 
the literature on ‘B. and J.’ is given by Krumbacher in Iwan von Miiller’s Hand- 
buch der alt. Wissensch. vol. 9, pt. 1, p. 469. 


OF THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 69 


intrusion of sad sights and sounds. At last precaution fails, and 
he sees one day a lame man and a blind man, and another day a 
man wrinkled and tottering with age. He inquires whether 
accidents may befal any man, and whether every man must come 
at last to miserable old age or death. There is but one answer: 
and the joy has fled from his life. 

A monk of the desert, Barlaam by name, is divinely warned of 
the prince’s condition; and comes disguised as a merchant, and 
obtains entrance to the prince to shew him a most goodly pearl. 
In a long discourse, into which Gospel parables and Eastern 
apologues are skilfully woven, he expounds to him the vanity of 
the world and the Christian hope of the life to come. In the 
end the prince is baptized, and Barlaam disappears into the 
desert. The king, distracted with rage on the one hand and love 
for his son on the other, casts about for means to shake his faith. 
A wily counsellor propounds a plan. An old man, who closely 
resembles Barlaam and who is an admirable actor, is to defend 
the cause of Christianity in an open debate. He is to make a 
lame speech, and be easily refuted by the rhetoricians. The 
prince, seeing his instructor baffled, will renounce his newly 
accepted faith. 

The day comes, and Nachor, for this is the old man’s name, 
appears to personate Barlaam. Josaphat addresses him in vigor- 
ous terms, reminding him of the difficulties in which his instruc- 
tions have involved him, and promising him a miserable fate if 
he fails to prove his point. Nachor is not reassured by this mode 
of address; but after some preliminary fencing on the part of 
the rhetoricians he begins to speak. Such, says our author, was 
the providence of God, that like Balaam of old he had come 
to curse, but he ended by blessing with manifold blessings. Or, 
as he says again, lowering his metaphor; ‘He beckoned to the 
multitude to keep silence, and he opened his mouth, and like 
Balaam’s ass he spake that which he had not purposed to speak ; 
and he said to the king: I, O king, by the providence of God 
came into the world....’ 

The Apology of Aristides carried the day: and, to cut the long 
story short, Nachor himself and finally the king and his people 
were converted: and at last Josaphat, who in due course succeeds 


70 THE ORIGINAL GREEK 


his father, resigns his kingdom and retires to spend his days with 
Barlaam in the desert’. 


What modifications then were required to fit the Apology 
for its new surroundings? Surprisingly few. 


(1) The king is of course addressed throughout: but this 
is so in the original piece. Only a short sentence at the end 
praises the wise choice of the king’s son, 


(2) The fourfold division of mankind into Barbarians and 
Greeks, Jews and Christians, was out of place in an Indian 
court. We find in its stead a triple division—Worshippers of 
false gods, Jews and Christians: and the first class is subdivided 
into Chaldeans, Greeks and Egyptians, as being the ringleaders 
and teachers of heathenism to the rest of the world’. 


(8) A short passage at the close, in which the Christians 
are defended from the foul charges so often brought against them 
in the first days, was out of date and consequently has disap- 
peared. 


(4) If we add to this that there are traces of compression 
here and there, and that the description of the Christians at the 
close is considerably curtailed, we have exhausted the list of 
substantial modifications which can with certainty be detected. 

The substance of the Apology then is for the most part faith- 
fully preserved: but can we say that with the exceptions already | 
named we have the actual Greek words of Aristides himself ? 

The first and most obvious test to apply is that of comparative 
length. The Syriac is, speaking roughly, half as long again as 
the Greek: and this difference is not fully accounted for by the 
combination in the latter of the preliminary statements about the 
Jews and the Christians with the fuller descriptions of them given 
later on, and by the omission of nearly two pages at the close. 


1 A small fragment (below, p. 104), which is omitted from its proper place in 
Nachor’s speech, is embodied in an early part of the book (Bois. p. 49). We thus 
see that the writer had the Apology before him at the outset of his work, and 
designed his plot with the definite intention of introducing it, 

2 See, however, below, p. 90; where reasons are given which tend to shew 
that the Greek has preserved the original triple division, as against the Syriac and 
the Armenian. 


OF THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 71 


The fact is that the Syriac has a large number of repetitions and 
not a few additional details which are absent from the Greek. 
Thus at the end of each description of the several gods and 
goddesses of the heathen, the Syriac Version points the moral 
and drives home the inevitable conclusion: and again such his- 
tories as those of Kronos and of Isis and Osiris are somewhat 
more elaborately told in this form of the Apology. 

Are we then to conclude that the Syriac translator has en- 
larged upon his original, and supplemented it here and there from 
his own resources? Or must we say that the author of ‘ Barlaam 
and Josaphat’ found the Apology too long for his purpose, and 
pruned away unnecessary details ? 

The second hypothesis has a prima facie probability, and the 
general reputation for faithfulness of Syriac translators might 
point us in the same direction. On the other side it is to be 
observed that, even when read in the light of the Syriac Version, 
the Greek form is still felt to be a harmonious and consistent 
whole: and it certainly does not convey the impression of serious 
mutilation. The genius of the author, in so framing his plot as 
perfectly to suit the Apology which he intended to introduce, 
needs no further praise than is involved in the fact that hitherto 
no one has had the remotest suspicion that he did not write the 
speech of Nachor himself. If anything could make his genius 
appear more extraordinary still, it would be the proof that he 
had consistently compressed the original document in almost 
every alternate sentence without leaving any traces of rough 
handling: but such proof is at present not forthcoming. In the 
absence of further documents, the question must be decided 
largely by internal evidence and the minute investigation of the 
points of difference. But there are two external sources from 
which light may be thrown upon the problem. 


(1) In 1855 Cureton published in his Spicilegiwm Syriacum 
a treatise bearing the title: ‘Hypomnemata, which Ambrose, a 
chief man of Greece, wrote ;’ and commencing with the words: 
‘Do not suppose, men and Greeks, that without fit and just 
cause 1s my separation from your customs. These words are 
the literal translation of the opening sentence of the Oratio ad 


72 THE ORIGINAL GREEK 


Gentiles traditionally ascribed to Justin Martyr: M7 tzroAaByre, 
© avdpes “EXAnves, aNoyov 7 aveTrixpiTov elvai pov Tov ex TOV 
Vpetépwov Ody ywpiopor. 

When we compare the original Greek with the Syriac Version 
of this document, we find that in point of length they stand to one 
another exactly as do the Greek and Syriac forms of the Apology 
of Aristides: that is to say, in either case the Syriac is about half 
as long again as the Greek. Moreover, as in the case of our 
Apology, the variation begins to shew itself immediately after 
the first sentence, which I have quoted. For the Greek continues 
thus: ovdév yap év avtois etpov dovoy } Oeopir€s. avTa yap Ta TOV 
TouTov vuev cuvOéuata AVEONS Kal axpacias éotl pynueia. TO 
yap év waW<cia Tap vpiv mpovyovTe hoTav Tis TavT@Y avOpeTraVv 
€otly dpyadewtatos. TpeoTicTa pev yap hac. Tov ’Ayapéuvova, 
«.T.r. But the Syriac replaces this by the following, as Cureton 
renders it: ‘For I have investigated the whole of your wisdom of 
poetry, and rhetoric, and philosophy; and when I found not 
anything right or worthy of the Deity, I was desirous of in- 
vestigating the wisdom of the Christians also, and of learning 
and seeing who they are, and when, and what is this its recent 
and strange production, or on what good things they rely who 
follow this wisdom, so as to speak the truth. Men and Greeks, 
when I had made the enquiry I found not any folly, as in the 
famous Homer, who says respecting the wars of the two rivals, 
“for the sake of Helen many of the Greeks perished at Troy, 
far from their beloved home.” For first they say respecting 
Agamemnon, Wc. 

Here then we have a similar problem to that of the Apology of 
Aristides ; and in this case we are not hampered by the considera- 
tion that the Greek may possibly have been abbreviated to fit 
it for incorporation into a religious novel. Few will be disposed 
to challenge the verdict of Otto’, that the Syriac translator has so 
altered and amplified his original as almost to have produced a 
new work, 

We may give one more illustration of the manner in which the 
translator has proceeded. We have seen already that he has 
paraded at the outset his independent acquaintance with Homer. 


1 Justini Opera, tom. 2, p. xxix. 


OF THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 73 


Where Ulysses is alluded to, later on, the Greek has a sentence 
full of satire and liable to be misunderstood. ‘O yap I@axkrjavos 
Aaeptiadns ex Kkakias dperny éverropevcato’ dt bé ayalijs ppo- 
VHTEWS Apmo“pos HV, O KaTa Tas Yeuphvas Siamrovs edyrwoer, 
bt 1) HOdvYNON hpovnces éudppakar THY axonv. Corresponding to 
this we find in the Syriac Version: ‘But respecting the guile 
of Odysseus, son of Laertes, and his murders, who shall tell ? 
For to a hundred and ten suitors in one day his house was a 
grave, and was filled with dead bodies and blood. And he it is 
that by his wickedness purchased praises, because by the ex- 
cellence of his wisdom he was concealed: and he it is that, as ye 
say, sailed over the sea, and heard the voice of the Sirens, because 
he stopped his ears with wax.’ 

The translator then has first supplemented his author by 
introducing fresh details about Ulysses: and then he has totally 
missed the meaning of the Greek. He has obviously read it as if 
it were 60 ayaOfs ppovncews dpuaupos Hv, ‘through the excellence 
of his wisdom he kept himself in the dark.’ Then not seeing the 
point of dpovnce: éudpatat, he simply tells us that ‘he stopped 
his ears with wax.’ This of course the hero did not do: and the 
translator has got the Homeric story wrong: nor shall we mend 
matters much by inserting with Cureton the word ‘not’ after ‘and 
heard.’ We see at any rate plainly enough what was this Syrian’s 
conception of a translator’s function when his author seemed 
obscure. | 

The parallel between the two Apologies is the more striking, 
because the line of argument in these Hypomnemata vividly recalls 
parts of Aristides, and the same illustrations of the misdemeanours 
of the gods frequently reappear in almost the same language. The 
satire of the so-called Ambrosius is a much keener weapon than the 
simple narrative of Aristides: but there is not the same intensity of 
moral earnestness. It is quite credible that the later Apologist 
had the work of Aristides before him when he wrote, and endea- 
voured to reproduce the same arguments in what he thought was 
a more telling manner. Thus he says: “Avayvwte té Ai, avdpes 
“EAAnves, TOY KATA TATPOAMGY Vomov Kal TO poryelas TPdTTLMOV 
Kal THv TaWepactias aicypornra (cf. infra p. 109, 1. 7). And 
again: Ti cewvov émideixvutas yuri drowsy KeKoopNMEVN, K.T.r. 


74 THE ORIGINAL GREEK 


(cf. p. 106, 1. 24). And once more: ®étw rov GHrov” Hdasortos, 
kat pa pOoveita, et mpecBtTns Ov Kal KUANOS TOV Toda pEepionTo, 
“Apns Sé trepirnto véos ov Kat wpaios (cf. p. 105, 1. 18). 

Enough then has been said to shew that a Syriac translator, 
finding an early Greek Apology and desiring to reproduce it in his 
own language, might have no scruple whatever in dealing very 
freely with his author, in expunging sentences which he was not 
able or did not care to translate, and in supplementing the original 
here and there out of his own resources. The Syriac translator of 
the Oratio ad Gentiles has clearly so treated his unknown author ; 
and this fact removes any a priori objection to the supposition 
that the Syriac translator of Aristides has acted in a similar way. 


(2) We are fortunate in having an additional source of evi- 
dence in the Armenian fragment which contains the opening sen- 
tences of the Apology. The Armenian translator has clearly done 
what we have had some reason to suspect in the case of the Syriac 
translator. He has dealt freely with his original, adding words and 
even sentences, and introducing the stock phrases of a later theology. 
But this, while it diminishes very considerably the amount of the 
evidence which can be produced from his version, does not materially 
affect its value as far as it goes. Phrases which are only found in 
the Armenian, or only found in the Syriac, may be dismissed as 
possibly the inventions of the respective translators: but there 
remains a considerable quantity of matter common to the two 
Versions, which therefore presupposes a Greek original. The 
question we have to ask is: What is the relation of this common 
matter to the Greek text now in our hands ? 


A preliminary point however demands attention: Is the 
Armenian translated: from the Syriac, or is it an independent 
translation made directly or indirectly from the Greek itself ? 

A few instances in which the Armenian corresponds with the 
Greek against the Syriac will suffice to shew that it cannot come 
from the Syriac as we now have it. 

In the opening sentence we have mpovoia and ‘ providentia’ 
(Arm.) against ‘goodness’ (Syr.). Immediately afterwards ceAnvnv 
and ‘luna’ (Arm.), which the Syriac omits. Lower down ‘rectorem’ 


OF THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 75 


three times corresponds to parts of 5caxparetv, but there is nothing 
to answer to these in the Syriac. In the Christological passage 
near the end of the fragment, ‘una cum Spiritu Sancto’ (Arm.) 
answers to év mvevpats ayiw: and here again the Syriac has no 
equivalent. 

Moreover in the description of the Divine nature the Armenian 
Version says: ‘Ei neque colores sunt neque forma, or as Mr 
Conybeare renders it, ‘Colour and form of Him there is not.’ This 
corresponds to the Syriac phrase: ‘He has no likeness, nor 
composition of members. The Greek fails us here: but we may 
suppose that the Greek word which has been variously rendered 
‘colour’ and ‘likeness’ was yp@pa, as in the passage quoted by 
Mr Harris from Justin (supra, p. 54): ov ypoma éyov, ov oxjpa. 

We may conclude then that the Armenian Version is not 
made from the Syriac Version in its present form’: and similar 
arguments could be adduced, if there were any necessity, to shew 
that the Syriac Version is independent of the Armenian. 


I have mentioned already almost all the cases in which the 
Syriac fails to reproduce in any form matter which is common to 
the Greek and the Armenian. They scarcely make up between 
them more than a dozen words. The additional matter found only 
in the Syriac Version is more considerable. 

First, there is the second title which introduces the name of 
Antoninus Pius, and so conflicts with the first which has the 
support of the Armenian’. 

Then we have the following phrases: 


(a) Who is hidden in them and concealed from them: and 
this is well known, that... 


1 See however p. 90, where the fourfold division of mankind, common to Syr. 
and Arm., is further criticised. 

2 Mr Harris inclines to accept this second title of the Syriac Version as the 
true one: see above, pp. 7 ff. But the course of the present argument tends to 
shew that the Syriac translator has introduced many arbitrary changes on his own 
account: and this makes me the more unwilling to accept his testimony against 
that of the Armenian Version, which has moreover the explicit statement of Eusebius 
to support it. The circumstances under which the Greek has been preserved to us 
necessitated the omission of the title altogether; so that no direct evidence on the 
point reaches us from that quarter, 


76 THE ORIGINAL GREEK 


(6) And in saying that He is complete, I mean that there 
is no deficiency in Him. 


(c) And that which has an end is dissoluble. 

(d@) From man He asks nothing. 

(e) Who begat...from whom was born...who begat. 

(f) Of their religion (bis). 

(g) And it is said that (in the Christological statement)... 
and clad Himself with...and they say that...who are well known. 


I have taken no account of the many places in which the two 
Versions wander far from each other, and yet seem to have some 
common basis. Here the Armenian is obviously the worst offender, 
and its interpolations are far more numerous. 


We now turn to the Greek itself in the passage covered by the 
Armenian fragment, in order to see first of all to what extent what 
we actually have faithfully represents the Greek words which 
underlie the Syriac and Armenian Versions. 


(1) The first sentence which bears the appearance of com- 
pression is the following: avétepov twavtav tdv maddy Kai 
ELATTMMATWV, Opyns TE Kal ANOns Kal ayvoias Kal TOV AoLTrO?. 
This seems to bring together several more expanded phrases 
witnessed to by the two Versions, which however do not agree 
with one another sufficiently closely to allow us to make a 
certain reconstruction. 


(2) In the sentence, dws iSwpev tives avtToév peTréyovat 
THS adnOeias Kal tives THs mravys, a word, corresponding to 
‘praefatas’ (Arm.) and ‘which we have spoken concerning Him’ 
(Syr.), has dropped out before adnOeias: and instead of tis 
mravys there must have been a verb in the original; ‘ab eis 
erraverint’ (Arm.), ‘have erred therefrom’ (Syr.). The difference 
is of course exceedingly slight in itself: but it 1s important from a 
critical point of view, when we are testing the faithfulness with 
which the author of ‘Barlaam and Josaphat’ has preserved to us 
the original Apology. We may probably trace in this sentence 
the influence of an almost identical one, which comes later on, 
after the preliminary descriptions of the four races have been 
given. As the Greek combines these descriptions with the fuller 


OF THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 77 


accounts afterwards given, it brings the parallel sentences close 
together. | 3 

(3) The division of mankind into three races, and not four, 
has been already noticed! 


(4) It is just at this point that the most serious divergence 
is found: viz., the omission of the preliminary descriptions of the 
races, as noted above. This was perhaps the result of the change 
in the method of their division, which rendered unsuitable the 
sentences which immediately followed. 


-Once more, we have to ask how much is there which can be 
shewn, by the united testimony of the Versions, to have stood in 
the original Greek, and which yet finds no place in the Greek 
which has survived. 


(1) In the first line both Versions have ‘into this world,’ 
while the Greek has eis tov koopov: but the demonstrative may 
perhaps only be an attempt to represent the Greek article. The 
first real gap is eight lmes lower down, where the Versions 
are very divergent’, but yet point to some common original. It 
is probable that the Greek text at this point was difficult or 
corrupt, and so was omitted altogether by the author of ‘ Barlaam 
and Josaphat.’ The topic is the difficulty and uselessness of 
elaborate investigation concerning the Divine nature: and the 
conclusion is drawn ‘that one should fear God and not grieve 
man’ (Syr.), ‘utpote unum Deum nos adorare oportet: unum- 
quemque autem nostrum proximum suum sicut semetipsum 
diligere’ (Arm.). To this the Greek has nothing to correspond. 


(2) For the list of properties of the Divine nature we 
have in the Greek merely the compressed sentence, part of which 
was quoted above. The Versions agree in telling us more fully 
that ‘God is not begotten, not made’; ‘ without beginning, because 
that which has a beginning has also an end’; ‘without name, 
because that which has a name belongs to the created’; ‘ without 
likeness (Arm. ‘colores,’ implying ypéua in the Greek) and com- 
position of members (Arm. ‘ forma’), for he who possesses this is 
associated with things created’ (Arm. ‘mensurabilis est, limiti- 


1 See above, p. 70; and further remarks on p. 90. 
2 The Syriac is untranslateable as it stands. 


78 THE ORIGINAL GREEK 


busque cogitur’); ‘neither male nor female’ (Arm. adds ‘quia 
cupiditatibus agitatur qui huic est distinctioni obnoxius’); ‘the 
heavens do not contain Him: but the heavens and all things 
visible and invisible are contained in Him’; ‘He has no ad- 
versary’ (in the reason for this there is fresh discrepancy); ‘He 
is altogether wisdom and understanding.’ After this the Greek, 
as we have it, is again, for the next seven lines, obviously the 
same as that which lay before the translators. | 

(3) Now comes the new division of mankind, and the 
Greek has omitted the following: ‘Now the Barbarians reckon— 
and from Dionysus, about six lines. 

(4) The preliminary accounts of the Jews and the 
Christians are found in the Greek later on, where they are amal- 
gamated with the fuller descriptions. The account of the Jews 
agrees fairly well with that given in the Versions, especially in the 
Armenian. The additions in the Greek will be noticed presently. 
It adds at the close: xaOarep eis é& adtadv (TOV atrocTONw?r) TAs 
Ka? nuds trepinrOe yopas, Td Sdypa KnpvTTaV Ths adnOelas. 

(5) The Christological passage which follows is so impor- 
tant that it will be an advantage to have the three forms side by 
side. I have given a strictly literal rendering of the Armenian. 


Oi dé xptoriavol ye- 


veahoyotrvrat amd Tod 
kuplov “Inood Xprorod. 
ovTos 6€ 6 vids Tob Beob 
Tod bWlorov dmodoye?- 
Tat év wvevpate ayly 
am ovpavot karaBas du 
Thy cwrnplay rév dvOpdrrwv* 
kal éx map0évov aylas 
yevvnbels, domdpws Te kal 
apbdpws, cdpxa avéhaBe, 


Kat dvedavyn avOpwrots. 


(Syr.) The Christians 
then reckon the beginning 
of their religion from Jesus 
Christ, Who is named the 
Son of God most High; 
and it is said that God 
came down from heaven, 
and from a Hebrew virgin 
took and clad Himself 
with flesh; and there 
dwelt in a daughter of 
man the Son of God. 


(Arm.) But the Christ- 
ians are race-reckoned from 
the Lord Jesus Christ. He 
is Son of God on high, Who 
was manifested by the 
Holy Spirit: from heaven 
having come down; and 
from a Hebrew virgin 
having been born: having 
taken His flesh from the 
virgin, and having been 
manifested by the nature 
of this humanity [as] the 
Son of God. 


Here I have distinguished by spaced type or by italics every 


word, which having a double testimony may be referred to the 
original Greek. As regards omissions, the Greek omits only the 
epithet ‘Hebrew’, which it replaces by the epithet dyia, and the 


OF THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 79 


second reference to ‘the Son of God, where however there is a 
discrepancy between the two Versions. The Syriac omits «upiou, 
mvevpate ayio, yevvnbels, avebavn. The Armenian has no omission 
that can be certainly traced. The additions in each case may be 
seen at a glance. The Armenian has practically none; though a 
few lines further down the epithet corresponding to @eoTdxos is 
applied to the Virgin. The most serious change is that in the 
Syriac, where the word ‘God’ is inserted as the subject of the 
verbs which follow. The passage is one which was more likely 
than any other in the whole piece to tempt later writers to make 
changes of their own. It is to be noted that here the Greek in 
spite of its additions represents the original Apology much more 
faithfully than the Syriac does. 

(6) In the words which follow next the Versions do not 
agree either with one another, or with the Greek, which has 
displaced the sentence and gives it a little lower down. But both 
the Greek and the Syriac appeal to a written Gospel, which the 
king might read if he chose. 

(7) The repetition of the fourfold division of mankind is of 
course not found in the Greek, and with it has disappeared the 
problematical sentence: ‘To God then ministers wind, and to 
angels fire; but to demons water, and to men earth.’ At this 
point the Armenian fragment ends. 


What then is the result of our investigation of this opening 
passage, in which alone we have a triple testimony to the contents 
of the original Apology ? 

(1) There is one serious modification (if, indeed, we have 
not here the original) in the Greek, as it is preserved to us; but 
it was necessitated by the conditions of its reproduction in its new 
surroundings. 

(2) There is one serious displacement in the Greek; but 
this was almost necessitated by the modification just mentioned. 

(8) The description of the Divine nature is very much 
abbreviated in the Greek ; but no word occurs in it which has not 
the support of the Versions. 


(4) In the Christological passage which we examined in de- 


80 THE ORIGINAL GREEK 


tail the Greek was seen to preserve the original statements, though 
with the addition of the later phrase domdpws te cal afOdpas. 


(5) The Syriac Version is often loose and inaccurate: it 
drops a phrase here and there; and it makes insertions by way of 
explanation or of supplement, and sometimes in such a way as to 
convey a wholly false conception of the original. 


We learn then to expect for the remainder of the Apology that 
the Greek, as we have it, will as a rule give us the actual words 
of Aristides, except in the very few places in which modification 
was obviously needed. Where the Syriac presents us with matter 
which has no counterpart whatever in the Greek, we shall hesitate 
to pronounce that the Greek is defective, unless we are able to 
suggest a good reason for the omission, or to authenticate the 
Syriac from some external source'. 


The Greek Text of ‘Barlaam and Josaphat.’ 


It is remarkable that this work, which at one time enjoyed 
such extraordinary popularity, should not have found its way into 
print in its original language before the present century. The 
Latin Version wrongly attributed to Georgius Trapezuntius, but 
really, as the MSS. of it prove, of a much earlier date, was printed, 
together with various works of S. John of Damascus, at Basel in 
1539: but it was reserved to Boissonade to publish the Greek 
Text for the first time in the fourth volume of his Anecdota, which 
appeared at Paris in 1832. 

Boissonade apologises for the meagreness of his apparatus 
crtticus on the ground that an edition was expected almost im- 
mediately from Schmidt and Kopitar the librarian of the Imperial 
Library at Vienna. This edition, however, never appeared. Out 
of seventeen MSS. preserved in the Library at Paris, Boissonade 
used throughout but two, 903 and 1128, which he refers to as A 
and C. He gives occasional readings from two others, 904 and 907, 
which he names B and D. In the portion of the book which 
specially concerns us, viz. the speech of Nachor, C is defective for 
about 10 of Boissonade’s pages, and the testimony of D is frequently 


1 Cf, infra, p. 90. 


OF THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 81 


recorded. From time to time readings are also quoted from the 
Latin Version. 

This very inadequate text has been reprinted in Migne’s 
Patrologia Graeca, tom. 96, in the third volume of the works of §. 
John of Damascus: but we have gained nothing by the reproduc- 
tion except new blunders. 

In the Wiener Jahrbiicher fiir Deutsche Interatur (\xxii. 274, 
xxiii. 176) Schubart has given some description of the Vienna 
MSS., and a list of the principal variants contained in them. 

Lastly, Zotenberg’ has made a useful list of about 60 MSS., and 
has constructed a critical text of certain passages of special interest. 
Nothing however has been attempted as yet in the way of a 
genealogical classification of the MSS. ; a work which will involve 
great labour, but which is essential to the production of a satis- 
factory edition. 


In editing the Remains of the Apology of Aristides I have 
used three MSS., which were kindly placed at my disposal in 
Cambridge. I have recorded their variants with a greater 
completeness than is necessary for my present purpose, in order 
to aid a future editor of the whole treatise in assigning them 
without further trouble to their proper families. 


(1) I have to thank Miss Algerina Peckover of Wisbech for 
kindly sending to the University Library a MS. in her possession, 
which apparently belongs to the beginning of the eleventh century. 
This Codex is specially interesting for the pictures which a later 
hand has drawn in the margin, sometimes in ink and sometimes in 
colours. It is unfortunately defective at the beginning and at the 
end. It commences with the words 7H mpovota tod Snusoupyod 
dorifopueva (Bois. p. 48), and ends with kcal év 686 tTav évtodav 
cov n&iwoas Tov Spomov réde (Bois. p. 357). Unhappily it has 
been corrected: very largely throughout, and it is frequently 
impossible to discover the original readings: those which are 
_ obviously by a later hand I have marked as W’”. 


(2) The authorities of Magdalen College, Oxford, with a like 
generosity allowed me to use their codex, Gr. 4, side by side with 


1 Notice sur le livre de B. et J., pp. 3—5. 
H, A. 6 


82 THE ORIGINAL GREEK 


the Wisbech MS. in our Library. This bears the date 1064. It 
contains besides: a Life of S. Basil, a tract on Images, the 
Martyrdom of SS. Galaction and Episteme, a tract on Penalties, 
and a work of Anastasius Sinaiticus. It has remained for the 
most part uncorrected. 


(3) In the Library of Pembroke College, Cambridge, there is 
a MS. of the 17th century, the readings of which are of sufficient 
interest to be recorded for the present in spite of its late date. 


In my apparatus criticus these MSS. are referred to by the | 
letters W, M and P respectively. I have now and then recorded 
readings from the Vienna MSS. collated by Schubart using the 
signs V,,, V,,., &c., where the figures correspond with Schubart’s 
numbers. Wherever I have differed from the text of Boissonade, 
I have recorded his readings, and sometimes I have expressly 
mentioned his MSS., A, C and D. I have given in the margin of 
the Greek text the reference to Boissonade’s pages. Where it 
seemed desirable I have recorded readings of the Latin Version, 


taking them from the Basel edition of 1539 mentioned above. 


The Bearing of the Apology on the Canon. 


There are but few references to the Books of Scripture in the 
Apology of Aristides, which thus stands in striking contrast with 
the works of Justin. On two occasions the Emperor is referred to 
Christian writings. In the first case a written Gospel is distinctly 
implied, as the matter in hand is the outline of our Lord’s Life ; 
the words in the Greek are!: od ro xX€os THs Tapovetas éx THs Tap’ 
avTois KaXoupévns evayyersKns ayias ypadbrs &Eeoti cou yvovat, 
Baowred, édv évtdyns (p.110,1.21). The second reference is more 
_ general, and possibly includes Books outside the Canon: tats ypa- 
dais éyxipas THY yptoTiavar evpnoets, K.T.r. (p. 111, 1. 24; ef. 
_ Syr. supra p. 50 fin.). There are no direct quotations from the 
New Testament, although the Apologist’s diction is undoubtedly 
coloured at times by the language of the Apostolic writers. 


(1) The opening sentence recalls the words of 2 Mace. vii. 28 : 
aia oe, Téxvov, dvaBdréWavta eis Tov ovpavdv Kal THY YHV, Kal Ta 


For the Syriac see above, p. 36 fin. ‘ This is taught from that Gospel,’ &c. 


OF THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 83 


év abtois travra iSdvra, yvdvas bre é& ovK dvTw@v éroincev atta O 
eds. 

(2) p. 100, 1 11. 8 adrod 8&8 Ta Tavta cuvéotynkev. Cf. 
Col. i. 17, cal ra wavra év avté ovvéornxer (cf. d¢ avrod in i. 16). 

(3) p.101,1. 6. «al JpEavto céBecOas thy KTiow Tapa Tov 
xticavta avrovs. This is clearly based on Rom. i. 25: kal 
éoeBacOnoav Kal édatpevoay TH KTice Tapa Tov KTicavta. The 
addition of avrovs is interesting. The Syriac translator renders: 
‘and they began to serve created things instead of the Creator of 
them’; he is probably led to make the change by the recollection 
of the Syriac Version (Pesh.) in this passage, where the word 
‘Creator’ has the suffix of the fem. plural. 


(4) p. 104,12. cool rNéyortes civar éwwpavOncav. Cf. Rom. 
i. 22: hackovtes eivar codoi éuwpavOncar. 

(5) p. 107, 1. 12. 60ev AapBavovtes of AvOpwtror ahopynv 
amo Tov Oedv avTorv, érpatTov Tacav avomiay Kal acéNyeav Kal 
acéBevav. These words are a kind of echo, although in a different 
sense, of Rom. vil. 8: adopuny dé NaBodca 7) apyaptia Sia THs 
évTOANS KaTELpyacaTo év éuor Tacav érLOupiav. 

(6) p. 109,112. vuvi é of vopor xaroi efor cai Sixator. Here 
again we seem to feel the influence of the same chapter; Rom. 
vil. 12, 16, dare 6 pwév vopos AyLos, Kal n évTOrA) ayia Kal Sixaia 
kal ayadn...cuvpnur TS vou Ott Kards (cf. 1 Tim. i. 8). 

(7) p. 109, 1. 26. obror yap, rod ‘ABpadp ovtes amréyovot Kai 
‘Toaax Kai laxodB, twapeéxnoav eis Aiyutrrov: éxeiev 5é éEnyaryev 
avTovs 6 Beds év yeupt Kpataa kal év Bpayiove vynro. The first 
part of this sentence has affinities with Heb. xi. 8, 9, micte 
"ABpadw...tapexnoer eis yqv tis érayyerias...weta Ioadk Kal 
‘laxo8. And the whole may be compared with Acts xiii. 17, év 
Th Tapokia év yn Aiyrrrov, Kal petra Bpayiovos v_nrod éEnyaryev 
avtovs €& avtjs. The second part of the phrase however is not 
attested by the Syr. and Arm. Versions, and may possibly have 
been introduced by the author of ‘ Barlaam and Josaphat’ from Ps. 
exxxv1. 11, 12. 

(8) p.110,1.2. rods drectarpévovs mpds avTovs mpodytas 
Kat dikaiovs amréxtevvav. This is a combination of words found in 
S. Matt. xiii. 17, zodXol trpodjtar cal Sixacor, and S. Matt. xxiii. 


6—2 


84, THE ORIGINAL GREEK 


37 (cf. S. Luke xiii. 34) 7 aoxteivovea todvs mpodytas, Kal 
ALGoBorodca Tovs atreatadpévovs Tpos avTnv. But here again we 
cannot be sure that we have the words of Aristides himself. This 
last remark applies also to the phrase, aA ov kat ériyvwow 
(p. 110, 1. 9), which comes from Rom. x. 2. 


(9) p. 110,119. @avatouv éyedoaro clearly comes from Heb. 
u. 9; but the Syr. simply has ‘ He died, and the Arm. has nothing 
at all to correspond. Hence we cannot be certain that these are the 
words of Aristides. They probably have replaced the statement 
preserved in the Syr. ‘He was pierced by the Jews.’ Throughout 
this great Christological passage it is worth noting how the actual 
phrases of the N. T..are not introduced. 


(10) p.111, 1.30. ov yap avépdrev pyyata Nadodow, adra 
ta tov Oeod. With this we may perhaps compare 1 Thess. 11. 13, 
édéEacbe ov Noyor avOpedtrwv adra, KaBds adnOAs éoTiv, AOYOV 
Peod?. 


The Apology and the Didaché. 


A source from which our author has drawn part of his 
description of the life and conduct of the Christians is the Two 
Ways, though it may well be doubted whether he knew it in the 
form preserved to us in the Didaché. 

The passage in question runs as follows in the Apology (e. xv.): 

Ov poryevovow, ov Tropvevovot, ov Wwevdouaptupoda.y; ovK 
émiOupovot Ta addOTpLA* TLL@oL TraTépa Kal pntépa: Kal Tods 


1 The following parallels may also be noted: p. 111, 1. 17, 1 Thess. ii. 10; 
p. 111, 1. 29, Apoc. xv. 3; p. 108, 1. 2 (dovvérwv), and p. 110, 1. 1 (dxydpioro), Rom. 
i. 21; p. 109, 1. 30, Rom. ix. 22; p. 111, 1. 26 (ov« da éuavrod Néyw), Joh. vii. 17, 
xii. 49. Moreover there seems to be some relation between our Apology and several 
chapters of the Book of Wisdom, beginning with the personal statement of ¢. vii. 1: 
elul pev Kaya Ovnrds dvOpwros x.r.’. Comp. esp. vii. 15 éuol 6¢ dan 6 Beds eiwety 
Kata younv...adros yap wo edwxe T&v bvTwy ywrdow awWevdh, eldévar cicracw Kbopmov 
kal évépyevay ororxeluw K.7.d....(iX. 1) 6 mouhoas Ta mdvra év byw cov k.T.A....(Xii. 24) 
Tov mrdvns 66@v waxpdbrepov érhaviOncay, Oeors brodapBdvovTes TA Kal év FwWols K.T.d.... 
(xiii. 2) GAN 7 rip 7} rvedua 7 raxwdy dépa 7 KiKAov dorpwy 7 Blavoy Viwp 7} pworhpas 
ovpavod mputdvers Kbopouv Oeods évduoay...6 Katackevdoas avtra Suvarwrepds éorw... 
Tanalrwpor dé kal év vexpots al édaldes abr&v k.T.d....€v Tolxw COnkev aird dopadiodpevos 
o.Onpw...d7u dduvaret éavr@ BonO hoa x.7.X. 


OF THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 85 


mrnolov dirovor Sixaa Kpivovow' boa od Oédovow adrtois 
ylcobas érép@ ob mrowidar Tods adikodyTas avToUS mrapaxahovor 
Kal mpochireis avtovs éavTois Totovar TOUS exOpous evepyereiv 
omovddtovet’ Tpacis elo) Kal émieikels’ ard Tdons cuvovoias 
avomou Kal aro maons dxafapotas eyxparevovTas XI pav OVX VITTEP- 
opaicvy, oppavov ov AvTrodawW" oO exav TO pa EX OVTL dverrpGoves 
emixopmryel: févov éav idwow, vO oreyyy ela dyouct, Kal Yaipovalw 
err’ avT@, Os em) GdEAPS AANOwW@ ov yap, K.7.r. 


The following parallels may be adduced from the Didaché: 


c. ii. od pouyetdoers...00 Topvedoess...ovK émiOupnaess Ta TOU 
mAnolov...ov YrevdouapTupya ess. 

c.i. ayamnoess...TOVv TAHTIOY Gov. 

¢. iv. Kpuvels Sixaios. 

ci. wavta 88 boa édv Oerjons pH yiverOai cot, Kal od adr 
p42) TrOveL. 

c. iv. etpnvedoess dé waxopévous. 

c. iii. toOe dé mpais. 

To these we may perhaps add, as parallel to the last of the 
sentences cited above: 

c.iv. ov« arootpadjon Tov évdcopevov, cuyKowwvnoers S€ 
TAVTA TO AEANPS Gov. 

It may also be noted that the whole passage is prefaced by 
the words: éyovor Tas évToAas avTOD Tod Kupiou ‘Incod Xpictod... 
Kai tavtas hvdatrover. Compare Did. c. iv.: od wy éyKatadimys 
évtovas Kupiov, durakeis Sé K.T.D. 

When we turn to the Epistle of Barnabas we find there the 
same parallels which have been quoted from the Didaché, with two 
exceptions; viz., ov Wwevdoyaptupnoes, and the negative form of 
the Golden Rule. 

On the other hand, we find in Barn. c. xix.: 1) ovv 060s Tod 
dotds éotw airy éav tis Oédwv oddv ddevew ert TOV wpiopévov 
TOTrOV, K.T.v.: With which we may compare Apol.c. xvi.: dvTws ovv 
avTn é€aTiv 4 000s THS GANOElas, Hris TOS OdEevOVTAS aUTHY Els THY 
aidviov Yeipaywyet Bacireiay. And the two phrases about the 
widow and the orphan, which found no parallel in the Didaché, may 
be compared with Barn. c. xx.: y7jpa «cal oppav@ ov mpocéxortes. 
Compare also Barn. c. xix.: 61a Noyou KoTL@y Kal TropEevomEVoS Ets 


86 THE ORIGINAL GREEK 


TO Tapakandéoat with Apol. c. xv. (quoted above) tods adicotvtas 
auTovs TapaKkadovet. 

It is possible then that here we have a witness to the earlier 
Two Ways, which has been variously embodied in the Didaché and 
the Epistle of Barnabas. 

Some support may be given to this view when we observe that 
the wording of the negative form of the Golden Rule in our 
Apology has a greater affinity to the famous interpolations in 
Codex Bezae than to the clause in the Didaché. This appears 
partly from the position of the first negative, and partly from the 
use of érepos rather than ddXos. 


Let us bring the various texts together : 
Acts xv. 20. dca un Oérovewv éavtois yeiver Oar, ETEpOLS fu) TroLEtTeE. 
Acts xv. 29. 60a pn Oérovew EéavTois yeiver Oar, ETEp@ jar) Trovety. 
Apol. c. xv. dca ov OéXovaw avTots yiverOas, Erépw ov TroLodawr. 
. - / \ 9 2\ \/ As) ey , ee 
Did. ¢. i. wavta 6é dca éav Oedynons pn yiverOai co, Kal od ad\r@ 
fn) Trovel. 


It is hardly possible therefore to believe that Aristides can 
have drawn this precept directly from the Didaché in the form 
in which we know it. 


The Apology and the Preaching of Peter. 


At the close of the Apology Aristides challenges the Emperor 
to examine the writings of the Christians, from which he declares 
that the materials for his defence are drawn: p. 111, 1. 23: Kat 
iva yv@s, Bacired, ott ove am euavtod Tadta Aéyo, Tals ypadais 
éyxuas TOV xXploTLavaV evpHaes ovdey eEw THs adnOeias 
pe A€yev: or, as it is more fully said in the Syriac Version: 
‘Take now their writings and read in them, and lo! ye will find 
that not of myself have I brought these things forward nor as their 
advocate have I said them, but as I have read in their writings, 
these things I firmly believe,’ &c. 

We have seen already that he refers to a written Gospel for 
his statements as to the life and work of our Lord. We have also 
seen that he has drawn part of his description of the conduct of 
the Christians from the ‘Two Ways. Moreover the Book of 


OF THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 87 


Wisdom seems to have influenced his method and his language in 
several parts of his work. 

The following investigation will tend to shew that he owes a 
still greater debt to a work now lost, which exercised a considerable 
influence upon the writings of the second century. 

The Preaching of Peter («jpuyua Tlérpov) is classed by 
Eusebius (H. £. ut. 3) together with his Acts, his Gospel and his 
Apocalypse as outside the Canon of writings accepted by the 
universal Church (ov édas év caborKois iopev mapadedopéva). 
He goes on to say of these four books that none of the early writers 
or of his contemporaries used quotations from them. This state- 
ment is however incorrect: for Clement of Alexandria again and 
again quotes from both the Preaching and the Apocalypse, as 
authoritative works. The Preaching of Peter then was one of 
those books which, like the Didaché, the Epistle of Barnabas and 
the Shepherd of Hermas, at one time claimed a place in the 
Canon ; though its claim was disallowed, even more emphatically 
perhaps than the claims of these other competitors. 

We must in the first instance gather together all the fragments 
which can be assigned with certainty to this work’. For the sake 
of clearness I have arranged them in the order in which it will be 
most easy to compare them with our Apology. 


A / a 
Clem. Al. Strom. vi. 39 ff.. Tuv@oxere ovv Ott eis Peds eoruv, Os 
ba € / e 
apynv Tavtwv emoincev Kal TéXous e€ovalay Eywv, Kal 0 aopaTos Os 
\ a a \ / an ’ \ \ 
TA TAVTA OPA, AXMPHTOS OS TA TaVTA KwpEl, avETrLOENS OV TA TAVTA 
> 8< ak oes ” 2. 2 / 7 *bO ? / 
émideeTat Kal Ov Ov oT” AKaTAaAHT TOS, aévaos, apOapTos, atroinTos, 
a \ / / b] a 
Os Ta TravTa éTroinoev NOY SUVdpEews AUTO’. 
a \ ’ 
Todrov tov Oedv céBeobe pt) Kata Tovs”EXAnvas*: btt ayvoia 


1 Hilgenfeld (N. 7. extra Can. pp. 56 ff.), to whose work I need scarcely 
acknowledge my indebtedness, has brought together under the head of Ilérpov (kai 
IlavAov) kipyvywa, various fragments of the Didascalia Petri, &c. The fact that 
these find no parallels in Aristides will give a new reason for keeping them separate. 

* Apol. c. i. avbrov oby héyw elvas Oeov Tov cvoTnodpevov TA TavTa Kal SiaxparovvTa 
.. .dmpoode7...ravres dé ab’rod xpyfovow. 

3 ¢. i. ‘Now I say that God is not begotten, not made: a constant nature,... 
immortal, complete, and incomprehensible,..the heavens do not contain Him; but 
the heavens and all things visible and invisible are contained in Him’ (Syr.). 

C. iv. d@Oapros...xal ddparos, abros dé mavra dopa. 

C. xiv. Tov ddparov kal wavTa dpOvTa Kal ravTa SnuoupyjoavTa det Oedv céBeo Oat. 

+ cc. vill. ff. 


88 THE ORIGINAL GREEK 


/ \ \ e a A 
hepopevor Kat 1) erriatapevor TOV Gedy) (Ws Nuets KATA THY yVOow 
\ / e re) b] a > / > n 2 / 3 
THY TEdELav), Ov &dwKev avTots eEovaias els Kphaow woppwcavTes 
/ n 
EvAa Kal riPovs, yadrkov Kal oidnpov, xpucov Kal apyupov, Tis 
A a fa) n : 
drAns avtav kal ypjocews Ta Sodra Ths brdp£ews avactyoavtes 
f ¢ a la) a 
céBovtau' Kai & Sédmxev avTois eis Bp@aw Oo eds, TeTEWa TOD 
> a t a A 
aépos Kal THs Oaracons Ta vnKTa Kal THS yhs Ta éprreTa Kai Ta 
/ \ / na ? a a a 
Onpia ovv KTHVvETL TeTpaTrodoLs TOD aypov, yards TE Kal MUS, 
ey \ ' \ Or, 4e \ , 25 , 
atNovpous TE Kal KUvas Kal mTLOnKous** Kal Ta idia Bpwpata 
a al ¢ 
Bpwrtots® Oipata Ovovow, Kal vexpa vexpois’ mpocdhépovtes ws 
a an a ‘ 
Oeois ayaptotovot TO Oew Sid TOVT@Y apvovpevot avToOV eivaL’. 
M be \ oT 8 / t 0 \ \ J a / 7 
noe Kata ‘lovdaious céBeobe, Kal yap éxelvot jwovotr olopevot 
\ > > > \ 
Tov Gedv ywvooKew ovK érrigTayTal, NaTpEVOVTES ayyéNoLS Kal 
? / \ \ ae \ 94 \ l A 0 
apxyayyéerols, MNVvi KaL GEANVYH’ Kai éav py TEAnVN havyn, caBBaTov 
Y / la) 
OUK ayovolt TO AEyomMEvOY TP@TOV, ode Alva oOUTE EopTHVY OUTE 
/ 
pmeyarny nmépar®. 
“C Nh? “ ¢ / \ 6 / @ / «\ 615 
OTE Kal UpEls Oolws Kal SiKaiws pavOavoyTes & Trapadidoper 
e Lal / @ 9 Lal \ @ \ Py \ fal lal / 
upiv puraccedbe®, Kawa@s Tov Geov ova TOD ypiaTOU cEBopevor. 
e \ > a la) \ ec Y / oon \ / 
epomev yap év Talis ypadais, cabas 6 Kvptos Neyer’ ‘ld0v diaTiPewat 
a \ / b a (al 
bpiv kawwynv SiabyKnv, ody ws SieOéunv Tois Tatpaow buev ev dpet 
val / 
Xwpy7B. véeav vpiv Sé0ero ta yap “EdXAnvav kat ‘lovdaiwr 
\ € ial \ ie a > \ / / / 
Tanraia, vues 5€ of Kaas avTov Tpit yéver ceBOmevor Xpto- 
TLavot, 


1 @. iii, ph elddres Oedv Errav7jOnoar. 

2¢.v. kal avrd yap els xpjow Tév avOpHruwv yéyove, Kal KaTraxuptederar bm’ adraev 
(et saepius). 

3 cil. ay Kal poppwuard Twa ToijoarTes wvopacay ExTUTwpa TOU Ovpavod, K.T.A.... 
kal cvykAeloayres vaots mpookuvotc.. ‘ 

4 ¢. xii. Twes yap avra&v éoeBdoOnoav mpbBarov...rwés dé Tov aldovpoy Kal Tov Kiva 
kal Tov NUKov Kal Tov TWiOnKoV, K.T.X. 

5 ¢@. xii. ddoya (Ga rapeonyayov Oeovs elvar, xepoaid Tre Kal evvdpa...dpavres yap 
rovs Oeovs aitav BiBpwokopuevors bd érépwv avOpwrwv...(this confirms Potter’s 
emendation Bpwrots for Bporois.) 6 Gili, ceBduevor dydd\uara vexpa. 

7 @, xiv. dyvapoves kal adrol pavévres kal dxdpioro....dpvodvrat Tov vidv Tod Beod. 

8 ¢, xiv. ‘The Jews...suppose in their minds that they are serving God, but... 
their service is to angels and not to God, in that they observe sabbaths and 
new moons and the passover and the great fast and the fast, and circumcision, 
and cleanness of meats.’ (Syr.) 

9@exv. Ta yap mpooraypuara avrov dopares pudrdrrovew, dolws Kal dixalws (Gvres. 

10 ¢, xvi. ‘And this people is truly a new people,’ &c. (Syr.) 

c. ii. avepdv...dre tpia yévyn elolv dvOpwHmrwv év THdE TE Kbouw’ wv elo oi TSv Tap’ 
bpiv Neyoudvuw Gedy mpoockuvytal, Kal "Iovdaio, kal xpvorcavol, ‘There are four races 
of men in this world: Barbarians and Greeks, Jews and Christians.’ (Syr.) 


OF THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 89 


» / \ \ \ \ \ > / 
Ibid. 48. (6 xdpids dyno mpos Tods pabntas peTa THY avacTa- 
an / \ / b] / > n A € 
ow) E£exeEdunv ipas SHSexa pabntas, cpivas a&iovs éuod (ovs o 
/ \ e / 3 / 
Kipios HOEANTEV Kal ATOTTOAOUS TLETOVS YNTAPLEVOS ELVAL), TEMTOV 
\ \ \ > / b) , 
éml Tov Kdapov evayyericacbar Tos KaTa Ti oiKovpérny avOpo- 
/ \ na n a / 
mous", ywooKew OTe els Oeds eotw, Sia THS TOU YpLaTOU TITTEWS 
a e / \ A 
éuns Snrobvtas TA wéAXOVTA, STTwS Ol AKOVTAVTES KAL TLTTEVTAVTES 
n > im r 6 > 
coda, of S€ pt) TicTEVoaVTES AKOVTaVYTES MAPTUPNTWOLY, OVK 
” > , ie > oe. ee ee ey ‘os 
éyovtes amrodoyiav eitreiv OvK jxovoapev. (TL ovY; OVXL Kat EV 
Cs’ e > \ / > / 2 
AiSov 1) avdtn yéyovev oiKkovopia ;) 
be >\ \ 5 / an? \ / \ 
Ibid. 48. éav péev odv tis OedAynon Tod Iopanr peTavonaas Sua 
an x \ > / > a 
Tov dvomaTos mou Tucteve ert Tov Deov, apEeOncovTal aVT@ at 
e / \ / 4 se / > \ / / ” 
apaptia. peta S@dexa Etn é€éNOETE Els TOV KOTMOY, pH TLS ELT 
> / 
Ov« nKovoaper. 
> ¢ ? > ’ AR b M4 \ 29 \ a \ 
Ibid. 48. éc0a ev ayvoia tis bua@v érroincer pu1) EidH@s Tapas TOV 
" JS / X22 / 
Gedv, éav érruyvods peTavoncyn, TavTa avT@ apeOnoeTat TA awapTn- 
pata’, 
. n ,’ z \ / A A 
Ibid. 128. pets d€ avarrtvEaytes Tas BiBXous as ei'youev TOV 
a \ \ fa) A bd / \ \ 
mpodyntav, a pev dia trapaBorav, a Sé Se aiviypdtov, a é 
lal \ ’ \ \ 2 a , 
avdevtiKs Kal avTodekel Tov yptotov Inoody dvopalovTar, evpomev 
/ n ‘ \ \ \ \ 
Kal THY Tapovciay avTOv Kal Tov OdvaToY Kai TOY OTAUpOV Kal TAS 
\ / / 4 > / b] an e? an 4 \ \ 
AouTras KoNdELS Taoas boas éTTOincay avT®@ ot lovdaio.*, Kal THY 
” \ \ > b] \ Bd / \ n > / 
eyepolw Kal THY Els oUpavods avddAn iv mpo Tov ‘lepocodupa 
a A! / a A a | a 
KTic Onvat, KaAOws eyéypaTTTO. TavTa TayTa a eet avTov Taleiy, Kal 
b ae \ < a UA Lal A 
HéeT avTOV a éotat’ TavTa ody éTuyvOYTEs éTLTTEVCapEV TO ODe@ 
\ a / es] / 5 
dia TOV yeypapméver Eis avTov’. 
7 \ vd € \ oN / ” 6 \ 90 \ »” 
éyvapmev yap Tt 0 Geos a’ta mpocétakev dvTws®, Kal ovdev aTEP 
n / 7 
ypadns Neyouev’. 


1 @, xv. ovros dwiexa oye padnras, ol pera THY €v ovpavois dvodov adbrod é&HOov 
els Tas €mapxlas THs oikoupévyns Kal édldazay k.T.X. 

2c. ii, ‘He had twelve disciples, in order that a certain dispensation of His 
might be fulfilled’ (Syr.); c. xv. kar’ oixovoulay weyadnv. 

3c, xvi. ‘And when it chances that one of them turns...he confesses to God, 
saying, In ignorance I did these things: and he cleanses his heart, and his sins are 
forgiven him, because he did them in ignorance in former time’ (Syr.). 

4c. ii. ‘He was pierced by the Jews’ (Syr.). 

5 ¢. xvi. ‘As I have read in their writings, these things I firmly believe, and 
those things also that are to come’ (Syr.). 

Sc, xv. Kas Kiptos 6 Peds adbtots mpocérater...dvTws odv airy K.T.X. (C. XVi.). 

7 @. xvi. xal wa yows, Baotded, bre odK am’ euavTod Tadra Néyw, Tais ypapais 
eyxuas Tov xpioTiavar, evpjoes ovdev iw Tis ddnOelas we Néyew. 


90 THE ORIGINAL GREEK 


I have given above in full (with one exception; Clem. Strom. 
i, 182, vowos Kai Adyos 6 Kvpsos) all the indisputable fragments of 
the Preaching of Peter’: and the parallels adduced from the 
Apology of Aristides shew that there is an intimate connexion 
between the two documents. 

Before going further into the interesting problem of the 
reconstruction of the Preaching, let us inquire what light these 
parallels throw upon the relation of the Syriac Version to the 
Greek text of the Apology. 


(1) Several passages of the Syriac Version, quoted above in 
the notes, which are wanting in the Greek as we now have it, are 
authenticated by their similarity to portions of the Preaching. 

Of these the most important are: (a) the worship of angels 
attributed to the Jews; (b) the description of the Christians as a 
‘new people’; (c) the confession of the converted heathen; (d) 
the attribution of our Lord’s sufferings to the Jews. Especially 
valuable are (a) and (c), as giving us ground for believing that the 
great closing section of the Syriac Version, which is so curtailed 
in the Greek, is substantially the writing of Aristides himself. 


(2) On the other hand, the division into three races, which 
we find in the Greek, has the support of the famous tpit@ yéver of 
the Preaching. The fourfold division of the Syriac and Armenian 
Versions (Barbarians and Greeks, Jews and Christians) comes 
therefore under grave suspicion: and the more we examine it, the 
less primitive it appears. For to the Greek mind the Jews were 
themselves Barbarians: see, for example, Clem. Strom. vi. 44, 
vomos pev Kal mpopntat BapBapois, durocodia Sé”EXAnoe: and 
Orig. c. Cels. i. 2, é&Ms BdpBapdvy dynow avwev civar To Soypa, 
Snrovete Tov ‘lovdaicpov. Moreover there seems to be no parallel 
to this fourfold classification of races in early Christian literature. 


The Preaching of Peter is quoted by Heracleon (Orig. Comm. 
in Joan, xiii. 17), and we shall see that possibly it was used by 


1 The context of the quotations in Clement may sometimes give us, in the light 
thrown by the Apology, further materials for the reconstruction of the Preaching. 
Thus Strom, vi. 127, érav tis Tov vidv Tod Oeot Tob Ta wdvTa TemoinKdTos odpKa 
dve.knpora kal év pjrpa mapbévov Kvopopydévra, Kad yeyévvnrat 7d aicOnrov avbrob 
gapklov, axodovOws dé Kabd yéyovey TodTo wemovOdra Kal dvicramevoy 6 ev héyet, oi dé 
dxovovcw, k.T.r., has several points of resemblance with Apol. ¢. xv., ovros dé 0 vids 
Tod Oeod Tod bWierou dmoroyetras...éx mapévov aylas yevynOeis...capKa avédaBe, K.T.D. 


OF THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 91 


Celsus. It seems also to have been in the hands of the unknown 
writer of the Epistle to Diognetus. Moreover in the Sibylline 
Oracles we have several passages which seem to be based on it. 
Some of these are especially interesting, as shewing coincidences 
with our Apology, though not with the existing fragments of the 
Preaching". 

Now if three or four extant works can be shewn to have drawn 
materials from a document, which is known to us now only by 
a few fragments, there is obviously a possibility that the lost 
document may be to some extent critically reconstructed by a 
consideration of common matter found in any two of the works, 
which may accordingly have been taken from the document in 
question. To attempt to do this fully for the Preaching of Peter 
would be beyond our present scope: but we may fairly consider 
here what contributions to such a reconstruction are afforded by our 
Apology, which has apparently made so free a use of it. 


Let us begin with those passages which either the Preaching 

or the Apology have in common with the Sibylline Oracles. I 
shall not attempt a discrimination between the various writings 
which are gathered under the name of the Sibyl, but shall simply 
give references to Alexandre’s edition of 1869. 
Prooem. 7 ff. 

Eis Oeds, Os povos apyet, VreppeyéOns, ayévytos, 

TAVTOKPATWP, GOpPaTOS, Op@Y movos avTos &rarTa, 

, \ , ,’ / n ¢ \ \ ¢ / 
autos & ov Brérretac Ovyths bo capKos atacns. 
* * * 
> \ \ / »v / > ¢e / Ud 

auTov Tov povoy dvta céBecO HyHiTOpa Koo pou, 

Os povos eis ai@va Kal €& atdvos étvyOn, 

AUTOYEVHS, aYéVNTOS, ATavtTa KpaTov StaTayTos. 

* * * 

1 The Gnostic Acts of Thomas are frequently indebted to the Preaching of 
Peter, as may be seen by the following passages: c. 1, dte(Aawev Ta KALwara THs 
olkoupévyns x.T.r.: C. 15, Kai elweiv pev ws Set od Sivapa, a bE XwPS Néyerv epi 
avTov, K.T.v.: C. 28, od« exer Tis Adyov dmodoylas wéANwv wap’ adrod kpiverOat, ws “7 
axkovoas: C, 36, ovdé Ovordv Séérar Wa aire Obons: c. 38, dd\dAd TwapaBrére budv Ta 
TapaTTHpaTa d KaTa dyvotav Are memwornxdtes: C. 55, Tov mpakewy wy dterpatacde 
xXwpls yywoews...miotevoarte...kKal dplinowy buly Ta Wpd TOUTOUV TWEeTpaypmeva 
apapThuara: c. 56, uy Noylcn Huey Ta TapamTwpara Kal Ta TpGTra cPaduara, a 
duerpatdueda év dyvolg dvres (see too the argument from prophecy in the same 
chapter). 


92 THE ORIGINAL GREEK 


> \ \ t e / a / 
adda Geos povos eis TavuTéptatos, 05 TeToinkev 
,’ \ ei / \ > - b] \ / 
ovpavoy, nédXLOV TE Kal aoTépas, HOE TEAHYND?, 
KapTopopov yatav Te Kal datos oidwata TwovTou. 
* x * 
id a / ¢ / a lal 
nui TE KTHVH UTéETALEVY TavTa BpoTotouD, 
> fal / 4 
wavtov & aynthpa Kkatéctnoev OeotevxTor, 
> 
avopt © vrétakev, «.T.2. 
* * * 
/ an 
aicxyovOnte yards kal kvddara OetotrotovrTes. 
> / \ / a ” > a1 
ov pavin Kat Avoca dpevev [aicOnow adaipet], 
> / a / 
el Nomrddas KNéETTOVaL Deol, cUAOVEL Sé YUTPASs ; 
* * * 
/ ” / ’ / , ‘ 
TPOTKVVEOVTES OELs, KUVAS, ALNOVPOUS, avonToL, 
\ \ / \ ¢ \ / / 
Kat TweTEenva céBeaOe, Kal éEpTeta Onpia yains, 
\ / / \ ’ / i 
kat NiOwa Eoava, Kai ayddpata YeLpoTrointa, 
> na / 
Kav Trapodo.at AiGwv cvyyopata’ TavTa céBeobe, 
BA " / a / , > \ > / 
adda TE TONMAA paTaia, a 6H K aloypoV ayopeEveEtr. 


Bk. ii. 9 ff. 

, ! , \ 4 tA A , \ 
timte patny wraleaOe, Kal ovK evOetay atapTrov 
Baivete, aOavatov Ktiotov pepvnpévos alei ; 

@ / 3 / ? / »fV/ / 
els Peds éote povapyos, aBécdarTos, aidéps vaiwr, 
avTOPUIS, AdPAaTOS, OPOY MOVvOS AUTOS aATarTa. 
\ / b] 3 > / / ‘ ba wed B] \ “ 
ov yelp Y ovK éTroinae ALO0EdOS, OVS amd YpuaoU 

/ > / / / +3O9 > / 

Téyyns avOperov daiver TUToOsS, ovd edéhavTos. 
* * * 


\ lal \ / 
tis yap Ovntos é€wov Katidety Svvatat Oeov dacats ; 


) TLS YwOpHoEeL KaV TOVVOMA povVOY aKovaaL 
b] / fe) / 
ovpaviov peyddo.o Yeov, KOT poYv KpaTéoVToS ; 
\ , 4 / \ ’ \ b \ / 
Os NOy@ ExtLcE TaVTa, Kal ovVpavoy Hdé Odracaar, 
+ 7 / ? > U / / 
NEXLOV T AkKamavTa, TeAHnVHVY TE TANOOVCA AD, 
A 
ATTPa TE, K.T.X. 
* * * 
b] *O\ an \ la) 
ov oéBeT, ovde hoBeicbe Ocov, pataiws dé wravaad be 
TpogKUVEOVTES OES TE, KaL alAOVPoOLaL OBorTEs, 
, / € an 
elo@Aols T AdXoLS, ALOivois O idpvpact hwTar, 
al > A \ 
kal vaots abéovot xabefouevoe po Ouvpdar, 
ro \ ‘ \ / 
THpette TOV €ovTa Oeor, Os Tavta phuddacet. 


OF THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 93 


Bk. viii. 375 ff. 
’ \ \ / S «\ > \ 4 \ a 
apynv Kal Tédos olda, 05 OVpavoy ExTLoOa Kai YA»P, 
rn \ / > \ > »” \ bs 
podvos yap Oeds eius, Kal ove éott eds addos. 
eixova Oeorrifovow éunv, AnPOcicav ad’ vrs, 
/ / | Be > / > / 
xeupl Te pophwacarTes em EiddroLow avavdols 
Sofafovor AiTais Kal OpnoKeiarow avayvors. 


\ / , > / ’ 
TOV KTLOTHVY TWPONLTOVTES AgEAyElals ENATpPEVCAD. 
* * * 


ov ypnlw Ovordy, ov orovdady vpeTepawr. 

# * * 
TavtTa yap, eis pynunv Bacirnev dé Tupavrmr, 
Saipoot Toincovar veKpots, ws ovpaviouct. 

When with these passages before us we read over again the 
early sections of the Preaching and the parallels to them which I 
have quoted from Aristides, we shall feel that we have here some- 
thing more than ordinary commonplaces about the unity of God and 
the folly of idolatry. Again, when we compare together the first 
and second groups of passages from the Sibylline Books, we shall 
be led to ask for a common basis which shall explain their resem- 
blances. Neither seems to be a direct imitation of the other: 
each presents us with words and phrases not found in the other, 
but accounted for at once on the supposition that either the 
Preaching of Peter or our own Apology lies in the background. 
Thus in the first we have ravtoxpatap, ayévntos, yadds, TeTenva 
Kal épteta, & bn K aicypov ayopevev. In the second, rovvoua, 
Oyo ExTice, vaois...TNpEITE. 

Moreover the mention of Creation by the Word guides us 
to the Preaching, in preference to the Apology, in which this finds 
no place: and the phrases which are found in the Apology, but not 
in the Preaching, need not cause us difficulty when we remember 
how very fragmentary is our knowledge of the latter document. 

In fact we may at once begin a tentative reconstruction, and 
say that the Preaching probably contained 

(1) wavroxpatwp and ayévntos as epithets of the Deity ; 

(2) the verb dvaxparety of His continuous action upon created 
things ; 

(3) the statement that the Deity has no outward image, and 
no name ; 


94, THE ORIGINAL GREEK 


(4) that God created ‘heaven, earth and sea, sun, moon and 
stars’; 


(5) that these were made for the sake of Man; 


(6) among objects of false worship, édevs, and other things 
disgraceful even to name in such a connexion; 


(7) a reference to the folly of guarding the Deity. 
From the lines in the eighth Book we may add: 
(8) the desertion of the Creator for the creature ; 
(9) that God has no need of sacrifice and oblation. 


Another passage of the Sibylline writings bears a striking 
resemblance to our Apology. This is the commencement of the 
fourth Book", of which Alexandre says: ‘ Liber hic Christianorum 
Sibyllinorum antiquissimus est habendus, scriptus nempe primo 
saeculo.’ It opens with lines which recall much of what has been 
already cited, dealing with the attributes of the Creator. It then 
gives a brief description of the men who shall one day inhabit the 
earth (ll. 25 ff.). We may select the following passages: 

daaot 5) orépEovat Oeov péyav, evNoyéovTes 

mptv hayéery iéetv Te, TWemolOdTes evoeBénow. 
‘* ‘* * 

ovd ap ém ardorpin Koitn ToOov aicypov éxorrTes, 

ovr él dpoevos UBpiv amwexOéa Te oTUyEpHy Te. 

Ov TpoTrov evoeBinv Te Kal Oca avépes Adov 

OUTOoTE piuncovTaL, avaioeinv toOéovTes: 

adn’ avtovs yrEeUN TE yérXoTi TE pUXOiCorTEs, 

vntiot abpoovvycw, éTLpevoovTal EKELVOLS, 

dao autol péEovowr, étivoya Kal Kaka épya. 

With reference to the first of these passages, we may remember 
that in the description of the Christians in c. xv. we saw that 
Aristides uses the ‘Two Ways’: but at the end of his account he 
adds words which remind us forcibly of the Preaching of Peter: 
daiws kal Sitxaiws Caves, Kabws KUptos 6 Oeds avTois mpocé- 
ragéev: and then he goes on: evyapiotobytes avT@ KaTa Tacay 
dpav év Twavtt Bpapate Kai ToT@ Kal Tois Novtrots ayaBois. 


1 Tt is not unimportant to observe that this Book has also remarkable affinities 
with the Apocalypse of Peter. 


OF THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 95 


With regard to the second passage, there is a still more 
striking parallel in c. xvii. preserved to us only in the Syriac 
Version. ‘The Greeks then, O king, because they practise foul 
things in sleeping with males, and with mother and sister and 
daughter, turn the ridicule of their foulness upon the Christians ; 
but the Christians are honest and pious,’ etc. 

These coincidences are worth noting even if we are not 
prepared, with our present knowledge, to suppose that they send 
us back for their explanation to the Preaching of Peter’. 


Next let us turn to the Epistle to Diognetus. As soon as the 
Armenian fragment of Aristides was discovered, it was observed 
that it had points in common with this anonymous Epistle. The 
coincidences have multiplied greatly with our larger knowledge of 
the Apology. Several of them have been quoted by Mr Harris in 
his notes, but it is necessary for our present purpose to bring them 
together again under one view. I shall do this in the briefest 
possible form, giving in the footnotes references to such parallels 
in the Apology as have not already been quoted above. 


. \ ¢ / 
Ep. ad Diog.c.1. otre rods vowtfopévous v0 TOV EXANVOY 
\ “4 4 U 
Geovs Aoyifovtar, ote THY “lovdaiwv Sevotdatpoviay dudAacoovet 
\ / , \ n / aed , > A > 
...kal Te Ontote Katvov TODTO yévos H EriTHOevpa EelondAOeD Ets 
/ a > / 
Tov Blov viv Kal ov TpoTeEpov. 
\ a a n \ \ / \ \ > , ©. 
Tapa Tov Oeod, Tov Kal TO NEyEeLY Kal TO aKoveW piv 
a n al d 2 
YopnyovrTos, aitodpat SoOnvat émol méev Eitety OVTWS K.T.D. 


e x \ / n ’ \ > U 
c. 2. ws av Kai Aoyou KaLvOD...aKpoaTns Ecomevos. 
b) ¢ / / 3 \ vA n / ¢ > > \ 
ovy 6 pév Tis NLOOs eotly buoLv0s TH TaTOUpévm, 6 S éoTi 
\ > , a — 

XAaNKOS OV KpEloowY TOV cis THY YPHoLY NuiY KexadKevpévov 
ad e \ , v \ / ¢ \ bd U 
axevov, 0 O€ EVNov dn Kai ceaontrds, 6 Sé apyvpos ypynfov 

td ‘ fal a 
avOpwrov Tod hurakavtos iva wy KraTh, 6 66 cidypos K.T.Xr. 
\ U a 
eis THY Mophnv TovT@V EKTUTWOHVAL® K.T.D. 


1 With the thought contained in the passage last quoted, compare Just. Apol. ii. 
12: AidécOnre, aldécOnre, & pavep&s mparrere eis dvatrious dvapéporres, kal TA pocdyTa 
kal éavtois Kal rots bmerépois mepiBdddovres TovTos wy ovdev ov Ertl tocdy peroucia 
éott. But here the notion of ridicule, which we find in Aristides and in the Sibyl, 
is wanting. 

2 Ap. c. ii. rTodtwy otrws elpnudvwv rept Oeod, kabds éue Exadpnoe wept abrod héyew. 

3 Ap.c. ili. av kal woppwuara Twa rovhoarres dvbuacav exTiTwpua K.T.Xr. 


96 THE ORIGINAL GREEK 


\ \ > / \ le] > / a \ \ 

Tous 6é€ apyupéous Kal YpuvToUS EyYKNELTAVYTES Tals vu&l, Kal 
CE See 2 / 6 t Y \ a 1 
Tals nuEpals PuraKkas TapaKkabloTarTes, iva ~yN KXaT OC LV". 


A na \ > 
c. 3. é&js 5€ mepi tod wn Kata ta atta “lovdailots 
lal > a / A \ 4 a U 
PcoceBetv... lovdato. Toivuv...caros Oedv Eva TaV TavtTwy 
/ % / ’ lal lal > \ an / 
aé€Bewv, kai SeormroTny aEtodat hpovetv: et dé Tols mpoerpnuévors 
¢ \ , >] an 
OmoLtoTpoTa@s® thy OpnoKeiay Tpocayovow avT@® TavTHV, d1a- 
papTavovatp. 
¢ \ U \ , \ \ \ a \ / ~' B 
0 yap ToLnoas TOV OVpaVvoV Kal THY YHV Kal TaYTa Ta év 
’ n an a a > 
avuTots, Kal TacLY Hiv Xopuyav Ov wh shh ahh coli! ovdEevos 
adv avTOS TPOTSEOLTO TOUTMY @V TOFS peeves diSova Tapeyel 
autos. ot dé ye Oucias K.T.X. 


/ , a 
c. 4. adda pny TO ye TEpt TAs Bpwaets avTav Wododess, Kat 
Thv Twepl Ta GaBBata Seordatpoviay, KaL THY THS TEPLTOMHS 
? A \ / 
aravovelav, Kal THY THS VHOTELas Kal voupyvias Eipwreiar, 
K.T.D. 
\ ol ¢ \ a an / > an 
TO Te yap TOV UTO TOV BEeod KTLDGAéVTMY Eis YpHoLY 
a] 
avO pera, K.T.X. 
TO 6€ TrapedpevovTas aUTOvS “oTPOLS Kal TEAHVH THY Tapa- 
pedp “uoTp Hvn TY Tap 
/ al a fal ¢ a a 
THPNTLVY TOV LNVOV Kal TOV NuEpav Troveia Oat, K.T.X. 
\ / \ ¢ > lal a / 
c. 6. ypiotiavol Katéyovtar pev ws év hpovpa TH Koopa, 
? \ 
avtol 5€ cuvéyouvat TOV KOoMOY. 
’ \ > / € v ¢/ a? ’ a / 
c. 7. ov yap ériyetov, ws pny, eU pnua TOUT avTots TapEddoOn, 
OX \ b] / / ds b] an b) an ’ \ 
ovde Ovntnv érivoray duraccew ovTws akwodow ETLpEerds, OVOE 
/ b) 
avOpwtiverv oikovopiay puvotnpiov jwemiotevyTat. aA avTos 
adnOas 6 TavToKpadtTwp Kal TavToKTioTnS Kal adpaTos 
\ 7 / 
Qeds, avtos...Tov Oyov Tov ytov...dvidpvage Kal éyKaTe- 
oTnpiee Tats Kapdialts avTor’. 
e / le] > \ 
c. 8. ot wév Ties TUP Efhacap civat TOV Bear (ov pédrAXovor 
3 \ nr n 
YoOpPNTELVY a’TOL, TOUTO KadovaL Oedv), of SE USwp, of S aX Tt 
al lA fa) 
TOV CTOLYELMV TOV EKTLOMEVOY UTO Oeod. 


1 Ap.c. iii, ouykdeloavres vaots...rnpodow dopands iva wh kNaToow. 

2 Ap. ¢.. xiv. Kal elol mapduoion tev EOvar. 

3 Ap.ec. xvi. ‘And I have no doubt that the world stands by reason of the 
intercession of the Christians’ (Syr.). 

4 Ap. c. xv. obrol elow of trép mdvta rd @Ovn Tis ys ebpdvres Thy adjOear’ 
ywwoKkovor yap Tov Oedv Krlarny Kal Snuoupydy T&v amdvTwv...éxover Tas évTOhas...év 
rais kapdlats Kexaparypéevas. 


OF THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES, 97 


c.10. 6 yap Ocds Tovs advOpwrovs HyaTN~E, bv ods éTTOince 
TOV KOopmo?, ols UTéTAEE TaYTAa TA ev TH YN: 

Os, a mapa Tod Oeod AaBov éEyet, TADTA Tots émLdeopméevots 
yopnyav, Oeds yiverar THv RapBavdvtwr, ovTOS wLwNnTHS eoTL 
Oeod’. 

We cannot account for these parallels by merely supposing 
that Aristides had the Epistle to Diognetus before him: for 
there are many points in common between Aristides and the 
Preaching of Peter, such as the worship of angels ascribed to the 
Jews, which do not appear in the Epistle. Nor will the converse 
hypothesis hold good. For, to take one instance out of several, 
the phrase in the Epistle yu) cata ta atta “lovdaios OeocePBety is 
directly parallel to wdé xara lovdaious céBeo Oe in the Preaching; 
but it has no counterpart in form in the Apology. 

Here again then we are guided to the hypothesis that the 
Preaching lies behind both of these works. Can we gain anything 
further in the way of its reconstruction 4 

Taking up some of our former points (see p. 93) we are con- 
firmed in thinking that the Preaching contained 


(1) avtoxpdtop as an epithet of the Deity. 

(2) the statement that God created ‘heaven and earth and 
all that is therein,’ 

(3) that these were made for the sake of Man; and we may 
add ‘placed in subjection under him.’ (Cf. Or. Sibyl. Prooem., 
quoted above.) : 

(4) a reference to the folly of guarding the Deity. 

(5) that God has no need of sacrifices. 


We may perhaps go on to add 


(6) a statement that God must give the power to speak 
rightly of Him. 
(7) areference to circumcision and meats in treating of the 
Jews. 
(8) the position of the Christians as sustaining the world. 
(9) the fixing of God’s commandments in their hearts. 
1 Ap.c.i. ‘He is God of all, who made all for the sake of man’ (Syr.). 


2 Ap. c¢. xiv. ‘They imitate God by reason of the love which they have for man: 
for they have compassion on the poor,’ &e. (Syr.). 


H. A, 7 


98 THE ORIGINAL GREEK 


(10) a reasoned condemnation of the worship of fire, water 
and other elements. 
(11) the imitation of God consists in beneficence. 


Mr Harris has collected (pp. 20 ff.) several instances of contact 
between the Apology of Aristides and the True Word of Celsus ; 
and he has suggested that Celsus may have had the Apology in 
his hands when he wrote his attack upon Christianity. We are 
now in a position to see that most of the coincidences which have 
been pointed out would be accounted for by the supposition that 
it was the Preaching of Peter itself, and not our Apology, which, 
like ‘Jason and Papiscus’ and other apocryphal writings, supplied 
the materials of his attack. 

It will be more satisfactory to present the evidence in full as 
we have done in the previous cases, even at the risk of some 
repetition. I shall follow the order of Origen’s reply. 


Orig. c. Cels. I. 4. xowvdv eivat kal mpos Tovs adXovs firoco- 
gous, Ws ov ceuvoy Te Kal Katvov padOnpa. Cf. 11. 5 pndév &é 
katvov év Tovtos didacKxerOar haivev yptoTtiavods, oleras avatpé- 
mew yprotiavicpov. Also IV. 14 rAéyw 5é ovdév Katvov, ard 
mara. Sedoypéva (i.e. he does not claim novelty for his view, as 
they do for theirs). 

I. 23. 76 hynoapévo ohOr éErropevot Movion...va évopicav 
eivar Oedv. 

I. 26. A€ywv avtovs céBewv dyyéXovs Kal yontela Tpoc- 
keiaOar, is 0 Mwiofs avtois yéyovev éEnyntns. Tod yap 
TOV ypaupatov Mawicéws etdpe tov vowobétny mapadidorta 
aéBew ayyédXous...emayyérretat b¢ bidaEew EFAs, Tas Kal “lov- 
Sato vo apabias éodarnoav éEarratwpevor' (cf. V. 6). 

...Tepl TOD TWTHPOS NuUaV, Ws yEevowévou Hyemovos TH KAO 
Xplotiavol éopev yevéoes Huav’ Kai dnow avTov Tpo TavU 
Ohiywv éT av THs SidacKarias TavTys KaOnyncacbat, voutcOévtTa 
UTO YplLaTLavaer vidy eivat TOD Deod”’. 

I. 28. wpa@tov 5€ @s TrAacapévou avTodD THY é€x TapOévoV 
yéveo tv. 

1 Ap. ¢. xiv. 


2 Ap.c. xv. ob 5é xpioriavol yeveahoyodvrat dd Tod Kuplov Inood Xpictod. ofros 
dé 6 vids Tod Oeod Tod bWiorov duodoyetra...xat Ex mapbévov aylas yerynGels. 


OF THE APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 99 


/ \ 
I. 49 f. add’ eitrev o éuos mpodytns év ‘lepocodvpors tore, 
¢ / a ey a id / \ \ tal 100, , 
ore HEEL Oeod vids, TOV ociwy KpiTNS, Kal TOV adikwY KOAATTHS... 
U n ee / e \ \ / / 
TL MaXNOV GU 7) AXNOL pUPLOL, Ol META THY TpOdHTEiay yevomevot, 
celal Tepl OV TADTA TpoEepNTEVETO ; 
\ a a > 
IIT. 19. pndév ceuvdtepov tTpdywv Kali Kvvev, Tov Tap 
lal nan lal , 
Atyutrriot, eiadyovtas év Tals tepi Tod ‘Inood Sunynoeow. 
al al , ¢ / 
III. 22. év 76 Kal? judy NOyw Atockovpovs cai Hpakréa 
3 \ \ , > , / b > / 
kat Aockdrnriov cat Atovucov ovopater...cat now ovk ave- 
\ ¢ A / / @ \ e/ ” Q x 
yerOat wéev nuds TovTovs vomilerv Beods, OTe dvOpwrrot Hoar... 
\ » ig a > , 
Tov dé Incoty atro0avovTa, K.T.X. 
a a / \ 
IV. 23. xalnpiv wavta bToRBéEBANTAL, yn Kal Vdwp Kai 
> mn ¢€ na / 
anp Kal dotpa, Kat nueov éveka Tavta, Kal nuiv SovrEeveELv 


/ 


tétaxta. (Cf. Iv. 99, ovxouv avOpere@ TeTrointat Ta TayTa.) 


Besides these parallels there are several instances in which 
Celsus seems to turn a weapon used by the Christians back upon 
themselves : eg., 1. 54, dvevdifec TS coTHpse emi TO TaBEL, ws pH 
BonOnOévts to tod Twatpos, » wn Suvnbévte EavTd BonPjoau’. 
I. 9, cairo. Oeov, dyoiv, dvta hevrye éviv, ove SeOévta atrayeo Oar, 
x.7.r. So again in Ill. 42, his reply to the charge of corruptibility 
brought against idols is that flesh is still more corruptible: 
TapaBdrr\wv tas avOpwtivas tod “Incod cdpxas ypvo@ Kat 
apyvp@ Kai NiOw, bt adtas éxcivov POaptorepar. And in II. 76 
we seem to hear the echo of Christian words in: épotov trovety 
Tov év piv SiddcKanror, ws el tis pweOvwr eis weOvovtas TapLov 
Kaknyopel Tos vnhovtas ws pweOVovTas’. 

It is not easy on the evidence here collected to say whether it 
was the Preaching of Peter or the Apology of Aristides which lay 
before Celsus, but we can hardly doubt that it must have been 
one or the other. The statement that the world was made for the 
sake of man does not find a place in the recognised fragments of 
the Preaching; but we have given good reasons for believing 
that it was contained in it. On the other hand, the Apology gives 
no starting point for the attack of Celsus on Jewish prophecies 
about the Messiah, whereas the Preaching laid great stress on this 
point (see above, p. 89). 


1 Ap.c. x. el ofv Acdvucos cpayels obk Rdvv}On éavTg@ BonOfoa...ra&s dy etn Beds; . 
(et passim). Cf. décu.os and dpamérns in the same chapter. 
2 Ap. ©, xvi, ddevovres yap é&v oxbrer mpocphocovTa EavTois ws weOUovTes. 


7—2 


APOLOGIA ARISTIDIS 


VT APVD HISTORIAM BARLAAM ET JOSAPHAT CONSERVATVR., 


wc I. ’Eyo, Bacired, rpovoia Ocod HrOov eis Tov Kocpov’ Kai 239 
Oewpyaas Tov ovpavov Kal THY yhv Kat THY Oddaccar, HrALOV TE 
Kal ceAnvny Kal Ta AoLTTA, COavpaca THY SiaKdopnoWw TovTMV. 
idov b€ Tov Kécpoyv Kal Ta év av’T@ TavTa, OTL KATA avayKnV 

a a \ a a 
KwelTal, TVVAKA TOV KivovYTAa Kal StakpaTodyTa eivat Oedv’ Trav 5 
a / an / \ la] 
yap TO Kwodv toyupoTEpov Tov KLvovpévov, Kal TO SvaxpaTody 
a“ / 2 5 
ioyuporepov Tov Svaxpatoupévou éotiv. avTov ovv déyw eivat 
\ a 
> Gedy Tov cvoTncapevoy Ta Tavta Kal SiaxpaTodyTa, avapyov 
/. ’ n oy 
Kat aid.ov, Abavatov Kal atpooden, avwTEepov TavTeV TAY TADeY 
/ > al / . 
Kal éXNaTT@MAaToV, Opyns Te Kal ANOns Kal ayvoias Kal Tor 10 
fal ’ ’ a \ \ / / 5 / , 
rourav. 8s avtod Sé Ta wavta cvvéctynKev. ov ypHCer Oucias 
a > / 
Kal omrovons, ovdé Tivos TavTwV TaY daivouévov: TravTes 5é 
na Ul 
avTov ypnfovat. 
7 
II. Tovtwv ottws eipnuévar trept Oeod, cabds éué éyopnoe 
3 
‘ > a / 4 \ 24° \ > , , v4 
mept avTov Aéyeuv, EXMOwpev Kal él TO avOpwruivor yévos, bTrws-15 
yy J ] lal / A > / \ / tal 
lSm@pev tives avT@y peTéxovat THS adnOecias Kal Tives THS 240 
/ \ / > C1 A 5 a ad , / 
Trans. pavepov yap éotw nyiv, & Bacired, OTL Tpia yévn 
Led / .? ec A 
eioly avOpotray év TOSE TO KOTHLM' OV Eiciv Of TOY Tap vpiV 
/ a a 
Neyouévay Oedv mpocxvyytal, kat ‘lovdaior, Kat ypiotavot: 
> \ \ / e \ \ / \ > / 
avtol 5€ mdadw ot Tos Todos cEeBdpevor Oeovs eis Tpia 20 
Svatpodvtas yévn, XadOaiovs te xat”EAAnvas Kat Aiyutiovs* 


2 Kal tiv yw cat rhvy] MP; xal viv cal Bois; yqv cal W; sed cf. p. 101, 


1.8 nrLbv Te] P Bois; 7Avov MW 5 xwetra] kwodvra M 6 loxv- 
pwrepov M (et 1. 7) 7,8 Oedv eva: M 11 @vowv M 12 orovdys] Bois; 
libamine lat; omovdds PW; crovday M om. tivos MP Bois; sed aliquo 


lat 15 él] wept W 18 d0pdérwr] P Bois syr; om. MW lat bpiv)} 
buav P Bois 21 dtalpovra P 


Io 


T5 


241 


25 


30 


APOLOGIA ARISTIDIS. 101 


e \ / ? \ \ / a a 
ovToOL yap yeyovacw apynyol Kal diddoKanrot Tots Novtrots EOvect 
THS TOV ToAVoVULwV Oedv NaTpElas Kal TpOTKUYHTEWS. 

v / an / \ 

III. “Id@pev ody tives rovTav petéyovat THs adnOeias Kai 

tives THS WAaVNS. 
e \ a \ \ / >? / 

Oi pév yap Xanrédaior, pr) eiddtes Oeov, érAavHnOncay oTricw 

/ % \ 

Tov oToLyelwy, Kal Hp~avTo céBecOar THY KTioLY Tapa Tov 
/ > / 

KTicavTa avTovs oy Kal wophPoOpmaTa TWa TrOLnoaVTES WVOMaTAaY 

extUT MOA TOD Ovpavod Kal THs yHs Kat THS Oadacons, 7dLov 

/ an / \ 

TE Kal GEAHVNS, KAL TOV AovTaV oToLyElwy } PwoTHpwV, Kal 

a a \ na \ \ 

auykreicavtes vaols mpooxuvodet Oeovs KaXovrTES, os Kal 

- n ? n vA \ a e \ A \ > 

Tnpovow acharas iva pn KrAaT@OW VUTO ANOTw@Y, Kal ov 

an A rt ’ \ ¢ 

cuvnKav OTL Tav TO THpovY petfov TOU THpoUpévoU EoTl, Kal O 

n \ Qn ¢ \ 

Towmv melfwv ott TOU Tovovpévov. eb yap advvaTovawy ot Beat 

a n a BA Ai 

avT@y tepl THs dias cwTnpias, Tes AdrOLs TwTNpiav yapi- 

s U / a 
covTat; TAdynv ovvy peyadnv érravnOncav of Xarédaior, 
‘ > / \ \ 3 a \ / 

oeRopevot ayddApata vexpa Kai avwdedh. Kai Oavpalev por 

> / te n A e / / > n 

émréepxetat, @ Bactired, TAS ol AEyouevor Pirocopor avTa@V 


ovo OAws curiKay 6TL Kal avTa Ta oTOLYela POapTa éoTLV. Et 


a / 

5é ta otovyeia POapta éott Kal broTaccOmeva KATA avayKn), 

“ PLA / > \ \ “ > > \ \ lal \ ? / 
TOS etol Oeot; e¢ 56 TA oTOLY ELA OVK Eliot Deol, TAS TA ayadpmaTa, 
\ A / 
& yéyover eis Tiny avTov, Yeol bTapyovow ; 

n \ \ aA / 
IV. "Ed@apev obv, 6 Bacinred, em’ adTa Ta otovyeia, OTTWS 
an \ \ 

aTrobeiEwpev Trepl avTa@v OTL ovK eial Oeol, aAAa POapTa Kai 
> n \ / n 
aNNotovpeva, €k TOD w1) GvTOS TapayOévTAa TpooTaypmaTL TOD 
v we. Le, > A / i 2 / Sh DPF 
dvTws Oeod, bs éotw ApOapTos Te Kal avadXoiwTos Kal adpaTos* 

Sa. ¥% c : / a 
autos 5€ mavta opd, kal cafes BovreTat adAoLot Kal peTa~ 

/ / > / \ al / 
Barre. Ti ovv Aéyw TrEpl TOV TTOLYELwD ; 

ce / > 
Oi vopifovtes Tov ovpavov eivar Gedy TAaVeVTAL. Opepmev 

\ ’ \ > 
yap avTov TpeTopevoy Kal KaTa avayKny Kiwovpevor, Kal éK 
TONNOY GuUVETTaTA’ O40 Kal KOTMOS KaNEiTal. KOTMOS bé KaTA- 

/ b] 

aKeun €oTl TWOS TexViTOV’ TO KaTacKevacBey Sé apy Kal 


2 modvoviuwv P 4 tives] +rov M 5 pn) of uy Bois 
6 om. trav M 7 x«rloavra] + kal romjoayvta P 8 éxritwpa] 
MPV oun; figuram lat; éxrurwpara W Bois kal (sec.)] 7 MP 11 rnpod- 
ow] cvvrnpodvres M 14 om. délas P 14,15 yxaplowvrac W* 18 
om. xal M 18, 19 om. POapraé éorw. ei 5é Ta crovxeia W 18—20 
om. @0apra éorw. ei—Oeol; ei 5¢ Ta ororxeta P 24 dddovotpmeva] drodv- 
peva W bvTos] dvTws W* 25 bdyTws] bvTos PW? 26 dpav P 


30 om. xai PW lat 


B | 


a 


ad 


102 APOLOGIA ARISTIDIS. 


, »y a Tile 4 > \ \ , / \ rn b] al 
TéNOs Exel. KivetTat € 6 OVpavods KATA avayKnY odV Tots avTOU 
n / \ 
gwothpa ta yap dotpa Taker Kal Siactypate phepopmeva aro 
a \ 
onuelou eis onpecov, of wev SUvovaw, oi Se avatéAXovet, Kal KATA 
Katpovs Tropelay TrovovvTaL TOD amroTeActy Oépn Kal yenpovas, 
Kada éritétaxtas avtTots Tapa Tod Oeod, Kal ov TrapaBaivovai 
\ al 
Tovs idiovs Spous, KaTa atrapaitntov diaews avayKny, ody TO 
7 \ 
ovpaviw Kooum. o0ev dhavepov éote pun eivar Tov ovpavov Oeor, 
> > + la) 
arr épryov Oeod. 
\ n a 
Oi dé vopifovtes Thy yhv civat Ocav érravnOncarv. sopamev 
ee, A > 
yap avtTynv tb TOV avOperrav LBpiCopévny Kal KaTAaKUpLeVOMEeVND, 
/ / ¥ \ \ 
cKaTTOMEVHY Kal Pupo“évynyv Kal aypnoToy yiwopevnv. éady yap 
OTTNHON, yiveTat VEeKpa’ €x yap TOD doTpaxou dveTas ovdév. ETL 
8 \ \ >\ > \ / lal - \ > \ \ e \ 
é Kal éav emt TrEOV Bpayh, POciperar Kal avTn Kal oi Kaptrol 
auTns. Katatateiras S€ vd Te avOpotwv Kai ToV oLTTOV 
/ / 
Cowv, aiwact povevouévav puaivetat, Swopvacetar, yeuiterat 
A ’ / 
vexpov, Onkn yiveTat C@PATaV. TOUTwY OUTS bYTMDV, OUK évdé- 
\ n 5 \ b] > + @ fa) > an b] 0 / 
NETaL THV yHv eivat Gedy, AN Epyov Geod eis yphow avOpoTrwr. 
‘- o, ey 
V. OF 8€ vopifovres To Udwp eivat Oeov érravHnOncar. Kal 
fo] / 
avTo yap els xphow Tov avOpoTaVv yéyove, Kal KaTaKUpLEvETaL 
id ’ b] a / \ f \ b] a id / 
UT AUTWY, fLaALVEeTAL Kal pbeiperat, Kal AadXdoLOUTaL EromevoY 
\ / \ n E 
Kal adNacoomEvoy YpMpmact, Kal LTO TOD KpVoUS THYyVUMEVO?, 
/ a 
Kal aiwact “woNuvo_evoy, Kal eis TAaVTMY TOV akaldpToVY TAVGL 
> , \ > / \. tv s \ > » a 
ayouevov. 610 addvvatov TO Udwp eivat Oedv, AXX Epyov Oeod. 
\ fal \ an \ 
Ot dé voulfovtes TO Tip civac Gcdov TrAaVaYTAL. TO yap 
aA / a b] 
mop éyéveTo els yphow avOpoTav, Kal Kataxuplevera tT 


wn 


_ 


oO 


242 


Lal 


5 


ee / ? / > / coe \ oo” 
avTOY, TEpLpEepopwevov €K TOTOUV ELS TOTTOV ELS ewrnow Kal OTTTYHOL | 


na 5 ” \ \ a , B , \ 

TavTobaT@y Kpedv, Ett O€ Kal vexpov cwpaTtav’ hOciperar Sé 

Kat KaTa TOAAOVS TpOTrOUs, UO TAY avOpeTeV TBevvdpevor. 
\ > > / \ nr \ > - eed n 
510 ovK évdéyetat TO Tip eivat Oeov, AX’ Epyov Geod. 

e Oy / \ wi. 9. \ 9 \ nm ; 

Oi dé vopifovtes THY TOV avéuwv Tronp civat Oedy TAVOVTAL. 


1 ovpavds] +Kxat W avrod] éavrod PW 3 dvovow Bois ava- 
té\ove. MW 5 Kaba] xad’ 8 W 11 om. cxarropuévny Bois (sed C 
habet) gpupopévny] Bois; gupovpévny PW; gpovpovyévny CM ii, 12 
om. ywoudvnv—érrnby P 12 é« yap] Kaddre éx W om. rod P 
15 om. yeulgerac Bois (sed C habet) 16 vexpwOnxkn P 19 om. rap 
PW 20 éWotmevov MPW 22 om. kal aiwact moduvvduevov Bois Vi, 
22, 23 om. kal els tavrwyv—ayduevov M 24, 25 1d yap mip éyévero eis 
xphow] Kal av’ro yap els xpnow éyévero Bois Vz, 25 xphow)] xpicw M 
28 om. kat W oBevipmevov W 


30 


APOLOGIA ARISTIDIS. 103 


\ / ? / 8 , ey 2 \ , a > Q , 
havepov yap éotw ott Sovrever ETEpe, Kal Yap TOV avOpwTroV 
al a \ \ / 
KaTeoKevactat wd Tod Beod mpos peTaywynv Trolwy Kai 
a 4 LA 
TUYKOMLSAS TOV TLTLKOY, Kal eis RoLTAS adTaV xpelas’ avEex TE 
- a \ > / \ A 
Kal Anyer Kat eritaynv Oeod. S10 ov vevoplotar THY TOV 
> / \ S G \ > rt 8 fa a 
5 ave“wv Tvony eivat Ceav, AXX Epo Ceov. 
/ > \ fal € 
VI. Of 8 vopifovres Tov HALOV eivas Oedv TAAVa@VTAL. Opa- 
es tees \ / \ 
pev yap avTov Kivovpevoy KaTa avdyKny Kal TpeETTOMEVOV, Kal 
a 4 Xe 2 f 
243 petaBaivovta amo onpetou eis onuetov, Sivovta Kal avaTenXoVTA, 
a \ fal lal > , 
Tod Oepuaivew Ta puta Kal Bracta eis yphow Tov avOporar, 
a ? / \ 
10 éte S€ Kal pepiopov EyovTa peTa TOY OLT@V aoTEpwV, Kal 
> ; ” a ’ a \ n" > if a \ 
éXatTova dvta Tod ovpavod Todd, Kal éKdElTrOVTAa TOD PwTos, 
4 \ \ / 
Kal pndepiav avtoxpatevav éyovta. 10 ov vevomtotat TOV 7LOV 
eivat Oeov, arr’ Epryov Oeod. 
J \ 3 \ a oe ts 
Oi 8 vowifovtTes THY ceAnVHY eivat Oeav TAVOVTAL. Opa@meEV 
/ \ > \ / 
15 yap aUTHY KLVOUMEeVNY KATA avadyKnY Kal TpETOMEVHY, Kal pmeTa- 
al / 
Baivovoay amo onpetov eis onpetov, SVvovody Te Kal avatér- 
na a ’ / > 4 na 
Noveay cis xXphow Tov avOpaTwv, Kal éXaTTOVA oVaaY TOU 
e / > / \ / \ > / 4 
HAtov, avéouéevny Te Kal pecoupévnv, Kal éKdElpets ExouCaY. 
\ ’ / \ / S \ ’ 2. a 
810 ov vevopsctat THY GEeAHVHY eivat Deav, adr’ Epyov Oeod. 
\ f \ a 
20 ~=6 VAT. S(O 8é vopifovtes Tov dvOpwrop civat Oeov TrAaAVeVTAL. 
“A ’ 
Op@mev yap avToVv KWovpevoy KaTa avayKny, Kal Tpepopevov 
\ \ ? a 
Kal ynpdoKovta, Kal un OédovTos avtod. Kal ToTé pév Yaipet, 
a Ul nm a 
mote dé AvTeEitat, Seopevos Bpwopatos Kal toTod Kal éaOATos, 
3S \ a Ss > y \ \ \ b] \ \ 
eivat S€ avTov opyiAov Kai Enr@Tnv Kai émtOupntny, Kat 
25 MeTApeAOMevoy, Kal eXaTT@MATA TrOAAA ExovTa. OeEipeTar SE 
/ a 
KaTa TOANOUS TpOTTOUS, UTO oToLyelwy Kal Fowv, Kai Tod 
a yf 
emruKelevou avT@ Oavatov. ovK évdéxyeTat ovv eivat TOV aVOpwTroVv 
‘ ’ > fal 
Oedv, adr’ Epryov Geod. 
e al a 
IIXavnv obv peyadnv érravnOnoav ot XarSaio1, dTricw THv 
/ n lal 
30 émvOuunuator avtov. oéBovta yap ta Plapta otovyeta Kai 
, > lal 
244 Ta vexpa ayadpata, Kal ovK aicPavovtat TadTa OeoTroLovpevor. 


1 érépy] dew C 3 auyKkounids M; uentilationem lat ottlwy Bois 
Vn, 103 avéoupévny P 10 pepicpov] W; diuisionem lat; nepicuors MP 
Bois 16,17 dvaréd\ovcay M 17 xpjow] W; xpelav MP Bois 18 
avéounévnv MPW Bois 22 kal moré wéev xalpe] deficit C usque.ad kat eiot 
mapdvouo. p. 110, 1. 10 23 Bpwparos] Bpwudrav Bois; dprov W; cibo lat 
24 ériOupnrny Kal fntwrnv M 25 perduedov W; pweraBadrbuevov P ToANG 
éX\arrwpara Bois 27 broxeyuévou W ; imminente lat 30 émiOumiwv P 


104 APOLOGIA ARISTIDIS. 


v 
VIII. “Ed@wpev ovy eri tods “EXAnvas, va iSmpev ef Te 
n \ a < 
gppovovar trept Oeov. ot ody" EXAnves codol A€yovTes eivar Euw- 
/ a Lal 
pavOnoav yelpov tév Xaddaiwv, twapetodyovtes Oeovs ToNXOVS 
yeyevncbar, Tovs ev Appevas, Tas 5é Onrelas, Tavtoiwy Taladv 
a , ) ra 
Kal Tavtodatrav Snutoupyovs avounuatwv. [ois éxeivor avtot [49] 
f-/ \ s \ a > /- \ \ \ 
» €€éevTo povyovs eivat Kai hovets, opyidhous Kal EnrwTas Kal 
OvupavTixovs, TaTpoKTovous Kal abeApoKTovous, KAETTAS Kal 
7 
aptayas, ywrovs Kal KuvAXOvS, Kal Pappakods, Kai pwatvopévous” 
/ 
Kal TOUTMY TLVAS MeV TETEAEUTNKOTAS, TIWas dé KEKEpavYwpLEVOUS 
\ / a ' \ , , \ 
kat SedovArevKotas avOporrots, Kal puyadas yevopuévous, Kal Ko- 10 
TTomévous Kal Opnvoupévous, Kal eis COa petapophoupévous éeTi 
jmovnpats Kat aioypais mpakeow.| b0ev yedota Kal pwpa 
\ ’ n / ed a) er \ 
kat aceBh Trapevonyayov ot “EXAnves, Bacired, pnuata, Tous 
\ / U a 
rs 44) GvTas TpocayopevovTes Oeovs, Kata Tas émOupias avToY 
i) 7 t a 
Tas Tovnpas, iva, ToVTOVs TuVHYyopous EXOVTES THS KaKias, MoL- 15 
/ \ 
yewow, apTafwot, povevwot, Kal TA Tavdeiva TOL@oW. Et yap 
of Geol avtTey ToLadTa étroincay, Tas Kal avTol ov ToLadTa 
/ a n 
mpatovow; é€k TOUTMY ovY TMV émiTndeuvpaToYv THs TAaVNS 
a > 
avvéBn Tois avOparrois Trodémous Exety TUXVOVS, Kal opayas Kal 
aixwarwocias TiKpas. — 20 
’ a >] lal J, 
IX. “Adda kat cal Exacrov taév Gedy avTav ei OeXnoomer 
a a / a / 
eXOciv TO NOY, TOAAHY OrYpeL THV ATOTrIaY’ OWS TrapEeLTayETaL 
? al , 
avtots mpo mavtav Oeds Kpovos, cai ToUT@ Ovovar Ta idia Téxva’ 
“A vy an \ > a ¢ / \ \ 4 \ » 
Os Eoxe Traidas ToAXOVs éx THS “Péas, Kal pavels Hove Ta idva 
lal \ > a lal 
téxva. gaol dé tov Aia Koa avtov Ta avayKaia Kai Banreiv 25 
/ a 
De els THV Oaraccay, b0ev Adpoditn pvOeveTrar yevvacOar. Sroas. 
\ € A 
ovv tov idvov matépa o Leds EBarev eis tov Taptapov. opds 245 
: \ U \ a a 
THY TraVHY Kal acédkyeLaY HY Tapeicayovet Kata Tov Oeov 
1 ofv] xai PW; itaque lat 3 moddods Oeods Bois 4 rds] rods 
Bois; alios lat 5 avrol éxetvor M 6 dwveis, dpyjdovs M 7 Kat 
adeApoxrovous] om. P syr; cal adedpoxrwvovs M 8 xwrods—pmawopévous] kal 
éfwreis kakwyv P kudAovs] Ko\ovs M 9 Katkepavywuevous M; Kepavywuévous P 
10, 11 kal Kxowr. kal Opny.] post Kexepavywuévovs Bois 12 mpdéeow] 
plécow Bois 15, 16 poxedowow, dpmdtwor, povetowo. M 16 wdp- 
dewa] wavra dewa P; dewa mavra M; omnia mala lat 18 mpdiwow PW +e 
yap oi Oeot adruv dppoves, was odxi Kal abrol Succ avrois érovrar W 19 rods 
dvOpwrouvs Bois 21 om. kai PW lat 22 Gmrws] 6 mpwros coniecit 
Bois; inducitur enim lat 23 Oeds] +6 eyduevos Bois Oiowor P 


24 ichte M 25 rov Alia kdWac] Trodrov diaxdyar W? 26 adpodirny W 
Bois wndvera M; pwvOverPau Bois 27 &Badrev W? 


APOLOGIA ARISTIDIS. 105 


> a > dé 9S a \ i dé \ > , 4 a r 
avtav; évdéyetar ovv Oedv civar Séopiov Kal aToKOTOV; @ TIS 
a a n / 
avoias' tis TOV vobv éxovTwY TadTa pyaeter ; 
a \ a fa) 
Acdtepos trapeodyetar 0 Leds, dv hacit Baciredoar Tov 
a 5a a > an 4 4 \ 
Gedy adtav, kat petapoppotabat eis CHa, bras povyevon Ovyntas 
a la) / > a 
5 yuvaikas. Tapevodyovot yap TOUTOY weTapoppovpeEvon els TaUpov 
\ > 4 
mpos Evpeémnv, cal eis yxpuvcov mpos Aavanv, Kai eis KUKVOV 
/ \ 
mpos Andav, kal eis oadtupov mpos “Avtidmny, Kal ets KEpauvov 
\ / 
mpos Leuérnv: eita yevécOas éx TovT@y Téxva TrOAAA, Atovucov 
a a / \ 
kat ZnOov Kal ’Audiova xat ‘HpaxrAv cai “Arod\@va kai 
/ 
10” Apteuw kat Ilepoéa, Kaoropa te cal “EXévnv cai [lorvdevnnr, 
246 kat Mivoa cai “PadduavOur cat Laprndova, cal tas évvéa Ovya- ~2 
“ 
Tépas as mpoonyopevoav Movaas. ci? ottws traperoayovor 
\ \ \ / / 9 a a > , 
Ta Kata TOV Lavupndny. cuvéBn odv, Bacir«d, Tois avOpwrtrois 
pipetoOar TadTa TWavta, Kal yiverOar porxods Kal appevomavets, 
15 Kal GAXwv Sewav Epywv épydtas, Kata pipnow Tov Oeod avTav. 
A Ss > , \ 5 \ x > / x 
TOS ovv évdéxeTat Oeov eivat poryov 7H avdpoRarnv, ) TaTpo- 
/ 
KTOVOD ; 
X. Ydv rovtT@ bé nal "Hdaiorov tia twaperodyovot Oedv 
4 \ a \ \ an a \ / 
eival, Kal TOUTOV YwXoY, Kal KpaTovYTAa ohdpav Kai TupdrAaBor, 
20 Kal yadKevovTa yap TpopHs. apa émevdens eat; GrEep ovK 
b] / \ >. \ >O\ / > , 
évdéxyetat Oedv eivat ywrov ovbé mpocdeduevoy avOpaTar. 
3 \ ¢ a 
Kita tov “Epuqv tapecoayovor. Ocov ecivar érvOuunrtnv Kal 
/ 
KNETTNV KaL TAEOVEKTHY Kal payov TKal KUArAOV+ Kal AOYyoV Re 
e / 4 / an 
EpenveuTnv. O7rep ovK evdéyeTar Oedv eivas ToLovTOY. 
To be "A \ / 0 \ 3 > \ ” ‘ 
25 ov 6€ "AckdAntriov Tapevodyovat Oeov eivat, iatpov 6vTa Kal 
katackevafovta pdppaxa Kat avvOeow eumdrdotpev, ydpwv 
‘ee > 5 = \ fe - c be a @ | ee, ig \ 
Tpopys* éemevdens yap nv: Vatepov Sé Kepavvovebas avdTov v0 
a \ \ n 
tov Avs dia Tuvddpewv Aaxedaipovos vidv, kal atobaveiv. et 


2 roav] rov W* 3, 4 trav Oedv] Tov Oeov P 8 onpédrnv P 
9 dudiwa P jpakhky M dmrokwva MW 10 xKdorwpa P 
modvoevkn M 11 pynvwa PW om. xal (prim.) P capmiddva M 
evéa W* 12 mapecdyouo. P 13 yavupldnv P cuvéBn] oéBy M 
14 om. raira ravra Kal ylvecPar P 15 om. épywy M TOU Oeod] Tar 
dewv AW syr; dei sui lat 18 ro’Ty] Tobras W? tmapecayovot twa M 
20 émidens W Bois 21 ovéde] kai P Bois 23 xvd\dv W; wersipellem 
lat 23, 24 om. xal uéyov—épunvevrqy M 24 eclyac] +rov P; 
+ xwhdv (kvd\dv W?) odd mpocdeduevov avOpwrwv* srep ovK evdéxeTar Oedv etvac W 
25 doxnmiov M 27 émidens W 28 ruvddpewy] Bois; ruvdapew M; 


Tuvdapews W?P ; rowddpews AW*; Darii lat 


106 APOLOGIA ARISTIDIS. 


dé “Ackdytids Beds dv Kal Kepavvabels ode HduviOn éavT@O 
BonOjoa, was adXois BonOynoe ; 

“Apns 5€ mapevodyetat Beds eivat woremioTHs Kat CnrwTI/s, VKT 

Kat émvOupntys Openpatov Kai érépwv twov* totepov Sé adtov 

4 \ "A bh Py OF : ee e \ a / 
hotxevovta THY Adpoditny SeOjvat adtov td Tod vytriov s 
“Epwtos «ai tro “Adaiorov. mas ody Beds Hv 6 ériOupnths 
kai TohemaTns Kal Séopsos Kal powyos ; 

Tov dé Avévucov rapeodyovar Oedr eivat, vuxtepwas dyovra 
éoptas Kat SiddoKxadov méOns, Kal atooTOvtTa Tas TOV TANG IOV 
yuvaixas, Kai pawopevov Kai devyovta: tatepov Sé€ avtov to 

an ¢€ \ lal / b] > / \ > 
chayjnvar ute tav Tirdvev. et odv Avovvcos odhayels ovK 
nduvynOn éavT@ BonOjoat, ddAdXr.a Kal pawwopevos Hv Kal péOvcos 
kal dpatrétns, TOs av ein Oeds; 
¢ n na an 
Tov dé ‘Hpaxdhv tapecodyovor peOvoOhvat Kai pavivas, 
\ \ 16 / / 5 \ > a \ cf 
kai Ta ida Téxva opdEa, eita Tupi avarwOfvat Kal odTws 15 
atoOavetvy. mas 6 av ein Oeds, wéOvcos Kal TexvoKTovos, Kal 
/ * n ” / e an fo) \ 
KaTAaKaLomevos; ) TOS arrows BonOynoer, EavTae PBonOjoar pr) 
duvnbeis ; 
XI. Tov dé "Aréd\Awva Tapetodyouva. Oedv civar EnroTiy, 
4 \ \ / \ / n \ \ \ / 
éru 6€ kal to£ov Kal hapétpav KpatobvTa, Tote 5é Kal KiOdpay 20 
kat térav0idat, Kai pavtevouevov Tots avOpmmos yap 
a 3 4 / b] vA b] b] / \ a 
picOov. dpa érevdens éotiv; Strep ovK évdéyetar Oedv eivat 
> an \ \ \ 
évoeh Kal &nrwTnv Kai KiOap@sdor. 
” \ 4 LO \ ’ lal & \ 
Apteuiv dé taperodyovow adeddiv avtod civat, Kuvyyov 
5 \ , ” \ , \ s cy 
ovoav, kal Tofov éxew peta hapétpas' Kai TavTny péuBerOar 25 

\ n > / U \ al n 0 fal 4 + 
KATA TOV OPEWVY LOVHV META TOV KUVOV, OTaS Onpevon EXadov 248 
n KaTTpov. Tas odv éxtat Oeds % ToLa’TH yuV) Kal KUVYNYOS Kal 
pemBomevn meTa TOV KUVOD ; 

"Adpoditny Sé Aéyouot Kal avTnv Oeav civat poryarioa. 

\ ~ ” \ \ tA: \ be "A t \ PS \ 
moTé yap éxye povyov tov “Apny, troré 5é 'Ayyionv, moTé é 30 
"Adwvuv, ovTivos Kal Tov OdvaTov Kraiel, EnTodca TOV épactHY 

1 7dvyyAa M aura W 4 émOupirns M Opeuparwv] xpynud- 
Tw Vins Xpnuarwv Opeuparwv W ; ouiwm lat 6 jv] éorw P Bois 12 
om. d\Ad M 14 jpaxrkn M 17 BonOnoa] +6 W 19 drod\wva W? 
20 om. xal (prim.) MW kparety M om. xal (tert.) W K0dpa M 
21 érav0ida] W Bois; éravdida M; émravAiéa P; tibiam lat; mnxrlda coniecit 
Bois 23 évieq kal fSyrtwrHv] SnrwrHv, evden P 25 éxew] éxov M 
26 om. ray (sec.) W Onpevce: P Bois 27 om. otv P 30 ayxlow 
Pw* 31 déuvnv MP ovrivos| atirn W? 


5 


APOLOGIA ARISTIDIS. 107 


avThs* jv Nyovow Kat eis “Adov kataBaivew, brws éEayopacy 
tov "Advi amd ths Ilepcedhovns. cides, & Bactred, peifova 
TavTns adpocivnv: Ocdv rapecayew Thy pmovyevovcay Kal 
Opnvovoav Kai KXalovear ; 

"ASoviv 5&€ mapevoayovat Oedv eivar Kxuvyyov, Kai ToUToV 
Biaiws arobaveiy wrnyévta Ud Tod Vos, Kal pH Suvnbévta 
BonOijcat TH TadaiTwpia advtov. Tas odv TOY avOpoTrev 
dpovtida touoetas 6 poryos Kal Kuvnyos Kal BroPavatos ; 

Tatra wdvta Kai TONKA ToLadTa Kal TONG TEtoV aiaypo- 


e¢ la) \ n 
10 TEepa Kal Trovnpa Trapevonyayov ot “EXAnves, Bacired, rept TOV 


249 


20 


2 


un 


rn al e ¢/ / 
Oedv avTav, & ovTe Néyeww Oéuts, odT él pynuns OrAws Pépeww 
\ > \ lal a > lal 
b0ev ANapPRavovtes oi AvOpwrro. apopunv amo Thv Gedy avdTor, 
n > / 
émpattoy Tacay avomiav Kat acédyetav Kal acéBevav, Kata- 
a lal a La) / 
pLaivovtes yhv Te Kal aépa tals Sewvais adtav mpakeow. 
f 
XII. Adyvrrios 8é, aBertepotepos kal adppovéotepor TOUT@Y 
n lal n \ , / 
OVTES, yEelpoy TavT@y TOV eOvav éerrarnOncay. ov yap npKéo- 
a lal ¢ > > 
O@ncav tois tOv Xaddalwv Kat “EXAjnvev ceBacpaci, arr 
éTt Kat droya Cia tapeonyayov Oeovs eivar yepoaia Te Kal 
54 ‘ \ \ \ \ ee , > , 
€vudpa, Kai Ta guTa Kal BraoTa, Kal eutavOnoav év Tracy 
pavia Kal acedyeia yelipov Tavtwv Tav eOvav él THs yijs. 
"A / \ ey \ vg ” LO > \ \ 
pxaiws yap écéBovto tHv “low, éyovoav aderdov kat 
wv \ v \ / ¢ \ a > rn ] fa) 
avépa tov “Ooipw, tov ohayévta vo Tod addedkfod avTod 
Tod Tupdvos. Kat dia todto hevyer 4) "Lows peta “Qpou tod 
econ > 5 a n 
viod avTis ets BUBAov tis Lupias, nrodca tov “Ocxpw, Kab 
fal fa) la) 4 A ce \ 4.38 \ a 
TiKpws Upnvovaa, ews nvEnoev 0“ Opos Kai aréxtevve TOV Tudava. 
BA 9 3 an / A 
oute ovv 1) ‘low icyvoe BonOjoa TO idim adeAP@ cal avSpi- 
+ tra, / a a 
oute 0 Oops ohafopevos v7 tod Tuddvos ndvvyOn avtidna- 
/ e al al 
BeoGar Eavtod: obte Tupadv 6 adeddoxrdvos, drorAdvpevos bd 
a “0 \ al "T 8 , / </ 0 ec \ a 
tov QYpov Kai tis “Ioidos, evrrdpnoe picacbar éavtov Tod 


1 ww] dv W* 2 Wes W 3 porxevouevny W2 5 dddvnv M 
6 vids W duvnPjvac MP 7 BonPjca post airod P avrov] 
éavrod Bois 8 ronenrac PW Biacobdvaros M 9 mrelova P; 
plura lat 10 mapecdyovow M3; wapiyayov P 12 rév] rot P 
14 kal] + 7ov P 15 dBedrepwrepa] M Bois; dBedrwrepo DW* ; dBedré- 
Tepa APW? 18 ddoya] d\\a M Tapiyyayov W 20 él ris yijs] 
éml ys M; rév éml rijs ys Ps érdaviOnoav W 21 dpxalws] dpx70ev Bois; 
in principio lat adeApiy W 23 om. rod (prior.) Bois peta] +70d 
Tigwvos kal W 24 BiBrov MPW* om. xal P Bois 25 Opnvoica] 


Gavotca W 27 om.6M 28 dmoAdduevos] Bois; doANbuevos MPW 


3 


108 APOLOGIA ARISTIDIS. 


Qavatov. Kai éri tovovTois atuynpace yvopiobévtes adToi 
Geot vio tov acvvérov AiyuTrTiov évopicOncav: oftives, und 250 
év TovTows apKeabévtes 7 Tots NovTois GeBadopact Tov eOver, 
Kal Ta ddoya Coa Trapetanyayov Oeovs eivar. 

Twes yap aitaév éoeBdcOnoav mpoBatov, tives dé Tpdyov, 


ut 


v4 \ / \ a 
ETepot O€ wooyov Kal TOV yotpov, ddXoL Sé TOY KOpaKa Kal TOV 
es \ \ a \ 
lépaka Kal TOV yiTa Kai TOY aeTOV, Kal AXOL TOY KPOKOOELAO?, 
\ be \ »- \ \ / . \ / ‘ \ 
tives O€ TOV aiXoupoyv Kal TOV KUVa, Kal TOY AUKOV Kal TOV 
/ \ 
mi@nkov, Kal Tov Spaxovta Kal tiv aomida, Kal addoL TO 
/ / 
Kpomvov Kal TO oKOpodoy Kal aKdvOas, Kal TA NoLTA KTICpATA. to 
\ > 
Kat ovK atoOdvovtat ot Taraitwpot tepl TavTwv TovTeV STL 
> \ > / c n an 
ovdev iaxvouvow. opavTes yap Tovs Oeols avTav Bi8packo- 
A ¢ A. ee ? , 
Mévous v0 éTépwv avOpwTrav Kai Katopévous Kal ohatTopévous 
\ / an a 
Kal ONTOMEVOUS, OV TUVKAV TEpL AVT@V OTL OVK eial Oeot. 
/ U 
XIII. [ldavnv obv weyarnv érravynOnoav ot te Aiyirrtiot y5 
\ ec val / 
Kat ot Xaddaiou Kat oi “"EXAnves ToLovTovs TapevadyovTes Oeods, 
> a a 
Kal adyadpata avToy trovodvTes, Kal OeoTrotovmevos TA Koda 
\ > 0. 16 \ 0 U a € a \ \ 
kal avaic@nta cidwra. Kal Oavpafw mds opdvtes Tods Beods 
¢ \ a / / 
avTov VTO TOV Snutoupyav mpLfouévous Kal TeNEKoupévous, Kal 
/ ¢€ a 
KkoroBovpévovs, Tadatoupévous TE VITO TOU ypdvoV Kal avadvo- 
; , a / 
févous Kal ywvevopévous, ovK éppovncay Trepl ad’T@Y OTL OVK 
elot Ocol. OTe yap Tepl THs dias cwrnpias ovdév iaxXVoVat, TOS 
TOV avOpeéTwv Tpovotay ToLMToVTAaL; GAN ob TroLNTal avToY 
a ¢ 
Kal piriocopo, Tov Te Xadbaiwv kai ‘EAAjvoev kal AiyuTTion, 
nr  ] nr n lal 
Pehkncavtes Tots Toujppacw avTév Kal ouyypadais cemvivar 9. 
\ > ] lal \ / \ ’ / > a , / 
Tovs Tap avTois Oeovs, wevSovas THY aloxuvny avTav éEexdduipav 
a \ al an ’ 
Kal yupyny Twaot mpovOnkav. €% yap TO T@ma TOD avOpwTrov 
3 / a , ’ \ 
Todupepes dv oVK aTroBadXAcTal TL TOY LOlwY MENDY, ANNA TpOS 
/ \ / > / v4 ” e A~.3 \ / 
TavTa TA MéeAH AdLappHKTOV Evwow éxov EavT@ ott aiphwvor, 251 
a / 4 \ 
Tas év poe Ocod paxn Kai diapwvia ExtaL TOTAUTH; Eb YAP 3 


2,3 pnd’ &] unde W 4 om. deods elvac MW*; deos esse lat z 
kopkdnov W 8 om. 7rdv (prim.) PW é\oupov W* om. Tdv (sec.) 
MPW — 9 wl@nxa W kal tov Spdxovra] Spdxovra dé P; om. riv M 
10 xpbupyvov M oxbpdov M axdvOas] Bois; dxkavOa PW; dxavOov M ; 
spinas lat 11 yo0dvovro P 14. ontopévous] +xalt P 16 om. of 
(sec.) W 19 medexwpévous Bois 19,20 om. kai kodoBovpévous Bois 20 
KodoBwyévous MP 20, 21 dyvaddoovpévous kal xovevouevous P 26 map’ 


avtav P 29 éxwv W* 30 rocatrn écrar PW 


APOLOGIA ARISTIDIS. 109 


pia pvow tov Oedv vihpyev, ovK wpeirev Beds Oedv SiaKesy, 
ovte ohafewv, ove KaKxoTrovetiv: ed Se of Oeol v7rd Oedy edidyOnoav 
Kai éohaynoar, cal jipraynoav Kal éxepavv@Onoar, ovK éTt pia 
pious éotlv, GAXA yvdpar Sunpnuévat, Tacat KaKoTroLOL’ wate 
ovdels €& avtdv éotl Beds. davepdv ody éotiv, 6 Bacred, 
TraVHy eivar Tacay THY TEpt TOV Dedy pvctoroyiar. 

Ilds 88 ov cuvijcav of cool Kai Noyio. TOV “EXAHvar Ste 
vopwous Oéuevor Kpivovtat vd Tav idiwy vowwv; eb yap ot 
voor Sixatol eiow, adiKot TavT@s of Oeol a’Tay cial, Tapavopa 


ur 


/ b] / \ / \ / \ 
10 TroLNoaVTES, AAAHNAOKTOVias Kal PappaKkelas Kal polyelas Kal 
F ” a € 
KNoTras Kal apoevoxoitias. et 5é Kados érpakay tava, ol 
vopot dpa adekoi eiot, kata TOV Oewv ouvTeBévTes. vuvi dé ot 
fa) \ \ 
vosot KaXOL ciot Kal Sixatol, TA KAXA eTrAaLVODYTES Kal TA KAKA 
> a U 
atrayopevovtes’ Ta 5é Epya TOV Oedy avTaY Tapavoya’ Trapa- 
b] fal / \ ’ n 
15 vowot apa ot Geol avTar, Kal évoxo. Tavtes Oavarov Kal acePets 
U \ \ \ e \ 
oi TovovTous Oeods TrapetoayorTes. eb mev yap puvOiKal ai Trept 
] lal e 4 b) / > > \ / / > \ \ 
avT@v taTopiat, ovdév eiow ef pn povoy Aoyou eb SE huvotkal, 
»” nr / \ 
ovx étt Oeot ciow oi TadTa Totnoavtes Kal waOovTes* et é 
nr > ] 
addAnyopikat, wvO0i eiot Kal oVK AXXO TL. 
> a n / \ 
252 XIV. “Arodédevxtat toivvy, 6 Bacied, TadTa TavTa Ta 
/ / / 4 \ > / id / 
TmowGea ceBacpata TraVNS Epya Kal atr@deias vTapxeEt. 
> \ \ \ b / € \ \ A et > \ 
ov yp yap Oeovs ovouatery opatods Kal wn opdévtas' adda 
‘ ? / c \ / 
Tov aopatov Kal Tayta opavTa Kal tavta Snm.oupynoavTa 
a \ , 
def Oeov céBecOau. 
> a ? 
25 “EAdwpev ody, 6 Bactred, kal eri todvs “lovdaious, bras 
a \ > \ \ n \ ac 
idwpmev TL Ppovovat Kal avToi Trepi Oeov. ovTOL yap, TOD ABpaap 
” eS \? \ \>? \ , > ” 
dvTes atroyovot Kal loaak kat laxoP, tap@Knoay eis Aityurrtov* 
> tal \ 3g / 2 \ c \ > \ lal Vi «2 
éxeiOev Sé é&jyayev avtovs o Beds ev yxeipi Kpatard Kal év 
/ ¢ \ / a Rie te 
Bpaxiov vynr@ bia Macéws Tod vopobérou avtav, Kal Tépace 
n \ / a a 
30 Tools Kal onpeiois éyvopicey avTois THy éavTod Svvapwr. 


1 bretpxev ox M Sudxnv M 2 ef] Oi M (0 rubr.) oi] supra 
lin, e pri. manu M 4 xaxoraal PW? 5 gavepay W om. éoriv 
MW 7 61] + xal of coniecit Bois 9 mdvrws] mavres W om. 
elot W* 10 dappyaxtas P Bois 11 dpoevoxoiretas M 14 era &pya 
dé M 15 dpa] +xal P 17,18 om. ef uy—Oeot cicow M 18 raira] 
Troatra M 20 dmrodédecxrar cum praeced, W 21 irdpye W? 22 yap] 
oty Bois 23 mdvta épOvra Kal rdvta] wayta épdvta Kal wavras P; ravras 
Bois 24 océBecOa Oedy Bois 26, 27 dvres Tod dBpadu P 27 


om, «al (prior.) P icadx] +7e P Bois 


NX 


| 


110 APOLOGIA ARISTIDIS. 


> b ’ / 
adda, ayvaopoves Kal avtol havévtes Kal ayaptoTot, TOAAKLS 
/ al \ ’ / 
éXaTpevoay Tois Tov €Ovav ceBacpact, Kal TOvS aTrEecTAApEVOUS 
/ ~ ’ / 
mpos avtovs mpodntas Kal Sixaious améxtewav. Elta ws eddd- 
Knoev 0 vios Tod Oeod érOeiy eri THS ys, euTapowwnoartes eis 
auto 0 Tlivate té Hyewove TOV “Pwpaiwv kat D 
vy wpoédmxay Tlitato Te Hye ov Pwpaiwr cal oravpd 
\ > > a 
katedikacay, pn aidecbévtes tas evepyerias avTov, Kal ta 
> >] n 
avapiOunta Oavpata dep év avTots eipyacato: Kal am@XovTo 
a \ a \ 
™ dia Tapavopia. céBovrar yap Kal viv tov Bedv povov 
TavToKpatopa, aX ov Kat ériyvwow* Tov yap ypioTov 
apvobvtat Tov viov TOD Oeod, Kai eiol Tapopotor TOV eOvOY, Kav 
A a @ \ U a 
éyyifew Twas TH adrnOeia Soxdaw, hs EavTods euaxpuvay. TadTa 
mept Tov “lovdaiwr. 
XV. O68 yptotiavol yeveadoyodvtat ato Tod Kupiov Incod 
na na na an ¢ a 
Xpictov. ovtos dé 0 vids Tod Oeod Tod vioTov 6poroyeiTas év 
mvevpate ayio am ovpavod KataBas da tHv cwTnpiay Tov 
> / > / 
avOpdrwv: Kat é« twapQévov ayias yevvnbels, aomopws Te Kar 
’ / ’ , ~ 
apOopws, capka avéraBe, kal avedavn avOperross, brs ex THS 
/ / > \ > / \ / \ 
moAvGéov mAaVvns avTovS avakadéontal. Kal Tedoas THY 
a \ a t 
Oavpactiy avtTod oixovoulav, dia ctavpod Oavatov éyevoato 
éxovoia BovrAn KaT oiKkovopiay peyadnv: peta dé TpEls uépas 
a Bourg play pw pets rhuép 
] / \ > 5) ees AT. ® \ / fal / 
aveBiw kal eis ovpavovs avidOev. ot TO Kos THS Tapovaias 
] n > > n / > n ¢ / lal + / 
EX TNS TAP AVTOLS KaXoUpEVNS EVayyEediKNS aylas ypadis e~eoTi 
fal fy, 29-% > , 4 8 / »” \ 
cou yvovat, Bacired, éav évtvyns. ovTOs dadexa Exye palnras, 
€ n eb] n a \ / 
of peta THY év ovpavois avodov avTod é&nNOov eis Tas érrapyias 
~~ > / \ Ba Zs \ > / / / 
THS olKoupEeVns, Kal ediSakav THY éxelvou peyadwovynv' Kabdrep 
e b] b] fal \ — ¢ lal fal fa Uy : \ 50 / 
els €E avtadv Tas Kal nuds TepinrOe ywpas, TO Soyua KNpUTTOV 
n > / 6 © > / lal lal , fa) 
THS adnOeias. b0ev oi eioéts StaxovodvTes TH StKarocvvyn Tod 
la) / 
KNpUYLATOS aAUTOY KadodYTAL YpLOTLAVOL. 
\ Lg / > €..¢€ \ U \ a A Cay \ 
Kal ottol eiow of vrép Tavta Ta EOvn THs ys EvpoVTEs THY 
\ / \ \ 
arnOeav' yweoKovot yap Tov Bedv Ktiorny Kal Snusovpyov 
n a , cS \ 
TOV aTavToVY év Vi@ movoyevEel Kai TVEvMAaTL ayi@, Kal ado 
1 dxdpicro] a&xpynoro. Bois 3, 4 nbddxnoev P 5 om. tg M 
irynpove P 7 Kal] 60 P Bois 8 Oedv Tov pdvoy Bois 9 mayro- 


kparwpa PW* 10 apéporor] mapdunor M ; rrapavouo. W* Tots @0veot Bois 
Kay] kal W? 11 doxdcw W* 14 om.6P 17 ddapOdpws W? 18 


avrovs mdavns P 19 adrod] +peyarnv W Oavarov W 20 peyd- 
Au W 22 om. dylas M 23 om. yravar W Toxns W* toxe 
dwbdexa P 25 peyadootyvny PW* 29 om. oi P 30 Oedv] + ely 


Ww? 31 povoyerh PW? 


VI 


253 


25 


30 


5 


254 


15 


25 


30 


APOLOGIA ARISTIDIS. 111 


\ \ , ’ / »” \ > \ ’ a a 
Gedv mANY TOUTOU ov céBovtat. Eyovot Tas évTONasS avTOV TOD 
an na a / / \ 
xupiov “Inood Xpicrod év tais Kxapdias Keyapaypévas, Kal 
/ \ \ 
ravtas duNaTTovel, MpocdoKdvTes avactaciw vexpov Kai Sony 
el : ? ‘f > 
ToD péANOVTOS aiBvos. OU moLyEevoOVoLY, OU TOpVvEevOVoW, ov 
,’ a > , al , 
wevdopaptupovary, ov ériOupodat Ta adOTPLA, TLLOOL TATEpA 
\ / \ \ / a / / A b] 
Kal pntépa, Kai Tods mAnaLov hirovat, Sixara Kpivovawy, Ooa Ov 
a ’ A \ 
Oérovew avtois yiverOat éErépw ov Tovodct, Tods abdvKodVTAS 
al al \ al lal 
avTovs Tapakanovot Kal tpocdircis avTovs éavTois TroLovat, 
Tovs €yOpods evepyeTetv orrovdalovar, mpaeis etal Kal émrverKeis, 
BJ \ > / 
avo Taons cuvovolas avou“ov Kal ato tTaans aKxalapcias 
€ “ Lal 
eyKPATEVOVYTAL, YNPAVY OVX VIrEpopwcty, Oppavoy ov AuTrovaL 
¢ ¥ \ 4 > , n / \ 
0 éyov TO pn ExovTe aveTripOovas émuyopnyet’ Eévov éav 
. ’ a 
ldwow, vmod otéynv Eeicayouvot, Kal yalpovow ém av’T@ ws 
A > lal > \ > 
Eri aderxp@® adnOiv@ ov yap Kata capKka adedXdovs éavTovs 
a > \ \ / 4 / > ¢ \ 6 
Kadovolw, adda Kata Wuynv. éEToiuwol etow v7ep Xpiotov 
’ A fa! 
Tas Wuyas avTov mpoécba’ Ta yap mpootaypata avTod 
U ¢ 
dodares hvrattovow, ociws Kai Sixaiws Covtes, Kxabads 
/ e > an a 
Kuplos o Geos avTois mpocérakev, evyapiotobvTes a’T@ KaTa 
A ‘/ / A lal a 
Tacav wpav év tavti Bpwpatt Kal ToT@® Kal Tois RovTois 
ayabois. 
v - / ea\ A 
XVI. “Ovtas ot avtn éotiv 7 0805 THs adnOeias, HTLs TOS 
c / ] \ > \ an 
odevovTas avTnVY Eis THY ai@vioy yYeLpaywyel Bacirelav, THY 
> / \ an > fal / a . 6 
eTnyyedAmernv rapa Xpiotov év TH peddXoven Fon. Kal iva 
al a > > 2 fa) a al . a 
yves, Bactred, bt ovK am éuavtod TadTa réyo, Talis ypadhais 
> / lal na ¢e / > \ 54 n > / 
éyxupas TOV XplaTiavay evpHaes ovdév Ew THs adyOeias pe 
Névyeuv. 
A 9 ral e / , ‘al 
Karas ody curiKev o vids cov, Kai Sixaiwms edidayOn Tod 
/ [al aA na \ 

Aatpeveww Cavte Oe@ Kai cwOjvar eis Tov péAXovTA érrépyed Oat 
IA hy \ \ an a 
aidva. peyddha yap Kal Oavpacta Ta Td TOV yYpLoTLAVeV 
/ \ ’ : 4 \ 5) , es a 
eyoueva Kal TpatTopeva’ ov yap avOpeTrar pyyuata Nadodawr, 
\ \ a an a 
andra Ta TOD Oeod. Ta dé Nowra EOVH TaVEOVTAL, Kal TKAVOCLY 


1 rotrov] airod W 2 éyKxexapayyévas P 5 av dddorplwow M 
6, 7 avrots ob OédNovo. W 7 mowitor] + xal P 8 avrov’s (prior.)] 
avrots W om. éavrots W 9 om. eioi W 12 apddvws P Bois 
13 adr@] airots W? 14 éavrods ddeXpods W 15 puxjy] rretya Ve, 
Bois; animam lat 16 avrév] éavrav W 18 om. 6 6eds W 19 org] 
mopar. M 22 xetpaywyei] + ovpavav W? 27 éb:daxOnv W om. 


tov Bois 28 cwOfvac] cvvOetvac W2 31 om. ra (prior.) P 


b 


re APOLOGIA ARISTIDIS. 


Eavtovs’ odevovTes yap év oKOTEL TpocpHacovTaL éavTois ws 
peQvortes. 
XVII. “Eas dde 6 mpos oé pov AOyos, Bacided, 6 Vd THs 
VA arnOelas év TS voi pou vrayopevbeis. 810 TavedcOwoar oi 
eA avontol cov cogol pataioroyodrtes KaTa TOD KUplov’ cupdépeEn 5 

yap vpiv Oedv xtiotnv céBecOar Kal ta adOapta adrtod 255 
evativerbar pyuata, iva, kpiow éxpuyovtes Kai Tywwplas, Sans 
avwnéOpov SevyOeinre KANpovopot. 


1 mpospiccortes P 6 tyiv W apOapra] dppacra W 7 Tipw- 
plas] MPW?; tormenta lat ; tiuwplavy W* Bois 8 dvodé@pov M 


INDEX OF GREEK WORDS. 


aBedrepwrepos 107, 15 dvTiAauBavecba éavrod 107, 27 
‘ABpadu 109, 26 *"Avriéryn 105, 7 
dydd\wara 101, 20; 108, 17; dy. vexpd dvwréOpov gwis 112, 8 

101, 16; 103, 31 dvwpedrhs 101, 16 
adyvepuov 110, 1 déparos 101, 25; 109, 23 
"Ayxtons 106, 30 amapalrnros 102, 6 
ddedpoxrévos 104, 7; 107, 28 dmoBad\ecOa, mid. 108, 28 
“Adns 107, 1 dméyovos 109, 27 
adidppnxros 108, 29 améxomos 105, 1 
aduvarety mepi 101, 13 "Amédd\\wy 105, 9; 106, 19 
"Adwvis 106, 31; 107, 2, 5 amorenety Oépn kal xeudvas 102, 4 
derés worshipped 108, 7 dmpocdejs 100, 9 
Alyirrwos 100, 21; 107, 15; 108, 2, 15, “Apys 106, 3, 30 

24 dppevouavys 105, 14 
Alyurros 109, 27 dpoevoxaitia 109, 11 
aiiovpos worshipped 108, 8 "Apres 105, 10; 106, 24 
aixuarwola: mixpal 104, 20 apxaiws 107, 21 
dkav0a worshipped 108, 10 apxnyés 101, 1 
adrAdooer Oa. 102, 21 ’AckAnmids 105, 25; 106, 1 
addAnyopixds 109, 19 donis worshipped 108, 9 
a&\AnAoxTovia 109, 10 domépws Te kal dpOdpws 110, 16 
dddotodv 101, 24, 26; 102, 20 atréxnua 108, 1 
"Audiwy 105, 9 avroxpareca 103, 12 
dvaBiobty 110, 21 cpopuy 107, 12 
dvayxata 104, 25 _ "Adpodirn 104, 26; 106, 5, 29 
avdyknv, card 100, 4; 101, 19, 29; 102, appootvyn 107, 3 

1, 6; 103, 7, 15, 21 axapicros 110, 1 
dvala@nros 108, 18 dxpnoros 102, 11 
dvahauBdvew, cdpxa 110, 17 
dvadXolwros 101, 25 Bialws 107, 6 
avapxos 100, 8 BiBpwoxecGa 108, 12 
dvaoraots vexpav 111, 3 Bwo8dvaros 107, 8 
dvdpoBarns 105, 16 BraoTd Vv. pura 
dveripOdvws 111, 12 Bonbety 107, 7, 26; éavre 106, 2, 17; 
dvodos, 7 év ovpavots 110, 24 dros 106, 2, 17 
dvéunua 104, 5 BvBros 107, 24 


H, A, 8 


114 


Tavupjins 105, 13 

yeulfer Oar 102, 15 

yeveadoyetcbar 110, 13 

ypapis evayyedkhs aylas 110, 22; ai 
yp. Tav xp. 111, 24 

yéy worshipped 108, 7 


Aavdn 105, 6 

déouwos, of a god 105, 1; 106, 7 

Snucoupyety 109, 23 

Snumovpyos 104, 5; 108, 19; of God 
110, 30 

dtaxovety TH Sikatoctvy 110, 27 

Siaxdoounors 100, 3 

diaxparety 100, 5, 6, 7, 8 

Sudornua 102, 2 

Siadwvia 108, 30 

Avévucos 105, 8; 106, 8, 11 

SioptccecOar 102, 15 

doyua, TO THs ddyOelas 110, 26 

dovrevey, of wind 103, 1; of gods 104, 
10 

dpaxwy worshipped 108, 9 

dparérns, of a god 106, 13 


éyyltev 7H adnOela 110, 11 

éyximrew Tats ypadais 111, 25 

eldwrov 108, 18 

éxovala BovdAy 110, 20 

éxtumwpa 101, 8 

éX\arrwpya 100, 10; 103, 25 

‘Edévy 105, 10 

“EdAnves 100, 21; 104, 
10, 17; 108, 16, 24; 

éumapowey 110, 4 

éumdactpov 105, 26 

évdens 106, 23 

évruyxawvew, ypady 110, 23 

évvdpos 107, 19 

évwots 108, 29 

évwtiferOar 112, 7 

érapxlat THs olkovmévns 110, 24 

téravida 106, 21 

érevoeys 105, 20, 27; 106, 22 

érlyvwow, xard 110, 9 

ériecxyjs 111, 9 

ér.Ouunris 103, 24; 105, 22; 106, 4, 6 

émixeimévov ait@ Oavdrw 103, 27 


1, 3,183 107, 
109, 7 


INDEX OF GREEK WORDS. 


émirndevua 104, 18 

ércxopyyetv 111, 12 

épyov Geos 102, 8, 17, 23, 29; 103, 5, 
13, 19, 28 

Epunveutis Néywv 105, 24 

“Epujs 105, 22 

"Epws 106, 6 

evayyenixys aylas ypapjs 110, 22 

evdoxeitv 110, 3 

evepyeoia 110, 6 

evrropetvy 107, 29 

Eipaémrn 105, 6 

evxapicrety 111, 18 


Zevs 104, 25, 27; 105, 3, 28 

Zj00s 105, 9 

fmrwrjs 103, 24; 104, 6; 106, 3, 19, 
23 


“Hpakd7jjs 105, 9; 106, 14 
"“Hgaoros 105, 18; 106, 6 


Oeoroeto bac 103, 31; 108, 17 
Onxn 102, 16 

Opéupara 106, 4 

Oupyavtixds 104, 7 

O@vela 100, 11 


"IaxwB 109, 27 

iépaé worshipped 108, 7 

"Inoods 110, 12; 111, 2 

"Tovdaioe. 100, 19; 109, 25; 110, 12 
"Ioadx 109, 27 

"Ios 107, 21, 23, 26, 29 

isropia 109, 17 


Kaxotro.etvy 109, 2 

kaxotrotés 109, 4 

Kdorwp 105, 10 

karaduxagew 110, 6 

katraxalecOa: 106, 17 

kataxupreverOac 102, 10, 19, 25 

katapuatvew 107, 13 

katramatetaba. 102, 14 

kepavvotoba. 104, 9; 105, 27; 106, 1; 
109, 3 

Knpvyua 110, 28 

KtOapwdds 106, 23 


INDEX OF GREEK WORDS. 


kXéos THs mapovolas 110, 21 

Ko\oBodcGac 108, 20 

képaé worshipped 108, 6 

xéopmos (emph.) 101, 30; x. odpavios 102, 7 
kpoxdde.hos worshipped 108, 7 

kpéuvov worshipped 108, 10 

Kpévos 104, 23 

kuvynyos 106, 24, 27; 107, 5, 8 

kUwy worshipped 108, 8 


Aaxedaiuwy 105, 28 
Ajda 105, 7 
NUKos worshipped 108, 8 


pdyos 105, 23 

paxpivew éavrov 110, 11 
paratodoyety 112, 5 
beyadwatvyn 110, 25 

peOvev 106, 14; 112, 2 
uéOucos, of a god 106, 12, 16 
pevovcbac 103, 18 

Hepiopuds 103, 10 

petaywyn 103, 2 
petrapérecbac 103, 25 
perapoppovcba 104, 11; 105, 4, 5 
peréxew THs adnOelas 100, 16; 101, 3 
piunors 105, 15 

Mivws 105, 11 

portverOac 102, 22 

povoyevys, vids 110, 31 
Léppwua 101, 7 

udcxos worshipped 108, 6 
Moica 105, 12 

puOeverOac 104, 26 

pvOixds 109, 16 

p000s 109, 19 

Mwe7s 109, 29 


vouobérns 109, 29 
vuxtepival é€oprat 106, 8 


ddedew 111, 22; 65. &v oxdre 112, 1 
650s Tis adnOeias 111, 21 

oixovoyla 110, 19, 20 

oixoupévn 110, 25 

omodoyeto Oa: 110, 14 

dpyidos 103, 24; 104, 6 

éppavés 111, 11 


115 


"Oops 107, 22, 24, 27 
dolws Kat dtxaiws 111, 17 
dorpaxov 102, 12 


maraodcbac 108, 20 

mdviewos 104, 16 

mavrodamds 102, 27; 104, 5 

mavrokpatwp 110, 9 

mapdyerOar, éx Too wh ovros 101, 24 

mapakareiv, Tovs ddikodvras 111, 8 

mapeodyev 104, 3, 13, 22, 28; 105, 3, 
5, 12, 18, 22, 25; 106, 3, 8, 14, 19, 
24; 107, 3, 5, 10, 18; 108, 4, 16; 109, 16 

map0évos ayia 110, 16 

mapoKeiv 109, 27 

mapduo.s 110, 10 

mapovola 110, 21 

matpoxrévos 104, 7; 105, 16 

medexovc0a 108, 19 

Ilepcevs 105, 10 

Ilepcepévn 107, 2 

ml@yxos worshipped 108, 9 

IliAdros 110, 5 

mravay 111, 31; mwravacOa 101, 28; 
102, 9, 18, 24, 30; 103, 6, 14, 20; 107, 
16; 111, 31; rravacba driow 101, 5; 
103, 29; mdAdvnv mwravaoOa 101, 15; 
103, 29; 108, 15 

mwreovéxtns 105, 23 

mrvors 102, 22 

mvetua dyov 110, 15, 31 

avon, avéwwv 102, 30; 103, 5 

mwoinua 108, 25 

monTrys 108, 23 

motemorns 106, 3, 7 

IloAvdevxns 105, 10 

mwodvGeos 109, 21; 110, 18 

modupepyjs 108, 28 

modvevunos 101, 2 

mptgecbar 108, 19 

mpoBarov worshipped 108, 5 

mpoécOa, wuxyv 111, 16 

mpovoa 100, 1; 108, 23 

mpocdeduevos avOpHmruwv 105, 21 

mpockivno.s 101, 2 

mpockuyyTys 100, 19 

mpocphocerbat éavrots 112, 1 

mpoarayuwa 101, 24; 111, 16 


8—2 


116 


mpoopirets rovetvy 111, 8 
mpopyrns 110, 3 
muporaBov 105, 19 


‘PadduwavOus 105, 11 
“Péa 104, 24 
péuBecOa 106, 25, 28 
pvecOar éavrov 107, 29 
“Pwyator 110, 5 


Laprndwv 105, 11 

odpxa dvé\aBe 110, 17 

adrupos 105, 7 

oeBagecOa 108, 5 

céBacua 107, 17; 108, 3; 109, 21; 110, 2 

Leuérdyn 105, 8 

onuetov, of the zodiac 102, 3 bis; 103, 
8 bis, 16 bis; répacr kal o. 109, 30 

onwecOa 108, 14 

oirikd 103, 3 

gxdpodov worshipped 108, 10 

otrovdy 100, 12 

otaupos 110, 5, 19 

oréyn 111, 13 

oraxetov 101, 6, 9, 18, 19, 20, 22, 27; 
103, 26, 30 

ovyypageyn 108, 25 

ovykvelew 101, 10 

cuyKkoyudy 103, 3 

auviyyopos 104, 15 

atvOeos éumddotpwv 105, 26 

cuvovela dvowos 111, 10 

Zupla 107, 24 

opdrrecba 108, 13 

cpipa 105, 19 


radairwpla 107, 7 
rahalrwpos 108, 11 
Tdprapos 104, 27 
texvoxrovos 106, 16 
tnpewv 101, 11, 12 bis 


INDEX OF GREEK WORDS. 


Tirdaves 106, 11 

Tpdyos worshipped 108, 5 

Tpopys, xapw 105, 20, 27 

Tuvddpews 105, 28 

Tudwy 107, 23, 25, 27, 28 


bBpiferOar, tiv yhv 102, 10 
vids rod Geo 110, 4, 10, 14; povoyerijs v. 
110, 31 


pawoueva 100, 12 

gpapérpa 106, 20, 25 

dOapros 101, 18, 19, 23; 103, 30 
POelperOa- 102, 13, 20, 27; 103, 25 
g@irdcogos 101, 17; 108, 24 
pupécOar 102, 11 

gvoixds 109, 17 

guvawroyia 109, 6 

pura kat Braord 103, 9; 107, 19 
pworhpes 101, 9; 102, 2 


Xaddato. 100, 21; 101, 5, 15; 103, 29; 
104, 3; 107, 17; 108, 16, 24 

xapdocecOar év rats kapdias 111, 2 

xaptfouar 101, 14 

xeipaywyew 111, 22 

xepoatos 107, 18 

xnpa 111, 11 

xotipos worshipped 108, 6 

xpjow, els 102, 17, 19, 25; 103, 9, 17 

Xpicrvavot 100, 19; 110, 13, 28; 111, 
25, 29 

Xpiords 110, 9, 14; 111, 2, 15, 28 

xpaua 102, 21 

xwveverbar 108, 21 

xwpetv 100, 14 


evdouaprupeiy 111, 5 


Qpos 107, 23, 25, 29 


INDEX OF SUBJECT MATTER. 


Ambrose; Hypomnemata, 71 ff. 

Anima, De; Syriac MS. of, 5 

Antoninus Pius; his journeys to the 
East, 16 f. 

Aphrodite, cult of, 60 f. 

Apology of Aristides; discovery of Syriac 
Version, 3; description of MS., 3 ff.; 
discussion of title, 7 ff., 52, 75; con- 
tains traces of a Creed; 13, 23 ff.; 
possible existence of original Greek, 
18 f.; transl. of Armenian fragment, 
27 ff. ; transl. of Syriac Version, 35 ff. ; 
notes on, 52 ff.; remains of original 
Greek, 67 ff.; how far modified, 70 f.; 
criticism of Syriac Version, 71 ff.; its 
comparative faithfulness, 80, 90; the 
Apology and the Canon, 82 ff.; its use 
of the Two Ways, 84 ff.; and of the 
Preaching of Peter, 86 ff.; possibly 
used by Celsus, 19 ff., 98; text of 
the Greek, 100 ff, 

Aristides; our previous knowledge of, 1, 
18; Eusebian account of, 6 ff.; to 
whom he presented his Apology, 7 ff. ; 
52, 75. 

Armenian fragment of the Apology; 
previous criticisms of, 2; whether 
translated from the Greek, 26, 74 ff.; 
Latin transl. of, 27 ff.; English transl, 
of, 30 ff.; compared with Syriac and 
Greek, 75 ff.; other fragments, 33 f. 


Barlaam and Josaphat; embodies our 
Apology, 67; outline of the story, 68 ff.; 
condition of Greek text, 80 ff.; MSS. 
used for the text of the Apology, 81 f. 


Bezae, Codex; parallel quoted from, 86 


Canon; bearing of the Apology on, 82 ff. 

Celsus; possibly used the Apology, 19; 
points in common with it, 20 ff.; 
possibly used the Preaching of Peter, 
98 f. 

Cephas, Bar; quotation from the Hex- 
aemeron of, 53 

Christians; a third race, 70, 77, 88, 90 

Christology of Aristides; the term Theo- 
tokos, 2, 3, 79; discussion of main 
passage, 78 f. 

Chrysostom; Syriac MS. of Hom. in 
Matth., 6 

Creed; known to Aristides in some form, 
13 ff., 23 ff. 

Crucifixion; attributed to the Jews, 14, 
55 f., 84 


Didaché; parallels with the Apology, 
63; the Two Ways used by Aristides, 
84 ff. ; relation of Didaché and Bar- 
nabas to the Two Ways, 85 f. 

Diognetus, Epistle to; Doulcet’s theory 
criticised, 54, 64; used the Preaching 
of Peter, 95 ff. . 

Division of Mankind into three races, 70, 
77, 90 


Eusebius; on the date of Aristides, 6, 
9; on Quadratus, 10 f. 


Fasting; Hermas and Aristides com: 
pared, 15 
Fathers; Syriac Lives of, 4 


118 


Gentiles, Oratio ad; see Hypomnemata 
Golden Rule; negative form of, 62, 86 
Gospels; referred to by Aristides, 82 


Hermits; Syriac Lives of Egyptian, 4 
Hypomnemata of Ambrose; Syriac com- 
pared with Greek, 71 ff. 


John; Acts of, 14 f. 

John the Solitary; Syriac MS. of, 5 

Justin Martyr; parallels with our Apo- 
logy, 53 ff. 


Lucius (Lucianus); Syriac MS. of, 5 


Magdalen College, Oxford; MS. of B. 
and J., 81 f. 

Margoliouth, Prof.; criticism of emen- 
dation by, 58 


Nilus; Syriac MS. of, 4 


Paradisi Liber; Syriac MS. of, 4 

Pembroke College, Cambridge; MS. of 
B. and J., 82 

Peter, Preaching of; used by Aristides, 
86 ff.; the fragments collected, 87 ff. ; 
attempt at its reconstruction, 91, 93 f., 
97 f.; used in Acts of Thomas, 91; 
and in Sibylline Books, 91 ff.; and in 


INDEX OF SUBJECT MATTER. 


Ep. to Diognetus, 95 ff. ; and possibly 
by Celsus, 98 f. 

Philosophers, Sayings of; Syriac MS. of, 
5 

Plutarch; Syriac MSS. of, 4 f. 

Pythagoras, Syriac MS. of, 5 


Quadratus; his Apology, 2; Eusebian 
account of, 6 ff.; whether bishop of 
Athens, 11 ff. 


Sibylline Books; used the Preaching of 
Peter, 91 ff. 

Syriac Version of the Apology; its dis- 
covery, 3; description of MS., 3 ff.; 
English translation, 35 ff.; notes on, 
52 ff.; compared with Armenian frag- 
ment and with Greek, 71 ff.; its 
comparative faithfulness, 80, 94 


Teaching of the Apostles; see Didaché 

Theano; Syriac MS. of, 5 

Thomas, Acts of; used the Preaching of 
Peter, 91 

Two Ways; see Didaché 


Virgin Mary; the term Theotokos, 2, 3, 
79; the Panthera story, 25 


Wisbech; MS. of B. and J., 81 


THE SYRIAC TEXT OF THE 


APOLOGY OF ARISTIDES. 


atl e ye a% 


Snails 





wasn wir’ 03.5 


MX eaml om wed ite lam . allsni0 
resasaw Caskos ot ede or eiz, ole) Cask cas 
Mendisax sansa am Wales burpiza -petaa rls 
emadur’ sith wamalasa .tulwias  ammaas 
mAs alr samls disss ol J asioh = Kimass 5 
alles eitia eee ae eater ine eae 
eauamzos pls gaa poh em podur’s pir 
seh ear sar mst am elios mun liam 
oortamin’ Weat ols bs when 


rrfSaala :ausloin’s etwas sna sale 10 


H. A. (28) 9 


1s cos wir’ 


rier . amdhas pwshio Lal A sas 
tad pin ciadus Aad opi’ alisasa\ po@ws iss 
ad Cc o.oo tame toms saawls als pion 
be thor ajirhwm 

5 WhaASe eetsor Vhs tales ar os cad» 
hea ord wan 3: STAN ON MAMAS chiar 
paaoas muloia ds  ambhaaihs casa .khiso 
PAD sO KITA .pwsa Girt ot culos .oak 
na pam Lisa 1. amwat KAA 62 amutis 
To tasmsoa atd\ saci psdshma . amass) pasts 
zin oe re Ooms pis dur tedua eae 
raral. potom samalea «Wham 6 pEttwn 
VIAN er re ambos) oa 2_asadhis od 
reiisaw 2 ortaaloo is a Awadon oon Joes 
risa oto a wall wanama ml Gisswr 
papéissa mal arma .disww pics chs wrto 
re OI Wo Khe mrts eins Ws .amacmle ol 
Man sccIa cam S39 3A oases ists 
durwetzra islotiar chioiz e ombhks ror 
2oui> eamla em reulwtan Coit ~hoalks 
Aussa w anhhzes otis cart Ls dur’s czar 


tual wial anysa Shanstw pilsasar amis 





1. Cod. pea hz, 


(27) 


waa wir ana 


a) aed widen g aamis alzasa .col ezhsoa 
maim . alnaia te Qcnssazsa\ a _OF-IT pasa 
e aml .hot whwaazhs ~amhals condaz 
re amislaar Simsazna alsa ar’ . acaisbada ean 
Rs Jet caijraw mW fe amis Fant IKK waawa 5 
eos Rs a tor’ roalss mi AGF . - acaisa 
piston Mdvtsss Es ed 280 wanhs din’ warsn 
ulwiar wamtiza gamasam ds -. ashaalal 
MDeN wel seamala: mismha ois WY durDLe. 
emadur chase durpiza .as dahosa Sands ro 
ase .m> bur cdumled whats .xti@ eos 
paar coma .. ams atoa .. amdsha liam 
e_ AMICI ard shorn’ paleo aZAd (D0 als < adurn’ 
pical sacunhis datos 2 were ic hia leo 
dh Adie rao Liisa .. wdian plod aro hier’ 15 
mahs esals\ ssa mp een piri ITZ Asana 
malotan wambharsh We als erhaia ul dula 
sashmo ask sass pr ate ohims woo 
= vel wcalss amamasal or’ 39 RANG Ser 7S 
ema. g OI FAsIN . amdusths tay Md m5 20 
wt soatasais ie eis Lis .aazess wor’ 
mesas .plaia saul as PeAwW@O peta e2AI a i 
ment wBX, ates As tor ww als Sail 





7: Cod. RIN. 


(26) 9—2 


os cass wir’ 


WIL. -_am-\as te ama AR Met 6. Aid snA5 
o_ Aone test ronlre’s oo hdaaasl, aor Av rt Nasa 
Naa . amhlasawa Aaa imi pwArIA pIAs 


rom zinc ra .mbhassl) plaamw . amdhem 
smhasal plana pete orcs oo ids Jamin 
pias <hr oa3 nee mxil palsa .mlena 
praso os samis awl shdua ahaa ore 
eras .mhajars dima za\ sah . ra onl el 
mAs sols) miass ps wer’ durtsiat cain 
ro ALAID gama aw dust iw sah oo a ols 
wemddina durpiso was im ds samambiss ar 
wets pes \imis whan os angst 

ralss an’ eaulwtan ~ammasis . 1508 ain 
ples wold sms rik wor .._amstoara 
15 .alanzal .amla Shoal al eran ecvdiets mim: 
pesser Wma .._acasint is aslo <iama 
ert wamdll=s Ko OORT roles mhasal, 
a our ples durpiza ols s buns Chie 


waa ald asso psisha aa itizl smasauds 
20 paS na.xlos eleor Lata piahors p30 
elias <\ etaws er whacsl tins wheter 
Lear a om> 2X mAs cede esd ra OF IIS 
MHTIO wALII ae - amhsmam\ wl xls 





23- Cod. 2 nae E 
(25) 


war wir’ 1 


- Amuasaliala .. aml etsy aml eoawia ema 
dlahs anere also ar pas es amtia Sethe 
As = pimes samiata aia . amdhisa 
ine As emharml mila oa war is Xa 
whmsare a HSS iter ols whos CINTA 5 
pomass .. amis a» talk duc 2 Ww ais ar 
OAR eT DAs AAs eaulwits saamis -_acalk 
rale\ .Xdaa wis sami eta ae cams rsa 
hasaasa chasm miasa este cl cotaa 
rarsla re ORT AE wi whalwaa saalcase 10 
eotula Lams wiaso lh whinic’ pa ani 
cal durcs yaa otloo coal 35 a gt 
roo amadla ome is sce ml dubs aml 
Yer m2 ptwa .cra\ piso e_ amstsas\ peber 
rece eto Wast car wX_ Al ikqete tortor ss 
pA tex et wher’ unvmletiscra waior Mod <i’ 
sow La ml wisa .tcols oo iss ._amiace 
pari era .mdjanon ac. calas wor’ «2 amisa 
oe OCR sa IT casas. ‘eo wih Or mas « AISI It 
sidux cisars oo Ka .mdisrn rege ama 20 
On ams zinc . ams duc . a onl pois 
Ih erie uvdhide whims dul . amla wigs 
hoes . alsa masiels me parade KaNA are’ 
rhatecny= —Arawars7 smaissaaa .. amdblaarcsor 
a durtasia durinta .. aml etl what 25 


(24) 


Xe coas\yoin 


Whdudhe how pas) J aim Ad or nts 
et ano ~asla am Walels pine Lamduaihoa 
am wall <la am warwlsa\ ee AMITFRAM I 
rts\aa ets meta Mae etlhs as -e_amislas 
smaaana .rShiarXQa AAA ot ema. 
eis durulsars casa cl ans pelea wwohlacons 
| | cas 
psbo aatadho as wales on’ ot culowis 
“e_ Omaha pa platans ca oth omasare’ 
10°50 eds rhdudhe whamla Ktizl ol pa to pico 
roles mp piesa AK uss saa Ate 
soasa Asa ms Man Om oS aeRO Sateen raat 
cis alasa da otiten’ hole< Wine ml duis da 
plos 62 air asazd Camdusih Ass ples asbaa 
5.sahan woalss <isawa Kiso As -—_acn\ re 
geste t2_S9 ria ret) ria eA cl oS RCIN malisas 
nla wéaluag. As paras ela wahlXa charm 
eto wodla <odti camila wis reXt 
Fiat pact <a ooh e_acl paint plarcla 
20 .paIX.0 el rzito miios wihala plan What AD 
wach otitior’ J aml . asasis 2 mis jyx0 
mel Weaken shorn whlaacm 20 wise i 
—_ace\ peans7 plarcta ve Cera diers FaX_ <n valare 





1. Cod. ,pwWdrsdy. 


(23) 


wan wir’ as 


Jax asan7 e_Oenscal pias s_Acnswazas arta 
rvhaszies eirwa rayaok pitas RS orwam.s 
MAID BN oS TAT AS passer spaiia paAloa eta 
Wax se comm le ot eo er Cama saws 
eo _Amsazas pias sonia pica AIO podRasar era 5 
e_Acastales Muse wer amwhhe la otatder 
reals mesals csi Mam>= 270 
wlha emis +e Ocn-scalee’s BaX, Sduizdh 
hiswba cdhtasn wmisma .dulia ~»nima 
haste iss .cdhiisa Liam <dta » peers dar’ 10 
Se tshow wd ohn os la mama 
piona Ac RAYE) Aaasa ce awd’ wool al Tas 
rheans wir cls ultiios alma .ota.wa ary 
+ ems dul xia toads 
~sIAMet DIL As or also aw lias Whrs 15 
wolw Ls cami bor “azrasn Mik Kissa 
dan oats Wale am ass peta Ainco andre 
vlc rete jas sXdhes om isa oda tana 
patos pebedisa Mamna .smardslo cold <0 La 
durtedes wm .casa. wamls oo ede Witel 20 
wealts paahma .wmasdsl ala eto cole 
As poeta a cml bok’s Sra howt sus 
eisa chasm ptasa sunt potdta .iahm 
One etara awole ds dates ule wulord Ucar 
UTIID « Amano’ A alass MAY wzwin\ 25 


(22) 


rs waa wir 


aomlas euas toro ales . amaamtiaa 
coaldel alshow la .aw amadhor 2 acmcle 
wluac ash, .smadur’ Aas amadur ae san ot 
eA iehaios a{ow aA Sztion MTX HA WX 
5 TNA ocmadur’ ta Wik sine pa rtsaie Los 
oe diam diam .mla wx waz mia iectaaton 
cal om Whadur Raw imiaS ae amadurs Kale’ 
aX .cormam dis la smdaduma muss waz sa 
roles om CN comadur ay wollen wus diam 
rom\ sasan tl or Salais claw’ . aarti wmlw 
| ofe x eh 

arabia aanthed’ cole = wale Liam ea 
Cusaad <ota> samima :aadlwhh ~ anmisa 
MASIA .. AQmam@ie’s aA am aw alt ioc Rast 
15 pax om am cdhas\s alsa ar’ om rast 
a ous sal waml phissa s._amcale’s aia 
wis elo kids iomieo tordus of dam 
win pacn So setmonl eat buridu esos 
ela sah oro oad tba awh wl cuss 
2onla san aw otimar’s mdqsiso im wo Shas 
omamars eaaas\ sac sass 


alahor cl .nwdsa aids ame as WA Ko 
BWA el «paws -_ aramlAc a AMwOATALI1 





22. Cod. Naho rv, 
(21) 


Caw wir nN 


As dur’s ortsasas .amls 2 ph. eat ewe as\, 
As ipalsa ark cordur’ er CMEDIAIN NIT CAS 
itasas soamlas Sate oo pidus san orcad 
tha asl, Mito omhallsasa e_AcaAAden_> 


pets tA tras nti esate whisn <taAha 5 


feshzma pimihm ~amsass pan . acmclrek 
Asla Lebehma exsohhma sushohma piahma 
hott fa wohs aa0 aalehzs Caml ams 
Miter .anorho waa Ami saa Ads Minis 
wmcalr’ e acmsdur wis c amls alahow wl us 
Miser dees’ ek J omrsiy einiaan wlaa 
Or ele’ conasan uwars ezine ainr whadees 
o Acoals alu’ es TA sacs s wSamlaa wmaie 
mio) prasdoas am Rigtes pica se ain coales 
roalel Jasna aso us asa wAs tua’ Woolen 
rela .pson als smats CA sic pohmoas am 


Io 


— hac An piss picasa -2CICapsI% 2579 


Seteads ons ATS eo rs92 Ae hate on aco 
wid éiiisa weanaia Was Meza dhsws55 Asasas 


emake Soe wl er cmiw .rilasma <zirc 20 


om ssna 3 .ml washa <\ pam pic psa 


Te AomsAsM =. paaredican pices oid wis ska 





10. Cod. Nahor. 
22. Cod. = _Acaddealsra tt e acaacalr, 


(20) 


\» wanlwir’ 


0 amas I> Moka .wmavne Lb cole 
wd idea core dah gasay waasso isa .odhia 
ole amadum insco <A mxoarks am 

Matz «a ~hasrmr: Lyn :liam cium 
5 pie ee ray.) ocak mio <<) oma 
dul zs saulon whain Is aw KK okie 
ae XK Med omles oe Ew sams 
a—omima .lysh os cater octal esto 
walssianl J amima .xialal K<tieca .xtroal 
ro S<txtla Winasla .rdanla .tiaria .aorata 
maa aieca .ioizl ero wamm .éasila 
ott caomim .walslwamim .<\aase 
waewa weil tera waded) ~ amima 
wisaal <iiwwa .odala mlcala mah 
15 ponlas iraan exzXyts ria ico aia ta ratzia 
o Amamnlres pets masala sa .e_ ir’ oase als pico 
(ee ar tzu wis eo erora tavhon 
pduss 3A. omima jpn AS J _acisia pamdhais 
ears pela dioosa cla .rwilsr aoe puamisa 
20 Sra © réalt> 

sac a Vila Note ‘atom ‘ae alahorw cia 
oe _AMN»r2IK< > dls pahon tonal’ a _ Acre dard’ wl 
e AMZAIT RILOTAS As os Pt) A021 STAS 


maw a o_ Acs TAL WA Mintiaa Pu -plasion 
os rhhay ince Whos), .._otssas ross acs bur’ 


(19) 


war wir 32 


a omls oa tebe elderma ams Mw en a 
pa ede lo Caimi’ As dur’s sams 
—ambles sami hato tr2X Ww) cask) zits 
moan poo Aw ala cic oaitdena MIDts5 
Wale Jamdurs wamals atearda oWhasin 5 
Axa .tasasa xs whem Szeto Aca 
re Ord tales acaisan ata aah dso .whoes 
womls mide .whaaila haus clas alandea 
oom pslS TeX Jono oo otic As burs oom 
mam dura .casdur’ pl whales Eta .word 10 
A\ode ma \ et WA .MAs OPO iss mi al 
Tor wS wor hots .amdawd aiaal a who 
sam ist aah hama oatawss walasnl ais 
allna max waidsl as rhadea ois ois ow 
jar wx ham eatahma &18 wor nl petecna 15 
mhasla .alss wiosrs oalzl ham cassa «cis 
whale word diam oc ham Male buciion 
alssa mane word isshs hare la soaduc 
mesarsa Win So iaskh Satecls Soars cau 
aa ortlia aia ar ssatsia Lim damle usas 20 
AX aw wl ret 
emadun calles ptm opors ex amalsa 
sax waar ela ward eo Wado itham 
ontrasa <\ whamle das Cans IMA .c2-zAI 
emadurcs samdaue warar.l) As pian saha 25 


(18) 


te Carwin 


Miser .tnsan ware’ cl oral - Kwa omar 
eesarsa cl ona .oigdin asasco azine’ word) 
mamarss frist an Was an WHaX Kooles 
 pacns 

srt pl casdurs oeiot Ls pts sah 
Mast 1D cal rams culls piarra ve Aenscal e's 
lass tats ham ans crm ama .wale 
mA ham calea ehaasts hbo’ et cdl 
SA. acmcales wor liam a .cndat walre\ 
ro. has pa amaarsha .ocoeth inchs har 
Sanco tar Nh Mitorls wars LK 
elas Ls whaoswa -erasha sath choles 
| cal wach 
whole’ casdurs ptsira .tao whim sah 
r5 aan’ ela .arabala «a halwhe exc oma 
max ila .casdur whale liam ok ood ths 
Mites Meus maaan .iaihsa dard vl 
ot Aasdo aX alodeas AC ole tach 

Ais wads alae tale ar’ emia diam ul 
20 pea N «eg AMals atmarca arsa .~_amsale 
As Joofsen ered Meir ain sama asa 
seola main dander’ Wamsa .. ack dao uszai 





5. Cod. wrt. 
6. Cod. cal. 


(1%) 


war wir a> 


pan dzs eos pahoos paras on ocalic 
Weal 
lads whe chalk’ amir piss minha 
mush .nam oma ovhw. ham Gadus petora 
as rtal> ham catahma kinda chro ham 5 
tS stews an clic soeds ar otald Wiis 
WBA corasls rhlaho cdulhs ctasmas om 
el ram Wma owas Te TOL wials 
ot eamh kwhalc camlin’s wars 
sadur’ al rhole’s lesaiand ds etme sah to 
MUS I Ha te Oomclne me ota ml Pisa 
arte ew col Wom wt epipa tzid sino 
wm. isa .wiasdh smaduncs main ot 15 
wiamas colar mhasl eassa haw cule’ clara 
was omanasihs me dared ddr visor a 15 
Sunes oe Naa tS cdiar’s wasadanta a 
emastswas hess ela .casdun’ hole lara 
ILA stoi Misgod rider’ wohkhasis cast l\ 
anal aml aan scohtzds ciwarss wf) Kscm0 
aR ciavla realela 20 
walked’ amadhurs wiash Aa pir saha 
Mam amt etaca .WtaXo We mA amature 
Gaian ward la ts tos haw oa Mode 





13. Cod, maarc, 


(16) 


cns wasn wir’ 


a Shots Wan “nics Swarm wha ot 
SSB OR Fan 

emadur’ mal woales .wmans Iv eta maha 
ahia .rhasat alsa ehalils wats clam 
5nara Wirt wim ehisla .oalis “is wz 
Sark mhauzs sa otoacal stra mduizsazmal 
a walsh oo dshe wchiwla .vhaas cam 
Ashe ana orvam smatunc’ Kole wwanr liam 
ritorcis wars ide .cardal Gran ware’ wl 
10 ac 3353 

emddums smals petra spss cah alsio 
wank Mba cahsisa Kaat) chud Ko mie 
weaial \\oa Kaz hiss pian mics amalsa 
role culoia Jaa or dua Riais xd) Waza - 
sana Cl .chzis pten pmiasa .smaduc’ 
pis casa RNTTAS ter Riser ocak janis 
On orate Wom oles arse wis oc .aam 
eeias ea Masha or .smardl) Ms or .xtsai 

ml pina .titor’ cold also im tho =x 
20 meaalsdizsa al smadun’s amals ptrra .. alar 
idan et i otsin).co cho as psa 
M15 WS oxi asinl MAD Aba .zania 
msc om WEL As can RIK OTA Camis 





4. Cod. hasnt. 


wan wire bh 


Aria Whats. Rust KPA smadun’s tora 
Ming ana oA MXurAa SraXma ida, 
nats ram wales warm la wn olson 
wales eds josso ART Or ort Quran reise ar’ 
wis smadun wake ol ot wa tins a's 
“+ CigaXse 
aasloor) otiturn’ mole alas tim tho pa 
Mass parma oor’ wmadhora ptoara 
Kin .mdtaws where isa Wo Wchaulaora 
alo whiels ac iti Wald acoder Rate aA 10 
iatasasal warimals whls Wb :wass os otas 
amadar’ role adlowrw’ Liam —K his iama 
As $s ware wl ota>s slo taa iam 
wis Gm) opom faSa5 warm Stew) car 
rmsd ar soto eam aml Maan wars is 
soi 
air ol piso eaten mie els saha 
Mots Aria ciila itscio emaducs ptoarca 
Mico .mlet wap alo ina omen is mhasca 
pa waSdera olhenatars Tid, Wwhiwls toon 20 
wilaratanca cals wal war (20 .WOIRS TAS mull, 





¥i rta\_seems to be a mistake for real The Greek has 
KANerr nV. 
11. Cod. warysnals. 
(14) 


“A Cas wir’ 


PEIATATOO PLIATIITON eau «Bata Ia gare 
chsant Wao eins hams aloher et chtol 
7 CaN T WADINALAA 

hes optalss an cdhusih pions wails — 
588 otic disios eed whl ewhoy ch sas 
peaibhaa eiaXa ..amaminets soho 
STAT ANT asymIsa s_ambhasetsa ~amhamrés 
re AMam@owl AK’ —oll\ars astimm .amisa 
a omaclns alsa eet torvhsar dm iQ wk 
10 ,wOATALG a> g_asaxdy durpdu sas LH pias 
wiico Iss Camatrs ual alaws whan K>t0 
ide ar eran ar’ Na woolen ears TA wl 
waar Lalas ar .tan man casa 
ortalaws Wosss com eas ako el os oir 

isptmada .waluad <itor role plssa saha 
BwetS Masde ww KX emadur’s salsa 
shaw wlra .wartasa whals mmo ala 
cala as Ie .oohtasws edie weds cais7 wre 
estes <n am itm wale uw iim 
20nN et a KO tae Xue Ort enaiw Wad Roles 
 rtlasssa oa 00 

asaia ol pina . itor’ orale’ place 2aha 





I. <Lrasatoa, a corrupt form. The Greek has cat “PadapavOuv. 


3- MWADIAAIAN for WATTIALAR. 


(13) 


aay coir’ 2s 


wmsaz Wad sa waral mila tho cstodio 
maids alar’s rtisiza cha) diam coi daar 
ATW pica poalas ema .g amsmles wey Ls 
ganda wollen wars ch otal ac’ .amals 
sax avo ol ei ea «mad ars 
Or tw ale pls warts tho —0 
rama hain? (as ams .tims smalls piace 
aloes omals pisaca .cle —amlan xtaln 
Wadhdase eizil Xin ater sete’ eamla cpsal 
Slohers ptr pip aa tain pois ml praia ro 
soha .fa.mana <Atancs mdmant Mb tail 
wreaas mdcant Lm comin chasms oalodtzr 
Moan wiadda ovals cmdmani Wa warsanla 
ime mdhzint Wen roinla aalic’s mdzaet 
para XS eis alae wlio pon iar’; 
pa .tiasssara wad slan’s to WA aad’ 
.a\\ — J.) soaloiel meusaale = JoAw~aALT <ie~ 
pa on eSTS ean pra ca Lircla . alarl 
rT.) swaralaa mésika .wassasiaa yalws r’a\ 


mor wwams al eh S sth alae’ wdmris 20 





3. Cod. wes¥. 14. Cod. .fymws mdhsaist. 
17. For easana\w we should read rasole OFT sale, 
19. For msli<a we should read alea. 
20. eoacasaid seems to be a corruption of mrqamsaisa (Mi7y- 
poovrys). 
H. A. (12) 10 


ra wat wir 


mer WLS ean ain ands casa ovale’ 
As Jatana 6. aahssa ..asisa ._ataXus 
te Oensdaley todos ples A ok osetia awa sos 
durvtads san .atswm Asi eo pathan ule emis 
5 pins = _AM_D5 plac’ irzin’ ain gir . aim 
waa chashs carat oa alan OTOF lms 
masia .aish oto ozinc ainl ara\ Km 
wana As an Whosm0 opis canara roiai 
dls pols plo .acls PALO ptaas cma 
ropeeX3 <l ieml pines ssa ranuls Warm 
team) yea ples Lamhas\ Wes _amtusihs 
te armscale’s eamlss eduseh As diam wheres 
= ators emis As durduhe wasn tin’ 
wmarzal .roale’ maids alico paso ls pro so Ash. 
15 oak MSI ois emaslaa ¢ as .nxahar am 
emals g_aml wrodo pias TA wamima .._acis 
cima oct pezis ml om Bis im ds 
masa ar slaw coisas om cere XS ws ala 
les pra tax htwls im .war eiodoon 
20.eepain Narsl am ott .ml torches AON 
mami mix .2X\Gnc ela war mis arXde's im 
ius axa mhaiai\ amdsa war tad whiwl 
elpratan dsledhies Etta cldmass ma ns ah an 





9. Cod. plas panla. 
(11) 


Caan wir’ 2 


pad psa pila PBA Asshirn = _Acnscral 
eaita ..amdocl wllhsa whosdhma ei 
aac ROE PS Ta_Xasot ids e_amisia paiva 


a OCTIA AE irs Jamisa ty g amima 
faam patsha dials samma arin W<idund 5 
mMoi> w> wamima .adum Ams 2 amima 
onan her ezine ssl a6 samima asd 
Mud a5 > Jamia Auli Rinats> ._amima 
wb on alba ainha co —acisja aa air’ 
occa .ahe Jol wim’ Lamia oer’ ro 
ehessa whasoal —_acaisaa oe \ adie arX rhs 
wwhhduss zis dens wun — saalodur’ 
-_ Amina Aass\ ord MIAT FAN ADAMS ._amima 
aamhisna ~amthdseca ~amhaad pas ptm 
mae d15 pas tor Camisole tka Qari 
am Acs pa KMAQK emis aslude a cot 
iat Iss wt’ emism isa am whasm 
Maret wali urs pei 15 pana. astwde 
maids alu :alsa aw’ .halla AwAKA AWTY.. 
veraa picals ems se amr: Asa samcale As 20 
a domsdur’ eis ala cal ats J ocdur’ eiaa 





1. For paka we should probably read pila. 
17. For eyadaz. we should probably read ~yaaz. 


18. Cod. 2 als. 5 
(10) 10—2 


1, csr wir’ 


wjohss daals Ac ne Ae Ty) anh sata xds 
Ratat .arta cl whan plas a ra» sais (30 
role .Ansdios ac shiima .wmlara mi dur 
wad dul muss ular oo cae dtsor’n mers el 
s Ama talavhos le vmos SL cade ele 
wmduris) MLA OO eid tot ears SL onc 
cl ezsX chose sam a sion tic ovole's 
emadur’s mac oats ml aaa eavaXla whos 
mate ms raha cahmamwa ula esdoas 
roe gmss Janda tito asa ted cieass 
onhhaas a Ara .maalora 

aambhau\, Aston § om coisas a’ cama 
Onis opi Wale As anos Wis amor inion 
ta Lamdusths wKAAG tho alia ott eo 
15 ova reaalela risthrs rasalorl pala 
cold iss peati cl -camhasl, Liha 
+ SYote 

PCA SON TT ater oetads As or’ Lasse salar 
Sanco wards on tetz wool As Caml dun waran 
20 <atDIDA e ami wd. wotSIS> oe Sta ‘im 
acme oss Weta role ale sa cas 
2 a_acnisns eae sehSar . acimia ctax ame 





6. Cod, »mazas@), 
(9) 


Coa wir | ery 


JOIN AMT My — »AX com — thas 
a 970 03 Sets MS BOT wars rio Ara 
pasha whore sank clsus i » SORIA 
Mena ore eh or’ ml dul willaz mzar Lan cal 
ine woatots wale wots erica cl wns 
ool’; mre 
emaduns mxsar |. atser’s ule aX iam 
Raters eunund ax wool ats AK wo cash cole 
MXIT a 3 geameia ATA vis edie saathisn 
MEIN ee Sts0 wit parlas sa er XGalio 
ines esaia evhlhina ChSun hdl 
acl mia .wtsin’ daa ola Ke’ ah co Ayden 
maadas aw wi om duc whim oinrans 
mharsal .miuas amature’ aw am 380) .mdurims 
—ombhsre1 cathas hasl Apmima whretaXoss 
acon Miss wl ALD & aa otic’ wisn 
Mac escns wars Sl oso Wena ool ioscan 
somole’s sas Ind ovale 
et alr .aadaa Kime ac ovhamas asa 
naam roale ~acisa opiate znis As atsors 20 
dur’ Or dur wasn pel asl, ~\X © peice oA 
(20 .emialor casino unten ton als ar 





13. Cod. coal dur’ wduss. 


(8) 


‘ wos wir’ 


Ax Sasha wants ieXaXtres da wale 
wsdustor cduadsla refit ~alssa re OAD BD 
a ANerta ori wins mls: .andia . azais ver 
Omnis ziiot ohare . alsa har. cals 
5g cam) eoale eases tars SL unseen dlls 
oetsalusn dum moles conan 2 acmsdunw le 

casdurs iar Ls atsors ula Ac ciama 
dwar ooo Ors Wb jasis cis ash wale 
amd Wea XS Sansa oxic sins dutshe 
10 :pwWdlees Wotadsa ehlatons Waaxars Waar hrm 
wo aa og anhasla ems mam ube -raizaa 
smtalbdesa asshso oéraQ and eno 

roles vain tars Is ainors pir’  cakha 
32M Maske cama asl, RAY. 1M Ar’ wad 
I5~ppip AA «esashes Mitel risat saics ee 
c23 TOA 4 Asa 13 tPtPa 3. Amar Xow 
atodred BK zinc wD A\=a ve om gnsxsax door 
Riana mealies chore alsin We ime os 
eras plan mss wale alarsala sina 
20 psesSEN Rider pr has ua hers zinc’ ainl 
wa~lsa mhdism samisia war els cal 
Kor rte’ dur’ ‘Ted AAA WAS Aa DID IM aM 





20. Cod. pest. 


21. Cod, gasaax.—Read a amszais ? 
(7) 


war wir ra) 


ns 508 cts Salam aa uid la .alodhess wlio 
.alursna 
wale cadurs sid ds visas lam ulna 
Mowh=ma comiho aa seam asl ass pm 
rhodes rv dir veloaom sA0 AL wdisaa 5 
rsdc TA Isa iM wasta Whast1a oz uios 
wwhdus oom <KtXhe VK OK sane is 
pate a caha .pas melo ss XK Des 9 
cers coma olasdes ost on Rou aula 
mona choral, c<laama Kisssa Weis ~a10 
maama cous culmima comihwa olliss 
am uAy wars cin wrm WtXAl moh 
ras (nds calashsa la cahsala cinama S30 
hoc cl sins .h dupwhr’ son cama «+ lo 
a voale’s oduts le woole 15 
masa As atmos peice as\, sah chamas maa 
Mzatox codserel Pa ase on cale’ ._amadurs 
palohzsa .al erashes wea asa .astode 
re OMA pIDAMA pinasdima har. pinoma Ta 
plname -alrsha WhtQwm whas. me 3A 20 
pralhn rete pa Ars MAY. te acles rls eiay 
ellis coisa oS Yssna ruins Chowhsa 
TaD 3 egltaes Mamdd~ pa owQyadhsa aoindhs 





I5- Cod. mahi s 


on wsrlwir’ 


has am am 34 this uw dan uisis 
a .Winhas prim am mam ot Kiss = isa 
e omzcax eaozaal palasica a domdlre’s liam am 
dase wha) .tiniaa réizuial . amijar mia 
shiss ell ester srsisis ash choi 
1a _THAs wis eam o_Acaadur’s 

wocmacala As alse ar toaskie’s al euadieco 
wham cole’ ammara sas) wai An asus 
alahow ria seasalors tml sashes 
roptilash=a cwmadlorw cain Acxs Kian 
mis Jilo aX whim .cuihsma —amdur 
mias .rtlavsdhss ad’ Kathe oe imaalors 
waaaleor wa liam oc dant Kihem 
atocl a asas dies pesdima plash=aa pihzs3 
15 .poalrY g_acataas 4 acd’ nla & caisson 
Se a omtad) sadn whassl os Cur’ 
ammadala alas hash liam om ot ole 
+e Omismhisa Ls 

e amiss . amls als aw liam nage 
20 eo Amada’ wae amls Wass w maaalior’s 
irevhualsdhese whulasho duets Wie ocale 
Asha Sd en ole ziion mhamss cadur's 





9. Cod. anand s. 
(5) 


war wir 5] 


Lilo pros sm Khiswo oo WIM wales mits 
am .waldss dntades Oona TAS psd cist 
wcaalasa wiles . asinh cas —atoh 2 . abun’ ans 
Lad rcotass whois oo wan cam Lam am 
mbar aan Sider’ Fosth wasalh en cal aam 5s 
dua wander aces a IM ae wisahzdh sas 
wlsdieva po ads CaN Th an Liao anh o 
rhaims jaxth pico riaalh anos pesca .rtataxl 
aac pals dmx mhasi dso .vmolan whan 
pir anc eam Liha owhasusa Whassam clas to 
pishs ciulwia .pisamsa whats aml Tov 
Masih Liam samba .tninl .amdur’s 
aista Ato dra a Metin» wary 
wualwisa Kasad. .rudea 
ian arisala cwat txmrs liam Kmlwl 15 
opiate’ isin ainla ontasa os ewasal 
Mees curso oto is exo lism Wiz 
glans (schon ets’ rts ais hal Wher 
—omim plea wwole Ass tz pias . acaiss 
oS wha), 20 
asl, .rolel smasine ls We Law cisis 
powats ale eduial . anlar atia Wmaalocs 
roma lass arise chases ara Ka003 codllma 
what cham sam wil a saml esto 
alahor cia ..aadda Wl hal fo W amcales 25 


(4) 


oN war wir 


cd dirs camals Meohs J dusth husres esas 
gles asin ise’ oteuion Rei me em 
twas cam otis oo cds emer . amin 
seman. a ash plea .smals 

g réxuaioa ety oetalss ar’. asl ac ulX eno 
MAIATA .RTDID oasin’ . oomdurn io eslss 
| etslojaa méstdcas 

= -amdloara MaX at pars Liaw cKInio 
samicale’s aizna nd (aa warts 

rowmadurs toarhsas a0 swale (2 et raids 
wodtamsa wale shad’ os wale (29 et 
htel .ortiais aa as oo onsbs os ais 
MOWAT AA AAD AA rtd AIT ED EN 

PISS I. MMI eat paw Et Morden 
I5QmN .>2dns. ald ims snc slacs im 
pa anhdhhe’ Jair .taio jesth slo’ cio 
2 etaas Wak atoded eaha .t sas <etaw 
AMAR LM p27 hte .c amw~ams mo aa 
|  oNQone 

20 SOr (= a Ambler stax ear liam culwis 
alsa oles mia mmr Sim ama oar 
rdhloho psa jason oo ole has tov 
zinc dta> tmsa owiws zalo dor Wdtasr 





13, gaa. A=IAD] Cod. IAs IO. 


wat wird’ 2 


gal oeoled dons was tend ess al eopedsa 
ans wih et zinc 
AL tsa, <L acnadur woale’s Gt id tan 
ek lan wina stax is uk Mua oma 
ea eulsoeso aatshion lo walarss hams 
aie ria HAT oO mo duis oc eam disars 
htcarsa .aumd smals et pacala .w.wim is 
mataz ol dur’s dan tam Wao atan ws wmadurs 
reoalaz mi burs ama .m\ wam cmlaz aX 
mas aX. Aa ml dul wm umadur Muthes 10 
chasms .Wdheina omadunc wd .tsar ml durs 
Mamr WA oO .svims aay ei ara .cl dul 
emadun Wiss wd tldXs amodur chia oti 
mums ein’ ol assess Sl ae whan claw 
misanks ssh ma ppd laa cpwdhoos Maas 
mosis ona . dhint carn dure’ XK WS) ool dul 
maais warms pam XQ dul wis wh iXata 
BA_ ocala .camss dul whauzihme wal =misanl 
Aisa pra moa <lsaada amaduc Whmaw olas 
mae mel Oe .rtanaia wheos Ace ch orton co 
As Ante ch pass cae oo petwdicnn ube pm 
| + Ats CAII get pxAd 
wwoaley As pam wash teavde's Liaw Lin 





22, ex-As] Cod. 22. } 
(?) 


Caan wird’ 


m¥somls assloic sansa cwata miss sah 
mane’ ipmle dies uae As - alse WAIN We 
rm ta-\ © AIA) Ie’ WALII09 wall, wan la 
msamlia worlwir WALSTS ~ .iswtma 
5 o pads 
eesals\ dude woole’s mhasils ales a circ’ 
sue ointsoa Masrs dunshe’ saan im 
cadus ho Apsara’ .adahs aga czsaxl duiwa 
wax con dao mols ams o4n hada orctcolas 
Io Saysax doa wdlahora semi ddisa eatorns dee 
eo ocaisa wha Cams Wear .umadurd’ ole ~ aml 
seethdoan am oo ods 224205 amn am Maemo 
mersaa wdan risesse ams oles amals maosdena 
eA wal oped A Wm amadurn’ Raa 
As Riwhrna imuas omadur TeQK Maids 
eX .colal casstacs wer’ mhaitoams Wwhaopiz 
durtulsoess woes sie XQ cl ol Kihas 
teésalua css am Js et Sin tor’ +cat 
wean to bso ds sass dan Walk scmadurs 





2. A % seems to have been deleted before 5. 


\OV 





MwyAt> 1A 


Zacks Cam wir’ 5 





CAMBRIDGE : 
PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A. & SONS, 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 








et aay ite a) 
ako 4 3.0 
tht 





F CALIFORNIA LIBRARY 





UNIVERSITY O 
BERKELEY 
Return to desk from which borrowed. 
This book is DUE on the last date stamped below. 
| ECD LV 
18 0ci'So 
CT 11 068 
gyandi¥BE <\:\ 
\N bs ee 11 4015 2 fy. 
SA pai 
SEP. ra 19 Cc’D'LD NR ee 
yt Ee dal N g iS) 19 co] 
vo 2r JAN 2 2 1091 
: ngy®™ 
Novi 1952 LO ic auto vis a 
ano" RECD CD JAN 05 


APR 1953 LU 
95Mar’57AS 





LD 21-100m—11,'49 (B7146s16) 476 





YE 1VU19J 
GENERAL LIBRARY - U.C. BERKELEY 


(MnO. ON 


pooo3be514 





THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY 


a 
a ee 





