Title: The Journal of the Rev. Francis Asbury, Bishop of the
  Methodist Episcopal Church, from August 7, 1771, to December 7,
  1815. In Three Volumes. Vol. II, from July 15, 1786, to November
  6, 1800
Creator: Francis Asbury
Publisher: N. Bangs and T. Mason, for the Methodist Episcopal
  Church, New York
Publication Date: 1821
Rights: Public Domain
Source: Internet Archive, identifier journalofrevfran00asbu
  (New York Public Library copy). Fetched directly (curl, raw
  bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text derivative,
  2026-09-25.
Provenance note: OCR full-text derivative; no long-s or thorn/eth
  encoding artifacts found. Nothing else altered. Rights basis: 1821
  publication, well over 95 years before this session (2026) --
  public domain by date. Same not-the-1958-critical-edition flag as
  Vol. I of this same work.
______________________________________________________________________

NYPL  RESEARCH  LIBRARIES 


3  3433  08254557  9 


\ 


\v 


\ 


ISAAC  JiENDUR^ON 


Jr..4, 


THE 


JOURNAL 


OF  THE 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY, 

BISHOP 


OF 


FROM 


AUGUST  7,  1771,  TO  DECEMBER  7,  1815. 


JDolume£. 


VOL.  II, 

•FROM  JULY  15,  1786,  TO  NOVEMBER  I,    •   .. 


NEW-YORK: 


i'1'BLISIIED    BT    K.  BANGS   AND   T.  MASON    FOR   THE    MKTHODIiP 
EPISCOPAL  CIIVKCH. 


Abviham  Paul,  Printer,  182  W»Ur-8tre»f. 

1821. 


THE  X*V;  YORK 

PUBLIC  LIBRARY 
56  'V 


MTW, 

TICDEK 


ten 


.  Southern  Cisi  -ict  f>/  J<'ttv-York,  si. 

jiE  IT  RI  MKMhKRKl >,  rha't  6n  the  thirtieth  day  of  Apvil,  in  the  forty-fifth  year  of  the  Inde- 
pendence pf  the  Uniled  fetate:  of- America,  JV.  Bangs  and  T.  Mason,  of  the  said  district,  have  de- 
posited in  this  ot"i.<.  vlie  title  of  a  book,  the  right  whereof  they  claim  as  Proprietors,  in  the  words 
following,  to  wil  • 

."The  Jourrt.il't.f  trt   Re<.   Francis  Asbury,  Bishop  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  from 

Au-just-7,  11-7.',  tp  December  7,  1815.     In  three  Tolumes." 

I.i  confirtnity  (o  ihv  .Ac,!,  of  tfie  Congress  of  the  United  States,  entitled  "  An  Act  for  the  Encou- 
ragement tf  L<Wb$lg  byspciiring  the  Copies  of  Maps,  Charts,  and  Books  to  the  Authors  and  Pro- 
prietors of  such  Copies,  dur'al^  the  times  therein  mentioned."  And  also  loan  Act  entitled  "An  Act 
supplementary  to  an  Act  entitled,  An  Act  for  the  Encouragement  of  Learning,  by  securing  the 
Copies  of  Maps,  Charts,  and  Books,  to  the  Auihors  and  Proprietors  of  such  Copies,  during  the  times 
therein  mentioned,  and  extending  the  Benefits  thereof  to  the  Arts  of  Designing,  En^ravin"-,  and 
Ktrhing  historical  and  other  Prints.'1 

G.  L.  THOMPSON, 
f'lerk  of  the  Southern  District  of  J\'ea<-York. 


THE 


OF    TH1 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY. 


JV1.ARYLAND.—  Sunday,  July  15,  1786.  I  rest  from  riding. 
Preached  on  "  Who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come?"  I  had  sweet  communion  with  God  in  the  woods  —  my  soul 
hath  rest  in  the  Lord. 

Monday  10.  Came  to  Old  Town,  and  preached  on  1  Tim.  i.  15.  ; 
and  administered  the  sacrament. 

Tuesday  11.  I  rested  to  look  over  some  papers  and  prepare  some 
parchments.  Spent  nearly  a  third  of  the  day  in  prayer,  that  the  Lord 
would  go  with  me  to  the  springs.  O  what  hath  God  wrought  for 
brother  Jacobs  and  his  wife  since  I  lodged  with  them  four  years  ago  ! 
I  believe  from  that  day  the  Lord  heard  our  prayers  for  them. 

There  has  been  a  remarkable  storm  of  hail  at,  and  about  the 
warm  springs,  by  which  great  damage  has  been  sustained  :  some  of 
the  hail,  it  was  said,  measured  seven  inches  in  circumference. 

VIRGINIA.  —  Tuesday  13.  I  came  to  Bath  ;  the  water  made  me  sick. 
I  took  some  pills  and  drank  chicken-broth,  and  mended.  I  am  ill  in 
body,  and  dispirited.  I  am  subject  to  a  headach,  which  prevents  my 
reading  or  writing  much,  and  have  no  friends  here  ;  but  I  desire  to 
trust  the  Lord  with  all  my  concerns.  Having  no  appointments  for  three 
weeks  to  come,  I  have  concluded  to  stay  here  awhile  ;  and  I  arn  the 
more  inclined  so  to  do,  as  I  am  apprehensive  my  stomach  wants  all 
the  healing  efficacy  of  the  waters  to  restore  it  to  its  proper  tone. 

Sunday  16.  I  had  some  divine  assistance  in  speaking  to  the  people 
under  the  trees,  on  "  Lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God  " 
In  the  afternoon  I  enlarged  oc  "  Having  the  form  of  godliness,  but 
denying  the  power  thereof. 

Monday,  Tuesday,  and  \Vednesday.  Quite  weak,  and  ron*u?orably 
affected  by  the  water 

V.M..    II.  1 


HEV.  FJRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [178(.:. 

Thursday  20.  I  am  better.  Employed  in  reading  Mr.  Harvey,  and 
Brooks's  Practice  of  Physic  ;  more  than  ordinary  in  prayer,  and  spoke 
in  public  every  other  night. 

Sunday  30.  1  spoke  plainly  and  closely  in  the  playhouse  on  "  Oh ! 
wicked  man,  thou  shalt  surely  die."  The  people  were  serious  :  I 
cannot  get  the  people  to  attend  preaching  except  on  the  Sabbath  : 
this  evil  is  to  be  remedied  only,  I  presume,  by  our  getting  a  preach- 
ing-house, and  preaching  therein  by  candle  light. 

Saturday,  August  5.  I  began  to  pack  up,  in  hopes  of  moving  on 
Monday. 

Sunday  6.  I  had  a  serious,  little  congregation  in  the  country.  Re- 
turned to  town,  and  preached  at  four  o'clock. 

A  pleasing  thought  passed  through  my  mind  ;  it  was  this,  that  I  was 
saved  from  the  remains  of  sin  ;  as  yet,  I  have  felt  no  returns  thereof. 
I  was  solemnly  impressed  with  the  account  of  the  death  of  poor 
Styor,  a  German,  who  dropped  down  suddenly  and  died.  He  was  a 
man  of  piety,  and  had  a  gift  to  preach  ;  had  a  noble  spirit,  and  sound 
judgment.  I  have  spent  twenty-three  days  at  this  place  of  wicked- 
ness (Bath.)  We  are  trying  what  can  be  done  towards  building  a 
house  for  worship  :  we  collected  something  on  the  Sabbath  for  that 
purpose,  and  it  appears  the  business  is  entered  upon  with  spirit.  My 
horse  was  running  in  the  pasture  last  week,  and  hurt  himself,  so  that 
J  find  him  utterly  incapable  of  travelling,  and  that  I  am  compelled  to 
linger  here  another  week  ;  this,  as  it  is,  I  am  willing  to  do,  for  the 
sake  of  the  people,  the  cause  of  God,  and  my  health  ;  and  I  am  dis- 
posed to  consider  it  a  providential  call,  although  I  should  not  remain, 
was  my  horse  able  to  carry  me  away.  I  sent  brother  B.  to  my  ap- 
pointments, and  directed  him  when  and  where  to  appoint  for  me.  My 
hopes  revive  here,  and  I  trust  my  labour  is  not  all  in  vain. 

Tuesday  15.  I  preached  for  the  last  time  during  this  visit,  but  the 
people  showed  but  little  affection  for  the  word. 

Capon  River  being  full,  I  crossed  in  a  canoe,  and  found  my  horse 
better.  The  cut  was  a  deep  one,  but  we  applied  a  piece  of  bacon  to 
the  wound,  bound  some  leather  round  it,  and  on  Thursday  1  took  mv 
departure  from  this  unhappy  place. 

Came  to  my  old  friend  B.  Boydstone's.  I  had  the  happiness  of 
seeing  that  tender  woman,  his  wife,  who  careth  for  the  preachers  as 
lor  her  own  soul :  full  oft  hath  she  refreshed  my  spirit :  her  words, 
looks,  and  gestures,  appear  to  be  heavenly.  Here  1  could  make  no 
stay,  lest  I  should  miss  my  appointments  in  Philadelphia  ;  and  if  ?o 
he  too  late  for  those  made  in  the  Jerseys  and  New-York, 


i7i)6.j  KLV.  IKAM.I.s   AaBlKY  S   JOLRN.U 

MARYLAND. — Sunday  morning,  Rode  twenty  miles  to  Pipe-Creek 
chapel,  and  preached  to  a  large  congregation. 

Monday  21.  Reached  Mr.  Cough's,  where  I  spent  two  days  :  the 
weather  was  very  warm  ;  but  for  one  hundred  miles  and  upwards  I 
have  had  it  sufficiently  agreeable. 

Carae  to  Abingdon — Our  college  is  still  without  a  cover,  and  our 
managers,  as  I  expected,  almost  out  of  breath.  I  made  but  little  stay, 
but  hasted  on  to  Philadelphia,  and  arrived  there  ou  the  twenty-sixth, 
Saturday. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Monday  20.  I  came  to  Trenton  ;  and  thence  pro- 
ceeded on  to  Brunswick.  I  was  accidentally,  or  rather  providentially, 
favoured  with  a  ride  in  a  carriage  ;  else,  I  know  not  how  I  should 
have  proceeded  on  my  journey.  I  reached  New-York  on  the  thirty, 
first  of  August,  having  travelled  three  hundred  and  fifty  miles  since  I 
left  Bath,  iu  Virginia. 

NEW-YORK — 1  was  taken  ill,  and  was  confined  about  eight  day?, 
during  which  time  I  was  variously  tried  and  exercised  in  mind.  I 
spent  some  time  in  looking  over  my  Journals,  which  I  have  kept  for 
fifteen  years  back  :  some  things  I  corrected,  and  some  I  expunged. 
Perhaps,  if  they  are  not  published  before,  they  will  be  after  my 
death,  to  let  my  friend*,  and  the  world  see  how  I  have  employed  my 
time  in  America.  1  feel  the  \vorth  of  souls,  and  the  weight  of  the  pas- 
toral charge,  and  that  the  conscientious  discharge  of  its  important 
duties  requires  something  more  than  human  learning,  unwieldy  sala- 
ries, or  clerical  titles  of  D.  D.  or  even  bishop  . — the  eyes  of  ail- 
both  preachers  and  people,  will  be  opened  in  time. 

Saturday,  September  17.  It  was  a  very  solemn  season  at  the 
ordination  of  brother  Dickens  to  the  eldership.  I  gave  the  charge 
from  I  Tim.  iii.  10,  14.  In  the  afternoon  1  preached  to  the  people 
from  these  words,  "  Pray  for  us  ;"  and  in  the  evening  from  "  The 
world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God  :  it  pleased  God  by  the  foolish- 
ness of  preaching  to  pave  them  that  believe."  I  met  the  Society, 
and  opened  my  mind  to  them  on  various  subjects. 

Tuesday  20.  I  rose  with  a  sense  of  God  upon  my  soul. 

I  hare  been  a  little  grieved  with  letters  from :  but  it  is  in 

vain  to  look  for  more  than  man  in  the  best  of  men  :   my  witness  is  or. 
high  ;  and  I  shall  have  respect  to  my  Great  Shepherd  in  all  thii  . 
After  preaching  on  "  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 
love  of  God,"  &c.  and  settling  some  temporal  matters  relative  to  the 
support  of  the  stationed  preacher?,  I  left  the  city  and  came  to  Eliza- 
bethtown  :  at  seven  o'clock  I  preached  and  had  much  liberty. 
NEW  JERSEY — Friday  21.  We  dined  at  Amboy,  and  reach 
mouth  at  nigh. 


•1  IU,V.  FRANCIS  ASBURV's  JOURNAL,  [1786. 

Saturday  22.  I  preached  with  life  and  love  at  Leonard's  :  the 
people  here  appear  very  lifeless.  1  have  lutoly  been  much  tried  and 
much  blessed. 

Tuesday  26.  I  had  many  to  hear  at  Potter's  church,  but  the  peo- 
ple were  insensible  and  unfeeling. 

Wednesday  27.  I  met  with  brothers  P — s  and  Budd  ;  we  sailed 
over  the  bay  to  the  sea,  for  the  benefit  of  the  air. 

Thursday  28.  Since  this  day  week  we  have  rode  about  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  miles  over  dead  sands,  and  among  a  dead  people,  and  a 
long  space  between  meals. 

Friday  29.  I  preached  in  a  close,  hot  place,  and  administered  the 
sacrament ;  I  was  almost  ready  to  faint.  I  feel  fatigued  and  much 
dispirited.  We  lodged  at  Freedom  Lucas's,  near  Batskow,  an  honest- 
hearted  man.  We  shall  see  whether  he  will  continue  to  be  the 
same  simple-hearted  Christian  he  now  is,  when  he  gets  possession  of 
the  estate  which,  it  is  said,  has  fallen  to  him  in  England. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Sunday,  October  1.  We  had  a  very  large  congrega- 
tion ;  to  whom  I  enforced  "  Look  unto  me,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth, 
and  be  saved." 

Cape-May. — We  stopped  at  the  Cape. — I  find  there  is  a  great 
dearth  of  religion  in  these  parts  ;  and  my  spirit  is  clothed  in  sack- 
cloth before  the  Lord. 

Tuesday  3.  At  P.  Cresey's  we  had  a  few  cold  hearers — the  glory 
is  strangely  departed. 

Thursday  5.  There  are  a  few  pious  souls  at  Gough's  ;  but  here 
also  there  is  an  evident  declension.  My  soul  is  under  deep  exer- 
cise on  account  of  the  deadness  of  the  people,  and  my  own  want  of 
fervour  and  holiness  of  heart. 

Friday  6.    At   Morris-River  church   I  was   warm   and   close  on  , 
4t  Lord,  are  there  few  that  be  saved  ?"     The  people  were  attentive 
to  the  word. 

Sunday  8.  At  New-England  Town  we  had  a  small  house  and  large 
congregation  ;  I  had  liberty  in  preaching  on  "  By  grace  are  je  saved 
through  faith."  Thence  I  proceeded  to  M — 's,  where  I  had  poor 
limes.  Next  day  I  felt  quite  unwell  for  want  of  rest,  so  annoyed 
were  we  the  night  before. 

Thursday  12.  I  was  shut  up  in  speaking  on  1  Cor.  i.  30.  At  Mar- 
frey's  we  had  many  dull,  prayerless  people.  We  came  to  the  widow 
Airs's  ;  the  mother  and  daughters  are  serious,  and  the  son  thought- 
ful. The  weather  is  oppressively  warm,  and  1  feel  weary  and  faint. 
I  was  much  shut  up  at  Bethel  on  1  Pet.  iii.  18.  Three  times  have  1 
been  here,  and  always  straitened  in  spirit. 


1736. j  '  .  VRANCIS  ASBt'RV':-.  JOCRNAL. 

Saturday  11.  Came  to  Sand-Town:  the  mother  very  warm,  and 
the  people  <lull  :  I  administered  the  sacrament,  and  rode  away  to 
Cooper's  ferry,  where  we  left  our  horses  and  crossed  to  the  city  : 
(Philadelphia)  here  I  found  brother  Whatcoat,  with  whom  I  took 
sweet  counsel. 

PENNSYLVANIA. — Sunday  15.  I  had  some  energy  in  speaking,  and 
at  sacrament  In  the  afternoon  it  was  a  feeling  time  on  "  The  Lord 
will  give  grace  and  glory." 

NEW-JERSEV.— Monday  16.  Uode  to  Holly,  where  I  preached  on 
"  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,"  &c.— and  then  at  New-Mills  on 
"  Suffering  affliction  with  the  people  of  God." 

At  Burlington  1  enlarged  on,  "  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any 
other,"  &c. — these  are  not  a  zealous  people  for  religion. 

PENNSYLVANIA. — Wednesday  18.  We  returned  to  the  city  of  Phi- 
ladelphia. Next  day  I  preached,  and  was  close  and  pointed. 

Friday  20.  I  was  led  to  treat  on  the  sufferings  of  God's  people  ;  as 
entirely  distinct  from  those  they  endure  in  common  with  other  men, 
and  certainly  unavoidable  by  all  who  are  really  alive  to  God.  I  found 
it  necessary  to  change  some  official  men  ;  and  to  take  proper  steps  in 
preparing  to  defray  our  church  debt,  which  is  now  £500.  I  gave 
them  a  sermon  on  "  By  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  my  disci- 
ples, if  ye  love  one  another." 

Sunday  22.  In  the  afternoon  I  left  the  city,  and  preached  in  the 
evening  at  Chester. 

DELAWARE. — Monday  23.  I  rode  forty-five  miles  to  Dickenson"?. 
in  the  Delaware  State.  Preached  at  Little-Creek,  and  then  rode 
five  miles  to  Dover,  and  preached  in  the  court-house.  I  bless  God 
for  peace  of  mind,  and  communion  with  him. 

Sunday  29.  1  had  many  to  hear  at  Dover,  and  had  power  and  liberty 
in  speaking  on  Gal.  i.  5. :  we  also  had  a  good  sacramental  time.  In 
the  afternoon  I  spoke  on  the  latter  part  of  my  text — how  and  what  it 
was  to  suffer  according  to  the  will  of  God.  Thence  to  Thomas 
White's,  where  I  was  closely  employed. 

Sunday,  November  5.  I  preached  at  Cambridge  on  "  We  preacli 
Christ  crucified,"  &.c.  little  light,  and  less  heat.  I  was  blessed  in  my 
own  soul,  and  had  liberty  in  preaching  at  M'Keels's  in  the  afternoon, 
where  there  is  some  revival  among  the  people. 

Thursday  9.  I  rode  to  Mr.  Bartholomew  Ennalls's  ;   the  notice  was 

short,  and  the  congregation  small ;  the  word,  nevertheless,   reached 

some  hearts.     I  crossed  at  Vienna,  a  dead  and  dark  place  for  religion. 

Friday  10.  We  had  more  than  1  expected  of  hearers  at  Quantico 

chapel.     Thence  I  went  to  Wrcomico-River,  and  lodged  at  Captain 


W  REV.  HIANCIS  ANBURY'S  JOt'KNAt.  [17i>tJ. 

Conoway's,  where  we  met  with  a  kind  reception.  I  feel  the  need  of 
being  more  than  ever  given  up  to  God.  I  preached  in  Curtis's  chapel : 
our  love-feast  was  lively :  several  holy  women  spoke  of  the  perfect 
love  of  God. 

Sunday  12.  According  to  the  custom  of  the  place,  I  preached  to 
accommodate  them  ;  my  subject  was  Joshua  xiv.  8. 

Monday  13.  I  had  about  fifty  hearers  at  Myles's  chapel,  where  I 
preached  a  funeral  sermon  on  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25. 

Tuesday  14.  I  crossed  Pocomoke-River,  and  had  some-enlarge- 
ment in  preaching  at  Melvin's. 

VIRGINIA. — Thursday  16.  Rode  to  Paramore's.  The  winter  comes 
on  apace.  I  am  at  times  beset  with  temptation ;  but  sin  is  as  hateful 
to  me  as  ever. 

Friday  17.  The  weather  was  cold  and  rainy,  so  that  there  were 
but  few  people  at  the  widow  Burton's  ;  among  these  there  were  some 
who  enjoyed,  and  others  panting  after,  the  perfect  love  of  God. 

Sunday  19.  I  rode  about  twenty  miles  through  the  rain  to  Garrett- 
son  chapel,  where  about  fifty  whites,  and  as  many  blacks  met  me,  to 
whom  I  preached  with  liberty. 

Monday  20.  I  rode  about  forty-five  miles  ;  and  on  Tuesday  preached 
at  Snow- Hill  to  about  one  hundred  people.  Here  I  visited  some- 
prisoners  under  sentence  of  death ;  they  were  sunk  down  with  fear 
and  horror. 

DELAWARE. — Friday  24.  My  soul  has  peace  under  sore  temptation, 
I  want  to  live  from  moment  to  moment  under  a  sense  of  God. 

Saturday  25.  We  had  a  cold,  long  ride  to  the  sound.  On  Sunday 
we  had  an  open  house,  and  the  weather  was  very  cold  ;  but  my 
preaching  was  not  all  in  vain :  I  spoke  from  these  words,  "  I  will 
give  them  a  heart  of  flesh." 

Monday  27.  I  rode  thirty  miles  to  Lewistown,  very  unwell.  I 
preached  at  Shankland's,  and  the  people  were  serious,  but  I  was 
compelled  to  cease  from  speaking  by  a  violent  pain  in  my  head,  ac- 
companied by  a  fever. 

Tuesday  28.  I  preached  in  the  court-house  at  Lewistown,  and  I 
trust  the  word  went  with  some  weight;  the  congregation  was  large. 

MARYLAND. — I  attended  a  quarterly  meeting  at  William  Frazier's, 
where  I  rested  from  travelling  two  days  ;  the  first  day  I  spoke  on 
"Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith;"  and  on  the  second,  "Look  unto 
me,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth,  and  be  saved."  My  soul  was  blessed, 
although  our  meeting  was  cold  ;  and  our  dwelling-house  crowded  with 
a  dozen  preachers,  besides  others. 


v.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL 

Sunday,  December  J.  Preached  at  Tuckahoe  chapel  on  "These 
shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment,  but  the  righteous  into  life 
eternal  ''  1  spoke  again  at  widow  Lyder's  at  four  o'clock. 

Monday  4.  I  rode  to  the  bay-side  through  snow  and  hail,  and  met 
about  one  hundred  people :  this  we  owe  to  the  revival  of  religion 
among  them.  Our  return  thence  was  through  heavy  roads.  I  stop- 
ped in  my  way  at  H.  Bunning's,  whose  wife  felt  conviction  under  my 
preaching  three  years  ago. 

Tuesday  5.  I  had  a  few  people  at  Bolingbrook,  and  spent  the  even- 
ing with  Colonel  Burckhead,  who  wants  to  know  the  Lord  ;  he  opened 
his  mind  to  me  with  great  freedom  and  tenderness.  Brother  White 
says  that  live  hundred  souls  have  joined  society  in  this  circuit  (Tal- 
bot)  this  year  ;  that  half  (hat  number  profess  to  have  found  the  Lord  ; 
and  more  than  one  hundred  to  have  obtained  sanctificalioa  ;  good  news 
this  if  true. 

At  Barratt's  chapel  there  was  some  move  during  the  course  of  the 
quarterly  meeting,  especially  at  the  love-feast.     1  rode  in  the  even 
ing  to  Dover,  and   preached  on  "  so  is  every  one  that  la}'eth  up 
treasure  for  himself,  and  is  not  rich  towards  God." 

Friday  15.  We  had  a  heavy  ride  to  queen  Anne's  chapel.  I  did 
not  arrive  there  until  near  two  o'clock.  My  soul  melted  for  back- 
slider?. I  was  much  led  out  on  Hos.  xiv.  14. ;  and  hope  it  will  never 
be  forgotten.  We  dined,  and  then  rode  to  Newtown  by  sunset. 

Sunday  17.  A  day  of  rest  to  my  soul.  I  preached,  and  administer- 
ed the  sacrament  in  Newlown.  They  have  a  comfortable  house  for 
worship  here,  especially  in  the  winter.  Came  to  Worton  chapel, 
and  had  some  life  in  speaking  to  a  few  people. 

We  waited  at  the  widow  Frisby's  for  a  boat  to  cross  the  Chesa- 
peake bay  ;  but  none  was  to  be  had.  We  rode  round  the  head  of 
Elk  River,  and  crossed  the  Susquehannah  :  we  came  in,  after  riding 
that  evening  in  the  rain  and  snow,  with  the  wind  in  our  faces,  about 
twenty  miles. 

MARYLAND. — Thursday  23.  Reached  the  college  ;  and  on  Friday 
went  to  Baltimore,  where  1  was  in  great  haste  to  settle  the  business 
of  the  book  concern,  and  of  the  college. 

Saturday  25.  We  called  a  meeting  of  the  trustees,  formed  otn 
constitution,  and  elected  new  members.  I  preached  twice  on  the 
Sabbath,  and  ord, lined  Woolman  Hickson  and  Joseph  Cromwell  to  the 
eldership.  I  met  the  trustees  anil  luljusted  the  accounts.  We  find 
we  have  expended  upwards  of  £2000  ;  we  agreed  to  finish  two 
rooms,  and  to  send  for  Mr.  Heath  for  our  president.  On  Tuesday  I 
loft  (own,  and  came  to  Annapolis  about  seven  o'clock.  Finding  my 


8  REV.  FIUNflS  AS  Rimy  !S  JOURNAL.  [17S7. 

appoiotments  were  not  made,  I  determined  to  direct  my  course 
towards  Alexandria.  The  Lord  has  been  powerfully  at  work  at  An- 
napolis since  I  was  here  last  Autumn  :  twenty  or  thirty  whites  and 
some  blacks  have  been  added  to  the  society. 

VIRGINIA. — I  reached  Alexandria,  and  on  Saturday,  preached  in 
the  court-house  on  "  If  we  suffer,  we  shall  also  reign  with  him." 

January  1,  1787.  Preached  at  brother  Moss's  on  2  Chron.  xv.  12. 
13.  on  the  people's  entering  into  covenant  with  God. 

Tuesday  2.  We  rode  near  fifty  miles  on  our  way  to  Westmoreland  : 
next  day,  by  hard  riding,  we  came  to  Pope's,  in  Westmoreland  ;  but 
I  have  not  been  more  weary  many  times  in  my  life. 

Saturday  &  Sunday.  Attended  the  quarterly  meeting  in  the  North- 
ern Neck :  there  were  many  simple  and  loving  testimonies  delivered 
in  the  love  feast. 

Thursday  11.  Rode  through  the  snow  to  Fairfield.  Here  a  Capt. 
R.  had  turned  the  people  out  of  the  barn  in  which  worship  was  held, 
and  threatened  to  take  brother  Paup  to  jail  if  he  did  not  show  his 
authority  for  preaching ;  after  all  this  vapouring  of  the  valiant  Cap- 
tain, when  the  affair  was  brought  before  the  court,  Captain  R — 
found  it  convenient  to  ask  pardon  of  our  brother,  although  he  sat 
upon  the  bench  in  his  own  cause  : — so  the  matter  ended.  The  Lord 
is  at  work  in  the  Neck  :  more  than  one  hundred  have  been  added  to 
the  society  since  conference,  who  are  a  simple,  loving,  tender  people. 

We  had  a  good  time  on  Friday  the  12th  ;  I  spoke  on  Acts  xxvi. 
18.  I  think  God  has  spoken  by  me  to  S — s,  a  wild  man — but  the 
Lord  can  tame  him  :  O  Lord,  speak  for  thyself! 

Sunday  14.  We  had  a  crowd  at  the  Presbyterian  meeting-house 
in  Lancaster,  to  whom  I  delivered  a  very  rough  discourse  :  it  was 
a  close  and  searching  time,  and  we  had  many  communicants,  both 
white  and  coloured. 

Tuesday  16.  Preached  at  the  church  on  the  love  of  Christ.  I  find 
it  hard  to  the  flesh  to  ride  fifteen  or  twenty  miles  every  day  and 
perform  the  duties  of  my  station  ;  especially  when  indisposed  and 
suffering  therefrom  the  bodily  pain  incident  thereto.  Lord,  give  me 
patience  !  I  feel  uncommon  affection  for  the  people  here. 

Wednesday  17.  I  had  a  crowd  of  careless  sinners  at  Mrs.  Ball's, 
who  is  a  famous  heroine  for  Christ.  A  lady  came  by  craft  and  took 
her  from  her  own  house,  and  with  tears,  threats,  and  entreaties  urged 
her  to  desist  from  receiving  the  preachers,  and  Methodist  preaching  ; 
but  all  in  vain.  She  had  felt  the  sting  of  death  some  years  before, 
and  was  a  most  disconsolate  soul  ;  having  now  found  the  way,  she 
"  ould  not  depart  therefrom. 


1787.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURv's  JOURNAL, 

Thursday  18.  Rode  ten  miles  to  the  ferry  ;  but  being  unable  to 
cross,  1  returned  to  Mrs.  B.'s  :  next  morning  1  came  away  before 
day,  and  reached  Shackford'ri. 

Saturday  20.  Preached  at  Douglas's — very  low  in  body  and  spirit. 

Sunday  21.  &  Monday  22.  Cold  times  in  religion  in  this  circuit, 
''Gloucester)  compared  with  the  great  times  we  have  had  in  Lan- 
caster. 

Tuesday  23.  Came  off  early,  and  preached  in  Yorktown  to  some 
well-behaved  women.  Dined  with  Mr.  Mitchell,  and  went  on  to  dear 
brother  Weldon's,  whose  heart  and  hands  were  open. 

Wednesday  24.  According  to  appointment,  I  attended  at  Williams- 
burg.  1  had  about  rive  from  the  country,  and  about  fifteen  hearers 
from  the  town,  besides  a  few  blacks  and  children.  I  spoke  with  free- 
dom on  "  They  made  light  of  it."  I  returned  through  the  rain,  but 
hope  to  receive  no  harm. 

"  He  guards  our  souls,  he  keeps  our  breath, 

Where  thickest  dangers  come  : 

Go,  and  return;  secure  from  death, 

Till  God  commands  thee  home. 

Friday  26.  We  waited  four  hours  in  the  rain  before  we  could 
cross  the  ferry  at  Old  Jamestown  ;  it  was  two  hours  after  night  when 
we  came  to  brother  Morings. 

Tuesday  30.  We  held  a  quarterly  meeting  at  Craney  Island  ;  tht 
weather  prevented  many  from  attending.  I  was  blessed  in  the  com- 
pany of  the  preachers. 

Wednesday  31.  1  enlarged  on  "  What  shall  the  end  be  of  them 
who  obey  not  the  Gospel  of  God  ?"  I  observed  to  them  that  the  Gos- 
pel had  once  been  taken  away  from  them  ;  and  that  they  ought  to 
lay  it  seriously  to  heart,  lest  it  should  be  the  case  again.  We  had 
some  quickening  in  the  sacrament  and  at  the  love-feast.  Thence  I 
went  through  Portsmouth,  and  preached  on  "  Ye  are  now  returned 
to  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  your  souls." 

Saturday,  February  3.  Visited  my  old  friend  Fullford  :  he  is  fee- 
ble in  body,  and  not  much  at  ease  in  his  worldly  possessions,  yet 
happy  in  God. 

Brother  Poythress  frightened  me  with  the  idea  of  the  Great 
Swamp,  the  east  end  of  the  Dismal  ;  but  I  could  not  consent  to  ride 
sixty  miles  round  ;  so  we  ventured  through,  and  neither  we  nor  our 
horses  received  any  injury. — Praise  the  Lord  ! — Our  passing  unharm- 
ed through  such  dangers  and  unhealthy  weather,  feelingly  assure?  me 
that  I  am  kept  by  the  immediate  interposition  of  His  providence 

VOL.  II. 


10  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY?S  JOURNAL.  [1787, 

I  preached  in  the  new  chapel. — 1  hope  not  in  vain.  I  am  now  sur- 
rounded with  waters,  and  hideous  swamps,  near  the  head  of  Pasquo- 
tank- River. 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Thursday  9.  Came  on,  wet  and  unwell  to 
Proby's. 

Went  on  toNixonton,  where  I  had  many  to  hear,  and  was  blessed  in 
iny  own  soul,  and,  I  think,  spoke  to  the  cases  of  some  of  my  audience. 

Friday  10.  I  had  a  long  ride  of  nearly  fifty  miles  to  Gates  county. 
We  stopped  at  one  Newby's,  one  of  the  society  of  Friends,  who  en- 
tertained us  kindly.  We  reached  sister  Gibson's,  cold  and  weary. 
The  foor  flesh  complains,  but  my  soul  enjoys  peace  and  sweetness. 

Sunday  11.  We  had  a  large  congregation,  and  an  open  time  at 
Knott}'-Pine  chapel. — Here  we  have  a  little  revival. 

Tuesday  13.  I  had  about  sixty  people  at  Wicocon  :  I  spoke  as  1 
felt  on  Jer.  xiii.  11.  I  mourned  over  the  people  and  left  them. 

I  came  to  Hardy's,  where  I  spoke  with  some  light  on  Matt.  xxii.  5. 
I  unhappily  ran  a  splinter  into  my  leg  which  has  alarmed  me. 

I  found  we  had  to  go  twelve  miles  by  water,  and  send  the  horses 
another  way.  O  what  a  world  of  swamps,  and  rivers,  and  islands, 
we  live  in  here  !  I  met  brother  B —  and  A —  ;  two  devoted  young 
men  ;  the  former,  a  native  of  Maryland  ;  the  latter  of  Virginia.  At 
the  desire  of  several  of  the  brethren  I  preached  at  Washington, 
where  many  collected  in  the  court-houss,  whom  I  addressed  on  my 
favourite  text,  1  Tim.  i.  15.  Three  miles  on  the  water,  and  riding 
three  more  on  roads  under  the  water,  (such  is  the  inundated  state  of 
the  country,)  made  our  jaunt  unpleasant. 

Thursday  22.  We  set  off  for  Newbern.  Stopped  at  Kemps- 
Ferry,  kept  by  Curtis,  where  we  were  kindly  entertained,  gratis.  I 
feel  heaviness  through  labour  and  temptation,  yet  I  am  given  up 
to  God. 

Friday  23.  I  arrived  at  Newbern.  I  felt  the  power  of  death  as  1 
journeyed  along.  We  rode  round  the  town,  and  could  get  no  certain 
information  about  preaching,  brother  Cole  being  absent.  We  were 
at  last  taken  in  at  Mr.  Lathrop's.  The  place  and  people  were  in 
such  a  state,  that  I  judged,  by  my  own  feelings,  it  would  be  as  well  to 
leave  them  just  as  I  found  them — and  so  I  did. 

Tuesday  27.  It  was  rather  a  dry  time  at  the  love-feast  and  sacra- 
ment. There  was  some  life  and  melting  while  I  enforced  "  Look 
unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth."  We  then  rode 

to  H •'§  on  Island  Creek.     I  went  alone  into  the  woods,  and  had 

sweet  converse  with  God.    At  night  we  were  poorly  provided  against 
the  weather  ;  the  house  was  unfinished  ;  and,  to  make  matters  worse, 


1787.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  11 

a  horse  kicked  the  door  open,  and  I  took  a  cold,  and  had  the  toothach, 
with  a  high  fever. 

Thursday,  March  1.  I  had  more  hearers,  and  they  were  more 
attentive  than  I  expected  :  I  trust  it  was  a  profitable  time.  Rode  to 
brother  Johnson's — without  the  labour  of  slaves  he  manages  to  have 
abundance  for  man  and  beast. 

Tuesday  G.  My  horse  is  stiff,  and  almost  foundered,  and  there  is 
an  appearance  of  a  swelling  on  his  head.  I  have  always  had  hard 
struggles  to  get  to  Charleston — Lord,  give  me  patience,  and  bear 
me  up  ! 

Wednesday  7.    Crossed  the  main  fork  of  Black-River,   and   came 

through  a  wild  country  to  Colonel  R 's  :   the  Colonel's  wife  is  a 

tender,  devoted  woman. 

Thursday  and  Friday  8,  9.  Directed  our  course  to  the  south  :  crossed 

Cape  Fear,  and  reached  Drowning-Creek.   Rested  a  day  at  W 'a, 

a  kind  people,  but  without  religion. 

SOUTH  CAROLINA. — Sunday  1 1.   Preached  at  Robinson's  new  court 
house.     Rode  in  the  evening  to  M — 's.     Crossed   Little  Pee-Dee  ; 
stopped  at  S — 's  ;  ate  a  morsel,  and  came  on  to  Buck  Swamp. 

Thursday  15.  Preached  at  the  new  church  at  S — 's  :  here  I 
heard  that  Doctor  Coke  was  in  Charleston.  Proceeded  thence  to  the 
widow  Port's,  where  I  had  much  ado  to  prevail  on  brother  H.  to 
stay. 

We  rode  nearly  fifty  miles  to  get  to  Georgetown.  Here  the 
scene  was  greatly  changed  :  almost  the  whole  town  came  together  to 
hear  the  word  of  the  Lord. 

We  arrived  in  Charleston,  and  met  Doctor  Coke.  Here  we  have 
already  a  spacious  house  prepared  for  us  ;  and  the  congregations  are 
crowded  and  solemn. 

Sunday  25.  1  enlarged  on,  "  I  had  rather  be  a  door-keeper  in  the 
house  of  God,  than  to  dwell  in  the  tents  of  wickedness  ;"  at  night 
again  on  Fsai.  xlv.  '22.  We  held  our  conference  in  this  city. 

Tuesday  27.  We  exchanged  sentiments  on  matters  freely. 

Wednesday  28.  The  Doctor  treated  on  the  qualifications  and  dutie1- 
of  a  deacon. 

Thursday  29.  Our  conference  ended. 

Friday  30.  I  left  the  city,  and  rode  thirty  miles,  although  my 
horse  had  been  injured  by  over-feeding.  Next  day  I  rode  forty  miles 
through  the  rain,  and  begged  a  lodging  with  Doctor  W . 

Sunday,  April  1.  We  came  to  S.mtee  Ferry,  and  there  was  such 
an  overflowing  of  water  in  our  route  that  we  had  to  swim  upon  our 


12  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

horses  several  times  :  my  horse  performed  so  well  that  I  was  not 
wet  much  higher  than  my  knees  :  that  day  we  rode  thirty  miles,  and 
the  next  day  fifty  miles,  and  came  to  Moore's.  Here  we  met  with 
brother  R.  Swift,  who  had  been  near  death,  but  then  was  recovering  : 
we  advised  him  to  go  with  us  for  his  life.  The  people  here  begin 
to  feel,  and  yield  to  the  power  of  truth. 

Wednesday  4.  At  Camden  I  preached  on  "  They  made  light  of 
it :"  thence  we  rode  on  to  quarterly  meeting,  where  I  met  with  a 
multitude  of  people  who  were  desperately  wicked — but  God  hath 
wrought  amony;  them  :  we  had  little  rest  by  day  or  night. 

Friday  6.  Rode  forty  miles  to  preaching  at  Jackson's  ;  and  then  to 
brother  Pace's. 

Saturday  7,  and  Sunday  8.  Attended  Anson  quarterly  meeting,  in 
North  Carolina  :  the  Doctor  preached  on  the  love  of  Christ,  and  I 
on  "  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation  ;"  sacrament  followed. 

From  Saturday  to  Saturday,  I  have  rode  about  three  hundred  miles, 
and  have  preached  only  about  half  the  time  :  O  may  the  Lord  seal 
and  water  his  own  word,  that  all  this  toil  of  man  and  beast  be  not  in 
vain. 

Tuesday  10.  The  Doctor  and  myself  preached  to  a  few  simple 
people  at  W.'s,  I  hope  not  in  vain.  At  our  next  meeting  we  had 
many  hearers.  We  have  scarcely  time  to  eat  or  sleep. 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Thursday  11.  I  preached  at  Salisbury.  After- 
ward rode  to  Huggins's,  where  we  had  many  hearers,  and  a  melting 
among  the  people. 

Good-Friday,  12.  I  was  much  led  out  at  Caton's.  Thence  to 
M'Knight's  chapel,  where  we  found  a  living  people. 

Saturday  13.  We  hasted  to  C — y  church,  where  we  had  many  peo- 
ple :  after  riding  twenty-two  miles,  we  had  another  meeting  about  six 
o'clock;  and  about  midnight  got  to  bed. 

Sunday  15.  Rose  about  six  o'clock,  and  went  to  Newman's  church, 
where  the  Doctor  and  myself  both  preached  :  the  people  were  rather 
wild,  and  we  were  unwell.  I  came  to  Arnat's  about  eight  o'clock, 
having  rode  forty  miles  :  the  Doctor  went  by  Dick's  ferry,  and  did 
not  get  in  until  near  midnight. 

Monday  16.  Rodo  to  Jeremiah  White's,  and  on  Tuesday  about  fifty 
miles  to  Page  Mann's,  in  Charlotte  county,  Virginia. 

VIRGINIA. — Wednesday  18.  Rode  to  Rough-Creek.  On  Thursda}r 
the  19th,  our  conference  began  at  William  White's.  We  had  much/ 
preaching,  morning,  noon  and  night,  and  some  souls  were  converted 
to  God. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBVRv's  JOURNAL.  13 

Saturday  21.  I  gave  them  a  discourse  on  Jer.  iii.  15.  "  And  I  will 
give  you  pastors  according  to  mine  heart." 

Sunday  ll.  The  Doctor  spoke  on  the  qualifications  of  a  deacon  ; 
and  I  gave  them  a  charge.  Some  said  there  were  three  thousand 
people  to  hear  :  it  was  a  solemn,  weighty  time. 

Monday  23.  We  called  at  Hampden  and  Sidney  college,  in  Prince 
Edward  :  the  outside  has  an  unwieldy,  uncommon  appearance,  for  a 
seminary  of  learning  ;  what  the  inside  is,  I  know  not.  The  presi- 
dent, Mr.  I.  Smith,  is  a  discreet  man,  who  conducts  himself  well. 
About  half  past  eleven  o'clock  we  reached  John  Finney's,  in  Amelia, 
having  rode  about  sixty  miles.  I  want  to  live  more  constantly  in  the 
spirit  of  prayer. 

Wednesday  25.  Preached  at  I.  A.'s,  and  then  rode  to  Manchester, 
where  I  preached  again.  The  Doctor  preached  in  Piiohmond. 

Thursday  20.  Went  onwards  to  the  north.  We  have  made  it  a 
point  to  pray  in  the  families  where  we  lodge,  whether  public  or  pri- 
vate ;  and  generally  where  we  slop  for  refreshment. 

Saturday  28.  At  night  the  Doctor  preached  in  Alexandria;  and 
again  on  the  Sabbath  morning,  to  many  hearers.  We  were  kindly 
entertained  on  Sunday  night  at  S.  Turner's,  near  Bladensburg,  Mary- 
land, and  on  Monday  reached  Baltimore  about  noon. 

MARYLAND. — We  had  some  warm  and  close  debates  in  conference  ; 
but  all  ended  in  love  and  peace.  After  much  fatigue  and  trouble,  our 
conference  ended  on  Monday  the  sixth  of  May.  We  went  forward 
to  Perry  Hall.  Thence  we  went  to  Cokesbury  ;  drew  a  deed  for 
the  conveyance  of  the  property  of  the  college,  and  settled  our  tem- 
poral matters  there. 

Wednesday,  May  8.  Many  attended  at  Elkton,  and  we  were  received 
by  the  Rudolph  family  with  great  respect. 

Thursday  9.  We  attended  at  Wilmington  at  noon  ;  and  at  Chester, 
at  night. 

Friday  10.  We  reached  Philadelphia,  where  the  Doctor  preached 
that,  and  the  following  evening.  We  spent  the  Sabbath  in  the  city, 
and  on  Monday  came  to  Trenton,  where  we  found  a  lifeless  people. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Tuesday  14.  The  Doctor  preached  with  life  io  the 
F-i>i-copal  church  at  Elizabethtown,  and  we  had  a  good  time. 

NEW-YORK. — Wednesday  15.  Arrived  in  New- York  and  rested. 
On  Friday,  Saturday,  Sunday,  and  Monday,  the  Doctor  preached  with 
great  energy  and  acceptance. 

Tuesday  1G.  After  long  silence  I  preached  on  "  For  Zion's 
sake  I  will  not  hold  my  peace,  and  for  Jerusalem's  sake  I  will  not 
rest.'1 


14  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOVRNAL.  [1787. 

Rode  twenty  "miles  on  Long- Island,  to  Hempstead  Harbour,  and 
preached  with  some  liberty  in  the  evening.  I  am  now  out  of  the 
city,  and  have  time  to  reflect :  my  soul  returns  to  its  rest,  and  to  its 
labour  for  souls,  in  which  I  can  live  more  by  rule. 

Thursday  18.  I  rose  very  sick — felt  solemn  and  devoted  to  God. 
I  preached  in  a  paper  mill  on  "  If  any  man  will  do  his  will  he  shall 
know  of  the  doctrine  whether  it  be  of  God." 

I  preached  at  Moscheto  Cove,  where  many  attended  notwithstand- 
ing the  rain  :  there  was  a  power  went  with  the  word. 

Saturday  26.  Rode  to :  our  friends  had  procured  the  Pres- 
byterian church  for  me.  I  felt  a  spirit  of  life  on  these  words,  "  Be 
ready  to  give  an  answer  to  every  man  that  asketh  you  a  reason  of  the 
hope  that  is  in  you."  I  called  to  see  my  old  friend  and  assistant, 
James  Glaisbrook,  who  was  the  first  preacher  I  travelled  with  upon 
a  regular  appointment  in  England.  He  is  now  a  Presbyterian  minis- 
ter ;  much  changed  in  his  outward  man,  but  I  believe  his  sentiments 
are  much  the  same  as  when  I  first  knew  him.  The  Lord  be  with, 
and  bless  him  ! 

Sunday  27.  I  came  to  Harper's,  where  we  have  a  little,  new  house, 
and  about  thirty  members  :  I  hope,  and  expect,  in  a  few  years,  to 
see  a  circuit  of  six  weeks  formed  here,  and  four  or  five  hundred 
members  in  society.  The  people  on  this  island,  who  hear  the  Gos- 
pel, are  generally  poor,  and  these  are  the  kind  I  want,  and  expect 
to  get.  I  have  had  great  assistance  and  freedom  in  speaking. 

Monday  28.  Came  to  York — Preached  at  night  on  "  They  that 
are  after  the  flesh  do  mind  the  things  of  the  flesh,  and  they  that  are 
after  the  Spirit,  the  things  of  the  Spirit."  I  found  it  necessary  to 
stop  brother  Hickson  from  going  to  Nova  Sotia  :  brother  C—  is  mar- 
ried, and  I  expect  brother  Jessop  will  go  alone. 

Tuesday  29.  I  delivered  a  close  and  awful  discourse  on  "  They 
shall  come  from  the  east,  and  from  the  west,  and  from  the  north, 
and  from  the  south,  and  sit  down  with  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and 
Jacob,"  &c.  1.  A  scriptural  view  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  2. 
The  subjects  or  citizens  thereof.  3.  Sit  down  with  Abraham,  famous 
for  faiith ;  Isaac  for  justice,  truth,  meditation,  and  walking  with  God  ; 
and  Jacob,  mighty  in  prayer.  I  was  in  prayer  until  near  midnight. 
O  Lord  make  me  all  life  and  love  ;  patience  and  resignation  under 
the  troubles  of  the  church  and  disappointment  of  its  ministers. 

Sunday,  June  3.  I  had  a  gracious  time  on  2  Cor.  iv.  1,  2,  3,  4. 
Ordained  E.  Cooper  a  deacon.  In  the  afternoon  my  soul  had  peace 
whilst  I  enlarged  on  Matt,  xviii.  15.  to  the  end. 


1787.]  HKV.   FRANCIS  ASHURV'S  JOURNAL.  I, 

Tuesday  5.  Preached  on  "  No  man  having  put  his  hand  to  the 
plough,  and  looking  back,  is  fit  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  I  felt 
freedom  and  power  in  speaking. 

Wednesday  tJ.  Met  leaders  and  trustees,  and  after  some  explana- 
tion, settled  matters  relative  to  singing  in  public  worship.  I  preach- 
ed at  the  poor-house  on  "  Whosoever  shall  call  on  the  name  of  the 
Lord  shall  be  saved/'  My  soul  has  peace.  I  keep  myself  busy  in 
visiting  the  families  of  the  society,  or  the  sick,  or  meeting  class,  if 
some  other  business  does  not  call  me. 

Sunday  10.  1  had  some  life  in  preaching  on  Luke  iv.  18.  and  in 
the  afternoon  on  "  I  thank  thee,  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and 
earth  because  thou  hast  hid  these  thiogs  from  the  wise  and  pru- 
dent," &c. 

I  left  the  city  in  great  union  with  the  Lord  and  with  the  church. 
My  soul  is  variously  exercised :  I  want  the  country  air.  and  to  live 
more  in  the  spirit  of  solitude  and  of  prayer.  Came  to  East-Chester 
and  preached  in  the  shell  of  the  new  church  on  "  To-day  if  ye  will 
hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts  ;"  the  power  of  God  was  felt. 
I  came  to  the  widow  Bartoe's,  where  I  lay  ?ick  fifteen  years  ago,  and 
was  treated  with  the  greatest  tenderness  ;  may  the  Lord  reward  them 
all  a  hundred  fold,  and  convert  their  souls  ! 

Tuesday  12.  1  found  it  the  same  at  New-Rochelle  town  as  in 
times  past  :  will  it  always  be  so  1 — If  there  is  no  change  I  shall 
trouble  them  no  more.  In  the  afternoon  I  rode  to  C — 's,  where  I 
laboured  many  years  ago,  and  there  is  some  fruit  remaining  to 
this  day. 

Wednesday  13.     We  had  a  long  and  warm   ride  to  North-Castle. 
Here  a  multitude  were  gathered  together,  to  whom  I  spoke  in  an 
orchard  on  "  Him  hath   God   exalted    with  his  right-hand    to    be  a 
Prince  and  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  unto  Israel,  and   remission  of 
sins."      I  was  quite  unwell,  faint  yet  pursuing. 

Rode  to  R — 's,  of  the  society  of  Friends,  who  received  us  with 
great  love. 

At  H — 's  a  multitude  came  to  hear,  whom  I  exhorted  to  "  Seek  the 
Lord  while  he  might  be  found." 

1  was  happy  in  being  alone.  I  poured  out  my  soul  to  God  for  tin- 
whole  work,  and  the  dear  people  and  preachers  of  my  charge.  My 
body  is  weak — my  soul  enjoys  peace.  I  have  power  over  all  sin,  am! 
possess  a  spirit  of  prayer  and  watchfulness  :  I  feel  myself  dead  to  all 
below,  and  desire  to  live  only  for  God  and  souls 

Friday  15.  I  preached  to  a  listening  multitude  at  Peekskill  ;  and 
was  alarming  and  close  on  "  By  grace  ye  are  saved  through  faith  ' 


16  REV.  FHANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1787. 

I  thought  there  were  no  people  here  of  spiritual  understanding  ;  but 
I  was  informed,  to  my  comfort,  that  a  number  of  simple-hearted  peo- 
ple had  formed  themselves  into  a  society  for  prayer :  perhaps 
these  will  be  some  of  the  first-fruits  in  this  place. 

Saturday  16.  Rode  over  the  mountain,  and  was  gratified  with  the 
sight  of  a  remarkable  recess  for  the  Americ  ms  during  the  last  war  : 
the  names  of  Andre  and  of  Arnold,  with  which  misfortune  and  trea- 
chery are  so  unhappily  and  intimately  blended,  will  give  celebrity 
to  West-Point,  had  it  been  less  deserving  of  notice  than  its  wonder- 
ful appearance  really  makes  it.  It  is  commanded  by  mountains 
rising  behind,  and  appears  to  be  impregnable  :  there  are  block- 
houses on  the  east ;  and  on  the  west,  stores,  barracks,  and  fortifica- 
tions. From  West-Point  we  crossed  a  high  mountain,  and  came  to 
New  burgh. 

Sunday  17.  In  the  love-feast,  sacrament,  and  public  exercises,  we 
were  employed  nearly  seven  hours:  there  was  some  life  in  the 
love  feast,  but  the  congregation  appeared  very  little  moved  under 
preaching. 

Monday  18.  I  presume  I  had  nearly  seven  hundred  hearers  at 
Allen's,  to  whom  I  spoke  with  some  power  on  Luke  xi.  13.  I  bap- 
tised several  adults,  and  some  children  ;  and  came  to  W 's,  and 

baptised  others.  Thence  to  Mr.  Ellis's,  whose  wife  (a  dutch  lady) 
entertained  us  like  a  queen. 

I  visited  Colonel  P ,  supposed  to  be  at  the  point   of  death  : 

after  close  examination,  I  administered  the  sacrament  to  him. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Wednesday  20.  I  came  to  Warwick,  where  I  sup- 
pose not  less  than  a  thousand  people  were  collected  :  I  was  very 
low  both  in  body  and  spirit,  but  felt  stirred  up  at  the  sight  of  such 
a  congregation,  and  was  moved  and  quickened  while  I  enlarged  on 
Gal.  i.  4.  I  baptised  some,  and  administered  the  sacrament  to  many 
communicants. 

Thursday  21.  A  multitude  attended  at  B-  -'s,  in  a  barn.  Here 
God  hath  wrought  a  great  work  for  a  poor,  blind,  ignorant  people. 

Friday  22.  I  preached  at  the  stone  church,  after  riding  upwards  of 
thirty  miles  :  we  then  rode  until  ten  o'clock  in  the  night  through  a 
heavy  rain.  I  was  much  tried  in  body  and  mind  :  I  had  nothing  to 
eat  but  a  little  bread  and  milk,  and  that  made  me  sick. 

Saturday  22.  We  had  a  good  time  at  Sweezy's.  After  administer- 
ing the  sacrament,  we  had  another  long  ride  after  night. 

Sunday  24.  I  preached  in  the  woods  to  nearly  a  thousand  people. 
I  was  much  oppressed  by  a  cold,  and  felt  very  heavy  in  body  and  soul. 
Like  Jonah,  I  went  and  sat  down  alone.  I  had  some  gracious  feelings 


1787.]  UEV.  KKANCIS  ASBUUY'S  JOURNAL.  17 

in  the  sacrament — others  also  felt  the  quickening  power  01  God. 
I  baptised  a  number  of  infants  and  adults,  by  sprinkling  and  by  im- 
mersion— I  felt  my  body  quite  weary  m,  but  my  spirit  not  of,  the 
work  of  God. 

Tuesday  26.  Preached  at  W.  Wallace's  to  a  dull,  contracted 
people.  Since  last  Monday  two  weeks,  I  have  rode  about  three 
hundred  and  fifty  miles. 

PENNSYLVANIA. — Wednesday  21.  We  had  a  warm  ride  through 
a  fertile,  pleasant  country  to  Trenton  ;  and  on  Thursday  the  28th 
to  Philadelphia.  Here  I  found  T.  V.  had  scattered  firebrands,  and 
thrown  dirt  to  bespatter  us. 

Friday  &  Saturday  29,  30.  Taken  up  in  writing  letters,  packing 
up  books,  and  begging  for  the  college. 

Sunday,  July  1.  Preached  three  times  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia 
— On  Monday  2.  to  a  few  simple-hearted  souls  at  Radnor. 

Tuesday  3.  We  had  a  flat  time  at  the  Valley. 

Wednesday  1.  We  had  a  few  feeling  souls  at  Uchland — after- 
ward went  to  Coventry  Forge. 

Saturday  7.  1  had  some  energy  in  preaching  to  a  few  people  at 
Morgans-Town. 

Sunday  8.  Preached  at  Evans's,  Rich-Land — a  poor  people  for 
religion  :  I  hope,  nevertheless,  that  God  will  visit  them, 

Monday  (J.  Preached  at  I.  Miller's,  who  has  a  pious  wife. 

Friday  13.  We  rode  to  Hagerstown  ;  and  found  it  a  journey  01 
about  fifty  miles  :  we  and  our  horses  were  weary  enough.  1  wa-i 
sorry  to  hear  that  the  people  came  twice  to  hear  me  last  year  ; 
and  the  lameness  of  my  horse  caused  me  to  disappoint  them. 

Saturday  14.  At  five  o'clock  in  the  evening  the  court-house  v. 
opened  ;  a  few  of  the  great  and  many  of  the   poor   attended,  to 
whom  I  spoke  with  divine  assistance.     I  preached  again  on  Sunday 
;it  eleven  o'clock. 

I  find  T.  V.  has  misrepresented  us  as  having  cast  off  Mr.  Wes- 
ley, making  this  a  plea  for  his  re-ordination. 

VIRGINIA.' — Monday  16.  Set  out  for  the  springs. — In  the  first 
place  we  missed  our  way  ;  then  my  baggage  horse  ran  back  two 
miles — 1  was  tried  not  a  little. — O,  how  sad  the  reflection,  that 
matters  trifling  as  these  should  make  a  person  so  uneasy.  \Vc 
reached  the  springs  about  seven  o'clock.  I  preached  the  two  fol- 
lowing days  \vith  some  satisfaction.  By  advancing  nine  pounds,  foi 
nails  and  planks,  I  engaged  brother  Eaton  to  have  our  chapel  < 
vered  by  the  first  of  August. 

VOL.   II. 


1&  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1787, 

MARYLAND. — Friday  20.  We  had  a  heavy  ride  to  Old  Town  : 
we  met  with  a  kind  reception  ;  and  had  a  reviving  season  in  the 
family. 

Saturday  21.  Was  a  day  of  rest  to  my  soul  and  body.  Preached 
on  Cant.  iv.  16. 

Sunday  22.  We  had  sacrament  attended  with  some  power  in  the 
evening. 

Tuesday  24.  There  was  to  have  been  great  doings  at  Cumber- 
land, but  Mr.  B — ,  a  minister,  failed  coming.  I  had  a  good  time  in 
Mr.  Bell's  mill  on  "  Thou  art  fairer  than  the  sons  of  men." 

We  had  feeling  and  weeping  at  Barratf  s — my  subject,  "  I  sleep, 
but  my  heart  waketh,"  &c.  eight  or  nine  verses.  I  feel  a  sweet- 
ness of  spirit,  and  much  of  the  love  of  Christ.  Came  to  Cressap's. 

Friday  27.  Ordained  brother  Phoebus  deacon,  and  had  a  seri- 
ous time. 

Sunday  29.  At  Jones's,  all  death  !  death  !  death  !  My  mind 
was  devoted  to  God.  I  administered  the  sacrament,  but  could  find 
no  openings.  Rode  to  Old  Town. — Six  years  ago  I  preached  in 
this  place,  when  there  was  scarcely  a  soul  that  knew  any  thing  of 
God  ;  now  there  are  sixty  in  membership,  many  of  whom  are 
happy  in  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  We  held  a  love-feast,  and- 
had  a  quickening  time. 

Tuesday  31.  Rode  to  the  springs  (Sath)  much  tried  in  spirit.  1 
gave  myself  to  reading  and  prayer. 

Wednesday,  August  1.     Preached  at  Bath, 

Sunday  5.  Preached  on  Pet.  iii.  9.  to  a  large  congregation,  with 
but  little  liberty. 

Monday  6.  I  began  my  lectures  on  the  Prophecies  by  Bishop 
Newton,  and  had  more  hearers  than  I  expected.  The  weather  is 
very  warm  ;  many  are  sickly  ;  and  continued  changes  of  comers 
and  goers — all  this  leaves  but  little  opportunity  for  prayer.  I  for- 
bear reading  on  account  of  my  eyes,  lest  I  should  not  be  able  to 
read  in  public. 

Tuesday  &  Wednesday  7,  8.  Had  very  few  to  hear,  so  I  gave 
them  up  :  every  thing  that  is  good  is  in  low  estimation  at  this  place. 
1  will  return  to  my  own  studies  :  if  the  people  are  determined  to  go 
to  hell,  I  am  clear  of  their  blood.  My  soul  is  clothed  in  sack- 
cloth and  covered  with  ashes  before  the  Lord. 

Thursday  9.  I  enjoy  some  peace. 

Friday  10.  I  feel  a  calm  within,  and  the  want  of  more  life,  and 
more  love  to  God,  and  more  patience  with  sinner?.  1  read  my 


7.J  .  .   FRANCIS  ASni'KV's  JOl'K.VAL. 

Testament.  Oli !  what  a  weariness  would  life  be  without  God,  and 
love,  and  labour.  The  tivo  first  weeks  of  my  time  at  Bath  have  been 
spent  in  carrying  on  the  building  of  the  new  chapel,  reading  New- 
ton on  the  Prophecies,  visiting,  bathing,  iVc.  My  soul  has  been 
under  great  trials,  at  times,  but  hitherto  the  Lord  has  helped. 

Tuesday  21.  O,  how  sweet  will  labour,  and  Christian  society, 
and  the  solitary  woods  be  to  me. 

Thursday  23.  I  have  beec  under  great  exercises,  but  was  di- 
vinely assisted  in  preaching  on  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  over 
the  righteous,"  See. 

Sunday  26.  I  preached  on  "  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains 
are  the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings,"  &c.  It  was  a 
solemn  time — my  soul  was  stayed  upon  God.  We  had  a  melting 
sacrament  and  love-feast,  and  many  spoke.  The  devil  is  angry, 
and  so  are  his  children  :  brother  Whatcoat  spoke  at  the  steps,  and  it 
was  with  difficulty  the  people  kept  themselves  within  decent  bounds 
of  respect. 

VIRGINIA. — Friday  31.  I  gave  them  my  farewell  address  at  Bath, 

and  had  many  hearers. 

Saturday,  September  1.  I  set  out  in  the  rain,  and  came  to  the 
widow  Stroud's,  where  I  met  with  T.  V.  who  made  some  acknowfr- 
ledgments  for  what  he  had  said  in  the  heat  of  his  zeal  at  Philadel- 
phia and  at  Bath. 

Sunday  2.  1  attended  at  a  place  where  every  one  has  liberty  to 
preach  ;  but  it  so  happened  that  no  one  had  an  appointment  there 
but  myself — The  Methodists  would  do  well  to  withdraw  from  this 
as  a  preaching  place  in  their  circuit.  I  had  a  large  congregation 
at  Shepherds-Town,  to  whom  I  spoke  on  Luke  iv.  18.  I  have  had 
some  trials  and  great  consolations  ;  and  at  times,  it  is  Paradise  Re- 
gained with  me  since  1  left  Bath  and  the  wicked  there. 

MARYLAND. — Friday  7.  1  had  a  cold  time  at  Rysters  on  "  Wo 
to  them  that  are  at  ease  in  Zion."  Thence  I  rode  to  the  new 
rhurch.  where  1  had  not  much  life.  Came  to  Baltimore.  The 
weather  is  extremely  warm. 

Sunday  9.  Preached  in  the  morning— my  text,  "  Thou  art  fairer 
than  the  sons  of  men  :"  in  the  afternoon  at  Mr  Otterbine's 
church  :  and  at  night  on  "  They  shall  come  from  the  east,  and  from 
the  west,  and  from  the  north,  and  from  the  south,''  Xc. — large 
crowds  attended  :  1  was  straitened  in  speaking.  The  following 
was  a  week  of  haste  and  business.  Wednesday  I  went  to  Perry- 
Hall — thence  to  Cokesbury — fixed  the  price  of  board,  and  the 


REV.  FUAXCIS  ASBVKY'S  JOURNAL.  17i;7.] 

lime  for  opening  the  college.     On  Friday  I  returned  to  Baltimore. 
ID  the  midst  of  business  my  mind  is  calm. 

Sunday  16.  Preached  at  town  and  Point.  On  Monday,  the  peo- 
ple waited  nearly  two  hours  at  Evans's  before  1  arrived,  owing  to 
my  horse  being  out  of  the  way  :  I  found  he  had  stuck  a  nail  into 
his  foot,  so  that  I  had  to  leave  him.  Under  these  discouraging  cir- 
cumstances I  was  much  exercised  ;  nevertheless,  I  had  liberty  in 
speaking,  and  there  was  a  melting  time  among  the  people.  Thence 
I  hastened  to  Hunt's  chapel,  where  I  enlarged  on  "  I  know  you, 
that  you  have  not  the  love  of  God  in  you." 

I  rode  by  I.  C — 's  gate — an  old  stand  of  mine — It  is  now,  in  two 
senses,  fallen  into  decay.  The  want  of  religion  oftentimes  causes 
the  want  of  economy.  Ah!  how  do  the  persons  and  fashions  of 
this  world  pass  away  ! 

Tuesday  18.  I  found  the  work  of  God  in  a  reviving  state  at 
G 's. 

Wednesday  19.  I  had  a  liberal  opening  at  Wilson's  on  "who- 
soever shall  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved."  Thence 
1  hasted  to  the  Fork  church,  and  preached  on  Cant.  iii.  1 — 6.  I 
lamented  the  gayety  of  the  children  of  Methodists  ;  but  yet  they 
do  not  appear  to  be  so  full  of  enmity  against  God  and  his  people  as 
other  children. 

I  hasted  to  Cokesbury,  it  being  the  examination  :  some  gentle- 
men, and  some  triflers  were  present.  Friday  I  preached  at  Joseph 
Dallanvs. 

Saturday  22.   I  preached  at  Havre  de  Grace,  on  Acts  ii.  23. 

Sunday  23.  I  had  a  large  congregation  at  Elk-Town,  and  some 
power  attended  the  word.  In  the  evening  spoke  at  Isaac 
Harshay's. 

Monday  24.  I  had  a  large,  solemn  congregation  at  Wilmington. 
I  feel  a  persuasion  that  God  will  revive  his  work  at  this  plat  e. 

Tuesday  25.  I  attended  at  Chester  ;  and  nest  day  came  to  Phila- 
delphia. I  had  liberty  in  speaking  on  Cant.  v.  6 — 10.  On  Thurs- 
day and  Friday,  I  had  not  freedom  as  I  wished.  I  was  seized  with 
a  violent  headach,  exceeding  any  thing,  as  I  thought,  1  had  ever 
felt. 

Saturday  29.  I  felt  a  little  better.  My  mind  was  stayed  upon 
God. 

Sunday  30.  We  had  a  good  sacramental  occasion.  In  the  after- 
noon brother  Willis  preached;  and  at  night  I  had  some  enlarge- 
ment on  Ephes.  iv.  17.  18,  IP. 


1787.  .        •  •  IAI- 

Wednesday,  October  3.  I  met  the  people,  anil  explained  the  na- 
ture and  design  of  the  college. 

Thursday  4.   I  preached  on  the  primitive  design  of  the  church. 

Friday  5.  We  had  an  uncommon  love-feast — a  gracious  season — 
much  speaking.  On  Saturday  I  met  class,  and  on 

Sunday  7.  There  was  life  in  the  administration  of  the  sacrament. 
I  felt  humbled  before  the  Most  High.  I  trust  the  Lord  will  revive 
his  work,  and  make  his  power  known. 

Monday  8.  I  came  to  Chester,  and  preached  on  "  My  grace  is 
sufficient  for  thee." 

DELAWARE. — Tuesday  9.  I  had  unusual  freedom  in  speaking  at 
Aaron  Matron's.  Thence  I  pushed  on  through  the  rain,  and  was 
sorely  tempted  to  complain. 

Wednesday  10.  1  was  at  Wilmington  ;  and  next  day  came  late  to 
Dickinson's. 

I  visited  Duck-Creek  Cross-Roads,  where  we  have  a  comfortable 
bouse  which  cost  about  two  hundred  pounds. 

Saturday  13  Came  to  Dover  very  unwell,  and  brother  I.  E. 
preached  in  my  stead. 

Sunday  14.  1  read  prayers,  and  preached  on  2  Tim.  iii.  10.  ;  and 
solemnly  set  apart  Jacob  Brush  and  Ira  Klli?,  for  the  office  ot 
deacon  :  I  trust  it  was  a  profitable  time.  I  spent  two  days  at 
Thomas  White's. 

Tuesday  16.   I  preached  the  funeral  sermon  of  Joshua  Barack 
a  faithful,  steady  man,  who  had  followed  the  Lord  about  ten  years, 
my  text  was,  "  These  all  died  in  the  faith.5' 

Thursday  18.  I  had  divine  aid  in  preaching  at  Millford's  :  the 
house  was  open,  and  the  day  was  cold. 

Friday  19.  Came  in  the  evening  to  Shanklands.  Here  I  found 
the  people  in  disorder  and  violence  about  the  election  ;  some  ha^l 
gone  so  far  as  to  take  up  fire  arms. 

Sunday  morning;,  21.  Before  sacrament  I  preached  on  Psalm  ii.  24, 
25.  and  then  in  Lcwistnwn,  on  "  God  sent  not  his  Son  into  the 
world  to  condemn  thp  world,''  &.c. 

Tursdav  23,  and  Wednesday  24.  I  had  a  good  time  at  quarterly 
tnectitic,  at  the  Sound  church  :  thence,  through  a  barren  sandy 
country,  we  came  to  Kvans's  church,  whore  \\(t  \\-.\t\  a  good  and  gra- 
cious time,  more  so  than  1  have  felt  for  some  time.  From  Evans'.- 
we  rode  to  the  beach,  and  gratified  our  curiosity  tvilh  a  sight  ot 
the  raging,  roaring  sea. 

Wednesday  24.  1  spoke  closely  upon  the  discipline  of  tli' 
•  linrch — my  subject.  t:  all  Scripture  is  given  by  ir.?  pi  ration  of 


.  KKAMus  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

and  is  protitable  for  doctrine,"  &c.     After  meeting,  we  had  a  very 
long  ride  to  brother  Bowen's. 

MARYLAND. — Friday  26.  After  preaching  at  Pennall's  on  "  I  will 
give  them  a  heart  to  know  me,"  Sic.  I  rode  in  the  evening  to 
Downing's. 

Saturday  27.  Reached  Paramore's  at  night. 

Sunday  28.   We  had  a  gracious  time  indeed. 

Monday  29.  There  were  life  and  power  among  the  people  in  the 
Sacrament  and  love-feast.  I  was  greatly  comforted  to  find  the  Lord 

had  greatly  blest  the  labours  of  brother  S ,  and  that  a  revival 

had  taken  place  all  around  the  circuit.     In  the  evening  I  rode  to 
Burton's,  in  Virginia.  The  former  inhabitants  have  gone  to  the  dust. 

It  seemed  as  if  I  was  let  into  heaven,  while  I  enlarged  on  "  Be- 
hold what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us,  that 
we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God."  We  have  twenty  miles,  and 
sometimes  more,  a  day  to  travel  ;  but  we  have  fine  roads,  kind 
friends,  and  good  entertainment. 

Thursday,  November  I.  The  people  coming  in  still  after  I 
began,  caused  me  to  lengthen  out  my  discourse.  Came  afterward 
4o  Captain  Burton's,  and  spoke  with  life  and  consolation. 

Friday  2.  Was  a  day  of  sore  exercise  of  soul,  and  barren 
preaching.  I  visited  Mr.  R.  and  administered  the  sacrament  to 
him.  Rested  that  evening  with  Mr.  Curtis. 

Saturday  3.  Quarterly  meeting.  I  was  close  on  keeping  the 
feast,  and  on  discipline — some  felt  the  word. 

Sunday  4.  Preached  on  "  Thou  shall  arise  and  favour  Zion."  I 
believe  God  will  make  his  power  known  ;  and  I  trust  brother 
Everitt  will  be  made  a  blessing,  as  well  by  strictness  of  discipline, 
as  by  faithful  preaching. 

Monday  5.  I  had  a  few  living  people  at  Phoebus's.  My  soul 
is  given  up  to  God  ;  but  I  have  felt  Satan  near  :  Lord,  help,  or  I 
perish  ! 

Sunday  11.  I  had  some  light  in  preaching  at  the  Fork  chapel. 
Spent  the  evening  with  brother  Ennall. 

Monday  12.  I  preached  at  Hooper's — Thence  I  rode  to  Johnson'? 
chapel,  and  spoke  on  2  Tim.  8 — 12.  I  had  some  enlargement. 

After  riding  thirty  miles,  and  preaching  twice,  we  held  a  watch- 
night  at  Todd's. 

Sunday  18.  We  went  to  church  at  Cambridge,  and  heard  a  ser- 
mon. Afterward  I  spoke  to  a  large  congregation  at  Tucker's  on 
Rom.  x.  1—4.  :  upon  the  whole  it  has  been  a  laborious,  trying 
time  of  late. 


1787.  J  UEV.   JUA.VClS  A.-KtKY  «  JOVKNAL. 

Tuesday  20.  We  rode  through  excessive  rain  thirty  miles.  Our 
quarterly  meeting  at  Frazier's  chapel  was  large  and  lively.  I  had 
very  few  to  hear  at  Doctor  Allen's,  the  fiery  edge  is  greatly  worn 

off  there. 

Thursday  22.  We  had  a  feeling  time  at  Bolingbrook  ;  but  it  is  not 
here  as  in  months  past.  Oh  how  soon  does  the  power  of  religion 
decline  !  I  came  to  Kaston,  Talbot  county,  where  we  had  a  watch- 
night,  and  the  gentry  had  a  ball. 

Friday  23.  We  had  a  gracious  season  at  the  Bay  side,  where 
many  attended.  r 

Saturday  24.  My  soul  is  dejected  :  0  that  it  was  perfectly  re- 
signed to  the  will  of  God  ! 

Sunday  25.  I  stopped  at  Keet's  on  my  way  to  Kent  Island. 
Although  under  a  great  depression  of  spirits,  I  was  uncommonly 
led  out  whilst  !  enlarged  on  ';  Wo  to  them  that  are  at  ease  in 
Zion,"  to  a  large  assembly  of  people. 

Monday  2G.  My  mind  is  still  depressed.  I  called  on  poor 
Colonel  H.  who  bears  his  imprisonment  for  debt  with  great  forti- 
tude :  I  had  a  good  time  at  Boardley's,  notwitstanding  two  drunken 
men  came  in  and  made  some  disturbance. 

Friday  27.  Cold,  straitened  for  time  at  Tuckahoe — something 

better  al  Choptank.     I  here  heard  of  the  conduct  of  A.  C so  : 

he  is  gone  from  us  at  last.     There  were  many  people  at  Barren's 
chapel  during  quarterly  meeting,  but  I  had  little  life  in  speaking. 

Monday,  December  3.  We  had  a  melting  time  at  Queen  Annes 
chapel.  I  enforced  "  Because  iniquity  shall  abound,  the  love  ol 
many  shall  wax  cold." 

Tuesday  4.  At  Chestertown,  I  had  but  little  life  on  Isai.  liii. 
1 — 5.  :  at  night  the  Lord  was  with  us  indeed,  while  I  enforced 
"Let  your  moderation  be  known  to  all  men.1' 

Wednesday  5.  After  preaching  at  Worton  chapel,  we  set  out  to 
cross  the  Bay,  and  were  on  the  water  until  ten  o'clock  at  night. 

Thursday  6.  We  opened  our  college,  and  admitted  twenty-five 
students.  I  preached  on  "  Trust  in  the  Lord,  and  do  good."  On 
the  Sabbath  I  spoke  on  "  Oh !  man  of  God,  there  is  death  in  the 
pot" — and  on  Monday,  "  They  are  the  seed  of  the  blessed  01 
the  Lord,  and  their  offspring  with  them."  From  Cokesbury  I 
came  to  Baltimore,  where  I  was  closely  employed,  and  much  in 
haste  about  temporal  concerns. 

Saturday  15.  I  had  a  cold  ride  to  Annapolis  ;  and  but  lew  to 
hear  me  on  Sunday  morning.  Brother  II.  attempted  to  travel  with 


24  UEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1788: 

ine,  but  was  soon  glad  to  resign.  My  soul  has  been  kept  in  peace., 
and  for  three  weeks  past,  I  have  enjoyed  a  most  devoted  frame  of 
mind. 

Thursday  20.  We  must  now  direct  our  course  for  Lancaster, 
Virginia,  through  a  barren  route  of  sixty  miles.  This  is  the  only 
uncultivated  part  of  Maryland  ;  and  God  will  surely  visit  these 
people,  and  bless  them  in  his  own  time,  if  they  hear  his  voice. 
We  crossed  Patuxent-River  at  sunrise  :  brother  James  having  un- 
dertaken to  be  our  guide,  led  us  ten  miles  out  of  our  way.  Bear- 
ing near  to  Port  Tobacco,  we  came  to  the  ferry,  crossed  about 
sunset,  and  put  up  at  Mrs.  H.'s,  where  we  paid  eight  shillings  for 
our  oats,  and  six  for  our  fodder — all  this  exclusive  of  charge  for 
lodging,  as  she  said. 

Friday  21.  Reached  Pope's  some  time  in  the  night.  On  Satur- 
day I  read  the  apostolical  canons,  pulished  by  Johnson — curious 
enough  :  he  is  a  violent  churchman,  and  appears  to  have  little 
charity  for  the  Presbyterians,  upon  whom  he  is  unmercifully 
severe.  I  have  been  sorely  tempted,  and  at  sword's  point  with 
the  enemy. 

Sunday  23.  I  had  very  little  life  in  preaching  to  a  few  dead 
souls  at  Pope's  ;  on  Monday,  at  Hutt's,  it  was  nearly  the  same  both 
in  preaching  and  sacrament ;  in  the  evening  at  brother  Cannons, 
the  Lord  powerful!}'  broke  into  my  soul,  and  the  cloud  disappeared. 
That  night  while  sleeping,  I  dreamed  1  was  praying  for  sanctifica- 
tion,  and  God  very  sensibly  filled  me  with  love,  and  I  waked  shout- 
ing glory  !  glory  to  God  !  my  soul  was  all  in  a  flame.  1  had  never 
felt  so  much  of  God  in  my  life  ;  and  so  I  continued  :  this  was  on 
Christmas  day,  a  great  day  to  me. 

I  rode  to  the  widow  Wollard's,  and  preached  on  "  For  this  pur- 
pose was  the  Son  of  God  manifested  that  he  might  destroy  the 
works  of  the  devil."  During  the  five  last  days,  we  have  rode  one 
hundred  and  forty  miles.  We  crossed  Wicomoco  and  came  to 
G.'s  :  death  prevails  here  :  my  spirit  was  clothed  in  sackcloth. 

Saturday  29,  and  Sunday  30.  Held  quarterly  meeting  at  Lancas- 
ter meeting-house  :  there  was  a  large  gathering,  and  some  life  on 
the  first  day.  On  Sunday  there  was  much  snow,  and  only  about 
three  hundred  people  attended.  I  ordained  E.  Ellis  a  deacon. 

Tuesday,  January  1,  1788.  Preached  at  the  widow  Ball's  on 
Psalm  sc.  12. 

Thursday  3.  Crossed  the  Rappahannock  and  came  to  G.'s,  but 
did  not  feel  free  to  stay.  I  went  on  to  Blake's.  Came  to  bro- 
ther Billups's,  in  Kingston  parish,  Gloucester  county  :  here  we  were 


1788.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  ~i> 

at  home,  and  happy  in  our  religious  exercises.  During  the  last 
one  hundred  miles  of  our  journey  we  have  preached  very  little 
for  the  want  of  appointments.  We  left  brother  Dillups's,  and,  after 
riding  forty  miles,  and  preaching  by  the  way,  we  came  to  Cappaho- 
cey-Ferry  ;  but  being  unable  to  cross,  we  rode  on  ten  miles  to 
the  Widow  Roe's. 

Tuesday  8.  There  being  a  storm  of  rain  and  a  thaw,  we  set  out 
to  cross  the  river  at  York  :  we  succeeded,  hut  with  some  difficulty  : 
I  had  had  some  distressing  apprehensions  of  this.  I  preached  at 

B 's  ;  on  "  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are  the  feet,"  &c. 

We  came  to  James-River  ;  the  ice  was  in  the  way,  yet  we  pushed 
through  safely  to  the  opposite  shore,  and  arrived  at  Moreing's  just 
as  the  quarterly  meeting  ended  ;  nevertheless,  we  too,  had  a  meet- 
ing, and  the  cry  of  glory  !  was  heard  in  great  life  :  God  is  among 
these  people.  Brother  Cox  thinks  that  not  less  than  fourteen  hun- 
dred, white  and  black,  have  been  converted  in  Sussex  circuit  the 
past  year  ;  and  brother  Easter  thinks  there  are  still  more  in  Bruns- 
wick circuit.  I  preached  at  P.'s  in  Nansemond  circuit:  thence 
to  Cowling's,  and  preached  on  Isai.  liii.  1 — 4.  We  came  on  to 
Sleepy  Hole  Ferry  ;  being  unable  to  get  our  horses  over,  we  walked 
tire  miles  to  Turner's. 

Sunday  13.  I  had  some  liberty  on  Isai.  lii.  6,  7,  8. 

Monday  14.  We  continued  our  meeting  nearly  four  hours,  but 
had  little  satisfaction  by  reason  of  the  extreme  cold.  There  is  u. 
growth  in  religion  here  since  last  year 

We  came  to  Portsmouth,  hut  too  late,  the  ice  hindered  :  how- 
ever, I  preached  at  three  o'clock.  Next  day  it  rained,  and  few 
attended  ;  so  that,  upon  the  whole,  we  had  but  a  low  lime  there. 
I  preached  at  N.  Wilson's.  Here  I  had  an  interview  with  I. 
M.  :  he  wants  to  go  into  the  Old  Church.  I  had  a  great  and  good 
time  at  brother  Williams's  on  Isai.  xxxv.  3,  4,  5.  the  power  and 
love  of  God  were  manifested  and  felt. 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Sunday  20.  1  prearhed  at  Col.  Jarvis's  ;  and 
on  Monday  at  Saunders's  — dull  times  at  both  these  places. 

Tuesday  22.  At  Coenjock  :  there  is  a  death  here.     has 

been  experimenting  on  extremes — wise  doctrine — hard  discipline. 
I  doubt  whether  it  will  end  well. 

I  have  rode  about  eighty  miles,  and  preached  four  times  to 
about  eight  hundred  people,  most  of  whom  were  dead  and  igno- 
rant; yet  I  hope  God  will  arise. 

Currituck — a  pleasant  place  :    I  rode  along  the  shore  and  en- 
joyed the  view  of  its  banks  of  evergreen. 
VOL.  If.  4 


IVEV.  FRANCIS  AiBURv's  JOURNAL  1788.] 

I  preached  at  Camden  court-house  with  freedom,  but  the  peo- 
ple appeared  insensible  :  after  meeting,  we  rode,  hungry  and  cold, 
to  brother  C 's. 

Thursday  24.  We  had  a  violent  storm  ;  so  we  kept  within 
doors  ;  and  man  and  beast  were  well  provided  for. 

Friday  25.  Was  an  uncommonly  cold  and  windy  day  ;  I  never- 
theless attempted  to  preach  at  Richardson's  chapel.  In  the  even- 
ing visited  W.  P. 

Saturday  26,  and  Sunday  27.  We  had  cold  weather,  and  a  cold 
people  at  the  quarterly  meeting  at  Flatty-Creek  chapel.  Oo  Sab- 
bath evening  I  preached  at  Nixonton. 

Monday  28.  Rode  to  Gates's  ;  and  next  day  preached  at  Knotty- 
Pine  chapel :  there  were  but  few  people,  and  it  was  a  barren 
meeting. 

Wednesday  30.  Preach'ed  on  "  The  grace  of  God  that  bring- 
eth  salvation  hath  appeared  unto  all  men."  Alas!  for  the  rich — 
they  are  so  soon  offended.  Rode  to  Winton,  a  little  town  on 
Chowan-River ;  here  I  had  a  dry  meeting  with  a  few  people  in 
the  court-house.  I  housed  for  the  night  with  W .  I  sel- 
dom mount  my  horse  for  a  ride  of  less  distance  than  twenty  miles 
on  ordinary  occasions  ;  and  frequently  have  forty  or  fifty,  io 
moving  from  one  circuit  to  the  other  :  in  travelling  thus  I  suffer 
much  from  hunger  and  cold. 

I   preached  at   W 's,  with  some  liberty. — Our  brother 

Chastaine  stamped  to  purpose. 

Saturday,  February  2.  At  Wicocon  I  enlarged  on  Peter's  fall. 

Sunday  3.  I  preached  on  Hebr.  vi.  11,  12.  I  rode  that  evening 
to  friend  Freeman's,  whom  I  had  not  visited  for  five  years  past :  I 
found  him  still  an  honest  Baptist,  and  we  were  kindly  entertained. 

Rode  to  Ross's  in  Martin's  county.     The  rise  of  the  waters  of 
the  Roanoak-River  had  inundated  the  low-lands  more   than  a  mile 
from  the  banks,  and  made  the  ferry  altogether  a  wonderful  sight. 
We  came  to  our  lodging  about  nine  o'clock,  and  found  a  plain,  kind- 
hearted  host. 

I  preached  a  funeral  sermon — my  text,  "  The  sting  of  death  is 
sin."  I  spoke  on  the  nature  of  the  law — of  sin  ;  its  guilt,  power, 
nature,  and  punishment, — and  the  victory  through  Christ.  Does  it 
not  appear  that  those  who  live  in  sin,  which  is  a  breaeh  of  the  law, 
wish  to  abolish  the  law,  seeing  they  must  know  the  necessary  con- 
sequence of  its  violation  ? — And  if  this  postulation  is  just,  what 
saves  them  from  theft,  murder,  rape  ? — self-preservation.  Alas  ! 
poor  world,  is  this  all  thy  virtue  ! 


17?    .  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'*  JOUK.\AL. 

Wednesday  C.  Rode  twenty  miles,  and  had  the  ice  to  break  in 
two  swamps.  Preached  at  Lloyd's,  near  Washington. 

Saturday  9.  1  had  a  very  unfeeling  people  at  Mr.  O.'s,  to  whom  1 
preached  with  some  freedom  on  Luke  iv.  18. — Death!  death! 
death  !  in  the  low-lands  ! 

Sunday  10.  I  had  many  to  hrar  at  S.'s  ;  but  it  was  an  uncom- 
fortable time  :  thence  I  rode  to  Cox's  on  Neuse  River,  where  we 
had  an  open  time,  and  there  is  a  prospect  of  good.  We  then  had  to 
move  towards  Trent.  Our  rides  are  still  long — from  fifteen  to 
twenty  miles  a  day. 

Wednesday  13.  We  had  many  dead  souls  at  the  quarterly-meet- 
ing at  Lee's. 

Thursd  iy  14.  My  heart  melted  for  the  people  :  they  do  not, 
will  not  pray  ;  and  if  they  so  continue,  must  be  undone. 

Friday  15.  Came  to  poor  J.'s,  where  I  spoke  dreadful  things  to 
a  lifeless  people  on  Isai.  liii. 

Saturday  16.  We  rode  to  T 's,  an  old  stand  in  Duplin  coun- 
ty, where  I  was  met  by  a  few  souls.  We  had  nought  to  eat,  nor 
where  to  lodge  short  of  Colonel  C— — 's  ;  we  pushed  for  that 
shelter,  and  reached  there  about  nine  o'clock  at  night :  a  poor 
place  for  religion  it  is,  but  we  met  with  good  entertainment. 

Sunday  17.  I  had  about  five  hundred  hearers  at  Samson  court- 
house, to  whom  I  enlarged  on  Peter's  denial  of  his  Master.  1.  He 
was  self  confident.  2.  Followed  afar  off.  3.  Mixed  with  the 
wicked.  4.  Denied  his  discipleship,  and  then  his  Lord. 

Tuesday  19.  At  Fayetteville  I  was  unable  to  preach.  Wednes- 
day we  pushed  on  for  the  south  state,  but  being  unacquainted  with 
the  way,  we  fell  ten  miles  too  low  :  after  riding  as  many  in  the 
night,  we  ended  our  blunders  and  our  fatigue  for  that  day  at  S.'s, 
who  used  us  kindly. 

SOUTH  CAROLINA. — Thursday  21.  We  rode  twenty  miles  in  the 
rain  through  the  woods  and  sands,  and  had  but  a  poor  time  at  Col. 
M.'s  :  thence  we  descended  to  the  Green  Ponds,  fifteen  miles, 
where  we  were  very  comfortable  at  C.'s. 

Saturday  23.  I  attended  the  quarterly-meeting  at  the  Beauty 
Spot :  the  weather  was  cold,  but  I  had  great  assistance  on  Isai. 
xxxv.  1—6. 

Sunday  24.  I  preached  on  Zech.  xi.  12. :  we  had  a  gracious, 
moving  time. 

Monday  25.  We  crossed  Pee  Dee  at  the  Long  Bluff,  and  rode 
nearly  fifty  miles  to  brother  Gardener's. 


-S  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1788. 

I  preached  at  Black-Creek  on  Psalm  cxlv. :  I  was  much 
fatigued,  and  had  a  high  fever ;  but  my  soul  had  peace  and  was 
stayed  upon  God. 

Wednesday  27.  After  preaching  at  D.'s,  I  had  to  ride  ten 
miles  out  of  my  way  to  cross  Lynch's  Creek.  We  moved  forwards 
to  our  worthy  friend  Rembert's,  who  entertained  us  kindly,  and 
supplied  us  with  horses  to  ride  to  our  appointments  at  Lenoir's 
and  Moore's,  where  we  had  few  hearers  and  dead  times.  After 
our  meetings  at  these  places  we  returned  to  Rembert's,  at  whose 
house  our  quarterly  meeting  began  on  Saturday  the  first  of  March, 
which  was  not  without  some  life  :  in  our  love-feast  there  appeared 
to  be  more  feeling  than  speaking. 

Monday,  March  3.  We  rode  through  the  snow  to  Bradford's ; 
and  next  day  had.no  small  difficulty  in  crossing  the  swamps  in  order 
to  get  to  Santee  Ferry  :  we  made  it  a  ride  of  about  fifty  miles  to 
H.'s,  and  did  not  get  in  until  about  nine  o'clock  at  night. 

Wednesday  5.  I  passed  Dorchester,  where  there  are  the  remains 
of  what  appears  to  have  once  been  a  considerable  town  :  there 
are  the  ruins  of  an  elegant  church,  and  the  vestiges  of  several 
well  built  houses.  We  saw  a  number  of  good  dwellings,  and  large 
plantations  on  the  road  leading  down  Ashley- River.  In  the  evening 
we  reached  the  city  of  Charleston,  having  rode  about  fifty  miles. 

Sunday  9.  Brother  Ellis  preached  in  the  morning.  In  the 
evening  I  felt  some  liberty  in  enlarging  on  Rom.  x.  1,  2,  S.  On 
Monday  my  soul  and  body  enjoyed  some  ease  and  rest. 

Friday  14.  Our  conference  began,  and  we  had  a  very  free,  open 
time.  On  Saturday  night  I  preached  on  "  I  have  set  watchmen 
upon  thy  walls,"  &c.  On  the  Sabbath,  on  "  The  Lord  turned 
and  looked  on  Peter,"  &c.  It  was  a  gracious  season,  both  in  the 
congregation,  and  in  the  love-feast.  While  another  was  speaking 
in  the  morning  to  a  very  crowded  house,  and  many  outside,  a  man 
made  a  riot  at  the  door  ;  an  alarm  at  once  took  place  ;  the  ladies 
leaped  out  at  the  windows  of  the  church,  and  a  dreadful  confusion 
ensued.  Again  whilst  I  was  speaking  at  night,  a  stone  was  thrown 
against  the  north  side  of  the  church ;  then  another  on  the  south  ; 
a  third  came  through  the  pulpit  window,  and  struck  near  me  inside 
the  pulpit.  I  however  continued  to  speak  on — my  subject,  "  How 
beautiful  upon  the  mountains,"  &c. 

Upon  the  whole,  1  have  had  more  liberty  to  speak  in  Charleston 
this  visit  than  I  ever  had  before,  and  am  of  opinion  that  God  will 
work  here  :  but  our  friends  are  afraid  of  the  cross. 


1  l.ANCJ.-  ASBURV'S    JOURN 

Monday  17.  Preached  in  the  morning,  and  took  my  leave  of  the 
city  :  when  I  reached  Mr.  Giveham's  the  congregation  had  been 
dispersed  about  ten  minutes. 

I  preached  at  R.'s,  at  L.'s,  and  at  C.  C.  church,  in  the  Edisto 
circuit:  the  people  are  insensible,  and,  1  fear,  are  more  in  love 
with  some  of  Christ's  messengers  lhan  with  Christ.  I  now 
changed  my  course  and  went  through  Orangeburgh  by  the  conga- 
rees  to  Saleuda,  and  thence  up  to  Broad- River  quarterly  meeting  : 
we  rode  till  one  o'clock  on  Friday  the  21st  of  March;  I  believe 
we  have  travelled  about  two  hundred  miles  in  five  days  :  dear  bro- 
ther Smith  accompanied  me.  I  was  so  unwell  that  I  had  but  little 
satisfaction  at  the  quarterly  meeting  :  my  service  was  burdensome  ; 
but  the  people  were  lively. 

Wednesday  26.  We  rode  from  Finch's  to  Odell's  new  church, 
where  we  had  a  good  time  whilst  I  e  larged  on  Tit.  ii.  14.  and 
administered  the  Lord's  Supper.  Thence  to  Smith's,  thirty  miles  , 
after  preaching  we  had  a  night  meeting  that  prevented  our  getting 
to  bed  until  about  twelve  o'clock:  we  had  a  comfortable  cabin, 
and  were  very  well  entertained. 

Thursday  27.  1  had  but  little  freedom  on  "  The  foundation  of 
"God  standeth  sure."     Brothers  Mason  and  Major  spoke  after  me. 
I  went  alone  into  the  woods,  and  found  my  soul  profitably  solitary 
in  sweet  meditation  ami  prayer. 

Friday  28.  Rode  about  thirty  miles  to  B.'s  :  my  soul  wa?  tried, 
but  it  was  also  comforted  in  the  Lord.  I  was  much  led  out  on 
Eph.  vi.  18.  and  we  were  employed  till  nearly  twelve  o'clock  at 
night. 

Sunday  30.  I  had  some  liberty  in  preaching,  but  the  people 
began  to  move  about  when  they  were  pointedly  dealt  with.  Bro- 
thers Mason  and  M^ijor  spoke  after  me.  I  found  it  good  to  be 
nlone  by  the  solitary  stream  and  silent  woods,  to  study  the  welfare 
of  Zion,  and  to  pray  for  her  prosperity. 

Monday  31.  We  rode  within  a  mile  of  Savannah  River.  The 
land  in  general,  during  our  route,  is  very  fine.  We  were  brnight- 
ed,  and  moping  in  the  woods,  made  our  journey  a  long  one  of 
.'bout  fifty  miles. 

Tuesday,  April  1.  We  crossed  the  Savannah  at  the  Forks,  nnd 
•  ame  where  I  much  wanted  to  be,  in  Georgia  ;  nevertheless,  I  fear 
1  shall  have  but  little  freedom  here. 

GEORGIA. — Wednesday,   April   2.    I    rested  ;    and  compiled  two 
lions,  which  1  shall  recommend  to  be  put  into  our  form  of 


30  REV.  FUANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1788. 

cipline  in  order  to  remove  from  Society,  by  regular  steps,  either 
preachers  or  people  that  are  disorderly. 

Saturday  5.  I  was  led  out  in  preaching  at  the  quarterly  meeting 
on  Zecb.  xii.  10. 

Sunday  6.  There  was  a  moving  on  the  souls  of  the  people  ;  and 
I  felt  much  life  on  Isai.  xlv.  22. 

I  have  been  told,  that  during  the  last  rupture,  the  Indians 
butchered  nearly  one  hundred  people. 

Wednesday  9.  Our  conference  began  at  the  Forks  of  Broad- 
River,  where  six  members,  and  four  probationers  attended.  Bro- 
ther Major  was  sick,  and  could  not  meet  us :  soon  after,  he  made 
his  exit  to  bis  eternal  rest. 

Thursday  10,  and  Friday  11.  I  felt  free,  and  preached  with 
light  and  liberty  each  day.  Many  that  had  no  religion  in  Virginia, 
have  found  it  after  their  removal  into  Georgia  and  South  Carolina  : 
here  at  least  the  seed  sprung  up,  wherever  else  it  may  have  been 
sown.  Our  little  conference  was  about  sixty-one  pounds  deficient 
in  their  quarterage,  nearly  one  third  of  which  was  made  up  to  them. 

SOUTH  CAROLINA. — Sunday  13.    I  called  at  a  Presbyterian  meet 
ing-house,  and  heard  Mr.  Hall,  the  minister,  preach  a  good  sermon 
on   Isai.  Iv.  :  after  meeting  we  rode  to  brother  Moore's,  twenty 
miles  on  the  Seleuda. 

Monday  14.  Was  almost  entirely  occupied  with  writing  letters 
to  the  north. 

Tuesday  15.  I  bid  many  people  at  the  widow  Bowman's.  While 
here  we  had  a  most  awful  storm  ;  1  was  afraid  the  house  would 
come  down.  We  rode  in  the  night  to  M.  Moore's  :  I  was  seized 
with  illness  on  the  way,  which  continued  during  the  night  ;  next 
day  however,  I  was  able  to  pursue  my  journey. 

Friday  18.  We  rode  along  crooked  paths  to  Kasey's,  where  we 
received  the  afflicting  account  of  the  death  of  dear  brother  Major, 
who  departed  this  life  last  Saturday  :  he  was  a  witness  of  holi- 
ness, and  died  in  peace  and  love. 

Saturday  19.  I  preached  at  Wilson's,  with  some  liberty,  on  Peter 
iii.  7. 

Sunday  20.  I  spoke  with  little  enlargement.  Our  friends  here 
on  Tyger  River,  are  much  alive  to  God,  and  have  built  a  good 
chapel.  We  rode  to  Buffington's  in  the  evening,  on  Fair-forest 
Creek,  and  were  kindly  entertained. 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Tuesday  22.  Rode  to  Rutherford  court- 
house ;  and  the  next  day  to  Burke  court-house :  it  being  court 


1788. J  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBVflY  S  JOURNAL.  31 

time,  we  went  on,  and  reached  brother  White's,  on  Johns-River, 
about  ten  o'clock  at  night :  here  I  found  both  the  saddles  broke  ; 
both  horses  foundered ;  and  both  their  backs  sore — so  we  stopped 
a  few  days. 

I  preached  on  Rev.  xxii.  5 — 8  ;  and  had  liberty  in  speaking  to 
the  people  :  our  souls  were  blest  in  a  near  access  to  the  Lord. 
Our  preachers  in  the  Yadkin  circuit  have  been  sick  :  they  have 
had  hard  travelling  the  past  winter  ;  and  the  work  has  consequently 
suffered.  I  have  read  D.'s  Study  of  Divinity— the  catalogue  of 
books  at  the  end  I  thought  of  more  value  than  all  the  rest  of  the 
work. 

Sunday  27.  I  preached  at  the  Globe,  on  the  main  branches  of 
Johns-River,  where  there  are  a  few  who  fear  God  :  there  was 
some  stir,  and  I  hope  some  good  done. 

Monday  28.  After  getting  our  horses  shod,  we  made  a  move  for 
Holstein,  and  entered  upon  the  mountains  ;  the  first  of  which  1 
called  steel,  the  second  stone,  and  the  third  iron  mountain  :  they  are 
rough,  and  difficult  to  climb.  We  were  spoken  to  on  our  way  by 
most  awful  thunder  and  lightning,  accompanied  by  heavy  rain. 
We  crept  for  shelter  into  a  little  dirty  house  where  the  filth  might 
have  been  taken  from  the  floor  with  a  spade  :  we  felt  the  want  of 
fire,  but  could  get  little  wood  to  make  it,  and  what  we  gathered  was 
wet.  At  the  head  of  Watawgn  we  fed,  and  reached  Ward's  that 
night.  Coming  to  the  river  next  day,  we  hired  a  young  man  to 
swim  over  for  the  canoe,  in  which  we  crossed,  while  our  horses 
swam  to  the  other  shore.  The  waters  being  up  we  were  com- 
pelled to  travel  an  old  road  over  the  mountains.  Night  came  on — 
I  was  ready  to  faint  with  a  violent  headach— the  mountain  was 
steep  on  both  sides.  1  prayed  to  the  Lord  for  help  :  presently  a 
profuse  sweat  broke  out  upon  me,  and  my  fever  entirely  subsided. 
About  nine  o'clork  we  came  to  Grear's.  After  taking  a  little  rest 
here,  we  set  out  next  morning  for  brother  Coxe's  on  Holstein- 
River.  I  had  trouble  enough  :  our  route  lay  through  the  woods, 
and  my  pack-horse  would  neither  follow,  lead,  nor  drive,  so  fond 
was  he  of  stopping  to  feed  on  the  green  herbage.  I  tried  the  lead, 
and  he  pulled  back. — 1  tied  his  head  up  to  prevent  his  grazing;  and 
he  ran  back :  the  weather  was  excessively  warm. — I  was  much 
fatigued  and  my  temper  not  a  little  tried.  I  fed  at  I.  Smith's  and 
prayed  with  the  family.  Arriving  at  the  river,  I  was  at  a  loss  what 
to  do ;  but  providentially,  a  man  came  along  who  conducted  me 
across ;  this  has  been  an  awful  journey  to  me,  and  this  a  tiresome 


RET.  tRANcis  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL,  [1788. 


day,  and  now,  after  riding  seventy-five  miles,  I  have  thirty-five 
miles  more  to  General  Russell's.  I  rest  one  day  to  revive  man  and 
beast. 

Friday,  May  2.  Rode  to  Washington,  where  I  met  brother  Tun- 
nell  on  the  way  to  Mr.  C.'s.  We  have  to  put  up  in  houses  where 
we  have  no  opportunity  for  retirement. 

VIRGINIA.  —  Saturday  3.  We  came  to  General  Russell's  —  a  most 
kind  family  in  deed  and  in  truth. 

Sunday  4.  Preached  on  Phil.  ii.  5  —  9.  I  found  it  good  to  get  alone 
in  prayer. 

Tuesday  6.  I  had  many  to  hear  at  Easley's  on  Holstein.  I  was 
much  wearied  with  riding  a  strange  horse,  having  left  mine  to  rest. 
It  is  some  grief  that  I  cannot  be  so  much  in  prayer  on  the  road  as 
I  would  be.  We  had  a  good  time,  and  a  large  congregation  at  K.'s. 

TENNESSEE.  —  The  people  are  in  disorder  about  the  old  and  new 
state  :  two  or  three  men,  it  is  said,  have  been  killed. 

At  Nelson's  I  had  a  less  audience  than  was  expected  ;  the  peo- 
ple having  been  called  away  on  an  expedition  against  the  new- 
state  men  :  my  subject  was  Hebr.  vi.  11,  12.  Rode  to  Owens's,  and 
met  our  brethren  from  Kentucky,  where  I  preached  on  Psalm  cxlv, 
17,  18,  19,  with  some  fervour. 

Came  to  Half-  Acres  and  Key  woods  where  we  held  conference 
three  days,  and  I  preached  each  day.  The  weather  was  cold  ;  the 
room  without  fire,  and  otherwise  uncomfortable,  \ve  nevertheless 
made  out  to  keep  our  seats  until  we  had  finished  the  essential  parts 
of  our  business. 

Thursday  15.  We  came  to  General  Russell's,  —  and  on  Friday  to 
I.  Smith's  on  the  south  fork  of  Holstien-  River. 

Sunday  18.  Rode  to  a  chapel  near  New  River,  where  I  preached 
on  "  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are  the  feet,"  &c.  After 
eating  a  morsel,  we  hasted  on  our  way  to  F  -  ?s.  A  twenty  miles' 
ride  through  the  mountains  brought  us  to  our  lodgings  for  the  night 
at  K  --  's,  near  the  Flower  Gap. 

Monday  19.  We  rode  about  fifty  miles  to  S  -  :s  :  the  weather 
was  warm  in  the  extreme  ;  we  had  rain,  thunder,  and  lightning  — 
and  were  weary  enough. 

Tuesday  20.  After  riding  nearly  thirty  miles,  we  came  to 
M'Koight's  chapel  in  North  Carolina  ;  here  I  preached  on  Peter's 
denial  of  Christ.  Thence  we  went  to  Hill's  :  after  meeting,  we 
proceeded  to  the  neat  and  well-improved  town  of  Salem  :  making 
a  journey,  besides  the  labours  of  the  day,  of  nearly  forty  mile? 


I  7;  .  .  .    t  KAN.   IS   AMiURV 

1  carae  to  ilie  quarterly  meeting  at  C-      -'s,  where  I  spok< 
i'celingly  and  pointedly  ;  and  the  word  appeared  to  have  effect. 

Thursday  22.  Preached  at  P — 's  chapel  :  we  then  rode  to 
C—  -'s,  about  seven  miles  from  Guilford  court-house,  where  we 
had  a  good  time. 

Friday  23.  Was  a  damp,  rainy  day,  and  I  was  unwell  with  a  slow 
lever  and  pain  in  my  head  :  however  I  rode  to  Smith's  chapel  ;md 
preached  :  and  thence  to  brother  Harrison's,  ou  Dan-River,  and 
preached. — In  the  space  of  one  week  we  have  rode,  through 
rough,  mountainous  tracts  of  country,  about  three  hundred  miles. 
Brothers  Poythress,  Tunnell,  and  myself  have  had  serious  views  of 
things,  and  mature  counsels  together. 

Sunday  25.  Preached,  and  bad  a  love-feast  and  sacrament. — I 
then  rode  to  the  widow  Dicks's  :  many  were  waiting  here,  and  the 
power  of  God  was  felt  by  some,  whilst  I  enlarged  on  Isaiah  Iv. 

i    o   s 
»»*»«*• 

Monday  2G.  We  had  a  g"M  time  at  Martin's — Leaving  this,  on 
our  way  to  Stamfield,  we  were  obliged  to  swim  our  horses  across 
Dan-River,  and  losing  our  road,  made  it  late  before  we  arrived. 

Riding  thirty  miles  brought  us  to  Hammon's  :  here  we  had  a 
serious,  feeling  time,  whilst  1  spoke  on  Isaiah  Ixi. 

Thursday  29.  Reached  E.  T — 's  about  two  o'clock,  and  gave  a 
rhort  discourse  on  "  Happy  is  he  that  hath  the  God  of  Jacob  for 
his  help."  Thence  to  Pope's,  to  Hill's,  to  Long's,  and  to  Jones's 
chapel :  on  our  way  to  the  latter  place  we  got  out  of  our  route 
tvhen  within  a  mile  of  the  chapel,  and  did  not  reach  it  till  two 
o'clock. 

Sunday,  June  1.  At  Clayton's  there  are  a  hundred  blacks  joined 
in  society  ;  and  they  appear  to  have  real  religion  among  them — 
here  Ethiopia  doth  stretch  out  her  hand  unto  the  Lord.  I  sup- 
pose there  were  not  less  than  a  thousand  souls  at  preaching. 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Monday  2.  Preached  at  Moore's  in  North- 
ampton— once  a  poor,  dead  people,  but  now  revived,  and  increased 
from  eleven  to  sixty  members. 

We  had  much  of  the  power  of  God  at  Clark's  :  sixty  members, 
among  whom  are  some  children,  are  the  subjects  of  this  work. — I 
feel  life  among  these  people — preaching  and  praying  is  not  labour 
here  :  their  noise  I  heed  not ;  I  can  bear  it  well  when  1  know  that 
God  and  Christ  dwells  in  the  hearts  of  the  people.  Thence  I 
passed  through  Southampton,  where  I  also  beheld  the  power  of 
<»od  manifested  in  several  lively  meeting5. 

VOL,  II. 


34  UEV.  FKANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

VIRGINIA. — Rode  to  and  rested  with  Philip  Davis.  On  Saturday  I 
bad  a  feeling,  living  time  on  Psalm  Ixxxv.  9,  10. 

Sunday  8.  We  had  a  gracious  season  :  it  was  a  memorable  day, 
and  my  soul  was  much  blessed.  After  meeting,  we  hastened  to 
Petersburg,  where  I  preached  on  2  Cor.  v.  20.  Our  elders  and 
deacons  met  for  conference  :  all  things  were  brought  on  in  love. 
The  town  folks  were  remarkably  kind  and  attentive  ;  the  people 
of  God  in  much  love,— The  awful  circumstance  of  B.  C — 's  los- 
ing his  religion,  and  lately  attempting  to  pull  out  R.  Swift's  eyes, 
may  yet  be  sanctified  to  some,  and  explained  by  his  conduct  here- 
after. 

Friday  13.  I  preached  a  pastoral  sermon,  under  a  large  arbour 
near  the  borders  of  the  town,  on  1  Tim.  iv.  13,  16.  with  consider- 
able consolation. — Ordained  Henry  Ogburn  and  John  Baldwin, 
deacons  ;  and  Edward  Morris  and  Ira  Ellis,  elders. 

Sunday  15.  I  preached  at  the  Manakintown — then  rode  ta 
Maxey's. 

Monday  15.  Rode  about  fifty  miles  to  brother  Agee's  in  Bucking- 
ham county  ;  and  thence  to  Bedford  circuit ;  in  our  route  we  were 
compelled  to  ford  the  James-River,  not  without  danger  :  we  were 
hospitably  entertained. 

Wednesday  18.  At  night  I  had  some  opening  whilst  I  enforced 
"  Whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be 
saved." 

Heavy  rains,  bad  roads,  straying,  bewildered  in  the  woods, — 
through  all  these  I  worried  to  Murphy's  :  great  was  the  cross  under 
which  I  spoke  on  "  The  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation,"  £.c. 
I  had  a  high  fever,  and  was  otherwise  distressed  in  body,  and  ill  at 
ease  in  mind  :  I  was  afraid  the  medicine  I  had  made  use  of  would 
be  injurious  to  me  in  consequence  of  my  getting  wet. 

Saturday  28.  I  had  considerable  liberty,  though  unwell,  at  Ayres's 
new  chapel. 

Sunday   29.    After  preaching  I  went  to  V 's,  and  after 

trying,  had  to  silence  him.     O,  my  God,  what  awful  subjects  come 
before  me  ! 

Monday  30.  Crossed  the  high  mountains,  and  came  to  H 's 

in  Green-Brier. 

Tuesday,  July  1.  I  enlarged  on  Gal.  iii.  22.  We  then  rode  to 
M'Pherson's,  a  serious  family  on  Sinking  Creek,  where  I  preached 
with  ,soine  freedom.  After  crossing  some  considerable  mountains, 
and  preaching  occasionally,  on  Friday  we  arrived  at  the  Sweet- 
Springs  :  here  I  preached,  and  the  people  were  very  attentive 


j  788.J  r.EV.  FRANCIS  ASnt'UV  <  ..UVRNAL. 

Saturday  5,  and  Sunday  6.  I  had  large  congregations  at  Ilohoboth 
1  preached  with  some  satisfaction. 

Monday  7.  Our  troubles  began  ;  it  being  the  day  we  set  out  for 
Clarksburg.  Thirty  miles  brought  us  to  W 's,  on  the  Great- 
Levels. 

Tuesday  8.  Reached  M'Neal's,  on  the  Little  Levels,  where 
almost  the  whole  settlement  came  together,  with  whom  I  found 
freedom  on  Matt.  xi.  28,  29,  30.  Our  brother  Photbus  had  to 
answer  questions  propounded  to  him  until  evening. 

Wednesday  9.  We  rode  to  the  Clover  Lirk,  to  a  very  remote  and 
exposed  house  :  here  we  found  good  lodgings  for  the  place.  The 
former  tenant  had  made  a  small  estate  by  keeping  cattle,  horses,  &c. 
on  the  range,  which  is  fertile  and  extensive. 

Thursday  10.  We  had  to  cross  the  Alleghany  mountain  again, 
at  a  bad  passage.  Our  course  lay  over  mountains  and  through  val- 
leys, and  the  mud  and  mire  wag  such  as  might  scarcely  be  expected 
in  December.  We  came  to  an  old,  forsaken  h  ibitation  in  Tygers- 
Valley  :  here  our  horses  grazed  about,  while  we  boiled  our  meat  : 
midnight  brought  us  up  at  Jones's,  after  riding  forty,  or  perhaps, 
fifty  miles.  The  old  man,  our  host,  was  kind  enough  to  wake  us  up 
at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning.  We  journeyed  on  through  devious 
lonely  \vilds,  where  no  food  might  be  found,  except  what  grew  in 
the  woods,  or  was  carried  with  us.  We  met  with  two  women  who 
were  going  to  see  their  friends,  and  to  attend  the  quarterly  meeting 

at   Clarksburg.     Near  midnight  we  stopped  at  A 's,    who 

hissed  his  dogs  at  us  :  but  the  women  were  determined  to  get  to 
quarterly  meeting,  so  we  went  in.    Our  supper  was  lea.    Brothers 

Phoebus  and  Cook  took  to  the  woods  ;  old gave  up  his  bed 

(o  the  women.     I  lay  along  the  floor  on  a  few  deer  skins  with  the 
fleas.     That  night  our  poor  horses  got  no  corn  ;  and  next  morn- 
ing they  had  to  swim  arro«s  the  Monongahela  :    after  a  twenty 
miles'  ride  we  came  to  Clarksburg,  and  man  and  beast  were  so  out- 
done that  it  took  us  ten  hours  to  accomplish  it.     I  lodged  with  Col. 
Jackson.     Our  meeting  was  held  in  a  long  close  room  belonging  to 
the  Baptists  -.  our  use  of  the  house  it  seems  gave  offence.   There  at- 
tended about  seven  hundred  people,  to  whom  1  preached  vviili  In1'1 
dom  ;  and  I  believe  tlie  Lord's  power  reached  the  hearts  of  somr 
After  administering  the  sacrament,  I  was  well  satisfied  to  take  n. 
leave.     Wo  rode   thirty  miles  to  Father   IlaymondX   after  tl. 
o'clock,  Sunday  afternoon,  and   made   it   nearly  eleven   before  we 
fame  in  •  about  midnight  we  went  to  rest,  and  rose  at  five  o'clock 
morning.    Sfy  mind  has  beeti  severely  tried   under  the  gi 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL  [1788. 

fatigue  endured  both  by  myself  and  my  horse.  O,  how  glad  should 
I  be  of  a  plain,  clean  plank  to  lie  on,  as  preferable  to  most  of  the 
beds  ;  and  where  the  beds  are  in  a  bad  state,  the  floors  are  worse. 
The  gnats  are  almost  as  troublesome  here,  as  the  moschetoes  in  the 
low-lands  of  the  sea-board.  This  country  will  require  much  work 
to  make  it  tolerable.  The  people  are,  many  of  them,  of  the  bold- 
est cast  of  adventurers,  and  with  some  the  decencies  of  civilized 
society  are  scarcely  regarded,  two  instances  of  which  I  myself  wit- 
nessed. The  great  landholders  who  are  industrious  will  soon  show 
the  effec.ts  of  the  aristocracy  of  wealth,  by  lording  it  over  their 
poorer  neighbours,  and  by  securing  to  themselves  all  the  offices  of 
profit  or  honour  :  on  the  one  hand  savage  warfare  teaches  them  to 
be  cruel  ;  and  on  the  other,  the  preaching  of  Antinomians  poisons 
them  with  error  in  doctrine  :  good  moralists  they  are  not,  and  good 
Christians  they  cannot  be,  unless  they  are  better  taught. 

Tuesday  15.  I  had  a  lifeless,  disorderly  people  to  hear  me  at 
Morgantown,  to  whom  I  preached  on  "  I  will  hear  what  God  the 
Lord  will  speak."  It  is  matter  of  grief  to  behold  the  excesses,  par- 
ticularly in  drinking,  which  abound  here.  I  preached  at  a  new 
ehapel  near  Colonel  Martin's,  and  felt  much  life,  love,  and  power, 

Rode  to  the  widow  R 's,  and  refreshed  with  a  morsel  to  eat : 

thence  to  M.  Harden's,  where,  though  we  had  an  earth  floor,  we 
had  good  beds  and  table  entertainment. 

Friday  18.  Rode  forty  miles  to  quarterly  meeting  at  Doddridge's  ; 
where  we  had  a  melting  season. 

Sunday  20.  From  twelve  o'clock  to-day  we  rode  forty  miles — 
my  soul  in  sweet  peace. 

Tuesday  22.  Our  conference  began  at  Union-Town  :  we  felt 
great  peace  whilst  together  ;  and  our  counsels  were  marked  by  love 
and  prudence.  We  had  seven  members  of  conference  and  five 
probationers.  I  preached  on  1  Peter  v.  7. :  and  brother  Whatcoat 
gave  us  an  excellent  discourse  on  "  Oh !  man  of  God,  flee  these 
things." 

Friday  25.    We  concluded  our  conference. 

Saturday  and  Sunday,  26,  27.    Attended  quarterly  meeting. 

Monday  28.  Came  over  the  mountains  along  very  bad  roads. 
Brother  Whatcoat  and  myself  were  both  sick.  We  stopped  at 
Simkins's,  and  were  comfortably  entertained. 

VIRGIMA. — Tuesday  29.  Reached  Barratt's,  where  we  had  a 
little  rest  and  peace.  We  had  left  our  horses  at  Old  Town  on  the 
other  side  of  the  river,  but  1  thought  it  best  to  have  them  brought 
over,  and  so  it  was  ;  for  that  night  there  were  two  stolen.  On 


1788. j  utv.  MiAjfi.i:>  AS.KI-RV  s  Ju;  ;  • 

Monday  we  rested  ;  on  Tuesday  rode  down  to  Capon  ;  and  on 
Wednesday  visited  Bath.  I  took  lodgings  at  brother  Williams's,  wn- 
well  fixed,  and  found  the  waters  to  be  of  service  to  me. 

Sunday,  August  10.  Preached  at  Bath.  I  received  heavy  tidings 
from  the  college — both  our  teachers  have  left ;  one  for  incompe- 
tency,  and  the  other  to  pursue  riches  and  honours  :  had  they  cost 
us  nothing,  the  mistake  we  made  in  employing  them  might  be  the 
less  regretted.  I  have  read  one  volume  of  Church  History,  by 
Mosheim,  containing  an  account  of  the  state  of  ecclesiastical  mat- 
ters in  Germany,  and  the  different  churches. 

Sunday  17.  I  attempted  to  preach  at  Bath,  on  the  lame  and  the 
blind  :  the  discourse  was  very  lame ;  and  it  may  be,  I  left  ray 
hearers  as  I  found  them — blind. 

1  am  now  closely  engaged  in  reading,  writing,  and  prayer — mv 
soul  enjoys  much  of  God.  We  have  great  rains,  and  are  obliged 
to  keep  close  house  ;  but  we  have  a  little  of  almost  every  thing  to 
improve  the  mind — the  languages,  divinity,  grammar,  bistory,  and 
belles-lettres  :  my  great  desire  is  to  improve  in  the  best  things. 

Sunday  24.  Preached  at  Bath  on  Isaiah  Ixiii.  1.  with  little 
liberty  and  poor  attendance.  But  we  have  some  stir  among  the 
poor  people  in  the  country. 

Friday  29.  We  left  Bath,  and  on  the  Saturday  and  Sunday  fol- 
lowing attended  a  quarterly  meeting.  I  felt  enlargement  on  Peter'5 
case,  and  also  in  the  love-feast. 

Monday,  September  1.  I  enlarged  with  some  freedom  on  the 
case  of  the  man  who  brought  the  child  to  our  Lord. 

Wednesday  3.  Rode  from  I.  Rite's  to  the  Blue-Ridge  :  the 
weather  was  warm,  and  so  were  the  hearts  of  the  people. 

Thursday  4.  I  preached  at  Leesburg,  and  was  very  warm  on 
•'  Thou  wilt  arise  and  favour  Zion  ;"  and  the  people  appeared  to 
be  somewhat  stirred  up.  To-day  I  received  a  letter  from  brother 
Tunnell,  informing  of  the  spreading  of  the  work  of  God  in  West 
New- River  ;  and  several  parts  of  North  Carolina — Glory  be  to 
God,  for  his  great  and  glorious  power! 

MARYLAND. — Wednesday  10.  Our  conference  began  in  Balti- 
more. I  chose  not  to  preach  while  my  mind  was  clogged  by  busi- 
ness with  so  many  persons,  and  on  so  many  subject;:. 

Sunday  14.  I  felt  considerably  moved  at  our  own  church  in  the 
morning,  and  in  the  Dutch  Church  in  the  afternoon  :  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  came  among  the  people,  and  sinners  cried  aloud  for 
mercy :  perhaps  not  less  than  twenty  soul?  found  tho  Lord  from 
that  time  until  the  Tuesday  following. 


JOIRKAL.  [f78£. 

Monday,  Tuesday,  and  Wednesday,  were  spent  at  Cokesbury  in 
examining  and  arranging  the  temporal  concerns  of  the  college. 

PENNSYLVANIA. — Sunday  21.  I  preached  with  some  satisfaction, 
morning  and  evening,  in  Philadelphia.  On  Monday  our  conference 
began  and  held  until  Friday  26. 

Saturday  27.  We  left  the  city. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Sunday  28.  Preached  with  some  assistance  in 
Elizabethtown. 

NEW- YORK. — Monday  29.  Rode  to  New-York.  Next  day  (Tues- 
day 30.)  our  conference  began,  and  continued  until  Saturday  the 
4th  of  October. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Sunday  October  5,  and  Monday  6.  My  soul  was 
uncommonly  led  out  in  prayer  and  preaching — I  found  it  a  very 
gracious  season.  My  return  brought  me  through  Elizabethtown, 
Amboy,  Hydestown,  Crosswecks,  and  Burlington. 

DELAWARE. — Sunday  12.  I  was  much  depressed  in  spirit  whilst 
in  Philadelphia.  I  left  there  on  Wednesday,  and  preached  at 
Chester :  where  I  had  some  energy  ;  and  had  openings  at  Wil- 
mington and  Duck-Creek,  where  I  also  administered  the  word  of 
life. 

Monday  20.  Our  meeting  in  Dover  was  attended  with  some 
power.  At  Milford  we  had  liberty  and  love.  At  Johnstown  I  was 
very  unwell,  and  was  under  the  necessity  of  going  to  bed,  but  our 
friends  were  alive :  God  is  with  them  of  a  truth.  Preached  at 
Shankland's.  My  soul  enjoys  great  peace  and  love.  On  Sunday 
I  was  under  bodily  affliction,  but  I  went  to  the  court-house  and 
spoke  a  few  words  on  "  Ye  will  not  come  to  me  that  ye  might  have 
life."  We  have  a  house  now  building,  and  I  hope  something  will 
be  done  here. 

Monday  was  remarkably  warm  weather,  and  I  was  ready  to  faint 
whilst  I  rode  to  the  Sound.  We  reached  Powell's  about  three 
o'clock. 

Wednesday  22.  I  was  very  alarming — seldom,  if  ever,  have  1  felt 
more  moved.  We  came  away,  and  rode  twenty-five  miles,  having 
nothing  to  eat  from  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  till  six  at  night. 
My  body  was  weak,  but  my  soul  was  kept  in  peace.  Knowing  the 
obligations  I  am  under  to  pay  money  to  several  persons  to  whom 
the  college  is  indebted,  my  mind  is  much  exercised,  and  I  feel  very 
heavily  the  weight  of  such  responsibility.  The  Lord  opened  the 

heart  of .  and  1  thankfully  received  the  kindness  as  from  (- 

man. 


d.j  .  .    KJ.AM.I.S   AbBUU  ,  \ 

MARYLAND. — Preached  at  Bowen's,  and  I  trust  the  Lord  was  pre- 
sent ;  as  also  at  the  Lord's  supper.  We  then  hasted  to  the  widow 
P;iramore's,  about  nineteen  miles  :  the  people  were  moved  whilst 
I  exhorted  them  to  come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace. 

On  Friday  I  met  with  an  engaged  people  at  Pernal's,  and  they 
-tppeared  tender  whilst  I  enlarged  on  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for 
thee."  After  meeting  we  rode  to  B.'s,  nineteen  miles. 

VIRGINIA. — Saturday,  November  1.  Attended  ^quarterly  meeting 
at  Garrettson -chapel — O  how  changed  !  A  preacher  absent  nearly 
nine  weeks  from  his  circuit,  failing  to  give  proper  notice  of  the 
quarterly  meeting.  Other  persuasions  are  less  supine  ;  and  their 
minister  boldly  preaches  against  the  freedom  of  the  slaves.  Our 
brother  Everett  with  no  less  zeal  and  boldness,  cries  aloud  for 
liberty — emancipation. 

Sunday  2.  Brother  Whatcoat  preached,  and  I  exhorted  a  little. 
My  soul  and  body  are  deeply  depressed.  We  rode  fifteen  miles 
that  evening,  and  held  meeting  again. 

Monday  3  Myself  and  the  people  were  comforted  at  S/s :  we 
had  a  meeting  in  the  evening. 

Wednesday  5.  I  preached  at  the  school-house,  on  Peter's  denial 
of  Christ :  it  was  a  time  of  refreshing — there  were  few  present 
that  did  not  feel  the  word.  Spoke  again  in  the  evening  at  S — 's  In 
a  very  unfeeling  people. 

Friday  7.  Preached  at  the  court-house,  to  many  people,  with 
liberty.  We  have  had  heavy  riding  ;  dust,  heat,  and  fevers.  Our 
meeting  at  Downing's  almost  overcame  us  with  heat  and  fatigue. 

3IARVI.AND. — At  Annamessex  quarterly  meeting  I  was  at  liberty 
on  Rev.  iii.  20.     Again  1  preached  on  "  Fear  not  little  flock,"  &c 
most  of  our  members  in  these  parts  have  freed  their  slaves. 

Wednesday  12.  We  bad  a  precious  season  at  the  line  chapel  on 
Rev.  <:  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in  the  fire,"  &c. 
After  meeting  I  rode  to  Broad-Creek.  We  have  travelled  little 
Jess  than  two  hundred  miles  a  week. 

Thursday  13.  At  quarterly  meeting  I  preached  on  "  Thy  teach 
ers  shall  not  be  removed  into  a  corner." 

Friday  14.  My  subject  was  "  Is  my  hand  shortened  at  all  that  J 
cannot  redeem,  or  have  I  no  power  to  deliver  ?" — there  was  somf 

moving  on  the  souls  of  the  people.     Rode  twelve  miles  to  L 's, 

and  preached  at  night  on  "  Search  the  Scripture;.'' 

DELAWARE. — After  preaching  at  North  West  Fork.  I  rode  twenty 
:ivp   mile*   In   quarterly   meeting   ;it  F. — '--  •     hero  we   h;id  a  iroori 


4O  UK\.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  t>  JOURNAL.  [178L-. 

time.     I  preached  at  Johnson's,  Todd's,  and  at  the  chapei.   I  feel 
myself  weak,  but  the  Lord  is  present. 

Friday  21.1  felt  some  power  in  speaking  on  Matt.  xi.  5,  G.  at 
Mr.  K. — 'e.  We  came  on  to  Hooper's,  where  we  had  a  time  of 
refreshing. 

Saturday  22,  and  Sunday  23.  Attended  quarterly  meeting  at  Wil- 
liam Frazier's  :  there  was  some  quickening  among  the  people  each 
day. 

We  crossed  Choptank  to  Bolingbroke — death  !  death  !  The  se- 
cond day  of  our  meeting  a  great  power  went  through  the  congrega- 
tion, and  a  noble  shout  was  heard  among  the  people. 

I  was  much  led  out  at  the  Bay  side.  At  Doctor  Allen's  I  was 
greatly  comforted  after  a  wet  ride  of  thirty  miles. 

I  preached  at  Queenstown  to  a  few  people,  who  appear  to  be  far 
gone  in  forgetfulness  of  God. 

MARYLAND. — I  went  to  Kent-Island,  and  found  about  two  hundred 
and  fifty  people,  among  whom  were  some  of  the  rich  and  great : 
we  had  a  good  meeting.  I  then  returned  to  Queenstown,  and 
gave  the  citizens  another  rally;  there  were  more  to  hear  tharj 
before. 

Saturday  29.  I  felt  some  power  in  preaching  at  Boardley's.  We 
had  a  little  move  among  the  people  at  Choptank.  My  soul  is  kept 
in  peace.  In  times  past  I  have  felt  some  disagreeable  impressions 
on  my  mind  about  the  college  being  burnt ;  now  I  have  heard  of 
an  attempt  to  do  it :  but  I  trust  the  Lord  will  encamp  about  the 
house.  We  had  a  very  good  meeting  at  Dover,  although  the  wea- 
ther was  very  cold. — We  had  meeting  again  that  night  in  town — I 
hope  not  in  vain.  Next  day  I  rode  to  Dudley's  church,  Queen- 
Annes  ;  and  thence  to  Chester-Town,  and  preached  on  "  Let  us 
have  grace  whereby  we  may  serve  God  acceptably,  with  reverence 
and  godly  fear." 

Saturday,  December  6.  I  had  some  freedom  in  preaching  at  Still- 
pond  church,  on  "  Simon,  Satan  hath  desired  to  have  you  that  he 
might  sift  you  as  wheat,"  &c. 

Sunday  7.  I  preached  at  the  widow  Woodland's — was  not  in  a 
good  frame  of  body  or  mind.  At  Georgetown  I  felt  still  worse  ; 
and  to  crown  all,  I  had  a  long  dispute  with  Mr.  B —  about  ordina- 
tion and  experimental  religion. 

Monday  8.  Rode  to  Cecil  court-house,  and  had,  I  trust,  a  profi- 
table time.  We  crossed  Elk-River  to  brother  Ford's,  and  had  a 
gracious  meeting  at  his  house. 


178:).]  ALV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  41 

Tuesday  9.  We  had  a  dump  ride  to  Cokesbury,  and  found  it  was 
even  as  it  had  been  reported  to  us  : — an  attempt  had  been  made 
to  burn  the  college  by  putting  fire  into  one  of  the  closets  ;  but 
some  of  the  students  made  a  timely  discovery,  and  it  was  extin- 
guished. I  stayed  two  days  and  expended  more  than  £100,  and 
felt  my  spirit  tried.  I  put  the  young  men  to  board  in  the  college. 
—We  have  some  promising  youths  among  them  for  learning,  but 
they  want  religion. 

I  came  to  Baltimore  and  found  some  tokens  of  the  Divine  pre- 
sence, at  the  quarterly  meeting,  ou  Chron.  xv.  8.  "  Thou  canst  save 
by  many,  or  by  those  that  have  no  might." 

Monday  15.  Came  to  Cromwell's  and  preached  with  some  satis- 
faction. Thence  I  hasted  to  Annapolis,  where  the  Lord  was  pre- 
sent while  I  declared  "  The  Lord's  hand  is  not  shortened." 

Tuesday  16.  Rode  to  Weems's  chapel,  and  preached  with  fer- 
vour on  "  Oh  !  Zion  that  bringeth  good  tidings,"  &LC.  Thence  to 
Calvert  quarterly  meeting  :  the  weather  was  very  cold,  but  there 
was  some  spiritual  heat  among  the  people. 

VIRGINIA. — Friday  19.  Rode  thirty  miles  to  Hoe's  ferry;  and 
thence  to  Pope's,  about  thirty  miles  more  :  the  weather  is  still 
excessively  cold. 

Sunday  21.  I  preached  to  a  few  tender  souls  at  P — 's,  on  Isaiah 
xxix.  •'  Yet  a  very  little  while  and  Lebanon  shall  be  a  fruitful  field." 

Tuesday  23.  Had  a  few  lively  people  at  Woollard's.  I  read, 
write,  pray,  and  ride  ;  and  hope  to  see  much  of  the  power  of  God 
on  this  journey. 

Christmas  day.  I  preached  in  the  open  house  at  Fairfield's,  on 
Isaiah  ix.  6.  1  felt  warm  in  speaking — but  there  was  an  offensive 
smell  of  rum  among  the  people. 

Saturday  26.  At  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Lancaster,  there  was 
A  divine  stir  >n  the  congregation.  Envy  and  disputation  have  been 
injurious  to  the  work  of  God  in  these  parts— O  may  the  Lord  yet 
help  us  and  revive  his  work!  I  found  our  opposing  the  doctrine  of 
final  perseverance  had  given  offence  :  a  house  of  our  own  will 
alone  fix  us  properly. 

January  1,  1789.  After  waiting  about  two  hours,  the  wind  sud- 
denly calmed,  and  I  crossed  R,«ppahannock  and  came  to  Cheese- 
cake. 

We  had  a  comfortable  meeting  at  R.  M.'s,  in  Kingston,  thence  to 
B 's;  and  afterward  to  D 's,  where,  although  I  had  an  un- 
feeling audience,  I  had  satisfaction  in  my  own  soul. 
Vor,.  II.                                         6 


I.  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURv's  JOURNAL.  [17DLJ. 

We  came  to  James-City  ;  where  God  has  wrought  a  glorious 
work  ;  as  also  in  New-Kent  county  in  the  same  circuit :  a  number 
of  young  people  have  been  made  the  subjects  of  this  grace. 

Thursday  8.  I  had  a  most  agreeable  passage,  for  the  season, 
across  James-River. — Arrived  at  Mooning's  about  three  o'clock, 
and  found  a  lively  people.  Christians  here  appear  to  stand  faith- 
ful, but  sinners  are  not  brought  in. 

Friday  9.  Was  a  good  day  at  Ellis's  :  my  soul  felt  peace,  and 
I  was  happy  to  find  our  old  friends  standing  fast. 

Saturday  10.  We  had  a  happy  meeting  at  Lane's  chapel.  I 
went  to  the  widow  Lane's  :  I  felt  uneasy  ;  but  I  found  it  needful 
for  me  to  be  there. 

Sunday  11.  Preached  on  "  Kiss  the  Son,"  &c.  and  afterward  rode 
fifteen  miles  to  Moss's.  They  are  a  dear  people  at  Lane's  chapel : 
slavery  is  greatly  on  the  decline  among  them. 

Tuesday  13.  An  appointment  had  been  made  at  Mabry's  chapel, 
but  the  sleet  and  rain  hindered  the  people  from  attending ;  so  I 
preached  at  brother  Theweett's  to  about  six  preachers,  and  as 
many  members. 

Wednesday  14.  I  had  about  three  hundred  hearers  at  the  Lo\V- 
Ground  chapel  :  our  brethren  shouted  whilst  I  enlarged  on  Isaiah 
Ixiii.  1.  I  have  felt  very  solemn  for  two  or  three  days  past,  as 
though  God  would  speak  through  me  to  the  souls  of  the  people. 

Thursday  15.  Rode  to  Moore's — had  a  dead,  dull  people — ex- 
cept those  few  who  came  from  a  distance.  Crossed  Roanoak,  and. 
arriving  at  the  place  of  preaching  a  little  after  night,  I  spoke  on 
"  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,"  &.c. 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Saturday  &  Sunday  17,  18.  Preached  at 
Whitaker's  chapel,  where  we  had  a  profitable  time  :  I  found  God  had 
been  working,  and  that  many  souls  had  been  awakened. 

We  came  to  J 's  :  in  this  neighbourhood  the  Christians  are 

sino-ularly  devoted,  but  sinners  yet  stand  it  out.  The  Lord  has  begun 
to  work  on  Sandy-Creek,  in  Franklin  county,  where  twenty  souls 
have  been  lately  brought  to  God.— Came  to  Bemnet  Hills,  hungry 
and  unwell.  My  soul  enjoys  much  of  God. 

We  had  a  shaking  time  at  H 's  :   a  sweet  love-feast  and  sacra- 
ment.    Thence  1  went  to  Pope's  chapel :  I  came  to  G — 's. 

Saturday  24.  Rode  to  Kimborough's,  twenty  miles,  where  there 
were  many  people,  and  but  little  engagedness  among  them.  After 
attending  a  few  appointments  on  Tuesday  27,  I  crossed  Haw- 
River,  and  rode  twenty  miles  to  brother  Kennon's,  in  Chatham 


J789.J  J.KV.   KUANTIS   ASBURV'*   .'•>!  C.NAf..  1    ' 


county  :   I  had  not   been  in  this  county  for  eight  years  ;  we  had  a 
meeting  at  night,  but  I  was  strangely  shut  up. 

Thursday  2i».  Rode  to  W.'s,  wet  and  water-bound  :  we  found 
the  poor  Antinomian  drunk;  however,  as  the  rain  was  great,  we 
made  out  to  stay. 

Friday  .'30.  Rode  through  the  rain  to  Bowdon's.  Deep  River 
\vas  very  high  ;  and  we  had  an  awful  time  in  crossing  it. 

Saturday  31.  Came  to  Fair-Creek,  which  was  nearly  swimming 
high.  Then  to  Little-River,  but  we  could  not  cross:  we  stop- 
ped at  M'D.'s,  and  ate  our  own  morsel;  afterward  we  rode  down 
the  river,  and  was  thankful  to  be  housed. 

Monday,  February  2.  I  attended  an  appointment  made  for  ano- 
ther preacher  at  Mask's,  where  there  were  a  few  serious  souls. 

Tuesday  3.  I  stopped  on  my  way  at  Dr.  King's,  and  took  dinner, 
and  had  my  horse  shod.  By  some  means  my  appointments  have 
not  been  published. 

SOUTH  CAROLINA.  —  Came  to  the  Green-Ponds  ;  where  there  wa~ 
an  appointment  for  me  ;  I  felt  a  little  comforted.  I  have  rode  about 
one  htmdred  and  forty  miles  in  the  last  seven  days,  through  a  very 
disagreeable  part  of  the  country  to  travel  in  when  the  waters  are 
high  :  I  have  had  various  exercises,  and  have  suffered  hunger,  fa- 
tigue, and  fever,  and  have  not  had  a  comfortable  bed  for  a  week  [ 

Wednesday  4.   I  wasjmich  moved  at  the  Beauty-Spot,  on  '  •  \  • 
did  run  well,"  &c.     I  found  it  had  been  the  case  here  ;  but  ah  ! 
the  use  of  strong  liqour. 

We  rode  to  R.'s,  a  long  stretch  across  a  deep  swamp  :  we  came 
in  late,  and  I  preached  with  little  liberty.  1  lodged  at  -  -  a  poor, 
kind  man. 

Sunday  8.  Notwithstanding  the  rain,  we  had  many  to  hear  at 
Flowers's.  It  was  in  due  season  that  I  was  led  out  here  on  Peter's 
denial  of  his  Master  :  for  there  has  been  a  great  falling  away,  par- 
ticularly by  drunkenness  :  this  was  not  told  me  till  after  preaching. 

Monday  9.  Rode  to  Rewell's  meeting-house:  my  soul  was  in 
peace,  and  uncommonly  led  out  in  preaching.  Thence  to  Port's. 
Long-Ferry,  three  miles  across  Pee  Dee  :  the  inundation  of  the 
river,  occasioned  by  the  rains,  has  made  a  mere  sea.  My  mind 
has  been  variously  tried  and  strongly  exercised  by  dejection.  Lord, 
give  me  faith  and  patience  ! 

Tuesday  10.  Came,  after  a  ride  of  forty  miles,  to  Georgetou.i 
and  lectured  on  Isai.  xl.  1  —  9. 

Friday  13.  Rode  forty-five  miles  to  Wappata'.v  ;  ami  next  d;n 
arrived  in  Charleston  in  sweet  peace  of  soul. 


44  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL.  [I78C!. 

Sunday  15.  Preached  in  the  morning  with  some  light.  In  the 
afternoon  on  Matt.  xi.  28,  29,  30.  I  preached  again  on  Tuesday 
and  on  Wednesday.  My  heart  was  drawn  out  greatly  for  these 
people. 

Firday  20.  I  spoke  very  pointedly  on  Rev.  iii.  20—22.  but 
the  people  are  of  small  spiritual  understanding.  Lord,  stir  them 
up !  I  was  closely  employed  in  making  my  plan,  and  arranging 
the  papers  for  conference.  I  m;ide  out  a  register  of  all  the 
preachers  on  the  continent  who  bear  the  name  of  Methodists. 

Saturday  21.  I  was  very  ill  with  a  fever  and  cholic  ;  and  it 
being  rainy,  I  kept  within  doors. 

Sunday  22.  Very  rainy,  but  I  had  about  a  hundred  blacks,  and 
nearly  fifty  whites  to  hear  me.  I  preached  also  in  the  afternoon, 
and  at  night. 

Tuesday  24.  I  set  out  for  Edisto  circuit,  journeying  up  the  south 
side  of  Ashley-River.  Here  live  the  rich  and  great  who  have 
houses  in  the  city  and  country,  and  go  backward  and  forward  in 
their  splendid  chariots  :  the  land,  however,  with  the  exception  of 
the  rice-fields,  is  barren,  the  weather  is  cold;  but  my  soul  has 
peace,  full  and  flowing  peace.  After  riding  thirty-six  miles,  I  was 
kindly  entertained  by  Mr.  Giveham — but  there  was  still  something 


wanting. 


Wednesday  25.  They  were  out  of  bread  at  P 's,  and  we 

found  our  own  stores  of  use.  We  had  to  send  one  of  our  weary 
horses  eight  miles  to  fetch  the  flour  from  the  mill. 

Thursday  26.  Rode  to  Bruten's,  and  enjoyed  uncommon  hap- 
piness in  God.  Some  time  in  the  night  Dr.  Coke  came  in  :  he  had 
landed  in  Charleston  about  three  hours  after  I  left  the  city  :  next 
day  he  and  myself  both  spoke  at  Ridgell's. 

Sunday,  March  1.  We  spent  the  day  at  Chester's  :  we  bad  very 
few  hearers,  occasioned,  in  part,  by  a  black  man's  preaching  not 
far  distant. 

Monday  2.  I  was  violently  exercised.  The  Doctor  and  myself 
both  preached  at  Puckett's.  Thence  we  set  out  with  a  design  to 
reach  Treadway's,  but  were  greatly  deceived,  and  went  up  the 
road  that  leads  to  Ninety-Six  ;  at  last  we  thought  we  had  gone  far 
enough,  and  stopped  at  a  house  twenty-one  miles  from  the  place 
whence  we  started,  and  still  further  from  the  place  we  aimed  at. 

GEORGIA. — Came  to  Doctor  Fuller's,  at  Beach-Island,  and  next 
day  arrived  in  Augusta,  Georgia.  Riding  late  two  nights  past,  has 
much  disordered  me  ;  having  taken  a  cold,  attended  with  a  fever 
and  pain  in  the  head. 


1789.]  KF.V.     FRANCIS   ASBVRY's  JOURNAL. 

Thursday  5.     I  obtained  a  little  rest  at  brother  Haines's. 

Friday  6.  Although  it  rained,  we  had  a  few  people  at  Browns- 
borough  :  next  day  there  was  some  life  at  Scott's  :  here  they  hare 
built  us  a  large  chapc-1. 

Sunday  8.  Our  conference  began  at  Grant's.  Here  we  have  a 
house  fur  public,  worship  ;  and  one  also  at  Merrfweather's.  On 
Thursday  we  appointed  a  t  ommittf-e  to  procure  500  acres  of  land 
for  the  establishment  of  a  school  in  the  state  of  Georgia.  Confer- 
ence being  en. led,  we  directed  our  hasty  steps  back  to  Charleston, 
calling  at  the  several  places  we  attended  on  our  journey  hither. 

SOUTH  CAROLINA.—  Sunday  15.  We  reached  the  city,  having 
rode  two  hundred  miles  in  about  five  days  and  two  hours.  Here 
I  received  skitter  pill  from  one  of  my  greatest  friends — praise  the 
Lord  for  my  trials  al-o — may  they  all  be  sanctified  ! 

Tuesday,  Wednesday,  and  Thursday,  17,  18,  19.  were  spent  in 
conference  :  it  was  a  time  of  peace  and  love.  My  mind  was  much 
hurried  with  book,  and  other  temporal  concerns.  We  had  an 
unkind  attack  published  against  us  relative  to  our  slave  rules  ;  it 
was  answered  to  purpose.  1  had  not  much  doubt  who  the  author 
of  this  unworthy  work  was. 

Saturday  21,  was  spent  in  preparing  to  move  on  Monday  next. 

Sunday  22  Doctor  Coke  preached  an  ordination  sermon  in  the 
forenoon  ;  and  in  Ihe  afternoon  1  felt  lively  in  soul  whilst  I  enlarged 
OD  Ezek.  xxxiii  5. 

Monday  23.   We  left  the  city,  and  rode  upwards  of  forty  mile?. 

Tuesday  24.    Crossed  S;»ntee,  and  came  to  brother  Broivman's. 

Wednesday  25.  Preached  at  Gibson's — then  rode  to  Ramsay's, 
near  Statesburg,  sixteen  miles. 

Thursday  2G.  I  was  hurried  away  to  preach  a  funeral  sermon. 
I  have  rode  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles,  and  preached  three 
times  since  1  left  Charleston,  last  Monday  morning.  I  am  at  times 
templed  to  lightness  ;  yet,  blessed  be  God,  my  soul  has  sweet  com- 
munion with  him. 

Saturday  28.  At  Bradford's  chapel  I  preached  on  Hebr.  xi. 
1C,  17.  At  Rembert's,  on  Isaiah  xl.  1.  My  soul  was  ble?t  among 
the  people. 

Sunday  29.  I  was  led  out  in  preaching  and  prayer  ;  the  people 
were  melted  ;  and  the  work  of  God  progresses.  1  trust  the  Lord 
will  get  himself  great  glory  here.  " 

Monday  30.    We  rode  about  fifty  mil.1*  to  Colonel  Marshall'-- 
the  weather  was  very  warm,  and  we  were  hungry  nnd  weary 


4t>  JcKV.  FRANCIS  ASBUIlV's  JOl'RNAL.  [1789. 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Wednesday,  April  1.  The  people  came 
together  at  Jackson's  at  twelve  o'clock  ;  I  did  not  reach  there 
until  three — I  enlarged  a  little  on  Zech.  xiii.  12.  and  was  some- 
what severe.  I  rode  to  Savannah-Creek,  and  met  with  an  Antino- 
mian  people.  Reached  Threadgill's  ;  having  been  out  twelve 
hours,  and  rode  nearly  forty  miles,  without  food  for  man  or  beast. 

Friday  3.  Preached  by  the  way,  and  carne  to  Randall's,  twenty 
miles.  We  have  rode  three  hundred  miles  in  about  nine  days,  and 
our  horses'  backs  are  bruised  with  their  loads.  I  want  more  faith, 
patience,  and  resignation  to  the  will  of  God  in  all  things.  I  wish 
to  send  an  extra  preacher  to  the  Waxsaws,  to  preach  to  the  Cata- 
baw  Indians  :  they  have  settled  amongst  the  whites  on  a  tract  of 
country  twelve  miles  square. 

Sunday  5.  We  had  a  move  whilst  I  was  speaking  on  Isai.  xxxiii. 
14,  15.  some  souls  were  brought  to  experience  peace  with  God. 
Here  Doctor  Coke  came  up  with  us  :  we  expect  to  continue  toge- 
ther for  some  time.  We  had  a  long  ride  to  Jones's  :  I  preached 
there,  and  continued  on  to  M'Knight's,  on  the  Yadkin. 

Friday  11.  We  opened  our  conference,  and  were  blessed  with 
peace  and  union  ;  our  brethren  from  the  westward  met  us,  and 
we  had  weighty  matters  for  consideration  before  us. 

VIRGINIA. — We  left  M'Knight's,  having  about  two  hundred  miles 
to  ride  in  four  days.  We  had  a  tedious  ride  to  Almond's,  and  a 
blessed  season  of  grace. — Set  out  from  Almond's,  and  reached 
Good's. 

Saturday  19.  We  rode  thirty-six  miles  to  Petersburg.  On  Sun- 
day the  Doctor  preached.  I  had  nothing  to  say  in  public.  We  met 
the  preachers  on  Saturday  and  Sunday  evenings,  and  brought  our 
work  forward.  I  had  disagreeable  feelings  while  here  ;  there  is  a 
spiritual  death  among  the  people. — 1  spoke  a  little  on  Monday  and 
on  Wednesday. 

Thursday  23.  We  came  to  Manchester.  My  exertions,  want  of 
rest,  and  distress  of  mind,  brought  on  a  violent  headach  ;  instead  of 
preaching,  1  found  myself  under  the  necessity  of  going  to  bed. 
Doctor  Coke  had  gone  over  the  river  to  Richmond  and  preached 
there. 

Friday  24.  We  rode  about  fifty  miles  ;  and  next  day  reached  Fre- 
ilericksburg,  but  found  no  door  open.  We  met  with  one  soul  in 
distress. 

Sunday  26.  Having  no  appointment  to  preach,  we  pushed  on  and 
rode  forty-five  miles,  and  lodged  in  Prince- William  county. 


AEV.    FKAM  IS  AbBUHy  S  JOURNAL.  4? 

Monday  27.  Arrived  at  Loo.sburg,  am]  opened  the  conference. 
We  found  a  litlle  rest  comfortable  to  m;tti,  and  advantageous  to  beatt. 

MARYLAND. — Thur-d.'v  ->0.  We  crossed  Patomac  into  Maryland. 
My  soul  cleaves  to  God  ;  but  I  mi  again  afflicted  in  my  head.  Reach- 
ing brother  Nicholson's,  in  Montgomery,  we  were  kiudly  entertained. 

Friday,  May  1.  1  felt  life  in  speaking. 

Saturday  2.  We  attended  quarterly  meeting.  Not  being  permit- 
ted to  use  the  chapel,  we  went  into  a  tobacco-house  :  many  attend- 
ed— and  the  young  converts  shouted  aloud. 

Sunday  3.  Was  a  great  day  to  saints  and  sinners  :  God  has  wrought 
wonderfully  in  brother  Pigman's  neighbourhood  ;  fifty  or  sixty  souls 
have  been  suddenly  and  powerfully  converted  to  God. 

Came  to  Baltimore,  and  had  rery  lively  meetings  ;  multitudes 
came  to  hear,  and  great  cries  were  heard  among  the  people,  who 
continued  together  until  three  o'clock  in  the  morning  ;  many  souls 
professed  to  be  convicted,  converted,  sanctified. 

On  reaching  Cokesbury,  we  found  that  here  also  God  was  work- 
ing among  the  students.  One.  ho\vever,  we  expelled.  We  revised 
our  laws,  and  settled  our  temporal  concerns. 

Tuesday  12.  We  \vere  detained  at  Susquehannah-Ferry,  so  that 
we  were  compelled  to  ride  in  the  night  to  reach  Chester-Town. 

We  had  a  blessed  work  of  God  on  our  way,  loud  shouting  was 
heard  in  almost  every  meeting — at  sacrament  especially,  the  Lord's 
power  and  presence  were  great  indeed. — At  Duck-Creek  we  had  a 
good  season. 

Saturday  1C.   Doctor  Coke  preached  in  Wilmington. 

Sunday  17.  The  Doctor  preached  at  Chester  ;  and  in  Philadel- 
phia in  the  evening. 

Wednesday  20.  In  the  evening  the  Lord's  power  came  down 
among  the  people  in  the  city  ;  and  I  hope  to  hear  He  is  doing  great 
things. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Thursday  21.  Rode  to  Burlington  in  Jersey. 
In  crossing  the  Delaware  we  encountered  an  uncommon  storm, 
but  were  providentially  brought  safely  over.  We  were  comfortable 
in  our  meeting  ;  but  we  had  a  painful  interview  and  explanation 
with  L.  H.  H.  O,  iny  soul,  keep  near  to  God ! 

Friday  22.  We  rode  to  Trenton  ;  and  on  Saturday  23.  opened 
our  conference  in  great  peace.  We  laboured  for  a  manifestation 
of  the  Lord's  power,  and  it  was  not  altogether  in  vain. 

Sunday  24.  We  had  abundance  of  preaching. 

Monday  25.    We  rode  through  a  heavy  rain  to  Elizabethtoivn. 


48  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1709. 

• 

and  next  day  reached  New- York.     I  was   under  great  travail  of 
soul  for  a  revival  of  religion. 

NEW  YORK. — Thursday  28.  Our  conference  began  :  all  things 
were  conducted  in  peace  and  order.  Our  work  opens  in  New -York 
state  ;  New  England  stretcheth  out  the  hand  to  our  ministry,  and  I 
trust  thousands  will  shortly  feel  its  influence. — My  soul  shall  praise 
the  Lord.  In  the  midst  of  haste  I  find  peace  within. 

Sunday  31.  We  had  a  gracious  season  to  preachers  and  people, 
while  I  opened  and  applied  Isaiah  xxv.  6,  7,  8.  "  And  in  this  moun- 
tain shall  the  Lord  of  Hosts  make  unto  all  people  a  feast  of  fat 
things  ;  a  feast  of  wines  on  the  lees  ;  of  fat  things  full  of  marrow  ; 
of  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined." 

Friday,  June  5.  Doctor  Coke  left  us  and  went  on  board  the 
Union  for  Liverpool.  My  soul  retires  into  solitude,  and  to  God. 
This  evening  I  was  enabled  to  speak  alarmingly,  and  felt  my  heart 
much  engaged  for  about  thirty  minutes  on  Isaiah  xxix.  17,  18,  19, 
the  power  of  God,  and  a  baptising  flame  canae  among  the  people. 

I  have  lately  read  Whiston's  Translation  of  the  Apostolical 
Institutions  (so  called) — Also  Cave's  Lives  of  the  Apostles  and 
Fathers. 

Sunday  7.  Was  a  good  day.  I  felt  inwardly  quickened  towards 
the  close  of  my  morning's  discourse,  and  the  people  were  moved ; 
in  the  afternoon  many  were  divinely  drawn,  and  my  own  soul  was 
humbled  and  filled  with  the  love  of  God. — Several  souls  have  been 
stirred  up  this  conference  :  1  trust  the  Lord  will  claim  the  peo- 
ple of  York  for  his  own. 

Tuesday  9.  We  left  the  city  of  New-York,  and  came  to  Kings- 
bridge  ;  after  refreshing:  ourselves  and  our  horses,  we  pushed  on  to 
East  Chester. — The  appointment  for  us  was  to  have  been  made  at 
D — 's  :  there  came  together  about  two  hundred  people,  among 
whom  there  was  a  considerable  move. 

Wednesday  10.  My  horse  was  limed,  (by  fetters,  I  suppose)  so 
that  I  had  to  walk  part  of  the  way  to  New-Rochelle  :  proper 
notice  of  my  coming  not  having  been  given,  I  had  but  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  hearers. — We  have  a  good  house  here  ;  a  large  so- 
ciety ;  and  several  of  the  old  members  whom  I  formed  into  a 
society  some  years  past,  are  still  alive  to  God. 

Thursday  11.  My  horse  continues  lame  ; — the  journey  is  long, 
and  the  day  unfavourable — yet  I  must  go. 

I  came  on  to  Crum-Pond,  and  expected  to  have  preached  at 
Oakley's  church,  but  my  appointment  was  made  at  P— 's,  where 


1789.J  HEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURv'fl  JOURNAL  49 

I  had  but  few.     Returned  to  F-    —  's  ;   we  had  a  comfortable  time 
at  Oakley'?  church  at  seven  o'clock. 

We  rode  four  miles,  and  stopped  at  K — 's  for  some  refreshment  : 
then  hasted  on  to  Peekskill- Hollow,  where  I  found  a  poor,  simple- 
hearted  people,  to  whom  1  enforced  "  Repent,  and  be  converted, 
that  your  sins  may  be  blotted  out ;"  there  was  a  power  attended 
the  word.  We  rode  aboiu  twenty  miles  to  brother  Jackson's, 
where  brother  Cook  lay  sick  :  we  had  heard  that  he  was  dead.  I 
laboured  under  violent  temptation — vast  consolation  followed.  x 
Glory !  Glory  to  God  !  He  bears  me  up,  body  and  soul.  In  our 
way  we  stepped  into  a  house,  exhorted  and  prayed  with  the  mother 
and  daughter,  who  appeared  thankful  for  our  services. 

Sunday  14.  Preached  at  Jackson's,  in  Dutchess  county,  to  a  con- 
siderable number  of  quiet  hearers;  I  hope  not  in  vain.  Brother 
Cook  is  low  in  body  ;  but  his  soul  is  solidly  happy  in  God,  who 
will  be  glorified  in  his  life  or  death.  The  people  here  are  a  still 
kind  of  folks  ;  but  God  can  work  in  a  storm  or  a  calm. 

Monday  15.  We  rode  about  twenty  miles  to  Dover  :  the  settlers 
in  this  neighbourhood  are  mostly  Low  Dutch.  It  is  a  day  of  small 
things  with  us  ;  yet  I  trust  there  are  a  few  feeling  souls.  We  had 
very  alarming  meetings  at  noon  and  at  night.  Thence  to  Oblongs, 
where  I  found  a  dull  ppople  :  I  exerted  myself,  sick  as  I  was  ;  and 
had  I  been  well,  I  should  have  made  no  little  noise.  After  meet- 
ing we  rode  to ,  where  an  Antinomian  came,  drunk  as  he  was^ 

to  tell  his  experience:  he  gabbled  strangely   until   I   stopped  his 

mouth  ;  he  then  left  us.    Rode  to  L s,  and  preached  on  "  Seek 

ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,"  &c.  the  people  appeared  like  rocks  ; 
O  that  the  hammer  and  fire  of  God's  word  and  love  might  come 
down  among  them  ! 

Friday  19.  I  preached  in  a  barn  on  the  North-River  :  my  hear- 
ers were  chiefly  Low  Dutch.  Our  congregations  are  small— the 
craft  is  in  danger ;  we  are  therefore  not  to  wonder  if  we  meet  with 
opposition.  To  begin  at  the  right  end  of  the  work,  is  to  go  first  to 
the  poor;  these  -will,  the  rich,  may  possibly,  hear  the  truth  :  there 
are  among  us  who  have  blundered  here.  I  feel  as  if  I  wanted  to 
get  across  the  river  ;  I  am  pressed  in  spirit,  and  pity  our  preachers 
who  labour  here  ;  it  seems  as  if  I  should  die  amongst  this  people 
with  exertions  and  grief. 

Sunday  21.  Preached  at  Latin-Town  to  a  poor,  dull  people  • 
some,  however,  appeared  to  be  moved.  At  Allen's  I  was  more 
enlarged,  and  many  wept,  and  felt  the  word.  We  have  had  a  try- 
ing, warm  day  to  ride  in,  and  preach  twice. 

VOL.  U- 


50  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [178S1. 

Monday  22.  Rain  and  business  prevented  most  of  the  people 
from  attending  at  Newburg,  except  a  few  women.  I  felt  moved 
while  I  spoke  on  Isaiah  Ixiii.  :  I  hope  the  Lord  will  water  the  word 
sown. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Thursday  25.  1  was  sick.  Brother  Whatcoat 
gave  them  a  sermon  at  Warwick,  on  the  "  wages  of  sin  ;"  and  I 
gave  them  a  finishing  exhortation :  I  have  no  desire  to  see  them 
again  until  there  is  some  change. 

Friday  26.  The  power  of  God  came  down  among  the  people  at 
B.'s,  and  there  was  a  great  melting.  After  meeting  we  rode 
through  the  heat  fifteen  miles  to  Pepper-Cotton. 

Saturday  27.  Rode  to  the  stone  church  ;  and  found  stony  hearts. 
The  Methodists  ought  to  preach  only  in  their  own  houses — I  have 
done  with  the  houses  of  other  people  :  brother  Whatcoat  bore  the 
cross,  and  preached  for  me  here.  When  I  see  the  stupidity  of  the 
people,  and  the  contentiousness  of  their  spirit,  I  pity  and  grieve 
over  them.  I  have  hard  labour  in  travelling  amongst  the  rocks  and 
kills. 

Sunday  28.  My  body  is  weak  ;  my  spirits  are  low  ;  and  I  am  bur- 
dened under  the  spiritual  death  of  the  people  :  yet,  O  my  soul, 
praise  the  Lord  !  I  spoke  a  few  words  with  freedom  at  Sweezey's, 
to  insensible  people :  we  then  drove  through  the  heat  to  Axford's, 
where  I  found  life  and  liberty  amongst  my  hearers. 

Monday  29.  We  had  a  heavy  ride  to  C.'s,  where  brother  W. 
preached,  while  some  of  the  audience  slept.  Thence  we  came  to 
M'Cullock's.  I  had  no  small  trial  with  A.  C.  who  was  once  a 
preacher  amongst  us  and  disowned.  He  had,  in  some  instances, 
fallen  short  of  his  quarterage  during  his  ministry,  and  now  insisted 
on  my  paying  him  his  deficiencies  :  1  did  not  conceive  that  injus- 
tice or  conscience  this  was  required  of  me  ;  nevertheless,  to  get 
rid  of  him,  I  gave  him  £14. 

PENNSYLVANIA. — Wednesday,  July  1.  I  had  a  good  time  at 
Newman's,  near  Hunt's  ferry.  We  crossed  the  ferry  on  Thurs- 
day, about  six  o'clock,  got  some  refreshment  at  Inkletown,  whence 
we  proceeded  to  Climer's,  where  we  had  a  good  meeting. 

Friday  3.  Came  to  Philadelphia ;  here  I  found  enough  to  do. 
My  soul  longs  for  more  religion  in  this  city  ;  1  am  distressed  for 
these  people  :  twenty  years  have  we  been  labouring  in  Pennsylva- 
nia, and  there  are  not  one  thousand  in  society  :  how  many  of 
these  are  truly  converted  God  knows. 

Sunday  5.  We  had  a  dead  time.  O  that  the  Almighty  wnulo 
bless  and  stir  up  this  people '. 


i  789.]  .'.   FRANCIS   ASUVfn 

Rode  to  Handon,  where  there  wore  a  few  feeling  soul.-*. 

Tuesday  7.  It  being  harvest-home,  and  short  notice,  we  had  few 
hearers.  I  love  God  supremely,  and  feel  myself  greatly  weaned 
from  earth  :  I  have  a  glorious  victory  ;  sweetly  resting  and  suffer- 
ing  in  Christ.  Yesterday  1  felt  so  unwell  that  I  could  scarcely 
sit  on  my  horse.  My  soul  was  so  filled  with  God,  that  it  appear- 
ed as  if  all  sense  of  pain  was  suspended  by  the  power  of  faith.  I 
was  so  led  out  in  speaking  at  the  V alley  church,  that  all  my  suffer- 
ings were  forgotten.  I  spoke  very  loud  a  part  of  the  time  ;  we 
had  a  gracious  season. 

Wednesday  8.  After  riding  thirty  miles,  I  preached  at  Rod- 
fong's  at  night  \vith  satisfaction,  and  souls  were  brought  to  God. 

Friday  10.  I  called  on  Mr.  II—  — ,  a  Dutch  Presbyterian  minis- 
ter ;  he  and  his  wife  were  both  very  kind  :  I  believe  they  are  chil- 
dren of  God.  I  had  an  interview  with  Mr.  M ,  a  Lutheran 

minister,  and  teacher  of  languages  :  he  is  a  childlike,  simpli- 
hearted  man,  and  has  a  considerable  knowledge  of  the  arts  and 
sciences.  We  came  to  York;  but  I  felt  no  desire  to  preach.  1 
proceeded  on  to  Carlisle :  in  the  morning  I  was  permitted  to 
preach  in  the  church  ;  but  in  the  evening,  this  privilege  was  denied 
me  :  it  was  said,  the  reason  was,  becausp.  I  did  not  read  prayers, 
which  I  had  forborne  to  do  because  of  my  eyes  ;  I  apprehend  the 
true  cause  might  be  found  in  the  pointed  manner  in  which  I  spoke 
on  "  Blessed  is  he  whosoever  shall  not  be  offended  in  me."  I  went 
to  the  court-house  and  called  them  to  repentance,  from  "  Look  unto 
me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth ;"  to  the  great  offence 
of  all  who  set  themselves  up  for  judges,  and  who  declared  it  wa- 
no  preaching. 

Wednesday  15.  Came  to  Juuiata-River ;  we  were  well  nigh 
being  lost  in  the  woods,  but  kind  Providence  brought  us  safe  in 
company  with  brother  W to  I.  C 's,  and  we  lodged  there. 

Thursday  16.  Came  to  G 's,  nine  miles  from  Bedford,  and 

being  informed  that  the  people  thereabouts  were  willing  to  hear, 
we  yielded  to  the  persuasion  of  some  who  desired  us  to  stay  and 
preach. 

Friday  17.  We  rode  on  to  Wells's,  a  place  visited  by  our  preach- 
ers :  here  we  had  a  good  night's  rest. 

Saturday  18.  We  passed  Greensburg,  stopping  at  Hanover 
Davia's,  a  man  who  has  had  trouble  and  conviction  :  his  three  sons 
were  killed  by  the  Indians  ;  his  wife  and  two  children  taken 
prisoners,  and  detained  from  him  eighteen  months. 

IP,  Came  to  Rowlett's  and  dined  ;  thence  we  set  out  and 


KEV.   1RANCIS  ASBb'RY'S  JOURNAL 

reached  Pittsburg,  twenty-five  miles  ;  I  preached  in  the  evening 
to  a  serious  audience.  This  is  a  day  of  very  sm  ill  things  :  what 
can  we  hope  ?  yet,  what  can  we  fear  ?  I  felt  great  love  to  the  peo- 
ple ;  and  hope  God  will  arise  to  help  and  bless  them. 

Monday  20.  I  preached  on  Isai.  Iv.  6,  7.  had  some  zeal:  and 
the  people  were  very  attentive  ;  hut  alas !  they  are  for  from  God, 
and  too  near  the  savages  in  situation  and  manners.  We  were  not 

agreeably  stationed  at ,   who  was  continually   drunk,  and  our 

only  alternative  was  a  tavern. 

Tuesday  21.  1  spoke  on  "  The  Son  of  Man  is  come  to  seek  and 
to  save  that  which  was  lost :"  we  were  crowded,  and  I  felt  more 
courage.  The  night  before,  the  rude  soldiers  were  talking  and 
dancing  about  the  door ;  but  now  they  were  quiet  and  mute  ;  this, 
I  judged,  might  be  owing  to  the  interference  of  the  officers,  or 
magistracy. 

Wednesday  22.  We  left  Pittsburg,  and  came  by  the  Alleghany- 
River  to  Wilson's,  who  was  formerly  an  elder  in  the  Presbyterian 
Church.  Brothers  Green,  Willis,  and  Conway,  were  my  compa- 
nions on  the  road. 

Thursday  23.    We  had  a  number  of  poor,  attentive   people  at 

M'G 's,  the  weather  was  excessively  warm,  and  we  were  in  a 

close  log-house,  without  so  much  as  a  window  to  give  us  air. 

Saturday  25.  We  rode  through  a  heavy  rain  to  Yohogany,  to 
brother  Moore's  quarterly  meeting.  We  had  a  shout  amongst  the 
people,  and  I  felt  much  liberty  of  soul  in  speaking.  In  the  love- 
feast  the  Lord  manifested  his  power  ;  one  woman,  in  particular, 
was  so  wrought  upon  that  she  fell  to  the  ground. 

We  came  to  Union-Town,  where  there  appeared  to  be  some 
melting  love  among  the  people.  Now  I  believe  God  is  about  to 
work  in  this  place  :  I  expect  our  circuits  are  better  supplied  than 
formerly  ;  many  of  the  people  are  alive  to  God  ;  and  there  are 
openings  in  many  places.  I  wrote  a  letter  to  Corn-planter,  chief 
of  the  Seneca  nation  of  Indians.  I  hope  God  will  shortly  visit 
these  outcasts  of  men,  and  send  messengers  to  publish  the  glad 
tidings  of  salvation  amongst  them.  I  have  constant  consolation, 
and  do  not  feel  like  my  former  self. 

MARYLAND. — Friday  31.    I  crossed  the  mountain,  and  lodged,  I 

trust  for  the  last  time,  at  S 's.      Preached   at  Barratt's,  to  a 

dry,  unfaithful  people.  The  number  of  candidates  for  the  minis- 
try are  many  ;  from  which  circumstance  I  am  led  to  think  the 
Lord  is  about  greatly  to  enlarge  the  borders  of  Zion. 

Monday,  August  3.    Preached  at  Cumberland.     It  is  partly  fill- 


KI.V.   I'RANi   IS   .\M.iav".S   JOI  R.NAI., 

Jilled — none  cared  to  give  us  ought  to  eat.  My  poor  country- 
woman, who  sometimes  heard  and  trembled,  was  absent  this  time  ; 
in  her  sickness  she  cried  out,  "  it  is  too  late"  —and  rejected  prayer. 
It  was  a  time  of  refreshing  at  Old  Town,  in  Maryland  ;  the  Lord  i3 
among  this  people.  Brother  Willis  preached  the  funeral  sermon 
of  Mrs.  Sprigg  ;  a  blooming,  fair  woman  ;  at  her  own  desire  she 
was  interred  in  our  burying-ground.  She  died  greatly  lamented  by 
her  family,  to  whom  her  death  is  one  loud  call  to  turn  to  God.  I 
trust  she  died  in  peace. 

VIRGINIA. — Friday  7.  Came  to  Bath.  I  took  lodgings  with  our 
Virginia  friends,  Adams  and  Summers. 

Saturday  8.  My  soul  has  communion  with  God,  even  here. 
When  1  behold  the  conduct  of  the  people  who  attend  the  springs, 
particularly  the  gentry,  I  am  led  to  thank  God  that  I  was  not  born 
to  riches  ;  1  rather  bless  God,  that  I  am  not  in  hell,  and  that  I  can- 
not partake  of  pleasure  with  sinners.  I  have  read  much,  and 
spoke  but  little  since  I  came  here.  The  water  has  been  powerful 
in  its  operation.  I  have  been  in  great  pain,  and  my  studies  are 
interrupted. 

August  19.  I  left  Bath  ;  which  was  much  sooner  than  I  ex- 
pected. 

God  was  powerfully  present  at  Hendrick's,  where  there  were 
twelve  or  fifteen  hundred  people  :  many  professed  to  be  converted 
to  God — Glory  be  to  his  name  !  My  body  enjoys  better  health  ; 
and  blessed  be  God !  my  soul  is  wholly  kept  above  sin  :  yet  1 
blame  myself  for  not  being  more  watchful  unto  prayer ;  and  I 
sometimes  use  unnecessary  words.  We  made  a  tour  through  Berk- 
ley circuit,  where  I  had  some  freedom;  and  where  we  found  not 
a  little  living  affection  in  the  congregations. 

Sunday  23.  We  had  alarming  words  at  Winchester,  from  Ezek. 
xxxiii.  11.  I  feel  the  worth  of  souls,  and  their  disobedience  gives 
ine  sorrow  of  heart. — Oh  Jehovah  !  work  for  thine  own  glory  ! 

Saturday  29.  Our  quarterly  meeting  began  in  the  woods  near 
ShepherdVTown  :  we  had  about  seven  hundred  people  :  1  felt 
energy  and  life  in  preaching,  and  power  attended  the  word. 
Brother  Willis  spoke,  and  the  Lord  wrought  powerfully. 

Sunday  30.  Was  a  high  day — one  thousand  or  fifteen  hundred 
people  attended  ;  sinners  began  to  mock,  and  many  cried  aloud  : 
and  so  it  went.  I  was  wonderfully  led  out  on  Psalrn  cxlr.  8 — 12  ; 
and  spoke,  first  and  last,  nearly  three  hours.  O,  how  thr»  wicked 
contradicted  and  opposed  ' 


j4  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL  .  [1"> 

MARYLAND. — Wednesday,  September  1.  I  came  to  brother  Phi- 
lips's,  in  Maryland,  and  had  a  quickening  time.  God  has  preached 
to  the  whole  family  by  the  death  of  his  daughter,  and  the  fire 
spreads  throughout  the  whole  neighbourhood. 

We  must  needs  go  through  Samaria. — I  called  at  Frederick- 
Town,  and  had  a  number  of  wild,  unfeeling  hearers.  Thence  to 
Liberty,  where  the  Almighty  is  working  amongst  the  people.  I 
preached  in  the  day,  and  again  at  night — I  hope  not  in  vain. 

Friday  4.  I  rode  to  Seneca — O  what  hath  God  wrought  for  these 
people  !  many  precious  souls  have  been  brought  to  the  knowledge 
of  salvation. 

Monday  7.  Preached  at  Rowle's  :  here  fifty  or  sixty  souls  pro- 
fess to  have  been  brought  to  God  in  a  few  weeks.  We  had  a  shout, 
and  a  soul  converted  to  God.  I  preached  in  the  evening  at  Balti- 
more, on  "  Lord,  increase  our  faith." 

Tuesday  8.  Preached  in  town  and  at  the  Point.     The  last  quar- 
terly meeting  was  a  wonder-working  time  :  fifty  or  sixty  souls,  then 
and  there,  appeared  to  be  brought  to  God  :  people  were  daily  pray- 
ing from  house  to  house  ;  some  crying  for  mercy,  others  rejoicing 
in  God,  and  not  a  few,  day  after  day,  joining  in  society  for  the  be- 
nefit of  a  religious  fellowship.     Praise  the  Lord,   O  my  soul !     1 
spent  some  time  in  visiting  from  house  to  house,  and  begging  for 
the  college.     The  married  men,  and  the  single  men;  the  married 
tvomen,  and  the  single  women,  I   met  apart,  and  was   comforted. 
Many  of  the  children  of  the  Methodists  are  the  happy  subjects  of 
this  glorious  revival.      We  have  more    members   in    Baltimore, 
(town  and  Point,)  than  in  any  city  or  town  on  the  continent  besides. 
Sunday  13.  I  preached  three  times ;  baptised,  and  administered 
the  sacrament  twice  ;  and  ordained  A.  F. and  W.  L dea- 
cons.    I  trust  it  was  a  profitable  time  to  many. — I  took  cold,  and 
was  much  hurt  by  labour,  so  that  I  could  hardly  move  my  body. 

Monday  14.  Came  to  Daniel  Evan's,  one  of  our  oldest  members, 
and  his  house  one  of  our  oldest  stands  ;  to  this  day  he  has  continued 
to  be  steadfast. — The  Lord  has  now  made  bare  his  arm,  and  brought 
in  forty  or  fifty  young  people,  among  whom  are  some  of  his  own 
children,  for  whom  so  many  prayers  have  been  offered  up  to  God  : 
the  fire  of  the  Lord  spreads  from  house  to  house,  and  from  hear: 
to  heart. 

Tuesday  15.  I  had  but  few  hearers  at  Hunt's  chapel,  but  the 
Lord  was  present,  and  I  am  persuaded  there  was  not  an  unfeeling 
son!  in  the  house.  I  spent  the  evening  with  one  of  the  great :  the 


:».J  lav.  FKANCla  AstftKY  s  JvllV.-  ou 

Lord  and  his  own  conscience  will  witness  that  I  did  not  flatter  him. 

0  that  his  soul  were  converted  to  God  ! 

Friday   18.  At  G 's  we  had  a  solemn  time  ;  the  power  of 

the  Lord  has  been  displayed  here  to  great  purpose. 

Sunday  20.  Was  an  alarming  time  at  the  Forks  church — a  number 
of  serious  people — no  trifling  here  now  :  how  many  dead  souls 
restored  from  a  backsliding  state  !  and  their  children  converted  too. 

Monday  21.  Rode  in  the  evening  to  Cokesbury.  I  found  I. 
Steward  had  gone  to  his  final  rest  :  he  was  a  pious  lad  who  kept  too 
close  to  bis  studies.  He  praised  God  to  the  last,  even  when  he  was 
delirious  :  it  made  the  students  very  solemn  for  a  season. 

Sunday  27.  Preached  at  Gunpowder  chapel  in  the  forenoon, 
and  at  Abingdon  at  three  o'clock. 

Monday  28.  After  a  long  absence  I  preached  at  Bush  Forest 
chapel :  this  was  one  of  the  first  houses  that  was  built  for  the 
Methodists  in  the  state  of  Maryland  ;  and  one  of  the  first  societies 
was  formed  here.  They  had  been  dead  for  many  years ;  of  late 
the  Lord  has  visited  this  neighbourhood,  and  I  suppose,  from  report, 
fifty  souls  have  been  converted  to  God. 

I  preached  at  Havre  de  Grace  with  divine  illumination  and 
authority.  Thence  1  went  to ;  I  was  hardly  welcome — per- 
haps 1  wrong  him  ;  I  shall  know  when  1  call  again.  Called  at  I. 
and  S.  Hersey's,  and  found  the  Lord  had  not  departed  from  these 
houses;  I  hope  their  children  will  all  come  to  God. 

Wednesday  30.  At  Wilmington  1  was  warm  in  spirit.     Thence 

1  rode  to  Philadelphia  ;  where  I  gave  a  short  discourse  on  another 
man's  appointment  ;  my  subject — Jocob's  wrestling  with  God.     On 
Friday  night  I  spoke  on  "  Who  may  abide  the  day  of  his  coming?" 

Sunday,  October  4.  We  were  not  without  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  at  our  love-feast  and  sacrament  this  day.  Brother  Willis 
spoke  feelingly  in  the  afternoon. 

Monday  5.  We  had  a  meeting  of  the  principal  members  in 
order  to  consult  about  the  incorporation  of  our  church. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Tuesday  6.  After  twenty  years  preaching,  they 
have  built  a  very  beautiful  meeting-house  at  Burlington  ;  but  it  is 
low  times  there  in  religion.  At  New-Mills  both  preachers  and 
people  appeared  to  feel,  and  the  watch-night  was  attended  with 
some  breathings  after  God. 

Thursday  9.  We  had  a  poor,  dry  meeting  at  Mount-Holly  :  some 
were  alarmed  with  fear,  lest  we  should  make  a  noise  as  we  ti  r 


utj  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBUKY'S  JOURNAL.  [1789. 

done  in  Philadelphia  ;  some  dear  country  friends  felt  the  Lord 
powerfully,  and  carried  home  the  flame. 

Friday  10.  I  felt  inward  strength  at  Bethel  on  Isai.  Ixiii.  12. 
The  power  was  present,  but  there  is  not  as  much  religion  amongst 
them  as  formerly. 

Saturday  11.  My  ride  to  Bethel  was  thirty  miles;  and  thirty 
miles  more  brought  me  to  Deerfield  ;  I  spoke  very  alarmingly,  and 
to  little  purpose  at  the  Methodistico-Presbyterian  church. 

Sunday  12.  At  the  Glass  House  I  felt  myself,  and  the  Lord  made 
others  feel — to  purpose,  I  hope.  Thence  to  Salem,  at  three 
o'clock  :  it  was  levelling  work,  storm  and  thunder,  whilst  I  opened 
and  applied  Isai.  xxx.  20,  21. 

Monday  13.  I  returned  to  Philadelphia,  where  there  were  five 
criminals  hanged  ;  one  of  them  professed  conversion. 

Tuesday    15.    Was   the   day  of  election   for   representatives  ; 
•preaching  in  the  evening  was  to  little  purpose,  on  "  Arm  of  the 
Lord  awake."     "  O  Lord,  of  life  !  when  shall  it  be." 

DELAWARE. — I  preached  at  Wilmington,  on  the  dedication  of  our 
new  chapel :  thus  far  are  we  come  after  more  than  twenty  years' 
labour  in  this  place. 

Thursday  17.  I  preached  at  Dickinson's.  Here  we  have  a  good 
house  built ;  and  a  blessed  foundation  of  living  stones  fixed  on  the 
chief  corner-stone.  After  preaching  at  Severson's  and  Duck- 
Creek  Cross  Roads,  we  came  on  Saturday  to  Dover  quarterly  meet- 
ing ;  here  the  congregation  was  large  and  serious. 

Sunday  20.  Preached  on  "  The  Lord  whom  ye  seek  shall  sud- 
denly come  to  his  temple."  Ordained  W.  I.  and  I.  B.  elders. 
We  have  had  encouraging  intelligence  of  an  opening  in  New-Eng- 
land :  we  shall  send  Jacob  Brush  to  assist  Jesse  Lee,  who  has  been 
some  time  visiting  those  parts. 

Reached  judge  White's  in  the  evening,  and  rested  there  on 
Mondaj'. 

Tuesday  22.  Rode  to  Millford  ;  where  we  had  a  great  move  and 
noble  shouting.  I  felt  myself  very  unwell.  We  had  a  very  com- 
fortable love-feast  next  morning.  1  was  taken  with  a  sore  throat, 
and  brother  Whatcoat  supplied  my  lack  of  service.  I  was  laid  up 
four  days  ;  a  violent  headach  and  fever  attended  the  inflamma- 
tion in  my  throat,  with  little  or  no  perspiration.  I  made  use  of 
flaxseed  tea,  and  a  very  great  expectoration  followed. 

Wednesday  30.    I  came  to  Lowry's,  at  the  head  of  Nanticoke. 


1789.)  Riiv.  KRA.NUS  ASUURY'S  JOUK.N 

I  still  feel  much  pain,  with  ;i  fever  and  hoarseness.  1  must  take 
blame  to  myself  lor  rilling  sometimes  in  thr  night  and  cold  even- 
ings without  an  upper  coat  :  I  am  growing  old  ;  ;md  I  livo  much  in 
southern  climes.  I  lodged  at  brother  H — 'g,  who  was  ill  with  a 
bilious  and  nervous  complaint. 

Thursday  31.   Came  to  W ,  and  was  kindly  entertained. 

Friday,  November  1.  We  rode  in  the  rain — it  was  almost 
enough  to  kill  healthy  men. — After  steeping  our  feet  in  warm  water, 
we  came  to  brother  Downing'*.  Next  day  we  rode  twenty-eight 
miles  to  1'ararnour's  ;  my  rest  being  interrupted,  I  roso  early,  and 
rode  through  the  cold  to  the  love-feuet,  where  we  had  great 
shouting. 

Although  very  weak  in  body,  I  rode  thirty  miles  ;  a  dish  of  tea, 
and  a  biscuit  and  a  half,  was  all  my  food  till  six  o'clock  in  the  evening. 
Monday  4.  I  rode  forty  miles  to  Magotty-Bay,  and  preached  to  a 
few  people.  The  Anlinomians  please  them  and  gain  them — alas  ! 
for  us.  O,  that  the  Lord  would  send  an  earthquake  of  his  power 
among  them ! 

Tuesday  5.  We  had  an  open  time  at  brother  J—  -;s.  The 
school  for  the  charity  boys  much  occupies  my  mind  :  our  annual  ex- 
penditure will  amount  to  £200,  and  the  aid  we  get  is  but  trifling  : 
the  poverty  of  the  people,  and  the  general  scarcity  of  money,  is 
the  great  source  of  our  difficulties  ;  the  support  of  our  preachers 
who  have  families  absorbs  our  collection?,  so  that  neither  do  our 
elders  or  the  charity  school  get  much.  We  have  the  poor,  but 
they  have  no  money  ;  and  the  worldly,  wicked  rich  we  do  not 
choose  to  ask. 

I  have  rode  about  one  hundred  miles  from  Sunday  morning  till 
Tuesday  night ;  at  the  same  time  very  unwell  with  a  cold  and  influ- 
enza, which  spreads  in  almost  every  family. 

Wednesday  6.  We  had  many  people  at  Accomack  court-house, 
and  power  attended  the  word  whilst  brothers  E.  and  W.  spoke 

Thursday  &.  Friday  7,  U.     We  held  quarterly  meeting  at  Down- 
ings  ;  the  first  day  the  Lord  was  powerfully  present,  and  the  peo- 
ple were  greatly  agitated  ;  on  the  second  day  at  the  love-feast  and 
sacrament  there  was  a  shout,  and  1  believe  two  hundred  <ouls  prai.-- 
ed  God  at  one  time;   my  soul  was  happy  among  thrm. 

MARYI,  \.\n. — Saturday  9.   At  ^nnamessex  quarterly  meeting  the 
Lord  was  amongst  the  people  on  the  first  day.     On  Sunday  at  tli«' 
love-feast,  the   young  were  creatly   filled,  and  the  power  of  the 
Most  High  spread  throughout  ;    it  appeared  as   if  they  \v«juld  1 
VOL,  II. 


53  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBORY'S  JOURNAL.  [1789, 

continued  till  night  if  they  had  not  been  in  some  measure  forced 
to  stop  that  we  might  have  public  worship.  I  stood  near  the  win- 
dow and  spoke  on  Isaiah  Ixiv.  1 — 5.  there  was  a  stir,  and  se- 
veral sinners  went  away.  There  were  very  uncommon  circum- 
stances of  a  supernatural  kind  said  to  be  observed  at  this  meeting. 
The  saints  of  the  world,  are  dreadfully  displeased  at  this  work; 
wkich,  after  all,  is  the  best  evidence  that  it  is  of  God. 

The  preachers  urged  me  to  preach  at  Princess  Anne  ;  I  did  so  ; 
and  many  poor,  afflicted  people  came  out ;  I  trust  some  will  be 
able  to  say  of  Christ,  "  He  is  altogether  lovely  !" 

I  felt  uncommon  power  in  preaching  at  Thomas  Garrettson's — - 
surely  the  Lord  will  work. 

At  the  quarterly  meeting  I  did  not  speak  the  first  day  ;  the  se- 
cond, I  preached  on  Rom.  x.  14,  15.  there  was  a  little  stir,  yet 
this  is  said  to  be  the  dullest,  or  one  of  the  dullest  places  in  the 
peninsula. 

Thursday  14,  was  a  warm  day,  and  we  had  a  heavy  ride  to 
the  Line  chapel  :  there  were  but  few  hearers,  owing  to  the  great 
affliction  that  prevails.  The  influenza,  and  other  complaints,  carry 
off  many  people  ;  and  it  is  an  awful  time. 

Friday  15.  Came  to  Broad-Creek  chapel,  where  some  of  the 
wicked  had  broken  the  windows.  There  had  been  a  stir  at  the 
quarterly  meeting,  and  a  testimony  borne  against  their  revellings, 
and  it  was  judged,  that  on  this  account  the  injury  was  committed 
on  the  house.  My  throat  was  sore,  and  my  testimony  feeble  on 
2  Cor.  vi.  1.  I  rode  to  the  head  of  Nanticoke,  where  brother 
Whatcoat  preached  a  warm  sermon. 

Saturday  16.  Preached  at  Brown's  chapel :  the  general  afflic- 
tion hindered  many  from  attending ;  but  we  were  happy  together, 
and  it  was  a  strengthening,  confirming  time  to  many  tried  souls. 

Sunday  17.  The  people  were  shouting  the  praises  of  God  when 
I  came  ;  after  the  noise  and  fervour  had  subsided,  1  preached  on 
the  men  of  Nineveh's  repenting  at  the  preaching  of  Jonah  ;  and 
the  word  sunk  into  some  hearts. 

Monday  18.  We  had  a  noble  shout,  and  the  people  rejoiced  in 
the  Lord. 

Friday  22,  being  the  day  of  our  quarterly  meeting  fast,  we 
strove  to  keep  it  as  well  as  our  feeble  bodies  would  admit. 

Saturday  and  Sunday,  23,  24.  There  was  a  shaking  among  the 
people  ;  some  were  alarmed  ;  some  professed  to  be  justified  ;  and 
others  sanctified  ;  whilst  the  wicked  brought  with  them  much  of 


1789.]  HEV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOVRNAJ. 

the  power  of  Satan.  I  received  some  relief  for  my  poor  orphans. 
For  some  clays  past  I  have  been  kept  in  an  humble,  living,  holy, 
conquering  frame. 

Monday  25.  Although  the  north-west  wind  blew  very  strong, 
we  crossed  Choptank  River  and  came  to  Bolingbroke  :  here  we 
had  loud  shouts,  and  living  testimonies  from  many  of  our  oldest 
members,  whilst  some  of  our  eay  young  Methodists  were  mute. 
Being  a  day  of  public  thanksgiving,  I  rode  to  Wye,  where  there  is 
a  good  new  chapel :  the  rain  hindered,  so  that  we  had  but  few 
hearers.  Came  through  the  rain  to  Tuckahoe. 

Friday  29.  There  was  a  good  move  at  Choptank-Bridge.  I 
ordained  five  persons  to  the  office  of  deacons. 

Saturday  30.    Preached  with  some  freedom  at  Dover. 

Sunday  31.  I  preached  at  Duck-Creek.  Stopped,  and  gave 
them  a  discourse  at  Middletown  ;  and  spent  the  evening  with  a 
worthy  kind  friend.  A  number  of  dear  old  brethren  accompanied 
roe  to  Cokesbury,  where  we  had  an  examination  of  the  boys,  and 
stationed  eleven  on  charity.  Thence  we  hastened  on  to  Baltimore. 

Thursday,  December  4.  Our  council  was  seated,  consisting  of 
the  following  persons,  viz. :  Richard  Ivey,  from  Georgia  ;  R.  Ellis, 
South  Carolina;  E.  Morris,  North  Carolina;  Phil.  Bruce,  north 
district  of  Virginia  ;  James  OKelly,  south  district  of  Virginia  ; 
L.  Green,  Ohio;  Nelson  Reid,  western  shore  of  Maryland ; 
J.  Everett,  eastern  shore  ;  John  Dickens,  Pennsylvania  ;  J.  O. 
Cromwell,  Jersey  ;  and  Freeborn  Garrettson,  New- York  :  all  our 
business  was  done  in  love  and  unanimity.  The  concerns  of  the 
college  were  well  attended  to,  as  also  the  printing  business.  We 
formed  some  resolutions  relative  to  economy  and  union,  and  others 
concerning  the  funds  for  the  relief  of  our  suffering  preachers  on 
the  frontiers.  We  rose  on  the  eve  of  Wednesday  following. 
During  our  sitting,  we  had  preaching  every  night  ;  some  few  souls 
were  stirred  up,  and  others  converted.  The  prudence  of  some 
had  stilled  the  noisy  ardour  of  our  young  people  ;  and  it  was  diffi- 
cult to  rekindle  the  fire.  I  collected  about  £28  for  the  poor  suf- 
fering preachers  in  the  west.  We  spent  one  day  in  speaking  our 
own  experiences,  and  giving  an  account  of  the  progress  and  state 
of  the  work  of  God  in  our  several  districts  ;  a  spirit  of  union  per- 
vades the  whole  body  ;  producing  blessed  effects  and  fruits. 

Thursday  11.  This  and  the  two  following  days  were  spent  in 
writing,  and  other  necessary  business.  I  also  preached  at  town  and 
Point. 


6'0  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1780. 

Sunday  14.  1  delivered  some  alarming  truths  at  our  meeting- 
house with  some  life.  I  preached  at  the  German  church  in  the 
afternoon  ;  and  in  the  evening  I  spoke  on  "  The  men  of  Nineveh 
shall  rise  up  in  judgment  against  the  men  of  this  generation,  and 
condemn  it,"  &c. 

Monday  15.  To  my  comfort  I  found  one  of  Thomas  Cromwell's 
children  under  deep  distress ;  when  I  formerly  frequented  the 
house  she  was  a  child. 

Came  on  to  Annapolis,  and  found  the  work  rather  dead. 

Tuesday  1C.  I  preached  with  more  liberty  than  the  evening  be- 
fore. 

Wednesday  17.  Set  out  for  Herring  Bay  :  it  rained,  and  our  ride 
was  heavy.  I  lodged  with  William  Weem's,  once  a  great  zealot 
for  the  Old  Church. 

Thursday  18.  We  rode  to  Childs's — it  was  an  awfully  stormy, 
rainy  day,  and  we  had  no  meeting.  The  Lord  has  made  bare  his 
arm  since  my  last  visit  here,  and  souls  have  been  converted  and 
sanctified. 

Friday  19.  Rode  to  Gray's  :  here  also  the  Lord  hath  wrought 
powerfully  amongst  the  children. 

VIRGINIA. — Saturday  20.  Rode  through  Charles  county  to  Hoe's 
ferry. — Death  !  death !  We  had  prayer  at  our  lodgings  :  Mr.  H. 
treated  us  very  kindly. 

Sabbath  morning  21.  I  read  part  of  the  thirty-third  chapter  of 
Ezekiel's  prophecy,  and  gave  an  exhortation.  We  then  rode 
twenty-five  miles  through  the  snow  to  Pope's,  where  I  spoke  with 
some  liberty.  We  found  ourselves  not  at  home,  so  we  went  to  our 

friend  S 's  ;  my  spirit  has  been  wounded  not  a  little.     I  know 

not  which  to  pity  most,  the  slaves  or  their  masters.  Thence  we 
went  on  to  the  widow  Hutt's  ;  I  am  ill,  and  have  little  to  do,  which 
makes  me  worse. 

On  Christmas  eve  I  made  a  visit  to  counsellor  Carter;  a  very 
social  gentleman,  a  Baptist.  After  preaching  we  had  fifteen  miles 

to  ride  to  sister  W 's  ;  and  twenty  miles  the  next  morning  to 

Lancaster  quarterly  meeting. 

Sunday  27.  Feeling  myself  unwell,  brother  Whatcoat  preached  ; 
and  our  public  and  society  meeting  occupied  six  hours  and  a  half. 
Notwithstanding  the  rain,  we  had  many  to  hear,  both  white  and 
black.  1  was  very  sensible  that  the  work  of  grace  was  deepened  in 
the  souls  of  the  people  :  sever.il  spoke  of  the  pure  love  of  God. 

Monday  28.  I  felt  much  enlarged  in  spirit.     It  seemed  to  me  as  if 


I7HO."]  UKV.  HUNCIS  ASIUK\   -  .IDUKNAI..  til 


the  Lord  was  only  beginning  to  work  ;  but  the  Antinomians  oppose. 
—  Nevertheless,  I  have  growing  hopes  that  the  glory  of  Zion  will 
shortly  appear. 

Tuesday  29.  After  waiting  at  the  ferry  about  four  hours,  we 
made  an  attempt  to  cross  in  an  old  boat,  with  tattered  sail-,  which 
gave  way  near  the  middle  of  the  river  :  through  mercy  we  got  safe 
over.  Thence  directing  our  course  to  Turks-Ferry,  a  poor  old 
negro  made  out  to  get  us  across  in  a  little  flat  :  about  eight  o'clock 
we  arrived  safely  at  sister  D  --  's,  where  we  found  three  of  the 
preachers  waiting  for  us,  preaching  having  been  appointed  for  the 
morrow.  We  had  the  presence  of  God  with  us  in  the  meeting. 
:md  at  the  sacrament. 

ThundaySl.  We  had  a  few  attentive  people  at  brother  Bel- 
lamy's. O  Gloucester!  Gloucester!  when  will  it  be  famous  for 
religion.  Finding  my  appointments  not  made,  we  crossed  York- 
Iliver,  and  came  once  more  to  my  dear  old  friend  Welden's.  —  I  was 
much  indisposed. 

January  1,  1790  No  appointment  for  preaching.  We  are  bound 
to  the  south,  and  shall  proceed  on  as  fast  as  we  can. 

Saturday  2.  We  were  refreshed  in  the  evening.  Next  day 
(Sabbath)  1  preached  at  Chirkahominy  church  once  more  :  sin- 
ners, Pharisees,  backslider?,  hypocrites,  and  believers,  were  faith- 
fully warned  ;  and  of  all  these  character*  there  were  doubtless  a 
goodly  number  in  the  large  congregation  which  attended.  Brother 
Bruce  went  to  Brown's,  and  brother  W.  and  myself  to  Welden'?  : 
at  both  these  places  the  Lord  was  powerfully  present  in  our 
meetings. 

Monday  4.  We  crossed  James-  River,  with  a  fresh  wind  a-head, 
and  only  two  poor  blacks,  where  four  ferrymen  are  necessary. 
Two  brigs  under  sail  came  doxvn  full  upon  us,  and  we  had  hard 
work  to  get  out  of  their  way.  These  large  ferries  are  dangerou= 
and  expensive  :  our  ferriages  alone  have  cost  us  £3  since  we  left 
Annapolis. 

Tuesday  5.  Rested,  and  next  day  prenched  at  brother  Morings  : 
1  felt  some  power  among  the  people  ;  but  the  glory  is  measurably 
departed  ;  the  imprudent  haste  of  the  young  people  to  marry  un- 
believers, and  divisions  exited  by  other  causes,  have  done  much 
injury. 

Thursday  7.  Was  an  ameliorating  tim?  at  Ellis's  church.  The 
next  day,  at  Lane's,  1  had  many  people,  Although  it  rained  ;  I  fel' 
comfortable  in  speaking  to  thorn. 

-  iturday  !?.  Was  a  cold  time  in  a  cold  house  at  brother  }f  --  'a 


62  RtiV.  FRANCIS  ASBUHV'S  JOURNAL.  [1790, 

I  felt  unwell,  and  much  dejected  at  the  situation  of  the  people, 
whom  I  fount)  divided  about  the  merits  of  a  certain  character,  once 
a  preacher  among  the  Methodists,  but  now  disowned,  and  striving 
to  make  a  party  ;  this  man,  and  the  disputes  for  and  against  slavery 
have  been  hurtful. 

Sunday  10.  Came  to  Jones's  church,  and  was  much  lifted  up  in 
spirit. 

Monday  11    I  had  many  to  hear  at  Mabry's. 

Tuesday  12.  From  Mabry's  we  came  to  Brunswick  quarterly 
meeting,  where  there  was  a  considerable  quickening,  and  mani- 
festation of  the  Lord's  power.  We  had  a  good  meeting  at  Roan- 
oak  chapel ;  I  rejoiced  that  the  society  had  increased  to  more  than 
a  hundred  souls. 

I  received  a  letter  from  the  presiding  elder  of  this  district,  James 
O'Kelly :  he  makes  heavy  complaints  of  my  power,  and  bids  me  stop 
for  one  year,  or  he  must  use  his  influence  against  me — power '. 
power  !  there  is  not  a  vote  given  in  a  conference  in  which  the 
presiding  elder  has  not  greatly  the  advantage  of  me  ;  all  the  influ- 
ence I  am  to  gain  over  a  company  of  young  men  in  a  district  must 
be  done  in  three  weeks  ;  the  greater  part  of  them,  perhaps,  are 
seen  by  me  only  at  conference,  whilst  the  presiding  elder  has 
had  them  with  him  all  the  year,  and  has  the  greatest  opportunity  of 
gaining  influence  ;  this  advantage  may  be  abused ;  let  the  bishops 
look  to  it :  but  who  has  the  power  to  lay  an  embargo  on  me,  and  to 
make  of  none  effect  the  decision  of  all  the  conferences  of  the 
union  ? 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Friday  15.  Crossed  Roanoak,  and  was  met 
by  several  preachers  at  sister  Pegram's,  where  the  Lord  was  with  us. 

Saturday  16.  I  had  a  long  ride  to  R.  Jones's  ;  we  bad  a  good 
season  at  the  sacrament :  several  spoke  powerfully  of  the  justify- 
ing and  sanctifying  grace  of  God.  A  hundred  souls  have  been 
brought  to  God :  thus  the  barren  wilderness  begins  to  smile,  i 
found  it  3  time  to  speak  from  Isai.  lii.  1. 

We  had  to  ride  sixteen  miles  ;  and  here,  O  what  my  spirit  felt! 
It  is  a  day  of  very  small  and  feeble  things,  and  but  little  union 
among  the  people.  I  found  it  needful  to  enforce  that  prayer.  O 
Lord,  revive  thy  work !  One  poor  black  fell  to  the  ground  and 
praised  God. 

Tuesday  19.    I  had  some  freedom  in  preaching  at  B 's  ;  but 

I  fear  there  is  too  much  vanity  and  Antinomian  leaven  amongst 
them  to  permit  much  good  to  be  done. 

Rode  to  Tomlinson's — but  here  they  had  made  no  appointment, 


1790.]  RET.  FRANCIS  ASBVRY  s  JOURNAL.  ,    63 

At  Merritt'a  chapel,  on  New-Hope  Creek,  Chatham  county,  I  en- 
forced "  How  shall  I  give  theo  up,  O  Ephraim  !" — there  was  some 
feeling  among  them  ;  but  they  are  not  a  united  people. 

Thursday  21.  I  rode  to  the  widow  Snipe'?,  twenty  miles  ;  and 
preached  on  Isaiah  xlv.  22.  then  crossed  Haw  River,  and  came  to 
M 's,  about  two  hours  in  the  night,  where  I  found  a  congrega- 
tion waiting,  to  whom  I  spoke  on  "  1  am  not  ashamed  of  the  Gos- 
pel of  Christ,"  &c.  the  people  were  tender. 

Friday  22.  Came  to  Rainey's,  in  Orange  county,  to  a  quarterly 
meeting  where  seven  of  our  preachers  met  together  ;  the  first 
day  the  people  were  dull ;  the  second,  our  congregation  was  large  ; 
my  subject  was,  "  We  will  give  ourselves  to  prayer  and  the  minis- 
try of  the  word."  I  ordained  Thomas  Anderson  to  the  office  of 
an  elder.  We  rode  through  a  heavy  rain  sixteen  miles  to  our 
friend  Burr's  ;  here  they  have  built  us  a  complete  house  of  the 
heart  of  oak.  Proceeded  twelve  miles  to  Rocky-River,  and 
preached  at  M'Master's  chapel  ;  afterward  we  had  a  night  meeting, 
and  upon  the  whole  I  believe  we  were  speaking  about  four  hours, 
besides  nearly  two  spent  in  prayer.  We  came  to  our  friend  K— 'a, 
and  were  kindly  entertained.  Thence  we  went  to  Mr.  Bell's,  on 
Deep-River,  and  were  received  in  the  kindest  manner  ;  before  I 
left  the  house,  I  felt  persuaded  that  that  family  would  come  to 
experience  the  power  of  religion. 

Tuesday  26.  We  had  to  make  our  way  through  a  dreary  path, 
and  rode  about  fifty  miles  :  we  were  favoured  by  only  getting  a 
sprinkling  of  rain,  which  became  very  heavy  after  we  were  housed 

at  Thomas  C 's,  about  eleven  o'clock.  Rode  to  Doctor  King's, 

twenty-five  miles,  and  performed  the  funeral  rites  of  Captain  C , 

who  was  sick  when  1  was  here  last  year.  I  then  prayed  for  him, 
and  felt  as  if  his  sickness  was  unto  death  :  now,  I  preached  his 
funeral  sermon— my  text  was,  «*  It  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to 
die,"  4ic.  1  felt  some  enlargement  in  speaking,  and  a  few  people 
appeared  to  be  moved. 

I  have  read  an  account  of  the  wonderful  revolution  in  France  ; 
may  the  good  of  Protestantism  and  the  glory  of  God  be  advanced 
by  it! 

Since  we  crossed  Roanoke-River,  we  have  passed  through  War- 
ren, Granville,  Wake,  Chatham,  Orange,  Randolph,  and  Richmond 
counties,  in  North  Carolina. 

After  passing  Hedge-Cock  creek,  I  preached  at  Night's  chapel 
on  "My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee  :"  there  was  some  quickening, 
and  I  was  blest.  It  is  no  small  exercise  to  ride  twenty  miles,  or 


(j-l  REV.  tRANcis  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1790. 

. 
more,  as  we  frequently  do  before  twelve  o'clock  ;  taking  all  kinds 

of  food  and  lodging  and  weather  too,  as  it  conies,  whether  it  be 
good  or  bad. 

I  saw  the  hand  of  the  Lord  in  preserving  my  life  and  limbs  when 
my  horse  made  an  uncommon  start  and  sprung  some  yards  with  me> 
it  was  with  difficulty  I  kept  the  saddle. 

SOUTH  CAROLINA. — We  had  a  severe  day's  ride  ;  and  called  at  the 
Beauty-Spot :  the  beauty  here  has  somewhat  faded  :  the  society 
is  disjointed,  and  in  a  poor  state.  We  made  it  a  fifty  miles'  ride,  or 
thereabouts,  to  Pryor's. 

Sunday  31.  There  were  some  signs  of  remaining  life  seen  under 
preaching,  and  a  little  spirit  and  feeling  in  the  love-feast.  1  felt 
great  enlargement  on  '•  Oh !  Ephraim,  how  shall  I  give  thee 
up,"  &c.  I  found  it  heavy  work. 

Monday,  February  1.  Brother  W.  preached  at  the  Grove  ;  I.E. 
and  myself  spoke  after  him,  and  there  were  gracious  signs  of  ten- 
derness among  the  people.  An  elderly  Baptist  preacher  attended, 
whose  heart  the  Lord  touched,  and  he  acknowledged  the  power  of 

the  Most  High  to  be  present.     We  lodged  at   old  friend  J 's, 

having  rode  twenty-five  miles  ;  we  were  wear)'  and  hungry,  having 
breakfasted  on  tea  at  eight  o'clock,  and  taken  nothing  more  till  six 
o'clock  at  night.  Lord,  help  me  to  bear  all  things  without  mur- 
muring or  disputing. 

At  Flowers's  there  was  a  living  stir  ;  one  soul  found  peace  ;  and 
I  had  freedom  in  preaching. 

After  riding  fifteen  miles  to  Sweet's  meeting-house ;  on  a  cold 
day,  we  had  about  a  dozen  people  :  of  these  few,  some  were 
drunk,  and  began  to  laugh  and  trifle  round  the  house.  After  three 
exhortations  and  prayers,  we  came  to  Port's  ferry,  and  had  to  cross 
in  the  night,  and  wade  the  low  places. 

Came  to  sister  — — ,  and  had  a  comfortable  table  spread  before 
us,  which,  to  us,  who  had  rode  thirty  miles  through  heavy  rain, 
without  eating  or  drinking,  was  almost  necessary.  I  think  our  kind 
hostess  has  several  of  the  marks  St.  Paul  gives  of  a  widow 
indeed. 

I  have  lately  read  Thompson's  Seasons,  containing  upwards  of 
two  hundred  pages.  1  find  a  little  wheat  and  a  great  deal  of  chaff; 
I  have  read  great  authors,  so  called,  and  wondered  where  they 
found  their  finery  of  words  and  phrases  ;  much  of  this  might  be 
pilfered  from  the  "Seasons,"  without  injury  to  the  real  merit  01" 
the  work  :  and  doubtless  it  has  been  plucked  by  literary  robbers : 
und  my  wonder  may  cease, 


1790.]  REV.     FRANCIS    ASBURl's  JOURNAL. 

My  own  soul  has  peace  :  but  \  feel  a  death  amongst  the  people. 
I  hope  the  Lord  will  come  and  visit  them  in  power  ;  if  they  do  not 
turn  to  God,  I  expect  they  will  be  cut  off,  and  that  soon. 

Saturday  f>.  Rode  to  Georgetown  ;  and  on  the  Sabbath,  brother 
W-  -preached  on  "  In  all  places  where  1  record  my  name,  I  will 
^ome  in  to  thee,  and  I  will  bless  thee." 

Monday  8.  I  gave  them  a  close  and  serious  address  on  rightly 
dividing  the  word  of  truth. 

Tuesday  9.  Carae  to  Wapataw,  and  preached  on  1  John  iv. 
16,  17. 

Wednesday  10.  Came  to  Charleston.  Here  I  received  good 
news  from  r..dtimore  and  New- York  :  about  two-hundred  souls  have 
been  brought  to  God  within  a  few  weeks.  1  have  been  closely  oc- 
cupied in  writing  to  Europe,  and  to  different  parts  of  this  continent. 
We  feel  a  little  quickening  here :  brother  Whatcoat  preaches 
every  night. 

Saturday  13.  The  preachers  are  coming  in  to  the  conference.    I 
have  felt  fresh  springs  of  desire  in  my  soul  fora  revival  of  religion. 
O  may  the  work  be  general  !  It  is  a  happy  thing  to  be  united  as  is 
our  society  ;  the  happy  news  of  the  revival  of  the  work  of  God  flies 
from  one  part  of  the  continent  to  the  other,  and  all  partake  of  the  joy. 
Sunday  14.  I  preached  twice.     Next  day   (Monday)  our  confe- 
rence began  :  our  business  was  conducted  in  great  peace  and  love. 
The  business  of  the  council  came  before  us  ;  and  it  was  determined 
that  the  concerns  of  the  college,  and  the  printing,  should  be  left 
with  the  council  to  act  decisively  upon  ;    but  that  no  new  canons 
should  be  made,   nor  the  old  altered,  without  the   consent  of  the 
conference  ;  and  that  whatever  was  done  on  this  head,  should  come 
in  the  shape  of  advice  only.     We  had  some  quickening  seasons, 
and  living  meetings  :  several  young  people  come  under  awakenings. 
Wednesday  17.    I  preached  on    "  If  thou  take  forth  the  pre- 
cious from  the  vile,  thou  shalt  be  as  my  mouth  -."  it  was  a  search- 
ing season  :  several  spoke  and  prayed  ;  and  we  had  noise  enough. 
The  evening  before  an  extract  of  sundry  letters  from  New- York 
and    Baltimore   was   read   in    the   congregation,    at   which   saints 
and  sinners  were  affected.     But  we  have  not  a  sufficient  breast- 
work :  our  friends  are  too  mute  and  fearful,  and  many  of  the  out- 
doors people  are  violent  and  wicked.     I  have  had  a  busy,  trying 
time  for  about  nine  days  past ;  and  I  have  hopes  that  some  hun- 
dreds in  this  city  will  be  converted  by  this  time  next  year.     Our 
:onference  resolved  on  establishing  Sunday-schools  for  poor  chil- 
Iren,  white  and  black. 

H.  o 


lib  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1790 

Friday  19.  We  rode  to  Edisto  :  at  Gueham's  Ipreached  on 
the  "  Great  salvation  :"  there  appeared  to  be  attention,  and  some 
were  affected. 

Saturday  20.  Was  a  dry  time  at  Lynder's.  Brother  Whatcoat 
preached — I  was  very  unwell  with  a  headach. 

Sunday  21.  We  had  a  better  season  at  Cattle-Creek,  on  Mai.  iii, 
J.  May  God  arise  to  help  these  people,  and  revive  and  work 
mightily  for  and  amongst  them  ! 

Monday  22.  We  had  a  heavy  ride  to  B.'s  :  it  was  still  more  so 
when  we  came  to  preaching.  Poor  souls  !  the  Antinomian  leaveti 
brings  forth  death  here  :  some  appeared  hardened,  others,  never- 
theless, appeared  a  little  melted — may  God  help  these  people!  I 
was  unwell — could  eat  but  little.  I  was  not  at  home — I  felt  as 
if  God  had  departed  from  this  house,  and  was  miserable  until  f 
Jeft  it. 

Tuesday  23.     We  rode  to  R 's.     Here  we  found  people  of 

another  spirit.  We  had  a  large  congregation — but  very  blind,  deaf, 
and  dumb.  O  Lord  !  can  these  dry  bones  live  ?  I  spoke  very 
close,  but  to  little  purpose.  May  the  Lord  help,  and  stand  by 
the  poor  preachers  who  labour  on  this  side  Edisto  ! 

Wednesday  24.     At  Chester's,  and  next  day  at  P 's  there 

was  a  small  stir.  Some  here  have  been  awakened,  but  they  lean 
to  Calvinism,  and  the  love  of  strong  drink  carries  almost  all  away  : 
my  spirit  was  bowed  down  amongst  them.  I  spoke  a  little,  and  so 
did  brother  Whatcoat.  We  appointed  a  night  meeting ;  there 
came  only  two  men,  and  they  were  drunk. 

Friday  26.  There  came  about  a  dozen  people  to  hear  us  at 
Treadwell's,  to  whom  brother  Whatcoat  preached  on  the  "  works 
of  the  flesh,"  and  the  "  fruits  of  the  Spirit." 

After  riding  thirty  miles  through  heavy  sands,  we  came  to  Doc- 
tor Fuller's.  I  am  strongly  inclined  to  think  I  am  done  with  this 
road  and  people  ;  they  pass  for  Christians — a  prophet  of  strong 
drink  might  suit  them.  1  was  clear  in  not  receiving  any  thing 
without  paying  for  it. 

Saturday  27.  Rode  to  Campbell-Town,  and  stopped  at  brother 
G 's.  Since  Friday,  the  19th,  we  have  rode  about  one  hun- 
dred and  sixt}r  miles. 

I  have  been  under  various  trials  and  exercises,  and  have  some 
dejected  hours  :  this  also  shall  tend  to  my  humiliation,  and  work 
for  my  good. 

Sunday  20.  I  preached  on  1  Tim.  i.  15.  I  had  a  very  still  and 
'infeeliog  congregation.  The  inhabitants  of  this  little  town  (Camp- 


i790.]  KI.V.  FKANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  C7 

bell-Town)  seem  to  be  sober  and   industrious  ;  but  even  here  1 
found  some  drunkards. 

GEORGIA. — Monday,  March  1.  We  crossed  at  Augusta,  in 
Georgia,  and  rode  to  S.  C.  church.  1  had  some  enlargement  on 
Luke  iv.  18,  19.  Thence  we  proceeded  to  Brier-Creek. 

Tuesday  2.  I  preached  in  an  old  church,  near  Waynesborough  ; 
at  Wyche's,  in  the  evening;  and  next  day  at  Golphin's,  OKI 
Town — the  house  was  open,  and  the  day  cold. 

Thursday  4.  I  preached  with  liberty  in  a  new  church,  near 
Fan's  bridge.  We  have  been  exercised  in  public  night  and  day  ; 
frequently  we  have  not  more  than  six  hours'  sleep  ;  our  horses  are 
weary,  and  the  houses  are  so  crowded,  that  at  night  our  rest  U 
much  disturbed.  Jesus  is  not  always  in  our  dwellings  ;  and  where 
He  is  not  a  pole  cabin  is  not  very  agreeable  :  provisions  for  man 
and  horse  we  have  plenty  of.  Our  journeys  are  about  thirty  miles, 
day  by  day  ;  but  under  all  these  trials  I  enjoy  peace  and  patience, 
and  have  much  of  the  love  of  God. 

Sunday  7.  We  had  a  crowded  congregation  at  H.'s  ;  brother 
W.  attempted  to  preach,  but  soon  concluded.  We  lodged  with 

brother  S ,  above  the  forks  of  Ogeeche.     My  mind  has  been 

much  tried  under  so  much  bodily  fatigue. 

I   went  to  view  four  hundred  acres  of  land,  and  found   it  not 

suitably  situated  for  a  seminary  of  learning.     Came  to  S 's — a 

cold  place,  and  cold  congregation  there. 

Wednesday  10.  Our  conference  began  at  Grant's.  We  had 
preaching  every  day,  and  there  were  some  quickenings  among=t 
the  people.  Our  business  was  conducted  in  peace  and  unanimity. 
The  deficiencies  of  the  preachers,  who  receive  a  salary  of 
sixty-four  dollars  per  annum,  from  this  conference,  amounted  to 
seventy-four  pounds  for  the  last  year. 

Thursday  11.  We  had  a  rainy  day,  yet  a  full  house,  and  a  living 
love-feast ;  some  souls  were  converted  ;  and  others  professed  sanc- 
tificalion.  1  had  some  opening  in  speaking  from  Ezek.  ii.  7.  We 
have  a  prospect  of  obtaining  a  hundred  acres  of  land  for  every 
OUO  we  can  raise  and  pay,  for  the  support  of  Wesley  and  Whit- 
rield  school.  On  Monday  we  rode  out  to  view  three  hundred  acre* 
of  land  offered  for  the  above  purpose.  My  soul  has  been  much 
tried  since  conference  began  :  1  must  strive  to  keep  from  rising  too 
high,  or  sinking  too  low. 

Tuesday  1C.   We  s^t  out  on  our  journey,  and  r.-ime  to  the  new 
chapel  at  Bibb's  Cross  Roads  ;  I  preached  with  some  life  and  liberty, 
ordained  brother  Bennct  Maxey  to  the  office  of  dearon.     I 


68  liEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1790. 

spent  the  evening  at  brother  Herbert's,  where  lie  interred  the 
remains  of  dear  brother  Major.  I  was  told  that  a  poor  sinner  was 
struck  with  conviction  at  his  grave,  and  thought  he  heard  the  voice 
of  God  calling  him  to  repentance.  I  was  also  told  of  a  woman  who 
sent  for  brother  Andrew  to  preach  her  funeral  while  living ;  she 
was  blest  under  the  word,  and  died  in  peace. 

SOUTH  CAROLINA. — Wednesday  17.  We  were  kindly  entertained 

at  P.   C 's  ;  and   next  day,   after  riding  twenty-two  miles  to 

P 's,  we  had  an  evening  meeting,  and  were  happy  with  a  few 

living  souls.  The  Presbyterians  are  very  kind,  giving  us  freely 
whatever  is  needful  for  man  and  horse.  I  have  great  consola- 
tions, and  severe  trials. 

Friday  19.  We  had  some  stir,  especially  amongst  the  young  peo- 
ple, at  the  widow  Bowman's  on  Reedy-River. 

Saturday  20.   Rode  to  M 's  ;  and  finding  brother  Ellis  was  to 

be  at  C 's,  we  hasted  to  see  him,  and  rode  tsventy  miles,  cross- 
ing Ennoree-River,  near  the  slaughter  ground,  where  a  battle 
was  fought  in  the  last  war. 

Sunday  21.  Preached  to  a  quiet  people,  and  had  a  small  stir. 
We  had  a  meeting  in  the  evening  at  brother  Smith's. 

Monday  22.  I  feel  myself  unwell  with  a  sick  and  nervous  head-, 
ach,  which  returns  once  a  month,  and  sometimes  oftener.  We  have 
travelled  about  six  hundred  miles  in  about  three  weeks,  besides 
the  time  taken  up  in  conference.  Thou,  Lord,  wilt  have  mercy, 
and  save  both  man  and  beast.  I  expect  Providence  brought  us 
this  way,  to  pity  and  to  help  the  people.  Dear  brother  and  sister 
S are  unspeakably  kind. 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Friday  26.  Rode  about  twenty-two  miles ; 
stopped  at  Col.  Graham's,  dripping  wet  with  rain  ;  he  received  us, 
poor  strangers,  with  great  kindness,  and  treated  us  hospitablj-. 
We  had  awful  thunder,  wind,  and  rain.  I  was  still  unwell  with  a 
complaint  that  terminated  the  life  of  my  grandfather  Asbury,  whose 
name  I  bear  ;  perhaps  it  will  also  be  my  end.  We  were  weather 
bound  until  Monday  morning,  the  29th  of  March  :  for  several  day- 
I  have  been  very  sick  and  serious  :  I  have  been  enabled  to  look 
into  eternity  with  some  pleasure.  I  could  give  up  the  church,  the 
college,  and  schools  ;  nevertheless,  there  was  one  drawback — what 
will  my  enemies  and  mistaken  friends  say  ?  why.  that  he  hath 
offended  the  Lord,  and  He  hath  taken  him  away.  In  the  afternoon 
I  felt  somewhat  better.  Brother  Whatcoat  preached  a  most  excel 
lent  sermon  on  "The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  word  but  ii 
power" — not  in  sentiment'?  or  forms,  but  in  the  convincing.  • 


1790.]  HEV.  FUANCIS  ASRURY'S  JOURNAL.  C9 

verting,  regenerating,  sanctifying,  power  of  God.  I  atn  making 
close  application  to  my  l!H>lr  ;  reading  the  Prophets  at  my  leisiiro 
whilst  on  my  journey,  I  met  with  a  pio'H  UnpiUt — TJlnrv  to  God. 
for  what  religion  there  is  still  to  be  found  amongst  all  sects  and 
denominations  of  people  ! 

Wednesday  "1.  Rode  to  Gilbert-Town,  and  preached  at  H 's 

with  some  freedom,  but  was  very  unwell  in  the  afternoon. 

Thursday,  April  1.  Rode  about  fifty  miles  through  Rutherford 
and  Burke  counties  :  it  is  a  day  of  small  things  here. 

Crossed  Catawha-River  at  Greenlee's  ford,  and  came  to  our 
good  friend  White's  on  John's  River  about  eight  o'clock  at  night. 
When  I  set  off  in  the  morning,  it  seemed  as  if  I  should  faint  by 
the  way,  I  was  so  ill  with  a  mixed  internal  complaint  to  which  I 
am  subject.  We  arrived  in  the  very  nick  of  time,  Friday  being; 
a  very  rainy  day,  and  there  being  no  necessity,  that  day,  to  ride. 
1  feel  happy  in  the  prospect  of  death  and  res'.  ;  yet  am  I  willing  to 
labour  and  to  suffer  the  Lord's  leisure. 

Saturdays.  Quarterly  meeting  began.  Brother  W — and  my- 
self both  preached,  and  there  was  a  reviving  among  both  white  and 
black  ;  and  I  trust  some  souls  were  blessed. 

Sunday  4.  Was  a  serious  day — none  were  admitted  to  our  pri- 
vate meeting  but  members  :  many  spoke,  and  most  felt  the  power 
of  God.  AVe  then  hnsted  to  the  Globe  chapel,  where  the  people 
met,  but  had  not  patience  to  wait :  we  had  a  rough  road,  and  John> 
River  to  cross  twenty  times.  I  was  desired  to  preach  sister  B — 's 
funeral.  She  was  formerly  a  Presbyterian  ;  then  a  Methodist ; 
and  last  of  all  a  Christian  ;  and  there  is  good  hope  that  she  died 
in  the  Lord  : — I  was  resolved  to  fulfil  her  desire,  and  preached  on 
1  Cor.  xv.  56,  57.  to  about  eight  souls. 

Monday  5.  We  made  an  early  move.  After  worming  the.  stream 
for  awhile,  we  took  through  the  Laurel  Hill,  and  had  to  scale  the 
mountains,  which  in  some  places  were  rising  like  the  roof  of  a 
house.  We  came  to  the  head  of  Watauga-River — a  most  neglect- 
ed place.  Here  the  people  have  had  their  corn  destroyed  by  frost, 
and  many  of  them  have  moved  away.  It  was  thus  we  found  it  in 

Tyger's  Valley.     We  passed  by  W 's,  a  poor   lodging,  and 

slept  at  the  Beaver-Dam  in  a  cabin  without  a  cover,  exrept  whnt 
a  few  boards  supplied  :  we  had  very  heavy  thunder  and  lightning, 
and  most  hideous  yelling  of  wolves  around — with  rain,  which  is 
frequent  in  the  mountains. 

TEXNESSEE. — Tuesday  5.  We  were  compelled  to  ride  through 
the  rain,  and  crossed  the  Stone  Mountain  : — those  who  »i?h  to 


70  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURv's  JOURNAT,.  [1790. 

know  how  rough  it  is  may  tread  ia  our  path.  What  made  it  worse 
to  me  was,  that  while  I  was  looking  to  see  what  was  become  of 
our  guide,  I  was  carried  off  with  full  force  against  a  tree  that 
hung  across  the  road  some  distance  from  the  ground,  and  my  head 
received  a  very  great  jar,  which,  however,  was  lessened  by  my 
having  on  a  hat  that  was  strong  in  the  crown.  We  came  on  to  the 
dismal  place  called  Roan's  Creek,  which  was  pretty  full.  Here 
we  took  a  good  breakfast  on  our  tea,  bacon,  and  bread.  Reaching 
Watauga,  we  had  to  swim  our  horses,  and  ourselves  to  cross  in  a 
canoe  ;  up  the  Iron  Mountain  we  ascended,  where  we  had  many  a 
seat  to  rest,  and  many  a  weary  step  to  climb.  At  length  we  came 
to  Greer's,  and  halted  for  the  night. 

Wednesday  6.  We  reached  Nelson's  chapel  about  one  o'clock, 
after  riding  about  eighteen  miles.  Now  it  is  that  we  must  prepare 
for  danger  in  going  through  the  wilderness.  I  received  a  faithful 
letter  from  brother  Poythress  in  Kentucky,  encouraging  me  to 
come.  This  letter  I  think  well  deserving  of  publication.  1  found 
the  poor  preachers  indifferently  clad,  with  emaciated  bodies,  and 
-subject  to  hard  fare  ;  yet  I  hope  they  are  rich  in  faith. 

Friday  8.  After  receiving  great  kindness  from  dear  sister  Nel- 
son, we  came  on  to  brother  Bull's,  who  wrought  for  us.  gratis, 
what  we  wanted  in  shoeing  our  horses.  Thence  we  went  on  to 

brother  Gott's,  and  to  brother  P 's  ;  and  thence,  groping 

through  the  woods,  to  brother  Easley's  ;  depending  on  the  fidelity 
of  the  Kentucky  people,  hastening  them,  and  being  unwilling  they 
should  wait  a  moment  for  me.  We  crossed  Holstein  at  Smith's 
ferry,  and  rode  thirty  miles  to  Amie's,  where  we  were  well  enter- 
tained for  our  money. — Coming  along,  I  complained  that  the  peo- 
ple would  take  no  pay  for  their  food  or  services — that  complaint 
has  ceased.  Very  unwell  as  I  was  we  pushed  down  Holstein  to  the 
last  house  ;  here  we  had  no  hope  of  company  from  the  eastern  or 
western  side.  We  turned  out  our  horses  to  graze,  and  they  strayed 
off — so  here  we  are  anchored  indeed. 

The  unsettled  state  of  my  stomach  and  bowels  makes  labour  and 
life  a  burthen.  We  are  now  in  a  house  in  which  a  man  was  killed 
by  the  savages  ;  and  O,  poor  creatures !  they  are  but  one  remove 
from  savages  themselves.  I  consider  myself  in  danger  ;  but  my  God 
will  keep  me  whilst  thousands  pray  for  me. 

Sunday  11.  My  soul  is  humbled  before  God,  waiting  to  see  the 
solution  of  this  dark  providence.  The  man  of  the  house  is  gone 
after  some  horses  supposed  to  be  stolen  by  Indians.  I  have 
been  near  fainting ;  but  my  soul  is  revived  again,  and  my  bodily 


1790. j  REV.  FUANCIS  ASBURv's  JOURNAL.  11 

strength  is  somewhat  renewed.  If  these  difficulties,  which  appear 
to  impede  my  path,  are  designed  to  prevent  my  going  to  Kentucky, 
I  hope  to  know  shortly.  I  spent  the  Sabbath  at  Robert  Beans's. 
In  the  evening,  a  company  of  eleven  came  to  go  forward.  Our 
horses  were  not  to  be  found  without  a  great  sum. 

Monday  morning  12.  We  loaded  brother  Anderson's  little  horse 
with  my  great  bags,  and  two  pair  smaller  ;  four  saddles,  with  blan- 
kets and  provender.  We  then  set  out  and  walked  (en  miles,  and 
our  horses  were  brought  to  us,  and  those  who  brought  them  were 

pleased  to  take  what  we  pleased  to  give.     Brother  A sought 

the  Lord  by  fasting  and  prayer,  and  had  a  strong  impression  that  it 
\vas  the  will  of  God  that  I  should  not  go  with  that  company. 

Tuesday  13.    We  came  back  to  A 's, — a  poor  sinner.     He 

was  highly  offended  that  we  prayed  so  loud  in  his  house.  He  is  a 
distiller  of  whiskey,  and  boasts  of  gaining  £,300  per  annum  by  the 
brewing  of  his  poison.  We  talked  very  plainly  ;  and  I  told  him 
that  it  was  of  necessity,  and  not  of  choice,  we  were  there — that  I 
feared  the  face  of  no  man.  He  said,  he  did  not  desire  me  to  trou- 
ble myself  about  his  soul. — Perhaps  the  greatest  offence  was  given 
by  my  speaking  against  distilling  and  slave-holding. 

Having  now  been  upon  expenses  from  Friday  until  this  day,  foi 
four  horses  and  three  men,  I  judged  it  high  time  to  move. 

Thursday  15.  We  rode  fifty  miles  ;  and  next  day  preached  at 
•Owens's. 

Saturday  17.  We  rode  on  with  great  violence,  which  made  me 
feel  very  serious. 

Sunday  18.  Brother  W.  preached  at  General  Russell's,  on  the 
birth,  character,  and  office  of  John  the  Baptist. 

Monday  19.  I  resolved  on  taking  a  proper  dose  of  Tartar-emetic  : 
this  has  wrought  me  well,  and  I  hope  for  better  health. 

From  December  14,  1789,  to  April  20,  1790,  we  compute  to  have 
travelled  two  thousand  five  hundred  and  seventy-eight  miles.  Hi- 
therto hath  the  Lord  helped.  Glory  !  glory  to  our  God  ! 

VIRGINIA. — We  had  a  good  prayer-meeting  at  General  Russell  - 
This   family  is  lavish  in  attentions  and  kindness  :   I   was  nursed  a- 
an  only  child  by  the  good  man  and  woman  of  the  bouse,  and  indeed 
by  all  the  family. — God  Almighty  bless  them  and  reward  them  ! 

Thursday  22.  We  had  a  lively  prayer-meeting  at  Keywood's — 
Come,  Lord,  like  thunder,  and  break  in  upon  these  dearyonn. 
people  ! 

Friday  23.  We  had  a  very  lively  prayer-meeting  and  cxhorta 
tion.     We  trust  the  Lord  will  do  something  for  these  people  befor- 


7-  REV.  K&ANCIS  ASBURYrS  JOURNAL. 

we  leave  the  rich  Holstein- Valley  :  I  feel  for  their  state — they  are 
settled,  and  dwindling.  I  have  been  happy  in  my  own  soul,  and 
have  gained  bodily  strength.  Two  weeks  are  now  spent,  one  in 
waiting  on  the  Kentucky  business,  and  one,  illness  has  prevented 
my  improving,  except  that  it  has  furnished  time  to  publish  my  ap- 
pointments on  Clinch  and  Nolachucky. 

Saturday  24.  Many  attended  a  prayer-meeting  at  M'Kenry's,  but 
there  was  little  life. 

Sunday  25.  Preached  at  General  Russell's  on  Ezek.  xxxiii.  11. 
I  saw,  1  felt,  I  knew  that  some  of  my  congregation  were  touched. 

Monday  26.  We  rode  through  the  poor  Valley,  calling  on  F , 

who  had  been  sick  and  frightened  with  convictions  and  the  fear  of 
death  ;  we  prayed,  fed  our  horses,  and  rode  on  to  Clinch-River. 

Tuesday  27.  We  had  a  house  well  crowded,  but  there  was  but 
little  stir  among  them.  I  felt  for  these  dear  souls,  and  judged  that 
Providence  was  about  to  open  a  way  for  a  circuit  to  be  formed 
here  in  Russel  county,  for  one  preacher. 

Wednesday  28.  I  preached  at  brother  B 's,  a  frontier  house. 

and  a  station.  In  time  past,  a  person  was  killed  here  by  the  In- 
dians. The  people  showed  their  zeal  in  purchasing  two  magazines 
and  several  hymn-books.  Some  say,  nothing  but  whiskey  will 
bring  money  ;  but  I  proved  the  contrary,  and  I  give  them  credit. 
We  have  had  cold  weather,  and  severe  frosts  for  two  nights 
past. 

We  had  a  dreary  ride  down  to  the  Ford  of  Clinch,  through  a 
solitary  plain  :  many  attended  at  L 's. 

We  rode  down  to  Blackmore's  station  :  here  the  people  have 
been  forted  on  the  north  side  of  Clinch.  Poor  Blackmore  has  had 
a  son  and  daughter  killed  by  the  Indians.  They  are  of  opinion 
here,  that  the  Cherokee?  were  the  authors  of  this  mischief:  I  also 
received  an  account  of  two  families  having  been  killed,  and  of  one 
female  that  was  taken  prisoner,  and  afterward  retaken  by  the 
neighbours  and  brought  back. 

Friday  30.  Crossed  Clinch  about  two  miles  below  the  fort.  In 
passing  along  I  saw  the  precipice  from  which  Blackmore's  unhappy- 
son  leaped  into  the  river  after  receiving  the  stroke  of  a  tomahawk 
in  his  head  ;  I  suppose,  by  the  measure  of  my  eye,  it  must  be 
between  fifty  and  sixty  feet  descent ;  his  companion  was  shot  dead 
upon  the  spot — this  happened  on  the  6th  of  April,  1789. 

We  came  a  dreary  road  over  rocks,  ridges,  hills,  stones,  and 
streams,  along  a  blind,  tortuous  path,  to  Mockason  Gap  and  Creek  ; 
thence  to  Smith's  ferry  across  the  north  branch  of  Holstein.  Herr 


i790.j  ntV.  PftANCIS  ASBCKV'S  JOURNAL. 

1  found  some  lies  had  been  told  on  me  ;  feeling  myself  innocent, 
1  was  not  moved. 

Saturday,  May  1.  Rested.  Next  day  (Sabbath)  1  preached  to 
a  hardened  people. 

Monday  3.  I  preached  at  brother  Payne's,  and  had  some 
encouragement  among  our  Maryland  people.  Sabbath  night,  I 
dreamed  the  guard  from  Kentucky  came  for  me  ;  and  mentioned  it 

to  brother  VV .     In  the  morning  I   retired    to  a  email  stream, 

for  meditation  and  prayer,  and  whilst  there  saw  two  men  come 
over  the  hills:  1  felt  a  presumption  that  they  were  Kentucky  men, 
and  so  they  proved  to  be  ;  they  were  Peter  Massie  and  John  Clark, 
who  were  coming  for  me,  with  the  intelligence  that  they  had  left 
ei»ht  men  below  :  after  reading  the  letters,  and  asking  counsel  of 
God,  I  consented  to  go  with  them. 

Tuesday  4.  We  prepared  ourselves  and  horses  for  our  journey, 
aud  the  next  day  came  once  more  to  Amie's. 

Thursday  (>.  Came  to  Crahbe's,  at  the  lower  end  of  the  Valley, 
and  were  occupied  in  collecting  our  company. 

Friday  7.    We  formed  the  whole  of  our  company  at  the  Valley 

station  ;    besides   brother   W 1  and   myself,   we   were  sixteen 

men,  having  thirleen  guns  only.  We  moved  on  very  swiftly,  con- 
sidering the  roughness  of  the  way,  travelling,  by  my  computation, 
thirty  five  miles  to  day.  Next  day  we  reached  Rich-Land  Creek, 
and  encamped  on  the  road  about  nine  o'clock  at  night,  having 
made,  by  computation,  forty -five  miles. 

KENTUCKY. — Sunday  9.  We  travelled  about  fifty  miles  ;  and 
next  day  forty  five  miles,  and  reached  Madison  court-house,  passing 
the  branches  of  Rock-Castle  River  :  on  our  journey  we  saw  the 
rock  whence  the  river  derives  its  name  ;  it  is  amazing,  and  curious, 
with  appearances  the  mo*t  artificial  1  have  ever  seen — it  is  not 

unlike  an  old  church  or  castle  in  Europe.   We  stopped  at  M 's, 

whose  wife,  now  a  tender,  gracious  soul,  was  taken  prisoner  by 
the  Indians  during  the  last  war.  .\nd  carried  to  Detroit. 

Tuesday  11.  Crossed  Kentucky-River.  1  was  strangely  out- 
done for  want  of  sleep,  having  been  greatly  deprived  of  it  in  my 
journey  through  the  wilderness  ;  which  is  like  being  at  sea,  in 
some  respects,  and  in  others  worse.  Our  way  is  over  mountains, 
steep  hills,  deep  rivers,  and  muddy  creeks  ;  a  thick  growth  of 
reeds  for  miles  together  ;  and  no  inhabitants  hut  wild  beasts  and 
savage  men.  Sometimes,  before  I  was  aware,  my  ideas  would  be 
leading  me  lobe  looking  out  ahead  for  a  fence  ;  and  1  would,  with- 
out reflection,  try  to  recollect  the  houses  we  should  have  lodged 

Vnr.  II.  10 


74  HEV.  1'nANus  AsatiRy's  JOURNAL.  [1790. 

at  in  the  wilderness.  I  slept  about  an  hour  the  first  night,  and 
about  two  the  last :  we  ate  no  regular  meal ;  our  bread  grew 
short,  and  I  was  much  spent. 

I  saw  the  graves  of  the  slain — twenty-four  in  one  camp.  I  leara 
that  they  had  set  no  guard,  and  that  they  were  u-p  late,  playing  at 
cards.  A  poor  woman  of  the  company  had  dreamed  three  times 
that  the  Indians  had  surprised  and  killed  them  all  ;  she  urged  her 
husband  to  entreat  the  people  to  set  a  guard,  but  they  only  abused 
him,  and  cursed  him  for  his  pains.  As  the  poor  woman  was  re- 
lating her  last  dream  the  Indians  came  upon  the  camp  ;  she  and 
her  husband  sprung  away,  one  east,  the  other  west,  and  escaped. 
She  afterward  came  back,  and  witnessed  the  carnage.  These  poor 
sinners  appeared  to  be  ripe  for  destruction.  I  received  an  ac- 
count of  the  death  of  another  wicked  wretch  who  was  shot  through 
the  heart,  although  he  had  vaunted,  with  horrid  oaths,  that  no 
Creek  Indian  could  kill  him.  These  are  some  of  the  melancholy 
accidents  to  which  the  country  is  subject  for  the  present ;  as  to  the 
land,  it  is  the  richest  body  of  fertile  soil  I  have  ever  beheld. 

Wednesday  12.  I  preached  for  the  first  time  at  R 's,  on 

Jer.  1.  4,  5.  and  the  Lord  was  with  me. 

Thursday  13.  Being  court  time,  I  preached  in  a  dwelling-housej 
at  Lexington,  and  not  without  some  feeling.  The  Methodists  do 
but  little  here — others  lead  the  way.  After  dinner  I  rode  about 

five  miles  in  company  with  poor  C W .  Ah  !  how  many 

times  have  I  eaten  at  this  man's  table,  in  New-York — and  now,  he 
is  without  property  and  without  grace.  When  about  to  part,  I 
asked  him  if  he  loved  God  :  his  soul  was  in  his  eyes  ;  he  burst 
into  tears,  and  could  scarcely  speak — "  he  did  not  love  God,  but 
he  desired  it."  Our  conference  was  held  at  brother  Masterson's, 
a  very  comfortable  house,  and  kind  people.  We  went  through 
our  business  in  great  love  and  harmony.  I  ordained  Wilson  Lee, 
Thomas  Williamson,  and  Barnabas  M'Henry,  elders.  We  had 
preaching  noon  and  night,  and  souls  were  converted,  and  the  fallen 
restored.  My  soul  has  been  blest  among  these  people,  and  I  am 
exceedingly  pleased  with  them.  I  would  not,  for  the  worth  of  all 
the  place,  have  been  prevented  in  this  visit,  having  no  doubt  but 
that  it  will  be  for  the  good  of  the  present  and  rising  generation. 
It  is  true,  such  exertions  of  mind  and  body  are  trying ;  but  I  am 
supported  under  it : — if  souls  are  saved,  it  is  enough/  Brother 
Poythress  is  much  alive  to  God.  We  fixed  a  plan  for  a  school, 
and  called  it  Bethel;  and  obtained  a  subscription  of  upwards  nf 
£300,  in  land  and  money,  towards  it»  establishment. 


nr.v.  FHANTIS  *<,RI  KV>  .Toi>n\jir 


Monday  17.  Kode  to  Coleman's  (Impel,  ;il>ont  (en  miles  from 
Lexington,  nml  preached  to  an  unengaged  people.  We  thcnc<- 
rode  to  I.  Lewis's,  on  the  bend  of  Kentucky-River.  Lewis  is  an 
old  acquaintance,  from  Lecsburg,  Virginia  ;  1  wa«  pleased  to  find 
that  heaven  and  religion  were  not  lost  sight  of  in  this  family. 
Brother  Lewis  offered  me  one  hundred  acres  of  land  for  Bethel, 
on  a  good  spot  for  building  materials. 

We  rode  through  mire  and  rain  twenty-one  miles  to  Franri? 
Clark's,  near  Danville,  where  we  had  a  numerous  congregation. 

Saturday  22.   We  had  a  noble  shout  at  Brown's,  and  four  souls 
professed   to  be  converted  to  God.     Reached  the  Crab-Orchard, 
and  lodged  under  a  tree,  very  feverish  and  unwell—  a  poor  begin 
mng  this. 

Monday  24.    We  set  out  on  our  return  through  the  wilderness 
with  a  large  and  helpless  company  ;   we  had  about  fifty  people, 
twenty   of  whom    were   armed,  and   five   of  whom  might    have 
stood  fire.      To  preserve  order  and  harmony,  we    had  articles 
drawn   up   for,  and  signed  by  our  company,  and   I  arranged  the 
people  for  travelling  according  to  the  regulations  agreed   upon. 
Some   disaffected  gentlemen,   who   would   neither   sign  nor  come 
under  discipline,  had  yet  the  impudence  to  murmur  when  left  be- 
hind.    The  first  night  we  lodged  some  miles  beyond  the  Hazel- 
patch.      The  next  day  we   discovered  signs  of  Indians,  and  some 
thought  they  heard  voices  ;  we  therefore  thought  it  best  to  travel 
on,  and   did   not   encamp    until  three  o'clock,  halting  on  the  east 
side  of  Cumberland-River.     We  had  gnats  enough.     We  had  an 
alarm,  but  it  turned  out  to  be  a  false  alarm.     A  young  gentleman, 
a  Mr.  Alexander,  behaved  exceedingly  well  ;  but  his  tender  frame 
was  not  adequate  to  the  fatigue  to  be  endured,  and  he  had  well 
nigh   fainted  on  the  road  to  Cumberland  Gap.     Brother  Massie 
was  captain  ;  and  finding  I    had  gained  authority  among  the  peo- 
ple, I   acted    somewhat  in   the   capacity  of  an   adjutant   and  quar- 
ter-master amongst  them.     At  the  foot  of  the  mountain  the  com- 
pany separated  ;  the  greater  part  went  on  with  me  to  Powell's 
River  ;    here   we   slept  on   the  earth,    and   next   day  made  the 
Grassy  Valley.     Several  of  the  company,  who  were  not  Metho- 
dists, expressed  their  high  approbation  of  our  conduct,  and  most 
affectionately  invited  us  to  their  houses.     The  journeys  of  each 
day   were    as   follow  :     Monday   forty-five   miles  ;    Tuesday   fifty 
miles  ;  Wednesday  sixty  miles. 

TENM.-.SSKE.—  Thursday  27.  By  riding  late   we   reached 
Amie's.  where  I  had  a  bed  to  rest  on. 


TvEV.  FKAN'CIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1790. 


Friday  28,  Saturday  29,  and  Sunday  30.  I  spent  at  Gen.  Rus- 
sell's, whose  wife  is  converted  since  1  left  the  house  last  ;  1  thought 
then  that  she  was  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God. 

I  found  myself  dispirited  in  public  preaching.  I  afterward  or- 
dained I.  Ragan  and  B.  Vanpelt,  local  preachers,  to  the  office  of 
deacons. 

Monday  31.  Rode  to  New-  River,  forty-five  or  fifty  miles  ;  here 
1  saw  John  Tunnell,  very  low  ;  a  mere  shadow  ;  but  very  humble 
and  patient  under  his  affliction. 

NORTH  CAROLINA.  —  Tuesday,  June  1.  I  rode  about  forty-five 
miles  to  Armstrong's,  and  next  day  about  four  o'clock  reached 
M'Knights  on  the  Yadkin-River,  in  North  Carolina  ;  here  the  con- 
ference had  been  waiting  for  me  nearly  two  weeks  :  we  rejoiced 
together,  and  my  brethren  received  me  as  one  brought  from  the 
jaws  of  death.  Our  business  was  much  matured,  the  critical 
concern  of  the  council  understood,  and  the  plan,  with  its  amend- 
ments, adopted. 

Saturday  5,  and  Sunday  6.  Were  days  of  the  Lord's  presence 
and  power  —  several  were  converted.  We  had  an  ordination 
each  day.  We  have  admitted  into  full  connexion  some  steady 
men,  with  dispositions  and  talents  for  the  work. 

Monday  7.  Rode  through  Salem  Town  ;  the  Moravian  brethren 
have  the  blessing  of  the  nether  springs,  and  houses,  orchards, 
mills,  stores,  mechanic's  shops,  &c.  I  rode  about  three  hundred 
miles  to  Kentucky  in  six  days  ;  and  on  my  return  about  five  hun- 
dred miles  in  nine  days  :  O  what  exertions  for  man  and  horse: 

VIRGINIA.  —  Wednesday  9.  Came  forty-five  miles  to  !.  C  -  's, 
and  next  day,  thirty  miles  to  sister  Jones's. 

Friday  11.  Rode  to  brother  I  -  's,  and  next  day  late  in  the 
evening  reached  Petersburg. 

Sunday  13.  I  preached  on  Psalm  Ixxxv.  G.  I  was  weak  and  un- 
well with  excessive  labour  and  want  of  rest. 

Monday  14.  Our  conference  began  ;  all  was  peace  until  the 
council  was  mentioned.  The  young  men  appeared  to  be  entirely 
under  the  influence  of  the  elders,  and  turned  it  out  of  doors.  I 
was  weary,  and  felt  but  little  freedom  to  speak  on  the  subject. 
This  business  is  to  be  explained  to  every  preacher;  and  then  it 
must  be  carried  through  the  conferences  twenty-four  times,  i.  e. 
through  all  the  conferences  for  two  years.  We  had  some  little 
quickenings,  but  no  great  move  among  the  people  at  our  public 
preaching.  Mr.  Jarratt  preached  for  us  ;  friends  at  first  are 
friends  again  at  last.  There  were  four  elders,  and  seventeen 


0.]  .  .    J-ftA.N'  •  Al.. 

ileacons  ordained  ;  ten  young  men  who  offered  to  travel,  besides 
those  who  remained  on  trial.  We  have  good  news  from  a  far 
country— Jersey  flames  \\ith  religion;  some  hundreds  are  con- 
verted. The  work  of  God  does  revive  here,  although  not  in  the 
same  decree  as  it  did  two  years  ago.  In  the  midst  of  all  my  labour 
and  trouble  I  enjoy  peace  within. 

Saturday  19.  Ended  my  week  of  business.  I  am  crowded  with 
letters — have  much  reading  and  writing,  and  the  temporal  concerns 
of  the  college,  and  the  printing  to  attend  to. 

Sunday  20.  I  spoke  melting  words  on  Hosea  xi.  8.  many  felt  ; 
one  found  pence  with  God.  In  the  afternoon,  I  believe  the  power 
of  God  was  felt  in  the  hearts  of  some  of  my  congregation.  1 
I  did  not  wonder  that  there  was  not  a  greater  work  of  religion 
in  this  place,  when  I  learned  that  they  were  sometimes  three 
or  four  weeks  without  preaching  :  thus  Satan  tries  to  keep  preach- 
ers and  people  asunder — yet  some  cry  out,  "  We  have  no  faith 

for  Petersburg !''     My  dear  old  friend  and  fellow  traveller  W 

is  smitten  witli  boils  so  that  he  cannot  go  on.     Stopped  at  brother 
G 's. 

Monday  21 .  We  had  the  divine  presence  in  our  worship  at  sister 
Stringer's. — I  am -often  blessed  at  the  houses  of  the  fatherless  and 
widows.  Now,  I  say  to  my  body,  return  to  thy  labour  ;  to  my  soul, 
return  to  thy  rest,  and  pure  delight  in  reading,  meditation,  and 
prayer,  and  solitude.  The  shady  groves  are  witness  to  my  retired 
and  sweetest  hours  :  to  sit,  and  melt,  and  bow  alone  before  the 
Lord,  whilst  the  melody  of  the  birds  warbles  from  tree  to  tree- 
how  delightful ! 

Tuesday  22.  The  Lord  was  with  us  at  Finney's  church  ;  and 
God's  dear  children  praised  his  name,  whilst  sinners  felt  and  looked 
serious. 

Wednesday  23.  I  preached  at  Paine's,  an  ancient,  and  almost  worn- 
out  place.  At  Ryall's,  the  next  day,  I  was  quite  unwell  ;  and  what 
made  the  matter  worse,  was,  that  I  imprudently  walked  out,  and  sat 
upon  the  ground,  and  took  fresh  cold.  From  Ryall's  I  proceeded  to 
the  old  court-house,  where  I  spoke  with  great  pain — from  head  to 
foot  was  pain,  all  perspiration  appeared  to  be  quite  stopped.  1  lodg- 
ed at  Jones's — a  whole  family  snatched  as  brands  from  the  burning. 

Saturday  26.  1  was  so  unwell  that  1  could  not  preach  at  Pri(J 
church. 

Sunday  27.  Rode  to  brother  Strong's,  where,  as  there  were  many 
who  had  come  expecting  to  hear  me,  1  made  a  feeble  attempt  in 
the  wood?  on  2  Thess.  i.  5 — 9.  my  head  was  greatly  arilir* 


7o  KEV.  KKANCIS  ASEURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1790. 

Monday  morning  28.  I  took  a  strong  decoction  of  rue  and  worm- 
wood. My  fever  breaks,  and  I  feel  a  little  better. — I  found  perfect 
patience  in  great  misery  of  body.  Lord,  make  me  perfect  through 
suffering  ! 

Monday  28.  I  had  a  few  Christians,  and  a  few  sinners  at  the 
Widow  Lackland's  ;  and  there  was  a  small  reviving  among  the  peo- 
ple. The  leaven  of  Antinomianism  prevails  here,  and  the  Metho- 
dists talk  much  about  persons  and  opinions,  when  they  should  be 
looking  to  God. 

Tuesday  29.  I  am  very  weak  and  low  in  body. — Lord,  sanctify 

affliction,  and  make  it  a  mean  of  health  to  my  soul !  Brother  W 

preached  on  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste."  I  have 
felt  grieved  in  mind  that  there  is  a  link  broken  out  of  twelve,  that 
should  form  a  chain  of  union  :  I  hope  God  will  sanctify  some  pro- 
vidence to  the  explanation  of  this  matter,  and  heal  the  whole. 

Wednesday  30.  Brother  W gave  us  a  weighty  discourse 

on  the  prophetic,  priestly,  and  kingly  offices  of  Christ.  In  great 
weakness,  I  enlarged  on  1  Peter  iii.  15.  and  showed  that  it  is  not 
enough  to  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  his  name,  word,  Sabbath,  ordi- 
nances, ministers,  people,  and  worship  ;  but  that  the  heart  must  be 
filled  with  a  holy,  constant  fear  of,  confidence  in,  and  love  to,  God. 
But  how  common  is  it  for  different  denominations  to  ask  each  other 
of  their  distinguishing  peculiarities  ;  and  how  very  rare  it  is  for 
them  to  talk  closely  of  the  dealings  of  God  with  their  own  souls. 

July  1.  As  we  rode  on,  there  was  a  great  appearance  of  imme- 
diate rain  ;  I  prayed  that  it  might  pass,  fearing  its  effects  in  my  very 
weak  state  ;  I  was  mercifully  preserved  ;  a  few  drops  fell  on  me 
only,  and  I  found,  as  I  proceeded,  that  it  had  rained  very  heavily 
ahead. 

We  had  a  few  unfeeling  souls  at  Svviney's  ;  one  man  appeared  to 
be  hardened  to  an  extraordinary  degree  :  I  thought  I  felt  his  spirit 
as  soon  as  I  came. 

Thursday  2.  I  preached  in  a  school-house,  near  brother  M 'sf 

with  some  enlargement,  but,  I  fear,  to  little  purpose  :  one  woman 
appeared  to  be  under  conviction. 

Friday  3.  I  had  a  painful  ride  of  twenty-five,  or  thirty  miles,  to 
brother  C 's. 

Saturday  4.  My  mind  was  afflicted,  and  my  body  weak.  I  was 
led  to  speak  on  "  Be  ye  also  ready," — and  some  felt  the  word. 

Sunday  5.  I  was  set  at  liberty,  and  there  was  a  little  shaking  and 
breathing  after  God,  while  I  opened  and  explained,  "  And  there  is 
none  calleth  upon  thy  name,  that  stirreth  up  himself  to  take  hold  of 


1700. j  uKV.  UlANCls  A6BCKY  S  JOUKAAL.  ''0 

thee."    Afterward  I  roile  to  brother  Murphy's. — I  felt  very  weak, 
but  patiently  happy  in  God. 

Monday  6.  We  had  some  move  at  Ayre's  church  ;  brother  W 

was  much  led  out  in  exhortation  and  prayer.     I  spent  the  after- 
noon in  reading  and  spiritual  exercises. 

Tuesday  7.  We  rode  to  Liberty,  the  county-town  of  Bedford. 
We  set  out  towards  Botetourt,  and  reached  brother  Mitchell's 
about  ten  o'clock  the  next  day,  and  found  some  zeal  amongst  the 
people.  Next  day  at  E.  Mitchell's,  on  Craig's  Creek,  one  soul 
found  the  Lord. 

Friday  10.  We  had  a  tedious,  tiresome  journey  over  hills  and 
mountains  to  Pott's  Creek.  After  a  melting  season  at  brother 
C 's,  we  came  to  brother  W 's,  where  we  were  in- 
formed of  the  death  of  dear  brother  John  Tunnel!. 

Saturday  11.  Brother  Tunnell's  corpse  was  brought  to  Dew's 
chapel.  I  preached  his  funeral — my  text,  "  For  me  to  live  is 
Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain."  We  were  much  blessed,  and  the  power 
of  God  was  eminently  present,  ft  is  fourteen  years  since  brother 
Tunnell  first  knew  the  Lord  ;  and  he  has  spoken  about  thirteen 
years,  and  travelled  through  eight  of  the  thirteen  States  :  few  men, 
as  public  ministers,  were  better  known  or  more  beloved.  He  was 
a  simple-hearted,  artless,  childlike  man  :  for  his  opportunities,  he 
was  a  man  of  good  learning  ;  had  a  large  fund  of  Scripture  know- 
ledge, was  a  good  historian,  a  sensible,  improving  preacher,  a  most 
affectionate  friend,  and  a  great  saint ;  he  had  been  wasting  and 
declining  in  strength  and  health  for  eight  years  past,  and  for  the 
last  twelve  months  sinking  into  a  consumption. — I  am  humbled.— 
O,  let  my  soul  be  admonished  to  be  more  devoted  to  God  ! 

Sunday  12.  The  morning  was  rainy.  About  noon  I  set  out  for 
the  Sweet-Springs,  and  preached  on  1  Cor.  i.  23 — 29.  A  fexv  of 
the  gentry  were  kind  enough  to  come  and  hear — and  some  were 
enraptured  with  the  sermon  ;  for — it  was  very  like  the  subject. 
The  three  following  days  I  rested,  and  was  very  unwell.  I  had  no 
place  to  preach,  but  under  the  trees,  and  preaching  here  seems 
unseasonable  with  the  people  except  on  Sundays. 

Thursday  16.  Rode  to  Rohoboth,  where  brother  W preach- 
ed, and  brother  A and  myself  spoke  after  him,  and  the  peo- 
ple appeared  somewhat  affected. 

Friday  17.  We  had  twenty  miles  to  Green-Brier  court-house  :- 
here  some  sat  as  critics  and  judges.     We  had  to  ride  thirty-one 
miles  without  food  for  man  or  horse,  and  to  call   at  three  ho> 


XEV.  I  KAN-CIS  ASBtTRV's    JOURNAL.  f  11''C. 

before  we  could  get  water  fit  to  drink — all  this  may  serve  to  try 
our  faith  or  patience. 

Saturday  18.  Some  very  pointed  things  were  delivered  relative 
to  parents  and  children  from  Gen.  xviii.  19.  After  being  in  pub- 
lic exercises  from  ten  till  two  o'clock,  we  rode  in  the  afternoon 
twenty  miles  to  the  little  levels  of  Green-Brier.  On  my  way  I 
pre  meditated  the  sending  of  a  preacher  to  a  newly  settled  place 
in  the  Kenhaway  county. 

Sunday  19.  We  had  a  warm  sermon  at  M'Neal's,  at  which  many 
were  highly  offended  ;  but  I  trust  their  false  peace  is  broken. 
There  are  many  bears  in  this  part  of  the  country  ;  not  long  since, 
a  child  in  this  neighbourhood  was  killed  by  one. 

Monday  20.  Rode  to  Drinnon's,  whose  wife  was  killed,  and  his 
zon  taken  prisoner  by  the  Indians. 

Tuesday  21.  I  believe  I  never  before  travelled  such  a  path  as  I 
this  day  rode  over  the  mountains  to  reach  Mr.  Nelson's,  in  Tyger- 
Valley. 

Wednesday  22.  I  preached  at  Wilson's.  Here  many  careless 
people  do  not  hear  a  sermon  more  than  once  in  one  or  two  years  ; 
this  one  of  them  told  me  ;  and  that  he  and  his  wife  had  not  been 
to  preaching  since  I  was  here  on  my  last  visit.  I  endeavoured  to 
apply  "  My  people  are  destroyed  for  lack  of  knowledge." 

Thursday  23.  My  horse  lost  a  shoe  on  a  bad  road,  and  next  day 
on  the  mountains  dropped  two  more  ;  so  I  rode  my  old  baggage 
horse  along  a  most  dreary,  grown-up  path  to  brother  C 's. 

Saturday  25.  Attended  quarterly  meeting  at  Morgan-Town  : — 
1  spoke  on  superstition,  idolatry,  unconditional  election  and  re- 
probation, Antinomianism,  Universalism,  and  Deism. 

Sunday  26.  Preached  on  Matt.  xxv.  31.  to  the  end,  brother 
W —  -  also  gave  us  a  sermon  ;  and  a  Presbyterian  minister  two — 
so  here  we  had  it  in  abundance. 

Monday  27.  Preached  at  B 's  ;  and  the  next  day  at  H 's, 

Our  conference  began  at  Union-Town  on  Wednesday  the  twenty- 
ninth  of  July  : — it  was  conducted  in  peace  and  love.  On  Thurs- 
day I  preached. 

PENNSYLVANIA. — Saturday,  August  1.  I  spoke  on  education,  from 
Prov.  xxii.  6.  I  was  led  to  enlarge  on  the  obligations  of  pa- 
rents to  their  children  ;  and  the  nature  of  that  religious  education 
which  would  be  most  likely  to  tit  them  for  this,  and  which  alone 
•;ould  qualify  them  for  the  next  world. 

2.  I  ordnined  C.  C .  I.  L ,  and  G.  G .  elder?. 


1790.)  hi.v.  UIANVJS  \>nir.k  s  .mi, p.:;  LI 

and  four  deacons.  Here  tliore  is  a  revival  among  preachers  and 
people ;  some  of  the  societies  are  much  enqM-od  with  God,  and 
after  we  have  had  a  few  more  conferences  in  Union-Town,  1  hope 
we  shall  drive  Satan  out,  and  have  a  glorious  work. 

Tuesday  4.  Rode  to  B 's  ;  and  next  day  came   to  Cressap's, 

where  I  rested  the  following  day,  and  was  employed  in  reading, 
meditation,  and  prayer.  1  had  very  solemn  thoughts  of  God  and 
his  work  :  I  want  a  closer  walk  with  God  ;  and  to  be  more  alone, 
and  in  prayer. 

Friday  7.  We  had  divine  hreathings  at  the  chapel. 

Saturday  8.  We  held  a  quarterly  meeting  at  the  widow  Conl- 
son's.  There  was  much  rain  ;  we  had  many  people,  and  but  little 
room:  these  circumstances  rendered  the  meeting  in  some  respects 
uncomfortable  ;  yet,  I  trust,  it  was  profitable  :  many  souls  felt  the 
Jiyine  power,  among  whom  were  some  poor  backsliders. 

Tuesday  11.  I  had  an  attentive,  well-behaved  congregation  at 
Squire  Vanmeter's.  O  that  they  may  feel  the  truth  and  effects 
of  godliness  on  earth,  and  iu  heaven. 

At  Doctor  Naves'*,  formerly  Hyder's,  I  applied  "  O  Ephraim, 
how  shall  I  give  thce  up  ?"  I  felt  a  vast  weight  upon  my  spirit 
for  these  people. 

Wednesday  l~.   We  had  about  forty  miles  to  ride  to  G ,  and 

Brock's  Gap,  over  a  severe  mountain  to  cross  :  the  weather  was 
extremely  warm.  I  viewed  and  pitied  the  case  of  the  people  on 
the  south  fork  of  the  south  branch  of  the  Patomac  :  they  are  Ger- 
mans, and  have  no  preaching  in  their  own  language,  and  English 
preaching  is  taken  from  them — none  careth  for  them.  1  am  of 
opinion,  that  if  a  preacher  would  come  and  continue  amongst  them 
for  one  year,  riding  up  and  down  the  river,  preaching  from  house 
to  house,  it  would  answer  a  very  good  purpose. 

VIRGINIA. — Came  to  brother  Baker's,  a  pious  German,  well  set- 
tled on  a  branch  of  Shenandoah-River.  I  had  an  attentive  congre- 
gation of  bis  countrymen. 

Saturday  15,  and  Sunday  16.  I  preached  at  Rockingham,  where 
there  is  the  beginning  of  a  good  work.  We  have  a  church  built 
on  a  hill,  that  cannot  be  hid.  People  came  as  far  as  thirty  miles 
to  preaching  ;  and  some  found  the  Lord  during  my  stay.  We 
Lave  some  very  respectable  friends  here. 

Tuesday  18.  We  had  a  crowd  of  people  at  Bethel,  who  appeared 
very  insensible.  Rode  on  to  Millers-Town,  properly  Woodstock  : 
here  I  was  permitted  to  preach  in  the  Episcopal  church  ;  many 
attended,  and  behaved  well,  and  I  had  light  and  libertv  in  speaking 

V-..T..  II.  II 


i.t^V.   FRANCIS  ASBMRYS  JOURNAL.  [1790. 


\\ednesday  19.  We  had  twenty-two  miles  to  Newtown  :  here 
they  have  built  us  a  spacious  chapel.  Our  horses  are  stiff,  and 
lame,  ami  sore,  and  the  weather  is  oppressively  warm  :  we  have 
many  sick,  hungry,  wenry  rides  through  the  heat,  and  over  hills, 
rocks,  and  mountains. 

Saturday  22,  and  Sunday  23.  We  held  our  quarterly  meeting  at 
N  i:\vtown  :  many  felt  the  power  of  God  —  particularly  at  the  love- 
feast  ;  some  were  of  opinion  that  twenty  were  converted. 

Tuesday  25.  We  had  a  melting  time  whilst  I  opened  these 
words,  "  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other,"  &c.  I  feel  a 
persuasion  that  these  people  will  come  home  to  God.  One  was 
deeply  distressed  under  preaching.  I  rode  about  an  hour  after 
night,  in  order  to  reach  brother  Donaldson's,  by  which  I  found  I 
had  taken  cold. 

Wednesday  26.  Our  conference  began  at  Leesburg  ;  and  we 
continuecKWogether  until  the  Sabbath  following  :  and  had  a  happy 
time  of  peace  and  union. 

To  conciliate  the  minds  of  our  brethren  in  the  south  district  of 
Virginia,  who  are  restless  about  the  council,  1  wrote  their  leader 
a  letter  informing  him,  "  that  I  would  take  my  seat  in  council  as 
another  member  ;"  and,  in  that  point,  at  least,  wave  the  claims  of 
Episcopacy  ;  —  yea,  I  would  lie  down  and  be  trodden  upon,  rather 
than  knowingly  injure  one  soul. 

MARYLAND.  —  Monday  31.  Preached  at  the  Sugar-Loaf  mountain 
with  great  freedom  on  "  For  Zion's  sake  I  will  not  hold  my 
peace,"  &c.  and  found  the  work  of  God  had  been  greatly  far- 
thered :  —  here  I  preached  sixteen  years  ago. 

Tuesday,  September  1.  I  had  a  blessed  season  at  Pigman's 
church,  where  the  Lord  hath  wrought  wonders. 

Wednesday  2.  There  was  an  appearance  of  good  at  I.  Holland's  ; 
and  the  work  goes  on  there. 

Thursday  3.  At  the  widow  H  --  's,  I  put  them  in  mind  of  my 
first  labours  amongst  them  from  house  to  house,  and  some  sinners 
felt  and  shook.  Next  day  at  Rowe's,  there  was  a  shaking. 

Friday  4.  At  night  I  preached  in  Baltimore,  "  Oh  !  Ephraim,  how 
shall  I  give  thee  up  ?" 

Monday  7.  Our  conference  began  ;  was  conducted  in  great 
peace  and  union,  and  ended  on  Wednesday  9. 

Thursday  10.  I  rode  to  Cokesbury. 

Friday  11.  In  the  morning  philosophical  lectures  were  deli- 
vered ;  and  in  the  afternoon  the  boys  delivered  their  orations,  some 
parts  of  which  were  exceptionable,  and  duly  noticed. 


..').]  REV.   FRANCIS  ASB' 

-Saturday  1 -'•  We  made  some  regulations  relative  to  the  order 
and  government  to  be  observed  in  the  college. 

Sunday  13.  I  preached  in  tin-   c<>llo^<>  hall,  on  Matt.   xxv.   - 

to  forty-six  scholars  ; — brothers    1) ,   and  C— -  — ,  spoki-  at'tn 

me. 

Monday  14.   Set  out,  and  next  day  reached  Duck-Creek  Cross- 
Roads,  where  we  held  our  conference  for  the  CMM«TH  ~\\«\ 
Maryland  and  Delaware.     One   or  two   of  our  brethren  felt  tlic 
Virginia  fire  about  the  question  of  the  council,  but  all  thm^  < 
into  order,  and  the  council  obtained.     Whilst  in  session  I  pn-adied 
twice  ;  first,  on  Jos.  iii.  5.   and  the  second  time,  on  Psalm  cxxxvn 
G.  :  we  had  a  solemn,  uniting,  melting  season,  and  great  power  at- 
tended our  last  meeting. 

Saturday  19.  At  noon  I  set  out  for  Philadelphia,  but  my  paddle 
horse  being  lame,  1  was  compelled  to  ride  my  old  horse,  which  is 
only  fit  to  carry  my  baggage. 

Sunday  20.  Dined  with  brother  Bond,  and  came  on  to  Wilming- 
ton. Whilst  preaching  we  had  Satan  inside  and  outside  of  the  house, 
and  through  the  windows  ;  I  believe  good  was  done,  at  which  he 
was  not  well  pleased. 

A  daughter  of  my  old  friend,  Stedham,  had  not  forgotten  me  ;  she 
invited  me,  with  much  affection,  to  her  house  ;  she  remembered 
the  living  and  dying  monitions  of  her  father,  and  was  mindful  of  hi* 
friends. 

PENNSYLVANIA. — Monday  21.  I  reached  the  city  of  Philadelphia. 
Our  brethren  have  built  a  new  chapel,  thirty  feet  square,  at  the 
south  end  of  the  city.  I  feel  myself  fatigued  and  unwell,  occa- 
sioned by  riding  a  rough  going  horse. 

Tuesday  22.   Was  spent  in  reading,  writing,  and  visiting. 

Wednesday  23.  The  conference  began  in  poor  Pennsylvania 
district :  all  was  peace  and  love.  Our  printing  is  in  a  good  state. 
Our  society  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia  are  generally  poor  ;  per- 
haps it  is  well  :  when  men  become  rich,  they  sometimes  forget  that 
they  are  Methodists.  I  am  weak,  and  have  been  busy,  and  am  not 
animated  by  the  hope  of  doing  good  here  ;  I  have  therefore  been 
silent  the  whole  week  :— "  I  must  needs  go  through  Samaria.' 

Friday  25.  There  was  some  feeling,  and  profitable  speaking  ; 
we  also  had  a  love-feast.  Next  day,  Saturday,  I  wa-  clo.-cly  em- 
ployed in  writing. 

Sunday  27.  Many  felt  and  wept,  whilst  I  enlarged  on  <l  The 
Lord  is  in  his  holy  temple."  At  the  new  chapel,  called  Ebenezer. 
in  the  afternoon,  my  subject  was  1  Sam.  vii.  I'-'.  I  first  explained 


;;  [  REV.  FRAXCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1790. 

the  text ;  then  showed  the  Methodist  doctrine  and  discipline,  and 
the  work  God  had  wrought  by  them  in  this  country. 

NGW-JKRSEY. — Monday  28.  Rode  to  Burlington,  the  place  ap- 
pointed tor  our  next  conference  :  here  I  preached  on  "  searching 
Jerusalem  with  candles,"  and  it  was  a  searching  season.  On  Tues- 
day night  we  had  a  shout — then  came  the  bulls  of  Bashan  and 
broke  our  windows  ;  it  was  well  my  head  escaped  the  violence  of 
these  wicked  sinners  :  I  hope  the  strong  power  of  Satan  will  feel 
a  shake  this  conference.  The  session  has  been  in  great  peace ; 
harmony  has  prevailed,  and  the  council  has  been  unanimously 
adopted. 

Wednesday  30.  We  had  a  love-feast ;  and  a  genuine,  sweet 
melting  ran  through  the  house.  S.  Strattan  stood  up  and  declared 
he  had  followed  the  work  of  God  for  six  months,  and  that  he  be- 
lieved six  hundred  souls  had  professed  conversion  in  that  time. 
There  is  a  most  genuine  work  in  several  places  ;  viz.  in  Flanders, 
Trenton,  Burlington,  Salem,  and  Bethel  circuits — glory  to  our 
wonder-working  God  !  All  hail,  eternal  Father,  coequal  Son,  and 
everlasting  Spirit,  in  time  and  for  ever !  Amen,  and  Amen  !  ! ! 

I  delivered  a  discourse  on  Psalm  cxxii.  6.  On  Friday  I  rode 
through  Cross- Weeks,  and  Allen-Town,  and  Cranbury,  lodging  at 
Doctor  Jaques's. 

Friday,  October  1.  As  we  could  not  reach  York,  1  stopped  and 
gave  them  a  discourse  at  Elizabethtown.  We  afterward  had  a 
safe,  although  a  long  passage,  by  water  to  New-York  ;  and  found 
all  in  peace. 

NEW-YORK. — Sunday  3.  I  preached  at  the  old  church  ;  and  in 
the  afternoon  at  the  new,  on  Matt.  xxv.  31 — 46.  The  new  church 
is  commodious,  elegant,  yet  plain. 

Monday  4.  We  beuan  our  conference,  and  sat  with  close  appli- 
cation to  business  until  Thursday  morning  :  all  was  peace,  order, 
and  unanimity.  On  Thursday  evening  I  returned  to  Elizabeth- 
town. 

Friday  8.  Rode  twenty-five  miles  to  Trenton,  and  preached  at 
night.  Next  day  I  rode  through  a  heavy  rain  to  Philadelphia. 

PENNSYLVANIA. — Sunday  morning  10,  was  rainy;  1  however 
preached  at  St.  George's  church,  and  again  in  the  evening.  H. 
Willis  is  come  hither  to  settle  himself  in  life,  and  will  probably  go 
into  trade  :  the  church  has  hereby  lost,  in  part,  a  faithful  servant. 

Thursday  14  1  left  the  city  :  dined  at  Chester  ;  and  here  I  saw- 
one  whose  soul  was  m;tde  dear  to  me  by  long  acquaintance,  now 
feeble  in  body,  and  deeply  affected  in  mind.  Reached  New-Castle, 


1790.]  HI.V.  iT.A-.ris  A-.BIKV  -:  Jotr.NAi 


in  Delaware,  and  once  more  preached  there,  and  had  a  few  seri- 
ous hearer?. 

DKI  \\v  \RI..  —  Friday  15  1  did  not  reach  Dickinson's  in  time; 
however,  I  spoke  a  little.  I  found  -i'l«-r  l>i<  km«"ti  \\npt  in  clay, 
whom  1  left  sn  k  about  throe  week-,  ago  :  she  li  i-  li  -en  an  atten- 
tive, devoted  woman,  li.is  wa-ln-d  llie  saint-'  fret,  and  kindly  served 
the  dear  servants  of  (iod  ;  and  I  trust  her  ?oul  is  now  in  peace. 
i  spoke  ,i  little  at  Duck  Creek  Cross  Roads,  where  nearly  thirty 
members  have  been  added  to  the  society  since  last  conference. 

Sunday  17.    We  had  a  gracious  love  feast,  and  a  very  powerful 
meeting  ;  many  bore  a  living  testimony  ;  there  was  great  life  and 
?houting  among  the  people  of  God.     In  the  evening  I  rode  to  i 
ther  White's. 

Monday  18.  At  Thomas  White's  my  soul  has  been  made  to  feel 
very  solemn  :  a  view  of  the  remarkable  work  of  God  ;  the  death 
of  some,  and  the  deep  spirituality  of  others  ;  the  sending  out 
young  men  for  the  ministry;  and  the  providing  for  the  father; 
and  widows  —  these  are  all  weighty  matters,  and  greatly  occupied 
my  mind.  In  the  midst  of  all  my  -oul  panteth  after  God. 

Wednesday  20.  We  rode  twenty  miles  to  Millford  quarterly 
meeting.  They  have  ceiled  the  chapel,  and  put  the  galleries  in 
order  ;  and  what  is  still  better,  there  were  many  living  soul* 
among  them. 

Thursday  21.    At  the  love-  feast  many  spoke  of  the  dealings  ol 
God  with  their  souls.      I  once  more  visited   B.   Williams,   and  felt 
my  soul  powerfully  drawn  out  towards  the  children 
are  alive  ;   but  I  fear  they  are  not  as  much  engaged  as  they  v 
this  time  last  year. 

Friday  22.  Came  once  more  to  sister  Sharklry's  ;  now  my  dear 
old  friend  is  gone,  perhaps  the  Gospel  must  go  out  of  the  house  : 
I  trust  the  dear  woman  is  gone  to  heaven.  1  then  visited  the  fa- 
therless and  the  widow,  (sister  Abbitt  :)  1  felt  sweet  peace,  and  a 
solemn  sense  of  the  presence  of  God. 

Saturday  23.  Came  to  LewiMown.  There  being  no  preaching 
appointed,  we  rode  to  the  li<;ht-house  :  1  could  but  praise  tied  tha' 
the  house  was  kept  by  people  who  praise  and  love  him  —  no  drink 
ing  or  swearing  here.  Brother  H  -  is  a  Christian  and  u 
preacher;  and  God  has  owned  his  labours.  An  Irish  vessel  hnd 
been  cast  away  with  three  hundred  souls  on  board,  all  of  whom 
perished  but  about  forty  ;  1  asked  him  concerning  it,  and  I  learned 
that  they  were  within  sight  of  land  ;  and  that  if  they  had  timely 
thrown  themselves  into  the  sea,  they  were  nigh  enough  tbr*  lair1 


nfcv.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [!' 


to  have  been  washed  ashore,  so  that  many  more  would  have  pro- 
bably been  saved.  So  much  for  a  drunken  captain,  who  threw 
these  precious  lives  avv.iy.  Brother  H  -  told  me  that  he  did 
not  go  near  the  wreck  until  after  his  return  from  Lewistown,  with 
a  gu.ird  ;  that  it  was  reported  some  of  the  crew  were  as  ready  to 
plunder  the  goods  on  board  as  others  :  stricter  laws  are  now 
made  ;  and  the  people  on  this  shore  are  greatly  reformed  —  for 
which  they  may  thank  the  Methodists.  We  have  a  chapel  built 
at  Lewistown  ;  and  we  had  an  agreeable  Sabbath  day.  The  peo- 
ple, however,  have  their  prejudices.  Mr.  W  -  ,  a  minister  for 
thirty  or  forty  years  standing,  has  gone  (since  I  was  here  last)  to 
give  an  account  of  his  stewardship,  as  we  must  all  shortly  do. 

Tuesday  26.  I  preached  at  the  Sound  chapel.  Brother  Everett 
then  spoke  of  the  sin  of  unbelief  as  the  chief  sin  that  keeps  people 
from  the  blessings  of  the  Gospel.  We  administered  the  sacra- 
ment, and  in  the  afternoon  rode  to  Buckingham.  I  rejoiced  io 
the  account  brother  Powell  gave  me  of  the  state  of  religion  at  the 
Sound  ;  he  said  that  the  Lord  had  owned  and  blest  their  prayer 
meetings  ;  that  he  thought  one  hundred  souls  had  been  affected 
and  shaken,  and  perhaps  eighteen  or  twenty  converted,  in  the  space 
of  eighteen  or  twenty  months  ;  that  brother  Williams,  a  local 
deacon,  was  in  the  spirit  of  the  work  ;  formerly  he  pleased  all 
with  his  smooth  speaking,  but  that  now  they  cry  out  against  him. 

Wednesday  27.  I  fell  glad  in  my  soul,  notwithstanding  brother 
Lee  is  on  forbidden  ground  —  and,  in  spite  of  prejudice  and  Antino- 
mianism,  that  souls  are  awakened  by  his  ministry.  I  feel  myself 
under  some  temptation  ;  but  1  fight  and  conquer  in  the  strength  of 
Christ. 

Thursday  28.  I  finished  reading  the  second  volume  of  the  Ar- 
minian  Magazine.  Notwithstanding  its  defects,  I  am  persuaded  it 
is  one  of  the  best  and  cheapest  books  in  America  :  the  life  of  Mr. 
Fletcher,  the  tracts,  letters,  and  sermons  are  good  —  the  poetry 
might  be  better. 

Saturday  30.  I  feel  the  weakness  and  infirmities  of  flesh  and 
blood  ;  having  rode  seventy  mile?  the  two  last  days.  At  the  quar- 
terly meeting,  at  Garrettson's,  I  was  unwell,  but  felt  divine  assis- 
tance in  preaching. 

VIRGINIA.  —  Sunday  31  We  had  a  powerful  love-feast;  and  I 
believe  it  would  have  been  more  so  had  God's  dear  children  had 
time  to  speak.  We  had  a  vast  crowd  of  people.  Brother  F  - 
preached  first,  and  I  after  him  :  I  had  a  solemn  sense  of  God,  and 
winners  were  serious. 


").]  RLV.  KRAIDClb  A3SURV  S    JOURNAL. 

Monday,  November  1.  Preached  at  Accomack  court-house,  ou 
Horn.  i.  16.  We  had  a  weighty  season.  A  poor  man,  who  had 
lately  professed  religion,  appeared  to  be  somewhat  distracted  :  he 
has  been  a  vile  sinner  ;  hut  I  hope  he  will  recover  his  r^ht  mind  . 
the  family  is  subject  to  derangement.  Th«  re  are  some  unrea- 
sonable things  among  the  people  here  ;  but  we  are  afraid  01" 
gathering  out  the  tares,  lest  \ve  should  root  up  the  whr.ct  il<o. 
We  must  continue  to  observe  the  order  of  (Jod  and  our  own  disci- 
pline— attend  to  preaching,  prajer,  class-meeting,  and  love-feast  : 
and  then  if  they  will  shout,  why  let  them  shout. 

Wednesday  3.  I  preached  on  education,  from  "  Come,  ye  chil- 
dren, hearken  to  me  ;  I  will  teach  you  the  fear  of  the  Lord." 
The  word  was  felt  by  the  parents.  After  preaching  I  rode  to 
Littleton  Long's.  This  neighbourhood  is  supplied  with  preaching 
by  the  Episcopalians,  Presbyterians,  Baptists,  and  Methodists. 
All  is  well,  if  the  people  are  saved. 

MARYLAND. — Thursday  4  We  had  but  few  hearers,  and  an  un- 
comfortable time  at  our  quarterly  meetirig  in  the  Annamessex 
chapel.  Next  day  we  had  a  full  house,  and  I  preached  on  educa- 
tion— my  text,  "  Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  po  :  and 
when  he  is  old  he  will  not  depart  from  it.''  After  meeting  we 
rode  eighteen  miles  without  our  dinner,  which,  with  the  disagree- 
able weather,  made  me  sick.  Rode  twenty-five  miles  to  Broad- 
Creek  quarterly  meeting,  and  preached  on  Matt.  x.  37,  38  ;  and 
the  next  day  on  Hosea  vi.  4.  it  was  a  searching  time.  We  came 
off,  and  found  the  wind  blowing  fiercely  ;  but  when  we  had  en- 
tered the  boat,  we  had  a  sudden  calm  :  if  this  were  not  an  answer 
to  prayer,  it  was  a?  I  prayed.  I  reproved  myself  for  a  sudden  ami 
violent  laugh  at  the  relation  of  a  man's  having  given  an  old  negru 
woman  her  liberty  because  she  had  too  much  religion  for  him. 

Monday  8.  We  held  a  quarterly  meeting  in  Dorset,  in  a  neiv, 
unfinished  house. 

Tuesday  9.  We  had  a  gracious  love-feast ;  and  I  addressed 
parents  ver^  seriously  on  Deut.  vi.  67.  I  lodged  with  brother 
Henry  Ennalls,  who  with  his  wife,  has  been  powerfully  brought  to 
God — his  slaves  were  freed  immediately  His  sister,  Nancy  1 
sett,  has  gone  to  rest :  the  other  two  have  followed  the  example  ot' 
a  dear  brother — God  has  heard  their  prayers. 

Wednesday  10.   I  came  to  Frazier's  chapel :  my  spirits  were 
very  low;  and  1  felt  that  there  was  death  amon^t  tlic  people. 
Thursday  11.  Our  love-feast  was  living  and  powerful. 


3i>  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1790, 

seen  a  wonder  of  grace  in  Capt.  B :  this  has  been  the  wish  of 

my  heart,  the  desire  of  my  soul,  and  the  answer  to  prayer  ;  for 
which  I  am  thankful  to  God. 

Friday  12.  I  preached  At  Bolingbroke  to  a  full  house  on 
Ephrahn'fl  mixing  himself  among  the  people. 

Saturday  13.  We  had  a  gracious  season  at  the  love-feast.  In 
the  evening  I  came  to  Allen's.  The  next  day,  being  rainy,  we  had 
but  one  hundred  hearers  at  Tuckahoe  ;  whereas,  we  expected, 
that  had  it  been  a  clear  day,  we  should  have  five  or  six  hundred. 
I  preached  in  the  evening  at  Choptank  Bridge  to  a  few  people. 

Monday  15.  I  see  the  wonders  of  grace;  and  have  had  severe 
conflicts  :  my  soul  is  more  and  more  established  in  God  ;  but  so 
many  persons  and  things  occupy  my  time,  that  I  have  not  as  much 
leisure  and  opportunity  for  prayer  and  communion  with  God,  and 
for  drinking  into  the  Holy  Spirit  of  life  and  love  as  I  could  wish. 
We  had  a  seasonable  time  at  brother  White's  :  I  was  very  pointed 
on  2  Peter  ii.  9.  Perhaps  1  have  spoken  my  last  admonition  to 
some  who  were  presenr. 

Thursday  18.  Rode  to  Dover;  and  next  day  we  had  quarterly 
meeting  at  Dudley's  chapel. 

Saturday  20.  At  Duck  Creek  Cross  Roads  a  spirit  of  prayer  pre- 
vails amongst  the  people,  and  God  is  with  them 

Sunday  21.  At  Cecil  quarterly  meeting,  held  at  Dickinson's,  we 
bad  many  people,  and  some  life.  On  Monday  I  rode  to  Dr.  Clay- 
ton's ;  and  next  day  to  Cokesbury,  where  I  continued  until  Mon- 
day the  29th.  We  then  examined  the  students  relatively  to  learn- 
ing and  religion  —paid  debts,  and  put  matters  in  better  order, 
We  have  forty  five  boys.  The  charitable  subscriptions  to  the 
establishment  amount  to  £300  per  annum. 

Tuesday,  December  1.  The  council  was  seated  in  Philip 
Rogers's  chamber  in  Baltimore.  After  some  explanation,  we  all 
agreed  that  we  had  a  right  to  manage  the  temporal  concerns  of  the 
church  and  college  decisively  ;  and  to  recommend  to  the  confe- 
rences, for  ratification,  whatever  we  judged  might  be  advantageous 
to  the  spiritual  well-being  of  the  whole  body.  For  the  sake  of 
union,  we  declined  sending  out  any  recommendatory  propositions  : 
we  had  great  peace  and  union  in  all  our  labours.  What  we  have 
done,  the  minutes  will  show. 

Sunday  5.  I  preached  a  funeral  discourse  on  the  death  of  Mrs. 
Murray,  on  2  Cor.  xv.  29—31.  it  was,  I  hope,  not  altogether  in 
v;;in.  In  the  afternoon  I  preached  in  Mr.  Olterbine's  church.  I 


1790.]  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL. 

have  kept  no  journal  during  tin;  hitting  of  the  council  ;  I  enjoy 
peace  of  soul,  but  such  a  variety  of  person-  .unl  subjects  agitate 
my  poor  mind.  Lord,  keep  me  in  perfect  peace  ! 

Thursday  9.  The  council  rose  after  advising  a  loan  of  |J  I 
payable  in  two  years,  for  Cokesbury  ;  and  giving  diiLutiMn- 
proper  books  to  be  printed. 

Friday    10.     I   left  Baltimore,   and   reached  my    old  frit  ml 
Turners  :   the  girls,  who  were  babes  when  I  first  visited  this  house, 
arc  now  grown  up,  and,  1  trust,  possess  religion. 

VIRGINTA. — Saturday  11.  Wo.  rode  through  heavy  rain  to  Alexan- 
dria in  Virginia. 

Sunday  1'2.  I  preached  morning  and  pvpning,  but  the  «nvi •(-, 
being  muddy,  and  but  few  friends  attending  from  the  country,  we 
had  a  thin  congregation. 

Monday  13.  We  set  out  for  Stafford.  The  weather  being  un- 
comfortable, and  the  roads  deep,  we  turned  in  at  twenty  miles,  to 
Mr.  Dawning's,  who  treated  us  kindly. 

Tuesday  14.  We  hasted  to  Mrs.  Waller's,  where  we  found  a  few 
people,  to  whom  I  spoke  on  Rom.  ii.  7,  8,  U.  Finding  Tommy  (a 
son  of  Mrs.  W.'s)  had  genius,  I  gave  him  a  pass  to  Cokesbury  :  it 
may  be  that  he  may  serve  himself,  his  family,  and  his  country  : — 
O  that  he  may  serve  his  God  ! 

Wednesday  15.  Came  to  King  George  ;  and,  cold  as  it  was,  I  found 
nearly  one  hundred  people  had  assembled  at  the  widow  Bomb\ 

Saturday  1C.  Attended  the  quarterly  meeting  at  brother  Kd- 
xvards's  :  the  weather  was  extremely  cold,  and  we  had  but  few 
hearers. 

Sunday  19.  After  preaching  at  the  quarterly  meeting,  I  visited 
Counsellor  Carter  ;  and  spent  the  evening  in  much  peace  and 
love  :  he  has  the  manners  of  a  gentleman,  the  attainments  of  a 
scholar,  and  the  experience  of  a  Christian. 

Monday  20.  The  weather  softening,  I  made  haste  to  get  across 

the  Kappahanock,  and  reached  brother  B s,  about  twenty-five 

miles  :  I  found  myself  much  chilled  by  my  ride.  My  soul  has 
been  kept  in  great  peace  ;  and,  almost,  in  constant  prayer  :  I  wish 
to  feel  so  placid  as  not  to  have  any  acid  in  my  temper  ;  nor  a 
frown,  or  wrinkle  on  my  brow — to  bear  all  things,  do  all  tilings, 
suffer  all  things  from  the  ignorance  or  weakness  of  the  children  of 
(iod,  or  the  wickedness  of  the  sons  and  daughters  of  Satan.  I 
think  my  soul  momentlv  pants  after  more  of  God. 

VOL.  H.  12 


ntv.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1790. 


Thursday  -3.  I  preached  at  brother  C  -  s  ;  and  was  very 
pointed  :  I  hope  it  will  have  the  good  effect  of  preventing  the  sin 
and  vanity  that  too  often  prevail  at  Christmas. 

Friday  24.  Came  to  the  widow  Clayton's  ;  where  there  has  been 
a  work  of  God  :  I  preached,  with  liberty,  from  "  Put  ye  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  make  no  provision  for  the  fleah  to  fulfil  the 
iusts  thereof."  I  cautioned  the  people  against  the  sins  of  the  times. 

Christmas  day.  I  had  thirty  miles  to  Hanover.  William  Glen- 
denning  began  before  I  came  ;  when  he  had  done,  I  went  into  the 
tavern  keeper's  porch  ;  but  I  afterward  judged  it  best  to  with- 
draw, and  speak  in  another  place.  I  stood  in  the  door  of  a  pub- 
lic house,  and  with  about  half  of  my  congregation  out  of  doors, 
preached  on  "  Behold,  I  bring  you  good  tidings  of  great  joy  :"  the 
people  behaved  exceedingly  well  ;  and  the  town  was  very  still. 

Sunday  26.  I  had  a  large  congregation  at  New-Castle,  to  whom 
I  spoke  on  "  Thou  shalt  call  his  name  Jesus  ;  for  he  shall  save  his 
people  from  their  sins."  William  Glendenning  spoke  after  me  :  I 
am  clear  he  is  not  right  in  his  head  or  heart,  and  am  therefore  re- 
solved he  shall  speak  no  more  at  my  appointments. 

Monday  27.  Preached  at  Colonel  Clayton's.  The  people  here- 
abouts are  wealthy,  and  few  attend  preaching  ;  nevertheless,  I  was 
favoured  with  their  company,  and  had  great  liberty  and  sweetness 
in  speaking  to  them  :  I  feel  as  if  God  would  yet  work  among 
them.  It  was  in  this  neighbourhood  I  was  laid  up  four  years  ago. 

Tuesday  23.  I  had  many  people  at  the  widow  A  --  s  ;  but  they 
did  not  appear  to  be  in  a  good  frame  to  receive  instruction  :  their 
Christmas  company  ;  sinful,  worldly  joy  ;  full-feeding  ;  together 
with  the  severity  of  the  weather  —  all  appeared  to  make  against  a 
profitable  meeting. 

Wednesday  29.  Preached  in  James-City  —  crowded  with  com- 
pany —  I  was  informed  of  some  painful  circumstances  relative  to  our 
dissatisfied  brethren  :  I  leave  these  things  to  God,  who  will  bring 
all  thinss  to  light.  Contrary  to  my  expectations,  I  found  there  was 
an  appointment  made  for  me  to  preach  in  Williamsburg,  being  the 
(Jay  I  had  intended  to  cross  the  river. 

Thursday  30.  I  preached  in  the  city  of  Williamsburg,  according 
to  appointment  :  I  felt  much  liberty  ;  and  had  some  hope  that 
Providence  was  about  to  open  the  way  for  a  work  in  this  place. 

Friday  31.  I  came  on  to  the  ferry,  chilled  with  the  cold.  We 
had  to  ride  seven  miles  ;  the  wind  was  high  about  the  time  we 


1791.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASDURY'S  JOURNAF.. 

embarked;  presently  a  snow  storm  came  on  •,   and  alth<jir_rli   uind 
and  tide  were  in  our  favour,  we  had  round  umk  m  <  i<,--mt:.     Oui 
horses  were  smooth,   the  bottom  of  the   boat  icy,   so  that  it 
with  difficulty  they  could  keep  their  feet  ;   however   kind   fi 
dence    brought  us  safe  to  Cohham,  whence  we    hasted  along  t •.. 

brother  M 's,  and  found  brother  Paup  speaking,  and  tin 

shouting.     I  preached  on  Kphes.  v.  17,  18,  19.      I  afterward  had  an 
interview  with  brother  Paup,  and  a  more  full  account  of  m;r 
relative  to  our  disaffected  brethren.     Thence  I  rode  on  to  brother 
Blunt's  ;  but  there  were  none  to  preach  to. 

Sunday,  January  2,  1791.  Notwithstanding  the  snow  was  deep. 
we  rode  to  brother  Cowling's.  Few  people  attended  ;  hut  we  had 
a  comfortable  meeting,  especially  at  the  sacrament. 

Monday  3.   We   rode   hard   to  get  to   Craney-I«land,  and  earn' 
within  three  miles   by  two  o'clock  ;  the   people  being  dispersed, 
we  came  bark  to  brother  JolifPs. 

Tuesday  4.   I  had  a  few  to  hear,  to  whom  1  spoke  on  Rom.  x 
11.     I  engaged  R.  I ,  as  a  French  teacher  for  Cuke-bury. 

Wednesday  5.     We    had    a  blessed    time   at    Norfolk,    wLiNt  1 
applied    Zech.   xii.    10.     Many  praised    the   Lord   aloud.     1 
closely  employed  until  the  moment  I  left  town.      I   find  the  Lord 
has    wrought    in    Norfolk,    Portsmouth,    and    the    country    round 
about. 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Thursday  C.  I  did  not  reach  Chapel  until 
three  o'clock.  Next  day  I  reached  Col.  Williams's,  Curntuck, 
North  Carolina.  Here  we  had  a  quickening  time.  I  possess 
peace  of  mind  ;  and  feel  no  murmuring  nor  discontent.  My  horse 
is  very  lame,  and  the  roads  in  this  country  are  very  deep. 

Saturday  8.  After  preaching  at  B 's,  I   hasted  to   S—    -'g 

ferry,  on  Pasquotank-River,  where  1  waited  about  three  hours. 
The  negroes  were  dancing.  I  staid  behind  until  all  the  company 
were  over,  and  then  crossed  about  eight  o'clock  ;  and  about  nine, 
reached  brother  P s. 

Sunday  9.  Preached  at  New-begun  church  in  the  morning,  and 
it  Xixonton  in  the  evening,  in  the  court-house,  which  was  nc.ul-. 
tilled. 

Tuesday  11.  Yesterday  I  rode  to  brother  B—  -'s,  within  fiv.. 
miles  of  Gates  court-house.  My  faro  is  sometimes  poor,  my  ridei 
are  long,  my  horse  is  lame ;  yet,  while  Christ  is  mine,  1  feel 
nothing  like  murmuring  or  discontent.  I  have  passed  through 
Winton,  Wicocon,  Campbell,  and  Hardy  rounti' "=.  prenrhir  :  ;i-  i 
journeyed,  and  found  a  few  living  soul-. 


t)2  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1791, 

Sunday  16.  Came  to  Gardener's,  to  quarterly  meeting,  where  I 
enlarged  on  Peter's  fall,  and  it  was  a  serious,  powerful  meeting. 

I  thence  rode  to  our  late  brother  F 's,  whose  funeral  rites 

1  performed.  Although  the  weather  was  cold,  the  congregation 
was  large.  I  was  importuned  to  visit  the  town  ;  but  found  there 
were  but  few  who  really  wished  me  to  go.  I  however  went,  and 
preached  to  them  at  candle  light,  and  many  of  them  laughed  at  the 
foolish  old  prophet.  Perhaps  when  I  next  come  to  see  them 
they  will  be  more  serious.  Thence  we  hastened  to  brother  Jones's, 
whose  wife  lately  departed  this  life  in  the  full  triumph  of  faith — 
and  his  son  is  engaged  in  horse-racing.  This  brought  to  my  mind 
young  P —  ;  who,  after  the  death  of  his  pious  father,  turned  away 
the  preachers,  and  sinned  with  a  high  hand  ;  but  the  Lord^  followed 
him  ;  and  after  he  had  spent  a  good  deal  of  the  substance  left  him 
by  his  father,  he  was  made  a  happy  subject  of  the  grace  of  God. 
I  will  not  give  up  all  hope  for  young  Jones. 

Saturday  22.  Crosspd  Ncnsp-River,  at  Smith's  ferry,  and  came 
to  the  dwelling  of  the  late  Gen.  Hardy  Bryan  ;  a  man  I  had  often 
heard  of,  and  wished  to  see — but  death,  swift  and  sudden,  reached 
the  house  before  me.  His  son  H died  the  18th  of  last  No- 
vember ;  his  daughter  Mary,  December  28th ;  and  himself  the 
10th  instant :  each  of  them  feared  the  Lord,  and  were  happy  souls. 
I  felt  strangely  unwilling  to  believe  the  General  was  dead,  until  I 
could  no  longer  doubt  it  :  at  the  grave-yard  I  had  very  solemn 
feelings — there  was  some  melting  among  the  people  whilst  I  en- 
larged on  Psalm  xii.  1. 

Sunday  23.  I  had  very  great  opening  on  1  Thess.  iv.  13,  14. 
It  was  on  the  occasion  of  the  late  lamented  deaths.  Surely  this  is 
loud  preaching — it  is  one  of  the  most  awakening  scenes  of  my 
life  :  how  soon  were  these  dear  souls  justified,  sanctified,  and  call- 
ed home  to  glory.  Hail,  happy  dead! — We  toil  below,  but  hope, 
ere  long,  with  you  to  sing  God's  praise  above.  Lord,  help  us  to 
improve  this  providence,  and  always  be  looking  and  longing  for  glory  ! 

Monday  24.  1  had  a  most  dreary  ride  to  Trenton  :  (Jones 
court-house)  here  I  met  with  Lewis  Bryan,  brother  to  the  late 
General  :— his  heart  and  house  are  open.  After  getting  some 
refreshment  we  went  to  the  chapel,  where  I  preached  with  great 
freedom  :  there  were  brethren  present  who  came  to  meet  us  from 

a  great  distance.     In  the  evening,  brothers  C ,  and  L 

and  A held  meeting. 

Tuesday  25.  I  preached  at  Lee's  chapel.  There  is  a  yen 
great  change  for  the  better  since  I  was  here  three  years  ago 


1791.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNU 

they  have  now  built  a  very  decent  house  for  worship.    1  wasun*. 
in  my  body,  but  happy  iu  my  God,  and  resigned  to  his  will. 

Wednesday  26.     Preached  to  a  large   congregation    at   brother 

D 's,  on   White-Oak  River. — I  baptised  and   administered  the 

sacrament.  After  dinner  I  rode  twelve  miles  to  L—  -'3,  ami 
found  the  people  waiting  :  about  six  we  began  exhortation  and 
prayer,  and  about  midnight  laid  ourselves  down  to  rest 

Thursday  '11.  1  had  many  to  hear  at  Svvansbury  ;  the  people 
were  attentive — O  that  God  may  bless  his  word  to  them  ! — Surely, 
all  shall  not  be  in  vain.  I  returned  to  brother  T-  -'s,  a  mile 
out  of  town  ;  but  the  people  found  where  1  was  and  came  out. 
Sometime^  1  am  tr!*:d  >vlieu  I  cannot  enjoy  my  hours  of  retire- 
ment ;  but  we  must  bear  all  things,  if  thfrrhy  \VP  may  do  gu'jj. 
and  gain  the  more  souls  to  Christ. 

Friday  28.    We  rode  sixteen  miles  to  an  old  chapel  on  the  way 
to  Richland's  ;  the  people  and  myself  suffered  from  the  weather  ; 
however,  I   spoke   a  little,  and  administered  the  sacrament ;    after 
which,  1  rode,  cold  and  hungry,  sixteen  miles  more  to  brother  (' 
Ballard's. 

Sunday  HO.  The  truth  was  delivered  sharply  and  pointedly  ; 
but  the  people  were  wild  and  unfeeling. 

Tuesday,  February  1.     I  had  a  large   congregation  at  the  Sand 
Hills.     Feeling  myself  enlarged  in  spirit,  although  weak  in  body, 
I  entered  very  extensively  into  the  nature  and    excellencies  of  tin 
Gospel.     We  administered  the   Lord's  supper,  and   had  a  shaking 

among  the   people  :  brothers  L—       and  B were    there,  and 

we  rejoiced  in  the  Lord  together.  We  were  honoured  with  a 
little  cabin  at  a  distance  from  the  other  house,  about  eight  feet 
wide  and  nine  feet  long,  and  were  as  happy  as  princrs  in  a  palace. 
Wednesday  2.  We  had  our  difficulties  in  getting  along  an  un- 
known path.  Arrived  at  De  V 's  ford  ;  we  met  with  a  very 

kind   man,  who   gave   us  and   our  baggage   a  passage  on   a  broken 
'..inoc  ;  then  led  us  part  of  our  way,  and  sent  a  servant  to  conduct 
us   on.     We   reached   Anderson's   about   two  o'clock  ;  and   found 
many  people   waiting  ;  but  they  appeared   to   be    unfeeling.     We 
wpi-p  most  kindly  treated.    The  people  are  about  to  settle  a  newly 
introduced  minister  ;  so   we  may  go   off  for   a  year   or  two  : 
by  that  time  the  way  may  be  open  for  our  return.     1  am  thai 
with  dreadful  things  about  the  council ;  but  1  believe  the  Lord  will 
make  it  appear  where  the  mischief  lies. 

Crossed   Cape-Fear  River,  and   rode  thirl)  miles  to  si.^cr  Tur- 
ner's :  here  1   spoke  to  some  assembled  people,  some  ot  uhoin 


94  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL,  [1791. 

felt,  and  my  labour  was  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord  :  my  own  soul  was 
blessed.  I  was  awfully  impressed  with  the  conviction  that  the 
interests  of  religion  had  been  injured  by  backsliders  and  loose 
walkers. 

Saturday  5.  We  had  many  at  the  quarterly  meeting  for  that 
part  of  the  country.  My  subject  was  "  And  Peter  went  out  and 
wept  bitterly." 

Sunday  6.  We  had  a  little  melting  among  the  people  at  noon, 
and  in  the  evening.  Ah  !  my  God,  how  few  there  are  who  truly 
love  thee  ! 

Monday  7.  Rode  to  Lockwood's  Folly  ;  and  preached  at  Char- 
lotte-River to  not  less  than  one  hundred  people  ;  a  vast  congrega- 
tion for  so  Innely  a  part  of  thp  world  :  the  soil  is  very  barren  ; 
and  the  country,  consequently,  but  thinly  settled.  We  were  re- 
commended, for  lodging,  to  a  certain  squire's  ;  but  Providence  so 

ordered  it,  that  we  came  to  a  simple-hearted   brother  S 's, 

where  we  were  kindly  received,  and  abundantly  supplied  with 
every  thing  necessary  for  man  and  horse.  As  our  time  would 
admit,  I  was  disposed  to  indulge  a  desire  I  had  of  going  by  Pyra- 
way,  about  twelve  miles  distant.  We  crossed  Wacatnaw-River  : 
it  is  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  yards  wide  :  our  horses  ferried 
themselves  over  by  swimming.  I  preached  in  the  evening  on 
"  The  Son  of  Man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was 
lost." 

SOUTH  CAROLINA. — Tuesday  8.    We  came  a  long,  dreary  way, 

missed  our  road,  and  at  last  reached  brother  S -'s  ;  a  distance 

of  twenty-five  miles,  which  our  wandering  made  thirty  miles.  I 
rejoice  to  find  that  this  desert  country  has  gracious  souls  in  it :  O 
how  great  the  change  in  the  flight  of  six  years  !  we  have  now 
many  friends,  and  some  precious  souls  converted  to  God — glory 
be  to  the  Lord  most  high !  I  feel  power  to  bear  all  things,  and 
leave  events  to  God  :  the  misconduct  of  other  men  is  my  grief, 
but  not  my  sin  ;  so  I  will  trust  God  with  his  own  cause. 

Friday  11.  We  set  out  for  Black-River,  from  about  six  miles 
above  Kingston,  having  Bull-Run,  Bramble  Island,  and  great  Pee- 
Dee  to  cross.  Reaching  Black-River,  we  were  compelled  to  turn 

aside  to  Mr.  S "s  rice  plantation,  where  we  procured  provender 

for  our  horses,  and  breakfasted  on  our  own  tea. 

Saturday  12.  Came  to  Georgetown  through  the  rain — felt  my- 
self unwell  and  very  low  in  spirits. 

Sunday  13.  I  preached  a  plain,  searching  sermon  ;  and  some 
felt  the  word  :  but  it  is  a  day  of  small  things.  In  the  afternoon  I 


1791.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBI-HY'S  JOURNAL  05 

enlarged  on  "  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  O  Ephraim  ?"  the  wicked 
youths  were  playing  without,  and  inattention  prevailed  amongst 
those  within.  I  was,  and  continued  to  be,  under  great  dejection 
during  my  stay. 

Monday  14.  Rode  forty-five  miles  to  brother  Sinclair  Capereas's, 
under  depression  of  spirits  ;  and  here  I  received  letters  not  at  all 
calculated  to  relieve  me. 

Charleston,  Tuesday  15.  I  went  to  church  under  awful  dis- 
tress of  heart :  my  drooping  spirits  were  somewhat  revived  in  the 
house  of  God.  We  grow  here  but  slowly. 

Thursday  17.  I  had  a  small  congregation  of  whites.  I  feel  the 
want  of  religion  here  :  indeed,  the  gross  immoralities  of  the  place 
are  obvious  to  every  passenger  in  the  streets. 

I  learn  that  in  Georgia  preachers  of  other  denominations  have 
had  high  disputes  with  ours  :  I  am  clear  that  controversy  should 
be  avoided  ;  because  we  have  better  work  to  do  ;  and  because  it  is 
too  common  that  when  debates  run  high,  there  are  \vrong  word? 
and  tempers  indulged  on  both  sides. 

Sunday  20.  I  read  prayers  in  the  morning  ;  and  brother  EHi* 
preached.  In  the  afternoon  brother  Askew  preached  his  farewell 
sermon  ;  and  at  night  I  was  very  pointed  to  young  people,  on  "  Re- 
member now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth,"  &.C. 

Wednesday  23.    Lon^-looked  for  Doctor  Coke   came  to  town 
he  had  been  shipwrecked  off  Edisto.     I  found  the  Doctor'*  senti 
ments,  with  regard  to  the  council,  quite  changed.    James  O'KelU 
letters  had  reached  London.     I  felt  perfectly  calm,  and  acceded  to 
a  general  conference,  for  the  sake  of  peace. 

Sunday  27.  Doctor  Coke  preached  to  a  very  large  audience  in 
the  evening  :  the  poor  sinners  appeared  to  be  a  little  tamed.  I  \ 
much  blessed  in  meeting  the  married  and  single  men  apart  :  I  also 
met  the  married  and  single  women.  I  trust  there  has  been  good 
done  in  Charleston  this  conference.  I  want  to  be  gone  into  the 
country  to  enjoy  sweet  solitude  and  prayer.  I  have  been  reading 
three  hundred  pages  of  Taylor's  sermons,  where  I  find  many  in- 
structing glossas  on  the  Scriptures. 

Tuesday,  March  1.  At  night  I  made  my  last  effort  for  this  time  . 
and  the  people  were  more  attentive. — I  let  out  freely  against  tin- 
races.     I  am  somewhat  distressed  at  the  uneasiness  of  our  peopl-- 
who  claim  a  right  to  chuse  their  own  preachers,  a  thing  quite  new 
amongst  Methodists.     None  but  Mr.  Hammett  will  do  for  them. 
We  shall  see  how  it  will  end. 


y6  REV.  FR-ANcrs  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1791. 

Wednesday  2.  I  left  (he  city,  something  grieved  in  mind.  I 
crossed  the  toll-bridge  over  Ashley-River  :  came  to  Jacksons- 
borough,  and  lodged  at  Bonham's. 

Thursday  3.  Came  to  Allen's  tavern. — My  host  (a  Yorkshireman) 
and  his  wife,  are  attentive,  obliging,  and  cleanly  :  they  want  nothing 
but  religion  to  make  them  superior,  in  their  way,  to  almost  any  I 
have  met  with  in  America.  I  proceeded  on  to  the  Salt-Ketchers  ; 
and  thence  to  Coosanhatchie,  where  I  was  kindly  entertained  by 
Mr.  Lambrights. 

Friday  4.  I  had  a  very  well-dressed,  serious,  attentive  congrega- 
tion, at  the  district  court-house  :  I  had  not  much  liberty  ;  how- 
ever, I  endeavoured  to  speak  plainly  on  "  Godliness  is  profitable,'5 
&.c.  an  attentive,  pious,  old  man  thanked  me  for  my  discourse. 

Our  horses  are  much  hurt  by  long  rides,  having  travelled  one 
hundred  miles  in  two  days. 

Saturday  5.  I  read,  critically,  Mrs.  Rowe's  Devout  Exercises  of 
the  Heart.  I  wrote  'nearly  twenty  pages  to  Doctor  Coke  on  the 
concerns  of  the  church. 

Sunday  6.  Notwithstanding  the  heavy  rain,  we  had  many  to  hear 
at  brother  Stafford's  :  where  I  enforced  "  Let  this  mind  be  in  you 
which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus." 

GEORGIA. — Monday  7.  I  preached  at  Hudson's  ferry  with  some 
freedom  ;  but  the  people  appeared  wild  and  stupid.  I  was  alarmed 
at  hearing  a  man  talking  large  and  loud,  thinking  he  was  drunk,  and 
would  come  in,  and  disturb  the  congregation  ;  but  he  was,  as  I  after- 
ward learned,  an  Antinomian.  I  came,  in  a  heavy  storm,  to  bro- 
ther H 's.  This  day  I  passed  Savannah  Swamp,  parts  of  which 

are  not  unlike  the  Santee  and  Kentucky  lands. 

Tuesday  8.  We  had  nearly  four  hundred  people  at  R 's  ;  and 

1  trust  the  Lord,  in  some  good  degree,  breathed  upon  the  souls  pre- 
sent. We  then  rode  sixteen  miles,  and  had  a  comfortable  evening 
exercise  at  brother  R 's. 

Wednesday  9.  Preached  at  an  old  church  ;  I  was  much  fatigued, 

and   felt  unwell.     At  the  invitation  of  Mr.  C ,  I   came   to 

Waynesborough.  I  lodged  with  Mr.  Henry,  a  Jew.:  we  read  He- 
brew part  of  the  night,  and  I  should  have  been  pleased  to  have 
spent  the  night  thus  occupied  with  so  good  a  scholar. 

Thursday  10.  I  preached  at  C 's  church  ;  my  body  was 

wearied  with  labour  and  want  of  sleep. 

Sunday  13.  Came  to  Georgetown  at  Ogechee  Shoals,  and  found 
Satan  was  there.  I  levelled  away  on  the  parable  of  the  sower.  I 


llEV.      KRANC19    ASBURV'S  JOURNAL. 

come  to  brother  H 's. — Heard  heavy  tidings.     My  soul  is  <• 

— Let  the  Lord  look  to  his  own  house.  I  hasu-d  to  Scott's  :  Doctor 
Coke  came  in  time  enough  to  preach  ;  aud  then  we  opened  con- 
ference. 

We  sat  very  closely  to  our  work  ;  and  had  some  mailers  01  mo- 
ment to  attend  to  in  the  course  of  our  deliberations.  1  have  rode 
about  two  hundred  and  fifty  miles  in  Georgia,  and  find  the  work,  in 
general,  very  dead.— The  peace  with  the  Creek  Indians,  the  settle- 
ment of  new  lands,  good  trade,  buying  slaves,  &,c.  take  up  the  atten- 
tion of  the  people. 

Sunday  20.  There  was  a  shaking  amongst  the  people  whilst  1 
spoke  on  Rom.  x.  21. 

SOUTH  CAROLINA. — After  meeting,  I  came  away,  and  rode  twenty 
miles  to  brother  Herbert's  that  evening. 

Whilst  Doctor  Coke  stayed  behind  to  preach  at  Ninety-six  Town, 
i  came  on  and  made  an  appointment  and  preached  at  Finche's ;  and 
some,  1  know,  felt  the  word. 

Wednesday  23.  We  crossed  the  Ennoree,  Tyger,  and  Broad 
Rivers. 

Saturday  2G.  We  had  white  and  red  Indians  at  Catawba ;  the 
Doctor  nnd  myself  both  preached.  I  had  some  conversation  with 
the  chiefs  of  the  Indians  about  keeping  up  the  school  we  have 
been  endeavouring  to  establish  amongst  them.  1  asked  for  one  of 
their  children  ;  but  the  father  would  not  give  consent,  nor  would 
the  child  come.  My  body  is  weak  ;  but  my  mind  has  heaven  and 
peace  within.  We  closely  employed  our  intervals  of  leisure  in 
preparing  different  tracts  for  the  press. 

Lord's  day  27.  We  found  the  people  insensible  at  the  Waxsa«i 
church  :  some  few  seemed  alarmed  whilst  Isai.  xxxiit.  1-1.  was 
opened  and  enforced. 

Wednesday  30.  We  came  to  Salisbury  :  I  felt  unwell,  and  no 
freedom  to  speak.  Doctor  Coke  gave  them  a  sermon,  and  we 

then  rode  five  mile?  to  B 's.    Next  day  we   reached  Jones's; 

and  the  day  after  (first  of  April)  M'Knight's,  where  we  opened 
conference  in  great  peace.  Many  of  the  preachers  related  their 
experience,  and  it  was  a  most  blessed  season  of  grace. 

Monday  4.  We  rose,  after  sitting  each  night  (Sabbath  except* 
until   twelve   o'clock.     Several  of  our  brethren  expressed  some- 
thing like  the  perfect  love  of  God,  but  they  had  doubts  about  their 
having  retained  it. 

Tuesday  5.  We  rested  awhile  at  Salem  on  our  way,  and  came  m 
the  evening  to  brother  W — 's,  and  had  a  meeting  there.  I  beL 

VOL.  I!  13 


...  RLV.  fKANcis  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1191. 


trouble  is  at  hand  :  —  but  I  trust  God  with  his  cause,  and  Christ  with 
his  church.     My  soul  drinks  into  holiness. 

Friday  8,  I  observed  as  a  day  of  abstinence  and  prayer,  read- 
ing and  meditation.  O  for  more  of  heaven  !  Poor  Minters's  case 
has  given  occasion  for  sinners,  and  for  the  world  to  laugh,  and  talk, 
and  write. 

Saturday  9.  We  had  a  large  congregation  at  A  -  's  ;  I  felt  life  ia 
speaking,  although  weak  and  weary  in  body.  We  rode  seven  miles 
to  the  banks  of  Dan-River,  but  knew  not  where  to  cross.  At 
length  we  came  to  the  Fishery  ;  crossed  in  a  canoe,  and  walked 
two  miles,  in  the  night,  to  T.  Harrison's  :  thus  ended  the  labours  of 
the  day. 

VIRGINIA  __  Sunday  10.  Doctor  Coke  and  myself  both  preached 
at  Watson's  church  ;  and  there  was  some  little  effect  produced.  I 
spent  the  evening  with  George  Adams,  a  true  son  of  his  worthy 
father,  Silvanus  Adams,  for  kindness  to  the  preachers.  I  am  con- 
stantly weak  and  feverish  in  body  ;  but  my  soul  is  uncommonly 
happy  and  calm.  We  moved  from  G.  Adams's  to  the  widov;  Dicks's  ; 
and  thence,  next  day,  to  brother  Marten's. 

Wednesday  13.  Came  to  Difficult  church  :  where  we  were 
honoured  with  the  company  of  some  of  the  great  :  the  Doctor 
preached  a  noble  sermon  on  the  Divinity  of  Christ  ;  and  I  urged, 
"It  is  time  to  seek  the  Lord."  Afterward  we  preached  in  Char- 
lotte and  Mecklenburg  ;  and  on  Sunday  following  came  to  quar- 
terly meeting  at  sister  Walker's,  in  Brunswick.  Doctor  Coke  went 
to  the  barn  ;  and  1  preached  in  the  house  :  the  rain  rendered  our 
meeting  uncomfortable. 

Monday  18.  Near  Dinwiddie  court-house  I  waited,  it  being  the 
day  of  the  election,  until  our  brethren  returned  from  the  court- 
house, and  then  preached  in  the  new  church  on  2  Cor  vi.  17,  18. 

Tuesday  19.  We  rode  to  Petersburg.  We  agreed  to  take  diffe- 
rent lodgings  during  the  sitting  of  the  conference  —  the  Doctor  at 
brother  Davis's,  and  myself  at  brother  Harding's. 

Wednesday  20.  I  preached  on  "  Our  light  afflictions  which  are 
but  for  a  moment,"  &c.  ;  and  there  was  some  warmth  amongst  the 
preachers  and  people.  The  business  of  our  conference  was 
brought  on  in  peace  ;  and  there  was  a  blessing  attended  our  speak- 
ing on  our  experiences,  ami  in  prayer.  The  affair  of  the  council 
was  suspended  until  a  general  conference. 

Friday  22.  Late  in  the  evening  our  conference  rose. 

Saturday  23.  I  preached  at  E.  West's,  to  a  large  congregation  ; 
had  a  little  spring  of  power, 


V.   1-nANTl^  A.-»ni 


Sunday  LM.  Came  to  Colonel  Clayton's  ;  who  was  very  ill.     '\ 
had  a  large  collection  of  people,  and  -A  good  meeting  :   we  wer< 
have  held  our,conference  at  the  Colonel's,  but  his  illness  prevented. 
We  sat  at  his  son,  B.  Clayton's  ;  and  were  amply  provided  for  :  the 
son  is  not  a  member  ;    but  he  was  very  kind. 

Monday  25.  Doctor  Coke  and  brother  1.  Ellis  preached  ;  and 
there  was  some  power  attended  the  word.  I  found  the  Doctor  had 
much  changed  his  sentiments  since  his  last  visit  to  this  continent  ; 
and  that  these  impressions  still  continued  —  I  hope  to  be  enabled  to 
give  up  all  I  dare  for  peace  sake  ;  and  to  please,  all  men  tor  their 
good  to  edification. 

We  hastened  our  business  ;  and  on  Tuesday,  twenty-six,  canv- 
to  New-Castle  :  here  I  preached  on  "  How  often  would  I  have 
gathered  thy  children  together  as  a  hen  gathereth  her  brood  un- 
der her  wing?,  and  ye  would  not  :"  I  have  no  doubt  but  the  peo- 
ple felt  the  word.  We  came  on  to  Hanover-Town  ;  where  the 
Doctor  preached  in  the  afternoon. 

Wednesday  27.  We  rode  thirty  miles  to  the  widow  Collins's, 
Caroline  county,  much  wearied  in  body,  but  greatly  comforted  in 
God. 

Thursday  28.  At  eleven  o'clock,  at  Pope's  chapel,  the  Doctor 
preached  on  "  Pray  without  ceasing."  Myself,  on  "  By  grace  are 
ye  saved,  through  faith  :"  1  was  long  and  very  close.  We  hasted  to 
Port  Royal,  where  a  number  of  fine*  people  were  waiting,  to 
whom  the  Doctor  preached  on  "  Ye  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid 
with  Christ  in  God  :"  they  expressed  a  desire  for  me  to  preach 
also  ;  but  it  being  late,  I  declined  it. 

Friday  29.  The  solemn  news  reached  our  ears  that  the  public 
papers  had  announced  the  death  of  that  dear  man  of  God,  John 
Wesley.  He  died  in  his  own  house  in  London,  in  the  eighty- 
eighth  year  of  his  age,  after  preaching  the  Gospel  sixty-four  year= 
When  we  consider  his  plain  and  nervous  writings  ;  his  uncommon 
talent  for  sermonizing  and  journalizing  ;  that  he  had  such  a  steady 
flow  of  animal  spirits;  so  much  of  the  spirit  of  government  in  him; 
his  knowledge  as  an  observer;  his  attainments  as  a  scholar;  In- 
experience as  a  Christian  ;  1  conclude,  his  equal  is  not  to  be  found 
among  all  the  sons  he  hath  brought  up  ;  nor  his  superior  among 
all  the  sons  of  Adam  he  may  have  left  behind.  Brother  Coke  wri- 
sunk  in  spirit,  and  wished  to  hasten  home  immediately.  For  my- 
self, notwitstanding  my  long  absence  from  Mr.  Wesley,  and  a  feu- 
unpleasant  expressions  in  some  of  his  letters  the  dear  old  mm. 
to  me,  (occasioned  by  the  misrep- 


100  -.'.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  *. 

'eel  the  stroke  most  sensibly ;  and,  I  expect,  I  shall  never  read 
his  works  without  reflecting  on  the  loss  which  the  church  of  God 
and  the  world  has  sustained  by  his  death.  Dr.  Coke,  accompanied 

by  brother  C and  Dr.  G ,  set  out  for  Baltimore  in  order  to 

get  the  most  speedy  passage  to  England  ;  leaving  me  to  611  the  ap- 
pointments. I  had  a  large  congregation  at  sister  Bombry's.  In 
the  afternoon  I  rode  to  sister  Waller's,  making  a  journey  of  forty 
miles  for  this  day.  Next  day  I  overtook  Dr.  Coke  and  his  com- 
pany at  Cholrhester.  Brother  Coxes's  horse  being  sick,  I  put  my 
oUI  horse  in  his  place  to  carry  them  to  Alexandria ;  where  we  ar- 
rived about  three  o'clock,  after  riding  forty  miles  by  our  reckon- 
ing. At  Alexandria  Dr.  Coke  had  certain  information  of  Mr.  Wes- 
ley's death.  On  Sabbath  day  he  reached  Baltimore,  and  preached 
on  the  occasion  of  Mr.  Wesley's  death  ;  and  mentioned  some  things 
which  gave  offence. 

MARYLAND — May,  Thursday  5.  This  day,  and  the  two  following 
days  we  held  conference  in  Baltimore  ;  and  great  love  and  sweet- 
ness prevailed  throughout  the  sitting.  I  preached  to  a  large  con- 
gregation on  the  Sabbath,  and  we  had  a  gracious  time. 

Monday  9.  Came  to  Cokesbury.  I  found  there  was  a  vast  de- 
mand for  money  for  the  establishment,  there  having  been  an  ex- 
penditure of  £700  in  five  months. 

Tuesday  10.  Crossed  Susquehannah  and  came  to  Cecil ;  and  next 
day  reached  Duck-Creek.  Our  conference  began,  and  was  con- 
ducted in  much  peace  and  harmony  amongst  preachers  and  people. 
Our  meetings  in  public  were  attended  with  great  power. 

Sunday  15.  Two  elders  and  three  deacons  were  ordained. 
After  the  ordination,  I  rode  to  Middletown,  Delaware,  and  preached 
to  a  large  congregation. 

PENNSYLVANIA. — Monday  16.  I  rode  to  New-Castle,  and  had 
the  last  interview  with  Dr.  Coke,  Surely  the  time  to  favour  New- 
Castle  is  swiftly  coming.  In  the  evening  I  came  to  Chester  ;  and 
next  day,  (the  17th)  arrived  in  Philadelphia,  and  opened  confe- 
rence. We  had  a  tender,  melting  account  of  the  dealings  of  God 
witb  many  souls ;  and  settled  our  business  in  much  peace.  Mr. 
Hammett  came  from  Charleston  with  a  wonderful  list  of  petition- 
ers desiring  his  return  :  to  this,  as  far  as  I  had  to  say,  I  submitted  ; 

but I  see  and  hear  many  things  that 

might  wound  my  spirit,  if  it  were  not  that  the  Lord  bears  me  up 
above  all. 

Wednesday  18.  I  preached  on  "  The  Lord  liveth  ;  and  blessed 
be  my  rock,  and  let  the  God  of  my  salvation  be  exalted." 


'  '!•]  •      -. M 

Friday  20.  We  had  a  l.i^t-tlay  ;  and  in  the  afternoon  a  feast  ot 
love.     Jt  was  a  time  to  be  remembered  :  some  precious  soul-  u 
converlt-d. 

Saturday  21.  I  left  Philadelphia  for  New- Jersey.  On  the  road  I 
felt  much  of  the  spirit  of  prayer. 

NKW-.'EHSKY.  —  Sunday  22.   I  preached  in  Trenton  on  Joel  11.  17. 
Seve  al  preachers  exhorted,  and  the  Lord  in ;nl«-  -nmcr-  it-  inMr 
Eighteen  years  ago  I  nftcn  v|||iprd  away  from  Philadelphia  to  1 
lington  one  week,  and  to  Trenton  another,   to  keep  a   few   >• 
alive  :   I   had  then  no  conferences  to  take  up  my  time  and  occupy 
my  thoughts  ;  and  now — what  hath  God  wrought! 

We  attended  to  the  business  of  the  conference  with  a  good 
spirit.  In  the  course  of  our  sitting  we  had  some  pleasing  and 
some  painful  circumstances  to  excite  our  feelings. 

Tuesday  24.  1  set  out  for  New-York.     At  Princeton  I  preached, 
nnd  I  trust  a  few  felt  the  word.      Passing  through  Kingston,  I  pro 
ceecled  on  to  Mr.  Jaques's,  near  Brunswick,  making  32  miles.    Mv 
soul  is  in  peace  ;  my  body  weak  and  weary. 

Wednesday  25.  Rode  to  Elizabethtown.  After  dinner,  I  went 
by  water  to  New  York  ;  and  found  all  in  peace. 

NEW-YORK. — Thursday  26.  Our  conference  came  together 
great  peace  and  love.    Our  ordinary  business  was  enlivened  by  thf 
relation  of  experiences,  and  by  profitable  observations  on  the  work 
of  God. 

Nothing  would  satisfy  the  conference  and  the  society  but  my  con- 
senting to  preach  on  the  occasion  of  Mr.  Wesley's   death,  which 
I   did  on   Sunday  May  29:   my  text  was  2  Timothy  iii.  10,  11.     I 
took  the  same  subject  at  the  old  church  in  the  morning  ;  and  in  th- 
afternoon  at  the  new  church,  varying,  but  retaining  the  substance. 

Monday  30.  Our   conference    rose  ;  and    after   love-feast,    tic 
preachers  dispersed.     We  had  had  about  30  preachers  at  this  con- 
ference, and  not  a  frown,  a  sign  of  sour  temper,  or  an  unkind  word 
was  seen  or  hoard  amongst  us  : — but  I  am  J-irk.  and  quite  out-donr 
with  constant  labour.     Mr.  Hnmmett's  preaching  was  not  well  re- 
ceived :  it  was  supposed  to  be  aimed  at  our  zealous  men  and  i 
sionate  meetings  :  at  the  new  church  his  preaching  was  still  more 
exceptionable  to  those  judicious  persons  who  heard  him.     I  expect 
some  things  will  be  retailed  to  my  disadvantage.     Be  it  so— I  " 
the  Lord. 

Wednesday,  June  1.  I  preached  at  New-Rochelle  church  :  tl" 
weather  was  unfavourable  ;    but  we  had  n  living 


1(JJ  .    IRANCIS    ASBVRV'S    .10VRX.AI..  [1791. 

Thursday  -'.  We  had  a  decent,  lifeless  congregation  at  the  court- 
house on  the  Plains.  In  the  afternoon  1  preached  at  North-Castle 
on  Phil,  ii-  12.  My  clay  is  heavy,  and  my  spirits  low. 

Friday  3.  I  very  sensibly  feel  the  cold  I  had  taken  on  my  way  to 
Xew-Rochelle  by  riding  in  the  rain  ;  however,  I  rode  to  Bedford, 
and  preached  in  the  town-house  to  about  200  serious  and  deeply 
attentive  hearers.  Rode  on  to  brother  H 's  and  was  muc5  in- 
disposed. 

CONNECTICUT. — Saturday  4.    I  rode  over  rocks  and  hills,  and 
came  to  Wilton  ;  and  preached  to  a  serious,  feeling,  well-behaved 

people  at  squire  R 's.     In  the  evening  I  went  on  to  Reading. 

Surely  God  will  work  powerfully  amongst  these  people,  and  save 
thousands  of  them.  We  have  travelled  about  24  miles  this  day 
over  very  rough  roads  :  the  weather  is  cold  for  the  season  ;  my 
horse  is  very  small,  and  my  carriage  is  inconvenient  in  such  rocky, 
uneven,  jolting  ways.  This  country  is  very  hilly  and  open — not 
unlike  that  about  the  Peak  of  Derbyshire.  I  feel  faith  to  believe 
that  this  visit  to  New- England  will  be  blest  to  my  own  soul,  and 
the  souls  of  others.  We  are  now  in  Connecticut ;  and  never  out 
of  sight  of  a  house ;  and  sometimes  we  have  a  view  of  many 
churches  and  steeples,  built  very  neatly  of  wood  ;  either  for  use, 
ornament,  piety,  policy  or  interest — or  it  may  be  some  of  all  these. 
I  do  feel  as  if  there  had  been  religion  in  this  country  once  ;  and  I 
apprehend  there  is  a  little  in  form  and  theory  left.  There  may 
have  been  a  praying  ministry  and  people  here  ;  but. I  fear  they  are 
now  spiritually  dead  ;  and  am  persuaded  that  family  and  private 
prayer  is  very  little  practised  :  could  these  people  be  brought  to 
constant,  fervent  prayer,  the  Lord  would  come  down  and  work  won- 
derfully among  them.  I  find  my  mind  fixed  on  God,  and  the  work 
of  God. 

Lord's  day  5.  About  ten  o'clock  we  assembled  in  a  barn  at 
Reading,  where  we  had,  perhaps,  three  hundred  serious,  attentive 
people  to  hear — My  subject  was  Eph.  ii.  8,  9.  I  felt  freedom,  and 
the  truth  came  clearly  to  my  mind.  Rode  in  the  evening  twelve 
miles  over  rocks  and  uneven  roads  to  Newtown  :  1  found  multitudes 
of  people  in  a  Presbyterian  meeting-house,  many  of  whom  appear- 
ed \vild  in  their  behaviour — the  young  laughing  and  playing  in  the 
galleries  ;  and  the  aged  below  seemed  to  be  heavy  and  lifeless. — 
I  was  sick  and  weary  ;  nevertheless,  I  attempted  to  preach  on  Acts 
v.  31,  32.  and  endeavoured  to  enlarge  on — 1.  The  humiliation  of 
Christ-— 0.  His  exaltation  in  his  resurrection,  ascension,  glory, 


hEV.  jrjH.Nri>  ,AL. 


Head  of  the  church  :  a  Prince  to  »ive   repentance  rdon   to 

rebels.  I  felt  the  power  of  Satan,  and  soon  ended  my  feeble  testi- 
mony. Brother  L  -  preached  at  six  o'clock.  I  felt  much 
weakened  and  wearied.  —  My  impressions  relative  to  the  people  in 
these  parts  are  unfavourable. 

Monday  G.   Came  to  Stepney,  and  found  a  few  people*  tor 

us  at  brother  O  —  *s,  to  whom  1  gave  an  exhortation,  and  we  had 
an  awakening  and  melting  time.  Came  on  to  Chrsnut-llill,  about. 
twenty  miles  from  Newtown  ;  the  people  here  had  not  had  pro- 
per notice  of  our  coming  ;  a  fe\v,  however,  being  informed  of  it, 
let  others  know,  so  that  by  the  time  I  had  exhorted  ami  prayed 
many  joined  them:  1  exhorted  again  about  forty  minutes  ir, 
pointed  a  manner  as  I  well  could.  After  meeting,  we  called  at 
E.  H  -  's,  and  obtained  refreshment  for  man  and  beast  ;  aftev 
conversing  and  praying  with  the  family,  we  set  out  and  reached 
J.  H  -  's  in  the  evening,  where  we  had  a  small  family  meeting, 
at  which  I  spoke  on  Hosea  x.  12.  "  Break  up  your  fallow  ground, 
for  it  is  time,  yea,  yet  time  to  seek  the  Lord,  till  he  come  and  rain 
righteousness  upon  you."  To-day  I  have  felt  wear;,  and  heavy, 
and  yesterday  I  was  agitated  in  mind,  and  sorely  buffeted  by  the 
enemy  —  but  I  have  peace  wilh  God. 

Tuesday  7.  Body  and  mind  more  tranquil  and  serene.  Time 
was  nhen  I  should  have  thought  the  prospects  here  were  very 
great  —  the  people  attend  in  great  multitudes.  I  find  i!  necessary 
to  guard  against  painful  anxiety  on  the  one  hand,  as  well  as  against 
lukewarmness  on  the  other.  I  judge  that  the  spirits  of  men 
must  be  stirred  up  to  expect  more  than  in  former  time?,  and  pray. 
preach,  and  converse  accordingly.  We  came  to  Stratford  —  good 
news  —  they  have  voted  that  the  town  house  shall  he  shut  :  well  — 
where  shall  we  preach  1  Some  of  the  select-men  —  one,  at  least, 
granted  access.  —  I  felt  unwilling  to  go,  as  it  is  always  my  way 
not  to  push  myself  into  any  public  house  :  —  we  had  close  work  on 
Isaiah  Iv.  6,  7.  some  smiled,  some  laughed,  some  swore,  some 
talked,  some  prayed,  some  wept  —  had  it  been  a  house  of  our  own, 
I  should  not  have  been  surprised  had  the  windows  been  broken.  — 
I  refused  to  preach  there  any  more  ;  and  it  xvas  well  I  did  —  two  of 
the  esquires  were  quite  displeased  at  our  admittance.  We  met 
the  class,  and  found  «ome  gracious  souls  ;  the  Methodists  have  a 
society  consisting  of  twenty  members,  some  of  thorn  conver1 
but  they  have  no  house  of  worship  —  they  may  now  make  a  benefit 
of  a  calamity  —  being  denied  the  use  of  other  hous<. 
more  earnestly  labour  to  get  one  of  their  own  :  the  Pre^burr 


104  JIEV.   FRANCIS  ASBURV:S  JOURNAL.  [1791. 

and  the  Episcopalians  have  each  one,  and  both  are  elegant 
buildings. 

Wednesday  8  We  rested  at  Stratford  ;  and  had  meeting  in  bro- 
ther p .'3  house  :  finding  that  most  of  those  who  attended  were 

serious  people,  I  spoke  on  our  blessed  Lord's  words  Matt.  xi.  28, 
29,  30.  it  was  a  time  of  comfort  to  the  few  seekers  and  believers 
present 

Thursday  9.  Came  to  New-Haven,  and  found  my  appointment 
(o  preach  had  been  published  in  the  newspapers.  Every  thing- 
was  quiet ;  we  called  on  the  sheriff — he  was  absent  :  we  then  put 
up  our  horses  at  the  Ball-tavern,  near  the  college  yard. — I  was 

weary   and   unwell.     I  had  the   honour  of  the  president  S , 

Dr.  W ,  and  the  Rev.  Mr.  E to  hear  me,  and   several  of 

the  collegians,  with  a  few  scattering  citizens.  I  talked  away  to 
them  very  fast,  telling  them  some  little  stories,  whilst  the  sun  shone 
full  in  my  face.  The  judges  looked  very  grave  while  I  endeavour- 
ed to  show — 1.  What  we  must  be  saved  from  ;  2.  What  has  been 
esteemed  by  the  men  of  the  world  as  the  wisdom  of  preaching  ; 
3.  What  is  meant  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching. — When  I  had 
done  no  man  spoke  to  me.  I  thought  to-day  of  dear  Mr.  White- 
field's  words  to  Mr.  Boardman  and  Mr.  Pilmore  at  their  first 
coming  over  to  America : — "  Ah  !"  said  he,  "  if  ye  were  Calvinists 
ye  would  take  the  country  before  ye."  We  visited  the  college 
chapel  at  the  hour  of  prayer  :  I  wished  to  go  through  the  whole, 
to  inspect  the  interior  arrangements,  but  no  one  invited  me.  The 
divines  were  grave,  and  the  students  were  attentive  ;  they  used  me 
like  a  fellow  Christian,  in  coming  to  hear  me  preach,  and  like  a 
stranger  in  other  respects  :  should  Cokesbury  or  Baltimore  ever 
furnish  the  opportunity,  I,  in  my  turn,  will  requite  their  beha- 
viour, by  treating  them  as  friends,  brethren,  and  gentlemen.  The 
difficulty  I  met  with  in  New-Haven,  for  lodging,  and  for  a  place  to 
hold  meeting,  made  me  feel  and  know  the  worth  of  Methodists 
more  than  ever.  My  body  is  fatigued  and  listless — my  spirit  tried 
and  tempted  :  infirmities  cleave  to  me. 

From  New-Haven,  through  a  poor  country,  we  passed  on  to 
Northbury,  where  there  is  a  large  Independent  church.  In  Wal- 
lingford  the  meeting-house  of  the  Separatists  supplied  a  place  for 
our  preachers  ;  we  have  also  used  a  neat  Episcopal  church — 
small  indeed,  compared  with  others. 

I  am  reminded  of  England  in  travelling  here  :  this  country  more 
resembles  my  own  than  any  I  have  yet  seen  on  this  side  the  Atlan- 
tic. I  preached  at  five  o'clock,  in  the  meeting-house  of  the  Se« 


1791-]  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURv's  JOURNAL.  ]  n  - 

paratists — a  large  room,  and  small  company.  My  subject  was 
2  Cor.  vi.  20.  1  alarmed  the  town  by  the  excessive  noi<-e  1  made, 
and  thereby  enlarged  nay  congregation.  I  felt  more  assisted  than 
I  expected. 

Saturdciy  11.  At  Wallingford-Farms.  Here  has  been  some  stir 
about  religion  ;  but  the  people  say  new  divinity  has  put  out  the 

fire — Methodists,  Baptists,  Separatists,  &c.  &c.  1  f«  It  conirwh^t 
warmed  while  1  opened  and  applied  "  Strait  is  the  gate,  and  nar- 
row is  the  way  that  leadeth  unto  life."  Some  were  tender,  and 
some  appeared  a  little  alarmed.  1  then  came  to  MiddlH'idil*.  .md 
lodged  at  the  house  of  a  niece  of  David  Brainard.  Here  we  enjoy 
the  quiet  use  of  a  meeting-house. 

Lord's  day  12.  Very  unwell,  hut  had  to  preach  three  times. 
1  began  at  ten  o'clock,  on  "  Blessed  is  he  whosoever  shall  not 
be  offended  in  me."  I  had  the  attention  of  the  people  much  more 
than  I  expected.  In  the  afternoon  1  enlarged,  under  very  great 
weakness,  on  "  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim  ?" 

Came  in  haste  to  Middletown,  where  the  committee  favoured 
me  with  the  meeting-house  belonging  to  the  standing  order.  1  tdt 
exceedingly  low  in  body,  while  I  spoke  to  a  very  large,  serious, 
and  attentive  congregation,  and  I  had  liberty  in  preaching  on 
1  John  iii.  23.  After  meeting  we  rode  a  mile  out  of  town  to  get 
lodging.  It  was  to  the  poorer  classes  of  people  that  this  preaching 
on  love  and  charity  was  anciently  blest. 

Monday  13.  Rode  by  Haddam,  where  David  Rrainard  was  born. 
We  came  through  dreadful  rocky  ways  to  Capt.  Lee's  :  a  Congre- 
gational minister  had  just  finished  his  sermon  as  we  came  in.  \- 
we  did  not  wish  to  force  ourselves  on  any  one,  we  went  forward 
to  Lime,  and  found  a  free,  open-hearted  Baptist  minister,  who  rose 
from  his  bed,  and  received  us  kindly.  By  this  time  we  were 
weary  and  sleepy.  I  trust  the  Lord  had  a  dwelling  in  this  man's 
heart  and  house — his  wife  is  a  kind,  loving  soul  ;  their  children 
obliging,  and  ready  to  serve  us  cheerfully. 

Tuesday  14.  We  came  over  rocks,  and  through  heat  and  dust, 
to  New-London.  My  mind  has  felt  but  little  temptation  to  impa- 
tience until  yesterday  and  this  day  ;  but,  through  grace,  I  do  not 
yield  thereto.  It  is  both  unreasonable  and  unchristian  to  murmur 
— it  betters  nothing:  to  deny  ourselves,  and  to  take  up  our  ci 
daily,  is  our  duty — let  us  not  flee  from  it. 

New-London  standj  upon  the  River  Thames — almost  nenU 
built  since  the  war.  This  town  suffered  in  the  general  burning 
carried  on  by  Arnold  in  this  quarter.  The  new  nv^iinq-li 

Voi.   II.  14 


10(3  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUKY's  JOURNAL.  [1791. 

stands  on  an  eminence  ;  the  Episcopal  church  is  a  pleasant,  well 
formed  building.  The  New-Light  Baptists  were  very  kind,  and 
some  of  them  appeared  like  Methodists.  My  church  was  the 
court-house — my  subject  2  Peter  iii.  15.  :  I  was  not  happy  in 

speaking.  Brother  L gave  them  a  sermon  at  half  past  eight 

o'clock.  I  understood  there  was  a  work  of  religion  in  this  place 
last  year  ;  little  of  it  now  remains.  I  came  onto  Stonington,  pro- 
perly so  called,  a  distance  often  miles,  over  a  most  dreadful  road 
for  a  carriage  :  I  would  almost  as  soon  undertake  to  drive  over  the 
Alleghany  mountain.  From  Stonington  I  came  on  to  Westerly, 
crossing  the  line-bridge  between  Connecticut  and  Rhode-Island. 
I  dropped  a  few  words  to  the  woman  of  the  house  where  we  dined, 
and  saw  very  clearly  that  she  felt  them.  I  had  some  life  in  speak- 
ing to  about  one  hundred  people,  at  Mr. 's,  in  Charlestovvn, 

on  Rev.  iii.  20.  One  said,  I  had  fitted  the  people  well :  another 
said,  that  I  had  the  signs  of  the  times. 

RHODE-ISLAND. — Thursday  15.  Came  to  Newport — the  roads 
were  comparatively  good — the  ferry  three  miles  wide  ;  which, 
however,  we  safely  crossed  in  a  spacious  open  boat,  excellent  in  its 
kind.  In  Newport  are  two  Presbyterian  meeting-houses, — one, 
New-Divinity,  so  called  :  three  others,  regular  Baptists,  New- 
Lights,  and  Sabbatarians  ;  one  Friends'  meeting,  and  one  Episco- 
pal church.  We  stayed  two  nights  at  our  kind  friend's,  brother 
Green,  a  New-Light  Baptist.  I  lectured  the  second  night  from 
Isaiah  Ixiv.  1 — 7. ;  there  was  some  life  amongst  the  people,  although 
it  was  late,  and  the  congregation  like  our  Lord's  disciples  before 
his  passion.  There  is  also  a  Jews'  synagogue,  and  a  Moravian 
chapel.  I  expect  before  many  years  the  Methodists  will  also  have 
a  house  for  worship  here.  I  feel  the  state  of  this  people — they 
are  settled  upon  their  lees,  and  want  emptying  from  vessel  to 
vessel.  My  soul  enjoys  peace. 

Saturday  18.  We  go  hence  to  Providence,  attended  by  our  kind 
friend  for  guide.  Blessed  be  the  Lord  for  a  refreshing  rain  the 
last  night.  On  this  journey  I  feel  much  humbled  ;  1  am  unknown, 
and  have  small  congregations,  to  which  I  may  add,  a  jar  in 
sentiment — but  I  do  not  dispute.  My  soul  is  brought  into  close 
communion.  I  should  not  have  felt  for  these  people  and  for 
the  preachers  as  I  now  do,  had  I  not  visited  them  :  perhaps  I  may 
do  something  for  them  in  a  future  day.  We  came  to  Bristol,  and 

should  have  gone  farther,  but  Captain  G saw  us,  and  took  us 

to  his  house.  At  the  request  of  a  few  persons  I  preached  in  the 
:ourt-house  to  about  a  hundred  people,  and  enforced  "  The  Son 


1791.]  REV.  FRANCIS   ASBlTlv's  JOUANAL.  107 

of  man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  whii  h  was  lost,"  and  found 
a  degree  of  liberty.     Some  time  ago  there  was  the  beginning  of  a 
work  here,  but  the  few  souls  who  began  are  now  discouraged  from 
meeting  together  :   I  fear  religion  is  extinguished  by  confining  it  too 
much  to  church  and  Sunday  service,   and  reading  of  sermons.     J 
feel  that  I  am  not  among  my  own  people  :   although  I  believe  tt. 
are  some  who  fear  God  ;  and  I  find  reason  to  hope  that  souK  ! 
gone  to  glory  from  this  town. 

Sunday  19.  Came  to  Providence.  1  attended  the  ministry  of 
Mr.  M ,  a  Baptist,  in  the  forenoon  ;  and  Mr.  S a  New- 
Light,  in  the  afternoon.  In  the  evening  I  preached  with  some  life 
on  Isai.  Ixi.  1 — 3.  There  are  Presbyterians,  Episcopalians,  Inde- 
pendents or  Congregationalists,  here  :  but  the  Baptists  appear  to 
be  the  leading  people.  I  found  a  few  gracious  souls,  and  some 
seeking.  It  has  been  a  season  of  deep  exercise  with  me  while 
here  :  I  have  had  some  weighty  sensations  ;  I  think  the  Lord  will 
revive  his  work  in  Providence. 

Monday  20.  I  visited  some  serious  families  that  truly  Jove  and 
fear  God.  The  afternoon  I  spent  very  agreeably  >vilh  the  old  pro- 
phet Mr.  Snow,  aged  about  seventy  years  :  he  was  awakened  L . 
the  instrumentality  of  Gilbert  Tennant,  whose  memory  I  revere. 
He  told  me  much  about  Mr.  Whitelield,  and  old  times,  and  of  the 
ministers  of  old  times — of  himself,  his  awakening,  and  conversion 
to  God — of  his  riding  thirty  miles  to  Newport,  in  exceeding  cold 
weather,  to  bring  Mr.  Tennant  to  Providence. 

Having  obtained  more  knowledge  of  the  people,  my  subject  was 
Gal.  vi.  14. — plain  and  pointed:  my  audience  was  serious  am' 
attentive.  I  endeavoured  to  show, 

1.  What  it  is  for  a  man  to  glory  in  a  thing. 

2.  What  men  glory  in  which  is  not  the  cross  of  Christ. 

3.  What  it  is  to  glory  in  the  cross  of  Christ. 

4.  How  a  person  may  know  when  he  glories  in   the  cross  01 
Christ,  viz.  by  the  world's  being  crucified  to  him,  and  he  unto  the 
world. 

The  people  here  appear  to  be  prudent,  active,  frugal  ;  cultiva1 
a  spirit  of  good  family  economy  ;  and  they  are  kind  to  strangers. 
They  have  had  frequent  revivals  of  religion  :  I  had  faith  to  believe 
the  Lord  would  shortly  visit  them  again,  and  that  even  we  shall 
have  something  to  do  in  this  town.  We  rested  a  day  at  Kaston, 
and  appointed  meeting  at  five  o'clock.  I  had  good  freedom  on  Acts 
xvii.  27.  and  the  people  felt  the  word.  We  have  had  a  solemn, 
happy,  and  solitary  retreat,  and  my  soul  entcrrd  inte  renewed  lii« 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1791, 

MASSACHUSETTS. — Thursday  23.  We  rode  through  dust  and  heat 
to  Boston.  I  felt  much  pressed  in  spirit,  as  if  the  door  was  not 
open.  As  it  was  court  time,  we  were  put  to  some  difficulty  in  get- 
ting entertainment.  It  was  appointed  for  me  to  preach  at  Murray's 
church — not  at  all  pleasing  to  me  ;  and  that  which  made  it  worse 
was,  that  I  had  only  about  twenty  or  thirty  people  to  preach  to  in 
a  large  house  :  it  appeared  to  me  that  those  who  professed  friend- 
ship for  us,  were  ashamed  to  publish  us.  On  Friday  evening  1 
preached  again  :  my  congregation  was  somewhat  larger,  owing,  per- 
haps, to  the  loudness  of  my  voice — the  sinners  were  noisy  in  the 
streets.  My  subject  was  Rev.  iii.  17,  18.  I  was  disturbed,  and 
not  at  liberty,  although  I  sought  it.  I  have  done  with  Boston  until 
we  can  obtain  a  lodging,  a  house  to  preach  in,  and  some  to  join 
us.  Some  things  here  are  to  be  admired  in  the  place  and  among 
the  people — their  bridges  are  great  works,  and  none  are  ashamed 
of  labour  ;  of  their  hospitality  I  cannot  boast  :  in  Charleston, 
wicked  Charleston,  six  years  ago  a  stranger,  I  was  kindly  invited 
to  eat  and  drink  by  many — nere,  by  none.  There  are,  I  think, 
nine  meeting-houses  of  the  Establishment  ;  Friends'  meeting- 
house, one  ;  Sandeminians,  one  ;  Universalists,  one  ;  Roman  Catho- 
lics, one  ;  Baptists,  two  ;  Episcopalians,  two ;  the  Methodists 
have  no  house — but  their  time  may  come. 

I  preached  at  Slade's  tavern  on  my  way  to  Lynn  on  "  If  our 
Gospel  be  hid,  it  is  hid  to'them  that  are  lost."  I  was  agreeably  sur- 
prised to  6nd  a  house  raised  for  the  Methodists.  As  a  town,  I  think 
Lynn  the  perfection  of  beauty  ;  it  is  seated  on  a  plain,  under  a 
range  of  craggy  hills,  and  open  to  the  sea  :  there  is  a  promising 
society — an  exceedingly  well-behaved  congregation— these  things, 
doubtless,  made  all  pleasing  to  me.  My  first  subject  was  Rom.  viii. 
33. — in  the  afternoon  Acts  iv.  12.  :  here  we  shall  make  a  firm 
stand,  and  from  this  central  point,  from  Lynn,  shall  the  light  of 
Methodism  and  of  truth  radiate  through  the  state.  Our  brother 
Johnson  is  simple-hearted,  and  hearty  in  the  cause  :  we  owe  our 
entertainment  and  house  for  worship  chiefly  to  him. 

Tuesday  28.  Rode  to  Marblehead.  When  I  entered  this  town, 
my  heart  was  more  melted  towards  its  inhabitants,  than  to  any  in 
those  parts,  with  the  exception  of  Lynn.  After  consultation,  and 
some  altercation  among  themselves,  the  committee  invited  me  to 
preach  in  Mr.  Story's  meeting-house,  which  1  did  accordingly  at 
four  o'clock,  on  Acts  xxvi.  17,  18.  I  was  led  to  speak  alarmingly, 
whilst  I  pointed  out  the  Gospel  as  descriptive  of  their  misery  am5 


1791. J  KEV.   FUANtIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL.  10S> 

need  of  mercy  :  brother  Lee  preached  in  the-  evening  to  a  gr«  .a 
number  of  people  in  and  about  Mr.  Martin's  house.  Next  morn- 
ing, weak  as  I  was,  1  could  not  forbear  spe.ikm^  to  them  on  "  Seek 
ye  first  the  kingdom  of  Cod." 

Wednesday  29.   Rode  to  Salem.      Here  arc  five  meeting-houses, 
two  of  them  on  the  New-Divinity  plan — i.  e.  regeuei.uioti  tin-  fn-t 
work — no  prayer,  repentance,  or  fuith,  until  this  is  accomplished  : 
the  other  three  belong  to  the   Establishment     one    Kpi&copah.m  , 
and  one  Friends'  meeting-house.     1  found  no  access  to  any.     1  lec- 
tured in  the  court-house  on   Rom.    v.    G — 9.     I   looked   upon   the 
greater  part  of  my  congregation  as  judges  ;   and  I  talked  until  they, 
becoming  weary,  began  to  leare  me.      1  have  done  with  Salem  un- 
til we  can  get  a  better  stand.     I  had  the  curiosity  to  visit   the  cal- 
vary of  the  witches — i.  e.  those  who  were  destroyed  on  the  ch 
of  witchcraft  :  I  saw  the  graves  of  many   innocent,   good   people, 
who  were  put  to  death,  suffering  persecution  from  those  who   had 
suffered  persecution — such,  and  so  strangely  contradictory,  is  man. 
I  have  felt  weakness  of  body,  and  deep   exercise  of  mind,  and,  ;it 
times,    good   liberty   in  speaking — I  am   now   convinced  that  the 
Methodists,  as  a  body,  have  the   most  religion,   and  am   more  and 
more  confirmed  in  my  choice. 

We  rode  to  Manchester.  Mr.  Foster  received  us  with  great 
kindness.  The  Selectmen  granted  us  the  privilege  of  the  meeting- 
house :  I  lectured  on  Malachi  iii.  13.  at  five  o'clock.  Here  arc 
some  feeling  and  understanding  souls.  This  place  has  been  visited 
for  many  years,  and  a  society  kept  up,  although  the  ministers  did 
not  favour  the  stir  ;  of  this  work,  father  Lee's  ministry,  an  aged  man 
of  that  country  and  town,  has  been  the  principal  means  ;  for  a  long 
time  he  has  faithfully  stood  his  ground,  praying  with,  and  exhorting 
the  people.  We  were  invited  to  lodge  at  a  place  where  provision 
is  made  for  the  entertaintment  of  ministers,  and  in  the  morninc; 
money  was  offered.  I  declined  accepting  their  invitation,  and  re- 
fused their  money. 

Friday,  July  1.  Came  to  L—    -'s  to  dinner:  after  praying  with 
them,  and  speaking  to   each   in   the  family,  I   left   them  to   (iod. 

Thence  I  proceeded  to  T 's,  and  preached  at  Drown's  folly.  t<> 

many  people — my  subject,  Luke  ii.  10. 

Saturday  2.   I  returned  home  to  brother  .1—     -'s  in  Lynn. 

Sunday  3.  My  first  subject  was  "  The  great  salvation"-— In   the 
afternoon  I  spoke  on  Titus  ii.  11,  12.  and  had  liberty  :   in  the  eve- 
ning my  subject  was  Matt.  xi.  28 — 30.  the  congregation  w,is  ;r 
five,  and  my  mind  enjoyed  sweet  peace:  although,  out^.i;  'l\.  »• 


HO  REV.    FRANCIS   ASBURY's   JOURNAL.  [1791. 

were  uncomfortable,  the  meeting-house  being  open,  and  the  wea- 
ther very  cool  for  the  season.  I  feel  as  if  God  would  work  in 
these  states,  and  give  us  a  great  harvest.  My  intervals  of  leisure 
have  been  spent  in  close  application  to  my  Bible,  and  reading  Bax- 
ter's Call  to  the  Unconverted. 

Monday  4.  I  took  the  benefit  of  the  sea-air,  and  began  visiting. 

Tuesday  5.  My  soul  is  in  great  peace  and  love.  Here  it  is  a  day 
of  small  things  :  the  people  have  been  neglected,  but  now  the 
Lord  has  opened  their  eyes.  0  what  skill,  and  patience,  and  wis- 
dom are  needful  to  deal  with  souls !  I  was  happy  in  meeting  the 
women  in  class  ;  I  found  but  few  believers,  but  I  do  believe  that 
God  will  bring  them  all  into  full  liberty. 

Wednesday  6.  Found  my  mind  stayed  upon  God.  In  the  even- 
ing I  had  a  large,  attentive  congregation. 

Thursday  7.  I  was  engaged  closely  in  reading.  I  visited  and  con- 
versed freely  with  two  families.  I  am  informed  that  Lynn  and 
Lynnfield  afford  upwards  of  2200  souls  (1791.)  This  day  brother 
Jesse  Lee  put  a  paper  into  my  hand  proposing  the  election  of  not 
less  than  two,  nor  more  than  four  preachers  from  each  conference, 
to  form  a  general  conference  in  Baltimore  in  December,  1792,  to 
be  continued  annually. 

Saturday  9.  I  preached  a  sacramental  sermon  on  "  Let  a  man 
examine  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of  that  bread  and  drink  of  that 
cup." 

Sunday  10.  Preached  on  the  great  supper,  Luke  xiv.  a  very 
solemn,  baptising,  and  sacramental  season.  The  people  chose  to 
receive  the  elements  sitting,  as  is  the  practice  amongst  Presbyte- 
rians. In  the  afternoon  I  enforced  "  What  shall  the  end  be  of  them 
that  obey  not  the  Gospel  of  God  :"  at  night  I  spoke  on  "  These 
shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment:"  the  Lord  was  among 
the  people,  and  I  hope  and  trust  some  real  good  was  done. 

Monday  11.  I  labour  under  deep  exercises  of  soul.  The  sea- 
bath  I  found  to  strengthen  me.  In  the  evening  I  met  the  men's 
class  in  Lynn,  and  was  led  to  hope  that  a  glorious  work  of  God 
will  be  wrought  here  ;  several  people  are  under  awakenings  at 
this  time  ;  my  staying  so  long  among  them  may  be  of  the  Lord. 

Tuesday  12.  We  had  a  blessed  rain  after  nearly  a  month's 
drought. 

Wednesday  13.  We  came  through  Waltham,  Sudbury,  and  Mai- 
borough  ;  at  this  last  place  there  is  a  grand  meeting  house,  and  one 
not  less  elegant  in  its  kind  for  the  minister  :  thence  we  proceeded 
on  through  Northbury  and  Shrewsbury,  to  Worcester,  through 


1791.]  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOt'UNAI  .  Ill 

rain,  and  with  pain  and  weariness.  Mr.  Chandler  received  us 
with  kindness  more  than  common,  and  courtesy  anxious  to  please, 
calling  his  family  together  with  softness  of  address,  and  in  all  things 
else  being  agreeable  ;  perhaps  more  so  than  any  man  I  have  met 
with  in  America;  this  reception  shall  comfort  us  a  little  in  our 
toil.  From  Worcester,  we  journeyed  on,  passing  through  Leices- 
ter, Spenser,  Brookfields,  and  another  town.  We  dined  at  a  pi 
where  "  the  people  are  united,  and  do  not  wish  to  divide  the 
parish" — their  fathers,  the  Puritans,  divided  the  kingdom  and  llie 
church  too,  and  when  they  could  not  obtain  liberty  of  conscience 
in  England,  they  sought  it  here  among  wild  men  and  IKMM-.  U 
Greaves's  tavern  I  saw  a  man  from  Vermont,  who  said  the  number 
of  their  inhabitants  was  ninety  thousand  ;  he  invited  me  to  send 
preachers  among  them. 

Friday  15.  My  mind  has  been  dejected  ;  Satan  has  assaulted  me— 
I  could  not  be  fixed  in  prayer  as  I  desired.  We  have  made  it 
one  hundred  and  eight  miles  from  Lynn  to  Springfield.  1  want  to 
be  with  the  Methodists  again — O  how  unworthy  of  such  fellowship  : 
yet  am  I  seated  among  the  princes  of  thy  people  !  At  6  o'clock  I  de- 
livered a  discourse  in  Mr.  C 's  house  on  "  It  is  time  to  seek  the 

Lord  till  he  come  and  rain  righteousness  upon  3'ou:"  the  people  were 
a  little  moved  ;  and  onp  sisfpr  nmWdppp  conviction.  1  Ins  place  is 
a  haunt  of  soldiery  :  the  armory  being  kept  here  :  there  appears  to 
be  little  religion  among  the  inhabitants. 

CONNECTICUT. — Sunday  17.  Passed  through  Suffield  to  Turkey- 
Hills,  where  1  had  a  large  and  very  criticising  congregation, to  whom 
I  preached  my  first  discourse  on  John  vii.  17.:  my  second  subject 
was  Hebr.  vi.  1.:  there  were  some  feeling  hearts  present  ;  the 
Lord  will  work  here.  On  Monday  1  had  a  crowd  at  Proquonac,  in  a 
school-house,  to  whom  1  preached  on  2  Cor.  iv.  1,2.:  some  were 
frightened,  some  melted,  and  some  were  offended.  We  came  to 

Windsor  ;  Mr.  S received  us  kindly,  but  did  not  fail  to  let  us 

know  how  lightly  he  thought  of  us  and  of  our  principles — here  my 
feelings  were  very  gloomy,  and  1  secretly  wished  myself  out  of  the 
way.  1  went  to  the  school-house  and  found  it  crowded  with  people  : 
the  Lord  lifted  me  up  whilst  I  opened  and  applied  Gal.  iii.  JJ 
think  I  was  given  to  see  and  feel  the  true  state  of  these  people  ; 
some  of  them  were  melted  and  praised  God  for  the  Gospel. 

Tuesday  U'.  1   came  to  the  city  of  Hartford.     At  Mr.  S- 
meeting-house  I   was  attended  by  three  ministers  :   I   was  clear  not 
to  keep  back  any  part  of  the  truth  whilst  1  enforced  Luke  vn 
the  people  were  mostly  serious  and  attentive. 


llii  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1791. 

1  had  an  interview  with  Dorcas  Brown,  who  was  converted  forty 
years  ago,  and  in  the  history  of  whose  experience  there  were 
some  remarkable  manifestations  of  the  power  of  God,  and  of  the 
interposition  of  his  providence  in  answer  to  prayer  in  times  of  per- 
secution and  violence.  Her  son's  case  was  also  remarkable  :  he 
had  been  captured  by  the  Indians,  and  was  returned  killed ;  in  con- 
tradiction to  this  account,  and  the  general  belief,  she  pronounced 
that  she  should  again  see  him  in  the  flesh  :  contrary  to  the  expec- 
tation of  all  but  herself,  he  did  return  after  an  absence  of  three 
years  and  eight  months. 

Wednesday  20.  At  East- Hartford  I  felt  more  than  usually  assisted 
on  Luke  xix.  10.  I  had  an  attentive,  feeling  congregation.  On 
Thursday  we  had  a  gracious  shower  at  the  quarterly  meeting  at 
West-Farmington,  where  1  delivered  a  pointed  discourse  on  Acts 
xvi.  31,  32.  which  was  blessed  to  some  souls. 

Friday  22.  The  Episcopal  church  was  open  at  Litchfield,  where 
1  preached,  with  very  little  faith,  on  the  love  of  Christ.  I  think 
Morse's  account  of  his  countrymen  is  near  the  truth  :  never 
have  I  seen  any  people  who  would  talk  so  long,  so  correctly, and  so 
seriously  about  trifles. 

Saturday  23.  By  a  rocky,  mountainous  way,  we  came  to  Cornwall 
in  the  midstof  the  harvest  home  :  we  had  about  one  hundred  and 
fifty  hearers  :  I  had  openings  of  mind  whilst  I  spoke  on  1  Pet.  iii.  15. 

Sunday  24.  Came  to  Canaan,  after  preaching  at  a  new  meeting- 
house :  here  nought  would  satisfy  but  my  going  to  the  ancient 
Presbyterian  church  ;  I  reluctantly  complied,  and  made  a  feeble 
attempt  on  Luke  xi.  13.  I  offended,  and  was  offended  :  the  peo- 
ple seemed  uneasy,  and  wished  to  be  gone.  This  is  the  first,  and  I 
expect  will  be  the  last  time  I  shall  speak  in  that  house,  if  not  in 
that  place.  Twenty-five  years  ago,  the  people  in  this  place  had 
religion  ;  at  present,  it  is  to  be  feared,  there  is  little  or  none  :  how 
it  is  I  know  not  ;  but  at  such  places  I  feel  dreadfully, — as  if  such 
people  were  the  worst  of  all  under  the  sun,  and  at  the  greatest  dis- 
Umce  from  God. 

Wednesday  27.  Although  under  considerable  affliction  of  body 
;ind  mind,  I  rode  over  rough  ways,  to  New-Britain  ;  where,  in 
general,  the  people  appeared  unfeeling  ;  nevertheless,  I  found  a 
few  among  them  who  felt  the  need  of  Christ  :  1  was  led  to  exhort 
them,  and  to  pray  with  them — I  am  persuaded  some  are  not  far 
from  the  kingdom  of  God. 

NEW-YORK. — Thursday  28.    I  felt  some  freedom  at   T 's, 

while  speaking  on  2  Tim.  iii.  16. :  the  length  of  the  ride,  and  the 


1791.)  REV.     FRANCIS    AbBVRY's  Jf  !]..-• 

languor  of  my  bodily   powers,  had   not  enfeebled   my  mind  : 
found  some  gracious  souls  in  the  society. 

Friday  29.     Came  to  Albany.     My  mind  iVlt  improved  with  the 
value  of  the  souls  in  this  place.     By  the  curves  I  have  tn.uV  in 
course  from  Hartford  to  this  place,  1  suppose  1  have  not  travelled 
less  than  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  :   perpetual  motion  is  no  small 
trial  to  my  body  and  mind  ;  but  I  mu^t  cast  my  care  upon  the  Lord^ 
I  am  led  to  think  the  eastern  church  will  tind  this  saying  hold  true 
in  the  Methodists,  viz.  "  I  will  provoke  you  to  jealousy  by  a  peo- 
ple that  were  no  people  ;  and  by  a  foolish  nation  will  1  anger  you  :' 
they  have  trodden  upon  the  C|'i,ikt>r-   the  Episcopalians,  the   Bap- 
tist?— see   now    if   the    Methodists  do    not   work   their  way  :    the 
people  will  not  pay  large  money  for   religion   if  they  can  get  it 
cheaper. 

I  preached  to  about  three  hundred  people  in  a  barn  at  Cocyman's 
Patent,  the  new  stone  church  not  being  ready.    Our  society  is  pi 
raising  in  this  pi. ice. 

Tuesday,  August  2.    Came  to  Hudson.     I  felt  disagreeable  sen- 
sations, a  chill,  hoarseness,  headach,  and  fever. 

Wednesday  3.  The  day  was  unusually  warm,  and  I  was  «ick  and 
felt  like  Jonah  ;  1  was  ready  t<>  fmnt  in  my  carriage  ;  at  last,  through 

mercy,  I  arrived  safe  at  kind  sister  L 's  :   I  went  to  bed,  took 

eorue  chicken  broth,  and  after  a  comfortable  sleep  felt  revived. 
No  more  rest  -  1  took  the  road  a^i'm,  and  arrived  at  Khinebeck  by 
noon.  My  soul  is  in  peace — 1  want  more:  prayer,  patience,  lil«:, 
and  love — 1  walk  daily,  hourly,  and  sometimes  minutely  with  God. 
Saturday  6.  I  had  a  feiv  serious  people  at  the  Mountain  meeting- 
house. I  lodged  at  C 's,  who  was  formerly  a  Shaking  Quaker. 

Sunday  7.  We  received  the  sacrament ;  and  then  went  to  .t 
^mall  grove,  where  we  had  a  green  carpet  of  nature's  spreading 
underneath,  and  an  umbrella  of  variegated  leaves  above  us.  I 
preached  on  Zech.  xii.  10.  to  about  a  thousand  or  twelve  hundred 
people,  as  it  was  judged  :  I  felt  solemn  and  recollected,  and  was 
assisted  in  speaking  :  1  had  some  faitli  to  believe  it  would  be  thr-. 
beginning  of  days,  and  of  n  revival  of  religion. 

CONNECTICUT. — Preached  at  Salisbury  on  Acts  r.  31,  r  \ly 
mind  is  in  peace. 

I  came  to  Sharon  time  enough  to  preach  at  three  o'clock  :  the 
women  crowded  the  house,  whilst  the  men  stood  at  the  door,  with 
patient  attention,  in  the  rain,  which  indeed  many  seemed   scarcely 
to  perceive  ;  I  spoke  with  life  and  freedom  on  Ephes.  ii. 
Here  are  some  praying  souls.  I  read,  much  to  my  comfort,  Corhii' 


jjl  HEV.  1-KAM.la  ASUIRV'S  JOURNAL.  [1791. 

memoirs  of  the  secrets  of  his  heart,  brought  to  public  view  after 
his  death. 

NEW- YORK. — February  12.    I  preached  at  B 's,  on  Luke 

xix.  10.  to  a  number  of  simple-hearted  people.  Rode  to  brother 
J_  _'g  to  attend  quarterly  meeting ;  I  felt  weak  and  unwell,  yet 
happy  in  God.  My  soul  enters  into  deeper  union  with  God,  and 
nto  a  sweet  resignation  and  confidence  in  him  for  his  work  and 
church.  I  judge  that  my  journey  to  Lynn,  and  my  rides  through 
the  country  thereabouts,  have  made  a  distance  of  little  less  than 
live  hundred  miles  ;  and  thence  to  Albany  ;  nearly  the  same,  and 
from  Albany  to  New-York  not  much  less  ;  with,  occasionally,  very 
rough  roads  for  a  carriage  :  well,  it  is  all  for  God,  and  Christ,  and 
souls  :  I  neither  covet  nor  receive  any  man's  silver  or  gold — food, 
raiment,  and  a  little  rest,  is  all  I  want. 

Saturday  and  Sunday,  13,  14.  We  began  our  meeting  in  a  barn 
at  Jackson's  :  I  had  freedom  whilst  enlarging  on  Joshua  xxiv.  15.  : 
there  was  a  large  collection  of  people  from  far  to  our  sacrament 
and  lave-feast ;  among  these  there  was  life,  but  the  people  about 
this  place  are  dead — dead  !  there  is  a  curse  somewhere.  I  doubt 
if  one  soul  has  been  converted  to  God  since  I  was  here  two 
years  ago. 

Monday  15.  1  feel  great  power  to  trust  God  with  his  church  and 
work  :  and  am  resolved  on  more  frequent  access  to  the  throne  of 
grace,  not  continuing  so  long  as  heretofore  :  I  feel  greater  sweetness 
in  so  doing,  and  it  tends  more  to  an  hourly  and  momently  walk  with 
God. 

Tuesday  16.  This  is  a  day  of  rest  from  public  labour.  I  have 
uncommon  trials,  and  great  liberty  of  spirit :  my  addresses  to  a 
throne  of  grace  are  frequent  to-day. 

Wednesday  17.  Felt  a  good  degree  of  liberty  at  B 's  on  Col. 

i.  28.  "  Christ  formed  in  you  the  hope  of  glory" — perfect  in  Christ 
Jesus — ours  is  not  the  perfection  of  God,  of  Christ,  of  angels  ;  such 
perfection  must  be  ours  as  excludes  evil  tempers  from  the  heart, 
and  yet  supposes  us  liable  to  ignorance  and  error,  while  in  tene- 
ments of  clay.  As  1  came  along  to  P— — 's  I  was  ready  to  complain 
of  the  roughness  of  the  roads,  but  I  was  suddenly  stopped,  when  I  be- 
held a  poor  Irish  woman  with  a  heavy  child  on  her  shoulders,  and 
without  covering  for  head  or  feet ;  she  said  she  was  from  Canada, 
and  thus  far  had  begged  her  way  : — pity  for  her  at  once  stilled  all 
murmur  of  complaint  for  myself. 

On  Thursday  we  had  a  gracious  season  at  Stoney-Street,  amongst 
sinners,  seekers,  and  believers,  while  !  applied  Gal.  vi.  10. 


'I.  11KV.    KAANi'lS  ASBVRY'S   .lOT'RXAl 


Saturday  20.  Quarterly  meeting  at  Nortli-<  'a-,tle  :  it  be^..i>  v.«-ll 
I  was  happy  in  mind,  although  unwell,  whil-i  I  -jmkc  to  the  u 
who  attended  on  1  Sam.  vii. 

Sunday  21.  Our  congregation  became  unvvcildy  an  '  NT;  m  . 

subject,  Luke  xxiii.  3.  was  new,  to  mo,  at  least  :  although  my  mind 
enjoyed  some  degree  of  peace,  my  frame  was  .-imitated,  and  my 
rits  hurried.      I  received  the  olive  branch  from  Virginia  —  All   i- 
peace  —  it  was  obtained  by  a  kind  letter  from  me  to  OKdlv. 

Saturday  27.     Quarterly  meeting  in  Newtown  :   1   felt  freei! 
of  mind  whilst  treating  on  Deut.  v   2G. 

Sunday  28.  We  had  a  good  sacramental  time,  and  a  melting  love- 
feast.  There  are  four  houses  of  worship  in  this  place,  but  I  fear 
the  church  of  Christ  is  very  small.  I  have  lately  been  led  into 
great  depths  of  God,  and  sight  of  my  danger  and  constant  need  of 
pr.iyer. 

Monday  29.  Camo.  to  Now  York  :  the  weather  is  warm,  and  here 
:«.  an  awful  season  of  affliction. 

!  preached  at  the  new  church  on  Hour.  v.  12.  we  had  an  acci 
able  time,  and  some  gracious  movings. 

Wednesday  31.    We  had  a  serious,  heart  affecting   time  ;  man\ 
were  ready  to  break  out  into  praises  to  God.     1  respect  the  kind- 
ness of  the  dear  people  here,  and  leave  New  York  m  faith  that  thi 
Lord  will  return  to  visit  them. 

Thursday,  September  1.  I  visited  my  old  friend*  on  Staten- 
Island  :  many  whom  I  have  preached  to  and  prayed  for,  still  keep 
at  a  distance. 

Friday  2.  I  preached  in  our  new  chapel  to  a  large  congregation 
on  "  Ye  that  hare  escaped  the  sword,  go  away,  stand  not  still  : 
remember  the  Lord  afar  off,  and  let  Jerusalem  come  into  your 
mind."  Jer.  li.  50.  :  it  was  n  gracious  season  :  after  preaching  the 
society  met,  and  several  declared  the  Lord'?:  dealings  with  then 
souls. 

NEW-JERSEY.  —  Monday  5.     I  rode  through  much  rain  to   Mon- 
mouth,  New-Jersey,  where  I  preached  to  a  considerable  con 
gation  on  "  The  just  shall  live  by  faith  ;  but  if  any  rn  in  draw  hack, 
my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  him."  There  is  some  stir  am 
the  people  :  at  Long  Branch,  within  eighteen  months,  as  I  am  in- 
formed, nearly  fifty  souls  have  professed  conversion. 

Tuesday  C.  I  found  the  Lord  had  not  left  himself  without  u 
nesses  at  Kettle-Creek. 

Wednesday  7.  At  P  -  's  church  I  learn  some  were  • 
blessed  be  God  !  my  soul  was  kept  in  great  pearr 


life  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBtmY'^JOWRNAX.  ,!•»!. 

Friday  0.  At  Little-Egg  Harbour  I  endeavoured  to  speak  very 
pointedly  on  Acts  xiii.  46. — my  spirit  was  much  moved,  and,  I  think, 
as  a  preacher  and  visiter,  I  am  thus  far  free  from  the  blood  of 
saints  and  sinners. 

Saturday  10.  Rode  a  dreary,  moscheto  path,  in  great  weakness, 
to  Batstow  works. 

Sunday  11.  Preached  on  Luke  six.  10.  I  advised  the  people 
to  build  a  house  for  the  benefit  of  those  men  so  busily  employed 
day  and  night,  Sabbaths  not  excepted,  in  the  manufacture  of  iron — - 
rude,  and  rough,  and  strangely  ignorant  of  God. 

Thursday  15.  Having  exerted  myself  more  thnn  my  strength 
would  well  bear  last  evening,  I  feel  faint,  yet  pursuing.  I  gave  an 
exhortation  to  a  house  full  of  people.  The  evening  was  spent 
with  S.  H •; — gracious  souls,  mother  and  children. 

Friday  16.  Preached  at  C 's  :  here  are  some  under  awaken- 

ings  ;  and  the  prospect  is  pleasing.  Many  attended  the  word  OB. 
the  Lord's  day  :  several  of  our  sisters  and  of  our  brethren  on 
this  day  (and  on  Monday  at  Bethel)  after  sacrament,  testified  to 
the  goodness  of  God. 

PENNSYLVANIA. — Tuesday  20.  Rode  to  Philadelphia.  Here,  as 
usual,  I  was  closely  employed  in  writing  ;  I  had  several  meetings, 
and  some  awful  seasons  that  will  be  remembered  in  eternity — Thi? 
city  abounds  with  inhabitants — it  is  the  London  of  America. 

Wednesday  28.  We  rode  to  Strasburg,  thirty  miles,  where  I 
preached  at  night  in  a  respectable  tavern  on  Acts  iii.  19.  I  was 
very  plain,  and  had  some  energy  in  preaching,  although  unwell  in 
body.  I  have  faith  to  believe  we  shall  have  a  house  of  worship, 
and  that  the  Lord  will  have  a  people  in  this  place. 

Thence  to   M.   B 's :    hitherto   the   Lord   hath   been   our 

helper  in  spite  of  sin  and  Satan.  We  had  a  good  time  whilst  I 
spoke  on  Zech.  xii.  10.  after  sacrament  several  bore  their  testi- 
mony for  the  Lord.  My  soul  is  much  humbled,  and  brought  into 
close  communion  with  God  ;  yea,  1  rejoiced  greatly  to  find  so  much 

religion  among  the  people.     We  went  hence  to  brother  M 's. 

where,  for  two  days,  we  had  a  gracious  season  :  I  preached  on 
Acts  ii.  37,  38.  I  had  openings,  and  was  made  to  feel  after  the 
souls  of  the  people.  How  will  Satan  take  advantage  to  raise  pre- 
judice in  the  minds  of  many  ! — At  first  the  cry  was,  "  They  are 
enemies  to  the  country!"  that  tale  worn  out,  it  is  said,  "  They 
will  pull  down  the  churches — they  hold  erroneous  doctrines  1" 
aye  ;  we  will  labour  to  raise  a  true  spiritual  church  ;  and  if,  in 
doing  this,  we  injure  wolves  in  sheep's  clothing,  let  unfaithful 
ministers  look  to  it ;  we  shall  deliver  our  own 


"•!.]  .  i  :.A-  KV  - 

DELAWARE. — Came  to  Wilmington.  Alas  !  for  poor  Wilmington 
—when  will  this  people  open  their  eyes  !    We  rode  in  li.i-te  thirty 

miles  to  D 's,  but  the  people  had  met  throe  hours  before  our 

arrival,  and  brother  E—  had  preached  to  them.  I  preached 
at  the  Cross- Road?,  but  the  minds  of  the  people  were  so  occupied 
by  the  approaching  election,  that  I  fear  there  was  little  room  for 
things  of  more  importance. — Finding  there  were  no  more  appoint- 
ments published  for  me,  I  rode,  through  the  dust,  thirty-two  nnl«-- 
to  judge  White's.  O  Lord,  help  me  to  watch  and  pray  !  I  atu 
afraid  of  losing  the  sweetness  I  feel :  for  months  past  I  hnv« 
felt  as  if  in  the  possession  of  perfect  love — not  a  moment's  de- 
sire of  any  thing  hut  God.  I  have  an  awful  view  of  the  reformed 
churches,  and  am  determined  to  speak  to  the  very  hearts  of  tin- 
people.  After  attending  a  quarterly  meeting  at  B 's  chapel, 

I  came   to  W 'g  ;  we    had  a   large   conuregation  :   after   public 

service,  we  had  a  meeting  for  the  local  preachers,  leaders,  aud 
stewards.  Next  morning  we  had  love-feast  for  the  coloured  bre- 
thren at  sunrise  ;  and  at  nine  o'clock  for  the  whiles.  We  find 
new  members  are  added  every  year  ;  many  living  experiences, 
und  miracles  of  grace  in  this  society. 

Friday,  October  14.    Came   to    brother  L 's.     Hail,  happy 

Eouls  ! — three  out  of  four  in  this  fimily  love  God. 

Saturday  15.  Came  to  Downing'*  chapel  ;  had  a  blessed  love 
feast ;  most  of  those  who  spoke  professed  sanctification.  My  aoul 
was  filled  with  God.  I  did  what  1  could  to  put  those  in  band  who 
had  witnessed  perfect  love  in  love-feast.  There  is  a  great  work 
of  God  in  the  lower  counties  of  Virginia  ;  but  the  Antinomian 
doctrines,  so  liberally  set  forth  by  some,  greatly  hinder.  Wf 
have  rough  weather. 

Thursday  10.    The  storm   continued  ;  it  was  thought   no  out 
could  go  out;  we,  nevertheless,  ventured  through  heavy  rains  and 
cnme  to   P 's  ;  at  night   we  reached    D 's,  making  a  jour- 
ney of  nearly  forty  miles  ;  we  were  wet  and  uncomfortable  ;  but 
the  Lord  preserves  our  goings  out,  and  our  comings  in. 

MARYLAND.— Friday  21.  Preached  at  brother  L—  -'s  on  Hebr. 
riii.  10,  11,  12.  1  think  the  Lord  will  work  in  this  neighbourhood, 
and  take  away  the  covering  and  the  veil  that  are  spread  upon  thr 
minds  of  the  people.  Temptations  have  oppressed  my  soul,  and 
disease  afflicted  my  body  ;  it  is  the  Lord's  power  alone  that  can 
help  me  ;  1  fear  I  am  not  so  constant  in  prayer  as  I  should  be.  J 
made  an  effort  to  establish  a  female  school,  under  sister  G — ,  and 
sister  B :  and  endeavoured  to  impre?«  the  nece^'itv  .T 


REV.  FUANCIS  ASBUKV'S  JOURNAL.  j  17yl. 

'icncy  of  band-meeting,  on  men  and  women,  both  married  and 

Dingle. 

Tuesday  25.  At  M 's,  there  was  a  living  stir  among  some  who 

came  to  the  quarterly  meeting  from  a  distance.     My  soul  is  bowed 
down  for  this  neighbourhood. 

Wednesday,  November  2.  We  crossed  Choptank-River  and 
came  to  Talbot  quarterly  meeting.  My  subject  on  the  first  day 
ivas  "Oh!  let  the  \vickedness  of  the  wicked  come  to  an  end." 
We  had  a  close  love- feast,  and  some  living  souls. 

Sunday  6,  and  Monday  7.  Attended  quarterly  meeting  at  Greens- 
burg,  commonly  called  Choptank-Bridge  :  we  had  a  strict  and 
living  love-feast,  and  powerful  testimonies. 

Wednesday  15.  Came  to  Havre  de  Grace,  and  thence  hurried 
to  Cokesbury,  where  I  found  all  in  peace. 

Thursday  16.  Came  to  the  old  meeting  house  at  Bush,  and 
preached  on  "  Enoch  walked  with  God  :"  the  meeting-house  at 
Bush  is  the  second  house  built  for  the  Methodists  in  the  state  : 
it  is  a  poor  building,  remaining  unfinished  to  this  day,  and  likely 
so  to  continue. 

Friday  17.  We  had  a  powerful,  melting  time,  at  Deer-Creek  : 
my  subject  was  Jeremiah  xiv.  8,  9,  10. 

Sunday  26.  I  preached  at  Baltimore  a  searching  discourse  OR 
Zeph.  i.  12.  In  the  afternoon  I  preached  at  the  Point,  to  some 
unfeeling  souls  ;  and  in  the  evening  performed  the  funeral  so- 
lemnity of  my  dear  old  friend  sister  Tribulet,  on  Acts  xvi.  13,  14, 
15.  :  I  was  uncommonly  drawn  out  this  day.  and  truly  laboured  in 
body  and  spirit. 

Monday,  December  7.  I  went  from  house  to  house  through  the 
snow  and  cold,  begging  money  for  the  support  of  the  poor  orphans 
at  Cokesbury. 

Rode  to  Annapolis  and  preached  at  night. 

VIRGINIA. — Wednesday,  December  9.  A  day  to  be  remembered. 
We  stopped  once  in  forty-three  miles  :  when  we  reached  Oxen- 
hill-Ferrv,  opposite  to  Alexandria,  I  was  nearly  frozen,  being 
hardly  able  to  walk  or  talk.  We  crossed  the  Patomac  in  an  open 
boat,  on  whose  icy  bottom  the  horses  with  difficulty  kept  their 
feet ;  and  still  worse  it  would  have  been,  had  I  not  thoughtfully 
called  for  some  straw  to  strew  beneath  them  ;  we  had  five  of  them 
on  board,  and  the  waves  were  high. 

Friday  11.  Rode  forty  miles  to  Mrs.  W 's  :  I  suffered  not  a 

Httle  with  cold  :  I  thank  God  my  life  is  spared. 

Sunday  13.  I  could  not  find  the  way  to  the  hearts  of  an  unfeeling 


i7&-'  KtV.   HUNCIS   A.-B110   a  JT  il    ' 

people  at  the  widow  Botubry's  ;  thence  we  went  in  luste  to  F 
Royal  ;  the  inhabitants,  seeing  u~,  r.m  to^» -thcr,  to   whom  I  «poke 
on  Acts  ii.  27.  :   the  people  were  respectful  ami  attentive. 

Monday    14.   Rode  through  a  storm  of  snow  to  brother  A 'a. 

My  mind  enjoys    peace  ;    and  although  by  run-taut  travelling  I  am 
kept  from  the  privilege  of  being  so  frequently   in  private    pr;i'. 
yet  I  am  preserved  from  anger  and  murmuring — my  soul  is  wholly 
given  up  to  God. 

I  am  now  about  entering  upon  the  business  of  the  conferences 
lor  the  present  year — all  is  peace.  Notwithstanding  1  have  been  so 
highly  favoured,  my  sufferings  may  be  le-  >v  an  earlier  move 

to  the  south  ;   I  will  therefore  remember  to  be  on   the   «outb  side 
of  the  Patomac  by  the  middle  of  November,  if  circumstances  allmr 

Wednesday  13.  Came  to  brother  Dickenson's,  Caroline  county, 
and  waited  for  the  preachers  composing  the  conference  in  the  cen- 
tral district  of  Virginia. 

In  the  evening  the  brethren  came  together  ;  we  opened  con- 
ference, and  went  through  a  great  part  of  our  minute  work  ;  all 
was  peace  and  love.  We  had  searching  work  in  speaking  expe- 
riences, and  in  examining  the  young  men  who  offered  as  candidate? 
for  the  ministry. 

Friday  16.  After  fasting  and  prayer  our  conference  rose, 
subject  at  the  new  chapel  was  1  Cbron.  xxix.  15 — 17.     Saturday  I 
rode  to  Hanover-Town. 

Sunday  18.  I   preached  at  Hanover  on  1  C'or.  ii.  17.     1  rode 

the    evening  to    brother   C 's.     My    mind    was   in   peace.     1 

journeyed   on   through   Richmond,   Manchester,   and   Petersl' 
accompanied  by  brothers  E and  K ;  on  Friday  23d,  arriv- 
ing at  Lane's  chapel,  where  our  conference  began  and  ended  in  great 
peace. 

Sunday  25.  I  preached  on  John  iv.  14.  and  had  a  comfortable 
season  ;  many  spoke  of  the  dealings  of  God  with  their  soul?  :  the. 
examination  among  the  preachers  relative  to  character  and  experi- 
ence, was  very  close  :  all  was  meekness  and  love. 

Tuesday  27.  We  had  a   long,  cold  ride   to  our  kind  brot! 
Blunt's. 

Wednesday  28.   I  preached  on  1  Peter  iv.  1 — I. 

Thursday  29.  I  rode  twenty-five  miles,  through  \ery  < 
ther,  without  taking  any  refreshment,   to  sister  P--     -'s  ;  on  our 

way  we  had  a  meeting  at  brother  C 's,  where  many  attended, 

to  whom  1  spoke  with  freedom  on  2  Tim.  ii.  19 — 21.  :  her    - 
wicked  young  men  behaved  quite  ont  of  charac' 


REV.  FitANCIS  ASBtftY  S  JOUUNAL.  [1792, 

Sunday,  January  1,  1792.  On  this  beginning  of  the  new  year,  I 
preached,  and  had  liberty  on  Isai.  Ixv.  1,2.  in  the  evening  I  once 
more  cried  to  the  people  of  Norforlk,  "  Repent,  and  be  conver- 
ted :"  my  audience  was  attentive  and  tender.  My  body  was  greatly 
fatigued,  my  soul  much  comforted  in  the  Lord.  Religion  revives 
here,  the  seed  which  has  been  sowing  for  twenty  years  begins  to 
spring  up  :  Norfolk  flourishes  ;  Portsmouth  declines,  and  is  al- 
ready low. 

Thursday  5.  Rode  to  W.  B 's,  there  were  but  few  peo- 
ple. On  our  way  thither  brother  M would  stop  to  feed  : 

I  believe  the  Lord  sent  me  to  speak  a  word  to  a  broken-hearted, 
forsaken,  distressed  woman.  My  soul  enjoys  peace  ;  but  excessive 
labour,  and  bodily  suffering  from  the  cold,  prevents  that  deep  com- 
munion with  God  I  wish  for  :  I  do  little  except  reading  a  few  chap- 
ters in  my  Hebrew  Bible. 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Sunday  8.  I  preached  at  the  widow  Hardy's 
to  a  large  congregation  :  I  felt  freedom  in  speaking,  and  the  souls  of 
the  people  appeared  tender.  The  prospect  of  our  journey  ahead 
seemed  gloomy  ;  however,  we  came  down  in  the  snow,  and  got  on 
board  a  leaky  flat,  which  we  were  obliged  to  bail  as  we  went ;  the 
ferry  was  five  miles  wide,  our  horses  restless,  the  river  (Roanoak) 
rough,  and  the  weather  very  cold  ;  but  the  Lord  brought  us  safe 
to  shore,  twelve  miles  from  our  destined  place  :  we  were  stran- 
gers to  the  road,  and  had  not  an  hour's  sun ;  nevertheless,  kind 
Providence  brought  us  through  the  dark  and  cold  to  brother 
Ward's  about  eight  o'clock :  here  I  sold  my  carriage  and  took 
borse  again. 

Thursday  19.  I  rode  with  no  small  difficulty  to  Green  Hills, 
about  two  hundred  miles,  the  roads  being  covered  with  snow  and 
ice.  Our  conference  began  and  ended  in  great  peace  and  harmo- 
ny :  we  had  thirty-one  preachers  stationed  at  the  different  houses 
in  the  neighbourhood.  I  find  we  have  had  a  good  work  in  the 
eastern  district  of  North  Carolina  in  the  past  year.  For  some  time 
back  I  have  travelled  with  much  difficulty,  having  few  hearers, 
much  weakness  of  body,  and  uncomfortable  weather. 

Monday  23.  Our  conference  rose.     I  rode  twenty  miles  through 
severe  cold  to  brother  B 's. 

Tuesday  24.  Brother  Morrell,  my  fellow  traveller,  was  unwell : 
we  had  our  horses  roughed,  which  detained  us  an  hour  or  two  after 

the  appointed  time.     I  reached  brother  T 's,  and  said  a  little 

from  Philip,  ii.  14 — 1C. ;  but  the  people  could  not  hear,  their  souls 
•in<l  their  bodies  were  cold.     Finding  it  wns  twenty-two  miles  to 


1792.}  REV.  FKA.NCl.S  ASDVnv'S  JOURNAL. 

my  next  appointment,  I  set  off  without  r<  frrHhmont,   intending  to 

reach  brother  D 's,  near  HHbborongh  ;  on  the  wny.  however, 

hearing  of  brother  S ,  a  local  preacher,  we  callnl  on  him,  and 

he  gave  us  freely  of  such  tilings  as  fir  had. 

Thursday  L'G  I  was  led  out  with  freedom  on  the  two  I.M  verses 
of  Hebr.  xii.  at  M "s.  I  find  outward  difficulties  in  my  pro- 
gress ;  the  roads  are  covered  with  ice  and  snow,  and  (he  seventy 
of  the  weather  prevents  my  having  an  opportunity,  when  I  wi-h, 
of  spending  time  in  private  exercise?  ;  hut  blessed  be  God  !  I  am 
resigned,  and  am  kept  from  sin,  and  my  soul  is  stayed  upon  God. 

Friday  27.  After  riding  thirty  miles  through  ice  and  snow  to 
Rainey's,  I  found  many  people  waiting  for  me,  and  1  began,  with- 
out any  refreshment,  to  speak  on  "  This  is  the  victory  that  over- 
cometh  the  world,  even  our  faith."  1  I  endeavoured  to  point 
out  the  object  of  this  faith  ;  2.  Its  subjects  ;  3.  Its  nature  ;  and 
4.  Its  victory.  In  our  route  through  North  Carolina  we  p 
through  Bertie,  Gate?,  Tyrrel,  Tarborough,  Franklin,  Wake, 
Chatham,  Orange,  Guilford,  and  Randolph  counties.  We  hi\o 
travelled  nearly  eight  hundred  miles  since  the  7th  of  December 
last  past.  Seldom  have  I  been  tempted  to  a  murmuring  thought  ; 
it  is  now  the  29th  of  January  :  1  want  nothing  but  more  mental 
and  private  prayer. 

Tuesday  31.  Yesterday  and  to-day  we  have  rode  about  sixty 
miles,  a  great  deal  of  the  way  through  heavy  hail  and  r.ain.  1 

gave   an   exhortation   at   C 's,  on  seeking  the  kingdom  of  God. 

Here  we  had  all  things  richly  to  supply  our  wants  ;  and  what  u .. . 
still  better,  we  found  the  Lord  had  souls  in  this  family. 

SOUTH  CAROLINA. — February  1.  I  preached  to  a  considerable 
congregation  at  M'D 's  on  Acts  xiii.  38. 

Saturday  and  Sunday,  4  and  5.  1  attended  a  quarterly  meeting. 

Monday  6.  At  Flower's  church.  For  some  time  past  I  have 
enjoyed  much  of  God,  though  suffering  under  indisposition  of  body, 
and  frequently  in  a  croud  :  I  feel  nothing  but  peace  in  my  soul, 
and  find  power  to  trust  Jehovah  with  his  own  cause. 

Tuesday  7.  We  reached  sister  Port's.  I  find  there  is  a  great 
r.ommotion  among  the  people,  excited  by  the  conduct  of  U  .  Ham- 
mett,  who  has  divided  the  society  in  Charleston,  and  taken  to  him- 
self some  chaff  and  some  wheat.  This  is  not  all— they  say  our 
house  will  go  too. 

Wednesday  8.  We  set  off  after  six  o'clock  in  the  morning  ;  oui 
horses  being  over-fed  we  did  not  push  them,  so  that  we  did  not 
reach  Georgetown  until  near  six  in  the  evening.  After  my  ' 

V,,i.   II. 


Kt-y.  JKAJSCia  AsflURV*S  JOt/ftNAL.  [1*792,, 


and  hard  riding  my  cordial  is  to  preach  at  night.  Except  George- 
town and  Charleston,  there  are  few  places  where  I  have  not  a 
good  congregation  when  weather  permits.  I  can  praise  God  —  my 
soul  is  happy  in  Him  ;  by  his  grace  I  am  kept  from  sin,  and  I  still 
hope  this  dark  cloud  that  lowers  over  us  will  yet  break  with 
blessings  on  our  heads. 

Thursday  9.  We  rested  ;  and  next  day  came  to  Wappataw,  and 
found  that  brother  S.  C  --  had  moved.  We  then  went  to  his 
brother's,  whose  wife  was  buried  that  day.  We  were  fatigued 
and  cold,  and  rejoiced  to  6nd  we  were  not  compelled  to  take  up 
our  lodgings  under  a  pine  tree. 

Saturday  11.  Arrived  in  Charleston.  I  received  a  full  and  true 
account  of  Mr.  Hammett's  proceedings.  Brothers  E  --  and 
P  --  have  done  all  things  well.  Mr.  Hammett  had  three  grand 
objections  to  us  —  1.  The  American  preachers  and  people  insulted 
him.  2.  His  name  was  not  printed  in  our  Minutes.  3.  The  nota 
bene  cautioning  minute  was  directed  against  him.  He  has  gone  to 
the  New-Market,  to  preach,  and  has  drawn  about  twenty  white 
members  after  him.  We  are  considered  by  him  as  seceders  from 
Methodism  !  —  Because  we  do  not  wear  gowns  and  powder  ;  and 
because  we  did  not  pay  sufficient  respect  to  Mr.  Wesley  I 

Sabbath  12.  My  subject  was  Isai.  liii.  11.  Brother  H.  preached 
in  the  afternoon. 

Tuesday  14.  Our  conference  began.  I  preached  at  night  on 
Luke  xxiv.  17.  and  endeavoured  to  show  the  low  estate  of  the 
interest  of  Christ  at  that  time.  In  our  conference  we  were  un- 
usually close  in  examination  of  characters,  doctrines,  and  expe- 
rience :  we  had  great  peace  and  some  power  amongst  us,  and 
received  the  good  news  of  eighty  souls  being  converted  in  Phila- 
delphia, and  of  a  revival  in  Connecticut. 

I  preached  a  sermon  to  the  preachers,  on  "  Endure  hardness  as 
a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ." 

Saturday  18.  I  received  an  abusive,  anonymous  letter  (1  believe 
from  Mr-  S.)  on  several  subjects.  My  spirits  were  low  ;  I  came  from 
my  knees  to  receive  the  letter,  and  having  read  il,  I  returned 
whence  I  came  ;  I  judged  it  prudent  and  expedient,  and  I  think  I 
was  urged  thereto  by  conscience,  to  tell  the  people  of  some  things 
relating  to  myself.  I  related  to  them  the  manner  of  my  coming  to 
America  ;  how  I  continued  during  the  war  ;  the  arrival  of  Dr.  Coke, 
and  the  forming  of  the  American  Methodists  into  a  church  ;  and 
finally,  why  I  did  not  commit  the  charge  of  the  society  in  Charles- 
ton, to  Mr.  Hammett,  who  was  unknown,  a  foreigner,  and  did  not 


•  . 

acknowledge  the  authority  of,  nor  join  in  connexion  with,  the  Ame 
rican  conference. 

Sunday  19.  I  preached  on  ''  U'ho  i-  «n  the  Lord's  side  ?"     . 

M s  sent  in  his  resignation.     For  certain   rc:i<uiis  \ve  were  le>. 

to   pass   over  his  character,  but  we  were  wrong  ;  it  might  1 
been  better  to  subject  it  to  scrutiny,  although  none  grieved  at  his 
going  from  us. 

Monday  "0.  /  came  out  of  the  fire. — Rode  to  Parker's  ferry. 

Tuesday  21.  Came  to  Mr.  Lambright's,  and  next  day  had  a  he  . 
ride  to  Maixer's,  and  missed  my  congregation  after  all,  and  so  1  did 
at  Hudson's,  in  Georgia  ;  however,  I  spoke  a  few  words   to  a  few 
people,  and  it  was  felt. 

Friday  24.  We  had  fifty  miles  to  ride,  but  had  the  advantage  01' 

good  roads.     Stopped  at  F 's,   and  then   came  on  to  brother 

M -'s  ;  lie  and  his  father  have  kindly  entertained  us  as  the  ser- 
vants of  the  Lord. 

Saturday  25.  I  had  an  attentive  and  feeling  people  at  Providence, 
where  I  saw  C ,  and  learned  that  poor  Henry,  the  Jew  (men- 
tioned March  9,  1791)  was  dead,  and  died  wretched  in  body  and 
mind,  a  few  months  after  my  departure.  Let  preachers  or  people 
catch  me  in  VVaynesbcrough  until  things  are  altered  and  bettered. 
Since  last  Monday  I  have  rode  one  hundred  and  eighty  miles,  and 
was  obliged  to  ride  on,  though  late,  to  prevent  man  and  beasts 
being  on  the  road  on  the  Sabbath  day.  My  mind  was  powerfully 
struck  with  a  sense  of  the  great  duty  of  preaching  in  all  companies  ; 
of  always  speaking  boldly  and  freely  for  God  as  if  in  the  pulpit. 

GEORGIA. — Sabbath  morning  26.  1  made  frequent  visits  to  the 
throne  of  grace,  and  feel  my  soul  comforted  in  God's  word,  "  Instead 
of  thy  fathers,  thou  shalt  have  sons,  whom  thou  shall  make  princes 
in  all  the  land  :"  I  feel  solemn  ;  the  burthen  of  the  work  lies  on 
me  ;  the  preachers  have  left,  and  are  leaving  the  field. 

Monday  27.  We  rode  thirty  miles  to  White-Oak  meeting-house 
— a  painful  journey  ;  the  weather  was  cold,  and  the  house  open  ; 
the  people,  however,  were  attentive.  It  is  not  pleasing  to  the  flesh 
to  take  only  a  little  tea  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  then  go 
until  six  at  night  before  we  have  a  table  spread  ;  and  ah  !  how  few 
Christian  houses — I  had  my  tri;:ls  in  the  evening. 

Tuesday  28.    We  rode  through  the  snow  to  Little-River,  and  a 

few  people  met  us  at  S 's  :    I  preached  on  2  Tim.  iv.   2,  3,  -J. 

Without  staying  to  eat,  we  rode  on  to  Washington,  making  thirty 
miles  this  day  also.     We  collected  our  conference,  and  had  g- 
^arching  and  sifting,  and  were  under  the  necessity  of  suspending 


KLV.  rnANcis  ASBURY'S  - 


one  ;  we  were  very  close  in  examining  characters  and  principles  : 
each  preacher  spoke  his  experience,  and  made  his  observations 
relative  to  the  work  of  God  since  last  conference.  Brother  Hull 
accompanies  me,  and  H.  Herbert  repairs  to  Alexandria  in  Virgi- 
nia. 1  hope  in  fulure  there  will  be  harmony  among  the  brethren  : 
if  souls  are  converted  to  God  ii  answers  no  valuable  purpose  there- 
after to  disciple  them  to  ourselves.  1  preached  on  the  marriage 
supper,  and  took  occasion  (o  show  how  some  are  kept  from,  and 
others  lose,  the  grace  of  God  by  the  unlawful  use  of  lawful  things. 

Saturday,  M.irch  4.  Rode  to  Fishing-Creek,  and  had  an  uncon> 
fortable  time  on  the  Sabbath  at  Bibb's  Cross-Roads. 

SOUTH  CAROLINA.  —  Monday  6.  I  left  Georgia,  and  lodged  near 
Whitehall  in  South  Carolina. 

Tuesday  1.  Rode  fift)  miles  to  brother  Finch's  ;  here  the  bre- 
thren gave  me  a  meeting  on  Wednesday  ;  the  congregation  was 
small,  and  the  people  unengaged  ;  rode  that  evening  to  Odle's,  and 
the  next  day  to  Watter's. 

Sunday  12.  Preached  at  Smith's  on  Romans,  v.  1,  2,  3.;  and 
kept  the  holy  solemn  Sabbath  as  a  day  of  rest  for  man  and  beast. 

NORTH  CAROLINA.  —  Monday  13.  Rode  forty  miles  to  Major 
Moor's,  cold  and  weary.  1  have  read  two  volumes  of  Gordon's 
American  Revolution,  containing  about  one  thousand  pages  We 
came  to  the  u  idow  M  -  's  :  here  we  heard  that  fifty  poor  wander- 
ing sinner?  had  been  brought  back  to  God  in  this  wild  place,  and  we 
rejoiced  at  the  glad  tidings. 

Friday  17.  1  was  very  much  chilled  in  riding  twenty-five  miles 
over  the  mountains  to  Wiltshire's  :  at  3  o'clock  1  preached  on  Hebr. 
iii.  12,  13,  14  —  1  was  very  unwell  and  in  much  pain.  There  was 
a  poor  man  in  the  house  who  was  wild  enough  to  swim  the  river 
on  a  mare  with  another  man  behind  him  —  what  a  mercy  that  he 
was  not  drowned  ! 

Saturday  18.  I  felt  death  in  some  measure  at  this  place.  Brother 
Hull  preached  and  I  exhorted. 

Sunday  19.  We  had  a  close  love-feast,  and  a  few  testimonies  of 
the  power  and  love  of  Christ  :  there  was  some  little  melting  also 
amongst  the  people  ;  but  it  is  hard  to  civilize,  methodize,  and  spiri- 
tualize ;  sin,  Satan,  flesh,  and  hell  are  against  us. 

We  have  rested  two  days  besides  Sabbaths,  and  rode  two 
hundred  and  fifty  miles  in  about  two  weeks  :  our  entertainment  i? 
generally  mean. 

Monday  20.  Our  horses'  backs  being  bruised,  we  had  our  diffi- 
culties in  getting  to  Rehoboth. 


•2.}  RLV.   I  RANC75  AiBfKY's  JOURNAL.  1  -   . 

We  were  well  nigh  cast  away  in  going  to  the  widow  W 's  ; 

it  was  very  dark,  and  we  were  bewildered  in  the  woods  :  my  sad- 
dle turned,  and  \  slipped  from  tny  horse,  but  received  no  h;irm.  I 
had  to  walk  nearly  half  a  mile  through  mud  and  water  to  reach  the 
bouse. 

Tuesday  21.  I  came  to  Gordon's,  on  the  Yadkin  :  it  is  seven 
years  since  \  was  here — dead  !  do, id  ! — The  world — the  devil  — 
Antinomi.inism  in  doctrine  and  practice.  I  was  led  out  in  preach- 
ing on  Dent,  xxxiii  29. 

Wednesday  22.  We  started  for  Holstein.  After  ridingabout  fif- 
teen miles,  we  stopped  to  feed,  and  a  woman  directed  us  along  the 
new  way  over  the  Elk  Spur  :  we  found  ourselves  in  a  wilderness  ; 
the  weather  was  very  cold,  and  the  ni^ht  coming  on,  we  were  at  a 
loss  what  to  do  ;  whilst  we  were  wishfully  looking  about  UP,  to  our 
great  satisfaction  we  discovered  a  house  ;  it  was  clean  and  com- 
fortable, and  we  were  well  entertained. 

VIRGINIA. — Thursday  23.  We  made  an  early  start  for  friend 
Osborne's,  on  New-River,  fifteen  miles  distant  ;  here  we  were 
generously  entertained.  After  talking  and  praying  together,  ive 
were  guided  across  the  river,  for  which  I  was  thankful.  Arriving 
at  Fox-Creek,  we  crossed  it  eleven  times,  and  (;irried  that  night 

•with  C ,  a  nominal  member  of  the  society  of  Friends,  who  used 

us  very  well. 

Friday  21.  Rode  twelve  miles  to  S *s  :  nfter  dinner,  exhorta- 
tion, and  prayer,  we  came  down  the  south  fork,  and  crossed  the 
middle  foik  of  Holstein  river. 

Saturday  25.  Came  to  the  Salt  Works,  and  on  Sunday  preached 
on  "  Happy  is  the  people  whose  God  is  the  Lord." 

Monday  27.  1  had  enlargement  in  preaching  to  an  attentive  con- 
gregation at  Abingdon  court  house. 

Tuesday  28.  Preached  at  Owen's  on  "  This  people  have  I  formed 
for  m\  self." 

Thursday  30.   We  had  many  people  to  hear  at  Ch;irles  B;ikrr'- 
to  whom  I  preached  with  some  life.     We  took  half  a  day  to  hiv-- 
the  smith's  work  done  in  fitting  our  horses  for  the  journey  through 
the  wilderness. 

TENNESSEE. — Rode  twenty-four  miles  to  Mr.   Y 's  on  ; 

main  Holstein;    and  the  next  day,    eighteen   miles   to    Hawk- 
court-house,  and  thence  to  Crabb's.     Wi>   have  confuted  account- 
of  Indians  :  our  guard  rested  on  the  Sabbath  day  within  four  r 
of  the  wilderness- 


.  .  FRANCIS  ASnt'AV'S  JOUKWAt.  [l  , 

Saturday,  April  I.  I  heard  a  company  had  arrived  from  Ken- 
tucky to  Crabb's  :  this  man's  son  and  a  Mr.  Henderson  have  been 
killed  by  the  Indians  since  I  ivas  here  last. 

Sunday  2.   I  preached  to  all  th«  people  I  could  collect. 
Monday  3.    We  entered  the  uilderness  and  reached  Robinson's 
station.     Two  of  the  company  were  on  foot,  carrying  their  parks  ; 
and  women  there  are  with  their  children  ; — these  encumbrances 
make  us  move  slowly  and  heavily. 

KENTUCKY. — Tuesday  4.  We  reached  Richland  Creek,  and  were 
preserved  from  harm.  About  two  o'clock  it  began  to  rain,  and  con- 
tinued most  of  the  day.  After  crossing  the  Laurel- River,  which 
we  were  compelled  to  swim,  we  came  to  Rock-Castle  station, 
where  we  found  such  a  set  of  sinners  as  made  it  next  to  hell  itself. 
Our  corn  here  cost  us  a  dollar  per  bushel. 

Wednesday  5  This  morning  we  again  swam  the  river,  and  also 
the  west  Fork  thereof— my  little  horse  was  ready  to  fail  in  the 
course  of  the  day — I  was  steeped  in  the  water  up  to  the  waist : 
about  seven  o'clock,  with  hard  pushing,  we  reached  the  Crab- 
Orchard.  How  much  1  have  suffered  in  this  journey,  is  only 
known  to  God  and  myself.  What  added  much  to  its  disagreeable- 
ness,  is  the  extreme  filthiness  of  the  houses.  I  was  seized  with 
a  severe  flux,  which  followed  me  eight  days  :  for  some  of  the  time 
I  kept  up,  but  at  last  found  myself  under  the  necessity  of  taking  to 
my  bed. 

Tuesday  1 1.  I  endured  as  severe  pain  as,  perhaps,  I  ever  felt.  I 
made  use  of  small  portions  of  rhubarb  ;  and  also  obtained  some 
good  claret,  of  which  I  drank  a  bottle  in  three  days,  and  was  almost 
well,  so  that  on  Sunday  following  1  preached  a  sermon  an  hour 
long.  In  the  course  of  my  affliction  I  have  felt  myself  very  low  : 
I  have  had  serious  views  of  eternity,  and  was  free  from  the  fear 
of  death.  I  stopped  and  lodged,  during  my  illness,  with  Mr.  Willis 
Green,  who  showed  me  all  possible  attention  and  kindness. 

I  wrote  and  sent  to  Mr.  Rice,  a  Presbyterian  minister,  a  com- 
mendation of  his  speech,  delivered  in  a  convention  in  Kentucky, 
on  the  natural  rights  of  mankind  :  I  gave  him  an  exhortation  to 
call  on  the  Methodists  on  his  way  to  Philadelphia,  and  if  conve- 
nient, to  preach  in  our  houses. 

Tuesday  11.  I  wrote  an  address  on  behalf  of  Bethel  school. 
The  weather  was  wet.  and  stopped  us  until  Friday. 

Friday  21.  Rode  to  Clarke's  station  ;  and  on  Saturday  preached 
on  David's  charge  to  Solomon. 


KbV.   fJlAtfCIS  AbfcUKY'b  JULivr.A. 

Sunday  23.  I  preached  a  long,  and  perhaps  a  it  mule  sermon, 
some  may  thinlt,  on  "  Knowing  therefore  the  tenor  of  the  Lord, 
we  persuade  men  " 

Monday  24.  I  rode  to  Bethel.  I  found  it  necessary  to  change 
the  plan  of  the  house,  to  make  it  more  comfortable  to  the  scho! 
in  cold  weather  I  arn  too  much  in  company,  and  ln-.ir  «<>  much 
about  Indians,  Convention,  Treaty,  killing  and  «< -.dpin^,  that  my 
attention  is  drawn  more  to  these  things  than  1  could  wish  :  1  found 
it  good  to  get  alone  in  the  woods  and  converse  with  God. 

Wednesday  2G.  Was  a  rainy,  damp  day  ;  however,  we  rode  to 
meet  the  conference,  where  I  was  closely  employed  with  the  tra- 
velling and  local  preachers  ;  with  the  leaders  and  stewards.  I  met 
the  married  men  and  women  apart,  and  we  had  great  consolation  in 
the  Lord.  Vast  crowds  of  people  attended  public  worship.  The 
spirit  of  matrimony  is  very  prevalent  here  ;  in  one  circuit  both 
preachers  are  settled  :  the  land  is  good,  the  country  new,  and 
indeed  all  possible  facilities  to  the  comfortable  maintenance  of  a 
family  are  offered  to  an  industrious,  prudent  pair. 

Monday,  May  1.  Came  to  L 's.     An  alarm  was  spreading  of 

a  depredation  committed  by  the  Indians,  on  the  east  and  west  fron- 
tiers of  the  settlement ;  in  the  former,  report  says  one  man  was 
killed  ;  in  the  latter,  many  men,  with  women  and  children — every 
thing  is  in  motion.  There  having  been  so  many  about  me  at  con- 
ference, my  rest  was  much  broken  ;  I  hoped  now  to  repair  it,  and 
get  refreshed  before  I  set  out  to  return  through  the  wilderness  ; 
bat  the  continual  arrival  of  people  until  midnight  ;  the  barking  of 
dogs,  and  other  annoyances,  prevented.  Next  night  we  reached  the 
Crab  Orchard,  where  thirty  or  forty  people  were  compelled  to 
crowd  into  one  mean  house.  We  could  get  no  more  rest  here 
than  we  did  in  the  wilderness.  We  came  the  old  way  by  Scaggs- 
Creek,  and  Rock-Castle,  supposing  it  to  be  safer,  as  it  was  a  road 
less  frequented,  and  therefore  less  liable  to  be  way-laid  by  the 
savages.  My  body  by  this  time  is  well  tried  :  I  had  a  violent  fever 
and  pain  in  the  head,  such  as  I  had  not  lately  felt  ;  I  stretched  my- 
self on  the  cold  ground,  and  borrowing  clothes  to  keep  me  warm, 
by  the  mercy  of  God,  I  slept  four  or  five  hours.  Next  morning 
we  set  off  early,  and  passed  beyond  Richland-Creek  : — here  we 
were  in  danger,  if  any  where  :  1  could  have  slept,  but  was  afraid  : 
seeing  the  drowsiness  of  the  company,  I  walked  the  encampment 
and  watched  the  sentries  the  whole  night.  Early  next  morning, 
we  made  our  way  to  Robinson's  station.  We  had  the  best  com- 
pany I  ever  met  with — thirty-six  good  travellers,  and  a  few  tvnr 


REV.  FRANCES  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL.  [1792, 

riors  ;   but  we  had  a  pack-horse,  some  old  men,  and  two  tired 
horses —  these  were  not  the  best  part. 

VIRGINIA. — Saturday  G.  Through  infinite  mercy,  we  came  safe 
to  Crabb's.  Rest,  poor  house  of  clay,  from  such  exertions  ! — re- 
turn, O  ray  soul,  to  thy  rest ! 

Monday  8.  I  came  to  Young's — a  comfortable,  quiet  house, 
within  six  miles  of  Ratclifle's,  whose  wife  and  children  were  mur- 
dered by  the  Indians.  Here  I  slept  comfortably. 

Tuesday  9.  We  came  to  brother  Baker's,  where  we  rested  two 
days,  and  had  our  horses  shod. 

Friday  12.  Rode  to  Halfacre's,  about  fifty  miles,  and  came  is 
about  eleven  o'clock.. 

Saturday,  Sunday,  and  Monday,  13,  14,  15.  We  were  engaged  in 
the  business  of  conference  at  Holstein.  I  had  a  meeting  with  the 
men  ;  a  lively  one  with  the  women,  most  of  whose  hearts  the 
Lord  touched. 

Tuesday  16.    We  came  to  Russell's  old  place,  at  Seven  Mile 

Ford  ;  and  next  day  set  out  for  Greenbrier,  and  reached  C 's, 

My  spirits  were  too  lively  and  disposed  to  gayety,  which  indulged;, 
perhaps  too  far,  made  me  feel  mean  before  the  Lord. 

Thursday  18.    Rode  to  Hogg's  ;  and  next  day  to  M 's ;  forty 

miles  each  day  :  the  roads  were  better  than  I  expected. 

Saturday  20.  Rode  twenty  miles.  My  \veary  body  feels  the 
want  of  rest ;  but  my  heart  rejoiced  to  meet  with  the  brethren 
who  were  waiting  for  me.  1  am  more  than  ever  convinced  of  the 
need  and  propriety  of  annual  conferences,  and  of  greater  changes 
among  the  preachers.  I  am  sensible  the  western  parts  have  suf- 
fered by  my  absence  ;  I  lament  this,  and  deplore  my  loss  of  strict 
communion  with  God,  occasioned  by  the  necessity  I  am  under  of 
constant  riding  ;  change  of  place  ;  company,  and  sometimes  disa- 
greeable company  ;  loss  of  sleep,  and  the  difficulties  of  clamber- 
ing over  rocks  and  mountains,  and  journeying  at  the  rate  of  sevea 
or  eight  hundred  miles  per  month,  and  sometimes  forty  or  fifty 
miles  a  day — these  have  been  a  part  of  my  labours,  and  make  no 
small  share  of  my  hinderances. 

I  crossed  the  Kanhaway  at  Paris's  ferry.  Here  1  conversed 
with  a  man  who  informed  me  a  brother  preacher  bad  called  there, 
and,  as  he  said,  was  peevish  :  the  dear  man  was  just  at  death's 
door,  and  though  his  exercises  and  bodily  infirmities  may  have 
pressed  him  sore,  and  excited  expressions  of  discontent,  he  was, 
nevertheless,  a  meek  and  holy  servant  of  God.  My  informant  also 
mentioned  another,  who  had  been  a  member,  and  who  would  swear 


1792.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  129 

horribly  and  drink  to  excess  :  it  is  proper  I  notice,  that  1  did  not 
receive  these  accounts  from  :i  professor  of  n-ligion.  I  thought 
within  myself — See  how  we  are  watched  :  ah  !  we  little  think 
oftentimes  how  narrowly  our  conduct,  our  tempers,  are  ob««-i\rd 
by  the  world  ;  and  poor  sinners  still  less  imagine  how  strictly  u-- 
\vatch  them,  and  how  well  this  habit  of  observation,  and  tin-  inti- 
mate knowledge  we  gain  of  our  own  hi-arts,  makes  us  competent 
judges  of  their  cases,  and  enables  us  so  justly  and  so  powerfully  to 
condemn  their  wickedness. 

Sunday  21.  I  preached  at  Rehoboth  on  Isai.  Iv.  12.  there  was 
no  great  move  :  brothers  H and  C both  spoke  after  me. 

"  Weary  world,  when  will  it  end  ?" 

My  mind  and  body  feel  dull  and  heavy,  but  still  my  soul  drinks 
deeper  into  God.  We  rode  about  one  hundred  and  sixty  mih  - 
from  the  Rich  \ralley  to  Greenbrier  conference  ;  talking  too  much, 
and  praying  too  little,  caused  me  to  feel  barrenness  of  soul  We 
had  a  hope  that  not  less  then  ten  souls  were  converted  during  the 
conference  :  at  preaching,  I  myself  having  a  violent  headach,  re- 
tired ;  the  Lord  was  with  them  at  the  sacrament  ;  alter  w'.iich,  the 
doors  being  opened,  many  came  in  and  the  meeting  continued  un- 
till  nearly  sunset. 

We  had  a  most  solemn  ordination  on  Thursday  morning.  After- 
ward we  rode  through  Greenbrier  by  the  town,  on  to  brother 
W 's,  a  distance  of  thirty-six  miles.  My  headach  still  con- 
tinuing, brother  Hope  Hull  preached,  and  I  retired  to  rest. 

Friday  26.  We  rode  twenty-six  miles  to  the  Little  Levels.  O 
what  a  solitary  country  is  this !  We  have  now  one  hundred  and 
twenty  miles  before  us,  fifty  of  which  is  a  wilderness  :  there  is  a 
guard  at  two  houses  on  our  route  ;  but  I  do  not  fear  :  nature  is 
spent  with  labour  ;  I  would  not  live  always — hail !  happy  death  : 
nothing  but  holiness,  perfect  love,  and  then  glory  for  me  ! 

Saturday  27.  My  body  is  much  wearied  ;  my  bowels  bcins:  much 
disordered,  the  water,  the  milk,  and  the  bread,  are  like  physic  to 
me.  We  now  thought  it  necessary  to  be  moving ;  it  was  dreary 

\vork  as  we  rode  along  the  dreary  path  to  1) 's  ;  one  of  m\ 

companions,  as  well  as  myself,  was  unwell.  From  D—  -'•*  we  had 
still  forty  miles  to  go,  over  hills  and  mountains  :  this,  1  think 
equalled,  if  not  exceeded,  any  road  1  had  ever  travcllod  :  wo  at 
length  reached  Tygers  Valley.  We  stopped  at  Cap- 
nhere  there  were  several  families  crowded  together,  for  (fir  nt 
IF.  IT 


130  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL  [1792. 

the  Indians.  The  upper  end  of  the  valley  has  been  depopulated, 
one  family  has  been  destroyed  since  I  was  last  here.  The  Captain's 
wife  was  decent,  kind,  and  sensible.  Thence  we  went  on  to 

\V 's,  where  I  got  some  fowl  soup  ;  thence  a  few  miles  to 

,  where  the  woman  of  the  house  was  kind  and  attentive  ; 

but  a  still,  a  mill,  a  store,  causes  much  company,  and  some  not  of 
the  most  agreeable  kind. 

Tuesday  30.  We  hasted  to  O 's  in  the  Cove,  where  we  met 

with  a  most  kind  and  affectionate  reception.  But  O  the  flies  for 
the  horses,  and  the  gnats  for  the  men  !  And  no  foo'd.  nor  even  good 
water  to  be  had.  1  slept  well,  although  forced,  ever  and  anon,  to 
stir  a  little. 

Wednesday  31.  We  had  a  dreary  path,  over  desperate  hills,  for 
fifty  miles  ;  no  food  for  man  or  beast,  which  caused  both  to  begin  to 
fail  very  sensibly  :  my  bowels  continued  to  be  disordered,  and  had 
I  not  procured  a  little  wine,  I  suppose  I  should  have  failed  al- 
together. 

PENNSYLVANIA. — Thursday,  June  1.  Both  men  and  horses 
travelled  sore  and  wearily  to  Union  Town.  O  how  good  are 
clean  houses,  plentiful  tables,  and  populous  villages,  when  com- 
pared with  the  rough  world  we  came  through  !  Here  I  turned 
out  our  poor  horses  to  pasture  and  to  rest,  after  riding  them  nearly 
three  hundred  miles  in  eight  days. 

Friday  2.   Wrote  letters  to  send  over  the  mountains. 

Saturday  3.  1  began  to  feel  lame,  and  had  a  severe  touch  of  the 
rheumatism,  accompanied  with  a  high  fever,  which  occasioned 
great  pain  to  me  while  sitting  in  conference.  I  found  it  necessary 
to  remove,  by  exchange,  six  of  the  preachers  from  this  to  the 
eastern  district. 

Sunday  11.  Having  been  too  unwell  to  attend  preaching  through 
the  week,  I  now  ventured  in  public  :  a  great  crowd  of  people  at- 
tended, and  there  was  some  melting  and  moving  ;imong  them.  I 
feel  the  death  of  this  district ;  I  see  what  is  wanting  here — disci- 
pline, and  the  preaching  a  present  and  full  salvation,  and  the  en- 
forcement of  the  doctrine  of  sanctification.  I  have  been  variously 
tried,  and  was  constrained  to  be  cheerful. 

We  have  founded  a  seminary  of  learning  called  Union  School ; 
brother  C.  Conway  is  manager,  who  also  has  charge  of  the  district  : 
this  establishment  is  designed  for  instruction  in  grammar,  languages, 
and  the  sciences. 

I  have  bad  some  awful  thoughts  lest  my  lameness  should  grow 
upon  me,  and  render  me  useless.  I  sometimes  have  fears  that  I 


1792.]  REV.   FRANCIS  AS1HK1    -   Ji. I  KNAL.  131 

am  too  slack  in  speaking  in  puhlic,  at  conlV'ivnces  ;  I  also  let  I  the 
want  of  time  ,md  places  to  pursue  my  practice  of  solitary  jn.iver, 
being  frequently  obliged  to  ride  all  the  day  and  late  al  night,  that  1 
may  in  time  reach  the  appointed  places  to  pre.ich. 

T  lie-day  13.    We   ascended  Laurel-hill,   and   after   forty   miles 

riding  reached   M 's,   quite  weary.     Came  to   I.  C '-,  and 

found  the  Lord  was  still  in  this  house  :  1  preached,  and  fe.lt  a  melt- 
ing heart,  and  there  was  some  move  in  the  congregation.  I  find 
myself  recruited  in  body  and  mind  ;  and  1  feel  as  if  God  would 
work  once  more  amongst  this  people. 

I  was  informed  that  Mr.  Hammett  had  sent  abroad  circular  let- 
ters, and  had  been  railing  against  the  presiding  eldership,  kc.  I 
am  not  surprised  that  he  should  find  fault  with  the  office — its  du- 
ties he  was  a  man  not  likely  to  fulfil  ;  )et  had  it  not  been  for  the 
power  attached  to  it,  how  greatly  might  Mr.  (lammett  have  con- 
fused the  society  in  Charleston,  and  perplexed  the  preachers  in 
the  district.  The  Lord  will  see  to  his  own  house. 

MARVLAND. — 1  preached  at  Fort  Cumberland,  in  our  new  house, 

to  many  people.     Dined  with  Mr.  D ,  at   whose  house  I   \vac 

entertained  the  first  time  1  visited  this  town  :  O  that  each  of  the 
family  may  he  everlastingly  saved  !  It  is  now  three  years  since  I 
came  down  this  road. — Swift-winged  time,  O  how  it  flies  !  My 
body  is  ia  better  health,  and  my  soul  in  great  peace  ;  I  feel  no 
wrong  temper.  O  that  my  whole  heart  might  be  running  out  in 
holiness  after  God  ! 

Lord's  day  18.  We  had  a  solemn  meeting,  whilst  I  enlarged  on 
•'  Blessed  are  they  that  hear  the  word  of  God  and  keep  it."  It 
was  a  good  season. 

VIRGINIA. — Monday  19.  Rode  to  Bath.  Here  1  had  the  Oppor- 
tunity of  writing  to  all  the  connected  preachers  in  the  district. 

Friday  23.  In  the  evening  I  preached  with  some  assistance  on 
Luke  xix.  10. 

Saturday  -4.  I  attended  quarterly  meeting  at  the  widow  Flint';;. 
Here  I  had  the  first  sight  of  Mr.  Hammett's  and  brother  Time. 
Morrell's  attacks  on  each  other — or  rather  Mr.  liammett's  ;iur:nii-t 
the  Methodists,  and  brother  Morrell's  reply.  Had  brother  M. 
known  more,  he  would  have  replied  better.  Mr.  H.'s  quotation 

of  a  clau?e   in  my  confidential   letter  to   brother  S d,  is  not 

altogether  just.  He  has  also  misquoted  (he  an/n'o/i,  leaving  out 
the  word  "  District,"  which,  when  retained,  -l-mv*  it  to  have 
been  American,  and  to  have  been  directed  ;»g.:ir>t  .-lincn'ran  apos- 
tates and  impostors. 


132  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1192, 

Sabbath  day  25.  We  had  a  living  love-feast,  although  the  house 
\vae  crowded,  and  warm,  almost  past  sufferance. 

Tuesday  27.  I  had  a  sweet  opening  at  the  quarterly  meeting,  on 
Ephes.  ii.  12.  I  met  the  preachers,  leaders,  and  stewards,  and  they 
resolved  to  enter  more  fully  into  the  spirit  of  discipline.  Next 
day  1  preached  on  "  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man." 

PENNSYLVANIA.— Rode  twenty-two  miles  to  S town,  weary 

and  warm  ;  the  people  were  waiting,    and  I  began  on  "  An  adul- 
terous and  sinful  generation."     This  is  a  poor  place  for  religion. 

Friday  30.  I  rode  nearly  fifty  miles  through  excessive  heat,  and 
felt  somewhat  like  Jonah. 

Saturday,  July  1.  I  was  taken  up  with  writing  letters,  having 
received  accounts  from  Cokesbury.  The  college  seems  to  be  the 
weighty  concern  for  the  present. 

Sunday  2.    1   had    heavy  work — no  freedom   at   D.  W 's  : 

Nothing  will  do  here  but  discipline.     I  felt  my  spirit  much  hum- 
bled before  the  Lord,  and  a  willingness  to  suffer. 

Tuesday  4.  Rode  to  A.  Kageell — it  was  the  harvest  home.  1 
feel  it  my  duty  to  press  the  people  of  God  to  go  on  to  holiness  of 
heart  and  life.  As  the  next  morning  was  rainy,  we  staid  until  the 
afternoon,  and  then  rode  to  see  our  old  brother  M.  Behem.  We 
had  a  tender,  feeling  season  on  1  John  i.  8.  on  Salvation  from  all 
sin.  At  Strasburg,  in  the  afternoon,  we  had  a  solemn  meeting  ;  a 
young  woman,  who  was  married  a  few  minutes  before  worship  be- 
gan, was  powerfully  struck  under  the  word,  and  wept  greatly.  O 
may  she  mourn  until  a  second  marriage  takes  place  in  her  soul. 

Friday  7.  We  had  a  long  ride  to  Morgantown  :  we  came  in  at 
]  1  o'clock,  being  much  fatigued.  I  discoursed  on  the  likeness  be- 
tween Moses  and  Christ,  in  the  academical  church.,  This  building 
is  well  designed  for  a  school  and  a  church.  I  directed  Esq.  Morgan 
to  one  of  our  local  preachers  as  a  teacher. 

We  set  out  for  Coventry  Forge,  but  we  missed  our  way,  and 
came  to  brother  Meredic's,  in  the  valley.  I  prayed  heartily  for, 
and  spoke  plainly  to  the  young  people.  O  that  the  Lord  would  fol- 
low them  powerfully  ! 

Saturday  8.  This  day  my  soul  enjoyed  the  presence  of  God.  J 
dined  at  Radnor,  and  went  into  Philadelphia. 

Sunday  9.  I  preached  at  Ebenezer  church  on  James  iv.  8.  :  at 
St.  George's  church  on  Mark  viii.  38.  1  had  large  account* 
from  the  eastward,  and  am  requested  to  send  them  more  preach- 
ers. After  twenty  years  standing  of  the  house  in  our  hands,  the 
galleries  are  put  up  in  our  old  ney  church. 


1792.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBfRv's  .TOfRNAf ..  I3S 

Mond.iy  10  and  Tuesday  11.   Employed  in  rending  and  writing. 
1  wish  to  be  alone — O  how  sweet  is  solitude  ! 

Wednesday  12.   1  sought  and  obtained  peace  between  two   bre 
tliren  who  had,  unhappily,  been  at  variance. 

NKW-JERSF.Y. — Thursday  13.  Rode  through  ^reat  heat  and  dust 
to  Burlington,  New-Jersey.  Here  I  had  UI.HIV  of  my  old,  ;md 
some  new  hearers  :  hut  some  are  mucli  wiser  than  they  were 
twenty  years  ago.  We  had  a  cold  time  of  it,  whilst  I  spoke  on 
Hebr.  iv.  7. 

Friday  14.  After  [preaching  at   •      -'s  we  rode   on  to  brother 

H 's.     He  is  resolved,   that  after  he  and   his  wife  are  served, 

the  remainder  of  his  whole  estate  shall  go  to  the  church  ;  his  plan- 
tation to  be  rented,  and  the  annual  income  to  be  applied  as  the  con- 
ference held  for  Pennsylvania  and  the  Jerseys  shall  please  to 
direct. 

NEW-YORK. — Sunday  1C.  Preached  at  our  church  on  Stolen  Is- 
land. I  was  very  close  on  the  law  and  the  Gospel — a  few  felt  ;  bu* 
it  was  a  dry  time.  Lord,  help  u-  ' 

Monday  17.  We  hasted  to  V-  -'s  ferry  ;  but  found  oursclvc - 
detained  by  the  absence  of  both  boats,  so  that  we  did  not  so  soon 
as  we  expected  reach  New- York.  I  did  not  find  that  life  and  har- 
mony here  that  there  have  been  in  times  past.  I  have  just  now  ob- 
tained and  am  reading  Mr.  Wesley's  Life,  the  work  of  Dr.  Coke 
and  Mr.  Moore,  containing  five  hundred  and  forty-two  pages.  It  is 
in  general  well  compiled  ;  but  the  history  of  American  Methodism 
is  inaccurate  in  some  of  its  details,  and  in  some  which  are  inte- 
resting. For  some  days  past  I  have  been  occupied  in  reading,  and 
and  in  meeting  the  several  women's  classes,  and  found  the  Lord 
was  amongst  them. 

As  very  probably  all  of  my  life  which  I  shall  be  able  to  write 
will  be  found  in  my  journal,  it  will  not  be  improper  to  relate  some- 
thing of  my  earlier  years,  and  to  give  a  brief  account  of  my  first 
labours  in  the  ministry. 

1  was  born  in  Old  England,  near  the  foot  of  Hampstead  Bridge, 
in  the  parish  of  Handsworth,  about  four  miles  from   Pirmin£; 
in  Staffordshire,  and,  according  to  the  best  of  my  after-knowl. 
on  the  20th  or  21st  day  of  August,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1  7  Id. 
My  father's  name  was  Joseph,  and  my  mother's  Elizabeth    \ 
bury  :  they   were  people  in   common  life  ;  were  remarkable  for 
honesty  and  industry,  and  had  all  things  needful  to  enjoy  :   h.id  my 
lather  been  as  saving  as  laborious,  he  might  have   been   u.iitlu. 
As  it  \v;i«,  it  was  his   province   to  be   employed  as  a  fu:: 


UEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1792, 

gardener  by  the  two  richest  families  in  the  parish.  My  parents 
had  but  two  children,  a  daughter  called  Sarah,  and  myself.  My 
lovely  sister  died  in  infancy  ;  she  was  a  favourite,  and  my  dear 
mother  being  very  affectionate,  sunk  into  deep  distress  at  the  loss 
of  a  darling  child,  from  which  she  was  not  relieved  for  many  years. 
It  was  under  this  dispensation  that  God  was  pleased  to  open  the 
eyes  of  her  mind,  she  living  in  a  very  dark,  dark,  dark  day  and 
place.  She  now  bpgan  to  read  almost  constantly  when  leisure  pre- 
sented the  opportunity.  When  a  child,  I  thought  it  strange  my 
mother  should  stand  by  a  large  window  poring  over  a  book  for 
hours  together.  From  my  childhood  I  may  say,  I  have  neither 


dar'd  an  oath,  nor  hazarded  a  lie." 


The  love  of  truth  is  not  natural ;  but  the  habit  of  telling  it  I  acquired 
very  early,  and  so  well  was  I  taught,  that  my  conscience  would 
never  permit  me  to  swear  profanely.  I  learned  from  my  parents  a 
certain  form  of  words  for  prayer,  and  I  well  remember  my  mother 
strongly  urged  my  father  to  family  reading  and  prayer  ;  the  singing 
of  psalms  was  much  practised  by  them  both.  My  foible  was  the 
ordinary  foible  of  children — fondness  for  play  ;  but  I  abhorred 
mischief  and  wickedness,  although  my  mates  were  amongst  the 
vilest  of  the  vile  for  lying,  swearing,  fighting,  and  whatever  else 
boys  of  their  age  and  evil  habits  were  likely  to  be  guilty  of ;  from 
such  society  I  very  often  returned  home  uneasy  and  melancholy  ; 
and  although  driven  away  by  my  better  principles,  still  I  would  re- 
turn, hoping  to  find  happiness  where  I  never  found  it.  Sometimes 
I  was  much  ridiculed,  and  called  Methodist  Parson,  because  my 
mother  invited  any  people  who  had  the  appearance  of  religion  to 
her  house. 

I  was  sent  to  school  earl)',  and  began  to  read  the  Bible  between 
six  and  seven  years  of  age,  and  greatly  delighted  in  the  historical 
part  of  it.  My  school-master  was  a  great  churl,  and  used  to  beat 
me  cruelly  ;  this  drove  me  to  prayer,  and  it  appeared  to  me,  that 
God  was  very  near  to  me.  My  father  having  but  the  one  son, 
greatly  desired  to  keep  me  at  school,  he  cared  not  how  long ;  but 
in  this  design  he  was  disappointed  ;  for  my  master,  by  his  severity, 
had  filled  me  with  such  horrible  dread,  that  with  me  any  thing  was 
preferable  to  going  to  school.  I  lived  some  time  in  one  of  the 
wealthiest  and  most  ungodly  families  we  had  in  the  parish  :  here  I 
became  vain,  but  not  openly  wicked.  Some  months  after  this  I  re- 
turned home  ;  and  made  my  choice,  when  about  thirteen  years  and 
a  half  old,  to  learn  a  branch  of  business,  at  which  1  wrought  about 


1792.]  RF.V.  FRANCIS  ASBUHV'S  JOURNAL. 

six  years  and  a  half:  during  this  time  I  enjoyed  great  liberty,  ami 
in  the  family  was  treated  more  like  a  son  or  an  equal  than  an  ap- 
prentice. 

Soon   after  I   entered   on  that   hii-nif--.  <  in.l    -rut  .1   pious    man, 
not  a   Methodist,  into  our  neighbourhood,  ami    my  mother   invited 
him  to  our  house  ;   by  his    conversation    and    prayers,  I    \\.i-   .- 
kened    before  I  was  fourteen  years  of  age.      It  was    now  easy  and 
pleasing   to    leave  my  company,  and    1  began  to    pray  morning    and 
evening,  being  drawn  by  the  cords  of  love,  as  with  tin-   bandi  of  a 
man.      I  soon   left   our  blind    pric-t,   ami  went  to   Wtj-t  Bronmick 
church  :   here  I  heard  Kyland,  Stilliagfleet,  T;dbu'.,  l'.,i^nall,  .Mans- 
field, Hawes,  and  Venn,  great  names,  and  esteemed  <in.pcl-mn.i- 
ters.     I   became  very  serious  ;  reading  a  great  deal — WhitHield 
and  Cennick's  Sermons,  and  every  good   book  I  could    meet  \\ith. 
It  was   not    long   before    I    began   to  inquire  of   my  mother  who, 
where,  what  were  the   Methodists  ;  she  gave    me  u  favourable  ac- 
count, and  directed  me  to  a  person  that  could  take  me  to  Wednes- 
bury  to  hear  them.     I  soon  found  this  was  not  the  church — but  it 
was  better.     The  people  were  so  devout — men  and  women  kneel- 
ing down — saying  Amen. — Now,  behold  !  (hey  were  Dinging  U  nm- 
sweet  sound  !     Why,  strange  to  tell!  the  preacher  had  no  prayer- 
book,  and  yet  he  prayed  wonderfully  !     What  was  yet  more  extra- 
ordinary, the  man  took  his  text,  and  had  no  sermon-book  :   thought 
I,  this  is  wonderful  indeed  !     It  is  certainly  a  strange  way,  but   tin- 
best  way.     He  talked  about  confidence,  assurance,  ice. — of  which 
all  my  flights  and  hopes  fell  short.      I  had  no  deep  convictions,  nor 
had  1  committed  any  deep  known  sins.     At  one  sermon,  some  time 
after,  my  companion  was  powerfully  wrought  on  :    I    was   exo 
ingly  grieved  that  I  could  not  weep  like  him  ;  yet   T  knew  m \.-«.-li 
to   be   in  a  state  of  unbelief.     On  a  certain   time  when   we  were 
praying  in  my  father's  barn,  I  believe  the  Lord   pardoned  my  HH- 
and  justified  my  soul  ;  but  my  companions  reasoned  me  out  of  (In- 
belief,  saying,  "  Mr.  Mather   said   a   believer  was  as   happy  as  if 
he  was  in  heaven."     I   thought   I  was   not  as  happy  as  I  would  1" 
there,  and  gave  up  my  confidence,  and  that  for  months  ;  yet  I 
happy  ;  free  from  guilt   and  fear,  and  had  power  over  sin,  ami  lei: 
great  inward  joy.     After   this,  we   met   for  reading  and  prayer, 
and   had   large   and   good  meetings,   and  were    much  persecuted, 
until    the  persons    at  whose   houses   we    held  them  weie  alr.ihl 
and  they  were   discontinued.      I   then    held   meetings   frequently 
at   my  father's    house,   exhorting   the    people    (hero,    as    al- 
Sutton-Cofields.  and   several  <=ouls  professed  to   find  pearc  thr< 


13G  UEV.  FKANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1792. 

my  labours.  I  met  class  awhile  at  Bromwick-Heath,  and  met  in 
band  at  Wednesbury.  I  had  preached  some  months  before  I  pub- 
licly appeared  in  the  Methodist  meeting-houses  ;  when  my  la- 
bours became  more  public  and  extensive,  some  were  amazed,  not 
knowing  how  I  had  exercised  elsewhere.  Behold  me  now  a  local 
preacher  ;  the  humble  and  willing  servant  of  any  and  of  every 
preacher  that  called  on  me  by  night  or  by  day,  being  ready,  with 
hasty  steps,  to  go  far  and  wide  to  do  good,  visiting  Derbyshire, 
Staffordshire,  Warwickshire,  Worcestershire,  and  indeed  almost 
every  place  within  my  reach  for  the  sake  of  precious  souls ; 
preaching,  generally,  three,  four,  and  five  times  a  week,  and  at  the 
same  time  pursuing  my  calling. — I  think,  when  I  was  between 
twenty-one  and  twenty-two  years  of  age  I  gave  myself  up  to  God 
and  his  work,  after  acting  as  a  local  preacher  near  the  space  of 
five  years  :  it  is  now  the  19th  of  July  1792. — I  have  been  labour- 
ing for  God  and  souls  about  thirty  years,  or  upwards. 

Sometime  after  I  had  obtained  a  clear  witness  of  my  accep- 
tance with  God,  the  Lord  showed  me  in  the  heat  of  youth  and 
youthful  blood,  the  evil  of  my  heart:  for  a  short  time  I  enjoyed, 
as  I  thought,  the  pure  and  perfect  love  of  God  ;  but  this  happy 
frame  did  not  long  continue,  although,  at  seasons,  I  was  greatly 
blest.  Whilst  I  was  a  travelling  preacher  in  England,  I  was  much 
tempted,  finding  myself  exceedingly  ignorant  of  almost  every  thing 
a  minister  of  the  Gospel  ought  to  know.  How  I  came  to  Ame- 
rica, and  the  events  which  have  happened  since,  my  journal  will 
show. 

Yesterday  I  preached  in  New-York,  on  "  Who  is  on  the  Lord's 
side  ?"•— I  had  some  life  in  speaking,  but  there  was  little  move  in 
the  congregation.  O  Lord,  hasten  a  revival  of  thy  work  !  This 
city  has  been  agitated  about  the  choice  of  Governor  :  it  would  be 
better  for  them  all  to  be  on  the  Lord's  side. — The  standard  is  set 
up — who  declares  for  the  Lord  ? — The  wicked  ;  the  carnal  pro- 
fessors ;  carnal  ministers,  and  apostates,  are  the  Lord's  enemies. 

Sunday  23.  Was  a  melting  time  with  many  hearts  in  the  old 
church  :  my  subject,  1  John  i.  6,  7.  In  the  afternoon,  although 
very  unwell,  I  laboured  hard  in  the  new  church,  but  the  people 
were  exceedingly  insensible.  There  was  a  little  shaking  under 
brother  Hull  in  the  old  church  in  the  evening. 

Monday  24.  We  set  out  for  Lynn,  and  made  our  way  through 
Bedford,  riding  fifty  miles  the  first  day  :  I  prayed  in  four  houses,, 
and  felt  much  given  up  on  the  way. 


"2.J  ,  .  yiuvi  i~  A-PI  r.  i  s  JO 


CoVKECTICVTi  —  Tu:  -day    25.      liaiu    (o-ilny  uv 

<:ame  to  Rending  ;   ami  although  it  was  laio.  ami  the 
I  v/as  unwilling  to  omit  the  opportunity  of  speaking  tn  the  pcopl<-. 
Brother  Hull,  my  fellow-Jravrll  •  T    vent  to  I. 
wrought  in  this  town  :  the  spirit  of  pray. 
and  several  souls  have  been  brought  to  <iod. 

Wednesday  2G.  We  came  to  Newtown  and  fed  —  thence  to  \\  a- 
terbury  :  brother  H.  is  still  very  ill.  llr-iv  we  wnv  entertained 
kindly,  and  at  small  charges  ;  the  people  submitted  and  were  at- 
tentive to  prayer.  Thence  «•••  <-untinin'd  on  to  Southerington  : 
we  dined  at  a  public  house,  whore  wo  had  cheap,  good,  plain 
usage  :  our  host  told  us,  "  It  was  the  misfortune  of  tho  .Mrtlimli-t- 
to  fall  in  with  some  of  the  most  ignorant,  poor,  and  disrepul 
people  in  the  state."  My  answer  wa«,  the  poor  have  the  (iu.epel 
preached  to  them  —  that  it  had  hrr-n  afnn  -tin:  :  •-  ll:ivr>  nny 

of  the  rulers  believed  on  him  ?" 

Came  to  the  city  of  Hartford,  and  thcnre  went  on  to  I'-a^t  Hart- 
ford.      I  was  alarming  on  Rev.  xxi.    8.;    brother   II     i-    itil]    \ 
sick  ;  and  for  my  poor  self,  1  am  tempted  to  fretfuhicss  ;   hut  by 
grace  I  was  kept  in  peace,  and  blessed  in  speaking.      The  r: 
we  came  through  the  extreme  heat  to  Stafford,  and  attended  a  quar- 
terly  meeting,   where  we   had  a  crowd  of  people  in  a  nor/,  open 
house  :   I    was   very   unwell,  and   much  tempted,    but  I  had  good 
liberty  in  preaching  ;    my  subject  was  Colos.  ii.  6.  ;    on  Sunday  I 
was  very  pointed  on  Rom.  i.  18. 

There  has  been  a  work  in  Tolland  circuit  :   I  suppose  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  souls  have  been  converted,   and  twice   the   number 
under  awakenings  in  the  different  societies  around  :  I  felt  very 
^olemn  among  them.     Brothers  Smith,  and  Raynor,    bay.'  !. 
owned  of  the  Lord  in  these  parts. 

MASSACHUSETTS.  —  We  came  through  Ash  ford,  Pomfrct,  Mcnden, 
and  Douglass  :  we  lodged  at  a  tavern,  where  the  people  were  verv 
obliging,  and  attentive  to  prayer  :  thence  we  rode  to  Medtield's  to 
dinner  ;  thence  through  Dover,  Newton,  Cambridge,  Maiden 
Lynn  ;  which  we  reached  about  midnight,  having  travelled  sixty- 
five  miles  —  my  soul,  meanwhile,  continually  filled  with  the  good- 
ness of  God. 

Thursday,  August  3.    Our  conference  met,  consisting  of 
preachers,  much  united,  beside  myself.    In  Lynn,  we  have  the  < 
side  of  a  house  completed  ;  and  what  is  best  of  all,  srvral  - 
profess  to  be  converted  to  God.     I  preached  on  1  John  iv.    I 

VOL.  IT  1-1 


I3tf  REV.  FRASTCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1792 

and  had.  some  life,  but  was  too  formal.  There  was  preaching 
every  night  through  the  sitting  of  the  conference. 

Saturday  5.  I  preached  an  ordination  sermon  to  a  very  solemn 
congregation,  on  2  Cor.  iii.  5. 

Sabbath  morning  6.    I  preached  on  1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20.'    In  the 

afternoon  brother  A preached  ;  and  I  afterward  gave  them  a 

farewell  exhortation,  and  there  were  some  affectionate  feelings 
excited  amongst  the  people. — Many  were  moved,  and  felt  a  great 
desire  to  speak  in  the  love-feast,  but  they  had  not  courage.  O 
that  we  had  more  apostolical  preaching ! 

Monday  7.  We  took  leave  of  town,  making  a  hasty  flight.  We 
dined  at  Cambridge.  The  rain  drove  us  for  shelter  under  the  hos- 
pitable roof  of  Mr.  How  ;  the  kind  family  here  accepted  of  family 
worship. 

Tuesday  8.  We  came  through  Brookfield  and  Shrewsbury  to 
Worcester  ;  after  resting,  we  briskly  pursued  our  way  to  Brook- 
field.  We  found  we  had  stopped  at  the  wrong  house  ;  some 
wicked  labouring  young  men  were  intoxicated,  singing  psalms  and 
aong  tunes  for  their  amusement ;  one  man  railed  on,  and  cursed  us 
because  he  was  not  told  all  he  wanted  to  know. 

Wednesday  9.  We  came  to  Belcher  Town,  and  were  kindly  en- 
tertained at  W 's  :  thence  we  pushed  on  to  Hadley,  crossed 

Connecticut-River,  and  stopped  at  Northampton.  Ah  !  where  is 
the  blessedness  of  which  we  formerly  heard  in  this  place. — I  in- 
quired of  our  host,  but  received  little  satisfactory  information.  I 
proposed  prayer,  but  found  it  was  not  well  received.  I  went  to 
bed  weary  and  unwell ;  and  about  half  past  six  o'clock  next  morn- 
ing set  out  again  over  the  rocks  and  uneven  roads,  across  the  moun- 
tain, having  passed  through  Worthington,  Chesterfield,  and  Par- 
tridgefield.  I  wondered  to  see  the  people  settled  here  so  thickly, 
among  the  rocks,  where  the  soil  can  only  be  cultivated  by  the  iron 
hand  of  active,  laborious  industry  :  I  should  prefer  any  part  of  the 
Alleghany  where  it  is  not  too  rocky,  because  the  land  is  better.  We 
made  it  nearly  forty  miles  to  Pittsfield  ;  and  our  journey  was  more 
disagreeable  from  the  falling  of  a  heavy  shower.  We  have  now 
rode  about  one  hundred  and  seventy  miles  from  Lynn  in  four  days. 
My  mind  has  been  variously  exercised,  and  my  body  much  fatigued  ; 
if  I  have  been  kept  from  sin,  to  the  Lord's  name  be  all  the  glory  ! 
Pittsfield  is  a  pleasant  plain,  extending  from  mountain  to  mountain  ; 
the  population  may  consist  of  two  thousand  souls.  There  is  a  grand 
meeting-house  and  steeple,  both  as  white  and  glistering  as  Solomon'*. 


H£V.  IRAN^ 


temple.    The  minister,  as  I  li.--.ini,  ii  on  iln-  >,  u-l  Mutiny  j>l.m.     1 

heard  the  experience  of  one  of  tli«-  lien  m  ihe  town,  n 

Was  clearly  brought  out  of  bondage  ;  but  by  re-tin^  in  unf.iiling  j 

severance,  he  again  grew  cold  :   of  late  In-  li 

restored  by  the  instrumentality  of  thr  Mrtlimli-t-.      I  u  i-  (•!.  \ised 

to  enjoy  the  privilege  of  retiring  alone  to  the  coolm/  ijlvai 

in  frequent  converse  with  rny  best  Friend. 

Saturday  12.   \Ve  held   our   meeting   in  a  noble  IIOUSP,   limit 
Baptists,  Separatists,  or  somebody,  and  is  now  occupied  by  the  Me 
thodists.     There  was  a  large  and  attentive  congregation,  and  ?oiiv 
melting  amongst  the  people,  with  whom  the  Lord  is  at  work. 

Sunday  13.   I  was  so  unwell,  that  I  concluded  not  to  go  to  tn^ 
ing,  but  was  at  last  persuaded  along.     1  felt  enlargement  in  preach 
ing,  and  the  people  were  tender  and  attentive.     It  has  been  said. 
"  The  Eastern  people  are  not  to  be  moved  ;"   it  is  true,  they  :u 
too  much  accustomed  to  hear  systematical   preaching  to  be  on 
by  a  systematical  sermon,  even  from  a  Methodist  ;  but  they  have 
their  feelings,  and   touch   but  the   right  string,  and  they  will 
moved.     I  became  weary  of  staying  three  days  in  one  house  ;  Mr. 
Stevens  was  very  kind,  his  wife  was  under  heavy  heart-awakenings 

NEW-  YORK.  —  We  set  out  and  came  to  Lebanon  in   the  state  of 
New-  York.     The  medical  waters  here  are  warm  and  very  aofl  ; 
pure  and  light,  with  no  small  quantity  of  fixed  air.     I  found  a  poor 
bath-house.   Here  the  devil's  tents  are  set  up,  and,  ns  is  common  at 
these  his  encampments,  his  children  are  doing  his  drudgery.     1 
baptised  F  -  's  child  :  he  and  his  wife  came  out  from  amongst 
the  Shakers,  where  they  had  lived  in  celibacy  many  years.     At 
the  request  of  the  people,  notwithstanding  my  barrenness  at  bro- 
ther W  -  's,  I  delivered  a  discourse  on  1  Peter  iii.  15.  ;  my 
dience  appeared  to  be  strangers  to  our  way.    Mr.  K.-  —a,  a  l'i 
byterian  minister,  bore  his  testimony  in  favour  of  the  word  delr. 
ed,  and  recommended  it  to  his  people.     We  then  came  to  Bethli 
hem,  and  the  next  day  1  preached  at  the  house  of  a  Baptist  t" 
about  three  hundred  people  :   it  was  a  searching,  moving  time.     I 
also  baptised,  and  administered  the  Lord's  supper  ;   i   then  went  a 
small  distance  to  lodge,  but  I  felt  not  myself  at  home,  the  worship 
of  God  not  being  in  the  house.     I  now  began  to  bring  up  my  read 
ing  in  the  New  Testament. 

Wednesday  1C.  Came  to  Albany,  and  had   a  joyful,  hap|>\ 
ference,  twenty-one  preachers  boing  present.     We  constitute.!  tw. 
deacons  and  four  elders.    Each  preacher  was  called  upon  to  speak  of 
Vis  exercises  and  observation*3  sin^e  our  last  annual  soesjon  •  we  e»- 


Ml"  KKV.    l-KA&Vlt.    ASIU'KV'S   JOUft.VAl.  [  1'.    '- 

arnined  our  doctrines,  and  whether  our  faith  was  still  firm  in  those 
which  were  believed  and  taught  amongst  us.  We  appointed  Jona- 
than Newman  as  a  missionary  to  the  whites  and  Indians  on  the 
frontiers.  We  also  sent  another  to  Cataraqui.  Before  we  rose, 
we  propounded  a  few  questions  of  theology,  viz. 

1.  How  are  we  to  deal  with  sinners  ? 

-.  How  should  we  treat  with  mourners  ? 

3.  Which  way  should  we  address  hypocrites  ? 

4.  How  can  we  deal  with  backsliders  ? 

5.  What  is  best  for  believers  ? 

We  had  preaching  iu  the  market-house  in  Albany  j  and  nolwitu 
standing  our  hurry  and  crowd,  we  were  happy  and  had  living  testi- 
monies from    preachers  and   people.     I  trust  two  hundred  have 
been  converted  in  the  district  since  last  conference. 

Monday  20.  I  came  to  Coeyman's  Patent,  and  had  a  degree  oi 
light  in  preaching  in  the  new  church  on  Ephes.  i.  18,  19.  After 
preaching  we  hasted  to  Hudson,  thirty-two  miles.  On  our  way 
we  called  on  a  friend  whose  wretched  wife  had  made  an  attempt 
to  poison  him  and  two  others  by  strewing  bane  on  the  meat  they 
ate  :  the  dose  wrought  so  powerfully  that  they  threw  it  up  ;  and  so 
she,  Satan,  and  hell,  were  all  disappointed.  I  lodged  with  brother 

W :  he  and  his  wife  were  kind,  dear  souls  to  me,  when  sick 

here  last  year — now  I  am  well :  praise  the  Lord,  O  my  soul  1 

I  had  to  ride  thirty-five  miles  to  Rhinebeck  ;  the  weather  was  ex- 
tremely warm  and  dry.  We  hasted  along,  and  arriving  a  little  be- 
fore five  o'clock,  found  the  people  waiting.  I  preached  in  a 
school-house,  which,  by  enlargement  makes  a  good  church,  so 
called. 

I  had  reason  to  fear,  from  former  and  later  information,  that  bro- 
ther   was  not  as  useful  nor  as  acceptable  here  as  I  could 

wish  :  from  a  sense  of  duty  I  mentioned  this  to  him  with  great  ten- 
derness. At  first,  it  proved  some  trial  to  him ;  but  when  bro- 
ther -  —  and  brother confirmed  what  I  had  said,  and  I 

assured  him  that  a  desire  to  promote  the  cause  of  God  was  the  only 
motive  that  led  me  to  mention  this  to  him,  he  resumed  his  former 
cheerfulness,  and  we  parted  in  peace. 

It  was  appointed  for  me  to  preach  at  a  place  forty-five  miles 
distant,  but  the  weather  being  extremely  warm,  and  our  horses 
weary,  we  did  not  get  in  until  eight  o'clock,  in  consequence  of 
which  many  people  were  disappointed. 

Thursday  24.  I  breakfasted  at  Governor  Van  Cortlandt's  I 
feel  as  if  the  Lord  had  been  striving  here. 


'-•1 

Saturday  '26.  Came   to  the  quarterly  meetum  at  NY.w-Ku 
The  Lord  gave  light  and  liberty  in  speaking.     W«-  had   a  meeting 
with  the  local  preachers,  stewards,  and  leaders  win.  u.  r.    pn.--ent. 
Mr.  Haminett's  rejoinder  has  made  its  appearance.     N.  M;im 
has  also  come  to  town,   to  spread  his  doctrine   and  di-tnbule  hi-. 
hooks  :  was  he  a  gracious  man,  I  cannot  think  he   would  \\nte  as 
lie  does  against  Mr.  Wesley  and   Mr.  Fletcher.     Perhaps  he  will 
tind  it  rather  easier  to  write  and  print  hooks,  than  to  sell  and  ; 
the  cost  of  publishing  them. 

Sunday  27.  I  preached  to  a  vast  congregation,  with  liberty, 
J  Cor.  iii.    15,    1(J.     Many  hearts  were   touched,  and   we  bad  u 
blessed  season  at  love-feast  and  sacrament. 

Monday  28.     Came   to    New-\<uk,    and    opened    conft . 
twenty-eight  preachers  being  present.     We  spent  most  of  tin 
ternoon  in  prayer  ;  and  nearly  all  the   preachers  g;ive  an  acco 
of  what  each  one  had  seen   and  felt  since   last  conference.     Thu 
young  gave  us  their  experience,  and  there  were  several  who  pro- 
fessed sauctilication.     Awful  IT-       -  haunted  us  one  day,  reqi. 
ing  us  to  give  him  an  honourable  discharge   from  the  connexi 
but  we  shall  publish  him  expelled — he  is  the  Whtatly  of  America. 

Friday,  September  1.  We  had  a  solemn  love-feast,  the  louc: 
floor  of  the  house  being  nearly  filled  :  several  of  the  brethren 
professed  perfect  love  ;  others  had  lost  the  witness. 

My  mind   has  been  so  bent  to  the  business  of  the  conference, 
that  1  have  slept  but  little  this  week.     Connecticut   i.s  supplied 
much   to  my  mind  ;  several   very  promising  young  men    ha\ 
been  admitted  this  conference.     The  societies  are  in  harm* 
but  not  as  lively  as  they  ought  to  be.     I  went  to  hear  Dr.  L—  — , 
but  was  greatly  disappointed  :  he  had  such  a  rumbling  voice  that 
I  could  understand  but  little  in  that  great  house.     How  elegant  the 
building!     How  small  the  appearances  of  religion  !     Lord,  ha\-_ 
mercy  upon  the  Reformed  Churches  !     O  ye  dry  bones,  hear  th< 
word  of  the  Lord  !     I  was  much  obliged  to  my  friend  for  renewing 
my  clothing  and  giving  me  a  little  pocket  money — this  is  better 
than  £500  per  annum.     I  told  some  of  our  preachers,  who  w 
very  poor,  how  happy  they  were,  and   that  probably,   had  they 
more,   their  wants   would   proportionably   increase.     My   soul   i- 
humble,  and  by  grace  is  kept  holy  :   I  do  the  best  I  can,  and  1- 
the  event  to  the  Lord — if  others  do  wrong,  they  must  answer  foi 
themselves  now,  and  at  the  day  of  judgment. 

Sunday  3.  I  preached  a  preparatory  sermon,  on  1  Cor.  v. 
previously  to  the  administration  of  i\\-  -ment.     I' 


HEV.  FRANCIS  ASBuKV'S  JOUtt:-, 

served  what  a  fitness  of  similarity  there  was  between  the  pass-over 
and  the  supper  of  the  Lord.  The  simplicity  and  purity  of  the 
latter— bread,  instead  of  the  flesh  of  an  animal,  and  wine,  instead 
of  the  blood  of  the  creature  :  wine,  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  grace 
the  life  of  our  souls.  It  was  shown  who  were  proper  communi- 
cants— true  penitents  and  real  believers.  Not  with  the  leaven  of 
malice  and  wickedness — acid,  bitter,  and  puffing  up,  but  the  un- 
leavened bread  of  sincerity  and  truth — uprightness  of  heart,  and 
sound  experience. 

I  now  leave  New-York  for  one  whole  year,  under  the  hope  and 
prophecy  that  this  will  be  a  year  of  the  Lord's  power  with  them. 

NEW-JERSEY. — We  had  severe  crossing  the  North-River:  it 
was  much  as  ever  the  horses  could  do  to  keep  their  feet.  We 
came  to  Newark,  and  thence  to  Elizabethtown,  in  Jersey.  I 
now  began  to  unbend  my  mind,  and  became  very  heavy.  1  went 
up  stairs,  sat  in  my  chair,  rested  my  head,  and  slept  solidly  ;  but  a 
kind  friend  would  have  me  waked,  which  made  roe  sick. 

Tuesday  5.  I  pursued  my  journey  through  Woodbridge,  and 
came  to  Brunswick.  The  weather  was  very  warm  ;  the  roads 
dusty,  and  our  journeys  long.  We  reached  Milford  town  in  the 
evening. 

Wednesday  6.  Passed  through  Crosswicks  and  Burlington,  and 
came  to  Philadelphia  :  I  found  I  was  too  late,  the  preachers  hav- 
ing waited  a  day  for  me  to  come  and  open  the  conference. 

Thursday  7.  We  had  great  peace  in  our  conference.  The 
preachers  gave  a  feeling  account  of  the  work  of  God.  We  had 
more  preachers  than  we  needed  this  time  ;  both  they  and  the  peo- 
ple were  lively :  most  of  our  brethren  in  the  ministrj'  can  now 
stand  the  greatest  exertions. 

Sabbath  morning  10.  We  had  a  melting  love-feast — the  mouths  of 
many  were  opened  to  declare  the  loving  kindness  of  the  Lord.  I 
preached,  but  did  not  like  their  ill-contrived  house.  At  Ebenezer 
I  had  an  attentive  congregation,  to  whom  I  spoke  on  Philip,  i.  18. 
At  night  the  mobility  came  in  like  the  roaring  of  the  sea  :  boys  were 
around  the  doors,  and  the  streets  were  in  an  uproar.  They  had 
been  alarmed  by  a  shout  the  night  before,  which,  probably,  was 

one  cause  of   the  congregation  being  so  large.     Brother  A 

went  to  prayer ;  a  person  cried  out  :  brother  C joined  in 

prayer  ;  the  wicked  were  collected  to  oppose.     I  felt  the  powers 
of  darkness  were  very  strong.     After  ending  my  discourse,  brother 

M rose  up  and  mentioned  the  shocking  conduct  he  had  obser- 

among  them — fighting,  swearing,  threatening,  &c.— But  where 


•  ASM i.  A V  a  JOUlhAi_ 

the  watchmen  .'—asleep. — Where  are  the  mngistr.,,.  —  dozing 
at  home.  This  is  a  wicked,  horribly  wirkcd  city  ;  and  if  the 
people  do  not  reform,  I  think  they  will  be  let  loose  upon  one  an- 
other, or  else  God  will  send  the  pestilence  amongst  them,  and  t-lay 
them  by  hundreds  and  thousands  : — the  spirit  of  prayer  has  de- 
parted, and  the  spiritual  watchmen  have  ceased  to  cry  aloud  among 
all  sects  and  denominations  :  for  their  unfaithfulness  they  will  be 
smitten  in  anger  :  for  sleepy  silence  in  the  house  of  God,  which 
ought  to  resound  with  the  voice  of  praise  and  frequent  prayer,  the 
Lord  will  visit  their  streets  with  the  silence  of  desolation. 

DELAWARE. — Monday  10.  I  left  Philadelphia,  dined  at  Cheater, 
and  preached  at  Wilmington  iti  the  evening.  The  next  day  I  rode 
to  Duck-Creek  Cross-Roads,  state  of  Delaware,  to  hold  conference. 
We  were  full  of  business,  and  had  life  and  liberty.  I  met  the  lead- 
ers and  local  brethren  in  the  ministry,  and  we  had  a  powerful  time. 
I  requested  them  to  give  an  account  of  their  past  and  present  ex- 
perience ;  the  state  of  their  respective  families  ;  and  the  classes 
they  had  the  charge  of,  together  with  the  prospects  of  religion 
where  they  lived  :  they  understood  me,  and  spoke  much  to  the 
purpose.  We  parted  with  a  good  love-feast,  from  which  the  gay 
and  the  worldly,  at  least,  were  excluded,  if  we  did  not  keep  out 
sinners,  Pharisees,  and  hypocrites. 

Saturday  16.  Rode  to  Camden.  To  Dr.  Barrett,  a  true  son  of 
a  worthy  father,  we  are  chiefly  indebted  for  a  neat,  economical 
meeting-house.  I  had  so  many  friends  1  knew  not  where  to  go. 
My  attendance  on  conferences  and  quarterly  meetings  has  lately 
been  so  constant,  I  found  it  expedient  to  make  a  sudden  change  and 
come  home.  In  my  way  I  stopped  at  a  friend's  house  ;  the  wo- 
man had  been  early  a  member  ;  the  man,  not  of  us  :  I  pressed 
family  prayer  upon  her  from  divine  authority  :  I  saw  her  to 
and  heard  her  promises.  Came  home  to  T.  White's.  1  resolved 
on  the  establishment  of  a  prayer-meeting  for  the  women  before  J 
go  hence.  I  have  felt  my  soul  greatly  quickened  of  late  to  bear 
and  suffer  all  things,  and  to  feel  nothing  but  lore  :  it"  we  are  tried 
by  Christian  people,  it  is  chiefly  for  want  of  grace  or  knowledge  in 
them,  or  us,  or  both — they  are  objects  of  pity,  not  of  anger. 

This  day  is  spent  in  reading,  writing,  meditation,  and  prayer. 
To  be  retired  and  solitary  is  desirable  after  the  presence  of  crowds 
and  the  labours,  various  and  unceasing,  to  which  I  am  called  :  when 
our  Lord  was  pursued  by  the  people,  he,  as  a  man,  would  1. 
himself.     I  thought,   if  my  brethren  would  not  <p;ire  me.   I  r 
*pare  roysrlt". 


IT.  rllANClIS  AsBl.TxV'6  JOUtt.\'AJL.  [1792"., 

I  have  been  reading  Doctor  Langdon  on  the  Revelations,  and 
find  little  new  or  very  spiritual ;  he  is  like  the  Newtons  and  all 
the  historical  interpreters — one  thing  is  wanting.  And  might  not 
an  interpreter  show  the  present  time  foretold  by  these  signs,  which 
plainly  point  to  the  why  and  wherefore  it  is,  that  some  are  Chris- 
tian bishops  and  Christian  dissertators  on  prophecy  ?  A  bishoprick 
with  one,  or  two,  or  three  thousand  sterling  n  year  as  an  appendage, 
might  determine  the  most  hesitating  in  their  choice  :  I  see  no 
reason  why  a  heathen  philosopher,  who  had  enough  of  this  world's 
\visdom  to  see  the  advantages  of  wealth  and  honours,  should  not 
say,  "  Give  me  a  bishoprick  and  I  will  be  a  Christian."  In  the 
Eastern  states  also  there  are  very  good  and  sufficient  reasons  for 
the  faith  of  the  favoured  ministry.  Ease,  honour,  interest :  what 
follows  ? — idolatry,  superstition,  death. 

Tuesday  19.  Continued  at  Judge  \V %s,  and  spoke  a  feu- 
words  to  a  few  people. 

Wednesday  20.  We  came  to  Millford,  and  had  a  solemn  time  ou 
Genesis  vi.  3.  Here  I  held  a  conference  with  the  local  preach- 
ers, and  was  pleased  at  the  accounts  they  gave  of  their  prospects 
of  religion  in  their  neighbourhoods. 

Thursday  21.  We  had  a  moving  feast  of  charity,  and  a  close, 
searching  time  in  public — my  subject,  2  Tim.  iii.  20,  21. 

Friday  22.  I  came  to  Broad  Creek  with  a  heavy  heart.  We 
had  a  blessed  time  in  the  love-feast :  many  souls  had  longings  for 
sanctification,  and  some  boldly  professed  it.  I  felt  as  if  it  would  be 
long  before  I  should  again  visit  this  house.  A  poor  man  attempted 
to  come  near  me  ;  being  encouraged  by  my  speaking  to  him,  be 
approached,  and  told  me,  with  a  full  heart,  that  about  that  time  five 
years  past,  the  Lord  spoke  through  me,  to  his  conviction,  at  Moore's 
chapel. 

Tuesday  26.  Attended  quarterly  meeting  at  Myle's  chape], 
where  I  met  with  a  few  serious  people  :  the  second  day  we  had  a 
few  Church-folks — something  wild. 

VIRGINIA. — Thursday  28.  Crossed  Pocomoke  to  L 's  :  at 

Dowings's  at  night.  Brother  Everett  was  sick.  I  had  a  large 
congregation  at  Garrettson  chapel  ;  and  was  much  bleat  on  Rom. 
viii.  29,  30.  I  had  a  comfortable  conference  with  the  leaders, 
stewards,  local  preachers,  and  exhorters  ;  and  \ve  had  a  living 
love-feast. 

Sunday,  October  1.  We  had  a  crowded  congregation,  and  some 
melting  amongst  the  people  whilst  I  enlarged  on  "  Almost  thou 
jtersuadest  me  to  be  a  Christian."  I  endeavoured  to  point  out  the 


i/:.1  Htv.  FRANi.is  ANBURY'S  Jo 

genuine  marks  of  .1  Christian  :  -.  Remove  the  objection  against 
these  marks  ;  and  .>.  Persuade  by  appl^iii'j;  to  the  hopes  and  fears 
of  my  hearers. 

Monday  ii.  I  had  a  kind  of  chill  and  hi:;id.n-h,  and  was  verv  un- 
well ;  yet  1  rode  about  fortj  miles  to  Littleton  Lon:;'- —  1  went 
quick  to  bed. 

MARYLAND. — I  attended  the  quarterly  meeting  in  Dorset  on  the 
last  day  ;  we  had  few  people.  Thence  to  Henry  Ennall's,  where 
young  sister  Kane  was  struck  with  conviction  at  family  prayer  -. 
she  followed  us  to  quarterly  meeting,  at  Easton,  under  deep  distress  ; 
and  returning,  found  peace  where  she  found  conviction  three  days 
before.  We  had  great  plainness,  and  were  much  stirred  up  in  the 
conference  with  our  local  brethren.  The  congregation  was  largu 
the  second  day,  and  the  people  were  more  quirt  than  common— 
perhaps  because  we  were  so. 

Thence  we  rode  to  Choptank,  now  Greensborough  ;  and  preached 
on  Ephes.  ii.  17. ;  and  some  power  went  through  the  house.  I  had 
a  good  conference  with  the  local  brethren  ;  making  close  inquiries 
relative  to  themselves,  their  families,  and  the  societies  to  which 
they  respectively  belong. 

I  stopped  a  day  at  Judge  White's,  and  read  in  haste  the  most 
essential  parts  of  "  Jefierson's  Notes."  I  have  thought,  it  may 
be  I  am  safer  to  be  occasionally  among  the  people  of  the  world, 
than  wholly  confined  to  the  indulgent  people  of  God  :  he  who 
sometimes  suffers  from  a  famine,  will  the  better  know  how  to  re- 
lish a  feast. 

Saturday  14.  We  had  many  gracious  souls  at  Boardley's  barn. 
I  was  greatly  weakened  by  preaching  ;  but  I  hope  souls  were 
spiritually  strengthened.  We  had  a  gracious  season  in  conference 
with  the  local  brethren,  men  who  felt  for  the  cause  of  God.  Two 
professed  to  find  the  Lord  ;  and  it  was  said  two  were  awakened  the 
first  evening  of  the  quarterly  meeting. 

Sunday  16.  We  had  a  great  love-feast,  the  women  led  the  w:i\. 
I  preached  on  "  Thou  knowest  not  the  time  of  thy  visitation."  A 
larger  or  more  attentive  congregation  has  not,  perhaps,  been  seen 
in  these  parts.  I  feel  more  than  ever  the  necessity  of  preaching 
sanctification. 

Monday  16.  Rode  to  Chester-Town.  Here  I  was  warmly  im- 
portuned to  preach,  and  submitting  to  the  desire  of  my  friends,  I 
enlarged  on  1  John  ii.  18.  and  was  very  pointed  and  alarming,  nt 
which  some  were  offended. 

VOL.  IF.  lf> 


REV.  FJUXCI3  ASBLRY  S  JOURNAL. 

Saturday  21.  Rode  to  Back-Creek  :  being  detained  at  the  ferry, 
1  did  not  get  in  until  after  night,  which  made  me  unwell. 

Monday  23.  Rode  to  Cokesbury — all  is  not  well  here. 

Saturday  28.  I  came  to  Baltimore  :  here  I  only  stopped  to  feei] 

myself  and  horses,  and  then  proceed  on  to  T.  C 's,  and  had  a 

little  rest  and  peace. 

Sunday  29.  Contrary  to  my  wish,  I  was  constrained  to  ride  to 
Annapolis,  which  I  reached  about  eleven  o'clock,  and  gave  them  a 
sermon  on  1  Peter  iii.  18.  with  some  help  and  liberty. 

Monday  30.  We  opened  our  district  conference  in  great  peace 
and  love  ;  and  so  it  ended. 

Tuesday  31.  Came  to  Baltimore  in  a  storm  of  rain.  Whilst  we 
were  sitting  in  the  room  at  Mr.  Rogers's,  in  came  Dr.  Coke,  of 
whose  arrival  we  had  not  heard,  and  whom  we  embraced  with 
great  love. 

I  felt  awful  at  the  general  conference,  which  began  November 
1,  1792.  At  my  desire  they  appointed  a  moderator,  and  prepara- 
tory committee,  to  keep  order  and  bring  forward  the  business  with 
regularity.  We  had  heavy  debates  on  the  first,  second,  and  third 
sections  of  our  form  of  discipline.  My  power  to  station  the  preach- 
ers without  an  appeal,  was  much  debated,  but  finally  carried  by  a 
very  large  majority.  Perhaps  a  new  bishop,  new  conference,  and 
new  laws,  would  have  better  pleased  some.  I  have  been  much 
grieved  for  others,  and  distressed  with  the  burthen  I  bear,  and 
must  hereafter  bear.  O,  my  soul,  enter  into  rest!  Ah!  who  am  I. 
that  the  burthen  of  the  work  should  lie  on  my  heart,  hands,  and 
bead? 

Thursday  8.  Having  taken  cold,  and  had  my  rest  broken,  I  went 
to  bed  to  bring  on  a  free  perspiration  ;  and  from  this  I  received 
relief,  my  soul  breathed  unto  God  ;  and  I  was  exceedingly  happy 
in  his  love.  Some  individuals  among  the  preachers  having  their 
jealousies  about  my  influence  in  the  conference,  I  gave  the  matter 
wholly  up  to  them,  and  to  Dr.  Coke,  who  presided  :  meantime  I 
sent  them  the  following  letter. 

My  dear  brethren, 

Let  my  absence  give  you  no  pain — Dr.  Coke  presides.  I  am 
happily  excused  from  assisting  to  make  laws  by  which  myself  am  to 
be  governed  :  I  have  only  to  obey  and  execute.  I  am  happy  in 
the  consideration  that  I  never  stationed  a  preacher  through  enmitj% 
or  as  a  punishment.  I  have  acted  for  the  glory  of  God,  the  good 


ilAXtli  Ml 


of  the  people,  and  to  promote  th*;  indulnc^  of  the  \>\°- 
Are  you  sure,  lh;it  if  you  plea^f  Miiirsclvc*.  tli.it  the   j>»  opl. 
be  as  fully  satisfied  ?    They  often  eny,  "  Id  i:-  have  such  ;i  j-iva<-|i 
*T  ;"    and  sometimes,  "  we  will  not  have  such  a  pre.n  IK  -i  —  \ve  will 
sooner  pay  him  to  stay  at  home."     I'trhaps  I  n  u-t  I  r, 
peal  forced  him  upon  you."     I  am  one  —  ye  are  many       I   am  as 
willing  to  serve  you  as  ever.     I  want  not  to  sit  in  any  man's  « 
1  scorn  to  solicit  votes  :   I  am  a  very  trembling,  poor  crcatm 
hear  praise  or  dispraise.    Speak  your  minds  freely  ;  but  rcmcm: 
you  are  only  making  laws  for  the  present  time  :  it  may  br,  th;r 
in  some  other  things,  «o  in  this,  a  future  day  may  give  you  fur: 
light. 

\  am  yours,  &c. 

!'i  AXCI«  Asm  RV. 

i  am  not  fond  of  altercations  —  we  cannot  pleape  every  body— 
and  sometimes,  not  ourselves  :   I  am  resigned. 

Mr.  O'Kelly  being  disappointed  in  not  getting  an   appeal  from 
any  station  made  by  me,  withdrew  from  the  connexion,  and  went 
off.     For  himself,  the  conference  well  knew   he  could  not  com- 
plain of  the  regulation  :   he  had  been  located  to  the  south   distric* 
of  Virginia  for  about  ten   succeeding  years  ;  and  upon  hi-  plan 
might  have  located  himself,  and  any  preacher,  or  set  of  preach 
to  the  district,  whether  the  people  wished  to  have  them  or  not. 

The  general  conference  went  through  the  Discipline,  Articles 
of  Faith,  Forms  of  Baptism,  Matrimony,  and  the  Durial  of  the 
Dead  ;  as  also  the  Offices  of  Ordination.  The  conference  ended 
in  peace,  after  voting  another  general  conference  to  be  held  four 
years  hence.  By  desire  of  my  brethren,  I  preached  once  on  1 
Peter  iii.  8.  My  mind  was  kept  iu  peace,  and  my  soul  enjoyed 
rest  in  the  Strong  Hold. 

Thursday  15.  I  was  comforted  at  the  women's  class-meeting  :  1 
appointed  three  prayer  meetings  for  them,  sister  K  --  ,  O  -  , 
and  F  -  ,  to  be  the  leaders  of  them  :  if  this  is  regularly  attended 
to,  I  think  good  will  follow. 

Friday  16.  I  left  Baltimore,  and,  contrary  to  my  first  intention, 
called  on  the  widow  H  -  ,  whose  daughter  was  awakened  the 
last  time  I  was  hero,  and  still  continues  to  be  happy  in  the  Lord. 
I  met  the  sisters  here,  and  urged  prayer  meeting:  perhaps  it  wa« 
tor  this  I  unexpectedly  came  here. 

VIRGINIA.  —  Saturday  17.  Brother  Ira  Ellis  and  myself  came  on 
to  G^rgetown  ;  and  thence  to  Alexandria,  makic^  a  ride  of  .'" 


148  REV.  FRAKCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1792. 

miles.     Here  the  preachers  were  waiting  for  the  district  confe- 
rence. 

Sunday  18.  I  preached  in  our  small,  neatly  finished  house. 

Monday  19.  We  had  a  close  sitting  in  conference,  and  completed 
our  work  in  one  day. 

Tuesday  20.  We  set  out  southwardly  :  the  day  was  very 
storm}',  and  we  had  a  gale  in  crossing  the  River  at  Colchester,  and 
came  to  our  newly  made  friend  Ward's,  near  Dumfries. 

Wednesday  21.  Six  of  us  set  out,  and  rode  fifty-three  miles  to 
D.  Dickinson's,  in  Caroline  county — so  much  for  an  American 
episcopos.  Travelling  in  such  haste,  I  could  not  be  as  much  in 
mental  prayer  as  1  desired  ;  although  I  enjoyed  many  moments  of 
sweet  converse  with  God. 

The  mischief  has  begun  :  brother called  here  and  vented 

his  sorrows,  and  told  what  the  general  conference  had  done.  I 
was  closely  employed  in  reading  "  The  Curse  of  Divisions,"  and 
my  Hebrew  Bible. 

Sunday  25.  Came  to  Manchester ;  and  preached  in  the  after- 
noon, and  felt  life  amongst  the  people,  and  the  preachers  who 
were  met  for  the  district  conference.  I  met  the  preachers  in  band, 
and  found  their  fears  were  greatly  removed  :  union  and  love  pre- 
vailed, and  all  things  went  on  well.  W.  M'Kendree  and  R.  H 

sent  me  their  resignation  in  writing.  We  agreed  to  let  our  dis- 
pleased brethren  still  preach  among  us  ;  and  as  Mr.  O'Kelly  is 
almost  worn  out,  the  conference  acceded  to  my  proposal  of  giving 
him  his  *  £40  per  annum,  as  when  he  travelled  in  the  connexion, 
provided  he  was  peaceable,  and  forbore  to  excite  divisions  among 
the  brethren.  The  general  conference  and  the  district  confe- 
rences have  kept  us  a  long  time  from  our  work  ;  but  after  all 
Satan's  spite,  I  think  our  sifting  and  shaking  will  be  for  good  :  I 
expect  a  glorious  revival  will  take  place  in  America,  and  thousands 
be  brought  to  God. 

Thursday  29.  Came  to  Petersburg — Myself,  and  several  others 
preached  during  our  stay. 

Saturday,  December  1.  I  had  a  few  attentive  hearers  at  brother 
Bonner's,  of  whom  I  inquired,  "  Where  is  the  blessedness  ye 
spake  of." 

Sunday  2.  Rode  fifteen  miles  to  G 's  chapel,  where  we  had 

a  full  house,  and  I  felt  life  and  love  in  speaking  to  the  young  peo- 

*  For  a  part  of  that  rear  he  received  it,  but  re-fused,  and  left  u?  to  form  a  new  and 
pure  church 

* 


nr.v.  fUANcis  ASUI  .  j.t 

pie.    I  lodged  with  brother  G ,  and  wa-  v^ry  much  moved  to 

lay  a  plan  for  a  district  school. 

Monday  3.    Preached   at  K '3  chapel  :  cold  house  and    hi. 

fjuid  people.  Came  to  brother  Coxe's  in  the  evening.  I  am  not 
conscious  of  inward  or  ouUvard  sin,  yet  I  do  not  fed  (fiat  inw.inl 
life  1  wish.  I  have  lately  rend  our  "  Cure  of  Church  Divisions." 
and  much  of  the  word  of  God. 

Tuesday  4.  Preached  at  Mabry's  chapel  ;  and  the  tH-xt  day  at 
J.  Mason's,  where  we  had  a  full  house  and  a  comfortable  time. 

Thursday  C.  Rode  through  the  rain  to  IMward  Dnim^old's  : 
here  I  found  a  few  friends  and  formed  a  constitution  for  a  District 
school,  which,  with  a  little  alteration,  will  form  a  general  rule  for 
any  part  of  the  continent. 

Saturday  8.     I  once  more  visited  Owen  Myrick,  whose    wife   i- 
gone,  and   from  all   we  can   learn,  departed   in  a  good  old  age,  in 
triumph  to  glory  :   the  dear  old  man  is  much  dispirited.     We  spent 
the  evening  together  very  solemnly,  remembering  the  ocrui  • 
^s  of  nineteen  years  ago,  now  gone  as  yesterday— 

"  Short  as  the  watch  that  ends  the  nigh* 
Before  the  rising  sun." 

The  cause  of  his  slaves  was  not  forgotten. 

Sunday  9.  1  came  once  more  to  Roanoak  chnpel,  and  gave  them 
a  discourse  on  Eph.  ii.  13.  R.  and  I.  Hllis  gave  an  exhortation  . 
I  met  the  society.  We  then  rode  six  miles  and  got  to  our  quar- 
ters about  sunset. 

Monday  10.  We  crossed  Roanoak  at  Black's  ferry,  and  directed 
our  course  for  Lewisburg.  We  passed  Warrington,  and  misted 
our  way.  We  remembered  the  name  of  William  Myrick,  and 
inquiring  after  him,  found  he  lived  nearly  on  our  way  ;  we  ac- 
cordingly called  on  him,  and  were  gladly  received,  and  kindly  en- 
tertained.—  Memory  is  good  in  distress — had  we  not  housed  here. 
we  should  have  had  our  difficulties  in  getting  to  sister  L — 

Tuesday  11.    Rode  to  H 's,  near  Lewisburg.     Here  I   n 

the   preachers  in  conference,  and   were  closely   employed  until 
Saturday  morning.     We  had   about   forty  preachers  from  the   ; 
districts   in   North  Carolina.     Our   labours  finished,  we  rode    ' 
Neuse-River. 

Sunday  1C.   Preached  at  Merrill's. 

Monday  17.    Rode  fifteen  miles  to  S 's— preached  on  Qir. 

the  believer'*   wisdom,  ri%hteousnr^,  svnctificcilion.  and  rtdempb 


RF.V.  FRANCIS  ASBORY'S  ,TOT;F.:V  [17 

We  had  a  difficult  road  in  going  to  Haw-River,  but  a  kind  provi- 
dence brought  us  along  very  well,  although  the  weather  was  ex- 
ceedingly cold  :  we  crossed  the  stream  by  fording,  about  half  past 

eight  o'clock,  and   about  ten  arrived  at  R 's,  very  cold  and  in 

much  pain. — I  know  not  why,  but  so  it  is,  that  I  cannot  feel  that  I 
hold  such  sweet  communion  with  God  in  cold  weather  as  in  warm  : 
it  may  be  that — 

"  .Nature  being  oppress'd, 
Commands  the  mind  lo  suffer  with  the  body." 

The  great  love  and  union  ivhirh  prevailed  at  the  late  conference 
makes  me  hope  many  souls  will  be  converted  in  the  ensuing  year : 
an  account  was  brought  in  of  the  conversion  of  about  three  hundred 
souls  last  year  within  its  limits — chiefly  in  the  Lowland  circuits. — 
Glory  be  to  God  !  I  feel  that  he  is  with  us  ;  and  I  have  good  evi- 
dence that  fifteen  or  eighteen  hundred  souls  have  professed  to  have 
been  converted  in  the  United  States  within  the  last  twelve  months. 
At  Rainey's  a  congregation  of  willing,  patient  souls  was  called 
hastily  together,  to  whom  I  preached  on  2  Peter  i.  4. — I  was  led  out 
on  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world,  arising  from  three  grand  sour- 
ces,— the  lust  of  the  flesh  ;  the  lust  of  the  eye ;  and  the  pride  of  life. 

Wednesday  19.  I  was  detained  until  about  ten  o'clock,  and 
then  rode  on  to  S 's,  and  dined  :  we  then  hastened  on  to  Deep- 
River,  and  lodged  at  Mr.  B 's.  Lord,  show  kindness  to  those 

who  have  succoured  me  ! 

Thursday  20.  I  took  a  route  along  a  new  path  below  the  Nar- 
rows  of  Pee  Dee;  and  after  riding  forty-five  or  fifty  miles,  came 
in,  cold  and  hungry,  about  seven  o'clock,  and  found  a  congrega- 
tion waiting  :  I  was  fatigued,  and  could  say  but  little  to  them. 

Friday  21.  I  rode  thirty  miles  to  Rocky-River — had  few  to 
hear. 

Saturday  22.  The  people  were  attentive  and  behaved  well  at 
Anson  court-house. — In  the  evening  we  had  a  weary  ride  to  bro- 
ther Jackson's. 

Sunday  23.  We  attended  from  ten  till  one  o'clock  in  a  house 
built  of  poles — here  were  light  and  ventilators  plenty.  We  rode 
this  evening  twenty  miles  to  Mr.  Blakeney's  :  the  rain  caught 
us  in  the  woods,  and  we  were  well  steeped.  Arriving,  we  found 
a  good  house,  table,  and  bed,  which  was  some  relief  to  weather- 
beaten  pilgrims. 

Christmas  eve.  We  rode  in  the  rain  twenty-five  miles  to  our 
kind  brother  Morton's,  and  found  many  people  had  gathered. 


l?iK5.j  .  UtANCIS  ANBURY  5  JUVHNAL. 

SOUTH  CAROLINA. — Christmas  day.  Although  the  weather  was 
cold  ami  damp,  and  unhealthy,  with  signs  of  snow,  we  rode  forty- 
rive  miles  to  dear  brother  [lenibrrt'«-  kind  ami  good,  rich  and 
liberal,  who  has  done  more  for  the  poor  Methoditta  than  .in\  mail 
in  South  Carolina  The  Lord  grant  that  he,  with  hid  whole 
household,  may  find  mercy  in  that  day. 

Wednesday  -0.  Preached  at  quarterly  meeting  on  1  Peter  iv. 
13.  I  was  pleased  to  hear  the  young  men  exhort  and  ging  after 
sacrament.  I  felt  uncommonly  melted — tears  involuntarily  burst 
from  my  eyes.  God  was  there. 

Thursday  27.  I  had  a  long,  cold  ride  of  forty-five  miles  to  bro- 
ther Bowman's,  near  Santee.  I  was  overtaken  on  my  way  by  rain 
mingled  with  hail,  which  «>ndcil  in  snow,  covering  the  ground  six 
or  eight  inches  deep.  The  unfinished  state  of  the  houses,  lying 
on  the  floor,  thin  clothing,  and  inclement  weather,  keep  me  in  a 
state  of  indisposition. 

Friday  28.  We  had  to  cross  Santee,  and  ride  thirty-five  miles  to 
Jear  sister  Browings's.  The  weather  still  very  cold. 

Saturday  29.  Rode  thirty-three  miles  to  Charleston,  and  found 
our  little  flock  in  peace,  and  a  small  revival  amongst  them. 

Mr.  Hammetl  has  raised  a  grand  house,  and  has  written  an 
peal   to   the    British  conference.     He  represents   Or.  Co1* 
sacrilegious  tyrant  and  murderer.     1  have  no  d"ubt  but  the  Doctor 
will  be  able  to  make  good  his  cuise.     As  to  Ilammett,  time  uill 
show  the  man,  and  the  people  who  have  mado  lies  their  refuge. 

Sunday  30.   Brother  1.  S preached  in  the  forenoon.     In  the 

aftenoon  I  said  a  little  on  Isai.  ix.  6,  7.  The  blacks  were  hardly 
restrained  from  crying  out  aloud.  O  that  God  would  bless  th 
wild  and  wicked  inhabitants  of  this  city  !  I  am  happy  to  find  that 
our  principal  friends  have  increased  in  religion.  Accounts  from 
Philadelphia  are  pleasing — souls  are  converted  to  God.  There  is 
also  a  move  in  New-York,  and  their  numbers  are  daily  increasing. 
On  reviewing  the  labours  of  the  last  six  weeks,  I  find  we  h.iw 
rested  about  fourteen  days  at  conferences,  and  rode  at  least  seven 
hundred  miles. 

January  3,  1793.  From  Wednesday,  December  31,  to  this  <: 
Sunday  excepted,  we  sat  in  conference  in  this  city. 

Friday  4.  I  was  unwell,  yet  I  set  out  and  reached  Mr.  G 

on  Edisto-River.     A  few  people  met  me  here  in  the  evening,  but 
I  was  unwell  and  weary,  and  sleepy,  and  very  until  for  pu 
exercise. 


KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1793. 

Saturday  5.  Rode  fifty  miles  to  R 's,  and  rested  on  the  Sab- 
bath. I  had  a  meeting  with  eight  or  ten  souls.  The  people  in 
these  parts  are  much  given  up  to  sin  ;  they  have  a  little  charity 
for  the  Baptists,  but  none  at  all  for  the  Methodists. 

Monday  7.  We  rode  thirty-seven  miles  to  T 's  ;  where,  had 

we  not  begged  and  promised  to  pay  well  for  it,  I  know  not  if  we 
should  have  been  taken  in. 

GEORGIA. — Tuesday  8.  We  passed  Augusta,  and  rode  thirty- 
seven  miles  to  H 's,  where  we  were  treated  kindly.  Thence, 

next  day,  to  Washington,  forty-four  miles.     I  was  taken  ill  at  bro- 
ther M 's. 

Thursday  10.  Met  our  dear  brethren  in  conference.  We  had 
great  peace  and  union  :  the  Carolina  preachers  came  up  to  change 
with  those  in  Georgia  :  all  things  happened  well.  Bless  the  Lord, 
O  my  soul!  We  now  agreed  to  unite  the  Georgia  and  South  Ca- 
rolina conferences — to  meet  in  the  fork  of  Seleuda  and  Broad 
Rivers,  on  the  first  of  January,  1794.  Our  sitting  ended  in  ex- 
ceeding great  love. 

Sabbath  13.  We  had  sacrament,  love-feast,  and  ordination.  I  felt 
very  serious,  and  was  very  pointed  on  Acts  xx.  26,  27.  I  have 
now  had  an  opportunity  of  speaking  in  Washington  :  most  of  the 
people  attended  to  hear  this  man  that  rambles  through  the  United 
States.  In  due  time  I  shall,  with  permission,  visit  Georgia. 

Monday  14.  I  preached  in  the  new  house  at  Grant's,  on  "  He 
that  overcometh  shall  inherit  all  things,  and  I  will  be  his  God,  and 
he  shall  be  my  son." 

1.  The  Christian  soldier  has  to  overcome  the  world,  sin,  and 
the  devil,  with  his  temptations. 

2.  He  fights  under  the  banner  of  Christ,  who  is  the  Captain  of 
his  salvation. 

3.  His  armour  is  described  by  St.  Paul,  Ephes.  vz. 

4.  His  inheritance— Christian  tempers,  and  the  things  promised 
to  the  seven  churches  ;  and  finally,  glory — "  Will  be  his  God" — • 
giving  him  wisdom,  truth,  love — "  He  shall  be  my  son" — a  son 
partakes  of  the  nature  and  property  of  the  father,  and  doeth  his 
will :  so  it  is  with  those  who  are  the  children  of  God. 

Our  dear  Georgia  brethren  seem  to  think  some  of  us  shall  visit 
them  no  more  :  they  appear  to  be  much  humbled,  and  will  not 
give  up  the  travelling  preachers.  I  am  now  bound  for  Savannah  ; 
where  I  may  see  the  former  walks  of  a  dear  Wesley  and  White- 
field,  whom  I  hope  to  meet  in  the  new  Jerusalem, 


1793.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  163 

Wednesday  1G.  We  had  to  swim  Long-Creek.  We  had  few  to 
hear  at  II  -  '$  ;  but  they  felt  the  word,  and  w«-  hud  a  t;oou  tun.-. 

When  the  weather  is  open  and  the  sunshines,  the  da>s  art*  gene- 
rally warm  in  this  country,  but  the  nights  are  cold,  and  tin-  houses 
open. 

Saturday  10,  Was  taken  up  in  reading  Oslervald's  Christian 
Theology  ;  it  is  simple,  plain,  and  interesting. 

Sunday  20.  I  preached  at  Bethel  on  Peter  ii.  24,  25.  1  had  a  full 
congregation,  and  great  freedom  in  speaking  :  the  house  was  a  mi- 
serable one. 

Wednesday  23.  I  came  to  Buckhead  :  a  few  people  had  gather- 
ed, to  whom  I  gave  an  exhortation.  Reached  J  -  's  ;  making  it 
thirty-three  miles  without  refreshment,  being  out  from  seven  to 
seven  o'clock  again. 

Friday  25.  I  rode  fifteen  miles  to  my  very  loving  friend  brother 
D  -  's  :  here  my  mind  was  exercised  with  what  I  heard  and  felt. 
Mr.  Matthews  wrote  brother  D  -  he  had  been  taught  my  i 


t«j  which  Air.  II  -  (his  brother)  gave  his  sanction.  And  why 
I  thus  charged  ?  —  Because  I  did  not  establish  Mr.  \NVsU  y  '-  absolute 
authority  over  the  American  connexion  :  —  for  myself,  this  I  had 
submitted  to  ;  but  the  Americans  were  too  jealous  to  bind  them- 
selves to  yield  to  him  in  all  things  relative  to  church-government. 
Mr.  Wesley  was  a  man  they  had  never  seen  —  was  three  thousand 
miles  off  —  how  might  submission,  in  such  a  case,  be  expected  .'  — 
Brother  Coke  and  myself  gave  offence  to  the  connexion  by  enfor- 
cing Mr.  Wesley's  will  in  some  matters  ;  for  which  I  do  not  blame 
Mr.  Wesley  :  —  like  other  great  men  he  had  his  elbow  friends  ;  and 
like  other  people  I  had  my  enemies. 

Tuesday  29.  We  reached  Savannah.  Next  day  I  rode  tweUv 
miles  along  a  fine,  sandy  road  to  view  the  ruins  of  Air.  Whitefield's 
Orphan-House  ;  we  found  the  place,  and  having  seen  the  copper- 
plate, which  I  recognized,  I  felt  very  awful  :  the  wings  are  yet 
standing,  though  much  injured,  and  the  school-house  still  more.  It 
is  reported  that  Mr.  Whitefield  observed,  whilst  eating  his  last  din- 
ner in  the  house,  "  This  house  was  built  for  God  ;  and  cursed  be 
the  man  that  puts  it  to  any  other  use."  The  land  for  the  support 
of  the  school  is  of  little  value,  except  two  rice  plantations,  which 
wo  passed  in  our  route. 

I  returned  to  Savannah,  and  preached  on  Luke  xix.  10.  to  a  seri- 
ous people,  with  whom  I  had  liberty. 

Friday,  February  1.  1  came  to  Ebene/er  ;  and  had  a  plea«iiv. 
interview  with  Mr.  Forgman  ;  he  cannot  speak  mu-'b  F. 

Vor.  II  C" 


REV.    FRANCIS   ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1793. 

The  Lord  has  certainly  something  in  design  for  this  man,  more  than 
to  be  buried  in  this  place.  We  rode  through  rice  plantations  for 
nearly  two  miles,  and  were  entangled  in  the  swamp. — O,  how 
dreadful  to  be  here  in  the  dark  ! 

Saturday  2.  I  am  not  enough  in  prayer.  I  have  said  more  than 
was  for  the  glory  of  God  concerning  those  who  have  left  the  Ame- 
rican connexion,  and  who  have  reviled  Mr.  Wesley,  Mr.  Fletcher, 
Doctor  Coke,  and  poor  me.  O,  that  I  could  trust  the  Lord  more 
than  I  do,  and  leave  his  cause  wholly  in  his  own  hands  ! 

This  being  Saturday,  we  rest  to  read  and  write,  having  rode,  since 
Monday  morning,  about  one  hundred  and  twenty-four  miles. 

I  reflected  upon  the  present  ruin  of  the  Orphan-House  ;  and 
taking  a  view  of  the  money  expended,  the  persons  employed,  the 
preachers  sent  over,  I  was  led  to  inquire  where  are  they  ;  and  how 
has  it  sped  ?  The  earth,  the  army,  the  Baptists,  the  Church,  the 
Independents,  have  swallowed  them  all  up  at  this  windmill  end  of 
ihe  continent.  A  wretched  country  this — but  there  are  souls,  pre- 
cious souls,  worth  worlds. 

I  was  offered  the  use  of  the  court-house  to  preach  in,  but  the 
night  being  cold  and  windy,  prevented  :  I  preached  at  Mr.  M — 's. 
We  want  a  house  here,  which  I  expect  we  shall  obtain.  I  suppose 
there  are  five  hundred  houses  of  all  sorts  ;  and  if  I  guess  well, 
about  two  thousand  inhabitants.  There  is  one  Lutheran  church 
with,  perhaps,  fifty  or  sixty  members.  Goshen  church  is  about 
forty  by  twenty- five,  well  finished  :  Mr.  B and  the  congrega- 
tion have  given  it  to  us,  on  condition  that  we  supply  them  with 
preaching  on  Sabbath-days — once  in  two,  or  even  three  weeks. 

I  lodged  at  our  kind  W 's.     Crossed  the  Savannah  at  the 

Sister-Ferry  ;  and  came  on  to  Blackswamp,  and  in  the  dark  got 
pretty  well  scratched  by  the  trees. 

SOUTH  CAROLINA. — Sunday  3.  Preached  at  Blackswamp  church 
on  2  Cor.  iii.  9. :  the  subject  was  pointed  ;  and  the  people  were 
attentive. 

Monday  4.  I  preached  at  Purisburg  to  a  full  house  :  some  of 
the  women  appeared  to  feel  the  word.  We  had  a  heavy  ride  :  I 
was  faint,  and  low-spirited  at  the  view  which  I  could  not  fail  to  take 
of  the  state  of  professors  and  sinners.  I  had  about  fifty  hearers,  and 
was  invited  to  a  friend's  house,  but  thought  it  best  to  pursue  my  jour- 
ney. We  came  to  the  Salt  Ketchers  bridge,  where  we  stopped  to  pay 
our  fare — but  Oh,  the  scent  of  rum — and  men  filled  with  it !  How 
shocking!  Who  could  enter  such  a  house  !  I  hoped  for  quiet 
private  entertainment  at  Red-Hill ;  but  the  gentleman  refused  to 


1793.]  REV.  FRANCIS  Asnuixv's  jornvAL. 

receive  us  for  love,  money,  or  hotpitalitj  .     I  then  pent 

brother  R.  to  know  if  we  could  get  in  at  thu  n«  vt  m  _M  H -,|ii;n  ter  : 
into  the  house  we  might  be  permitted  to  enter,  but  wo  cuul.l 
no  corn  for  our  horses,  ;md  no  bed  for  ourselves  :  overset  : 
not,  and  their  employers  will  not  receive  ^r;mt_'fr-  :   tln-\  .in-  too 
proud  to  sell,  and  too  covetous  to  give.     At   length  wo  ju 

tially  reached  a   Mr.  C 's,  a  schoolmaster  ami    IM:  u, 

bought  some  corn  for  our  horses,   and   had   tea,  and   bread   and 
cheese  for  ourselves.     1  saw  some  beautiful  boys   at   this  house  : 
had  these  children  the  opportunity  of  a  northern  education,  v. 
choice  young  men  they  might  make.     I  was  happy  in  the   house, 
and  pleased  with  two  poor  black*,  who  wen;   much  moved   ui 
prayer.     Next  morning  I  set  out  about  six  o'clock,  and  i>,i--m^  lli<- 
Fishpond,  we  came  on  slowly  to  Parker's  ferry.     I   found  my  Ap- 
pointment to  meet  brother  Jackson  was  not  properly  made  ;  and  as 

it  was  out  of  my  way,  I  made  a  sudden  turn  to  G 's,  on  Edislo- 

River.     After  dinner  I  met  with who  offered  to  be  our 

guide  ;  but  when  I  began  to  show  him  his  folly  and  the  da: 
state  of  his  soul,  he  soon   left   us,  and   we   had   to  beat  our   way 
through  the  swamps  as  well  as  we  could  :   he  said,  he  had  killed  a 
negro  worth  £GO,  and  a  valuable  horse  with   racing.     Pushing  uu 
we  found  our  way  to  the  ferry,  and  crossed  about  eight  o'clock. 

I  laid  me  down  at  nine,  and  rose  again  at  seven  o'clock  in  the 
morning  and  set  out :  travelling  through  heavy  rains,  deep  swamps 
in  dark  nights,  makes  both  man  and  beast  feel  the  effect  of  yester- 
day's journey  of  forty-five  miles.  My  mind  has  been  severely 
agitated  this  tour  ;  I  have  rode  about  six  hundred  and  fifty  miles 
in  one  month,  lacking  one  day. 

Friday  8.  Charleston.  I  have  got  through  Mr.  Wesley's  Journal 
as  far  as  1782.  Finding  the  subscription  set  on  foot  at  the  con- 
ference to  purchase  a  burying-ground  and  build  a  house,  was  like  |\ 
to  succeed,  we  began  to  think  about  looking  out  for  a  lot.  I  also 
see  a  prospect  of  stationing  two  preachers  here. 

Sunday  10.    I  preached  with  some  life  on   Kzek.  xxxvi.  2 
but  alas  !  the  people  are  so  dissipated,  and   so  ignorant  of  Go-pi  I 
truth,  that  it  is  difficult  to   preach   to   them  ;  but  I   cannot   -\ 
though  they  keep  their  course  to  hell.     At  night  I  spoke  on  Isaiah 
vi.  8 — 10.     Our  congregation  consists  of  five  hundred   souls  and 
upwards  ;  three  hundred  being  l>l,n  lc. 

I  have  seen  Mr.  Johnson,  the  last  President  of  the  Orphan- 
House  in  Georgia,  who  confirmed  what  I  had  written  respertm- 
it. 


J5G  UEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1793 

Charleston  is  a  growing,  busy,  dreadfully  dissipated  place.    The 
printed  list  of  vessels  in  the  harbour  sets  forth,  53  ships,  55  brigs, 
25  sloops,  25  schooners,  7  snows,  and  2  barques,  besides  pilot 
boats  and  coasters. 

Monday  1 1.  Met  the  women's  class,  white  and  black,  and  had  a 
powerful  meeting.  They  agreed  to  hold  a  prayer-meeting,  once 
a  week,  amongst  themselves. 

Tuesday  12.  I  make  it  my  work  to  visit  every  afternoon.  I 
happily  met  with  Mr.  Wesley's  Journal,  bringing  the  date  down  to 
two  years  before  his  death.  I  could  not  but  specially  notice  that 
his  latter  days  were  more  abundant  in  labours  ;  and  that  he 
preached  in  places  formerly  unnoticed.  He  made  this  observa- 
tion, (so  fi\ed  on  my  mind)  that  it  is  rare — a  mere  miracle,  for  a 
Methodist  to  increase  in  wealth  and  not  decrease  in  grace.  I  have 
now  read  the  third  volume  of  Gordon's  History  ;  Burnham's  Se- 
lect Martyrology  ;  and  Memoirs  of  dying  Saints.  We  have  two 
hundred  and  seventeen  travelling  preachers ;  and  about  fifty 
thousand  members  in  the  United  States.  Glory  to  God  in  the 
highest ! 

Saturday  16.  I  met  the  stewards  and  leaders  :  it  was  agreed 
that  every  other  meeting  should  be  purely  spiritual — speaking 
experience  and  opening  their  hearts  to  each  other. 

Sunday  17.  I  preached  on  Romans  iii.  11 — 21.  In  the  evening 
was  very  low,  but  very  plain  on  Luke  xvi.  31.  The  building  of 
a  new  house,  and  stationing  another  preacher  in  this  city,  and  the 
state  of  this  and  the  Georgia  districts,  with  things  relative  to  indi- 
viduals in  this  society,  do  not  work  to  my  mind  ;  I  felt  as  if  the 
charm  was  near  breaking — some  wish  union  ;  others  will  come 
back.  The  union  must  first  take  place  with  Dr.  C.  then  with  the 
British  conference,  and  then  with  the  American  : — 1  ask  ;  who 
made  us  twain,  and  strove  to  scatter  fire-brands,  arrows,  and  death, 
through  the  whole  continent  ? 

Wednesday  20.  I  had  an  interview  with  Doctor  A.  who  came 
from  the  north  for  his  health  ;  seeing  him  so  low,  and  fearing  he 
would  die  if  he  stayed  here,  I  hastily  invited  him  to  ride  out  into 
the  country  with  me. 

Thursday  21.  We  left  the  city  on  small  horses,  with  heavy  bag- 
gage. We  came  to  the  Cypress-Swamp  in  the  night,  following  a 
poor  negro,  who  waded  through  as  a  guide,  and  not  expecting  to 

find  it  as  bad  as  it  was  :  at  length  we  came  to  sister  B 's,   and 

were  kindly  received  ;  I  found  no  appointments  were  made  forme, 
owing  to  brother being  sick. 


1793.]  REV.  FRANCIS   ASBtT.v's  .JOURNAL 

Friday  22.  We  set  out  for  ?antce,  bul  miesed  our  way,  and  took 
the  road  to  Fourholds-Bridge,  being  six  miles  out  of  our  coin 
We  again  directed  our  course  to  Santrr  ;  and  alu-r  coming  within 
sight  of  Managoe's  ferry,  I  took  ;i  VTOHL;  rc.nl,  and  went  three  miles 
up  the  river.  We  came  to  !\Ir.  H.'s,  where  we  were  comfortable 
and  had  whatever  we  ivanted. 

Saturday  23.  We  had  our  difficulties  in  getting  across  the  river  ; 
the  overseer  had  moved  the  flat  to  the  middle  ground,  and  \\ould 
not  suffer  any  one  to  have  it  ;  I  entreated  him  in  behalf  of  tin- 
sick,  but  in  vain.  Had  we  waited  a  few  minutes  longer,  our  dear 
brother  B.  would  have  been  there  to  conduct  us.  I  have  lateh 
had  cross  winds  ;  the  roads,  myself,  Satan,  and  my  sick  companion, 

Dr.  A ,  have  all  been  matter  of  trial  to  me. 

Sunday  24.    I  preached  the  funeral  of  our  brother  B ,  on 

Isaiah  Ivii.  I.  The  congregation  was  large  and  attentive,  but  ap- 
peared stupid  and  unfeeling. 

Monday  25.  Came  to  brother  B 's,  the  weather  as  sultry  a^ 

in  the  month  of  July  in  the  north.     We  rode  thirty  miles. 

Thursday  23.  The  weather  was  exceedingly  cold,  so  th.tt  wr 
declined  going  to  the  chapel,  but  had  a  comfortable  meeting  at  bro- 
ther R—  -'s  on  Ephes.  vi.  10 — 20. 

Saturday,  March  2.   We  crossed  the  water  at  E 's  ferry,  and 

came  to  father  M 's,  an  Englishman,  from  Epworth  ;  who  wa» 

formerly  converted,  but  living  under  Antinomian  dotage?,  he  lost 
the  blessing.  I  trust  the  Lord  hath  again  restored  him  by  means 
of  our  labours.  Here  we  have  a  chapel  and  society. 

Sunday  3.  This  day  was  rainy,  yet  nearly  four  hundred  soul- 
came  together  ;  but  I  could  not  fix  the  attention  of  the  people,  nor 
get  them  to  understand. 

Monday  4.  Came  to   H 's,  and   thence    through  Columbia, 

the  capital  of  South  Carolina.     Brother  Ellis,  who  is  nearly   n-.  i: 

from  the  dead,  accompanied  me  from  M 's  :  having  left  onr 

man,  I  now  take  up  another.  We  came  to  a  house  five  miles  from 
Columbia  ;  we  got  a  little  bread,  drank  our  own  tea,  had  our  horses 
fed,  and  paid  two  dollars  next  morning — so  the  matter  ended. 

Tuesday  5.  We  had  our  difficulties  in  crossing  the  river,  which 
was  rising  ;  and  in  beating  up  Cedar-Creek  fifteen  miles,  much  <u 
it  through  the  woods  :  in  the  evening,  we  came  greatly  wearied  to 

fl 's,  and  were  kindly  entertained  ;  it  may  be  that  Providence 

sent  us  here  for  some  good — the  man  and  his  wife  feel  (lie  w:int 
of  religion. 


I5i)  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1793. 

Wednesday  6.    We  came   to   Little-River-Bridge  ;    crossed   at 

S 's  ferry,  and  at  length  came,  thoroughly  wearied,  to  brother 

Finches.  I  expect  we  have  been  forced  to  ride  twenty  or  thirty 
miles  out  of  our  way  among  strangers  on  account  of  high  waters  ; 
iny  mind  has  been  variously  tried  :  I  have  been  employed  in 
improving  myself  in  the  Hebrew  tones  and  points  ;  this  being  my 
horse-back  study. 

Thursday  7.  Preached  at  F 's.    I  consulted  the  minds  of  our 

brethren  about  building  a  house  for  conference,  preaching,  and  a 
district  school ;  but  I  have  no  ground  to  believe  that  our  well-laid 
plan  will  be  executed  ;  our  preachers  are  unskilful,  and  our  friends 
have  little  money. 

Friday  8.  The  rains  continued,  and  the  waters  kept  up,  crossed 
Enoree  ;  high — and  rising  powerfully — Tyger  River  being  impass- 
able, we  rode  to  Cokesbridge,  and  had  a  hungry  time — came  to 
brother  W 's,  near  Union  court-house. 

I  next  day  preached  to  a  few  people  at  the  open  meeting-house, 
with  some  spiritual  opening  and  sweetness.  We  were  closely  em- 
ployed in  writing  subscriptions  for  the  district  school,  and  copies 
of  the  constitutions.  Great  rains  still  continue. 

Thursday  14.  I  preached  at  Flat-Rock,  in  an  open  house,  to  an 
unfeeling  people.  Thence  we  came  to  Pacolet :  the  waters  were 
up  ;  but  for  our  money  we  got  across  in  a  flat  that  had  drifted  and 
was  taken  up. 

Friday  15.  Came  to  Father  S 's,  a  German  ;  first  a  Baptist, 

then  a  Methodist,  but  last,  and  best  of  all,  a  Christian. 

Saturday  16,  and  Sunday  17.  Attended  quarterly  meeting  in 
Union  circuit.  There  were  no  elders  present.  I  preached  on 
Eph.  vi.  10 — 18.  and  felt  a  great  death  among  the  people.  Sun- 
day, we  administered  the  sacrament  and  held  love-feast.  I  de- 
sired D.  A to  preach,  and  brother  G to  exhort,  whilst  I 

retired  to  write  to  I.  S ,  desiring  him  to  take  the  president- 
ship of  Union,  Catawba,  Little  Pee  Dee,  Great  Pee  Dee,  Anson, 
and  Santee  circuits. 

The  people  hereabouts  have  been  poorly  handled  by  those 
who,  whilst  they  made  a  great  profession  of  religion,  main- 
tained Antinomian  principles  and  practice.  1  have  been  unwell, 
occasioned  by  the  change  of  seasons,  houses,  and  tables.  Came 
to  brother  M.'s,  on  Sunday  evening,  to  get  a  day  of  rest.  I 
feel  the  want  of  religion  in  families,  congregations,  and  societies. 
I  have  travelled  about  three  hundred  miles  the  last  three  weeks ; 


1793.]  nr.v.  FRANCIS  ATT-IU  ^  .WRVAL. 


and  have  escaped  the  excessive  rains,  hut  have  had  to  wrestle  with 
floods. 

NORTH  CAROLINA.  —  Monday  18.    I  spent  in  writing  ->milrv  let1.- 
to  the  north  ;  and  in  my  favourite  study. 

Tuesday  19.  1  had  a  full  house  at  L  -  's.  I  felt  very  until 
for  public  exercises,  both  in  body  and  mind.  I  have  little  desire 
to  come  here  again  :  —  we  can  hardly  get  <  Mirrtairimmt.  \\'t  \vant 
brethren  and  children  here.  A  woman  invited  \\*  to  hrp  house, 
but  when  I  understood  the  distance,  I  determined  to  haste  along, 
and  made  it  about  thirty  miles  to  F.'s,  in  the  cove  of  the  mountain  ; 
where  we  rested  in  peace,  after  getting  a  little  Indian  bread,  fried 
bacon,  and  drinking  some  of  our  tea.  Our  lodging  was  on  a  lu-d 
set  upon  forks  and  clap-boards  laid  across,  in  an  earthen  Boor 
cabin.  —  But  worse  than  all  the  rest,  these  people  decline  in  n  li- 
gion.  I  feel  awful  for  them  on  this  account.  Next  morning  about 
sunrise  we  took  the  path  up  the  mountain. 

I  sent  D.  A.  to  Dr.  Busnell's  to  inquire  if  there  was  any  expec- 
tation of  my  coming  to  Burke  to  preach  ;  for  being  indispose.!.  I 
intended  to  turn  aside  to  Johns-  11  iver.  D.  A.  returned  ;  and  the 
Doctor's  nephew  pursued,  and  brought  us  to  town,  where  I  gave 
them  a  plain,  pointed  sermon  on  "  The  Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek 
and  save  that  which  was  lost  :"  every  one,  younjz  and  old,  lawyer--. 
doctors,  and  clerks,  were  obliging,  attentive,  and  serious.  Doc- 
tor Busnell  is  a  man  1  have  heard  of  these  twi  -re,  but 

knew   him  not  until  now.  —  He  descended  from  the   1'nlnMM 
His  son  Joseph  was  happily  brought  home  to  Hod  by  means  of  th. 
Methodists  ;  he  lived  to  God,  and  died  in  Winchester  about  tu 
months  ago.     The  Doctor's   usage  to  me  was  that   of  a  gentlem  i:. 
and  Christian.     The  transition  with  respect  to   entertainment 
very  great  :  here  we  had   a   table,  bed,  room,  and   whatever   we 
wanted  ;  but  all  this  could  not  give  me  rest,  having  a  return  of  my 
rheumatic  and  nervous  complaints. 

Friday  22.  Rode  up  to  Johns-  River  ;  I  am  heavy  ;  cannot  attend 
study  nor  mental  prayer,  and   company  is   irksome.  —  Oh!  that  my 
soul  were  always  flaming  with  perfect  love.     In  the  evening  t 
of  us  met  together   and  conversed  on  the  work  of  God  :  all 
love.     Brother  P.  gave   us  an   animating  sermon   on  '•  I'y   uhom 
shall  Jacob  arise  1  for  he  is  small.'' 

Sunday  24.   I  preached  on  1  Cor.  xiv.  3.  there  was  a  noi-e,  an.! 
shaking  each  day  :  some  were  awakened,  one  profes-^d  to  be  con 
verted,  and  several  to  be  quickened  :   the  meeting  lastnl  livm  MD 
A.  M.  to  four  o'clock  IV  V      "  ^"hile  he  wa<  .kins  »1 


JtiO  11EV.  FHANCIS  ASBOn.?!S  JOURNAL.  [1793, 

t 

catne  also  another."  I  heard  there  was  a  conference  appointed  at 
Reese's  chapel,  in  Charlotte  county,  Virginia,  to  form  what  they 
call  a  free  constitution,  and  a  pure  church  ;  and  to  reject  me  and 
my  creatures.  I  know  not  whose  hand  is  in  this  ;  I  hope  they  will 
call  themselves  by  another  name.  Only  let  them  settle  in  congre- 
gations, and  tax  the  people,  and  I  know  how  it  will  work.  If  we 
(the  itinerant  connexion)  would  give  the  government  into  the 
hands  of  a  local  ministry,  as  some  would  have  it,  and  tax  the  peo- 
ple to  pay  preachers  for  Sabbath  work — this  would  please  such 
men  :  but  this  we  dare  not  do.  Whenever  the  people  are  unwill- 
ing to  receive  us,  and  think  they  can  do  better,  we  will  quietly 
withdraw  from  them  ;  and  if  those  who  wish  the  change  can  serve 
them  better  than  we  have  done,  well.  Perhaps  some  of  them  may 

think  with ,  in  Georgia,  that  I  am  the  greatest  villain  on  the 

continent ;  I  bid  such  adieu,  and  appeal  to  the  bar  of  God.  I  have 
no  time  to  contend,  having  better  work  to  do  :  if  we  lose  some 
children,  God  will  give  us  more.  Ah  J  this  is  the  mercy,  the  jus- 
tice of  some,  who,  under  God,  owe  their  all  to  me,  and  my  tyrants, 
so  called.  The  Lord  judge  between  them  and  me  !  There  appears 
to  be  a  general  quickening  in  the  Yadkin  circuit,  and  about  eight 
souls  have  professed  conversion  there  in  the  last  three  mouths. 

Monday  25.  I  rested  and  prepared  to  cross  the  Harmon  harim — 
the  multitude  of  mountains. 

Tuesday  26.  We  wrought  up  the  meanders  of  Johns-River  to 
the  Globe,  and  met  a  few  people  at  Mr.  Moor's,  a  Baptist,  a  very 
kind  head  of  a  respectable  family. 

Wednesday  27.  We  began  our  journey  over  the  great  ridge  of 
mountains  ;  we  had  not  gone  far  before  we  saw  and  felt  the  snow, 
the  sharpness  of  the  air  gave  me  a  deep  cold,  not  unlike  an  influenza. 

We  came  to  the  head  of  Watauga-River.     Stopped  at  Mr.  S 's, 

and  had  some  enlargement  on  "  The  promise  is  to  you  and  to  your 
children,"  &c.  My  soul  felt  for  these  neglected  people.  It  may 
be,  by  my  coming  this  way,  Providence  will  so  order  it,  that  I 
shall  send  them  a  preacher.  We  hasted  on  to  Cove's  Creek,  in- 
vited ourselves  to  stay  at  C 's,  where  we  made  our  own  tea, 

obtained  some  butter  and  milk,  and  some  most  excellent  Irish  po- 
tatoes :  we  were  presented  with  a  little  flax  for  our  beds,  on 
which  we  spread  our  coats  and  blankets,  and  three  of  us  slept 
before  a  large  fire. 

Thursday  28.  We  made  an  early  start,  and  came  to  the  Beaver- 
Dam  ;  three  years  ago  we  slept  here  in  a  cabin  without  a  cover. 
We  made  a  breakfast  at  Mr.  W 's ;  and  then  attempted  the 


J793.J  REV.  n 

iron  or  stone  mountain,  which  is  sleep  like  the  roof  of  a  house.  I 
found  it  difficult  and  trying  to  my  lungs  to  walk  up  it.  I '  ing 

the  mountain  we  had  to  jump  down   the  -leep  itairt,   tr<>rn  two  to 
three  and  four  feet.     At  the  foot  of  this  mountain  our  gunk-  Iff' 
to  a  man  on  foot ;  he  soon  declined,  and  we  made  the  I  our 

way  to  Dugger's  ford,  on  Roans-Creek.  We  came  down  tlie  river, 
where  there  are  plenty  of  large,  round,  rolling  stone*,  and  the 
stream  was  rapid.  My  horse  began  to  grow  dull  :  an  intermit- 
tent fever  and  a  deep  cold  disordered  me  much.  I  was  under 
obligations  to  Henry  Hill,  my  new  aid.  who  was  ready  to  do  any 
thing  for  me  in  his  power.  Perhaps  Providence  moved  him  to 
ofier  to  travel  with  me,  and  his  father  to  recommend  him.  Twenty 
years  ago  a  rude,  open  loft  did  not  affect  me — now  it  seldom  fails 
to  injure  me. 

TENNESSEE. — Friday  29.    We  took  our  journey  dehber 
We  passed  Doe-River  at  the  fork,  and  came  through  the  Gap — a 
most  gloomy  scene— not  unlike  the  shades  of  death  in  the  Alle- 

ghany  mountain.     Mr.  L ,  a  kind  Presbyterian,  fed  our  horsea 

gratis.  I  must  give  the  Presbyterians  the  preference  for  respect 
to  ministers.  WP  prayed,  and  rame  on  to  -  — .  n  kind  people  ; 
but  to  our  sorrow  we  iind  it  low  times  for  religion  on  Holstein  and 
Watauga  Rivers.  In  Green  circuit  there  is  some  increase, 
way  opens  ;  and  I  think  I  shall  go  to  Kentucky.  I  laid  my  hands 
on  what  is  called  "  The  Principles  of  Politeness,"  imitated  from 
Chesterfield  :  it  contains  some  judicious  remarks,  and  shows  the 
author  to  have  been  a  man  of  sense  and  education — but  of  no 
religion.  He  recommends  some  things  contrary  thereto. 

Tuesday,  April  2.  Our  conference  began  at  Nelson's,  near 
Jonesborough,  in  the  new  territory.  We  have  only  four  or  five 
families  of  Methodists  here.  We  had  sweet  peace  in  our  con- 
ference. 

Wednesday  3.  I  gave  an  exhortation  after  brothers  H and 

3j['H had  preached,  and  there  was  a  melting  among  the  people 

Thursday  4.  I  had  a  happy  time  at  my  old  friend  C-  -'s  ;  I 
am  pained  for  his  children,  who  are  yet  unconverted. 

Friday  5.    Rode    to  Nolachucky,   and   attended    a   meeting    at 

Squire  E 's,  where  I  had  about  two  hundred  hearers. 

have  formed  a  society  in  this  place  of  thirty-one  member? — most 
of  them  new.     There  are  appearances  of  danger  on  the  road  t 
Kentucky  ;  but  the  Lord  is  with  us.     We  have  formed  a  company 
of  nine  men  (five  of  whom  are  preachers    who  are  well 
Mid  mounted 

Vor     II 


IlEV.  FRANCIS  ASBUHV  S  JOURNAL  [1793. 

Saturday  6.  Rode  to  Green ,  and  crossed  the  grand  island 

ford  of  Nolachucky  :  the  low  lands  are  very  rich,  the  uplands 
barren.  Stopped  and  fed  at  Green  court-house  ;  here  was  brought 
a  corpse  to  the  grave  in  a  covered  carriage  drawn  by  four  horses. 
Solemn  sight !  Be  instructed,  O  my  soul !  A  whiskey  toper 
gave  me  a  cheer  of  success  as  one  of  John  Wesley's  congregation  ! 
I  came  on  alorve  through  heavy  rains,  over  bad  hills  and  poor 
ridges,  to  brother  Vanpelts,  on  Lick  Creek — he  is  brother  to 
Peter,  my  old,  first  friend  on  Staten-Island  :  I  was  weary,  damp, 
and  hungry  ;  but  had  a  comfortable  habitation,  and  kind,  loving 
people,  who  heard,  refreshed,  and  fed  me.  We  had  a  large  con- 
gregation at  brother  Vanpelt's  chapel,  where  I  had  liberty  ia 
speaking.  I  left  the  young  men  to  entertain  the  people  a  while 
longer,  and  returned  and  read  Mr.  Wesley's  Sermon  on  Riches. 

If  reports  be  true,  there  is  danger  in  journeying  through  the 
wilderness  ;  but  I  do  not  fear — we  go  armed.  If  God  suffer  Sa- 
tan to  drive  the  Indians  on  us  ;  if  it  be  his  will,  he  will  teach  our 
hands  to  war,  and  our  fingers  to  fight  and  conquer. 

Monday  8.  Our  guard  appeared,  fixed,  and  armed,  for  the  wil- 
derness. We  camp,  flown  tn  F-- 's.  anrJ  wpre  well  entertained. 

Thence  we  proceeded  on  to  the  main  branch  of  Holstein,  which 

being  swelled,  we  crossed  in  a  flat ;  thence  to  R 's,  where  I 

found  the  reports  relative  to  the  Indians  were  true  ;  they  had  killed 
the  post  and  one  or  two  more,  and  taken  some  prisoners.  I  had 
not  much  thought  or  fear  about  them. 

Tuesday  9.  We  came  off;  there  were  only  eight  in  our  com- 
pany, and  eight  in  the  other — two  women  and  three  children. 
We  had  two  poor  sinners,  that  set  themselves  to  work  wickedness; 
they  would  not  let  us  go  foremost ;  so  we  took  it  patiently,  and 
followed  up  to  the  Cumberland  station.  I  went  to  Robinson's 
station,  where  the  soldiers  behaved  civilly.  We  gave  them  two 
exhortations,  and  had  prayer  with  them.  They  honoured  me  with 
the  swinging  hammock  (a  bear  skin)  which  was  as  great  a  favour 
to  me  as  the  governor's  bed  ;  here  I  slept  well. 

KENTUCKY  (East  line) — Wednesday  10.  We  hasted  on  our  way. 
meeting  with  our  troubles  at  the  foot  of  Cumberland  mountain  ; 
we  then  went  foremost,  and  travelled  at  a  great  rate,  the  roads 
being  uncommonly  good.  We  fed  on  the  banks  of  Cumberland- 
River,  and  kept  up  the  head  of  Rich  Lands.  We  then  pushed 
through  Little  and  Big  Laurel  to  the  Hazle  Patch,  Hood's  station. 
Here  there  was  high  life  below  stairs — talking,  laughing,  &.c.  We 
had  a  troop  of  poor,  very  poor  sinners  :  I  gave  dreadful  offence  by 


*3.] 

a  prayer  I  made.     After  resting  !  m  thn-o  in  «ix.   «.    irged 

our  way  along  the  new  road  to  Rock-Castle.  Fed  at  the  deserted 
station,  and  hasted  to  Willis  Green's,  but  mi-«in^  our  way,  did  not 
get  in  until  eight  o'clock  ;  a  supper  at  that  time  was  good,  and  a 
bed  was  better,  having  not  slept  in  one  for  three  nights,  and  having 
rode  one  hundred  miles  in  two  day?.  1  felt  so  well  in  the  morn- 
ing 1  was  ready  to  set  out  for  Salt-Kiver.  I  went  to  Danville,  and 
set  myself  down  in  Mr.  Rice's  church  ;  thence*  to  V.  Clar 
where  I  was  not  expected,  but  was  quite  welcome.  I  left  my  aid 

and  pack  horse  at  G '=,  to  re 

Saturday  13.  We  rode  thirty-three  miles  down  to  a  quark 
meeting  at  Humphries  chapel.  Here  my  presence  surprised  the 
brethren.  The  state  of  the  work  here  appears  to  be  low.  1  had 
some  light,  life,  nnd  lihertj'  in  preaching,  nnd  some  felt  the  word. 
We  closed  our  meeting  after  several  had  joined  in  pra>or  Lord 
remember  the  labours  of  this  day  !  Let  not  thy  faithful  word  fall 
to  the  ground  !  From  the  quarterly  meeting  we  came  to  Col. 
Harding's.  He  has  been  gone  some  time,  as  a  commissioner,  to 
treat  with  the  Indians  ;  if  he  is  dead,  here  is  a  widow  and  siv 
children  left.  I  cannot  yet  give  him  up  for  lost.  We  had  a  large 

congregation  at  W 's,  where  I  was  led  out  on  Psal.  xxxiv.  17— 

20.  I  cannot  stand  quarterly  meetings  every  day — none  need  de- 
sire to  be  an  American  bishop  upon  our  plan,  for  the  ease,  honour, 
or  interest,  that  attends  the  office  :  from  my  present  views  and 
feelings,  I  am  led  to  wish  the  conference  would  elect  another 
bishop,  which  might  afford  me  some  help. 

Tuesday  1G.  Rode  thirty  miles  without  food  for  man  or  horse. 
I    was  uncomfortable    when   1  came    into    the    neighbourhood   ot 

W- 's  :  there  is  a  falling  away  among  the  people.     Lord  help 

me  to  bear  up  in  the  evil  day  !  Let  me  not  disquiet  myself,  and 
kill  man  and  horse  in  vain  ! 

Thursday  18.   I    rode  sixteen  miles  to  Clarke's  station  to  attend 
the   quarterly  meeting.      i\Iy    winter's  clothing,  the    heat  of  the 
weather,  and  my  great  exertions  in   travelling,   cause   me  to  he 
heavy  with  sleep  ;  yet,  blessed  be  God,  I  live  continually  in 
presence  ;  and  Christ  is  all  in  all  to  my  soul  ! 

Friday  19.   I  preached  a  short,  pointed  sermon  ;  and  the  preach 
ors  and  members  were  moved. 

Sunday  21.   We  had  sacrament  and  love-feast  ;  and  some  spo 
much  to  the  purpose  :  my  subject  was  Hebr.  vi.  4—  S.  The  congre- 
gation was  very  large.   I  endeavoured  to  show,  l«t.  How  far  pe<  , 
may  advance  in  the.  grace  of  God  :  2d.  By  what  deprers  thev  n 


l;fc\  .   M'-ANUs  AsBl.'KY's  JOUIXAL.  [17&3 

Apostatize  ;  3d,  The  impossibility  of  a  recovery  when  they  arrive 
at  a  certain  degree  of  wickedness  :  1st,  Because  they  sin  against 
God,  Christ,  and  the  Eternal  Spirit,  and  lose  all  they  ever  felt  or 
knew;  2d,  Every  means  is  lost  upon  them  ;  to  sin  against  the  re- 
medy, is  to  be  undone  without  it.  The  difference  between  those 
who  are  recoverable  and  those  who  are  not— such  are  not  who 
deny  the  work  to  be  of  God,  persecute,  and  say  the  devil  was 
the  author  of  it  ;  the  others  acknowledge  the  work  that  it  was  of 
God,  and  have  some  regard  for  his  people.  Lastly  ;  that  the  only 
security  pointed  out  by  the  apostles  against  apostacy,  is  to  go  on  to 
perfection. 

Tuesday  23.  I  was  at  Bethel — the  place  intended  for  a  school. 

Sunday  28.  We  had  sacrament  and  love-feast,  and  some  living 
testimonies. 

Monday  29.  Rode  through  the  rain  to  Lexington.  I  stopped  at 
C.  White's  once  more.  Oh  that  God  may  help  him  safe  to  glory  '. 
Came  to  brother  Morgan's.  I  felt  awful  and  solemn,  and  some  de- 
jection of  mind.  Ah  !  want  of  religion  is  too  visible  in  most 
houses. 

Tuesday  30,  Wednesday  May  1,  Thursday  2.  We  spent  in  con- 
ference ;  and  in  openly  speaking  our  minds  to  each  other.  We 
ended  under  the  melting,  praying,  praising  power  of  God.  We 
appointed  trustees  for  the  school ;  and  made  sundry  regulations 
relative  thereto  :  we  read  the  Form  of  Discipline  through,  section 
by  section,  in  conference. 

Friday  3.  I  preached  on  Habakkuk  iii.  2.  I  first  pointed  out 
the  distinguishing  marks  of  a  work  of  God  ;  2d,  The  subjects  ;  3d, 
The  instruments  ;  4th,  The  means.  If  ever  I  delivered  my  own 
soul,  I  think  I  have  done  it  this  day.  Some  people  were  moved  in 
an  extraordinary  manner,  shoutiag  and  jumping  at  a  strange  rate. 

Saturday  5.  Came  to  Bethel  to  meet  the  trustees. 

Sunday  6.  We  had  an  awful  time  whilst  I  opened  and  applied 
"  Knowing  therefore  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men." 
It  was  a  feeling,  melting  time,  among  old  and  young  ;  and  I  am 
persuaded  good  was  certainly  done  this  day.  I  feel  a  good  deal 
tried  in  spirit  ;  yet,  blessed  be  God,  I  still  have  peace  within  ;  God 
is  all  to  me  :  I  want  more  faith  to  trust  him  with  my  life,  and  all  I 
have,  and  am. 

Tuesday  8.  We  rode  down  to  the  Crab  Orchard,  where  we 
found  company  enough  ;  some  of  whom  were  very  wild  :  we  had 
a  company  of  our  own,  and  refused  to  go  with  them.  Some  of 
them  gave  us  very  abusive  language  :  and  one  man  went  upon  a 


KANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOUR.V 

hill  above  us,  and  fired  a  pistol  towards  our  company.   We  resolved 
to  travel  in  our  order,  and  bound  ourselves  by  honour  and  con- 
science to  support  and  defend  each  other  ;    and  to  see  every  man 
through  the  wilderness.     But  we  could    not  depend  upon  wicked 
and   unprincipled  men,  who  would  leave  and  ix'gluct  us,  and  even 
curse  us  to  our  faces.     Nor  were  we  at  liberty  to  mix  with  swear- 
ers, liars,  drunkards  ;  and,  for  aught  we  know,  this  may  not  be  the 
worst  with  some.     We  were  about  fourteen  or  fifteen  in  compaey  : 
and  had  twelve  guns  and  pistol*.     We  rode  on  near  the  defeated 
camp,  and  rested  till  three  o'clock  under  great  suspicion  of  Indian^ 
we  pushed  forward  ;  and  by  riding  forty  five  miles  on  Wednesday 
and  about  the  same  distance  on  Thursday,  we  came  safe  to  Robin 
son's  station,  about  eight  o'clock. 

Friday  1 1.  We  rode  leisurely  from  the  eJge  of  the  wilderne.-- 
crossed  Holstein,  and  about  one  o'clock  came  to  brother  E- 
it  being  about  sixteen  miles. 

TENNESSEE. — Saturday  12.  We  came  to  brother  Vanpell's,  with 
whom  we  rested  on  the  Sabbath.  I  have  travel-led  between  five  and 
six  hundred  miles  in  the  last  four  weeks,  and  have  rested  front 
riding  fifteen  days  at  conferences,  and  other  places.  I  have  been 
much  distressed  with  this  night  work — no  regular  meals,  nor  sleep  . 
and  it  is  difficult  to  keep  up  prayer  in  such  rude  companies  as  u 
have  been  exposed  to  ;  I  have  also  been  severely  afflicted  through 
the  whole  journey. 

Monday  14.   Was  a  day  of  great  trial  ;  we  rode  about  forty 
miles — stopped  at  -    — ,  where,  through  carelessness,  I  nearh 
been  burnt  up. 

Tuesday  15.  At  eleven  o'clock  we  came  to  B —  -'s.  The  sub- 
ject was,  "  Let  this  mind  be  in  you  which  was  also  in  Christ  Je- 
sus." Sisters  W ,  and  H ,  making  some  clothing,  and  re- 
pairing my  burnt  raiment  next  day,  we  could  not  move  until  eight 
o'clock.  We  then  set  out  without  a  guide,  missed  our  road,  and 
came  in  about  two  o'clock  :  we  found  the  people  patiently  waiting, 
to  \vhom  I  preached  on  "  Ye  will  not  come  to  me  that  ye  might 
have  life." 

VIRGINIA.— Thursday  17.  Came  to  Abingdon— felt  very  heavy  ;  1 
however  preached  in  the  court-house  to  a  very  genteel  people  on 
the  words  of  Joshua,  "  Ye  cannot  serve  God," 

Saturday  19.     Came  to  Sister  Russell's— 1  am  very  solemn.     I 
feel  the  want  of  the  dear  man,  who,   I  trust  is  now  in  Abraham'^ 
bosom,  and  hope  ere  long  to  see  him  there.     He  was  a  general  of- 
•?  in  the  continental  army,  where  he  underwent  err:it  fat;. 


REV.    FRANCIS    ASBURY'S    JOURNAL,  [1793. 

>vas  powerfully  brought  to  God,  and  for  a  few  years  past    was  a 
living  flame,  and  a  blessing  to  his  neighbourhood. — He  went  in  the 
dead  of  winter  on  a  visit  to  his  friends  ;  was  seized  with  an  influ- 
enza, and  ended  his  life  from  home — O  that  the  Gospel  may  con- 
tinue in  this  house  !     I  preached  on  Hebr.  xii.  1 — 4.  and  there  fol- 
lowed several  exhortations.     We  then  administered  the  sacrament 
and  there  was  weeping  and  shouting  among  the  people  :  our  exer- 
cises lasted  about  five  hours.     I  have  little  rest  by  night  or  day — 
Lord,   help   thy  poor  dust !     I  feel    unexpected   storms — within 
from  various  quarters  ;  perhaps  it  is  designed  for  my  humiliation. 
— It  is  a  sin  in  thought  I  am  afraid  of;  none  but  Jesus  can  support 
u?,  by  his  merit,  his  spirit,  his  righteousness,  his  intercession,  i.  e. 
Christ  in  all,  for  all,  through  all,  and  in  every  mean,  and  word,  and 
work. 

Monday  21.    Rode  to  C 's,  and  was  well  steeped  in  rain 

here  I  wrote  a  plan  for  a  district  school. 

Wednesday  23.  We  rode  forty-five  miles  to  H.'s,  where  \ve 
had  many  people.  About  five  o'clock,  on  our  way  over  the  hills, 
we  felt  the  rain  without,  and  hunger  within  :  next  day  we  crossed 

Walker's  Mountain,  and  in  the  evening   met   brother  M- at 

3Iunday's. 

Friday  25.  Came  to  Rehoboth,  in  the  sinks  of  Green-Briar  ; 
where  we  held  our  conference.  I  was  greatly  comforted  at  the 
sight  of  brothers  B.  J.  and  Ellis  Cox.  We  had  peace  in  our  con- 
ference, and  were  happy  in  our  cabin.  I  learn  Jhat  mischief  is 
begun  in  the  lower  parts  of  Virginia  ;  J  O'Kelly,  and  some  of  the 
local  preachers,  are  the  promoters  and  encouragers  of  divisions 
among  the  brethren. 

Tuesday  29.  WTe  passed  the  Sweet  Springs,  and  crossed  a  rough 
mountain  to  brother  Drew's,  on  Pott's  creek.  I  wrote  many  letters 
to  the  south  district  of  Virginia,  to  confirm  the  souls  of  the  peo- 
ple, and  guard  them  against  the  division  that  is  attempted  among 
them.  Came  to  E.  Mitchel's.  Crossed  James-River,  near  the 
mouth  of  Craiges-Creek;  but  was  prevented  by  the  rain  from 
pursuing  our  journey.  We  spent  the  evening  comfortably  at  sister 
Fryer's. 

Friday  31.  Rode  forty-five  miles  to  Moore's  furnace  ;  and  lodged 
with  kind  brother  R. 

Saturday,  June  1.  We  came  to  Siaunton,  a  very  unpleasing  place 
to  me.  There  is  an  Episcopal  church,  a  court-house,  good  taverns 

and  stores  here.     We   went  tfc  Mr. 's,  expecting  to  find  a 

•riend  :  aftpr  making  the  trial,  we  thought  it  best  to  rptnrn  and 


ULV.   tHANCIS   ASBIKY   »  JOLU^ 


take  lodging  in  a  tavern.  Thence  ML-  proceeded  on  to  Kocktown,  a 
beautiful  place  ;  here  I  felt  my?elf  stiff,  and  weai  y,  and  troubled 
with  rheumatic  pains  :  sweet  sleep  was  quite  welcome.  My  con- 
gregation was  small,  the  people  not  having  proper  notice  of  tny 
coming.  Satan  has  been  sowing  discord  here,  and  ha-  hindered 
the  work  of  God  ;  but  I  hope  the  approaching  quarterly  meeting 
will  be  a  Messing  to  them  ;  and  that  we  shall  not  toil  in  vain.  The 
loss  of  sleep,  and  other  circumstance^,  mail*'  me  very  heavy,  and 
brought  on  a  sick  headach,  which  I  had  not  felt  for  some  time.  1 
spent  the  evening  with  Doctor  Dulany.  Rose,  and  took  the  raiu 
next  morning  as  usual,  having  had  rain  for  eight  or  ten  days  suc- 
cessively. On  my  way  I  was  met  by  an  old  German,  who  shook 
me  by  the  hand,  and  said  he  wished  he  might  be  worthy  to  wash 
my  feet  —  Yea,  thought  I  —  if  you  knew  what  a  poor  einfol  c: 
lure  I  am,  you  would  hardly  look  at  one  so  unworthy,  but  Jesu-  ' 
lives  —  O  precious  Christ  —  thou  art  mine  and  I  am  thine  ! 

Came  to  Newtown  :  the  roads  exceeding  mirey,  and  our  hor- 
very  tired  :  we  are  glad  to  get  a  little  rest  at  brother  Fhelp's.     M-. 
soul  has  been  much  tried  by  Satan,  and  I  am  pained  for  the  work 
of  God.    In  my  six  month's  travel  I  find  that  six  acceptable  preach 
ers  are  preparing  to  settle  themselves  in  the  world,  and  leave  th< 
itinerancy. 

Thursday  6.  We  came  to  Winchester  ;  where  they  have  built 
an  excellent  house,  and  we  have  better  times  than  I  expected  :  L 
nothing  would  do,  but  I  must  preach,  notwithstanding  the  lanes  anil 
streets  of  the  town  were  so  filled  with  mire,  owing  to  the  hU-. 
rains. 

Friday  7.  We  rode  to  Bath,  that  seat  of  sin  :  here  we  continued 
to  rest  ourselves  :  my  public  work  was  a  sermon  on  the  Sabbath 
A  number  of  our  society  from  various  parts  being  here,  I  have  an 
opportunity  of  receiving  and  answering  many  letters.  I  am  afran! 
I  shall  spend  nine  or  ten  days  here  to  little  purpose  ;  I  employ 
myself  in  reading  a  Kempis,  and  the  Bible  :  1  also  have  an  oppor- 
tunity of  going  alone  into  the  silent  grove,  and  of  viewing  the  con- 
tinent, and  examining  my  own  heart.  I  hope  for  some  relief  from 
my  rheumatic  complaint  which  has  so  oppressed  me  for  .«ix  months 
past.  The  people  here  are  so  gay  and  idle,  that  I  doubt  then- 
being  much  good  done  among  them.  The  troubles  of  the  cnst 
west  meet  me  as  1  pass. 

MARYLAND.  —  Sunday  17.    A  number   of  us  crossed  the  lei. 
the  mouth  of  Great  Capon  ;  and  made  our  wny  through  great 
to  Oldtown,  thirty-two  tniles  :  we  were  obliged  to  ride  mot' 


Itij  ui.v.  FKANccs.  ASRURY'S  jouftNAL,  [1793. 

or  the  excessive  warmth  of  the  weather  might  have  killed  our 
horses.  We  had  no  small  consolation  in  uniting  the  brethren  from 
three  districts  in  conference  ;  whose  names  only  were  before 
known  to  each  other.  I  gave  them  one  sermon  on  "  Pray  for  the 
peace  of  Jerusalem  :  they  shall  prosper  that  lo?e  thee."  Our  con- 
ference sat  three  days  successively,  very  closely  employed. 

Friday  21.  We  rode  thirty-five  miles  to  F.'s,  and  thirty-five  more 
the  next  day  to  Fort  Littleton.  Our  roads  are  rough  ;  I  am  sick  ; 
our  fare  is  coarse  •,  but  it  is  enough — I  am  to  die.  I  have  been 
under  violent  temptations — Lord,  keep  me  every  moment !  Our 
horses  were  out  of  the  way,  so  that  we  could  not  pursue  our  jour- 
ney. 1  was  desirous  to  be  doing  good  somewhere  ;  and  was  led 
to  speak  to  a  woman  unknown  to  me,  and  urged  her  to  pray  three 
times  a  day  :  she  appeared  tender  ;  and  with  tears  promised  so  to 
do— perhaps  this  labour  may  not  be  lost.  I  have  had  the  happi- 
ness to  hear  that  my  labour  of  this  kind  at  the  widow  H.'s,  when 
there  last,  was  successful,  and  that  a  woman  was  wrought  upon  to 
give  herself  to  God,  and  found  peace.  We  collected  the  little 
persecuted  society,  to  whom  I  preached  on  "  All  that  will  live  godly 
in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  persecution  :"  they  were  poor,  but 
very  kind.  Thence  we  proceeded  on  to  Juniata  ;  crossed  to  Mif- 
lin-Town,  and  came  to  H.  M.'s. 

Thursday  20.  I  had  some  little  time  to  read,  write,  and  pray. 
My  congregation  was  careless  and  unfeeling.  I  enforced  David's 
charge  to  Solomon.  Methinks  it  ought  to  be  with  those  who 
have  to  do  with  souls,  as  with  a  tender,  feeling  physician  that 
attends  a  patient : — does  the  fever  rage,  or  the  delirium  continue? 
his  countenance  is  sad  ;  and  when  labour  and  medicine  fail,  and 
the  symptoms  continue  or  grow  worse,  he  is  then  forced,  as  a  skilful 
physician,  to  pronounce  his  patient  incurable — whilst  a  quack  flat- 
ters and  sees  no  danger  :  such  is  the  difference  between  a  true  mi- 
nister ?f  Christ  and  a  false  teacher,  when  applied  to  the  souls  of 
men. 

Thursday  27.  Was  to  me  a  day  of  trial.  We  set  out  late  towards 
Northumberland  :  night  coming  on,  we  stopped  at  Penns-Creek. 
Next  morning  we  went  to  Northumberland  to  breakfast.  It  has  a 
little  chapel  (that  serves  as  a  school-house)  belonging  to  the  Me- 
thodists. We  have  a  few  kind,  respectable  friends,  whose  circum- 
stances are  com  tor  table.  I  gave  them  a  sermon  on  John  xiv.  6. ; 
und  in  the  afternoon  paid  Sunbury  a  visit.  The  people  here  are 
almost  all  Dutch.  !  was  enabled  to  speak  alarming  words  on 
Acts  iv.  12. 


Hi.'  KtV.   FKANC.K-.   AbJ;UA*  's  JOLKNAI..  ll/J 

July  2.  After  preaching  on  "  the  grace  «.|  <ini!  appealing  to  all 
men,"  xve  wrought  up  tin-  hill-  ami  nar -n-  A  vomuii;. 

stopped  at  a  poor  house  ;  ncvcrthrh •--,  tin -v  ich  enough   t. 

M.'ll  us  a  half  bushel   of  oats,  anil    lr.ul  sense   enough  (<>  n 

pay  well  for  them.  We  reached  Mr.  P 's  about  eleven  -/(.lock. 

1  found  riding  in  the  night  caused  a  return  of  my  rheumatic  com- 
plaint through  my  breast  and  shoulders.     But  all  is  well,  the  1. 
is  with  us. 

Thursday  -1.     Being  the  anniversary  of  the  American  indepen- 
dence, there  was  a  great  noise   among  the   sinners  :  a  few  o: 
went  down  to   Shawanee  ;  called  a  few  people   from   their  w 
-'ind  found  it  good  for  us  to  be  there. 

Sunday  7.    The  Lord   has  spoken   in   awful  peals    of  thum. 
O,  what   havock  was  made  here  fifteen   years   ago !    most  of  the 
inhabitants  \vere  either  cut  ofl',  or  driven  away.    The  people  might 
have  clothed  themselves   in  sackcloth  and  ashes  the  third,  i; 
white  and   glory  the  fourth  of  July.     The   inhabitants    here  arc 
very  wicked;  but  I  feel  as  if  the  Lord  would  return.     I  hope  bro- 
thers F ,  I ,  and  I* ,  will  be  owned  of  the  Lord.     The 

man  at  whose  house  I  was  to  preach,  made  a  frolic  the  day  before  : 
it  was  said  he  sent  a  mile  across  the  river  for  one  of  his  neigh- 
bours, taking  him  from  his  work,  and  telling  him  he  was  about  to 
bleed  to  death  :  this  falsity  was  invented,  I  suppose,  to  incline  the 
man  to  come  :  the  people  would  not  come  to  his  house.  1  had  to 
walk  a  mile  through  burning  heat  to  preach  ;  I  was  severely  ex- 
ercised in  mind,  hardly  knowing  where  to  go  to  get  a  quiet,  clean 
place  to  lie  down. 

Monday  3.  1  took  the  wilderness,  through  the  nmunLm,-,  up 
Lackawamy  on  the  Twelve- miles  Swamp  ;  this  place  is  famous  for 
dirt  and  lofty  hemlock.  \Ve  lodged  in  the  middle  of  the  swamp 

at  S 's  ;  and  made  out  better  than  we  expected.  Next  morning 

we  set  out  in  the  rain,  without  breakfast  :  whet)  we  came  to  the 
ferry,  a  man  took  us  to  his  house,  and  gave  us  some  bread,  butter, 
and  some  buckwheat,  and  then  charged  us  four  shillings  and  tun 
pence,  although  we  found  our  own  tea  and  sugar, — the  place  we 
should  have  called  at  was  a  little  further  on  the  way. 

On  the  5th,  after  very  sultry  weather,  there  came  a  whirlwind, 
and  a  very  great  storm  ;  in  which  there  fell   hail  of  such  a  - 
that  three  stones  filled  a  pint  measure  :  this  went  through  Hudson, 
some  distance  from  u-. 

NICW-JEHSKV. — Wednesday  !'.  We  came  to  Brosidhead'.-,  ami 
were  totally  unknown  :  I  was  sicli,  and  stopped  for  breakfast — 1! 

V0;.  II. 


ntv.  HIANCIS  ASBtnv  s 

suspected  we  were  preachers ;  one  asked  brother  Hill  who  1  was  i 
being  informed,  the  mother,  son,  and  daughter  came  running  with 
tears  to  speak  with  me. — I  stopped,  and  gave  them  a  sermon  at 
Marbletown.  I  found  the  work  of  God  going  on  among  the  Low 
Dutch  : — these,  of  all  the  people  in  America,  we  have  done  the 
least  with. 

NEW- YORK.— Saturday  12.  We  rode  to  Coeyman's  Patent ;  we  had 
a  good  quarterly  meeting  ;  many  newly  converted  souls  testified  of 
the  goodness  of  God,  and  of  the  power  of  his  grace.    From  thence 
to  Albany  with  reluctance  ;  and  lectured,  being  Sabbath  evening :  I 
ielt  the  wickedness  of  the  people  :  but  we  had  a  melting  saason 
among  the  preachers  in  our  conference.  Great  changes  will  be  made 
among  the  preachers  from  this  conference  ;  some  will  be  sent  to 
New-Jersey  ;   others  to  Rhode-Island  and  Massachusetts.      The 
people  of  Albany  roll  in  wealth  :    they  have  no  heart  to  invite 
any  of  the  servants  of  God  to  their  houses  ;  unless  a  great  change 
should  take  place,  we  shall  have  no  more  conferences  here.     I  am 
tired  down  with  fatigue  and  labour,  under  great  weakness  of  body. 
Yet  I  must  haste  to  Lynn — it  may  be,  to  meet  trouble.     But  my 
days  will  be  short, 

"  My  suffering  time  will  soon  be  o'er, 
Then  shall  I  sigh  and  weep  no  more 
My  ransom'd  soul  shall  soar  away, 
To  sing  God's  praise  in  endless  day." 

We  hope  two  hundred  souls  have  been  awakened,  and  as  many 
converted  in  Albany  district  the  past  year.  Our  friends  are  happy 
here,  not  being  distressed  with  divisions  in  the  church,  nor  by  war 
with  the  Indians,  as  they  are  to  the  southward.  According  to  our 
reckoning,  we  make  it  about  four  hundred  and  forty-seven  miles 
from  Oidtown  to  Albany — to  come  the  mountainous  road  through 
the  wocds  ;  and  to  come  by  Baltimore,  Philadelphia,  and  New- 
York,  it  is  six  hundred  miles. 

Saturday  19.  The  congregation  being  small,  and  the  preachers 
sleepy,  made  it  a  task  for  me  to  preach  at  Howe's  chapel. 

Sunday  20.  There  was  a  breath  of  life  in  the  love-feast.  I  was 
enabled  to  be  close  in  preaching  on  Matt,  xviii.  3.  "  Except  ye  be 
converted,  and  become  as  little  children,  ye  cannot  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven. ':  In  my  introduction  I  showed  that  the  being 
converted  here  mentioned,  is  the  same  word  which  in  other  places 
ia  translated,  "  born  again  ;"  answering  to  the  new  creation  and 
resurrection.  In  this  discourse  I  took  occasion  to  show  the  misera- 


.     . 

ble  state  of  the  unconverted,  both  present  and  future,  ami  tin 
ercises  that  converted  souls  do,  and  must  pass  through  ;-— that  thtv 
must  be  made  as  little  children,  wholly  dependent  on  God  ;  ] 
ing  meekness  of  spirit,  and  freed  from  the  guilt,  power,  anil  nature 
of  sin.     My  mind  enjoyed  peace  ;  but  I  was  grieved  at   seen 
number  of  young,  unfeeling  sinners  assembled  at  a  tavern  on  the 
Lord's  day. 

CONNECTICUT. — Monday  21.  We  rode  fifteen  miles  to  Sharon, 
(wo  miles  from  Litchfield — there  is  a  little  move  among  the  peo- 
ple of  this  place. 

Tuesday  22.    Came  to  H 's.     I  rested  in  a  very  solitary 

shade,  and  was  comforted  in  my  own  mind.     Perhaps  the  old   man 
is  right  who  says,  not  many  of  this  generation  will  enter  into  the 
promised  land,  but  their  children.     Came  to  East-Hartford,  and  find 
it  still  a  day  of  small  things.     Tailing  under  deep  dejection   (such 
as  I  had  not  known  for  months,)  I  concluded  to  preach  this  eve- 
ning for  my  own  consolation  on  "  Thou  that  teachest  ano'.; 
(eachest  thou  not  thyself?"     We  passed  through  and  spent  a  night 
at  Windham — a  pleasant  town.     Thence  through  Canterbury  and 
Plainfield  :  where  our  preachers  from  Connecticut  have  visited  - 
but  it  is  a  dry  land — little  rain  in  a  double  sense.     Thence  I  cam- 
upon  the  state  of  Rhode-Island  ;  stopped  in  Coventry,  and  found 
that  the  two  preachers  stationed  here  have  been  running  over  al- 
most the  whole  state,  and  had  formed  but  few  societies.     When  1 
came  to  Providence,  I.  Martin  told  me,  that  under  the  present  dif- 
ficulties they  had  agreed  not  to  forward  the  preachers  of  the  Me- 
thodists among  them,  nor  to  befriend  them  ;  I   asked  for  a  tavern, 
and  was  directed  to  General  T — 's,  where  I  was  used  well  :  sonip 
were  displeased  at  our  praying  ;  and  acted  much   like  Sodomites. 
Oh  !  the  enmity  and  wickedness  that  is  in  the  human  heart.     In  tho 
morning  I  was  visited  by  Mr.  Wilson  ;  I  gave  him  my  mind  fre- 
and  left  him  :  the  secret  of  the  matter  was,  that  many  in  that 
gregation  would  have  been  kind  to  us,  but  meeting  with  Mr.  — — , 
coming  from  Ireland,  (once  a  travelling  preacher)  he  settled  with 
them  :  their  convenience  suited  his  interest.     But  the  people  can 
hear  us  in  the  school-house  ;    and  if  any  are  awakened,  they  will 
join  the  church  over  the  bridge. 

MASSACHUSETTS. — We  had  heavy  work  for  man  and  horse  to 
reach  Easton — our  money  grew  short. 

Sunday  27.  Reading  the  Scripture  in  the  congregation  appeared 
to  be  a  new  thine;  among  thr>  people.     I  gave  them  a 


l  ;-j  UEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1793. 

under  the  apple-trees  on  Isaiah  xxxv.  3 — 6. ;  and  trust  my  labour 
was  not  lost. 

Monday  28.  We  rode  upwards  of  thirty  miles,  through  great 
heat,  to  Lynn.  On  our  way  we  fed  our  horses,  and  bought  a  cake 
and  some  cheese  for  ourselves  ;  surely  we  are  a  spectacle  to  men 
and  angels  !  The  last  nine  days,  we  have  rode  upwards  of  two  hun- 
dred miles,  and,  all  things  taken  together,  I  think  it  worse  than  the 
wilderness:  the  country  abounds  with  rocks,  hills,  and  stones  ;  and 
the  heat  is  intense — such  as  is  seldom  known  in  these  parts. 

Tuesday  29.  Preached  in  Lynn  on  2  Chron.  xv.  2.  the  prophecy 
of  Azariah  by  the  Spirit. 

I.  We  are  to  seek  Jehovah  in  the  means  ;  by  the  direction 
of  the  word  and  Spirit ;  through  Christ,  by  repentance  and  faith. 

II.  The  Lord  will  be  with  his  people,  as  a  Father  and  God  ;    in 
his  wisdom,  love,  truth,  and  mercy  ;    at  all  times,  and  places  ;    in. 
every  strait  and  difficulty. 

III.  We  should  be  with  God  as  his  children,  to  fear,  trust  in, 
worship,  and  serve  him. 

IV.  The  breach  of  the  covenant  by  idolatry,  departing  from  the 
love,  fear,  and  confidence  they  have  in  him. 

V.  That  the  Lord  will  withdraw  from  such  souls. 

August.  We  have  only  about  three  hundred  members  in  this 
district ;  yet  we  have  a  call  for  eight  or  seven  Preachers  :  although 
our  members  are  few,  our  hearers  are  many. 

Sunday  3.  We  had  preaching  at  six,  twelve,  two,  and  seven 
o'clock,  and  administered  the  Lord's  supper  also.  I  have  now 
finished  my  work  at  Lynn.  Circumstances  have  occurred  which 
have  made  this  conference  more  painful  than  any  one  conference 
beside. 

Monday  4.  We  rode  to  Cambridge.  On  our  way  we  called  on 
Mr.  Adams,  and  found  him  and  his  wife  under  deep  exercise  of 
mind.  We  then  came  to  Walktham,  where  many  attended.  Things 
appear  strange  here  ;  but  several  souls  are  under  awakenings,  and 
there  is  hope  the  Lord  will  work.  The  harvest  is  great ;  the 
living,  faithful  labourers  are  few. 

We  hasted  to  Westham  ;  and  found  a  congregation  at  the  Baptist 
meeting-house.  From  Westham  we  came  two  miles  to  Needham : 
here  the  majority  of  the  people  prefer  the  Methodist  preachers  ; 
and  want  to  pay  them  by  a  tax  on  the  people  ;  but  brothers  Smith 
and  Hill  absolutely  refused  this  plan  ;  for  which  I  commend  them 
I  gave  them  a  sermon,  and  found  some  feeling  souls. 


'   >•]  KKV.   FRA.V 

Wednesday  C.    We  passed  several  little  town?,  and  came  to.Mil- 
ibrd,  about  nineteen  miles  from  .NYrdham  ;  hen*  th"*-.  Live  a  good 
priest's  house,  and  meeting  house  ;  all  appe.tr  to  be   in    p»-ace  and 
fulness  of  bread.     About  three   hundred  were  HOOD   rolU-i  In!. 
whom  I  preached  on  "  The  love  of  C'ln  i-t    . •-.MMrameth    nt,*'   &:c. 
The  man  at  \vhu<e  house  we  lodged  was   very   kind,    .md    t'  M   me 
his  father  held  society  meeting  in  the  hnuse  where  we   preached  ; 
and,  except  conditional  perseverance,  preached  o.n  di><  tiitics.   We 
rode  through  Miuden,  Douglas,  Thompson,  Woodstock,  up  to  Pom- 
fret ;   missing  our  way,  and  being  very  unwell,  as  1  have   boen   for 
some  time  with  an  inflammation  in  my  throat,  we  concluded  to  turn 
in  at  a  tavern,  and  spend  the  night  in  pain  :   pain  begets  invention. 
I  now  began  to  think,  What  shall  I  do  1   I   am  my   <>\%n   p!i\Hcian. 
I  sent  for  two  blisters  ;  applied  both  to  rny  ears  ;  and  then  br- 
io march  to  Ashford.     I  turned  in  at  Mr.  \V  's,   and   met    brotl. 
T.  and  S.  and  was  dragged  out  to  baptise  an   household,   whiUt  I 
had  a  fever  ;  the  weather  was  excessively  warm,   like  Carolina 
I  bad  an  awful  nu;ht. 

CONNECTICUT. — Saturday  9.  Came  to  brother  H.'s  :   here  I  g: 
worse  :  this  night  I  had  some  discharges,   ami  was  somewhat  re- 
lieved.    For  a  few  days  I  have  felt  some   pain    in   my    left  foot 
it  now  inflamed  more  aud  more,  until  I  could  scarcely  put  it  to  t!.- 
door  ;  I   applied  a  poultice,  and  spent  the  Sabbath  in  private  ;  and 
was  closely  engaged  in  reading  the  Scriptures. 

Monday  11.  Our  conference  sat  at  Tolland.  Lame  as  1  u 
I  went  through  the  business  ;  and  notwithstanding  I  was  tired  out 
with  labour,  heat,  pain,  and  company,  I  must  ;dso  prr.ieh  ;  so  I 
submitted  ;  and  endeavoured  to  apply  2  Tim.  ii  24  —  -t".  Bt-inp 
unable  to  ride  on  horseback,  I  drove  on  in  a  carriage  through  the 
rain,  over  the  rocks  in  the  dark,  and  came  to  Doctor  Steel's  at 
Ellington. 

Yesterday  the  pain  seized  my  right  foot.  I  am  now  not  able  to 
move  from  my  horse  to  a  house  ;  an  attack  of  this  kind  generally 
terminates  in  about  eight  days. 

Thursday  14.  Came  in  brother  S.'s  carriage  to  Hartford.    From 
what  we  can  g  ither.  we  are  encouraged  to  hope  that  upwai  Is  of 
three  hurnhvd  souls  luve   been   awakened  ;  and   more    th.m    two 
hundred  converted  to  God,  the  last  year  :  if  this   work   goes  on. 
Satan  will  be  labouring  by  all  means,  and    by   every   instrument. 
From  Hartford  I  came  to  Middlefown.    I  slept  at  K.  F.'s,  who  " 
the  first  separate   minister   on   the   west  of  Connecticut-Rivei 
man  who  had  laboured,  and  wrote  much  :  had  his   learning   ! 


174  REV.  FliANCIS  ASSAY'S  JOURNAL.  [1790 

equal  to  his  piety  and  good  sense,  the  standing  order  would  have 
trembled  under  his  haad.  Who  would  think  his  church  would  vote 
him  out,  when  old  and  gray  headed,  because  he  could  not  subscribe 
to  the  new  divinity  ?  He  is  now,  as  he  saith,  like  a  broken  vessel ; 
upwards  of  fourscore  years  of  age  :  his  wife  and  children  favour  us. 
I  came  to  New- Haven;  thence  to  Derbj  ;  and  had  a  return  of 
the  inflammation  in  my  throat.  Came  to  West-Haven — very  un- 
well. I  had  heavy  work  to  get  to  Reading,  being  lame  in  both  feet : 
I  laid  myself  down  on  the  road-side,  and  felt  like  Jonah  or  Elijah, 
1  took  to  my  bed  at  Reading. 

Monday  18.  Rode  ten  miles  on  horseback,  and  thirteen  in  a  car- 
riage, to  Bedford,  and  rested  a  day  at  dear  widow  Banks's,  where  I 
was  at  home.  Oh,  how  sweet  is  one  day's  rest! 

NEW-YORK. — Wednesday  20.  When  I  came  near  the  White- 
Plains,  my  horse  started,  and  threw  me  into  a  mill-race  knee  deep 
in  water,  my  hands  and  side  in  the  dirt ;  my  shoulder  was  hurt  by 
the  fall.  I  stopped  at  a  house,  shifted  my  clothes,  and  prayed 
with  the  people.  If  any  of  these  people  are  awakened  by  my 
stopping  there,  all  will  be  well.  This  day  I  made  out  to  ride 
thirty-three  miles. 

Thursday  21.  Came  to  New- York.  The  weather  is  extremely 
warm.  Great  afflictions  prevail  here — fluxes,  fevers,  influenzas. 
It  is  very  sickly  also  in  Philadelphia.  I  have  found  by  secret 
search,  that  I  have  not  preached  sanctification  as  I  should  have 
done  :  if  I  am  restored,  this  shall  be  my  theme  more  pointedly 
than  ever,  God  being  my  helper.  I  have  been  sick  upwards  of 
four  months  ;  during  which  time  I  have  attended  to  my  business, 
and  rode,  I  suppose,  not  less  than  three  thousand  miles.  I  kept 
close  house  in  New- York  until  Sunday  24. ;  then  I  attempted  to 
preach  on  Romans  xiii.  10—12.  The  weather  being  warm  and 
dry,  I  caught  an  influenza  which  held  me  four  days — and  this  in 
addition  to  my  fevers,  and  lameness.  The  effects  of  this  weather 
were  sensibly  felt  by  every  member  of  conference,  some  of  whom 
were  so  indisposed  that  they  could  not  attend.  We  made  a  collec- 
tion of  £40  for  the  relief  of  the  preachers  on  the  frontiers  of 
New-York  and  Connecticut. 

We  have  awful  accounts  from  Philadelphia;  which  made  me 
feel  too  much  like  a  man,  and  too  little  like  a  Christian. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Monday,  September  1.  I  rested.  Tuesday  2, 
dined  at  Elizabethtown  on  my  way  to  Philadelphia.  Wednesday  3, 1 
reached  Trenton,  and  received  a  letter  from  brother  M — k — y,  re- 
questing me  to  come  to  Burlington,  and  that  it  was  doubtful 


IltV.     MUNCIS    AMlUKY'S  JOL'UNAL.  1  1  o 

whether  it  were  prudent  to  go  into  Philadelphia  on  account  01  the 
contagion  that  then  prevailed  in  that  city  :  1  did  not  reach  Burling- 
ton so  soon  as  was  expected,  and  the  preachers  went  on  to  Phila- 
delphia I  preached  in  Burlington,  and  the  people  « ••!••.•  \ery 
solemn. 

PENNSYLVANIA. — Friday  G.  We  rode  to  the  city.  Ah !  how  the 
ways  mourn  :  how  low  spirited  are  the  people  whilst  ranking  their 
escape  !  I  found  it  awful  indeed.  I  judge  the  people  die  from 
fifty  to  one  hundred  in  a  day  :  some  of  our  friends  are  dying,  other* 
flying. 

Sunday  G.  I  preached  on  Isai.  Iviii.  1.  "Cry  aloud,  spare  not, 
lift  up  thy  voice  like  a  trumpet,  and  show  my  people  their  trans- 
gressions, and  the  house  of  Jacoh  their  sins."  The  people  of 
this  city  are  alarmed;  and  well  the  ymay  he.  I  went  down  to 
Ebenezer,  (a  church  in  the  lower  part  of  the  city)  but  my  strength 
was  gone  :  however,  I  endeavoured  to  open  and  apply  Micah  yi.  ?. 
The  streets  are  now  depopulated,  and  the  city  wears  a  gloomy  as- 
pect. All  night  long  my  ears  and  heart  were  wounded  with  the 
cry  of  fire  !  Oh  !  how  awful !  And  what  made  it  still  more  serious, 
two  young  men  were  killed  by  the  fall  of  a  wall :  one  of  them  was 
a  valuable  member  of  our  society.  Poor  Philadelphia !  the  lofty 
city,  He  layeth  it  low  !  I  am  very  unwell  ;  my  system  is  quite 
weak  ;  I  feel  the  want  of  pure  air.  We  appointed  Tuesday  9th  to 
be  observed  as  a  day  of  humiliation  :  I  preached  on  1  Kings  viii. 
•17 — 40. ;  and  had  a  large  and  very  serious,  weeping  congregation. 
The  preachers  left  the  city  on  Monday  ;  I  continued  in  order  to 
have  the  minutes  of  conference  printed. 

Wednesday  10.  We  left  the  city — solemn  as  death  !  The  people 
of  Derby  and  Chester  are  sickly :  and  they  are  greatly  alarmed 
at  Wilmington.  I  found  a  quiet  retreat  at  friend  Bond's,  near 
New-Castle. 

MARYLAND. — Came  to  the  quarterly  meeting  at  the  Cross-Roads  ; 
where  there  were  crowds  of  people  :  I  gave  them  a  sermon 
on  "  Yea,  in  the  way  of  thy  judgments  have  we  waited  for  thee." 
I  showed,  1.  That  God  sent  pestilence,  famine,  locusts,  blasting, 
milldew,  and  caterpillars,  and  that  only  the  church  and  people  of 
God  know,  and  believe  his  judgments.  2.  That  God's  people  wail- 
ed for  him  in  the  way  of  his  judgments ;  and  3.  That  they  improved 
and  profited  by  them.  About  one  o'clock  we  set  out  and  rode 
thirty-two  miles  to  Thomas  White's  ;  and  spent  one  day  at  my 
former  home 


176  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY^S  JOUKNAL.  [1793. 

Sunday  14.  We  rode  twenty  miles  to  Millford,  and  had  a  com- 
fortable love-feast;  I  preached  to  many  on  2  Chron.  vi\.  13 — 15. 
I  preached  a  laboured  sermon  at  Qjiantees  quarterly  meeting :  the 
second  day  brother  G.  preached  on  "  There  remaineth  there- 
fore a  rest  to  the  people  of  God."  My  finishing  stroke  was  ^lo 
show  them  the  way  to  ruin — so  we  parted. 

Thursday  18.  We  rode  to  Accomack  ;  and  had  a  comfortable 
quarterly  meeting  at  Downing's.  I  met  the  located  official  mem- 
bers, and  we  had  S'.veet  fellowship  together. 

Sunday  21.  After  a  gracious  love-feast  and  preaching  on  Jer. 
xvii.  9,  10.  I  returned,  weak  in  body,  and  under  dejection  of  mind, 

to  C 's  chapel,  a  ride  of  twenty  miles  :  this  is  one  of  the  most 

awful  places  I  ever  visited,  according  to  my  feelings  :  I  had  only 

courage  to  exhort  for  a  few  minutes.     Brother  S ,  one  of  our 

elders,  gave  it  as  his  opinion  that  two  hundred  people  had  died  in 
the  bounds  of  Somerset  circuit  the  last  summer. 

I  searched  the  continent  for  the  Travels  of  Sin  and  True  Godli- 
ness ;  now,  they  are  printed  and  bound  together,  and  sell  well ; 
our  Americans  are  not  fools  :  no  books  sell  like  those  on  plain, 
practical  subjects  ;  as  the  Saints'  Rest,  Baxter's  Call,  Alleine's 
Alarm,  and  Thomas  a  Kempis. 

1  came  to  B.  E — — 's  to  quarterly  meeting  :  we  had  a  solemn 
time,  though  onr  congregation  was  small. 

Friday  26.  We  came  to  Easton,  twenty  five  miles ;  here  the  peo- 
ple pretended  to  be  afraid  of  my  communicating  the  infection 
of  the  yellow  fever,  although  I  bad  been  out  of  Philadelphia 
from  the  9th  to  the  26th  Instant.  I  gave  them  a  long  discourse, 
and  then  rode  to  Hillsborough  ;  and  thence  to  Judge  White's. 
Sickness  prevails  in  every  house  ;  but  there  arc  not  so  many  deaths 
as  might  be  expected  from  general  afflictions. 

Monday  29.  I  preached  at  quarterly  meeting  on  '•  The  Lord  is 
good  ;  a  strong  hold  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  be  knoweth  them 
that  trust  in  him."  1 .  Originally,  independently,  communicatively 
good.  2.  He  knoweth,  loveth,  approveth,  and  delivereth  those 
that  put  their  trust  in  him. 

Tuesday  30.  I  came  early  to  Churchhili ;  and  felt  myself  solemn- 
ly engaged  with  God.  In  the  evening  I  was  enabled  to  give  a  close, 
alarming  exhortation  on  the  present  alarming  and  awful  times. 

October,  Wednesday  1.  I  endeavoured  to  enforce,  at  Worten's, 
"  Let  us  search  and  try  our  ways,  and  turn  again  to  the  Lord.': 
The  wind  being  contrary,  we  rode  twenty  miles  to  brother  B — 's. 


1793.]  REV.  FIUN'CIS  ASBURV1!-  JOURNAL.  17. 

through  dust  and  drought.     Brother  B conveyed  me  to  North 

East  on  Thursday  ;  and  Friday  .'<,   alter  deputing  (he   passage  at 

the  ferry  with  Mr.  K ,  I  rode  to  Cokesbury.     I  had  left   Pin 

ladelphia,  and  knew  not  that  a  pass  was  necessary  until  I  came  to 
the  ferry.  Mr.  Barney,  who  was  a  health-officer,  behaved  like  a 
gentleman,  and  gave  in«  a  true  and  honourable  certificate.  1 
found  matters  in  a  poor  state  at  college — JL!500  in  debt,  and  our 
emplojers  nearly  £700  in  arrears. 

Thursday  9.  Came  to  Baltimore  ;  passed  the  guard  against  th^ 
plague  in  Philadelphia,  set  for  prudence,  one  hundred  miles  oQ". 
Oh  !  the  plague  of  sin  !  Would  to  God  we  were  more  guarded 
against  its  baleful  influence  !  I  was  sick,  weary,  and  feeble  ;  yet, 
preaching  being  appointed  for  me  in  town,  I  sounded  the  alarm  on 
Jer.  xiii.  16.  "  Give  glory  to  God  before  he  cause  darkness,''  vvc 

Friday  10.  I  hasted  to  Annapolis. 

Saturday  11.  Attended  a  quarterly  meeting  at  Signal's,  in  a 
large  tobacco-house,  where  I  enlarged  on  the  weighty  words  of 
our  Lord  "  Because  iniquity  shall  abound,  the  love  of  many  shall 
wax  cold." 

Monday  13.  I  opened  and  applied  the  charge  given  by  David  to 

Solomon,  at  G.  R 's,  well  adapted  to  the  children  of  the  MP 

thodists. 

Tuesday  14.  I  had  a  large  congregation  of  serious  women  at 
Capt.  Weems's.  To  these  I  preached  on  John  xiv.  16.  1.  Christ 
is  the  way  to  God  by  precept,  example,  and  power.  2.  Thf 
truth  ;  the  true  Messiah,  revealing  the  truths  of  God,  the  standard 
and  judge  of  all.  3.  The  life,  by  his  merit  and  spirit,  leading  to 
the  knowledge  of  God  in  his  perfections  and  glory. 

Wednesday  15.  I  enlarged  on  "  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing,' 
and  applied  it  to  sinners,  Pharisees,  hypocrites,  backslider?,  be 
lievers,  and  sanctified  souls. 

Saturday  18.  I  attended  a  quarterly  meeting  at  H 's  ;  when 

I  exhorted  the  people  to  "  Forget  the  thing?  that  are  behind,  and 
to  reach  towards  the  things  that  are  before" — i.  e.  Establishment 
in  grace  ;  walking  with  God  ;  resignation   to  hi?  will  ;  roeekn*  — 
humility,  perfect  love,  a  glorious  resurrection,  and  eternal  glory — 
"  Leave  the  things   that  are  behind" — see  Hebr.  yi.  1.  and  v.  1  J 
"  Leave    these  ;"    so   as   not  to   rest  in   conviction,    repentance, 
faith,  justification,  nor  in  church  ordinances,  as  being  the  whole  of 
religion,  or  any  part  thereof,  any  farther  than  as  they  lead  us  to 
Christ.     We  had  some  life  in  the  love-feast,  and  ID  pobhc  service 

VOL.  M.  53 


178  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1793. 

but  there  is  a  dearth  here.     The  circuit  has  suffered  for  want  of  a 
preacher. 

Sabbath  19.  I  came   to  Baltimore,  and  preached  on  Amos  iii. 
6,  7,  8. 

Monday  20.  Our  conference  began.  I  was  well  pleased  with 
the  stations,  and  the  faithful  talk  most  of  the  brethren  gave  us  of 
their  experience  and  exercises.  I  preached  a  charity  sermon  on 
"  Hath  God  cast  away  his  people."  We  collected  £27,  which 
was  augmented  to  £43,  and  applied  it  to  the  supplying  the  wants 
of  the  distressed  preachers. 

Sunday  26.  I  preached,  and  ordained  elders  and  deacons,  at  the 
Point,  and  at  night  in  town  spoke  on  Jeremiah  ix.  12 — 14. 

Monday  27.  1  left  Baltimore  in  a  cool,  stormy  day.  We  dined 
with  Capt.  White,  on  the  north  branch  of  the  Patuxent,  and  had 
only  time  to  warm,  eat,  drink,  and  pray.  We  hasted  on  to  S. 
Turner's.  We  stopped  on  the  way  at  the  house  of  some  old, 
forgotten  English  people  :  I  talked  plainly  to  the  poor  old  woman, 
and  commended  the  family  to  God  in  prayer.  I  rode  to  my  old 

friend  A 's,  and  spent  the  evening  in  Christian  conversation, 

writing,  and  prayer. 

VIRGINIA. — Tuesday  28.  Five  of  us  came  to  Stafford  court- 
house. The  next  day  we  dined  and  prayed  at  F '9,  and  in  the 

evening  reached  Collins's,  an  old  stand  in  Caroline  county. 

November,  Friday  1.    We  breakfasted  at  Ellis's  tavern,    and 

next  day  rode  to  Richmond  and  Manchester,  and  came  to  B 's, 

and  preached  to  a  congregation  mostly  women.  Thence  we  pro- 
ceeded to  J.  A 's.  I  was  so  hoarse  it  was  with  difficulty  I 

spoke  to  the  people.  In  six  days  we  have  rode  two  hundred 
and  twenty  miles. 

Sunday  3.    We  had  to  ride  ten  miles  to  quarterly  meeting  at 

T 's  chapel.     I  did  not  expect  to  be  heard  ;  but,  to  my  great 

surprise,  1  had  not  spoken  long  before  my  voice  was  clear.  We 
had  a  melting  time  under  brother  John  Easter — was  much  blessed 
with  the  local  brethren.  Brothers  W and  A were  recom- 
mended to  the  office  of  deacons,  and  ordained.  Brother  W 

with  two  others,  are  appointed  to  wait  on  me  at  the  ensuing  con- 
ference— what  for  will  then  be  better  known. 

Tuesdays.  I  rode  to  brother  B.'s,  and  the  next  day  preached 
at  Charity  Chapel.  It  was  a  day  appointed  by  the  bishop  and 
committee  of  the  Episcopal  church  to  be  observed  as  a  day  of  fast- 
rng.  I  feel  my  mind  greatly  eased  relative  to  those  who  have 


1793.]  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

lately  separated  from  us  and  set  out  as  reformers.     Let  the  Lord 
look  to  his  own  church. 

Thursday   7.    We   had  a  serious  congregation   at   Cumberland 
quarterly  meeting  :  some  appeared  to  be  much  en<;;iped. 

My  Sabbath  day's  journey  was   from   sister  I — '«  to  a   new 

chapel  in  Prince  Edward,  twenty  miles,  where,  after  preachin 
Matt.  xxiv.  12 — 11.  I  was  led  to  say  a  few  things  for  myself— 
my  coming  to   and   staying  in   America :  of  the  exercise  of  that 
power  which  was  given  by  the  first   and  confirmed  by  the  last  ge- 
neral conference.     Many  of  the  people  thought  me  not  that  mon- 
ster I   had  been  represented.     I  thought  this  the  more  necessary 
here,  as  great  pains  had  been  taken  to  misrepresent  and  injure  me 
in  this  congregation  and  neighbourhood.     So  it  is  ;  when  I  am  ab- 
sent some  will  say  what  they  please  of  me.     After  sacrament  we 

came,  weary  and  hungry,  to  brother  R 's,  by  whom  we  were 

kindly  entertained.     My  soul  is  staid  on  the  Lord,  although  Satan 
will  push  at  me  by  means  of  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  false  brethren. 

Tuesday  12.  I  preached  at  brother  T 's,  on  Nottaway-Ki- 

ver.     The  people  here  have  been  unsettled  by  the  divisions  which 
a  few  persons  have  endeavoured  to  make  in  our  societies. 

Thursday  14.  Rode  from  brother  N 's  to  Salem,  and,  after 

preaching,  to  brother  M 's,  in  Brunswick,  making  it  about 

thirty  miles,  without  eating  or  drinking. 

Friday  15.  I  had  a  few  serious  souls  at  Roses-Creek.  Here  1 
received  the  happy  tidings  from  John  Dickins,  that  he,  with  his 
family,  have  been  preserved  during  the  late  contagion  in  the  city 
of  Philadelphia. 

Sunday  17.  At  Meritt's  chapel  ;  the  weather  was  rainy  and  un- 
comfortable, and  brother  E very  unwell.  The  nest  day  I 

rode  from  brother  F 's,  about  twenty  miles,  to  preach  a  funeral 

discourse  on  the  death  of  our  dear  brother  Cox.  The  Lord's 
power  was  present.  Brother  Bruce  preached  at  Jones's  chapel 
on  "  Sowing  to  the  flesh."  I  was  happy  in  God  at  brother  P-  -'s, 
in  the  evening.  The  next  day  1  staid  at  the  chapel  until  it  ap- 
peared as  if  I  was  well  nigh  chilled  through,  and  to  cure  me  had  to 
ride  twelve  miles  to  brother  Moss's  :  thence  twenty  miles  to  bro- 
ther Bonner's,  where  I  met  several  of  the  brethren  in  great  peace 
and  love.  Came  to  J.  Smith's,  and  had  a  good  season  on  Jljili.  iv 
22 — 25.  The  seeds  of  discord  have  been  sown  here,  but  they 
have  not  taken  deep  root.  Several  of  the  preachor-?  ram^  in. 
we  spen  the  evening,  and  were  happy  together. 


180  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1793. 

Sunday  24.  Hasted  to  Petersburg.  Came  in  a  little  before 
noon,  and  preached  on  Isai.  Ixvi.  4,  5. 

Monday  25,  and  the  following  days,  were  spent  in  conference. 
The  preachers  were  united,  and  the  Lord  was  with  us  of  a  truth. 
There  were  fifty-fire  preachers  present.  I  had  some  difficulties 
respecting  the  stations  ;  but  there  was  a  willingness  among  the 
brethren  to  go  where  they  were  appointed,  and  all  was  well. 

Our  disaffected  brethren  have  had  a  meeting  at  the  Piney-Grove, 
in  Amelia  circuit,  and  appointed  three  men  to  attend  this  confe- 
rence. One  of  these  delegates  appears  to  be  satisfied,  and  has  re- 
ceived ordination  amongst  us  since  he  was  delegated  by  them  ;  the 
other  two  appeared,  and  we  gave  them  a  long  talk.  My  mind  has 
been  closely  employed  in  the  business  of  the  conference,  so  that  I 
hare  slept  only  about  sixteen  hours  in  four  nights. 

Friday  29.  Rede  nineteen  miles,  and  preached  at  Mrs.  Cox's 
barn.  The  next  day  we  reached  brother  Mooring's,  in  Surry. 

Sunday,  December  1.  My  mind  was  in  a  state  of  heaviness.  I 
endeavoured  to  preach  on  2  Cor.  xiii.  5.  It  is  heavy  times  here  ; 
but  the  work  is  the  Lord's,  and  I  wish  to  leave  it  all  to  him.  In 
discoursing  on  the  above  text  I  pursued  nearly  the  following 
method — 

I.  Such  as  profess  to  have  experienced  religion  should  examine 
whether  they  have  not  let  some  fundamental  doctrines  slip. 

II.  Examine  into  the  nature  and  effects  of  faith  ;  it  is  the  sub- 
stance of  things  hoped  for,  in  a  penitent  state  ;  and  the  evidence  of 
things  not  seen,  in  a  justified  state. 

III.  They  should  know  themselves,  whether  they  are  seekers, 
believers,  or  backsliders. 

IV.  They  should  prove  themselves,  to  themselves,  to  their 
ministers,  the  world,  and  the  church  of  God. 

V.  That  if  they  have  heart-religion,  Christ  is  in  them — the 
meek,  loving,  pure  mind  of  Christ. 

Monday  2.  Came  to  Ellison's  chapel,  in  Sussex. 

Tuesday  3.  Preached  at  Lane's  chapel  :  it  was  low  times  and 
cold  weather.  Thence  to  my  old  friend  Moss's,  near  Sussex 
court-house.  I  have  lately  read  Blair's  Sermons,  where  I  find  some 
very  beautiful  things  :  they  contain  good  moral  philosophy  ;  and 
his  Sermon  on  Gentleness,  is  worthy  the  taste  of  Queen  Charlotte  ; 
and  if  money  were  any  thing  towards  paying  for  knowledge,  I  should 
think  that  sermon  worth  two  hundred  pounds  sterling — which  some 
say  the  Queen  gave  him. 


J793.]  P.EV.  FRANCIS  ASBI'HY'S  JOURNAL.  181 


Thursday  5.  After  riding  several  mile*  out  of  my  way,  1  •  m;,-  to 
dear  brother  and  sister  Parham's  —  two  l-,ia<-liti-3  uidred.  I  was 
unwell,  yet  spent  the  evening  comfortably.  N«-vldi\  1  li.nl  .1  long 
ride  to  Pelbam's,  in  Greensville  ;  where  I  i-nlan;c<l,  t.>  .1  -mall, 
serious  congregation  on  2  ('or.  .xii.  la.  —  the  grand  subjects  of  the 
faithful  minister's  care. 

Saturday  7.  IIo«le  through  the  rain  to  Woohey's  barn  —  now 
Dromgoole's  chapel. 

Next  day  we  had  but  twenty  miles  to  ride  for  our  Sabb.ilh  day's 
journey.  Came  to  Roanoak,  and  enlarged  on  Kph.  iii.  7,  8.  —  In 
which  I  showed,  1st,  How  a  minister  of  Christ  is  madr  ;  L'd,  To 
whom  he  is  to  preach  ;  3d,  What  he  is  to  preach,  vi/.  the  un- 
searchable riches  of  Christ  ;  1th,  The  humble  opinion  the  minis- 
ters of  Christ  entertain  of  themselves. 

NORTH  CAROLINA.  —  Monday  9.  Crossed  Roanoak  in  a  (Lit,  with 
seven  horse*  ;  but  we  were  mercifully  preserved.  Came  to  War- 
renton.  1  had  a  violent  pain  in  my  head,  and  my  horse's  back  h^- 
ing  injured,  1  stopped  at  Myrick's,  having  rode  only  twenty  uiili  -. 
Tuesday  10.  Came  to  Lcwisburg,  and  held  our  conference  at 
Green  Hills,  about  a  mile  from  town.  Great  peace  and  unity  pre- 
vailed amongst  us.  The  preachers  cheerfully  signed  an  instru- 
ment, expressing  their  determination  to  submit  to,  and  abide  by 
what  the  general  conference  has  done. 

Friday  13.  Our  conference  rose  :  it  was  agreed  that  the  m\t 
conference  should  be  held  in  Petersburg  :  there  the  preachers 
from  North  Carolina,  Greenbriar,  the  Centre  and  South  Districts 
of  Virginia,  may  all  meet,  and  change  properly,  and  unite  together 
for  their  own  and  the  people's  i;ood. 

Saturday  14.   Rode  to  father  1'.  B-    -'s  :—  Oh  that  the  last  d 
of  ancient  Methodists  may  he  the  best  !   1  have  a  cold  and  pain-  , 
but  tnere  is  ease  in  peace,  and  love,  and  communion  with  God. 

Sunday  15.  We  had  as  many  people  at  father  R  --  's  as  we 
could  find  room  for  :  I  delivered  some  alarming  words  from  Ism  th 
Ixv.  2. 

Monday  1C.  Rode  up  Neuse  ;  fed  at  Tomkins's,  and  h.nted  to 
the  widow  Carson's,  (about  forty  miles.) 

Tuesday  17.   After  riding  about  twenty-six  miles  to   K- 
jrave  them  a  short  discourse  on  "  The  foundation  of  (J-id   standeth 

O 

sure:"  after  eating,  we  had   to  ride  sixteen  or  eighteen  mil 
the  evening  home  with  brother  M'Gee.   In  the  morning  we  rr 
Deep-River,  in  a  flat,    not   without  danger.     Thence  down  ' 
away  creek,  to  Randolph  Town  ;  thence  to  Unwary,  at  Full-'i'-  lord. 


182  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURv's  JOURNAL.  [1794, 

Here  we  were  assisted  by  some  young  men  with  a  canoe.  Thank 
the  Lord,  both  men  and  horses  were  preserved.  The  young  men 
sometimes  prayed  and  sometimes  swore.  After  riding  three  miles, 
came  to  Wood's,  but  Russel's  was  the  place  of  preaching,  where  I 
found  some  who  had  heard  me  in  Virginia  many  years  past ;  I 
laboured  to  speak,  although  my  throat  was  very  sore  :  the  hearts 
of  the  people  appeared  to  be  cold,  as  well  as  their  bodies. 

Friday  20.  I  had  to  ride  thirty  miles  by  two  o'clock  ;  but  was 
so  poorly  I  declined  preaching.  Saturday  and  Sunday  I  spent  at 

I.  Handle's  :  I  gave  place  to  brothers  M'K and  B .     On 

Sunday  evening,  I  gave  the  family  a  discourse  at  W.  Handle's. 

Monday  23.  Crossed  Hockey-River  :  this  is  a  bold  stream  :  it 
rises  in  Mecklenburg,  North  Carolina  ;  and  after  running  eighty 
or  ninety  miles,  empties  itself  into  Pee  Dee,  a  little  below  Mont- 
gomery. 

SOUTH  CAROLINA. — Came  to  Blakeney's,  on  the  waters  of 
Lynch's  creek :  here  I  preached  to  about  forty  people  ;  it  being 
Christmas  day. 

Thursday  26.  We  crossed  various  branches  which  empty  into 
•Pee  Dee  about  ten  miles  below  Ports-Ferry  :  we  passed  the 
hanging  rock  to  J.  H 's. 

Friday  27.  We  set  out  at  sunrise  :  the  weather  was  cold  and 
frosty  :  we  made  it  twenty-two  miles  to  Camden.  After  dinner 
we  crossed  the  river,  and  came  to  Marshall's. 

Saturday  28.  We  set  out  very  early,  and  came  through  pine 
and  oak  barrens,  twenty-five  miles  :  about  one  o'clock  I  was  wil- 
ling to  sit  down  and  rest.  I  have  lately  felt  all  the  grace  I  had 
put  to  trial  :  through  mercy  I  am  kept  from  sin,  and  long  to  be 
perfect  in  faith  and  patience,  love  and  suffering  :  I  am  sometimes 
tempted  to  wish  to  die  ;  but  I  fear  it  is  wrong  :  I  rather  chuse  t» 
wait  the  Lord's  time. 

Sunday  28.  With  some  difficulty  I  attended  at  the  meeting-house 
near  Marshall's. 

Monday  30.  We  rode  forty-five  miles  to  brother  Cook's,  on  Broad- 
River  ;  and  the  next  day  to  brother  Finch's  :  here  we  are  to  have 
about  thirty  preachers  from  South  Carolina  and  Georgia.  We  were 
straitened  for  room,  having  only  twelve  feet  square  to  confer, 
sleep,  and  for  the  accommodation  of  those  who  were  sick. — Bro- 
ther B — —  was  attacked  with  the  dysentery. 

Wednesday,  January  1,  1794.    We  removed  brother  B into 

a  room  without  fire.     We  hastened  the  business  of  our  conference 
as  fast  as  we  could.     After  sitting  in  a  close  room  with  a  very  large 


1794.]  RF.V.   JRANC1S  AMII'RY'S  JOURNAL.  1       • 

fire,  I  retired  into  the  woods  nearly  an  hour,  and  was  sci/.ed  with 
a  severe  chill,  an  inveterate  cough  and  fever,  with  a  sick  stomach  : 
with  difficulty  I  sat  in  conference  the  following  day  ;  and  I  could 

get  but  little  rest;  hrother  B '3  moving  so  frequently,  and  the 

brethren's  talking,  disturbed  me.  Sick  as  I  w.i-,  I  had  to  or- 
dain four  elders  and  six  deacons  ;  never  did  1  perform  with  -m  li 
a  burthen.  I  took  a  powerful  emetic.  1  was  attended  by  Doctor 

D . 

I  found  I  must  go  somewhere  to  get  rest.     The  day  was  cloudy, 

and  threatened   snow  ;    however,  brother  II.    E and   myself 

made  out  to  get  seven  miles  to  dear  old  hrother  A.  Yeargin's  hou-e. 
The  next  day  came  on  a  heavy  fall  of  snow,  which  continued  two 
days,  and  was  from  six  to  ten  inches  deep.  I  had  to  let  some 
blood  :  I  made  use  of  flaxseed,  and  afterward  of  betony  tea,  both 
which  were  of  use  to  me.  I  must  be  humbled  before  the  Lord, 
and  have  great  searching  of  heart. 

Monday  13.  Rode  thirty  miles  ;  although  the  weather  was  damp 
and  unpromising,  and  came  to  Herbert's  store,  on  Broad-River.  I 
was  so  weak  that  my  exercise  and  clothing  almost  overcame  me. 
The  next  day  we  passed  Connelly's  ferry  ;  and  got  nothing  for  our- 
selves until  we  had  rode  forty-six  miles  to  Colonel  Rnmph's.  when- 
we  bad  every  thing,  and  were  free  and  comfortable. 

Sunday  19.  Rode  to  the  Cypress,  where  I  could  not  rest  without 
giving  them  a  little  sermon. 

Monday  20.  I  reached  the  city  ef  Charleston.  Here  I  began  to 
rest  :  my  cold  grew  better.  Doctor  Ramsey  directed  me  to  thn 
use  of  laudanum,  nitre,  and  bark,  after  cleansing  the  stomach  with 
an  emetic.  The  kindness  of  sister  Hughes  was  very  great.  I 
have  written  largely  to  the  west,  and  declined  visiting  those  part* 
this  year.  The  American  Alps,  the  deep  snows,  and  great  rains  ; 
swimming  the  creeks  and  rivers,  riding  in  the  night,  sleeping  on 
the  earthen  floors,  more  or  less  of  which  I  must  experience,  if  I 
go  to  the  western  country,  might  at  this  time  cost  me  my  life.  I 
have  only  been  able  to  preach  four  times  in  three  weeks. 

I  have   had  sweet  peace  at  times  since  1  have  been  here  ;  the 
love  of  meetings  ;  (especially  those  for  prayer)  the  increase  of 
hearers  ;  the  attention  of  the  people  ;    my  own  better  feelings  : 
and  the  increasing  hope  of  good  that  prevails  among  the  preachers 
lead  me  to  think  that  "  the  needy  shall  not  always  be  forgotten, 
nor  the  expectation   of  the  poor  fail."     1  have  been  pleased  in 
reading  Prince's  Christian  History,  of  about  four  hundred  p.. 
it  was  a  cordial  to  my  soul  in  the  time  of  my  affliction.     It  i*  M«. 


1C4  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL,  [1794 

thodism  in  all  its  parts.  I  have  a  great  desire  to  reprint  an  abridg- 
ment of  it,  to  show  the  apostate  children  what  their  fathers  were. 
1  have  read  Gordon's  History  of  the  American  Revolution  :  here 
we  view  the  suffering  straits  of  the  American  army ;  and,  what  is 
greatly  interesting,  General  Washington's  taking  his  farewell  of  his 
officers — what  an  affecting  scene  !  I  could  not  but  feel  through  the 
whole  of  the  description.  What,  then,  was  the  sight !  O,  how 
minds  are  made  great  with  affliction  and  suffering  !  Poor  Beverly 
Allen,  who  has  been  going  from  bad  to  worse  these  seven  or  eight 
years — speaking  against  me  to  preachers  and  people,  and  writing  to 
Mr.  Wesley  and  Doctor  Coke,  and  being  thereby  the  source  of  most 
of  the  mischief  that  has  followed  ;  and  lastly,  having  been  agent  for 

Mr. ,  is  noxv  secured  in  jail  for  shooting  Major  Forsyth  through 

the  head.  The  Major  was  marshall  for  the  federal  court  in  Geor- 
gia, and  was  about  to  serve  a  writ  upon  B.  A :  the  master-piece 

of  all  is,  a  petition  is  prepared,  declaring  him  to  have  shown  marks 
of  insanity  previous  to  his  killing  the  Major  !  The  poor  Metho- 
dists also  must  unjustly  be  put  to  the  rack  on  his  account,  although 
he  has  been  expelled  from  amongst  us  these  two  years. — I  have 

had  my  opinion  of  him  these  nine  years  ;  and  gave  Doctor  C 

my  thoughts  of  him  before  his  ordination  :  f  pity,  I  pray  for  him — 
that  if  his  life  is  given  up  to  justice,  his  soul  may  yet  be  saved. 

Friday,  February  14.  I  enjoy  peace  of  mind,  and  am  closely  em- 
ployed in  reading  my  Bible  ;  and  a  collection  of  sermons  deliver- 
ed at  Bery-street  1733,  by  Watts,  Guyse,  Jennings,  Neal,  Hubbard, 
and  Price,  containing  upwards  of  five  hundred  pages. 

Sunday  16.  I  preached  in  the  morning  on  Phil.  ii.  30.  and  in  the 
evening  again.  I  was  tried  in  spirit :  I  had  not  more  than  one 
hundred  white  people  to  hear  me.  Brother  S.  and  myself  let 
loose  ;  and  according  to  custom  they  fled  :  they  cannot,  they  will 
not,  endure  sound  doctrine. 

Monday  17.  I  was  employed  in  reading  and  visiting. 

Tuesday  18.  I  feel  restless  to  move  on,  and  my  wish  is  to  die  in 
the  field.  I  have  had  a  time  of  deep  dejection  of  spirits,  affliction 
of  body  ;  loss  of  sleep,  and  trouble  of  soul.  I  have,  in  the  course 
of  my  stay  here,  had  frequent  visits  from  the  blacks  ;  among  whom 
t  find  some  gracious  souls. 

Wednesday  19.  I  find  this  to  be  a  barren  place  ;  I  long  to  go  to 
my  work.     When  gloomy  melancholy  comes  on,  I  find  it  best  to 
think  as  little  as  may  be  about  distressing  subjects.     Thursday, 
Friday,  and  Saturday,  I  visited  sundry  families.     It  seems  as  if  a 
strange  providence  holds  me  here-:  I  am  sometimes  afraid  to  eat. 


••1-J  .  13   A.SULUY  .  AL. 

drink,  or  even  to  talk,  uul:--  it  iiu  of  (iod  and  religion.  1  bh.dl 
certainly  feel  a  Paradise  when  I  go  hence.  I  am  not  unemployed  ; 
yet  I  might  be  much  better  occupied  tor  (iod  .1:1  !  *  -\\~. 

Tuesday  25.    Last  evening  wo  had  a  love-ft-a-t  ;    and   the   ; 
Africans  spoke  livingly  of  the  goodness  of  God.      I  am  now    pre- 
paring to  leave  this  city,  where  I   hare   experienced  consolation, 
afflictions,  tribulations,  and  labour. 

Friday  'JO.    I  now  leave  Charleston  ;  the  seat  of  Satan.  di--ipa- 
xion  and  foil}'  :  ten  months  hereafter,  \\ith  the  permission  of  di. 
Frovidence,  I  expect  to  see  it  again.     i\ly  hur.se   proving  unruly, 
and  unwilling  to  take  the  boat  to  Iladrill's  point,  we  changed  our 
course,  crossed  at  Clemen's  ferry,  and  then  came  the  road   to  I 
noir's  ferry  :   we  passed  the  plantations  of  the  great,  lying  east  and 
\vest ;    their  rice  fields  under  water.     We  got  no  refreshment  un- 
til we  came  to  S 's,  thirty-four  miles,  except  the  little  our 

horses  got  at  the  ferry. 

Saturday,  March  1.  We  set  out  in  great  spirits,  having  sixteen 
xniles  to  the  ferry  ;  where  we  were  detained  six  hours.  We  hoped 
to  have  been  in  Georgetown  by  sunset.  Now  we  thought  of  tra- 
velling until  midnight :  we  came  to  Cedar  Creek,  which  we  found 
in  a  bad  state.  We  stayed  at  the  ferry  ;  being  persuaded  we  could 
not  reach  Georgetown  time  enough  for  meeting. 

Sabbath  morning.    We  directed  our  course  westward,  and  came 

along,  drooping  and  solitary,  to  M 's  ferry,  about  twenty-live 

miles.  We  rode  up  to  a  large  house,  and  were  asked  in  to  dim!; 
brandy  :  three  men  and  two  women  appeared  to  be  set  in  to  drink  the 
pure  stuff,  glass  after  glass  ;  we  were  glad  to  retreat.  There  came 
on  a  storm  of  rain,  with  thunder  and  lightning.  I  was  unwilling  to 

go  to ,  expecting  the  same  kind  of  Sabbath  devotion  there. 

We  travelled  a  most  dreadful  road  to  Black-Kiver,  and  had  plenty 
of  water  above  and  below  us.  After  riding  fifteen  miles,  \ve  came  in 

the  widow  B 's,  where  we  got  a  shelter  -,  still  we  had  our  f- 

there  is  such  a  quantity  of  water  in  the  swamp  and  lowlands,  that 
our  feet  are  kept  very  uncomfortable,  and  some  place?  are  imp 
able.      Isaac  Smith,  in  all  these  difficulties  and   trials  of  suamj'- 
colds,  rains,  and  starvation,  was  my  faithful  companion. 

After  riding  twenty-seven  miles  without  eating,  how  good   were 
the  potatoes  and  fried  gammon  !  we  then  had  only  ten  miles  to  bro- 
ther Renabert's  ;  where  we  arrived  about  seven  o'clock.     I  roi. 
my  soul  and  body  have  been  powerfully  tried. — What  blanks 
in  this  country — and  how  much  worse  are  the  rice  plantations!    If 
a  man-of-war  is  "  a  floating  hell,"  these  are  standing  ones  ;  wi- 

VOL.  If. 


FKANC1S  ASBURv's  JOURNAL.  [J794. 


masters,  overseers,  and  negroes—  cursing,  drinking  —  no  Sab- 
baths  ;  no  sermons.  But  hush  !  perhaps  my  journal  will  never  see 
the  light  ;  and  if  it  does,  matters  may  mend  before  that  time  ;  and 
it  is  probable  I  shall  be  beyond  their  envy  or  good  will.  O 
wretched  priests,  thus  to  lead  the  people  on  in  blindness  ! 

Thursday  6.  We  had  family  meeting  at  brother  R  -  's  :  I  gave 
them  a  long  discourse  on  the  last  words  of  David,  2  Sam.  xxiii.  5. 
"  Although  my  house  be  not  so  with  God,  yet  he  bath  made  with 
me  an  everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure,  for  this 
is  all  my  salvation  and  all  my  desire,  (pleasure  or  delight,)  although 
he  make  it  not  to  grow."  1.  I  considered  how  we  enter  into  cove- 
nant with  God.  2.  On  man's  part  it  is  ordered  to  repent,  believe, 
love,  obey,  suffer,  &c.  and  in  a  word,  to  attend  to  every  duty  God 
hath  enjoined.  3.  That  this  is  all  the  delight  of  a  gracious  soul-— 
that  his  eternal  all  is  rested  upon  the  covenant  relation  he  bears  to 
the  Lord.  David  appears,  1.  To  have  been  looking  to  Solomon's 
peaceable  kingdom.  2.  To  Christ,  who  was  to  come  of  David's 
seed.  3.  Parents,  and  gracious  souls,  may  say  the  commonwealth, 
the  church,  their  families,  &c.  are  not  as  they  could  wish  ;  yet  God 
is  their  portion.  What  distresses  were  experienced  in  the  families 
of  ancient  saints  !  see  the  history  of  the  families  of  Adam,  Noah, 
Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  Eli,  Samuel,  David,  and  others  of  whom  we 
read.  My  time  is  short  —  this  may  be  my  last  to  speak,  or  theirs 
to  hear  :  we  are  not  only  creatures  of  a  year,  but  of  a  day,  an 

hour. 

Sunday  9.  I  preached  on  Romans  v.  20,  21. 

Monday  10.  We  held  a  little  conference  to  provide  for  Charles- 
ton, Georgetown,  Edisto,  and  Santee  :  some  are  afraid  that  if  we 
retain  none  among  us  who  trade  in  slaves,  the  preachers  will  not  be 
supported,  but  my  fear  is  that  we  shall  not  be  able  to  supply  this 
state  with  preachers. 

Tuesday  11.  I  had  to  preach  to  the  respectable  people  of  Cam- 
den  —  where  I  suppose  I  had  two  hundred  hearers  in  the  court- 
house. H  was  heavy  work,  my  body  and  faith  being  both  weak  — 
some  trifled  ;  some  felt  ;  and  perhaps  more  understood. 

Wednesday  12.  We  missed  our  way  to  the  chapel  called  Gran- 
nies-Quarter ;  and  made  it  thirty  miles  to  Horton's,  at  the  Hanging- 
Rock,  on  a  very  warm  day,  without  any  refreshment,  except  a 
little  biscuit. 

Thursday  13.  Rode  thirty  miles  more  to  the  Waxsaws,  after 
preaching  at  the  chapel  in  the  woods.  I  went  to  brother  T  --  's, 
where  we  had  a  room  to  ourselves  ;  and  our  horses  were  richly 


1704.]  RF.V.   FRANCIS  ASEURY  5  .10:    . 

fed  :   this  was  a  great  favour — surh  as  we  do  not  generally  rc< 
in  this  country. 

Saturday  15.  We  set  out  under  discouraging  pin-; 
had   a   heavy    rain  the   night  before.      \\Y   ramc   tn   Mirphn 
where  we  had  to  swim  our  horses  aim,-  *[,!,.  ;1  ,  a, me,  ami  li.nl  i 
not  struggled  powerfully,  and   freed   themselves    from  anr 
bushes  and  grape-vines,  they  had  certainly  drowned  :   v. 
across  the  stream,  and  then  brought  them  down  the  creek,  to  a  \>' 
where  there  were  no  trees  in  the  way,  and  we  got  safe  across. 

Sunday  16.  The  waters  being  still  high,  our  tTi<-ulf. 

and  having  no  inclination  to  travel  on  the  Sabbath,  we  continued  at 
S 's,  where  we  stayed  the  night  before.  Notice  was  circula- 
ted through  the  neighbourhood,  and  by  eleven  o'clock  there  wa- 
collected  a  congregation  of  sixty  or  seventy  people. 

Monday  17.   We  set  out,  and  passed  Charlotte,  in  Bf ecklenborr ; 

here  I  learned  that  meeting  was  appointed  for  me  at  A 's.      I 

came  to  L.  Hill's,  where  1  met  with  N.  W.  and  D.  A.  having  rodo 
thirty-four  miles.     By  the  time   I   reach  justice   White's  '   shall 
make  out  to  have  rode  about  one  thousand  miles  in  three  mon1 
and  to  have  stopped  six  weeks  of  the  time  with  great  rolurt;,: 

I  preached  at on  2  Tim.  ii.  12 — 17.     I,  1.  Gave  the  m 

of  a  Christian  ;  one  of  which  is,  that  he  suffers  persecute 
The  marks  of  heretics  and  schismatics  ;  the  former  oppose  the 
established  doctrines  of  the  Gospel  ;  the  latter  will  divide  Chris- 
tians. 3.  That  we  must  continue  in  what  we  have  been  taught 
by  the  word,  the  Spirit,  and  faithful  ministers  of  Christ.  4.  That 
the  Holy  Scriptures  are  the  standard  sufficient  for  ministers  and 
people,  to  furnish  them  to  every  good  wmk. 

Thursday  20.  I  directed  rny  course  in  company  with  my  faithful 
fellow-labourer,  Tobias  Gibson,  up  the  Calahaw,  settled  mo«tU  l.y 
the  Dutch.  A  barren  spot  for  religion.  Having  rode  in  pain 
twenty-four  miles,  we  came,  weary  and  hungry,  to  O—  i  n  ; 

and  were  glad  to  take  what  came  to  hand.  Four  miles  forward 
we  came  to  Howes-Ford,  upon  Catabaw-River,  where  we  could 
neither  get  a  canoe  nor  guide.  We  entered  the  water  in  an  im- 
proper place,  and  were  soon  among  the  rocks  and  in  the  whirl- 
pools :  my  head  swam,  and  my  horse  was  affrishtnl  :  (lie  water 
was  to  my  knees,  and  it  was  with  difficulty  we  retreated  to  the 
same  shore.  We  then  called  to  a  man  on  the  other  side.  \vli« 
came  and  piloted  us  across,  for  which  I  paid  him  well.  IM ;. 
being  afraid  to  take  the  water  a  second  time,  brother  Gibson 
crossed,  and  sent  me  his  ;  and  our  guide  took  mine  across.  v> 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURv'S  JOURNAL.  [1794, 

went  on,  but  our  troubles  were  not  at  an  end:  night  came  on, 
and  it  was  very  dark.  It  rained  heavily,  with  powerful  light- 
ning  and  thunder.  We  could  not  find  the  path  that  turned  out 
to  Council's.  In  this  situation  we  continued  until  midnight  or 
past ;  at  last  we  found  a  path  which  we  followed  till  we  came  to 
dear  old  father  Harper's  plantation  ;  we  made  for  the  house,  and 
called  ;  he  answered,  bat  wondered  who  it  could  be  ;  he  inquired 
whence  we  came  ;  I  told  him  we  would  tell  that  when  we  came 
in,  for  it  was  raining  so  powerfully  we  had  not  much  time  to  talk  : 
when  I  came  dripping  into  the  house,  he  cried  %'  God  bless  your 
soul,  is  it  brother  Asbury  ?  wife,  get  up."  Having  had  my  feet 
and  legs  wet  for  six  or  seven  hours,  causes  me  to  feel  very  stiff. 

Friday  21.  We  set  forward  towards  brother  White's,  and  took 
our  time  to  ride  twelve  miles. 

Saturday  22.  My  soul  enjoys  peace  ;  but  Oh  !  for  more  of  God: 
This  campaign  has  made  me  "  groan,  being  burthened."  Bad 
news  on  my  coming  to  the  mountains  ;  neither  preachers  nor 
elders  have  visited  Swanino  since  last  October ;  poor  people — - 
poor  preachers  that  are  not  more  stable  :  but  all  flesh  is  grass,  and 
I  am  grass.  I  have  provided  brothers  G.  and  L.  for  the  westward. 
I  wrote  a  plan  for  stationing  ;  and  desired  the  dear  preachers  to 
be  as  I  am  in  the  work  :  I  have  no  interest,  no  passions,  in  their 
appointments  ;  my  only  aim  is  to  care  and  provide  for  the  flock  of 
Christ.  1  see  1  must  not  leave  Charleston  till  the  third  or  fourth 
week  in  March  ;  then  the  rains  will  subside,  and  the  creeks 
and  rivers  be  passable ;  and  so  shall  we  escape  the  danger  of 
drowning  ourselves  and  horses.  1  feel  that  my  sufferings  have 
been  good  preaching  to  me — especially  in  crossing  the  waters.  I 
am  solemnly  moved,  in  not  visiting  my  Holstein  and  Kentucky 
brethren.  It  may  be  their  interest  to  desire  the  preservation  of 
my  life  :  while  living  I  may  supply  them  with  preachers,  and  with 
men  and  money.  I  feel  resolved  to  be  wholly  the  Lord's  ;  weak 
as  I  am,  I  have  done  nothing,  I  am  nothing,  only  for  Christ !  or  I 
had  long  since  been  cut  off  as  an  unfaithful  servant ;  Christ  is  all, 
and  in  all  I  do,  or  it  had  not  been  done  ;  or  when  done,  had,  by  no 
means,  been  acceptable. 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Sunday  23.  My  subject  at  justice  White's  was 
Hebr.  ii.  1,  2,  3.  I  had  more  people  than  I  expected.  I  have  visit- 
ed this  place  once  a  year  ;  but  M.  K and  L.  have  both  failed 

coming  at  all ;  I  pity  them  and  the  people.  If  I  could  think  myself 
of  any  account,  I  might  say,  with  Mr.  Wesley,  "  If  it  be  so  while 
I  am  alive,  what  will  it  be  after  my  death?"  I  have  written 


r.K.v.  rr.AM  t-,  .  AL. 

-everal  letters  to  the  we-tward  to  supply  my  lark  of  service.     I 
am  mightily  wrought  upon  for  New-Hamp>hire,  1'rovince  ot 
Vermont,  and  Lower  Camilla. 

Saturday  ~'J.  Stalled  for  Nolenten's  and  ramo    part  of  (he   v. 
alone.      Alter  winding  about  (lit-  rreek^  and  lull-.  '  ainc  In  a  <   iliin  : 
here  1  found  a  few  seriou-  people,  to  whom  I  pi  :  <m  I    !  irn. 

iv.  8.  after  which   I  .-pent  the  evening  with  de.tr  Inuilier  S.  in   his 
clean  cabin. 

Sunday  30  Alter  riding  abou1  five  mile*.  I  came  to  a  meelme;- 
house  :  it  was  a  cabiti  ball'  floored,  with  long  open  windows  between 
the  lo;,-. 

Monday  31.   I  hat'  the  house  filled  with  «erious  people,  and  found 
:nuch  to  say  on  Ruth  i.  lt\  1".   whatever  weight  there  might  i. 
been  in  the  discourse,  1  was  happy  in  my  own  soul. 

Tuesday,  April  1.  1  vas  very  happ\  ubil-t  ridins  alone  down  i  • 
Doctor  Brown's  :  on  my  way,  1  saw  Babel,  th--  Baptist-Methodist 
house,  about  which  there  has  been  so  much  quai  n  lln.i: :  i' 
made  of  logs,  and  is  no  great  matter.  I  am  astonished  at  pro- 
fessors, old  profe.*sors.  neglecting  family  and  private  prayer — Lord, 
help!  for  there  is  hul  little  genuine  religion  in  the  W"ild. 

Wednesday  'J.  Came  to  E.'s  meeting-house,  near  Hunting  Creek, 
in  Surry  county  :   here  I   met   with  ?ome  old  dU<  iples  from  Mary- 
land, Delaware,  and  Virginia,   who  b  i\o   known    me  these  tne: 
two  years.      Our  meeli;i-  UM-  attended  with    mutual  pleasure  : 
soul  enjoyed  much  sweetness  with  these  people.     There  has  been 
some  trouble  amongst  them  ;  but  1  know  God  is  with  them.     I 
secretly  led  to  treat  on  sanrtinVation  at  W.'«  ;   rind  if  the  Lord  will 
help  rne,  I  am  resolved  to   •-peak   more  on   thi.s   bb'--cd  doctrine. 
After  preaching,  I   came  to  Cokesbury  school,  at   Hardy  Jonf-s  :  it 
is  twenty  feet  square,  two  stories  high,  well  set  out  with  doors  and 
windows  ;   this  house  is  not  too  large,  as  some  others  are  :  it  stands 
on  a  beautiful  eminence,  and  overlooks  the   Lowland*,  and  river 
Yadkin. 

Monday  7.  I  set  out  alone,  and  missing  my  way.  got  entangled 
in  the  bush  and  thickets,  and  made  it  about  twenty  miles  :  althotii;!i 
it  was  a  trial  to  me,  it  might  be  intended  to  prevent  the  poor  peo- 
ple from  being  disappointed  who  came  late. 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  dining  and  drinking  tea  with  a  Moravian 
minister,  who  has  the  charge  of  the  congregation  at  .M.nMy-Cr 
xt  day  I  called  at  Salem. 

I   rode   twenty    miles   to   Levin  Ward's,   nn   the   lioad    write: 
Dan-River,  Stokes  county.     I  was  greatly  fatigued,  !>nt  having  no 


190  KEV.  FRAKC1S  ASBURY's  JOURNAL  [1794. 

appointment  to  preach,  after  a  good  night's  rest,  I  was  much  re- 
freshed. Having  little  opportunity  of  being  alone,  I  wandered 
into  the  field  for  solitude.  I  met  with  P.  S  from  old  Lynn,  a 
child  of  Provi'lence  :  after  passing  solemn  scenes  at  sea,  he  was 
taken  and  left  in  the  Lowlands  of  North  Carolina.  First  a  Chris- 
tian, then  a  preacher.  He  was  stationed  in  Guilford  ;  but  offered 
himself  a  volunteer  for  Swanino  ;  which  station  hath  been  vacant 
nearly  six  months  ;  one  of  the  preachers  appointed  there  being 
sick,  and  the  other  married  ;  and  now  because  I  have  power  to 
send  a  preacher  to  these  poor  people,  some  are  pleased  to  account 
me,  and  call  me  a  despot. 

Friday  11.  I  went  to  Simpson's  house.  I  was  greatly  chilled, 
and  unable  to  preach.  The  house  was  very  open,  but  brother  B. 
sounded  away  bravely.  It  appeared  as  if  my  fingers  were  nearly 
frozen.  I  went  home  with  brother  C.  and  had  every  thing  com- 
fortable. 

Saturday  12.  I  had  a  small  congregation,  but  a  good  time  with 
some  feeling  souls  at  brother  J.'s,  on  my  choice  subject,  Hebr. 
iii.  12.  We  have  rumours  of  war  with  England.  But  the  Lord 
reigneth,  although  the  earth  be  so  much  disquieted.  1  spent  the 
evening  with  brothers  B.  and  S. 

I  was  in  the  clouds  on  Sunday  13.  :  my  body  was  full  of  pain, 
and  my  mind  much  dejected.  I  came  through  Rockingham,  and 
saw  no}1  old  friends :  lodged  with  father  Low,  who  is  seventy-six 
years  of  age,  and  happy  in  God. 

Monday  14.  Brother  Sands  set  out  for  Swanino  Had  I  ventured 
to  Kentucky,  how  should  I  have  stood  (he  wilderness,  with  four  or 
five  days  of  such  cold,  rainy  weather  as  we  have  lately  had  ;  1  was 
thankful  to  God  that  I  changed  my  course.  I  feel  wholly  devoted 
to  God,  and  greatly  wish  to  see  more  fruit  of  my  labour. 

Friday  18.  1  rose  early — crossed  Pudding  Creek,  Banister,  and 

Bearskin,  and  came  to  brother  C 's,  five  miles  from  Pittsylvania 

court-house.  I  met  with  my  old  friends  Jones  and  W.  D.  and  had 
a  comfortable  meeting. 

VIRGINIA. — Monday  21.  Rode  with  brothers  B.  and  M.  (who  met 
me  the  day  before)  to  brother  Landrum's,  and  gave  them  a  short 
sermon.  I  was  happy  in  the  company  of  the  dear  preachers. 
Oh  !  my  soul,  trust  thou  in  the  Lord  !  O  for  Zion's  glory  !  come 
Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly  ! 

Wednesdny  23.  I  attended  the  funeral  of  R.  O.  ;  who,  I  learn, 
died  of  a  consumption,  in  the  fear  and  love  of  God.  I  was  too 
systematical  for  my  congregation,  who  were  wild  and  unawakened. 


KLV.   1 KANU3   A.M. IKY  b  JOl'KNAL.  I'jl 

I  baptised  a  few  children,  then  crossed  Symes-l'erry,  and  came 
twelve  miles  to  brother  Spencer's,  in  Charlotte  county  :  here  re- 
port saith,  that  there  is  sail  work  with  th<>>p  who  have  left  us,  and 
who  are  now  exerting  themselves  to  form  as  strong  a  party  as  they 
can  ;  the  principal  of  these  are  J.  O'K.  K.  A.  J.  K.  and  J.  C. 
I  learn  by  a  letter  from  J.  Ellis,  that  matters  are  not  desperate  : 
this  letter,  with  some  others,  I  shall  reserve  for  a  future  it  iv.  If 
the  real  cause  of  this  division  was  known,  I  think  it  would  appear, 
that  one  wanted  to  be  itnmoveably  fixed  in  a  district  ;  another 
wanted  money  ;  a  third  wanted  ordination  ;  a  fouith  wanted  hUTty 
to  do  as  he  pleased  about  slaves,  and  not  to  be  called  to  an  ac- 
count, &c. 

Thursday,  Friday,  and  Saturday,  I  spent  in  private  application. 
Sunday  27.  I  had  a  crowded  congregation  at  Ki cvi  V  chapel, 
those  who  had  just  left  us  appeared  very  shy.  I  was  very  unwell, 
and  said  but  little  on  the  division  :  1  told  them  how  long  I  had  been 
in  the  country,  how  I  had  laboured,  and  what  1  had  gained.  Alter 
all  we  shall  see  what  the  end  of  all  this  work  will  be. 

Wednesday  30.    I  preached  (though  not  of  choice)  at  Charlotte 

court-house,  here  Mr. met  me  and  charged  me  with   saying 

at "  that  they  would  take  off  my  head."  1  told  him  I  did  not 

remember  to  have  said  so,  but  if  I  did,  1  must  certainly  have  meant 
the  Episcopacy  of  our  Church  ;  he  answered,  that  in  that  I  was 
very  right,  he  strove  to  do  it  with  all  his  might ;  yet  he  talked  of 
union,  and  hoped  I  would  do  my  part — At  what  ?  Why  to  destroy, 
first,  the  Episcopacy,  and  then  the  conference — or  at  least  its 
power  and  authority.  1  went  to  Major  R.'s  and  was  treated  very 
kindly. 

Saturday,  May  2.  I  had  a  serious  congregation,  and  a  good 
meeting  at  C's.  Came  to  Pride's  church,  in  Amelia  county,  where 
there  are  no  very  great  prospects.  I  was  at  the  kind  widow  C  's,  on 
Appomattox-River,  thence  to  brother  H.'s  ;  where  I  was  attended 

by  brothers  F ,  M ,  B ,  T-    -,  and  \V-    -.     I  learn 

I  am  set  forth  as  an  enemy  to   the   country,   that   I   am  laying  up 
money  to  carry  away  to  England,  or  elsewhere  ;  but  in  the   n.    - 
of  all,  1  bless  God   for   peace  in   my  spirit.     Let  them  nir^r,  but 
God  will  bless,  and  his  faithful  preacher*  will  love  and  pity  me. 
Friday  8.  After  preaching  at  S—    -'s  chapel  on  Peter's  denial, 

I  rode  to  brother  G 's,  twenty  miles  ;  my  mind  was  hca\  \ .  mv 

body  weak  and  feeble  ;  O,  that  I  had  in  the  \vildcrnr«  a  I...1 
place!  1  ordained  brother  G.  and  baptised  his  son  Philip 
dreadful  rumour  followed  me  from  last  -Sabbath.  I  felt  hu::. 


luJ  AEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1794, 

and  thankful  that  I  could  suffer  ;  I  think  more  of  religion  now  than 
ever.  O,  my  God,  I  am  thine  ;  glory  to  Christ  for  ever! 

Monday  11.    Rode   forty   miles  to  S 's,  and  preached  the 

next  day  ;  hut  it  seemed  as  if  my  discourse  had  almost  as  well 
have  been  Greek,  such  spiritual  death  prevails  among  the  people. 
After  preaching,  brothers  H.  B.  W.  and  myself  rode  to  brother 

W 's,  in  Campbell  county. 

I  preached  in  the  court  house  at  New-London,  where  I  had  a 
large,  serious,  and  polite  congregation  ;  I  dined  with  my  old  friend, 
countryman,  and  neighbour,  Joseph  Perkins,  who  is  superintendent 
of  the  arnsoury.  In  this  county  (Bedford)  there  are  thirteen 
societies  of  Methodists,  three  or  four  of  which  are  large  ;  there 
are  about  ten  local  preachers,  who  labour  for  Christ  and  souls. 

Saturday  16,  and  Sunday  17.  Was  quarterly  meeting  at  Wilson's 

chapel.     The  first  day  I  gave  place  to  brother  B .     Sabbath 

day,  after  sacrament,  and  love  feast,  I  preached  on  Rev.  iii.  20. 
The  people  within  were  serious,  those  without  had  their  own  talk 
and  entertainment.  1  kept  the  Sabbath  in  the  crowd  in  the  best 
manner  I  could.  1  came  oft'  under  rain  and  clouds  to  a  town  called 
Liberty,  and  preached  in  the  court-house,  but  did  not  find  freedom 
to  eat  bread  or  drink  water  in  that  place.  Why  should  I  receive 
aught  from  those  who  renounce  my  service  ?  I  went  to  friend 

S 's,  who  has  a  eodly  wife,  and  was  kindly  entertained  ;  I  wish 

to  serve  the  Methodists  who  can  hear  with  candour ;  but  I  am  not 
fond  of  preaching  at  places  where  the  prejudices  of  the  people  run 
so  high. 

Friday  19.  I  had  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  hearers  at  Edson's, 
and  had  liberty  in  preaching  ;  brothers  M.  and  B.  assisted  me.  My 
soul  is  in  peace  and  perfect  love.  I  purpose  to  preach  present 
conviction,  conversion,  and  sanctification.  1  might  do  many  things 
better  than  I  do  ;  but  this  I  discover  not  till  afterward.  Christ  is 
ail  to  my  soul ;  if  my  labours  are  not  blest,  yet  my  soul  shall  rejoice 
in  the  Lord  and  be  blest. 

Thursday  21.    Came  to  M on  Mill-Creek,  in  Botetourt's 

county,  where  I  was  met  by  brother  I.  E.  who  assisted  me  next 
day  in  preparing  the  minutes. 

Saturday  23.   Preached  at  Fincastle,  and  had  very  few  to  hear 

except  our  own  people  ;  came  the  same  evening  to  E.  M 's, 

where  we  were  to  hold  our  conference  :  here  I  met  the  brethren 
from  Kentucky,  and  received  a  number  of  letters. 

Sunday  24.  I  was  enabled  to  preach  a  searching  discourse  to 
near  one  thousand  souls  on  Isa.  Iii.  8. 


179 1.  j  1 

Monday  25.   We  were  closely  employ M  m  thr-   b'j-inr-,-  of  the 
conference. 

Wednesday   27.    \\ '••    \\ont  nvor  the    mountain    t<«    li'.khn 
county.     We  crossed  the  north  branch  of  .lames-River,  half  .1  mil.: 
from  the  town  of  Lexington  ;  dined  at  the  Red  1 1  nd  cnme  to 

Mr.  F 's  on  the  south  branch  of  Shanaduih.      Thence   1  u: 

my  way  by  Stanton  through  the  rain,  without  any  boots  ;  and  ! 
ing  sold  my  oil  cloth  a  few   days  before,  I  was  wet  from  head  to 
loot.     My  mind  is  in  peace,  waiting  till  my  change  come— hanging 
on  Jesus  for   everlasting  re*t.     \\V  have  a  valuable   hou-e   li 
(New-town)  and   three  local  preachers ;    at  Charlestown   n  good 
house  and  one  local  preacher  ;   I  feel  as  though  it  would  he  a  ! 
time  before  I  go  through   this  country  again.     l\>r  -ooic:  din-    I 
have  had  an  inflammatory  complaint  in  my  ear,  it  is  now  removed 
into  my  mouth. 

I  spent  Monday  25th,  and  Tuesday  2Gth  at  brother  - 
was  very  much  indisposed.     Came  to  Winchester;  here  is  a  good 
meeting-house.     I  had  many  to  hear  my  very  feeble  .testimony  on 

Romans   v.    10.      Doctor made   a  gargle  of  rose    lea 

nitre,  and  spirits  of  vitriol,  which  was  of  use  to  my  tlirnat.  I 
came  on  Thursday  to  J.  H.'s,  and  employed  brother  A.  to  preach, 
my  throat  continuing  very  had.  I  Inund  my  mind  greatlv  resigned 
to  the  will  of  God  under  my  affliction. 

Sick,  wet,  and  weary,  I  found  a  comfortable  retreat  in  thu  ho 
of  R.   Hamson  ;  I  have    not  been   so  thoroughly   scaked   in 
years  ;   I  think  I   have  need  of  a  leathern  coat   that  will  stand  all 
weathers.     I   got    two   men  to  canoe  me  across  the   river;  thi  v 
brought  me  over  safe,  and  appeared  to  be  satisfied  with  a  quarter 
of  a  dollar  each.     Saturday  was  an  awful  day  to  me  ;  my  ear 
exceedingly  painful. 

Sunday,  June  1.  I  ventured  to  the  church  in  the  rain,  and  bore 
a  feeble  testimony  for  nearly  an  hour  on  2  Pet.  i.  1. 

It  was  with  difficulty  I  could  attend  the  conference  ;  my  throat, 
and  passage  to  the  ear  being  inflamed,  and  I  had  also  a  chill  and 
high  fever.  We  had  preaching  morning,  noon,  and  night,  and  had 
peace  and  consolation  in  our  deliberations.  On  the  laat  day  of  the 
conference  I  delivered  a  discourse  on  1  Cor.  i.  5.  and  we  conclu- 
ded with  a  solemn  sacrament. 

I  next   came  to  Shanadoah  county.     We   have  had  awful   rain- 
or  about  two  weeks— to  these  I  have  been  exposed  in  my  affli 
state. 

VOL.  II. 


194  HBV.  IttANClS  ASDUIIY'S  JOL1VSA1.  [1794. 

Sunday  8.  Preached  at  Newtown,  little  notice  being  given,  and 
few  people  attending. 

Monday  9.  Rested  at  brother  Phelp's.  My  mind  is  in  peace  ; 
but  I  feel  the  spiritual  death  of  the  people  ;  they  are  not  what 
they  were  in  religion.  I  am  now  on  the  head  branches  of  Opec- 
ken.  I  stopped  awhile  at  J.  H.'s,  and  then  came  on  to  Shepherds- 
Town.  It  was  a  very  instructing  time  to  me  ;  I  cannot  pretend  to 
preach  ;  yet  I  talk  a  little  to  the  dear  people,  who  flock  to  see  and 
hear  me  by  hundreds.  I  hope  to  be  as  much  resigned  to  a  life  of 
affliction  as  a  life  of  health  ;  and  thus  may  I  be  perfect  in  love  and 
wholly  crucified  with  Christ !  I  concluded  after  my  high  fever, 
and  my  being  forced  to  bed,  that  it  was  out  of  the  question  for  me 
to  attempt  to  speak  ;  but  when  I  saw  the  people  coming  on  every 
side,  and  thought  "  This  may  be  the  last  time,5'  and  considered  I 
I  had  not  been  there  for  nearly  five  years,  I  took  my  staff,  faintly 
ascended  the  hill,  and  held  forth  on  1  John  i.  6,  7.  and  felt 
strengthened,  having  a  clear  view  of  the  word  of  God. — After 
meeting,  we  administered  the  sacrament,  and  I  then  returned  to 
ray  bed.  I  preached  at  Fredericktown.  Rode  to  Liberty  ;  when 
I  came  there,  I  was  so  faint,  and  my  strength  so  spent,  that  I  felt  as 
if  I  could  by  no  means  attempt  to  preach  ;  but  after  brother  R. 
had  sung  a  hymn  and  prayed,  I  made  a  feeble  attempt  on  Gal.  i. 
11,  12. 

MARYLAND. — Tuesday  17.  1  rode  twenty-three  miles  to  the 
stone  chapel,  where  I  preached  on  Peter's  denial  of  his  Lord. 

Wednesday  18.  I  once  more  came  to  Baltimore;  where,  after 
having  rested  a  little,  I  submitted  to  have  my  likeness  taken  :  it 
seems  they  will  \vant  a  copy  ;  if  they  wait  longer,  perhaps  they 
may  miss  it.  Those  who  have  gone  from  us  in  Virginia,  have 
drawn  a  picture  of  me,  which  is  not  taken  from  the  life.  We  called 
a  meeting  at  Cokesbury,  and  made  some  regulations  relative  to  the 
salaries  of  the  teachers,  and  the  board  of  the  students.  I  return- 
ed to  Baltimore,  and  spent  Sabbath  day  22  there,  and  found  the 
people  but  dull.  Brother  M'C.  took  his  stand  at  the  wind-mill 
between  town  and  Point.  My  soul  was  quickened  whilst  applying 
these  words,  "  Every  knee  shall  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  things  on 
earth,  and  things  under  the  earth,  and  every  tongue  shall  confess 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father  ;"  I  was 
grieved  to  find  the  hearts  of  the  people  so  cold  in  religion  :  the 
world  is  a  thief,  stealing  the  heart  from  God. 

Monday  23.  Set  out  for  Philadelphia.     Spent  a  day  at  college 


1794.}  REV.  FRANCIS  ASEl  RY  's  JOURNAl 

Wednesday  25.  I  reached  J.  H >,  very  unwell  with  bod 

infirmities,  but  I  found  Christ  with  me.     Next  d;i\  wr  lucakl  uted 

with  brother  M ,  at  Newport,  dined  at  (  lic-i-  :      ituJ  preached 

in  the   evening  at   Philadelphia,  alter  riding  luity  uulcs.     I 
weak  and    heavy  in  body  and  soul.     1   spent  Friday  in   writing  to 
my  brethren  in  various  parts  who  called  for  iny  a>!\ 

PENNSYLVANIA. — Sunday  29.    I    preached  at  the   new    Aln 
church.     Our  coloured  brethren  are  to  be  governed  by  the  doc- 
trine and  discipline  of  the  Methodists.     We  had   some  stir  am 
the  people  at  Ebenezer.     In  the  evening  we  had  a  cold  time  at 
the  great  church  on  Amos  iv.  11.     This  has  been   a  hard  ii 
work. 

NEW-JERSEV. — Monday  30.  I  rode  to  Trenton  an  excecdin 
warm  day,  and  preached  in  the  evening.     We  rode  to  Kingston  : 
thence  to  Brunswick  ;  thence  to  Bonham-town.  and  \verr  weary 

enough  when  we  got  to  Mr.  B — 's.     Poor  brother  S almost 

fainted,  and  went,  outdone,  to  bed. 

Came  to  Elizabcthtowo,  and  was  grieved  at  the  conduct  of  some 
of  the  preachers.  Oh,  how  careful  should  each  one  be  leat  he 
become  a  stumbling-block  and  destroy  precious  souls !  As  I  can- 
not help,  so  neither  am  I  to  answer  for  other  men's  sins. 

Wednesday,  July  2.  I  gave  them  a  close  discourse  on  2  Cor. 
vii.  1.  1  had  four  Methodist  and  one  Presbyterian  minister  to 
hear  me,  and  we  had  some  life  in  our  souls. 

Thursday  3.  Came  faint  and  weary  to  Powlcs-Hook,  and  felt 
my  mind  solemn  and  devoted  to  God.  Thence  crossed  over  I* 
New- York,  and  found  my  friends  kind  and  full  of  the  world. 

NEW-YORK. — Friday  4.  Was  the  anniversary  of  [ndepccden 
I  preached  on  2  Pet.  iii.  20,  21  :  wherein— 

I.  I  showed  that  all  real  Christians  had  escaped  the  pollutions  of 
the  world. 

II.  That  it  is  possible  for  them  to  be   entangled  therein  ag 
and  overcome. 

III.  That  when  this  is  the  case  they  turn  from  the  holy  com- 
mandments delivered  unto  them. 

IV.  That  the  last  state  of  such  is  worse  than  the  first  :  for  God 
is  provoked,  Christ  slighted,  the  Spirit  grieved,  religion  disho- 
noured, their  understanding  is  darkened,  the  will  i?  perverted,  the 
conscience  becomes   insensible,  and   all  the   affections   unmoved 
under  the  means  of  grace  ;  they  keep  the  wisdom  of  the  - 

but  lose  the  harmlessness  of  the  dove. 


19C  KHV.  FRANCIS  ASBORY'S  JOURNAL.  [1794. 


At  dinner  Mr.  P  -  spoke  a  word  in  favour  of  Mr.  G  — 
(who  was  once  with  us,  as  also  he  had  been)  this  brought  on  an 
explanation  of  matters  :  my  answer  was,  1.  That  I  did  not  make 
rules,  but  had  to  execute  them.  2.  That  any  one  who  desired  me 
to  act  unconstitutionally,  either  insulted  me  as  an  individual,  or  the 
conference  as  a  body  of  men.  I  hardly  know  sometimes  where 
to  set  my  foot  ;  I  must  be  always  on  my  guard,  and  take  heed  to 
\vhat  I  say  of  and  before  any  one.  Lord,  make  me  upright  in  heart 
and  life  before  thee  and  all  men  ! 

Sunday  6.  My  mind  was  much  agitated  about  trifles.  I  preached 
in  the  morning  on  Hebr.  xiii.  12.  and  we  had  a  little  move  at 
the  sacrament.  At  three  I  preached  in  the  new  house,  and  again 
in  the  evening  at  the  old  bouse,  and  gave  a  close  exhortation  to 
the  society. 

Monday  7.  Came  to  Berian's,  near  Kingsbridge,  and  thence  to 
the  White-Plains,  and  dined  with  Lawyer  H  -  ,  a  member  of  our 
society.  I  preached  at  Chester  court-house  to  about  one  hundred 
people  :  here  are  some  living,  gracious  souls.  Came  in  the 
evening  to  King-street.  I  am  not  conscious  of  having  sinned,  but  I 
feel  the  infirmities  of  flesh  and  blood,  and  am  in  continual  heavi- 
ness through  manifold  temptations.  We  had  a  sultry  afternoon, 
and  a  rough  ride  over  the  rocks  and  hills  to  Bedford,  where  I  had 
a  feeble  time  in  the  town-house,  on  the  fall  of  Peter.  I  was 
sick,  sore,  tempted,  and  grieved  :  —  and  bade  Bedford  farewell  ! 

CONNECTICUT.  —  Thursday  10.  Came  to  Norwich,  sixteen  miles  : 
thence  to  F  airfield,  twelve  miles  ;  and  in  the  evening  reached  Po- 
quonack,  making  nearly  forty  miles,  in  very  great  debility  of  body. 

Friday  11.  We  came  to  New-Haven  ;  thence  to  North-Haven  ; 
thence  to  Middlefields  :  the  rain  took  us  as  we  crossed  the  moun- 
tains, and  made  it  heavy  work.  We  found  it  poor  times.  Were  I  to 
be  paid  by  man  for  my  services,  I  should  rate  them  very  high  :  it 
is  so  painful  at  present  for  me  to  ride,  that  a  small  sum  would  not 
tempt  me  to  travel  forty  miles  a  day.  I  bless  the  Lord  for  daily 
afflictions  of  body  and  mind  :  O  may  these  things  terminate  in  my 
total  resignation  to  the  will  of  God  ! 

Saturday  12.  The  rain  detained  us  till  noon  ;  I  then  came  to  Mid- 
dletown,  and  preached  at  three  o'clock  in  the  Separate  meeting- 
house with  some  life.  I  lodged  with  the  old  prophet,  Frothingham. 
After  this  dear  old  man  had  laboured  and  suffered  many  years, 
and  had  been  imprisoned  three  times  for  the  cause  of  Christ  ;  af- 
ter he  grew  old  and  his  memory  failed,  and  he  could  not  receive 


'4.J  i.i-.v.  THAN'  i- 


the  Jjeti'  divinity,  they  mistook  anil  wrested  hi<  words  ;  and  his  con- 
gregation turned  liiiii  out  to  starve  :  —  but  tin-  l.nrd  will  provide. 

Sunday  13,  Was  a  great  day  \\i  h.i  I  a  II-M  I.  i-t,  arid  1 
preached  in  the  court-house,  morning  and  cv«-i,nr/.  and  brother 
S  -  in  the  afternoon. 

Monday  II.  Kode  fourteen  miles  to  the  city  of  Hartford  ;  and 
preached  once  more  in  Strong'*  church  —  and  I  roared  out  wonder- 
fully on  Matt.  xi.  2U  —  30.  Next  day  we  came  five  miles  t 
cer's,  in  Hartford  ;  where  we  have  a  neat  house,  forty  l»y  thirty- 
four  feet.  Thence  I  rode  fifteen  miles  to  Coventry,  \\here  I  had 
a  large  congregation,  and  a  comfortable  meeting. 

Wednesday   1C.    We  had  to  make  our  way  through  heat,  rocks, 
and  dust,  to  Gargle's,  at  the  wonderful  water-works  erected  on  the 
falls  of  the  river  :  and  thence  to  l'omfret'<  ;  making  in  all  thirty 
three  miles. 

Thursday  17.  We  came  a  very  rough  path  of  five  mile*,  t» 
Douglass,  then  hasted  twelve  miles  to  Menden  ;  thence  to  Milford, 
three  miles  :  we  stopt  at  Mr.  -  —  '.-,  and  brother  K  --  went  for- 
ward to  supply  my  place  :  1  was  not  able,  nor  was  there  time  to 
speak  much  after  he  had  done  :  the  heat  was  intense  —  and  there 
was  very  little  shade,  this  country  being  long  since  untimbered. 

Friday  18.    Rode  nineteen  miles   to  Needham  :    if  possible  the 
heat  and  dust  were  greater  than  before,  so  that  by  the   time  u> 
reached  the  appointment,  we  were   nearly  spent  ;    here  we  met 
with  brother  T  --  ,  and  was  grieved  at  the  account  of  the  impro- 
per conduct  of  -  ,  which  causes  noise,  smoke,  and  fire  enough. 

Saturday  19.  Came  to  Waltham  to  a  quarterly  meeting  :  at 
three  o'clock  I  gave  them  a  discourse  on  thr.  link  Jlock,  to  comfort 
the  affrighted  sheep.  Sabbath  day,  we  had  love-feast  at  eight 
o'clock,  sermon  at  half  past  ten  o'clock,  and  again  in  the  afternoon  : 
there  was  some  life  in  the  love-feast,  and  sacrament  also. 

MASSACHUSETTS.  —  Monday  21.1  came  to  Boston  unwell  in  body. 
and  with  a  heavy  heart.     I  passed  the  road  and  bridge  from  tin 
University  to  Boston.     A  noble  road  and  grand  bridge.     We  li.m 
very  agreeable  lodging  in  this  town  :  but  have  to  preach,  as  did  our 
Lord,  in  an  upper  room.     We  had  a  prayer  meeting,  and  the  Lord 
was  present  to  bless  us. 

Labour,  and   affliction  of  body  and  mind,  make  my  poor  heart 
sad,  and  spirits  sink  :   why  art  thou  cast  down,  O  my  soul,  and  win 
art  thou  disquieted  within  me?  hope  thou  in  (/Jod:  thou  sh.il*   - 
praise  him  ! 


108  HEV.  FftANCis  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1794. 

Tuesday  £2.  I  took  up  my  cross  and  preached  in  a  large  room, 
which  was  full  enough,  and  warm  enough  ;  I  stood  over  the  street ; 
the  boys  and  Jack-tars  made  a  noise,  but  mine  was  loudest ;  there 
was  fire  in  the  smoke,  some,  I  think,  felt  the  word,  and  we  shall 
yet  have  a  work  in  Boston  :  my  talk  was  strange  and  true  to 
some. 

Wednesday  23.  I  now  go  hence  to  Lynn  ;  once  the  joy,  now 
the  grief  of  our  hearts  :  but  we  must  go  through  all  for  Christ  and 
souls. 

Sunday  27.  I  gave  them  a  sermon  in  the  forenoon,  and  another 
in  the  afternoon.  I  could  but  rejoice  in  the  prospect  of  leaving 
Lynn  on  Monday  morning.  The  society  here  began  in  union.  It 
is  now  incorporated  in  order  to  prevent  the  Methodists  from  being 
obliged,  by  law,  to  pay  congregational  tax. 

I  left  Boston,  and  passed  Roxbury,  Dorchester,  Milton,  Stough- 
ton,  and  Easton  ;  making  it  upwards  of  forty  miles. 

Tuesday  29.  Rode  through  Attlebury  to  Providence— I  had 
no  freedom  to  eat  bread,  or  drink  water  in  that  place.  I  found  a 
calm  retreat  at  Gen.  Lippelt's,  where  we  can  rest  ourselves  :  the 
Lord  is  in  this  family :  I  am  content  to  stay  a  day,  and  give  them  a 

sermon. 

RHODE-ISLAND.— Thursday,  August  1.  I  left  Gen.  Lippelt's  and 
set  out  for  New-London. 

CONNECTICUT. — Friday  2.  Brother  R.  preached  in  the  evening 
in  New-London. 

Saturday  3.  I  made  my  appearance  in  the  court-house,  and 
preached  to  about  seven  hundred  people  with  considerable 
freedom. 

Sunday  4.  We  had  love-feast  in  the  upper  room  of  the  court- 
bouse  ;  where  some  spoke  feelingly  :  our  sermon  and  sacrament 
took  up  three  hours.  God  is  certainly  among  these  people.  We 
have  set  on  foot  a  subscription  to  build  a  house  of  worship,  and 
have  appointed  seven  trustees. 

Monday  5.  Was  one  of  the  warmest  days  we  have  known.  We 
left  New-London  and  came  through  Norwich,  twelve  miles  :  this  is 
a  well  improved  country  ;  producing  fine  clover,  oats,  and  flax. 

We  passed  Windham,  and  Mansfield.  We  were  met  by  a  power- 
ful thunder  gust ;  but  stepping  into  a  house,  escaped  its  effects  : 
this  is  one  advantage  which  we  have  in  travelling  in  the  eastern, 
rather  than  the  western  country  ;  in  the  latter,  oftentimes  there  is 
?iot  a  house  for  miles ;  in  the  former  there  are  houses  always  in 


1794. j  ..    UUN<  li   ASU 

sight.     We  passed  fine  streams  ami   cxn-lli-nl  meadows  ;   but  tin 
heat  was  excessive,  and  we  hail  no  ^h  i  ;-t  now  and  then  a 

spreading  tree  :  our  horses  were  as  tlmp^h  tin  y  had  !>frn  r< 
through  a  brook  of  water.  We  purchased  our  dinnrr  on  the  w 
and  it  was  sweet  :  we  laboured  hard  till  cpj;ht  !ii>: 

?ick  and  weary  to  father  P 's,  notice,  in  my  judgment,   linn 

forty  miles. 

Thursday  7.  A  day  of  rest  and  atlliction  of  body  :  came  to  Tolland 
very  unwell.  1  find  my  ?oul  stayed  upon  (iod  in  perfect  love,  and 
wait  his  holy  will  in  all  things. 

Saturday  9.  I  preached  in  a  school-house  at  tin,  north  end  of 
Tolland,  and  had  the  house  filled. 

Sunday  10.  Brother  R ,  though  sick,  went  to  Coventry,  and 

I  was  left  alone  at  Tolland  ;  where  I  preached  in  the  forenoon  on 
Acts  ii.   37,  38.    with  some   freedom  ;  and   in   the  afternoon    on 
Colos.  ii.  G.   and  found  it  heavy  work.      After  meeting  I  was  taken 
with  a  dysentery,  (attended  with  great  sinking  of  bodily  pow 
which   held   me   most  of  the   night.     Monday   I   was   better,   and 
preached  in  a  school-house  at  Ellington.     I  felt  great  dejection  of 
spirit,  but  no  guilt  or  condemnation.      Ah!   here  are  the  iron  walls 
of  prejudice  ;  but   God  can    break    them  down.     Out   of  fifteen 
United  States,  thirteen  are  free  ;  but  two  are  fettered  with  en- 1- 
siastical  chains — taxed  to  support  ministers,  who  are  rhusrn  1 
small  committee  and  settled  for  life.     My  simple  prophecy  H, 
this  must  come  to  an  end  with  the  present  century.     The   Rhode- 
Islanders  began  in  time,  and  are  free  : — hail  sons  of  liberty  !   Wl, 
first  began  the  war?  Was  it  not  Connecticut  and  Massachusett- 
and  priests  are  now  saddled  upon  them.     O  what  a   happy  people 
would  these  be  if  they  were  not  thus  priest-ridden!  It  is  well  for 
me  that  I  am  not  stretching  along,  while  my  body  is  so  weak  and 
the  heat  so  intense  ;  brother  Roberts  is  with  me,  and  we  both  only 
do  the  work  of  one  man  in  public.     I    heard  -      -  read  a  most 
severe  letter  from  a  citizen  of  Vermont,  to  the  clergy  and  Chris- 
tians of  Connecticut,  striking  at  the  foundation  and  principle  of  the 
hierarchy,  and  the  policy  of  Yale-College,  and  the  Independent 
order.     It  was  expressive  of  the  determination  of  the  Vermcntcrs 
to  continue  free  from  ecclesiastical  fetters  :  to  follow  the  Ribb- 
and give  liberty,  equal  liberty,  to  all  denominations  of  profe- 
Christians.     If  so,  why  may  not  the  Methodists  (who  have  been 
repeatedly  solicited)  visit  these  people  also. 

Tuesday  113.  I  rode  over  the  rocks  to  the  Square  Fond?,  and 
found  our  meeting-house  as  I  left  it  two  years  ago,  open  and 


200  .  IKANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1794. 

finished.  We  have  here  a  few  gracious  souls  :  I  preached  on 
Luke  xiii.  24.  and  lodged  with  brother  C ,  who  was  exceed- 
ingly kind  to  man  and  horse. 

W  ednesday  1 3.  Came  to  brother  M 's,  on  a  branch  of  the 

Alemantick.     Our  friends  and  the  people  in  North-Stafford  had 

appointed  for  me  to  preach  in  Mr. 's  meeting-house  :  to  this 

I  submitted,  but  it  was  not  my  choice  :  I  was  loud,  plain,  and 
pointed,  on  Rom.  viii.  6,  7.  Mr.  —  -  was  present,  and  after 
meeting  kindly  invited  me  to  his  house.  The  soil  of  this  country 
is  naturally  poor,  but  made  rich  by  cultivation  :  it  is  blest  with 
good  stone  to  build  chimneys,  and  to  make  walls  or  fences,  that 
may  boast  of  strength  and  duration  to  the  end  of  lime. 

1  went  beyond  my  strength  at  brother  M 's  ;  we  had  a  crowd 

of  hearers,  and  some  melting  among  the  people.  I  felt  myself  so 
moved  that  I  could  not  be  calm.  I  gave  them  a  sermon  in  West- 
Stafford,  on  Hebr.  iii.  12,  13,  14.  I  am  awfully  afraid  many  in 
these  parts  have  departed  from  the  love,  favour,  and  fear  of  God. 
I  was  led  to  treat  particularly  on  unbelief,  as  the  soul-destroying 
sin  :  it  keepeth  men  from  turning  to  God  ;  and  it  is  by  this  sin  that 
the  heart  first  departs  from  God  ;  to  prevent  which,  Christians 
ought  to  exhort  one  another  daily,  lest  they  be  hardened  through 
the  deceitfulness  thereof,  and  so  become  cast-avvays.  Came  to 

Esq.  S 's :  In  the  evening,  I  felt  much  hurt  by  the   exertions 

I  had  made  for  precious  souls. 

Saturday  16.  I  rode  up  the  hills,  where  we  had  some  close 
talk  ;  I  observed  there  was  good  attention,  and  some  melting  in  the 
congregation.  I  came  to  L.  S.'s  ;  here  some  of  the  young  people 
are  with  us,  and  the  old  people  prefer  hearing  the  Methodists 
preach  to  the  hearing  of  sermons  read. 

Sunday  17.  I  came  to  the  new  chapel  in  Wilbraham,  forty  by 
thirty-four  feet ;  neatly  designed  on  the  Episcopal  plan.  I  was  un- 
well and  under  heaviness  of  mind.  I  preached  to  about  four  hun- 
dred people,  who  were  very  attentive,  but  appeared  to  be  very 
little  moved.  The  standing  order  have  moved  their  house  into 
the  street,  not  far  from  ours  ;  and  they  think,  and  say,  they  can 
make  the  Methodist  people  pay  them  :  but  I  presume  in  this  they 
are  mistaken. 

Monday  18.  Came  to  S.  B.'s — and  was  at  home,  feeling  com- 
fortable in  body  and  mind. 

Tuesday  19.  I  preached  at  Mr.  R.'s  ;  and  was  led  on  a  sudden 
to  open  and  apply  Phil.  ii.  12,  13. ;  1.  Who  are  addressed  ?  Chris- 
tian believers ;  2.  The  leading  subject — future  and  eternal  salva- 


J794.]  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

tion  ;  to  avoid  legality,  AntinomianNm,  and  luk»-w;,rmne*s  ;  3.  Thy. 
he  hath,  and  doth  work  HI  then.  t<>  will  and  tu  <!<>  ;  (..  i.  -i-t 
tion;  to  be  sanctified  ;  and  to  be  finally,  -  \.  I  i  I  I,,  y 
work  out  their  own  salvation,  by  being  found  in  every  ni'-  ,i,-  >A 
grace;  attending  to  mercy,  justice,  truth,  .in. I  h>\i-  .  ",  \\ith  i 

where  many  have  failed  ;   with  trembling,  \\  ( rn.m\   I,  ,v  t   l.dl.-n 

Some  were  not  well  pleased  at  thu  Aoti-Calvinutic  doctrine ;  b'it 
I  cannot  help  that.      I  have  been  much  tn.-d,  and   much   blessed  ; 
weak  in  body,  but,  I   trust,  happy  in  Christ — in  the  precious  I 
of  Jesus. 

Wednesday  20.  1  had  a  quiet  retreat  at  brother  W.'s.  My 
mind  enjoys  peace;  and  my  soul  shall  breathe  after  the  salvation 
of  dearly  bought  souls.  Mr.  S.  a  mini-ter  of  the  standing  order, 
held  a  meeting  near  us  at  the  -  ime  time  :  whether  this  were  in 
opposition  or  not,  he  knoweth.  1  preached  on  "  Seek  the  Lord, 
and  ye  shall  live."-  — 1.  The  death  to  which  those  are  exposed  who 
have  not  found  the  Lord  ;  2.  The  life  those  do  and  shall  enjoy  who 
have  found,  and  do  live  to  the  Lord — a  life  of  faith,  love,  and  holi- 
ness here,  and  glory  hereafter  ;  3.  We  must  seek  him  in  all  the 
means  of  grace.  Rode  in  the  evening  to  father  A.'s,  in  Spring- 
field ;  a  kind  family.  Here  I  gave  them  a  short  sermon  on  Acts 
ii.  22.;  I  showed  I.  What  we  must  be  saved  from  ;  '2.  That  \\. 
cannot  save  ourselves  ;  3.  On  whom  we  must  call  for  salvation  ; 
4.  That  whosoever  thus  calls  on  the  name  of  the  Lord,  without 
distinction  of  age,  nation,  or  character,  shall  be  -aved. 

Friday  22.    We  came  to  mother  K.'s,  in  Enfield,  a  capital  town 
in  Massachusetts.      The  inhabitants  one  hundred  and  lilty  miles  up 
the  river,  scud  down  the  white  pine  logs  by  means  of  the  ' 
at  the  breaking  up  of   the   winter   and   fro^t  :   the  people  up  the 
stream  mark  them  ;  and  the  people  here  take    them  up,   and   are 
paid  for  it,  or  purchase  the  logs.      It  is  «aid,  that  if  the  proprietor 
is  paid  for  two-thirds  of  those  he  puts  into  the  river,  he  is  content 
and  well  rewarded  for  his  labour. 

Sunday  21.  I  was  well  attended  at  the  Separate  meeting-house, 
where  I  applied  Acts  v.  29 — 33.  We  had  a  solemn  sacrament ; 
but  O  !  my  soul  is  distressed  at  the  formality  of  these  people.  Bro- 
ther Roberts  preached  in  the  afternoon  to  a  crowded  house,  and  at 
five  o'clock  I  had  to  preach  to  a  few  sermon-stupilied  hearers  of 
different  denominations.  Oh  my  Lord  !  when  wilt  thou  again  . 
the  people  of  this  place.  I  have  read  Lowman  on  the  Jcwi-l: 
Government  :  strange  that  it  should  be  so  much  like  the  Br 

VOL.  II.  26 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1794, 

government,  and  ancient  New-England  :  but  the  wonder  ceases 
when  we  know  the  writer  was  an  Englishman.  Now  I  suppose  I 
have  found  out  how  the  Bostonians  were  moved  to  call  the  General 
Assembly  a  court,  and  their  members  deputies — they  followed 
Lovvman. 

Tuesday  2G.  I  rode  twelve  miles  to  Wapping.  I  was  happy  to 
have  an  opportunity  of  retreating  a  little  into  much  loved  solitude 

at  Capt.  S 's,  a  man  of  good  sense  and  great  kindness.     I  had 

some  enlargement  on  Isai.  Iv.  6 — 9.  and  was  enabled  to  speak  with 

power  and   demonstration.     I    preached   at  T.  S 's  barn  :  my 

spirits  were  sunk  at  the  wickedness  of  the  people  of  this  place. 
My  subject  was  Isai.  Ixiv.  1 — 7.  O  what  mountains  are  in  the 
way  !  Idolatry,  superstition,  prejudice  of  education,  infidelity, 
riches,  honoors,  and  the  pleasures  of  the  world.  Ver.  7.  "  None 
calleth."  Prayer  of  every  kind  is  almost  wholly  neglected. 
<c  That  stirreth  up  himself."  Oh  !  how  might  men  address  their 
own  souls  :  as,  O  !  my  soul,  hast  thou  had  conviction,  penitence, 
faith,  regeneration  ?  Art  thou  ready  to  enter  the  unseen,  unknown 
state  of  happiness,  and  stand  before  God  ?  or  wilt  thou  be  content 
to  make  thy  bed  in  hell  ? 

I  lodged  at  the   oldest  house  in  Windsor,  with  another  brother 

S -,   not  unlike   the   captain.     Notwithstanding   his    certificate 

from  the  Methodists  he  has  been  taxed  to  pay  a  ministry  he  heareth 
not.  O  liberty  !  O  priestcraft !  So  all  that  withdraw  must  pay 
the  ministry. 

I  can  scarcely  find  a  breath  of  living,  holy,  spiritual  religion 
here,  except  amongst  a  few  women  in  East-Hartford.  If  there 
should  continue  to  be  peace  in  America,  yet  I  am  afraid  that  God 
will  punish  the  people  himself  for  their  wickedness — it  may  be 
by  pestilence,  or  civil  discord,  or  internal  plague. 

Saturday  30.  We  were  called  upon  to  baptise  a  child,  which 
Mr.  — —  refused  to  do,  because  the  parents  owned  the  covenant 
and  have  now  broken  it.  This  is  the  way  to  bind  people  to  the 
good  old  church. 

Sunday  31.  My  affliction  of  body  and  mind  was  great  at  Spencer- 
town,  yet  I  had  a  solemn  time  in  preaching  in  the  new  tabernacle 
to  about  -four  hundred  people  on  Luke  xxiv.  45 — 48.  After  an 
hour's  recess  we  came  together  again,  and  some  were  offended, 
and  others  convicted,  while  I  enlarged  on  "  The  promise  is  to 
you  and  your  children."  I  was  in  public  exercise  about  five 
hours,  including  sacrament,  and  was  so  outdone  with  heat,  labour, 
and  sickness,  that  I  could  take  but  little  rest  that  night. 


J794.J  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBtRY's  JOURNAL. 

Monday,  September  1.   1    roile  to   the   plains  of  r.llington,   and 

next   day  to   Wilbraham,  and    was  kindly  tr«-  it»-d  l,\    J,  8 .     I 

preached  at  the  next  house,  and  we  bad  a  dn-  eh'ul  t  dk  to 

rable,  faithless  people.     We  rode  two  miles  in  the  be.it.  and  I  was 

near  fainting,  and  felt  almost  like  Jonah. 

Thursday  -1.  We  opened  our  conference  with  what  preacher* 
were  present.  1  was  still  weak  in  body.  1  lodged  with  Abel 
Bliss,  whose  son  was  educated,  ami  nut  sj><jil,,(,  at  ('t,!^-l.ur  \ . 

Friday  5.  We  had  a  full  house,  and  hasted  through  much 
business. 

Saturday  G.  Brother  L.  R and  myself  preached.     My  sub 

ject  was  Mai.  iii.  1 — 4.  I  treated  on  the  coming  and  work  of 
John  the  Baptist  ;  the  coming,  work,  and  doctrine  of  C  lm»».  and 
his  changing  the  ordinances  and  priesthood,  with  the  mini-try  and 
discipline  of  the  church. 

Sunday  7.  We  spent  from  eight  to  nine  o'clock  in  prayer  :  a  ser- 
mon, three  exhortations,  and  the  sacrament  followed.  We  parted 
at  three  o'clock,  and  I  came  to  Kniield,  and  got  my  dinner  at  seven 
o'clock  in  the  evening. 

Monday  8.  We  spent  this  day  on  the  road  ;  passing  Windsor  and 
East-Hartford,  and  came  to  the  city.  The  next  day  we  reached 
Middletown,  where  1  was  taken  ill.  We  have  a  call  for  preachers 
to  go  to  New-Hampshire  and  to  the  Province  of  Maine. 

Wednesday  10.   We  rose  at  three,  and  set  out  at  five  o'clock,  ;> 
breakfasted  at   North-Haven.     We  came  in  the  evening  to  Strat 
ford,  and  had  a  little  meeting,  although   I    was  heavy,  sick,  and 
sleepy. 

Thursday  11.     We  rode   to  General  W. '9.     Here   I   learn  they 
guard  Kingsbridge,  and  will  not  sutler  any  one  to  pass  from  v^ 
Haven.     It  is   also  said,  the   pestilential  fever  prevail':  in   the  > 
of  New-York,   having  been   brought  there    by   a   brig  from   the 
Islands.      I  thought  it  best  to  stop,  and  consult  the  preachers  in  thr 
Albany  district,  before  I  go  into  the  city.     As  the  yellow  fever  is  so 
prevalent  in  the  West  Indies    and  our  vessels  continually  trading 
there,  the  United  States  will  partake,  I  fear,  of  their  plague-  :  ami 
so  the   Lord   will   punish  us  for  our  sins  and  prodigality.      I  onl\ 
^vi«h  to  be  holy  :  and   then,  let  come  \vhatever  the    Lord  plf:.- 
I   came    through   Poquonnock,   Fairlicld,  and   Norwalk  :  but  there 
is  no  room  for  the  Methodists  in  those  pla> 

We  had  a  plea-ant   ride,  within  sight  of  Long  Island,  on  the  -,d: 
water  creeks,  where  there  arc  tide  mill?  which  work  very  swiftly 


204  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUHY's  JOURNAL.  [1794. 

and  powerfully.     Brothers  R.  and  P.  left  me  to  attend  the  quar- 
terly meeting  at  Dan-Town,  and  I  spent  my  time  in  retirement. 

Friday  12.  I  filled  my  minute-book,  and  read  freely  in  the 
Bible  ;  this  book  is  so  much  hated  by  some  ;  as  for  me  1  will  love 
and  read  it  more  than  ever. 

Saturday  13.  Very  warm  and  I  was  very  faint.  I  preached  in  a 
new  open  house,  and  had  a  sweet  comforting  time  on  Luke  xii.  31, 
32.  Here  I  met  brother  Dunham  from  Upper  Canada,  who  wants 
more  preacher?  in  that  province. 

Sunday  14.  Although  very  unwell,  I  crept  out  to  administer  the 
sacrament,  and  preached  a  little  on  Rom.  xiii.  11.  I  must  needs 
go  through  Bedford.  O  !  how  should  I  learn,  whatever  I  think,  to 
say  but  little  ;  it  was  the  sin  of  meek  Moses,  when  pressed  hard, 
to  speak  unadvisedly  with  his  lips.  This  country  is  so  rough  and 
ridgy  that  we  cannot  get  forwards  except  it  be  along  the  road  to 
the  landing,  or  to  some  capital  place. 

NEW-YORK. — My  horse  having  wandered  and  left  me,  I  borrow- 
ed a  horse,  and  on  Monday  rode  to  lawyer  H.'s  ;  and  the  next  day 
came  in  a  carriage  to  New-Rocbelle  :  after  preaching  on  Hebr. 
iii.  12.  I  lodged  near  the  place  1  preached  at  twenty-three  years 


ago. 


Wednesday  17.  I  came  near  Kingsbridge,  and  found  that  it  was 
not  as  had  been  reported  concerning  the  malignant  fever  in  New- 
York  ;  perhaps  a  dozen  might  have  taken  the  infection  from  a 
vessel ;  but  it  hath  not  spread,  and  the  weather  became  propi- 
tious by  rain  and  pure  winds.  On  Thursday  the  18th  I  came  into 
the  city. 

Sunday  21.  I  preached  in  the  old  house  on  Psalm  cxxxii.  :  at 
the  new  church  in  the  afternoon  on  Psalm  i.  :  and  at  Brooklyn  in 
the  evening.  Here  our  brethren  have  built  a  very  good  house. 
The  labours  of  the  day,  pain  of  body,  and  my  concern  for  the 
peace  of  the  church,  tended  to  keep  me  from  proper  rest,  and 
caused  an  awful  night. 

Monday  22.  We  opened  conference,  and  sat  closely 'to  our  busi- 
ness. Several  of  our  preachers  want  to  know  what  they  shall  do 
when  they  grow  old — I  might  also  ask,  what  shall  I  do  1  Perhaps 
many  of  them  will  not  live  to  grow  old. 

Tuesday  23.  I  preached  with  liberty ;  but  on  Thursday  night  I 
had  a  powerful  temptation  before  I  went  into  the  church,  which 
sat  so  heavily  on  me  that  I  could  not  preach  ;  yet  I  trust  I  was  kept 
from  sin.  My  sleep  is  so  little,  that  my  head  becomes  dizzy,  and 


1794.]  REV.   FRANCIS   ASUURY's  JOl  r.NAI  . 


distresses  me  much  :  four  hours'  sleep  in  the  ni<_'ht  i=;  as  m'-.rh 
can  obtain.  We  concluded  our  work  ;  and  nl>--  •!  VIM)  !'n.l.i\ 
day  ot  abstinence  and  prayer,  and  had  a  good  time  .it  -mi  l--\- 

Sunday  J8.    Preached  ;it  ten  o'clock  at  Brooklyn.      In  th- 
noon   at  the  new   church   on    "  \Vo   to   them   that  are  at  «-as«-  in 
/ion  !"     I  ordained  seven  deacons  and  live  filler-  ;   and  in  tin-  » 
ning,  at  the  old  church,  I  preached  again  :    we  had  the  l>  •  -t  <ri. 
the  last,  at  least  it  was  so  to  me.      All  day    1  was  ^tr.ntfn.  d  in  my 
throat,  and  in  my  heart.      We  collected  two  hundred  and  fifty  dol- 
lars for  the  relief  of  the  preacher*  in  distress. 

This  has  been  a  serious  week  to  me  :  money  could  not  purchase 
the  labour  and  exercise  I  have  gone  through.  At  tins  conference 
it  was  resolved  that  nothing  but  an  Knghsh  free  day-suhuul  should 
be  kept  at  Cokeshury. 

Monday  'J9.  I  did  not  sleep  after  three  o'clock  in  the  morning. 
Came  to  the  boat  at  seven  o'clock,  hut  could  not  get  across  till  one 
o'clock  ;  which,  to  my  no  small  grief,  prevented  my  attending  my 
appointment  on  Staten-lsland. 

NKW  JERSEY.  —  Tuesday  30.  Rose  at  three  o'clock.  Set  out  at 
five  o'clock,  and  rode  forty-two  miles  to  Milford,  and  pit-ached; 
but  1  found  this  heavy  work. 

Wednesday,  October  1.    1  had   some  life   in  preaching  at  Cros- 
week's   meeting-house.     I  then  came  to  brother  Hancock 
took  sweet  counsel  with  my  old  friend,  whose  wife   I  receive-l 
member  of  society  twenty-two  years  ago.     I  was  in  <u-pi-n-'-  ihout 
going  through  Philadelphia,   lest   I  should  not  reach  Baltimore  in 
due  time.     Now  report  saith  that  they  have  stopped  thr  Baltimore 
stage  on  account  of  the  malignant  fever,   which  rages  powerfully 
at  the  Point.     There  is  a  great  stir  among  the  people  concerning 
the  western  insurrection  ;  the  people  have  risen  up  against  govern- 
ment on  account  of  the  excise   law  relative  to  the   distillation  of 
spirits.   A  number  of  the  militia  are  called  out  :  thus  trouble  comes 
on  in  church  and  state.     O,  my  Lord,  give  us  help  ;  for  rail 
help  of  man  ! 

Thursday  2.     I  came  to  Burlington  ;   and  as  I  had  not  had  a  i'  y 
to  myself  for  some  time,  I  took  one  now,  to  read,  write,  and  fill  up 
my  journal,  &G.     I    feel  for  the   church,   and  continent:   but  the 
Lord  sitteth  above  the  water-Hoods,  and  rcmaineth  a  King  i-»r  - 
I  preached  at  Burlington,  and  the  people  were  serious. 

IV.NNSYI.VAMA.  —  Saturday,  October  •!.     Brother   M.  and 
"imc  to  Philadelphia  ;  and  on 


liANU?    AM. IKY    S  .UM     IB  -  [1" 

Suml.n  .».    I  preached  throe  times;   and  «as  not  a  little  fati_ 
wjth  tl  r:  I   fe.  d,  and   LaJ  some  openings  in 

pn 

'   :  conference  began,  and  our  matters  were  talked 
OM:   -    --.    :i  continued  until  Fridav.  hv  which  time  I 

.  •  • 

felt  tired  of  tbe  city,  and  b.td  a  desire  to  be  on  horseback.  I 
luxe  telt  liberty  in  preaching  to  the  citizen?,  and  indulge  some 
bope  of  .1  lexixal  of  i  among  them. 

>l.iv    11.    Kode  thirty-five   mik«   to   sister   Grace's,  at  Co- 
\,       j  with  her  daughter  and  granddaughter,   are,  I  trust, 

«\  in  (i  d  this  house  twenty  years  ago.     Sister  Grace, 

when  in  a  dilirium.  was  singing  and  talking  about  God.  1  spent  a 
solitary  Sabbath  at  her  house,  aud  xvas  liappj.  in  speaking  at  her 
door,  ^she  I 

Brother   Cook  and  myself  had   a    heavy    ride    ol 
ily  rifu  miles  to  J.  H '*,  \vhich  xve  accomplished  by  travel- 
ling a  hule  in  the  night. 

Tnisdav  U.   1    pifu-hed   at   liethel,   on  Back-Creek;    and   on 

-    '  F.lk- River,   and  came  to  quarterly   meeting 

yt  Hart's  meeting-hou«c.      1  spent  the  evening  with  my  dear  son  in 

Jesu*.  P.  ? :   I  cannot  give  him  up. 

M  \r.\i  \vr>. — Thursday  U>.   Crossed  Susquchannah,  and  came  to 
Cokesbury    college.     I   found  it     .  in   debt,   and    that  there 

were  between  5  and  .£600  du<  us,  '_  0  of  what  \ve  oxve  ought 
now  to  be  paid. 

S   uirdav   18.   "\Ve   came  to  Perr\    Hall.     The  preachers  were 
iltimore.    bin  the  brethren  from  there  came  out 
to  calm  tbtir  fears  and  invited  them  in.     1  h  ,\c  b«  1. 1,  hurried,  and 
have  not  as  mu.'h  time  for  retirement  as  my  ?oul  p.::,u  i!i  for — 
1  i!'.  :t  Christ. 

3Ioml  .   -       ^VL  r   .'e  to  Baltimore  :  ar/!  i:i  the  afternoon  opened 
our   confer*  we   had  n!  .\  preachers,  including  proba- 

tioners :  oar  business  was  conducted  in   peace  and  love.     .M\ 

g    .nwell.  we  sat  o\  Ij   -  \  hours  in  the  day. 
21.     !  _t\e  them  a  sermon  on  Kxodus  xxxii.    I2t>.     \'>\ 
had  a  li.-t  of  nr.me>  from  Fairfax  ;  who  required  an  ev.'Ln.uion  01 

einourll;:.:    ifdis   iniirn,  re  to  the  trial  of  meatx 

iriog  \\hether   t!:>        -     .ct   me:n   ,:-   \\ere   a«  \vi:nes«cs.-,  or 
.   -          i   had   power  to   vote  num!)crs  in   or  c 

G.  p.  56.]      We.  r.oswercd  them. 
:r  cclie;u;e  matters  now  came  to  a  ciisis.     N^'e  now   P..  b 


1794.]  .  FRANCIS  Asnt-nv's  jc/rrvu  . 


Sudden  nml  dead  pan-.-  —  v.  .•  rnc.ui  to  , 
and  take  some  better  plan.  If  wu  <  arm* 
(i.  e.  a  school  under  ('lnr>ti.in  di-<  iplnir  .n,i|  ;  we 

will  have  notir.       I   hail  p<':i>  ••  of  mi'id,   lmt  not  ". 

Sunday  'JG.    U'c  li.nl  ;i  r,,infortald».'  \<>  v«;  -  ftsnt  ,  but  wore  pr< 
from  attundino;  our  other  ni'"  tin--  by    the    '•*<.<  »*i  re    r  . 
next  day  1  came  to    r.lk-Kidgr  ;    when-    I         •  two 

-    I  iliour,  a  well  <!i  -i:;n«  A  frame  oi  hoijee  '.or- 

-hip  ;   a  few  good   wuini-n  are  tru-t«-«>».      'J'tn-  *•  me 

from   having   a  coi  m   IK.M  '  I.    I  f.. 

\.hcrc  I  had  a   lV-w  lifai'i  •!>»,    and   had   a  it 

like  paradise  regained  amut.-  tin.  <  !  ' 

\'II.'.I\IA.  —  'Ihui  '.  Crossed  the 

Roo-c  frcck  ;   and  raun.-,  unexpected  \>y   tl 
burg.      'J'hence  we  journey*  d  on  through  l'iint«-  Will, 
qilier  roiinties.      \\  '<•  |   i--i-d  ^i  tmantown.  and  < 
Koad,  to  Norm.  in  <  ferry,  on  Rappahaoaock 

journey,  and  being  expo-id  to  unrfiuiloi  •  l'«je«- 

day,  th<;  'll\\  of  November,  we  cai  !hfr  K 

Culpfj'p.  r  county.      Thank  the  Lord,  th-  -e  a 

house  for  God.     At  fat  In:  r   K.'s  I  had   omr,  jut  few 

men  to   hear.     Some  of  the  men  are  gone  lo  v.  -ie  to  their 

«j)orl  =  ,  and  Home  have  no  desire  to  h 

\Ve  rode  ten  miles  to  brother  Fr  fter  a  lone  a^-ence  often 

years  I  am  here  again.  My  mind  is  in  ^r«  nd  the  preach- 

ers  and   people  appear  pleased   to  see   me.      I    l<-irn   that  aboat 
the  month   of  June   last   died  the  great  politician    Iliclnrd  H 
Lee,  of  \Vc-tmorpland  county  ;  one  who  took  an  active  part  in  pro- 
moting  tlip    independence  of  the   United   .States   of  America. 
when  will   liberty  be  extended  to   the   sable  sons  W* 

trust  the  happy  period  will  come,  when  universal  i 
through  all  the  earth,  and  Jesus  shall  reign 


_<•  v 


D<  v s  run  : 

Hi*  k 

Till  'ui  •  »nd«ct  n 

Thursday  G.   I  had  some  lif..-.   nnd  there  was  a  small  sur  on 

of  some  at  I  where  we  had  a  crowd  of  pr>  -  and 

people. 

Friday  7.  Crossed  one  of  the  south  branchf  <hanoo< 

called  the  Rapid-Ann,  and  C'TTif  ' 


208  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1*94, 

Saturday  8,  and  Sunday  9.  Attended  the  quarterly  meeting  at 
Lastley's  meeting-house  ;  we  had  a  large  congregation,  a  quicken- 
ing sacrament,  and  life  in  the  love-feast.  I  feel  it  necessary  to  re- 
tire and  humble  myself  before  the  Lord  :  I  have  been  crowded 
with  company,  and  have  had  much  talk,  and  I  find  a  solitary  walk 
very  agreeable. 

I  attended  a  few  appointments  in  Hanover,  and  Goochland  coun- 
ties ;  and  on  Saturday  15  came  to  the  city  of  Richmond,  about 
five  o'clock,  and  preached  to  a  few  people  in  Mr.  Parrot's  store- 
house. 

Sunday  16.  We  came  to  a  church  near  brother  B *s,  where 

were  gathered  many  people,  among  whom  were  some  sons  of  divi- 
sion. Here  were  many  pale  faces,  and  (as  I  was  told  afterward) 
some  who  had  been  making  solemn  promises  in  their  affliction, 
wondered  how  I  should  know,  and  speak  so  pertinently  on  that 
subject.  Thence  we  came  to  brother  I.  M.'s,  in  Chesterfield  ; 
and  the  next  day  crossed  Appomattox  and  Nottaway  rivers,  and 
reached  to  B.  Jones  in  Brunswick  county,  on  our  way  to  Bruns- 
wick quarterly  meeting  at  Meritt's  chapel.  It  was  rather  a  doll 
time,  although  I  had  some  freedom  in  speaking,  and  we  had  a  good 
love-feast. 

Saturday  22,  and  Sunday  23.  Attended  a  quarterly  meeting  at 
Jones's  chapel  in  Sussex  county,  where  we  had  many  people  :  I 
preached  on  Deut.  ix.  12. — too  applicable  to  many  of  these  souls. 
The  rumour  of  the  small-pox  being  at  Petersburg,  and  only  ten 
or  twelve,  out  of  seventy  or  eighty  of  the  preachers,  having  had 
it,  it  caused  us  to  think  of  holding  our  conference  at  sister  Mabry's 
in  Greenville  county,  where  there  are  fifteen  or  sixteen  houses  that 
will  receive  and  entertain  the  preachers.  After  sending  brother 
Hutt  to  Petersburg,  it  was,  by  a  mojority  of  the  preachers  present, 
judged  most  prudent  to  hold  the  conference  at  the  place  just  men- 
tioned. 

Monday  24.  About  thirty  preachers  were  collected  together.  I 
am  crowded  too  much  for  my  head  and  heart :  when  I  sit  and  hear 
people  talk  on  unprofitable  subjects,  it  clouds  my  head  and  grieves 
my  spirit,  even  if  I  say  nothing. 

Tuesday  25.  We  opened  our  conference,  and  had  great  sift- 
ings  and  searchings,  especially  on  the  subject  of  slavery.  The 
preachers  almost  unanimously  entered  into  an  agreement  and  reso- 
lution not  to  hold  slaves  in  any  state  where  the  law  will  allow 
them  to  manumit  them,  on  pain  of  forfeiture  of  their  honour  and 
their  place  in  the  itinerant  connexion  ;  and  in  any  state  where  the 


>7lM.  j  KI:\  .  i  KAM  i  a 

law  U'ill   not   admit  of  uaanumi.-sK.in   tin  .1  to   juiy  llieui   tin: 

worth  of  their  labour,    and  when  they  die   to  l-'.uc  l! 

person  or  persons,   or  the  society,   in   trust,   to  \n\\\z  about  tl"  :r 

liberty.     After  raising  and  applying  what  tnoix  \  we  could     win-  h 

was  about  JJoU)   we  calculated  that  one  fourth  of  the  | 

this    conference    had    received    for    their    salary   the    [  i-t     • 

about  £10;  one  half  from  about  12  to  £15,   and  OIK    I   'nth  their 

lull  quarterage  (sixty-four  dollars).     We  had  great  pe 

one  preacher  objected  to  his  station.     \Ve  sent   an  npnlotry  to  our 

brethren   in   Petersburg  for  not   having   held    conference    there, 

according    to    appointment,    for    reasons     already    assigned.      ^  <• 

were    greatly  obliged  to  our  friend*  in  Greenville  for  accon 

dating  the  conference.     Men  and  horses  were  well  entertaii. 

all  for  love. 

Monday,  December  1.   1  rode  twenty-seven  miles,  and  on  Ti, 
day  2,  1  preached  at  F.  B 's,  twelve  miles  from  Petersburg. 

Wednesday  3.  Came  to  J.  Smith's,    and  had  a  comfortable  ;•• 

son.     Brother  S has  been  on  the  verge  of  eternity,  and 

blest  with  delightful  prospects  of  glory,  but  the  Lord  has  ra 
him  up  again. 

Thursday  4.  Came  to  Grave's  chapel,  very  unwell ;  here  lived 
brother   Lewis  Lloyd,   who  left  this  world   this  year.     Il« 
old  preacher,  and  professed  perfect  love  fifteen  years  before   hi- 
death,  and  finally  departed  in  the  triumphs  of  faith. 

Friday  5.  I  preached  at  Mivers's  chapel,  and  made  it  twenty 
miles  by  the  time  I  reached  brother  Petham's  in  Greenville.  1 
was  heavy  in  body  and  spirit.  I  am  not  conscious  of  having  sin- 
ned, yet  I  suffer  on  account  of  the  people.  1  delighted  myself  in 
reading  some  of  Doddridge's  Sermons  to  Young  People.  To  the 
young  persons  present  I  preached  at  brother  P-  -'s  on  Satur- 
day ;  and  on  Sunday  7,  rode  twenty-eight  or  thirty  miles  to  brother 
Paup's,  on  Roses-Creek,  where  I  enlarged  on  Peter's  fall.  Our 
burdensome  stone,  Ebenezer,  now  gives  us  seme  trouble  and  < 
If  we  can  employ  good  men,  keep  up  discipline,  and  maintain 
credit,  it  may  come  to  something. 

Monday  0.  I  performed  the  funeral  rites  of  sister  W-    — ,  on 
Waquae-Creek,  Brunswick  county.     We  had  a  full  house  of  un- 
feeling people,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  w;;s  a  burden.     I  op< 
the  Bible  on  Jer.  xiv.  10.     Let  any  one  read  it   a-  .1:1  awful  por- 
tion— it  may  be  it  is  as  true  to  these  people  as  ii  wafl  '-•>  I .-r.nl 
had   a  meeting  with  the   trustee-    of  J '.'•  hool. 

VOL.   II. 


210  KCV.   FIIANCIS  A'SBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1794. 

are  very  discouraging  ;  people  in  general  care  too  little  for  the 
education  of  their  children. 

Tuesday  9.  Preached  at  Williaras's  meeting-house.  These  are 
a  poor  people,  not  impoverished  with  slaves  ;  but  they  have  a  good 
meeting-house,  with  a  glass  window  behind  the  pulpit,  so  that  we 
can  see  to  read  without  raising  a  shutter  and  receiving  all  the  wind 
that  comes,  though  this  is  in  Lunenburg  county,  near  Mother 
Ogburn's,  where  we  used  to  have  our  melting  seasons  twenty 
years  ago.  We  dined  with  the  gracious  aged  people,  and  in  the 
evening  crossed  Meherrin,  and  came  to  S.  Holmes's,  an  ancient 
stand  in  Mecklenburg.  Next  day  I  preached  at  Salem,  where 
there  is  the  best  house  we  have  in  the  country  part  of  Virginia. 
In  this  neighbourhood  there  has  been  a  society  standing  for  twen- 
ty-one years.  Rode  in  the  evening  to  brother  Spedd's — rich  and 
full,  and  a  friend  to  freedom. 

Thursday  11.  Preached  and  administered  the  sacrament  at 
Youngs's  chapel  ;  and  came  iu  the  evening  to  T.  Jones's.  Dear  sis- 
ter Jones  is  gone  to  rest,  after  two  years  of  deep  affliction.  She 
Las  had  a  painful  journey  through  life ;  but  her  persecutions  and 
troubles  are  now  at  an  end ;  and  heaven  will  compensate  for  all. 
She  made  choice  of  Job  iii.  17..  for  her  funeral  text ;  and  with  great 
deliberation  disposed  of  her  property.  I  preached  her  funeral  on 
Friday  12th,  and  found  it  a  serious  day  to  me.  I  never  saw  her  more 
than  twice  or  thrice,  and  we  have  interchanged  a  few  letters.  She 
was  doubtless  a  woman  of  sense,  vivacity,  and  grace.  She  wrote 
to  admiration — all  in  raptures.  She  would  pray  in  any  place,  and 
before  any  people;  she  reproved  with  pointed  severity,  and  sung 
with  great  sweetness. 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Saturday  13.  We  crossed  Roanoak,  and 
came  to  Mr.  Smith's,  in  Granville  county.  On  Sunday  16th  cross- 
ed Mountain  and  Grassy  Creeks,  and  came  to  brother  Owens's, 
whose  wife  is  a  true  daughter  of  D.  Grant,  my  dear  old  friend  in 
Georgia.  He  was  among  the  last  fruits  of  that  great  man  Mr. 
Davies,  when  he  laboured  in  Hanover  in  Virginia,  forty  years  ago. 

Monday  15.  Crossed  the  head  streams  of  Tar-River,  which  are 
only  small  branches,  and  rode  on  to  R 's  (where  I  had  an  ap- 
pointment ;)  and  found  I  had  another  twenty-five  miles  forward  at 

L—    -'s  :  so  I  left  brother  C to  fill  up  my  place,  and  went 

forward  to  the  latter  ;  where  I  preached  to  about  two  hundred 
people.  I  feel  weak  in  body  and  mind,  yet  find  my  soul  staye<! 
upon  God.  "  Still  onwards  I  go,"  fainting  yet  fighting. 


Tl)  .  -,  ,\  i  . 


Tharsdaj  i;;.  I  h.ue  ,-x  lon^  _j.ninn-\  i.»  <  h.nlc-i^ii. 
bnt  fifteen  days  to  ;n-i!  um  it  ;  bavi 
1st  of  January. 

Friday  i:».    \Vr  rode  twenty  -In  e  nn\>-<  '.'«.\ 
rain  ;  but  wj   wrought  our  way  through   th 

;t. 

:tinl,iy  20.    It   snowed   :is   powerfully   as    it   rain. 
liowcver,  we  set  out  t  m  aboi;i     . 

creeks;  but  the  third  we  sw.:m  Urothrr  \\.ir.l 
after  a  paase  I  followed;  but  being  cloaked  up,  m 
slipped  from  under  me  :  one  foot  :kod 

about  one  mile   and   rode  another,  and   reached   the   town   about 
twelve  o'clock,  just  as   they  were  ringing  i: 
\vant  of  a  fire,  I  wen.l  to  the  tavern  ;   but  1  found  bu; 
there  ;   1   sat  down  with   the  company,   and   dried  my   feet   a  Ir 
until  my  companions  came  along.      I  have  ne. 
accused  of  having  too  much)  to  stand  such  d  iy»  a-  tln>  :   in 
kept  in  peace  and  communion   with  (iod;  and,   th. 
will  not  murmur  at  my  sutlering-;  whilst  the  - 
end  and  aim.     We  found  a  home  at  father  I  Jill'.-,  from  .\I.u\l 
about  three  o'clock,  having  rode  nineteen  miles  to 
yesterday.     I  was  thankful  for  a  h.->u?e  and  frit:  '.  an  oppor- 

tunity of  putting  into  port.      It  is  a  comfort  to  r 
raaineth  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God. 

Sunday  21.   1  came  to  Cokesbury  school;  and  a: 
on  1  Cor.  xv.  58.  I  rode  down  to  brother  <'h,,j|. 
a  few  souls  have  been  brought  to  God  since  I  wis  in  th. 
May  last. 

Monday  22.    We  were  detained  some  time  at  Lou- 
a  wagon,  and   a    number    of    hor=e?.     -Mrs.  •   en! 

very  kindly,  and  her  husband  gave  us  a  hearty  welcome  when  lv 
came   home,  and  found  out   who  wo  wore.      It  was    t  \pr 
some  that  1  should  preach  at  Salisbury,  but  I  did   nr<t  ;  ?o  u 
on  and  reached  the  widow  D.'s  about  eight  o'clock 
rode  thirty  miles. 

Tuesday  23.     We  set  out  at  sunri-e  :   the:  ud 

frosty.      \Ve   rode   ten  miles  and  fod    a'.     \ 

twenty-five  miles  to  J.  R.'g,  took  a   I..1  \N- 

II.'?,  making  upward--   of  fort;  '    d  i\    v  '.\un 

Kocky-River  ;  we  then  j  'own,  and   mad 

to  J: 


512  HKV.  FRANCIS  ASBURv's  JOURNAL.  [1795. 

Thursday  25.  Christmas  day.  We  changed  our  course,  and  took 
the  grand  Camden  road  to  great  Lynch's  Creek,  thirty  miles. 
When  I  came  to  Mr.  Evans's  and  told  my  name,  I  was  invited  to 
stay  ;  and  it  was  well  for  us  that  we  did. 

Friday  26.  I  came  off  about  sunrise  ;  and  made  forty  miles  to 
Publius  James  Rembert's  :  I  was  hungry,  sore,  and  very  low  spirit- 
ed ;  here  we  found  a  warm  house,  comfortable  table,  (which  was 
very  acceptable)  good  bed  and  fire,  with  very  kind  friends.  Lord, 
dispose  us  to  humility  before  Thee,  and  bless  our  benefactors ! 
James  Rogers  and  Samuel  Cowls  were  my  faithful  attendants.  I 
hear  my  friend  John  Hughes,  of  Charleston,  is  dead.  From  what 
1  learn  of  him  in  his  last  illness,  I  trust  the  dear  old  man  is  gone 
safe.  William  Adams  and  Captain  Darrell  of  the  same  place, 
have  been  cast  away  and  drowned  ;  strange  changes  take  place  in 
a  very  short  time.  O  my  God  !  help  me  to  be  each  moment  on 
my  guard,  ready  for  death  and  judgment.  The  land  we  came 
through  yesterday  is  poor,  and  but  thinly  settled — a  plantation  once 
in  three  or  four  miles.  The  long-leaved  lofty  pines  have  a  grand 
appearance. 

Sunday  evening  28.  Rode  after  preaching  to  brother  Bradford's. 
Monday  29th  to  Bowman's.  Tuesday  30th  we  had  to  wrestle 
with  Santee  Swamp  for  three  hours,  having  to  wade  the  flat  ground 
then  under  water ;  but  through  mercy  we  got  safe  over  at  last.  We 
hasted  on,  and  came  in  the  evening  to  the  house  of  a  very  kind 
Frenchman,  who  entertained  us  gratis. 

Wednesday  31.  Myself  with  the  main  body  of  the  preachers 
came  into  the  city  of  Charleston.  I  felt  faint  and  unwell  after  the 
fatigues  I  had  passed  through  on  my  journey. 

Thursday,  January  1,  1795.  Being  New-Year's  day,  I  was  called 
upon  to  preach,  unwell  as  I  was,  which  I  did  on  Psalm  xc.  12. 
We  entered  on  the  business  of  our  conference,  and  continued  until 
Wednesday  7th.  We  had  preaching  every  night  during  the  sitting 
of  conference.  It  was  the  request  of  the  conference  that  I  should 
preach  them  a  sermon  on  Tuesday  night;  with  which  I  complied, 
and  made  choice  of  Jer.  xxiii.  29 — 32.  In  times  past  I  have  en- 
deavoured to  keep  on  travelling  all  the  year,  but  I  now  judge  it 
meet  to  stay  in  Charleston  a  little  longer  and  then  take  the  field  : 
yet  it  is  with  fear  and  trembling. 

Sunday  11.  Brothers  I.  C.  and  G.  being  about  to  leave  the  city, 
I  gave  place  to  them  to  perform  the  services  of  the  Sabbath.  I 
heard  part  of  a  discourse  by  Mr.  Furman  on  partial  and  total  back- 


i  7  :'.">.] 

sliding:    I  thought  IIP  -poke  vvHI,  ami  tint  it  u 
mon.     I  doiiht  ii"  he  h.nl  m<>if  Mum  -cvcnty  whit.'  !i 
number  in  the  city  do  not  ;iiu-ml  to  lh>-  worship 

.Monday  1J.    The-  rctiMttiiiv^  m<  IH'MT-  d   i1 

city.      Brother  Uni-  <•  ;m<l  .nn-l    n..\v    '  :  ^    to 

the  work.      I  have  my  fi'diriv 

ton;  but  grace  is  sufficient  :   I   u  i  1  to  God  ; 

whether  1  read,  write,  preach,  «>r  vi-it,  to  d;>  it  all    to    his   gk 
and  to  employ  rny  [)recious  time  profitably. 

And  am  I   yet   alive,  with   <!r,i1h   - 

friends  in  this  city,  and  in  other  phc  ity  '     1 

hear  very  little  from  the  piv.i  i  th. 

Tuesday  13.     I  had  a  comfortable  season  in  the  church,  • 
words  of  St.  Paul  to  the  Galaiians.  "  Am  i  MM  ret. M  .our 

enemy  because  I  tell  you  the  truth."    In  this  di- 
how  great  was  the  affection   between   the   Christian    societies  in 
ancient  Galalia,  and  St.  I'aul,  until  the  Judai/.ing  teachers  < 
among  them.     The  province  of  CJalatia   vva.«   in   Le?Ker  Asia  :   an.l 
when  the  ancient  Gaols,  or  Gatatae,  wauled  to  extend  their  pro- 
vince, they  penetrated  through  Italy  and   Greece,   and   went   into 
Asia,  and  pillaged  the  country  as   Car  south  as    H.ibylon  :   but  one 
hundred  and  twenty  thousand  bein£  defeated  by  a  handful  <>|'.lt 
and  Altulus,  king  of  Fergamus,  having  forced  them  from  his  terri- 
tory, they  settled  here.     Among  these  the  Gospel  w.i-  plant. -d  I  \ 
St.  Paul,  Acts  x\\.  G.  ;   who  had  but  just  left  the   countrs    \-, 
the  schism  began  by  means  of  the  teachers  of  the  ceremonial 
law.     In  this  church  there  have  been  a  great  number  of  bishops, 
and  some  councils,  and  Synods  ;   but  for  near  eight  hundred    \  • 
the  tyranny  of  the  Mahometans,  Saracens,  and  Turks,  hath  almost 
exterminated  the  very  name  of  Christianity.     1  observed,   1.  That 
there  is  a  proper  portion  of  truth   which  i.-   applicable  to  every 
one's  case  ;  2.  That  it  is  a  bad  sign  when  a   man    is  esteemed  an 
enemy  for  telling  the  truth,  as  if  falsehood  alone  were  pleasing. 

Wednesday  14.    1  preached  nt  brother  Wells's   on  "  It  is  g 
for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted,  that  I  might  learn  thy  statu: 
this  cannot  be  the  language   of   any   but  gracious  souls.     Sim 
think  all  these  things  are  against  them,  and  wonder  what  they  li 
done  more  than  others,  that  they  are   thu?   afflicted.     1  tr> 
afflictions  of  body  and  mind  ;   personal  and  family  ;    in   the   church 
and  in  the  state.     Ah!  my  Lord,  by  whom  shall 
he  is  very  small. 


214  Ri  \-.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1795. 

Sunday  18.  I  preached  in  the  morning  on  Exod.  xx.  the  first 
and  second  commandment.  In  the  afternoon,  on  the  affliction  and 
conversion  of  Manassch,  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  12,  13.  One  young  man 
behaved  amiss,  for  which  I  reproved  him  :  perhaps  he  might  be 
among  those  in  the  evening  who  made  a  riot,  broke  the  windows, 
and  beat  open  the  doors. 

Tuesday  20.  I  read  Mr.  Flavel  on  keeping  the  heart  ;  where 
I  found  some  weighty  sayings.  I  preached  in  the  evening,  and 

brother  Bruce  exhorted.  Mr. came  home  with  me,  pleading 

and  crying  to  God,  and  acknowledging  his  sin  :  who  knoweth  but 
he  will  turn,  repent,  and  find  mercy  !  The  desperate  wickedness 
of  this  people  grieves  and  distresses  my  soul,  so  that  I  am  almost 
in  continual  heaviness  ;  yet,  through  grace,  1  trust  1  am  kept  from 
sin.  I  spent  part  of  this  week  in  writing  and  reviewing  some  ex- 
planatory notes  on  our  form  of  discipline. 

Sunday  25.  I  preached  morning  and  afternoon.  My  soul,  at  sea- 
sons, wadeth  through  deep  waters  for  this  city  and  society  ;  it 
cannot,  in  my  opinion,  continue  long  in  its  present  situation — per- 
haps a  dispensation  of  mercy  or  judgment  is  near. 

Wednesday  28.  I  finished  reading  the  history  of  the  French 
Revolution,  containing  about  eight  hundred  pages,  and  a  surprising 
history  it  is.  They  have  had  heavy  struggles  with  monarchy, 
aristocracy,  and  democracy  ;  and  have  had  martyrs  of  each  and 
every  form. 

Thursday  29.  I  am  sensible  of  not  being  enough  in  prayer : 
this  gives  rne  pain.  There  came  on  a  violent,  awful  storm  of  rain, 
and  what  should  1  do  upon  the  road  in  such  weather  ?  Charleston 
is,  to  me,  one  of  the  most  serious  places  I  ever  was  in. 

Saturday  31.  I  was  in  a  most  distressed,  gloomy  state  of  body 
and  mind.  I  employed^  myself  in  reading,  writing,  and  prayer — 
but  very  uncomfortably. 

Sunday,  February  1. 

"  Still  heavy  is  my  heart, 
Still  sink  my  spirits  down." 

I  went  to  the  church,  and  lectured  on  the  second  table  of  the  law  : 
attending  particularly  to  our  Lord's  comment  on  each  precept.  In 
the  afternoon  I  enlarged  on  Jer.  xxxi.  33. ;  and  I  do  hope  there 
was  some  stir  in  the  hearts  of  the  people  ;  I  had  an  afflictive  night, 
by  the  labours  of  the  day.  I  began  reading  "  Berridge's  Christian 
World  Unmasked."  How  like  the  man  and  his  conversation,  which 
f  have  heard  by  the  hour  thirty  years  ago !  I  think  there  is  some 


. 

tartness  in  hia  Christian  i  he  Checks,  and  dear    I\Ii. 

rietcher,  of  ivliuin    I  IMV  h'-.n-l  Mi-.  !  ;••!•!  ul^i- 
very  great  respect.     1  w;is  in-  :t  with 

horrible  i  coald  come  ont  of  a  <:rtM!u!.  tlii- 

side  of  hell — When  I  pray  in  my  room  with  a  few  poor  <>M 
those  who  walk  the  streets  will  shout   at   me.     Thf   Mnp n.ili 
wickedness  of  the  people  of  this  ;  aid  the  spirit  of  contention 

among  the  professors  of  religion,  most  severely  ai;itat«-  my  mind.    1 
now  spend  my  time  in  running  hastily  through   the  lir-t  volume  of 
the  Hebrew  Bible. 

Thursday  5.  I  was  deeply  dejected.  I  have  been  lately  more 
subject  to  melancholy  than  for  many  years  past,  and  how  can  I 
help  it  :  the  white  and  worldly  people  are  intolerably  ignorant  r>l 
God  ;  playing,  dancing,  swearing,  racing  ;  these  are  their  com- 
mon practices  and  pursuits.  Our  few  male  members  do  not  attend 
preaching;  and  I  fear  there  is  hardly  one  who  walks  with  (' 
the  women  and  Africans  attend  our  meetings,  and  some  few  stran- 
gers also.  Perhaps  it  may  he  necessary  for  me  to  know  how 
wicked  the  world  is,  in  order  that  1  may  do  more  a-  a  president 
minister.  Thpre  is  somr  Mmibrily  hptwern  my  stay  hfro,  :n 
Bath  in  Virginia.  O  how  I  should  prize  a  quiet  retreat  into  the 


woods  ! 

In  reading  Mr.  Wesley's  Journal,  Vol.  I.  page  151.  he  obsen 
'•  I  set  myself  carefully  to  read  N.  Machiavel's  celebrated  Book.    1 

began,"  says  Mr.  W ,  "  with  a  prejudice  in  his  favour,  having 

been  often  informed  he  had  been  misunderstood  and   ^:< atly   mis- 
represented ;  1  weighed  the  sentiments  it  contained  ;  compared  one 
passage  with  another,  and  endeavoured  to  form  a  cool,   impartial 
judgment ;  and  my  most  deliberate  judgment  is,  that  if  all  the  other 
doctrines   of  devils   which  have   been  committed  to  writing   since 
letters  were  in  the  world   were  collected  together  in  one  volume, 
it   would  fall  short  of  this  ;  and  should  a  prince  form  himself  by 
this  book,  so  openly  recommending  hypocrisy,  treachery,   lying. 
robbery,  oppression,  adultery,  and  murder  of  all  kinds.    Domitian 
or  Nero  would  be  angels  of  light  compared  to   that  man." 
wonder  that  Doctor  -      -  should  say  that  the  Methodist  preac! 
were  men  of  true  Machiavilean  principles  :  jml 
the  justice,  this  is  the  mercy  we  arc  to  expect  : 
and  why  ?  because  we  spoil  tfa        ;  g  trade. 

Sunday".   I  preached  on  1'  .  ii.    I.     Brother  Bruce  en: 

tained  us  on  v-  That  your  faith  should  not  stand  in  th- 
men,  but  in  the  power  of  '  I  met  the 


REV.   FRAX  r.Y's    JOURNAL.  [17 

of  Discipline,  and  gave  a  close  talk  about  conformity  to  the  world. 
I  hare  now  finished  the  first  volume  of  Mr.  Wesley's  Journal.  I 
admire  his  candour  and  the  soundness  of  his  sentiments  ;  but  I  need 
say  hut  little,  as  it  will  be  shortly  published  and  speak  for  itself. 

Monday  9.  The  people  have  high  work  below  stairs  laid  off 
for  each  day  this  week.  The  western  regiment  parades  to-day, 
the  eastern  to-morrow  ;  Wednesday  is  the  President's  birth-day  ; 
Thursday,  Friday,  and  Saturday,  come  on  the  races.  I  intend  to 
keep  close  to  my  room,  except  when  attending  meetings  in  the 
evenings.  I  am  in  the  furnace  ;  may  I  come  out  purified  like 
gold  !  It  is  a  dark  Providence  holds  me  here.  Mr.  Phillips  is  here, 
and  in  want  of  money.  Our  friends  opened  their  hearts  and  gave 
him  twenty  or  thirty  dollars.  He  is  not  clear  on  Original  Sin  :  so 
that  we  cannot, nor  dare  not  employ  him;  yet,  notwithstanding  his 
sentiments,  I  hope  he  is  a  good  man  ;  but  good  or  bad,  he  ought 
not  to  starve. 

Monday  16.  I  rode  out  to  take  the  air  ;  and  saw  the  wandering 
air-balloon.  I  am  persuaded  there  are  gracious  souls  among  Mr. 
Hammetf  s  people  ;  some  of  whom  have  left  him,  and  will,  per- 
haps, return.  I  was  employed  in  reading  Mr.  Wesley's  Journab  : 
and  I  am  now  convinced  of  the  great  difficulty  of  journalising. 
Mr.  Wesle}'  was,  doubtless,  a  man  of  very  general  knowledge, 
learning,  and  reading,  to  which  we  may  add,  a  lively  wit  and  hu- 
mour ;  yet,  I  think  I  see  too  much  credulity,  long  flat  narrations, 
and  coarse  letters  taken  from  others  in  his  Journal :  but  when  I 
come  to  his  own  thoughts,  they  are  lively,  sentimental,  interesting, 
and  instructing.  The  Journal  of  a  minister  of  the  Gospel  should 
be  theological :  only  it  will  be  well  to  wink  at  many  things  we 
see  and  hear,  since  men's  feelings  grow  more  and  more  refined. 

Sunday  22.  I  had  no  small  inflammation  ia  my  ear  ;  yet  after  I  got 
to  preaching,  I  was  long  and  loud  ;  warm,  and  very  pointed  :  our 
congregations  are  uncommonly  large.  I  was  recollecting,  by  the 
help  of  Mr.  W  Tournal,  how  long  it  had  been  since  I  became 

acquainted  with  the  Methodists.  I  was  awakened,  (as  I  think.) 
when  about  thirteen  years  six  months  old  ;  at  the  age  of  sixteen 
I  began  to  read  and  pray  in  the  public  congregation  ;  one  year  six 
months  after  this,  publicly  to  exhort  and  expound  God's  holy  word  ; 
at  twenty-one  1  travelled  much  ;  and  in  the  beginning  of  my 
twenty  second  year,  I  travelled  altogether.  I  was  nine  months  in 
Staffordshire,  and  other  adjoining  shires  ;  two  years  in  Bedford- 
shire  circuit,  and  two  in  Salisbury  circuit. 


.    i-r.i.NCia    AsUl  KV    ^   Jubft.V 


Mr.  Wesley,  in   his  Journal,  seems  to  think   that  tlu-   <     . 
the  hinderance  of  the  work  of  Ciod  i-«  wholly  and  entirely  in  man. 
But  may  we  not  ask,  with  reverence,  hath  not  God  nomrtin 
his  own  purposes,  withheld  his  power,  that  no  l!>  Jory  m 

his  sight,  but  feel  that  He  is  all  in  all  ? 

Wednesday  25.  We  had  a  lore-feast  for  the  Africans  ;  and  m;i- 
gave  in  their  experiences  with  life. 

In  the  evening  we  had  a  love-feast  for  the  whites.     I  have  had 
a  long  stay  here,  and  now  rojoice  in  the  hope  of  going  again 
the  field  to  work.     Nothing  would  have  kept  me  here  but  the 
hope  of  preserving  ray  health  the  other  ten  months  of  the  year  ; 
which  will  enable  me  to  run  through   North  and  South  Carol  i 
the  New  Territory,  Virginia,  Maryland,  D.-lawarr,  lYnn-ylv.'.iua, 
Jersey,     New-York,    Connecticut,    Rhode-  Island, 
Province  of  Maine,  New  Hampshire,  Vermont,  and  sometimes  Ken- 
tucky. 

Friday  27,  we  observed  as  a  general  fast.     I  was  weak  in  body 
and  afflicted  with  the  headach  ;  yet  I  met  the  people  in  the  church, 
and  read  Joel  ii.  12  —  18.  1  prayed,  I  wept  before  the  Lord:   I 
fasted  from  two  o'clock  on  Thursday  until  half  past  five  on  1'n 
day.     I  wish  we  could  have  solemn  monthly  fa?t>,  ;md  love-fi 
before  sacrament.     I  hope  the  Lord  will  look  upon  us  generally 
throughout  the  continent,  and  take  away  our  reproach. 

Mr.  Wesley  lived  to  see  two  general  revivals  of  religion,  • 
.it  the  beginning,  the  other  about  thirty-six  years  ago  ;    though, 
doubtless,  they  had  generally  a  gradual   growth  of  religion;   v.  •• 
also  have  had  two  revivals  —  ene  at  the  beginning,  the  other  about 
seven  years  ago  :  the  third  revival  has  now  taken  place  in  1 
land,  and  I  hope  ours  will  soon  follow. 

Saturday  28.  I  attended  the  meeting  of  the  stewards,  and  direct- 
ed that  each  of  the  three  stewards,  in  rotation,  should  receive  am! 
pay  all  moneys,  for  one  third  of  the  year,  and  then  give  place  to 
another  for  the  same  time.  I  also  appointed  a  clerk  to  attend  par- 
ticularly to  the  books. 

Sunday,  March  1.  I  preached  in   the  forenoon   and   afternoon  ; 
and  it  was  thought  the  arrows  of  the  Almighty  flew  abroad.     We 
had  a  melting  sacrament  with  white  and  coloured  people  :  ;:' 
half  a   dozen   of  Mr.    Hammetl's  people  from   Trinity  atUmled. 
The  people  have  had  much  dust  cast  in  their  eyes  in  thi-  pi 
but  now  they  begin  to  see  more  clearly. 

I  am  now  about  packing  up  in  order  to  take  my  leave  of  this 
city  :  I  am  sure  faithful  preaching  will  be  ble?t.     I  have  eflectinlK 
V.-.T  .  II 


. .  r 

oat,  and  we  should  not  have  strength  to  ride  over  the  barren 
sands.  We  accordingly  set  out,  and  rode  twenty-two  miles  to  G.'s  ; 
tried  it  since  1  have  been  here :  my  parting  subject  was  1  Cor, 
xvi.  23,  24.  the  congregation  was  very  large  :  and  if  the  people 
are  prudent,  and  the  preachers  faithful,  we  shall  have  a  work  in 
this  place.  The  poor  Africans  brought  their  blessings,  and  wishes, 
and  prayers  :  dear  souls  !  may  the  Lord  provide  them  pastors  after 
his  own  heart ! 

Thursday  5.  I  left  this  seat  of  wickedness,  not  without  both 
grief  and  joy.  I  never  saw  so  great  a  prospect  here,  and  doubt  if 
there  hath  been  such  an  one  since  the  place  was  first  settled.  We 
crossed  Ashly-River  about  ten  miles  from  town  ;  here  was  a  bridge 
of  value,  which  was  so  damaged  by  the  worms  and  barnacles,  that 
it  stood  only  two  years.  Sister  G.  her  family,  and  a  wagon  were 
on  it  when  it  gave  way ;  it  sunk  with  them  into  the  water,  but 
they  received  no  injury.  We  rode  thirty-five  miles,  eating  some 
biscuit  with  a  little  wine  and  water,  and  came  to  Mr.  Eccles's,  Beach- 
Hill,  near  Eilisto-River.  I  was  somewhat  wearied,  but  happy  in 
iny  solitary  retreat.  I  think  I  have  not  spent  my  time  in  vain  in 
Charleston  :  first,  I  have  had  near  as  many  hearers  as  I  could 
have  found  in  the  country  :  secondly,  there  hath  been  real  fruit 
among  the  white  and  coloured  people  ;  and  such  as  may,  with  cares 
be  preserved.  I  gave  them  a  sermon  at  Squire  Eccles's  near  two 
hours  long.  My  soul  has  peace  ;  and  by  the  help  of  God  I  must 
hasten  eastward  and  heavenward. 

Saturday  7.  We  came  to  Lindsey's  ;  and  after  preaching  to  about 
sixty  people,  had  to  ride  twelve  miles  to  Cattle-Creek  after  four 
o'clock  :  nor  was  that  the  worst ;  a  storm  of  thunder  and  rain  came 
on,  and  had  we  not  stopped,  we  should  have  been  steeped  from 
head  to  foot. 

Sunday  8.  We  had  about  four  hundred  people  at  the  church, 
among  whom  were  a  few  that  loved  and  feared  God  ;  and  many 
that  are  stupid,  and  have  become  hardened  under  the  preaching  of 
the  Gospel.  I  spent  Monday  9  at  brother  M.'s,  and  felt  the 
society  iu  the  city  near  my  heart. 

Wednesday  11.  We  rode  to  S.'s,  where  I  gave  them  a  long 
talk  on  "  The  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation,"  &c.  I  thought 
the  weather  was  too  fine  to  continue  so  long ;  so  we  made  a  push 
and  rode  eighteen  miles  to  P.'s  at  the  Ponds  ;  where  we  supped 
and  breakfasted  at  our  own  expense  ;  and  bought  provision  for 
our  horses.  About  midnight  the  rain  began  to  patter  on  the  long 
shingles — what  could  we  do  ?  if  we  stayed,  our  provision  would  be 


17  r.f. 


where  \vc  stopped  to  eat,  and  feed  ;   and  then  rode  eighteen  n 
more  to  the  widow  Pope'-,  «i\  I.ittli-  S.-ln:i!.i. 

Saturday  14.    I  came  to  A.'s  diapel  ;  htit   the   weather  was  eo 
exceedingly  cold,  and  the   hou.se   so   open,   that  we  went  to 
dwelling  house,  where  I  preached  and    prayed,   and     tin     prople 
said)  stormed  and  scolded.    \Vh<.-n  meetit  .<  r    I      u  the 

still-house,  which,  as  George  Fox  said,  "  Struck  at  m\  and 

we  found  it  necessary  to  deal  plainly  with  brother  -      -  about  hi* 
distillery,  and  to  tell  him  what  we  apprehended  would  be  the  con- 
sequence if  persisted  in  —  Its  natural  tendency  would  be  locorrupf. 
his  family,  and  the  neighbourhood  ;  and  to  destroy  the  society. 
that  the  snare  of  Sitan  may  be  for  ever  broken  !    We  came  to  ' 
meeting-house,   where  we  had  as  wild  and  disorderly  a  c« 
lion  as  could  well  be  without  words  and  blows.    I  preached  a  little, 
;md  stormed  a  great  deal,  but  all   would   not  do.     It  was  an  awful 
day  to  me  ;  but  I  hope  my  labour  was  not  wholly  in  vain.    I  lodged 
at  D.  Earpes's,  who  came  from  Berkley  to  Seleuda,  and  has  been  a 
preacher  twenty  years  ;  I  ordained   him  deacon,  and  joined  his 
daughter  to  a  husband.     Thence  I  came  to  J.'s,  where  there 
another  wedding  :  t  had  work  enough  —  the  bishop  —  the  wedding— 
I  could  hardly  keep  them  serious.    I  preached  on  Isai.  xx\v.  "  —  1 
and  had  an  open  time. 

Wednesday  18.  I  rode  to  R  -  's  and  preached. 

Thursday  17,  and  the  two  following  days,  we  had  work  enough 
to  write  subscription  papers  to  be  sent  abroad  for  the  purpose  of 
collecting  £100  to  finish  Bethel  school,  and  secure  the  hnd  :  but 
my  expectations  are  small  ;  the  people  have  so  little  sense  of  God 
and  religion.  Saturday,  1  opened  the  new  house  on  1  Thess.  v.  ' 
and  on  Sunday  we  had  a  sermon  and  love-feast. 

Tuesday  24.  Crossed   Enoree  at  Anderson's  ford,  in  a  canoe  : 
:.!m  Tyger  at  Crenshaw's  ford,  and  came  to  brother  G  -  's,  near 
(he  Fish-Dam  ford,  on  Broad  River.     What  a  confluence  of  \\.\ 
Jlow  into  the  Santee  in  about  two  hundred  miles,  on  a  straight  line. 
from  the  mouth  ;  and  in  its  meanders,  three  hundred  or  more  ! 

Wednesday  25.  I  preached  and  administered  the  sacrament  at  a 
store  near  the  Fish-Dam  ford  :  this  part  of  the  country  hath  been. 
settled  about  forty  years. 

Thursday  26.  I  found  some  assistance  on  Jcr.  xxxi.  34,  35.  at 
Gregory's  meeting-house,  in  the  woods  ;  and  I  hope  it  was  not  alto- 
gether in  vain.  Last  night  I  spent  an  hour  with  the  blacks  in  their 
•innrter*.  and  it  wn«  well  received  by  thrm  :  it  will  never  f'  • 


Jl£V.  FRANCIS  ASBthl   s  jriVR\ A  j  J79.r}, 

meet  them  with  the  whites  ;  by  this  means  our  preachers  lose  all 
their  fruit ;  many  reasons  might  be  assigned  for  this.  O,  my  soul, 
rest  in  the  Lord  from  moment  to  moment !  All  the  places  I  have 
visited  this  week  are  new,  and  I  hope  the  Lord  will  work  at  some, 
or  all  of  them.  1  exhorted  our  people  to  learn  their  slaves  to  read  ; 
(this  is  greatly  wanting)  they  would  then  understand  preaching 

much  better.    We  crossed  Pacolet,  and  came  to  P 's  ;  my  mind 

was  under  deep  exercises  on  account  of  the  state  of  religion  in  this 
neighbourhood. 

Sunday  29.  Was  an  awful  day — perhaps  the  most  awful  I  shall 
ever  spend  in  this  place.  My  comfort  was  in  the  woods  with  the 
Lord. 

Monday  30.  I  rode  forty  miles  to  M 's  :  my  body  is  weak, 

and  so  is  my  faith  for  this  part  of  the  vineyard.  God  is  my  por- 
tion, saith  my  soul.  This  country  improves  in  cultivation,  wicked- 
ness, mills,  and  stills  ;  a  prophet  of  strong  drink  would  be  accep- 
table to  many  of  these  people.  I  believe  that  the  Methodist  preach- 
ers keep  clear,  both  by  precept  and  example  ;  would  to  God  the 
members  did  so  too  !  Lord  have  pity  on  weeping,  bleeding  Zion  i 

Wednesday,  April  1.  We  rode  thirty  miles  through  a  barren 

country,  and  came,  weak  and  hungry,   to  brother  B 's  clean, 

comfortable  house  ;  and  had  all  things  agreeable.  I  find  it  hard  to 
ride  eight  or  nine  hours  without  any  other  nourishment  but  a  little 
bread  and  tea. 

Friday  3.  Was  a  rainy  day.  I  had  some  talk  with  a  few  blacks, 
and  was  comfortable  and  happy ;  we  lose  much  by  not  meeting 
these  people  alone.  I  find,  generally,  that  those  who  are  held  by 
professors  of  religion  are  hard  to  move. 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Saturday  4,  and  Sunday  5.  Quarterly  meet- 
ing at  Daniel  Asbury's  meeting-house.  I  notice  many  attend 
preaching  at  such  times  as  these,  who  appear  wild,  and  do  not 
know  how  to  behave  themselves.  In  the  afternoon  I  met  the 
poor  blacks  by  themselves,  and  was  greatly  blessed. 

Monday  6.  We  crossed  Catabaw,  rode  thirty-five  miles,  and 
came  to  brother  Fitzhugh's,  where  we  met  with  kind  treatment  to 
sweeten  the  bitter  cup  of  a  hard  and  hungry  day's  ride. 

Thursday  9.    Crossed   Hunting-Creek,    and  came   to   A 's 

meeting  house  in  Surry  county  :  here  I  had  near  three  hundred 
hearers,  to  whom  I  preached  on  Hebr.  v.  12 — 14.  and  had  more 
enlarged  views  of  this  subject  than  I  ever  had  before.  We  have 
had  a  good  work  here  ;  fifty  souls  are  lately  brought  in  :  appear- 


1795.]  RF.V.  FRAKCI*  ASBfRY  f  JOURNAL. 


ances  are  greatly  changed  for  the  better  since  I  was  here  ele 
months  nico 

Friday  10.  We  came  to  G 's,  in  Wilkes  county.      I  feel  awful 

— I  fear  lest  darkness  should  be  felt  here.  Ah,  Lord,  help  me  to 
go  through  good  ;md  evil  report;  prospi  ntv  ;nid  acHerMty; 
storms  and  cidrns  ;  kindness  and  uiikii.dnrs-  .  friends  and  ene- 
mies ;  life  and  death,  in  the  spirit  and  practice  of  the  Gospel  of 
Jesus  Christ ! 

Sunday  12.   1  preached  the  funeral  of  grandmother  G ,  aged 

eighty-seven  or  eighty-eight  years. 

Monday  13.  We  took  our  acceptable  departure — I  cannot  live 
where  God  is  not  acknowledged.  I  passed  through  the  heart  of 
Wilkes  county.  Here  is  a  poor  prospect  of  religion  among  all 
sects.  We  came  in  the  evening  to  the  house  of  a  poor,  honest 
man.  Bless  God  !  we  can  embrace  the  poor  cabins,  and  find 
shelter.  The  people  are  kind  and  free  with  what  they  have. 

Wednesday  15.  I  preached  on  Hebr.  iv.  1.  to  many  people, 
collected  from  various  parts,  at  brother  White's,  on  John's  Kiver, 
and  was  greatly  assisted. 

Thursday  16.  We  h;id  preaching,  and  were  engaged  in  writing 
letters  and  copying  the  minutes.  My  soul  enjoys  sweet  peace  ; 
but  1  see  an  awful  danger  of  losing  that  simple  walking  and  living 
in  the  enjoyment  of  God. 

Friday  17,  I  observed  as  a  day  of  rigid  fasting— this  I  cannot  do 
more  than  once  a  month.     I  am  frequently  obliged  to  go  on  three 
cups  of  tea,  with  a  little  bread,  for  eight  or  nine  hours,  and  to  rid- 
many  miles,  and  preach,  and  perform  my  other  ministerial  labours. 

Sunday  19.  We  had  a  crowded  congregation,  and  a  moving  sea- 
son at  the  sacrament.  Monday  and  Tuesday  we  directed  our 
course  up  John's  River. 

Wednesday  22.  Crossed  the  Ridge,  and  kept  on  to  the  west- 
ward. We  went  Major  J.  White's  path,  and  found  it  abundantly 
better  than  the  old  one.  We  reached  the  top  of  the  Ridge  in 
about  six  miles  ;  hero  we  found  ourselves  among  fruitful  lulls  • 
then  we  had  a  good  path  for  «ix  miles  more,  except  where  there 
were  some  laurel  brandies  and  roots.  \Vp  stopped  at  S—  -*8,  and 
it  wa*  well  we  did,  or  we  should  have  been  well  nich  start  ed.  both 

man  and    horse.      I  «ent  on    to   D '$,   and  thence  to  NrNt-n'? 

whore  I  met  with  brothers  B ,  A—   --,  and  W .  anaent  men 

among  us.  I  stood  the  fatigue,  nnd  sleeping  three  in  a  bed,  better 
than  I  exported.  From  While's  to  Nelson's  ^  eighty  miles.  \\  < 
Tossed  the  Wattawba  about  twenty  limes.  At  supper  we  a' 


UEV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1795.. 

the  perch  that  are  taken  in  great  plenty  from  Smith's  fish  spring. 
I  judge  there  must  be  a  subterraneous  communication  from  that  to 
the  river.  I  felt  uncomfortable  in  rny  mind,  as  I  feared  the  Lord 
had  left  this  place.  I  was  led  to  speak  with  life  and  power  on 
"  Will  ye  also  go  away  ?"  I  spent  a  night  with  brother  Whitaker ; 
I  wish  his  wife  may  not  love  him  to  death. 

TENNESSEE. — Monday  27.  We  hasted  to  F.  Earnest's,  on  Nola- 
chucky-River  ;  where  we  hold  our  western  conference.  Here 
six  brethren  from  Kentucky  met  us,  and  we  opened  our  conference 
with  twenty-three  preachers,  fifteen  of  whom  were  members. 
We  received  every  man's  account  of  himself  and  his  late  labours  ; 
and  inquired  of  each  man's  character  among  his  brethren.  Our 
business  was  conducted  with  great  love  and  harmony.  Our  bre- 
thren have  built  a  meeting-house,  and  I  must  needs  preach  the  first 
sermon  ;  which  I  did  on  Exod.  xx.  24.  Notwithstanding  it  was  a 
time  of  great  scarcity,  we  were  well  and  most  kindly  entertained. 

Friday,  May  1.  We  rode  thirty  miles  to  Holstein,  without  food 
for  man  or  horse  :  but  when  we  came  to  brother  Baker's  we  had 
food  and  friendship.  My  feelings  were  disagreeable.  In  addi- 
tion to  the  heat  of  the  weather  and  the  fatigue  I  have  gone 
through,  I  have  not  slept  five  hours  a  night,  one  night  with  ano- 
ther, for  five  nights  past. 

Saturday  2.  On  our  way  we  called  to  see  father  A.  where  we 
ied  and  prayed  ;  and  in  the  eveniug  reached  Abingdon  ;  being  the 
time  and  place  of  the  sitting  of  the  district  court. 

VIRGINIA. — Sunday  3.  I  gave  them  a  sermon,  and  although  it 
was  so  public  a  time,  we  had  great  decency  in  the  congregation. 
Rode  thirteen  miles  in  the  evening. 

Monday  4.  We  rode  thirty-five  miles  to  the  head  branches  of 
the  main  Holstein,  and  the  next  day  reached  Alfred's,  on  New- 
River. 

Wednesday  6.  We  rode  to  Pepere's  ferry,  and  made  it  thirty- 
five  miles  to  M< Daniel's.  Thursday,  we  rode  to  brother  W.'s, 
near  Fincastle,  thirty-eight  miles  :  the  toils  of  this  journey  have 
been  great,  the  weather  sultry,  the  rides  long,  and  roads 
rough.  We  suffered  from  irregularity  in  food  and  lodging ;  al- 
though the  people  are  very  kind,  and  give  us  the  best  they  have, 
and  that  without  fee  or  reward  ;  so  that  I  have  only  spent  about 
two  shillings  in  riding  about  two  hundred  miles.  I  hope  posterity 
will  be  bettered  by  my  feeble  efforts.  I  have  rode  two  hundred 
and  twenty  miles  in  seven  days  and  a  half,  and  am  so  exceedingly 
o'ltdone  and  oppressed  with  pain,  weariness,  and  want  of  sleep, 


'•J-j  ..••.     * 

that  I  have  hardly  courage  lu  do  any  thing.  -Hail,  happy  day 
of  rest!  It  draws  nigh,  and  this  labour  and  toil  will  soon  be  at  an 
end  ! 

Saturday  ft.  I  conforred  with  the  travelling  and  local  preacher - 
at  E»  Mitchell's.  Sunday  1(),  the  preachers  and  people  were 
solemn  whilst  I  enforced  "  Grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.' 

Monday  11.     I  rode  forty  miles  to  Mi     Maker's  at  the  Calf-Pa- 
(ure,   and   the    next   day  thiily-tive    to   JMcorrV      \V«-dne«;d.iy 
rode   twenty-four  miles   to    Kcck-Town,   and   preached   at   tfi 
o'clock  ;  and  again   the  next  day      Here  1  met  the  trustees  of  our 
school,  to  whom  I  read  my  Thoughts  on  Kducation.     In  the  eve- 
ning I  left  the  town,  and  on  Friday  \'t,  rode  forty  miles. 

Saturday  16.  I  had  a  hard  push  to  Newtown  quarterly  meeting, 
where,  after  delivering  a  short  discourse,  I  held  a  conference 
\vith  the  local  preachers  and  leaders.  I  enjoyed  myself  among 
these  people  ;  they  are  not  quite  as  lively  as  heretofore,  but  God 
is  still  with  them.  Sabbath  day,  after  sacrament,  love-feast,  and 
ordination,  I  preached  with  some  freedom  on  2  Peter  iii.  17,  1 
Upon  the  whole  my  soul  is  refreshed  ;  although  I  have  been  on 
the  run,  and  have  wrote  none  in  my  Journal  for  more  than  a  week. 

Monday  IS.  We  rode  to  Charlestown,  Jeflerson  county,  and 
lodged  with  a  pious  physician.  Next  morning  breakfasted  wit!; 

H ,  and  then  came  to  Harper's  ferry,  where  the  impendm:. 

rocks  impress  the  mind  of  the  traveller  with  terror  ;  and  should 
they  fall,  would  crush  him  to  pieces  :  this  scene  is  truly  awfil  am! 
romantic.  We  came  to  S.  Phillip's,  hut  were  not  expected  until  next 
week  :  so  I  directed  my  course  to  Baltimore. 

MARYLAND. — Wednesday  20.  I  passed  Kredericktowu  ;  thence  to 
Liberty  Toivn.  where  I  stopped,  conversed,  and  prayed,  and  then 
came  on  to  brother  Warfield's,  thirty  miles. 

Thursday  21.  We  set  out  for  Baltimore  ;  the  rain  came  on  very 
heavily  ;  I  have  not  felt,  nor  seen  such,  since  the  sixth  of  March, 
since  which  time  I  have  rodo  nbout  one  thousand  two  hundred 
miles.  This  day  I  heard  of  tin  -Icalh  of  one,  among  my  best 
Iriends  in  America — Judge  W'hitc,  of  Keut  county,  in  the  state  of 
Delaware.  This  news  was  attended  with  an  awful  shock  to  me.  I 
have  met  with  nothing  like  it  in  th'-  drath  of  any  I'ri'-iiii  on  the 
continent.  Lord  help  us  all  to  live  out  our  sh  irt  day  to  thy  glory  ' 
I  have  lived  days,  weeks,  and  months  in  his  house.  O  (hat  In-  !• 
moval  may  be  sanctified  to  my  good  and  the  good  of  the  family 
.He  was  about  sixty-five  years  of  age.  lie  was  a  friend  to  the 
poor  and  oppressed  ;  ho  had  been  a  professed  churchman,  and  * 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY5S  JOURNAL.  [1795, 

united  to  the  Methodist  connexion  about  seventeen  or  eighteen 
years.  His  house  and  heart  were  always  open  ;  and  he  was  a 
faithful  friend  to  liberty  in  spirit  and  practice  ;  he  was  a  most  in- 
dulgent husband,  a  tender  father,  and  an  affectionate  friend.  He 
professed  perfect  love,  and  great  peace,  living  and  dying. 

Sunday  24.  I  preached  twice  in  town,  and  was  delivered  from  my 
gloomy  state  of  mind.  I  spent  part  of  the  week  in  visiting  from 
house  to  house.  I  feel  happy  in  speaking  to  all  I  find,  whether 
parents,  children,  or  servants  ;  I  see  no  other  way  ;  the  common 
means  will  not  do  ;  Baxter,  Wesley,  and  our  Form  of  Discipline, 
say,  "  Go  into  every  house  :"  I  would  go  farther,  and  say,  go  into 
every  kitchen  and  shop — address  all,  aged  and  young,  on  the  sal- 
vation of  their  souls. 

Wednesday  27.  1  read  "  The  Dawn  of  Universal  Peace  ;"  and 
the  second  and  third  volume  of  Walker's  Sermons.  Thursday, 
my  mind  was  under  deep  exercises,  unknown  to  all  but  God  alone. 

Saturday  31.  I  met  the  Africans,  to  consult  about  building  a 
house,  and  forming  a  distinct  African,  yet  Methodist  church. 

Friday,  June  5.  I  came  in  peace  to  Cokesbury.  Stayed  on  Satur- 
day ;  and  gave  them  a  sermon  on  the  shortness  of  time  : — thence 
came  through  dust  and  heat  to  North-East.  Sunday,  I  preached 
within  the  frame  of  a  house  that  is  begun,  to  a  number  of  sinners. 

Monday  8.  I  preached  twice  ;  and  came  in  the  evening  to  Mr. 
Bassett's,  on  the  Manor.  I  have  great  inward  distress  in  my  soul. 
I  felt,  when  in  prayer,  as  if  the  Lord  would  restore  sister  Moore  to 
health  ;  time  will  determine  whether  the  impression  is  of  the  Lord. 

Tuesday  9.  We  hasted  on  to  Georgetown.  Some  are  of  opinion 
that will  receive  £200  per  annum  or  more,  Glebe  subscrip- 
tions, &c.  this  is  more  than  64  dollars  ;  and  even  that  he  seldom 
received  among  us.  He  was  always  very  generous,  and  did  not 
serve  us  for  money.  He  did  certainly  run  well.  I  was  low 
in  body  and  mind  ;  and  very  flat  in  preaching.  Dear  brother 

B ,  who  attended  me  with  his  carriage  to  North-East  the  last 

time  I  was  here,  is  now  gone  to  rest.  Oh  !  how  short  is  the  life 
of  man!  we  roust  needs  come  on  to  Chester-Town.  Still  languid 
in  body,  and  my  spirits  under  an  awful  fit  of  dejection  at  reviexving 
the  state  of  persons  and  things.  I  was  quite  unwell,  and  crowded 
•with  company  :  my  subject  in  town  was  Psalm  li.  9 — 13.  We  then 

rode  fifteen  miles  home  with  brother  C ;  my  body  and  spirit 

still  very  low.  O  !  my  Lord,  help  me  through  all  my  afflictions. 
Ah!  what  a  comfortable  thing  it  is  to  be  among  the  ancient  Metho- 
dists !  But  this  is  not  always  my  place  ;  indeed,  it  cannot  be. 


1795.]  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOVRNAF . 

Tuesday  11.  Still   under  awful  depression.      I  am  not  conscioat 
of  any  sin,  even  in  thought  ;    but  the  imprudence    and   unfaithful- 
ness of  others  bear  heavily  on  my  heart  ;    I  feel  a  degree  of  »il 
lingness  to  decline,  die,  and  enter  into  rest.     For  the  lirM  tniif,    1 
visited  Centreville,  and  preached   in  the  new  house  :  some  of  the 
people   felt  awful.      I   saw    Doctor   Hall,   who   is  greatly  ch.u 
since  1792,  and  under  deep  exercise  about  preaching  ;  so  that  he 
cannot  attend  to  his  practice,  and  appears  to  be  lost  in  thought.     1 
wrote  to  him  to  try  llaltimore  :  it  is  a  pity  such  a  man  of  sentiment, 
learning,   and   fine   feeling,  should  be  lost.     1  rode  home  with  K. 
VV.  he  is  rich  in  the  world,  but  wants  more  of  the  life  of  religion  : 
he  appears  still  to  love  the  preachers,  and  the  cause   of  God.     1 
received  information    that  Doctor    M        -'s  wife,  before  she  died, 
manumitted  her  favourite  servant-maid;  not  long  after  tlu-  Doctor 
himself  was  called  away  ;  but  before  his  removal   he  manumitted 
all  his  slaves.     This  man  claimed  nn  high  Gospel  light,   and   pro- 
fessed no  more  religion  than  the  generality  of  thp  world  among  us 
do.     1  have  a  hope  that  God  is  preparing  me  for  greater  useful- 
ness in  my  latter  days.    Oh  how  happy  should  I  be,  if  after  labour- 
ing thirty  years,  as   I   sometimes  fear,  to   very  little  profit,  if  it 
should  hereafter  appear  that  hundreds  have  been  converted  by  my 
ministry  !  Of  late  1  have  had  but   little  to  do,   but   pray,  preach, 
ride,  converse,  and  take  my  necessary  refreshment. 

Saturday  13.  We  crossed  Choptank-Uiver  at  Ennall's  ferry  , 
we  had  nine  men,  three  horses,  and  a  carriage  on  board,  and  a 
very  indifferent  boat,  but  through  a  kind  Providence  we  got  safe 
over.  When  I  first  landed  I  felt  a  damp  on  my  spirits,  which  I 
feared  was  ominous  of  persons  and  things.  Our  friends  were 
loving  at  the  Dorset  quarterly  meeting,  but  not  very  lively  ;  how- 
ever there  was  some  stir  in  the  love-feast.  At  eleven  o'clock  we 
had  nearly  a  thousand  people  collected,  but  they  are  awfully 
hardened.  We  had  a  heavy  time  :  I  felt  much  like  what  I  sup- 
pose Jonah  felt.  We  were  furnished  richly  with  the  comforts  of 
life.  I  came  to  the  dwelling-house  of  my  dear  friend  Judge  White 
(whose  death  I  have  already  mentioned)  —  it  was  like  his  fum  i  il 
to  me.  I  learned  since  I  came  here,  and  I  think  it  worthy  of  ob- 
servation, that  just  before  he  died,  unknown  to  hi-  \\itr.  he  had 
?howed  Samuel,  his  son,  his  books,  and  given  directions  concerning 
his  house,  &c.  He  then  came  to  his  wifo,  and  sai.l.  "  I  lc<  I  -  I 
never  felt  before, "and  gave  certain  directions  concerning  lii^  lnm.il 
DELAWARE. — Wednesday  17.  I  had  a  solemn  -.i-on  it  hover. 
I  spent  the  evening  with  Doctor  A.  Ridgcley,  in  the  lute  dwelhng- 
VOL.  II.  l-'P 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1795. 

house  of  his  father.  In  some  houses  we  serve  the  fathers,  not 
the  children  ;  in  some  the  children,  not  the  fathers  ;  and  in  some 
we  serve  both  parents  and  children. 

Thursday  18.  I  preached  at  Duck-Creek  Cross-Roads,  where 
there  has  been  a  great  revhnl  of  religion. 

Friday  19.  I  set  out  for  Philadelphia,  and  came   to  Whiteclay 

and  Redclay  Creeks.     I  saw  my  old  friend  S.  H once  more. 

I  must  needs  preach,  although  I  had  rode  thirty-five  or  forty 
miles.  Next  day  I  called  at  Chester,  and  found  my  dear  sister 
Withy  unwell  and  in  trouble.  0  may  I  meet  her  in  heaven 
at  last  ! 

PE.VNSYLVA.MA. — Sunday  21.  I  preached  in  the  city  of  Philadel- 
phia three  times,  not  with  the  success  I  would  wish.  I  was  ex- 
ceedingly assisted  in  meeting  the  classes,  in  which  I  spent  three 
days,  and  am  now  of  opinion  that  there  is  more  religion  among  the 
society  than  I  expected. — I  trust  both  they  and  myself  will  re- 
member this  visit  for  days  to  come.  I  was  also  much  quickened 
in  meeting  the  local  preachers  and  leaders,  who  spoke  feelingly 
of  the  state  of  their  souls  and  the  work  of  God.  I  now  go  hence 
to  meet  new  troubles,  and  to  labour  while  feeble  life  shall  last. 

Thursday  25.   1  rode  to  Cross-weeks. 

Friday  2G.  Although   very  poorly  I   reached  brother  B 's. 

I  was  happy  in  this  family,  and  addressed  most  of  them  concerning 
their  souls. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Saturday  27.  I  came  to  Elizabethtown,  and  found 
brother  Morrell  (who  had  been  bled  and  physiced  almost  to 
death,)  «n  the  recovery.  My  troubles  are  greater  than  ever  : 
my  body  is  weak,  and  my  spirits  very  low.  At  the  request  of  my 
friends,  I  stayed  in  town  until  Sunday,  and  was  assisted  in  a  manner 
I  least  expected,  in  preaching  to  about  eighty  people  from  1  Cor. 
xv.  58.  :  after  sermon  I  called  the  society  together,  and  had  a  melt- 
ing time  in  speaking  personally  to  each.  I  attended  the  Bowery 
church  in  the  afternoon  ;  and  the  minister  spoke  largely  on  "  That 
your  faith  might  not  stand  in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in  the  power 
of  God." 

NEW- YORK. — Monday  29.  I  came  to  New-York  the  new  way  by 
Newark  bridges,  which  are  well  established  over  Second  and  Pas- 
saick  rivers  :  it  is  the  nearest  way  to  New-York,  and  preserves  the 
traveller  from  heat  in  the  summer,  and  cold  in  the  winter  :  from 
moschetos,  and  delays  by  winds,  and  other  incidents.  I  began 
meeting  the  women's  classes,  and  felt  happy,  and  found  the  Lord 
amongst  the  sisters. 


1795.]  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURv's  JOL'UNAr 

Saturday  July  4.       Being   the    anniversary    uf    Independeii 
the   bells   ringing,   drums    healing,    »nn-    linn-,    and  orations  on 
liberty,   and   equality    too,    are   not   forgotten.      I  see  tin-  need  o! 
being  more   watchful   among  the   best  of   men  :    a  spirit  of  l»v- 
exists  among  the  preachers  ;   but  we  are  far  from  In -m^  ,i>  -puilual 
as  we  ought  to  be.     The  Rev.  Mr.  Ogden  was  kind  enough  to  pi.-- 
sent  me  with  his  first  volume  On  Revealed  I,   II^IMI,  ;   u  cont.n 
soft,  yet  general  answer  to  the  deistical    athri-tical   oraclo  »\  tin- 
day,  Thomas  Paine  :   it  is  a  most  excellent  compilation,  tak»  n  tnm- 
a  great  numbur  of  ancient  and  modern  u  ritei  -  un  the  »ide  of  truth  . 
and  will  be  new  to  common  readers.     So  far  as  1  have  n-ad.  I 
recommend  it  to  those  who  wish  for  full  information  on  tin 
I  met  the  official  members  of  the  society  ;  and  liad  some  i  lo-r  talk 
on   the    doctrine   and   discipline   of  the  church  :     I  asked  il  tin  \ 
wished  to  be  Methodists  ?  But  how  could  1  suppose  any  tiling  eltt, 
when  they  had  been  a  society  of  nearly  thirty  years  standing? 

Sunday  5.  I  preached  in  Brooklyn  in  the  morning,  and  returned 
to  assist  in  the  sacrament  in  the  afternoon  at  the  new  church  ;  1 
then  met  the  black  classes  ;  and  preached  at  half  past  six  ;  I  closed 
my  day's  work  by  meeting  two  men's  classes. 

Monday  6.  1  met  nine  classes  ;  so  that  I  have  now  spoken  to 
most  of  the  members  here,  one  by  one.  I  left  the  city  in  peace, 
and  received  of  their  bounty  toward>  hearing  my  expenses.  We 
came  to  Stamford  ;  where  1  preached  in  a  private  house. 

CONNECTICUT. — Rode  thirty-three  miles  to  Stratford  ;  the  pi 
pects  here  are  great  as  to  the  fruits  of  the   earth.     My  body  was 
weak  and  my  faith  still  more  so  ;  however,  I  gave  them  a  sermon 
on  John   iii.    19 — 21.  ;    and   the   house   was   crowded    inside   and 
out. 

Friday  10.  We  had  a  very  warm  ride,  fourteen  mile?,  to  New- 
Haven.  I  think  it  is  as  sultry  here  as  it  was  the  tenth  of  June  in 
Delaware.  Nothing  would  do  but  I  must  preach  iti  Doctor  1  <l 
ward's  meeting-house  ;  which  1  did,  on  these  words,  '  I,  doubt- 
less, and  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  know- 
ledge of  Jesus  Christ  my  Lord." 

Saturday  11.     I  came  to  Middletown  :   we  had  a  prayer-meetii: 
and  I  spent  some  time  in  visiting  from  house  to  hou-r. 

Sunday  12.  Brother  Roberts  being  indisposed,  I  had  to  give  them 
two  sermons  at  the  farms,  and  one  at  the  court-lion  - 

Monday  13.   We  had  some  life  at  Middle  I  lad.lam.     Tue-da\   U, 
preached   at  New-London   about   six  o'clock,  where    1  found  D 
of  the  preachers  present.     Wednesday  1"-,  we  opened  on 


228  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1795. 

rence,  which  consisted  of  about  twenty  members,  and  sat  until 
noon  on  Saturday.  We  had  great  peace  in  our  conference  ;  but 
some  exercises  relative  to  externals,  arose  from  the  ancient  contest 
about  baptism,  these  people  being  originally  connected  with  those 
that  are  of  that  line.  O  !  what  wisdom,  meekness,  patience,  and 
prudence,  are  necessary  !  Our  brethren  were  exceeding  kind  ;  and 
I  hope  this  conference  will  be  for  the  good  of  the  people  in  this 
place,  and  thousands  besides. 

Monday  20.  We  took  our  leave  of  town,  and  set  off  for  our  re- 
spective appointments.  Two  of  our  British  brethren  from  the 
West  Indies,  Harper  and  Kingston,  who  had  fled  here  to  save  their 
lives,  (i.  e.  if  possible  to  recover  their  health,)  were  with  us  :  I 
was  pleased  to  see  our  preachers  ready  to  give  their  strange  bre- 
thren a  little  of  the  little  they  had.  I  came  to  Norwich,  fifteen 
miles,  and  preached  at  eight  o'clock  A.  M.  in  the  academy,  (formerly 
the  Separate  meeting-house.)  It  was  a  most  awful  time  of  heat. 

RHODE-ISLAND. — Tuesday  21.  We  rode  twelve  miles  to  Plain- 
field  ;  and  after  resting  and  feeding,  we  came  to  Coventry,  in  Pro- 
vidence. My  fatigue  and  indisposition  made  me  glad  to  get  to 
bed.  The  people  here  have  made  some  attempts  to  improve  the 
state  of  the  roads  ;  and  really  they  need  it,  for  they  are  properly 
made  up  of  rocks  and  stones. 

Wednesday  22.    At  brother   L 's  I   ordained   D.   M'C 

from  Passamaquoddy  ;  who  is  as  one  born  out  of  due  time.  He 
has  been  labouring  between  the  British  and  American  boundaries. 
I  consider  it  fifty  hard  miles  from  New-London  to  General  Lip- 
pelt's  :  we  have  been  the  best  of  three  days  riding  it,  through  the 
intense  heat ;  and  last  year  I  rode  it  in  one  day.  I  feel  a  moving 
towards  these  people,  as  though  the  Lord  would  get  himself  a  name, 
and  have  a  people  to  praise  him  in  this  place.  I  feel  myself 
greatly  humbled  before  the  Lord,  for  the  peace  and  union  in  our 
late  conference  ;  and  the  satisfaction  expressed  by  the  preachers 
on  receiving  their  stations. 

Thursday  23.  We  came  in  the  evening  to  Providence  :  when 
we  entered  the  town,  some  'drunken  fellows  raised  a  cry  and 

shout,  and  made  a  sacrifice  of  the  Methodists  to  hell.  Mr. 

is  now  pastor  of,  and  the  Tennant-house  is  shut  against  us.  I 
wished  to  ride  on,  and  not  to  stop  in  town  ;  but  Mr.  Robertson,  an 
ancient  Englishman,  constrained  us  to  turn  in  with  him.  We  dined 
at  Milton  ;  and  made  it  thirty  miles  to  Boston,  where  I  preached 
twice  on  the  Sabbath,  (though  very  unwell)  in  a  room  that  will 
hold  about  two  hundred  and  fifty  people.  It  seemed  as  if  w<? 


1795.]  RF.V.   FRANCIS  ASBt'Rv's  JOVRNAI..  229 

hardly  had  either  cursing  or  blessing  among  the  people  here.  I 
have  no  doubt  but  that  if  we  had  a  house,  \ve  should  command  a 
large  congregation  ;  but  we  labour  under  gr«-at  inronv<-iiirnce-» 
where  we  preach  at  present.  1  feel  myself  fri-ldf  m  liudv  and 
faint  in  spirit  ;  yet  Christ  is  mine,  and  I  hope  to  be  his  in  time  and 
for  ever  :  Amen. 

MASSACHUSETTS. — Monday  27.  I  rode  through  some  rain  to  Lynn. 
I  was  much  shut  up  and  distressed  in  mv  public  c\>  iu-'-s  :  my  con- 
gregations were  large  and  lifeless.  Since  I  have  been  in  Lynn,  I  1 
visited  Woodsend  and  Gravesend,  met  five  classes,  vi.-itcd  admit 
one  dozen  families,  nnd  talked  to  them  personally  about  their  souls, 
and  prayed  with  them.  I  have  filled  up  intervals  in  r»-;nlin-  my 
Bible,  and  the  second  volume  of  Mr.  \\Y-lr\-  >.TIHOIIS.  Oli.huv. 
I  wish  our  preachers  and  people  to  read  his  .lournal-,  >ermons,  and 
Notes  !  My  body  is  afflicted,  but  my  soul  is  serene. 

Thursday  30.  1  preached  OQ  Isaiah  Iv.  10,  11.  Friday  \va<  ari 
excessively  rainy  day.  My  spirits  were  sunk  into  dejection.  I 
feel  no  passion,  but  grieve  and  sorrow  :  to  move,  more,  seems  to  be 
my  life.  I  now  lament  that  I  did  not  set  off  with  tiie  young  men  to 
the  Province  of  Maine.  There  are  some  tender,  gracious  soul-  in 
this  town  ;  especially  among  the  members  of  society. 

Sunday,  August  2.  Was  a  very  warm,  sultry  day.  I  rose  in 
morning  very  feeble  in  spirit,  and  attended  prayer-meeting  at  M 
o'clock.  I  preached  three  times  ;  administered  the  sacrament,  and 
met  two  classes,  and  was  not  so  fatigued  as  I  expected  1  >hould 
have  been.  I  have  had  some  refreshing  seasons  ;  and  now  I  bid 
farewell  to  Lynn  for  two  years.  I  rode  a  solitary  way  through 
Maiden,  Mistick,  and  North-Cambridge  ;  and  preached  at  Walt- 
ham,  at  five  o'clock,  to  a  few  people  :  the  great  rain  prevented 
many  from  attending.  Brother  Roberts  took  an  intermittent  fever 
when  we  were  at  New-Haven,  and  hath  laboured  and  suffered,  sirk 
or  well,  until  he  is  almost  dead.  I  received  from  the  quarterly 
meeting  held  in  Fairfield  circuit,  what  I  should  be  glad  to  receive 
once  a  year  from  every  circuit  in  the  Union.  It  w.i?  as  folio* 
"The  preachers  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  order  who  have  tra- 
velled on  this  circuit  since  the  last  conference,  have  so  conducted 
themselves  that  their  characters  are  unimpeachable.'  ed  by 

the  local  preachers,  exhorters,  stewards,  and  lead' 

Tuesday  4.  Brother  L—  -  and  myself  came  ten  mil- •«  to  Frarn- 
ingham,  whore  I  preached  to  a  simple-hearted  people  :  and 
although  weak  in  body,  1  frit  enlargement  of  heart-;  here  the  so- 


230  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1795. 

ciely  appeared  to  be  all  tenderness,  sweetness,  and  love.  After 
riding  thirty  miles  to  Milford,  (being  an  excessive  day  of  heat  and 
hunger,)  I  preached  on  Isaiah  xxxv.  3—6.  To  my  great  surprise, 
whilst  I  was  preaching,  brother  Roberts,  whom  I  had  left  sick  at 
Waltham,  came  in  ;  I  was  amazed  that  he  should  ride  thirty  miles 
through  such  heat  without  eating  or  drinking  ;  it  was  enough  to 
make  a  well  man  sick. 

Thursday  6.  We  set  out  for  Thompson  in  Connecticut,  whence 
we  came  to  dear  brother  Nichols's  :  if  I  had  not  eaten,  I  could  not 
have  stood  the  labour  of  thirty  miles,  and  preaching.    I  found  there 
was  religion  among  this  society  ;  the  ancient  people  are  stirred  up 
by  the  Baptists,  and  the  young  ones  by  the  Methodists. 

Saturday  8.  We  rode  twenty-six  miles  to  Wilbraham  ;  I  was  well 
nigh  spent,  and  brother  Roberts  was  ready  to  drop  on  the  road 
side.  I  spoke  late  ;  the  weather  was  warm  ;  I  took  but  little  rest 
for  my  body,  and  my  mind  was  powerfully  tried  various  ways. 

Sunday  morning  9.  My  first  subject  was  the  parable  of  the  sower, 
afterward  the  sacrament  was  administered :  I  thought  it  a  dull 
time ;  but  others  did  not  think  so.  I  gave  them  another  discourse 
in  the  afternoon  on  "  The  promise  is  to  you  and  to  your  children." 
It  was  a  running  exhortation,  chiefly  application.  In  the  even- 
ing brother  Roberts,  though  weak  in  body,  gave  them  a  sermon  on 
"My  little  children  for  whom  I  travail  in  birth  again  till  Christ  be 
formed  in  you."  I  see  but  little  prospect  of  good  being  done  here 
whilst  the  people  are  so  divided. 

Monday  10.  I  stopped  and  gave  an  exhortation  at  Springfield: 
After  a  thunder-gust,  we  came  on  to  Agawomin.  If  I  accomplish 
the  tour  I  have  in  contemplation,  it  will  make  about  six  or  seven 
hundred  miles  to  the  city  of  New-York.  I  was  stopped  by  the 
rain  :  but  when  I  cannot  do  one  thing  another  offers  ; — I  could 
read,  write,  pray,  and  plan.  I  laid  out  apian  for  my  travels  in  1797  ; 
through  Connecticut,  Rhode-Island,  Massachusetts,  Province  of 
Maine,  New-Hampshire,  Vermont,  and  New- York:  making  a  dis- 
tance of  twelve  or  fifteen  hundred  miles.  1  set  out  for  Williams- 
town  on  the  banks  of  Hoosack,  on  the  west  borders  of  Massachu- 
setts ;  I  lodged  at  sister  H.'s  ;  I  was  well  steeped  in  water,  although 
ray  cloak  saved  me  in  a  good  degree  as  is  frequently  the  case. 
My  rest  was  interrupted.  To  labour  hard  all  the  day,  and  have 
no  sleep  at  night,  ill  suit  the  flesh.  Well  might  St.  Paul  say.  "  If 
in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in  Christ,  we  are  of  all  men  most 
miserable."  To  labour  and  to  suffer  by  night  and  by  day,  meet 


1795.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASUURv's  JOURNAL. 

reproach,  give  up  father  and  mother,  wife,  children,  country, 
liberty,  ease,  health,  wealth,  and  finally,  sometimes  life  itselt  m 
martyrdom  : — all  this  may  he  required. 

VERMONT. — Friday  '21.  We  rode  in  the  afternoon  into  the  woods 
of  Bpnnington,  and  preached  at  brother  D.'s,  and  Ltd  ;t  m<  Inn-, 
comfortable  season  with  about  fifty  souU.  There  are  -im,. 
Deists,  Universalists,  ice.  and  they  all  have  something  In  i:iy  about 
religion.  I  have  felt  awful  for  this  place  and  people  ;  but  (in, I  i-- 
able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up  children  unto  Abraham.  I  feel 
my  soul  stayed  upon  Ciod,  although  I  am  m  heaviness  through  mani- 
fold temptations.  .. 

Saturday  22.  Brother  Roberts  and  myself  parted  :  he  went  to 
Pownell,  and  myself  to  Ashgrove,  where  we  hav;1  a  society  of 
about  sixty  members  :  they  originated  with  P.  Embury,  who  left  the 
city  of  New-York  when  the  British  preachers  came  tin  i •••.  !!•• 
continued  to  pursue  his  purpose  of  forming  societies  in  the  country  ; 
but  dying  in  a  few  years,  the  society  was  left,  and  were  without 
preaching  by  the  Methodists  for  fifteen  years  :  we  have  now  a  ne.it 
little  chapel  here. 

Sunday  23.    I  had  a  free,  open  time,  with  a  few  feeling  soul*  on 
Luke  xi.  1.      In  the    afternoon,  1  visited  a  neglected  people  anmn^ 
the  hills,  and  had  an  attentive  congregation.     This  day  I  enj> 
peace  of  soul,  and  was   happy  in  Christ. — After  riding  fifty  mil-  - 
1  found  myself  at  home  at  this  place,  (Asbgrove.) 

CONNECTICUT. — My  soul  has  been  much  quickened  thi-  S.»bb,ith, 
and  I  find  a  difference  between  being  among«t  stints  and   MIM 
We  came  through  Cambridge  county,  now  Washington  ;  and  p 
Argyletown,  named  after  Argylc,  in  Scotland.   We  came  to  brother 

M 's  ;   we  and  our  horses  were  quite  weary  ;   but  it  is  enough 

the  Lord  is  with  us  ;  let  this  suffice  at  all  times,  and  in  every  pi 
We  came  through  a  mere  wilderness   of  swamp  :   the  roots  of  the 
white  pine,  beech,  and  hemlock  were  a  good  deal  in  our  way.     We 
reached    Westfield,  where    is  a    considerable    settlement,    and    a 
promising  society. 

NEW-YORK. — We  passed  Skoynesborough,  and  turned  our 
course  eastward  through  some  rough  ground,  and  came  to  Hamp- 
ton township,  where  we  held  a  quarterly  meeting  at  brother  M — '?, 
in  a  pleasant  vale.  We  rode  through  considerable  he.it.  nearly 
twenty  miles,  without  obtaining  any  refreshment!  I  have  rea-on  t< 
praise  God  that  I  have  been  able  to  travel  from  Lynn  to  this  pi. ice  ; 
the  distance,  the  way  I  have  come.  I  compute  to  be  four  hundred 


232  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1795, 

miles  ;  I  am  now  within  a  mile  of  the  line  of  Vermont.  There 
is  only  one  county,  in  the  state  of  New- York,  between  this  and 
Lower  Canada.  There  is  a  place  called  Plattsburg,  where  they 
have  often  solicited  us  to  send  preachers.  I  find  some  similarity 
between  the  northern  and  western  frontiers. 

Sunday  30,  was  a  high  day  :  we  had  sacrament  and  love-feast, 
and  many  opened  their  mouths  boldly  to  testify  of  the  goodness  and 
Jove  of  the  Lord  Jesus  :  the  porch,  entry,  kitchen,  and  the  lodg- 
ing rooms  were  filled  :  one  soul  professed  conversion.  I  find 
that  two  hours'  close  meeting  flags  the  minds  of  God's  children  : 
many  of  the  people  of  the  world  are  filled  with  prejudice  because 
they  are  shut  out. 

Sister  S ,  an  ancient  woman,  and  a  professor  among  the  Bap- 
tists, was  sent  for  by  her  father  to  turn  the  head  and  heart  of  her 
son  from  the  Methodists  :  but  she  had  grace  and  sense  to  know 
that  God  had  been  at  work  upon  his  soul ;  and  with  tears  and 

prayers  wished  him  God  speed.     Mr.  G ,  who  had  heard  great 

and  bad  things  of  the  Methodists,  was  surprised  to  hear  that  a  son 
of  his  died  a  Methodist,  in  New-York  ;  and  still  more  so,  when  he 
was  visited  by  another  son,  who  had  joined  society  in  Waltham. 
When  this  son  came  home,  the  father  and  family  were  alarmed, 
finding  that  he  had  met  with  something  that  had  greatly  changed 
him  :  after  this,  the  prejudices  of  the  dear  old  man  were  dissipa- 
ted, and  he  came  five  miles  to  our  quarterly  meeting.  I  rode 
forty  miles  :  I  conclude  that  for  thirty-five  miles  of  this  road  there 
are  ten  or  twelve  houses  for  every  mile,  including  those  which 
extend  to  the  mountains  on  either  side  of  the  road.  Notwithstanding 
the  roads  are  somewhat  hilly,  they  are  good  for  travellers.  1  labour 
under  great  exercise  of  mind  from  various  quarters  ;  and  my  own 
infirmities  of  body  and  mind  are  neither  few  nor  small. 

Wednesday,  September  2.  We  had  a  solemn  meeting  at  Bethle- 
hem, in  Ashgrove.  Thursday  3,  we  had  a  warm-hearted  people 

at  R 's,  and  a  better  time  than  weakness  of  body  or  mind  could 

promise.  On  Friday,  we  came  to  Lansingburgh,  and  thence  to  Troy  ; 
at  last  we  got  to  Coeyman's  Patent,  weary,  sick  and  faint,  after 
riding  thirty-six  miles. 

Saturday  5.  We  were  crowded  with  people  :  I  suppose  we  had, 
perhaps,  a  thousand  at  the  etone  church,  at  Coeyman's  Patent  ;  and 
I  felt  some  life  and  warmth  amongst  them. 

Sunday  6.  In  the  morning  we  had  baptism,  ordination,  sacra- 
ment, and  love-feast ;  some  spoke  with  life  of  the  goodness  of  God 


179/3. j  RF.V.   FRANCIS  ASBT'RY'S  JOURNAL.  233 

I  gave  them  a  discourse  at  eleven  o'clock,  nod  then  went  to  bod  \\  ith 
a  high  fever.  Brother  Roborts  pleased,  and,  1  trust,  profiled  tin: 
people  with  a  discourse,  after  I  had  done. 

(Monday  7.  I  rose  very  unwell,  and  had  to  ride  thirl \  fi\i-  or 
forty  miles  through  the  rain  :  1  came  in  much  wearied,  and  l"ijud  a 
comfortable  lodging  at  Mr.  I 's. 

Tuesday  8.  I  am  somewhat  better  in  body,  but  clouds  and  dark- 
ness still  rest  upon  my  mind. 

Thursday  10.  We  rode  twenty  miles  to  Marble-Town  (properly 
so  called  at  present)  I  preached  on  Hebr.  xii.  '-'.'!,  !''».  I  frit  auful  ; 
there  appeared  to  be  very  little  devotion  among  the  people.  <>ur 
southern  friends  are  battered  on  the  subject  of  -l.i\r-,  and  t! 
are  in  peace  ;  it  will  not  do  ;  we  must  be  Methodists  in  one  place 
as  well  as  another. 

Saturday  19.  We  reached  brother  Garrettson's ;  and  Sunday 
13,  I  preached  at  R—  -'9  chapel.  Then  returned  to  Rbinebeck 
chapel,  and  preached  on  Hehr.  xiii.  5.  God  once  put  into  brother 
Garrettson's  hands  great  riches  of  a  spiritual  nature,  and  he  labour- 
ed much  ;  if  he  now  does  equal  good  according  to  his  temporal 
ability,  he  will  be  blessed  by  the  Lord,  and  by  men. 

Tuesday  15.  We  made  it  twenty  miles  to  the  wreck  of  an  old 
Presbyterian  meeting  house,  at  Wapping-Creek,  called  the  hollow; 
where  I  gave  them  a  di>course  on  "  Judgment  beginning  fn>t  at 
the  house  of  God" — and  there  was  some  little  motion,  but  the 
Methodists  were  not  on  their  own  ground. 

Wednesday  16.  Brother  R gave  us  a  close,  good  sermon  on 

"  My  people  have  committed  two  evils,"  &.c.  I  then  enlarged  on 
"  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee  ;"  our  meeting  continued  till  three 
o'clock  ;  we  got  no  dinner,  and  had  to  ride  twelve  miles  to  get  to 
our  supper  and  lodgings.  We  stopped  at  Governor  Van  Court- 
landt's,  who  reminds  me  of  General  Russell — we  had  all  we  needed, 
and  abundantly  more  than  we  desired.  Rest,  rest,  how  sweet !  yet 
how  often  in  labour  I  rest,  and  in  rest,  labour. 

Sunday  20.  I  had  a  comfortable  time  at  Croton  chapel,  on  Rom.  i. 
16.  I  returned  to  General  Van  Courtlandt's,  and  dined  with  my  dear 
aged  friends.  Shall  we  ever  meet  again  ?  We  came  to  Fisher's, 
near  the  White  Plains  chapel,  to  hold  conference.  My  soul  is 
kept  solemn  ;  and  I  feel  as  if  earth  were  nothing  to  me  ;  I  am  happy 
in  God,  and  not  perplexed  with  the  things  of  this  world. 

Tuesday  22.  A  few  of  us  met  in  conference  ;  the  main  body  of 
the  preachers  not  coming  in  until  about  twelve  o'clock.  W.«  < 

VOL.  II  ™ 


;J34  UEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1795, 

through  the  business  of  the  conference  in  three  days,  forty-three 
preachers  being  present.  I  was  greatly  disappointed  in  not  hear- 
ing the  preachers  give  a  full  and  free  account  of  themselves  and 
circuits.  Although  we  sat  ten  hours  in  each  day  we  did  not  close 
our  business  until  Thursday  evening,  after  sitting  each  night  till 
twelve  o'clock. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Friday  25.  We  crossed  Hudson-River  twenty-six 
miles  above  the  city  of  New-York,  and  came  on  the  waters  of 
Hackensack  ;  a  river  that  is  only  thirty  miles  long  and  navigable 
two  thirds  of  the  way  :  we  then  came  to  Passaic-River,  crossed 
at  Second-River,  and  made  out  this  day  to  ride  forty  miles,  much 
fatigued. 

Saturday  26.  We  rode  about  thirty-two  miles  with  very  little  to 
eat ;  however,  we  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  the  famous  Bruns- 
wick bridge,  which  is  now  nearly  finished.  It  is  the  grandest  of 
the  kind  I  have  seen  in  America.  I  was  properly  wearied ;  and 
prepared  to  rest  on  Sunday.  I  was  sorely  tried  yesterday  ;  more 
so  than  I  have  been  these  six  weeks  past. 

Monday  28.  We  came  to  Monmouth  ;  we  would  have  gone  to 
Shrewsbury,  but  time  and  horses  failed  us.  1  learn  that  the  an- 
cient spirit  of  faith,  prayer,  and  power,  is  taking  place  in  a  few 
places  below.  I  was  shocked  at  the  brutality  of  some  men  who 
were  fighting,  one  gouged  out  the  other's  eye  ;  the  father  and  son 
then  beset  him  again,  cut  off  his  ears  and  nose,  and  beat  him 
almost  to  death.  The  father  and  son  were  tried  for  a  breach  of 
the  peace,  and  roundly  fined  ;  and  now  the  man  that  hath  lost  his 
nose  and  ears  is  to  come  upon  them  for  damage.  I  have  often 
thought  that  there  are  some  things  practised  in  the  Jerseys  which 
are  more  brutish  and  diabolical  than  in  any  of  the  other  states  .- 
there  is  nothing  of  this  kind  in  New-England — they  learn  civility 
there  at  least.  We  rode  twenty  miles  to  Emley's  church,  where 
the  great  revival  of  religion  was  some  years  ago.  I  felt  a  little  of 
the  old,  good  spirit  there  still.  Thence  we  journeyed  on  to  Penny- 
Hill,  fifteen  miles,  where  I  was  enabled  to  speak  strong  words. 
Thence  I  came  to  New-Mills,  and  gave  them  an  alarming  talk  on 
—Judgment  beginning  at  the  house  of  God. 

PENNSYLVANIA. — Saturday,  October  3.  I  came  through  the  sand 
to  Philadelphia,  and  on  Sunday  evening  I  preached  on  "  All  seek 
their  own,  not  the  things  which  are  Jesus  Christ's."  In  doing 
which — 

I.  I  pointed  out  the  things  that  are  Jesus  Christ's. 


1795.]  nr.v.  FRANCIS  ASHI-IIY'S  JOURNAL. 

II.  How  these  are  to  be  sought. 

III.  That  men  are  not  to  seek  thonr-i  h-<--i  whollv,  or  parti;ilU 
in  the   ministry  of  Christ,  but  that  self  must  !"•   altogether  «.ut  of 
the  question. 

Monday  5.  We  opened  our  conference,  and  went  on  wit' 
peace,  love,  and  deliberation,  but  were  rather  in .  .jil  u,  . 
some  preachers  not  coming  in  until  tlie  third  or  luiirtl.  V\ ,. 

made    better    stations    than   could    be   expected,    extending    from 
Northampton,  in  Virginia,  to  the  Seneca  l...k«  . 

Friday  9,  we  observed  as  a  day  of  fasting  and  prayer.  I 
preached  at  eleven  o'clock  on  Joel  ii.  15 — 17. 

Saturday  10.  Our  conference  rose. 

Sunday  11.  I  preached  in  the  morning  at  the  African  church,  in 
the  afternoon  at  Ebenezer,  and  in  the  evening  at  St.  (itur. 
where,  to  my  surprise,  the  galleries  uere  filled.  J  applied 
"  Knowing  therefore  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men." 
I  had  work  enough,  being  often  compelled  to  digress  to  call  the 
attention  of  the  wild  people. 

Monday  12.  After  getting  a  copy  of  the  minutes  I  came  to 
Chester,  and  dined  with  Mary  Withy,  who  hatli  lived  a  ui<l<>\> 
this  house  thirty-one  years,  and  hath  kept  one  of  the  most  com- 
plete houses  of  entertainment  in  America.  Sho  hath  -old  out  for 
£3000,  and  is  to  give  place  in  three  weeks.  1  <  arnc  late  to  Wil- 
mington, and  preached  on  Col.  i.  10.  The  great  hinderanre  to 
the  work  of  God  here  is  the  loose  walk  of  professors  of  religion. 

Thence,  by  T.  H 's,  I  proceeded  to   North -Ka-t  Forge,  and 

lodged  with  my  dear  son,  D.  Sheredine. 

MARYLAND. — Wednesday  14.  We  came  to  Cokesbnry.  Here 
we  undertook  to  make,  an  inventory  of  all  the  property  belonging 
to  Cokesbury  college,  and  found  the  sum  total  of  the  amount  to  be 
seven  thousand  one  hundred  and  four  pounds,  twelve  shillings  and 
nine  pence. 

Saturday  17.  I  came  to  Baltimore  to  attend  the  quarterly  in. 
ing  ;  brother  Whatcoat  and  myself  611ed  up  Sunday  the  13th,  and 
were  crowded  with  people. 

Tuesday  20.  Our  conference  began.  We  had  preachers  from 
the  Northern-Neck;  and  what  is  called  Now-Virginia,  ,  hit  Dis- 
trict,) and  the  west  of  Maryland — about  fifty-live  in  number.  On 
Friday  night  there  was  a  public  collection  for  (I,  <nce  of  the 

preachers  who  were  deficient  in  their  quarterage. 

Sunday  evening  25.    I   preached  on  "  Then  shall  man} 
fended,  and  shall  betray  one  another.''     As  I  wished  not  to  be  i<lk 


236  REV.  FRANCIS   ASBURY3S  JOURNAL.  [1795. 

I  concluded  to  spend  a  good  part  of  this  week  in  meeting  classes. 
The  Africans  of  this  town  desire  a  church,  which,  in  temporals, 
shall  be  altogether  under  their  own  direction,  and  ask  greater  pri- 
vileges than  the  white  stewards  and  trustees  ever  had  a  right  to 
claim. 

Thursday  29.  Was  a  very  solemn  day  of  thanksgiving  :  the  sub- 
ject 1  made  choice  of  was  Psalm  cxlvii.  2U.  "  He  hath  not  dealt 
so  with  any  nation."  This  1  applied  spiritually — 

I.  To  ourselves  as  individuals. 

II.  As  it  applies  to  our  families. 

III.  To  the  society  and  ministry. 

IV.  As  it  applies  to  the  continent. 

In  the  afternoon  I  preached  at  the  Point  on  "  In  every  thing 
give  thanks." 

Saturday  31.  I  left  town  and  came  to  Elk- Ridge,  where  I  found 
a  little  time  for  reflection  and  prayer. 

Sunday,  Nov.  1.  I  preached  and  administered  the  sacrament  on 
the  Ridge.  After  twenty-three  years  preaching  here,  we  have  a 
small  society.  I  dined  at  the  widow  Howard's,  and  had  an  inter- 
view with  sister  Pue,  who  appeared  to  be  deeply  oppressed  with 
the  loss  of  her  valuable  husband.  It  is  now  more  than  twenty 
years  since  the  doctor  attended  my  ministry  ;  and  I  have  to  hope 
was  deeply  awakened.  In  the  latter  part  of  his  life  he  was  much 
afflicted  ;  he  called  upon  God,  and  I  trust  died  in  peace.  I  doubt 
if  there  hath  been  a  man  of  his  profession  of  equal  skill,  continua- 
tion, and  attention,  in  the  state  of  Maryland.  Mr.  Fletcher,  when 
near  his  end  cried  out,  "  My  poor,  what  will  become  of  my  poor?" 
So  the  Doctor,  when  on  his  death-bed,  "  What  will  become  of  my 
patients  ?" 

Monday  2.  After  riding  forty  miles,  I  came  late  in  the  evening- to 
Georgetown,  and  found  a  congregation  waiting  at  the  new  chare!. 
Although  wearied  and  unwell,  I  felt  some  liberty  in  speaking  ;  and 
I  am  persuaded  that  good  might  have  been  done  here  if  professors 
had  not  traded  away  their  characters.  It  is  strange,  that  peope  pro- 
fessing no  religion,  look  for  justice  and  perfection  in  all  Ch  istians, 
and  forget  themselves. 

VIRGINIA. — Thursday  5.  I  reached  Faulks.  Friday  6, preached 
at  the  widow  Bumbury's,  to  about  sixty-six  hearers,  a£er  riding 
about  sixty  six  miles  from  Alexandria. 

Saturday  7.  I  rode  about  forty-two  miles,  and  found  !  quiet  re- 
treat at  brother  E 's.  Next  day  I  had  about  fo  r  hundred 

hearers. 


1795.]  REV.  FRANrrs  ASBIT.Y'S  JOVRNAI 

Wednesday  11.    I  had  about  tliroo  hundred  I  .  ,n  n  at  I.:i: 
meeting-house.     C;unc  in  the  evening  to  tl.c  wi.ln»\  I  >n."_r-'-.      Kri- 
day  13,  after  preaching  to  a  t'n*  people  at  the  w  iduw  \\  .  odl  ,i. 
we  set  out  at  one  o'clock  for  P..>i\le-\  i't  ny,  .u,.l  .  u>--ed  in  luity 
miiuitos,  although   it  wa-  three   miles 'over:   we  landed  in    !.--•  \ 
county,  and  rode  eight  miles  to  brother  Mann's,  where  I  prt-ai.hed 
fifteen  years  ago. 

Saturday  14.  1  visited  brother  L.  R.  Coir,  and  sprnt  thr  <Viy  «ith 
him  and  his  agreeable  wife,  lliother  Reuben  I'.lh-  i-  •  eii.unly 
married,  for  the  first  time  ;  may  it  be  for  the  ulnr\  ->t  <md.  and  the 
good  of  his  church,  and  comfort  of  the  dear  man  and  hi-  mfe  ! 

Sunday  15.  I  preached  to  some  souls  within  rmd  round  the 
house,  with  a  mixture  of  rich  and  poor,  tame  and  ui!d  people 
mother  Cowles's  ! — I  am  amazed  at  the  dear  aged  woman — the  addi- 
tional labour  to  which  she  submits,  although  now  bet\\i  nty 
and  eighty  years  of  age,  and  possessing  such  strong  mental  pow- 
ers! — it  is  surprising. 

Monday  1G.  After  a  rainy  morning  I  rode  to  I'aup's  rlnpel,  and 
had  nearly  a  hundred  people.  I  spent  the  eTeoing  with  Mi-.  J. 
Ellis,  brother  I'aup,  and  brother  I'erry  : — I  was  not  *o  spiritual  as 
I  might  have  been. 

Tuesday  17.  Crossed  Mattaponi  at  l'ia/.ii  -  ferry,  and  Fomonkey 
at  Putney,  and  came  to  Colonel  Cleaton's  :  the  weather  was  cold, 
and  the  wind  and  hunger  were  both  pinching.  We  were  kindly 
entertained  at  P.  Davies's  :  Stephen,  his  brother,  is  dead,  and  hath 
left  the  chief  of  what  he  had  to  the  church.  He  hath  appointed  mo 
his  trustee  to  dispose  of  it,  and  J.  Kllis  his  executor.  1  feel  the 
burden  of  the  connexion  ;  my  only  hope  i«,  that  the  Lord  of  thr 
harvest  will  send  labourers  into  his  vineyard,  not  mine. 

Thursday  19.  1  preached  at  Piichmond  ;  and  the  ii».-\t  d.iy  came. 
cold  and  hungry,  to  my  affectionate,  kind,  adopted  son.  J.  Hardn 
in  Petersburg.     Here  several  of  the  preachers  met  me,  to  accom- 
pany  me  to  the  quarterly  meeting  in    I'.runswirk.      I    reci-ned  an 

original   letter   from  Mr.  L .  not  like  what  1  wrote  ;    so  1  bid 

him   farewell  :    1    will   not  give  him  another  opportunity  to  a' 
me  ;  neither  shall  1  lay   to  heart  what  he  saith  to  afflict  me.      I  at- 
tended the  quarterly  meeting  at  Meritt's   chapel,  and  there   wa? 
some  move  among  the  people.      I  rode  to  J.  Paup's,  and  had  some 
consultation  about  Ebenezer  school. 

Monday  23    1  preached  at  VV *  chapel,  and  in  the  eveni; 

came,  cold  and  hungry,  to  L.  Holmes's,  in  Mecklenburg. 


238  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1795. 

Tuesday  24.  Our  conference  began  at  Salem  chapel ;  there 
were  present  about  fifty  members,  and  sixteen  probationers — 
we  had  close  work  ;  and  great  harmony  in  sentiment. 

Saturday  28.  Brothers  A and  C preached  ;  and  we  had 

a  warm,  living  season. 

Sunday  29,  was  a  great  day.  I  preached  on  1  Tim.  iii.  15,  16.  ; 
and  there  were  ten  elders  and  nine  deacons  ordained.  This  part 
of  the  connexion  has  regained  its  proper  tone,  after  being  kept  out 
of  tune  for  five  years  by  an  unhappy  division.  We  were  kindly  en- 
tertained by  our  friends  and  brethren  ;  preachers  and  people  were 
blest ;  and  we  parted  in  peace. 

Monday  30.  I  bad  a  few  people,  and  several  preachers  at  bro- 
ther Seward's.  The  next  day  at  Wolsey's  barn,  (now  Drumgold's 
chapel)  I  had  a  few  people,  they  having  had  but  short  notice  : 
here  religion  appears  to  be  in  a  low  state  :  I  spent  the  evening  with 

brother  E.  D ;  his  house  is  not  with  the  Lord,  as  he  prayeth 

and  longeth  ;   yet  I  trust  God  hath  made  an  everlasting  covenant 
with  the  father,  well  ordered  and  sure. 

Wednesday,  December  2.  I  preached  at  my  old  friend  W, 
Owen's,  whom  I  first  knew  at  Portsmouth  ;  we  had  a  small  house, 
and  a  good  meeting.  In  the  evening  I  came  to  my  aged  friend  M. 

M 's  ;  whom  I  have  known  these  twenty  years,  although  never 

at  his  house  before. 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Monday  7.  I  preached  at  brother  Clayton's, 
near  Halifax  ;  and  then  hasted  to  brother  Bradford's,  where  we 
had  a  small  congregation  the  next  day.  Yesterday  evening  Wil- 
liam Glendenning  stayed  here  :  he  talked  very  boldly  to  R.  W ; 

alleging  that  he  was  free,  &c.  I  expect  he  will  go  on  without 
fear  or  wisdom,  until  many  of  the  Methodists  will  not  receive  him 
into  their  houses  and  hear  the  abuse  of  their  ministers,  people, 
and  discipline. 

We  crossed  Tar-River  and  Town-Creek,  and  came  to  T.  Shep- 
pard's,  where  we  had  all  things  richly  to  enjoy.  I  had  my  trials, 
and  my  spirit  was  greatly  afflicted  and  humbled  :  I  was  glad  to  get 
alone  to  pour  out  my  soul  unto  God. 

Saturday  12.  This  bath  been  to  me  a  day  of  trial  and  consola- 
tion. It  is  wonderful  to  see  how  the  people  in  this  country  are 
hid  by  swamps  and  creeks. 

Sabbath  day  13.  We  set  out  in  the  midst  of  the  rain  to  Span's 
meeting-house  ;  I  had  ten  hearers,  to  whom  I  preached  on  Luke 
xii.  32.  We  came  to  brother  Span's,  who  has  sold  off  bis  pro- 


1795. j  l:£V.  F.  -    JOL'RNAL.  , 

petty,  and  is  about  to  move  to  the  high  land*  of  South  Carol. 
the  reason  he  assigns  is  hudable  ;  and  I  think  God    «ill   be   • 
him.     It  rained  powerfully  in  the  night,  which  brought  me  under 
great  exercise  about  getting  along,  haying  been  so  often  stop 
by,  and  dipped  in  the  rivers  and  swamps. 

Mond;iy  14.    We  crossed  Neuse-River  at  Whitefield's  ferry,  the 
river  rising  very  ft?t.     U'e  passed  North- East  and  Goshen  bn. 
and  Bear-Swamp;  all  of  which  we  crossed  in  -af\-t\ ,   though  not 
without  fear  :  my  feet  w^re  wet,  my  body  cold,   and   my   stomach 
empty,  having  had  no  dinner.     1  found  a  good  fire,   a   warm 
and   a  little   medicine,  each   nece?sary  in   its  place.     No   people 
make  you  more  welcome  to  their  houses  than  these  ;  but  is  Clin-t 
welcome  to  their  hearts  2     I  am  sensible  of  the  want  of  more  re- 
ligion among  them. 

Friday  18.  After  riding  about  twenty  miles,  I  preached  at  Fa- 
ther ^ 's  ;  I  felt  strangely  set  at  liberty,  and  was  uncommonly 

happy.     Here  we  left  Goshen  circuit,  and  Samson  county. 

Saturday  1C'.  U'e  crossed  the  sooth  branch  of  Black- River,  and 
came  to  Elizabethtown,  about  fifty  miles  above  Wilmington  :  we 
had  a  very  cold  day,  and  nothing  to  eat  for  thirty  miK;s.  Brother 
M-Rea  met  us  near  the  town  and  took  u«  to  his  house  ;  and  it 
well  he  did,  or  we  might  have  been  lost  in  the  woods.  But  the 
kindness  of  the  people  in  supplying  our  wants  made  up  for  our 
toil — Lord,  comfort  them  who  comfort  us  !  Here  we  had  a  quiet 
retreat,  and  spent  the  Sabbath  in  public  and  private  exercises. 

3Ion«!ay  21.  We  set  out  by  sunrise,  and  had  to  work  our  waj 
through  the  swamps,  where  I  feared  being  plunged  in  headfore- 
most. I  have  lately  been  much  tried  several  ways  ;  and  much 
comforted.  We  came  down  Brunswick  county,  North  Carolina, 
twenty  miles  to  Norman's,  within  the  line  of  South  Carolina. 
Cross  where  you  will  between  the  states,  and  it  is  a  miserable  pass 
for  one  hundred  mile-  I  was  much  led  out  on  Rev. 

6—8.     This  country  abounds  with  .amps,   and   drain- 

there  were  here  no  sinners.  I  would  not  go  along  these  roads.  1 
am  in  want  of  rest,  and  should  be  glad  of  better  fare.  O,  for  pa- 
tience, faith,  courage,  and  every  grace !  Sometimes  I  feel  as 
though  I  could  rejoice  to  die  and  go  home  :  but  at  other  times  the 
work  of  God  is  in  my  way,  and  sometimes  my  own  unworthmess. 

SOCTH  CAROLINA. — Thursday  J4.  We  came  to  Kingston,  where 
I  preached  in  an  old  Presbyterian  meeting-house,  now  repaired  for 
the  use  of  the  Methodists.  I  spent  the  evening  with  W.  Rogers, 
formerl  of  Bristol,  where  our  w  .•  -  \\cre  richly  "iippli*-" 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1795. 

sometimes  we  abound  and  at  other  times  suffer  want  ;  and  we  may 
balance  the  one  with  the  other. 

Christmas-day  25.  We  set  out  at  six  o'clock  for  Georgetown, 
and  came  to  Urania  Ferry,  which  we  crossed  and  came  to  Waca- 
maw-River  :  we  were  detained  at  the  two  ferries  about  three  hours, 
and  rested  one,  and  came  to  Georgetown  about  four  o'clock  in  the 
evening  ;  having  rode  thirty-seven  miles  without  eating  or  drink- 
ing, except  a  low  land  hard  apple,  which  I  found  in  my  pocket. 
The  vanity  of  dancing  in  this  place  is  in  a  good  degree  done  away, 
and  they  have  no  play-house,  and  the  people  are  very  attentive  : 
I  trust  that  time  and  patience  will  bring  all  things  about;  that  we 
shall  not  ride  so  many  hundred  miles  in  vain,  and  that  so  many 
prayers  offered  up,  and  tears  shed  for  their  welfare,  will  not  be 
lost.  After  ten  years'  labour  we  have  done  but  little,  but  if  we 
could  station  a  preacher  here,  we  might  yet  hope  for  success.  I 
found  brother  Cannon  had  not  laboured  in  vain  ;  he  bath  established 
class  meetings  among  white  and  black;  and  the  good  would  have 
been  stili  greater  had  prayer  meetings  been  properly  kept  up.  We 
try  to  do  good,  but  who  among  us  try  to  do  all  the  good  they  can  ? 
for  myself,  1  leave  no  company  without  fears  of  not  having  dis- 
charged my  duty.  Were  it  not  for  Jesus,  who  would  be  saved  ? 
When  I  have  preached,  I  feel  as  though  I  had  need  to  do  it  over 
again  ;  and  it  is  the  same  with  all  my  performances.  Brother 
Blanton,  my  faithful  friend,  who  freely  offered  himself  to  go  to 
South  Carolina,  now  my  companion  in  trarel,  had  not  preached  for 
a  month,  so  I  thought  it  time  for  him  to  begin  again,  which  he  did 
in  the  evening.  I  preached  on  Psalm  xii.  1.  and  on  the  Sabbath  I 
preached  on  Deut.  v.  12 — 14.  In  the  afternoon  the  people  were 
attentive  and  somewhat  moved.  I  find  the  scene  is  changed  in 
Georgetown  ;  we  have  a  number  of  very  modest,  attentive  hear- 
ers, and  a  good  work  among  the  blacks.  The  Methodists  begin  to 
stand  on  even  ground  with  their  antagonists. 

Monday  28.  We  directed  our  course  towards  Charleston,  and 
crossed  Saotee  at  Lanues's  ferry,  which  is  the  best  I  know  on  the 

river.   In  the  evening  we  reached  Mr.  C 's  :   1  felt  for  the  man 

of  the  house,  and  was  pleased  in  having  the  privilege   of  praying 
with  them,  and  enjoyed  great  sweetness  therein. 

Tuesday  29.  We  came  to  our  dear  brother  Jackson's  on  Cain  Hoy 
River :  here  we  had  the  pleasure  of  hearing  of  some  revival  of 
religion  among  the  children  and  domestics  of  the  Methodists. 

Wednesday  30.  We  reached  Charleston,  having  made  it  about 
seventy-four  miles  from  Georgetown,  along  an  excellent  road 


1796. J  REV.  KUANCIS    . 

Here  are  the  rich,  the  rice,  ami  the  slaves  ;  the  last  is  awful  (.. 
me.  Wealthy  people  settled  on  the  rice  lands  of  Cooper-Kiver 
hold  from  fifty  to  two  hundred  sla\i:s  on  a  plantation  in  chains  of 
bondage  :  yet  God  is  ahlc  of  these  stones,  yea,  of  the-.'  -live  hold 
ers,  to  raise  up  children  unto  Abraham.  My  soul  !.  It  joful  and 
solemn  at  the  thoughts  of  a  revival  of  religion  in  Charleston.  I 
find  several  young  persons'  are  brought  into  the  fold  of  Chi 

Thursday  31.  Several  of  the  preachers  came  into  the  city  to 
conference.  We  had  a  melting  time  at  the  love-feast  at  brother 
Wells's. 

Friday,  January  1,  179G.  I  gave  them  a  sermon  -uited  to  the 
beginning  of  the  year,  and  the  sacred  (ire  was  felt.  Saturday  '-', 
we  began  our  conference.  Lord's  day  i  day  of  extraordi- 

nary divine  power,  particularly  at  the  sacrament ;  white  and  black 
cried  out  and  shouted  the  praises  of  God — yea, 

"  Clap  your  hands,  yc  people  all,' 

Praj-r  the  Cod  uii  »-hum  ye  call." 

Monday  4.  We  again  entered  on  the  business  of  conferee. 
>resent,  about  twenty  members  and  seven  graduates.  Tuesday  o, 
continued  our  business  ;  we  have  great  peace  and  love — see  eye 
to  eye,  and  heart  to  heart.  We  have  now  a  second  and  confirmed 
account  that  Cokesbury  college  is  consumed  to  ashes,  a  sacrifice 
of  £10,000  in  about  ten  years!  The  foundation  was  laid  in  1735, 
and  it  was  burnt  December  7,  1795.  Its  enemies  may  rejoice,  and 
its  friends  need  not  mourn.  Would  any  man  give  me  £10,000 
per  year  to  do  and  suffer  again  what  I  have  done  for  that  house, 
I  would  not  do  it.  The  Lord  called  not  Mr.  Whitefield  nor  the 
Methodists  to  build  colleges.  I  wished  only  for  schools — Doctor 
Coke  wanted  a  college.  I  feel  distressed  at  the  loss  of  the  library. 
Thursday  7,  we  observed  as  a  day  of  fasting;  and  humiliation,  to 
seek  the  blessing  of  God  on  the  conference.  We  began,  continued, 
and  parted  in  the  greatest  peace  and  union.  We  concluded  to 

J.  J and  J.  R ,  alternately,  as   missionaries  to   Savannah 

and  the  ancient  parts  of  Georgia.     Friday  8,  most  of  our  bretl 
took  their  leave  of  the  city,  and  I  had  time  for  recollection.     U> 
have  in  some  cases  had  to  station  »ne  preacher  where   formerly 
there  were  two  :   1   trust  the  cause  to  God,  ami  he  will  -uj'pnrt  i' 
for  his  own  glory  ;  I  must  look  more  to  him  and  less  to  men,  whe- 
ther  aged,   middle-aged,   youn'r,  married,    or   single,  of  great  i-i 
small  abilities.    My  mind  is  variously  exercised  about  staying  here 
Vor.  II. 


iitV.  FKANCIS  AS>BURY:S  JOURNAL,  [1796. 

I   lament  the  partiality  of  the  people  for  and  against  particular 
preachers. 

Sunday  10.  I  gave  them  a  discourse  on  Hab.  i,i.  1,2.  "I  will 
stand  upon  m)  watch,  and  set  me  upon  the  tower,  and  will  watch  to 
see  what  he  will  say  unto  me,  and  what  I  shall  answer  when  I  ain 
reproved.  And  the  Lord  answered  me,  Write  the  vision,  and  make 
it  plain  upon  tables  that  he  may  run  that  readeth  it."  At  noon  bro- 
ther Hill  made  an  attempt  to  preach  in  the  street  opposite  St. 
Michael's  church,  but  was  prevented  by  the  guard  ;  however,  it 
wrought  right,  for  many  were  led  to  attend  the  church  in  the  after- 
noon and  evening  meetings  :  there  appears  to  be  great  moving  one 
way  or  another. 

Monday  11.     My  soul  is  stayed  upon  God,  momently  looking 
onto  him.     In  reading  Mr.  Winterbotham,  I  compared  the  great 
talk  about  President  Washington  formerly,  with  what  some  say  and 
write  of  him  now  :  according  to  some  he  then  did  nothing  wrong ; 
it  is  now  said  that  he  was   always  partial  to   aristocrats  and  conti- 
nental officers :  as  to  the  latter,  I  ask,  Who  bought  the  liberty  of 
the  states  ?  the  continental  officers  : — and  surely  they  should  reap 
a  little  of  the  sweets  of  rest  and  peace  :  these  were  not  chimney- 
corner  whigs.     But  favours  to  many  of  the  officers  now  would  come 
too  late — a  great  number  of  them  are  gone  to  eternity,  their  con- 
stitutions being  broken  with  hard  fare  and  labour  during  the  war, 
As  to  myself,  the  longer  I  live,  and  the   more   I  investigate,  the 
more  I  applaud  the  uniform  conduct  of  President  Washington  in  all 
the  important  stations  which  he  has  filled. 

Sunday  17.  My  spirit  felt  awful  through  the  morning  :  I  preach- 
ed to  a  full  congregation,  and  had  a  solemn  season  ;  and  in  the 
afternoon  I  preached  on  Luke  viii.  10.  Monday  18.  I  am  still 
employed  in  reading  :  I  admire  the  sterling  truth  contained  in  Mr, 
Wesley's  writings  on  divinity. 

Thursday  21.  Precious  time — how  it  flies!  I  was  greatly  en- 
tertained and  comforted  in  spirit  in  receiving  from  brother  Sou- 
therland  an  account  of  the  great,  confirming  blessing,  he  hath  expe- 
rienced to  his  soul.  Oh  !  that  we  could  receive  such  accounts  from 
every  family !  I  have  written  to  several  of  my  ancient  friends  in 
Philadelphia.  I  may  say  of  letters  as  it  was  said  of  silver  in  the 
days  of  Solomon,  "  I  make  no  account  of  that :"  I  suppose  I  must 
write  nearly  a  thousand  in  a  year. 

Sunday  morning  24.  I  was  so  poorly  as  to  be  hardly  able  to  rise 
from  my  bed;  however,  1  made  out  to  deliver  two  discourses  » 


P.\'.*   ;r,rp.v 

public    to    large    congregatii.  .  ri.J.iy.    I    wrote,   visited,   and 

rode  ;   I  read  hut  little.     <>h!   time,  prerious  time,  how  swiftly  dotU 
it  fly! 

Wednesday  27.    I  have  great  reason  to  praise  God  that  I  am  in 
a  house,  and  not  exposed  to  the  dreadful  rains  and  freshets   that 
have   taken   place.     Wo  learn  by  late   accounts    that   corn,  r 
cattle,  bridges,  and   we   know  not   what,  are  ^wept  away  and   de- 
stroyed by  the  late  uncommon  rains.      I  feel  myself  humbled  be: 
God,  under  a  sense  of  my  not   having  been  as  faithful  to    hi:.. 
I  might  have  been.     I  am  rather  too  much  delighted   with  readme; 
on  paper,  what  1  have  read  with  my  eyes  in  my  travels  through 
the  continent. 

Sunday  31.  Was  much  taken  up  with  the  work  of  the  Lord  :  I 
preached  in  the  morning  and  afternoon. 

Monday,  February  1.     I  have  wrote  in  the  most  pointed  manner 
to  my  dear  brethren  at  Baltimore,  to  establish  prayer  meeting 
every   part  of  the   town.     My  mind    is  unhappy  ;    I  wish  to  be 
gone  into  the  country  to  be  about  my  Master's  work. 

We  had  a  prayer  meeting,  but  the  spirit  of  prayer  and  suppli- 
cation did  not  appear  to  be  among  the  people.  I  have  peace  with 
God  ;  but  my  soul  is  in  continual  heaviness  for  Zion. 

Wednesday  3.  I  had  near  two  hundred  and  fitly  of  the  Afri< 
society  at  the  love-feast  held  for  them  in  the  evening.  Oh,  my 
God  !  display  thy  power.  1  received  good  news  from  Jesse  Lee 
concerning  the  prospect  of  religion  in  Boston,  Providence,  and  thr 
District  of  Maine — that  the  preachers,  societies,  and  quarterly 
meetings  are  lively.  My  soul  at  times  is  in  heaviness  through 
manifold  temptations.  I  felt  an  impression  on  my  mind  wher. 
prayer  that  I  felt  too  much,  and  might  fret  myself  because  of 
evil  doers  ;  I  resolve,  through  grace,  to  be  more  resigned  to  the 
Lord,  and  less  distressed,  least  I  should  lightly  sin  against  God  or 
myself  in  unnecessarily  injuring  my  health. 

Friday  5,  I  spent  in  reading  and  writing,  and  observed  it  as  a 
day  of  fasting  and  prayer.  I  felt  myself  under  dejection  of  spirit. 
Ah !  what  a  dreary  world  is  this — my  mind  is  under  solemn  im- 
pressions— the  result  of  my  reflections  on  God  and  souls-  I  will 
endeavour  not  to  distress  myself  above  measure.  If  Dinners  are 
lost,  I  cannot  save  them,  neither  shall  I  be  damned  for  them.  I 
was  happy  last  evening  with  the  poor  slaves  in  brother  \\rlN'- 
kitchen,  whilst  our  white  brother  held  a  sacramental  love-feast  in 
the  front  parlour  upstair?.  I  must  be  poor:  this  i«  the 
E  roc 


.'K  >>)•.•*•   VJ\AM  IS  ASHU&r'S  JOUiSAL.  [ITL'b 

The  Methodists  have  now  about  ninety  thousand  members  oi" 
society  in  Europe,  about  seventy  thousand  in  America  and  the 
Islands,  and  about  four  hundred  in  Africa. 

Sunday  7.  We  had  an  awful,  solemn  season,  while  I  discoursed 
on  the  two  thieves  that  suffered  with  our  Lord,  and  still  more  so 
in  the  afternoon  on  our  Lord's  comment  on  the  sixth  command- 
ment :  it  was  dreadfully  loud  and  alarming.  I  believe  that 
believers,  seekers,  and  sinners  felt  the  word,  and  I  was  pleased 
to  hear  that  some  were  stricken  with  the  power  of  God.  I 
feel  very  weak  in  body,  and  find  that  age  makes  an  alteration. 
But  my  soul  is  truly  happy  in  the  Lord,  and  his  work  is  reviving 
amongst  us. 

Sunday  14.  I  began  the  solemnity  of  the  day  by  opening  and 
applying  our  Lord's  comment  on  the  seventh  commandment,  which. 
is  designed  to  condemn  the  adultery  of  the  heart.  It  appears  to 
have  been  the  will  of  our  Lord  not  to  give  liberty  for  a  second 
marriage  while  a  former  husband  or  wife  is  living.  St.  Paul  un- 
doubtedly understood  it  so,  even  when  heathen  husbands  left  their 
wives,  or  wives  left  their  husbands. 

Wednesday  19.  The  city  now  appears  to  be  running  mad  for 
races,  plays,  and  balls.  I  am  afraid  of  being  out  of  my  duty  in 
staying  here  too  long  :  my  soul  is  among  the  lions  ;  yet  Christ  is 
mine,  and  I  trust  my  supreme  desire  is,  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord.'* 
My  soul  longeth  to  be  gone  like  a  bird  from  a  cage.  I  have  been 
employed  in  visiting  from  house  to  house,  and  lament  the  super- 
ficial state  of  religion  among  the  white  people  who  are  called 
Methodists.  I  have  thought  if  we  had  entered  here  to  preach 
only  to  the  Africans,  we  should  probably  have  done  better. 

Sunday  21.  I  delivered  two  discourses  on  our  Lord's  Ser- 
mon on  the  Mount,  and  was  loud,  long,  alarming,  and  not  very 
pleasing. 

Monday  21.1  felt  myself  indisposed,  owing  to  the  exertions  of 
the  day  past. 

Wednesday  24  and  Thursday  25,  I  was  employed  in  putting  iny 
thoughts  together  on  the  unlawfulness  of  divorce — of  having  more 
than  one  wife,  or  taking  a  second  on  any  consideration  while  the 
first  is  living.  I  begin  to  feel  comfortable  at  the  thoughts  of 
leaving  this  city  shortly.  This  makes  me  fear  I  ought  not  to  stay 
here  so  long.  It  is  true,  I  have  a  thousand  or  twelve  hundred 
hearers,  and  two  or  three  hundred  of  these  change  with  the  day. 
My  soul  possesseth  peace,  but  great  unworthiness  cleaveth  to  me. 
I  am  apprehensive  I  injure  myself  by  giving  too  intense  applies- 


l'J(.  *-.  PHA.tcis  A.-iuuv  3  Juu.r.-A/-... 


lion  to  reading.     In  my  early  days  I  contracted  a  habit  for  : 
and  I  cannot  easily  give  it  up. 

Sunday  28.  My  morning  subject  was  Philippians  i.  U,  'J.  In  tin. 
evening  I  treated  on  -svolvi  »ps'  clothnt-  -omc  |.i'ii;licd,  *onic 

wept,  and  some  were  vexed.  Ah  how  I  wisli  to  m  .k«  my  i-M-.ipe 
and  be  gone  !  1  must  pay  for  this  indulgence  with  pain  of  mind  : 
I  feel  for  these  souls  :  many  of  them  who  have  been  sitting  ui 
my  ministry,  appear  to  be  more  hardened  now  than  when  I  began 
first  to  preach  to  them  ;  and  no  wonder,  seeing  they  have  so  in- 
sulted the  Spirit  of  Ciod. 

Wednesday,  March  L2.  For  my  unholiness  and  unfaithfulness,  my 
soul  is  humbled  :  was  I  to  stand  in  my  own  merit,  where  should  1 
be  or  go,  but  to  hell  ?  The  time  drawing  nigh  when  I  expected  to 
leave  the  city,  1  was  visited  by  my  poor  Africans,  and  had  their 
prayers  and  best  wishes.  And  now,  what  have  I  been  doing?  I 
have  preached  eighteen  sermons,  met  all  the  classes,  fifteen  in 
number,  wrote  about  eighty  letters,  read  some  hundred  pages  ; 
visited  thirty  families  again  and  again  But  who  are  made  the  sub- 
jects of  grace  ?  Such  are  my  impressions,  that  I  am  apprehensive 
God  will  work  more  in  judgment  than  in  mercy  ;  and  that  this 
will  be  an  eventful  year  to  the  inhabitants  of  this  place.  In  the 
course  of  my  stay  here  I  have  written  more  than  three  hundred 
pages  on  subjects  interesting  to  the  society  and  connexion. 

Thursday  3.    I  left  the  city  ;  the  rain  of  yesterday  and    to-day 
has  made  the  road  extremely  \vet  and  muddy  ;  it  was  in  our  favour 
that  we  came  over  the  Causeway  at  Ashley-  River,  without   r-wim- 
ming.      We   came   in  the   evening,  dripping,  to  father  E  -  .- 
having  rode  thirty-four  miles. 

Friday  4.  We  crossed  Edisto-River,  and  came  to  Island-Creek. 
At  a  pole-house  I  talked  awhile  on  1  Chron  vii.  14.  and  adminis- 
tered the  sacrament.  My  feet  were  as  if  they  had  been  steeped 
in  water. 

We  had  to  ride  three  miles  for  lodgings,  hungry,  wet,  and  we.ny. 
Since  half  past  eight  yesterday  we  have  rode  upwards  of  sixty 
miles.  1  am  now  turned  fifty  years  of  age,  and  feel  it  hard  to  flesh 
and  blood  to  go  upon  the  old  line,  as  in  former  days.  God  i?  at 
work  in  this  place,  so  that  we  do  not  labour  and  sutler  altogether 
in  vain.  I  was  under  some  difficulties  about  getting  along,  owing 
to  the  great  rain?,  which  have  so  raised  the  water  courses  that 
they  are  impassable.  We  at  length  directed  our  course  towards 
Augusta  ;  with  deep  wading,  by  the  assistance  of  brothei  I 
and  by  the  blessing  of  Providence,  we  rame  to  father  K- 


546  REV.  FRANCIS  Asnuny-s  JOUKXAL.  [1796, 

Lot  in  Sodom.  It  is  all  right  that  I  should  come  to  see  these  aged 
people,  and  preach  to  the  young  ones.  I  am  weary,  but  I  will  tra- 
vel on  :  I  only  want  more  of  the  spirit  of  faith  and  prayer.  I  feel 
very  sensibly  for  my  dear  Charleston  people  ;  I  doubt  not  but 
they  think  of  and  pity  me.  My  feet  have  been  wet  every  day, 
for  four  days  successively  ;  but  the  kindness  o£  the  people  help- 
eth  me  greatly  over  these  troubles. 

Wednesday  9.  Rode  twenty-five  miles  to  Chester's.  Here  I 
learned  Edisto  was  impassable.  If  we  had  not  hasted  along  as  we 
did,  we  should  not  have  passed  it  in  proper  time,  and  I  should  have 
been  prevented  from  visiting  Georgia  this  year  also.  There  are 
so  many  water  courses,  and  so  few  ferry's,  that  going  through  this 
country  in  any  certain  time  is  like  a  lottery. 

Thursday  10.  We  sent  notice  through  the  neighbourhood,  to 
collect  a  congregation  ;  so  I  had  the  privilege  of  preaching  to  a 
people  I  had  not  addressed  for  six  years.  Oh  !  my  soul,  how  dost 
thou  travail  for  souls  night  and  day  ! 

GEORGIA. — I  crossed  W 's  ferry  ;    the  point  on  the  south 

side  is  washed  like  a  beach,  and  the  house  swept  away  by  the  late 
freshets ;  I  saw  how  the  flood  had  ploughed  up  the  street  of 
Augusta  :  I  walked  over  the  ruins  for  nearly  two  miles,  viewing 
the  deep  gulfs  in  the  main  street.  I  suppose  they  would  crucify 
me  if  1  were  to  tell  them  it  is  the  African  flood  ;  but  if  they  could 
hear  me  think,  they  would  discover  this  to  be  my  sentiment.  I 
was  honoured  with  the  church  to  preach  in ;  where  I  had  about 
four  hundred  respectable  hearers.  I  have  delivered  my  own 
soul — it  may  be  once  for  all.  I  have  rode  about  one  hundred  and 
ninety  miles  from  Charleston  into  Georgia  ;  I  have  attended  four 
meetings  ;  and  have  not  had,  in  all,  above  six  hundred  hearers. 

Wednesday  16.  I  rode  fifteen  miles  to  Whiteoak;  I  was  sick ; 
the  house  was  very  open,  and  the  wind  blew  powerfully.  Dying! 
— dead ! — unpleasing  appearances  !  We  swam  our  horses  across 
Little- River,  and  had  to  ride  fifteen  miles  after  preaching  to  get 
our  dinners. 

Friday  18.  I  was  very  much  outdone  before  I  reached  Comb's 
raeeting-house,  which  was  very  open.  I  was  very  warm  in  preach- 
ing. I  rode  to  G 's  in  the  evening,  making  it  nearly  twenty 

miles  :  when  I  came  there  I  was  so  indisposed,  that  I  was  glad  to 
go  to  bed.  Next  morning  I  felt  better,  and  rode  to  the  school  at 
Coke's  chapel :  where,  after  preaching,  I  partially  examined  the. 
scholars. 


, 

Thursday  21.  I  had  a  few  wealthy,  and,  1  fear,  wicked  people 
.  at  Pope's  chapel ;  I  preached  on  our  Lord's  weeping  over  Jer; 
lem.     We  had  deep  wading  across  Long-Creek,  and  made  it  oearlv 

twenty  miles  to ,  very  kind,  but  no  religion  here.    Since  I 

have  been  in  Georgia,  I  have  had  a  blessed  time  of  consolation  in 
my  own  soul.  I  must  needs  go  through  Petersburg.  I  had  to 
ride  to  Curltail-River,  and  thence  to  the  head  of  Reedy- Piiver, 
twenty-eight  or  thirty  miles.  We  got  no  food  for  man  nor  h 

until  we  came  to  D V,  1  preached  to  his  father  twenty-tw. 

years  ago. 

SOUTH  CAROLINA. — Tuesday  29.   I  held  forth  about  an  hour  anu  ;. 
half  on  Acts  iii.  26.     We  set  out  again  about  two  o'clock,  and  ha 
to  ride  for  our  dinner  only  twenty  miles.     We  crossed  Muddy,  and 
Lick  Creeks,  Little  and  Great  Bush-River.     These  afford  bodie- 
of  excellent  land. 

Wednesday  30.  We  had  a  meeting  of  the  trustees  of  Bethel 
school,  and  it  was  agreed  it  should  be  a  free  school ;  and  that  only 
the  English  tongue  and  the  sciences  should  be  taught.  I  drew  up 
un  address  on  behalf  of  the  school  in  order  to  raise  three  hundred 
dollars  per  annum,  to  support  a  president  teacher.  I  dined  with 
my  unshaken  friend,  W.  P.  an  Israelite  indeed.  He  hath  all  things 
richly  to  enjoy,  and  a  good  conscience  also.  He  was  formerly  a 
travelling  preacher  amongst  us,  and  laboured  for  and  with  us  nearly 
as  long  as  he  was  able.  The  weather  is  as  warm  here  as  in  the 
month  of  June  to  the  north.  I  was  so  weary  with  riding  that  I 
could  not  sleep. 

Sunday,  April  3.  A  multitude  of  sinners  came  together  at  W. 

S 's.     I  feel  myself  still  faint  and  feeble,  and  would  not  liv 

always. 

Monday  4.  I  crossed  Fair- Forest,  and  came  to  J.  G.'s,  where  1 
liad  to  stop  and  rest.  Since  I  came  into  South  Carolina,  I  have 
rode  through  Newbury,  Spartansburgh,  Union,  and  Lawrence  coun- 
ties. There  is  a  general  complaint  of  the  want  of  corn  in  these 
parts  ;  and  no  wonder,  when  we  consider  the  great  storm  which 
they  have  had,  and  the  number  of  stills  in  the  country  :  the  people 
here  drink  their  bread  as  well  as  eat  it.  I  am  so  very  poorly  in 
body  that  close  study  injures  me.  I  crossed  Lawson-Fork  at 
high  shoals,  a  little  below  the  Beauty-Spot.  I  could  not  but  admire 
'he  curiosity  of  the  people — my  wig  was  as  great  a  subject  of  spe- 
culation as  some  wonderful  animal  from  Africa  or  India  would  have 
been.  I  had  about  one  hundred  people  at  the  meeting-house, 
«ome  came  to  look  at,  and  others  to  hear  me.  We  must  PCCL- 


248  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1796. 

off  without  any  dinner,  intending  to  ride  nearly  forty  miles  to 
father  Moore's,  in  Rutherford  county,  (N.  C.)  After  brother  M. 
and  myself  had  preached,  we  passed  the  Cow-Pens,  where  Morgan 
and  Tarlton  had  their  fray.  We  made  it  nearly  twenty -five  miles 
to  the  Upper  Island  ford,  on  the  main  Broad-River;  and  after 
travelling  until  seven  o'clock  at  night  were  glad  to  stop  at  brother 

S 's,  ten  miles  short  of  the  place  we  intended  to  reach  when 

we  set  out. 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Wednesday  6.  We  came  to  Moore's  :  I  was 
at  a  loss  how  to  address  myself  to  these  people — it  may  be  for  the 
last  time  :  it  was  laid  on  my  heart  to  speak  from  our  Lord's  lamen- 
tation over  Jerusalem.  I  felt  awful  among  them. 

Saturday  9.  We  came  to  Cane-Creek,  in  Burke  county.  We 
dined  on  some  peach-pie  in  the  woods.  In  the  afternoon  there 
arose  a  most  dreadful  storm  of  rain,  with  thunder  and  lightning  : 
it  was  very  awful ;  we  cried  to  God  for  man  and  beast,  and  were 
preserved.  We  came  in  about  seven  o'clock,  and  were  received 
by  T.  B.  with  great  kindness. 

Monday  11.  We  crossed  Lovelady's  ferry  and  came  to  Con- 
nell's,  where  I  met  with  several  preachers.  After  preaching,  I 
was  going  to  administer  the  sacrament,  and  discovered  that  what 
they  had  provided  for  wine  was  in  reality  brandy  ;  so  I  desisted. 

Here  I  met  Doctor  B 11,  who  is  still  praying  and  waiting  for 

the  con«olation  of  Israel.     I  rode  a  mountainous  path  six  miles  to 

father  W 's,  where  we  dined.    Ah!  what  a  round  of  continual 

running  is  my  life.  Of  late,  feeble  as  I  am,  I  cannot  help  thinking 
of  Cumberland,  in  Tennessee  ;  and  trying  to  go  there  :  if  I  must 
go  to  Kentucky,  I  think  it  is  time  to  go  to  Cumberland  also. 

Thursday  14.  We  took  our  departure  from  Johns-River,  up 
the  branches  of  Catabaw  :  on  our  way  we  met  with  a  half  dozen 
living  creatures,  like  men  and  women,  who  seemed  quite  pleased 
with  their  mountain  wedding  ;  they  were  under  the  whip,  riding 
two  and  two  as  if  they  would  break  their  necks  ;  one  had  a  white 
cloth  like  a  flag,  and  the  other  a  silk  handkerchief;  when  they 
had  spent  their  fire,  they  called  at  a  still- house  to  prime  again, 
I  ascended  about  one  mile  up  a  mountain,  and  came  to  M.  Da- 
venport's :  here  1  felt  deep  dejection  of  mind  as  well  as  great 
weakness  of  body,  and  as  if  I  could  lie  down  and  die  ;  owing,  in 
some  measure,  I  presume,  to  the  great  fatigue  1  underwent  in 
ascending  the  mountain,  which  was  very  steep. 

Saturday  16.  We  set  off  at  six  o'clock,  and  directed  our  course 
up  Tow-River  ;  thence  up  the  Rocky-Creek  through  the  gap  of 


j796.]  UEV.   FRANCIS   ASIU'RV   S  JOURNAL. 

the  Yellow  Mountain,  to  the  head  water-  <>i  I  01  Kiver  ;  w».-  1m. 1 
to  ride  till  eight  o'clock  at  night.  My  ruiinl  is  'till  under  deep 
degression. 

TENNESSEE. — Sunday  17.    F  prea«  linl  at    I'm-  .limit  two 

hundred  people  ;  and  then  met  the  society,  and  had  a  melting  B4  i 
son.      The  milk  and  water  of  thin  country    are  hoth  as    pli\-ic  to 
me  ;   I  am  afraid  that  such   shocks   as  these,  will,  some   time  or 
other,  overset  me. 

Monday  18.    I  rested  at  D 's  ;  my  body    very   feeble,  ami 

mind  under  exceeding  dejection,  with  imaginary  and  real  eviU. 

Tuesday  evening,  the  preachers  came  in  from  Kentucky  and 
Cumberland. 

Wednesday  20.  Our  conference  began  in  great  peace,  and  thus 
»t  ended.  We  had  only  one  preacher  for  each  circuit  in  Kentucky ; 
and  one  for  Green  circuit  in  Tennessee.  >I\ -.elf  being  weak, 
and  my  horse  still  weaker,  1  judged  it  impracticable  to  attrtnpt 
going  through  the  wilderness  to  Kentucky  ;  and  have  concluded  to 
visit  Nolachucky.  I  wrote  an  apology  to  the  brethren  in  Kentucky 
for  my  not  coming,  and  informed  them  of  the  cause. 

Monday  25.    On  the   banks  of  Nolachucky   I    parted   with   our 
dear  suffering  brethren,  going  through  the  howling  wilderness.     I 
feel  happy  in  God.     Sinners  appear  to  be  hardened,  and  pr<>lf- 
cold  ;  the  preachers,  although  young  men,  appear  to  be  solemn  and 
devoted  to  God,  and  doubtless  are  men  who  may  bo  depended  upon. 

NORTH  CAUOMTVA. — 1  came   to  C "s,  where  I  «,iw  a  P..ipti^ 

minister,  who  had  moved  from  Georgia  to  Kentucky  ;  he  appeared 
desirous  of  returning  again.     I  was  told  he   expressed  his   f« 
that  the  ministers  in  Kentucky  will  be  a  curse  to  each  other,  and  the 
people  too  :  good  religion  and  such  good  land,  are  not  so   e 
matched  together.     We  came  to  D—    -'§,  and  had  a  full   meeting 
Brother  Hill  and  his  aids  had  a  great  time  on  the  Sabbath  ;  und  1 
trust  the  time  to  favour  this  people  is  come. 

Sunday,  May  1.   We  came  to  Acuff's  chapel.    I  found  the  funilj 
sorrowful  and  \veeping  on  account  of  the  death  of  Francis  AcufT 
who  from  a  fiddler  became  a  Christian  ;  from  a  Christian,  a  preachei  . 
and  from  a  preacher,  I  trust,  a  glorified  saint  :  he  died  in  the  >\.>rk 
of  the  Lord  in  Kentucky.     I  found  myself  assisted  in  preaching  on 
Kphes.  ii.  1,  2.     The  house  was  crowded,  and  1  trust  they  did  not 
come  together  in  vain.     I  was  somewhat  alarmed  at  the  sudden 
death  of  Reuben  Ellis,  who  hath  been  in  the  ministry  upwards  of 
twenty  years  :  a  faithful  man  of  God,  of  =low.but  v.-rv  «=oli.l  i  • 
Vnr.  IT. 


IIF.7.  FRANCIS  ASBUKY's  JOURNAL.  [1796 

he  wag  an  excellent  counsellor,  and  steady  yoke-fellow  in  Jesus. 
My  mind  is  variously  exercised  as  to  future  events — whether  it  is 
my  duty  to  continue  to  bear  the  burden  I  now  bear,  or  whether  I 
had  not  better  retire  to  some  otber  land.  I  am  not  without  fears, 
that  a  door  will  be  opened  to  honour,  ease,  or  interest ;  and  then 
farewell  to  religion  in  the  American  Methodist  connexion  ;  but 
death  may  soon  end  all  these  thoughts,  and  quiet  all  these  fears. 

VIRGINIA. — Thursday  5.  I  came  to 's  ;  thence  to  the  un- 
meaning meeting-house,  and  found  a  wild,  wicked  people,  to  whom 
I  preached  on  Gen.  xix.  13.  An  appointment  had  been  made  for 
me  to  preach  in  Abingdon.  As  1  expected  there  would  be  no  op- 
portunity, as  the  court  was  then  sitting,  F  concluded  to  go  off  to 
Clinch,  but  was  informed  there  would  be  (by  the  will  of  the 
judges)  an  adjournment  of  the  court  for  my  preaching  :  I  there- 
fore went  and  preached  at  three  o'clock,  and  had  the  judges,  some 
of  the  lawyers,  and  very  few  of  the  citizens  to  hear  me.  As  sen- 
tence was  passed  on  a  poor  criminal  this  day,  and  two  more  were 
burnt  in  the  hand,  I  judged  I  ought  to  meet  the  solemnities  of  the 
day,  and  spoke  on  "  Knowing  therefore  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  we 
persuade  men  ;"  but  was  shut  up  in  my  own  mind. 

Saturday  7,  1  escaped  from  Abingdon  as  out  of  a  prison,  and  rode 
to  Clinch.  I  passed  by  Mr  Cummings's — he  hath  not  laboured 
for  nought  ;  few  men  have  a  better  house  or  plantation  :  but  his 
plea  is,  "  He  put  his  life  in  his  hand  :"  and  so  have  I,  every  time 
1  have  crossed  the  wilderness  and  mountains.  I  expect  a  crown 
tor  my  services  :  were  I  to  charge  the  people  on  the  western  wa- 
ters for  my  services,  I  should  take  their  roads,  rocks  and  moun- 
tains into  the  account,  and  rate  my  labours  at  a  very  high  price. 

We  crossed  North-Holstein,  and  came  to  D 's,  sixteen  miles  : 

where  we  had  a  congregation  of  about  two  hundred  people. 

TENNESSEE. — Saturday  14.  We  passed  Russell  court-house,  and 

intended  to  go  to  B 's,  but  were  met  by  a  most  violent  storm  oi 

rain,  thunder,  and  lightning.  We  had  a  most  dreadful  crack  ;  the  fire 
and  scent  were  like  the  discharge  of  a  great  gun  ;  I  was  much  alarmed 
for  nearly  a  mile  with  expectation  or  fear  of  what  would  overtake  us. 
We  found  shelter  from  part  of  the  storm  in  a  poor  cabin,  where 
some  people  had  stopped  on  their  way  to  Cumberland.  Cold,  la- 
bour, and  being  in  the  rain,  causes  me  to  feel  very  unwell. 

Sunday  8.  In  the  morning  I  awoke  very  unwell ;  I  took  a  few- 
drops  of  camphorated  spirits,  Bateman's  Drops,  and  paregoric,  and 
found  some  ease,  although  my  headach  and  fever  still  continued. 
!  made  out  to  preach  to  about  two  hundred  people. 


1796.]  M:\.IK.\V  K\  's  .mi  RNAI  261 


Monday  9.    I  hobbled  over  tin-  ri'lur.  'hr.iiiL'h  '!"    •  ipitiil  part  of 
Russell  count)',  sixteen  mih-s  t<.  15  -  's  :    lln  -••  (,.•.  p|i    |,.,vi    h\.  d 
in  peace  ever  since  the  death  of  Ben,  tin:  h.di  M.,,,1,.,1  Indian  , 
nor,  who  was  shot  through  the  hf.nl  \\lnh-  <  .u  i  \  n._'  f.il  u\  ••  win.. 
He  was  a  dreadful  \virkcd   wretch,   v.  ho  \,\   \,  ;,.  (;  n.    . 
the  agent  of  death  to  nearly  one  hundred  p.  opl«  m  im-  :\  il.ii  -i  ness, 
and  on  Kussell.      I  If  •!•<•  I  pn-a<  hrd  to  .1  lew  i  ,  .-opl!- 

had  time  to  read,    write,  and  -Ict-p  in  quirt.       \  (  -tri.la\   our  \  • 
or-  were  requested  on  behalf  of  K.  D  -  .     Tl.i-  day  in  the  • 
ning  brother  K  -  was  called   upon   to   perform   her   fuinT.il  so- 
lemnities.     Perhaps  she    has  been  ;i-    great  a  !•  ;i-alf  -ullrrrr  a-  I 
have   heard    of.      The  following  account,  in  "uh-t.mre,    wa-   t 
from  her  own  mouth,  some  time  ago,  by  .1.  Kobler,  who  perfoi; 
her  funeral  rites. 

Her  maiden  name  was  Dickenson.     She   was   married   to  a  Mr 
Scott,  and  lived  in  Powell's  Valley  :   at  which  time  the  Indian-  •••. 
very  troublesome,  often  killing  and  plundering  the  inhabitant*.     On 
a  certain  evening,  her  husband  and  children  being  in  bed,  eight  or 
nine  Indians  rushed  into  the   hou-e  ;   her  husband    being  alanm-d 
started  up,  when  all  that  had  linns,  tired  ;»l  him.      Alth<.irj;h  h- 
badly  wounded,  he  broke  through  them  all,  and  got  out  of  the  hoi 
several    of  them  closely  pursued  him,  and  put  an  end  to  In-  lilr 
they  then  murdered  and  scalped  all  her  children  before   In  i   • 
plundered  her  house,  and  took  her   prisoner.      The   remainder  of 
the  night  they  spent  around  a  lire  in  the  \\oods.  drinking.  -h"iiting, 
and  dancing.     The  next  day  they  divided  the  plunder,  with   ;_•: 
equality  ;  amongst  the  rest  of  the  goods  >\as  one  of  Mr.  \N  •  -I 
hymn-books  ;  she  asked   them  for  it,  and  they  gave  it  to   her,  but 
when  they  saw  her  often  reading    therein,   they    were  di-| 
called  her  a  conjurer,   and  took  it  from  her.     After  thi>  tin  y  tra 
veiled  several  clay's  journey  towards  the  Indian  town-:    but,  s.m! 
she,  my  grief  was  so  great  I  could  hardly  believi    m\  -ituation  nas 
a  reality,  but  thought  I  dreamed.      To  a^giavate  nn  gnel.  one  of 
the  Indians  hung  my  husband's  and  my  children's  scalp-  t"  In-  b;i.-L 
and  would  walk  the  next  before  me.     In   walking  up  :ind  down  the 
hills  and  mountains,  1  was  uorn  out  with  fatigue  iron  .    tin  \ 

would  often  laugh  when  they  suv    me  almost  ppi  nt,  a:n!  mimic  my 
panting  for  breath.      There  u;i-  nnr  Indian  who  u  as  more  him. 
than  the    rest  ;    he  would  got    me    water,    and    in 
stop  when  I  wanted  to  rest  :   thus  th-\y  cairn'd  m<    .  ;i  •  -I.  ven  .' 
journey,  until  they  were  all  irre-aly  ilistn^-^d  with   Insnirei 


252  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1796. 

then  committed  me  to  the  care  of  an  old  Indian  at  the  camp,  while 
they  went  off  a  hunting. 

Whilst  the  old  man  was  busily  employed  in  dressing  a  deer-skin. 
I  walked  backward  and  forward  through  the  woods,  until  I  ob- 
served he  took  no  notice  of  me  ;  1  then  slipped  off,  and  ran  a  con- 
siderable distance  and  came  to  a  cane-brake,  where  I  hid  myself 
very  securely.  Through  most  of  the  night  I  heard  the  Indians 
searching  for  me,  and  answering  each  other  with  a  voice  like  that 
of  an  owl.  Thus  was  I  left  alone  in  the  savage  wilderness,  far 
from  any  inhabitants,  without  a  morsel  of  food,  or  any  friend  to 
help,  but  the  common  Saviour  and  friend  of  all :  to  Him  I  poured 
out  my  complaint  in  fervent  prayer  that  he  would  not  forsake  me 
in  this  distressing  circumstance.  I  then  set  out  the  course  that  I 
thought  Kentucky  lay,  though  with  very  little  expectation  of  see 
ing  a  human  face  again,  except  that  of  the  savages  ;  whom  1  looked 
upon  as  so  many  fiends  from  the  bottomless  pit ;  and  my  greatest 
dread  was  that  of  meeting  some  of  them  whilst  wandering  in  the 
wilderness. 

One  day  as  I  was  travelling,  I  heard  a  loud  human  voice,  and  a 
prodigious  noise,  like  horses  running ;  1  ran  into  a  safe  place  and 
hid  myself;  and  saw  a  company  of  Indians  pass  by,  furiously  dri- 
ving a  gang  of  horses  which  they  had  stolen  from  the  white  peo- 
ple. I  had  nothing  to  subsist  upon  but  roots,  young  grape-vines, 
and  ssveet-cane,  and  such  like  produce  of  the  woods.  I  acciden 
tally  came  where  a  bear  was  eating  a  deer,  and  drew  near  in  hopes 
of  getting  some,  but  he  growled  and  looked  angry;  so  I  left  him. 
and  quickly  passed  on.  At  night  when  I  lay  down  to  rest,  I  never 
slept,  but  I  dreamed  of  eating.  In  my  lonesome  travels,  I  came  to  a 
very  large  shelving  rock,  tinder  which  was  a  fine  bed  of  leaves  ;  I 
crept  in  among  them,  and  determined  there  to  end  my  days  of  sor- 
row. I  la}r  there  several  hours  until  my  bones  ached  in  so  dis- 
tressing a  manner  that  I  was  obliged  to  stir  out  again.  I  then 
thought  of,  and  wished  for  home  ;  and  travelled  on  several  days, 
till  I  came  where  Cumberland-River  breaks  through  the  mountain. 

I  went  down  the  cliffs  a  considerable  distance,  until  I  was  af- 
frighted, and  made  an  attempt  to  go  back,  but  found  the  place 
down  which  1  had  gone  was  so  steep  that  I  could  not  return.  1 
then  saw  but  one  way  that  I  could  go,  which  was  a  considerable 
perpendicular  distance  down  to  the  bank  of  the  River.  I  took  hold 
of  the  top  of  a  little  bush,  and  for  half  an  hour  prayed  fervently 
to  God  ti>r  assistance  ;  I  then  let  mvself  down  bv  the  little  bush 


I  796.]  REV.   FRANTIC    AT.t-'RY's  JOL'RNAI 

until  it  broke,  and  I  went  with  -rn-at  violence  down  to  ihe  bottom 
This  was  early  in  the  morning,  and  I  lay  tlu  r-    .1  i -un-i'l -i  .dd»-  til 
with  a  determination  to  go  no  further.     About  t»-n  >  I   grew 

so  thirsty,  that  I  concluded  to  crawl  to  the  water  and  dunk 
which  I  found  1  could  walk.  Tke  j>!nce  I  nu/i»-  through,  at  I  /'. 
been  since  inter  mett,  is  anli/  ?:;•«  miles,  and  I  Teas  four  days  in  getting 
<;'/i  it.  I  travelled  on  until  1  came  to  a  little  path,  one  end  ol 
which  led  to  the  inhabitants,  and  the  other  to  the  wilderness  ;  I 
knew  not  which  end  of  the  path  to  take — after  standing  and  pray- 
ing to  the  Lord  for  direction,  1  turned  to  take  the  end  th  it  led  to 
the  wilderness  ;  immediately;  tin-re  came  a  little  bird  of  a  dove 
colour  near  to  my  feet,  and  fluttered  alum;  tin-  path  lint  h-d  to  the 
inhabitants.  1  did  not  observe  tin-  much  at  lir<t.  until  it  did  it  a 
second  or  third  time  ;  1  then  un.iei>tuod  this  as  a  direction  of  Pro- 
vidence, and  took  the  path  whn  li  led  me  to  the  inhabitants.  Imme- 
diately after  her  safe  arrival  she  embraced  religion,  and  lived  and 
died  a  humble  follower  of  Christ. 

Sunday  15.  How  gladly  would  I  have  attended  my  bed,  rather 
than  my  meeting;  but  it  was  fixed  otherwise,  and  I  had  tn  -land  in 
the  door,  pressed  with  people,  and  preach  to  about  three  hun- 
dred hearers.  There  was  some  stir  among  them.  1  felt  bettei 
soul  and  body  after  meeting  than  1  did  before.  We  passed  through 
Wythe  county,  and  rode  seventy  miles  in  two  days. 

Thursday  19.   I   was  crowded  with  stupid  sinner*  of  various  de- 
scriptions, to   whom  1  preached   on  Joshua  xxiv.  ID.  "\e  cannot 
serve  God,"  itc.      It  was  a  matter  of  surprise,  that  1  not  only  relu 
sed  to  stay  •»  night,  but  that  1  did  not  eat  broad  nor  drink  water  in 
that  place. 

Friday  20.  We  rode  forty  miles  to    Indian-Creek,  about  fifteen 
miles  above  the  mouth.      We  had  no  place  to  dine  until  we  am 

at  father  C 's,  about  six  o'clock.      If  1  could  have  regular  food 

and  sleep,  I  could  stand  the  fatigue   1    have  to  go  through   much 
better;    but   this   is  impossible   under   some   circumstances. 
sleep  four  hours,  and  ride  forty  miles  without  food  or  fire  is  hard  : 
— but  we  had  water  enough  in  the  rivers  and  creek?.    1  shall  1 
rode  nearly  one  thousand  miles   on   the   western  \\  ifon    I 

leave  them  ;   I    have  been  on  the  water-   of  N'olarhucky,  to  the 
mouth   of  Clinch  ;  on   the  north,   middle,   and  south  hranchr- 
Holstein  ;  on  New-River,  Green  Briar,  and  by  the  head  sprim; 
Monongahela.  If  1  were  able  1  should  go  from  (  harleston 
a  direct  course,  five  hundred  miles,  to   Nolach  >wo 

hundred  and  fifty  miles  to  Cumberland  ;  thence  'Mi*-   : 


254  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  [179b 

Kentucky  ;  thence  one  hundred  miles  through  that  state,  and  two 
hundred  to  Saltsburg  ;  thence  two  hundred  to  Green  Briar  ;  thence 
two  hundred  to  Red-Stone,  and  three  hundred  to  Baltimore.  Ah ! 
if  I  were  young  again  !  I  was  happy  to  have  a  comfortable  night's 
sleep,  after  a  hard  day's  ride,  and  but  little  rest  the  night  before. 
I  have  now  a  little  time  to  refit,  recollect,  and  write.  Here  forts 
and  savages  once  had  a  being,  but  now  peace  and  improvement. 

Monday  23.  I  rode  to  Rehoboth  chapel  in  the  sinks  of  Green 
Briar,  where  we  held  conference  with  a  few  preachers.  Here  I 
delivered  two  discourses  Thursday  crossed  Green  Briar  River, 
and  had  to  pass  along  a  crooked  and  dangerous  path  to  Benton's. 
My  mind  is  in  peace. 

Friday  27.  I  felt  myself  very  heavy  :  my  mind  unprepared  for 
the  congregation  at  Gilboa  meeting-house,  and  could  not  preach 
with  an}'  satisfaction.  After  meeting  the  society,  I  came  away 

much  clouded.     We  came   off  from  brother  C 's   about  four 

o'clock,  aiming  at  the  Little  Levels  ;  but  darkness  came  on,  and  we 
had  to  climb  and  blunder  over  the  point  of  a  mountain,  in  descend- 
ing which  my  feet  were  so  squeezed  that  the  blood  was  ready  to 
gush  out  of  the  pores  :  I  could  hardly  help  weeping  out  my  sorrow  : 

at  length  we  came  to  brother  H 's,  where  the  kindness  of  the 

family  was  a  cordial,  and  we  went  to  rest  about  ten  o'clock,  and  all 
was  well. 

Sunday  29.  I  was  very  warm  in  body  and  mind  at  M'Neale's. 
In  the  afternoon  (contrary  to  my  sentiment  and  practice  on  the 
Lord's  day)  we  took  our  departure,  purposing  to  reach  Morgan- 
town  on  Wednesday  evening,  in  order  to  attend  an  appointment 
made  for  me  on  Thursday,  the  second  of  June.  We  reached  my 
old  friend  Drinnon's,  who  received  us  gladly,  and  entertained  us 
kindly.  Next  day  (Monday)  we  opened  our  campaign  through  the 
mountains,  following  a  path  I  had  thought  never  to  travel  again. 
Frequently  we  were  in  danger  of  being  plucked  off  our  horses  by 
the  boughs  of  the  trees  under  which  we  had  to  ride.  About  seven 
o'clock,  after  crossing  six  mountains  and  many  rocky  creeks  and 
fords  of  Elk  and  Monongahela  Rivers,  we  made  the  Valley  of 
Distress,  called  by  the  natives  Tyger's  Valley.  We  bad  a  com- 
fortable lodging  at  Mr.  White's  ;  and  here  I  must  acknowledge 
the  kindness  and  decency  of  the  family,  and  their  readiness  to 
duty,  sacred  and  civil.  Thence  we  hastened  on  at  the  rate  of 
forty-two  miles  a  da}'.  We  had  to  ride  four  miles  in  the  night, 
and  went  supperless  to  the  Punching,  where  we  slept  a  little  oa 
hard  lines. 


179C.]  n>:v.  FRANCIS  u  (  KVAL. 

After  encountering  many  dill'iculti*--;,  known  only  to  <•«>,!  ,,tij 
ourselves,  we  came  to  .Mor^.mtown.  I  doubt  w!  li.ill 

ever  request  any  person   Income    and  meet  n.e    .u   the    lc\.l 
Green  Briar,  or  to  accompany  me  across  these  mountain-  i^.m 
brother    D.    Hilt    has    now    done.     Oh!    how    <  !K  Buried    i-    I, 
How    thankful   ought   I   to  be  that    I    am   h<  nith   hi'.- 

limits,  in  peace  and  plenty,  at  kind  brother  9        -'9. 

I-'KNNSYI.VA.MA. — Thursday,  June    -.     I    gave  them   a  <!i- 
on  "Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  tear  and  li-mMi  1 

had  half  a  do/.cn  preachers  and  a  congregation  0  III  h« n 

and   some  wept.      I    was   informed  of  an    aw  In!  mvum-i.i!,. 
man,   aged  seventy  years,  Mrau_nlrd    hi-    own    -on    to    pi •  -\eiit  ln> 
appearing  as  evidence   against  him  for  theft. 

Thursday  9.  We  crossed  Great  \  ohi'^.iiiv,  and  came  to  Con- 
nel's-Town,  where  we  had  a  good  time.  I  pie. u  hid  on  Act*  n: 

26.     Sister  C ,  who  professed  to  iind  JM  .m.  MX  or  -even  \. 

ago,   when  I  prayed   with  her,   was  now  sick  ;   I  gave   her  counsel 
and  medicine,  and  trust  I  left  her  In  Ue.r  in  soul  and  body. 

Saturday  II.  I  rode  to  Inion-Town,  and  alter  u  solemn  meet 
ing,  1  sat  in  conference  with  the  preach* 

Monday  13.  We  left  Union-Town  and  rode  about  thirly-luc 
miles,  and  the  next  day  forty-five  to  J.  F '$. 

MA  (i  vi. -\M). — Wednesday  15.  I  came  to  Old-Town,  and  prrari. 
to  a   few  people  at   brother  J.  J.  Jacobs's,  and   the  next  day  rode 
nearly  forty  miles  to  father  F 's. 

Friday  17.   We  rode  forty-two  miles,  and  were  weary  enough. 

Saturday  18.  I  came  to  brother  S.  Philips'*,  ami  wa-  glad  to 
lay  me  down  and  rest,  having  rode  about  two  hundred  miles  on 
uneven  roads  in  five  days  and  a  half. 

Sunday  19.  I   was  musing  in  my  own  mind   how   I    could  1 
spend  the  morning  of  that  day.      I  concluded  to  call  the  family 
the   room,   and  address  them  pointedly,  one   by  one,  concen 
their  souls  :    I  did  so,    and  hope  it   was  not  in  vain.      In  the  a 
noon  1  pieached  on  the  twenty-third  J'salm. 

Tuesday  21.   I  preached  in  Ft  ederick-Town  at  ten  o'clock 
at  Liberty-Town  at  five  o'clock. 

Wednesday-?.   I    had  some   life  at  the   new  meeting  house  01 
the  Ridge.     I  borrowed  a  horse  to  ride  nine  miles  •'"'«'  then  v 
out  to  get  to  Baltimore.     O  what  times  are  here  !      The  :-.-:.idfri. 
crowded,  they  have  live  teacher?,  and  nearly  two  huudi  u 

1   will  now   take  a   view    of  my  jounif\    '.<j\-  some    moqtbi   , 
Froru  the  beat  judgment   I   can  !'»nn.  (he 


j*0t>  fcl-^.  FKANCIS  ASBUKV'S  JOURNAL.  [1796 

from  Baltimore  to  Charleston  (S.  C.)  one  thousand  miles  ;  thence 
up  the  state  of  South  Carolina  two  hundred  miles;  from  the  centre 
to  the  west  of  Georgia  two  hundred  miles  ;  through  North  Caro- 
lina one  hundred  miles  ;  through  the  state  of  Tennessee  one  hun- 
dred miles  ;  through  the  west  of  Virginia  three  hundred  miles  ; 
through  Pennsylvania  and  the  west  of  Maryland  and  down  to  Bal- 
timore four  hundred  miles.  I  was  employed  in  town  as  usual  in 
preaching  and  meeting  the  classes,  &c.  I  continued  in  town 
until  Thursday  30,  and  then  set  off,  and  came  in  the  evening  to 

Esquire  G 's,    our  ancient   lodging,    and   was   received   with 

their  usual  kindness. 

Friday,  July  1.  Came  to  Abiogdon  and  saw  the  walls  of  Cokes- 
bury,  with  some  pain  of  mind.  We  came  in  the  evening  to  Mr. 
Dallam's,  whose  house  was  the  first  home  I  had  in  these  parts. 
Sister  Dallam  is  worn  out  with  affliction  :  but  her  confidence  in 
God  continues  and  appears  to  grow  stronger. 

Saturday  2,  and  Sunday  3.  I  attended  Cecil  quarterly  meeting : 
and  spent  Monday  4th  at  Mr.  Bassett's  ;  I  was  so  unwell,  that  if  my 
company  had  not  been  entertaining  I  should  have  been  in  bed. 

Wednesday  6.  We  had  a  solemn  season  at  Dudley's  chapel  :  it 
was  like  a  Sabbath. 

Thursday  7.  I  rode  to  Choptank  (now  Gre«nsborough)  through 
excessive  heat ;  S.  Cook  was  watching  for  me,  and  when  I  came  she 
eould  hardly  bear  my  presence  ;  she  seemed  as  deeply  affected  as 
if  I  had  been  her  father,  knowing  the  great  affection  that  subsisted 
between  her  deceased  father  and  myself.  I  am  now  happy  that  it 
is  not  in  me  to  weep  as  do  others,  or  I  might  never  wipe  my  eyes. 
T  preached  on  Isai.  Ivii.  18 — 21. 

Tuesday  10.  I  went  to  meeting  under  great  heaviness;  and 
there  was  some  among  the  people.  I  dined  with  Wm.  Moore. 
where  1  prophesied  seventeen  years  ago.  How  few  are  left  now 
that  heard  me  then  ! 

Monday  11.  The  heat  has  been  for  some  time,  and  still  is,  ex- 
cessive ;  I  doubt  if  it  be  not  equal  to  that  in  Georgia  and  the 
islands.  We  rode  fifteen  miles  to  Quantee's  chapel ;  where  we  had 
a  number  of  gay  people ;  but  it  appeared  as  if  they  did  not  under- 
stand or  even  hear  what  I  said.  We  have  reason  to  praise  God 
for  an  abatement  of  the  heat  of  the  weather,  which,  had  it  con- 
tinued, would  have  been  insupportable.  We  had  excessive  rain, 
attended  with  thunder  and  lightning. 

We  came  to  Snow-Hill,  on  Pocomoke-River.  I  called  on  the 
weeping  widow  Bowen,  whose  la.te  husband,  after  being  the  princi 


»  7^6. j 

pal  in  building  a  house  lor  divine  vvoi-hip.  i!i-  >1  in  ;<i.i<:c.  lit-: 
met  about  one  tbomaod  people  :  being  nn.iidi-  to  >  immand  the  - 
gregation  from  tlie  pulpit,  I  -tuod  in  m  -id  pica* 

to  thos-  who  \\i_-rc  in,  and  to  these  uho  une  oi:t  uf  tin-  ! 

I  rode   eight  miles  to  the   K  .1  -liore  ;  when  u 
lelt  the  cool  sea  luee/.'  \<  i  v  powerfully.     I  lodged  with  > 
n  hose  house  I    visited   -i\tee.n    vars  :igo  :    hen:   are   tw<, 
above  seventy  <,f  age,  who  have  lived  tu.xth-'i 

years. 

Tuesday  19.  We  rode  (oily  miles  to  I.'.-ui-iuwn  ;  we  .-topped  lu 

Jine   near  II ':>  grand  mill   seat.     My  spirit:-  uf  Lite  , 

yreatly,  not  being  hiihjcct  to  depression  as  heretofore.      It 
away  about  noon,  and  gave  us  the  opportunity  «>f  inliii^;  lr. 
OOt-of  LewistOWB,   a;ui  preaching  to  the  brirti.:' 
cans.      I  dined  \\iih  Mr.  Shanklin,  wliose  hou-e   \,.^  the  I: 
\vas  opeued  to  me  in  this  place.     We  then  urged  our  uay  up 
county,  and   escaped  the   rain  until  we  came   uilhin  two  i 
Milford  ;  it  then  poured  down  very  heavily,  ami  we  came  in  drip- 
ping about  eight  o'clock. 

Triday  '22.    We    had    a    living   love-least  :    many    opened   ti 
mouths,  but  spoke  too  much  of  what  ua^   jia-t.     \V»-   h:u. 
ceeding  great  rompany,  to  whom  I  preached  on  !>.ii.  Kii.  1 
two  following  day?,    Saturday  and  Sunday,  I    atlendod    I'uvn-.i 
terly  meeting;  where  I  suppose  we  had  nearly  tn"  ihuuvuul  ; 
pie.     It  was  a  living,  open  season  :  there  was  great  sw<  ai:d 

love  among  the  brethren. 

Monday  25.  About  thirty-live  minutes  before  I   he-an  n  • 
I  received  the  last  loving  request  of  our  dear  brother  \\  ilium 
Jessop,  which  was  to  preach  his  funeral  sermon  :   1  bad  my  difficul- 
ties in  speaking,  and  the  people  in  hearing  of  a  man  so  n 
and  so  much  beloved  :   he  was  always  solemn  ;   and 
steady  men  have  been  found  amongst  us.     I  stopped  at  Mid  JI.  t 
Wilmington,  and  Chester,  in  rny  way  t.»  Philadelphia. 

PENNSYLVANIA. — Thursday  20.  I  preached  on  I'.-.iln.i 
I  have  thought  that  we  should  preach  as   it'  \ve  expected   no  i 
from  the  people  ;  yea,  a->  if  we  believed  that  enen,  and 

us  were  in  the  congregation.      1  began  meeting  ( l.i->r-  i:i 
I  had  some  pleasure  in  receiving  news  of  a  revival  "t    r>  ! 
Jie  south  ;  likewise  from  the  ca-ti.rn  siatr.-.      lint  tin 
failures  among  the  preachers  on  account  of  health,  be.  pin- 
iheir  travelling  and  -tan«i  the  \vork.     Diotl.or   I 

.   11. 


268  HEV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURKAL.  [1796. 

given  me  mi  account  of  the  late  fire  in  Charleston,  and  says  that 
about  five  hundred  houses  are  destroyed. 

Saturday  30.  I  began  reading  Mr.  Fletcher's  Portrait  of  St.  Paul '. 
the  notes  are  significant,  and  show  what  a  minister  of  the  Gospel 
ought  to  be,  and  what  he  may  be  through  grace. 

Sunday  31.  I  had  some  life  and  more  liberty  at  Ebenezer  in  the 
morning  at  five  o'clock  :  I  must  needs  attend  the  second  African 
church  ;  and  at  half  past  seven  o'clock,  in  the  great  unwieldy  house 
and  congregation  in  Fourth-street,  I  preached  on  John  i.  17. 

Monday,  August  1.  1  drew  the  outlines  of  a  subscription,  that 
may  form  part  of  a  constitution  of  a  general  fund,  for  the  sole  pur- 
pose of  supporting  the  travelling  ministry  ;  to  have  respect; 

First,  To  the  single  men  that  suffer  and  are  in  want. 

Secondly,  To  the  married  travelling  preachers. 

Thirdly,  To  the  worn-out  preachers. 

Fourthly,  The  widows  and  orphans  of  those  who  have  lived  ami 
died  in  the  work. — And 

Fifthly,  To  enable  the  yearly  conference  to  employ  more  mar- 
ried men  ;  and  finally,  to  supply  the  wants  of  all  the  travelling 
preachers,  under  certain  regulations,  and  restrictions,  as  the  state 
of  the  fund  will  admit. 

Thursday  4.  1  was  called  upon  by  the  African  society  in  Cam- 
pington  to  open  their  new  house,  which  I  did  on  Rom.  i.  16 — 18. 
and  had  an  unwieldy  congregation  of  white  and  black  Brother  D. 
gave  a  lively  exhortation  on  the  new  birth. 

Friday  5.  Having  concluded  on  the  presentation  of  the  subscrip- 
tion, I  hasted  with  it  from  house  to  house.  After  dinner  we  came 
to  Germantown,  where  I  preached  in  the  academy  at  six  o'clock 
to  a  large  congregation  of  women.  I  lodged  once  more  at  the 
house  of  mother  Steele  and  her  daughter  Lusby  ;  having  had  an  ac- 
quaintance of  twenty-two  years. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Sunday  7.  It  being  rainy  in  the  morning,  my  con- 
gregation was  not  very  large  at  Trenton.  1  preached  on  Isaiah 
Ixii.  10.  1.  The  charge  to  the  ministry  to  go  through  the  gates  as 
ministers  and  Christians.  2.  Prepare  the  way— removing  all  the 
difficulties.  3.  Cast  up  the  highway — repentance,  regeneration, 
and  sanctification.  4.  Gather  out  the  stones— wicked  ministers 
and  people.  5.  Set  up  the  standard — i.  e.  form  the  Christian 
church  ;  give  the  standard  of  Christian  doctrine  and  experience. 
In  the  afternoon  I  preached  on  Hebr.  x.  38.  It  is  a  dry  time,  and 
we  cannot  get  along :  I  was  sorry  I  did  not  preach  in  the  street, 


I79C.]  RF.V.  FRAK.  j 


Monday  >'-.    \\'c  directed  our  <  >.ur>e  tlir.m-!i  tl.>  -u.irdi 

New-York  ;  passing  through  IYmiv-T»u  n,  u,,l  ;i|.« 
well-improved  part  of  the  country. 

Tuesday  0.     \\c    made   our  w:iy   twenty-five   nub  -    ; 
M'Collough's,  near   Schooley's  .Mountain—  pmj, 
the  Blue  Kidgc.     After  a  good  meetiun  at  brother  M-l'. 
to  lay  the  foundation   of  a  new  uieelin^  Imu-c  :    u  .  <  t  of 

I>r.  Watts's  hymn  on  the  amcr-slnnc,  and    prayed  :    I  tln:ri  h.id    l.i 
lend  a  hand  to  lay  the  mighty  corner-stone  of  the  li  !i«  u 

sung  and  prayed,  and  retired  to  brother  lludd's,  an  \-i.u  -hie  t...k-ed  ; 
my  never-failing  friend  in  time,  and  1  hope  uill  be  to  all  eternity. 

Wednesday  10.     1  thought   it  good  not  to  be   idle,  --o    I   went  to 
Hackets-Town,  and  preaclu-d   on  u  The  protni-e  i^  to    |  !   t-j 

3rour  children,"  &.c.  we  had  few  people,  but  a  feeling,  serious  time. 
Thence  we  rode  to  Dover,  where  we  had  many  people  at  a  -' 
warning  :   I    admired  the  solemnity  of  the   women  ;  the   men  ap- 
peared to  be  outdone  with  the  heat  and  labours  of  the  day. 

Friday  1  -'.   We  rode  twenty  miles  to  brother  Dickinson's  :   h' 
now  an  official  character   among  us,  and  can   remember,  when  l> 
was   a   child,   how  godly  men    came   to    the  house    of  his   father, 
preaching,  praying,  and   talking  about  religion,  as   wa-  the  c;t- 
my  father's  house  when  I  was  a  child. 

Saturday  13.     I  rode  to   Eli/abethto\vn,  where  I  preached  :   tl.- 
next  day  I   met  the   classes.     Having   heard    many  thin.     .1    Mi. 
Vistin,  many  of  which  were  very  wild,  I  went  and  heard  for  I 
self:  he  explained   the   22d  chapter  of  the   Revelation   of  .'• 
<  ,'hrist  to  St.  John,  and  applied  it  to  the  Millennium  and   i 
Christ  upon  earth  :   his  foretelling  the  time  and  place  of  tli^  cm 
and   kingdom    of   Christ;    General    Washington    being    /HP: 
be!,   and   himself  Joshua   the   high   priest,  and  the   p!  ;  up 

of  a  certain  field  —  all  this  appeared  to  me  like  wiHnc-?  of  th<" 
brain. 

Monday  15.    We  rode  to  New-York  :  whilst  crossing  thr  fc: 
some  foolish,  wicked  people  uttered   so  many  damns  tii  ::i  1    v. 
little  afraid  the  Lord   would  sink  the   boat  :   I  asked   a  man  i; 
bad  any  chalk  to  lend  me  that   I  might  mark  down  the  cm 
company  gave   us   on  our  passage  of  thirty  or  forty  mm. 
was  taken  up  in  meeting  classes  and  veiling  from  hon^r:  to  h 
a  good  deal  of  my  time   in   (he  day,  and  I  frequently  prcachr 
night.     I  read  Watson's  Apology  for  the  I'.ible. 

Sunday  21.   I  went  over  to   Brooklyn,  whirr  no   h.ivr  n 

:  I  had  very  few  hearer*  except  thosn  who  <"\m<*  )r'"n  the- 


i'UU  Kt:V.  FIUXCIS  ASIH'UV'S  JOURNAL.  [1796> 

city.  1  administered  the  sacrament,  and  we  had  some  life.  We 
then  returned  to  the  city,  where  I  preached  in  the  afternoon  to 
about  one  thousand  six-hundred  people,  some  of  whom  were 
wicked  and  wild  enough.  The  preachers  h;id  pity  upon  me.  and 
desired  me  to  preach  only  twice  this  Sabbath.  In  my  own  soul  I 
feel  happy,  but  on  account  of  the  church  of  God,  and  poor  sinners, 
awful.  It  appears  as  necessary  to  preach  conviction  and  conver- 
sion among  our  own,  as  among  other  congregations.  Oh  !  when 
will  the  Lord  appear  as  in  ancient  times  ! 

Monday  22.  I  met  three  living  classes  ;  several  among  whom 
professed  perfect  love.  The  weather  is  excessive!}'  warm  and 
dry  :  people  are  sickly,  and  dying,  especially  children  ;  I  rind  coy 
body  very  weak  :  preaching  at  night,  added  to  the  moschetoe.?, 
causes  me  to  sleep  very  little. 

Wednesday  24.  We  have  still  very  great  heat  :  it  appears  to  me 
to  be  unhealthy,  judgment  weather  :  I  feel  almost  spent.  I  generally 
walk  three  or  four  miles  a  day,  pray  ten  or  twelve  times,  in  the 
congregation,  families,  and  classes  ;  my  sleep  is  interrupted  with 
pain  and  heat. 

Thursday  25.  I  was  much  fatigued  in  meeting  classes  and  visit- 
ing from  house  to  house  ;  but  the  Lord  was  present  to  bless,  which 
gave  me  consolation.  In  the  evening  we  had  a  full  house  ;  I  was 
uncommonly  assisted  in  preaching  ;  and  there  was  much  weep- 
ing in  the  congregation.  It  is  impossible  to  preach  to  these  peo- 
ple till  you  are  well  acquainted  with  them  ;  but  here  I  have  no  con- 
tinuing cit}'  :  next  week  I  go  hence. 

Sunday  28.  I  preached  in  the  morning  at  the  old  church  ;  in  the 
afternoon  at  the  new  church,  on  Hebr.  ii.  3.  and  in  the  evening  at 
the  old  church  again  on  Rev.  iii.  2,  3.  besides  meeting  six  classes 
in  the  course  of  the  day  ;  in  general  I  have  had  no  extraordinary 

assistance  in  preaching  of  late.     Brother  L preached  twice  in 

the  north  end  of  Broadway  ;  the  congregation  appeared  serious 
and  attentive.  Notwithstanding  the  labours  of  the  day  were  con- 
siderable, I  was  not  much  wearied.  In  meeting  the  society,  I  ob- 
served to  them,  that  they  knew  but  little  of  my  life  and  labours, 
unless  in  the  pulpit,  family,  or  class  meetings,  that  they  were  unac- 
quainted with  my  labours  even  in  that  city,  much  less  could  they 
tell  where  I  had  been,  and  what  I  had  been  doing  for  one  year. 

Tuesday  30.  I  delivered  my  concluding  discourse  on  Isaiah  Ivii. 
10.;  1.  The  penitent  backslider  ;  2.  The  Lord  hath  seen  his  ways  ; 
3.  Healing  him  ;  4.  Leading  him  ;  5.  Restoring  comforts  to  him  : 
\ve  had  some  serious,  feeling  souls  at  our  meeting. 


..  FRAN  AT. 


Wednesday  01.  I  had  a  meelinff  with  (he  le  iders  in  close 
'pence,  and  foand  it  i  •  \l  ;:  iii-upi 

•  •I   |    rii--ui.ii  \y  that  of  the  right  of  preach  .  '...^m- 

,   win  •!!   Hi-id   before    tli'-  -  •»  iety   or   a   ••  -n-lrrt  nun  .m.l 

found  guilty  of  .1   Im-.irh  of  the    l.iw  of  God,  ami  our    ruh-s  ;  and 
ih.it  if  aa  appeal  were  made,  it  .-huuld  be  bro>.J.t  '  .  i.-ic  the  quar- 
terly meeting  conference,  composed  of  travelling  :nu!  local  preach- 
ers, leaders,  ami  -tt".,mN,  and  finally  he  dctennined  by  .1  n 
of  votes.     1  found  it  al-o  needful  to  observe  there  w,»«  -u<-h  a  thing 
as  heresy  in  the  church  •   and  I  know  not  what  it  is  if  it  he  not  to 
deny  the  Lord  thai  bought  them  ;   and  the  cteroity  of  th>-  pm. 
.t    of  llic   danuiud,    a-    i-,    Miluallv    dn:ie.    by    tin      I    mv<> 
y//i  is  not  dividinn  hypocrites  from  hypocrites,  formal  profes- 
from  people  of  their  own  cast  :   it  i<  not  dividing  nomiii.d   Kpisco- 
j)alianH  iVoni  each  otlirr  ;  nominal  :Methodi-ts  from  nominal  Metho- 
dists ;  or  nominal  Quakers  from  nominal  Quakers,  &c.    But  sc/ 
is  the  dividing  real  Christians  from  each  other,  and  breaking  the 
unity  of  the  Spirit.      1  met  the  trustees  ;  and  after  going  hither 
,:nd  thither,  and  being  much  spent  with  labour  through  the  d  iv  .   I 
gave  them  a  discourse  at  the  new  hoi'^e,  (in  the  evening  on   ' 
xx.  32.     My  attempt  was  feeble  but  faithful. 

Friday,  September  -.   1  left  the  city,  stopped  at  fitiirr  <>akle\'- 
tiventy  miles  from  New-York,  where  a  few  peoplo  came  {( 
to  whom  I  preached  on  Acts  iv.  TJ.  and  at  night  I  \v;i^  enabled  to 
take  a  little  rest. 

Saturday  3.   Notwithstanding  the  rain  I  rode  twelve  miles  to  tl 
White-Plains  quarterly  meeting,  where  1  enlarged  on  I'.phe-.  vi. 
13  —  18.;  —  being  Paul's  exhortation  to  the  use  of  the  whole  ar- 
mour of  God.     I   was  in  -great  heaviness  through  temptation 
infirmity  of  body.     I  lodged  with  Elijah  Crawford  :   thi*  hou- 
for  God. 

Sunday  4.   1  was  very  low,  but  attended  the  fore-feast  ;   1  stood 
in  oue  of  the  windows,  and  preached  very  loud  to  a  large  rongi  • 
tion  on  Hehr.  xii.  ~5.     There  were  some  feeling,  gracious  souls 
present.     1  was  desired  to  preach  in   Bedford,  hut  declined  it  for 
several  reason*.     1  cannot  stand  such  constant  exertion*.     1  have 
felt  very  severe  pain  in  one  of  my  shoulder-.  rnu>  h  like  that  1  expe- 
rienced after  Ocil  quarterly  meeting.       I  lodged  uith  brother 
vis  where  we  had  the  company  of  one  who  ma\  be    i  di-riplc  of. 
mine  :   I  hope  to  see  him  yet  in  the   kingdom  of  cnn-r-  and  glory 
if  he  should  live  to  read  the-e  lines  he  will  know  who  1  nv. 


REV.   FRANCIS  ASEURY;S  JOURNAL.  [17 ."" 

Monday  5.  I  rode  fifteen  miles  to  the  widow  Banks's  to  tarry  for 
a  night.  My  soul  is  in  peace,  and  Christ  is  mine  ;  but  trouble  will 
come  :  I  am  not  yet  all  immortal  and  at  rest  ;  my  rheumatic  af- 
fections are  very  severe  ;  I  was  imprudent  in  making,  and  my 
indisposition  prevented  my  attending  my  appointments. 

CoiVNECTicux. — We  came  ofi'  in  the  morning  for  Reading  ;  fed  at 
Piidgefield,  and  reached  my  journey's  end  about  one  o'clock,  about 
twenty-three  miles.  On  my  way  I  dined  with  lawyer  Smith,  and 
preached  at  Sanford's  on  1  Peter  i.  13 — 15. :  in  doing  which,  I 
pointed  out,  1.  The  most  leading  features  that  formed  the  character 
of  the  people  addressed — elect — begotten  again — scattered  abroad 
by  persecution  and  by  the  ministry  of  the  word — suffering  ministers 
and  saints  of  God  ;  2.  The  subject  on  which  they  were  addressed—- 
to gird  up  the  loins  of  their  mind,  and  hope  for  great  grace  when 
Christ  shall  appear  to  overthrow  Jewish  superstition  and  heathen 
idolatry — obedient  children — to  fear,  trust  in,  and  lore  the  Lord; 
and  to  keep  all  his  commandments  :  to  be  holy,  according  to  the 
nature  and  will  of  God,  and  his  great  and  gracious  promises. 

Wednesday  7.  We  had  very  bad  roads  over  hills  and  mighty 
^ocks,  to  Oxford,  twenty-eight  miles  ;  and  after  dinner,  eight  miles 

more  to  Derby ;  where  I  preached  in  brother  H 's  house  to 

about  sixty  people,  on  "  If  the  righteous  scarcely  be  saved,"  &.c. 
I  felt  my  pain,  but  could  thank  the  Lord  for  all  things. 

Thursday  8.  Was  a  day  of  pain  to  my  body,  but  peace  to  my 
soul.  I  have  been  of  late  attending  quarterly  meetings,  and  have 
felt  great  heats  and  colds,  and  changes  of  weather.  We  came  to 
New- Haven,  where  I  preached  in  brother  Thacher's  house,  near 
the  foundation  of  the  college  ;  we  were  crowded,  and  I  was  elabo- 
rate on  Piomans  i.  16 — 18. 

Friday  9.^  We  rode  solitarily  on  the  sand  to  Middletown.  We 
dined  witii  Captain  Hall,  who  received  us  kindly,  and  entertained 
us  comfortably. 

Saturday  10,  and  Sunday  11.  We  had  many  brethren  and  sisters 
from  distant  towns,  at  the  quarterly  meeting  :  here  I  preached  on 
1  Peter  iv.  12 — 15.  and  on  Isaiah  Ixii.  12.  ;  and  was  much  at 
liberty,  and  a  little  comforted  at  the  love-feast  and  sacrament. 
Walking  backward  and  forward  tended  to  fatigue  my  body  as  well 
as  speaking.  As  I  thought,  so  it  is,  the  preachers  have  been  very 
acceptable  to  the  people  this  year. 

Monday  12.  I  came  to  Old-Haddam.  Here  they  have  built  anew 
meeting-house:  and  there  are  some  gracious  souls  here.  I  sen- 


I~y6.j  I  ilA.Ntlb    •  AL. 

siMy  fell  the  effects  of  heat  ami  the  labours  of  ihc  d 

it  fifteen  miles  to  littler  Wilr.ox's.      I  conclude,  tliat  since   I    li 

left  New  York  I  have   rod*;    about   IMJC   hun.'.-  :    :    . 

ond  a  ;;reat  part  of  the  way   is    rough    ;.ml    lucky  ,    m\   but!  . 

of  infirmities,  and  my  soul  of  the  love  of  (iu.l.      I  think   lh.it    ' 

is  returning  to  this  place  ;  and  that  great  days  will  yet  come  t: 

.New-England. 

Wednesday  14.    \\  .t-;  an  exceedingly  warm  day.    The  Kpiscoji.il 
house  here  is  grand  indeed.     \\  i:  i>,!--cd  Hadhr.  Mill- 

ington,  where  we  had  many  to  hear  at  kind  brother  1'  -- 


Thursday  15.     1  had  twenty    miles   to   New-London.      My 
thren  have  given  me  work  enough.     I  feel  like  a  man  •  !  .1   ;•  eble 
body,  but  my  soul  enjoys  a  sweet  rahn,  and  pure  love  ;   1  cai. 
seek  or  desire  any  thing  but  Cud.     1  ivlu->  d  to  go  into  the  couit- 
hoose  to  preach,  but  we  had  a  gracious  season  .it  a  dwrl!iiig-h<' 

Friday  1G.    We  came  to  I'ogustonick,  a  little  town  of  a'tenlivc 
people  :    I  preached  on  "  The  Son  of  Man  is  come  to  ;  •  d  to 

save  that  which  was  lost  :''  an  aged  man  cried  out,  and  risi;. 
the  close  of  the  meeting,  delivered    his  ny  :   w!  i     1 

cannot  infallibly  say  ;  he  spoke  in  too  high  term?  of  me  to  my  i 

Saturday  17.    1  came  with  a  heavy  burden  to  x  !i  landing  ; 

1  held   forth   in   the  academy   made   out  of  a  separate   meeting- 
house :  there  were  few  present  beside   the  brethren   from   other 
towns;   I  enlarged   on    "If  ye   he   repr  Cached   for   tlie  cause  of 
Christ,  happy  arc  ye,  for  the  spirit  of  glory   and   of  dod  resteth 
upon  you  ;  on  their  part  he  is  evil  spoken  of,  but  on  your  pa:  I 
is  glorified."      The   persons  under  sufferings  —  those   who   u 
the  friends  to,  and  followers  of  Jesus  —  partakers  of  the   spirit  of 
God,  as  a  spirit  of  glory  teaching   them  to  believe,  to   love,  and 
suffer,  and  give  glory  to  God  and  Christ. 

Sunday  13.     We  held  our  feast  of  charily   at   eight  o'clock 
was  a  sweet,   refreshing  season  ;    several   talked  very   feelii  .. 
among  whom  were  some  aged  people  ;  many  praised  doJ  i   r  the 
instrumentality  of   the    Methodists   in   their  salvation.     My  spirit 
felt  awful  this  morning  ;  and   my   body  unwell  ;  howerer,  at 
time  appointed  I  began  preaching  on   Uoin.ms  viii.  •!- 
versalist  had  his  book  and  pen,  or  pencil,  1  suppose,  re.uiy  to  take 
down  my  discourse  ;  I  said  "  Stop,  let  that  gentlcuun  writ* 
it  appeared  as  though   his   lingers   or   heart   failed   him  :  brother 
P—  —  g  had  preached   a   sermut;   in   lli.it  lu>u?«  .  v.  !n--i. 
printed  and  traduced.     Serious  impn  appfan  d 

on  the  minds  of  some  of  the  ami*  After  sprndin^  alum* 


-   -  ll 

boors  in  the  congregation,  (including  sacrament  and  1;  -.1 

passed  the  afternoon  in  retirement  at  my  lodgings,  being  ut- 
?  day  I  v.  t.;  leJ  c"t  greatly  for  New-England  :     I    believe   • 

r.g  this  people  ;  perhaps  they  hare  not  1-.       -  .;'a   a 
time  here  for  mari  -  :  :  God  wai  .    some 

:  n=  at  hcciven's  c/-: — hr<     .  _       -omen  spoke  as  on  the 

.    .  -V.  and  i  .  C  old  «s  the  E 

under  the  disagreeable   nece- 

Miles;    I  CTO9E  !  :.   _-v  ~e  in 

e  to  brother   I  I  w.-  -d  to  hear  an  aged  mother, 

:  !y  a  Separ     •  :       ;  j  with  her   before 

herd,i  .ow  br       _.  I   tiler's  wife    v, 

ondaj  :  indham.  Scotl:. 

^  at  Captain  P on  to  Thomps         ifi  -T  oi 

the  preachers  were  present,  and  vr  :m  a  c:. 

rence.     ^Ve  talk?  the    Lord.     7 

ning  and  the  next  morning.  Tuesday  20  and  -         - '. .  w€ 

were  closely  ez          -  !  :   we  had  aboct  thirty   r:  e  of 

whooj  uere  uca  the  Province  of  Maine,  three  bundred  i    les  dis- 

i  -  a  pleasing  relation  of  the  work  •: . 

irfe  la  discourse  on  Ac:§  ssi.\  e  or- 

seven  deacom  :jt  four  o'clock  I  took 

ieave  c: "      -•  -  .  .  .;,er 

solemn  ?aint — lamenting  the  decline  .  .be  Baf  . 

Th-;  -  -are   icile;    to  ;ord. 

r  on  Zeph.  UL  IS,  13      Friday 
we  r;  I  in  tL .     • 

me-      .  :   at  four  o'clock.     Had  we  not  ha?e  fallen  in  • 

B.  we       .  not  ha. 

p!  :    ret. 

:         -  -  .        .  .  and  roc 

~alem  ?.:  :t  made 

in  \  place  §  what 

to  New-  -  :w  B r 

•  great  ;  ell  in  b: 

V»'e  have  rode  npwai  B  of  one  imndred  • 

:  stiii   I    : :    • .   :  -re  is  I  atte      . 

.     -  .  5.  :    r. 

hat  was 
built  f  :i  CoLnectkat,  and  it  is  n:: 

rode  along  -alk,  and  ani 

•    -    - 


stopped  to  teed  our  horses,  ar.d  found  ;i  \\..mui  that  w.i  .itli 

whom  1  tallied  and  prayed.      I   felt  M  if  I  -honld  nut  preach   aj 
in  haste,  if  at  all,  in  Stamford.      We  n  (>-><•,!  ili<;  -t.it-  In.  inae 

to  New-Rochelle,  in  the  state  of  New-York,  twenty-three  mile* — 
heavy  and  hungry.     \Ve  stopped  at  ('lark's,  whep-  I  p. 
Isai.  Ixii.  1.  and   we  were   crowded  with  people.      I  < njoy  j><- 
of  mind,   but  am  deeply  tempted  ;  yet  few  minutes  pass  in  which 
my  soul  is  not  engaged  in  prayer. 

NEW-YORK. — Thursday   29.    I   preached   on   Luke  xii 
then  is  a  faithful  and  wise  servant,"  &c.    !  began  to  confer  with 
brethren  as  they  came  in,  and   do   the  bu-m( •-•<   \>\  -rr.ips  a 
could  come  at  it.    We  were  in  doubt  whether. some  of  the  prearl. 
would    come   at  all,    on   account  of  the   rumours  of  the    yellow 
fever,   which  still  appeared  in  parts  of  the   city.     On   l-'riday  we 
entered  fully  into  our  work  ;   and  on  Saturday  we  concluded 
short  conference,  the  preachers  being  desirous  to  depart.     We  had 
a  solemn,  peaceable  sitting;  and  so  also  were  our  congregations. 
I  preached  at  our  house  in  John-street  on  Mark    ix.    1.     "  Ti 
be  some  standing  here   which  shall   not  taste  of  death  until  • 
?ravc  seen  the  kingdom  of  God  come  with  power."  but  I  had  little 
opening. 

Sunday  October  2.    I  preached  at  the  house   in  John-street 
i.phes.  iv.  11  — 13.  and  had  great  enlargement:  the  feeling"  of  the 
people  were  touched,  and  my  own  also.,  as  if  it  had  been  the  la*t  time, 
as  it  probably  may  be  with  some  of  my  hearers,  if  not  myself:   1 
could  not  have  been  much  more  moved  ;  it  was  \\  ith  difficult^ 
continue  speaking.     In  the  afternoon,  at  the  new  house,  then 
also  a  move  in  the  congregation  whil-t  I  enlarged  on  1  Cor    iv 
11.     I  ordained  in  both  houses,  in  all  eight   deacons  and  beveo 
aiders,  and  was  on  my  feet  six  hours  in  the  course  of  this  >'. 

Monday  3.    In  the  morning  the  weather  had  a  stormy  ap|  car- 
mce,  so  that  no  passage  was  to  be  had  at  Powles  Hook.    Vv 

yet,  safe  on  shore,   but  brothers    K and  .t  to 

Whitehall,  where  they  found  a  bout  that  would  sail,  fink  vr  y. 
for  Van  Deezer's   Landing,  upon  Statcn-l-lam! :   1  '!id  ru>i  h!;.-  the 
appearance  of  things,  but  submitted  to  go,  with  a  hij;h  I  '  the 

ivind  at  N.  E.     We  pas«ed  the  bay,  ton  miles  over,  in  tin- 
\\n  hour  :    when  we   were  within  one   nnlc  of  the  do 
ihifted  to  N.  W.  and  blew  powerfully  :    the  people  on  -.hi-n    \. 
alarmed,  ami   had  the  skill"  ready  to   t 
"hould  (ill  and  sink,  or  be  bt-aten  ofl"  and  strike  the  rock* 

.  ir. 


liEV.     FRANCIS   ASBVRY?S  JOURNAL.  [1796,,. 

some  time  we  secured  the  boat,  landed  the  men,  but  left  the  landing 
of  the  horses  for  better  weather.  We  dined,  and  rode  up  to  the 
Blazing-Star,  greatly  against  my  inclination.  At  the  ferry,  the 
men  were  unwilling  to  move,  and  kept  us  on  the  bleak  marsh  some- 
time :  when  they  came,  they  told  us  in  anger,  it  was  at  our  own 
risk  of  men  and  horses  if  we  ventured.  We  suddenly  turned  and 
went  to  a  friend's  house,  fed,  and  dried  a  little,  and  then  rode 
twelve  miles  more,  and  stopped  within  a  mile  of  Amboy  ferry. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Tuesday  4.  We  came  to  the  ferry  ;  and  after 
being  detained  about  an  hour,  we  made  out  to  get  a  passage.  Here 
•we  met  with  the  preachers  who  had  been  retarded  in  their  journey 
by  the  late  storm.  I  pushed  along,  weary  and  unwell,  to  brother 
Hutchinson's  ;  and  nest  day,  faint,  though  cheerful,  we  reached 
Burlington. 

Thursday  6.  We  reached  Philadelphia  about  noon  ;  my  mind  is 
in  peace,  but  my  body  and  spirits  fail.  Here  1  met  my  old  friend 
Andrews,  from  Hartford,  in  England,  after  twenty-six  years' 
absence.  Friday  I  rested  a  little,  and  arranged  the  minutes  for  tho 
present  year. 

PENNSYLVANIA. — Saturday  8.  Was  spent  in  preparing  for  the 
ensuing  conference. 

Sunday  9.  At  Zoar  chapel,  the  church  of  the  second  African 
society,  in  Camping-Town,  I  enlarged  on  "  Ye  were  as  sheep  going 
astray,  but  are  now  returned  to  the  shepherd  and  bishop  of  your 
souls."  la  the  afternoon,  at  Ebenezer,  my  subject  was  Psalm 
Jxxxi.  11 — 16.  In  the  evening  in  Saint  George's  my  discourse  was 
like  a  storm  from  Mark  xvi.  19,  20.  I  observed  that  Jesus  sent 
out  his  disciples  ;  when  he  went  to  rest,  they  went  to  labour.  The 
signs  of  their  mission  were  miracles,  and  the  signs  that  followed 
their  ministry,  convictions  and  conversions; — the  hinderances  they 
had  to  expect,  and  the  qualifications  granted  them  every  where  ; 
and  his  not  leaving  them  without  witnesses. 

Monday  10.  We  opened  a  conference  of  between  forty  and  fifty 
preachers  ;  we  had  great  love  and  great  riches  also  :  never  before 
have  we  been  able  to  pay  the  preachers  their  salaries  ;  at  this  con- 
ference we  have  done  it,  and  had  two  hundred  dollars  left  for  debts 
and  difficulties  the  preachers  had  been  involved  in.  I  was  pleased 
to  hear  such  wholesome  talk  by  our  plain  countrymen.  I  sat  with 

great  pleasure  and  heard  G.  R on  "  We  beseech  you  that  ye 

receive  not  the  grace  of  God  in  vain  ;"   as  also  I.    W OR 

"  Feeding  the  flock  of  God;"  and  J.  P on  "  The  fountain 

for  sin  and  for  uncleanness." 


1796. J  REV.    FUANCIS  ASM: 

Friday  M,  we  set  apart  as  a  Jay  of  fasting  and  humiliation,  I 
for  ordination.     I  was  plra-r<!  to  JIMMI--,  lli.-  <  ..ulrivn.-,-  from  th>  :• 
confinement  in  business,  aiul  gavi-  a  ducum-  HumMf  your- 

selves under  the  mighty  hand  of  God."     I  now  felt  willing  to  i.  - 
both  mind  and  body.     We  heard  by  the  new -papers  of  the  ar: 
cf  Doctor  Coke  in  the  United  States. 

Saturday  15.   We  dined  at  Chester  with  my  dear  o!d  fnond 
Withy,  and  came  in  the  evening  to  Wilmington. 

DELAWARE. — Sabbath  day  Ifi.  The  morning  \va-  rainy,  l>utu< 
had  a  few  serious  people  to  whom  I  preached  on  Rev.  ii.  1—7. 
My  soul  enjoys  sweet  peace.  Being  in  haste  to  get  to  Baltimore, 
we  rode  on  the  Sabbath  afternoon  to  my  old  friend  S.  I  (causey's  ; 
of  this  I  am  not  fond,  and  where  necessity  does  not  compel  me, 
rarely  do  it.  I  turned  out  of  the  way  on  Monday  to  preach  a'. 
Bethel,  in  the  place  of  Doctor  Coke  ;  my  subject  was,  "  Let  u= 
labour  to  enter  into  that  rest,  lest  any  man  fall  after  the  same  ex- 
ample of  unbelief."  It  was  a  happy  season.  In  the  course  of  the1 
day  I  rode  thirty-five  miles  and  lodged  at  North-Kast. 

Tuesday  18.  We  rode  to  Perry-Hall,  and  were  entertained  with 
the  greatest  kindness. 

MARYLAND. — Wednesday    19.    We   came  to   Baltimore,    where 
about  a  hundred   preachers  were   met    for    general   confer,  i 
They  agreed  to  a  committee,   and  then  complained  ;  upon  win  -I, 
we  dissolved  ourselves.     I   preached  on  "  The   men   of  Issachar 
that  knew  what  Israel  ought  to  do  ;"   and  again,  on   "  Neither  a- 
being  lords  o?er  God's  heritage,  but  being  ensamples  to  the  flock  :' 
there  were   souls  awakened  and   converted.      No  angry    passions 
were  felt  amongst  the  preachers  ;  we  had  a  great  deal  of  good  and 
iudicious  talk.     The  conference  rose  on  Thursday,  the  3d  of 
vcmber  :  what  we  have  done  is  printed.     Bishop  Coke  was  cor- 
dially received,  as  my  friend  and  colleague,  to  be  wholly  for  Ame- 
rica ;  unless  a  wa}?  should  be  opened  to  France.  At  this  conference 
there  was  a  stroke  aimed  at  the  president  eldership.     I  am  thankful 
that  our  session  is  over.     My  soul  and  body  have  health,  and  I 
hard  labour.     Brother  Whatcoat  is  going  to  the  south  of  Virginia, 
brother  M'Claskey  is  going  to  New-Jersey,  brother  Ware  to  Pcnn 
sylvania,  and  brother  llutchinson  to  New-York   and    Connecticut  : 
very  great  and  good  changes  have  taken  place. 

Friday,  November  4.  We  reached  the  widow  Dorsey's  by  riding 
an  hour  in  the  night.  I  took  a  cold  :  and  a  boil  nn  my  faco  mnkc< 
me  uncomfortable1. 


5  .lOrjlN 

VIRGINIA. — Saturtlay  5.  We  rode  twenty  miles  ;  and  on  Sabbath 
morning  we  came  directly  to  Alexandria.  Doctor  Coke  preached 
on  "  The  wise  men  that  came  to  Jesus  :"  brother  Whatcoat  and 
myself  exhorted. 

Monday  7.  We  came  to  Captain  Ward's  :  he  is  gone  to  sea, 
but  his  wife  made  us  welcome.  Tuesday  8,  ive  rode  through 
awful  Fredericksburg  to  Todd's  tavern  :  men  and  horses  being 
weak  and  weary  we  contentedly  stopped. 

Wednesday  9.    We  came  about  thirty  miles  to  Ellis's  tavern, 

and  there,  as  well  as  at  T 's,  we  were   kindly  and  genteely 

entertained  at  a  reasonable  expense.  The  next  day  we  stretched 
on  to  Richmond  : — and  who  could  be  kinder  and  more  pleased  to 
see  us,  and  make  poor  sickly  travellers  welcome,  than  Blr.  Parrot 
and  wife  ?  Here  I  persuaded  Dr.  Coke  to  rest  a  day. 

Saturday  12.  Brother  Whatcoat  and  myself  came  to  brother 
Waltham's,  near  Chesterfield  court-house.  We  preached  to  a  fen- 
people,  refitted  a  little  better,  and  the  next  day  came  to  brother 
Featherston's,  where  I  gave  them  a  short  discourse.  We  dined  and 
came  on  to  Petersburg,  and  spent  the  evening  at  J.  Harding's.  I 
was  much  pained  with  the  boil  on  my  face,  and  another  on  my 
eye.  Here  1  heard  Dr.  C.  preach,  and  I  gave  an  exhortation. 

Monday  14.  I  must  needs  call  and  see  my  old  friends,  Wood.  Tuck- 
er and  wife,  and  talked  a  little,  prayed,  and  parted.  We  then  went 
forward,  calling  on  Richard  Graves,  an  old  disciple.  Thence  to 
mother  Maybury's,  in  Greensville,  where  I  have  often  had  a  com- 
fortable night's  lodging. 

Thursday  15.  Our  conference  began  at  brother  Bait's,  a  most 
convenient  house,  and  very  kind  people.  We  sat  in  great  peace, 
and  good  order.  A  few  preachers  declined  travelling.  We  elect- 
ed and  ordained  six  elders  and  nine  deacons.  The  deficiencies  of 
the  preachers  amounted  to  upwards  of  £194  Virginia  currency. 

Sabbath  day  20.  Dr.  Coke  gave  a  comment  on  the  20th  chapter 
of  the  Revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  by  St.  John,  and  then  a  sermon 
on  Luke  xiv.  26.  "  He  that  loveth  father  and  mother  more  than 
me,"  &c.  I  then  gave  a  short  exhortation,  and  ended  the  service 
of  that  pleasant  day. 

Monday  21.  I  visited,  perhaps  for  the  last  time,  mother  May- 
bury,  who  is  aged  and  swiftly  declining.  I  also  visited  brothers 
B.  and  D.  and  then  rode  once  more  to  Robert  Jones's,  in  Sussex 
county. — Here  I  had  a  few  moment's  leisure  to  write  and  recollect 
myself,  after  being  so  closely  employed  in  conferences  and  company 


• 

Tuesday  ...  1  preached  at  Jay's  chapel  to  about  one  hundred 
people,  with  whom  I  had  a  comfortable  -i  ;i-on  on  'J  lYter  iii. 
17,18.  1  noticed,  1.  The  ap|.r!l:iti..:i.  //>'.,,/.  J  Tint  of  tin. 
•wicked,  which  I  dMin^'Ji^li.-d  into  three-  r!  -I.  Tho^e  ; 

make  no  profession  of  religion,  and  arc  openly  nuked.      2.   Those 
who  have  been  aw.iki  m-il  and  may  lin-   eu;n\ed  religion,  but  hare 
fallen  from  it      3.   Tho^e    \vlio  profits   the  tn^lic~t    att.unmrtr 
religion  and   yet  live  in  known  sin  : — the  error  of  (he   nicked,  infi- 
delity in  theory,  or  practice,  or  both  :   which  embraces  the  above- 
mentioned   classes   of   the    wicked — grow  in   grace — to    grow  in 
the  graces  of  the  Spirit,  the   knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour, 
now  and  forever  ;  the  glory  due  to  Christ  in  hi-  kingdom  of  pr 
nnd  glory. 

Wednesday  23.  I  rode  to  brother  Davis'a,  about  twenty-seven 
miles.  On  my  way  I  visited  brother  Grains  and  mother.  Bro- 
thers Pennington,  Briggs,  and  Evans,  are  gone  to  rest.  My  soul 
enjoys  much  peace,  and  is  big  with  hope  that  we  shall  h ., 
greater  work  in  this  district  than  we  have  ever  yet  had  :  I  feel 
happy  among  the  few  ancient  disciples  who  are  left.  1  preached 
once  more  at  Lane's  chapel,  and  the  Lord  was  \\ith  us:  my  sub- 
ject was  Jer.  xxxii.  38,  3D.  We  have  lo*t  about  twenty  member* 
of  this  society  by  OKelly  ;  we  have  about  forty  left. 

Friday  25,  was  a  cold  day,  but  we  rode  twenty -five  miles  to 
brother  Joseph  Wood's,  in  Ule  of  Wi-jht  county  :  some  of  our 
brethren  riding  on  before,  called  a  night  meeting,  and  we  were 
comforted  together. 

My  mind  of  late  hath  been  in  great  peace.  I  am  glad  I  have 
not  contended  with  those  violent  men  who  were  once  with  u=. 
We  ought  to  mind  our  work,  and  try  to  get  souls  to  Christ  ;  and 
the  Lord  can  give  us  children  "  That  we  shall  have  after  we  have 
lost  our  former,"  that  shall  say  in  our  hearing,  "  Give  place  that 
there  may  be  room  for  us  to  dwell.''  We  had  a  very  tr/n? 
morning,  but  we  rode  to  brother  Blunt's,  where  I  preached  to 
many  people  on  Zeph.  iii.  12,  13.  Notwithstanding  my  name  l\r\* 
been  so  cast  out  as  evil,  and  my  character  traduced,  I  ordained 

brother  B and  another  brother,  after  taking  from  the  former  i 

written  declaration   of  his  opposition  to   slavery.     My  dear 
friends  told  me  their  trouble?  and  sorrow,  which  tho  divisions  i' 
the  societies  had  caused. 

Sabbath  day  28.  Through  hard  necessity  I  rode  sixteen  miles  to 
brother  Cowling's  in  Isle  of  Wight  county,  and  had  three  rooms  in 
fhe  hon?e  filled,  and  there  wer*1  some  of  the  coloured  pooj>!o  on' 


270  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY*S  JOURNAL.  £179(> 

of  doors,  notwithstanding  the  coldness  of  the  weather.  My  subject 
iras  Hebr.  x.  37 — 39.  I  spoke  with  great  rapidity  for  nearly  two 
hours,  administered  the  sacrament,  and  ordained  brother  Powell  to 
the  office  of  a  deacon.  It  was  time  for  me  to  visit  this  quarter 
again,  lest  some  should  think  I  was  afraid  to  come.  But  who  hath 
been  at  the  planting;  of  the  Gospel  in  the  sixteen  United  States  ? 
Had  1  none  but  Virginia  to  visit  I  could  show  myself  oftener. 

Monday  28.  We  crossed  a  small  ferry,  and  came  through  Suf- 
folk to  brother  Jolliff's,  twenty-two  miles.  I  had  solemn  thoughts 
while  I  passed  the  house  where  Robert  Williams  lived  and  died, 
whose  funeral  rites  I  performed.  The  weather  is  remarkably 
cold  for  the  season,  the  ice  being  more  than  an  inch  thick  on  the 
streams.  1  was  amazed  to  hear  that  my  dear,  aged  friend,  Benja- 
min Evans  (now  gone  to  glory)  was  converted  to  the  new  side  by 
being  told  by  J.  OKelly  that  I  had  offended  Mr.  Wesley,  and  that 
he  being  about  calling  me  to  account,  I  cast  him  off  altogether. 
But,  c/uere,  did  not  J.  OK.  set  aside  the  appointment  of  Richard 
Whatcoat?  and  did  not  the  conference  in  Baltimore  strike  that 
minute  out  of  our  discipline  which  was  called  a  rejecting  of  Mr. 
Wesley?  and  now  does  J.  O'K.  lay  all  the  blame  on  me?  It  is 
true,  I  never  approved  of  that  binding  minute.  I  did  not  think  it 
practical  expediency  to  obey  Mr.  Wesley,  at  three  thousand  miles 
distance,  in  all  matters  relative  to  church  government ;  neither 
did  brother  Whatcoat,  nor  several  others.  At  the  first  general 
conference  I  was  mute  and  modest  when  it  passed,  and  I  was 
mute  when  it  was  expunged.  For  this  Mr.  Wesley  blamed  me, 
and  was  displeased  that  I  did  not  rather  reject  the  whole  con- 
nexion, or  leave  them,  if  they  did  not  comply.  But  I  could  not 
give  up  the  connexion  so  easily,  after  labouring  and  suffering  so 
many  years  with  and  for  them.  After  preaching  at  Jolliff's  we 
rode  to  Portsmouth,  and  preached  in  the  evening,  where  we  had 
many  people  at  a  short  naming  My  subjects  this  day  were  1  John 
i.  3,  4  and  Isai.  i.  9.  We  visited  Norfolk,  and  preached  at  noon, 
Wednesday  30,  on  1  Peter  ii.  11,  12. — at  night  on  1  Cor.  xv.  58. 

Thursday,  December  1.  I  returned  to  Portsmouth,  and  preached 
on  1  Pet.  v.  10.  Thence,  through  damp  weather,  we  rode  back 
to  Jolliff's,  \vhere  we  had  preaching,  exhortation,  and  sacrament, 
and  the  Lord  was  with  us. 

NORTH  CAROLINA.-  Friday  2.  We  had  a  long,  cold,  hungry  ride 
to  Gates  county,  in  North  Carolina. 

Saturday  3.  We  had  a  blessed  season  in  Colonel  Baker's  new 
house  on  1  John  iii.  1,  2,  3.  I  have  felt  unwell  by  these  changes  - 


1796.]  j.KV.   FKANCIS   AMHKV  S  JOURNAL.  271 


sometimes  preaching  makes  me  ^i<-|{,  ami  :it  other  time*  mnkes  me 
well.  Yesterday  we  rode  nearly  fort\  null  -  ,  tn  <hv  we  laboured, 
and  our  horses  rested.  1  feel  solemnly  given  up  tu  (iod  in  toil 
and  suffering. 

Sabbath  day  4.  We  rode  fourteen  miles  fo  Winton,  where  I 
preached  to  an  attentive  congregation,  from  town  .md  r«>umr\.  on 
St.  John's  Gospel  i.  4.  I  remembered  my  old  fri«  nil  Hoop  ;  I  was 
invited  to  and  most  kindly  entertained  at  the  house  of  one  of  hie 
daughters.  So  it  i«,  when  the  dear,  aged  par«-ns  gu  •  tl  tlir\  |. 
me  their  children.  Thence  to  Northampton  county  («•  my  >  ight 
or  thirty  miles,  and  came  in  about  six  o'clock.  We  had  to  ila\  ,  as 
on  Friday  last,  to  bieakfa-t  about  six  or  seven  in  the  morning,  and 
to  dine  ;ibout  tf-e  same  hour  in  the  evening.  M\  *oul  hath  IK  •  n  ir. 
great  peace.  I  rode  to  see  Richard  \\  hitaker  .md  hi>  wile,  afte: 
several  years'  absence  :  I  felt  truly  solemn  when  I  found  m\ 
at  the  old  house  where  the  father  and  mother  died.  I  remember 
well  what  passed  when  I  was  here  last—  the  distress  of  the  doctor 
and  his  kindness  to  me  in  the  year  1785. 

Tuesday  6.    We    had    a   rainy    morning.      Crossed    Roanoke    at 
Edwards's  ferry,  and  came  to  Champion's  :  I  resoh'd  t«-  \>n  -.i.-h 
although  only  a  part  of  two  famili<*s  were  present.      \Vf  dined,  and 
hasted  to  mother  Whitake.r's,  about  twenty  four  or  twenty  -five 
miles. 

Wednesday  7.  We  had  a  very  sharp  morning.  I  preached  at 
brother  Bradford's  on  1  John  iv.  1C-  18.  Yesterday  on  "  The 
promise  is  to  you  and  to  your  children,''  <S:c.  I  parted  with  my 
dear  brother  Whatcoat,  after  travelling  together  about  seven  hun- 
dred miles.  It  was  painful  to  part,  yet  I  was  well  pleased  he  had 
not  to  drive  the  rough  way,  and  that  through  the  rain.  In  thi>  1 
loved  my  brother  better  than  myself.  We  had  a  comfortable 
season  at  sermon  and  sacrament  this  day.  I  felt  myself  at  home 
in  brother  Bradford's  family. 

Thursday  8.  I  came  again  to  the  wido\v  Philips's,  on  Swift-fret 
the  house  was  filled  —  my  subject  was  awful,  Amos  viii.  11.     ' 
hold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord  God,  that  I  will  «end  a  famine 
in  the  land  ;  not  a  famine  of  bread,  nor  a  thirst  for  water,  but  of 
hearing  the  words  of  the  Lord."     I  opened— 

I.  The  great  and  interesting  things  contained  in  the  word  of  the 
Lord. 

II.  The  benefits  and  blessings   communicated   by   the   faithful 
preaching  and  hearing,  believing  and   obeying  the  word  of  the 
Lord. 


Y.  1-KANCIS  AoLOKVS  JOURNAL.  [179U. 

IIF.  The  causes  and  effects  of  this  famine ;  deaths,  removals, 
backslidings  of  ministers  and  people,  and  bad  reference  to  ancient 
times. — Dreadful  effects — the  want  of  means  to  civilize,  moralize, 
and  spiritualize  mankind. 

I  felt  differently  to-day  from  what  I  did  yesterday  ;  it  was  like 
beating  upon  a  rock  ;  but  the  Lord  can  give  a  blessing.  We  are 
greatly  blessed  with  healthy  weather. 

Friday  9.  We  came  to  Tarborough.  They  had  made  a  fire  ia 
the  small  apartment  of  the  court-house,  and  I  thought  it  was  for 
preaching,  but  it  was  for  dancing,  and  the  violin  lay  on  the  table. 
Mr.  Clement  was  kind  enough  to  stop  the  scene,  and  we  had  a 
serious  congregation  to  hear,  to  whom  I  preached  on  Hebr.  viii. 
3 — II.  There  were  two  or  three  houses  open  to  me  in  town,  but 
I  lodged  three  miles  out  at  brother  Toole's.  We  rode  on  Saturday 
10th  twenty-eight  miles,  without  food  or  rest  for  man  or  horse,  un- 
til we  came  to  brother  Forbes's,  Pitt  county,  where  I  spent  the  Sab- 
bath, and  preached  on  Rom.  ix.  27.  I  had  many  hearers,  but  it 
was  cold  times,  both  literally  and  spiritually  ;  my  soul  waa  solemn 
—my  body  unwell. 

Monday  12.  I  rode  to  father  Barrows's  :  I  was  much  led  out  on 
Hebr.  iii.  12—14.  In  those  words,  1.  Christians  are  cautioned 
against  a  most  dreadful  end.  2.  The  means  to  prevent  it ;  and,  3, 
The  example  of  backsliders.  The  end  interesting  and  great — to 
hold  fast  the  beginning  of  their  confidence.  The  means — by  ex- 
horting one  another  daily.  We  rode  twenty  miles  to  father  Or- 
monds ;  the  people  came  before  the  rain,  but  had  to  return  home 
through  it;  my  subject  was,  "  The  little  flock;"  and  I  had  con- 
siderable opening.  I  feel  nothing  painful,  but  the  want  of  a  revival 
of  religion  ;  my  soul  feels  as  if  the  Lord  will  yet  do  wonders  among 
vhis  people. 

Wednesday  14.  We  rose  early,  and  rode  in  haste  to  Cox's  ferry, 
on  Neuse-River  :  the  weather  was  damp  and  chilly.  We  had  very 
few  to  hear  at  the  meeting-house  :  it  was  a  day  of  great  trial,  and  I 
\vas  beset  on  every  side. 

Thursday  15.  We  made  a  forced  march  of  twenty-five  miles  to 
Newbern  ;  we  had  no  refreshment  for  man  nor  horse.  Having  an 
mflammation  in  one  of  my  ears,  and  having  fasted  so  long,  I  was 
very  unwell ;  but  a  sermon  was  expected,  and  delivered  on  these 
words,  "  Because  thou  knewest  not  the  day  of  thy  visitation  :"  my 
hearers  were  numerous  and  serious.  I  had  never  viewed  the  situa- 
tion of  this  town  before  :  it  is  the  image  of  Charleston  (S.  C.)  Neuse 
and  Trent  have  a  likeness  to  Cooper  and  Ashley  rivers.  This  is  n 


1796.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL. 


growing  place.  Our  society  here,  of  while  and  coloured  members, 
consists  of  one  hundred.  I  every  d.iv  WC  :ind  feel  the  emptiness 
of  all  created  good,  and  am  taking  my  leave  of  all  :  what  i-  worth 
living  for  but  tin-  work  of  (i.id  '  I  wrote  to  our  brethn-n  in  the 
city  stations,  uut  to  nrglert  tlic  Mrk  an  hour,  nor  an  .ill-.  Dt«€  lmm 
<:la-s  one  week  ;  indeed  we  ou»ht  to  In-  al\v.i\-  ahounding  in  the 
work  of  the  Lord  ;  to  attend  to  old  and  new  -uh|.--t-,  to  our  work, 
and  to  every  means,  like  men  lahouim^  to  find  out  new  means  for 
new  difficulties.  Should  piety,  health,  and  trade  attend  thi-  New- 
bern,  it  will  be  a  very  capital  place  in  half  a  century  from  tin*. 

Friday  16.   1    had  great  openings  on   Rom.  i.    15  —  17.      1  Knoiv 
not  when  I  have  visited  a  place  with  such  plea-inn  hope-  and  i      I 
ings  :    1  tru.it  there   hath   been  something  more   than  man  in  this. 
Oh  !   how  greatly  was  my  heart  knit  to  these  people  ! 

Saturday  17.  1  preached  at  ten  o'clock  the  second  part  of  tiie 
same  theme,  Phil.  i.  27.  I  was  exceedingly  close  on  the  duties, 
spirit,  and  practice  of  the  Gospel.  We  had  to  ride  fifteen  mile>  to 
Lee's,  upon  Trent.  I  felt  solemn  and  sorrowful  at  leaving  my  dear 
people  at  Ncwbern  ;  they  wished  to  give  me  money,  but  love  is 
better  than  gold.  • 

Sunday  lo.  We  had  much  rain  :  but  few  came  to  meeting.  Find- 
ing we  had  twenty  miles  to  Bryans's,  we  wished  to  move  to  Le- 
muel Hatches's,  who  was  very  kind. 

Monday  19.  We  had  to  ride  early:  my  hor-e  trots  stiff;  and 
no  wonder,  when  I  have  rode  him,  upon  an  av«  page,  live  thousand 
miles  a  year  for  five  years  successively.  I  preached  on  llebr.  ni. 
7,  8.  I  felt  as  if  the  Lord  and  his  messengers  had  left  this  place. 
My  spirit  was  grieved  at  the  conduct  of  some  Methodi«ts,  that 
hire  out  slaves  at  public  places  to  the  highest  bidder,  to  cut,  skin, 
and  starve  them  ;  I  think  such  members  ought  to  be  dealt  with  : 
on  the  side  of  oppressors  there  is  law  and  power,  but  where  i-  j'i- 
tice  and  mercy  to  the  poor  slaves?  what  eye  will  pity,  what  hand 
will  help,  or  ear  listen  to  their  distresses  ?  I  will  try  if  words  ran 
be  like  drawn  swords,  to  pierce  the  hearts  of  the  owner*. 

I  have  heard  by  a  person  from  Baltimore,  that  by  means  •  I    th. 
weekly  society  meeting,  our  peopleare  all  on  flame  :  thank  ti   d  th.it 
it  came  into  my  heart  to  recommend  it  to  them  !  this  al-o  -hall 
fort  us  in  our  toil.      I  have  rode  upwards  of  thirty  mile*  tin-  d,.\ 

Tuesday  ^0.  At   the    rich   lands,    but  amongst  spiritually   p 
people.     I  had  about  thirty  hearers,  and  here  are  a  lew  ] 
souls.     Father  Bullard  and  family  still  stand  by  us.     I   hid   lome 
'reedom  on  Hebr.  iii.  14.     1.  Wherein  ' 
Voi.  H  - 


274  UEV.   FRANCIS  ASEURY's  JOURNAL.  [1796, 

Christ,  past,  present,  and  to  come — in  wisdom,  righteousness, 
sanctification,  and  redemption.  2.  The  beginning  of  their  confi- 
dence stedfast  to  the  end  ;  without  which,  they  cannot  be  saved  or 
safe.  I  described  the  nature,  effects,  and  fruits  of  this  confidence 
in  God,  in  Christ,  in  the  Holy  Spirit  ;  in  the  Scripture  promises, 
precepts,  threatenings,  in,  and  of  heaven,  earth,  and  hell. 

Wednesday  21.  We  had  a  cold  ride  of  about  twenty  miles  to 
Stone's  Bay  ;  where  there  are  a  few  people,  (who  have  been 
forsaken  by  the  preachers)  to  whom  I  preached  on  Hebr.  x. 
38,  39. 

Thursday  22.  I  came  to  Nixons's,  on  the  road  to  Wilmington  • 
here  I  found  a  kind  people,  but  the  preachers  had  left  them  be- 
cause they  did  not  immediately  join  in  fellowship.  Perhaps  1  was 
called  this  way  to  feel  for  souls  in  and  round  about  Wilmington  :  if 
we  had  men  and  money,  it  would  be  well  to  station  a  preacher  in 
such  places  as  Wilmington. 

Friday  23.  We  had  an  excessively  cold  ride  through  heavy  sands 
to  Wilmington  ;  when  we  came  to  the  town  wharf  there  was  nei- 
ther flat  nor  ferry ;  the  causeway  was  under  improvement ;  the 
only  expedient  therefore  that  remained  was  to  cross  at  Negro- 
Head.  We  came  up  the  sand  hills  to  Wright's  ferry.  It  was  truly 
cold  and  very  bleak  on  the  water,  while  in  a  trifling  flat  ;  and  I 
feared  one  or  both  the  horses  would  be  thrown  out  of  it.  We  were 
driving  through  the  woods  till  seven  o'clock,  and  the  weather  ex- 
ceedingly cold  ;  at  last  we  came  to  Rolks's,  on  Town-Creek.  We 
could  not  spare  ourselves  the  next  day,  but  came  off  blowing  and 
biding  our  fingers.  We  passed  Lockets-Folly  and  Shallot-River, 
and  came  up  to  father  Cause's,  where  we  met  with  friendship,  fel- 
lowship, and  love,  and  held  meeting  on  Christmas  day,  it  being  the 
Sabbath. 

SOUTH  CAROLINA. — Monday  26.  We  came  to  Little-River,  and 
thence  to  Kingston,  where  we  lodged  with  our  Mr.  Rogers,  after 
riding  about  forty-five  miles.  Tuesday  27.  I  gave  a  sermon  in  the 
cha-pel,  and  on  Wednesday  28,  rode  thirty-seven  or  forty  miles  to 
Georgetown.  Here  we  have  nearly  one  hundred  Africans  in  soci- 
ety, while  we  have  only  seven  or  eight  whites,  our  doctrine  being 
too  close,  and  our  discipline  too  strict.  After  riding  the  above  dis- 
tance in  the  cold,  without  any  regular  meal,  I  was  hardly  fit  for 
the  pulpit  at  night ;  however  I  gave  them  a  talk  on  "  Glory  to  God 
in  the  highest,  and  on  the  earth  peace,  good  will  towards  men."  £ 
observed  on  this,  as  I  had  on  some  former  occasions, — that  the  re- 
demption and  salvation  of  mankind  by  Jesus  Christ  was  the 


J797.J  IXEV.  FRANCIS  ASUL'RV's  JOURNAL. 

est  display  of  the  justice,  merry,  truth,  lovf,  and  holiness  of  God 
yet  in  such  a  manner  as  that  justice  should  not  destroy,  but  give 
glory  to  mercy  ;  and  that  mercy  should  not  destroy,  but  glorify  jus- 
tice and  mercy  in  Christ   to  sinners  :  justice  in  the   sufferings  of 
Christ,  and  in  the  punishment  of  incorrigible  sinners.     The  truth 
of  God  shiaeth  also  :   it  only  belongs  to  u  God  to  preserve  and  dis- 
play all  bis  attributes  and  perfections  :  in  tin-  plan  we  may  »ay 
mercy  and  truth  are   met  together,  righteousness  (or  justice)  ;ind 
peace  have  kissed  each  other;  and  all  the  truths  of  God  held  sa- 
cred, with  reverence  let  it  be  said,  God  would  no  longer  be  God 
to  act  unlike  himself,  or  to   be  unjust,  unmerciful,  or  unholy,  or 
untrue  ;  or  to  swallow   up   or   violate  one   attribute   by  exerting 
another.     What  should  we  think  of  a  governor  or  judge  that  would 
pardon  all  criminals  indescriminately  and  unconditionally  ? — where 
would  be  the  exercise  of  justice  ? 

Thursday  29.  Hearing  of  a  sacramental  occasion  at  Boon's 
chapel,  I  rode  thirteen  miles  to  attend  it;  it  was  up  Santee,  on  the 
upper  branches  of  Sand-Pitt:  my  subject  was  "  Christ  hath  once 
suffered  for  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to 
God."  We  were  entertained  elegantly,  and  with  great  hospita- 
lity, at  Mr.  Boon's. 

Friday  30.  We  set  out  in  the  rain,  crossed  Santee,  (we  had  a 
quick  passage  for  once)  and  rode  about  fifty  miles,  and  came  to 
brother  Jackson's  about  nine  o'clock.  Here  our  rapid  march  was 
ended  :  I  rested  two  days. — Serious  news  from  Baltimore — thr 
academy,  and  our  church  in  Light-street,  with  brother  Hawkins's 
elegant  house,  all  destroyed  by  fire  !  The  loss  we  sustain  in  the 
college,  academy,  and  church,  I  estimate  from  15  to  .£20,000  : 
it  affected  my  mind  ;  but  I  concluded  God  loveth  the  people  of  Bal- 
timore, and  he  will  keep  them  poor,  to  make  them  pure  ;  and  it 
will  be  for  the  humiliation  of  the  society. 

January  1,  1797.  Being  Sabbath  day,  I  lectured  on  Psalm  Ixxxir,. 
and  2  Cor.  v.  Monday  2.  I  came  to  Charleston,  and  preached 
in  the  evening  on  Eph.  v.  15,  16.  Tuesday  3.  We  began  confe- 
rence, and  sat  some  days  six  or  seven  hours.  We  had  pleasing  ac- 
counts of  the  growth  of  religion  in  Georgia  as  well  as  in  this  elate 
We  had  a  sermon  every  evening,  and  many  to  hear. 

Sunday  8.  My  subject  was  John  xiv.  21 — 23.      I  do  not  yet  feel 
myself  in  the  Spirit  of  the   work.     Monday   9.    Our  conference 
rose.     We  have  been  blessed  with  some  young  men  for  the  mini- 
try.     By  letter  from  James  M'Cannon,  in   Baltimore,  I  learn   that 
our  people  have  had  the  offer  of  the   Episcopal  church,  and 


276  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1797. 

English  ami  German  Presbyterian  churches,  until  we  can  rebuild, 
I  began  reading  the  Bible  and  Winterbotham's  View  of  the  United 
States.  We  have  sent  out  subscriptions  for  the  Methodist  Maga- 
zine. The  like  severity  of  weather  hath  not  been  known  here 
ibr  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  ;  the  gardens  and  oranges  appear  to 
be  destroyed  ;  the  want  of  moisture  may  have  increased  the 
eflects  of  the  frost.  I  have  felt  my  soul  filled  with  love,  for  the 
general  union  in  the  ministry,  and  for  the  church  :  my  mind  is 
stayed  upon  the  Lord  alone.  Tuesday  9.  Our  dear  brethren  set 
out  for  their  circuits.  Wednesday  10.  In  the  evening  we  met  the 
society  in  the  manner  I  had  recommended  to  the  brethren  in  New- 
York,  Philadelphia,  and  Baltimore.  We  were  much  blessed  ;  it 
was  a  gracious  season.  Brother  Wells  appears  to  be  dying  swiftly. 
I  purpose  to  go  out  only  every  other  night,  as  I  am  called  to  duty 
every  morning  with  fifty  or  a  hundred  Africans.  I  lament  the 
wickedness  of  thrs  city,  and  their  great  hatred  against  us.  I  spent 
Thursday,  Friday,  and  Saturday,  in  reading,  writing,  and  visiting 
the  sick. 

Sunday  15.  Notwithstanding  I  had  taken  medicine  on  Saturday, 
and  was  unwell,  1  preached  on  John  vi.  66 — 69.  We  were  much 
crowded,  and  more  so,  when  Dr.  Coke  preached  in  the  evening, 
Monday  16.  The  remnant  of  the  preachers  left  the  city.  I  rode 
up  the  path,  and  attended  the  Doctor  to  Clement's  ferry.  At 
night  I  met  the  seeking  Africans  in  brother  Wells's  kitchen.  This 
evening  I  prayed  with  brother  Wells  for  the  last  time  ;  he  ex- 
pressed his  confidence  in  God,  and  freedom  from  guilty  dread  and 
horror. 

Tuesday  17.  I  was  called  to  the  house  of  brother  Wells,  just 
departed  this  life.  His  widow  I  found  in  prayers  and  tears,  as  also 
the  dear  children  and  servants.  We  appointed  his  funeral  to  be  at 
four  o'clock  to-morrow.  The  scene  was  serious.  1  learned  he 
wished  to  see  me  once  more  :  I  visited  him  every  day  that  I  could 
with  propriety.  It  is  twelve  long  years  next  March  since  he  first 
received  Henry  Willis,  Jesse  Lee,  and  myself,  into  his  house.  In 
a  few  days  he  was  brought  under  heart  distress  for  sin,  and  soon 
after  professed  faith  in  Christ ;  since  that  he  hath  been  a  diligent 
member  in  society.  About  fourteen  months  ago,  when  there  was 
a  revival  of  religion  in  the  society,  and  in  his  own  family,  it  came 
home  to  his  own  soul  ;  he  was  quickened,  and  remarkably  blest, 
and  continued  so  to  be  until  his  death.  His  affliction  was  long  and 
very  severe.  The  last  words  he  was  heard  to  say  that  could  be 
understood  were  that  "  he  knew  where  he  was,  that  his  wife 


1797.]  IIEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JocuNAf.. 

with  him,  and  that  God  was  with  hi;n."       !!«•  li  iih  hron   a    p.ru    ui" 
sorrows,  and   hath  suffered   (he  lo<*  of  i\\n    \< •-]•• ••  'able  wivec 
a  favourite  son  ;   sustained  h«\i\\   In--,  by  lire,  .ind  was  -ulijt  • 
great  variety   of  difficulties  in  trade  and  IIH  M  h:n«li-r.      I!,   was  ouc 
much  for  tlie  feeling  |i;irt  of  religion  ;  a  gentleman  ol   ~|>mt,   and 
sentiment,  and  line  feeling*,  a  faithful  friend  tn  the  poor,  and  warm- 
ly attached   to   the  imnL-lers  o!   the    ('>o-\>   I         Tfeil  Vtt    a  solitai) 
day,  and    I    laboured  under  uncommon   iKjc-.tiun.      I  preached  in 
the  evening,  and  was  in  great  heaviness. 

Wednesday  13.  We  committed  the  dust  of  our  dear  brother 
Wells  to  the  old  church  burying-ground,  in  Cumberland ->-tn  ft. 
Doctor  Coke  performed  the  fuiier.d  rites,  and  delivered  an  oration  ; 
I  also  gave  a  short  one.  My  serious  gloom  continued. 

Thursday  19.  We  were  closely  attentive  to  the  notes  on  the 
Discipline. 

Friday  20.  Visited  Mr.  Grant,  declining  swiftly  in  a  consumption. 
He  appeared  to  be  somewhat  awakened  to  a  sense  of  the  state  of 
his  soul  and  body. 

Saturday  21.   Till  noon  my  heart  sinkclh,  and  I  am  ready  to  con- 
clude we  are  not  sent  to  the  whites  of  this  plar.e..   except  a  very 
few  ;  but  to  the  poor  Africans.     1  find  this  a  suffering,  holy  time. 
Sunday  2'J.    I  preached  Mr.  Wells's  funeral  sermon  on  Rev.  ii. 
10.     I  observed,   1.   \\hnitisthat  speaketh.   ~.  To  whom  he  was 
speaking.     3.  What  might  be  supposed  and  granted  concerning  the 
angel  of  the  church — that  he  had  professed  the  convicting  and  con- 
verting grace  of  God  ;  that  he  had  suffered  poverty,  temptation, 
and  persecution.     4.  What  it  is  to  be  faithful  to  God — to  fear  him. 
ns  also  to  trust  in  hi?  providence  and  grace  ;  faithful  to  Christ  and 
to  the  Spirit,  to  the  church  of  God,  to  his  family  and  citi/.ens  ;  faiih- 
ful  unto  death,  even  martyrdom.     I  gave   a  brief  account  of  Mr 
Wells's  life  and  death.     I  was  exceedingly  weak  in  body  and  i. 
before  I  began  preaching,  but  was  considerably  liberated.     I  had  a 
solemn,   attentive  congregation,  and  was  glad  to  come   home  ami 
spend  the  evening  in  solitary  reading  and  prayer.      I  have  to  meet 
the  African  people  every  morning  between  five  and  <ix  o'clock,  u: 
my  lodging,  with  singing,  reading,  exhortation,  and  prayer. 

Monday  23.  We  were  at  work  upon  our  notes  on  the 
Tuesday   -1,1  was  very  unwell,  yet  I  must  needs  preach  a  little  on 
2  Cor.  vi.  '-'.     My  body  is  weak,   and  my  sonl  i>  •!  1  ou  ac- 

count of  sinners.  I  have  made  out  to  read  the  third  volume  of 
Wintrrbotham's  General  View  of  our  continent  ;  this  1  do,  because 
I  have  some  hope  of  visiting  Dritish  America  before  1  <h< 


£78  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV's  JOURNAL.  [1797. 

Wednesday  25.  My  mind  oppressed  and  my  body  afflicted,  I  was 
close  at  work,  heart,  head,  and  eyes.  No  justice  for  Cumberland- 
street  Methodists — a  young  Scot  shouted  in  the  church,  and  after 
he  was  taken  out  of  the  house  struck  three  or  four  men,  no  bill 
was  found  against  him  ;  and  we  are  insulted  every  night  by  candle- 
light. 

Thursday  26.  Still  unwell.  The  three  following  days  I  was  con- 
fined to  the  bouse  with  a  fever.  I  wrought  at  our  work  :  O,  that 
it  may  be  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  bis  church !  I  have 
cumbered  the  chapters,  and  versed  Scriptures  in  it.  I  am  resolved 
to  visit  more,  if  spared  to  get  through  this  weighty  business.  Mr. 
Grant,  after  three  years  warning  with  a  consumption,  is  gone  ;  I 
trust  God  had  mercy  on  his  soul.  Doctor  Coke  preached  in  the 
morning,  brother  Hill  in  the  afternoon. 

Sunday  29,  and  Monday  30.  I  consulted  a  physician,  who  judged 
my  disease  to  be  an  intermittent  fever,  and  such  it  proved  itself: 
on  Tuesday  31,  I  was  taken  about  two  o'clock  with  a  powerful 
ague,  which  held  me  till  nearly  nine  o'clock.  I  presume  it  has 
been  working  for  two  weeks  ;  I  probably  took  it  by  going  out  at  the 
death  of  brother  Wells.  Wednesday,  February  1.  I  took  the  pow- 
ders of  Colombo  after  the  bilious  pills.  Thursday  2,  my  fever  did 
uot  return.  Friday  3.  Growing  better,  I  had  serious  thoughts 
about  going  home  to  God.  Of  late  I  have  been  kept  uncommonly 
happy.  My  depression  of  spirits  at  times  is  awful,  especially 
when  afflicted  ;  that  which  is  deeply  constitutional  will  never  die 
but  with  my  body.  I  am  solemnly  given  up  to  God,  and  have 
been  for  many  months  willing  to  live  or  die  in,  for,  and  with 
Jesus. 

Wednesday  8.  I  was  better,  and  was  enabled  to  read,  write, 
ride,  and  visit. 

Thursday  9.  To-morrow  my  dear  Coke  sails  for  Europe.  My 
mind  is  in  peace,  but  I  am  not  pleased  with  such  confinement.  I 
now  take  a  decoction  of  the  bark.  I  am  under  great  obligations 
to  Doctor  Joseph  Ramsay  for  his  peculiar  attention  to  me  in  my 
affliction,  without  fee  or  reward  for  his  services.  By  letter  from 
John  Dickins,  I  learn  the  work  of  God  greatly  revives  in  New- 
York  among  the  aged  people  and  little  children.  I  have  lately 
read  the  second  volume  of  Mr.  Wesley's  Sermons. 

Friday  10.  This  day  Doctor  Coke  is  waiting  to  sail  for  Ire- 
land. Strangers  to  the  delicacies  of  Christian  friendship  know 
little  or  nothing  of  the  pain  of  parting.  Glad  tidings  of  great  joy 
from  New- York- — A  second  glorious  work  is  begun  there,  twenty 


1797.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  27'? 

souls  converted,  a  great  love-feast,  and  Sabbath  evening  meeting 
held  until  one  o'clock  in  the  morning.  This  news  hath  given  a 
spring  to  us  in  this  city. 

Saturday  11.   I  vetted  a  little. 

Sunday  12.  I  attended  my  station,  and  stood  upon  my  watch- 
tower.  My  subject  was  Eccles.  v.  1.  "  Keep  thy  foot  when  thuu 
goest  into  the  house  of  God." 

I.  The  house  of  God — the  temples,  first  and  second,  and  syna- 
gogues, were  called  houses  of  God.    A  place  built  for  the  worship 
and  service  of  the  Lord  ;  the  congregation  and  church. 

II.  The  exercises  and  ordinances  of  the  house  of  God;  reailm; 
and  preaching  the  word  of  God  ;  prayer  and  praises  ;  baptism  and 
the  Lord's  supper.     In  his  temple  every  one  shall  speak  of  his 
glory. 

III.  The   manifestations  God  is  pleased  to  make   of  himself  iu 
bis  own  house  to  the  souls  of  his  people. 

IV.  How  people  should  prepare  for  and  behave  in  the  house 
of  God.     To  keep  their  eyes  and  ears — fix  their  attention  on  the 
Lord  and  Master  of  the  house. 

V.  The  wicked  called  fools,   and  the  sacrifice  they  make.     fg 
norant  of  themselves,  of  God,  of  Christ,  and  true  religion,  and  the 
worship  of  the  Lord,   and  do  not  consider  it  is  God,  Christ,  and 
sacred  things  they  make  light  of. 

We  were  full,  and  I  put  my  strength  to  the  test.  In  the  after- 
noon from  Ezekiel  xxxvi.  25—27.  I  showed  the  evils  God 
threatened,  and  prophesied  the  removal  of,  by  his  servant  to  his 
nominal  professional  people,  Israel. 

I.  Their  stony  heart ;  their  idols  and  filthiness. 

II.  The  blessings  promised  and  prophesied — a  new  heart,  a  new- 
spirit,  the  in-dwelling  and  sanctifying  influence  of  the  Spirit. 

III.  The  blessed  consequential  effects — "  I    will  cause  you  to 
walk  in    my  statutes,    and   ye  shall  keep  my  judgments    to    do 
them."     The  law,  the  judgments  of  God,   because  of  the  peualu 
annexed — thus  saith  the  Lord  to  the  renewed  soul,  "  Thou  shale. 
have  none  other  gods  but  me."     "  Lord,"  saith  the  Christian,       ' 
want   none  other  but  thee."     Saith  Jehovah,  "  Thou   shalt  not 
make  to  thyself  any  graven  image."     The  pious  soul  ?aith,  "  1  will 
not ;  the  work  of  my  hands  cannot  save  my  soul  :  1  will  not  take  thy 
name  in  vain.     I  love  thy  day — thy  love  hath  written  thy  law  upon 
my  heart,  and  love  to  my  neighbour  engages  me   to  fulfil  my  duty 
to  him  also."     "  The  meek  shall   inherit  the  earth,"  n< 
rharter  from  the  Lord—this  is  their  otoim.  srrurity.  nml 


:,.,ii  RKV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1797. 

I  was  wearied  with  the  duties  of  the  day,  and  had  only  retired 
to  rest  when  the  alarm  of  fire  was  cried — it  proved  only  to  be  a 
kitchen,  and  by  the  activity  of  the  people  it  was  soon  extinguished. 

Monday  13.  I  have  peace,  and  am  as  well  in  health  as  I  could 
expect.  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul !  I  was  taken  up  with  hand- 
ing about  a  subscription  for  the  new  house.  Our  people  appear 
much  afraid  to  move  in  this  work. 

Tuesday  14.  I  met  the  stewards  on  the  subject  of  the  new 
house.  We  have  adjourned  on  the  question.  If  materials  fall  in 
their  price,  and  if  we  can  secure  £400,  shall  we  begin  ?  Oh  we 
of  little  faith  !  It  is  a  doubt  if  we  had  fifty  in  society,  and  £100 
on  hand,  when  we  laid  the  foundation  stone  of  Cumberland-street 
house,  which  cost  us  (including  the  lot)  £1300.  The  society  has 
been  rent  in  twain,  and  yet  we  have  wrought  out  of  debt,  and  paid 
£100  for  two  new  lots,  and  we  can  spare  £100  from  the  stock. 
make  a  subscription  of  £150,  and  the  Africans  will  collect  £100. 

Wednesday  15.  I  felt  much  better,  and  rejoice  in  hope  of  going 
hence. 

Thursday  16.  Was  a  solitary  day  ;  my  soul  was  in  heaviness, 
and  my  body  weak.  I  was  employed  in  writing  letters,  and  read- 
ing the  Bible  with  critical  attention. 

Friday  17.  I  thought  I  would  fast,  refraining  from  food  till  six 
o'clock  ;  I  felt  very  weak,  had  a  fever  and  headach,  and  was  glad 
to  go  to  bed  at  seven  o'clock.  I  feel  pain  to  be  gone,  and  do  not 
expect  much  peace  of  mind,  or  health  of  body,  until  I  go  to  my 
old  solitary  country  life.  I  judge  that  discipline,  and  the  doing 
away  of  certain  things,  have  contributed  somewhat  to  the  late 
revival  of  religion  in  New-York. 

Sunday  19.  I  entered  on  my  duty.  I  had  not  an  opening  to 
preach,  so  I  made  an  explanatory  discourse  on  Isaiah  Iv.  1 — 7. ; 
and  it  appeared  to  be  of  use.  My  leading  heads  were, 

I.  The  spiritual  blessings  held  forth  in  the  temporal  good  things, 
waters,  wine,  milk — Water  to  quench  thirst,  cleanse,  and  heal,  as 
to  drinking,  bathing,  &.c.  all  expressive  of  the  grace  of  God  to  our 
souls  ;  comforting,  cleansing,  healing.  Wine  for  the  sickly,  tempted, 
dispirited  ones  ;  milk  for  babes. 

II.  The  grand  qualifications — thirst  and  no  money  ;  and  to  come, 
no  merit,  no  righteousness. 

III.  The  reasoning — "  Wherefore  do  you  spend  your  money," 
&LC.  i.  e.  make  great  sacrifices  for  pleasure,  and  yet  are  disap- 
pointed ;  such  is  the  case  of  those  who  seek  after  ceremonial 
righteousness. 


'7.J  ni.v.  H-.ANTIS  •-  -  .A, 

IV.  His  olTering  Christ. 

V.  The  promise  of  the  increase  of  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Clin- 
among  distant  and  unknown  nations. 

VI.  When  they  are  to  come  to  seek  tho   Lord,  vix.   "  while   he 
may  be  found." 

It  was  a  molting  season.  In  the  afternoon  1  pn-'irhcd  on  Rom. 
viii.  31.  "  What  shall  we  then  say  to  these  things  ;  if  God  be  for 
us,  who  can  be  against  us  .'" 

I.  I  viewed  the  whol<-  chapter.    The  character  and  distinguish 
ing  marks  of  the  people  of  God. 

II.  How  he  will  order  himself  on  the  *ide  of  his  people,  in  hi- 
justice,  mercy,  truth,  power,  anil  love  :  "  If  God    be    for 

(his  is  a  modest  supposition.  I  observed,  he  will  not  aid  our  per- 
secutors— their  help  is  departed  from  them  ;  that  he  sanctified  per- 
secution ;  and  sometimes  would  cut  off  the  enemies  of  his  church 
and  people  ;  that  some  were  enemies  from  policy,  others  from 
heretical  principles,  some  from  enmity  of  heart  ;  others  would 
think  their  fathers,  mother?,  husbands,  wives,  ^:c.  were  misguided 
and  deluded.  I  stood  on  my  feet  about  three  hours  this  day,  was 
much  wearied  and  slept  but  little. 

Monday  20.  I  was  weak — the  weather  uncommonly  warm.  I 
lejoice  in  hope  of  leaving  the  city  next  Monday,  if  the  Lord 
spareth  me. 

Tuesday  21.  My  mind  has  been  greatly  afflicted,  so  that  my 
sleep  has  been  much  interrupted,  yet  there  was  a  balm  for  this  ; 
;i  poor  black,  sixty  years  of  age,  who  supports  herself  by  picking 
oakum,  and  the  charity  of  her  friends,  brought  me  a  French  crown, 
and  said  she  had  been  distressed  on  my  account,  and  I  must  have 
her  money.  But  no  !  although  I  have  not  three  dollars  to  travel 
two  thousand  miles,  I  will  not  take  money  from  the  poor.  I  am 
very  unwell,  my  soul  and  body  is  distressed  :  ah  !  that  such  trifles 
should  affect  me.  I  have  read  four  books  of  Moses  critically. 

Wednesday  22.  Was  a  sorrowful  day  to  me  :  I  am  thinking  God 
is  teaching  me  I  ought  not  to  stay  in  this  place  after  this  manner  ; 
perhaps  I  shall  never  stay  here  again  for  so  long  a  time.  I  am 
kept  from  sinning,  yet  not  from  deep  and  sore  temptation. 

Thursday  23.  Brother  James  King  came  to  town  to  t.ike  the 
charge  in  this  city  as  assistant  preacher  to  Benjamin  Blanton. 

Friday  24.     I  began  to  prepare  for  my  departure  bonce. 

Saturday  25.  My  mind  is  happy  in  the  expectation  of  leu  in? 
this  city  on  Monday. 

IT.  36 


582  KKV.  FRANCIS  ASBVRY'S  JOUKIU;,.  [179', 

Sunday  26.  I  judged  it  best  to  be  plain  and  explanatory  upots 
the  Lord's  supper,  1  Cor.  v.  7,  8.  Our  congregation  was  large,  and 
the  sacramental  occasion  very  solemn.  My  farewell  discourse  was 
on  1  Sam.  xii.  23,  24.  I  observed  on  the  duty  of  those  who  have 
the  charge  of  souls  ; 

I.  To  pray  for  them. 

II.  To  teach  them  the  good  and  the  right  way  ;   which  is  to 
fear  the  Lord,  and  serve  him  in  truth,  sincerity,  and  purity  of 
intention. 

III.  The  motives  to  induce  them — the  consideration  of  the  great 
things  God  hath  done  for  them. 

What  good  have  I  attempted  to  do  here  ?  I  assisted  the  Doctor 
in  the  notes  on  the  Discipline.  I  have  preached  every  Sabbatb 
except  two  ;  formed  a  plan  to  erect  a  house  in  the  west  end  of 
the  city  suburbs,  to  be  equal  to  that  in  Cumberland-street ;  I 
have  made  peace  between  a  dying  man  and  his  brother-in-law,  in 
which  two  families  were  concerned,  and  I  cured  a  poor  African's 
sore  leg  by  applying  a  poultice  of  bread  and  milk. 

Monday  27.  I  felt  a  fever,  yet  rejoiced  to  leave  Charleston, 
Many  came  to  see  me.  I  have  persuaded  one  person  to  give  up 
the  use  of  what  1  feared  would  be  her  ruin  ;  she  promised  she 
would  ;  if  so,  all  will  be  well.  On  my  way  I  felt  as  if  I  was  let 
out  of  prison.  Hail !  ye  solitary  pines !  the  jessamine,  the  red- 
bud,  and  dog-wood  !  how  charming  in  full  bloom  !  the  former  a 
most  fragrant  smell.  We  reached  Monks-Corner,  and  were  most 
agreeably  entertained  at  Mr.  Jones's.  We  came  on  the  next  day 
and  had  but  hard  fare  till  we  reached  Nelson's  ferry  :  it  being  a 
rainy  day,  the  gentlemen  were  regaling  themselves  with  cards  ; 
blunt  Frank  Asbury  asked  for  dinner,  but  told  them  he  could  not 
dine  upon  cards  ;  the  cards  were  very  politely  put  away,  and  every 
necessary  mark  of  attention  paid  :  Mr.  Gurdine,  who  commands 
several  ferries  on  this  river,  is  a  complete  gentleman.  We  came 
off  in  the  rain,  and  it  fell  very  freely.  Through  the  swamp  we 
had  deep  wading,  and  steeped  our  feet ;  we  wrought  along  as  night 
came  on  ;  and  after  riding  four  miles  in  the  dark,  dirt,  and  rain,  we 
came  to  the  widow  Bowman's  :  here  I  found  shelter  and  was  kindly 
entertained.  Her  husband  was  a  godly,  gracious  man,  and  died  in 
the  Lord  some  years  ago. 

Wednesday,  March  1.  We  rested  and  refitted.  Thursday  2.  We 
had  a  cold  day  at  Gibson's  ;  my  subject  was  1  John  v.  13 — 15.  I 
mis  very  unwell,  under  infirmities  of  body  and  mind.  Thence  we 


'••  •  JT.jf 

rode  five  miles  to  Mark  Moore's,  where  I  preached  on  2  Peter  m 
18.  and  had  a  comfortable  time. 

Friday  3.   We  had  a  dry,  cold,  hungry,  long  ride  of  thirty  mile 
to  Bradford's,  where  I  dined,  and   preached  at  three  o'clock,  anC 
felt  resolved  to  give  them  one  plain  talk  on  Hebr.  lii.  7,  8.     1.  The 
voice  of  God,  is  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  as  preached  by  him 
self.     2.  What  is  comprehended  in  hearing  his  voice— attending 
believing,  obeying.     3.  How  men  harden  their  hearts — by  delays, 
and  by  inward  and  outward  sin  ; — the  Holy  Ghost  eaith,  To-day,  in 
(he  word,  in  the  ministry,  in  the  hearts  of  men. 

Saturday  4.   At  Rembert's  new  chapel  I  preached  on   Matt.    xi. 
28 — 30.  where  I  had  some  living  sweetn 

Sunday  5.  After  love-feast  and  sacrament,  I  preached  on  C2  Cor 
vi.  6 — 10.  but  had  not  much  satisfaction.    Religion  is  reviving  here 
among  the  Africans  ;  several  are  joined  in  society  :    these  are  thr 
poor  ;  these  are  the  people  we  are  more  immediately  called  to- 
preach  to. 

Monday  G.   I  preached  in  the  court-house  at  Camden,  eet  apart 
for  a  meeting-house  :  my  subject  was,  '•  Knowing  therefore  the  ter- 
ror of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men."    1.  I  treated  on  the  divine  cha 
ructer  of  Christ,  as  judge — his  perfections,  and  relation  to  the  per- 
sons xv ho  are  to  be  tried.     2.  The  characters  to  be  judged — infi- 
dels, sinners,  Pharisees,  hypocrites,  backsliders,  believers  ;  true 
and  false  ministers  .  these  are  to   be  tried,  found  guilty,  or  ac- 
quitted ;  sentenced  and  punished  ;  or  applauded  and  rewarded.     / 
received  a  second  letter  from  New-York,  informing  me  of  tL> 
revival  of  religion  there  among  the  aged  and  young   people.     1 

rode  fourteen  miles  to  G 's  quarter,  a  small  house  among  UK 

sand  hills  ;  thence  eight  miles  to  brother  Morton's,  whose  brother, 
a  Baptist,  had  lately  departed  this  life  ;   he  was  blest  in  his  end. 

Wednesday  8.  We  rode  thirty-two  miles  to  the  Waxsaws,  h  m 
gry  and  faint :  at  Wren's  I  was  led  out  on  "  Let  us  not  sleep  is  do 
others."     The  next  day,  at  quarterly  meeting,  I  preached  on  Isa. 
i.   9.  :  there   was   a    noise   and    shaking.     Thu  evening    a   little 
circumstance  gave  me  great  pain  ;  I  broke  my  skin  in  two  placer. 
We  rode  on   Friday   and  Saturday   seventy    miles.     We    passed 
through  a  large  settlement  of  Presbyterians  ;   Mr.   M'Crea,  their 
minister,  gave  us  a  kind  invitation  to  lodge  at  his  house  ;  but  v>< 
wished  to  cross  the  river  at  Martin's  Ferry,  and  stay  at  the  widow 
Featherston's. 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Sunday  1 1 .    We   were  ;it  Daniel  Asbur, 
My  leg  was  inflamed  by  riding,  and  I  found  it  necessary  to  pou! 


284  HEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY:3  JOURNAt,  [1797. 

it.  I  sat  down  and  taught  the  people  on  "  He  that  cometh  to  God 
must  believe  that  he  is  and  that  he  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  dili- 
gently seek  him."  We  had  a  living  meeting  in  the  evening  ;  some 
souls  were  greatly  blest. 

Monday  12.  We  rode  into  Iredell  county,  thirty-three  miles.  We 
were  caught  in  the  rain,  which  threw  me  into  a  chill,  followed  by 
a  fever  ;  in  this  situation  I  came  to,  and  preached  at  brother  Fitz- 
gerald's. Between  four  and  five  o'clock,  brothers  Dean  and  Dy- 
son, (Methodists)  Hall  and  Bowman,  (Presbyterians)  had  filled  my 
appointment  in  the  preceding  part  of  the  day. 

Tuesday  13.  I  preached  at  the  church  in  the  forks  of  the 
Yadkin  on  Isaiah  xxxv.  1 — 4.  I  had  to  ride  eight  miles  in  the 
rain  to  Templeton's. 

Wednesday  14.  I  rode  five  miles  to  Mr.  Hoy's,  and  treated  o» 
the  rest  that  remaineth  to  the  people  of  God.  In  the  afternoon  I 
rode  twelve  miles  to  father  Bruce's,  where  I  found  myself  at  home, 

Thursday  15.  We  had  to  ride  fifteen  miles  through  the  rain  to 
Oxford's.  After  preaching  on  Hebrews  ii.  1.  we  rode  eight  miles 
to  Paynes's.  The  weather  was  very  damp  :  I  felt  the  chill  through 
me.  The  next  morning  I  was  seized  with  a  fever  which  held  me 
more  or  less  until  Sabbath  morning,  when  I  preached  at  Perkins's 
and  Connelly's  meeting  houses  ;  at  the  former  on  Hebr.  ii.  3.  and 
at  the  latter  on  2  Cor.  latter  part  of  the  vith  chapter.  Here  a& 
many  as  eight  preachers  came  to  meet  me  ;  some  of  them  one 
hundred  miles.  I  feel  myself  very  unwell,  and  am  afraid  that 
almost  every  rain  will  bring  on  a  relapse  of  the  fever.  My  mind 
of  late  is  much  resigned  to  the  will  of  God  ;  I  feel  1  have  nothing 
here  but  the  church  of  God  ;  I  would  not  throw  my  life  away  nor 
hold  it  back,  if  the  Lord  called  for  it  in  labouring,  travelling,  and 
suffering.  I  conclude  I  have  rode  one  hundred  miles  this  week,, 
and  the  weather  has  been  very  uncomfortable,  the  roads  bad,  and 
our  lodging  in  some  very  open  houses  ;  to  which  I  may  add  my 
preaching  in  new  and  unfinished  meeting-houses  in  March,  which 
is  a  searching,  changeable  month,  especially  near  the  mountains. 

Sabbath  day  19.  At  Connelly's  new  church  I  preached  on  2  Cor. 
vii.  1.  I  only  intended  to  give  a  short  discourse. 

Monday  20.  I  had  but  twenty  miles  to  ride  to  Esquire  White's. 

at  the  Mulberry  Grove.     Here  I  left  Doctor  S.  B 1 ;  but  death 

hath  now   removed  him.     I  still  continued  to  feel  feverish  and 
feeble,  and  thought  it  needful  to  take  mountain  bark. 

Tuesday  21.  I  preached  once  more  at  Johns-River  ;  my  subject 
yas  1  Cor.  i.  24,  25.  As  I  thought  it  would  be  my  last,  I  exerte'" 


~.j  .  FRANCIS  ASBWIY'S  JOIT11N 


myself  until  ray  chill  and  fever  returned  :   I  aUo  administered  th« 
sacrament  and  baptised  children. 

Wednesday  '-"J.  I  set  out  on  my  journey  for  the  west  ;  and  it  had 
a  serious  intluence  on  my  mind  to  leave  brother  Hill  behind,  who 
I  fear  hath  a  confirmed  consumption,  und  I  too  so  unwell.  It 
began  to  rain  violently  before  we  came  to  Henley's  :  I  took  shelter 
in  a  house  from  the  rain,  and  talked  and  pr.iyed  with  a  poor 
woman.  We  dined  at  Mr.  Henley's,  calling  at  Wakefield  on  I;. 
talk  and  pray.  —  1  cannot  well  pass  by  my  friend-  v.  ilhout  calling. 
We  hastened  across  Lynville  Mountain,  which  is  awfully  barren, 
and  came  on  to  Young's  Cove  ;  the  storm  followed  us,  with  thun- 
der, lightning,  and  rain.  We  arrived  after  some  of  the  people 
were  gone  ;  but  some  returned,  and  I  gave  them  but  a  small  tail: 
being  very  weary  in  walking  down  the  mountains,  and  over  thr 
rocks. 

Thursday  23.  I  came  to   Davenport's  :  my  subject  was  "  Godl: 
ness  is  profitable,"  &:c.  —  Grace  in  the  heart,  in  all  its  operations 
bodily  exercise   for  a  little  time   is  useful   for  health  —  for  the  pre- 
sent world  —  for  the   means  of  grace.  —  Godliness    promiseth  every 
thing  we  can  wish  for  in  the  present  and  future  life  ;  answering  all 
the    purposes    of    civil,    domestic,    aud     Christian     life  :  —  justice, 
mercy,  and  truth  ;  —  every  duty  and   relation  ;    all  the  joys   and  all 
the  sufferings   of  life  ;  all   the   lawful   use  of  lawful   things  ;  —  and 
prepares   for  the   enjoyment  of  God,   Christ,  the  Ftrrnal  Spirit. 
angels,  and  glory. 

Friday  24.  I  was  unwell  :  the  clouds  were  lowering.  Wo  had 
rode  but  a  mile  when  the  rain  began  :  brother  Jones's  house  was 
at  hand  ;  here  we  stopped  two  hour?,  until  some  of  the  rain  fell  to 
the  earth  :  there  was  a  short  cessation,  and  about  half  past  twelve 
o'clock  we  set  out  again,  rode  six  miles,  and  were  driven  into  Mi. 
Cook's  by  thunder,  hail,  and  rain  ;  here  we  stopped  to  talk  with 
God  and  man.  Hard  necessity  made  us  move  forward  ;  the  west- 
ern branch  of  Toe-River,  that  comes  down  from  the  Yellow  Moun- 
tain, was  rapidly  filling  ;  and  was  rocky,  rolling,  and  roaring  like 
the  sea,  and  we  were  compelled  to  cross  it  several  times.  When 
we  came  to  ascend  the  mountain,  we  had  a  skirmish  of  rain,  thun- 
der, and  lightning  —  it  was  distant  —  it  was  mercy.  I  found  hard 
work  to  ride  where  Thomas  White  had  driven  his  wagon,  for 
which  he  deserves  a  place  in  my  journal  and  a  premium  troin 
the  state.  When  we  had  ascended  the  summit  of  the  moun- 
tain, we  found  it  so  rich  and  mirey,  that  it  was  with  groat  difficulty 
we  could  ride  along  ;  but  I  was  wrapped  up  in  heavy,  wet 


fiEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURYVS  JOURNAL.  [1797. 

tBents,  and  unable  to  walk  through  weakness  of  body  ;  so  we  had  it, 
pitch,  elide,  and  drive  to  the  bottom.  We  then  came  upon  the 
drains  and  branches  of  Great  Toe- River.  From  Fisher's  we 
bad  to  ride  through  what  I  called  the  shades  of  death,  four  milec 
to  Miller's;  here  we  had  to  cope  with  Toe-River,  and  near  the 
house  came  into  deep  water ;  my  horse  drove  to  the  opposite  bank 
above  the  landing,  and  locked  one  of  his  feet  in  a  root  or  something 
like  it,  but  freed  himself:  at  last  \ve  made  the  house,  the  people 
received  us  kindly,  and  gave  us  such  things  as  they  had.  We 
could  only  partially  dry  our  garments.  We  heard  heavy  tidings  of 
a  deep  rocky  ford  yet  to  he  passed  in  our  way  across  Toe- River. 

TENNESSEE. — Saturday  25.  We  were  escorted  by  three  brave 
young  Dutchmen.  After  riding  three  miles  we  began  to  scale 
the  rocks,  hills,  and  mountains,  worming  through  pathless  woods;, 
to  shun  a  deep  ford.  I  thought,  ride  I  must,  but  no — the  com- 
pany concluded  to  walk  :  I  gave  my  horse  the  direction  of  him- 
self, under  Providence.  I  had  to  step  from  rock  to  rock,  hands 
and  feet  busy,  but  my  breath  was  soon  gone,  and  I  gave  up  the  cause 
and  took  horse  again,  and  resolved  that  I  ivould  ride  donn  the  hilts, 
although  I  had  not  rode  up  them  :  at  last  (hit  or  miss,  Providence  is 
all)  into  the  path  we  came,  and  thence  kept  down  the  river  and 
over  to  Little  Toe,  bearing  down  the  stre->m  ;  when  we  had  passed 
the  Gap,  we  wished  to  feed  ;  but  the  man  had  no  corn  to  sell :  we 
tried,  man  and  horse,  to  reach  Nathan  Davies's  ;  where  we  ar- 
rived and  w^re  made  comfortable.  I  was  much  spent  with  the 
labours  of  this  day.  Hearing  of  the  quarterly  meeting  at  Dun- 
worth's,  1  rode  on  Sunday  26th  twelve  miles,  and  arrived  time 
enough  for  me  to  give  them  a  feeble,  let  faithful  ta'k  on  Isa.  i.  9. 
I  am  of  opinion  it  is  as  hard,  or  harder,  for  the  people  of  the  wes'i 
to  gain  religion  as  any  other.  When  I  consider  where  they  came 
from,  where  they  are,  and  how  they  are,  and  how  they  are  called 
to  go  further,  their  being  unsettled,  with  so  many  objects  to  take 
their  attention,  with  the  hfalth  and  good  air  they  enjoy,  and  when 
I  reflect  that  not  one  in  a  hundred  came  here  to  get  religion  ;  but 
rather  to  get  plenty  of  good  land,  1  think  it  will  be  well-  if  some  or 
many  do  not  eventually  lose  their  souls.  I  was  met  by  our  hre* 
thren  Kohler,  Burke,  and  Page.  I  rested  on  Monday  and  Tuesday 
to  t;>ke  breath  and  medicine.  I  find  myself  so  hardly  pui  to  it  at 
times  that  I  can  only  journalize  a  little.  We  concluded  as  there 
are  not  proper  stations  on  the  Cumberland  path,  it  will  not  do  for 
me  to  lodge  on  the  ground  :  the  general  opinion  is  against  it.  ^-  - 
are  to  try  to  go  to  Kentucky  i>ext  week. 


.  "jy?.]  UfcV.   J-KANCI3   ASUimV'S  JUURNA/.. 

Wednesday  29.  I  rode  to  William  Nelsons,  and  after  dinner  to 
Nathan  Davies's.  Thursday  morning  I  was  very  weak,  and  have 
elow,  but  almost  continual  fevers.  I  preached  with  great  difficulty 
in  the  afternoon,  am!  returned  to  William  Nelson's.  This  night  I 
felt  a  total  change  of  mind.  The  weakness  of  my  body,  and  the 
cold  aod  unsettled  state  of  the  weather,  made  me.  with  the  general 
advice  of  the  preachers  present,  give  up  the  cause  ;  they  aUo  ad- 
visnj  oae  to  make  the  be»t  of  my  wax  \->  U.diimore,  and  not  to  ride 
in  the  rain.  It  may  be,  the  Loid  minnl-  to  lead  me  in  a  way  I 
bave  not  yet  known;  it  is  perhaps  best  that  1  should  go  with  all 
expedient  haste,  from  conference  to  conference,  only  stopping  at 
the  towns  and  chief  places  on  Sabbath  days.  Live  or  die,  I  must 
ride.  After  all  the  disappointments,  perhaps  every  purpose  is  an- 
swered but  one.  I  have  sent  brother  Cobler  to  take  charge  of 
Kentucky  and  Cumberland,  by  visiting  the  whole  every  quarter  • 
brother  Bird  I  have  stationed  in  the  Hol*tfin  district.  I  have  writ- 
ten a  circumstantial  letter  to  brother  Poythress  and  the  Kentucky 
conference  I  have  made  a  plan  for  the  stationing  of  the  preacher?, 
at  least  those  of  any  standing  :  and  now  I  will  make  the  best  of  my 
way  to  Baltimore  ;  perhaps  there  may  be  some  special  call  for  me 
there  :  I  must,  as  the  burden  of  m  etirig  the  conferences,  oidaiu- 
ing,  and  stationing  the  preachers  re.-teth  on  me,  save  myself.  1  am 
peculiarly  concerned  for  the  cities  :  the  prosperity  of  the  work  of 
God  depends  much  on  having  prnppr  mfn  for  any  and  every  part  of 
the  work. 

Friday  31.  It  being  rainy  I  rested.  Saturday,  April  1.  The  wea- 
ther was  clear  and  cold  :  we  set  off  for  brother  Baker's.  My 
horse  hath  the  honour  of  swimming  Holstein  River  every  time  I 
visit  this  country. 

Sunday  2.  I  felt  better  than  I  had  done  since  I  crossed  the  moun- 
tains. I  prearhed  on  Acts  iii.  26.  and  was  for  pushing  on  again 
about  fifteen  miles  farther,  to  Edward  Coxe's  :  we  got  lost,  and 
were  an  hour  in  the  night. 

Monday  3.  We  made  a  stretching  ride  of  about  forty  miles,  and 
were  another  hour  in  the  night,  and  came  to  Hall- Acres.  1  was 
properly  outdone,  and  my  fever  returned  and  held  me  thirty  hours 

Tuesday  4.  I  reached  the  widow  Russell's  :  I  am  scarce  able  to 
read,  write,  sing,  or  pray  ;  nevertheless,  after  I  had  rested,  I 
preached  in  the  evening. 

VIRGINIA. — Thursday  G.  We  took  our  way  up  Walker's  Valley 
after   riding   about   eight    miles  my  weakness  came   on,  and  I  wa« 
rddressed  by  name  and  earnestly  requested  to  stop  and   take  re 


ttttv.  FRANCIS  ASUURY'S  JUUKNAL.  [1797, 

freshment  and  rest  at  Mr.  M'Carty's  ;  here  we  were  richly  provided 
for  :  the  mother  and  daughter  are  most  agreeable  and  kind.  After 
commending  ourselves  and  this  affectionate  family  to  God,  we  came 
to  Benoni  Banning's  ;  as  I  was  told,  so  I  found  this  family — most 
attentively  kind  :  we  stopped  here  Friday,  Saturday,  and  Sunday, 

My  fever  never  left  me,  as  I  thought,  from  Monday  until  Friday 
night.     1  am  kept  cheerful,  but  very  weak.     My  diet  is  chiefly  tea, 
potatoes,  Indian-men!  gruel,  and  chicken  broth.   My  reading  is  only 
the  Bible  :   I  cannot  think  much,  and  only    write  a  few  letters.     I 
think  of  my  charge,  of  the  conferences,  and  the  church,  and  of  my 
dear  parents,  who  will  probably  outlive  me — 1  must  be  made  per- 
fect through  sufferings.     I  rest  in  rainy  weather,  and  have  to  ride 
from  eighty  to  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles  in   a  week.     The 
way  we  now  go  we  have  sometimes  to  ride  thirty  miles  to  get  to  a 
house.     From  the  9th  of  April  to  the  27th  of  May  I  have  kept  no 
journal.     The  notes  of  our  travels  and  troubles  taken  by  Jonathan 
Bird   and  Joshua  Wells,  will   tell  a  small  part  of  my  sorrows  and 
sufferings.     I  have  travelled  about  six  hundred  miles  with  an  in- 
flammatory fever,  and  fixed  pain  in  my  breast.     I  cannot  help  ex- 
pressing the  distinguishing  kindness  of  some  families  where  I  have 
been  forced  by  weakness  to  stop — Captain  Shannon,  on   Walker's 
creek — my   friend  Scarborough,  on  the  sinks  of  Green  Briar — 
Colonel  Moffatt  and  brother  Young  in  Augusta  :  neither  can  I  for- 
get Mr.  Lee  and  Moore— the  Hnrrisons,  at  Rocktown,  and  brother 
and  sister  M'Williams — Sisters  Phelps  and  Reed,  in  Winchester, 
and  my  dear,  kind  friend  Doctor  Tiffin.     By  a  strange  providence 
!  was  cast  upon  Ely  Dorsey,  on  Linganore,  who  nursed  me  as  if  I 
bad  been  his  own  father. 

MARYLAND. — From  the  27th  of  May  until  June  10,  no  journal. 
We  rode  nearly  forty  miles  from  Linganore  to  Baltimore.  I 
lodged  at  brother  Hawkins's  retreat,  about  one  mile  from  the  city. 
I  lounged  away  a  week  in  visiting  a  little. 

Sunday,  June  18.  I  was  only  nble  to  speak  about  fifteen  minutes. 
I  recover  but  slowly.  The  constant  resort  of  the  wealthy  and 
poor  visiting  me,  made  me  much  ashamed  that  they  should  look 
after  such  a  worthless  lump  of  misery  and  sin. 

June  25.  I  met  the  male  members  of  the  society  Sabbath 
morning,  as  I  had  met  the  sisters  and  the  official  members  in  the 
preceding  week.  1  obtained  the  liberty  of  the  managers  of  the 
African  academy  to  congregate  the  faihers  as  well  as  to  teach  the 
children.  We  had  nearly  five  hundred  coloured  people.  Brother 
Willis  preached  on  Acts  vii.  7.  and  I  added  a  few  words.  In  the 


1797.]  KEY.  FRANCIS  ASBUKv's  JOURNAL  289 

afternoon  I  gave  a  short  oxhorlalion  at  Mr.  Otterbine's  church.  -  u 
Howard's  Hill.  I  am  now  waitini;  lop  tin-  rn  ikiri'4  of  a  sulky. 
Tbomai  Parber,  from  Birmingham  id  took  i  -•  •  .>nd  like- 

ness of  me,  at  the  desire  of  my  mother,  to  -cud  iu  Knghnd.  I  .un 
trying  to  org.mi/e  tin-  African  >  hun h.  I  m:id.-  inn-n -l  li  r  the 
use  of  Mr  (Mt(  rl.ni'-'s  <  Imrrh  for  Nihbath  in  the  morning  =«nd 
evening  for  the  white  people.  I  have  atle-mpted  to  promote 
society  meetings  at  Old-To«n  and  the  west  c-ml  of  the  city,  nther 
at  the  Duoker'fl  meeting-house  or  IMr.  Otterlune's  church.  My 
feelings  or  my  fears  premoniah  me  this  will  be  a  sickly  sumn 
I  visit,  dine,  and  ride  out  every  day — but  it  is  very  hard  work  for 
me  to  eat,  drink,  talk,  and  do  nothing.  A-  I  am  not  a  man  of  the 
world  the  ino<t  of  the  conversation  about  it  is  iik-oine  to  me.  I 
am  taken  from  house  to  house,  and  the  brethren  >M-!I  tin  plr.i-ure 
of  seeing  me,  and  those  who  are  acquainted  with  their  tan.ilics 
will  come  to  see  me  also. 

July  3.  I  attempted  to  preach  in  Doctor  Allison's  church,  and 
felt  more  assisted  than  I  expected. 

Tuesday  4.  1  was  taken  in  a  chariot  to  Perry-Hall  in  company 
with  sister  Fonerdon.  1  felt  the  effects  of  my  exerin>n-  on  the 
Sabbath,  the  w;mt  of  rest,  rising  early,  and  riding  to  .Mr.  (imn/h's. 
In  my  mind  I  felt  almost  as  in  old  times.  Cod  hath  not  h  ft  this 
house.  I  felt  great  love  to  the  family  in  praying  for  them  in  the 
family  and  in  the  closet.  1  had  an  open  and  free  conversation, 
with  Mr.  Gotiirh  about  his  souk  I  O'iiver>ed  uith  the  «erv;mls 
also,  and  had  freedom  in  prayer,  although  I  felt  \\eakm  ?•-  ot  l>o.U 
I  wrote  a  few  letters  and  read  a  little  in  the  Bible.  The  weather 
is  excessively  warm. 

Saturday  8.   I  cannot  now  as  heretofore  spend  ten  hour-  out  of 
sixteen  iu  reading  the  Bible  in  English  or  1  lehn-u  .  or  oiln  r  bo< 
or   write  letters  from  morning   until   night.      My  bow  i-  VM  ;d<.   it 
not  broken  ;  but  I    have  more  time    to  speak  to  God  and  >ouls. 
Sabbath  day  I  performed  at  Mr.  (Jough's  alone. 

Wednesday  12.  1  borrowed  a  servant  at  Mr.  Cough's,  and  came 
on  to  Mr.  Sheridan's  douse,  North  East  Cecil  county  ;  here  I  bor- 
rowed another  servant,  and  on  I  riday  I  n>de  to  Wilmin-t.'n,  and 
Stopped  at  Allen  M- Lane's,  now  living  th< 

PKNNSVI.VAMA.— Saturday  10.    Warm    -  it  wa^  I  len.-hed  Phil  i 
dr-lphia:     and   Sabeath   evening    1C.    1    felt    free  to  hbour  a  little, 
feeble  as  I  was,  and  enl.ii^'-d  <>n  John  xiv.   1.      1  have  gi  -on 

to   be  thankful  for  my  sulky  ;   I  should  soon  be.  silent   without    it. 
I   rode  to  Gcrui-uLovvn  to   see   aged    mother  Steel,    and    sister 

VOL.   II.  37 


»OQ  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1797, 

Lusby,  and  found  freedom,  although  I  could  hardly  walk  or  talk ; 
yet  must  needs  speak  to  the  women  of  the  house  about  their 
souls.  Dined  at  brother  Baker's  retreat,  and  came  back  to  the  city 
very  sick,  and  went  to  bed. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Tuesday  18.  I  came  off  to  Burlington  ;  and  was 
much  grieved  to  hear  my  appointments  had  been  made,  and  not 
attended  in  consequence  of  my  illness. 

Wednesday  19.  Dined  at  Crossweek's,  at  brother  Abbott's,  once 
a  travelling  preacher,  now  a  merchant.  We  came  on  to  father 
Hutchinson's  ;  here  1  was  almost  outdone  with  excessive  heat.  I 
stopped  four  days,  but  found  it  hard  work  to  sit  still. 

Monday  24.  We  came  to  Brunswick  ;  dined,  prayed,  and  re- 
joiced to  hear  that  God  had  kindled  a  living  fire  here,  through 
the  instrumentality  of  a  brother  from  Elizabethtovvn.  We  came  on 
to  Elizabethtown,  forty  miles  ;  it  was  ample  labour  for  man  and 
horse  :  here  I  was  sick  again. 

Tuesday  25.  I  rode  to  Newark,  and  dined  with  Mr.  Ogden,  a 
steady  friend.  After  the  rain,  I  came  to  New-York  ;  here  I  spent 
a  few  painful  days,  being  unable  to  visit  or  be  visited. 

NEW-YORK. — On  Monday  I  came  to  Shotwell's,  very  unwell ; 
and  the  nest  day  to  Kingsbridge  :  here  I  was  compelled  by  afflic- 
tion to  spend  two  weeks.  I  then  rode  to  New-Rochelle,  and 
lodged  at  Mr.  Sherwood's.  Finding  myself  swelling  in  the  face, 
bowels,  and  feet,  I  applied  leaves  of  burdock,  and  then  a  plaister 
of  mustard,  which  drew  a  desperate  blister.  I  had  such  awful 
sore  feet,  I  knew  not  but  that  they  would  mortify  ;  and  only  after 
two  weeks  was  I  able  to  set  them  to  the  ground.  I  took  cream  of 
tartar,  and  nitre  daily  to  cool,  and  keep  open  the  body  ;  I  also 
made  use  of  the  bark. 

Sunday,  September  12.  I  began  to  walk  once  or  twice  across 
the  room. 

Monday  13.  We  began  our  route  to  Wilberham  ;  we  had  not 
rode  far  over  the  rocks  before  I  was  taken  very  unwell.  We 
stopped  at  Byram,  at  father  Banks's  :  I  was  soon  put  to  bed  with  a 
very  high  fever  that  held  me  through  the  night.  I  now  began  to 
conclude  it  was  not  the  will  of  God  I  should  proceed,  and  the 
brethren  would  not  persuade  me  to  go  on  ;  brother  Totten  re- 
turned with  me  to  mother  Sherwood's.  I  have  had  slight  fevers, 
but  expect  to  rest  until  about  the  6rst  of  October,  which  I  hope, 
with  riding  a  little  every  clear  day,  will  restore  me  to  health. 

Thursday  16.  I  visited  Nicholas  Underbill's  wife,  who  is  near 
her  trying  hour ;  I  hope  it  was  good  for  me,  for  her,  and  the  fa- 


1797.]  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY?«  JOniNAf.. 

mily.  I  take  a  small  potion  of  bark  each  day,  and  one  third  of  a 
common  dose  of  cream  of  tartar  and  nitre,  and  hope  I  shall  yet  l>o 
raised  up.  My  mind  is  stayed  upon  <lod  :  and  1  hope  to  be  more 
holy  ;  hut  I  fear  I  shall  never  be  able  to  ride  and  preach  as  I  have 
done  in  former  days,  so  as  to  be  more  useful.  I  have  now  much 
time  to  think  of,  ami  review  my  whole  life. 

The  kindness  of  this  Shorwood  family  is  great ;  my  dear  mamma, 
and  Betsy  .Sherwood,  and  Jonathan  ;md  I'.i-tlmp  al»<>  :  if  I  had  not 
been  at  home  here,  what  additional  distress  of  mind  would  h;i\< 
attended  me  !  ciy  friends  also  were  welcome  to  come  and  see  me. 
Sabbath-day,  at  the  widow  Sherwood's,  I  had  the  pleasure  of  hear- 
ing our  brother  Matthias  make  a  pointed,  profitable,  and  powerful 
discourse.  It  is  now  eight  weeks  since  I  have  preached — awfully 
dumb  Sabbaths !  1-have  been  most  severely  tried  from  various 
quarters  ;  my  fevers,  my  feet,  and  Satan,  would  set  in  with  my 
gloomy  and  nervous  affections.  Sometimes  subject  to  the  greatest 
effeminacy  ;  to  distress  at  the  thought  of  a  useless,  idle  life  :  but 
what  brought  the  heavy  pang  into  my  heart,  and  the  big  tear  to 
roll,  that  never  rises  without  a  cause,  was,  the  thought  of  leaving 
the  connexion  without  some  proper  men  of  their  own  election,  to 
go  in  and  out  before  them  in  my  place,  and  to  keep  that  order 
which  1  have  been  seeking  these  many  years  to  establish.  My 
aged  parents  were  dear  to  me  in  their  advanced  age  and  dependant 
state  :  like  myself,  they  have  spent  what  they  had  to  spare  for 
many  years,  nearly  forty,  in  keeping  open  doors  for  the  Gospel 
and  people  of  God  :  this  burden  hath  been  laid  upon  them.  1  am 
happy  that  I  can  now  ride  a  little  every  clear  day  for  my  better 
health,  and  can  eat  and  sleep  better.  I  am  left  too  much  alone  :  I 
cannot  sit  in  my  room  all  day  making  gloomy  reflections  on  the 
past,  present,  and  future  life.  Lord,  help  me  !  for  I  am  poor  and 
needy  ;  the  hand  of  God  hath  touched  me,  and  I  think  Satan  forti 
himself  in  my  melancholy,  unemployed,  unsocial,  and  inactive  hours. 

Sunday  18.  I  was  strongly  impressed  in  my  mind  months  ago 
that  this  summer  and  fall  would  be  marked  with  heavy  afflic- 
tions. Oh  Philadelphia  !  I  have  had  very  little  faith  for  that  city  ; 
1  have  often  remarked  the  general  contempt  of  the  Sabbath  ;  the 
constant  noise  of  carriages  ;  there  is  a  perpetual  disturbance  of 
worshipping  assemblies.  It  is  true,  one  event  cometh  on  the 
righteous  and  the  wicked  ;  but  God  will  stand  to  his  word — he  hath 
punished,  he  will  punish  those  that  rob  him.  If  report  be  true, 
the  distress  of  the  Philadelphians  is  great;  three  fourths  of  the 
citizens  are  fled. 


292  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1797. 

Monday  19.  I  felt  strength  of  faith  and  body,  as  if  I  should  be 
raised  up  again.  I  rode  for  recreation  nine  miles.  The  clouds 
are  dispelled  from  my  mind — O  that  my  future  life  may  be  holiness 
to  the  Lord — prudent  and  exemplary  to  many  !  I  wished  to  speak 
to  a  poor  African  whom  I  saw  in  the  field  as  I  went  out,  and  as  I 
came  along  on  my  return,  he  was  at  a  stone  wall  within  eight  or 
nine  feet  of  me  :  poor  creature  !  he  seemed  struck  at  my  counsel, 
and  gave  me  thanks.  O,  it  was  going  down  into  the  Egypt  of  South 
Carolina  after  those  poor  souls  of  Africans  I  have  lost  my  health, 
if  not  my  life  in  the  end — the  will  of  the  Lord  be  done  ! 

Wednesday  20.  I  rode  about  fourteen  miles.  I  met  a  messen- 
ger who  came  to  desire  my  presence  to-morrow  at  the  funeral  of 
our  brother  Vanostrand  :  1  have  known  him  about  fifteen  years,  and 
had  great  confidence  in  the  man.  He  hath  laboured  as  a  local 
preacher,  and  three  years  as  a  travelling  one  ;  he  had  his  seals, 
and  I  know  one.  Some  will  complain  of  his  negligence  in  Eliza- 
beth circuit ;  but  what  could  the  man  do?  He  gave  his  life,  and 
perhaps  caught  the  cause  of  his  death  by  bad  lodging,  and  riding 
in  cold  weather.  He  told  a  friend  he  had  settled  his  temporal  and 
spiritual  business  ;  he  then  slept  in  peace.  Brother  Vanostrand 
was  a  native  of  Long-Island.  He  followed  the  fortune  of  king 
George  in  the  revolutionary  war,  but  soon  after  peace  he  joined 
himself  under  king  Jesus,  and  fought  till  he  died  In  a  good  cause, 
as  a  Christian  and  a  minister.  I  had  some  unpleasing  symptoms, 
and  am  ready  to  conclude  I  shall  linger  into  death,  or  at  least 
never  be  restored  to  perfect  health  :  my  soul  continually  cries  out, 
Thy  will  be  done,  O  Lord  ! 

Thursday  21.  I  attended  the  funeral,  and  gave  an  exhortation. 
I  have  rode  twenty  miles  this  day,  with  little  rest  and  no  food. 

Friday  22.  I  rode  eight  or  ten  miles,  1  was  touched  with  the 
fever. 

Saturday  23.  I  slept  well  last  night,  but  waked  with  a  slight  fever. 
I  received  a  letter  from  Dr.  Coke  ;  as  I  thought,  so  it  is — he  is 
gone  from  Ireland  to  England,  and  will  have  work  enough  \vhen  he 
cometh  there.  The  three  grand  divisions  of  that  connexion  are 
alarming.  It  is  a  doubt  if  the  Doctor  cometh  to  America  until 
spring,  if  at  all  until  the  general  conference.  1  am  more  than  ever 
convinced  of  the  propriety  of  the  attempts  I  have  made  to  bring 
forward  Episcopal  men  :  First,  from  the  uncertain  state  of  my 
health  ;  Secondly,  from  a  regard  to  the  union  and  good  order  of 
the  American  body,  and  the  state  of  the  European  connexion.  I 
am  sensibly  assured  the  Americans  ought  to  act  as  if  they  expected 


1797.]  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBtTRY1S  JOtT.NAL.  593 

to  lose  me  ever}'  day,  and  had  no  depend. m<e  upon  Doctor  Co 
taking  prudent  care  not  to  pi, in-  Umn-i  U>  -  .it  nil  uml<  i  tl.e  ' 
trnliug  influence   of  British    Mrthodi-S.      I   vi-ited   three    f.miil. 
talked,  and  pr.iy.'d  in  each,  but  was  r.itiier  outdone. 

Sunday  '-'I-  At  Sherwood'-.  \  alley  :  I  li  id  gn-allv  d.-ind  to 
speak  to  these  people,  and  was  much  ,i  —  i-u -.1  «.,,  to  do  ;  my  -ijl'ject 
u  i-  .'  ('or.  vi.  '2.  I  considered,  by  way  of  introduction,  what  • 
racter  of  people  they  were  who  are  to  be  the  suhjectu  of  salva- 
tion—the lost,  the  enslaved,  and  those  th.it  cannot  save  tin  m- 
selves.  First,  Christ  the  author  of  ilii<  salvation  ;  the  meritori- 
ous, efficient,  and  moving  cause.  Secondly,  The  nature  of  this  salva- 
tion— to  reach  all  the  mi-cry  and  yuilt  of  sinner?  ;  to  save,  redi  • 
and  liberate.  Thirdly,  What  bespeaks  an  accepted  time  and  a  day  of 
salvation  ;  to  have  God,  Christ,  the  Spirit,  ministei-  ;..•  m,  and 
people  that  have  religion,  Say,  behold — now  is  the  day  of  sah.t- 
tion  !  I  was  able  to  speak  fervently  and  regularly  for  an  hour  with 
great  affection.  I  rejoiced  to  find  I  hat  God  had  raised  me  up  to  rail 
poor  mourning  souls  to  Christ,  and  to  warn  careless  siuu.  r-.  After 
twenty-six  years  the  Gospel  is  established  in  this  neighbourhood,  at 
a  small  distance  from  this  house.  I  preached  at  Peter  Bonnetfi 
before  the  war  ;  and  after  peace  was  restored,  the  ble-Mng  re- 
lumed to  his  widow's  house  ;  two  of  his  daughters  are  in  fellow- 
ship with  us.  The  widow  Sherwood's  was  the  substitute  hou-e, 
after  the  widow  Bennett  went  to  live  at  New-York  :  now  they  .ire 
about  building  a  church  for  the  word  and  worship  of  God.  I  am 
happy  to  hear,  by  letters,  of  a  revival  of  the  work  in  several 
place?  in  Virginia,  as  also  in  North  and  South  Carolina. 

Monday  25.    The  day  was  clear,  and  very  warm.      I  rode  up  to 
the  Plains,  and  stopped  at  Elijah  Crawford1?.     God  hath  honoured 
this  house.     Two  young  men  arc  gone  into  the  ministry  out  o!   r 
I  have  rode  nearly  twenty  miles,  and  had  it  Dot  been  lor  the  heat, 
I  should  have  done  well. 

Tuesday  26.  I  wrote  a  letter  to ,  he  was   under  grief  and 

trouble.     This  day  Joshua  Wells  returned  from  Wilbraham  confe- 
rence.    Matters  were  conducted  well. 

Wednesday  27.  The  preachers  came  up  ;  and  Thursday  28,  tve 
had  a  sermon,  and  ordination  of  deacons.  1  was  employed  about 
three  hours,  and  faint  indeed.  I  rode  four  miles,  and  lodged  at 
Morgan's,  East  Chester  :  this  was  an  excessively  warm  day. 

Saturday  30.  We  rode  to  New-York  ;  a  very  warm  d  iy.  1  found 
myself  much  injured,  but  was  well  nursed  at  the  north  -iiie  of 
the  city.  They  have  a  touch  of  the  fever  here  in  George-street. 


294  HEV.  FRANCIS  ASBtmv's  JOURNAL.  [1797. 

Sabbath,  October  1.  We  had  much  rain.  Live  or  die,  I  preached 
at  the  old  and  new  church  on  Isai.  xxxiii.  20.  and  Deut.  xxviii.  9. 
I  had  some  disagreeable  things,  and  was  but  ill  fitted  in  body  to  bear 
them. 

Monday  2.  We  rode  about  twenty-seven  miles  to  Hammond's. 
My  fever  rises  every  night. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Tuesday  3.  We  rode  thirty  miles  to  Joseph 
Hutchinson's.  I  lament  most  of  all  that  I  have  not  lived  in  a  con- 
stant state  of  prayer.  I  have  had  most  deep  and  sore  temptations 
of  many  kinds,  such  as  I  could  have  hardly  thought  of  in  health.  I 
must  be  tried  so  as  by  fire.  By  reason  of  the  fever  in  Philadelphia 
our  conference  is  moved  to  Duck-Creek,  in  the  state  of  Delaware. 

Wednesday  4.  After  the  storm  was  over  we  moved  on  as  far  as 
Crossweek*,  and  lodged  at  father  Lovell's.  I  was  weak  in  body 
but  comfortable  in  mind.  I  visited  three  families  ;  called  at  Han- 
cock's, and  saw  my  old  friend  of  twenty-six  years  membership. 
I  came  on  to  Burlington.  Serious  times  still  in  Philadelphia.  I 
was  very  unwell  ;  I  had  an  awful  night. 

Friday  6.  We  crossed  Dunkes's  ferry,  and  came  a  rough, 
crooked  way  to  Germantown.  We  had  a  meeting  at  Dr.  Lusby's. 

Saturday  7.  We  rode  over  the  rocks,  after  crossing  Schuylkill 
at  a  ferry,  to  Chester,  and  thence  to  Aaron  Mattson's.  There  is 
a  new  house  and  mill  built  since  I  was  here  ;  but  there  is  room 
enough  for  Christ  yet.  We  rode  to  Wilmington,  where  I 
preached  on  Psalms  xlvi.  1 — 5. 

DELAWARE. — Monday  9.  We  came  thirty-eight  miles  to  Duck- 
Creek. 

Tuesday  10.  We  began  conference.  I  appointed  the  president 
elders  to  take  my  seat,  and  I  sat  alone,  because  the  hand  of  the 
Lord  was  upon  me.  I  was  resolved  to  put  out  my  strength  to  the 
last  in  preaching.  My  first  subject  was  Isaiah  i.  26 — 28.  ;  my 
second  was  on  Luke  xvii.  12.  ;  my  third  2  Cor.  xiii.  11.  Great 
times  :  preaching  almost  night  and  day  ;  some  souls  converted, 
and  Christians  were  like  a  flame  of  fire.  Eleven  persons  were 
set  apart  for  elders'  and  three  for  deacons'  orders. 

Friday  13.  We  rose.  I  was  much  outdone,  yet  happy.  We 
appointed  a  standing  committee  to  inspect  and  direct  the  press. 
We  read  some  passages  of  the  notes  on  the  Discipline,  and  left 
the  remnant  to  this  committee. 

MARYLAND. — Monday  16.  We  rode  to  Bohemia-Ferry,  twenty 
miles.  Dr.  Ridgely  has  sent  me  a  plenty  of  Columbo  magnesia^ 
soluble  tartar,  and  bark.  I  am  much  grieved  that  I  do  not  con- 


1797.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  ?r»i 

verse  more  abundantly  with  Cod  in  my  own  heart  and  soul.  We 
had  great  peace.  I  have  not  of  late,  if  at  any  time  in  these  parts, 
heard  such  an  awful  account  of  fever  as  we  now  hoar  rages  in 
Baltimore  city  and  Point.  It  i*  reported  that  our  conference 
first  moved  to  Evans's  meeting-house.  I  spent  the  evening  at  Mr. 
Basseft's,  and  lectured  upon  a  chapter. 

Tuesday    17,   was   a    very  warm   day.     We    rode    from    I- 
Creek  to    North-East      They    had    mutinied   the   matter  i-o   as  to 
appoint  for  me  and  brother  Lee  to  preach.      I  aave  them   a  short 
sermon  on  Gal.  v.  7.      "  Ye  did  run  well  ;  who  did  hinder  you  that 
ye  should  not  obey  the  truth  .'"     I  lodged  at  Mr.  Sheridun   -. 

Wednesday  10.   We  came  to  Josiah  Dallarn'e. 

Thursday  19.  Reached  Mr.  Cough's.  I  was  comforted  iu 
aeeing  a  few  of  my  age  who  were  my  spiritual  children. 

Friday  20.  After  all  the  alarm  we  came  to  Baltimore  ;  a  blessed 
rain  settled  the  amazing  dust  and  purified  the  air. 

Saturday  21.  I  opened  conference,  arid  gave  up  the  presidency 
to  the  presiding  elders.  Returned  unwell.  Very  uncomfortable 
easterly  winds  and  rainy  weather.  I  mentioned  in  my  speech  to 
the  conference  the  weakness  of  the  episcopacy. 

The  conference  rose  on  Friday  2G.  There  was  grcit  peace, 
and  all  the  preachers,  but  myself,  satisfied  with  their  station*. 

Sabbath  day  22.  I  preached  at  Dr.  Allan's  church  the  funeral 
•ermon  of  Martha  F.  Allison,  a  Methodist  for  about  twenty-seven 
years — a  class  leader — a  woman  of  sense  and  piety  :  the  subject 
was  John  xi.  24 — 27.  We  had  a  crowded  house. 

Sunday  29.  I  opened  the  new  church  in  Light-street  with  read- 
ing 2  Chron.  vii.  12.  Psalm  cxxxii.  Haggai  xi.  Mark  xi.  The  elders 
read  and  prayed.  My  subject  was  Eph.  ii.  19.  20,  22.  :  and  at  Old 
Town  I  preached  on  2  Samuel  xvi.  17.  I  had  to  preach  the  fu- 
neral sermon  of  father  Gatch  on  1  Thess.  iv.  13,  14.  I  observed 
the  pleasing,  cheering,  and  charming  manner  in  which  the  apostle 
described  the  death  of  the  righteous.  Sleep— sleep  in  Jesus — a 
rest  from  labour,  sorrow,  affliction,  and  pain  ;  happy  opening  vi- 
sions of  God  !  Secondly — the  hope  the  pious  who  are  alive  have  for 
their  pious  dead  who  have  hud  experience,  and  long  continuance 
in  religion,  and  a  comfortable  dying  in  the  Lord.  Those  who 
have  no  hope  for  themselves  nor  their  dead,  how  awful  their  sor- 
row !  I  feel  myself  very  weak.  I  dined  at  Mr.  Rogers's. 

Tuesday  31.  I  went  to  see  the  poor  orphans — to  weep  with  sis- 
ter Fonerdon's  children,  and  dear  Nt.lly  Owens,  her  daugh- 
ter also.  They  had  a  Nelly  Owens  baptised  for  the  dead  broiler 


296  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1797. 

anil  sister  Reed,  my  dear  nursing  friends  :  my  aged  friends  brought 
me  their  beneficence  and  tears. 

Wednesday,  November  1.  We  came  off  and  preached  at  the 
widow  Dorsey's  on  "  If  in  this  life  only  we  have  hope  in  Christ, 
we  are  of  all  men  most  miserable."  We  had  a  solemn  assembly. 
I  made  a  few  observations  on  the  hope  Christians  have  of  Christ 
only  in  this  life  ;  if  in  this  life  only  Christians  could  have  hope  in 
Christ,  they  would  be  most  miserable.  They  are  denied  the  sin- 
ful pleasures,  profits,  and  honours  of  the  world  ;  subject  to  great 
afflictions  and  persecutions  ;  often  deprived  of  life  in  ages  past  :  no 
mercy,  no  justice,  no  truth,  no  love  ;  lastly,  that  they  could  never 
be  borne  up  under  such  principles  and  persecutions  if  it  were  not 
for  the  hope  of  future  rewards  :  they  which  have  no  hope  in  this 
or  the  future  worid  in  Christ,  are  of  all  men  the  most  wretched 
and  miserable.  My  horse  is  a  little  ungovernable,  the  weather 
warm,  and  myself  unwell. 

Thursday  2.  I  did  not  preach,  but  exhorted  at  Shadrach  Tur- 
ner's :  here  are  five  children  and  a  mother  for  Christ,  and  for 
usefulness. 

Friday  3.  We  came  to  Georgetown.  I  felt  very  feeble  in  body, 
almost  ready  to  faint  before  we  reached  Col.  Bell's  :  I  was  glad 
through  my  weakness  to  be  excused  from  preaching  :  brother  Lee 
supplied  the  place.  I  visited  John  Long's  family  ;  I  saw  mother 
Moore  after  more  than  twenty  years — she  is  going  on  to  glory.  A 
son  of  brother  Long's  was  sick,  and  distressed  about  his  soul,  and 
resolved  to  seek  redeeming  grace.  We  must  needs  go  and  view 
the  famous  bridge — it  is  amazing  to  see  the  river  so  contracted 
that  a  stone  could  be  pitched  over  where  the  bridge  stands  :  this 
is  three  miles  above  Georgetown  :  from  the  bridge  upwards,  there 
is  a  good  road  cut  out  of  the  rocks.  The  rain  came  on,  and  we 
were  glad  we  could  find  Samuel  Adams's,  three  miles  from  the 
bridge  :  here  we  were  happily  sheltered  from  the  weather,  and 
comfortably  accommodated.  I  sent  for  brother  "Waters  and  his 
wife,  and  we  improved  the  evening  in  the  way  Christians  should; 
in  prayer,  singing,  reading  the  word,  and  exhortations. 

VIRGINIA. — Sunday  5.  We  rode  ten  miles  to  Alexandria,  and  had 
only  time  to  reach  town  when  the  rain  came  on  powerfully.  I 
made  a  feeble  discourse  on  Isaiah  xxxiii.  20.  I  ordained  Thomas 
Lyell  deacon 

Monday  6.  Came  out  of  town  late,  and  judged  it  best  to  call  at 
William  Bushley's.  We  had  a  storm  of  snow.  My  mind  is  dull 
and  my  body  languid  ;  my  only  hope  is  Christ  and  grace. 


?.]  HEV.   FIUNCIs  ASBI       - 


Tuesday  7.  We  thought  it  good,  as  the  weather 
our  course  southward  :   ive  fed  ut  Colchester,  at  tip-   i.«  w   l.iri. 
we  were  told  it  coct  eighty  thousand  dollars.    'I 

to  hasty  travellers.      We  dim-d  on  tin-  ro  i<l,  in  iin:  woods,  on  v\li  it 

we  brought  with  us.      We  <mt  to  Dumfries,  win  : 

sitting:   we  met  several  drunken  inou  in  the  i  have:. 

buch  sights  for  many  clays.    \Ve  sli-pi  at  Captain  Ward's  :   tln-y  ex- 

pected  us    the   evening   before.     I    ordained  brother    Ilopkn. 

deacon. 

Wednesday  8.     We  came   away  at  ei^ht  o'clock,  making  ti\»:lve 
miles  to  Stafford  court-house,  breakfasted  and  iVd,  and   then  di 
twenty-five  miles  to  the  widow  Dotnbry's,  where  we  arrived  about 
six  o'clock.     The  hills  were  very  bad  to  climb,  being  much  wa-.h- 
ed   and  broken  :   I   was    ready  to   be  cast  away,  or  overset. 
body  is  still  weak,  and  my  mind  greatly  affected. 

Thursday  9.  I  had  gloomy  feelings  last  night.  Hiding  in  the 
night  was  very  injurious.  I  feel  no  evil,  unless  something  like 
murmuring.  When  I  am  so  unable  to  travel  and  yet  go  on,  ; 
bably  I  do  more  than  God  or  man  requires  of  me  ;  but  the  will 
of  the  Lord  be  done  !  If  I  suffer  or  sin  in  this,  he  will  pardon  my 
weakness. 

Friday  10.    We  rested  at  the  widow  Bombry's  :   this  mother  in 
Israel  treated  us  with  every  necessary  mark  of  attention.     I  ha 
interview  with  sister  Forks   and  her  daughter.     I  found  them  still 
walking  in  the  narrow  way. 

Saturday  1  1.  We  rode  ten  miles  to  Port  Royal,  and  then  came  OQ 
nearly  twenty  miles  to  the  widow  Rouse's,  in  Essex,  where  we  were 
kindly   and   comfortably   entertained.      We   then   hastened    on   to 
Lersy  Cole's  ;    he  and  his  wife  were  gone  to  quarterly  meeting 
eight  miles  down   the  river  ;  but  a  pious  young  sister  and  he 
keeper  made  us  comfortable.     We  had  a  storm  of  wind  and  rain 
when   it   had  blown  over,  we   hasted    to  the  meeting-house.     I 
gave  a  short  sermon  on  "  No  man  speaking  by  the  Spirit  of  ' 
calleth  Jesus  accursed  ;"  and  that  "  No  man  can  say  JOHJ-  i-  I 
but  by  the  Holy  Ghost."     What  is  to   be  understood  by  calling 
Jesus  accursed  ?  —  To  put  him  wholly  out  of  the  question  ;  to  t 
him  from  being  any  thing  in  our  salvation  ;  and  to  say  all  Un- 
kind things  that  the  Jews  said  of  him.     We  had  to  ride  in 
to  the  widow  Humby's  ;  here  all  wa?  kindness  and  love.     \\Y 
joiced  to  see  our  much  esteemed  brethren,  Colo,  M'Kendree,  and 
Mead,  and  to  hear  of  a  great  and  gracious  work  of  God. 

VOL.  II.  38 


HfcV.   I-RAA'CIS   ASSURES  -JOURNAL.  JTV 

Monday  13.  We  rode  to  Pace's  chapel,  where  I  preached  on 
John  xiv.  C.  after  which  we  had  several  exhortations,  and  the  sa- 
crament. We  lodged  at  widow  Campbell's  :  we  have  been  fed  by 
the  widows  more  than  Elijah. 

Tuesday  14.  We  rode  to  Shackleford's  chapel,  and  held  meet- 
ing three  hours :  we  had  a  large  and  solemn  congregation.  I 
preached,  although  very  unwell,  on  1  Cor.  ii.  12.  In  the  month  of 
July  last,  the  Lord  visited  this  place  in  mercy,  and  it  is  judged  thirty 
souls  not  only  professed  to  be,  but  were  really  converted  to  God. 
In  speaking  to-day,  I  showed — Of  whom,  and  of  what  the  apostles 
xvrote  :  the  things  freely  given  them  to  know  as  apostles  and  Chris- 
tians—  redemption,  salvation  in  all  its  degrees — conviction  of  sin, 
repentance  for  sin,  faith,  justification,  regeneration,  sanctification, 
the  resurrection,  and  glorification — that  these  things  are  not  com- 
municated by  the  spirit  of  the  world,  but  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 
We  had  a  very  warm  day:  we  fasted  eight  hours,  and  held  meet- 
ing three,  and  then  rode  nearly  twenty-four  miles,  and  lodged 
at . 

Wednesday  15,  was  a  snowy  day,  and  very  cold  :  I  rode  seven 
miles,  cased  and  curtained  up  in  the  carriage.  I  kept  house  at  bro- 
ther Bellamy's  :  it  is  seven  years  since  I  was  here.  My  mind 
enjoys  peace,  but  my  body  is  languid.  I  had  a  severe  fever,  and 
found  it  time  to  rest.  A  society  of  nearly  forty  here  is  now  in- 
creased to  one  hundred,  and  it  is  hoped  that  nearly  five  hundred 
have  joined  this  year  in  Gloucester  circuit.  I  preached  at  Bel- 
lamy's chapel  on  Hebr.  iii.  12,  13.  it  was  an  exceedingly  cold  day, 
but  clear.  We  rode  ten  miles  to  John  Ellis's,  where  we  were 
comforted  with  kindness,  and  blessed  for  one  short  night.  We 
rose  early  to  go  on  our  way,  and,  behold,  who  should  meet  us  but 
Bishop  Coke,  with  a  borrowed  horse,  and  a  large  white  boy  riding 
behind  him  on  the  same  horse.  We  halted,  and  then  agreed  he 
should  have  brother  M'Kendree's  horse  ;  but  up  came  John  Ellis, 
and  took  the  Doctor  home,  and  brought  him  in  a  carriage  to  quar- 
terly meeting.  We  stood  on  our  course,  and  by  the  time  we  came 
to  Gloucester  ferry,  it  blew  a  storm  of  wind  and  rain  :  I  had  only 
to  turn  the  chair  back  to  the  wind  and  sit  wrapped  up.  After  two 
hours  we  crossed  the  river  and  rode  in  haste  to  John  Ellis's,  seven 
miles.  We  drank,  ate,  prayed,  and  came  on  our  way  :  the  day,  to 
one  in  my  state,  was  very  uncomfortable.  We  rode  thirty-two 
miles  this  day,  and  stopped  at  our  dear  brother  Taylor's,  in  James- 
City.  T.nere  are  two  very  good  meeting-houses  built  here  since 


RE7.   Fr 

I  visited  those  parts  ;  one  in  Jamo- 
Kent  county. 

Saturday  IS.  I  delivered  a  feeble  di-Tui:-  .    I 

observed  on  the  malice,  lor  some  real   or  -iipp^-rd   injury   done  . 
guile  to  hide  malice  until  :iri  »\>\>»\  'M  olTrr*.     // 

critcs — going  beyond    our  attainment-,    pmf, --.i^   i\lial  we  ,!o  not 
practise,  or  not   practising  what  we    pel'.--     MVMM  at    tin- 
cellences  or  liappiness  of  others  ;    r  — all   ti 

from  the   bad   state  of   the    heart  :     chirtly    |>i  ioY   and   «••!!  I 
liabes  ;  not  giving  theai  strong  food  or   medicines;  bales;  stran- 
gers to  malice  by  want  of  understand!!  1  not  ha\ 
for  guile  ;   strangers  to  hypocrisy ;    no  id.Ms  of  mw,  not  1m 
speech  to  speak  evil.    Dr.  Coke  preadird  on  Luke  xii.  1  ; 
where  your   treasure  is,  there  your  heart  is  al-  We  spent 
night  at  the  widow  Cowlr 

Monday  20.   We  rode  thirty-one  miles  to  brother  Moorings      I 
had  a  thought  never  more  to  cross  at  old  Jamrs-To\vn.     Hut   \\ 
had  a  remarkable  time  after  we   h.id  embarked  :    myself  and   Dr. 
Coke  crossing   in  a  skiff,  the  horses  and  carriage  came   in  a  1 
boat  ;    my   bible,   which   was  clothed  and  bound  up  in  a  hand!; 
chief,  was  accidentally  thrown  into   the  river,  but  the  bl.u-U   man 
snatched    it    up    uud.unag' -d.        The    weather    being  damp,    we 
rested. 

Tuesday  21.  I  wrote  a  small  epistle  to  the  official  members, 
Baltimore,  and    another  to  Philadelphia,   a-  also  a  ?hort  pathetic 
letter  to  my  parents.     We  have  rode  litile  less  than  four  hum! 
miles  in  twenty  days,  and  rested  one.    We  had  very  damp  weather 

Wednesday  22,  at  brother  Bellamy's. 

Thursday  23.  I  rode  about  thirty  miles  to  Mr.  BriggsV,  to  see 
how  the  preachers  would  be  accommodated,  and  where  the  cc 
rence  would  be  held  :   Mr.  Briggs  was  willing  to  take  eight  or  ten 
of  the  preachers,  and  gave  the  conference  the  offer  of  his  hall  to 
sit  in. 

Friday  24.  1  visited  my  old  friends,  and  wrote  to  Alexander  Ma- 
ther.    My  route,  which  I  oidy  guessed  at,  is  now   fixed  by   Nor- 
folk, Portsmouth,  Newbern,   Kingston,  Georgetown,  and  Clir,; 
ton.     Between  five  and  six   hundred  miles  in  little  more  th.m   . 
month  ;  sick  or  well,  living  or  dead,  my  appointment*  go  on. 

Saturday    25.     The    conference   began    their  sitting    at   Lane'- 
chapel      About  sixty   preachers   were  present:    nine  or  ten  had 
located;    and  four  or  five   were  tadded.     Sabbath 
were  spent  in  speaking  of  the  circuit',  and  for  - 


300  l;EV.  FIUSCl-J  AiBtRY'i  JOtKSAL.  [1797. 

Wednesday  29.  At  noon  the  conference  rose  ;  the  business  was 
conducted  with  despatch,  and  in  much  peace.  I  desired  the  advice 
of  the  conference  concerning  my  health  :  the  answer  was,  that  ! 
should  rest  until  the  session  of  the  conference  to  be  held  in  April, 
in  Virginia. 

Thursday  30.  I  travelled  under  much  weakness  of  body  to 
Stith  Parham's,  at  the  High-hill  store. 

Friday,  December  1.  I  collected  the  small  remains  of  strength  I 
had,  to  read,  and  hear  read  my  manuscript  journal.  It  was  writ- 
ten in  such  haste  that  it  was  very  incorrect.  I  visited  Robert 
Jones's  family,  and  on 

Sunday  3,  we  had  a  family  meeting  :  brother  M'Kendree 
preached  on  faith,  hope,  and  charity  :  on  faith  to  me,  as  I  felt  the 
need  of  its  exercise. 

Monday  4.  We  slopped  one  night  at  Matthew  Davis's  ;  and  the 
next  at  Ira  Ellis's.  Our  time  was  taken  up  in  journalizing  ;  I 
came  off  twenty-five  miles  to  Edward  Drumgold's  :  once  or  twice 
I  felt  on  my  way  thither  as  if  the  blood  would  rise  into  my  mouth. 
I  resolved  to  give  up  travelling  this  winter.  Dr.  Sims  bled  me  ;  and 
there  appeared  an  inflammatory  buff  on  the  top.  Oh!  to  rest — to 
be  idle  and  dependant — is  painful  :  but  if  this  is  to  make  me  per- 
fect, the  will  of  the  Lord  be  done !  I  sent  my  papers  to  brother 
Lee,  who  proceeds  to  Charleston  ;  also  my  plan  and  directions  how 
to  station  the  preachers,  to  brother  Jackson.  I  believed  that  my 
going  to  Charleston  this  season,  would  end  my  life  ;  yet,  could  I 
be  persuaded  it  was  the  will  of  the  Lord,  I  would  go  and  preach. 
I  cannot  bear  the  fatigue  of  riding  thirty  miles  ia  a  day.  I  am 
much  pressed  to  make  my  will,  lest  I  should  be  surprised  by  death  ; 
my  mind  is  greatly  calmed  and  centred  in  God.  I  have  well  con- 
sidered all  the  solemnities  of  death. 

Saturday  9,  and  Sunday  10.  We  sat  melancholy  in  the  house — 
dumb  Sabbaths !  Dr.  Sims  read  me  Mr.  Wesley's  sermon  upon 
the  depth  of  the  riches  of  the  wisdom  and  of  the  knowledge  of  God. 

Monday  11.  I  was  led  to  meditate  on  the  same  subject:  "By 
whom  shall  Jacob  rise?"  1.  Jacob,  the  church.  2.  Rise  to  spiri- 
tual glory.  3.  By  whom  Jacob  bath  risen.  4.  By  whom  the 
Church  shall  rise — it  is  a  prophetic  character  of  the  Church.  Ja- 
cob— see  that  man  loved  by  his  mother,  hated  by  his  brethren  after 
the  flesh,  guarded  against  unlawful  marriages,  yet  had  two  wives, 
representing  the  Jewish  and  Gentile  state  of  the  Church.  See  his 
afflictions  and  persecutions  ;  the  danger  of  being  extinct  in  bis  fami- 
ly ;  yet  preserved,  his  children,  his  piety,  his  prayers.  A  type  of 


iT'  •  • AL. 

Christ,  and  his  <  'liurch.     Jacob  n  ••,  m'-reaso  in  children,  in 

faith,  in  love,  in  mercy,  in  jn-ticp,  in  (ruth,   in  , 
gilt-,  in  f'iii ih I'u I  watchmen.      By  "hum  li.ilh  (lie  «  hnn  1 
Abel,  hy  Knoch,  by  NToih,  by  Abraham    I  :    ses 

and  Aaron,  Joshua,  and  tlie  elders  that  .;ut  I  oel, 

by  Ruth,  by  Obadiah,  servant   of  A!,  ik   1.;.  |,\   J, 

Jothan,  Hexekiah,  and  hi-  grandson  Jo-iah  ;   and  all  tkr  prophets  ; 
by  the  great  wrestling  Jacob  ;  by  Jesus  and  lr  hl'nl 

ministers  in  all  ages,  nations,  and  son  want  knowledge  to 

know,  and  time   to  mention  their  names.     liy   whom  shall  Jacob 
rise?     God   will  pour  out  his  Spirit  in  (he  l,i-t 
and  people,  old  men  and  maidens,  young  men  and  children  ;  minis- 
ters and  members  of  his  Church,  nn^istrates  at. 
and  guardians.     lie  is  small  :   see  all  the  liitle  (lock,  ihe  holy  -H-cd. 
All  the  weaknesses,  all  the  apostates  and  backsliders,  all  t: 
of  justice,  mercy,  truth,  and  true  religion  ;  tin •-<•  -hall  be  replaced 
with  opposite  characters  and  graces  ,    all  [he  »ai  ,.! 'mini- 

and    virtues  shall  be  tilled   up,   and   more  abundantly  Mijiplird  in 
spiritual  and  heavenly  glory.     When  ;i!l  s!i  :ll  know  the  Lord,  and 
be  taught  of  the  Lord,  and  all  be  righteous   and  the  knowledge  of 
the  Lord  shall  cover  the  earth,  as   the  water  doth   all  the  deep 
places  of  the  earth   and  seas.     Cut  by  whom  .-hall  Jarob  i  i-e  ?     I 
answer,  by  the  wisdom,  power,  mercy,  truth,  love,  and  holine- 
God,  displayed  in  a  glorious   Gospel.     1  am  sure  Jacob  shall  : 
by  the  merit,  righteousness,  and  intercession  of  J  .1 

answer  again,  by  the  operations  of  the  eternal  Spirit  <>i 
convincing,  converting,  and  sanctifying  influences,  mat 
the  calling  and  qualifying  ministers  for  the  work  ;   that  th. 
of  ministers  may  go   forth;  and  millions  of  souls  may  be  broi 
home  by  their  instrumentality. 

Tuesday  U.  Whilst  taking  a  sober,  contemplative  ride  forthi 
hours,  I  conversed  sweetly  with  God  ;  my   mind  and  body  were 
refreshed  with  a  clear  and  cold  day.     I  read  a  few  chaptor-  in  the 
book  of  God.     In  the  evening  Mr.  James  Green  Jlartin  r 
receive  deacon's  orders  ;  he  brought  letters  of  consolation  from 
Richard  Whatcoat  and  Jesse  Lee.     Also  the  wishes  of  my  dear 
brethren  and  sisters  that  waited  to  see  rn*1. 

Wednesday  13.   I  felt  a  little  better;   I  rode  out,  but  it  was  not 
as  comfortable  a  day  as  yesterday.      The  small.  or  ap- 

plication to  study  is  too  cf'.at  lor  me.      The  doctor  prm 
complaint  to  be  debility.      I  have  taken  cider  with 
and  fever  powders,  and  must  take  more  of  the  b 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL  [1797. 

Thursday  14.  My  mind  is  grieved  with  the  old  sore  in  Virginia ; 
but  I  must  bear  it  patiently.  One  of  our  sisters  asked  me  if  we 
would  not  rebaptise  persons  that  desired  it.  This  put  me  to  think- 
ing and  revolving  the  subject  in  my  mind.  I  considered  that  there 
vvas  neither  precept  nor  example  in  holy  writ  to  justify  our  re- 
baptising  one  who  had  been  baptised  in  the  Dame  and  form  which 
Christ  commanded  in  Matt,  xxviii.  19. 

Friday  15.  Was  my  well  day;  I  took  some  of  the  powders, 
had  good  nursing,  and  got  rest.  I  only  read  the  Bible  and  the 
Form  of  Discipline.  1  write,  ride,  and  talk  a  little  with  the  wo- 
men, children,  and  Africans.  My  thoughts  were  led  to  meditate 
upon  Timothy  iv.  16.  "  Take  heed  unto  thyself,  and  unto  thy  doc- 
trine ;  continue  in  them,  for  in  doing  this  thou  shalt  both  save  thy- 
self and  them  that  hear  thee.r> 

I.  "  Take  heed  to  thyself," — in  religion,  as  in  nature,  self-pre- 
servation is  one  of  the  first  laws.     Take  heed  that  thy  experience 
in  religion  and  doctrine   be  sound  ;  that   thou  hast  a  good    heart, 
and    a  good    head,   and   a   good    life,    and   a    good    conversation, 
ministerial  diligence  and  fidelity,  in  every  part  of  Christian   and 
pastoral  duty.     Saved  already  by  grace,  thou  shalt  be  preserved 
frcm  all  the  snares  set  for  thy  feet,  and  not  backslide  as  a  Christian 
minister,  but  feel  persevering,  sanctifying,  glorifying,  and  crown- 
ing grace. 

II.  Thou  shalt  "  save  them  that  hear  thee,"  from  lukewarm- 
ness  and  backsliding  ;  legality  on  the  one  hand,  and  making  void  the 
law  through  faith  on  the  other  ;  that  they  profess  and  possess,  lire 
and  walk  as  it  becometh  the  Gospel  of  Christ. 

III.  "  Continue  in  them  ;"  in  all  the  doctrines,  ordinances,  and 
duties  of  the  Gospel ;  the  same  Gospel,  the  same  ordinances,  the 
same  duties  which  are  designed  to  complete  the  work  in  the  souls 
of  ministers  as  Christians,  are  as  needful  to  continue  the  work  of 
grace  as  to  begin  it ;  and  not  only  continue,  but  to  finish  and  bring 
on  the  headstone  with  shouting;. 

D 

Saturday  16.  I  employed  myself  as  much  as  my  health  would 
admit,  in  reading  the  Bible  and  writing  such  observations  thereon 
as  were  suggested  to  my  mind. 

Sunday  17.  I  had  to  keep  house  ;  O  dumb  day!  I  am  better, 
yet  it  is  not  safe  for  me  to  go  out  such  very  cold  weather.  I  read 
the  Word  of  God  (for  my  comfort)  and  preached. 

Monday  18.  Very  little  done  ;  I  wrote  to  Dr.  Coke,  advising 
against  the  British  brethren  going  to  law  with  the  contentions 
party  about  their  houses. 


i  ,U7.j  .    JKA.V 

Tuesday  19.     I  aru  in  a  more  comf.nUble  Mate  of  body  and  mind," 
for  which  1  feel  thankful  :    I  am  Liking  the  h.irk. 

Wednesday  20.     I  felt  much  amended  \>\  the  bark  an<l   r<-t.      It 
appears  to  have  been  the  mount  Moriah  wln-H-   Abraham   revived 
to  offer  up  his  Isaac,  on  which  the  temple  of  God   was    built   up- 
wards of  eight  hundred  year-  thereafter,  ;.nd   hefon-    ti.r    off-  , 
of  Christ,  nearly  or  upon  the  same  spot,  eiiiht  hundred  and  seventy- 
two  :   the  types  and  prophecies  are   not   small    ar^ummts   for  tlu 
truth  of  the  Scriptures  ;    for  fore-knowledge  doth   not   liolun-;  to 
man  ;  he  cannot  tell,  only  by  probable  conjectures,  any  thin:;  that 
will  befall  himself,  unless  revealed  by  the  '•pint  of prophec* 
prophecy  made   by   the  man   of   (iod,    1  Km--   \\\\.  ;  fuliiHc-! 
Josiali,  J  Kings  xxiii. :   between  the  prophecy  and  fultiluir-nt  a  pro- 
bable space  of  time  of  about  three  hundred  and  fifty    ', .  -jin- 
pletely  accomplished  in  every  punctilio,  and   the    prophet 
and  sleeping  ashes  taken  notice   of,   the   proplu  i '-   m<  m.'>rv   I. 
who  died  a  witness  to  what  he  said,  to  seal  (he  truth,  and  !,, 
ing  bones  lying   there   on   the  spot  :   uhat  uian,  unf. night  by  God, 
who  knoweth  all  things,  could  COOM  and  foretell  .-mli  «-\.-i,i.  uhich 
should  so  surely  come  to  pa>«,  without  being  taught  and 
God? 

Thursday  21.    Perhaps  we  may  call  this  one  of  the  coldest  d.i\<< 
of  this  winter  ;  I  slept  under  two  double-milled  blanket.-,  b<  • 
coverlids  and  sheets,  but  could  not  keep  warm.     This  is  the  fifth 
season  of  cold  weather  vve  have  had  in  Virginia  since  the   first  of 
November  :   we  have  had  snow,  but  tin?   i-  gone   in   a  day  ;   tin- 
excepted,  it  is  cold  enough  for  the  north.     Str.mge  life  for  me — to 
sit  and  burn  myself  by  the  lire,  and  to  be  nursed.     I  feel  a  $•:. 
return  of  health.     I  have  been  reading  David's  Psalms  in  Hebrew, 
and  the  book  of  Genesis  in  the  English    Hil>!e.     I   could   not   but 
admire  the  provision  made  for  the  heathen  nation-,  civil  and   bar- 
barous, by  Abraham's  second  marriage,  and  by  Ishmael  nt«  : 
posterity  :  this  attended  to  according  to  their  name*,  n-   ti  i •••  ••!  in 
the  Universal  History,  we  should  not  wondering  ask.   Where   did 
this  or  that  nation  of  people  como  from  1  either   Indians   or   A 
cans.    I  cannot  preach  now,  only  to  the  family,  and  when 
ger  cometh  in. 

Friday  2'J.  I  rose  in  the  morning  in  some  fear  lest  1  had  or  should 
say  too  much  on  slavery.     I  made  choice  of  a  vrr--\   1  Kinc-  xsii. 
16.     "  And  the  king  said  unto  him,  How  many  tirm  -  sKall  1  adjur  • 
thce  that  thou  tell  me  nothing  but  that  which  is  true  in  tin-  : 
the  Lord"  or  Jehovah.     I  have  found  relief  by  ! 


,iOi  liEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1798. 

strength,  in  feeling,  in  breath,  and  in  my  breast,  and  have  a  hope 
of  being  raised  up  once  more. 

Saturday  23.  Extremely  cold.  I  am  closely  confined  in  my 
room,  but  could  neither  read  nor  write. 

Sunday  24.  It  is  exceedingly  cold  still.  The  pain  in  my  breast 
is  returned  ;  I  fear  it  is  immoveabty  fixed  more  or  less  until  death. 
Lord,  thy  will  be  done  !  Wearisome  days  are  appointed  for  me. 
Brother  Drumgold  came  in  the  evening  of  Christmas  day  :  1  am 
cheered  with  company  and  with  Christ  also.  1  feel  as  if  the 
coming  year  would  be  marked  with  displays  of  divine  power  upon 
the  souls  of  men  to  whoever  may  live  to  see  it. 

Tuesday  26.  We  had  open  weather  and  rain.  I  am  so  much 
belter  in  health  that  confinement  is  as  trying  to  me  as  hard  labour. 
I  hope,  if  it  pleaseth  my  God,  I  shall  have  health  to  be  of  some 
service  to  mankind  yet.  Ah  !  what  is  life  and  all  this  dull  round, 
but  for  God  and  souls  ! 

Wednesday  27.  A  falling  of  snow — very  cold.  1  have  taken  the 
bark  ;  this  is  the  ninth  day,  and  I  am  strengthened  ;  but  the  wine 
in  the  smallest  portions  makes  me  feverish,  and  it  is  astringent. 
I  feel  need  of  great  patience,  prayer,  and  faith. 

Thursday  28.  We  had  hard  frost  and  snow.  I  am  thankful  it 
is  rest  time  with  the  poor  blacks,  or  many  might  be  frozen  to 
death.  Ungrateful  man  that  I  am,  how  am  I  favoured  above 
millions ! 

Friday  29.  Extremely  cold.  Mrs.  Selby  desired  to  see  me,  bad 
riding  as  it  was  through  the  snow  and  ice.  I  am  mending.  I 
prayed  for  health,  and  had  faith  to  believe  I  should  recover.  I 
thought  if  God  would  spare  me  I  was  willing  to  labour  and  suffer 
out  my  days  ;  but  the  thoughts  of  being  useless  is  most  distressing 
to  an  active,  benevolent  mind. 

Saturday  29.  I  felt  weakness  of  body  and  dejection  of  mind,  and 
sometimes  I  am  brought  to  think  of  requesting,  as  Elijah  and  Jonah 
ditl,  that  I  may  die.  I  cannot  pray  in  the  family  without  injury, 
wherefore  should  I  request  to  live  ?  Oh !  my  God,  thy  will  be 
done  in  all  things— mine  in  nothing,  but  as  it  pleaseth  thee  ! 

Sunday  30.  We  had  a  meeting  at  my  lodging. 

Monday,  January  1,  1798.  Several  local  brethren  were  present 
-Drumgold,  Lane,  Moore,  Smith,  and  Phillips.  The  brethren 
were  lively  in  religion.  I  am  now  taking  an  extraordinary  diet — 
drink  made  of  one  quart  of  hard  cider,  one  hundred  nails,  a  hand- 
ful of  black  snakeroot,  one  handful  of  fennel  seed,  and  one  handful 
of  wormwood,  boiled  from  a  quart  to  a  pint,  taking  one  wine  glass 


1798.]  ,.  FRAN  i  AL. 

full  every  morning  for  nim:  m  ten  day*,  UMH-  no  butter,  << 
or  meat  ;  it  will   make   the  stomach   very  sick,  ;m<!  in  a  few  . 
purge  the  patient  \vcll.     I  was  better  in  my  feelings  linn   I    I 
been  since  I  have  been  taken  ill ;  but  1  must  tlce  convei-.ili.m,  grief, 
and  care,  with  deep  and  close  thinking  and  compo.-ition.      I  in.. 
small  meditation  on  being  free   from  the  ceremonial  law.     I'ol . 
my,  slavery,  and  sucli  like,    were   never  commanded  under  this 
dispensation,  but  only  tolerated  ;  and  accompanied  by  strict  mi 
lions  to  prevent  men  from  running  to  greater  length-  n.  ;!n  U  prac- 
tices, as   maybe  seen  in  Exodus  xxi.   Leviticus  xxv.   1 'enter 
my  xxiv.     Polygamy  was  allowed  to  prevent  general  uhoredom. 
"ervitude  was  regulated  to  prevent  slavery  and  oppres.-iun,  death, 
and   loss  of  limbs.     If  any  had    a>ked  the   l.<>r.l   CM,  th.-  MI!'|I. 
:-davcry,  as  on  polygamy,  he  must  have  said,  I\lr-  :i  ni.ni, 

fered  this,  a  less  evil,  to  prevent  a  greater  ;  but  it  was  nut  so  from 
the  beginning  of  the  creation  :  it  is  the  fall  which  hath  done,  tin-, 
not  a  holy  God.  It  is  man's  work,  of  two  evils,  to  choose  tin- 
least.  But  God  is  not  tempted  of  us  to  evil,  neither  temptrth  he 
;uiy  man.  Christians,  of  two  evils,  should  not  choose  ur  use  either 
if  they  would  be  like  God. 

Tuesday  ~.   Now  1   am  brought  to  the  second   day  of  the  new 
year— the  last  hath   been  a  year  of  great  ailliclion.     I   may  1. 
travelled  about  three  thousand  miles,  and  have  been  confined  with 
iflliction  and  weakness  six  months,   adding  the  single  d.vys   I  h 
stopped,  as  well  as  weeks.     In  April  last  1  had  very  lilt 
tion  of  living  until  this  day.     I  am  now  under  the  exercise  In  de.- 
>ire  life,   that  I  may  see  the  connexion  better  organi/ed,  ami 
more  personally  useful. 

Wednesday  3.  This  is  a  cloudy  clay  ;  it  is  probably  snowing 
north  or  west.  I  have  a  better  appetite  for  food  :  my  mind  i-. 
greatly  agitated  at  times  ;  but  patience  shall  have  its  perfect  wui!.. 
(  pray,  and  sometimes  I  wind  and  pick  a  little  culton,  and  read  and 
write  about  one  hour  in  the  day  ;  but  Chri-t  i-  all  !  I  cannot 
inactive  :  the  hardest  work  1  have  to  do,  is  to  do  nothing. 

Thursday  4.  A  proper  day  for  rain  !  Last  evening  I  had  a  vt 
high  fever  ;  but  I  am  as  usual   to-day.     I  read  my    I'-ilde,  an.! 
lected  those   texts    which  struck  my   mind,  that  if  ever  I  should 
preach  again  I   may   use.     Joseph   said,   I   fear  God; 
>aid,he  could  not  oppress  the  people  as  other  governors  had  d*. 
because  of  the  fear  of  God.    Fairy  God t  in  seekers,  1:1  brl 
and  in  those  who  are  sanctified  :  and  the  motives   to  the  fe.u 
•  od.    First,  He  is  holy  ;  Secondly,  He  is  wise  ;  Thirdly. 

VOL.  II. 


i-ilAKClS  A&BCRV'S  JOVUNAL.  [I79G, 

fourthly,  He  is  powerful : — If  holy,  be  hath  no  sin  ;  if  wise,  he 
knoweth  when  we  sin;  if  he  is  just,  he  must  punish  sin  ;  and  he 
hath  power  to  punish  it: — a  man  may  be  wise,  but  not  all-wise;  a 
man  may  be  just,  but  not  infinite  injustice  :  thus  man  may  be  holy, 
but  not  holy  as  God  :  man  may  be  wanting  in  wisdom,  in  power,  in 
holiness,  and  in  justice.  In  some  cases  it  may  not  be  man's  duly 
to  punish,  nor  in  his  power — not  so  with  Jehovah.  Who  will  not 
fear  him  according  to  his  attributes,  and  according  to  his  word  of 
threatened  vengeance? 

Friday  5.  The  rain  is  over  ;  the  clouds  scattered  and  gone  ; 
and  nature  smileth  again.  I  only  mourn  the  oppression  I  cannot 
remove. 

Saturday  6.  We  have  open  and  pleasant  weather.  It  may  be 
that  many  have  overlooked  the  prophecies  of  Jacob  in  Genesis 
xlix.  We  may  look  for  the  fulfilment  nearly  fourteen  hundred 
years  after,  in  the  coming  of  Christ ;  and  about  one  thousand  years 
after,  we  shall  see  in  Jeremiah,  and  Daniel,  what  Jacob  farther  re- 
ferred to.  It  appears  that  it  was  the  wish  of  Jacob,  that  his  young- 
est but  one,  Joseph,  should  have  the  birthright,  which  Reuben,  his 
first-born,  had  lost  by  his  unnatural  incest  in  defiling  his  father's 
bed.  Simeon  and  Levi — we  cannot  tell  whether  they  had  a  bless- 
ing or  a  curse  for  their  zeal  against  folly  in  Israel ;  they  punished 
whoredom  with  cruel  murder,  and  yet  we  see  how  Levi's  zeal 
wrought  in  the  case  of  Cozbi :  and  the  Lord  confirmed  the  priest- 
hood by  special  grant  to  him.  Joseph's  prophecy  concerning  the 
Israelites'  exodus  from  Egypt  was  not  fulfilled  for  upwards  of  three 
hundred  years  thereafter.  It  seemeth  that  Jacob  wished  (but  Je- 
hovah willed  not)  that  Joseph,  and  not  Judah,  should  be  the  ruler, 
and  from  him  should  come  the  Shepherd,  the  Stone  of  Israel,  tht 
promised  Messiah  :  see  this  1  Chron.  v. 

Sabbath  7.  My  mind  is  serene  and  happy.  I  was  comforted  in 
seeing  one  of  the  travelling  preachers.  The  physic  I  have  been 
taking  operateth  well.  O  that  I  may  not  flatter  or  elate  myself! 
I  can  only  promise  to  be  more  faithful  if  I  have  more  grace. 

Monday  8.  I  wrote  a  long  letter  to  John  Dickens  upon  the  man- 
ner of  expediting  his  books  to  the  distant  parts,  viz.  the  Journals, 
Sermons,  Saints'  Rests,  Patterns,  Hymn-Books  ;  and  that  the  Maga- 
zine should  be  our  grand  circulating  medium  ;  only  let  us  have 
more  American  Lives  and  Letters. 

Tuesday  9.  The  weather  is  temperate  :  my  mind  is  much 
pained.  Oh!  to  be  dependant  on  slave-holders  is  in  part  to  be  a 
slave,  and  I  was  free  born.  I  am  brought  to  conclude  that  slavery 


''•J 

will  exist  in   Vir;n,i.i  J-M  h.ip-  f"i  ,      icnt 

sense  of  religion  nor  of  liberty  to  de  : 

Presbyterians,  in  the  highest  lli^lil-  of  raptnro:.- 

tain  ;iud  defend  it.      I  judge  in  alt*  i  .'    will  In:  >-o  tl.      \ 

men  and  free  mm  will  not  live  among  >l.iv«  -li<-'.  .»  to 

new  lands  :  they  only  who  are  concerned  in,  and  dq 

them  will  stay  in  old  Virginia. 

Wednesday  10.   I  h.i\<   -»rnc  peace  and  some  pain  of 

Thursday  11.  My  mind  is  exceedingly  agitated  on   my  pujuhar 
situation  :   I  feel  each  day,  like  a  day  or  year  to  me,  a<  il  i.-  well  or 
ill  employed.     Lbenezer  academy  is  under  poor  regulations  ; 
what  is  more   than  all,  some  gentlemen  of  L>runswi<k  i  '-jur, 
the  confidence  and   want  of  propriety  to  wish  to  wro.st  it  wholly 
out   of   our  hands,  after   we   had  colK  unirli   m< 

build  it. 

Friday  12.  My  mind  still  in  pain.      I    read  a  •  liapter  each  day. 
and  take  down  those  verses  that  appear  to  me  tl  -dec;. 

which  I  have  never  used  before  in  preaching;  thr\\ 
i:  ever  I  should  serve  the  sanctuary  again.     I  have  read   ) 
and  Young. 

Saturday  13.   I  finished  three  feeble  letter*,  to  Nti- 
Ilenry  Willis,  and  John  Harper.     I   cannot   read  or  write   1 
together.     I  wind  broaches  of  cotton  for  diversion,  and  recreation  ; 
I  will  not  be  idle.     The  class  met  at  my  lodging  ;  and  I  ventured 
5o  give  a  small  exhortation  and  a  prayer. 

Sunday  M.  I  am  still  confined  ;   I  must  try  riurtu-  uiitar,  kill  or 
C'ire.     There  is  preaching  at  the  chapel,  a  mile  and  a  ! 
but  the  weather  is  such  that  I  cannot  go  with  sal  i'hc  invete- 

racy of  my  fever  was  such,  that  on  Monday   13  I  was  fnllv 
solved  to  take  three  grains  of  tartar  emetic,  which  operated  pow- 
erfully and  brought  off  a  proper  portion  of  bile  :  in  tin*  I  1 
for  a  cure.     I  must  commend  the  old  practice  after  all  ;  no  an'i- 
billious  pill  will  answer  as  well  in  my  case  and  many  oil. 

Tuesday  16.  1  read  a  letter  and  wrote  a  letter. 

Wednesday  17.   I  am  weak  in  body,  but  some  bettor  :   1  read, 
wrote,  and  wrought  in  winding  cotton,  as  I  could  .not  be  idle 
wholly  inactive. 

Thursday  18.  1  went  from  the  place  where  I  ha 
weeks,   and   had  received   every  mark  of  affection,   to   bro 
Drumgoold's,  ten  railes.     1  felt  at  home  here  also. 

Friday  10.  My  fever  wa?  liirht  last  ni^ht  ;  but  thi-  d;<v 
comfortablr 


RKV.   FJUNCIS  ASBl'IlY  S  JOURNAL.  [179G, 

Saturday  20.  Very  unwell.  I  ain  strangely  brought  down  ;  Lord, 
let  me  suffer  with  patience  ;  thy  will  be  done  !  I  could  not  do  any 
thing  at  my  books  ;  but  that  I  might  not  be  wholly  idle,  I  wound 
cotton  broaches  among  the  children. 

Sunday  21.  I  sat  at  home  reading  a  little.  Monday,  I  am  better  ; 
my  fever  is  greatly  broken.  1  can  only  write,  and  meditate  about 
an  hour  in  a  day.  I  must  have  some  exercise,  if  it  is  only  wo- 
men's work. 

Tuesday  22.  We  had  news  from  the  assembly,  that  the  Ame- 
rican ambassadors  were  rejected  at  Paris.  A  report  prevails  that 
the  French  were  about  to  invade  England  with  one  hundred  and 
fifty  thousand  men.  The  British  can  raise  two  hundred  thousand 
militia,  and  two  hundred  thousand  regulars  ;  there  may  yet  be 
most  desperate  times — worse  than  in  Julius  Cesar's  day.  My 
mind  is  in  peace.  We  have  winterly  weather  :  more  snow  after 
much  rain  this  day  :  thank  God  I  have  where  to  lay  my  head,  a 
little  reading  and  winding  of  cotton  that  I  may  not  be  quite  idle. 

Wednesday  23.  Nothing  of  moment  except  a  few  thoughts  for 
Ebenezer  school. 

Thursday  24.  I  employed  myself  in  winding  cotton ;  I  cannot 
think  long,  read,  or  write.  Rebecca  Drumgoold  reads  for  me  out 
of  Watts,  Alleine,  and  Baxter's  Works.  1  am  much  tried :  the 
weather  is  so  cold  that  I  must  keep  in  the  house. 

Friday  25.  Was  a  gloomy  morning  to  me  :  nothing  but  the 
thoughts  of  death  agitated  my  mind.  It  oppresses  my  heart  to 
think  that  I  live  upon  others  and  am  useless,  and  that  I  ma}' 
die  by  inches. 

Sunday  27.  A  solitary  day  to  me,  neither  preaching,  reading, 
writing,  nor  conversing. 

Monday  28.  1  was  employed  in  revising  my  journal.  I  am  like 
Mr.  Whitefield,  who  being  presented  with  one  of  his  extempore 
sermons  taken  in  short  hand,  could  not  bear  to  see  his  own  face.  I 
doubt  whether  my  journals  yet  remaining  will  appear  until  after  my 
death ;  I  could  send  them  to  England  and  get  a  price  for  them  ;  but 
money  is  not  my  object. 

Tuesday  29.  J  was  employed  in  explaining  my  manuscript;  but 
am  afraid  of  intense  application. 

Wednesday  30.  Still  engaged  in  revising  my  journal. 

Thursday  31.  I  rode  to  Owen's,  seven  miles,  and  heard  brother 

Whatcoat  on  the  "  end  of  the  commandment."     I  had  been  kept 

back  so  long  that  I  was  constrained  to   spend  about  forty  minutes 

in  glossing  on  the  epistle  to  the  angel  of  the  church  of  Ephesus  ; 


•o.]  .  ; 


1   then   commented   on  what  law  I'aul  uw  alluded  to  in  I 

Tim.  i 

Monday  1.   I  took  four  grains  of  tartar  emetic,  and  had   i 
Litter  return. 

Tue-il.iy  "..    My  fever   was  very  light  last  night.      I   recei\ 
most  loving  letter  from  the  (.'Jnrh-sfoti  ronlcn-ncc  ;   there  is  great 
peace  and  good  prospects  there.     I  hope  to  he  aide  to  move  next 
week.     I  have  well  considered  my  journal  —  it  is  inelc'j  ••(  it 

conveys  much  information  of  the  state  of  religion  and  country. 
is  well  suited  to  common  readers  ;   the  wise  need  it  not.     1  have  a 
desire  that  my  journals  should  he  pubh-hed,  at  I>  r  my  d< 

if  not  hefore.  I  make  no  doubt  hut  other--  h.ive  laboured:  hut  in 
England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  .tiul  those  kingdoms  which  have  been 
civilized  and  improved  one  thousand  years,  and  whn:h  are.  under 
such  improvements,  no  ministnrs  could  have  M///<.r/'/  in  the 
and  in  those  countries,  as  in  America,  the  mo^t  ancient  parts  of 
which  have  not  been  settled  two  hundred  years.  Some  parts  not 
forty,  others  not  thirty,  twenty,  nor  ten,  and  some  not  five  year-. 
I  have  frequently  skimmed  along  the  frontiers,  for  four  and  I'm- 
hundred  miles,  from  Kentucky  to  Green  Brier,  on  the  very  edge  of 
the  wilderness  ;  and  thence  along  Tigers  Valley,  to  (lark-burgh  on 
the  Ohio.  These  places,  if  not  the  haun  e  men,  yet 

abound  with   wild  beasts.     I  am  only  known  by  name  to  tnair, 
our  people,  and  some  of  our  local  preachers  ;  and  unless  the  pc 
were  all  together,  they  could  not  tell  what  I  have  had  to  cope  with. 
I  make  no  doubt  the  Methodists  are,  and  will  be,  a  numerous,  and 
wealthy  people,  and  their  preachers   who  follow  us  will  not  know 
our  struggles  but  by  comparing  the  present  improved  state  of  the 
country  with  what  it  was  in  our  days,  as  exhibited  in  my  journal 
and  other  records  of  that  day. 

Wednesday  Li.  Kain  and  snow  ;   lam  a   poor  prisoner.     Thi: 
day  7.   We  made  a  visit  to  Matthew  M\  :  .aid  returned. 

Friday  8.  'It  is  very  cold   weather:    I  was  glad   to    keep  close 
occupied  in  reviewing  my  journal,  and  writing  a  few  letteis 
is  a  sickly  time. 

Sabbath   10.   I  did  not  preach  —  I  cannot  attend  those  n, 
houses,  they  are  only  calculated  for   summer,   or  <:  'ith.      I 

have,  hopes  <>['  being  useful  once  more.      My  mind  at  turn  -  i-  under 
strong  temptations  :   I   cannot  bear  confinement.  -  hath 

told  some  persons  that  <he  i<  convinced,  by  my  i:  th  'i  -1  <•• 

is  -infill.     1  would  say    i!  BO,  in  <>ve  heavm  with  v.-ur  i 


KI  ftEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL,  [ 

earth  with  your  counsels  and  solicitations  ;  and  never  rest  till  sla- 
very is  expelled  from  the  plantation. 

Monday  11.  I  had  appointed  to  meet  the  trustees  of  Ebenezer 
academy,  at  brother  Holb's,  on  the  north  side  of  the  Meherrin. 
After  some  conversation  they  willingly  agreed  to  address  the  con- 
ference in  behalf  of  Ebenezer  academy  for  an  annual  subscription, 
to  make  provision  for  a  man  at  about  one  hundred  pounds  a  year, 
tvho  shall  keep  an  English  school  under  our  rules,  with  the  worship 
and  the  word  of  God. 

Tuesday  12.  I  rode  to  brother  Pelham's  ;  here  I  was  at  home. 
I  spent  my  time  with  the  women  and  children,  in  winding  cotton, 
and  hearing  them  read.  My  soul  was  much  blessed. 

Thursday  14.  The  weather  is  cool  and  changeable.  By  letters 
from  the  north  I  find  that  the  book-interest  is  upon  a  good  footing, 
the  fund-interest  well  secured,  and  great  peace  reigns  amongst  the 
preachers. 

Friday  15.  There  fell  a  heavy  snow  from  six  to  nine  and  twelve 
inches  deep.  I  had  to  keep  house.  I  had  but  little  to  say  but  what 
would  call  for  weeping,  lamentations,  and  wo.  I  was  a  little  recre- 
ated by  hearing  Betsy  and  Nancy  Pelham  read  Doddridge's  Sermons 
to  Young  People. 

Saturday  16,  and  Sabbath  17.  Clear,  but  cold,  and  much  snow. 
When  I  get  sick  and  dispirited,  I  think,  was  I  not  a  bishop,  and 
required  by  duty,  and  necessity,  and  conscience,  to  do  the  best  I  can, 
I  would  rather  go  into  some  line  of  business  to  get  my  own  living, 
and  not  lounge  about.  I  feel  for  those  who  have  had  to  groan  out 
a  wretched  life  dependant  on  others — as  Peddicord,  Gill,  Tunnell, 
and  others  whose  names  I  do  not  now  recollect ;  but  their  names 
are  written  in  the  book  of  life,  and  their  souls  are  in  the  glory  of 
God.  I  reflected  with  pain,  that  we  had  never  reprinted,  in  Ame- 
rica, the  life,  labours,  travels,  and  sufferings  of  that  great  man  of 
God,  David  Brainard,  of  gracious  memory  ;  it  would  be  a  book 
well  fitted  for  our  poor,  painful,  and  faithful  missionaries — none 
but  God  and  themselves  know  what  they  suffer  ;  the  minutes  of 
which  for  one  week  might  fill  a  volume  written  by  an  ingenious 
pen,  and  feeling  heart.  The  last  week  I  spent  in  some  pain  of 
mind,  patience  and  prayer.  It  being  meeting  day  at  my  lodgings, 
I  gave  an  exhortation  to  the  congregation,  having  three  subjects  iu 
view  ;  First,  The  excellency  of  the  religion  of  Jesus  :  Secondly, 
The  way  to  come  at  the  knowledge  of  the  hearts  of  men  and  women 
— namely,  by  their  actions :  Thirdly,  To  put  no  confidence  in  frames 


JiKV.    f,  AL. 

and  feelings,  whilst  people  are  living  in  wilful  MM,  or  th<  t  of 

plain,  known  duty. 

Sabbath  day  'Jt.   It   is  such  cloudy  wi  athei    I  .  ,umot  go  out:  I 
wind  cotton,   hear  the  rhiMren  read,  and  (e;uh  them  a  little  ^rnm- 
mar.     I  have,  by  the    help  of'  a  icribe,  marked  lli.   state-  I   I 
travelled  through    for  UH'M    twenty  y  ai-  ;   hut  ; 
so  quiek   (travelling  night  and  day)   it  «>•, TH*  that  th<    notes   r 
two   or  three  hundred  miles  are  only  like  a  p.irish  and  a  day — on 
paper.     Tlie  understanding   reader  (hat  could  jud^e  tin-  di-lai 
would  see  that   I    purpose  to  have   the  names  of  the   peopl- 
ivhose  houses  I  have  preached,  or  the  journal  will  apprar  u(«\- 

March  3.   I    can   oidy  make   a   l'<  w   weak   OM-I  •  W|j:n 

little  pen-work  I  dare  do  has  been  in  writini;  a  letter  to  York.      I 
shall  only  journali/e  a  little,  and  never  enter  ileepl-,  mt  >  my  ol 
subjects.      I  scorn  to  bo  idle  ;  tin:  pa-t  we.ek  hat  I. 
cotton  work  with  my  fingers,  and  in  1  ilir.  children  read,  and 

instructing  them  in  the  English  grammar.     1  have  thought,  ii 
do  wrong  we  rank  among  the  vilest  of  the  vile,  ;>-   liaring  been 
more  favoured  than   any  other*.      Many  other  chn:  pon 

the   paths  already   trodden   two    or    three    hundred    ycais.     \\  - 
formed   our  own  church,  and  claim  the  pov. 
four  years.     We  rnn  mnko  more  extensn  ••  :(inn«,  !•. 

our   preachers  in  six  or  seven  years  can   go  through  t!u-   «!. 
continent,  and  see  the  stale  el  ctlicr  (  IIHK  IK  -  in  all  p 
new  world.     We,  of  the  travelling  ministers,  who  I 
mind  but  the  Gospel  and  the  church  of  (irui,  may  and  oug! 
very  useful. 

Monday  4,  I  cla?s  among  my  weeping  da)  =  . 

I  have  rested  at  the  comfortable  hou>-e  i-i'my  ilear  Iriend,  1 
Pelham,  from    February  r>   till  March  !»,   on  which  davw-  r 
through  the  heat  to  Huldand  Saunders's,  a'nl  on   .   i(nii!.i\    1" 
llbenczer  meeting-house,  formerly  Merrill's  chapel.     1  met  a  few- 
local  brethren  ;  the  house    wa-.  open,  and  the   d,iy  w.um.      I  • 
soon  outdone,  and  sunk  into  dejection;  the  pain  ii'inm.'!  in  niv 
breast,  and  a  discharge  of  blood  took  place. 

Sunday  11.   I  sat  alone   at  brother  Men  ill  -  house.     It  was  ex- 
pected I  should  preach — but  Ah,  wo  is  me,  to  be  cut  oil  from  the 
happy  service  of  the  sanctuary   through  weakness  of  body  !     ( ' 
Lord,    show    me    wherefore  thou    contended  with    me !     1 
concerned  to  bring  in  better   order  atnoni;  ll;;-    1  «•  al  lino  of  th- 
ministry,  by  clawing  tli"in  t-'^ether.  and  then,   1 
by  making  (hem  take  regol 


utr.  FKAKCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [!'. 

appointed  them  a  leader,  to  meet  once  in  three  or  six  months,  to 
discourse  about  their  souls  and  families,  and  the  congregation  and 
society  they  attend. 

I  am  now  alone  with  God  the  Lord,  my  only  hope  !  In  conse- 
quence of  riding  twenty-five  miles,  a  bad  road,  and  sitting  about 
three  hours  in  conference  with  the  local  brethren,  in  an  open 
house,  I  am  quite  overcome.  It  shows  that  the  main  spring  in  my 
system  is  broken  or  much  weakened,  so  that  every  feeble  attempt 
I  make  to  do  any  small  service  to  the  church  is  very  burdensome 
to  myself,  and  will  always  give  grief  and  disappointment  to  my 
friends,  to  my  dearest  and  best  brethren. 

Sunday  18.  I  have  visited  four  families  in  Brunswick,  and  three 
in  Dinwiddie  counties.  On  Saturday  I  had  a  close  conversation, 

*r 

with  some  of  our  local  ministry  :  we  had  great  union.  I  was  led 
to  inquire  of  them  the  state  of  their  own  souls,  and  the  standing  of 
the  societies  and  congregations  they  attended,  and  .advised  them  to 
meet  in  a  conference  class  once  in  three  months,  and  deal  faith- 
fully with  each  other,  and  plan  their  work.  We  were  happy  to 
find  seven  out  of  ten  .were  not  in  the  spirit  or  practice  of  slavery. 
I  have  made  out  since  Friday  week  to  ride  about  sixty-five  mile^ 
and  to  meet  as  many  of  the  local  brethren  as  I  could  call  together 
from  Brunswick  and  Amelia  counties.  I  have  in  general  enjoyed 
peace  of  mind,  and  better  health  of  body,  than  heretofore.  I  re- 
cerVed  a  letter  from  the- African  preacher  and  society  in  Philadel- 
phia, giving  me  an  account  of  the  revival  of  the  work  of  God  in 
the  congregation  of  the  Methodists  in  the  city,  amongst  both  white 
and  black.  • 

Sunday  25.  Since  the  last  sacred  day,  I  have  visited  seven  fa- 
milies. A  friend  of  mine  was  inquisitive  of  my  trade  and  appren- 
ticeship— as  Mr.  Glendenniag  had  reported  ;  as  he  asked  me  so 
plainly,  I  told  him  that  1  counted  it  no  reproach  to  have  been 
taught  to  get  my  own  living.  My  health  is  somewhat  better.  I 
am  yet  unable  to  read  or  write  largely  ;  I  can  pray  and  praise  the 
Lord  a  little.  1  assisted  Philip  Sands  to  draw  up  an  agreement  for 
our  officiary  to  sign  against  slavery  :  thus  we  may  know  the  real 
sentiments  of  our  local  preachers.  It  appears  to  me,  that  we  can 
never  fully  reform  the  people,  until  we  reform  the  preachers  ;  and 
that  hitherto,  except  purging  the  travelling  connexion,  we  have 
been  working  at  the  wrong  end.  But  if  it  be  lawful  for  local 
preachers  to  hold  slaves,  the-n  it  is  lawful  for  travelling  preachers 
'Iso  ;  and  they  may  keep  plantations  and  overseers  upon  their 
•  ters  ;  but  this  reproach  of  inconsistency  must  be  rolled  away, 


REV.   FRANCIS   ASBVRY  Af  .  313 


Some  of  our  local  preacher*  complain  that  tln-y  h  iv->  not  a  <•••.!(  in 
the  general  annual  conference.  We  an-wi-r.  it  tLe\  will  do  the 
duty  of  a  mr-mber  of  the  yearly  ro-irerenre.  they  m.i\  the 

seat  anil  privilege  of  the  travelling  line.     The  travelling    mim~tr\ 
may  complain,  \\'e  must  go  at  i  imt.uie'.  warning  to  our  cir>  uit-  . 
and  near;     anil  attend  with  the  e:  -trirtru-—  to    on    .ippuint- 

ments  and  societies      The  local  preacher?  go  where  and  when  ' 
please  ;  can  prearh  any  where  and  no  where  ;   ti 
talions  and  si  ive-.  and  h  ive  them  bought  or  given  bv  their  •, 
The  local  preachers  can   receive    fifty  or   a   liundri  -d   d.dlar-    per 
year,  for  marriages  ;    and  we  travellers,  if  we  i  ••;*•  dol- 

lar* for  marriages,  we  must  return  them  at  the  conference,  or  bt 
called  refractory  or  di-ubedi»-ni.  L>  t  us  not  have  the  grace  of  our 
Lord  Je*us  Christ  with  respect  of  persons  in  mim-t.M~.  any  n. 
than  in  members  —  in  local  preacher*,  any  more  than  travelling 
ones.  1  have  done  great  thing*  this  week  —  I  have  rodfc  nenly 
sixty  miles.  I  heard  brother  Ira  Ellis,  on  the  second  epi-tk 
of  .John,  verse  8.  "  Look  to  yourselves,  that  }o  lose  not  tin- 
things  ye  have  wrought  ;  but  th.it  ye  receive  a  full  reward." 
Great  need  there  is,  i;i  this  degenerate  day  and  place,  for  ministers 
and  people  to  look  to  themselves. 

.Monday,  April  2.  1  visited  a  local  preacher,  and  gave  him  a 
plain  and  patient  talk  upon  -laxi-ry 

Tuesday  >.  1  atteuded  a  sermon  and  sacrament  at  brother 
Pelham's. 

Wednesday  4.   Rode  fifteen  miles  to  brother  Saunders's. 

Thursday  5  Attended  a  sermon  and  sacrament,  and  gave  a  short 
exhortation  on  the  purity  of  tbe  communion.  We  rode  fifteen 
miles  after  meeting  to  brother  Drumaoold's  ;  rested  Friday.  Sa- 
turday we  rode  eight  miles  to  brother  Owens'?  :  brother  Whatcoat 
gave  u*  an  excellent  discourse  on  '•  He  shall  feed  his  tlock  like  a 

O 

shepherd  :''  we  had  two  exhortation?  ;  mine  was  feeble.  We  had 
a  meeting  with  the  loi  al  preachers.  I  returned  to  brother  Drum- 
goold's  the  same  day-  i  feel  that  a  little  application  to  thought 
and  bodily  exercise  is  too  much  for  me. 

Saturday    7.     i   was   once  more  privileged  to  s.it  in  a  serious    - 
«otnh|y,  at  Edward  Drumzoold's  chapel  :     I   aUo  a-cemled    the 
cred  stand  after  brother  Whatcoat  had  given  u-  a  very  plain,  valu- 
able, and   useful  sermon,  properly  heard,  upon  Ac'        .      ••:  —  11 
I  ventured  to  give  a  ^loss  upon  Acts  ii.  -40. 

Sabbath  C.  The  hst  week  was  memor.ible  for  a  prodigious  fall- 
ing of  rain  from  Monday  to  Saturday.  1  rode,  ui'.li  -jir^yA.  weaknesi, 

VOL.   II. 


JI4  RKV.   FRANCIS  ASBUHV'S  JOURNAL.  [1798, 

to  my  dear  brother  Seward's,  seventeen  miles,  and  on  Saturday  to 
Salem,  for  conference.  Sabbath  we  had  an  open  time. 

Monday  9.  We  began  conference,  and  ended  on  Wednesday 
evening :  we  had  three  public  days.  The  peace  and  union  of  the 
conference  was  apparently  great :  I  was  assisted  to  attend. 

Thursday  13.  Rode  twenty-five  miles  ;  the  roads  very  deep  nnd 
much  broken  ;  we  stopped  at  brother  Paop's.  I  am  but  feeble  still, 
and  cannot  stand  labour  as  in  past  days.  I  have  travelled  since  1  let; 
brother  Drumgoold's  sixty-five  miles. 

Friday  14.  We  came  the  road  to  Harpers  bridge,  over  Notta- 
ivay-River,  fifteen  miles,  to  brother  Robinson's,  in  Dinniddie 
county  :  this  being  a  by-way  the  path  was  smooth.  1  have  en- 
tered upon  a  tour  of  two  thousand  miles  before  I  may  probably 
see  this  part  of  the  land  again.  Oh!  can  I  perform  such  a  toil? 
Weakness  of  body  maketh  me  feel  great  heaviness  of  mind.  I  must 
think,  speak,  write,  and  preach  a  little  ;  or  I  may  as  well  give  up 
my  station. 

Saturday  15.  We  rode  to  Henry  Reese's  ;  we  have  proper 
March  weather  in  April.  . 

Sabbath  16.  I  attempted  a  feeble  discourse  on  2  Peter  iii.  11, 
"  Seeing  then  that  all  these  things  shall  be  dissolved,  what  manner 
of  persons  ought  ye  to  be  in  all  holy  conversation  and  godliness." 
We  had  a  large  congregation  :  our  brethren,  Dyer,  White,  and  Ro- 
per, were  erdained  deacons.  I  appointed  my  dear  aged,  and  faith- 
ful brother  Whatcoat  to  visit  the  four  districts  belonging  to  the  Vir- 
ginia conference,  and  wrote  my  apology  as  not  being  able  to  ride 
on  horseback  as  heretofore.  Notwithstanding  my  bowels  were 
afflicted  and  much  affected  we  left  Brother  Henry  Reese's,  and  rode 
through  dust  and  deep  cut  roads  thirty  miles  to  Petersburg.  I  en- 
deavoured to  commune  with  God,  but  I  had  great  sinkings  of  heart, 

Monday  17.  I  preached  at  Petersburg  very  feebly  on  2  Peter 
iii.  17,  18. 

Tuesday  13.  There  was  a  severe  frost.  We  then  rode  to  Rich- 
mond :  I  was  very  unwell.  I  went  to  the  court-house  and  made 
my  apology  for  inability. 

Wednesday  19.  Being  so  UBwell  and  crowded  with  company,  I 
found  it  best  once  more  to  try  for  Baltimore  :  we  catue  only  forty 
miles  to  Lyon's,  in  Caroline  county. 

Thursday  20.  We  had  a  gentle  ride  to  Todd's  tavern. 

Friday  21.  We  crossed  the  new  bridge  at  Falmouth,  and  came 
to  Stafford  court-house  to  dine.,  and  thence  to  Ward's  at  night — thir- 
ty-five miles. 


738.]  ntV.    FRANCIS   ASBUHV'3  JOtnNAI  .1 


Saturday  22.   We  came   to  <  ',,l,-he-ter  to  .In,.,  -m.l  to    \\illiam 
Adams'*  ;it  flight,   thirty  mil---.       1  !.••    road-  ueie  m-aily  a*    ha.. 
in  winter,   and  ama/m^ly   pLiu^h'-d  up    with  fro-t  and  u-  I  In- 

pro*peetf  for  small  grain  are  li.-id.     \v«-  met  with  a  powerful  itofB, 
but   my   carriage     kept    m<:   dry,   and    my   clo:ik    detruded    I  i 
tieorge   from   damage.     This    has  In  ,|t.    ()ay  .   I 

wind,  nun,   ami  the  vast  fatigue  of  had    ;  Vep  gulhe-.   li> 

mire,    roots,   and  bills,  bore    hard   upon    me.      I  heard   «>l  br<  . 
Watters's  preaching  at  the  Fall  church,  a  faithful  funeral  -ennon. 

MARYLAND.  —  Monday  'J-l.     We    i«  "-lied    Turner'-,   and   m    ' 
rapid   ride  to  the  city  of  I'.altimni  e.      I  vi-i!cd    until   the   Sabbath. 
April  29,  they  would   publish  for   me  at  Old-Town   meeting  h. 
I  made  an  attempt  on  I'«alm  '  \\\n.  9.   "  Let  thy  priests  be  -  I" 
with   righteousnc^!?,  and   let   thy  saints  shout  for  joy."      I  went   to 
the    Point   and   heard  a  sermon  on  "  Speak   i-vil  of  no   man."     I 
gave  a  short  exhortation,  and  came  home  much  more  comfortable 
than  I  expected.     Our  beautiful  house  is    not  ready  yet  :    I  fear,  I 
tremble  in  imagination,  lest  it  should  have  more  temporal  tli  iu  -|  i 
ritual  clory. 

Wednesday,  May  2.  Our  conference  began  :  it  was  hnlf-ycai 
(o  bring  on  an  equality  by  the  change  from  fall  to  -puni:.  \V<- 
had  to  correct  the  many  offences  given  at  many  conferences  to  one 
particular  man  !  I  plea-ed  myself  with  tin-  idea  that  I  was  out  of 
the  quarrel  :  but  no!  I  was  deeper  in  than  ever,  and  r.-  \.  r  \\.\* 
wounded  in  ?o  deep  a  manner;  it  was  as  much  a>  1  could  bear  :  f 
cannot  stand  such  stn>:\ 

>  iliitath  9.     \Ve   opened  the  new  house  :    brothers  Lt  •       ' 
and    Forest   preached.      Monday    and   Tuesday    I    \i-i'ed 


Wednesday  12.   I  attended  the  public,  fast  :   rny  subject  was  "  > 
the  Lord  was  entreated  for  the  land."     1  observed  —  1     That  tlior« 
'.vere  special  times  and  seasons  in  which  it  become*  our  dut\     in 
most  special   manner,  to  entreat  the  Lord  for  the    church  and  tin 
land.      2.   Who  they  are  who  ought  to  be  assembled  —  every  ore 
the  elders  and  people  at  large  ;  sanctified  —  that  is.  «•€(   apart  from 
labour  and  common  service  —  the  bride  and  bridegroom,   the  chil- 
dren,   the  infant  offspring.     3.   Who   shall  intncedt  —  the  priests, 
the  ministers  of  the    Lord  :   ajjain,  if  my  people    which  are   called 
':-y  my  name  shall    humble  themselves.     4.  The  fpi-cial  -e.««ons  — 
calamities  threatened    by    God   or    man,    feared    or   telt.    such    U 
sword,  famine,  or  pestilence.   -r>.  How  we  should  entre.  tithe  Lord— 
with  fasting,  prayer,    reading,  and    preaching  the   v 


5IG  AEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [179$. 

confessing  our  sins  and  sorrows,  and  acknowledging  his  mercies. 
The  calamities  of  the  church  :  idolatry,  division,  superstition,  and 
backsliding.  6.  The  happy  consequences  of  God  being  entreated — 
he  heareth  and  answeretb,  in  temporal,  and  spiritual,  and  in  eter- 
nal blessings. 

Sunday  16.  I  had  to  go  upon  my  watch-tower.  My  subject 
in  our  temple  was  1  Kings  ix.  6 — 9.  It  was  observed  on  the  first 
head  of  the  discourse,  What  the  pious  Israelites  had  professed, 
experienced,  and  practised,  namely,  the  knowledge,  worship,  ordi- 
nances, and  service  of  the  true  and  glorious*  Jehovah  — they  and 
their  godly  children  had  an  experience  of  convicting,  converting, 
and  sanctifying  grace  through  a  promised  Messiah  ;  and  had  pardon 
of  sin,  and  peace  with  God.  Israelites  indeed — enjoying  the  love 
of  God,  and  walking  in  loving,  living  obedience  to%  all  the  known 
commandments  of  God.  Secondly,  How  they  might  partially  re- 
turn from  following  the  Lord  :  and,  again,  how  they  might  wholly 
depart  from  God.  Thirdly,  The  dreadful  consequences.  In  this 
discourse  the  parallel  was  drawn,  and  a  close  application  made,  to 
the  rising  generation  :  some  sentiments  were  expressed  upon  the 
burning  of  the  former  house  ;  the  probabilities  of  the  latter  house 
also  being  destroyed,  unless  defended  by  the  Almighty.  At  the 
Point  I  spoke  on  the  epistle  to  the  angel  of  the  church  of  Perga- 
mos — I  was  thankful  that  my  strength  was  so  great.  Our  congre- 
gations were  large  and  seriously  attentive. 

Saturday  22.  We  rode  to  Perry-Hall,  and  continued  there  until 
the  twenty-sixth  of  the  same  month.  I  was  not  employed.  Bro- 
thers Bruce  and  Harper  attending  me,  we  read  over  my  transcribed 
numbers  of  the  Journal.  A  situation  so  healthy  and  agreeable 
had  a  good  influence  upon  my  body  and  mind  ;  and  the  kindness 
and  company  of  the  elders  of  this  house  were  charming  and 
cheering. 

Wednesday  26.  We  rode  about  twenty  miles  to  Deer-Creek. 
I  was  pleased  to  find  here  mother  Walters,  aged  ninety  ;  her  son 
Henry,  sixty  ;  and  brother  Billy  Walters  and  his  wife  from  Virginia. 
But,  O,  how  many  are  dead  t  And  some  have  fled  to  the  woods, 
and  some  gone  back  to  the  world.  The  society  is  all  gone  thai  we 
had  formed  here  more  than  twenty  years  back.  A  most  serious 
aspect  in  sight — the  fly  hath  eaten  up  the  grain  of  the  fields.  My 
vegetable  diet  hath  its  salutary  influence  upon  my  system,  much 
more  so  than  medicine.  Could  1  rest  this  summer,  there  would 
be  hope  of  my  health  ;  but  1  must  move  and  live  upon  mercy, 
providence,  and  grace.  Poor  Deer-Creek !  the  preachers  hav<- 


1798.]  IFV.   FRAVCIS   AMJMlY's  .TOfRV/.r  . 


left  the  place  for  want  of  In  MI-IT-;  .    Imt  I  hi>l  mm\  —  and  :ui  .>|ir-M 
ing  on  Humans  VIM.  Jo.      I  *.iu  .1  few  who  li.i.l   followed    the    l...rd 
more  than  twenty  year-  a-o  :    liny  h.ive  halted--   but    I    tni-i   tliey 
will  .set  out  anew.      I  felt  life,  and   some    ml  m.-  im-nt    upon  it  ;   it 
was  a  comfortable  day. 

."Monday  Jl.     I  rested  on  account  of   rain. 

Tuesday  ,  June  1.     We  came   to   North  Ka-t.      U  '•   In-  -<!  .i\  .    We 
were   at    Her«ay'H.      Thm>d  iy.     We  cam*-    t..    Wilinm-ton.    I),  d 
ware.      Friday,    I  pn-yr  liril  on  I  .uki-  \  »i.  .-  1  -      M.!..V.     \\  « 

rode  to  Philadelphia. 

PBNN67LVAKIA.—  Saoday.      I    eiilaryi'd    on    (J.iL.tiah-     n.     J".       It 
ua<  ol»-<erved,  '1'hat  (_'hri-<t  crnnfi.  d  \\;i-  ili«'   irian.l 
in  coiitiiui  inre,  the  beutir  f  i  uritii-d  with  (  In  i-  -iiciU  .  ••  I  live  ; 

yet  not  I,  but  Clin«t  ln»jtli  in  me"  —  in  communicated  grao*  aod 
life,  as  mini't'T.s  and  Christians  :  to  live  Lij  /iu'j/j,  as  well  as  |..  !..- 
saved  by  taitli.  Lvvett  me,  i?  tlit-  \\:>  \\\\-j.  i-\|nTii-iice  «  .-MI? 

souls.  1  received  the  probable  news  of  the  near  approach  to,  or 
death  of  my  lather.  1  wrote  several  letters  ;  ;md  k-el  abundantlr 
better  in  my  body. 

Our  conference  began  on  Tuesday,  and  we  were  clo?cly  confined 
until  Saturday. 

Sabbath  10.     I  preached  on  .Matt.  xxiv.  45  —  IT. 
We  had  close  work,  but  good  ti-in;1   r-  almundi-d,  and    |u-t   mea- 
sures were  pursued.      1  made  an   attempt  to  ride    to   Germ  mlonn, 
but  returned  ;   and  it  wa«  well  I  did,  for  I  had  no  sooner  ui>i-hai  g< 
the  fragment*  of  tho  conference  Im-im  -s  anil  the  stationing  of  the 
preachers,  than    the  aflairs  of  the   society   came    in    si^ht   respt  rt- 
in^  the  city.      I  have  my   difficulties    with   the    government  of  the 
preachers  ;   but  I  have  some  trouble  \vith  the  rit\  soritiics  :   tliey 
wisli  (o  have  the  connexion  drafted,  and  some  of  the  most  arcept- 
ilile  preachers  to  serve  them.      1  made  all  haste  to  leave  the  city 
but  not  until  1  had  met  the  trustees  of  the  church. 

Monday  11.  Was  not  an  agreeable  morning:  we  had  some 
rain. 

1  had  <i  meeting  with  the  trustees.  It  was  granted  we  should 
raise  a  fund,  by  subscription,  U'  tinisli  tbe  meeting-house  in  Fourth- 
street. 

\i.w-  JERSEY.  —  I  then  came   on  to   Burlington,  where  preaching 
being  appointed  for  uie,  1  ventured  out  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  <  \> 
Liing,  that   my  commission   might  not  totally    expire    in  thi>    pi 
Mv  subject  was  Psalm  \x\vn.   •>.   I  had  an  opening  on  the  text. 
come  consolation  in  uoy  own  mind. 


KEV.  fn.vxcis  ASBUUY'S  JOURNAL,  f  1798, 

Tuesday  12.  We  came  to  Crosswicks  :  there  were  very  few  at 
four  o'clock  ;  as  it  was  thought  it  would  be  most  agreeable  for  me 
to  preach,  I  made  choice  of  Psalm  xxvii.  6,  7.  my  state  of  mind  was 
serene.  Universal  nature  is  beautiful  at  this  season.  I  feel  the 
want  of  a  fervent,  constant,  holy  flame,  such  a?  has  been  found  in 
the  hearts  of  martyred  saints,  and  favoured  souls. 

Wednesday  13.  We  came  to  Hutchinson's  ;  and  on  Thursday  to 
Brunswick  ;  where  I  bore  iny  feeble  testimony,  and  drew  up  a 
subscription  for  the  purchase  of  a  house  for  divine  worship.  On 
TViday  we  came  to  Elizabethtown  ;  and  on  Saturday  16th  to  New- 
York  :  here  I  received  the  serious  confirmation  of  the  death  of  my 
father,  aged  eighty-four  or  eighty-live. 

NEW-YORK; — Sunday  7.  I  preached  in  (he  new  church  on 
Eccles.  i.  1.  At  the  old  church,  in  John-street,  my  text  was 
1  Pet.  iv.  10.  "  As  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of  God." 
I  now  feel  myself  an  orphan  with  respect  to  my  father  ;  wounded 
memor}'  recalls  to  mind  what  took  place  when  I  parted  with  him, 
nearly  twenty  seven  years  next  September — from  a  man  that 
seldom,  if  ever,  I  saw  weep,  when  I  came  to  America,  over- 
whelmed with  tears,  with  grief,  he  cried  out,  "  I  shall  never  see 
him  again  !" — thus  by  prophecy  or  by  Providence,  he  hath  spoken 
what  is  fulfilled.  For  about  thirty-nine  years  my  father  hath  had 
the  Gospel  preached  in  his  house.  The  particulars  of  his  death 
are  not  yet  come  to  hand.  I  employed  the  remaining  part  of  this 
week  in  visiting,  reading,  writing,  attending  preaching  and  love- 
feast.  Brothers  Lee  and  Wells  were  officiating  ministers — myself 
a  hearer. 

Sunday  24.  I  preached  in  John-street  church,  from  Job  xvii.  9, 
•  The  righteous  also  shall  hold  on  his  way  :  and  he  that  hath  clean 
hands  shall  be  stronger  and  stronger."  After  tracing  the  origin  of 
the  land  of  Uz,  as  to  be  seen  in  the  genealogy  of  Nalwr,  his  son 
Hvz ;  taking  H  as  a  prefix  in  Hebrew — as  an  article,  the  uz.  In 
the  genealogy  of  Esau  we  find  Job's  friends  as  princes  and  pious 
philosophers.  This  is  the  presumption — Jobab  the  father  of  Job. 
or  Job  ab,  i.  e.  father,  or  grief,  according  to  the  Hebrew  word.  It 
was  observed,  from  whom  these  words  came,  and  under  what  great 
fifflictions— 

I.  The  difficulties  and  doubts  of  the  righteous  as  being  against 
their  holding  on  their  way. 

II.  Their  privileges  and  promises. 

III.  Clean  hands,   clean   hearts  ;  by   renouncing  oppression   of  . 
•ill  kinds,  civil,  sacred,  and  domestic  ;  every  act  of  injustice,  all 


179b.]  REV.   FRANCIS   ASLtHV'  -Al  . 

bribery,  all  sinful  practices;  these  shall  "add  strength  to ttrength :' 

we  may  -ee  this  exemplified  in  thr  <  Mil  anil  \.-.v  Ti 

At  the  liowery  church  I  \>i,  i,  !,.-.!  mi  tin-  i-pi-tle  t<>  tin     .: ,_.  I  . 
bishop  i.C  Smyrna.      On  Monday   I    nut    (In     ma- • 
old  church. 

Tuesday   ','U.    I    he. ml    brother    Nicholls    preach    in    llic    new 
church.      1   read   a  little,   write  a  l>  \v  lct(.-i>,    and   \  i-r.   .' ,il\  :    hie 
appears  to  be  but  poorly  spent  with  me.     I  met  the  mm 
iu  the  new  chun  li 

Sunday,  July   I.    At  the  old  church    I   preached  limn   I'hil.  in. 
IB,  19,  20.      At  the    north  church,  in  the  aflern<>..n,  on   I  ( 
2.  :    1  was  morh    heated   and    rather   inirried   in  pit  j        !  he 

weather  is  excessively  warm — the  rhildren  an-  i!\inLr,   in  1   \<i 
bly  so  will  the  parent::  uidr-^  <.ud      < nd  rain.      I  live  wholly  u 
vegetables,  and  wear  il.mnel. 

Mr.  O'Kelly  bath    now   publi-hed    to  the    \vorld  what  he  hath 
been  telling  to  his  disciples    lor  years.      Mr.   Hammeit  was   m 
rate  ;  Glendenning  not  very  severe  ;  but  James  h.itii  lurm  •! 
butt  end  of  his  whip,  and  is  unanswerably  abusive  :   the  Lord  judge 
between  us  ! — and  he  certainly  will  iu  that  tlnj  o) 

\Vednes«!.iy  -1.    This  day  we  had  sermons  in  all  the  church 
the  Methodists.      1  had  a  meeting  with  the  ollii  i.irv  at  the  ! 
church  in  the  afternoon,   and  <;ave  them  a  sermon  upon  1  I'etcr  v. 
J.     Sunday  I  preached  at  Brooklyn  on  1  Teter  iv.  17.  ;  and  in 
afternoon  at  the  old  church  on  Kev.  in.  1 — 5. 

Monday  9.  We  came  to  rJerian1?,  at  Kin^-ln-iii^e,  and  on  Tuead.iv 
to  my  home  at  the  widow  Sherwood's.     We  have  a  very  neatly 
built  bouse  here  ;  but  I  was  so  ill  that  Jesse  Lee  and  Joshua  ^ 
had  to  fill  my  place.      Mr.  Phillips,  of  Birmingham,  writes  tin, 
my  father — "  lie  kept  his  room  six  weeks  prev.  M        ;h  . 

the  Ur*t  month  of  the  time  he  ate  nothing  but  a  little  ln-cuit, 
the  last  fortnight  be  took  nothing  but  a  little  spirits  and  water 
•lied   very  happy-''      My   subject  at  Brooklyn  was,  "  The  i. 
come  that  judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God."      In  tempta- 
tion, persecution,  discipline,  heresy,  and  schism,  the  general  i <. 
inent  will  begin  at  the    house  of  (iod.      What  shall  the  em!   t>> 
them  that  hear,  but  will  not  obey  the  Gospel  of  God  ?    'I  in  y  »h  dl 
be  judged  by  the  (iu-prl  .is  having,  in  their  di-n'  ' 

every  blessing,  and  as  having  brought  upon  them-  >  CO.IM 

the  (io-pi'l  ihieatens — they  are  as  completely  damned  by  tins  di 
bedicnce,   as  the  obedient  souls  are   everlastingly   saved   by   the 
grace  of  Got!. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASDURY's  JOURNAL.  [1798. 

Wednesday  1 1.  We  had  to  keep  in  doors  on  account  of  rain,  and 
couM  not  attend  at  the  White  Plains. 

Thursday  12.  We  were  at  our  kind  hrother  Banks's,  upon  the 
banks  of  Byram-River,  near  the  line  between  Connecticut  and  the 
state  of  New  York  :  my  congregation  was  large,  and  seriously  at- 
tentive :  my  subject  was  Luke  xix.  10. 

Friday  13.  We  rode  over  the  rocks  and  hills  to  Stamford.  We 
had  a  comfortable  rain  that  cooled  the  air.  1  find  I  cannot  preach 
often — 1  must  spare  myself  or  destroy  myself. 

CONNECTICUT. — Saturday  14.  We  rode  to  Joseph  Hall's,  Po- 
quonock,  and  made  it  twenty-eight  or  thirty  miles. 

Sunday  15.  1  attended  the  congregation  at  Wheeler''s,  and  feebly 
administered  the  word  from  Acts  iv.  12.  I  had  a  desire  to  hear 
brother  Jocelin  in  the  afternoon  ;  but  he  addressed  me,  after  his 
reading,  singing,  ,ind  prayer,  desiring  me  to  preach  -.  my  subject 
was  Phil.  ii.  12,  13.  I  applied  the  test  to  believers,  seekers,  and 
sinners. 

Monday  16.  I  rode  sixteen  miles  to  New- Haven. 

Tuesday  17.  We  took  our  departure  from  New-Haven,  and  came 
through  North  Brandford  to  Durham,  twenty  miles.  The  day  was 
gloomy,  and  excessively  warm  at  times.  We  crossed  the  rocks  and 
hill?  to  Hadam,  and  rode  after  sunset,  for  nine  or  ten  miles,  a  most 
desperate  road  :  this  put  my  strength,  courage,  and  skill,  to  trial, 
with  all  my  patience,  and  every  spring,  and  every  part  of  the 
frame  of  my  carriage  :  but  we  came  safe  to  father  Wilcox's,  where 
we  had  many  tokens  of  love  shown  us,  to  make  rest  comfortable. 

Wednesday  18.   It  rained. 

Thursday  19.  At  four  o'clock,  brother  Lee  gave  a  warm,  en- 
couraging sermon  from  I  Cor.  xv.  58.  At  the  new  meeting- 
house, (properly  West  Hadam,)  where  the  Methodist?  are  upon  free 
principles,  1  added  a  few  words  ;  and  then  began  our  march  to 
New  London.  We  crossed  Connecticut  river  at  Chapman's  ferry  : 
we  came  on  without  touching  the  ground  sometimes,  as  the  car- 
riage would  frequently  jump  from  rock  to  rock.  After  riding  about 
thirty-two  miles,  we  reached  New  London  at  eight  o'clock.  James 
O'Kelly  hath  told  a  tale  of  me  which  I  think  it  my  duty  to  tell 
better.  He  writes,  "  Francis  ordered  the  preachers  to  entitle  him 
bishop,  in  the  directing  their  letters."  The  secret  and  truth  of 
the  matter  was  this  :  the  preachers  having  had  great  difficulties 
about  the  appellation  of  the  Rev.  or  Mr.  i.  e.  to  call  a  man  by  one 
©f  thp  divine  appellations,  supposing  Mr.  to  be  an  abbreviation  of 
Master,  ("  call  no  man  master  upon  earth,")  it  was  talked  over  in 


1798.J  

the  yeaily  conference,  lor  then  we  had  no  %•  inference  • 

blished.     So  \ve  concluded  that  it  would  be  by  far  the  be-t  tu  - 
each  man  his  official  title  ;    as  deacon,  elder,  and  l.i-h<>p  :    to 
the  majority  agreed.     James  O'Kelly  givelh  all  the  good,  ' 
and   middling  of  all  the  order  of  our  chun  h  to  me.  can  be 

the  cause  of  all  this  ill  treatment  which  1  receive  from  him 
it  because;  I  did  not,  I  could  not  settle  him  i'-.r  life  in  the  south 
district  of  Virginia  ?  is  this  hi-  gratitude  ?  He  was  m  thi- 
for  ten  years,  part  of  the  time  in  the  very  best  circuits  in  the  dis- 
trict, and  then  in  the  district  as  presiding  elder  ;  and  there  was  no 
peace  with  James,  until  Doctor  Coke  took  the  matter  out  of  my 
hands,  after  we  had  agreed  to  hold  a  general  conference  to  settle 
the  dispute  :  and  behold  when  the  general  conference  by  a  majority 
.ich  he  called  for.;  went  against  him,  he  treated  the  general 
conference  with  as  much  contempt  almost,  as  he  had  treated  rue  ; 
only  I  am  the  grand  butt  of  all  his  spleen. 

Sunday  23.  I  made  a  feeble  attempt  at  the  court-house  on  - 
Peter  iii.  17,  18.  1  was  greatly  assisted  in  mind  and  body.  In  the 
afternoon  I  preached  on  Matt.  viii.  .56  — 

At  the  foundation  of  the  new  meeting-house,  the  frame  of  which 
was   raised  on  Monday,  brother  Lee  preached.      1  wa?  pleaded  by 
moving  alone  on  a  good  road,  but  through  an  exceeding \    warm 
day,  6fteen  miles  to  Norwich.     The  loss  of  rest  la-t  evening  tu 
the  heat  of  this  day  more  burdensome  to  my  poor  body.     Thet 
a  growth   of  religion  in   this   circuit  ;  but   il   is  p'oushing  an 
rocks  and  stone  walls  in  a  twofold  sense.     The  society  came  toge- 
ther, and  after  myself  and  elder  Lee  had  exhorted,  we  had  ;t 
ing  and  living  time  among  the  brethren  and  sisters. 

Tuesday  2">.   U'e  rode  through  heat  and  over  rock 
to  brother  Lyon's,  at  Canterbury  ;  this  made  me  feel  like  Jor. 
I  was  much  outdone,  having  slept  but  little  for  two  i.i^hu  :  but  I 
was  compensated  for  all  in  finding  the  life  of  religion  amoi.. 
people.     Brother  Lyon  is  the  son  of  a  godly  father,  who 
tist  minister;   he  was  imprisoned  for  truth   and  reli^i-.'u*  1 
the  aged  man  lived  until  we  came  :   his  wife  is  yet  living  and  loving 
God.  The  father  was  awakened  by  Mr.  Whitetield's  ministry  :  the 
son  is  a  man  of  piety  and  property. 

RHODE-ISLAND. — Wedne- :    ,     i         We    passed    PlMitltl.l     and 
.Sterling,  and  came  to   Coventry,  in   the  state  of   Rhode- Island. 
They  have  established  turnpikes  upon  the  way  to  Providence, 
greatly  reformed  the  road  :   hut  I  had  to  turn  out  to  search  i   • 
.   If.  -1! 


'.il-.\  .   MIAM.;.1S  ASiJURV'8  JOUUNAt.  [1  , 

friends,  and  the  souls  of  my  charge  :  we  computed  it  twenty-five 

miles  to  General  Lippelt's — such  work  as  1  had  is  not  easily  told  : 

we  came  in  about  eight  o'clock.     Thursday,  at  General  Lippelt's., 

T  preached  on  1  John  i.  7,  8.     I  rested  on  Friday  and  Saturday  3 

and   on    Sabbath  day  my  subject  was  Hebr.  ii.  2.     Monday  rode 

twenty-two  miles  through  heat  to  Warren  :  we  lodged  at  father 

Martin  Luther's.     Here  John  Hills,  from  Lewistown,   Delaware, 

liveth  ;  but  he  is  no  Methodist ;  who  would  have  thought  this  once  ? 

Mr.  Wilson's  book  was  read   to  me  by  brother  Lee,  particularly 

those  parts  in  which  he  finds  fault  with  the  Methodists.    It  appears 

to  be  the  language  of  two  or  three  men  ;  who  they  are  I  know  not  :- 

but  be  they  who  they  may,  they  are  mild  without  merit ;  and  in  some 

things  are  very  simple,  if  not  silly,  about  our  drinking  water.    But 

why,  Mr.  Age  of  Reason,  whoever  you  are,  will  you  find  fault  with 

the  question,  "  Have  you  always  a  Bible  about  you  ?"  Poor  divinity, 

and  yet  poorer  spite. 

Tuesday  31.  We  came  upon  Rhode-Island;  stopped  at  Matthew 
Cook's,  dined,  and  then  came  to  our  little  meeting-house,  and 
had  a  good  season  on  Hebr.  x.  38,  39.  This  island  is  most 
beautiful  in  its  situation,  and  cultivation  ;  the  neat  stone  square 
walls,  level  fields  of  grass,  corn,  and  barley,  sloping  to  the  water, 
are  very  pleasing  to  the  eye  :  salt  water  prospects  are  most  delight- 
ful. Upon  the  summits  of  the  island  you  may  see  from  water  to 
water.  Here  fruit  trees,  fish,  and  shellfish  abound.  The  Friends' 
meeting-house  is  large,  and  the  settlement  extensive ;  and  if  the 
Baptists,  Moravians,  Episcopalians,  Friends,  and  Methodists  have 
any  religion,  there  must  be  some  good  people  here.  Rhode-Island 
is  by  far  the  most  beautiful  island  I  have  seen.  I  have  been  verv 
low,  and  weak,  and  feverish  of  late  :  I  can  hardly  write,  think,  read, 
preach,  ride,  or  talk  to  purpose.  It  is  a  little  trying  to  be  with 
people  who  are  healthy,  active,  and  talkative,  when  you  cannot 
bear  a  cheerful  part  with  them. 

Thursday,  August  2.  I  returned  to  the  north-east  end  of  the 
island,  where  we  have  a  small  meeting-house,  and  some  gracious 
souls.  Brother  Lee  preached  last  evening  at  Newport.  As  I  was 
unwell,  I  gave  my  services  to  brother  Hall's  family,  where  I  was 
entertained  with  every  mark  of  affection  :  may  they,  their  own, 
and  adopted  children,  be  numbered  with  the  saints  !  I  came  away  in 
weakness  of  body  but  strength  of  soul,  to  the  house  at  the  ferry 
which  we  came  to  when  we  first  entered  upon  the  island. 

Friday  3.  We  preached  at  Bristol  ;  my  subject  was  Luke  xviii,. 
It  was  to  me   a   serious,   comfortable  time  :    what  but  the 


mighty  power  of  (jotl  run!  the   unceasing    crir-,   <>t   ln<;    ]  an 

help  us  here  ? 

Saturday  -1.    U '••    came    through    Warren,  in-ct, 

Dighton,  and  Taunton,  thirty-two  miles  :   the  day   was  exce>M\H\ 
••arm;  and  Oh  !   rocks,  hills,  and  stones  '.     I   wa-  gr-  ;t.lnne  : 

no  price  can  pay,  there  is  no  purchase  for  th  Inn-  but  -mil- 

^Ve  frequently  spend  a  dollar  per  day  to  feed  our->  h  M  and  hor- 
I  never  received,  as  I  recollect,  any  personal  beneln  -  nrr,  no  not 
a  farthing,  in   New  England;  and   peril, ij><  never  shall,   in.!         ' 
should  be  totally  out  of  cash. 

MASSACHUSETTS — Sunday  5.   I  was  very  unwell  in  my  vitccra.    I 
attempted  to  preach  on  Rom.  x.  1 — 3.     I  am  under  drop  dejection 
of  mind  at  times,  and  distressed  above  measure  with  the  prnpli- 
they  appear  to  have  so  little  genuine  religion.     \N  <•    hoar    of  a 
serious  mortal  fever  prevailing  in  Boston  :   it  is  what  I  have  feared 
^vould  be  the  visitation  of  this  capital  town  as  in  other  cities  ;  li 
.also  are   theatres,  sinners,  blind  priest?,  and  backsliding,  formal 
people,  and  multitudes   who  are  Gospel-hardened.     We  ran.. 
Kaston  ;  here  we  have  a  new  house  built.    I  felt  exceedingly  \\ 
after  riding  ten  miles  ;  the  evening  was  very  warm  ;   I  howe\ 
gave  them  a  discourse  on  ~  Tim.  ii.  19.  and  passed  the  night  in 
•:ome  bodily  distress. 

Tuesday  7.  I  rode  twenty-two  miles  through  heat  and  hunger  to 
Boston:  here  I  spent  one  night,  very  unwell  in  body,  and  with 
pains  and  pleasures  of  mind,  upon  account  of  the  preachers  and 
people. 

Wednesday  8.   I  was  advised  to  retire  a  few  days  to  Waltham. 
There  is  affliction  in  Boston — the  malignant  fever.     But  who  ran 
tell  the  sick  that  are  in  the  second  or  third  house  from  his  own. 
in  a  town  or  city  where  it  is  needful  to  observe  secrecy  lest  people 
should  be  frightened  away  from  their  homes,  or  the  country  people 
from  bringing  food?    How  many  may  be  buried  in  the  night,  with 
out  any  tolling  of  bells  or  funeral  solemnity,  thrown  into  a  CO 
coffin,  or  a  tar  sheet?     Oh!  a  solitary  house,  and  social  f.imil ;. 
comfortable  table,  pure  air,  and  good  water,  are  blessing-  at  Wal- 
tham.    There  is  a  rumour  of  the  blood-shedding  in  Ireland. — ( Hi 
the  trade  and  plague  of  war!  I  pity  the  old  world;   I  fear  for  thr 
,,ew — shall   we   be    altogether    unpunished  .'       .'i;     calculation    i- 
that  we  have   rode  three  hundred  and  thirty  mile?  since  our 
parture  from  New-York. 

Thursday,  Friday,  Saturday,  and  Sunday.  At  Waltham.  I 
ventured  to  riuV  four  mile-,  and  prearh  (wo  ?erm<ni- 


KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBTJKY's  JOURNAL.  [179C. 

on  Ac!*  ii.  17,  18.  ;  and  the  second  from  Rom.  x.  1—3.  I  was 
much  enlarged,  and  had  clear  views,  and  saw  and  felt  for  the 
people. 

Monday  13.  We  began  our  march  to  Lynn,  in  weakness  of  body, 
;md  distress  of  mind.  I  gave  a  discourse  late  in  the  evening  on 
llebr.  iv.  9.  ;md  that  night  1  slept  but  little.  On  Tuesday  we  be- 

i  our  journey  for  the  Province  of  Maine  :  we  passed  through 
J'.mvers,  Salem,  Beverly;  thence  to  Hamilton;  where  we  were 
kindly  entertained  by  some  aged  people  :  dined  and  hasted  along- 
through  Ipswich,  and  thence  to  Newburyport :  here  I  passed  in 
-ight  of  tlie  old  prophet,  dear  Whitefield's  tomb,  under  the  Presby- 
terian meeting-house.  His  sermons  established  me  in  the  doctrines 
of  the  Gospel  more  than  any  thing  I  ever  heard  or  had  read  at 
that  time  ;  so  that  I  was  remarkably  prepared  to  meet  reproach 
and  persecution.  We  crossed  Merrimac-River  and  bridge  :  and 
came  in  late  to  Mr.  Merrill's,  where  we  were  kindly  entertained. 
Here  we  were  let  into  the  secret  of  a  negociation  with  a  congrega- 
tion by  Mr.  Elias  Hull,  one  of  our  wonder-workers — I  told  you  so 
— farewell. 

NEW-HAMPSHIRE. — Wednesday  15.  We  entered  properly  into 
New-Hampshire.  We  passed  Hampton  falls,  where  the  people 
and  priests  were  about  installing  a  minister  into  the  deceased  Dr. 
Langdon's  congregation.  We  had  a  dripping  morning  :  we  how- 
ever set  out  and  rode  about  twenty  miles  to  Portsmouth  :  there  is 
a  fever  somewhat  malignant  and  mortal  here.  This  is  a  well  for- 
tified town  against  the  Methodists.  Mr.  Hutchinson  and  daughter 
received  us  with  great  Christian  politeness  :  being  exceedingly 
outdone  with  heat  and  labour,  I  was  easily  persuaded  to  tarry  until 
morning.  We  crossed  Piscataqua-River  at  the  town  of  Ports- 
mouth, in  a  flat-bottomed  boat.  I  am  so  weak  that  the  smallest 
•-hock  shakes  me.  At  Portsmouth  there  is  a  strong  tide,  and  this 
morning  we  had  a  heavy  fog,  so  that  we  could  scarcely  see  the  tops 
of  the  houses  on  the  other  side  of  the  river.  We  came  through 
Old-York,  father  Moodie's  parish,  of  whom  many  tales  are  told  : 
one  of  which  is  worth  telling  to  posterity — it  is,  that  the  only 
ry  he  received  was  the  prayers  of  his  people.  We  came  on 
to  Wells,  and  were  kindly  entertained  at  Mr.  Maxwell's.  I  was 
restless  through  the  night,  and  sleepy  and  sick  through  the  next 
day,  yet  we  rode  forty  miles  to  Major  lllsley's,  near  Portland. 

DISTRICT  OF  MAINE — Friday  17.  WTe  passed  New  Stroudwater, 
named  probably  after  the  old  one  in  Gloucestershire,  in  Old  En- 
gland. We  have  rode  since  Mondav  morning  about  one  hundred 


J  79S.]  RKV.  FRANCIS  M  . 

and  forty  miles  ;    the   roaJs   tolerable  ;    the  weather  extretneK 
warm  ;  and  we  are  amongst  strangers. 

Saturday    18.    We  rode   five  miles    to   Presumscut-Kiver,    and 
Stopped  at  father  Baker's.     Sabbath  day,   I  preached  m  the  1 
on  "  Now  is  the  accepted  time,  and  now  is  the  day  of  «;drati. 
Mother  Baker  was  sick,  but  had  a  sure  confidence  in  God.     II 
\ve  have  the  frame  of  a  good  meeting-house  erected  upon  a  beau- 
tiful spot. 

Monday  20.  We  rode  to  Grey,  and  wore  kindly  entertained  at 
Mr.  Kauisdell's.     I  preached  to  a  few  in  a  school-house  on  Matt, 
xxiv.  12,  13. — the  case  with  these  people,  if  their  love  was  < 
warm. 

Tuesday  21.  We  came  through  Gloucester  to  the  widow  Koc'r. 

We  sat  under  a  shade  by  the  road  side  and  read 's  acknrm 

ledgment  of  his  fall,  in  an  address  to  the  conference — so  candid 
and  apparently  contrite  never  did  I  hear.  My  subject  at  Roe'.- 
was  Acts  ii.  21.  ;  the  people  appeared  careless  and  unfeeling.  In 
the  evening  there  came  tip  a  very  heavy  gust  of  rain,  lightning, 
and  thunder,  and  I  feared  for  ourselves.  Next  morning  a  dead  ox 
was  found  about  one  hundred  yards  from  our  horses  in  the  same 
field,  and  the  presumption  was  he  was  killed  by  lightning,  as  there 
nppeared  to  be  one  particular  shock  directed  to  that  place.  Oh 
Lord,  thou  pre?ervest  man  and  beast!  My  soul  was  much  engaged 
in  prayer. 

Wednesday  22.  We  rode  through  the  woods  to  Amariscnggin 
River,  thence  to  Lewistown,  where  our  appointment  for  preaching 
had  been  made  at  two  o'clock,  and  another  at  four  o'clock  :  no 
•one  attending  at  two  o'clock,  we  came  on  to  Monmouth. 

Thursday  23.   I  was  at  home  at  brother  Fogg's  :   he  and  his  wife 
:ire  pious  souls  ;  such,  with  an  increase,  inny  they  live  and  die'.     I 
had  taken  cold  in  crossing  the  mountain,  which   was   rocky  and 
uneven.     I  preached  in  the  open  meeting-house  to  a  congregation 
of  people  that  heard  and  felt  the  word.     My  subject  uas  Epb.  vi. 
13 — 18.     I  was  raised  a  small  degree  above  my  feeble  self,  an 
were  some  of  my  hearer*.     We  rode   that  evening  to   Hopki;. 
in  Winthrop,  where  meeting  was  appointed  in  the  Congregational 
house  :    as    the   day   was  damp,  and  myself  sick,  I  declined  ;   anil 
brother  Lee  preached,  and  the  people  said  it  was  n  ^ood   time-     J 
found   father  Bishop,   at  whose   house  we  staid  ;  his  ?on  and  M 
exceedingly   kind.     We    breakfasted    at    our   brother    Pre«i-ott'«. 
This  part  of  the  District  of  Maine  is  settled  with  people  from  th^ 
of  Ma^-.i<-'ri--etts.  and  some  from  New-Hampshire. 


BEV.  FRANXIS  ASBURY'S  JOURKAI^  [1798, 

Saturday  25.  We  had  to  beat  through  the  woods  between  Win- 
.lirop  and  Redfield,  which  are  as  bad  as  the  Alleghany  mountain, 
and  the  shades  of  death.  We  have  now  laid  by  our  carriage  and 
saddle,  to  wait  until  Wednesday  next  for  conference  :  the  first  of 
the  kind  ever  held  in  these  parts,  and  it  will  probably  draw  the 
people  from  far  and  near. 

Wednesday  29.  Ten  of  us  sat  in  conference  ;  great  was  our  union 
and  freedom  of  speech  with  each  other. 

Thursday  30.  was  our  great  day  :  it  was  computed  that  from  one 
thousand  to  eighteen  hundred  souls  attended  public  preaching  and 
ordination.     The  unfinished  temporary  state  of  the  gallery  was 
«uch,  that  the  plank  and  other  parts  would  crack  and  break  :    we 
had  one  alarm  while  ordaining,  owing  to  the  people's  wish  to  gratify 
their  curiosity  ;    but  no  person  was  killed  or  wounded.     My  sub- 
ject was  2  Cor.  iv.  1,  2.  it  was  observed,  "  this  ministry,'1''  by  way 
of  eminence  distinguished  from  the  law — the  ministry  of  the  Spirit 
md  power,  and  the  word  and  letter  of  the  Gospel :  Secondly,  The 
apostolical  manner  of  using  the  ministry — renouncing   the   hidden 
things  of  dishonesty,  not  walking  in   craftiness,  nor  handling  the 
word  of  God  deceitfully  :   not  seeking  either  worldly  honour,  ease, 
or  profit ;  but  by  manifestation  of  the  truth  commending  ourselves 
to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God — to  sinners  of  all 
-characters  ;  to  seekers,  believers,  men  of  tender  and  scrupulous 
consciences.    Thirdly,  The  temptations,  labours,  and  sufferings  the 
faithful  ministers  have  to  meet  with  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties  : 
Fourthly,  The  support  they  shall  have  by  the  mercy  and  power 
of  God,  and  fruit  of  their  labours  ;  Fifthly  ;   We  faint  not — a  person 
that  fainteth  loseth  all  action  ;  is  pale  and  dispirited  :  it  is  a  near 
resemblance  of  death,  and  sometimes  terminates  in  death.     UQ- 
hnppy  the  man  who  is  dead  and  useless  in  the  ministry  ! 

Weary  of  being  shut  up  in  one  house  for  some  days,  I  came  in 
•he  afternoon  through  the  dreadful  swamp  to  Squire  Prescott's,  at 
W  inthrop :  I  found  a  Congregational  priest  there.  Early  in  the 
morning  I  came  to  Monmouth  to  breakfast  ;  dined  at  Lewistown, 
and  lodged  at  the  widow  Roe's  :  the  next  day  (Saturday)  I  came  to 
Grey  to  dinner  ;  thence  to  Falmouth,  and  lodged  at  Major  Illsley's. 
I  came  chiefly  alone  ;  I  experienced  much  bodily  weakness  :  my 
trials  are  great ;  the  roads  are  bad,  and  I  fear  the  families  are  lit- 
tle bettered  by  any  thing  I  could  say  or  do  for  them. 

Sunday,  September  1.  I  am  surprisingly  supported,  and  am  gain- 
ing strength,  notwithstanding  the  heat  of  the  sun  and  most  despe- 
rate roads  and  rocks :  we  have  come  nearly  sixty  miles  in  two 


J.j  JVtV.   VKANUa'  AblitKV   b  JOLJO 

days.     1  hail  it  confirmed  that  the  ox  was  killed  by  lightning,  wl; 
was  found  dead  within  one  hundred  v.U'U  of  our    h<>r-t's.      I    u 
to  Portland,  unexpectedly,  upon  tin-  Xd>b:ith-day  :   1  preached  in 
the  widow  Bynton's  back  room  to  about  twenty-five  person-;,  <  hiefly 
women,  my  subject  was  2  Peter  ii.  'J.    In  the  afternoon  I  prraH 
to  about  double   the  number  on  Phil.  iii.  ".     I  returned  Sabbath 
evening,  to  my  very  kind  friend's  house,  Major  II!-!. 

Monday  2.    \Ve  came  off  in  haste,  and  rode  thirty-five  miles  to 
Wells.     We  lodged  with  Deacon  Clark  ;  a  most  complete  h^ 
of  entertainment. 

Tuesday.  We  rode  forty-seven  miles  to  Salisbury,  near  New 
bury  port. 

NEW-HAMPSHIRE. — I  passed  Hampton  and   Hampton-Falli 
the  latter  Mr.  Whitetield  preached  his  last  sermon,  and   probably 
caught  the  cause  of  his  death.      I  came  over   Piscataqua  bridge,  ;» 
most  admirable  piece  of  architecture  ;  it  is  double,   and  the,  tull 
gate  and  Tavern  stand  upon  the  Island  :   we  dined   at  Greenland 
and  had  great  attention  paid  us.     The  fever  is  breaking  out  again 
in  Portsmouth,   and   it  is   awful  in   Philadelphia  ;   it  seemeth  as  if 
the  Lord  would  humble  or  destroy  that  city,  by  stroke  after  stroke, 
until  they  acknowledge  God.     Very  serious  appearances  of  thi-. 
fever  are  now  in  New-York. 

Thursday  4.  Came  from  Captain  Patake's  to  Lynn  ;  where  I 
preached  on  Friday  from  Galatians  v.  G — 8. 

MASSACHUSETTS. — Saturday.  We  came  off  with  a  design  to  call 
at  Boston  :  the  heat  was  excessive,  and  the  sun  met  me  in  the  facr. 
so  that  I  was  almost  ready  to  faint  in  the  carriage  :  I  changed  m\ 
mind,  and  concluded  to  come  on  to  \V~altham,  and  spend  anothe: 
Sabbath.  I  missed  my  way  a  little,  but  came  in  about  seven 
o'clock,  riding  since  two  o'clock  twenty  miles. 

Sunday  0.  I  attended  the  chapel  in  the  morning  ;  my  subject 
was  1  Peter  ii.  9,  10.  ;  and  in  the  afternoon,  at  five  o'clock,  from 
the  llth  and  12th  verses  of  the  same  chapter  ;  many  attended. 

Monday  and  Tuesday.   We  continued  at  Waltham. 

Wednesday  12.    We  came  on  to  Weston,   whore  I  preachr 
the  new  house,  a  well  designed  building,  on  1  Cor.  " 

Thursday  13.    We  rode  twenty  miles,  the  way  stony  and  dn«(\. 
lo  Mr.  Nicoll's,  at  Westborough  :    here    five   preacher*   came  to- 
gether.    With  hard  sighs   1   attempted   to   preach,   and    u 
remarkably  assisted  upon  Titus  ii.  11,  1 

Friday  1  1.     We  rode  forty-one  miles  ovei  v»  i  \    uneven   r 
my  horse  run  away  with  :ne,  but  did  me  no  hurt.     We  K 


KKV.  1'KANCIS  ASflURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1798i 

Air.  Ilubbard's,  at  Broornfield  :  I  was  surprised  to  see  the  meeting 
;mil  dwelling  houses  they  have  built  in  this  place,  and  the  reforms 
they  have  made  in  the  roads,  since  I  came  up  through  this  part  of 
the  state  seven  years  ago. 

Saturday  15.  We  came  once  more  to  Silas  Bliss's,  at  Wilbra- 
ham.  We  have  rode  ninety  miles  in  two  days,  and  I  would  rather 
have  rode  two  hundred  in  the  low  level  lands  of  the  south  of  this 
continent. 

Sabbath  day.  I  attended  at  Wilbraham  ;  my  subject  was  1  Peter 
ii.  1—4. 

Monday  17.  We  came  to  Springfield  to  dine,  and  then  rode  on 
through  excessive  heat  and  bad  roads,  sixteen  miles  to-day. 

Tuesday  18.  We  came  up  to  Granville,  sixteen  miles:  it  was 
well  that  1  had  help  over  the  rocks  and  mountains. 

Wednesday,  Thursday,  and  Friday.  We  sat  in  conference  ; 
-about  fifty  preachers  of  different  descriptions  present :  ten  were 
admitted  on  probation.  We  had  many  weighty  and  deliberate 
conversations  on  interesting  subjects,  in  much  plainness  and  mode^ 
ration.  Six  of  us  lodged  amongst  deacon  Loyd's  kind  Congrega- 
tional people. 

CONNRCTICUT. — Saturday  22.  We  began  our  flight  to  the  White 
Plains,  across  the  hills  and  along  most  dreadful  roads  for  a  carri- 
age :  we  came  to  Canaan,  about  thirty-six  miles,  and  lodged  by  the 
falls  of  Housatonick  river.  Its  source  is  in  some  ponds  and 
springs  N.  and  S.  W.  of  Pittsfield,  Massachusetts,  and  running 
through  the  heart  of  Connecticut,  empties  into  Long-Island  Sound 
at  Stratford  :  it  is  the  second  in  magnitude  to  that  which  gives  a 
name  to  the  state. 

NEW-YORK. — Sabbath  day  23.  We  came  on,  twelve  in  company, 
to  Dover,  in  the  state  of  New-York.  I  should  have  stopped  at 
Sharon  meeting-house  had  we  not  expected  a  meeting  at  four 
o'clock  in  Dover.  We  made  this  Sabbath  day's  journey  twenty- 
five  miles  ;  the  weather  was  very  warm,  and  we  had  nothing  to 
eat  from  seven  o'clock  in  the  morning  until  four  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon.  My  subject  was  Hebr.  xii.  12,  13.  14. 

Monday  24.  We  came  through  Dutchess  county,  near  the  line 
of  the  two  states,  and  down  the  waters  of  Croton -River.  We 
lodged  at  Webb's,  near  Nevv-Salem.  We  reached  the  Plains  in 
about  thirty-six  miles,  and  came  in  about  sundown.  Most  awful 
times  in  Philadelphia  and  New- York — citizens  flying  before  the 
fever  as  if  it  were  the  sword  !  I  now  wait  the  providence  of  God 
which  way  to  go. 


3798.]  REV.  FRANTIS'ASF.I  ;  . 


Wednesday  2(j.  Came  to  my  former  lodging,  where  1  lay  sick 
last  year  :  it  is  still  like  a  home. 

Thursday  27.  Wo  attempted  to  cross  North  Rirer  :it  Won!-,  j 
ferry,  but  the  wind  blew  too  strong.      We  vi-itrd   a  UmJ   f.imilv. 
and  returned  to  the  widow  Sherwood'-.     \\Y   havr  ^|><-nt  a  i1 
and  rode  sixteen  miles,  :inil  ;iro  now  ivln-re  we  lu-^an.      Friday 
rode  twenty  miles   and  crossed    at  Bulls-Ferry,  <ix  miles   al> 
New-York  :  we  were  about  two  hours  and  a  half  in  getting  u\ 
after  which  we  rode  eighteen  miles  to  Cfizabethtown. 

NEW-JERSEY.  —  Saturday  'JD.  \\'e  rode  on  to  Hrunswick,  twenty 
miles,  dined,  and  then  hasted  to  Mi  I  ford,  twenty-two  miles  :  here 
we  spent  the  Sabbath  day.  I  preached  in  the  Hutchinsonian  cha- 
pel, my  text  was  Matt.  v.  8.  Now  we  meet  the  tidings  of  doleful 
distress  from  poor  Philadelphia  —  ninety  dying  in  a  day  —  surely 
God  will  plead  with  us  !  Monday  I  rested. 

Tuesday,  October  2.  I  stopped  and  dined,  talked,  and  prayed  with 
the  Lovell  family,  at  Crosswick's,  and  came  that  night  to  Ilule' 
Hancock's,  who  is  a  kind  and  gracious  man. 

Wednesdays.    Called  upon  James  Sterling.     Thi-  morning  ti 
certainty  of  the  death  of  John  Dickens   was  made  known  to  m- 
he  was  in  person  and  affection  another  Thomas  White  to  me  for 
years  past  :   I  feared  death   would  divide   us  soon:   I  cannot  write 
his  biography  here.     We  came  to  Germaritown  :  and   Thursday. 
twenty-five  miles  to   Daniel  Meridith's  ;  where   we  tarried  for  :i 
night.     Next  day  we    reached   Thomson"?  mill,  upon   Great  Elk  : 
within  a  mile  of  this  place,  while  going  over  a  desperate  piece  of 
road,   my   carriage  turned   bottom    upwards  ;    I    was   under,   and 
thrown  down  a  descent  of  five  or  six  feet  :   I  thought  at  first  I 
unhurt,  but  upon  examination  I  found  my  ancle  was  skinned  at 
rib  bone  bruised.     Oh,  the  heat,  the  fall,  the  toil,  the  hunger  of 
the  day  ! 

MARYLAND.  —  On  Saturday  we  rode  six  miles  to  North-  Tast  :  my 
bruised  side  pained  me  much,  my  spirits  were  sad  —  dark  clouds 
•impend  over  Methodism  here. 

Sabbath  day  7.  I  preached  in  the  Xorth-Kast  church  on  Ifobr.  \n. 
15,  16,  17.  The  substance  of  my  sermon  was  —  1.  A  caution 
•igainst  failing  to  obtain  the  repenting,  converting,  per«ev  erin-, 
sanctifying  grace  of  God.  2.  How  some  had  principl-  >DS, 

and  practices  were  like  wormwood,  gall,  and  pni-on   to 
.3.   How  small  the  gain,  and  how  threat  the  loss  of  peace.      1.   That 
some   might  apostati/e   beyond   the  possibility  of  being  rest'  : 

Vnr.  II.  42 


nuv.  FOANCIS  ASBV&Y'*  jncnm&AL.  [1  i 

.iiul  weep  hopeless  and  unavailing  tears  :  I  enforced  the  caution — 
looking  diligently  to  avoid  the  greatest  evil  and  danger  on  the  one 
hand,  and  to  secure  the  greatest  good,  grace,  and  glory  on  the  other, 
Monday  we  rode  to  the  Buck,  and  dined  with  a  daughter  of  Sarah 
Dallarn's.  We  then  came  on  to  Perry-Hall  :  in  consequence 
of  the  drought  this  place  does  not  appear  a  universal  green,  as 
formerly. 

Tuesday  9.  We  came  to  Baltimore  :  here  they  have  little  to 
boast  of  but  health  and  trade  :  the  outward  building  of  a  society- 
house  is  going  on.  1  had  John  Dickens's  son  with  me  :  we  sketch- 
ed out  a  few  traits  of  his  father's  life.  For  piety,  probity,  pro- 
fitable preaching,  holy  living,  Christian  education  of  his  children, 
secret,  closet  prayer,  I  doubt  whether  his  superior  is  to  be  found 
either  in  Europe  or  America. 

Friday  12.  I  had  an  appointment  in  the  new  church  at  ten 
o'clock.  I  endeavoured  to  suit  my  subject  to  the  season,  and 
to  the  time  of  affliction  in  our  towns  and  cities  ;  it  was  2  Chroo, 
vii.  13,  14. 

VIRGINIA. — Saturday  13.  We  rode  thirty-two  miles  to  Turner's, 
Here  man  and  beast  beginning  to  fail,  I  rested  on  Sabbath  day  ;  we 
had  a  long  ride  to  Fairfax  chapel,  where  we  came  in  about  twelve 
o'clock.  In  consequence  of  my  affliction  of  body  and  mind  I  was 
but  poorly  prepared  to  preach ;  however,  I  attempted  a  gloss  on  1 
Peter  ii.  1,  2,  3.  Here  I  saw  and  conversed  with  my  old  friend 
William  Walters. 

Monday  15.  We  came  to  Alexandria — I  preached  in  the  evening 
on  Col.  iii.  15. 

Tuesday  16.  Brother  Lee  and  John  Harper  accompanied  me  : 
we  came  through  excessive  heat  and  dust,  thirty  miles,  to  Ward's, 

Wednesday  17.  I  came  to  the  widow  Conner's,  who  keeps  a  de- 
cent boarding-house  :  we  rode  this  day  about  forty  miles,  having 
nothing  to  eat  but  a  little  bread  and  cheese.  On  Thursday,  twelve 
miles  to  the  widow  Collin's,  where  we  breakfasted  between  eleven 
and  twelve  o'clock,  and  in  our  usual  manner  prayed,  and  addressed 
the  family  about  their  souls  ;  and  then  rode  on,  ten  miles,  to  brother 
Lyon's.  Whilst  others  leave  us,  and  say  much  evil  of  us,  these 
people  in  Caroline  county  keep  closely  to  us.  I  felt  very  unwell, 
occasioned,  I  suppose,  by  riding  so  late  and  early  through  the  exces- 
sive heat,  dust,  and  dews. 

Friday  19.  We  came  through  the  dust,  thirty-five  miles,  to  Rich- 
mond :  here  I  heard  of  the  death  of  John  Norman  Jones,  who  de- 
parted in  joy  and  peace  in  Charleston  :  this  is  the  second  preacher 


HEV.  FRANr.JS  ASB'  :  Al,. 

we  have  lost  in  about  one  year  in  that  city.     Likewise  of  Hie'., 
and  Brush,  in  New  York  ;  M'dee  and  iMckens,  m  Philadelphia 
Francis  Spry  in  Baltimore.     M'Gee,  William  Dougharty,  J.  lir 
Stephen  Davi3,  John  Ragen,  James  King,  ami  John  Dickens,  died 
of  the  malignant  fever. 

Saturday  CJO.  I  rested  in  Richmond  :  I  here  rnu*l  ?r-<-ord  my 
thanks  to  my  ancient  and  firm  friend,  Philip  Ro^er?,  for  the  loan  ot 
a  horse,  when  mine  was  fully  worn  down,  and  unable  to  stand  my 
long  and  rapid  rides. 

Sabbath  21.  I  preached  in  the  court-house,  at  the  east  end  of  the 
city,  on  1  John  i.  C,  7.  ;   and  in  the  afternoon  on  Rom.  x.    13,  1  1 
15,  16.     On  Monday  22,   1  preached  at  Manchester,  on  Hebr.  viii. 
10,  11.  and  on  Tuesday  rode  to  Petersburg  by  three  o'clock,  and 
preached  on  Hebr.  iii.  lu.     I  spent  the  evening  with,  ami  ^opt  at 
Joseph  Ilarding's  ;  it  was  a  renewal  of  our  former  friendship.      I 
spent  Wednesday  at  Wood  Tucker's,  in  ns  sweet  affection  ;H  in  an 
cient  times.     I  exhorted  his  children  to  come  to  Chi 

Thursday  25.  In   company  with  my  never-failing  friend  (. 
is  man  can  be  so)  Richard  Whatcoat,  I  came  to  Roper's.    My  h< 
was  taken  sick,  which  detained  me  a  night.     On  Friday,  at  Her.rx 
Reese's,  my  subject  was  Matt.  vi.  16.     1  had  the  pleasure  of  see- 
ing seven  preachers  present.     On  Saturday  27,  we  Lad  what  \\ 
much  wanted — rain. 

Sunday  28.  I  rode  sixteen  miles  and  preached  at  3Iaye8's  cha- 
pel, lodging  at  Peter  Robinson's  :  here  1  left  my  carriage  and  sick 
horse  with  brother  Mansfield.     Monday,  at  Trotter'?.     Tuesday  f 
met  the  local  brethren  ;    in  speaking  of  our  own  soul*,  and    tin 
work  of  God  upon  others,  we  were  quickened. 

Wednesday  31.  At  Paup's  chapel  I  preached  on  Cph.  v. 
Brothers  Lee  and  Harper  exhorted  :  the  meeting  continued  until 
three  o'clock.    It  was  a  cold  day,  but  a  warm  meeting  ;  two  or  tl 
souls  professed  to  find  the  Lord  in  his  pardoning  grace. 

Thursday,  November  1.  It  rained.     On  Friday  we  rode  to  Ben 
jamin  Johnson's  :   here  we  talked  over  ancient  and  piv-ent   In; 
and  of  our  feelings  :  the  work  reviveth  in  this  society,  and  it  : 
we  wish  it  to  be,  and  should  be  :  the  young  people  are  coming  to 
Christ,  and  will  fill  up  the  places  of  their  parents,  who  mu*t  shortly 
go  to  glory.     In  the  evening  wo  came  to  brother  Meridith's  :   God 
hath  blessed  his  little  son  ;   but  we  found  the  father 

Saturday.;.   Rode  to  brother   Howard's,   nenr  U«  moali-Kiver 
xvhere   we  designed  to  keep  the   ^ab'mh.      I   f< •!'  Mie  wint  ot  * 
Monk  or  the  rarrin^«> 


•4\r[«-    tSRl-RY's  JOL'RN-jtf  .  [iT 

,-i.iv  I.   I  have  peace  in  my  soul,  but  feel  uncomfortable  in 
body. 

•ulay  5.  This  was  a  great  day  :  many  preachers,  travelling 
und  local,  were  present ;  my  subject  was  Eph.  iv.  11,  12. ;  we  had 
a  melting  lime  :  brother  Dromgoold  and  myself  wept ;  his  wife  and 
others  praised  the  Lord. 

NORTH  CAROLINA.— Tuesday  6.  We  crossed  the  Roanoak  at 
Moselej's  ferry,  and  stopped  at  M'Lane's  ;  here  God  is  working 
amongst  the  people.  We  came  on  Wednes-day,  by  riding  two 
hours  in  the  night  through  the  woods,  to  Harris's,  where  I  preach- 
ed on  Thursday  8th  from  2  Peter  i.  4.  On  Friday  we  rode  to 
Colonel  Edmund  Taylor's.  Sabbath  day,  at  Bank's  church,  I 
preached  on  Hebr.  vi.  11,  12.  and  administered  the  supper  of  the 
Lord,  and  ordained  John  Whitefield  deacon  ;  the  church  was  so 
very  open  that  we  could  not  be  outwardly  comfortable ;  we 
tried  to  remedy  it  in  some  measure  by  closing  up  some  of  the 
v.indows  with  blankets.  I  lodged  at  Nathan  Norris's,  one  of  my 
sons  in  Christ,  now  a  father  of  children,  and  a  very  useful 
preacher. 

Monday  13.  We  rode  twenty  miles  to  Charles  Cannon's:  and 
on  Tuesday,  twenty-five  miles  to  Snipe's.  Wednesday  we  forded 
How- River,  and  came  through  a  curious  path,  for  a  carriage,  to  the 
new  meeting-house  on  Hickory  Mountain  ;  we  dined  with  Mr, 
Reeves,  an  ancient  friend  of  mine,  and  thence  proceeded  on  to 
brother  M-Master's,  a  local  preacher :  we  have  rode  this  day  thirty 
miles. 

Thursday  16.  We  rode  from  the  upper  branches  of  Rocky  - 
Kiver,  twenty  miles,  to  Pleasant  Garden  :  when  I  came  to  the 
meeting-house,  I  had  little  strength  of  mind  or  body ;  we  lodged 
at  Daniel  Sherwood's  ;  my  aged  brethren  and  sisters  from  Mary- 
land and  Deleware,  rejoiced  to  see  me,  a  poor,  feeble  man,  as  I 
was  ;  they  had  seen  me  in  better  times. 

Friday  17.   We   rode  to    Mr.    Bell's,  on   Deep-River;    thence 

thirty  miles  to  Woods'?,  upon  River  ;  this  day  was  very 

warm,  and  we  had  exceedingly  uncomfortable  roads.  Going  at  this 
rate  is  very  trying  ;  but  it  v\ill  make  death  welcome,  and  eternal 
rest  desirable.  Saturday  and  Sunday,  at  quarterly  meeting,  my  sub- 
ject was  Acts  iii.  26.  We  rode  down  twelve  miles  to  D.  West's, 
and  were  benighted,  which  ill  suited  me.  As  we  had  to  travel  an 
unknown  road  to  Henry  Ledbetter's,  I  wished  to  continue  on  our 
journey,  and  not  stop  at  Hancock  ;  but  the  people  thought  and  said 
otherwise,  so  1  stopped,  and  brother  Lee  preached  :  after  which 


REV.  FRAK- 

1  gave  a  discourse  on  Acts  n.  .;  >.  and  came  off  i  1).  V. 

escorted  rap  down  to  the  ferry,  where  we  called  in  vain  for  the 
flat  :   D.   West  went  over,   and  it  was  with  difficulty   that   he  per- 
suaded the  ferryman  to  come  with  the  boat  and  t  -k-  it  being 
dark,  and  the    win,]   him  in,:   very   Mrong  ;md   cold,   we  h 
work  in  crossing  :  I  t.dd  the  compan\  MJ  in  tin-  tu.-inu,-.  hut  -tay  I 
must  and  preach,  or  be  accounted    proud.      At  lieu      I      !>><jtter's 
I  preached  on  Hebr.  x              »    and   it  John  liar.d.-H's,  2  Cor.  vi.  1 
Brother  Jackson  had  secured  for  me  ridiug  aud  preaching  enough 
as  far  as  Camden. 

Thursday  2-1.  We  recrossed  the  Pee  Dee  River  at  C.'s  ferry; 
and  made  it  about  eighteen  miles  to  Mask's,  where  I  preached  on 
H»br.  iv.  1.  On  Friday,  at  la-th,.-l  on  2  Cor.  vi.  11.  Saturday 
and  Sunday,  at  quarterly  meeting,  at  '  ••nloun-d  rn.m, 

raeeting- house,  near  Webb's  ferry.  My  -ulject  on  Saturday  was 
Acts  ii.  17,  1C.  and  on  Sabbath  day  2  Tim.  iv.  1,2.  \VC  theu 
rode  seven  miles  to  Isaac  Jackson's.  Monday  rodu. 

Tuesday  29.  Preached,  and  rode  twm'j-two  miles  to  Mr. 
Blakeney's,  on  Thomson's  Creek.  Wi-dne«da\  r«>df  to  Horton's, 
and  preached  on  Gen.  xxiii.  1 9.  At  Crnl's  meetinghouse,  on 

Thursday,  on  .  and  at  Granney's  Quarter  on  2  Cor.  lii.  9. 

and  on  Friday  we  came  into  Camden.  Brother  Lee  had  gone 
along  on  brother  Blanton's  district. 

SOVTH  CAROLINA.  —  We  have  rode  since  brother  Jackson  hath 
had  the  command  of  us  nearly  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles,  from 
Montgomery,  in  North  Carolina,  to  Camden,  in  South  Carolina. 
If  I  attempt  my  appointment*  that  brother  Lee  has  gone  upon,  I 
must  ride  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  next  week  to  Washington, 
in  Georgia.  I  have  made  little  or  no  observation  on  the  nay,  J 
have  been  so  unwell  The  people  are  remarkably  kind  in  thi> 
country.  I  preached  in  Camden  on  1  Kings  viii.  30,  36.  Here 
\ve  have  a  beautiful  meeting-house.  It  was  a  time  of  very 
severe  drought,  but  I  hope  this  place  will  jet  be  visited  in  mercy. 
Monday  we  rode  to  br  -ther  James  Kembart's,  and  on  Turid.iv  I 
preached  there  on  Hebr.  vi.  18.  Here  we  seated  ourselves  for 
writing  until  Saturday  10.  On  Sabbath  day  my  subjrrt  u 
iv.  20.  Monday,  we  rode  to  brother  Hradford's,  and  on  'rue- 
to  Jack-Creek.  The  changes  of  weather  and  lodging  affect  me 
much.  I  called  and  preached  at  Robert  Bowman's.  On  Friday 
we  came  to  Monk's  corner,  and  on  Saturday  to  Charleston.  I 
ing,  and  riding  through  the  lioav  .-ise  me  to  feel  unwell. 

I  received  a  cooling  breeze  in  a  letter  from  the  north.     For  the  • 


•-     FHANcIS   ASBtRv's  JOURSAi,.  £1799, 

lime  I  opened  my  mouth  upon  Psalm  Isvi.  13,  14.  We  have  peace 
!  good  prospect*  in  Charleston,  very  large  congregations  attend 
the  ministration  of  the  word.  Brother  Harper  opened  his  mis- 
sion upon  il  Thy  \vord  have  I  hid  in  my  heart  that  I  might  not  sin 
against  thee.:'  la  the  evening  I  spoke  upon  our  Lord's  lamenta- 
tion over  Jerusalem.  On  Christmas  day  I  preached  from  St. 
Luke  ii.  14.  and  at  the  new  church  on  Haggai  ii.  7. 

January  1,  1799.  Our  yearly  conference  assembled  at  Charles 
ton.     We  kept  our  seats  for  four  days  ;  thirty  preachers  present. 
We  had  great  harmony  and  good  humour.     1  gare  a  short  dis- 
course, addressed  to  the  conference,  from  Hebr.  xiii.  17. 

I.  Your  guides — consequently  governors.     These  how  needful 
.n  the  night,  if  there  be  ignorance  in  the  traveller,  and  danger  in 
;he  way,  deep  pits,  wild  beasts,  or  bad  men.     If  it  be  in  the  morn- 
ing, or  noon  day,  how  natural  it  is  to  follow  a  guide  ;  how  necessity 
-and  fear,  upon  the  part  of  the  traveller,  will  make  him  obedient. 

II.  People  are  to  be   led  into  essential  truth,  duty,  and  expe- 
rience. 

III.  Ministers  are  to  watch  for  their  souls  as  they  that  must 
^ive  an  account — the  general  and  special  accountability  to  God, 
Christ,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,   to  the  ministry,  and  to  the  church, 
and   to  all  men  ;  they  must  give  an  account  for  the  loss  of  the 
Christian  traveller,  if  that  loss  be  a  consequence  of  neglect  in  the 
guide.     The  joy  faithful  ministers  have  in  the  prosperity,  spi- 
rituality,  and  happiness  of  the  church;  their  grief  or  groaning, 
when  so  far  from  gaining  other  souls,  they  lose  some  already  par- 
tially gained  ;  how  much  the  interest  of  souls  is  concerned  in  the 
prosperity  of  the  ministry.     Pray  for  us :   the  great  duty  of  the 
flock.     The  argument. — We    have    a  good  conscience  :    that  this 
being  the  case,  their  prayers  might  be  answered.     Live  honestly, 
do  our  duty  faithfully,  and  take  what  is  allowed  us  as  wages — 
pa}  ing  our  just  debts  to  souls. 

I  ordained  three  elders  and  seven  deacons.  The  generosity  of 
ihe  people  in  Charleston  was  great.  After  keeping  our  ministry 
and  their  horses  they  gave  us  nearly  one  hundred  dollars  for  the 
benefit  of  those  preachers  who  are  in  want. 

Sabbath  day  6.  Very  cold,  sleet  in  the  streets,  and  dangerous 
walking.  We  bad  a  solemn  sacramental  season  ;  and  a  goodly 
number  of  "  Ethiopians  stretched  out  their  hands  to  the  Lord." 

Saturday  12.    I-Iy  time  ha?  been  chiefly  taken  np  in  composing 

nd  selecting  from  Cave's  Lives  of  the  Fathers,  showing  the  pri- 

rc  ep^ropary.     We  are  laid  up  for  winter,  when  it  is  like 


i-i.  .  -AL. 

summer.  I  hope  to  labour  upon  the  Lord's -day  in  the  churches, 
so  called. 

Sabbath  day  20.  I  preached  at  Bethel  :  my  subject  was  Mark 
xi.  17.;  •'  And  he  taught,  saying  unto  them,  Is  it  not  written,  My 
house  shall  be  called  of  all  nations  the  house  of  pray'  r  .'  but  ye 
have  made  it  a  den  of  thieve-.  At  the  old  church  my  subject 
was  2  Peter  i.  1C.  A  group  of  sinners  gathered  around  the  door, 
and  when  I  took  the  pulpit  they  went  off  with  a  shout  :  I  felt  what 
was  coming.  In  the  evening  there  was  a  proper  uproar,  like  old 
times.  I  employed  the  last  week  in  reading,  writing,  visiting,  and 
attending  feasts  of  charity  ;  one  with  the  white  society,  and  the 
other  with  the  Africans. 

Sabbath  day  27.  1  preached  in  the  morning  at  Bethel,  from 
Hebr.  xiii.  20,  21. 

I.  It  was  a  prayer  :  as  he,  Paul,  had  asked  their  prayers,  he  gave 
them  his. 

II.  "  The  God  of  peace  :"  the  gracious  relation  of  the  Hebrew^ 
as  reconciled  to  God. 

III.  "  Brought  again  from  the  dead  ;"  when  it  might  be  thought, 
all  was  lost  when  Jesus  was  dead  ;  again  he  had  brought  the  He- 
brews from  a  state  of  death  in  trespasses  and  sin?. 

IV.  This  was  more  than  bringing  the  apostle  to  them,  although 
he  might  be  given  to  them  of  God  to  their  prayers. 

V.  "  Great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep'' — all  the  sheep,  Jews  and 
Gentiles.      The  Shepherd  of  the  shepherds ;  doing  really,  what  they 
under  shepherds,  do  instrumental!)'  :  he  seeketh,  keepeth,  ft-edeth. 
qnd  watcheth  his  ordained  flock  against  thoi'c  who  would  steal  01 
kill  them,  and  alienate  them  from  Jesus,  or  the  true  fold,  and  faith- 
ful pastors. 

VI.  "Through  the  blood   of  the  everlasting  covenant:"  see 
Exodus  xxiv.  3.  Moses  said,   Behold  the   blood  of  the   covenant 
when  he  sprinkled  the  people  ;  it  is  this   that   meriteth,  sealeth. 
and  sanctifieth. 

VII.  "  Make  you  perfect    in  every  good   work" — as   to  the 
quantity  and  quality  of  good  works  :  and, 

Lastly,  "  Pleasing  to  God" — in  gracious  affection?,  purity  of  in- 
tention, and  uniformity  of  conduct ;   and  all  by  the  merit  and  inter 
cession  of  Jesus  Christ.      In  the   afternoon    I    preachc  'jm- 

berland-street  meeting-house  on  Deut.  iv 

Wednesday  30.    Once  more,  through  divine 
Charleston,  and  came  twelve  miles  to  brother  -T  ickcc' 
we  rested  one  dav. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY:S  JOURNAL.  [1799. 

Sunday,  February  3.  By  riding  until  ten  o'clock  in  the  night,  we 
came,  fifty  miles,  to  Mr.  Boon's.  On  Saturday  I  rode  alone  to 
Georgetown  :  we  have  made  it  nearly  eighty  miles  from  Charles- 
ton to  this  place.  I  preached  on  Galatians  v.  24 — 26.  :  First,  They 
that  are  Christ's  in  a  special  spiritual  sense  ; — his  sheep,  redeemed, 
sought,  and  saved  ;  his  children,  bearing  his  image.  Secondly, 
How  they  are  to  be  distinguished  : — they  crucify  the  flesh  with  the 
passions  and  desires  thereof; — the  sinful  love  of  the  world,  with 
the  sinful  fear  and  joy  also.  Thirdly,  Let  us  walk  in  the  spirit,  as 
an  evidence  that  we  live  in  the  spirit.  Fourthly,  Let  us  not  be 
*'  desirous  of  vain  glory  ;"  in  forms,  ordinances,  or  any  outward 
appearances  of  men  and  things.  Fifthly,  Let  us  not  by  such  mean 
measures  "  provoke  one  another,"  or  envy  one  another.  In  the 
afternoon,  I  preached  on  Isaiah  Ixvi.  5. 

Pflonday  4.  Was  an  uncomfortable  day  ;  so  we  did  not  ride. 

Tuesday  5.  We  crossed  Black- River,  at  Gadsby's  ferry  :  the 
bridge  over  one  of  the  natural  canals  was  broken  ;  we  had  pre-- 
sence  of  mind  to  loose  the  long  reins  of  the  bridle  :  brother  Lee  put 
the  horse  through  the  ford,  and  I  met  him  on  the  other  side,  and 
guided  him  out  safe.  This  day  we  made  it  nearly  forty  miles  to 
Rogers's,  near  Kingston. 

Wednesday  8.  We  rode  in  a  cold  day,  thirty  miles,  to  dear  bro- 
ther Hawkins's,  upon  Little  River,  crossing  Wacawman  at  Star- 
Bluff. 

NORTH-CAROLINA. — Thursday  9.  I  preached  at  the  meeting- 
house, from  Luke  iv.  18,  19.  ;  and  came  the  same  evening  to  fa- 
ther William  Cause's  ;  where  I  preached,  on  Friday  10,  upon  Rom. 
v.  1 — 5.  we  had  a  living  season  here.  I  paid  a  visit  to  the  sea,  and 
saw  the  breakers; — awfully  tremendous  sight  and  sound! — but  hotv 
curious  to  see  the  seagull  take  the  clams  out  of  the  sand  and  bear 
them  up  into  the  air,  and  drop  them  down  to  break  them,  and  then 
eat  the  flesh  !  This  I  saw  demonstrated  ;  and  if  they  fail  once  in 
breaking  the  shell,  they  will  take  it  up  again,  and  bear  it  higher, 
and  cast  it  down  upon  a  hard  spot  of  ground,  until  they  effect  their 
purpose 

We  are  now  in  Bladen  circuit,  Brunswick  county,  North  Caro- 
lina. I  have  travelled  nearly  four  hundred  miles  in  the  southern 
states,  and  spent  three  mouths  therein.  We  rested  on  Saturday 
9,  and  on 

Sunday  10.  We  attended  at  Shallot  church  ;  my  subject  was 
xiv.  22.  I  showed.  First,  That  the  souls  of  the  disciples  mu?f 


J  .    KKAV 


be  confirmed  m  doctrine,  ezpcrictx  i\  ]>r.irti.  e,   and   dHriplinp.  ol 
the  Gospel  of  Christ  in  the  church  of  Cot).     It  was  observed,  how 
plainly  these  were  taught  in  the  oracles  of  God.     I   offered  t> 
arguments  in  favour  of  revelation,  to  induce  a  continuance  in  tin; 
substance  and  exercise  of  faith  through  life  :   through  much  tribula- 
tion entering  the  eternal  kingdom  of  glory  :   an  object  so  . 
not  to  be  gained  without  great  trials  from  every  enemy,  in  doing 
and  suffering  the  whole  will  of  God.     The  day  was  so  eicessiv 
cold,  and  the  house  so  open,  that  1  was  chilled  through  my  whole 
system.     After  meeting  we  rode  on  to  Lockwood's  Folly  :  here 
are  several  young  converts. 

Monday  11.  We  came  by  Town-Creek,  where  I  stopt  fourteen 
years  ago  ;  but  what  a  change  since  then  !  Stephen  Daniel  and  his 
wife  are  no  more  ;  but  their  dear  children  are  coming  to  Christ,  to 
till  up  their  parent's  places. 

Sister  Daniel  was  an  excellent  woman.  It  seems  as  though  old 
Brunswick  in  North  Carolina,  would  be  a  Methodist  county,  and 
that  most  of  the  rulers  would  believe  in  Christ. 

Tuesday  12.  I  preached  at  Sullivan's,  on  Town-Creek,  from  Gal. 
vi.  9.  the  house  was  crowded  with  people  ;  there  were  many  chil- 
dren to  baptise  ;  but  my  spirits  were  sunk,  and  I  had  no  limit  t<> 
speak. 

Wednesday  13.  We  came  on  to  Wilmington  ;  here  I  was  in  low 
spirits  still.  This  town  has  suffered  by  two  dreadful  fires  ;  but  tln> 
people  are  rebuilding  swiftly.  I  was  so  afflicted  in  body,  that 
brother  Lee  had  to  preach  two  sermons  in  the  church  :  the  people 
were  very  attentive. 

Thursday  14.  We  rode  twenty  miles  to  Nixon's  ;  where  I  preach- 
ed a  little  to  ;t  little  flock,  as  there  was  only  a  half-day's  noti 
Through  this  day  I  have  been  ama/.ingly  dejected,   although  I  am 
abundantly  more  happy  in  constitution  and  feeling  than  formerly. 

Friday  15.  At  Stone  Bay  :  no  preaching  by  the  Methodists  at  thi« 
place.  We  lodged  at  friend  Johnson's  :  on  my  last  visit  I  preached 
here.  We  made  it  twenty-seven  miles. 

Saturday  16.  We  rode  eighteen  miles  to  Lot  Ballard's  :  here 
were  at  home.     It  was  an  excessively  cold  day  ;  at  noon  it  chan- 
ged to  bail,  and  terminated  in  rain.     I  housed  myself:  and  brotli«  ' 
Lee  went  to  the  New-River  chapel  to  preach  to  the  people. 

Sunday  17.   Cold  as  the  day  was,  and  unwell  as  1  felt  niyiel 
could  not  be  absent  from  the  house  of  God  :  my  *ul>je.  t  v 
iii.  10.    The  ?laves  wnro  not  permitted  to  come  into  the   ho 
If. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASEURV'S    JOURNAL.  [!?' 

We  rode  to  William  Bryan's,  at  Bryan  Town,  upon  Cedar-Creek  : 
and  on  Monday  we  held  a  meeting  at  Colonel  Bryan's,  the  father  of 
William. 

Tuesday  19.  We  were  at  Trenton  court-house  ;  and  on  Wednes- 
day at  Lee's  chapel  :  my  subject  here  was  Micah  vi.  6,  7,  8.  I 
endeavoured  to  show,  First,  That  it  is  still  the  voice  of  many, 
'  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before  the  Lord,  to  enjoy  his  favour, 
and  presence,  and  bow  myself  before  the  high  God  ?"  that  is,  wor- 
ship him  acceptably,  as  though  they  would  give  all  they  have  in  the 
world,  no  sacrifice  should  be  too  great ;  but  men  are  often  great  in 
promise,  but  defective  in  performance  ;  they  promise  much  and  do 
little.  He  hath  showed  thee,  O  man  !  ivhat  is  good — that  is,  true  re- 
ligion ;  the  blessed  effects  and  fruits  of  it  ;  do  justly  and  walk  hum- 
bly with  thy  God  ;  see  Deut.  x.  12.  Hosea  xii.  6.  First,  Do  justly  ac- 
cording to  human  laws,  and  the  claims  and  rights  of  men  with  men, 
as  it  respects  continents,  kingdoms,  or  families.  Second,  Do  jus- 
tice as  it  concerns  the  laws  of  God — as  the  second  table  is  a  claim 
of  justice  to  obey  parents,  and  not  to  take  mens'  lives  nor  their 
wives — to  bear  a  true  witness.  Third,  Do  justly,  according  to  the 
commandment  of  Christ,  Matt.  viL  12.  "  Love  mercy,"  as  it  ex- 
tends to  the  souls  and  bodies  of  men  ;  this  requires  more  than  to  do 
justly  to  them  :  "  walk  humbly  with  thy  God"— feel  thy  total  poverty 
and  universal  dependance  upon  God  for  all  things,  spiritual  and  tem- 
poral. 

We  lodged  at  Mrs.  Knight's,  the  mother  of  our  dear  deceased 
brother  Ahairs,  once  a  travelling  preacher  amongst  us. 

Thursday  21.  We  came  to  Newbern,  originally  settled  by  Ger- 
mans, and  called  after  old  Berne,  in  Switzerland.  For  sixteen  miles 
of  this  road  we  had  heavy  rain  ;  but  I  was  well  cased  up,  notwith- 
standing which  I  took  cold.  We  have  travelled  from  Charleston 
three  hundred  and  thirty  miles  in  this  our  retrograde  journev,  which 
we  have  made  longer  by  frequently  turning  out  of  our  way. 

Saturday  23.  My  subjects  at  Newbern  were  1  Peter  ii.  11,  12. 
Hebr.  vii.  25.  1  Tim.  iv.  8.  We  had  very  uncomfortable  weather. 
We  made  some  spiritual  and  temporal  regulations,  in  hopes  that 
matters  would  work  much  better  in  future. 

Monday  25.  It  was  cold  to  purpose,  and  we  had  twenty-four 
miles  to  ride  to  William  Cox's,  on  Neuse,  near  the  mouth  of  Con- 
tentny:  here  my  text  was  1  John  iv.  16,  17.  We  hence  in  a 
manner  fled  through  the  counties  of  Craven,  Lenoir,  Glasgow, 
and  Edgecombe. 


• 

Tuesday  L'G.  I  did  not  attend  at  the  Rainbow  meeting-hous»:  m 
consequence  of  my  illness,  the  effect  of  my  nJing  in  the  rold  th«- 
day  before. 

Wednesday  'J7.  I  was  comforted  in  administering  the  sacrament ; 
after  which,  as  the  day  was  damp,  1  It  tt  brother  Lee  to  finish,  and 
rode  along  sixteen  miles  to  Setli  Spavin's  ;  a  deeply  <!i-tre-,scd  man 
:or  the  loss  of  his  dear  wife,  who  lately  departed  \.\n<  li 

Thursday  28.    We  rode  thirty-four  miles  to   brother  Toole's  ; 
the  rain  poured  down  upon  us  on  our  way,  and  we   had  to  feed 
aider  a  pine-tree. 

Friday,  March  1.  We  made  out  to  ride  ten  miles,  to  Mr.  Hod- 
ges, near  Sosson's  bridge,  upon  Fishing-Creek  ;  where  we  wcr^ 
kindly  and  comfortably  entertained. 

Saturday  '2.    We  came  to  brother  Bradford's  quarterly  meeting : 
J  was  glad,  after  riding  sixteen  miles  through  the  damp  anil 
cold,  to  sit  by  the  fire. 

Sabbath-day  3.    I  preached  a  little  on  2  Cor.  iv.  li   -18. 

Monday  4.  The  generally  excessive  rains  having  made  the  lio- 
unolce  impassable  at  the  nearest  ferry,  we  had  to  ride  a  circuitous 
rout  through  Halifax,  which  made  it  about  thirty  miles  to  Kichard 
Whittaker's  in  Northampton.  We  had  a  bad  swamp  to  cross,  but 
I  kept  out  of  the  water.  It  was  well  for  me  my  carriage  did  not 
upset  in  the  water,  which  it  was  very  near  doing.  To  travel 
thirty  miles  in  such  a  coW  day  without  fire,  and  no  food,  except  a 
bit  of  biscuit,  is  serious.  We  were  received  gladly  by  our  waiting 
brethren,  Whatcoat,  Wanner,  and  Lamboth.  I  am  of  opinion  that 
we  have  left  five  hundred  miles  on  the  other  side  of  the  Roanoke, 
in  all  the  ground  we  have  rode  over  from  Charleston,  in  South, 
to  Halifax,  in  North  Carolina.  I  went  to  Rehoboth  (a  new  meeting- 
house) and  preached  on  2  Cor.  ii.  1-4. 

Wednesday  G.    The  cold  and  frost  was  very  severe,  and  it  v 
with  great  difficulty  we  made  our  way   through  the   swamp   from 
Kichard  Whittaker's.     We  rode  to  St.  John's  chapel,  where  bro- 
ther Lee  preached  upon   Rom.  v.  5.     The  house  being  open,  1 
was  most  severely  chilled,  and  unfit  for  any   public   service.     W, 
lodged  at  Williford  HortonV. 

Thursday  7.  We  rode  to  Winton court-house;  where  1  preached 
on  Hebr.  iii.  7.     Two  thirds   of  my  congregation  wore  wm 
perhaps  there  will  be  more  men  when  I  go  there  again. 

Friday  8.    We  rode  to  Knotty-Pine. 

Saturday  'J.    I  preached  at  Knotty-Pine   chapel  on   den. 
--19.  :   I  was  elaborate  upon  personal  and.  family  piety. 


340  KLV.  utANcis  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1799. 

f  saw  sister  Baker  ;  she  standeth  fast  in  the  liberty  wherewith 
Christ  hath  made  her  free,  and  I  hope  and  believe  God  will  save 
her  children  :  our  souls  were  mutually  blessed. 

Sabbath  day  10.  At  Gates  court-house  many  serious  people 
attended :  my  subject  was  Hebr.  vii.  26.  I  administered  the 
sacrament ;  and  had  a  solemn,  feeling  season. 

Monday  11.  We  rode  to  Constants  chapel,  on  one  of  the  bran- 
ches of  Bennett's  creek.  The  main  creek  affords  a  landing  at 
Gates  court-house,  and  communicates,  after  a  few  miles,  with 
Chowan- River.  I  was  made  very  comfortable  in  soul  and  body  at 
Isaac  Hunter's  ;  and  had  a  happy  meeting  with  the  poor  Africans 
at  night. 

Tuesday  12.  The  coolness  of  the  weather  increases.  We  rode 
thirty  miles  to  George  Sutton's,  in  Perquimons  county. 

Wednesday  13.  It  both  snowed  and  rained.  We  had  a  meeting 
at  a  house  near  Maggshead  chapel  ;  where  I  preached  a  short  ser- 
mon from  1  Peter  iv.  18.  We  lodged  at  J.  W 's,  a  comfort- 
able house,  after  a  very  uncomfortable  snowy  day. 

Thursday  14.  At  Nixonton  I  declined  preaching  and  made  an 
exhortation,  after  brother  Lee  had  given  them  a  long  sermon.  It 
is  probably  eight  years  since  I  came  through  this  circuit,  which 
caused  the  people  to  exert  themselves  in  coming  out,  so  that  we 
had  a  very  large  congregation. 

We  have  rode,  since  we  came  across  Roanoak,  one  hundred  and 
forty-three  miles  to  John  Russell's.  We  have  moved  rapidly 
through  Gates,  Chowan,  Perquimons,  and  Pasquotank  counties  : 
as  we  pass  we  have  lovely  levels,  fine  white  cedar  on  the  rivers, 
creeks,  and  swamps,  for  between  six  or  seven  hundred  miles  :  from 
the  low  lands  in  Georgia,  to  Black-water  in  Virginia ;  it  is  fine 
lumber  land,  but  unhealthy  in  some  places. 

Friday  15.  It  began  to  rain  heavily,  but  ceased  about  twelve 
o'clock  ;  we  then  rode  to  a  school-house,  where  many  attended  : 
my  subject  was  1  Peter  v.  10.  I  had  the  company  of  several 
preachers.  I  then  rode  on  eight  miles  to  brother  Probry's ;  it 
was  good  for  me  to  be  there.  Saturday  16.  I  felt  greatly  depress- 
ed in  spirit,  owing,  no  doubt,  in  some  measure,  to  the  changeable 
state  of  the  weather.  We  crossed  the  Pasquotank  at  Sawyer's 
ferry  ;  here  we  were  told  that  we  had  but  seven  miles  to  ride  ;  but 
we  wandered  until  we  made  it  twelve.  We  learned  that  one  of 
the  widow  Sawyer's  daughters  was  lately  committed  to  the  dust ;  at 
the  gate  of  the  yard  we  found  the  mother  in  tears.  As  I  was  not 
ible  in  body  or  mind  to  preach;  I  gave  an  exhortation  :  and  after  we 


•-.'.] 

hail  dined,  we  rode  ten  miles  to  Samuel  Simmons'?,  across  the 
North-River  swamps,  which  aflbrds  as  low  ;md  as  good  land  as  any 
part  of  the  beech  lands  of  Cumberland  or  Kentucky.  \\'e  swiftly 
passed  through  Camdrn  and  Currituck  counties. 

Sunday  17.    I  made  a  feeble  effort  to  pre..cb   at  Williarus's  cha 
pel  on  James  i.   Jl,  J.j.   our  congregation   wai    lar^c.      I  returned 
and  left  brother  Lee  to  finish.     We   lodged  at  brother  BrunneU'e. 
On  Monday  we   had  u  violent  slorin  of  wind  and  snow,  which  1 
cd  until  ten  o'clock,  and  we  had  a  bitter  ride  of  nineteen  or  twenty 
miles  to   James  Wilson's,  at  Hickory-Ground,  in    Virginia.      1  HJ- 
excecdingly  chilled  on  the  way,  the  snow  being  from  six  to  s< 
inches  deep,  and  it  blew  a  heavy  cold  wind. 

VIUUIMA. — Tuesday  19.   I   preached  at  brother  Wilson's,  fruu, 
1  Cor.  xv.  58.     I  sent  my  carriage  for  James  .Morris,  (formerh 
with  us)  afterward  an  Episcopal  minister,  and  now  near  death  :   h- 
expressed  great  consolation  in  God,  and  love  to  me.     He   hath  a 
pious  wife,  who  is  the  mother  of  nine  children.     We  lodged  with 
John  Hodge,  who  joined  the  Methodists  in  early  life.     I  was  ph- 
ed  to  find   that  the  elderly  Methodists   had  put   their  children  to 
trades  to  learn  to  \\ork  for  themselves.     1  am  in  hopes  the  parents 
will  not  leave  them  their  slaves,  but  manumit  them — by  n-i'/J  at 
least. 

Wednesday  20.  At  Cutherall's,  near  the  great  bridge,  and  ueai 
Manning's,  where  we  preached  before  the  revolutionary  war.  On 
Thursday  we  rode  through  the  rain  to  Norfolk,  where  I  preached 
on  Friday  from  Gal.  ii.  '20.  "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ." — Christ 
crucified  :  and  Paul  crucified  after  the  likeness  of  Christ,  and  for 
Jesus — crucified  to  the  world  in  afflictions,  hopes,  and  desires  ;  J 
live — 1  have  had  a  spiritual  birth,  and  live  a  spiritual  life  of  faith, 
love,  and  holiness;  yet  not  I,  as  the  author  of  my  own  birth  or 
Jife  :  '•  Christ  liveth  in  me, "--by  his  Spirit  ;  "  and  the  life  I  now 
live  is  by  faith  of  the  Son  of  God;" — faith  of,  and  faith  in  Chris! 
— "  who  hath  loved  me,  and  given  himself  for  me" — that  is,  1 
know  and  feel  my  personal  and  real  interest  in,  and  union  with 
Him. 

Wre  had  a  comfortable  sacramental  season  in  Norfolk  on  Master- 
day  ;  and  at  Portsmouth,  I  spoke  on  James  v.  '20.  Brother  Le< 
preached  on  Romans  ii.  11.  1  Cor.  ix.  19 — 22.  1  Tim.  iv.  1' 

Monday  25.  We  rode  eighteen  miles  to  Geonje  Walker's,  in 
I'rincess  Ann  county,  where  I.  with  great  labour,  preached  ou 
Luke  xxiv.  .10,  47,  4i>.  We  calculate;  that  wo  have  rode  eiglr 
hundred  and  eighteen  miles  since  we  left  C 


ir.  FRANCIS  ASBCRY'S  JOCRNAL,  L179!?. 

Tuesday  2(3.  We  came  to  quarterly  meeting  at  Dawley's  meet- 
lug-house  ;  the  day  was  cloudy,  and  myself  also :  as  there  were 
four  preachers  to  attend,  I  staid  at  home.  On  Wednesday  there 
was  a  most  awful  storm  of  rain  and  wind,  which  caused  us  to  keep 
within  doors. 

Thursday  28.  I  rode  seven  miles  to  Nimour's  meeting-house, 
where  I  preached  on  Hebr.  ii.  1.  The  day  was  excessively  cold 
and  the  house  too.  After  preaching  I  rode  nineteen  miles,  having 
no  refreshment  for  man  or  horse  until  we  came  to  James  Dawley's, 
within  two  miles  of  Norfolk,  about  seven  o'clock  at  night.  On 
Friday  we  came  into  town,  and  attended  quarterly  meeting  on  Sa- 
turday and  Sunday.  My  subject  on  Saturday  was  Psalm  cxxvii.  1. 
and  on  Sabbath  day  James  i.  24,  25.  I  had  a  painful  night  after 
preaching  on  Saturday,  having  a  small  ulcer  formed  in  my  breast. 

At  Suffolk  I  was  addressed  by  two  grand  daughters  of  my  dear, 
aged  friend,  Benjamin  Welden,  of  James-City.  I  dined  with  Mr. 
Whitlock,  and  after  the  rain  was  over  rode  to  William  Powell's, 
forty  miles  from  Portsmouth. 

Thursday,  April  4.  I  must  needs  preach  at  Wells's,  the  schism 
house  ;  the  great  were  there  ;  my  subject  was  2  Tim.  ii.  19. 
We  then  rode  to  William  Blunt's.  On  Friday  we  were  at 
3Ioody's,  and  on  Saturday  we  came  to  the  house  of  the  widow  of 
Henry  Davies.  On  Sunday  I  preached  at  Lane's  chapel  from 
2  Tim.  ii.  15.  but  it  was  the  dividing  of  blood  from  my  lungs.  On 
the  way  I  ordained  two  local  deacons. 

Monday  8.  We  rode  thirty  miles  to  Jones's  chapel.  Tuesday, 
Wednesday,  and  Thursday,  conference  sat  in  great  peace  and  love. 
As  the  house  was  cold,  and  I  was  very  unwell,  I  could  not  attend  ; 
I  had  about  two  pounds  of  blood  drawn  from  me. 

Friday  12.  We  rode  to  father  Nathaniel  Lee's,  and  on  Saturday 
13,  to  Frederick  Bonner's,  where  I  rested — a  solemn  Sabbath. 

Monday  15.  By  ten  o'clock  we  came  to  Petersburg;  and  then 
rode  on  and  crossed  James  River,  at  Woodson's  ferry.  We 
lodged  at  Keezee's,  having  rode  thirty-two  miles. 

Tuesday  16.  We  came  to  Philip  Davis's,  twenty  miles,  near 
Putney,  New-Kent.  I  feel  low  in  body,  but  serene  in  soul.  The 
brethren  in  Virginia,  in  conference,  gave  it  me  in  charge  not  to 
preach  until  the  Baltimore  conference  :  I  was  willing  to  obey,  feel- 
ing myself  utterly  unable.  The  houses  that  we  preach  and  lodge 
in,  in  this  severe  weather,  are  very  open.  My  breast  is  inflamed, 
and  I  have  a  discharge  of  blood. 

Wednesday  17.  I  rested  at  brother  Davis's  :  and  on 


7^9.]  REV.  FRAN.  IS  J  .  AJ  . 


Thursday    13.  Rode  to  Benjamin  1'ace's,  in  King's  anil  Qi/rm' 
county:  these  arc  gracious  and  kind  souls—  God  is  still  working  n. 
this  place  ;  they  have  one  hundred  members  in  society. 

Friday  19.   Wo  rode  twenty  miles  to  our  dear  brother  Cole'-,  in 
Essex  county.     We  rested  on  Saturday. 

Sunday  21.  Attended  a  meeting  :U  Shephard's  ;  and  then  rode  to 
the  widow  Cox's. 

Monday  22.  We  crossed  the  Rappaharaock,  at  Lajtoa'i 
and  came  to  the  widow  Bombry's,  in  King  George   county. 
have  rode  upwards  of  sixty  miles  in  two  days,  through  excessively 
cold  weather  for  the  season. 

Tuesday   23.     We  rode  thirty-rive  miles  to  Ward'.-.  near  Puni- 


Wednesday  24.  This  is  the  great  day  of  election  ;  and  there  i- 
no  small  stir  in  Virginia,  about  federal  and  anti-federal  men.  Wo 
rode  thirty  miles  to  William  Adams's  ;  I  was  much  chilled,  and  very 
\veary. 

Thursday  25.  The  general  fast  day  —  I  attended  at  Fain.iv 
chapel  ;  Philip  Bruce  gave  a  discourse  upon  those  words  of  our 
Lord,  "  And  then  shall  they  fast  in  those  day?."  As  I  wa- 
unable  to  preach,  I  gave  an  exhortation  from  the  subject.  I  find 
that  very  small  rest,  when  joined  with  comfortable  accommodation 
gives  une  great  strength  of  body  :  by  this  means  I  might  be  re- 
stored ;  but  I  must  keep  moving.  1  was  caught  in  a  heavy  thun- 
der storm,  from  which  I  took  cold,  and  had  a  hich  fever  and  head- 
ach  ;  1  rested  on  Friday  nt  William  Watters's.  Saturday,  rode  t.> 
Alexandria.  —  Monday  and  Tuesday,  rode  to  Baltimore. 

MARYLAND.  —  Wednesday,  May  1.  We  opened  our  conference. 
which  sat  four  days.  We  had  preaching  morning  and  evening.  1 
gave  a  short  exhortation  before  the  sacrament. 

Monday  6.    We  rode  out  to  Greenwood,  Mr.    Rogers's  country 
seat,  who  told  me  that  when  I  was  past  labour,  there  was  hi- 
as  my  own.     We  asked  for  new  wine  ;  but  find  the  old  is  better  . 
the  fermentation  is  done. 

Tuesday  1.  We  rode  to  Gunpowder-Neck  ;  I  only  exhorted  n 
little,  then  went  on  to  the  bay  side. 

Wednesday  0.  The  wind  was  high  :  I  declined,  but  brother  l,c«' 
waited,  and  crossed  in  an  hour.  1  rode  round,  and  lodged  at  Josinli 
Dallam's  :  but  dear  Sally,  his  wife,  is  gone  !  I  walked  to  hi" 

Thursday  9.    I   had  a  disagreeable  passage  across  the  Susijtie- 
hannah.     At  this  ferry,   recently,  three   poor  blacks  have  been 
\vned.     I  cannot  omit  relating  a  rircumstanr^  which  took  r  ' 


,i44  REVt  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOUiWfAt.  [1709, 

when  I  was  here  last.  A  very  large  negro  man,  an  old  ferryman, 
to  whom  I  talked  very  faithfully,  tvas  drowned.  I  remember  to 
have  told  him  that  if  he  did  not  take  heed  and  repent,  he  might  be 
drowned  and  damned  !  the  former  is  certain  ;  the  latter  is  to  be 
feared,  as  it  is  reported  the  negroes  were  intoxicated.  Doctor 
William  Dallam  escaped  ;  and  what  is  remarkable,  the  boat  that 
saved  his  life,  was  made  of  wood  taken  from  his  father's  plantation^ 
Thursday  evening  I  came  to  Back-Creek  well  wearied. 

Friday  10.  We  rode  to  Chester-Town — went  to  meeting  ; 
and  I  exhorted  a  little. 

Saturday  11.  At  Churchill  church  brother  Lee  preached,  and 
F  exhorted.  We  dined  at  Mr.  Cossey's,  and  rode  in  the  evening  to 
brother  Chair's. 

Whitsunday  12.  At  Centreville,  after  brother  Lee  had  preached, 
I  feebly  exhorted  upon  "  Grieve  not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God."  We 
administered  the  supper  of  the  Lord  :  I  was  weary  at  the  end.  I 
lodged  at  Thomas  Wright's. 

Monday  13.  At  Tuckahoe  a  multitude  attended  ;  my  services 
were  very  small. 

Tuesday  14.  At  Easton,  a  crowd  of  people  attended  ;  here  I 
could  say  but  very  little.  We  crossed  Dover-Ferry,  and  rode  to 
William  Frazer's,in  Caroline  county  ;  and  on  Wednesday  15,  held 
meeting  in  his  dwelling  house. 

Thursday  16.  At  Henry  Ennell's  I  could  only  gloss  upon  those 
gracious  words,  "  Casting  all  your  care  upon  him,  for  he  careth 
tor  you." 

Friday  17.  I  attended  Cambridge  quarterly  meeting  ;  which  was 
held  in  a  barn  :  I  commented  a  little  upon,  "  We  have  not  fol- 
lowed cunningly  devised  fables."  Having  had  but  little  rest  for 
two  or  three  nights  past,  1  retired  with  Bartholomew  Ennell's,  and 
went  on  the  way  to  Vienna,  to  visit  Somerset.  I  rejoiced  that 
Doctor  Edward  White  was  standing  firm  in  the  grace  of  God  ;  and 
that  the  Lord  had  blessed  the  souls  of  his  children. 

Saturday  19.  It  rained  plentifully  until  ten  o'clock.  We  crossed 
at  Vienna :  it  was  very  bad  ferrying  ;  the  wind  being  against  the 
tide,  it  raised  high  swells  in  the  river.  1  came  that  evening  to 
Thomas  Garrettson's  ;  we  had  a  very  serious  congregation  at  Quan- 
tico  chapel ;  I  had  taken  cold  and  was  very  unfit  to  speak  at  all. 
We  came  to  Salisbury,  where  we  rested  on  Monday.  Brother 
Lee  preached  three  times.  Here  I  got  bled. 

Tuesday  21.  We  came  to  Annamessex.  My  horse  began  to 
sweat,  swell,  and  tremble — and  died  upon  the  road.  Brother 


,   .     I-KAM    I-.    AsKl-rU     ^     Ml      ' 

Levan  Moore  was  iv<i(h   me:  we  pui  his  !„„-.•   m  ih,    mlkj 
both  of  us  rode  to  Samuel  Smith's. 

Wednesday  22.   1  borrowed  a  hoix,.  ,,f  Samurl  Smith,  and  cross- 
ed Pocomoke,  and  rode   to  Littleton  Lon-'s,  X\|MT.    I  gave   an  ex- 
hortation to    a  few  people.      It  was  a  very  r\tiaordinar\   Ii-jjary  of 
a  living  friend  that    put  forty  fiv  dollars  i.,t<>  m\  h.si.d.  •   h..d  I  not 
bought  a  coat  I  might  have  had  lifly  doll.nx  in  my  po,  Ut  ;   it  would 
have   been  a  wonder  for  me  to  have  a-  much   monr\  by  mo  :    but 
one  hundred  or  more  mi»ht  be  needful  to  purrhaM-  uunthn  horse. 
Thursday  L'3.  We  rode  to  DouningX  \\hrre  I  gave  ashui',  .  xh-i 
tation,  and  on  Friday  24,  we  came  to  John  I'urnall's  ;   hf  M  u'one  to 
his  long  home.     Here  I  gave  up  my  borrowed  h»i -«-,  UK!  th«   onl\ 
alternative  was  to   put  brother  Hardi-sty's  horse  in  th<-  Milky,  and 
wedge  ourselves   with   all    our   ba^ai^    together.     We    rode   by 
Frederick  Conner's,  and  made  it   neaily  thirty  miles,  through 
cessive  heat,  to  the  widow  Bowen's. 

DELAWARE. — Sabbath  26.  I  preached  at  the  chapel,  and  rode 
home  with  hrothpr  Leister,  living  in  the  north  end  of  Worcester 
county.  This  day  we  enter  the  state  of  Delewarc.  1  have  had 
great  dejection  of  mind,  and  awful  calculations  of  what  may  be 
and  what  may  never  be.  I  have  now  groaned  along  three  hundred 
miles  from  Baltimore. 

Monday  27.  After  preaching  at  Johnson's  we  rode  to  the  Sound, 
and  lodged  at  Arthur  Williams's,  an  aged  Methodist  preacher.  I 
passed  the  night  in  great  affliction. 

Tuesday  28.  We  came  on  to  Dagsborough  just  as  the  stage  w 
•about   to  set  off  for  Milford.     I   paid   the   fare,  and  sent   brother 
Hardesty  along.     I  called  upon  William  Johnston,  a  gracious  soul. 
We  then  came  into  Milford  about  eight  o'clock,  after  riding  forty 
three  miles.     Here  1  rested  a  day. 

Thursday  30.  I  must  needs  ride  twenty  miles  back  to  Lewi- 
principally  to  see  the  people. 

Friday  31.  Returned  back  to  Milford.  I  had  taken  cold.  I  or- 
;,iined  three  deacons  and  exhorted  a  little. 

Saturday,  June  1,  was  a  very  cold  day;  we  rode  to  Dover; 
the  crowds  of  people  were  painful  to  me  ;  I  ordained  two  deacons  ; 
was  contined  in  meeting  four  hour?,  and  attempted  to  preach,  but 
could  not. 

Sabbath  day  2.  After  meeting,  I  rode  to  Duck-Creek  Tross- 
Roads,  and  called  at  Doctor  Cook's  to  see  Thomas  White's  chil- 
dren. Doctor  Anderson.  Doctor  Ridgely,  and  Dortor  Vend' 

VOL,  II.  11 


,1  •         -      \S71IiIVYS    .Uji:R\Ar,.  [11      • 

considered  my  case  ;  they  advised  a  total  suspension  from  preach- 
ing, fearing  a  consumption  or  a  dropsy  in  the  breast. 

Monday  3.  I  ordained  one  person  at  the  Cross-Roads,  and  ano- 
ther at  Dickinson's  meeting-house.  I  dined  with  Mr.  Moore  near 
the  Appoquimamink  bridge,  and  then  rode  on  to  Wilmington  ;  we 
ha?e  made  forty  miles  this  day.  What  with  labour  and  fevers  my 
rest  is  greatly  interrupted. 

PENNSYLVANIA. — Thursday  6.  We  held  our  conference  in  Phila- 
delphia. I  retired  each  night  to  the  Eagleworks,  upon  Schuylkill,  at 
Henry  FoxalPs  solitary,  social  retreat.  The  conference  was  large,, 
and  the  business  very  important.  Ezekiel  Cooper  was  confirmed 
in  his  appointment  by  me  as  our  agent  in  the  book  concern. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Wednesday  12.  After  the  rising  of  the  confe- 
rence I  rode  to  Burlington  ;  and  on  Thursday  13,  to  Milford :  on 
Friday  to  Mr.  Drake's,  near  Amboy  ;  and  on  Saturday  to  New-York. 

NEW-YORK. — Sabbath-day  16.  I  gave  a  short  exhortation  in. 
the  John-street  church  ;  likewise  in  the  North- River  house.  It  is 
an  unseasonable  day  for  religion  ;  it  is  time  the  conference  should 
come  ;  may  Almighty  God  bless  and  own  their  labours  to  the  people ! 

Wednesday  19.  We  opened  our  conference  for  New- York,  and 
all  the  New-England  states. 

The  conference  was  crowded  with  work  ;  consequently  I  had 
but  little  rest,  and  what  added  to  my  pain,  was  brother  Bostick's 
laying  sick  in  the  next  room — heat  and  haste  ! 

Sunday  23.  We  had  a  charitable  day  at  all  the  houses,  and  col- 
lected nearly  three  hundred  dollars  :  but  the  deficiencfes  of  the 
preachers  were  almost  one  thousand  dollars.  I  attempted  to  preach, 
a  little  on  Phil.  iv.  19.;  and  gave  an  exhortation  at  the  Bowery 
church.  I  met  the  society  at  the  old  church  at  night.  The  exces- 
sive heat  made  us  wish,  and  haste  to  leave  town. 

Monday  24.  Was  exceedingly  warm  ;  we  rode  to  Sherwood's  ; 
but  did  not  get  there  in  time  to  meet  our  appointment. 

Tuesday  25.    We  came  to  the  Plains. 

Wednesday  26.  We  rode  about  thirty  miles  ;  and  came  in  about 
ten  o'clock  at  night  to  governor  Van  Courtlandt's,  whose  wife  is  a 
Shunamite  indeed. 

Thursday  27.  We  toiled  through  the  rain  over  Peekskill  moun- 
tains to  Richard  Jackson's,  where  we  lodged,  about  eight  miles 
from  Poughkeepsie.  In  the  night  I  was  taken  with  a  violent  pain 
in  my  knee.  We  have  travelled  over  rough  roads,  and  through 
great  heat,  since  we  left  New- York,  about  one  hundred  miles. 


htV  .     I   .<  •  Al   . 


Feverish  anil  full  of  j>;nn  as  I  \\.i-.  I  ..U»M),|.  .1  nu  .  ir  -  am!  • 
exhortation. 

Saturday  29.    I  rode  through  heat,  twenty-live  mil        to   !  •, 
beck  ;   the  pain  in  my  Lm-e  snb-idcd.      On  S.ibbatli-<la\    I  preached 
at  the  school  church  upon  "  Grace  be  with  all  them  that  love  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.        Brother  Lee  gave  a  sermon  on   the  frui 
the  Spirit. 

Monday,  July  1.    I  rested.     My  health  is  somewhat  better.     1 
must  confess  I  never  felt  so  great  a  i.-olution  to  resign  the  gei,, 
-uperintendancy  as  1  do  now  ;  and  if  matters  do  not  work  more  to 
my  mind,  it  is  highly  probable  I  shall  :   ray  prayers  and  council  will 
be  turned  this  way  until  next  ^*  i.dal  Conference. 

Tuesday  2.  1  visited  Mr.  Sand's  family  ;  and  on  Wei!ne-d.i\ 
breakfasted  with  Mrs.  Montgomery  at  her  beautiful  ietre.  f.  Dined 
at  Mrs.  Livingston's,  on  the  manor  ;  an  aj;ed,  n  -|n  ct.iMr  m< 
of  many  children.  The  house,  the  pinlrn,  the  river  view  —  all 
might  afford  much  painting  for  the  pen  of  a  Hervy.  Brother 
Garrettson  and  his  agreeable  wife  attended  us. 

Thursday  4.  We  rode  twenty  miles  to  what  is  called  Hudson- 
City  ;  a  mere  blank. 

Friday  5.  Excessively  warm  :  we  stopped  at  Kinderhook,  and 
at  Miller's,  time  enough  to  hide  from  a  heavy  gust  ,  we  (lu-n  r.une 
on  to  Albany  :  we  have  rode  thirty-live  miles  thi*  day.  I  i 
n  healing  letter  from  T.  M.  ;  but  matters  will  not  ea-ily  be  done 
away  with  me  ;  if  it  were  one  or  two  only  that  were  concerned,  it 
\rould  be  but  little  ;  but  it  is  hundreds,  yea,  thousands  of  travelling 
«'md  local  preachers  and  official  men  ;  and  thousands  of  pru|ili-  aU..> 

Saturday  6.  I  was  awaked  at  twelve  o'clock  exceedingly  -ick, 
and  totally  disabled  for  public  service  ;  I  was  not  able  to  sit  u\> 
until  six  o'clock  in  the  evening.  I  rode  two  miles  out  of  the  city, 
to  Mr.  Marks's. 

Monday  8.     Rode  to  Coeyraan's  landing  ;  and  then  to  the  stone 
chapel  ;  here  we  have  the  good  news  of  souls  converted  at  prayer 
meeting.     Rode    in  the  rain   and  damp  six  miles  to  brother  I'lod- 
getl's,  upon  Hocketuck,  in  Albany  county  and  circuit  ;   here  also  1 
found  the  labours  of  Anning  Owens  had  been  blest  in  tlu 
ing  of  some  young  women.     Our  congregation  was  large  :   I  L 
an  exhortation  and  a  prayer  in  much  weakness  of  body.     We  rode 
back  the  same  evening  a  few  miles  to  father  W.ildron's. 

Wednesday  10.    I  rose  at  five  o'clock,    very   unwell  ;  but  ; 
Deeds  ride  in  the  heat  and  dust,  over  hills   and   rocks,  thirty-five 
miles,  and  came  to  Crawford's  and  Dillon's  about  four  o'clock 


REV.  Fiuxcia  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [17&?. 

weary  as  I  was,  I  could  not  feel  satisfied  without  prayer  and  ex- 
hortation. We  have  rode  in  three  days,  upwards  of  sixty  miles, 
and  held  a  meeting  each  day. 

Thursday  11.  We  rode  nine  miles  to  Cockburn's,  iu  Ulster 
county  :  here  I  gave  a  small  exhortation  to  a  small  congregation  ; 
it  was  a  day  of  small  things  ;  but  it  may  not  be  so  always. 

Friday  12.  I  rode  fifteen  miles  to  Hurley,  and  stopped  at  Cor- 
nelius Cole's  ;  no  appointments  had  been  made  ;  but  we  called 
a /meeting  in  the  evening.  1  rested  on  Saturday  13  at  Marble- 
town. 

Sabbath  day  14.  I  was  very  unwell,  and  the  day  was  rery  warm 
I  made  an  attempt  to  preach  on  Matt.  xxv.  34 — 46.  ;  a  marble- 
hearted  congregation  as  well  as  Marble-town  ;  and  probably  will 
remain  so  whilst  the  love  of  the  world  predominates  :  family 
prayer,  class  meetings,  and  prayer  meetings,  are  neglected.  Bro- 
ther Lee  preached  at  Hurley  in  the  evening,  and  I  gave  a  closing 
exhortation. 

Monday  15.  We  rode  through  dust  and  heat,  without  refresh- 
ment, twenty-five  miles  to  Degoes  ;  here  the  people  of  the  house- 
seemed  all  soul;  we  could  not  leave  the  place  until  we  had  called 
a  meeting. 

Tuesday  16.  We  rode  fifteen  miles  to  Samuel  Fowler's,  and 
dined  :  we  then  rode  on  to  meet  my  appointment  at  Mr.  Ellison's. 

Wednesday  17.  Jesse  Lee  gave  an  awakening  discourse  from 
1  Cor.  xv.  58. 

Thursday  18.  We  rode  over  hills  and  rocks,  through  heat,  and 
with  hunger,  twenty-eight  miles,  without  stopping  until  we  came  to 
Leizier's,  near  the  Jersey  line,  Orange  county.  We  have  travelled 
and  toiled  nearly  four  hundred  miles  through  this  state  :  weary  as 
I  was,  I  must  needs  ride  five  miles  farther  to  Nicholas  Simonson's, 
where  I  was  comfortably  entertained. 

NEW-JERSEY. — Friday  19.  We  came  on  to  Sussex  court-house  ; 
dined,  and  pushed  on  to  father  Freeman's — no  appointments.  At 
night  I  was  taken  with  great  distress  in  my  bowels,  which  held  me 
two  nights  and  a  day. 

Saturday  20.  I  rode  in  great  pain  and  heat,  hungry  and  sick, 
twenty-five  miles  to  Mr.  M'Collock's  :  how  welcome  a  good  house, 
kind  friends,  and  a  cold  day  !  What  is  the  cause  of  my  affliction  ? 
Is  it  the  water,  or  the  weather,  or  my  bilious  habit?  I  am  at  a 
loss  to  know. 

Sabbath  day  21.  At  Colonel  M'Collock's.  Having  been  so  un- 
^Yell  for  some  days  past,  it  was  enough  for  me  to  exhort  a  little 


JTU'J.j  RKV.    J.RA.V.  1^,   A.^Ri  RV   S  j  ,- 


nflcr  Jesse  Lee  had  given  thorn  two  sermon*.     I  w.i«  \  i-iu-.l  in  the 
erening  by  John  Hannah,  an  aged,  «onal  I're«li\trn:in  minister. 

Monday  22.  I  rose  to  ride  to  Jam*'-  l;r\:in'«.  l\n>  k>  county, 
Laycock  township,  Pennsylvania.  U  e  fi>ll.i\v.  d  Mi^lvmeeco 
Creek  to  tlie  mouth  ;  we  had  trared  the  head  hunches  of  it  al- 
ready ;  it  is  a  most  beautiful,  useful  stream,  running  through  a  rich 
vale  into  Delaware  Kiver,  at  Hunt's  ferry.  The  weather  is 
warm,  and  the  roads  uneven  ;  we  had  a  journey  of  about  tlmtv 
miles.  We  have  travelled  about  sixty-five  miles  through  .'tT-o\ 
and  about  five  hundred  in  a  month. 

PENNSYLVANIA.  —  Wednesday  24.  We  rone  at  three  o'clock  in 
the  morning,  and  began  our  journey  at  five,  over  ridges  and  rotk--, 
txventy-eight  miles  to  Pottsgrove.  We  did  not  eat  until  we  came  to 
Coventry.  —  Thirty-six  miles  is  the  amount  of  this  day's  journey. 
O  heat,  drought,  and  dust! 

Thursday  25.    We  had  a  most  dreadful  time  over  the  mount. 
to  the  forest  chapel  ;  here  we  found  the   people  much  engaged  in 
religion  ;  this  was  a  halm  for  every  sore.     We  dined  at  Kerbur\  - 
and  lodged  at  Abraham  Lewis's. 

Friday  26.     We  rode  twenty  miles  to  New-Holland,  and  had  a 
sample  of  bad  roads   for  a  sulky.     Here  some  souls   have  been 
brought  to  Christ.     I  was  exceedingly  spent  for  want  of  sleep  ami 
rest.     After  five  o'clock  we   rode  with  elder  Ware  toward 
burg  ;  night  came  on  and  left  me  two  miles  from  the  place  in 
woods  —  in  darkling  shades,  a  new  cut  road,  and  stumpy  path.      \V. 
came   in   about  nine  o'clock,  having  rode  twelve  mile*.     Thank 
the  Lord  for  whole  bones  ! 

Sabbath  day  28.  There  was  preaching  in  Thomas  Ware's  01  - 
chard,  in  Strasburg  ;  we  had  the  respectables  of  the  town,  and 
a  large  assembly.  This  place  contains,  1  judge,  between  sixty  and 
seventy  dwelling  houses. 

Monday  29.  I  visited  Jacob  Boehm's  ;  God  hath  beg-in  to  bless 
the  children  of  this  family.  The  parents  have  followed  us  nearly 
the  space  of  twenty  years. 

Tuesday  30.  We  had  a  serious  earthquake  at  five  o'clock  ; 
earth  is  growing  old  ;  it  groans  and  trembles;  which  is  the  nt 
sary  consequence    of  "palsied   eld."       I    vitited   John  Milk: 
thence  we  rode  six  miles  to  Martin  Roehm'-. 

Wednesday  31  .  We  had  a  comfortable  meeting  at  Boehm's  clr: 
Here  lieth  the  dust  of  William  Jessop  ami  Michael  K.  Wilson.     1 
feebly  attempted  a  discourse  upon  Hebr.  vi.  12.     In  :h.-   • 
AVC  rode  to  Abraham  Cagy's.  near  the  mouth  "f  1'agan  Creek. 


.  VRANCIS  AhBURV'd  JOURNAL.  [1793, 


Thursday,  August  1.  After  a  suspension  of  rain  in  some  parts, 
tor  two.  four,  six,  and  eight  weeks,  we  had  a  gracious,  moderate 
rain  :  on  Friday  the  rain  continued  quickening,  and  thus  saving  the 
Irttter  fruits  of  the  earth.  I  rode  to  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Wright's.  We 
crossed  Canastoga  at  the  mouth  of  Little  Canasloga  ;  we  had  a 
very  uneven  path.  Mrs.  Wright's  family  are  blessed  —  all  the  chil- 
dren profess  religion  —  a  father  and  daughter  have  died  in  the  Lord. 
Our  friends  followed  us  from  Paqua.  Martin  Boehm  is  all  upon 
wings  and  springs  since  the  Lord  hath  blessed  his  grandchildren  ; 
his  son  Henry  is  greatly  led  out  in  pablic  exercises. 

Saturday  3.  We  rode  to  Columbia,  formerly  called  Wright 
Ferry.  The  excessive  warmth  of  the  sun  in  crossing  the  water 
made  me  sick.  We  stopped  at  Drinnon's  ;  here  we  met  Seely 
Bunn  ;  he  had  very  late  notice  of  our  coming  on  Sabbath  day. 
Seely  Bunn  preached  in  Little  York,  and  Jesse  Lee  in  the  evening. 
I  gave  a  short  exhortation.  Twenty  miles  made  our  Saturday's 
ride. 

Monday  5.  We  set  off  for  Maryland  :  I  rode  thirteen  miles,  and 
bad  my  horse  fed  and  shod.  We  continued  on  and  dined  at  Littles- 
town,  twenty-five  miles,  well  spent  with  heat,  hunger,  and  thirst 
We  then  rode  on  ten  miles  to  Tauny-Town  :  the  inhabitants  here, 
and  hereabouts,  are  chiefly  Germans  and  Romans.  We  crossed 
the  Maryland  line,  and  lodged  at  Bentley's.  Next  morning  we 
rode  on  to  Jeremiah  Browning's,  seventeen  miles,  before  we  break- 
fasted . 

MARYLAND.  —  It  may  suffice  to  say  my  mind  hath  been  kept  in 
4;reat  peace  ;  but  1  have  been  greatly  afflicted  and  dejected  with 
pain  and  labour.  We  have  visited  six  districts  since  the  sitting  of 
the  Baltimore  conference  ;  and  in  four  out  of  six  there  is  a  happy 
revival  of  religion  ;  on  the  eastern  shore  —  in  Jersey  —  Albany  — 
and  Pennsylvania  :  and  we  hear  a  rumour  of  a  revival  in  the  north- 
ern  district  of  Virginia. 

We  attempted  a  meeting  at  Lewis  Bronining's,  at  his  mill  near 
Woodsbury.  In  the  evening  we  rode  to  Liberty,  and  lodged  at 
Daniel  Dorsey's.  Oh,  heat!  heat!  We  have  rode  twelve  miles 
this  day. 

Thursday  8.  We  held  a  meeting  in  the  woods  near  Liberty  ; 
the  houses  were  not  large  enough  for  our  congregation.  I  visited 
Eli  Dorsey,  and  saw  the  children  of  my  dear  nurse,  Sarah  Dorsey, 
and  the  place  where  her  dust  is  deposited  until  the  resurrection  , 
Oh,  once  lovely  features  of  body  and  mind  !  but  above  all  her  *' 
'rrmhant  death  ! 


>.  FJUN 

Friday  9.    I  came  eight  miles  to  Edward  O wings  .s,  where  I  r 
oeivcd  every  mark  of  affection  I  could  desire. 

Saturday  10.   We  rode  to  Stephen  Shermardine's  :  it  was  well  u 
tiad  a  short  ride  of  four  miles,  the  weather   being  so  exo 
warm  :  here  we  were  treated  kindly. 

Sabbath  day  11.  We  had  a  meeting  at  Fredericktown.  I  exhort- 
ed a  little  at  every  one  of  the  above  places. 

We  rode  over  the  Catoctin  Mountain  to  Samuel  Philips'*,  to  sec 
his  dear  wife,  who  was  very  low  ;  the  people  came  together,  and 
John  Potts  gave  them  a  sermon  ;  it  was  but  little  I  could  gi?r 
them. 

Monday  12.  We  rode  to  Joseph  Howard's,  upon  Carroll's  manor, 
n-here  we  had  a 'comfortable  meeting. 

VIRGINIA. — Tuesday  13.    We  crossed  the  Potomac  at  Nolan  : 
icrry  :  the  river  was  so  low  that  those  on  horseback  forded  it ;  1 
came  over   with  the   carriage  in  the  flat.     1  think   of  nothing  less 
than  the  resignation  of  my  office  of  superintendent  at  the  general 
conference. 

Wednesday  14.  We  had  a  full  meeting  at  Leesburgh  :  many  of 
the  brethren  anil  sisters  from  societies  in  the  country  attended 
was  the  time  of  court.     A  company  of  soldiers  collecting  attended  in 
good  order. 

Thursday  15.    We    rode   twenty-eight   miles   to   Chariest 
We  had  a  very  rocky,  uneven  rode.     We  stopped  ;it  K  rry. 

and  were  kindly  entertained.     Friday  at  eleven  o'clock  we   heh' 
a  meeting  in  Charlestown,  and  then  rode  on  eighteen  miles  to 
borough. 

Saturday  17.    We  had  a  comfortable  rain  ;  after  which  we  roJ< 
on  four  miles  to  Winchester.     Sabbath  day  we  hold  meeting,  am. 
were  about  five   hours  in  love- feast,   preaching,  sacrament,  and 
exhortation.     I  rode  home  with  John  B.  Tilden,  seven  miles  from 
town. 

Monday  19.  We  rode  to  Stephensbnrgh  :  here  we  held  mrr;.. 
Tuesday  20,  and  Wednesday  21.  it  rained — we  could  not  br  mnn 
welcome  at  any  place,  or  more  richly  accommodated  than  we  ncrr 
at  Elijah  Phelps's. 

Thursday  22.    We  rode  fifteen  miles  to  Lewistown,  where  v\. 
dined,  and  then  rode  on  to  Pinnell's.     Oh,  the  rocks,  n<L 
gutters  we  had  to  cross  at  Chesters-Gap  !   I  would  prefer  riding  t\vu 
hundred  miles  upon  the  lowlands  than  ?prentv  f»  Ilenrv  Frv 


Ki,\.    VRAM  CIS    ASBI'RY'S    JOURNAL. 

Friday  23.  We  rode  twenty  miles  and  dined.  We  passed  Cul- 
pepper  court-house,  and  came  within  four  miles  of  Henry  F  rye's, 
and  stopped  at  a  tavern,  after  riding  iu  great  heat  and  h;iste.  I  was 
sick  :  from  hard  labour,  want  of  rest,  and  want  of  coffee,  my  sto- 
mach and  bowels  were  greatly  agitated  :  I  need  much  faith  and  good 
water. 

Saturday  24.  We  landed  at  the  mansion,  upon  the  banks  of 
Robertson.  Henry  Frye  may  console  himself  with  the  last  words 
of  David,  2  Sam.  xxiii.  1 — 7.  I  obtained  an  extract  from  Whitby 
on  the  Episcopacy  of  the  Early  Ages  of  the  Christian  Church. 

Sunday  25.  We  preached  at  the  Springs  to  about  one  hundred 
attentive  people.  I  took  a  bad  cold,  and  was  very  unwell. 

Monday  26.  We  rode  between  thirty  and  forty  miles  to  John 
Lasley's. 

Tuesday  27.  We  had  a  crowded  audience  at  the  chapel  :  like- 
wise at  M'Gee's  on  Wednesday  ;  on  which  day  I  rode  twenty 
miles,  and  lodged  at  Richard  Ferguson's.  Thursday,  at  a  new 
house  in  the  woods,  I  preached  on  Psalms  Ixxxiv  8.  :  and  on 
Friday  30  I  rode  eighteen  miles  to  Hezekiah  Arnold's. 

Saturday  31,  and  Sunday,  September  1.  I  attended  quarterly 
meeting  at  Devenport's  meeting-house  ;  and  we  had  large  congre- 
gations each  day  ; — there  was  a  shouting  among  the  people.  I 
attempted  to  preach  upon  Hosea  xiv.  4.  After  meeting  I  was  in- 
vited to  spend  a  night  at  Colonel  Fountain's. 

Monday  2.  At  Beaver  Creek  meeting-house  we  had  a  lively 
lime.  I  have  travelled,  since  I  came  into  Virginia,  through  Lou- 
<lcn,  Berkley,  Frederick,  Shanandoah,  Culpepper,  Madison, 
Orange,  Louisa,  and  Hanover  counties. 

Wednesday  4.  We  came  to  Richmond  ;  since  Friday  week  we 
have  travelled  two  hundred  miles  ;  to  which  we  may  add  the  labour 
of  our  meetings ;  in  common  three  hours  long,  and  sometimes  longer. 

James  O'Kelly  hath  sent  out  another  pamphlet,  and  propounded 
terms  of  union  himself;  for  the  Presbyterians,  Baptists,  and  Me- 
thodists. The  Presbyterians  must  give  up  their  confession  of  faith. 
The  Baptists,  if  they  open  a  more  charitable  door,  adult  dipping. 
The  Methodists  must  give  up  the  episcopacy,  and  form  of  disci- 
pline ;  renounce  the  articles  of  their  religion,  and  the  doctrine  of 
the  Trinity.  I  ask  in  turn,  what  will  James  give  up  ?  His  Unitarian 
errors?  Did  he  think  the  Protestant  Episcopalians  beneath  his  no- 
tice ?  I  am  now  more  fully  satisfied  than  ever  that  his  book  is  not 
worthy  of  an  answer. 


1739.}  HEV.  Flutters  AS?-.  ,     ,A 

Sunday  8.   F  left  ray  retreat  at  John  Kllis's  ; — a  mo-t  ,ln, 

social,  solitary  situation,  within  two  miles  of  Ki.-hm<mil.  I  would 
have  preached  within  the  walls  of  our  now  home  at  lln  htnond,  but 
the  excessive  rain  we  have  had  of  late  pirvmtrd  ;  I  was  closed 
up  in  an  upper  room.  My  subject  at  Manchester,  was  ~  Tim. 
ii.  19. 

Monday   9.    We   rode  twelve   milfia    to    Falling  '  'r« ••  k    church, 
xvhere  I  spoke  from  Rom.  v.  12.     There  is  some  small   stir  at 
religion  here. 

Tuesday    10.    We    rode  twelre  miles  to  (imlfrry '*,  an  ,ige<! 
that  stood    alone   when    Mr.   O- Kelly    made   a    rent  in  the  society. 
God   hath   blessed    our   labours  here  ;  sever. d  -mil-,  uiih  Ins  own 
children,   are  now  brought  to  (.iod.     My  subject  here  was  1  John 
i.  6,  7. 

Wednesday  11.  At  MixevX  my  foundation  was  Matt.  vi.  ('•.  I 
observed,  First,  What  things  we  arc  directed  to  pray  for  : 
Secondly,  The  rules  to  be  attended  to  in  prayer — the  preempt  and 
example  of  Christ  and  the  saints  :  Thirdly,  The  promise  ;  "  Your 
Father  that  seeth  in  secret,  shall  reward  you  opcnl 

I  put  a  blister  upon  my  bre.i-t.  Brother  Wlntcoat  proar.h»-ii 
Charity  chapel ;  where  we  administered  the  sacrament.  We  \vi  nl 
home  with  John  Hobson,  and  wen-  treated  with  every  mark  of 
kindness  we  could  desire.  On  Friday  1  preached  at  Smith's 
church  ;  dined  at  Robert  Smith's,  and  then  rode  on  in  a  very  warm 
and  dry  day,  twenty-six  miles,  to  I). mud  •  Juri-rant's,  and  rame  :n  a 
little  after  eight  o'Hock  in  the  evening.  I  have  stretched  along 
through  Chesterfield,  Powhatan,  Cumberland,  Buckingham,  into 
Prince  Edward  county  ;  and  this  whilst  enrlurin^  a  raw  and  run- 
ning blister  upon  my  breast,  excessive  heat,  and  with  very  I 
rest  by  night  or  by  day  :  1  would  not  live  always  :  weary  world  ' 
when  will  it  end  ? 

Saturday    14.    At  Lackland's   meeting-house   I    preaohed   on 
Peter  ii.  17,  18.     And  on  Sabbath-day   on   Psalm   cii.    11  — 14.      I 
felt  some  special  assistance.      I  lodged  at  mother  Lackland's. —  i 
weather  was  very  close  and  warm.     On  Monday  we  hail  a  cui 
ride  about  the  hills  of  Appomalox  river,  to  Robert  Martin's,  eight 
miles. 

Tuesday  17.  We  rode  twenty  miles  to  Mount  Pleasant.     I  pi; 
blister  in   the   morning  to  my  breast  ; — but  I  must  qo  to  mee; 
and  preach.     Why  ?    because  the  Presbyterian  minister  nml  v 
of  his  flock  came  to  hear  me  :  my  subject  was  Xerh.  \ii.  I'1 

Vor.  If.  }'. 


»a:v.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1799, 

Thursday  19.  We  rode  twelve  miles  to  William  Spencer's  ;  and 
lj;ul  a  comfortable  meeting  in  his  school- house  ;  he  keeps  a  Chris- 
tian school. 

Friday  20.  We  came  fifteen  miles  to  John  Spencer's,  near  Char- 
lotte court-house.  We  have  felt  great  spiritual  affection  and  fel- 
lowship in  our  meetings  this  week.  Richard  Whatcoat  attended  us 
through  the  district,  with  a  very  sore  leg  ;  and  myself  had  a  sore 
breast  inside  and  out. 

Saturday  21.1  rested  at  my  hospitable  home,  that  hath  been  so 
these  twenty  years,  in  Colonel  Bedford's  day,  and  now  in  John 
Spencer's  ;  these  people  have  not  turned  me  out  of  doors,  by  sepa- 
ration, defamation,  or  reproach  ;  they  have  made  no  such  return 
for  my  love  and  labours,  although  some  have  done  it.  I  could  not 
be  quite  idle  :  I  read  over  one  number  of  my  journal,  and  wrote 
a  few  letters. 

Sabbath  day  22.  I  had  thoughts  of  staying  at  home,  as  there 
were  no  less  than  eight  preachers  at  the  quarterly  meeting  at 
Taply's  ;  however  I  concluded  to  go.  I  gave  an  exhortation,  and 
returned  the  same  evening  :  our  meeting  was  held  in  a  dead  place  ; 
yet  we  had  a  lively  time. 

Monday  23.  I  crossed  Stanton  River,  and  rode  into  Halifax 
county  ;  we  made  it  thirty  miles  to  Hawkins  Landrum's.  Tuesday 
we  had  a  large  congregation  and  an  affecting  time  upon  the  banks 
of  Banister  River  :  here  I  saw  only  two  persons  that  I  was  ac- 
quainted with  twenty  years  ago— they  were  brother  Baker  and  his 
wife.  I  lodged  at  Robert  Chapel's. 

Wednesday  25.  We  rode  to  Armistead  Shelton's,  in  Pittsylvania, 
twenty  miles  :  we  stopped  to  dine,  pray,  and  feed  our  horses,  at 
Clement  M'DaniePs  ;  the  roads  were  much  broken  in  some  places, 
and  it  was  as  much  a?  we  could  perform  to  reach  Shelton's  by  sun- 
set. My  mind  is  calm — my  body  in  better  health. 

Thursday  26.  A  congregation  of  from  three  to  five  hundred  at- 
tended Divine  worship  :  religion  declines  in  this  society  ;  we  ad- 
vised close  class-meetings,  weekday  prayer  meetings,  with  fasting 
or  abstinence.  On  Friday  we  rode  twelve  miles  to  Carter's, 
where  a  large  company  attended ;  my  subject  was,  "  What  shall 
the  end  be  of  them  that  obey  not  the  Gospel  of  God?  " 

Saturday  28.  We  had  to  travel  a  most  uneven  path  up  Sandy- 
River  to  George  Adam's,  twenty  miles.  Sunday  29.  I  attended  at 
Watson's  meeting-house,  and  preached  from  Zephaniah  iii.  12,  13. 
I  was  much  assisted,  and  much  wearied  by  the  time  I  had  baptised 


~'J.]  UEV.   HU\US   ASKl'i:\  '•    J.MT.SAl 


several  children.     1   visited   our   brethren,   Trahan   and  Church, 
from  Maryland,  who  have  \><-<  n  M,  •tL.di-i..  fur  twenty-five  yi 
and  still  not  weary  in  well-doing. 

NORTH  CAROLINA.  —  We  crossed  |i.m-l;i\er  at  I'erkin's  ferry, 
entering  North  Carolina,  and  came  to  Juhn  Ham*-  .  in  Iio<  king- 
bam  county,  —  pious  souls  from  Dorset  in  Manland. 

By  resting  at  times  in  this  solitary,  country  life,  I  have  my  health 
better;  whilst  I  am.  in  some  degree,  free  from  tin-  knuwli  -dge  and 
care  of  the  church  at  1  irge.  On  TH---..I  <y,  at  Smith's  meeting- 
house, I  gave  a  short  discourse  on  Hehr.  in.  1'J,  !.">.  We  dioed 
at  Martin's,  and  then  came  on  to  father  Low's  :  we  have  rode  but 
eight  miles  this  day. 

At  Low's  meeting-house  a  large  congregation  attended  ;   I  '-poke 
upon  Isai.  xl.  1.      The  heat  was  very  painful.      I  si:, 
gregate  from  three  to  six  thousand  >ouN  \N^»  !Jy  ;  th'i-,  it  no  more, 
I   can   say  that  my    travelling   hath    brought  thous.tnds  to  hear  the 
Gospel,  who,  probably,  would  not  otherwise  have  heard  it. 

Thursday.  October  3.  We  rode  twelve  miles  to  Covey's  in  Guil- 
ford  county  ;  I  thought  it  best  to  decline  preaching  for  a  few  ti 

Friday  4.  We  rode  twelve  miles  to  Mrs.  Campbell's,  upon  the 
south  fork  of  Haw  Kiver.  We  had  to  work  our  way  through  the 
woods.  Saturday  and  Sunday,  I  attended  quarterly  meeting  at  Bethel, 
upon  Belew's  Creek,  where  I  ordained  five  de.  icons,  and  preached 
from  1  Tim.  vi.  11,  12.  :  we  had  a  gracious  time.  We  have  rode 
only  twenty  miles  in  two  days.  I  lodged  at  M  Dani-  1  -. 

Monday  7.  We  rode  through  Stokes  county,  and  attended  meet- 
ing at  Love's  church,  which  has  glass  windows,  and  a  yard  fenced 
in.  After  Jesse  Lee,  I  added  a  few  words  on  Hebr.  ii.  1.  We 
then  came  up  to  William  Jean's,  near  the  Moravian  Old-town.  W. 
have  rode  nearly  twenty  miles  this  day.  Sitting  in  meeting  so  many 
hours  among  such  a  multitude  of  people,  and  frequently  with  a 
blister  on  my  breast,  with  the  difficulties  of  driving  along  broken 
paths,  cause  me  to  be  variously  tried  and  comforted. 

Tuesday  8.  We  held  meeting  and  had  a  multitude  of  Germai:- 
present.  I  improved  a  little  upon  2  Cor.  v.  13,  14. 

Wednesday  9.  We  rode  through  Salem  ;  here  they  have  lately 
built  a  very  grand  church.  The  day  was  cloudy  ;  the  rain  began 
to  fall  upon  us  about  a  mile  from  Captain  Markland's,  on  Muddy 
Creek,  where  we  came  after  riding  seventeen  mil- 

Thursday  10.    Close  housed  ;  about  twelve  souls  attended,  not- 
withstanding it  rained  powerfully,  to  \\hom  I  lectun-d  on  Hebr.  \n 
1  —  4.     I   had  an  interview  with  Samuel  Kenmish,  the  Moravian 


UEV.  FUANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

minister,  and  visited  him.    Friday  11.    At  M'Knight's  ;— a  very  uu- 
romfortable  day  :  thence  we  rode  on  to  Hardy  Jones's,  6fteen  miles. 

Saturday  12.  I  said  but  little  at  the  Academical  school-house, 
now  a  house  for  God.  1  went  to  see  Charles  Clayton  and  wife, 
who  were  sick. 

Sabbath  day  13.  Rode  thirteen  miles  to  Whitaker's  church, 
where  1  gave  a  short  sermon  on  "  Casting  all  your  care  upon 
Him,  for  he  careth  for  you."  I  was  both  sick  and  tired. 

Monday  14.  We  came  to  Shadrach  Dial's,  from  Delaware,  near 
Choptank,  who  in  his  younger  days  attended  my  ministry  to  advan- 
tage. I  feel,  in  general,  great  weakness  of  body,  but  great  confi- 
dence in  God,  and  constant  and  near  access  by  prayer.  We  are 
now  upon  Cedar  and  Dutchman's  Creeks,  in  Rowan  county. 

Tuesday  15.  It  rained  and  we  rested.  On  Wednesday  we  came, 
twelve  miles,  to  Beat's  chapel,  where,  after  Jesse  Lee  had  discour- 
sed upon  the  word  of  the  Lord  as  a  fire  and  o  hammer,  I  added  a 
few  words  on  "  T<ike  heed  how  ye  hear,"  who  ye  hear,  what 
doctrine  ye  hear  — hear  in  faith,  with  prayer,  with  application, 
upon  all  the  truths  of  God.  We  dined,  and  then  hasted  on  eight 
miles  to  Prather's,  in  Iredfll  county.  Directly  after  crossing 
Hunting  Creek,  a  little  circumstance  took  place,  which,  if  it  had 
happened  in  the  creek,  might  have  been  attended  with  some  disa- 
greeable consequences  ;  it  was  caused  by  one  of  the  hooks  of  the 
swingle  tree  giving  way. 

At  Basil  Prather's  chapel.  I  gave  my  thoughts  upon  "  Ever  learn- 
ing, and  never  able  to  cooie  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  :"  I  fear 
this  will  be  the  case  with  many  souls. 

Thursday  17.  We  came  up  the  ridges,  between  Rocky  and 
Hunting  Creeks,  eight  miles,  to  John  Templeton's  ;  over  a  path 
no  sulky  ever  went  before ;  my  testimony  was  founded  upon 
James  iv.  2,  3. 

Friday  18.  We  had  a  very  uneasy  ride  of  fifteen  miles,  on  the 
borders  of  Surry  county,  over  to  Doctor  Brown's,  in  Wilkes 
county.  I  feel  my  mind  in  great  peace  and  resignation,  both  as  it 
respects  the  church  of  God,  and  my  own  soul.  The  Presbyterians 
here  are  much  more  friendly  with  the  Methodists  now  than  for- 
merly :  1  dare  not  say  it  is  policy  ;  it  may  be  piety. 

Saturday  19.  We  rode  through  a  damp,  and  in  the  end,  a  rainy 
day,  twenty  miles  to  George  Gordon's,  near  Wilkes  court-house  : 
we  crossed  and  recrossed  the  Yadkin  River. 

Sunday  20.  This  is  my  American  birth-day  ;  I  have  now  passed 
twenty-eight  years  upon  this  continent.  Do  I  wish  to  live  them 


1^9.  ,.  -,A. 

over  again?  by  no  means  ;  1  doubt  if  I  could  mend  it  in  my  \\f 
ness  and  old  age;    I  could  not  come  up  to   what  I  have  done:  I 
should  be  dispirited  at  \vli;it  would  be  presented  !>•  top-  me. 

Monday  21.    We  came  eight  mib  -  in  Willi.m,  Tnblu's  ;    w  I 
an  open   time  at  a  barren  place,  and  1  felt  divm-    .ud  in  .1  ^ln/rl  im- 
provement on  Gal.  ii.   l:»,  1JO. 

Tuesday  (JJ     We  bud  aseriou-,  l.i!n)i  K.II-  ride  of  thirty  miles. 
William   White's,  Esquire,  upon   .''dm-  liner,  Burke  county.      In 
this  route  we  had  to  cross  the  Yadkin  ten  times  ;    Klk  and  ]'•  <itl.d'j 
each  twice  :    twenty   mile*  of  tin-  p  itli  were  good  ;  ten  miles  un- 
even, with  short    bills,  stumps,  sideling  banks    and    deep   ruts  :    1 
have  renewed   my  acquaintance   with   these   rivers  ;     they  atVoril 
valuable  levels,  with  rising  hills  and  hi^h  mountain*  on  each  side 
the  prospect  is  elegantly  variegated  :   here  are  ^rand  heights  ;  am! 
there  Indian  corn   adorns  the   vales  :    the    water    Hows  admirably 
clear,  murmuring  through  the  rocks,  and  in  the    nrh  land?,  gently 
gliding  deep  and  silent  between  its  verdant  banks  : — and  to  all  tfm 
may  be  added  pure  air. 

Wednesday  2.3.   and  Thursday   24.    Our  quarterly  meeting  v, 
held  at  William  White's,  Inquire,  and  crand  p  itriarch  of  this  settle- 
ment, whose  family  of  children,  urandrhildren.  \:c.    are  numerous 
and  extensively    established    here.     Jesse    Lee  sermonized    each 
day.      My   discourse  the  first  day  was  1  Tim.  iv.    12 — 16.     Let  nt/ 
7/um  despise  thy  youth.      I.   That   Timothy  should   be  exemplary  to 
believers,  in   his    words,  which  formed   his   conv<T-.i<ion  ; — at  all 
times,   and   upon    all    subjects  : — be    that    offeodeth    not   with    In 
tongue,  is  a  perfect  man  ; — 1«  charity,  love,  and  beneficence 
spirit,  the  spirit    of  bis    mind   and   temper  ;    purity    of  heart  and 
intention  :   in  faith  ;  justift  in^,  persevering  faith  ;  confidence  in  th< 
£tire  promises  and  prophecies  of  God's  word  :    attendance  to  read- 
ing ;  the   word   of  God   in   the  church,  in  families,  in  the  closet 
exhortation  ;  as  a  gift  of  God,  in  which  some  eicel  :   dortrinc :   th( 
grand  doctrines  of  the  Gospel — man's  original  rectitude — his  fall— 
the    atonement — repentance — justification  —  sancti Heat  ion — the   re 
surrection — the  list  judgment,  and  final  rewards  and  punishm<  nt«- 
The  gift  that  is  in  thee  by  prophecy ;  it  is  probable,  some  person  sec- 
ing  the    piety   and  simplicity  of  Timoth\.  had  been  rnmod  by  tlu 
Holy  Ghost  to   prophesy  that   he  would   be  a  faithful   minister   of 
Christ  ; — the  laying  on  of  the  bands  of  the  presbytery     The  elder 
ship — here  the  apostle  mentioneth  the  eldership  ;  and  in  the  lir^1 
chapter  of  the  second  epistle,  sixth  verse,  the  Living  on  or  pu' 
on  of  his  own  hands  upon  Timothy.  That  Timothy  and  Tilus  rven 


JIEV.  FKANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [179y. 


apostles,  and  exercised  episcopal  powers,  is  plain  :  they  were  in- 
structed concerning  bishops,  elders,  and  deacons,  what  characters 
they  should  be.  Titus  was  left  in  Crete,  and  directed  to  ordain 
elders  in  every  city.  Meditate  upon  these  things  :  ministers  should 
be  men  of  much  meditation  and  prayer  ;  men  of  contemplative 
ininds,  and  ready  to  give  up  their  mental  and  bodily  powers  wholly 
to  the  work  of  the  Lord  :  That  thy  profiting  may  appear  to  all  men; 
in  all  things  belonging  to  thy  ministerial  and  Christian  calling.  The 
second  day  of  the  quarterly  meeting  I  exhorted. 

Friday  25.  We  had  to  cross  and  recross  the  Johns  River,  and 
man  it  over  the  hills.  I  came  to  Connelly's,  twenty-five  miles,  and 
dined  about  five  o'clock.  1  saw  a  natural  curiosity  in  the  moun- 
tains ;  —  an  old  trunk  of  a  poplar  had  fallen,  and  four  limbs  of  it 
had  taken  root  at  proper  distances  from  each  other,  and  had  grown 
to  be  large  trees  —  from  fifty  to  sixty  feet  high,  and  eighteen  inches 
in  diameter. 

Saturday  26.  I  stayed  at  the  house,  to  read,  write,  and  plan  a 
little.  I  tremble  and  faint  under  my  burden  ;  —  having  to  ride 
about  six  thousand  miles  annually  ;  to  preach  from  three  to  five 
hundred  sermons  a  year  ;  to  write  and  read  so  many  letters,  and 
read  many  more  :  —  all  this  and  more,  besides  the  stationing  of 
three  hundred  preachers  ;  reading  many  hundred  pages  ;  and 
spending  many  hours  in  conversation  by  day  and  by  night,  with 
preachers  and  people  of  various  characters,  among  whom  are 
many  distressing  cases. 

Sunday  27.  The  morning  was  damp  and  cloudy,  yet  I  must  needs 
go  to  the  quarterly  meeting,  which  was  held  in  a  very  open  house  : 
my  improvement  was  the  first  epistle  of  John  iii.  18  —  22.  The 
meeting  lasted  five  hours. 

Monday  28.  We  rode  about  forty  miles,  and  fed  upon  the  path. 
We  came  to  Daniel  Asbury's,  in  Lincoln  county.  I  crossed  once 
more  at  the  Horse  Ford,  where  I  was  formerly  in  danger  of  being 
drowned  :  at  that  time  the  river  was  high,  myself  weak,  the  horse 
I  rode,  loxv,  and  young  ;  and  we  went  in  at  an  improper  place  upon 
the  rocks,  and  amongst  the  falls  of  the  river. 

Daniel  Asbury,  an  experienced  guide,  conducted  me  across  this 
time  ;  but  not  without  some  difficulty  :  his  horse  stumbled  and  wet 
his  feet  ;  and  my  head  began  to  swim  before  we  got  through  ;  and 
my  carriage  to  pitch  over  the  large  stones,  and  small  rocks  :  —  I 
think  1  bid  a  final  adieu  to  this  ford  :  if  1  must  try  this  route  again, 
I  am  inclined  to  go  by  Morgan-Town,  the  capital  of  Burke  county- 

The  winter  approacheth  —  we  must  hasten  south. 


.  I-RAV 

Tuesday  29.    In  the  morning  I  rr-tnl      m  (he  evening  I  walked 
out  and  preached,  that  tin-  people  might  both  sec  and  h«  ;ir  \r.<: 
subject  was  I  Thess.  ii.  11,  1'J. 

Wednesday    30.     We   rode   to    Williams'*  rhapi-1  ,    when-  Jesse 
Lee  preached.      I   added   a    few    um.l<.      We   (hen    h;i-ted   to    tli« 

widow  Featbenton'*,  on  DolclmaB'c  Creek,  \\  •  IMV  r",ie  thirty 
miles  this  day  over  very  uneven  roads.  We  soon  culled  ,\  meeting 
after  our  arrival. 

Thursday   31.    We  crossed  the  south  branch  of  *"atabaw,  and 
soon  after  passed   the    line    hetween    North   and   South    ('arolr 
into  York  county.      In  consequence  of  our  wandering  out    of  om 
way  in  the  Hickory  barrm*.  we  m  u!o  it  thirty  miles  to   Alex,.: 
Hill's;    where   we  held   \  meeting,      (iixl  hath  hlt-s^cd  the  -on  and 
daughter  of  our  host,  which  is   better  to  him   than   thousands  ol 
gold. 

SOUTH  CAROLINA. — Friday,   November    1.    We    had    a    slr.i 
route  of  twenty  miles  to  Jo«iah   Smith's,  on  Broad-River,   Union 
county.     Here  we  held  a  meeting. 

Saturday  2.  We  came  to  Woads-Ferry  upon  Broad,  at  the  mouth 
of  Pacolet  Kiver,  near  a   small  town  called    Pinknevville  :  theno 
to  Spray's,  over  Tyger  and  Hendricks  bridge,  on  the  Enorce  :   u- 
were  benighted   among  the   woods.     The  wagons  and   waters  I, 
made  such  deep  ruts  and  Bullies,  that  I  almost  despaired  of  getting 
onward,  until  1  thought  of  the  expedient   of  leaving  the   earn 
and  mounting  the  horse's  hack,  by  which  means  I  was  better  ahl 
guide   him  :    we   came  into   Colonel   Benjamin    Herndon's,   about 
seven   o'clock,   where   we   met  brothers  Blanton,  Black,  Norman 
and  Smith. 

On  Sabbath  day  I  commented  upon  Romans  it.  10.  Accordi 
to  my  enumeration  I  have  travelled  one  hundred  and  sixty  m. 
in  four  days. 

Monday  4.  I  rested. 

Tuesday  5.  I  rode  eight  mile-:  to  Odell's  chapel,  Laurens  con 
it  was  a  damp  day,  and  we  had  an  open  house.     I  lodged  at  Neon 
Davies's,  a  native  of  Annarundrll  county,  Maryland 

Wednesday  6.  We  came  to  Zoar  chapel  ;  a  new,  unfmMird  hui. 
ing ;  the  morning  was  rainy,  yet  two  or  three  dozen  people  attcm1 
ed  :   we  lodged  at  William  Holl.mdV 

Thursday  7.   We  rode  sixteen  miles  in  haste  (>•>  attend  the  fum  i  . 
of  Nehemiah   Franks,    an   n^rd   man,  who,  we  hope,  dird    in   the 
Lord  ;  Jesse  Lee  preached  the  funeral  sermon  ;  after  which  1  in 
in  improvement  upon  Joseph's  prophecy  Gen.  ^1 


Jtil)  IlKV.  FRANCIS  ASBfcRY's  JOURNAL,  £179?, 

Said  unto  his  brethren,  I  die  ;  and  God  will  surely  visit  you."  I 
made  some  observations  on  his  typical  and  gracious  character ;  his 
earlv  piety,  his  persecution  from  his  brethren,  his  scenes  of  ad- 
versity, imprisonment,  exposure  to  death,  and  slavery  ;  his  piety 
in  prosperity  and  worldly  honour  ;  an  example  for  us  ;  how  God 
visited  the  Israelites,  and  how  he  hath  visited  the  people  of 
America. 

Saturday  and  Sunday.  Quarterly  meeting  at  Bramlet's  ;  I  made 
a  discourse  upon  Titus  ii.  3.  ;  we  had  a  good  season.  I  only  gave 
an  exhortation  on  the  Sabbath.  We  are  now  at  the  widow  Branv- 
blet's,  ten  miles  from  the  widow  Frank's. 

Benjamin  Blanton  came  up  with  us  sick  ;  his  famous  horse  died 
of  the  staggers  ;  he  reported  two  hundred  and  sixty  dollars  ;  and 
lie  had  received  from  the  connexion  in  four  years  two  hundred  and 
fifty  dollars.     If  we  do  not  benefit  the  people  we  have  but  little  of 
their  money  :  such  is  the  ecclesiastical  revenue  of  all  our  order. 

Monday  11.  We  rode  sick,  weary,  and  hungry,  through  a  most 
barren  country.  Jesse  Lee  stopped  to  preach  at  Colonel  Wolfe's  ; 
I  rode  on  to  the  Tumbling.  Shoals  Ford,  upon  Reedy-River  ;  thence 
on  to  William  Powels'g,  upon  the  banks  of  Fair  Seleuda  ;  I  came  ia 
as  usual,  sick  indeed,  after  riding  thirty  miles  ;  jolting  over  the 
roots,  stumps,  holes,  and  gullies. 

Tuesday  12.  Rode  five  miles  to  King's  chapel  ;  there  were  six 
travelling  preachers  present  :  the  house  was  very  open,  and  the 
two  sermons  and  love-feast  held  three  hours  ;  I  was  chilled  ex- 
ceedingly ;  my  subject  was  Ephesians  v.  1 — 3. 

Wednesday  13.  We  rode  westward  sixteen  miles,  to  Warwick 
Bristoe's,  where  we  held  meeting,  and  then  rode  to  Berry's  ford ; 
thence  to  Thomas  Terry's,  a  Yorkshire  Methodist,  whom  I  married 
seven  years  ago  to  Ann  W.  Dowell,  his  present  good  wife,  from  a 
Methodist  stock  on  the  mother's  side  in  Ireland. 

Thursday  14.  We  rode  ten  miles  to  the  Golden  Grove,  at  Cox's 
meeting  house  ;  my  subject  was  1  John  ii.  20.  It  is  agreed  that  this 
is  the  best  society  we  have  in  South  Carolina :  the  land  here  is 
rich.  We  lodged  at  deacon  Tarrant's.  On  Friday  we  crossed 
Seleuda  at  Wilson's  ferry,  and  rode  fifteen  miles  to  Thomas  Wil- 
lingham's,  upon  the  Indian  lands 

Saturday  15.  We  rode  ten  miles  to  Nash's  meeting-bouse,  in 
Pendleton  county  :  where  I  glossed  upon  Colossians  i.  27,  28.  I 
was  much  affected  with  the  faces  and  manners  of  this  people.  Mr. 
•Tames  Nash  is  not,  nor  any  of  his  family,  in  fellowship  with  us, 
are  our  most  kind  friends :  we  were  used  in  the  very  best 


1799.]  REV.   FHANCI9  ASBURV'S  JOURKAT..  361 

manner,  and  this  was  more  abundant  I  \  ai->-ept.dde  :  friend*  in  need 
are  friends  indeed.  We  li.nl  to  preach  in  .in  open  Imu-r  ;  il  w.is 
a  summer's  day  ;  we  had  a  love  feast  and  -  icrarnent  :  my  subject 
\vu-  J  I'oter  ii.  !». —  the  congregation  \%.i-  \,  is  !•! 

GuoKi.ix. —  Monday  17.  \Vt:  r»de  twentv--ix  mile-  int»  tin-  -tale 
of  Georgia,  crossed  Kocky-River,  pn>peH>  -o  >  ,ill< •.!,  hke\%i-e  the 
S.evannah  at  (lie  Cberokee-Ford  :  it  v%a<  wide.  .In- p.  .m.l  I|MM-  iv  ere 
large  rocks  in  it,  and  I  li.nl  no  guide  ;  howexer  we  came  -ale  to 
William  Tail'-  in  I'.lbert  county.  Little  did  I  think  I  -liould  ever 
vi-it  Georgia  again,  much  less  the  frontier-  of  it.  h  w.i-  ;i  i.ntiy 
day  ;  but  I  was  kept  dry  in  the  /flinty  :  not  so  with  brothers  Lee 
and  Blanton. 

Tuesday  13.  We  attended  :it  Tail'?  chapel,  in  tin-  l<>rk*  it  was 
a  cold  day.  I  gave  a  short  exhortation  on  \d-\  \\\.  7.  I  pa--«-d 
a  night  with  Charles'  Tail,  formerly  of  Cokesbury,  and  '.\.i-  made 
exceedingly  welcome  and  comfortable. 

Wednesday  19     Rode  twenty  miles  to  Coldvvater,    in  a  cold  day, 
and  held  meeting  in   a  cold   meeting  house,   but    we    had    a    warm- 
hearted people.      I  gave  a  brief  sermon  upon    Kphes.  v    ('..   "  \Valk 
as  children  of  light  '       We  lodged  at,  and  were  comfortably  eni> 
tained  by  llalph  BanL-. 

Thursday  -<•.  We  rode  sixteen  miles,  sometime*  through  the 
naked  woods,  to  Kcdvxinr's  ;  where  we  had  an  nnc\pi  c.tnl  ron^re- 
gation  in  the  solitary  woods  I  held  forth  on  ••  The  >ou  .>!  Man  is 
come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  The  hou-e  u.i- 
open,  but  the  people  were  simple-hearted,  and  very  kind. 

Friday  '21.  We  came,  sixteen  miles,  to  Carrol'-  m«  i  im-  li.ni-e  ; 
a  new  log  cabin  in  the  woods.  Some  of  the  people  of  the  congre- 
gation are  from  the  east  and  we-t  pait-  of  Maryland.  I  lelt  <  it 
the  Lord  was  with  them.  We  have  the  kitchen,  house,  and  cham- 
ber all  in  one.  and  no  closet  hut  the  woods 

Saturday  --.  At  I'.irk's  new  cabin  chapel,  after  riding  eighteen 
miles,  I  exhorted  We  lodged  at  Stephen  We-t  Brook's. 

Sabbath  day.  Still  at  Park's  chapel:  I  prearhed  up.m  J  <  '->r. 
vi.  1.  1  doubt  if  there  were  ever  twice  as  many  crowded  in  so 
small  a  house — some  stood  upon  the  benches,  and  other-  Dpoo  ilie 
floor:  public  and  private  in"e<uig  held  live  hours.  Ue  ilier»\  id 
had  to  ride  ten  or  twelve  miles  to  lo.lue  at  (ieoiL'e  Chn-tian'-. 
We  travelled  through  Albert,  but  mostly  in  Franklin  county  We 
have  cros>ed  about  thirteen  branches  of  Hn-ad  Hiver.  1  In  i 
them  which  rise  near  the  head  1'ianche.-  of  Ucouce,  are  laigs. 

VOL.    11.  46 


JbJ  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1799, 

The  land  is  not  very  fertile,  except  what  lieth  upon  the  water- 
courses. 

Monday  24.  We  were  detained  by  rain  in  the  morning,  but  set 
off  at  nine  o'clock,  and  came  in  half  past  one,  after  riding  twelve 
miles  to  Charles  Wakefield's,  in  Oglethorpe  county  :  so  called 
after  the  first  governor  of  the  state  or  province.  Benjamin  Blan- 
ton  could  go  no  farther,  but  went  to  bed  with  a  high  fever.  I  de- 
sired Jesse  Lee  to  attend  the  appointments  over  the  Oconee.  We 
had  the  appearance  of  the  beginning  of  winter,  and  were  in  a  cold 
cabin,  but  with  kind  people. 

Tuesday  25.  We  came  six  miles  to  Cornelius  M'Carty's.  Here 
we  had  to  drop  anchor  again  :  brother  Blanton  could  go  no  further 
this  day ;  and  as  there  were  three  of  us  in  company,  and  one  who 
was  well  able  to  do  the  work,  I  felt  it  my  duty  to  do  as  I  would  be 
done  by,  and  have  been  done  by,  i.  e.  to  stay  and  take  care  of  the 
sick  man. 

Wednesday  26.  After  brother  Blanton  had  been  very  ill,  and 
in  bed  most  of  his  time,  I  housed  him  in  my  carriage,  and  we 
proceeded  down  the  Oconee,  twelve  miles,  to  Barrel  Pope's,  after 
a  heavy  siege  through  the  woods,  from  one  plantation  to  another, 
on  brother  Blanton's  stiff-jointed  horse,  that  I  would  only  ride  to 
gave  souls,  or  the  health  of  a  brother.  Our  accommodations  com- 
pensated for  all.  I  admire  the  soft  soil  of  Georgia,  and  it  is  plea- 
sant to  see  the  people  ploughing  on  the  last  of  November,  as  if  it 
were  the  month  of  April.  The  weather  was  very  cold  on  Thurs- 
day and  Friday.  Saturday  I  rode  seven  miles  up  to  Hudson's 
ford,  at  the  mouth  of  Trail  Creek,  to  have  a  sight  of  Oconee- 
River.  Jesse  Lee  vi-sited  the  forks  of  the  river,  and  formed  a 
circuit  for  one  preacher.  The  land  upon  the  river  is  good.  I 
returned  to  Henry  Pope's. 

Sabbath  day  30.  The  weather  still  continues  cold.  At  the 
new  meeting-house  my  subject  WHS  Hebr.  iii.  12,  13,  14.  There 
appears  to  be  more  wealth  than  religion  here. 

Monday,  December  1.  We  rode  twelve  miles,  in  a  very  damp 
day,  to  the  widow  Steward's  :  we  had  a  large  congregation  for  the 
day  and  place.  The  widow's  house  stands  upon  a  line  between 
Green  and  Oglethorpe  counties. 

Tuesday  2.  At  Greenesborough,  in  a  large  meeting-house  built 
Tjy  and  for  the  Presbyterians,  we  held  meeting.  We  lodged  at 
William  Ufton's.  We  have  travelled  in  two  days  about  thirty- 
miles.  The  badness  of  the  weather,  and  my  constant  uneasi- 


1799.]  KEV.  FKAVCIS  ASBURY'S  JOI-RNAI  . 

ness  have  injured  me  much  :  I  have  spoken  very  little  in  public  :- 
I  drag  nlong  exceedingly  heavy.      It  is  serious  work  to  be  driving 
through  the  back  settlements,  and  having  open  meeting  .md  dwell- 
ing houses,  in  the  winter  season. 

Wednesday  3.  At  Burke's  meeting-home  Ji--r  !.•<  pi-.i-licd, 
and  I  exhorted  upon  the  importance  of  the  ministry,  and  onl.nned 
brother  Watts  a  local  deacon.  We  lodged  ;U  J, din  ('nitrhl'u -Id's  ; 
where  we  had  a  gracious  family  meeting. 

Thursday  4.  We  moved  along  in  a  cloudy,  damp,  cold  day,  four- 
teen miles,  to  Little  Britain,  a  log  pen,  open  at  tlie  top,  bottom,  and 
sides  :  a  few  people  attended  ;  my  subject  uas  Matt.  \n 

Friday  5.  We  rode,  fifteen  milr*.  through  a  heavy  rain  to  Hill's 
meeting  house,  upon  Long-Creek,  where  six  or  scvi-u  pn-achera, 
with  a  few  people  attended  :  my  subject  was  !K-l>r.  x.  92,  II 
Hull,  Josias  Randall,  S.  Covvles,  and  William  Partridge CMM  a  Ion-; 
way  to  see  me  ;  we  had  a  family  meeting  at  mother  Hill'-.  It  i* 
about  twenty  years  since  I  first  visited  this  house. 

Saturday  G,  and  Sabbath  day  7.  We  held  our  quarterly  meeting 
at  Mark's  meeting-house  :  I  had  dreaded  this  appointment.  1  had 
some  pain  and  some  pleasure.  The  state  of  religion  is  low  here. 
Hope  Hull  preached  on  Saturday  upon  Jer.  x.  C.  we  had  somr 
signs  to  show  that  life  had  not  entirely  departed,  in  the  love-feast 
and  sacrament.  Benjamin  Blanton  preached  Sabbath  day,  from 
Isai.  xxviii.  8.  and  I  gave  a  gloss  upon  Joshua  xiv.  U.  "  Neverthe- 
less, my  brethren  that  went  up  with  me  made  the  heart  of  the  peo- 
ple melt ;  but  1  wholly  followed  the  Lord  my  God."  In  the  intro- 
duction peculiar  attention  was  paid  to  the  dealings  of  God  with 
Israel  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  ;  the  influence  pious  charac- 
ters had  in  the  case  before  us — two  prevailing  against  ten  ;  that 
the  well-being  of  future  generations  required  that  a  decided  tone 
to  the.  morals,  manners,  and  religious  opinions,  should  be  given  by 
the  first  settlers  of  the  country.  The  weight  of  the  discourse 
opened  in  two  divisions  ;  First,  What  (iod  had  done  for  many 
Christians;  Secondly,  Their  unfaithfulness  and  complaints,  lik« 
the  Israelites)  and  their  bad  influence  upon  the  camp  of  Israel,  a< 
at  the  present  day. 

Monday  8.  We  rode  twenty  miles  to  Hope  Hull's,  near  Washing- 
ton, in  Wilkes  county. 

Tuesday  9,  we  rested  :  and  on  Wednesday  10.  1  gave  a  discourse 
at  Coke's  chapel,  upon  Gal.  vi.  .'.  Tin-  r;iin  1  "  • 

the  meetin^.     1  dined  at  I'.  Mcrnwrnth^r's  ami  r».|i>  hom^  will- 


364  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [179SF. 

Thomas  Grant  that  evening,  and  was  detained  on  Thursday  and 
Friday  in  consequence  of  a  rain. 

U'r  have  hud  an  exceedingly  heavy  rain  :  the  Little  River  was 
impassable  ;  but  I  was  kimlly  and  comfortably  provided  for.  1  la- 
ment the  state  of  religion  in  these  new  settlements  New  lands, 
new  officers,  and  new  objects,  occupy  the  minds  of  the  people. 
I  invented  a  continental  general  plan  of  movement  through  the 
eastern  and  western  states,  not  much  short  of  seven  thousand 
miles 

Saturday  13.  I  made  an  attempt  to  reach  Philips's  bridge  :  but 
tvas  soon  stopped  by  a  creek.  Thence  we  went  to  a  milldam, 
full  of  holes  and  rolling  stones.  I  did  not  choose  to  risk  the  over- 
turning of  the  carriage  into  the  millpond  or  the  creek  ;  so  1  return- 
ed to  D.  Merriweather's,  and  appointed  a  meeting  at  Coke's  chapel, 
and  upon  the  Sabbath  day  gave  them  a  long,  weighty  talk  upon 
1  Cor.  vii.  29. 

Monday  15.  We  had  to  take  the  rain  and  mud  upon  the  Augusta 
road ;  the  wagons  had  been  detained  by  high  water  ;  men  and 
wagons  were  very  heavily  loaded  with  rum.  We  rode  twenty- 
four  miles,  and  were  kindly  entertained  at  William  Shield's. 

Tuesday  16.  Rode  ten  miles  to  James  Allen's,  and  behold,  nei- 
ther the  man  nor  bis  wife  were  at  home  ;  the  day  was  far  spent, 
and  it  was  raining,  so  we  stopped. 

Wednesday  17.  Before  we  could  get  ready  to  move,  it  began  to 
rain  powerfully.  We  came  down  the  Augusta  road,  gouged  up  by 
wagons  in  a  most  dreadful  manner,  in  consequence  of  which,  we 
were  6ve  hours  in  going  twelve  miles  to  Thomas  Maine's,  upon 
Uchee.  I  had  great  intestine  war,  having  eat  but  little  ;  but  here 
we  have  all  things  comfortable.  I  doubt  whether  we  shall  be  able 
to  cross  Savannah-River  in  five  days  from  this  time  ;  the  former 
freshet  being  increased  by  latter  rains. 

Thursday  and  Friday  we  rested.  Saturday  19.  We  rode  to 
M'Gee's  to  attend  an  appointment  :  but  the  rain  prevented  the  peo- 
ple from  coming. 

Sabbath  day  20.  We  came  into  Augusta  town.  I  went  in  the 
morning  to  hear  a  sermon,  and  in  the  afternoon  I  gave  one  upon 
Hebr.  ii.  1.  We  have  preached  several  years  in  this  town,  but 
with  little  success  :  we  want  a  house  of  our  own  here.  On  Mon- 
day 21  the  waters  were  much  assuaged.  Augusta  town  is  greatly 
improved  in  houses  since  I  was  here  last.  The  boat  trade  from 
Savannah  is  very  considerable.  After  waiting  an  hour  on  the  banks 


1800.]  RF.V.  FRANCIS  ASHI-RY'S 

of  the  river,  we  crossed,  and  came  in  about    sun«et,    after   ruling 
wenly-two  miles  to  Cooper's  in  lli-    pm- 

SOUTH  CAROLINA. — TIK-.|.I\  :.'.  W-  ami  {treaty-three  mifa  to 
Chester's,  the  best  entertainment  we  could  find  :  it  was  but  for  a 
night. 

Christmas  day  -~>.  We  rode  twenty-three  mile-;  \ni\pnlr  meetmg- 
h'Mi«e,  near  Trolly's  ;  Ihence  ten  miles  to  Jacob  Barr's  :  here  I  was 
ence  more  at  hom--. 

Thursday  26.  We  rode  down  IMi-to  River.  whi<  h  was  murh 
swelled  by  the  la'e  rims;  I  -lined  at  Murra\'-:  \\<>  then  prm  .  ,  .|- 
ed  up  the  stream  to  .Mr.  Hall's:  we  have  rode  twenly-Ove  milei 
this  day. 

Friday  27.  We  crossed  at  Fourhold's  bridge,  whu  h  \\-.\-  K  ir<-i-ly 
pa»»able,  the  water  bein<;  deep,  and  spread  out  upon  tin-  Imv  land 
nearly  three  quarters  of  a  mile. 

I  came  accidentally  to  my  appointment  at  the  Cypress  rhapel. 
My  text  was  1  Tim.  ii.  5.  "  For  there  is  one  God,  and  one  Media- 
tor between  (iod  and  men,  the  man  Christ  Je*n«.''  I.  The  creat 
proportion  there  is  between  a  holy  God  and  fallen  m  mkind.  1 1  The 
absolute,  indispensable  necessity  of  a  mediator  in  nature  and  »ffire. 

Saturday  28.  I  never  knew  worse  roads.  I  needed  one  to  hold 
on  one  side  of  my  carriage  to  prevent  my  beinp:  overset  in  the  mud. 
Sabbath  day  I  preached  in  the  old  church  upon  Psalm  cxviii.  24,  25. 
On  Monday  and  Tuesday  we  had  a  little  re-;(. 

Wednesday,   January    I,   1800.     We    began   our    conference   in 
Charleston,  twenty  three  members  present.      I  had  select  meet  IT.:* 
with  the  preachers  each  evening,  who  gave  an  account  of  the  »!• 
ings  of  God  with  their  own  souls,  and  of  the  circuits  they  supplied 
the  past  year. 

Saturday  4.  After  determining  by  a  large  majority  that  our  next 
meeting  together  (by  divine  permission)  should  be  in  Camden  ;  the 
conference  rose. 

Slow  moved  Ihe  northern  posl  on  the  eve  of  new  year's  day.  :md 
brought  the  heart-distressing  information  of  Ihe  death  of  Washing- 
ton, who  departed  this  life  December  14,  1797. 

Washington,  the  calm,  intrepid  chief,  the  disinterested  friend, 
first  father,  and  temporal  saviour  of  his  country  UIH!  i  ili\i:i«  pro- 
tection and  direction.  A  universal  cloud  >;M  upon  tin  i.i>-.  -  .'I  the 
citizens  of  Charleston  ;  the  pulpit-  cloathed  in  black  — the  bells 
muffled — the  paraded  soldiery — a  public  oration  decreed  to  he 
delivered  on  Friday  14th  of  this  month — a  marble  Maine  to  lie  pi  iced 
in  some  proper  situation.  These  were  the  expressions  of  sorrow, 


366  HEV.  FJUNCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1800. 


and  these  (he  marks  of  respect  paid  by  his  feeling  fellow-citizens  to 
the  memory  of  this  great  man.  I  am  disposed  to  loose  sight  of  all 
but  Washington  :  matchless  man  !  At  all  times  he  acknowledged 
the  providence  of  God,  and  never  was  he  ashamed  of  his  Redeem- 
er :  we  believe  he  died,  not  fearing  death.  In  his  will  he  ordered 
the  manumission  of  his  slaves  —  a  true  son  of  liberty  in  all  points. 

Sunday  5.  After  the  burden  of  care  was  thrown  off,  I  again  re- 
sumed the  pulpit  ;  and  in  order  the  better  to  suit  my  subject  to 
meet  the  conference,  the  new  year,  ordination  of  elders  and  dea- 
cons, and  the  General's  death,  1  made  choice  of  Isai.  Ixi.  2.  "  To 
proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  ;  and  the  day  of  ven- 
geance of  our  God  to,  comfort  all  that  mourn."  — 

I.  The  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord. 

II.  The  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God. 

III.  To  comfort  all  that  mourn. 

The  congregation  was  large,  decent,  and  solemn  ;  the  ordination 
was  attended  with  unction  from  above,  and  the  sacrament  with  ten- 
derness of  heart.  At  the  new  church,  before  the  ordination  of 
deacons,  Jesse  Lee  discoursed  upon  "  The  harvest  truly  is  great," 
&c.  After  encountering  many  difficulties,  I  was  able  to  settle  the 
plan  of  stations  and  to  take  in  two  new  circuits. 

Monday  6.  The  main  body  of  the  preachers  left  the  city.  I 
desired  Jesse  Lee,  as  my  assistant,  to  take  my  horse  and  his  own 
and  visit  between  this  and  the  7th  of  February,  Croosawhatchie, 
Savannah,  and  Saint  Mary's,  (a  ride  of  about  four  hundred  miles) 
and  to  take  John  Garven  to  his  station  :  the  time  hath  been  when 
this  journey  would  have  been  my  delight  ;  but  now  I  must  lounge 
in  Charleston. 

Sunday  12.  We  have  had  a  week  of  snow,  which  made  the  ways 
extremely  mirey.  I  attended  the  church  in  Cumberland-street  : 
my  subject  was  1  Peter  i.  17  —  19.  I  did  not  enter,  as  1  wished, 
into  the  marrow  of  the  subject. 

Monday  13.  Benjamin  Blanton  left  me  to  attend  his  charge  of 
preachers,  circuits,  and  to  promote  the  sale  of  our  books,  within 
the  limits  of  the  Charleston  conference.     1  have  kept  no  journal 
from  Sabbath  to  Sabbath.     I  have  been  employed   in  reading  and 
answering  letters  to  different  and  distant  parts  of  the  continent. 

Sunday  19.  My  subject  was  1  Peter  i.  6,  7.  I  have  been  very 
unwell  since  Friday,  but  as  I  only  attempt  to  labour  upon  Sabbath 
days,  I  could  not  stand  back  from  duty  ;  I  was  greatly  assisted  in 
the  morning,  but  much  outdone  in  the  afternoon  in  body  and  mind. 

At  intervals  Nicholas  Snetheri  read  to  rae  those  excellent  ser- 


1800.]  REV.    FRANCIS   ASnURY's  JO' 

inons  of  Mr.  James  Saurin,  a  French   I'rotestant  minister  at  thr 
Hague  ;    they   are  long,  elaborate,    learned,   doctnu.il.   pra.;ti...d 
historical,  and  explanatory. 

No  journal  until  Friday  24.  I  have  been  very  unwi  II  in  my 
bowels  ;  C.  Patton  sent  me  a  decoction  of  bark,  rhubarb,  .ind  nut- 
meg, which  helps  me  much.  This  week  I  employed  in  an-vM  ring 
my  correspondents  in  the  District  of  Maine,  Massachusetts,  state  of 
New-York,  Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  and  Virginia.  On  Thur-d.iy 
night  departed  this  life  Kdward  Rutledge,  governor  of  South  Caro- 
lina; he  was  one  of  the  tried  patriots  of  1773  and  177G.  The 
Africans  give  him  a  good  character  for  his  humanity  :  on  Saturday 
25,  his  dust  is  to  be  committed  to  dust.  "  1  have  said  ye  are  gods  ; 
but  ye  shall  die  like  men,  and  fall  like  one  of  the  princes." 

Sunday  26.  I  was  under  some  weakness  of  body  and  mind.  I 
attended  at  the  old  church,  and  preached  on  Roman*  xii.  'J — 11. 
January  30th  we  had  ano  ier  snow.  February  3d,  I  have  kept  no 
journal  for  some  days,  /.Sabbath  was  a  cloudy  day  with  rain  ;  my 
sacramental  subject  was  Rev.  i.  5,  6.  1  have  had  a  distressing 
cold  in  my  head  ;  notwithstanding  which  1  have  read  much  in 
hooks,  letters,  and  lives. 

Wednesday  5.  I  began  to  relax  my  mind  from  writing  long  let- 
ters.    I  dioed  with  Jesse  Vaughan,  and  aflenvard  visitrd  Mr.  U 
nack's  family,  at  the  orphan  house  ;  there  is  no  institution  in  Am-- 
rica  equal  to  this  ;  two  or  three  hundred  orphans  arf  taught. 
and  clothed,  and  then  put  apprentices  to  good  trades. 

Friday  7.  Jesse  Lee  and  George  Dougharty  came  to  town  :  the 
former  hath  been  a  route  of  about  six  hundred  miles  ;  and  m\  poor 
gray  hath  suffered  for  it. 

Sunday  9.  I  gave  my  last  charge  at  Cumberland-street  church 
from  Rom.  xii.  14 — 18. 

Monday  10.   I  left  the  city  of  Charleston  ;   the  day  was  cold  and 
the  roads  bad  :  we  came  through  Broughton  swamp  ;  in  the  eve- 
ning my  carriage  got  set  fast  ;   the  second  draught,  the  hook  upon 
the  swingle  tree  gave  way,  and  I  had  to  take  to  the  mud  to  tiv  tin 
traces  ;  at  half  past  eight  o'clock  we  came  to  Monk's  Corner. 

Tuesday  11.   It  snowed  ;    I  was  distressed  for  a  wagoner  who-* 
horses  ran  away  at  the  sight  of  my  carriage,  and  whirled  the  wagon 
among  the  stumps   and  tree-,    happily  no  considerable  injnry    ' 
suffered.     We  lodged  at  the  widow  Turk's,  near  Nrl-on'-  lYrry— 
an  extremely  cold  night. 

Wednesday  12.  We  wrought  our  passage  over  and  through  th« 
river  and  swamp,  and  as  long  a?  we  kept  the  public  road  it  < 


JUS  UEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL.  [1800. 

swamp  :  we  at  length  came  to  Gibson's  chapel ;  where  I  preached 
upon  James  i.  25.  We  dined  at  Bowman's,  and  in  the  evening  held 
meeting  at  Mr.  Gales's. 

Thursday  13,  was  a  very  cold  day:  it  terminated  in  rain:  no 
meeting  at  Bradford's. 

Friday  14.  We.  came  to  Rembert'p,  where,  at  three  o'clock  I 
spoke  upon  Hebr.  iii.  3.  to  a  few  people  ;  brother  Snethen  also 
gave  them  a  discourse. 

Saturday  15.  We  came  to  Camden :  the  weather  is  still  cold; 
we  stopped  to  feed  at  Navy's.  We  have  rode,  since  Monday  l*st, 
one  hundred  and  thirty  miles,  and  my  horse  would  not  have  been 
60  outdone  in  two  hundred,  if  three  hundred  miles,  upon  good 
roads.  My  soul  hath  been  kept  in  patience,  and  much  prayer ; 
my  body  is  in  great  weakness,  undergoing  disagreeable  changes 
with  the  weather,  and  my  constitutional  maladies. 

Sunday  16.  At  Camden  I  preached  upon  1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20. 
We  administered  the  Lord's  supper  ;  the  day  was  cold  for  this  cli- 
mate ;  and  but  few  people  attended. 

Monday  17.  We  rode  twenty  miles  to  Horton's  ;  and  on  Tues- 
day 18,  held  meeting  there. 

Wednesday  19.  We  rode  forty  miles  through  the  sands,  and  roads 
made  bad  by  snow  and  frost ;  we  were  travelling  as  late  as  eight 
o'clock  in  the  evening,  groping  in  the  dark  until  a  boy  guided  us 
along  by  the  blaze  of  pine  wood  to  brother  Shaw's  peaceable 
dwelling :  he  was  gone  to  his  circuit,  but  his  gracious  wife  and 
children  were  at  home. 

Thursday  20.  At  Jackson's  meeting-house,  we  had  some  gracious 
feelings.  After  an  absence  of  ten  years,  I  called  once  more  at 
friend  Pace's. 

Friday  21.  We  attended  a  meeting  at  Anson  court-house.  We 
had  no  small  congregation  at  Mr.  Cashe's  new  house  :  1  was  kindly 
entertained  at  his  father's  when  in  Virginia  and  Tennessee,  and 
now  by  him  :  they  offered  us  money,  food,  lodging,  or  whatever 
we  wanted.  At  Threadgill's  meeting-house,  N.  Snethen  preached  ; 
we  then  hasted  to  Mr.  Atkin's  :  we  were  compelled  to  wade  Rocky- 
River — the  water  came  into  my  carriage  box. 

Sunday  23.  At  Randell's  church,  in  Montgomery  county,  (N.  C.) 
I  gave  a  discourse  after  brother  Snethen,  upon  1  Sam.  xii.  23. 

Monday  24.  We  came  to  Ledbetter's. 

NORTH  CAROLINA. — Tuesday  25.  Crossed  Pee  Dee  at  Tindelsville, 
and  landed  at  Andersonsborough  without  any  difficulties  ;  but  when 
we  came  to  Williams-Ford,  across  the  River,  it  was  impassable ; 


1800.]  ;'.   FfUWris    \,lll 


we  then  changed  our  course,  .-in.)  took  the  ruin*-  road,  \\inrli  wag  open 
to  the  Montgomery  line,  thence  wo  had  to  -HO-A  our  u;i\.  until 
came  to  Edward  Harris's,  where  we  fed,  dined,  and  prayed  with  tin 
woman  and  children,    and  then  came  on  wo  ,t  \\lnr.        AB 

the  sun  began  to  decline,  we  thought  it  ttn>"   to  ln.,k  out  ;   to  our 
surprise  we  saw  a   Friends'   meeting  hmi-e,   as   \\.    pd^i  .1   (.  . 
form;   I  then  concluded  we  could  not  reach   lu.p  l>i\rr,  and  \\f 
stopped  at  John  Henley's  —  we  had  all  wi-  wanted  but  prayer. 

Wednesday  26.   I  had  to  pass  over  heavy  hilN,   rocks,  and  <mall 
runs,  and  through  thick  clay  :  we  were  concluding  when  in  C'h.n 
ton,  and  after  we  set  out,   by  the  excessive  odd,  that  there  was 
snow  not  far  distant  :   when  we  came  into  North  Carolina,  W6  found 
that  upon   Pee  Dee,  and  Y.idkin,  nnd   I  loop  rivers,  the  ^now  had 
fallen   fifteen   and   eighteen   inches   deep,   and  continued   nearly   a 
month  upon  the  ground,  and  h  id  SIM  lied  the  rivers,  and  spoiled 
public  roads.     We   lodged  at  Mr.    RelTs  ;    having  rode  only   fiftv 
miles  in  two  days.      We  left   two  appointments  on   the  west  side  of 
Uwany  :  so  much  for  that  siege  :  my  horse  had  hard  worlc  :  rnv  car- 
riage was  very   loose  in  the  joints  by  constant  nnd  long  play  ;   ami 
myself  much  tired  ;  but  I  revived  when  I  saw  the  lawyers  con 
the   western   courts  :   I    thought,   if  they   toiled  and   suffered    for 
justice   and    silver,    how   ought   I    to   labour   fur   truth,    and    gold 
(hat  perisheth    not,  and   thousands    of  people,   and    hundreds   of 
preachers. 

Thursday  27.  I  gained  a  day  by  the  overflowing  of  Uwany,  and 
came  to  Daniel  Sherewood's,  in  Guilford  county,  within  twenty  n 
of  the  track  1  went  down  last  fall. 

Friday  28.  It  rained  and  snowed.  I  gave  an  exhortation,  and 
ordained  two  deacons.  We  got  our  horses  shod,  and  then  rode  to 
aged  William  Field's. 

Sunday,  March  2.    We  set  out  early  and   hasted   through    nVrj, 
roads  to  the  Hickory  Mountain  chapel  ;   nr>»  lees  then  twerr 
or  thirty  miles  ;   N.  Snethen  went  along,  nnd  preached  to  the  peo- 
ple, and  brought  a  few  to  meet  me  at  friend   R-  where  wr 

dined  about  six  o'clock. 

Monday  3.   We  had  no  small  race  through   Chatham  county  to 
Snipe's  ;    we  were  lost  three  times  before  we  came  to  flar. 
ferry,  on  Haw-River,  and  had  to  send  a  boy  a  mile  for  the  f> 
man,  and  wait  nearly  an  half  hour. 

Tuesday  4.   A  clear,    but   very   cold  day.       We   wrr*   tre 
with  great  respect  at  the  University,  by   the  president,  Calwrll. 
and  the  students,  citizens,  and  many  of  the  country  peopl 


.    lUAATtS   ASBURY-S  JOURNAL,  i  1801', 

ther  Snethen  preached  on  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save 
in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  When  the  University  is 
finished,  I  shall  take  notice  of  it ;  I  stopped  to  baptise  some  chil- 
dren, and  then  rode  on  to  Massey's. 

Wednesday  5.  We  rode  to  Sihon  Smith's  ;  and  I  gave  a  lecture 
in  the  evening. 

Thursday  6.  We  came  to  Raleigh,  the  seat  of  government ;  I 
preached  in  the  state  house  :  notwithstanding  this  day  was  very 
cold  and  snowy,  we  had  many  people  to  hear  ;  I  baptised  a  child, 
and  came  that  evening  to  Thomas  Proctor's. 

Friday  7.  We  came  to  the  Union  church  ;  many  attended,  but 
the  excessive  cold  penetrated  my  whole  system  :  we  lodged  at 
John  Whitefield's. 

Saturday  8.  I  rode  twelve  miles  through  the  snow  to  Edmund 
Taylor's,  senr.  This  week,  from  Monday  to  Saturday  at  noon,  I 
have  rode  one  hundred  and  ten  miles  :  my  mind  is  kept  in  great 
serenity.  I  have  spoken  every  day  but  this. 

Sunday  9.  We  have  a  great  sleet :  the  healthy  and  the  young 
went  to  Bank's  church.  At  four  o'clock  we  had  a  sermon  at  father 
Taylor's  on  Eph.  iv.  3.  "  Endeavouring  to  keep  the  unity  of  the 
Spirit,  in  the  bond  of  peace." — 

I.  The  end  ;  the  unity  of  the  Spirit. 

II.  The  means  ;  there  might  be  a  union  in  interest,  in  opposi- 
tion, in  sentiment,  in  ordinances,  but  not  in  the  Spirit  ;  that  this 
union  is  a  union  in  experiences  by  the  Spirit ;  and  in  the  spirits  or 
minds  of  Christians.     The  means  are  set  forth  in  the  first   and 
second  verses  of  the  same  chapter  ;  to  walk  worthy  of  their  Chris- 
tian  character  and  calling— disorderly    walking    breaketh    union. 

'  With  all  lowliness,"  or  every  mark  of  humility  :  pride  is  sure  to 
break  union  :  it  hath  done  it  in  heaven  and  Paradise.  "  Meekness  ;" 
unlawful  passion  will  break  union.  "  Long  suffering  ;"  if  men  will 
not  suffer  long  from  saints  and  sinners,  they  will  break  union  with 
the  Church  of  God. 

Monday  10.  I  rubbed  along,  some  how,  to  Smith's  church  ;  the- 
distress  1  suffered  in  my  bowels  was  great ;  and  had  been  so  for 
three  days ;  my  misery  was  so  exceedingly  great  that  I  set  off  to  leave 
the  place  ;  but  my  way  from  the  dwelling-house  lay  by  the  church, 
the  people  were  collected,  1  felt  better,  stept  in,  and  gave  an  ex- 
hortation.  I  took  Stoughtons  bitters,  and  got  relief;  and  then  rode 
on  to  friend  Harris's. 

Tuesday  11.  I  preached  a  short  discourse  on  Joshua's  resolu 
tien,  and  rode  twelve  miles  to  E.  Taylor's,  junior  :  I  felt  unwell 


l8GO.]  REV.  FRAN  -LftNAl, 

Wednesday  12.   I  attended  the  fun,  i;,l  •  pro- 

fessed religion  three  years,  lived  happy,  and  died  in  the  Lord.    \ 
Snethen  preached  the  fum-i-al  jtermon  from  "  A  IMMH!  name  is  b< 
than  precious  ointment;   and  iht-  d.iy  of  de;i(h  l.rii.-i  than   the  day 
of  ones  birth."     I   gave  some  sentiments  on   "  d'nd  forbid  that  I 
should  glory  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  .•«-,;„*  ciiri-it 

Thursday  13.   We  crossed  Roaooke  at  Tayl.n  -  i'vrry  :  i\«   , 
was  very  full.     Mail,  ancient  Virginia,  once  more!     In  little  more 
than  four  weeks  we  have  rodp  nearly  two  hundred  mile-  in      ,>it), 
and  three  hundred  in  North  Carolina.      \\  <•  r.nne  to  Howell  'I 
lor's.      N.   Snethen  preached  father  Young's  funeral,  on  l-;u.  Ivii. 
1.    I  could  only  exhort.     We  rode  home  with  S.   Hulmo,  fifteen 
miles,  and  it  was  well  we  did. 

VIRGINIA. — Saturday  15,  U  .1-  a  ^tormy  day.  One  of  my  friends 
wanted  to  borrow  or  beg  .£50  of  me  :  he  might  a<  well  have  asked 
me  for  Peru.  I  showed  him  all  the  money  I  had  in  the  world— 
about  twelve  dollars,  and  gave  him  five  :  strange,  that  neither  my 
friends  nor  my  enemies  will  believe  that  I  neither  have,  nor  seek 
bags  of  money  :  well,  they  shall  believe  by  demonstration,  uhat  I 
have  ever  been  striving  to  prove — that  I  will  live  and  die  a  poor 
man.  At  Salem  we  had  a  good  Sabbath  ;  my  subject  was  Kom. 
sii.  19 — 21.  Our  meeting  held  nearly  three  hours. 

Tuesday  18.  I  preached  at  William  Owens's  on  Psal.  xxivii.  39, 
'10.  we  had  an  open,  living  time. 

Wednesday  19,  at  M}  rick  >  hapel.  Thursday  20,  at  Drom- 
goold's  chapel  :  Jesse  Lee  and  N.  Snethen  did  the  preaching,  and  I 
rode  home  with  Peter  Pelham  :  thi?  day's  work  was  riding  twenty- 
five  miles.  We  crossed  a  bridge  like  a  castle  at  the  Westward-Ford. 

Friday  21.  We  escaped  another  dreadful  rainy  day  :  a  prodi- 
gious quantity  of  water  fell  :  we  were  housed  ;  not  a  single  per- 
son came  to  meeting  ;  but  we  had  a  sermon  at  noon,  and  one  in 
the  family  at  night. 

Saturday  22.  We  set  out  for  Sussex,  but  missed  our  way  ;  we 
,soon  came  to  an  impassable  stream  ;  I  a«k*-d  a  poor,  unintelligible 
negro,  Who  lived  near?  he  said,  Lewis  Gig,  I  recollected  Gr 
and  we  went  straight  to  hi*  hun>-e  and  dined.  We  then  pushed 
on,  and  finding  the  Three-Ilun-Creek  too  deep  to  cross,  took  up 
our  lodging  at  J.  Fisher's. 

Sunday    23.    We     rode    fifteen    miles    to    Jones's    chapel  :     I 
was  very    unwell,    but   gave    a   sermon    on    Hebr.    in.     I 
we  had   three  sermons,  'hen,  nr.d    ta       '  CP  having 

^d  rae. 


>.  1KA.%UJ>  ASBUHY  S  JOURNAL.  (16UO. 


Monday  24,  at  Pennington's  I  spoke  on  Hebr.  xiii.  20,  21.  As 
we  had  reason  to  believe  the  river  Notaway  was  impassable  at 
Mien's  bridge,  we  rode  back  se?en  miles  to  Smith's.  Tuesday 
morning  \ve  had  to  ride  nearly  one  mile  through  the  water,  which 
was  sometimes  knee  deep,  -««1  sometimes  up  to  our  horses  sides  ; 
after  riding  seventeen  miles,  we  came  to  Mr.  Briggs's  about 
twelve  o'clock  ,  the  day  was  extremely  cold,  and  indicative  of 
snow  :  ivegave  two  sermons  ;  my  subject  was  1  Cor.  vii.  29,  30. 

Wednesday  26.  We  gave  an  exhortation  at  Lane's  chapel  ;  lodged 

at  Philip  Davies's  ;  and  on  Thursday  27,  we  rode  to  J.  Moody's, 

twenty-four  miles  :  we  crossed  Black-water  at  Broad-water-bridge 

—it  was  very  deep  wading.     Brother  Soethen  preached  in  the 

evening. 

Friday  28.  At  Blunt's  chapel  :  here  I  was  unable  to  add  many 
words.  The  probability  is  we  shall  hold  conference  in  this  neigh- 
bourhood, as  the  small-pox  prevails  in  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth, 
and  the  people  in  this  settlement  have  made  most  generous  offers 
to  the  preachers,  provided  they  choose  to  sit  in  conference  here. 

Saturday  29,  was  a  day  of  settled  rain,  and  we  v/ere  kept  in  the 
house,  myself  being  very  unwell. 

Sunday  30.  We  rode  sixteen  miles  through  damp,  cold,  and 
cloudy  weather,  to  a  meeting-house  near  Everitt's  bridge,  not  fit 
for  a  horse  to  stay  in  :  I  could  not  refrain  from  speaking  on 
Psalm  xii:  1.  "  Help,  Lord,  for  the  godly  man  ceaseth,  for  the 
faithful  fail  from  among  the  children  of  men."  See  Isaiah  Ivii.  1» 
Micah  vii.  2.  It  was  observed,  First,  What  the  remaining  remnant 
had  to  do  when  the  truly  pious  were  taken  from  the  earth  :  —  to 
be  godly  ;  truly  gracious  souls  ;  faithful  —  faithfulness  the  test,  and 
continued  proof  of  such  souls  :  the  loss  the  world  and  the  church 
sustained  :  moral  men  were  valuable  ;  temperate  men  a  loss  ; 
friends  to  liberty  and  religion  a  loss  ;  —  much  more  men  of  sterling 
piety. 

Monday,  April  1.  We  passed  through  Suffolk,  and  called  upon 
Mr.  Coulings,  whose  pious  father  is  gone  to  rest  since  I  was  here 
last.  After  twenty  years,  I  called  at  Mr.  Yerbery's,  and  then 
came  on  to  Isaac  Lunsford's.  I  was  very  unwell  :  for  some  days 
1  have  had  chills,  headach,  and  bilious  symptoms  ;  to  this  suc- 
ceeded violent  vomiting,  and  a  desperate  night. 

Tuesday  2.  We  came  to  William  Wright's,  on  Pig-Point,  where 
I  preached  a  little  on  Hebr.  x.  29. 

Wednesday  3.  At  Crany-Island  chapel  :  here  dreadful  havoc 
!hath  been  made  by  James  O'Kelly  ;  a  peaceable  society  of  nearly 


1.JOU.J  !;>.>.   1  KAN.  la   A.-tlRV   ffJOVaij 


lifty  souls  are    divided,  ;md   I    fear  in   the   end,  some  may  be 
stroyed  :   how   he   hath  done   this  work   we  m;iv  Itnow    by  reading 
his  Apology.      N.  Six-then  gave  ;i   gi  •«•  it  di>c«urse  on   2  Cor.  xiii 
5,  6,  7.      It  is  astonishing  to  hoar  the  falsehood"  published  .ig. 
me.      I  lodged  at  Jame*  ''.urn 

Thursday  4.  At  JolhfT's  I  road  a  most  gracious  account  of  the 
work  of  God  on  the  eastern  shore  —  in  Cecil  county,  Duck-Creek, 
and  Dover,  in  the  state  of  Delewarc.  I  published  it  in  the  congre- 
gation, reading  tho  letter  :  my  subjects  oo  which  I  preached,  were 
Hebr.  xii.  15  and  Luke  xvii.  5. 

Friday  5.     We  rode  to    James  Tayl  >r's      I  was  deei.lv  afflicted 
probably  occasioned   by  my  eating  of  tish  :    I  exhorted  a  little,  ad- 
ministered the  Lord's  supper,  and  then  rode  twenty  miles  to  Po 
mouth,  and  gave  a  brief  exhortation  in  the  neat,  new   house. 
tarday  I  visited  the  brethren  in  Norfolk  :  they  presented  me  with 
a  plan  of  a  new  house,  fifty  by  seventy  ;  and,  wonder  of  wondt 
it  is  to  be  built  on  the  lot  adjoining  that  on  which  the  old  Episcopal 
church  stands  ! 

Sunday  7.  My  subject  was  1  Cor.  xi.  1  —  5.  We  administered 
the  sacrament.  In  the  afternoon  1  exhorted  in  Portsmouth,  but  it 
was  an  offence  to  some  that  I  did  not  preach,  weak  as  I  was  ;  —  and 
xve  had  to  administer  the  sacrament  here  also. 

Monday  8.  We  rode  forty  miles  to  William  Powell's,  in  tale  of 
Wight  county  :  it  caused  tears  and  some  disappointment,  because 
I  did  not  stop  at  Suffolk. 

Tuesday  9.     We    went   on    to    William   Blunt's.      Wedne;- 
Thursday,  and  Friday,  we  passed  in  close,  comfortable  conference 
We  had  great   accounts  of  the  work  of  God  in  the  state  of  Dela- 
ware, and  also  Franklin  circuit,  in  Virginia.      We  had  grace,  but  n 
gold,  and  we  wanted  one  hundred  and  forty-three  dollars  of  silver 
to  pay  the  just  demand*  of  the  preachers  to  their  sixty-four  dollar; 
per  year.     Friday  afternoon  we  rode  fifteen  miles  to  Moorii 

Saturday  12.  We  rode  twelve  miles  to  old  James-Town  ferry  . 
we  crossed,  and  had  a  very  good  pa—  age,  notwithstanding  it  «•;•• 
very  stormy  day  at  times,  with  heavy  showers:  we  then  rode 
twelve  miles  to  James-City,  and  lodged  at  Kdmund  Taylor's  :  my 
company  felt  the  effects  of  being  exposed  to  the  rain  :  I  was  safe 
under  a  cover,  but  had  as  much  as  I  could  well  bear. 

Sabbath  13     I  preached  at   James-City  chapel,  on  Col.  in.  I,  - 
we  concluded  our  meeting  at  two  o'clock,  dined,  ami  i<>  V  -ixteen 
miles  to  the  widow  KerbyV.     A  crent  hnil  storm  cnmn  on  a 
minutes  after  we  got  in 


374  AKV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1800. 

Monday  13.  After  the  rain  was  over,  we  stood  our  course  to 
Hampton  :  we  came  in  about  two  o'clock.  Brother  M'Kendree 
preached  the  funeral  sermon  of  a  little  child  at  three  o'clock,  my- 
self spoke  at  five,  brother  Snethen  at  seven  o'clock.  My  subject 
was  Phil.  iii.  8,  9,  10. 

Tuesday  14.  We  rode  back  to  York.  I  saw  the  grave  where 
was  buried  the  effigy  of  General  Washington,  at  the  probable 
place  where  Lord  Cornwallis  delivered  up  his  sword  to  him.  We 
lodged  at  brother  John  Stubb's,  in  Gloucester. 

Wednesday  16.  At  Mount  Zion,  Jesse  Lee  came  in  before  us, 
and  had  began  to  preach  :  1  had  a  headach  and  fever,  so  said  but 
little ;  I  had  the  pleasure  of  beholding  with  my  eyes  the  excellent 
plantation  of  Mr.  Tabb,  and  of  receiving  every  favour  the  heart 
of  love,  and  the  hand  of  liberality  could  bestow. — I  am  a  stranger 
that  tarried. 

Thursday  1C.  At  Cheese-Cake  I  said  a  little  upon  James  ii.  5~ 
here  is  a  new  house  and  society.  Since  I  was  here  ten  years  ago, 
my  old  friend  Douglas  is  gone  to  his  long  home. 

Friday  17.  We  came  in  baste  to  Urbanna,  fifteen  miles.  There 
had  been  some  notice  given  that  there  would  be  preaching 
here  :  the  court-house  doors  were  opened,  but  not  one  soul  ap- 
peared ;  we  paraded  upon  the  green  awhile,  and  then  went  to  the 
ferry ; — wind  and  tide  both  ahead — a  leaky  boat,  weak  hands  and 
oars,  heavily  loaded  in  the  bow  with  four  horses,  and  one  of  them 
ready  to  leap  out :  they  cried  out  to  me  to  put  back ;  after  some 
hesitation,  I  thought  we  must  go  back  or  to  the  bottom :  after 
cruising  two  miles,  brother  M'Kendree  and  brother  Snethen 
waited  ;  brother  Andrews  and  myself  covered  our  retreat  by  ri- 
ding twenty  miles  into  Essex,  and  about  sunset  stopped  at  the 
widow  Hundley's. 

Saturday  19.  We  rode  fourteen  miles  to  S.  Coles's.  I  jndge 
I  have  travelled  little  short  of  five  hundred  miles  this  route,  over 
Virginia  ;  having  been  iii  nineteen  counties. 

Monday  21.  We  rode  twenty-five  miles  through  a  storm  of  raic 
to  the  widow  Bauzee's. 

Tuesday  22.  We  crossed  at  Port-Royal,  and  came  to  the  widow 
Bombry's :  here  we  joined  brothers  M'Kendree  and  Snethen, 
Wednesday  23,  we  rode  forty  miles  to  Ward's,  near  Dumfries,  ant! 
Thursday  24,  to  Alexandria,  and  gave  a  short  discourse  on  James 
s.  12.  I  knew  not  which  was  best — to  attend  the  quarterly  meet- 
ing in  Fairfax,  or  to  go  to  Baltimore  ;  I  at  length  concluded  upon 
fhe  latter.  We  came  through  the  federal  city,  and  were  afterwan! 


>J.]  ULV.  tKANCIS  AbianY's  JOURNAL. 

lost  an  hour  in  the  woods,  and  were  benighted.  We  called  at  the 
widow  of  senior  John  Worthington,  and  saw  the  old  mansion  ;  we 
were  kindly  entertained,  and  had  a  comfortable  night's  rest. 

MARYLAND — Saturday  27  We  came  to  the  city  of  Baltimore, 
where  I  found  came  of  joy  and  sorrow. 

Sabbath  day  28.  1  attempted  a  discourse  on  James  v.  8,  9. 
Bishop  Coke  is  on  his  way  to  this  city. 

Monday  2<).  I  visited,  and  prepared  for  the  arrangement  of  the 
preachers  at  the  annual  conference  for  another  year.  The  great 
accounts  of  the  work  of  God  in  various  parts,  are  a3  cordials  to 
my  soul.  I  am  pemuaded  that  upon  an  exact  measurement,  I  have 
travelled  eleven  hundred  miles  from  the  10th  of  February,  to 
the  27th  of  April :  my  horse  is  poor,  and  my  carriage  is  greatly 
racked. 

Thursday,  May  1  We  opened  our  conference,  and  in  three 
days  we  concluded  our  work  in  peace. 

Monday  5.  We  came  to  Baltimore,  and  Tuesday  G,  we  opened 
our  general  conference,  which  held  until  Tuesday  20.  We  had 
much  talk,  but  little  work  :  two  days  were  spent  in  considering 
about  Doctor  Coke's  return  to  Europe,  part  of  two  days  on  Richard 
Whatcoat  for  a  bishop,  and  one  day  in  raising  the  salary  of  UK 
itinerant  preachers  from  sixty-four  to  eighty  dollars  per  year.  We 
had  one  hundred  and  sixteen  members  present.  It  was  still  de- 
sired that  1  should  continue  in  my  station.  On  the  18th  of  May. 
1800,  elder  Whatcoat  was  ordained  to  the  office  of  a  bishop, 
after  being  elected  by  a  majority  of  four  votes  more  than  Jesse 
Lee.  The  unction  that  attended  the  word  was  great  ;  more  than 
one  hundred  souls,  at  different  times  and  places,  professed  con 
version  during  the  sitting  of  conference.  I  was  weary,  but  sat 
very  close  in  conference.  My  health  is  better  than  when  we 
began. 

Tuesday  20.  I  came  to  Greenwood,  ''Philip  Rogers's,)  and 
Wednesday  21,  1  preached  at  Patapsco-Neck  chapel,  on  Psalm 
Ixxx.  17,  18,  19.  We  called  at  Tobias  Stansbury's,  and  dined, 
talked,  and  prayed  with  his  afflicted  wife,  who  felt  her  confidence 
in  God.  We  then  came  on  to  Perry-Hall,  and  were  received  with 
great  openness  of  heart.  Mrs.  Gough  is,  I  hope,  dying  to  the 
world,  and  living  to  Jesus.  Mr.  Gougli  is  most  affectionately 
kind. 

Thursday  22.     We  came  to    Gunpowder-Neck  :  bishop  What 
preached  and  1  exhorted  :  1  tru«t  the  Lord   will  rot'irn  *•• 


REV.  FRAJfCIS  ASBflRY's  JOURNAL.  [1SGU-. 

this  bouse.    I  believe  some  felt  the  word  this  day.     We  went  home 
with  Stephen  Walters,  once  more,  after  an  absence  of  sixteen  years. 

Friday  23.  We  came  to  Ahingdon  ;  the  bricks  are  fallen  down  ; 
the  probability  is  we  shall  not  rebuild  with  hewn  stones.  My  text 
xvas  Fsai.  xl.  10.  "  Behold  the  Lord  God  will  come  with  strong 
hand,  and  his  arm  shall  rule  for  him  ;  behold  his  reward  is  with 
him,  and  his  work  before  him."  This  text  was  given  me  by  open- 
ing my  Bible  at  the  sitting  of  the  general  conference,  when  I  trem- 
bled a  little  for  the  ark.  The  people  have  improved  the  chapel 
here  ;  it  was  not  burnt  with  the  college,  although  it  was  within 
twenty  yards.  We  lodged  at  William  Smith's  ;  it  is  above  twenty 
years  since  I  lodged  at  his  father's  house. 

Saturday  24.  We  were  at  Bush  Forest  chapel ;  the  most  ancient 
in  this  circuit  :  my  subject  was  Isai.  xxxv.  3 — 6. 

Sabbath  day.  We  were  crowded,  as  it  was  quarterly  meeting, 
!  went  home  with  J.  W.  Dallam  :  I  walked  to  the  grave  of  my  once 
dear  Sally,  his  former  wife. 

DELAWARE. — Monday  26.  I  crossed  Susquehannah,  and  came  to 
North-East,  we  stopped  a  night  at  Howell's  ;  brother  Whatcoat 
preached. 

Tuesday  27.  We  rode  up  to  Back  Creek,  (a  Bethel  indeed^  at 
four  o'clock,  I  gave  a  brief  discourse  on  1  Cor.  vii.  29-31.  The 
people  sang  and  leaped  for  joy  of  heart ;  they  have  beaten  down 
strong  drink,  and  the  power  of  God  is  come.  We  lodged  at 
Tohn  Caman's. 

Wednesday  28.  At  the  Manor  chapel  we  had  a  great  time  ;  my 
soul  was  divinely  refreshed.  We  lodged  at  Governor  Bassett's. 

Thursday  29.  We  came  down  to  Bridgetown,  at  the  head  of 
Chester  River.  In  the  evening  I  lectured  upon  Luke  six.  44. 
'  Because  thou  knewest  not  the  time  of  thy  visitation."  I  gave 
the  people  one  caution  ;  I  observed.  First,  What  always  marked  a 
time  of  visitation  to  a  people  collectively  and  individually  Se- 
condly, What  our  Lord  must  mean  by  knowing  or  not  knowing  this 
time  of  visitation  ;  that  it  was  the  improving  the  time  for  all  the 
valuable  purposes  designed.  Thirdly,  The  dreadful  consequences 
which  will  undoubtedly  follow  the  not  knowing,  not  improving  a  time 
of  visitation  ; — that  we  might  fear  that  every  calamity  which  might 
come  on  us  in  time  was  judicial  ; — and  eternal  torment  I  have 
been  led  to  meditate  upon  what  are  the  happy  consequences  of  a 
revival  of  religion— pure  doctrine — strict  discipline— great  ha*- 
mony — love  and  life. 


R\     3    J,, 


Friday  30.   We  wen.-  at  1.1  1.  k-tour  -  ,  i,  .[,.  ;  .   broth.  coat 

preached  ;   I  gave  a  short  <  '\liui  tatiun  ;  |  i  ,1  of  tho  prca<  h- 

ers  joined  in  prayer.     I  rode  in  tin'  aft-  forest, 

;uid  lodged  at  Cox's,  formerly  Lockwood's  ;  but  he  • 
the  people  could  remember  that  1  had  not  been  in  this  ueighb 
hood  for  fifteen  year-. 

Saturday  31.   I    preached  at   the  forest  chapel,  on  Habakkuk  in. 
-'.  and  rode  to  Dover  that  evening. 

Sunday,  June    1.    This   was   a    <l,iy    to    be   remembered:     w 
began  our   love-feast  at   half  past   ri^ht  ;    meeting  was  continued 
ept  one  hour's  intermission)  until  four  (/clock,  ami  MJHIO  peo- 
ple never  left  the  house  until  nearly  midnight  :  m  ill  pr"i't  - 

to  find   the   Lord.     In  the  evening   I  rode  up  to  Due!,  .,  t; 

meet  the  conference. 

Monday  '-'.  \Ve  had  sixty-six  preachc;-,  all  connected  willi  ; 
business  of  conference  :  we  sat  closely  six  hours  each  day,  until 
Friday  C,  when  about  nine  o'clock  the  conference  rose.  One  hour 
was  spent  in  public  each  day  ;  but  the  people  would  not  leave  tho 
house  day  nor  ni^ht  :  in  short,  such  a  time  hath  been  seldom 
known  :  the  probability  is,  that  above  one  hundred  souls  were  con- 
verted to  God.  The  stationing  of  the  preacher-  '.h  . 

look  my   attention  ;    it  was  with  the  greatest  difficulty  1  cuuld  m,- 
bend  my  mind  from  this  one  hour,  yea,  many  miiiult:-,  by 
night,  until  I  read  the  plan.      1  felt  myself  bound  in  .<id  per- 

haps conscience  also,  to  push  on  to  hold   the  next  S.ibb.ith  in  I 
ladelphia.     Bishop  Whatcoat  and  myself  ha-led  to  \Viluiin^t'>n  ou 
Friday  ;  and  on  Saturday  we  dined  with  Mary  Withy,   now   raised 
above  her  doubts,  and  rejoicing  in  (iud  ;    thiuugh   :  rumen 

'aliiy,  a  small  society  is  raised  in  Chester  ;    an  :  .'h  fed 

Lord's  prophets  twenty-eight  or  twenty-nine  ye  u  - 
to  Schuylkill  ;  and  thence  to  Philadelphia. 

IV.XNSYt.vAMA.  —  Sunday  C.     I    preached  morning   and  eve. 
.1  Fourth-street  ;  now  making  what  it  on-lit  to  be,  and  seated  ; 
perly.     I  preached  at  the  African  church,  on  '2  Peter  in.    IT, 
and  at  St.  George's,  on  1  Peter,  i.  5—7.     1  spoke  only  once  P.: 
conference  ;  my  subject  u  iin  xxix.   '.'.  "  And  in  \>\^  tot, 

doth  every  one  speak  of  his  glory  ;"  —  truly  fulfilled  at  that  I.- 
place  ;  surely  we  may  say,  our  Pentecost  is  fully  r.ime  ibis  year. 
When  we  recollect  what  God  hath  wrought  in  K'!i*to  in  Smith,  and 
Guilfordin  North  Carolinas;  in  Franklin,  Amelia,  and  dlono  - 
Virginia  ;  in  Baltimore,  and  Cecil,  in  Maryland  ;  in  Kick- 

'ek,  and  Milford,   in   I'clawaro!    Mv  hcal'd 
I!. 


378  i.i.V.  FRANCIS  ASIfUUY  S  JOOKNAL.  [18WO, 

astonishment  of  myself  and  friends.     Monday  and  Tuesday  in  Phi- 
ladelphia. 

NEW-JERSEY. — We  rode  to  Burlington,  through  excessive  heat 
and  dust,  in  company  with  Richard  VVhatcoat  and  Jesse  Lee  :  the 
latter  wished  to  preach  in  the  evening,  and  go  on  in  the  morning. 
The  Baptist  minister  had  appointed  a  lecture,  and  invited  brother 
Lee  to  lake  his  place  :  he  accepted,  and  preached  an  appropriate 
sermon  on  Acts  x.  25. 

Thursday  12.  I  gave  a  lecture  in  Burlington  on  1  Cor.  vii. 
"9 — 31.  this  is  an  awful  place. 

Friday  13.  We  came  through  heat  and  dust  to  New-Mills;  we 
were  comforted  in  God  :  brother  Whatcoat  preached  ;  I  made  a 
short  discourse  on  Hebr.  x.  32.  I  wished  some  to  look  back  to  for- 
mer feelings,  duties,  experiences,  and  days.  We  have  rode  above 
one  hundred  miles  since  our  departure  from  Duck-Creek. 

Saturday  14.  We  had  to  stretch  along  through  Julia,  Job's,  and 
Reckla's  towns,  to  Cross-Creek.  We  stopped  and  fed  at  Mr. 
Lovell'3  ;  where  we  refreshed  ourselves  an  hour  :  we  then  came 
on  to  M.  Moore's,  where  I  preached  on  Rom.  xii.  1,  2.  We  then 
took  the  road  through  Allentown,  to  Joseph  Hutchinson's  ;  and 
came  in,  weak  and  wearied,  about  five  o'clock. 

Sunday  15.  At  Milford,  I  gave  a  brief  discourse  on  Rom.  xiii. 
Jl.  we  attended  at  Mr.  Ely's  in  the  evening  :  a  few  souls  there  ap- 
peared to  be  deeply  impressed  with  religious  truth. 

Monday  16.  My  horse  drove  heavily;  and  I  did  not  get  in  to 
Brunswick  until  one  o'clock.  We  had  a  meeting ;  and  under  ex- 
hortation many  felt  the  word.  We  then  hasted  on  to  Mr.  Drake's, 
near  Amboy,  where  many  were  waiting  :  at  five  o'clock  I  gave  an 
exhortation,  and  I  believe  it  was  felt. 

NEW-YORK. — Tuesday  17.  We  were  at  Staten-Island  ;  where 
there  is  a  neat  meeting-house,  and  as  genteel,  well-dressed  a  peo- 
ple as  in  New-York.  My  subject  was  Hub.  iii.  2.  Appearances 
were  rather  unfavourable  :  I  was  very  unwell,  and  came  back  to 
Mr.  Drake's  the  same  evening. 

Wednesday  18.  We  rode  in  haste  to  New-York  ;  and  on  Thurs- 
day 19.  we  opened  our  conference  ;  about  forty  preachers  present. 
We  had  some  knotty  subjects  to  talk  over,  which  we  did  in  great 
peace,  plainness,  and  love.  Friday  and  Saturday,  we  were  closely 
confined  to  business.  Sabbath.  My  subject  at  the  old  church  was 
Romans  xii.  19,  20,  21.  In  my  introduction  1  observed  that  the  text 
was  quoted  from  Lev.  xix.  18.  and  Proverbs  xxv.  21,  22.  that  it 
discover  to  us  what  veneration  the  New  Testament  wri- 


1800.]  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY's  J.'.i 


ters  had  for  the  old  ;  and  what  was  mum-ed  in  a  believer,  m    • 
that  dispensation.     Vengeance  is  not  in  our  province  ;  we  <  • 
in  civil,  much  less  in  sacred  causes,  he  our  own  judge*  or  juror* 
we  must  feed  an  enemy,  and  not  only  forgive  him  an  injury,  hu' 
him  a  favour  ;  surely  then  we  ought  to  love  a  fi  MTI  !.  a  <  'hi  i«',ian, 
and   more  abundantly  a  minister  of  Christ.     Tin-  d.iv  «<   [in-!'*  .1 
general  collection  for  the  support  of  the  travelling  ministry. 

Monday  23.    Our  conference  concluded  its   sitting.      Tin-  «!•  n 
ciences  amount  to  six  hundred  and  ninety  dollars  :  the  monies  col- 
lected, and  the  draft  on  the  chartered  fund  amounted  to  four  hun- 
dred and  five  dollars.  A  motion  was  made  to  move  the  next  yearly 
conference  more  into  the  centre  of  the  work,  hut  it  was  lost. 

Tuesday  24.   I   have   now  a  little  rest.     We  have  had  a  mighty 
stir  in  the  Bowery  church,  for  two  nights  past,  until  after  midnight 
perhaps   twenty   souls  have  found  the   Lord.       I'.iihop   \Vhatcoat 
preached  the  ordination  sermon  in  the  afternoon  at  the   Bowery 
church.     I  have  now  a  little  time  to  unbend  my  mind  from  the 
tions  ;  hut  still  my  work  i?  not  done.   Tuesday,  Wednesday,  Thurs- 
day and  Frida\  ,  1  employed  myself  in  reading,  writing,  and  visiting 

Saturday  28.  We  left  the  city  ;  and  rode  twenty-six  miles  through 
heat,  and  plagued  by  the  flies,  to  my  old  home  at  the  widow  S 
wood's  :  hut  my  dear  Betsy  Sherwood,  my  nurse,  is  gone,  I  trn-t,  to 

glory. 

Sabbath  day  29.  We  had   a    remarkably  cool  day,  aftc: 
storm  of  rain  and  hail.     I  attempted  to  preach  at  Sherwood  chapel 
on  1  Cor.  XV.  34.  "  Awake  to  righteousness  and  ?in  not  ;  fir  ?orm- 
have  not  the  knowledge  of  God.    I  speak  this  to  your  *har  •          I 
observed  that  the  apostle  in  Rom.  xiii.  11.   F.ptir-.  v.  1  I.    I  Tl. 
v.  G.  and  in  the  text,  had  indicated  a  sleep  which  professional 
real  Christians  might  fall  into;  an  awful  insensibility  and  ii; 
to  spiritual  thing?,  so  as  to  bring  an  amazing  stupor  on  all  the  pow- 
ers of  the  soul  ;  so  that  it  would  be   insensible  to   rightcnu-i. 
which    is   religion;  the  justifying,   and  sanctifying,   and    practical 
righteousness  of  a  gracious,  wakeful  soul  :   "  some   h.ivc  not  the 
knowledge  of  God  ;"  living  in  sin,  neglecting  duty,  and  uilhout  the 
knowledge   of  God  ;  ignorant  of  the  fear,  favour,  nature,  and  1m  . 
of  God.     Brother  Whatcoat  and   John  Wilson   both   spoke;  -  "ul- 
were  quickened.     In  the    afternoon,  at    Ntw-Rochelle,   brother 
Whatcoat  preached,  and  1  gave  an  exhortation;  tn  my  .itter-drd.      I 
feel  as  if  there  would  ho  a  revival  of  n  li^ion    in  this 
voar 


J.M.  liiA.vus  AM;URY'S  JOURNAL. 

CON\F:CTICI  r. — Monday  30.  We  came  to  Byram-Bridge,  and  at 
Banks's  we  had  a  crowded  house,  and  a  feeling  time  ;  the  aged 
people  were  very  attentive. 

Tuesday,  July  1.  In  consequence  of  our  circumlocutory  motions 
we  have  rode  about  fifty-five  miles  since  we  left  the  city  of  New- 
York.  We  came  to  Stamford,  where  brother  Whatcoat  gave  a 
sermon  on  "  The  faith  and  choice  of  Moses."  I  had  only  time  to 
speak  a  few  words  on  Luke  xix.  44. 

Wednesday  2.  We  rode  on  to  Norwalk  ;  stopped  an  hour  at 
brother  Day's,  and  thence  rode  on  to  Fairfield.  It  was  a  cool  day. 
We  had  an  elegant  view  :  the  fields  in  full  dress,  laden  with 
plenty  ;  a  distant  view  of  Long-Island  and  the  Sound  ;  the  spires 
of  steeples  seen  from  distant  hills — this  country  is  one  continuity 
of  landscape.  My  mind  is  comforted  and  drawn  out  in  prayer. 
We  had  not  time  to  feed  nor  rest.  It  was  with  some  exertions 
we  came  in  time  to  Joseph  Hall's,  at  Poquonak.  After  we  got  a 
little  refreshment  and  rest  I  gave  them  a  short  discourse  on  Luke 
x.  2.  Strength  and  time  failed  me,  and  I  could  not  finish  and 
apply  as  I  wished. 

Thursday  3.  We  came  to  Stratford,  and  stopped  at  brother 
Wheeler's. 

Friday  4.  The  weather  is  damp  and  very  warm.  We  came  on 
to  New-Haven,  where  they  \vere  celebrating  the  Fourth  of  July. 
I  fear  some  of  them  have  broken  good  order,  and  became  inde- 
pendent of  strict  sobriety.  Bishop  Whatcoat  preached  in  the  San- 
diminian  meeting-house  purchased  by  the  Methodists. 

Saturday  5.  We  rode  through  excessive  heat,  over  rocks  and 
hills,  to  North  Bristol,  twenty  miles.  I  discoursed  with  some 
liberty  on  Acts  xxvi.  18. 

Sabbath  day  6.  We  rode  six  miles  to  Punsit's  new  meeting- 
house. A  revival  of  religion  has  begun  here  ;  a  dozen  souls  have 
professed  to  find  the  Lord,  and  several  young  people  are  under 
gracious  visitations,  and  the  aged  are  exceedingly  cheered  at  the 
prospect.  Bishop  Whatcoat  preached  in  the  morning,  and  in  the 
evening  I  made  some  improvement  from  1  Peter  ii.  11,  12.  ;  after 
which  we  administered  the  sacrament.  We  were  engaged  five 
hours  in  public  exercises  :  the  day  was  very  warm.  We  have 
travelled  since  last  Saturday  week  one  hundred  and  forty  miles. 

Monday  7.  We  rode  sixteen  miles  to  Hadley.  The  day  was 
awfully  warm  until  one  o'clock,  when  a  gust  came  up  of  wind  and 
rain  ;.  we  ran  from  house  to  house,  and  escaped  being  much  n-et : 


A 

i\-   stopped  at  Mr.  Woods'*.     Tor-day  u»-  rode  on  to   Ncw-I.oii 
<ion  ;   twenty  miles  of  tin-  n-;iy  tin:   road-,  were  exceeding   ror 
My  soul  was  ki-pt  in  peace,  hut  under  great  temptations  of  v.iriuu- 
kinds.     We  crossed  Connecticut-River  at  Cli .ipman's  ferry,  i 
Old  H;iild;ini.     Where  the  roads  here  are  improved  they  are  HI 
for  a^e>,  and  are  ni  i<  li  -up. Tior  to  those  in  the  south  or  we-t. 

Tuesday  I',.  J'.ishup  Whatcoat  hold  forth  in  the  new  house  in 
Ne.w-I.oiidon  ;  his  subject  i\  a-,  "With  him  i-  plenteous  redemp- 
tion." I  gave  a  discourse  upon  "  Christ,  the  author  of  eternal 
salvation  to  all  them  that  obey  him.' 

Thursday  10.  We  came  on  to  Norwich  Landing.  I  prrachpi! 
m  the  neat,  elegant  lip-copal  church  on  Acts  in.  16.  I  frit  un- 
commonly set  at  liberty  :  \ve  had  a  very  decent,  attentive,  well- 
behaved  congregation.  From  here  we  hasted  on  to  Norwirh- 
town.  Bishop  Whatcoat  preached.  We  had  a  most  agreeable 
ride  on  the  turnpike  road,  upon  each  side  beautifully  smiling  with 
variety  and  plenty  ;  the  stage  passed  us  like  a  whirlwind. 

Friday  1 1.  We  came  to  Preston,  and  were  kindly  entertained  :•' 
Isaac  Herrick's.     It  was  the  very  height  of  rye  harvest,  yet  manv 
came  together.     I  was  greatly  leit  out  on  the  great  salvation.     I 
was  refreshed  in  soul  and  body,  and  rode  on  in  the  evening  to 
than  Herrick's.    The  simplicity  and  frugality  of  New-England  i-* 
sirable — you  see  the  woman  a  mother,  mistress,  maul,  and  u 
and   in  all  these  characters  a  conversable  woman  ;  she  seetl. 
her  own  house,  parlour,  kitchen,  and  dairy  ;  here  are  no  n 
negroes  running  and   lounging.     If  you  wish  breakfast  at  bix  01 
seven  o'clock  there  is  no   setting  the  table  an  hour  before  ' 
provision  can  be  produced. 

Saturday  12.  We  took  our  departure  for  Rhode- Island  through 
Plainfield.  The  weather  is  still  excessively  warm  ;  the  road- 
sandy,  stony,  and  rocky,  notwithstanding  the  turnpike.  We  passed 
Sterling,  the  last  town  in  Connecticut.  We  wandered  a  mile  01 
two  out  of  our  way,  and  had  to  pay  for  it,  by  going  a  cross  path  : 
we  made  it  twenty-six  miles  to  General  Lippelt's.  The  general 
hath  built  a  neat  chapel  for  the  use  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal 
church  near  his  house.  I  was  taken  with  one  of  my  biliou* 
eruptions  through  the  night. 

RHODK-I-I  \M>. — Sunday  13.  Richard  Whatcoat  preached  in  thp 
morning.  In  the  afternoon  my  subject  was  Exod.  xx.  24.  "  In  all 
places  where  I  record  my  name  I  will  come  unto  thce,  and  I  will 
bless  thee."  It  was  a  feeling  tim«\  although  I  w  i-  rerj  'I  ^" 

?he  day,  but  I  could  not  stand  back  from  d;: 


;>8!i  JIEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1800. 

Monday  14.  We  came  on  our  way  to  Boston,  through  Provi- 
dence ;  here  we  did  not  stop  ;  the  time  is  not  yet  come.  We 
stopped  to  feed  at  a  house  that  was  not  very  agreeable  to  me,  and 
I  was  glad  to  come  off  without  dining.  We  came  to  Deacon  Stan- 
ley's, at  Attleborough,  where  we  took  some  refreshment,  and 
reached  Mr.  Guild's,  and  took  lodging. 

MASSACHUSETTS. — Tuesday  15.  We  came  through  Wrentham, 
Walpole,  Dedham,  and  Roxborough  to  Boston  :  it  was  a  damp  day, 
with  an  easterly  wind,  unfriendly  to  my  breast.  As  they  were 
about  finishing  our  church  we  could  not  preach  in  it.  The  new 
state-house  here  is,  perhaps,  one  of  the  most  simply  elegant  in  the 
United  States.  We  made  our  home  at  Edward  Haynes's,  late 
from  England,  where  we  had  most  agreeable  accommodations  after 
our  toil. 

Thursday  1 7.  We  have  dry  weather.  We  came  through  much 
dust  to  Lynn. 

Friday  18.  We  sat  in  conference  ;  there  were  twenty-one  mem- 
bers present :  we  had  great  peace  and  union. 

Saturday  19.  The  conference  rose  after  voting  the  session  of  the 
next  yeaily  conference  to  be  held  at  Lynn.  And  now  the  toil  of 
six  conferences  in  seven  months,  and  the  riding  of  thirteen  hundred 
miles,  is  over.  I  found  some  difficulty  in  stationing  the  married 
preachers. 

Sabbath  day  20.  We  had  an  elaborate  ordination  sermon  from 
Matt.  is.  36 — 38.  "  But  when  he  saw  the  multitudes,  he  was 
moved  with  compassion  on  them,  because  they  fainted,  and  were 
scattered  abroad,  as  sheep  having  no  shepherd,"  &c.  There  had 
been  a  long  drought  here,  and  nature  seemed  as  if  she  were  about 
to  droop  and  die.  We  addressed  the  Throne  of  Grace  most  fer- 
vently and  solemnly,  and  had  showers  of  blessings.  Whilst  I  was 
preaching  the  wind  came  up  and  appeared  to  whirl  round  to  every 
point,  and  most  gracious  rain  came  on  :  this  I  considered  as  a  most 
signal  instance  of  Divine  goodness. 

Monday  21.  We  came  to  Boston,  and  preached  in  the  taberna- 
cle, now  nearly  finished,  on  Hebr.  Hi.  12—14.  We  were  gene- 
rously entertained  at  Edward  Haynes's. 

Tuesday  22.  Bishop  Whatcoat  preached  in  Boston  from  Psalm 
cxvi.  7.  Wednesday  we  came  thirteen  miles  to  Waltham,  where 
we  had  a  meeting  ;  the  subject  was  Rev.  xxi.  6,  7. 

Friday  25.  We  rode  through  Weston,  where  is  a  grand  steeple, 
porches,  and  even  stalls  for  the  horses  ;  and  it  is  well  if  they  do 
not  make  the  Methodists  pay  to  support  their  pomp.  Oh  ' 


"J.j  KKV.  nvA.vcis  ASBtn*  3  JOUK."<  .',.! 


religion  ia  New-England  !  We  came  through  Needham, 
burne,  and  Holliston,  and  made  it  thirty  miles  over  Crook1*  Hillv 
through  excessive  heat.  We  had  not  time  to  stop  to  feed,  as  we 
had  appointed  meeting  at  Milford,  where  \\  c  arrived  a  little  after 
one  o'clock.  I  was  obliged  to  let  brother  Whatroat  ride  io  the 
carriage,  or  I  fear  he  would  have  fainted  ;  this  made  me  low 
spirited,  and  unfit  to  answer  questions. 

Saturday  2(j.  We  had  to  ride  through  excessive  warmth  thiity 
miles  to  Thompson's,  but  we  took  the  day  for  it  :  we  gut  to  ('apt. 
Nicholas  about  six  o'clock,  where  we  have  a  housre  built,  and 
some  ground  to  set  our  feet  upon  I  have  been  of  late  powerfully 
tempted,  and  distressed  in  mind  and  body.  We  had  a  finely 
dressed  congregation  —  a  good  name  is  a  great  matter  with  these 
people.  O  Baxter!  are  these  thy  apostate  children?  Will  M. 
thodism  ever  live  in  such  whited  walls  and  painted  sepulchres  as 
these  people,  who  delight  to  dwell  insensible  to  the  life  of  reli- 
gion, and  closed  up  in  their  own  formality  and  imaginary  security  .' 
We  have  now  returned  to  the  first  town  in  Connecticut. 

CONNECTICUT.  —  Saturday  -"•  I  preached   at  the  new  house  in 
Thompson  :   tny  subject  was  Mark  viii.  .11. 

I.  I  observed  the  harmony  of  the  evangelists,  Matthew  and  Luke 
with  Mark. 

IF.  That  our  Lord  had  given  the  clusters  of  the  grapes  of  UK- 
Promised  Land  in  blessings  and  promises. 

HI.  He  had  given  such  demonstrations  of  his  power  upon  the 
bodies  of  men  ;  the  dead  were  raised,  the  hungry  fed,  the  Icj 
cleansed,  the  lame  and  the  blind  were  restored,  the  wind  and  th»- 
sea  were  at  his  command. 

IV.  He  opened   the  distinguishing  conditions   of   disriplolnp 
the  denial  of  self  in  every  temper  and  affection  that  is  evil.     They 
that  seek  to  save  their  lives  by  denying  Chn-t,  shall  loose  soul  ami 
body  ;  if  it  is  through  pride  and  shame,  Chn-t  will  not  dishonour 
himself  by  owning  such  in  the  day  of  judgment. 

Bishop  Whatcoat  preached  in  the  afternoon  on   "  Acquaint  now 
thyself  with  him,  and  be  at  peace,"  &c. 

Monday  28.  We   rode  sixteen  miles  to  the  north  end  of  * 
ford.     We  have  travelled  nearly  one  hundred  miles  -nice  our  de- 
parture from  Lynn.     My   subject  at  Joseph  Work's  was  Matt.  v. 
'.'.  "  Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  revile  you  and  persecute  you, 
;md  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  of  you  falsely  for  my  sake."     ^  • 
lodged  at  Nathan  Palmer's.      I  stopped  a  tew  minute-*  at  Mr.  Wood- 
.r,r~.  in  Afford.     We  came  ou  to  Coventry,  twenty  miles.     W,« 


384  HEV.  utAKclb  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [180t>, 

stopped.'at  John  Searles's,  and  were  exceedingly  well  accommodated, 
both  man  and  horse. 

Wednesday  30.  We  rode  to  Mr.  Spencer's  in  Hartford.  My 
rnind  is  in  peace  ;  but  I  have  uncomfortable  feelings  in  my  body, 
[lere  I  met  brothers  Bostwick  and  Borrough.  We  have  a  house 
built  in  Spencertown  for  the  Lord,  and  now  they  are  building  one 
for  the  Lord's  servants — for  the  married  preachers  to  live  in  who 
:ire  sent  to  the  circuit. 

Thursday  31.  Was  excessively  warm  ;  we  made  it  little  less 
than  thirty  miles  to  Bristol ;  we  stopped  to  feed  our  horses,  but 
neglected  ourselves.  When  we  came  to  Samuel  Smith's  we  were 
nearly  outdone  by  excessive  heat  and  hunger.  This  day  we  cross- 
ed Connecticut  River,  and  passed  the  cities  of  Hartford  and  Far- 
mington. 

Friday,  August  1.  Freeborn  Garrettson  came  up  with  us:  heat- 
tended  the  funeral  of  the  venerable  mother  Livingston  ;  who  was 
suddenly,  and  safely  called  home,  aged  seventy-eight,  removed  by  a 
paralytic,  and  probably  it  was  apoplectickalso  :  perhaps  it  was  about 
thirty-four  years  ago  that  this  godly  woman  was  awakened  under 
the  first  sermon  the  Rev.  Dr.  Sadly  preached  in  the  Reformed  Low 
Dutch  church  in  New-York,  as  she  told  me  ;  nor  she  alone,  but 
six  or  eight  other  respectable  women.  Madam  Livingston  was  one 
that  gave  invitation  to  the  Methodist  preachers  to  come  to  Rhine- 
beck,  and  received  them  into  her  house  ;  and  would  have  given 
them  more  countenance  had  she  been  under  no  other  influence 
than  that  of  the  Spirit  of  God  and  her  own  feelings.  1  visited  her 
one  year  before  her  death,  and  spent  a  night  at  her  mansion  ;  she 
\vas  sensible,  conversable,  and  hospitable. 

Saturday  2.  We  attended  the  quarterly  meeting  for  Litchfieid 
circuit:  my  subject  was  2  Pet.  iii.  17,  13.  I  had  liberty  in 
preaching,  and  some  felt  tenderness  of  heart,  and  evinced  it  with 
weeping  eyes. 

Sunday  3.  We  had  a  living  love-feast ;  some  from  Waterbury 
were  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord.  We  had  a  crowded  con- 
gregation, a  close  day,  and  the  house  was  shut  up.  In  consequence 
of  my  breast  being  weak,  1  declined  speaking  in  public.  Bishop 
Whatcoat  preached,  and  F.  Garrettson  exhorted.  Our  meeting 
began  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  continued,  with  a  few 
minutes  intermission,  until  two  in  the  afternoon  ;  after  which  we 
came  off,  over  dreadful  roads,  twelve  miles  to  Torringford.  I  was 
pleased  to  see  a  house  bought  and  fixed  for  brothers  Joclin  and 
Bachelor,  the  stationed  preachers  of  the  circuit,  nnd  'heir  wive?. 


KtV  .    I  . 

These  brethren  we  left  behind  to  improve  in  tl.< 
Sibbath,  and  qdarterly-oiceiiog. 

NK.W-YORK,  Monday  -I. — W»-  r.u.-iu  c,n  ,t:,,l  ilopped 
Captain   Wright's  :   the  pi-npk-   tl.n  !»rd   tugc-llnT  .it  .1  »hort  w 
ing,  and  I  gave  a  di-course  on   Isai.   xxxv.  lit  r  »\  Inch  we 

dined,  and  came  on  across  the  hills  and  over  drerrlful  rocky    r- 
to  Cornwall  ;  where  brother  Whatcoat  preached  in  the   nn.-c: 
house  on   "We  know  that   we  are  of  Ciod,   and  the   whole  world 
lieth  in  wickedne- 

Tuesday  5.   We  had  another  tolerable  eiege  over  tin-  II.  u-.iton- 
nick  Uiver  and  hills  to  Sharon  ;  here  brother  Whatco.-.t  p; 
on."  The  Lord  knoweth  how  to  deliver  the  godly  -nit  ot  trm[    iti 
and  to  reserve  the  unjust  to  the  day  ot'  judgment  to  hi-  pum-h- 
I  gave  an  exhortation,  and  then  we  came  rapidly,  liaeen  n. 
• '.  Levie's,  in  the  Nine  Partners. 

Wednesday  6.  We  came  to  Row's:  bishop  Whato  i'   pi  • 
on    1  John   iv.    17.      I  g;ive  an  exhortation  :   we  then   c.imt    on 
Robert  Sands'*,  and  lodged  all   night.      We  carne  on  to  Freel 
'liirreUson's  new  design,  upon  the    Khineberk   flats;    he   hath    .1 
beautiful   land  and   water   prospect,   and   a  good,    simply   el 
useful  house  for  (iod,   his  people,  and  the  family.      We  have  roJt; 
between  eighty  and  ninety  miles  since  la?t  Sabb.it h  ;   ii  >(  \>  -•>   ti 
five  hundred  and  fifty  since  we  departed  from  New-York  ;  and  out- 
tliird  of  the  roads  were  rocky  and  very  uneven.      I  rea>! 
about  live  hundred  pages,  the  author  of  which  is  a  curious  writer. 

Friday  8  and  Saturday  9.  We  regaled  ourselves  and  horses  upon 
the  pleasant  banks  of  Hudson  ;  where  the  passing  and  rep.i- 
boats  and  small  craft,  perhaps  fifty  in  a  day,  is  a  pleasant  sight. 

Sunday  10.   We  had  a  sermnn,   and   administered  the  *  icr.ini- 
at  brother  Garrettson's  ;  and  notwithstanding  public  worship  \\ 
held  at  the  Dutch  church  at  the  same  hour,  we   h.id  a  large  con- 
gregation :    bishop   Whatcoat  and  myself  filled  up   the  scrvir 
the  day. 

Monday  11.  I  rested  and  visited  Dr.  Tillotson's,  ;,t  Ins  vcr 
gant  country  seat,  beautifully  situated  :   the  huu-,.  ,-  f.ndy  letro 
with  trees  ;  and  there  is  a  charming  view  of  the  North- Ui 
was  unwell  internally.     1  must  always  take  great  heed  to   wh:.t 
I   eat. 

Tuesday   12.    We  came  through   Poughkeep.^— no  place 
Methodism.     We   stopped  at   Elijah   .Morgan's;  brother   'i 
was  preaching  when   we    came   in.     We    have   rode   twenty 
miles  this  day,  and  Hined  in  the  road  upon  a  water-melon  : 
II. 


fitV.   FKAN'CIS  ASBVAV  "s    JOliftnAL. 

Tillolson  was  kind  enough  to  give  us  as  we  came  by  her  house. 
1  was  so  unwell  that  I  had  but  little  appetite  for  any  thing  else. 

Wednesday  13.  We  came  on  twenty-five  miles  to  Courtlandt- 
fown,  where  we  saw  the  aged,  venerable  pair,  the  Lieutenant  Go- 
vernor and  his  lady  :  he  is  in  his  eightieth,  and  she  in  her  seventy- 
eighth  year.  I  had  a  very  rocky  ride  over  the  mountains  of 
Peekskill.  I  have  great  and  sore  temptations  at  times,  but  God  is 
with  me  :  I  trust  through  grace  to  overcome  them  all.  We  stop- 
ped at  Warren's;  fed,  talked,  prayed,  and  refreshed  ourselves 
;i  little. 

Thursday  14.  This  day  is  very  warm.  I  preached  at  Pee-ks- 
kill-town,  upon  the  great  salvation.  Brother  Whatcoat  preached 
at  Croton.  We  lodged  at  General  Van  Courtlandt's. 

Friday  15.  At  the  Plains,  Richard  Whatcoat  preached  :  I  gave 
an  exhortation.  We  then  rode  on  in  haste  to  the  widow  Sher- 
wood's. 

Saturday  16.  We  pushed  on  with  great  courage,  towards  New- 
York,  but  when  within  six  miles  of  the  city,  my  horse  blundered 
twice,  and  then  came  down  with  great  force  and  broke  the  shaft : 
1  got  out,  and  my  horse  recovered  from  his  fall ;  a  smith's  shop 
being  at  hand,  the  shaft  was  mended  in  an  hour  ;  and  we  came 
into  New-York  and  found  our  service  was  wanting  in  the  city, 
(here  being  here  only  two  preachers,  and  one  of  them  disabled. 

Sunday  17.  We  had  much  rain  ;  the  streets  flowing  with  water 
like  streams.  I  gave  them  a  sermon  at  the  Bowery  church,  on 
"  Who  gave  himself  for  us  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  ini- 
quity, and  purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good 
works  :"  and  at  the  old  church,  John  street,  I  spoke  on  "  But  we 
are  not  of  them  who  draw  back  unto  perdition,  but  of  them  that 
believe  to  the  saving  of  the  soul."  It  appeared  most  advisable  to 
stay  awhile  on  Monday  to  have  a  new  shaft  put  to  the  carriage. 
We  landed  at  Powles-Hook  about  half  past  five  o'clock,  and 
pushed  on  to  Newark. 

NEW-JERSEY.— Tuesday  19.  We  came  off  at  five  o'clock,  and 
reached  Brunswick  by  twelve  o'clock,  where  we  dined  and  rested, 
and  then  continued  on  to  Joseph  Hutchison's,  at  Milford,  forty-six 
miles  ;  we  had  a  pleasant  and  cool  ride  for  the  season. 

Wednesday  20,  we  came  on  to  Hulet  Hancock's  ;  and  on  Thurs- 
day 21,  reached  Philadelphia.  I  preached  at  St.  George's  ;  and 
Bishop  Whatcoat  at  the  African  church. 

PEN-NSTLVAMA.— Friday  22.  We  rode  to  the  Valley  ;  it  was 
warm  enough.  Bishop  Wbatcoat  preached  at  Daniel  Meridith'a. 


•o.j 

Saturday  23.    We  had   a  Draper  siege  up  to  Saw 
got  in  by  four  o'clock,      l^u  ouree  on  Hebr 

Sabbath-day.     Bishop    Whatcoat    preached    at    .Martin    ' 
church  on  Psalm  Isxii.  10—20.   \\  L  have  now  rod*',  from  Mm. 
one  hundred  and  seventy  miles.    W.-  Indeed  at  Ahr.di.irn  K'r  i^  . 
Our  Dutch  Methodists  are  as  kind,  ;md  more   lively   than   many  of 
the  American  ones. 

Monday  25.     We  crossed  Susquehannah  at  M-Call's  ferry  ;  it  i« 
narrow,  but  very  deep  and  rocky.      After  feeding  man  ami   horse, 
we  came  on  to  Sittler's  mill,  on  Muddy-Creek  ;  as  we  were  ten 
miles  from  the  place  we  intended  to  reach,  well  wearied,  and  ! 
ing  bad  roads  before  us,  we  brought  to  an  anchor  here  for  a  night. 
What  time  I  have  had  to  read,  write,   or   journalize,   those  wh» 
know  the  distance    and    difficulties   that   must   have  attended 
through  the  last  week,  may  judge  ;  it  would  be  impossible  for  me 
to  relate  all  the  workings  of  my  heart;    but   I   trust  my  soul  li  i- 
been  kept  in  patience  and  devotion. 

MARYLAND. — Tuesday  27.  We  came  into  Maryland  :  <;ometime> 
we  had  no  roads,  and  at  other  times  old  ones  that  the  wagons  had 
left:  thus  we  bolted  and  blundered  along  the  rocky  rivulets  until 
we  came  within  sight  of  James  Fisher's.  The  meeting  had  been 
appointed  at  the  widow  Jolly's  :  the  house  was  large,  and  u» 
no  small  congregation  :  they  came,  some  to  see  and  some  to  hear. 
I  had  walked  where  1  feared  to  ride,  and  it  was  exceedingly  u:trm  ; 
hut  I  took  courage  when  1  saw  the  people  :  the  portion  win-  h  1 
gave  them  was  1  John  ii.  2t,  25.  We  had  hardly  timo  to  eat  and 
breathe,  before  we  had  to  bent  a  march  over  the  rocks,  eight  mile* 
to  Henry  Wattcrs's,  upon  Deer-Creek.  Brother  Whatcoat  won' 
ahead  and  preached,  and  I  came  on  time  enough  to  exhort  a 
little. 

Wednesday  28.    I  preached  at  the  Forks  meeting-house  (fifteen 
miles  on  a  carriage  road)  warm  as  it  was.    Brother  Whatcoat  L. 
us  a  good  sermon  upon  "  Return  unto  thy  re*t,  O  my  °oul  '."  and 
so  on  ;  I  exhorted  very  little.   The  heat  continued.    That  evening 
we  came   with  equal  difficulties  to  Perry-Hall;  hut  the  greatest 
trouble  of  all  was,  that  the  elders  of  the  hou-e  were  not  at  h. 
the  walls,  the  rooms  no  longer  vocal,  all  to  me  appeared  hung  in 
sackcloth  :    1  see  not  the   pleasant  countenance?,   nor  hear  the 
cheerful  voices  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gough  !     She  is  in  ill  health, 
writes,  "  I  have  left  home,  perhaps,  never  to  return  :''  tins  intelli- 
gence made  me  melancholy  ;  Mrs.  Gough  hath  b^on   mv  I  tithful 
:  she  nerer  oflended  rnc  at  any  time. 


iu,v.  FRANCIS  ASBUKY'S  JUI:KXAL.  [1800. 

Thursd.a  -':>.  At  Perry-Hall.  I  preached  on  Matt.  xi.  28—30. 
I  was  visited  by  elders  Bruce  and  Snethen.  I  heard  the  reply  to 
Mr.  O'Kelly's  Apology  ;  soft  and  defensive,  and  as  little  offensive 
as  the  nature  of  the  case  would  admit.  I  was  invited  to  town,  with 
(he  assurance  that  there  was  no  danger  of  the  fever  :  but  it  was 
very  bad  at  the  Point. 

Friday  evening  29.  I  held  forth  in  Light-street  on  Psalm  cxv.  1. 
"  Not  unto  us,  O  Lord,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  thy  name  give  glory, 
for  thy  mercy  and  for  thy  truth's  sake  !"  My  improvement  was 
the  application  to  Christians  ;  First,  To  contemplate  mercy  and 
truth  in  the  dealings  of  God  to  them  in  the  Gospel :  Secondly, 
That  they  should  disclaim  all  glory  to  themselves  :  Thirdly,  Ho\v 
the  Jehovah  God  giveth  glory  to  himself;  and  how  we  should 
glorify  him.  Brother  Roberts  wrote  that  they  were  a  thousand 
strong  in  Baltimore.  That  there  hath  been  a  work  in  Annapolis, 
13  certain :  indeed  it  begins  to  be  more  and  more  general  in  the 
towns,  and  in  the  country. 

Saturday  30.  We  had  a  most  severe  ride,  nearly  twenty  miles,  to 
Daniel  Elliott's.  At  St.  James's  chapel  God  hath  begun  to  pour 
out  his  Spirit ;  and  almost  generally  through  Montgomery,  ami 
Frederick  circuits. 

Wilson  Lee  is  all  upon  the  wing  in  the  work  :  glory  !  glory  I 
glory  !  1  will  not  speak  of  numbers  or  particular  cases,  without 
more  accurate  information,  which  in  my  haste  I  cannot  now  ob- 
tain ;  but  without  doubt,  some  hundreds  in  three  months,  have 
been  under  awakenings  and  conversions,  upon  the  western  shore, 
District  of  Maryland. 

Sunday  31.  At  St.  James's  Chapel  I  preached  on  Psalm  xxxvii. 
3.9,  40.  we  had  an  attentive,  solemn  sitting  ;  and  powerful  prayer 
closed  the  whole.  We  dined,  and  rode  on  five  miles  to  Henry 
Hobbes's.  The.  people  heard  of  us,  and  ran  together  in  the  even- 
ing. Brother  Whatcoat  gave  a  lively  discourse  upon  these  words, 
"  Thy  children  shall  be  all  taught  of  God  :"  we  had  a  very  quick- 
ening season.  Perhaps  six  hundred  souls,  in  this  district  and  in 
Baltimore,  have  been  converted  since  the  general  conference. 
Hartford,  Baltimore,  Calvert,  Federal,  Montgomery,  and  Frederick, 
feel  the  flame.  Monday  we  hobbled  along  to  Clarkesburg,  on  the 
way  dined  at  Joshua  Pigman's  :  here  I  once  more  saw  his  brother 
Ignatius  :  art  thou  he  ?  Ah  !  But  Oh  !  how  fallen  !  how  changed 
from  what  I  knew  thee  once  ! — Lord,  what  is  man,  if  left  to  him- 
self! Brother  Whatcoat  attended  the  meeting,  and  the  people  con- 
tinued in  meeting  at  Clarkesburg  until  the  morning;. 


•      '-».}  r  V.    1   ..    . 

Tuesday,  September  j.  At  tin-  .-uur  ir-Loaf,  my  • 
x.  2,  3,  '1.  compared  with  Matthew  xui.  1C,  IT.  ami  1  IVter  i.    !•• 
1-.  we  were  crowded  :   in  the  exhortation-,   prayers,  and  Hinging, 
the  power  came  down,  and  the    work    went   on    until   evening.      1 
then  rode  to  Mr.  Morton's. 

VIRGINIA.  —  Wc-ilne^Liy  !<.  We  came  to  I.nxhur^li  :  some  -.ml. 
go  this,  and  another  tliat  way  :  we  made  it  nearly  twenty  mile*, 
and  were  riding  six  hours  and  crossed  the  I'otom.n  at  Com 
ferry.  Brother  George  wai  preaching:  bishop  Whatcoat  '•puke 
upon  "  lie  that  belie.veth  shall  not  make  haste  ;"  hut  we  had  to 
make  haste,  after  I  had  ordained  S.  Welsh,  and  Kskridge  Hall, 
to  the  deacon's  office.  After  we  had  dined,  wo  rode  twelve,  it 
not  fifteen  miles,  to  the  widow  Ko/zell's  :  we  came  in  about  seven 
o'clock  ;  and  1  gave  a  discourse  on  1  Tim.  iv.  10.  We  have  tra- 
velled about  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  through  Mar\l nul  .  ami 
we  have  bad  bad  roads,  but  have  met  with  good  people.  My  soul 
hath  been  agonizing  for  a  revival  upon  the  western  shore  of  Mary- 
land for  many  years  :  and  now  the  Lord  bath  sent  it. 

Thursday  4.  We  came  to  Hector-Town  :  most  distressing  road*, 
for  eighteen  miles.  The  gentry  had  made  a  dinner  at  a  small  dis- 
tance from  the  town  :  a  kind  of  green  corn  feast,  with  a  roa 
animal,  cooked  and  eaten  out  of  doors,  under  a  booth.  I  wa- 
greatly  wearied  with  the  ride  ;  but  was  animated  while  explaining 
2  Cor.  vi.  1.  I  then  came  to  Benjamin  Hilt's.  We  have  pene- 
trated through  Loudon  and  Fauqoier  counties  iu  two  day-. 

Friday  5.    We  stopped  at  the  court-house,  and  were  richly   en 
tertained   with  a  breakfast,  at  Mr.  Johnson's  :  then  we  rude  on  (.- 
Norman's    bridge,  and   passed    another  old  ficltl-fraft,  with  a  ; 
tacked  to  it.     We  came  to  Roger  Abbott's,  upon  Mountain  Creek, 
in  the  forks  of  the  Rappahannock  river  ;  and  on 

Saturday  5.  To    Kobler's  ;  where  many  attended  from  different 
and  distant  parts  :   my  text  wa*  'J  Tim.   ii.    l~>.      We    pursued   out 
way  six  miles  to  the  river,  and  lodged  at  a  widow's  house,  u ! 
husband  died  in  the  Lord  a  few  years  ago.     We  had  an  awful  E 
bath  day's  journey,  through  part  of  Culpepper  and  Loui- 1     u  -      irm- 
to  Ferguson's  about  half  after  one  o'clock  :   the  people  were  waiting 
in   the   warm  sun  :   the  house  could  not  hold  them  :   after  a  littlr 
rest,  I  cried  .Vo:i'  is  the  day  of  sali-ation.    We  had  a  hungry  ride  for 
thirty  miles. 

Monday  G.  We  rode  to  Lastley's  meeting-house,  eighteen  miK- 
many  people  were  gone  to  court,  consequently,  f« 


HEV.  FHAIfCIS  ASBUUV'S  JOURNAL.  (180U, 

but  the  Lord  was  eminently  present  whilst  I  enforced  Habakkuk 


iii.  2. 


Tuesday  7.  We  rode  to  Risanna  in  Fluvanna  county :  I  have 
seen  the  hot,  warm,  sweet,  yellow,  red.  and  now  have  passed  the 
green  springs.  When  we  came  within  six  miles  of  Magruder's, 
hrother  Whatcoat  being  in  the  carriage,  the  hindmost  brace  gave 
way  :  I  took  hold  of  a  sapling  by  the  road  side,  and  put  it  under 
the  body  of  the  carriage,  and  brother  Magruder  mounted  the 
iiorse,  and  we  soon  came  to  his  house  :  that  evening  the  breach 
was  repaired.  I  took  William  M'Kendree's  horse,  and  went  on 
fourteen  miles,  to  Richard  Davenport's,  in  Amherst ;  where  we 
were  kindly  and  comfortably  entertained. 

Wednesda}'  8.  We  rode  twenty  miles  through  heat  and  over 
hills,  to  North  Garden,  Tandy  Kegs,  Albemarle  county.  I  was 
divinely  assisted  while  I  opened  2  Timothy  iv.  2.  1.  Preach  the 
word.  2.  The  application  of  it ;  that  is,  reprove,  rebuke,  exhort ; 
to  time  his  work ;  be  instant,  in  season,  out  of  season  ; — in  the 
morning,  noon,  and  evening  of  life  : — when  it  is  the  winter,  spring, 
summer,  and  autumn  of  the  church  ; — in  her  pleasing  and  un« 
pleasing  prospects. 

Thursday  9.  We  rode  to  New-Glasgow,  thirty  miles  ;  and  were 
entertained  most  hospitably  at  Colonel  Merideth's. 

Friday  10.  We  rode  to  Lynchburg,  twenty  miles.  Samuel 
Mitchell  had  dinner  provided  in  town,  at  Mr.  Miller's,  for  the 
preachers.  I  preached  in  the  Mason's  Hall — a  warm  day  and 
place,  on  Titus  ii.  12.  We  then  beat  along  to  Samuel  Mitchell's, 
three  miles  of  rude  roads. 

Saturday  11.  We  rode  to  the  New-London  Academy,  sixteen 
miles,  now  under  the  direction  of  Samuel  K.  Jennings,  a  local 
preacher  of  ours  :  the  institution  belongeth  to  the  Presbyterians 
and  Episcopalians.  R.  Whatcoat  preached  :  I  was  deprived  of  my 
rest  the  last  evening,  and  very  unwell ;  yet  I  gave  a  short  dis- 
course in  exhortation.  We  have  been  going  at  such  an  unreason- 
able rate,  that  I  have  not  had  time  to  put  pen  to  paper,  for  a  week 
together.  Good  news  from  the  South  District  of  Virginia  :  bro- 
ther Jackson  writes,  "  two  hundred  souls  have  been  converted  this 
last  quarter  ;  there  is  a  revival  in  all  the  circuits  but  two  ;  and 
great  union  among  the  preachers  and  people."  I  am  kept  in  pa- 
tience, faith  and  love. 

Sunday  12.  We  rode  sixteen  miles  to  Liberty,  and  preached  in 
Bedford  court-house  :  I  was  sick  in  earnest.  When  I  came  up 


!-.    A.-.1I  H\    '  ,  A  I   . 


into  the  crowd,  the  people  iMtliTed  :n  omul  my  rarmge,  as  if  I  had 
hail  a  cake  and  cider  carl  ;  this  sight  occasioned   a   kind   of  shock, 
that  made  me  forget  my  -K  kness.     After  alighting,   I  went  imme- 
diately to  the  throng  in  the  court-house  ;  and  founded  a  discourse 
upon  Matthew  xxii.  f>.      What  great   thin;:*   the  Go-  pel   rcvraleth 
to  mankind  ;  First,  The  love  of  God.     Secondly,  The   sufferii 
and  death,  and  merits  of  Christ.      Thirdly,  The  gifts,  extraordin 
and  ordinary,  of  the  Holy  Ghn-t  :   men  make  light  of  all  the  bless- 
ings of  God,  and  of  all  the  miseries  and  consequences  of  sin  :   the\ 
not  only  think  lightly  of,  but  are  opposed  exceedingly  to  them  ;  "  for 
the  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God  ;"    and   the  things  of  God. 
f  admired  the  attention  and  solemnity  of  the  people  ;   many  of  the 
men  standing  in  and  out  of  the  house   the  whole  time.     We   rode 
two  miles  to  hrother  Patterson's,  and  dined  ;  and  then  came  or 
Blackwell's  to  lodge. 

Monday  13.   We  had  a  heavy  march  to   Fincastle  :     I  ro>le    r. 
miles  to    Mr.  Ripley's  ;  and  then  gave  up  the  carriage  to  William 
M'Kendree,  and   took  his  horse,  and   came  in  ahout  ten  o'clock. 
My  subject   here  was    Isaiah  lii.  7.     Fir-t,   The  Gospel  ;  —  good 
tidings  of  God,   of  Christ,   of  the  Spirit   of  grace,  of  glory  :  —  by 
•  •nmparing  temporal  with  spiritual  things,  to  restore  the  dead,  the 
blind,  the  lame,  the  dumb,  the   sick,  the   poor  ;  publisheth   pt 
with  God  ;  with  conscience  ;  with  all  men  :  good  tiding  of  g» 
the  spreading  of  the  work  of  God  :  salvation  ;  —  from   all  our  - 
misery,  and  death.     Zion  thy  God  reigncth  ;  —  the  glory  of  Chr 
kingdom.     The    feet  of   the   messenger*,   beautiful:  —  becau-* 
their  message.     2.  Their  holy  walk  :   their  treading  the  mount  im-. 
enduring  hardship  ;   their  innocence. 

We  made   it   forty  miles   from  Liberty  to  Ld\vard   MitchcH'- 
whcre  we  lodged  on  Monday. 

Tuesday  14.    We  began   our  route   for  Holston,  by    Knpi 
ferry,    through    Montgomery  county.     The  first  day  wr  cam' 
Mrs.  Dialley's,  upon  Roanoake,  twenty-eight  or  thirty  milr«  :   (he 
river  ridges  were  very  rough  :   Mrs.  Dialley  received  n-  with  ^i 
maternal  attention  and  affection:   here  I   was  told  «\  my   appoint 
ment  at  Raboue's,  ten  miles  west,  over  the  mountains.     It  gave  me 
some  grief,  but  it  was  too  late.     1  was  advised  not  to  go  i'epi 
ferry  road. 

Wednesday  15.   We  passed  Montgomery-town   and  court-house 
among  the  mountain  barren?  ;   we  pushed  on   to  Christian's  —  ' 
r>rit.i«!i  i>»o;>le  ;    M  an   acceptable  rest   fur   n  very  « 


392  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1800, 

Jay.    We  came  to  the  ferry,  and  lodged  at  Draper's  (a  very  quiet 
house)  that  night. 

Thursday  16.  We  came  to  Wythe  court-house,  a  pleasant  town 
of  about  twenty  houses,  some  neat,  and  most  of  them  new  and 
painted.  We  had  good  accommodations  at  Mr.  Johnson's — both 
man  and  horse  needed  it. 

Friday  17.  We  began  at  6  o'clock  to  bend  for  Holston  :  it  was 
computed  to  be  forty  miles  distant.  We  came  in  about  the  going 
down  of  the  son  at  father  Carlock's,  a  German.  For  two  days 
past  we  found  we  could  not  stop  to  dine  ;  we  rested  only  to  feed 
our  horses.  After  we  cleared  the  mountains  we  came  upon  the 
perpetual  hills.  I  judge  we  may  charge  for  one  hundred  and 
thirty  miles  from  Edward  Mitchell's,  in  Bottetourt,  to  Russel's  old 
place  upon  Holston.  We  took  Saturday  to  refit  and  write  ;  bro- 
ther Whatcoat  attended  the  meeting.  My  mind  hath  been  kept  in 
peace  ;  I  had  enough  to  do  to  drive  ;  I  could  think  but  little — 
only  now  and  then  sending  up  a  message  to  heaven. 

Sabbath  day  19.  We  attended  at  Carlock's  ;  a  very  sultry 
day,  and  many  people  were  present.  My  subject  was  2  Tim.  vi. 
2 — 12.  It  was  judged  best  we  should  ride  ten  miles  to  Scott's,  in 
order  to  make  Edward  Cox's  the  next  day,  to  attend  at  Acuff 's. 

Tuesday  21.  As  we  came  off  it  began  to  rain,  and  that  rapidly, 
with  little  intermission  for  two  hours  ;  the  horsemen  were  dripping ; 
the  roads  were  so  bad  that  it  was  with  some  exertion  that  I  could 
so  shelter  myself  as  not  to  get  wet  to  the  skin  in  the  drowning  rain. 
Monday,  we  passed  Abingdon,  which  is  greatly  improved.  Break- 
fasted at  Craig's,  and  then  had  a  pleasant  ride  to  Cox's,  but  it  is 
excessively  warm  for  the  country  and  season.  At  Acuff's  I  talked 
a  little  upon  coming  to  the  Throne  of  Grace.  We  hasted  home 
with  Charles  Baker  upon  Holston.  If  we  have  a  dry  moon  and 
month  we  may  get  through  the  wilderness. 

Wednesday  22.  We  rested — man  and  beast.  We  have  rode 
sixty  miles  since  Sabbath  evening.  I  am  not  as  patient,  depen- 
dent, and  prayerful  as  I  wish  to  be.  Bluntsville  looks  very  re- 
spectable, and  they  have  built  a  needful  and  good  bridge  at  the 
end  of  the  town.  We  crossed  at  Charles  Baker's  by  putting  the 
chaise  to  two  canoes  and  swimming  the  horses  over  Main  Holston. 
The  stubble  fields  were  upon  the  north  side,  so  that  we  were  com- 
pelled to  work  through  the  woods  into  the  road  to  Snipe's  ferry. 
We  came  along  eight  or  ten  miles  where  they  had  made  new  cut- 
tings ;  at  last  we  struck  into  a  new  road  and  strayed  three  miles 


J8t" 

oat  of  our  u  ,.\,    we.  thm  returned   h.irk   lv.  w  it  wa»   I'.. 

felt  proprrly  content  to  lr;u.    m\ 

(0  the  wild,  \\r  mn.le  it  ne;,i!y  (I. if 

we  had  no  time  from  MX  in  the  n  :o.ed 

man  or 

Friday  24.   We  rode   twenty-on 
upon    Licking-Creek  ;  we   fed  our   hor-t  * 

once  !     Here  I  left  the  horse  ;iri'!  n  horse 

to  ride  to  Kentucky.     S-atun!  y  mile?  across  to  ! 

ston  quarterly  meeting  at  the  .Slubblo  Holds.      I    now  rode  upon 
horseback,    and  the  r;iin  rarno  on  powerfully  QOtil 
ping.     I    had  no  cloak  but  the  carriage  covering,   the   rain   t 
shoulder*,  elbow?,  and  fret — for  eight  mile*  it  \va.s  violent  ;   1 
not  been  so  steeped  for  four  years.     I  u.i-hed  the 
whiskey,    and  did  not  tike  the  damage  I  feared.     Oh  thou  of  little 
faith,  wherefore  didst   thou   di»»»l>t  ?     Bishop  V-  piea< 

Our  local   brethren  were  loving  and  lively — brothers    \ 
Wells,  and  Winiuii. 

Sabbath  day  26.  \\  f  1  sacramental  and 

I  preached  on  Titus  ii.  II.  and  brother  M'Kondree 
'2 — 6.     I   was  led  to  recollect  the  loss  of  time  and  cl, 
with  from  F.ottetourt  to  Holston,  one  hundred  miles — few  . 
rough  roads — one  week  lost  in  lidir 

.7.    We  brgan  our  grand  j  Kentucky  at   eight 

o'clock.     We  had  to  climb  the  steeps  of  Ciiin  h  about  the  heat  of 
the  dny  ;   walk  up    I   could  not  :   I   rode,   a:>  1  my  hor-c   by 

dismounting  at  times.     We  came   to   Hunt's    for   the  .^ht. 

.  h  roads  and  entertainment  I  did  not  ever  again  expect  to  see— 
at  least  in  so  short  a  tirno. 

Kr.vTctKv. — Tiv  :.   We  came  to 

at  night  we  slept  at  Hallinger's,  upon  ( .'mnbeihiid-Kiver. 

Wednesday  CO.  We  came  to  Logan's  and  fed  :   this  low  and  ncir 
land  is  «ccnted  ;   I  sost  sicki-nrd  with  the  smell.     ^ 

to  the  elder  of  the  Panies's  and  lodged. 

Thursday.  ''  !.   We  cam.'  '!y  (•>  Job  Join; 

reached  it  by  liding  in  the  night  :   now  I  to  fail. 

Friday  J.   U  ••  r  imc>  -n    to  our  brother  Howard'.--.      W«    L;u- 
Kentucky-r.iver  at  the  mouth  of  Hickman  ;   it  was  so  low  that 
forded  it  with  ease.      WL-  l.av.Mravelled   in  fivi 
and  forty-tivo  milcb'.      I  h  .i'.irlably  ;!. 

Saturday  3.    1   came  to  Helhel.      l'.i?h'«p  Whalr^nt    ai.d  \Vilh 
"\I'Kendree  preached  :  1  deject.      '  littlc- 

Vnr.   II. 


'J'J-l  KKV.  FKANCI5  ASBUftY'S  JOURNAL.  [1800, 

weep.  Sabbath  day  it  rained,  and  I  kept  at  home.  Here  is  Be- 
thel— Cokesbury  in  miniature,  eighty  by  thirty  feet,  three  stories, 
with  a  high  roof,  and  finished  below.  Now  we  want  a  fund  and  an 
income  of  300  per  year  to  carry  it  on — without  which  it  will  be 
useless.  But  it  is  too  distant  from  public  places,  its  being  sur- 
rounded by  the  river  Kentucky  in  part,  we  now  find  to  be  no  bene- 
fit :  thus  all  our  excellencies  are  turned  into  defects.  Perhaps 
brother  Poythress  and  myself  were  as  much  overseen  with  this 
place  as  Dr.  Coke  was  with  the  seat  of  Cokesbury.  But  all  is  right 
that  works  right,  and  all  is  wrong  that  works  wrong,  and  we  must 
be  blamed  by  men  of  slender  sense  for  consequences  impossible 
to  foresee — for  other  people's  misconduct.  Sabbath  day,  Monday 
and  Tuesday,  we  were  shut  up  in  Bethel  with  the  travelling  and 
local  ministry  and  the  trustees  that  could  be  called  together.  We 
ordained  fourteen  or  fifteen  local  and  travelling  deacons.  It  was 
thought  expedient  to  carry  the  first  design  of  education  into  exe- 
cution, and  that  we  should  employ  a  man  of  sterling  qualifications, 
to  be  chosen  by  and  under  the  direction  of  a  select  number  of 
trustees,  and  others  who  should  obligate  themselves  to  see  him 
paid,  and  take  the  profits,  if  any,  arising  from  the  establishment. 
Dr.  Jennings  was  thought  of,  talked  of,  and  written  to.  I  visited 
John  Lewis,  who  lately  had  his  leg  broken  ;  I  left  him  with  good 
resolutions  to  take  care  of  his  soul. 

Wednesday  8.  We  rode  fifteen  miles  to  Shawnee-Run,  and 
crossed  Kentucky -River  at  Curd's  ferry  ;  the  river  was  as  low  as 
a  stream,  and  the  streams  are  nearly  dried  up. 

Thursday  9.  I  preached  on  Hebr.  iii.  12 — 14.  at  the  new  house 
at  Shawnee-Run.  We  had  rich  entertainment  for  man  and  beast 
at  Robert  Johnson's. 

Friday  10.  We  rode  to  Pleasant-Run  to  John  Springer's  :  it 
was  a  very  warm  day  for  the  season.  I  had  a  running  blister  at 
my  side,  yet  I  rode  and  walked  thirty- two  miles.  We  refreshed 
ourselves  at  Crawford's  tavern  upon  the  way.  We  have  visited 
Knox,  Madison,  Mercer,  and  Washington  counties  in  this  state.  It 
was  strongly  insisted  upon  by  preachers  and  people  that  I  should 
say  something  before  I  left  Bethel — able  or  unable,  willing  or  un- 
willing ;  accordingly,  on  Tuesday,  in  the  academical  hall,  I  gave 
a  long,  temperate  talk  upon  Hebr.  x.  38,  39. 

Sabbath  day  12.  It  rained  excessively;  we  were  shut  up; 
William  M'Kendree  met  the  people.  We  have  had  but  two 
Sabbaths  to  spend  in  Kentucky,  and  in  both  I  was  prevented  by 
rain. 


•«BtTY' 


Monday  13.  We  left  John  Sprinter  |,  and  r.ime  to  I.  run  Tho- 
mas's, fifteen  miles  ;  a  deep,  damp,  narrow  |>.ith  ;  (lie  underwood 
very  wet.  Cn>--e,i  (  'artwright  and  llardn>  -  '  i<.\  !  •_•  ive  a 
short  sermon  on  Kom  VHI.  '.I.  "  If  any  man  have  nut  tin-  ^pirit  ><\ 
Clirist  he  is  none  <>l  In-/' 

I.  l\o\\  we  are  (•>  know  when  \\  e  h  ive  tin    ,-pirit  of  <  luM      by 
the  operations,  gift*,  r.in^nl.itimi-,  umlliuii-  of  tin-  >pinl. 

II.  We  are  mint-  of   Ins  if  w-i-  .ire  not  in!r>i  «  -i.  ,|  m  the  ollire!-,  if 
not  partakers  of  the  redemption  and  privilege.  (l|    f'hrist. 

III.  That    none   can  ho  intere-ted   in  '  hn-t.   \slio   are   not   par- 
takers of  the  Spirit  of  Je- 

My  system  is   greatK  >'d   with  the  weather  ;  hut   my   eoul 

hath  abundant  consolation  in  God.  It  is  plain  there  are  not  many 
mighty  among  the  Methodius  in  Kentucky.  In  travelling  hctween 
two  and  three  hundred  miles,  I  have  vNi'ed  '•ix  d»vi  1!  -idr« 

the  academy.  At  Plea-ant  Run,  October  IJ,  ue  ordained  .'oseph 
Ferguson,  and  Aloses  Crame,  to  the  office  of  iii-;icons. 

Tues<lay  11.    We  began  our  marrh  for  Cumberland.      We  were 
told  by   two  persons,   that  we  could   not  cros-  the  Hulling  I'ork    ef 
Salt-liiver;    I  judged    we  could,    and   as    I  thought,  «•>   it   wa<  :    we 
forded  it  ivith  ease       Wi    came  up  a  solit  ir\   path  »-a-t  ofll'.    |.  \  .  I 
woods,  and  strurk  into  the    road  to  Lee's  f«-rr\.      \'«r   ti-n  nnlr- 
the  lalter  part  of  this  ,|a\  '-    journe\,    ue  rn.le   ihrou^h    liarreus  of 
hickory,  shrub  oak,  and  ha/ehv;t  ;  thirty  miles,  il  not  llm  ;\   live,  is 
the  amount   of  this  day'-  work  ;    in  the   morning  then-  -\  ,-    i    \ 
great  damp,  and  in  the  afternoon   it  was  I  thought,  n«  warm  a«  the 
\vest  of  Georgia. 

Wednesday  lo.  We  crossril  dreen  lliver,  the  main  branch  of 
which  riseth  near  the  Crahh  Orchard  \Ve  cro-sed  at  the  mouth 
of  Little  Barren  River.  We  then  made  a  bold  push  for  the  great 
Barren's;  dining  at  Mr.  Morrison's  ;  I  could  not  eat  wallet  provi- 
sion, but  happily  for  me  1  was  provided  with  a  little  fresh  mutton 
at  the  house,  made  warm  in  a  small  space.  I  had  unfin  •Dur- 

able appearances  of  rain  ;  we  had  bleak,  barren  hilN  (~>  ride  ; 
which,  although  beautiful  to  MLrht,  were  painful  to  sense.  The 
rain  came  in  large  and  rapid  drops,  for  fourteen  miles  :  we  were 
well  soaked  on  all  sides.  A  little  after  d.uk  we  r  ime  to  Mr.  H.i 
gin's,  upon  Big  Barren  River  ;  a  -rood  hon<e.  an  excellent  fire  to 
dry  our  clothing,  good  meat  and  milk  for  -upper,  and  the  cleanest 
beds,  all  this  we  had.  I  have  paid  for  tins  roir 

TE\N!>-F,F..  —  Thursday  It'-.    We  came   on  t     I  or 

woman   wns    excessively    displeased    because    I    nsked    her   it 


39G  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUKY'S  JOURNAL.  [1800. 

prayed  with  her  children.  Next  day  we  made  thirty-five  miles  to 
Sharpe's.  old  place,  where  we  had  good  entertainment;  they 
charged  twenty  shillings  for  men  and  horses.  We  thence  hasted 
to  Mr.  Dickinson's,  on  White's  creek.  I  waked  at  four  o'clock  ; 
ale  but  little  breakfast,  and  rode  twenty-eight  miles— the  poor  men 
and  horses  were  tired  down  ;  we  fed  the  horses  upon  the  path,  but 
had  no  food  for  ourselves  until  we  came  in.  I  have  thought,  as  I 
rode  along,  that  in  travelling  nearly  six  hundred  measured  miles, 
we  have  had  only  six  appointments;  and  at  these  but  small  congre- 
gations :  have  we  wearied  ourselves  in  vain  ?  Our  judgment  is 
with  the  Lord  ;  I  can  only  say  for  myself,  I  have  had  the  Lord's 
presence,  and  great  support  in  soul  aud  body. 

Saturday  18.  At  Parker's  my  subject,  was  Col.  ii.  6.  Brothers 
M'Gee,  Lugg,  Jones,  and  Spier,  local  preachers,  came  to  meet 
me  :  we  had  a  small  shout  in  the  camp  of  Israel. 

Sunday  19.  I  rode  to  Nashville,  long  heard  of,  but  never  seen 
by  me  until  now;  eome  thought  the  congregation  would  be  small, 
but  I  believed  it  would  be  large  ;  not  less  than  one  thousand  peo- 
ple were  in  and  out  of  the  stone  church  ;  which,  if  floored,  ceiled, 
and  glazed,  would  be  a  grand  house.  We  had  three  hours  public 
exercises.  Mr.  M'Kendree  upon  "  the  wages  of  sin  is  death."  My- 
self on  Rom.  x.  14,  15.  Brother  Whatcoat  on  "  When  Christ,  who 
is  our  life,  shall  appear,  then  shall  ye  also  appear  with  him  in 
glory."  We  returned  the  same  evening,  after  dining  with  Mr, 
M'Kain.  I  had  a  feeling  sight  of  my  dear  old  friend  Greenhill 
and  his  wife  :  who  would  have  thought  we  should  ever  meet  in 
this  distant  land  ?  1  had  not  time  as  formerly,  to  go  to  their  house 
to  eat  and  sleep.  We  had  a  night  meeting  at  Mr.  Dickinson's. 

Monday  20.  We  came  by  Manslick  to  Drake's  creek  meeting- 
house, at  the  close  of  a  sacramental  solemnity,  that  had  been  held 
four  days  by  Craghead,  Hodge,  Rankin,  M-Gee,  and  Mr.  Adair, 
Presbyterian  officiating  ministers  ;  we  came  in,  and  brother  M'Ken- 
dree preached  upon  Jer.  iv.  14.  after  him  brother  Whatcoat  upon 
"  We  know  that  we  are  of  God  :"  I  also  spoke  ;  my  subject  was 
the  -work  of  God.  Last  Sabbath  was  my  birth-day.  This  will  make 
the  thirtieth  year  of  my  labours  in  America.  It  is  supposed  there 
are  one  thousand  souls  present,  aud  double  that  number  heard  the 
word  of  life  on  Sunday. 

Tuesday  21.  Yesterday,  and  especially  during  the  night,  were 
witnessed  scenes  of  deep  interest.  In  the  intervals  between 
preaching,  the  people  refreshed  themselves  and  horses,  and  re- 
turned upon  the  ground.  The  stand  was  in  the  open  air.  em- 


'0.  j 


bosomed  in  a  wood  ul   lofty   beech  trees.      Tin-   mmi-ters  ,  !   ' 
Methodists    and    I'n'shytman-,    muled    th-'ir   labour-.    .HI.]   min_ 
with    the   childlike   simplicity    of  primitive    time-,        Kire- 
here   and  lh  -pelk-d  the  dark  u,d  tin- 

deemed  captives,   and  the   cries   of  pn  ,  ,n(O 

life,  broke  the  silence  of  midnight.  The  w.-itlier  u;i-  ,!.  li-htiul  : 
as  if  heaven  smiled,  whilst  mercy  (lowed  n,  ab;ii;d.int  -ti..a:ns  of 
salvation  to  peri-dim- -inners.  We  suppose  tin -n-  «.-i«-  .,t  Ic.is;  thirty 
souls  converted  at  this  meeting.  I  rejoice  th.it  <i>  .1  i-  vi>i!.i,-  thr 
sons  of  the  1'tiritans,  wiio  are  candid  enough  to  acknou  utn 

obligations  to  the  Methodists. 

We   have   passed   only    two  connties   in   the    District  of  Mero  ; 
tjuict  Cumberland  keeps  "  the  noi-<  i  through 

the  mid-^t  of  the  settlement ;   Nashville  crowr^  it-  lui'iy  I.  n,k. 

Wednesday  22.    We  had  a  meeting  ,,t  Ki..h:u-d  ; '-,  upon  a 

branch  of  Station  Creek,  and  thci  great  emotions  ul  tender- 

ness among  the  people. 

Thursday  23.    We  came  to  Edward'*.      Hrother  Whatcoa* 
-I  continued  upon  .Matt.  xi.  'J!j— 30.      William  M-(iee  courlnded. 
W^e  lodged  with  Jauies  Douglass. 

Friday  ?•!.   ^Ve  came  to  Thomas  HlackmoreV.      i;i,,t!ici-  \\ '!, 
coat,  and   brother  M-Kendice  sermoni/ed  ;  the  people   irere   not 
greatly  moved  ;   I  concluded  with  prayer. 

Saturday  25.   We  crossed  Cumberland  liivcr  at  Mishop's  li  i : 
What  a  long,  solitary  river  is  tin.  !      It  i»    probably  ?evcn  hundred 
miles  upon  a  line;  and  near  one  thousand   in   its  mcandcrm--.  be- 
fore it  empties  its  waters  into   the  Ohio,   twelve  miles  al> 
mouth  of  the  Tennessee. 

We  began  our  quarterly  meeting  at   Klmour   l>ou^l,' •  "-       !'ro- 
thcr  Whatcoat  preached;    biutlui-   ^1  '  ex- 

horted.    At  the  evening  meeting  there  wo;.  \\\-.\\\ 

converts  ;  nevertheless  the  Lord  tvas  in  th<    , 

^Ve  have  rode   but  about  sixty-six   •  utv   r:nli>   thi>weck. 

The  country  is   greatly   in   want  of  rain  :   tin-  are 

much  absorbed  ;   and  the.  peoph-  gnial  llu-ir  i;rain  \vith  '.nil-. 

I  could  not  be  content  to  leave  the  settlement  without  a  circum 
stantial  account  of  the  v\urk  i<t'<fod  ;   ami  I  thep 
^I'Gee  to  give  it  mo  ;   and  1  purpose  to  -t-h-ct  such  .ic^nunt^  annu- 
ally, and  to  read  them  in  the  larire  o  VI  then  to  ha\ . 
them  published. 

Sunday  26.    I   attempted  but   little    tlii-  dav   i.i    public.   e\.  i>pt  a 
on   a  portion  of  the  word   :  '  i.    It".     AV- 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBt,'RY?S  JOURNAL..  [1800. 

Cumberland  River,  and  came  to  John  M'Gee's.  We  now  began  to 
think  seriously  upon  our  march  through/he  wilderness,  and  pro- 
viding food  and  provisions  for  man  and  horse — we  took  our  de- 
parture. 

Monday  27.  We  travelled  through  rich  forests  of  beech,  with 
rank  undergrowth  of  cane  or  reed,  and  arrived  at  Fort  Blount : 
thence  pursuing  our  way  up  Lynn-Creek,  we  took  the  ridge  and 
reached  Mrs.  Blackburn's,  where  we  lodged,  and  were  well  ac- 
commodated. This  day  we  have  rode  thirty  five  miles. 

We  urged  on  our  way,  expecting  rain,  which  overtook  us  about 
two  o'clock  at  Flat  Rock.  We  pressed  on  over  Drowning  Creek, 
and  the  sleepy,  discoloured  waters  of  Obeys-River.  About  twilight 
in  the  barrens  we  met  the  Presbyterian  ministers,  Hall,  Mont- 
gomery, and  Bowman,  with  whom  we  rejoiced  at  the  work  of  God 
in  Cumberland,  and  then  parted.  We  came  on  to  a  place  where 
we  found  the  woods  were  burning,  and  finding  we  had  made  about 
forty-five  miles  we  encamped  whilst  the  rain  was  i'alling  upon  us. 

Wednesday  29.  We  came  to  the  new  station  at  the  Crab- 
Orchard,  where,  although  the  station  was  not  yet  put  in  order, 
Mr.  Sidnor  received  us  politely,  and  treated  us  to  tea.  Here  we 
found  a  cabin  under  the  direction  of  the  Cherokee  nation,  on 
land  they  claimed  as  theirs.  We  journeyed  on  to  Spencer's 
Hill,  so  called  because  here  a  man  of  that  name  was  killed  by 
Indians.  Thence  we  travelled  forward  to  Prospect  Hill  arid  the 
descent  to  Cumberland  Mountain.  On  our  route  we  experienced 
a  heavy  rain.  Through  damps  and  mud  we  pushed  forward  to 
Clarke's  ferry,  upon  Clinch,  in  sight  of  the  fort  at  South-West 
Point,  at  the  junction  of  Tennesse  and  Clinch  rivers,  one  hundred 
miles  below  the  mouth  of  Powels- River.  We  have  travelled 
nearly  seventy  miles  upon  land  belonging  to  the  Cherokee  nation  : 
the  soil  is  generally  barren  and  broken,  except  where  we  enter  on 
Cumberland  Mountain  and  the  neighbourhood  of  the  new  station. 
This  Indian  land  cuts  the  state  of  Tennessee  into  two  parts,  passing 
nearly  through  the  middle,  making  an  indent  upon  the  state  of 
Kentucky  on  Yellow-Creek.  We  arrived  at  Mr.  Clark's,  where 
%ve  received  great  entertainment :  there  was  a  good  fire  in  the  hall, 
and  we  were  provided  with  a  good  dinner,  and  treated  to  tea  :  a  fire 
was  also  kindled  up  stairs,  at  which  we  dried  our  clothes,  to  which 
may  be  added  excellent  lodging  in  two  inner  rooms  :  thus  were  we 
within,  whilst  our  horses  were  feeding  to  fulness  in  a  grassy  valley 
without.  Our  kind  host  rents  the  land  from  the  Indians  at  600 
per  annum  ;  himself  making  the  improvements. 


1UOO.J 

Thursday  .'.u.     \V.-  rod,-  «dov\ly  »n  t»  Man  mde», 

and   had   a    heavy    >h<>\ver    of   r.iin    uu    our    w.iy.      From    Mor 
morning  to  Thur-dav  afternoon  we    Live    made    mie    hundred   and 
thirty  miles  ;   we  li.ivc  expei  ien<-e.l  m>  S-IUJUM-C  \>\   \\  iter  r^urscs, 
,uid  have  found  tin  «>f  the  udderm--.  ihoir   imevemie*-    ex- 

cepted,  pretty  good.     Anil  hen-  1ft  in-  |    "  ions  di-ali: 

of  God  Jo  my  soul  in  thi*  jonincy  :  I  have  had  nn« -oiniiion  peace 
of  inind,  and  spiritual  c.i.i,>ul.iiiuh  d.iy  ;  aotwitbttamliog  the 

long  ride-;  1  have  endured,  and  the  he^P-nt  prixati-.m  of  gooil 
water  and  proper  food  to  whirh  1  have  been  tobjei  "-d  ;  to  me  the 
wilderne?s  and  the  solitary  places  were  mad.-  Bfl  the  garden  of 
God,  and  as  the  presence-chambers  of  the  Kmt;  "i  kn--*  and  Lord 
of  lords. 

Friday  31.  I  gave  a  lon^  di^rnm-.  <\\>nn  the  epistle  in  the 
office  of  ordination  for  deacons,  and  ordained  John  Winton  in  the 
congregation. 

Saturday,  November  1.     Came  twenty   miles   to   Knuxville,  of 
which   I    had    often    heard,   and    which  mine  eyes  now  saw.      W, 
visited  my  old  friend  Greer. 

Sabbath-day  '-'.    1  preached  in  the  state-house  on  Isai.  Iv.  G,  ' 
I  was  very  unwell,  but  was  enabled  to   bear   the   heavy   cross  of 
public  speaking:   we  had  about  seven  hundred  p.-.-plt-  in  and  about 
the  house.     We  came  off  in  har-tc,  intending  to  make  twenty  miles 
that  evening  ;  but  F ranch  Alexander  Ramsay   pursued   us  to   the 
ferry,  franked  us  over,  and  took  us   to   his   excellent   mansion— a 
stone  house  :   it  may  not  be  amiss  to  mention,    that   our  host 
built  his  house,  and  takes  in  his  harvest  without  the  aid  of  whis- 
key.    We  were  kindly  and  comfortably  entertained. 

Monday  3.    We  rode  up  to  M-Cleary's,  fourteen    miles,  where 
we  dined,  and  pursued  our  journey  to  William  Blac  klmr; 

Tuesday  4.  Rode  twenty  miles  up  Nolachucky  to  I1.,  -.jamiii  \  a;i 
Pelt's,  where  I  had  left  my  horse  and  chaise.     In  thi<  neighbour- 
hood 'the   land,  except  a  feu   spots,  is  little  better  than  barn  n 
nevertheless,  good  cultivation  will  make  it  productive, 
twenty-seventh  of  last  month,  the  day  on  which  we  left  the  plea- 
gant  mansion  of  our  friend  Van  Pelt,  to  the  day  of  our  return,  we 
rode,  I  presume,  quite  six  hundred  and  sixty  if  not  Mven   bun 
dred  miles.     Hitherto  the   Lord  hath  helped  us. 
twelve  proper  appointments  ;  two  of  which  ( 
near  failing  because  of  rain. 

Wednesday  5.  At  Van-Town  I  preached  in  the  new  i 

Luke  iv.  18. 


UK*" a  JOURNAL.  [1800. 

Thursday  0.  Crossed  Nolachucky  at  Querton's  ferry  and  came 
to  Major  Cragg's,  eighteen  miles.  I  next  day  pursued  my  journey 
and  arrived  at  the  Warm  Springs,  not  however  without  an  ugly 
accident.  After  we  had  crossed  the  Small  and  Great  Paint  moun- 
tain, and  had  passed  about  thirty  yards  beyond  the  Paint  Rock,  my 
roan  horse,  led  by  Mr.  O'Haven,  reeled  and  fell  over,  taking  the 
chaise  with  him  ;  I  was  called  back,  when  I  beheld  the  poor  beast 
and  the  carriage,  bottom  up,  'lodged  and  wedged  against  a  sapling, 
which  alone  prevented  them  both  being  precipitated  into  the 
river.  After  a  pretty  heavy  lift  all  was  righted  again,  and  we 
were  pleased  to  find  there  was  little  damage  done.  Our  feelings 
were  excited  more  for  others  than  ourselves.  Not  far  off  we  saw 
clothing  spread  out,  part  of  the  loading  of  household  furniture  of  a 
wa?on  which  had  overset  and  was  thrown  into  the  stream,  and 
bedcloalhs,  bedding,  &c.  were  so  wet  that  the  poor  people  found 
it  necessary  to  dry  them  on  the  epot.  We  passed  the  side  fords 
of  French-Broad,  and  came  to  Mr.  Nelson's  ;  our  mountain  march 
of  twelve  miles  calmed  us  down  for  this  day.  My  company  was  not 
agreeable  here — there  were  two  many  subjects  of  the  two  great 
potentates  of  this  western  world — whiskey — brandy.  My  mim  • 
was  greatly  distressed. 


I'uL.  It. 


* 


