Title: The Journal of the Rev. Francis Asbury, Bishop of the
  Methodist Episcopal Church, from August 7, 1771, to December 7,
  1815. In Three Volumes. Vol. III, from November 8, 1800, to
  December 7, 1815
Creator: Francis Asbury
Publisher: N. Bangs and T. Mason, for the Methodist Episcopal
  Church, New York
Publication Date: 1821
Rights: Public Domain
Source: Internet Archive, identifier 00612616.874.emory.edu (Pitts
  Theology Library / Emory University digital collection). Fetched
  directly (curl, raw bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text
  derivative, 2026-09-25.
Provenance note: OCR full-text derivative; no long-s or thorn/eth
  encoding artifacts found. Nothing else altered. Rights basis: 1821
  publication, well over 95 years before this session (2026) --
  public domain by date. Same not-the-1958-critical-edition flag as
  Vol. I of this same work. This volume's own closing errata note
  (retained verbatim, unaltered) flags one date correction the
  original editors made against Vol. II.
______________________________________________________________________

THE 


JOURNAL 


OF    THE 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY, 


BISHOP 


OF 

FROM 

AUGUST  7,  1771,  TO  DECEMBER  7,  18 IS, 

Sin  Cfjree  j&ofumeg. 
VOL.  Ill, 

FROM  NOVEMBER  8,  1800,  TO  DECEMBER  7,  1815= 


NEW-YOUK: 

TOBJJSHED   BY   N.    BANGS    AND    T.    MASON,    FOR    THE     METHODIST 

EPISCOPAL    CHURCH. 

— »-©-« — 

Abritiam  VimI,  Printer,  182  Watcr-S^e^. 

1821. 


Southern  District  of  New-York,  as. 

BE  IT  REMEMBERED,  that  on  the  thirtieth  day  of  April,  in  the  forty-fifth  year  of  the  Inde- 
pendence of  the  United  States  of  America,  JY.  Bangs  and  T.  Mason,  of  the  said  district,  have  de- 
posited in  1his  office  the  title  of  a  book,  the  right  whereof  they  claim  as  Proprietors,  in  the  words 
following,  to  wit: 

"The  Journal  of  the  Rev.  Francis  Asbury,  Bishop  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  from 
August  7,  1771,  to  December  7,  1815.     In  three  volumes." 

In  conformity  to  the  Act  of  the  Congress  of  the  United  States,  entitled  "  An  Act  for  the  Encou- 
ragement of  Learning,  by  securing  the  Copies  of  Maps,  Charts,  and  Books,  to  the  Authors  and  Pro- 
prietors of  such  Copies,  during  the  times  therein  mentioned."  And  also  to  an  Act  entitled"  An  Act 
supplementary  to  an  Act  entitled,  An  Act  for  the  Encouragement  of  Learning,  by  securing  the 
Copies  of  Maps,  Charts,  and  Books,  to  the  Authors  and  Proprietors  of  such  Copies,  during  the  times 
therein  mentioned,  and  extending  the  Benefits  thereof  to  the  Arts  of  Designing,  Engraving,  anil 
Etching  historical  and  other  Prints." 

G.  L.  THOMPSON, 
Clerk  of  the  Southern  District  ofJ\T«w-York. 


THE 


OF    THE 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY. 

INoRTH  CAROLINA.— Saturday,  November  8,  1800.  We 
started  away.  The  cold  was  severe  upon  the  fingers.  We 
crossed  the  ferry,  curiously  contrived  with  a  rope  and  poles,  for 
half  a  mile  along  the  banks  of  the  river,  to  guide  the  boat  by« 
And  O  the  rocks  !  the  rocks  !  Coming  to  Laurel- River,  we  fol- 
lowed a  wagon  ahead  of  us — the  wagon  stuck  fast.  Brother  O'H. 
mounted  old  grey — the  horse  fell  about  midway,  but  recovered, 
rose,  and  went  safely  through  with  his  burden.  We  pursued  our 
way  rapidly  to  Ivey-Creek,  suffering  much  from  heat  and  the 
roughness  of  the  roads,  and  stopped  at  Wm.  Hunter's. 

Sabbath  day  9.  We  came  to  Thomas  Foster's,  and  held  a  small 
meeting  at  his  house.  We  must  bid  farewell  to  the  chaise  ;  this 
mode  of  conveyance  by  no  means  suits  the  roads  of  this  wilder- 
ness ;  we  are  obliged  to  keep  one  behind  the  carriage  with  a  strap 
to  hold  by  and  prevent  accidents  almost  continually.  I  have 
health  and  hard  labour,  and  a  constant  sense  of  the  favour  of  God. 

Tobias  Gibson  had  given  notice  to  some  of  my  being  at  Bun- 
comb  court-house,  and  the  society  at  Killyon's  in  consequence  of 
this  made  an  appointment  for  me  on  Tuesday  11.  We  were 
strongly  importuned  to  stay,  which  brother  Whatcoat  felt  inclined 
to  do.  In  the  meantime  we  had  our  horses  shod  by  Philip  Smith  : 
this  man,  as  is  not  unfrequently  the  case  in  this  country,  makes 
wagons  and  works  at  carpentry,  makes  shoes  for  men  and  for 
horses  ;  to  which  he  adds,  occasionally,  the  manufacture  of  saddles 
and  hats. 

Monday  10.  Visited  Squire  Swaine's  agreeable  family.  On 
Tuesday  we  attended  our  appointment.  My  foundation  for  a 
sermon  was  Hebr.  ii.  1.     We  had  about  eighty  hearers;   among 

Vol.  III.  1 


9.  „„«,.  „„.»»,«  .<,.,„„„' 


KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1800„ 

them  was  Mr.  Newton,  a  Presbyterian  minister,  who  made  the 
concluding  prayer.  We  took  up  our  journey,  and  came  to  Fos- 
ter's upon  Swansico — company  enough,  and  horses  in  a  drove 
of  thirty-three.  Here  we  met  Francis  Poythress — sick  of  Caro- 
lina, and  in  the  clouds.  I,  too,  was  sick.  Next  morning  we  rode 
to  Fletcher's,  on  Mud-Creek.  The  people  being  unexpectedly 
gathered  together,  we  gave  them  a  sermon  and  an  exhortation. 
We  lodged  at  Fletcher's. 

Thursday  13.  We  crossed  French  Broad  at  Kim's  ferry,  forded 
Mill's  River,  and  made  upwards  through  the  barrens  of  Broad  to 
Davidson's,  whose  name  names  the  stream.  The  aged  mother  and 
daughters  insisted  upon  giving  notice  for  a  meeting,  in  consequence 
thereof  Mr.  Davis,  their  Presbyterian  minister,  and  several  others9 
came  together.  Brother  Whatcoat  was  taken  with  a  bleeding  at 
the  nose,  so  that  necessity  was  laid  upon  me  to  lecture :  my  sub- 
ject was  Luke  xi.  13. 

Friday  14.  We  took  our  leave  of  French  Broad — the  lands  flat 
and  good,  but  rather  cold.  I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  making  a 
tolerably  correct  survey  of  this  river.  It  rises  in  the  south-west, 
and  winds  along  in  many  meanders,  fifty  miles  north-east,  receiv- 
ing a  number  of  tributary  streams  in  its  course  ;  it  then  inclines 
westward,  passing  through  Buncomb  in  North  Carolina,  and 
Green  and  Dandridge  counties  in  Tennessee,  in  which  last  it  is 
augmented  by  the  waters  of  Nolachucky  ;  four  miles  above  Knox- 
ville  it  forms  a  junction  with  the  Holston,  and  their  united 
waters  flow  along  under  the  name  of  Tennessee,  giving  a  name  to 
the  state. 

We  had  no  small  labour  in  getting  down  Seleuda  mountain.  Ar- 
riving at  father  Douthat's,  on  the  south  branch  of  Seleuda,  where 
finding  myself  quite  at  home,  I  had  leisure  to  reflect  upon  our 
western  visitation.  On  the  16th  of  September  we  set  out  from 
Bottetourt  in  Virginia,  and  on  the  14th  of  November  we  were  in 
North  Carolina,  at  the  foot  of  the  grand  mountain  division  of 
South  Carolina.  In  this  time  I  presume  we  have  travelled  one 
thousand  miles,  have  had  about  twenty  appointments,  not  many  of 
which  were  large,  have  lodged  about  twenty  nights  under  strange 
roofs,  or  at  houses  of  entertainment,  and  have  expended  about  fifty 
dollars. 

Monday  17.  Yesterday  we  rested  at  father  John  Douthat's  ;  he 
is  settled  in  a  cove;  in  the  midst  of  the  mountains,  upon  the  south 
branch  of  the  Seleuda.  Brother  Whatcoat  made  a  discourse  on 
Matt.  iii.   10.  The  computation  is,  that  from  Charleston  to  the 


1800.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURXAL.  O 

western  line  of  this  state  it  is  two  hundred  and  seventy-five  miles; 
but  from  the  centre-house  it  is  nearer  four  hundred  miles. 

My  mind  is  led  out  for  the  interest  of  the  southern  and  western 
conferences :  these  are  quite  enough  contiguous  to  enable  the 
preachers  to  change  with  each  other,  but  such  is  the  sickly  state 
of  the  South,  in  both  senses,  that  we  shall  probably  be  under  the 
necessity  of  locating  five  or  six  of  our  spiritual  labourers. 

To-day  I  gave  a  sermon  founded  upon  Psalm  cxlvi.  8,  9.  and  felt 
engaged,  if  the  people  were  not. 

Tuesday  18.  We  came  fifteen  miles  to  Samuel  Burdine's,  Pen- 
dleton county.  Here  were  many  wandering  people.  Brother 
Whatcoat  preached.  We  administered  the  Lord's  supper.  I  was 
very  much  indisposed,  and  felt  dejection  of  spirits.  Our  sister  Bur- 
dine  professeth  to  have  known  the  Lord  twenty  years  ;  in  her 
you  see  meekness,  gentleness,  patience,  and  pure  love — and  clean- 
liness. 

Wednesday  19.  We  came  to  John  Wilson's ;  I  gave  a  discourse 
on  Acts  ii.  17,  18.  my  mind  was  divinely  elevated,  but  the  people 
did  not  appear  to  feel.  Yesterday  and  to-day  I  am  disciplined  by 
keen  pain  in  my  breast.  To-day  Benjamin  Blanton  met  me  : 
he  is  now  a  married  man ;  like  others  of  his  southern  brethren,  after 
he  has  faithfully  served  the  connexion  about  ten  years,  he  talks  of 
locating. 

Thursday  20.  At  the  Grove.  We  were  lost  an  hour  in  the 
woods  at  setting  out,  and  terribly  bewildered  in  onr  wav  to  the 
meeting  house  ;  the  day  was  cold,  and  a  beautiful  snow  lay  on  the 
ground.  During  the  public  exercises  the  people  felt  as  at  the 
reading  and  preaching  of  Ezra.  Brother  Whatcoat  improved  with 
light  and  life  upon  Coloss.  i.  21 — 23. 

Through  twelve  miles  of  cold  and  snow  we  journeyed  to  Tho- 
mas Terry's.  Our  host  was  from  Gisborough,  in  Yorkshire  ;  he 
made  us  welcome,  and  gave  us  dinner  about  six  o'clock.  Here  I 
hauled  up  the  chaise — the  pleasure  of  riding  in  it  does  not  com- 
pensate for  the  trouble  and  difficulty  of  getting  it  along. 

As  there  were  few  appointments  in  this  state,  and  as  brother 
Blanton  agreed  to  fill  them,  I  thought  fit  to  accompany  brother 
Whatcoat,  who  was  under  the  necessity  of  going  to  fill  appoint- 
ments made  for  him  in  Georgia. 

We  have  travelled  about  forty  miles  since  we  left  father  Dou- 
that's,  near  the  Table  mountain,  which  on  a  clear  day  is  a  grand 
sight ;  the  stool  appears  like  a  great  house  of  free-stone  ;  to-day 


4  REV.  FRANCI3  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  [loUU., 

we  only  pa»v  it  through  a  mist  dimly.  At  the  Cove  there  are 
but  few  religious  people,  and  among  these  few  there  are  disorderly 
walkers*  The  northern  rivers,  I  presume,  begin  to  close  for  the 
winter,  which,  I  judge,  will  be  a  severe  one.  On  Friday  I  rested 
and  wrote. 

Saturday  22.  Rode  twenty  miles  to  James  Powell's,  upon  Wal- 
nut-Creek, Lauren's  county. 

Sabbath  day  23,  was  an  extraordinarily  cold  day  at  King's  chapel. 
J  began  reading  at  eleven  o'clock,  and  occupied  the  pulpit  one  hour 
and  twenty  minutes  ;  brother  Whatcoat  followed  for  fifty  minutes, 
and  brother  Blanton  succeeded  him  ;  to  thi9  followed  the  sacra- 
ment— making  the  public  exercises  four  hours  (or  thereabouts)  of 
continuance,  in  a  very  open  building.  It  may  not  be  amiss  to  men- 
tion that  this  house  for  the  worship  of  God  was  named  after  James 
King,  who  died  a  martyr  to  the  yellow  fever  in  Charleston.  We 
lodged  for  the  night  at  W  Powell's.  Next  day  we  crossed  Main 
Seleuda  at  Pension's  ford,  and  rode  twelve  miles  to  George  Con- 
nor^ upon  Silvador's  Purchase, 

I  had  thought  our  address  would  move  their  majesties  and  the 
peers  of  Charleston.  Report  says  they  have  pumped  poor  Dough- 
arty  until  they  had  almost  deprived  him  of  breath,  and  John  Har- 
per committed  the  addresses  to  the  flames  before  the  intendant  of 
the  city  :  I  have  sp.en  hie  apnlogy  for  receiving  them. 

At  George  Connor's  we  had  an  evening  meeting,  and  consider- 
ing the  coldness  of  the  night,  and  the  shortness  of  the  notice,  it 
was  well  attended.     Brother  Whatcoat  preached. 

Tuesday  25.  We  rode  to  Nathaniel  Burdine's— ancient  Metho- 
dists, who  have  a  son  in  the  ministry. 

Wednesday  26.  We  came  to  Hugh  Porter's,  at  the  New  De- 
sign. Here  we  called  a  meeting  in  the  evening;  brother  What- 
coat spoke — 1  spoke  after  him. 

Thursday  27.  Sick  and  weary,  we  arrived  at  Daniel  Baugh's, 
whither  we  were  conducted  by  Mr.  Hennington,  having  lost  our 
way  in  the  woods. 

Friday  28.  At  Butler's  meeting-house,  fifteen  miles — no  notice  ; 
we  therefore  pushed  on  to  Capt.  Carter's  ;  here  the  girls  hasted 
to  call  the  people  to  meeting.  Brother  Whatcoat  preached  upon 
Ezek.  xxxiii.  2.  In  this  neighbourhood  the  sad  apostacy  of  two 
professed  preachers,  and  of  one  or  two  private  members,  hath 
brought  reproach  on  the  cause  of  God  and  Methodism. 

Georgia.— Saturday  29.  Came  twelve  miles  through  deep  sands 


1800.J  HEy.  fjuncis  assuey's  sovonal.  5 

to  Augusta.  We  have  travelled  nearly  one  hundred  miles  since 
last  Sabbath  day  :  my  soul  hath  been  kept  in  great  peace  ;  but  I 
feel  the  effects  of  riding  a  stiff,  aged,  falling  horse,  with  a  sore 
back,  and  my  saddle  is  old  and  worn. 

We  have  a  foundation  and  a  frame  prepared  for  erecting,  in  a 
day  or  two,  a  house  for  public  worship,  two  stories  high,  sixty  by 
forty  feet :  for  this  we  are  indebted  to  the  favour  of  Heaven,  and 
the  agency  of  Stith  Mead  ;  and  what  is  better,  here  is  a  small 
society. 

Augusta  is  decidedly  one  of  the  most  level  and  beautiful  spots 
for  a  town  I  have  yet  seen  :  it  is  of  ample  extent  in  its  plan,  well 
begun,  and  when  their  intention  shall  be  fulfilled  of  building  a 
court-house,  a  college,  episcopal  churches  for  Methodists  and 
others,  it  will  do  credit  to  its  founders  and  inhabitants. 

Sabbath  day  30.  Brother  Whatcoat  preached  a  most  excellent 
sermon  at  Mr.  Fary's  dwelling-house  upon  Ephraim's  lamentation. 
In  the  afternoon  I  preached  in  the  church ;  we  thought  to  have 
joined  the  congregations  together,  but  others  thought  differently  ; 
we  had  the  honour  of  the  priest's  company,  and  few  of  his  people 
attended. 

Monday,  December  1.  We  came  to  Thomas  Hayne's,  upon 
Uchee-Creek,  Columbia  county.  Brother  Whatcoat  preached 
upon  Gal.  ii.  20.  ;  I  came  off  with  a  close  exhortation. 

On  the  following  Tuesday  and  Wednesday  we  held  a  quarterly 
meeting  at  White-Oak.  Brother  Whatcoat  first  officiated  :  I  fol- 
lowed him  ;  we  had  very  cold  weather,  an  open  house,  and  kw 
hearers.  We  then  rode  to  Joseph  Scott's,  eight  miles,  through 
damp,  rainy  weather.  Our  host,  his  children,  and  grand  children 
will,  we  hope,  if  they  continue  faithful,  receive  the  crown  of  life. 

Thursday  4.  I  rode,  my  mind  cloudy,  and  my  body  cold,  to 
Thomas  Grant's,  twenty-four  miles. 

Friday  5.  I  humbled  my  soul  before  God.  To-day  I  have  been 
occupied  in  correcting  a  transcript  of  my  Journal,  that  one  had 
copied  for  me,  who  did  not  well  understand  my  short-hand  :  the 
original  was  written  in  my  great  illness,  very  imperfectly  ;  but 
when  I  reflect  on  my  situation  at  that  time,  I  wonder  that  it  is  as 
well  as  it  is. 

Sabbath  day  7.  Yesterday  and  to-day  we  have  quarterly  meet- 
ing at  Coke's  chapel,  near  Washington.  Brother  Whatcoat  preached 
the  first  day  from  Hebr.  vi.  4 — 6.  I,  in  my  place,  gave  some  ac- 
count of  the  work  of  God  as  it  had  been  reported  to  me  during 


v6  &EV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY5S  JOURNAL.  [180U. 

this  year.  On  Sabbath  morning  we  had  a  quickening  season  at 
the  sacrament ;  my  subject  was  Hebr.  xii.  25.  "  See  that  ye  refuse 
not  him  that  speaketh."  By  Introduction — The  likeness  between 
Christ  and  Moses  in  their  persons,  offices,  ministry,  and  punishment 
of  the  disobedient.  In  Doctrine — 1st.  How  Christ,  speaking  by 
his  Gospel,  his  ministers,  Spirit,  and  miracles  of  grace.  2nd.  That 
sinners,  seekers,  saints,  and  backsliders,  ought  to  see  to  it,  that 
they  "  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh  :"  Lastly,  The  awful  conse- 
quences of  refusing.  Brother  Whatcoat  and  H.  Hull  exhorted  ; 
the  latter  began  to  feel  like  his  former  self:  upon  the  whole,  it 
was  a  good  meeting,  and  we  humbly  hope  that  good  was  done. 
After  meeting  we  were  obliged  to  ride  six  miles,  through  the  rain, 
to  Thomas  Grant's. 

Monday  8.  We  crossed  Little-River,  and  went  forward  twelve 
miles,  to  Thomas  Fountain's,  in  Warren  county  We  have  rode 
about  ninety  miles  since  Monday  week. 

Tuesday  9.     We  came  to  Abraham  Heath's  meeting-house  upon 

Long-Creek,  Warren  county  ;  we  arrived  during  the  sitting  of  the 
court,  and  had  but  a  small  congregation.  Brother  Whatcoat  being 
unwell,  I  filled  his  place  ;  my  subject  was  Hebr.  x.  31.  "It  is  a 
fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God."  First.  The 
character  of  those  people  who  expose  themselves  to  the  danger  of 
"  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God" — such  as  are  described 
in  verses  26  and  29  of  the  same  chapter.  Secondly,  The  charac- 
ter of  those,  the  contrast  of  the  former,  who  will  escape  his 
avenging  hand  :  these  do  not  as  the  others  do  ;  they  also  attend  to 
the  precepts  contained  in  verses  25,  32,  35,  36,  and  39.  Thirdly, 
"  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God  ;" 
that  is,  to  fear  and  feel  the  wrath  of  God  for  ever  ;  having  no  in- 
terest in  Christ,  and  no  advocate  with  the  Father  ;  but  exposed  to 
infinite  justice,  and  all  the  threatened  wrath  of  the  Almighty. 

We  crossed  Ogeechee  at  Thweat's  bridge,  and  came  to  Powell- 
ton,  a  new  establishment,  in  which  there  is  a  Baptist  meeting- 
house, formerly  occupied  by  Silas  Mercer :  he  is  now  gone  to  eter- 
nity ;  but  his  son  filleth  his  place. 

Wednesday  10.  We  came  to  Edmund  Butler's,  in  Hancock 
county  :  the  people  had  thrown  down  the  old,  but  had  not  yet 
finished  their  new  meeting-house;  I  was  therefore  under  the  ne- 
cessity of  standing  bareheaded  in  the  open  woods,  on  a  very  cold 
day :  as  I  travelled  so  much,  this  was  thought  a  light  thing  for  a 
man  like  me.     Moses  Black,  after  this,  brought  the  people  to  the 


1300/j  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  "7 

dwelling-house.  We  rode  home  with  Alexander  King,  a  brother 
to  the  preacher  who  ended  a  short,  but  honourable  life  in  the 
ministry  of  the  Gospel. 

Thursday  11.  We  were  at  Burke's  meeting-house  ;  after  which 
we  came  dripping  to  A  Gilmore's  :  here  brother  Whatcoat  preach- 
ed ;  after  which  I  gave  a  few  words  of  exhortation,  and  we  then 
pushed  on  to  William  Greaves's.  We  have  lately  crossed  the 
chief  branches  of  the  Ogeechee  and  Little  rivers. 

Friday  12.  Cold  as  it  was,  we  made  as  far  as  Thomas  Dunn's ; 
and  here  I  gave  a  short  discourse  on  2  Tim.  iv.  6,  7.  We, left 
Dunn's  in  haste,  and  continued  on  twelve  miles  farther  to  the 
widow  Hill's,  on  Long  Creek.  These  last  appointments  were  in 
Oglethorpe  county.  They  will  be  the  best  judges  of  the  severity 
of  the  cold,  who  have  rode  seventeen  miles  before  dinner.  I  met 
brother  Milligan,  at  brother  Dunn'g,  and  should  have  been  pleased 
to  stay  there  With  him,  but  the  situation  of  his  wife  subjected  us  to 
the  risk  of  being  disturbed  and  driven  from  our  warm  lodging  at 
midnight.     We  have  rode  about  sixty  miles  in  four  days. 

Saturday  13.  We  came  to  Mark's  meeting-house  ;  brother  What- 
coat filled  the  pulpit. 

Sunday  14.  We  had  sacrament  and  sermon  :  my  subject  was  Matt, 
xvii.  5.     "  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased  : 
hear  ye  him."     Introduction — These  words  were  in   part  spoken 
at  his  baptism — see  Matt.  iii.  17.     Mark  i.  2.     Luke  iii.  22. — that 
there  were  three  witnesses  present  to  hear,  and  four  had  recorded 
it  ;  to  wit,  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  and  Peter.     First,  The  Divine 
Father  acknowledged  the  sacred  and  mysterious  union — "  This  is 
my  beloved  Son  :"  a  relation  infinitely  above  that  of  angels,  of  Adam 
in  his  primeval  standing,  and  the  souls  of  any  regenerated,  sanctified, 
or  glorified  soul,  on  earth,  or  in  heaven — co-equal,  co-eternal^  and 
co-essential  with  the  Father.     "  Well  pleased  !" — that  is,  in  the 
whole  of   man's    redemption  by   this    "  beloved    Son  :"     "  well 
pleased" — in   his   preaching,  living,   dying — in  every  part  of  his 
official  character.     "  Hear  ye  him" — Mark  and  Luke  have  omitted 
ye.     Secondly,  The  particular  characters  who  should  hear  him  in 
his  word,  Spirit,  and  operations.     His  ministers  should  hear  him— 
this  was  designed  in  the  text,  by  ye :    hear  him  all   his  sanctified 
souls  ;  hear  him  all  who  are  justified  ;  hear  him  all  ye  seekers  ; 
hear  him  all  ye   sinners — hear  his  awful  warnings  :  all  ye  back- 
sliders, hear  him  as  Peter  heard  him,  and  repent,  and  turn  to  him  ; 
hear  him  ye  apostates,  as  Judas,  and  despair. 


t>  REV.  F&ANCiS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL,  [1800. 

We  must  needs  go  to  the  house  after  preaching,  and  dine  ;  then 
had  we  to  cross  Broad  River,  and  pierce  through  the  woods,  scratch 
and  go  in  the  by-paths — wind  round  the  plantations — creep  across 
the  newly  cleared  ground  by  clambering  over  trees,  boughs,  and 
fence-rails  :  thus  we  made  our  way  fifteen  miles  to  Charles  Tait's, 
in  Elbert  county. 

Monday  15.  We  got  over  Savannah  river  at  Robert  Martin's 
ferry,  a  few  miles  above  Petersburg  :  here  I  called  upon  a  family 
I  had  often  visited  in  Virginia  :  I  found  the  parents  had  grown  old, 
and  that  they  had  lost  some  of  their  children. 

South  Carolina. — We  came  onward  into  Abbeville  county,  and 
hastened  to  John  Brannon's,  near  the  court-house  ;  making  a  ride 
of  thirty  miles  for  the  day. 

Tuesday  16.  We  proceeded  to  Silvador's  Purchase,  twelve 
miles,  to  hold  quarterly  meeting,  for  Bush-River  circuit,  at  a  meet- 
ing-house near  George  Connor's. 

Wednesday  17.  1  attended  quarterly  meeting.  My  subject  was 
Philip,  i.  27.  We  spent  four  hours  in  the  private  and  public  meet- 
ing ;  a  number  of  white  and  black  children  were  to  be  baptised;, 
and  probably  there  were  who  thought  it  would  be  better  done  by  a 
bishop.  After  meeting  we  had  a  fifteen  miles'  ride,  part  of  it  in  the 
night,  crossing  Seleuda  at  Child's  ferry,  wishing  to  get  to  John 
Meeks's,  in  Lauren's  county.  Abbeville  is  a  large  county,  stretch- 
ing from  river  to  river,  and  holds  better  lands  than  any  other  in  the 
state:  although  Bush-River  circuit  extends  through  it,  there  are 
few  Methodists  ;  the  most  populous  settlements  being  composed  of 
Presbyterians. 

Thursday  18.  At  John  Weeks's,  brother  Whatcoat  sermonized 
upon  Gal.  vi.  15. 

Friday  19.  It  rained  :  after  it  had  holden  up,  we  rode  thirty 
miles  to  Benjamin  Herndon's,  upon  the  waters  of  Enoree. 

Saturday  20,  and  Sunday  21.  Held  quarterly  meeting.  Brother 
Whatcoat  spoke  from  1  Thess.  iii.  8.  a  very  profitable  improve- 
ment. On  Sabbath  day  my  choice  was  Acts  iii.  22,  23.  We  con- 
tinued about  six  hours  at  Bethel.  I  saw  one  of  the  members  of 
the  General  Assembly  of  South  Carolina,  who  informed  me  thai 
our  address  from  the  general  conference  had  been  read  and  repro- 
bated ;  and  furthermore,  that  it  had  been  the  occasion  of  producing 
a  law  which  prohibited  a  minister's  attempting  to  instruct  any  num- 
ber of  blacks  with  the  doors  shut;  and  authorising  a  peace-officer 


1800.]  11EV.  FRANCIS  ASSURES  JOliUNAL.  \) 

to  break  open  the  door  in  such  cases,  and  disperse  or  whip  the 
offenders — but  more  of  this  law  when  I  see  it. 

Monday  22.  We  rode  to  Thomas  Hardy's,  in  the  forks  of 
Enoree  and  Tiger  rivers — nine  miles. 

Tuesday  23.  At  Bluford's  meeting-house,  brother  Whatcoat  per- 
formed upon  Philip,  iii.  14.  We  went  forward  twelve  miles  to  Mr. 
Glenn's  at  Broad  River. 

I  have  had  heartfelt  sorrow  for  the  church  of  God  in  Philadelphia. 
No  city  upon  our  continent  hath  been  more  oppressed  by  divisions 
in  Christian  societies,  witness  the  Episcopalians,  Presbyterians, 
German  and  English  ;  Quakers,  Baptists,  Scotch  Presbyterians, 
Roman  Catholics — and  now  the  Methodists:  I  have  written  on  this 
subject  to  three  official  characters. 

Wednesday  24.  I  gave  a  sermon  upon  2  Peter  i.  4.  at  Glenn's 
chapel,  near  Broad- River  :  we  had  an  open  season  and  many  hear- 
ers. At  Glenn's  Flat,  Chester  county,  Sealey's  meeting-house,  we 
kept  our  Christmas.  Brother  Whatcoat  preached  on  "  The  Son  of 
God  was  manifested  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil." 

My  subject  was,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest;  and  on  earth 
peace,  good  will  towards  men." 

We  lodged  at  Robert  Walker's,  eighty  years  of  age,  awakened 
under  Mr.  Whitefield  in  Fogg's  Manor — re-awakened  at  Pipe- 
Creek,  and  a  member  of  the  first  Methodist  Society  in  Maryland  : 
he  is  now  living  upon  Sandy-River,  South-Carolina. 

Friday  26.  We  travelled  a  barren  path,  and  came  to  Alexander 
Carter's,  upon  Fishing  Creek — a  journey  of  about  thirty  miles, 
without  food  for  man  or  beast,  and  the  weather  warm  to  great  ex- 
cess :  after  our  arrival,  we  had  a  night  meeting. 

Saturday  27.  After  waiting  the  leisure  of  the  boatmen,  we 
crossed  Catabaw  at  Wade's  ferry,  and  came  three  miles  to  a  meet- 
ing-house at  Camp-Creek,  to  attend  quarterly  meeting  for  Santee 
and  Catabaw  circuits.  We  lodged  at  John  Grymast's,  a  Methodist, 
and  originally  from  Ireland. 

Sabbath  day  28.  Damp  morning.  I  gave  a  discourse  on  Ephes. 
vi.  10.     Our  lodging  was  at  Johnson's. 

Mondaj  29.  We  stopped  at  Georgetown,  at  Marler's.  Brother 
Whatcoat  preached  upon  "  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace, 
whose  mind  is  staid  on  thee  ;  because  he  trusteth  in  thee."  We 
made  eighteen  miles  progress  this  day,  and  put  up  with  John 
Horton  upon  Hanging  Rock-River. 

Vol.  III.  2 


M  ItEV     FKANCJS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [180L 

Tuesday  30.  Came  to  Camden.  I  have  received  several  letters 
from  the  north  :  they  bring  small  consolation—*'  While  he  was 
yet  speaking  there  came  also  another"— murmurs — complaints  of 
partiality— and  with  this  I  may  console  myself  in  the  midst  of  un- 
remitted and  hard  travelling  and  labour.  1  was  presented  with  a 
petition  from  about  eighty  male  members  of  the  society  in  the  city 
of  Brotherly  love,  entreating  me  not  to  do  what  I  had  no  intention 
of  doing — that  was,  to  remove  brother  Everett  from  the  city  : 
how,  indeed  was  this  to  be  done  ?  He  and  they  had  acquitted  M. 
Manly  of  all  the  charges  brought  against  him,  and  restored  him  to 
membership ;  the  presiding  elder  had  also  restored  to  office  three 
or  four  elders  who  had  been  put  out  for  raurmurings  and  mischiefs, 
and  had  ejected  the  elder  stationed  in  the  city,  and  had  filled  his 
place  by  another — and  they  had  great  congregations,  great  shout- 
ings ;  and  God  was  with  them,  and  nearly  one  hundred  had  joined 
society.  To  all  this  what  can  we  do  but  say,  "  Well  done,  good  and 
faithful  servant"  and  servants !  Poor  bishop !  no  money  for  my 
expenses.  I  am  afflicted,  my  life  threatened  on  the  one  hand  ;  my 
brethren  discontented  on  the  other ;  true,  I  received  from  them  a 
petition  dipped  in  oil  and  honey  ;  and  if  I  approve,  all  will  be 
well  :  but  if  not,  drawn  swords  may  be  feared. 

Thursday,  January  1,  1801.  We  began  our  conference  with 
the  new  year.  Sat  from  nine  to  twelve  o'clock  in  the  forenoon  ; 
and  two  hours  in  the  afternoon  ;  the  band-meeting  was  held  be- 
tween the  hours  of  seven  and  eight.  A  clerk  for  the  minutes  was 
appointed,  and  another  to  keep  the  journal.  We  admitted  four  pro- 
bationers ;  re-admitted  two  deacons  to  their  standing  in  the  travel- 
ling connexion,  who  had  left  it  to  locate ;  located  three,  to  wit, 
Blanton,  Cole,  and  Evans;  and  re-stationed,  Gains,  Wiley,  and 
West,  who  had  all  located  themselves  in  the  course  of  the  last  year. 
We  had  great  union  :  it  is  true,  some  talked  loud  ;  but  I  dare  not 
say  there  was  any  improper  heat.  Our  sitting  continued  five  days, 
and  we  rested  one  Sabbath.  We  were  richly  accommodated  at 
Smith's  and  Carpenter's,  and  two  other  houses.  We  only  failed 
forty-eight  dollars  in  paying  all  the  preachers  their  demands. 

Thursday  8.  Yesterday  and  to-day  I  have  been  busy  writing 
many  long  letters  to  my  correspondents  in  the  uorth. 

Friday  9.  We  came  on  thirteen  miles  to  Graoney's  quarterly 
meeting,  and  lodged  at  Anthony  Presslu's. 

Saturday  10.  I  gave  a  short  discourse  upon  2  Peter  iv.  3,  and 
afterward  rode  up  eight  miles  to  the  Hanging-Rock. 


iSOl.J  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUR¥?S  JOURNAL.  II 

Sunday  11.  At  Horton's  meeting-house  I  spoke  on  Hebr. 
viii.  10,  11. 

Monday  12.  On  this  day  we  rested,  and  were  busily  employed  in 
looking  over  our  books  and  papers. 

I  felt  deeply  affected  for  the  rising  generation.  Having  resolved 
to  catechise  the  children  myself,  I  procured  a  Scripture  catechism, 
and  began  with  brother  Horton's  ;  to  this  doty  I  purpose  to  attend 
in  every  house  where  leisure  and  opportunity  may  permit. 

Wednesday  14.  We  left  Hanging  Rock  and  came  to  Little 
Lynch  and  Flat  Creeks,  crossing  the  great  branch  at  M'Meenas's 
ford  :  this  last  is  called  a  creek  ;  but  it  rises  near  the  Waxaws,  and 
flows  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles,  mingling  its  waters  with  the 
great  Pee-Dee  below  Port's  ferry.  We  had  an  excessively  warm 
day  for  the  season  :  the  horses  and  their  riders  were  both  fatigued 
much  in  ricMng  forty  miles  in  ten  hours.  Seated  upon  the  sand- 
hills, we  dined,  at  the  root  of  a  pine,  upon  a  morsel  of  bread  and 
bacon  ;  and  then  remounted  and  pushed  on  to  Anson  in  North 
Carolina  :  we  sheltered  ourselves  for  the  night  at  Thomas  Shaw's, 
upon  Little  Thompson's  creek. 

North  Carolina. — Thursday  15.  We  are  still  at  Thomas 
Shaw's.  What  kind  of  folks  am  I  among — unhappy  people  !  One 
aged  man  had  shot  the  constable  when  about  to  serve  a  warrant 
on  him  ;  a  second  had  stabbed  another  dangerously — their  names 
may  go  into  shades.  Oh  sin  !  Oh  intoxication  !  when — when  will 
these  people  be  civilized — and  all  be  truly  spiritualized. 

On  Friday  we  attended  at  Jackson's  meeting-house  ;  it  was  a 
gracious  season.  Bishop  Whatcoat  spoke  on  Isai.  xii.  2.  We 
lodged  at  Stephen  Pace's,  upon  Browns-Creek. 

Saturday  17.  We  had  a  meeting  at  John  Mills's;  his  wife  came 
from  Maryland,  he  from  Virginia  ;  the  children  are  coming  to 
Christ.    This  neighbourhood  is  visited  with  a  revival  of  religion. 

Sabbath  day  13.  We  came  to  Wadesborough  after  a  court-week. 
We  held  our  meeting  underneath  the  court-house,  within  the 
arches  :  we  had  a  most  delightful  day.  Bishop  Whatcoat  spoke 
with  great  ingenuity  and  authority  upon  "  The  wages  of  sin  is 
death  ;  but  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life."  My  subject  was  Luke 
xviii.  27.     We  lodged  at  I.  (hash's. 

Monday  19.  We  came  to  Webb's  ferry:  the  rain  drove  us 
under  the  roof  of  the  widow  Williams,  where  we  remained  until 
the  storm  was  over,  and  then  pushed  on  to  .lames  Pickett's,  in 
Richmond  county. 


REV.  FKANCIS  ANBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [i80i- 

Tuesday  20.  I  gave  a  discourse  on  Amos  vi.  1.  "  Wo  to  them 
that  are  at  ease  in  Zion  !"     I  felt  some  openings. 

I  have  had  many  and  great  exercises  of  mind  respecting  men  and 
things,  but  my  soul  enjoys  great  resignation  :  I  take  the  bitters  of 
life  as  things  which  medicine  my  soul,  producing  caution,  humilia- 
tion, and  sanctification. 

Wednesday  21.  We  rode  ten  miles  to  the  Presbyterian  meeting- 
house :  many  attended  at  a  short  warning.  My  subject  was  Hebr. 
vii.  25.  We  had  a  quickening  season.  After  meeting  we  rode 
three  miles  to  Rockingham,  the  seat  of  justice  for  the  county  of 
the  same  name.  We  had  been  expected  at  twelve  o'clock,  yet 
with  this  circumstance,  and  that  of  Gourt  time  to  boot,  we  had  but 
few  hearers.  Meeting  was  held  in  the  academy,  a  very  commo- 
dious house  for  divine  service.  Rockingham  stands  upon  a  beau- 
tiful eminence,  and  hath  some  valuable  houses ;  afcout  twenty 
families  make  the  inhabitants.  We  were  kindly  and  elegantly  en- 
tertained at  the  house  of  one  who  had  been  one  of  us,  but  now  is 
of  and  in  the  world. 

Thursday  22.  We  came  to  Marks-Creek.  I  spoke  on  Hebr.  iii. 
13—15.     We  had  a  good  season.     We  lodged  with  Solomon  Rye. 

South  Carolina. — We  now  descended  into  South  Carolina. 
Marlborough  county  presents  many  interesting  views — the  saw- 
mills ;  the  solitary,  lofty,  long-leaved  pines  ;  and  the  land,  though 
a  barren,  is  of  the  most  beautiful  kind,  and  for  range  for  cattle  and 
for  timber  is  very  valuable.  It  was  my  lot  to  be  speaker,  brother 
Whatcoat  had  taken  so  deep  a  cold  he  could  do  nothing.  I 
preached  from  the  parable  of  the  sower. 

We  continued  our  journey  down  Naked-Creek,  by  Robinson's 
house,  mills,  and  stills,  and  brought  up  at  Turbot  Cottingham's,  at 
the  Beauty-Spot.  Notwithstanding  all  that  Methodists,  Baptists, 
and  three  meeting-houses  have  done,  the  people  are  still  far  from 
beautiful  in  a  spiritual  sense.  We  had  no  opportunity  to  send 
harbingers,  we  had  therefore  no  appointment. 

Saturday  24.  We  hasted  to  James  Speers's,  at  the  Three- 
Creeks,  where  we  dined,  talked,  and  commended  ourselves  to 
God.  That  we  might  make  our  own  appointments  at  Harris's 
meeting-house  we  came  on  to  James  Harris's,  upon  Muddy-Creek. 
Brother  Speers  spread  the  tidings  for  us  far  and  wide. 

This  is  an  unhappy  country  :  it  is  thinly  settled," and  many  are 

''moving  away  to  Georgia  and  the  Natchez  ;  our  societies  are  small, 

and  the  prospect  low.     Too  often,  when  any  rise  in  their  circum- 


180 J.]  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  13 

stances,  they  seek  for  offices,  or  become  slave-traders,  and  much 
too  great  to  be  Methodists. 

We  have  rode  since  the  commencement  of  the  year  one  hun- 
dred and  eighty  miles  in  the  Carolinas. 

Monday  26.  We  rode  twenty  miles  to  Bennet  Flowers's — the 
men  were  from  home,  but  the  women  gave  notice  of  a  meeting  for 
the  morrow  at  the  old  meeting-house.  After  our  meeting,  about  one 
o'clock,  we  came  off  and  travelled  down  to  G.  Sweet's,  Bull- 
Swamp,  Liberty  county  :  we  sent  our  host  to  call  a  congregation 
for  Thursday.     We  now  had  time  to  read  and  write. 

1  find  reasons  enough  in  my  own  mind  to  justify  myself  against 
the  low  murmurs  of  partiality  in  which  some  have  indulged.  We 
are  impartial.  We  spend  as  much  time  in  the  extremities.  We 
know  not  Maryland  or  Delaware,  after  the  flesh,  more  than  Ken- 
tucky, Cumberland,  Georgia,  or  the  Carolinas  :  it  is  our  duty  to 
save  the  health  of  preachers  where  we  can  ;  to  make  particular 
appointments  for  some  important  charges  :  and  it  is  our  duty  to 
embrace  all  parts  of  the  continent  and  union  after  the  example  of 
primitive  times,  and  the  first  and  faithful  preachers  in  America. 

Thursday  29.  At  Sweet's  chapel  I  preached  on  Rev.  xxii.  14, 
15.  The  order — 1.  The  city.  2.  The  citizens.  3.  Their  ad- 
mission. 4.  The  characters  shut  out  from  the  city.  I  felt  light 
and  liberty. 

Friday  30.  We  came  to  the  Bear-Pond's  school-house,  where 
we  had  a  decent,  attentive  congregation.  I  preached  on  John  vii. 
1Q,  17.  Introduction. — It  was  observed  that  the  dispute  of  the 
Jews  with  our  Lord  about  the  Messiah,  was  not  if  he  should  be  the 
eternal  Son  of  God,  and  the  adopted  son  of  man,  but  whether 
Jesus  was  that  person  whom  Moses  foretold  that  church  and  na- 
tion should  come,  and  what  manner  of  person  he  should  be,  fifteen 
hundred  vears  before.     The  Jews  knew  where  Christ  was  to  be 

V 

born  from  Micah  v.  2.     See  also  Matt.  ii. 

Mr.  Shacklesford  gave  us  a  pressing  invitation  to  dine  with  him, 
and  treated  us  with  friendship  and  hospitality.  We  rode  in  the 
evening  to  Port's  ferry. 

Thomas  Humphries  had  been  very  sick,  but  was  recovering 
from  a  perpneumony  :  it  was  reported  he  would  die  ;  but  I  did  not 
feel  as  if  he  would  die  at  this  time. 

Sure  nothing  could  so  effectually  alarm  and  arm  the  citizens  of 
South  Carolina  against  the  Methodists  as  the  Address  of  the  General 
Conference.     The  rich  among  the  people  never  thought  us  worthy 


34  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURYrS  JOURNAL,  [180J 

to  preach  to  them  :  they  did  indeed  give  their  slaves  liberty  to 
hear  and  join  our  church  ;  but  now  it  appears  the  poor  Africans 
will  no  longer  have  this  indulgence.  Perhaps  we  shall  soon  be 
thought  unfit  for  the  company  of  their  dogs.  But  who  will  mourn 
the  loss  of  the  friendship  of  a  world  that  hath  so  hated  our  Lord 
and  Master  Jesus  Christ ! 

We  have  loitered  away  this  month,  and  have  rode  but  about 
two  hundred  miles. 

Saturday  31.  We  rested  :  wrote,  and  read,  upon  the  solitary  un- 
healthy banks  of  Pee-Dee,  in  sight  of  the  lofty  moss-grown  cy- 
press-trees and  swamps.  My  soul  is  in  peace  ;  Jesus,  Jesus  is  my 
all  :  my  soul  is  love  to  God,  to  Christ,  his  church,  and  all  souls. 

Sabbath-day,  February  1.  We  rode  six  miles  to  Britons-Neck 
meeting-house,  where  I  preached  on  Luke  xix.  10.  "  The  Son  of 
Man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  What 
characters  were  lost — not  in  a  state  of  salvation  ;  open,  profane 
sinners  ;  those  who  had  sinned  away  conviction  :  backsliders  ; 
such  as  were  seeking  salvation  by  works  ;  avowed  infidels.  It  was 
observed,  that  many  were  lost  to  men  and  means — occasioned  hin- 
derances  themselves,  and  were  prevented  by  others. 

We  came  to  William  Williams's,  near  Little  Pee-Dee.  On 
Monday  we  were  housed  by  the  rain  in  the  forepart  of  the  day  : 
in  the  afternoon  we  visited  Richard  Woodbury,  a  great  man,  weigh- 
ing upwards  of  three  hundred  pounds,  and  as  kind  as  weighty. 

Tuesday  3.  We  had  preaching  at  William  Williams's :  there 
were  few  people. 

Wednesday  4.  We  crossed  Little  Pee-Dee  at  the  Potato-Bed 
ferry.  Beautiful  deep  sands,  live-oaks,  lofty  pines,  pimeta  swamps, 
with  intermingled  gums  and  cypress,  variegated  by  evergreens  of 
bay  and  laurel,  and  twining  jessamine  flinging  its  odours  far  and 
wide  around  ;  lawns  and  savannahs — such  is  the  country,  and  such 
the  charming  scenes  through  which  we  have  frequently  passed  in 
our  late  rides.    We  brought  up  at  Richard  Green's,  near  Kingston. 

Thursday  5.  Counsel  and  conversation  with  the  presiding 
elders  ;  several  long  letters  to  the  north  and  south,  and  reading, 
furnished  occupation  for  the  day.  1  received  the  compilation  of 
N.  Snethen,  intended  as  an  answer  to  James  O'Kelly  :  it  is  well 
done,  and  very  correctly  done,  except  in  a  few  cases.  There 
was  no  sharpness  at  all  upon  my  side  with  Doctor  Coke  at  Charles- 
ton respecting  the  proposed  general  conference,  which  was  after- 
ward held    (in  1792  :)    I  was  fully  convinced   that  nothing  else 


1801.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUJRYJS  JOURNAL,  lo 

would  finish  the  unhappy  business  with  O'Kelly — and  that  did 
finish  it. 

Friday  6.  Occupied  in  reading  and  writing.  The  preachers 
had  not  yet  made  out  our  plan  for  a  forward  move.  One  Sabbath- 
day  yet  at  Kingston,  and  then  we  keep  along  towards  the  lovely 
north. 

Saturday  7.  I  rode  to  Robert  Anderson's,  in  the  Swamps,  and 
met  about  thirty  souls,  to  whom  I  spoke  on  Ephes.  ii.  8 — 10.  Re- 
turned to  Richard  Green's. 

Sabbath  day  8.  At  Kingston.  A  lovely  day  ;  but  few  people- 
perhaps  not  more  than  one  hundred,  including  the  coloured  folks, 
My  subject  was  Luke  ix.  24.  Brother  Whatcoat  spoke  on  John 
iii.  16.  It  is  now  sixteen  years  since  I  rode,  anxious  and  solitary, 
through  this  part  of  the  land  ;  there  was  scarcely  a  house  to  re- 
ceive me,  and  no  Methodist  to  bid  me  welcome  ;  but  God  hath 
given  us  many  friends,  of  some  of  those  whose  houses  I  lodged  in; 
witness  the  children  of  Mr.  Clark,  and  of  Durant — and  their 
widows  also. 

We  have  been  obliged  to  rest  on  Thursday,  Friday,  Saturday, 
Sabbath  day,  and  Monday  9,  with  Richard  Green.  Mr.  Rogers 
will  not  give  us  an  invitation  :  his  kindness  towards  the  Methodists 
is  at  an  end. 

Tuesday  10.  We  rode  sixteen  miles  to  Kullum's  meeting- 
house  :  it  was  a  cold  day,  and  coming  after  such  warm  weather, 
its  severity  was  the  more  sensibly  felt ;  about  mid-day  it  rained 
powerfully.  My  subject  was  Hebr.  ii.  1.  After  meeting  we  rode 
to  father  Kullum's,  an  old  Maryland  man,  from  Dorset  county. 
Here  I  met  Benjamin  Sellers,  a  local  preacher,  and  a  faithful  ser- 
vant of  God. 

Wednesday  11.  We  went  forward  to  William  Norton's,  at  the 
Iron  Run ;  a  distance  of  twelve  miles,  through  swampy  ground. 
Brother  Whatcoat  preached,  and  ordained  brother  Sellers  a  deacon. 
I  spoke  from  Gal.  iv.  19.  It  was  a  disagreeable  time,  the  people 
were  trembling  with  cold. 

Thursday  13.  We  rode  twenty  miles  to  Frinke's. 

Friday  14.  At  Ebenezer: — the  house  was  unfinished,  and  the 
day  windy  and  uncomfortable.  Brother  Whatcoat  and  myself  held 
the  people  nearly  three  hours.     My  text  was  Gal.  vi.  14,  15,  16. 

A  Solomon  Reeves  let  me  know  that  he  had  seen  the  Address, 
signed  by  me  ;  and  was  quite  confident  there  were  no  arguments 
to  prove  that  slavery  was  repugnant  to  the  spirit  of  the   Gospel  : 


Itf  REV     FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL.  [1801. 

what  absurdities  will  not  men  defend!— If  the  Gospel  will  tolerate 
slavery,  what  will  it  not  authorise  ?— I  am  strangely  mistaken  if  this 
said  Mr.  Reeves  has  more  grace  than  is  necessary,  or  more  of  Solo- 
mon than  the  name.     We  lodged  for  the  night  at  William  Gore*s. 

From  this  neighbourhood  we  came  to  Abraham  Pepent's,  Bruns- 
wick county,  North  Carolina,  fording  the  Seven-mile  Creek,  and 
crossing  the  Wacamaw-River  at  Loftus's  Flat. 

North  Carolina. — We  have  rode  at  least  five  hundred  and 
fifty,  if  not  six  hundred  miles,  over  the  hills,  barrens,  swamps, 
savannahs,  rivers,  and  creeks  of  South  Carolina. 

At  Gause's  Manor,  or  more  properly  town,  we  were  pleasantly 
situated.  I  had  a  most  solemn  visit  to  the  sea-beach,  which  to  me 
was  a  most  instructive  sight :  the  sea  reminded  me  of  its  great 
Maker,  "who  stayeth  the  proud  waves  thereof;"  its  innumerable 
productions  ;  the  diversified  features  of  its  shores — the  sand-hills  ; 
the  marsh  ;  the  pimeta,  tall  and  slender  ;  the  sheep  and  goats  frisk- 
ing in  the  shade  or  browsing  in  the  sun  :  or  the  eye,  directed  to  the 
waters,  beholds  the  rolling  porpoise  ;  the  sea-gulls  lifting  and  letting 
fall  from  high  the  clam,  which  breaking,  furnishes  them  with  food  ; 
the  eagles  with  hovering  wing  watching  for  their  prey  ;  the  white 
sail  of  the  solitary  vessel  tossed  upon  the  distant  wave' — how  inte- 
resting a  picture  do  all  these  objects  make  ! 

We  preached  at  William  Gause's,  the  patriarch  of  the  place  : 
his  son  stood  for  scribe,   and  assisted  me  in  making  extracts  of 
letters  to  add  to  my  manuscript. 

We  visited  Charlotte  meeting-house,  named  after  the  River,  vul- 
garly and  improperly  called  Shalotte.  On  our  return  I  prepared  a 
few  long  letters  for  the  north. 

My  mind  is  in  great  peace.  I  lament  that  I  have  no  access  to 
the  poor :  our  way  is  strangely  closed  up  at  present  in  conse- 
quence of  the  Address.  I  made  my  last  visit  to  the  sea.  I  thought 
upon  my  friends  on  the  other  side  the  great  waters  ;  my  voyage  to 
this  country  ;  the  little  probability  there  was  of  my  ever  again 
seeing  my  dear  mother,  or  my  native  land. 

We  have  had  preaching  in  three  or  four  places  ;  to  wit,  at  Be- 
pent's,  in  Brunswick  county,  and  at  the  Manor. 

Sunday  22.  We  attended  a  meeting  at  Lockwood's  Folly.  I 
gave  a  sermon  upon  2  Cor.  iv.  5.  1.  What  the  apostles  of  our 
Lord  did  not  preach.  2.  What  they  did  preach.  3.  The  relation 
of  ministers  to  Christ  and  to  souls.  The  principles  of  their  service. 
They  sought  not  their  own  honour.  ea?e,  or  intere*?- — thev  did 


JC01.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL  17 

not  make  disciples  for  themselves— they  had  not  wisdom,  righteous- 
ness, redemption  for  souls  ;  nor  grace  to  convict,  convert,  or  re- 
generate. They  preached  Christ  in  his  prophetic,  priestly,  and 
kingly  offices — in  his  Gospel  ;  in  the  sacrifice,  once  offered,  of 
himself — in  his  divinity.  "  Ourselves  your  servants  for  Christ's 
sake," — his  saved,  his  qualified— his  commissioned  servants  (not 
slaves) — bound  by  his  word,  his  grace,  his  love — not  for  any 
worldly  consideration  ;  but  "  for  Christ's  sake  :"  warning  sinners, 
hypocrites,  Pharisees,  and  backsliders  ; — comforting  mourners  ; 
strengthening  believers,  and  urging  and  inciting  to  holiness  of  heart 
and  life.  I  observed,  "  servants,"  yet  their  rulers  ;  according 
to  Scripture  testimony — see  Hebr.  xiii.  17.  ;   1  Peter  v.  2. 

We  were  kindly  entertained  at  Mr.  Bellon's  :  the  whole  family 
came  to  the  house  of  public  entertainment,  eight  miles  from  their 
dwelling,  to  make  us  comfortable. 

Monday  23.  Rode  to  Edward  Sullivan's,  at  Town-Creek— 
eighteen  miles. 

Tuesday  24.  I  preached  :  my  subject  was  Luke  iv.  18.  We 
had  a  full  house.     I  baptised  three  adults,  and  as  many  children. 

Wednesday  25.  We  dined  with  General  Smith — there  was  abun- 
dance and  hospitality.  We  came  into  town.  Jeremiah  Norman 
gave  us  a  sermon.  Our  tabernacle  is  crowded  again  :  the  minds 
of  the  people  are  strangely  changed  ;  and  the  indignation  excited 
against  us  is  overpast :  the  people  see  and  confess  that  the  slaves 
are  made  better  by  religion  ;  and  wonder  to  hear  the  poor  Africans 
pray  and  exhort. 

Thursday  26.  I  preached,  for  the  first  time,  in  our  house,  and 
for  the  second  in  Wilmington  :  my  text  was  found  in  Acts  xxvi.  17, 
18.  At  eleven  o'clock  we  were  crowded  ;  and  I  felt  uncommon 
enlargement.  One  of  the  respectables  came  in  the  name  of  some 
of  the  reputables  to  request  that  1  would  preach  in  the  ancient, 
venerable  brick  church  :  I  was  weak — had  spoken  long  and  loud, 
and  was  more  than  ordinarily  unwell  ;  but  brother  Whatcoat  was 
unwell  and  not  able  to  go  out.  At  four  o'clock  we  had  a  large  and 
decent  congregation — 1  lectured  upon  Romans  x.  1 — 4.  In  the 
evening,  numbers,  both  white  and  black,  came  again  to  the  taber- 
nacle. After  John  Norman  had  preached,  I  read,  and  commented 
upon  two  letters  respecting  the  work  of  God  in  Delaware,  and 
Cumberland,  in  the  West. 

Friday  27.    We  came  off  early  and  travelled  on  to  Nixon's, 
through  dews,  damps,  and  rain— a  great  part  of  the  way  weary, 
Vol.  III.  3 


iu  REV.   FRANCIS  ASUfRY  S  JOURNAL.  [13(I<* 

pained  and  sleepy  for  want  of  rest     I  gave  a  discourse  on  Matt. 
xi.  28—30. 

Saturday  28.  About  sunrise  we  hasted  away  and  came  to  Lot 
Ballard's,  at  the  Rich-Lands,  New-River,  about  forty  miles  :  we 
stopped  not  on  the  way.  I  unfortunately  left  my  famous  spectacles 
behind  :  I  had  laid  them  by,  overwhelmed  with  drowsiness,  and 
failed  to  take  them  up  to  read  a  chapter,  as  is  my  custom,  except 
upon  such  over-doing  journeys.  We  walked  our  horses  at  the 
rate  of  four  miles  an  hour  :  my  poor  nag  limped.  I  thought  it 
was  owing  to  the  bad  state  of  his  shoes,  when,  behold,  an  oyster- 
shell  had  wedged  itself  in  the  hollow  of  his  hoof,  near  the  heel. 

Sunday,  March  1.  At  New-River  I  preached  on  Luke  xix.  10. 
We  had  a  very  serious  but  unaffected  congregation. 

Joseph  Ballard,  and  his  wife  Mary  Ballard,  are  gone  to  rest,  after 
a  respectable  profession  of  religion  amongst  the  Methodists,  for 
seventeen  or  eighteen  years.  John  Perry,  a  pious  soul,  formerly 
of  the  Baptists,  and  an  official  character  amongst  them,  is  also  gone 
to  his  reward.  He  had  backslidden  ;  but  was  restored  among  the 
Methodists,  and  became  a  preacher  and  deacon  :  he  died  upon  the 
road,  going  to  an  appointment:  neither  he  nor  Ballard  were  slave- 
holders— hail,  happy  souls  ! 

Monday  2.  We  had  to  march  down  upon  Trent,  sixteen  miles. 
The  appointed  meeting  had  been  transferred  to  Frederick  Argate's, 
occasioned  by  the  death  of  his  venerable  mother,  the  respectable 
wife  of  General  Frederick  Argate,  who  had  been  suddenly  called 
away.  This  lady  justly  deserved  the  great  and  good  character  she 
had  for  forty  years  preserved,  as  a  wife,  a  mother,  a  mistress,  and  a 
friend  :  to  relieve  the  poor,  and  to  solace  the  afflicted,  gave  her  plea- 
sure and  occupation  almost  uninterrupted.  Thursday  week  she  was 
at  meeting — the  following,  she  was  a  corpse.  My  subject  on  this 
solemn  funeral  occasion  was  1  Cor.  xv.  22.  "  As  in  Adam  all  die  ; 
so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive."  First,  Our  union  with  Adam, 
and  the  unhappy  consequences.  Secondly,  Our  union  with  Christ, 
and  the  happy  consequences.  We  have  already  rode  eighty  miles 
from  Wilmington. 

Tuesday  3.  We  came  to  Jones  court-house  :  we  had  many  wo- 
men, but  few  men  :  my  text  was  1  Cor.  vii.  29,  30,  31.  I  suppose 
I  shall  not  soon  prophesy  there  again — for  good  reasons. 

We  went  not  to  see  our  wealthy  friends,  but  came  down  to 
Thomas  Lee's,  where   we  held   a  meeting  on    Wednesday  and 


1801.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  19 

Thursday.     My  text  was  Acts  xx.  32.     Brother  Whatcoat  spoke 
from  Isaiah  lvii.  1. — a  portioi)  of  Scripture  very  seasonably  chosen. 

I  began  to  review  for  this  year  the  preachers  and  stations  :  we 
may  perhaps  find  one  preacher  for  a  circuit  in  the  Virginia  confe- 
rence. I  am  shocked  to  see  how  lightly  the  preachers  esteem, 
and  how  readily  they  leave  the  travelling  plan. — Oh  Lord  !  by 
whom  shall  Jacob  arise  ? 

Friday  6.  Rode  to  Newbern.  Brother  Whatcoat  preached  in 
the  evening. 

Sabbath  day  8.  We  had  a  sacrament  in  the  morning,  and  bro- 
ther Whatcoat  preached  :  in  the  afternoon  I  made  an  improvement 
upon  Matt.  xvii.  5.  I  have  been  rather  clouded  in  mind,  and  have 
felt  no  pleasure  in  my  administrations  to-day. 

Monday  9.  We  rode  thirty-seven  miles  to  Washington  :  in  our 
way  we  crossed  Neuse,  swiftly  and  safely,  at  West's  ferry.  At 
twenty-one  miles  we  stopped  to  feed — high  price,  and  poor  fare. 
We  have  rode  six  hundred  and  fifty  miles  towards  the  fourth  thou- 
sand since  Carolina  conference.  Here  R,alph  Potts,  a  Northum- 
brian, (old  England,)  but  American-made-Methodist,  received  us 
as  the  angels  of  God. 

Tuesday  10.  I  gave  a  serious  talk  to  more  persons  than  I  ex- 
pected on  Rom.  x.  16. — a  subject  well  fitted  to  the  state  of  the 
people  of  Washington. 

Ralph  Potts  hath  begun  a  handsome  chapel,  thirty  feet  square, 
and,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  he  will  finish  it  without  any  man's 
help. 

Wednesday  11.  We  came  twelve  miles  to  Josiah  Little's. — We 
called  upon  brother  Floyd  by  the  way  :  he  is  sickly — I  bless  God 
that  this  family  standeth  by  us  yet.  I  also  called  at  brother  Mor- 
ris's. At  Little's  we  had  many  people.  Two  of  our  friend  Little's 
brothers  are  gone  from  our  society.  Oh  !  the  slave-trade — when 
will  it  be  no  more  ! 

Thursday  12.  A  dreary  ride  of  thirty  miles,  without  food  for 
man  or  beast,  brought  us  to  Joseph  Pippin's  :  here  we  were 
kindly  entertained.  Our  friend  Pippin  hath  been  settled  in  the 
Connecta  Swamps  for  twenty  years  :  he  hath  six  children,  and  about 
fifteen  slaves,  and  never  has  had  a  death  in  his  family : — mercy 
and  miracle  ! — may  they  praise  the  Lord  ! 

Friday  13.  At  Toole's  meeting-house,  near  Tarborough,  bro- 
ther Whatcoat  addressed  the  congregation  upon  Zachariah  ix.  12» 
My  choice  was  Isaiah  i.  9,     I  spoke  with  great  heat  and  rapidity 


20  iiev.  faancxs  asbury's  journal.  [1801* 

about  half  an  hour  :  my  text  was  well  chosen,  if  the  comment  was 
not  well  executed.     We  lodged- at  Mr.  Toole's. 

Saturday  14.  Fifteen  miles  to  Prospect  chapel — open  to  all  soci- 
eties. Brother  Whatcoat  gave  a  short  discourse  upon  justification 
by  faith.  My  subject  was,  The  love  of  God,  and  the  love  of  the 
world  contrasted  with,  and  subversive  of  each  other:  according  to 
the  degrees,  so  the  effects  and  fruits  of  these  opposing  systems. 

Having  fourteen  miles  to  Henry  Bradford's,  we  had  no  time  to 
dine  ;  we  took  to  horse,  and  came  in  with  the  shadows  of  evening  : 
this  morning  we  breakfasted  at  seven  o'clock,  and  we  now  supped 
at  seven — hard  preaching,  and  hard  riding  occupied  the  interme- 
diate hours. 

We  have  passed  rapidly  through  Edgecombe  into  Halifax 
county.     Oh,  the  awful  state  of  religion  in  this  circuit  ! 

Sabbath  day  15.  At  Bradford's  meeting-house,  near  Fishing- 
Creek,  my  portion  of  the  word  was  from  Psalm  i.  2,  3.  I  disco- 
Tered  some  solemnity  and  a  few  tears.  Brother  Whatcoat  preach- 
ed on  John  iii.  17.  We  rested  this  Sabbath.  We  have  rode  one 
hundred  and  twenty  miles  in  a  few  days  of  the  past  week. 

Monday  16.  We  were  under  the  necessity  of  moving  to  North- 
ampton. It  was  very  warm:  we  started,  and  crossed  Roanoke- 
River  at  Pollock's  ferry,  and  arrived  at  R.  Whitaker's — twenty 
miles.  I  was  taken  very  ill  with  a  billious  affection.  1  had  a  high 
fever,  and  my  head  and  back  furnished  symptoms  of  a  lowland  inter- 
mittent. I  could  not  eat,  and  thought  of  staying  in  the  house  :  I 
changed  my  mind,  and  went  to  Rehoboth  chapel.  I  read  the  letters 
giving  the  accounts  of  the  work  of  God  in  the  state  of  Delaware, 
and  in  Cumberland.  At  brother  Grant's  I  took  a  little  water-gruel, 
and  rode  on  eight  miles  farther,  making  twelve  miles  this  day.  We 
lodged  at  Joseph  Pinner's. 

Wednesday  18.  We  had  timely  intimation  of  rain  :  we  started 
nevertheless,  and  had  the  rain,  more  or  less,  to  Winton,  a  distance 
of  twenty-five  miles :  here  we  were  glad  to  stop  to  dry  and  dine 
— and  no  more — ride  we  must  :  Gates  court-house  brought  us  up 
in  the  evening.— Our  ride  to-day  is  little  short  of  forty  miles.  I 
preached  in  the  court-house  on  Titus  ii.  11,  12. 

Friday  20.  We  went  forward  to  Isaac  Hunter's,  twelve  miles, 
— alas,  for  this  place  !— Five  souls  of  the  whites—some  poor  Afri- 
cans are  seeking  the  Lord. 

Saturday  21.  We  came  to  NewlandCreek,  twenty-two  miles, 
and  lodged  at  James  Spence's.     This  is  a  most  awful  place,  and  Sa- 


1801. J  &KV.  FRANCIS  ASBUftYTS  JOURNAL.  21 

tan  triumphs.  Sabbath  day  was  cloudy,  and  myself  very  unwell ; 
but  God  enabled  me  to  speak  with  uncommon  unction  from  John 
iii.  19,  20,  21.  "  The  darkness  of  the  world'' — in  birth,  educa- 
tion, dispensation,  practice — the  contrary  light  of  Revelation ;  the 
inspiration  of  the  Spirit ;  the  experience  and  practice  of  God's 
people  and  ministers  : — they  came  to  the  light  to  trv  thereby 
their  conviction,  conversion,  and  sanctification  ;  and  as  the  touch- 
stone of  their  justice,  mercy,  truth,  and  love.  "  Condemnation" 
• — they  are  condemned  by  the  word  of  God,  their  own  consciences, 
by  the  people  of  God — they  shall  be  found  guilty  in  the  day  of 
judgment,  and  be  condemned — according  to  the  Gospel  privileges, 
and  light  they  have  lived  under  and  rejected  ;  and  they  shall  con- 
demn themselves  for  ever  in  hell. 

We  came  to  M'Birde's.     1  had  a  dumb  chill,  and  a  sick  night. 

Monday  23.  We  made  twenty- two  miles  to  Samuel  Simmons's. 
Our  flight  has  carried  us  through  Pasquotank,  Camden,  and  Curri- 
tuck counties,  in  North  Carolina,  which  we  shall  leave  to-day. 
My  horse  enslaves  his  rider.  I  suffer  under  severe  bodily  afflic- 
tion— 1  am  sorrowful — yet  without  sinning. 

Tuesday  24.  At  Currituck,  William's  meeting-house,  brother 
Whatcoat  preached  :  I  gave  a  short  exhortation  ;  after  which  we 
proceeded  on  to  James  Wilson's.  We  have  done  with  North  Caro- 
lina for  the  present. 

Virginia. — Wednesday  25.  Cold  and  snow.  I  spoke  on  Isaiah 
li.  3.  1.  The  cause  of  Zion's  mourning.  "  Waste  places" — such 
as  had  been  improved  but  forsaken.  "  Wilderness" — never  cul- 
tivated :  the  one  representing  the  Jewish  nation  ;  the  other,  hea- 
then lands.  "  Joy  and  gladness" — yea,  the  shouts  of  the  millions 
of  the  redeemed  of  the  earth. 

Thursday  26.  Brother  Whatcoat  preached  at  CutheralPs,  near 
the  great  bridge.  We  came  through  the  rain  to  Hospital-Point, 
and  crossed  over  to  Portsmouth.     I  answered  several  letters. 

Friday  27.  We  had  an  open  time  at  Portsmouth. 

Sabbath  29.  Unwell :  my  horse  also.  Preached  in  Norfolk : 
my  subject,  Gal.  vi.  9.  returned  in  the  horse-boat  through  the 
rain.  At  three  o'clock  I  spoke  on  "  These  shall  go  away  into 
everlasting  punishment,  but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal."  The 
gracious  state  of  heart  and  the  gracious  practice  which  was  mani- 
fested by  the  righteous  in  their  doing  all  from  a  principle  of  love  to 
Christ ;  and  the  blessed   consequences — "  eternal   life."     Of  the 


22  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV  S  JOURNAL.  [1801. 

wicked— their  opposite  characters  and  practices,  and  the  effects  pro- 
duced— "  everlasting  punishment." 

Monday  30.    We  came  to  Jolliff 's :  it  was  not  my  day  to  preach, 
nor  indeed  was  I  well  able. 

Tuesday  31.  We  came  in  haste  to  Suffolk.  It  was  my  lot  to 
preach  in  the  court-house  at  twelve  o'clock :  my  foundation  was 
1  Tim.  iv.  9,  10.  it  was  with  great  labour  I  came  through  :  my 
cold,  loss  of  voice,  and  a  pain  in  my  breast,  was  greatly  afflictive. 
We  have  one  good-hearted  Methodist,  and  two  very  respectable 
friends  here  ;  and  the  inhabitants,  generally,  are  very  catholic — 
they  desire  to  build  a  house  for  us.  This  town  has  one  grand 
street,  about  one  hundred  houses,  and  is  well  situated  for  trade  in 
lumber,  turpentine,  tar,  and  pork,  collected  from  Carolina  and 
parts  of  this  state.  We  lodged  at  Richard  Yarberry's,  an  ancient 
friend  of  mine  from  Dinwiddie.  He  and  his  wife  were  the  disci- 
ples of  Mr.  Jarratt.  The  old  prophet,  1  hear,  is  dead  :  he  was  a 
man  of  genius,  possessed  a  great  deal  of  natural  oratory,  was  an 
excellent  reader,  and  a  good  writer:  from  1763  to  1801  (I  think) 
he  was  minister  of  the  parish  of  Bath,  in  Dinwiddie  county,  in  this 
state.  I  have  reason  to  presume  that  he  was  instrumentally  suc- 
cessful in  awakening  hundreds  of  souls  to  some  sense  of  religion 
in  that  dark  day  and  time  :  how  he  died,  1  shall  probably  hear  and 
record  hereafter. 

Wednesday,  April  1.  We  came  to  Jethro  Hazlett's,  near  Somer- 
ton  ;  the*  people  were  lively,  and  prayed,  and  praised,  and  exhort- 
ed. I  felt  the  soreness  in  my  breast,  and  was  silent.  After  meet- 
ing, we  came  on  to  Knotty-Pine — to  the  house  of  mourning  for 
a  favourite  son.  Marmaduke  Baker  was  this  day  to  have  gone  to 
Princeton  college  to  finish  his  education — we  hope  he  is  gone  to 
the  college  of  saints  and  the  society  of  heaven.  We  have  rode 
twenty-four  miles — faint  and  feeble. 

Thursday  2.  I  gave,  perhaps,  my  last  talk  in  Knotty-Pine  chapel 
on  1  Peter  iv.  17.  We  hasted  to  Winton  ;  benighted  in  the 
swamp,  which  for  two  miles  was  overflowed  with  water.  We  ar- 
rived late  at  Dr.  Laroque's,  where  we  lodged.  From  Portsmouth 
hither,  we  make  sixty-five  miles.  At  eleven  o'clock  brother  What- 
coat  preached  in  the  court-house  from  John  iii.  16.  After  preach- 
ing we  hasted  to  Murfreesborough,  twelve  miles. — I  preached 
at  N.  Vicks's  :  my  text  was  John  iii.  17. — Where  I  laboured  I 
lodged. 


1801.]  REV.  FK1NCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 


23 


Saturday  4.  We  came  to  Edward  Sorry's,in  Northampton  county, 
dined,  and  hasted  along  towards  Sterling  Boykin's,  twenty-eight 
miles. 

Sabbath  day  5.  I  preached  at  Concord  meeting-house,  and  lodged 
with  Thomas  Dupree,  a  descendant  of  a  Hugonot  who  fell  a  mar- 
tyr to  persecution.  I  felt  dejection  of  spirits  and  awful  feelings 
for  the  state  of  the  people.  I  preached  on  Hebr.  ii.  3.  1  again 
preached  on  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sin 
of  the  world:"  to  these  exercises  were  added  a  sacrament,  and 
the  baptism  of  children. — We  had  a  solemn  season. 

I  recollect  having  read,  some  years  since,  Ostervald's  Chris- 
tian Theology  :  having  a  wish  to  transcribe  a  few  sentiments  in 
the  work,  I  met  with  it,  and  extracted  from  Chap.  2.  page  317. 
what  follows.  "  Yet  it  cannot  be  denied  that  in  the  primitive 
church  there  was  always  a  president  who  presided  over  others, 
who  were  in  a  state  of  equality  with  himself:  this  is  clearly  proved 
from  the  catalogues  of  bishops  to  be  found  in  Eusebius  and  others  ; 
in  them  we  may  see  the  names  of  the  bishops  belonging  to  the 
principal  churches,  many  of  whom  were  ordained  whilst  the  apos- 
tles, (but  especially  John)  were  still  living."  So  far  Mr.  Oster- 
vald,  who,  1  presume,  was  a  Presbyterian.  In  Cave's  Lives  of 
the  Fathers,  and  in  the  writings  of  the  ancients  it  will  appear  that 
the  churches  of  Alexandria,  and  elsewhere,  had  large  congregations 
—many  elders — that  the  apostles  might  appoint  and  ordain 
bishops.  Mr.  Ostervald,  who,  it  appears,  is  a  candid  and  well- 
informed  man,  has  gone  as  far  as  might  be  expected  for  a  Presby-j 
terian.  For  myself,  I  see  but  a  hair's  breadth  difference  between 
the  sentiments  of  the  respectable  and  learned  author  of  Christian 
Theology,  and  the  practice  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church. 
There  is  not,  nor  indeed,  in  my  mind,  can  there  be  a  perfect  equal- 
ity between  a  constant  president,  and  those  over  whom  he  always 
presides. 

Monday  6.  At  Malone's  chapel  I  preached  on  Luke  xxiv.  44 — 48. 
We  lodged  at  brother  Reeple's. 

Tuesday  7.  Leaving  Jones's,  we  proceeded  on,  through  heavy 
rain,  to  Drumgoold's. 

Wednesday  8.  Dromyrick  chapel  had  been  removed  and  en- 
larged for  the  conferences.  Thursday,  Friday,  and  Monday  in 
conference.  We  had  a  press  of  business,  but  were  peaceable 
and  expeditious.  Brother  Lee  preached  on  Saturday  :  I  held 
forth  on  Sunday  morning  to  an  unwieldy  congregation  in  doors. 


Kli  REV.    FRANCIS    ASBURY's    JOURNAL.  [1801. 

whilst  William  Ormond  preached  out  of  doors,  and  the  poor  blacks 
had  their  devotions  behind  the  house.  My  subject  was  Rom. 
i.  16.  "  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  for  it  is  the 
power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth."  The 
manifest  excellence  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ  in  three  cases.  1. 
As  a  revelation  from  God,  by  ancient,  and  multiplied,  and  sure  pro- 
phecy. 2.  As  it  proclaimeth  salvation  to  all  the  world  who  will 
give  it  that  attention  and  that  credence  which  is  given  to  the  re- 
ports and  to  the  business  of  the  world.  The  spiritual  and  glorious 
salvation  of  the  Gospel.  The  power  of  God  displayed  upon  the 
rich,  the  poor,  the  worldly  minded,  the  worldly  wise,  and  worldly 
ignorant,  and  sinners  of  the  deepest  die.  Modern  ministers,  and 
the  people  of  God  of  the  present  day  should  not  be  ashamed  to 
believe  and  profess  the  experience  and  obey  the  precepts  of  the 
Gospel — not  ashamed  to  suffer  for  it  and  support  it — not  ashamed 
to  claim  all  its  promises  ;  contend  for  the  truth  of  its  doctrines, 
and  the  necessity  and  efficacy  of  its  divinely  appointed  ordinances 

Monday  13.  We  finished  our  conference,  and  next  day  I  recom- 
menced my  northern  march,  preaching  at  Drumgoold's,  (now  Ellis's) 
chapel,  whither  we  had  returned.  Doctor  Smith,  on  whom  I 
called,  took  a  wart,  cancerous  in  appearance,  which  had  troubled 
me  three  months,  from  my  foot. 

Thursday  16.  At  Mabry's  chapel.  I  paid  a  visit  to  an  old  mother 
in  Israel.  I  have  fevers  and  feebleness,  but  a  soul  entirely  swal- 
lowed up  in  God.  I  preached  on  Titus  i.  16.  The  characters  of 
those  who  profess  to  know  God  by  his  works  of  nature,  his  providen- 
ces— yet  there  are  of  these  who  reject  his  word — who  imitate  him 
not  in  his  attributes  and  perfections,  forgetting  that  we  might  as  well 
suppose  a  man  without  bodily  powers  and  mental  apprehensions, 
as  a  God  without  justice,  mercy,  truth,  love,  and  holiness.  Some 
profess  to  know  God  by  revelation,  yet  in  works  deny  him  ;  others 
profess  to  know  God  by  revelation  and  inspiration,  yet,  like  the  others, 
neither  fear  God,  trust  in,  or  love  him,  having  deceived  their  own 
souls  :  others  have  fallen  from  the  experimental  and  saving  know- 
ledge of  God,  yet  profess  to  know  God.  Lastly,  How  excellent 
the  character  of  those  who  know  God,  and  prove  it  by  their  works, 
and  uniformity  of  tempers  and  actions,  living  always  in  the  fear  of 
God,  and  in  an  unshaken  confidence  in  his  mercy  and  his  truth. 

Friday  17.  Ten  miles  brought  us  to  Supponey-Creek.  We 
lodged  at  the  house  of  Richard  Greaves's  widow.  The  husband  is 
gone  home,  having  departed  in  perfect  love,  after  twenty  years'  pro- 


1801.]  HEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  25 

fession  :  he  wrote  and  felt  a  blessed  experience  a  short  time  before 
his  death. 

Saturday  18.  For  thirty  years  pa3t  I  have  occasionally  preached 
at  Stoney-Creek  ;  I  held  forth  at  the  chapel  on  Psalm  Ixxviii.  5, 6,  7. 
After  preaching  we  hasted  on  to  B.  Malone's  to  dine,  and  thence  to 
Petersburg,  thirty  miles. 

Sabbath  19.  There  had  been  put  forth  a  printed  appointment  for 
me  to  preach  the  funeral  sermon  of  the  late  Rev.  Devereux  Jar- 
ratt ;  who  had  lately  returned  to  his  rest. 

My  subject  was  Matt.  xxv.  21.  "  His  Lord  said  unto  him,  Well 
done,  thou  good  and  faithful  servant ;  thou  hast  been  faithful  over  a 
few  things  :  I  will  make  thee  ruler  over  many  things  ;  enter  thou 
into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  It  was  observed,  1st.  That  a  good  ser- 
vant was  only  good  in  the  relation  which  his  practice  and  his  expe- 
rience bore  to  the  example  and  the  precepts  of  his  divine  Master  ; 
that  his  was  Christian  goodness — a  goodness  altogether  founded  in 
grace.  2d.  "  Faithful  servant"— -faithful  to  his  ministerial  charac- 
ter—he hath  a  high  and  just  sense  of  the  authority  of  his  divine 
Master  in  the  person  of  God  the  Father  and  God  the  Son  ;  he  bath 
a  just  respect  for  the  people  he  is  to  serve  of  all  characters:  the 
service  he  is  to  perform — 1st.  The  preaching  of  the  word.  2d.  The 
administration  of  the  sacrament  and  ordinances.  3d.  Ruling  the 
church  of  God.  The  "  talents,"  the  gift  of  prayer,  preaching, 
expounding  of  the  Scriptures  ;  and  social  advice.  "  Faithful  in  a 
few  things" — "  to  be  ruler  over  many  things"  in  the  glory  of 
God.  The  "joy"  of  Jesus — the  joy  of  his  redemption  and  salva- 
tion of  souls  socially,  and  personally,  felt  and  experienced—and 
lastly,  the  hearty  welcome  into  glory. 

Mr.  Devereaux  Jarratt  was  settled  in  Bath  parish,  Dinwiddie 
county,  Virginia,  in  the  year  1763,  and  continued  until  February, 
1801.  He  was  a  faithful  and  successful  preacher. — He  had 
witnessed  four  or  five  periodical  revivals  of  religion  in  his  pa- 
rish. When  he  began  his  labours,  there  was  no  other,  that  he 
knew  of,  evangelical  minister  in  all  the  province  !  He  travelled  into 
several  counties,  and  there  were  very  few  parish  churches  within 
fifty  miles  of  bis  own,  in  which  he  had  not  preached  ;  to  which 
labours  of  love  and  zeal  were  added,  preaching  the  word  of  life  on 
solitary  plantations  and  meeting-houses.  He  was  the  first  who  re- 
ceived our  despised  preachers—when  strangers  and  unfriended,  he 
took  them  to  his  house,  and  had  societies  formed  in  his  parish. — 
Some  of  his  people  became  travelling  and  local  preachers  amongst 

Vol.  III.  4 


26  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY5S  JOURNAL.  [180l» 

us.  I  have  already  observed  that  the  ministry  of  Mr.  Jarratt  wag 
successful — I  verily  believe  that  hundreds  were  awakened  by  his 
labours  ;  they  are  dispersed — some  are  gone  to  the  Carolinas,  to 
Georgia,  to  the  western  country — some  perhaps  are  in  heaven  ;  and 
some,  it  may  be,  in  hell. 

The  day  after,  we  rode  through  a  cold  day  to  Chesterfield  court- 
house, and  the  next  day  we  came  in,  dripping,  to  Richmond : 
about  four  o'clock  ;  lame  as  I  was,  I  walked  to  the  new  house, 
where  I  spoke  to  a  small  congregation  from  Matt.  v.  \6. 

Wednesday  22.  Although  it  was  excessively  cold,  occasioned 
by  a  fall  of  snow  on  the  mountains,  we  took  the  road,  and  came  as 
far  as  Lyon's,  in  Caroline,  about  thirty-five  miles. 

Thursday  23.  By  taking  the  road  over  Buck's  bridge,  we  crossed 
Mattopony  without  difficulty.  On  our  route  I  saw  that  beautiful 
spot,  the  Bowling  Green,  improved  into  a  neat  village  at  Caroline 
court-house.  We  dined  at  Todd's,  and  came  on  to  Fredericksburg  : 
here  I  completely  failed,  and  went  to  bed,  after  ordaining  William 
Hughes  a  deacon.  Brother  Whatcoat  spoke  in  the  new  house, 
which  I  could  only  behold  with  my  eyes  at  a  distance.  Some  years 
ago  Doctor  Coke  and  myself  wished  to  preach,  but  there  was  no 
place  ;  now,  the  people  desired  to  hear  me  and  could  not. 

Friday  24.  Was  a  day  of  rain.  Onward  we  went — Potomac 
run  was  passable — Aquia,  full  enough  to  catch  my  dipping  foot — 
hills,  and  clay,  and  another  swelling  stream  still  between  us  and 
Dumfries — arrived  at  last,  we  borrowed  a  widow's  house  and  held 
a  meeting  ;  my  subject  was  Luke  xix.  10.  We  were  kindly  enter- 
tained at  Cook's* 

Saturday  25.  We  came  on  to  Alexandria. — O  the  clay !  O  the 
insolvent  roads  I 

Sunday  26.  I  gave  a  discourse  upon  Zeph.  i.  12. 
I  received  two  letters  sent  after  me,  requesting  the  substance 
or  heads  of  the  sermon  preached  on  the  occasion  of  the  late 
Rev.  Devereux  Jarratt :  I  sat  down,  and  as  well  as  I  could  col- 
lect and  remember  them,  hastily  arranged  my  thoughts  upon  paper, 
and  left  the  manuscript  with  Nicholas  Snethen  to  copy. 

Maryland. — We  had  some  difficulty  next  day  at  the  ferry,  being 
obliged  to  wait  an  hour,  which  made  us  too  late  for  meeting  in 
George-Town. 

I  visited  Captain  Lloyd  Beal.  I  also  visited  Ezekiel  King,  son  of 
my  most  dear  friend,  father  King,  in  Stroud.  Can  a  son  of  so  many 
prayers  be  lost  1 — heavy  strokes  of  providence  have  afflicted  his 


'«   TrtirKMir  27 


1801.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL- 

mind  :    he  hears — he   weeps— Oh  !    that  I  may  yet  see  him  con- 
verted— he  desired  I  would  pra*y  in  the  family. 

Tuesday  28.  We  came  to  Montgomery  court-house,  fifteen 
miles,  where  I  found  a  decent,  attentive  congregation,  in  a  house  as 
well  contrived  and  fitted  for  religious  worship  as  any  1  have  seen : 
my  subject  was  Luke  xxiv.  45—48. 

Jehovah  is  at  work — We  have  new  converts  added.  We  dined 
at  E.  Busson's,  and  came  on  to  Joshua  Pigman's,  twenty-five  miles. 

Wednesday  29,  We  had  a  large  assembly  at  Goshen  meeting- 
house :  brother  Whatcoat  preached.  We  came  on  that  evening  to 
Levin  Warfield's. 

Thursday  30.  We  arrived  to  dine  at  Alexander  Warfield's,  on 
Sam's  Creek,  and  pushed  on  to  Henry  Willis's,  on  Pipe-Creek, 
where  it  had  been  our  intention  to  open  conference. 

We  had  about  forty  members  present,  and  sat  on  Friday,  Satur- 
day, and  Monday  :  on  Tuesday  morning  we  rose.  We  had  great 
peace ;  and  good  news,  from  several  circuits,  of  revivals  of  re- 
ligion. I  was  greatly  supported  in  mind  and  body.  On  Sabbath 
day  I  preached  from  Matt,  xxviii.  18,  19,  20.  1.  The  authority 
of  Christ — his  natural,  and  his  divine  right  as  the  co-eternal  Son— 
his  right  by  redemption — his  right  by  family  compact,  and  the 
delegation  of  the  whole  Trinity,  to  the  work  of  redemption  and 
salvation.  2.  The  branches  of  duty  appointed  to  his  ministers  :— - 
to  preach  the  Gospel  in  all  its  essential  points — to  administer  the 
ordinances  ;  and  to  rule  the  church  of  Christ.  3. .  "  I  am  with 
you" — at  all  times,  and  in  all  places,  to  support  and  to  give  you 
success  as  Christians  and  as  ministers.  We  had  six  elders  pre- 
sent; to  wit,  William  Watters,  John  Phillips,  Solomon  Harris, 
Joseph  Stone,  John  Cullison,  and  Alexander  M'Caine.  There  was 
preaching  every  day  and  every  night.  Our  own  people,  and  our 
friends  in  the  settlement  were  equally  kind  ;  and  we  had  rich  en- 
tertainment. This  settlement  of  Pipe-Creek  is  the  richest  in  the 
state  :  here  Mr.  Strawbridge  formed  the  first  society  in  Maryland— 
and  America. 

Wednesday  6.  The  clouds  are  gone  and  we  must  move.  The 
weather  has  lately  been  unpleasant  I  changed  my  old  horse  for  a 
younger  and  a  better.  We  came  to  Baltimore  in  a  great  storm,  but 
1  was  not  much  damped:  I  sat  in  George  Roberts's  house,  and  re- 
ceived my  old  friends  and  all  who  called  to  see  me. 

Sunday  10.  I  had  an  opportunity  of  speaking  in  Light-street 
church,  upon  Romans  i.  16,  17,  18.     We  had  an  open  time  and  an 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1801- 


attentive  congregation :  I  felt  that  the  Lord  was  amongst  the  peo- 
ple. In  the  afternoon,  at  the  Old-Town  church,  I  spoke  on 
Romans  xvii.  5.  In  the  evening  I  read  the  Duck-Creek  and  Cum- 
berland account  of  the  work  of  God  :  it  would  not  have  been 
greater  labour  to  have  preached.  We  went  to  bed  at  eleven 
o'clock,  slept  at  twelve,  waked  at  four,  and  at  five  mounted  and 
hasted  away  to  Perry-Hall  to  preach  at  eleven  o'clock  :  my  text 
was  Mark  ix.  14 — 29. 

Tuesday  12.  At  Gunpowder-Neck  I  spoke  on  Psalm  cii.  13.  at 
five  o'clock  we  had  a  meeting  at  Abingdon  :  there  is  a  revival  of 
religion  in  this  circuit.  The  day  is  excessively  warm  :  my  foot 
sore — and  a  high  fever.  We  lodge  at  William  Smith's.  Sarah 
Dallam's  eldest  daughter,  Eliza  Stump,  professeth  conversion,  and 
her  daughter  Sarah,  and  little  Philip  her  youngest  son  also. 

Wednesday  13.  I  preached  once  more  at  Josias  W  Dallam's— 
I  could  speak  with  more  faith  than  usual  upon  Acts  ii.  37.  for  be- 
hold !  Henry  Watters's  son,  many  years  insensible  to  the  things  of 
God,  was  converted !  When  we  parted  with  Godfrey,  he  looked 
after  us  with  wishful,  willing  eyes  and  heart  : — that  the  dear  soul 
should  sit  nearly  thirty  years  under  the  Gospel,  unconverted  and 
almost  unconcerned — how  strange !  and  should  be  at  last  visited 
and  converted— how  merciful  ! 

Thursday  14.  Crossed  Susquehannah  ferry,  and  came  in  to  meet- 
ing at  half  past  eleven  o'clock  :  the  people  were  waiting  ;  and  I 
gave  a  short  discourse  upon  Hebr.  ii.  3.  We  dined  and  rode  on  to 
Bohemia  Manor. 

Friday  15.  Brother  Whatcoat  preached  :  I  gave  a  short  exhorta- 
tion. We  hope  that  nearly  three  thousand  souls  have  been  added 
since  last  conference  in  the  peninsula  of  Delaware,  Maryland,  and 
Virginia. 

Saturday  16.  We  rode  rapidly  to  the  brick  meeting-house  in 
Kent,  a  distance  not  less  than  twenty-two  miles  :  I  was  outdone  : 
brother  Whatcoat  preached  upon,  "  Now  we  live,  if  ye  stand  fast 
in  the  faith." 

Sunday  17.  We  had  a  love-feast  for  the  whites  and  blacks  :  there 
might  have  been  fifteen  hundred  people.  My  subject  was  Psalms 
cxlvii.  3,  4,  5.  this  was  a  trying  exercise,  but  I  humbly  hope  it  was 
not  all  in  vain. 

We  came  away,  and  steered  to  New-Town,  Chester,  fifteen  miles, 
through  dust  and  heat,  to  keep  an  appointment  made  for  the  night3 


1801. ]  nsv.  francis  asbuky's  journal.  28 

which  held  us  until  after  nine  o'clock.  Fatigue  and  fever  pre- 
vented my  sleeping. 

Monday  18.  We  rose  at  five  o'clock,  and  came  off  at  six,  bend- 
ing our  course  to  Centreville,  seventeen  miles.— Ah  !  heavily 
moves  this  clay. — J  came  in  weary  and  unwell :  I  spoke  on  Rom. 
x.  21.  I  was  greatly  assisted  in  mind  and  body.  After  meeting 
I  rode  to  brother  Pinard's,  where  I  was  glad  to  lay  myself  down 
to  rest. 

Tuesday  19.  We  came  off,  cool  and  calm,  to  Easton.  Brother 
Whatcoat  preached  :  I  gave  an  exhortation.  We  take  a  county 
and  a  circuit  in  a  day.  I  can  only  say,  I  am  kept  from  murmuring 
and  sinning :  but  Ah !  it  is  like  pressing  out  life  with  labour :  such 
extraordinary  exertions  call  for  great  divine  support  for  soul  and 
body. — O  how  sweet  will  be  eternal  rest  to  labouring  souls  !  Our 
prospects  are  pleasing  in  Kent,  Queen  Ann's,  and  Talbot  circuits  : 
souls  are  added  to  the  church  and  to  Christ:  prejudices  fall  before 
the  force  of  truth  and  power  of  God. 

Wednesday  20.  We  came  to  Bolingbroke :  my  subject  here 
was  Hebr.  x.  38,  39.  We  dined  at  William  Brown's  :  one  of  his 
sons  hath  found  the  Lord.  A  calm  and  safe  passage  brought  us 
over  Choptank  at  Eunal's  ferry. 

Thursday  21.  In  Cambridge  we  held  a  meeting  in  the  court- 
house, and  had  a  large,  well-behaved  congregation  to  hear  :  bro- 
ther Whatcoat  spoke  on  "  To  you  is  the  word  of  this  salvation 
sent."  I  made  the  application,  "  How  shall  we  escape  if  we  ne- 
glect so  great  salvation  ?" 

Friday  22.  We  had  a  long  ride  to  William  Frazier's  through 
dust  and  excessive  heat. 

Saturday  23.  I  preached  upon  Peter's  fall.  It  was  hard  to 
leave  loving  souls  ;  so  we  tarried  until  morning. 

I  formed  a  plan  for  another  year,  allowing  only  about  twenty 
days  to  visit  every  circuit  but  Caroline,  by  one  appointment  in  a 
circuit  and  county. 

Sunday  24.  We  came  to  Choptank,  and  found  that  the  people 
had  attended  the  day  before,  of  which  we  were  ignorant,  and  that 
no  appointment  had  been  made  for  the  Sabbath.  It  was  not  light 
labour  to  make  thirty  miles  by  eleven  o'clock  ;  and,  worn  as  I 
was,  I   should  have  failed   had   not  Thomas  Forster  lent  me  his 


carriage. 


Monday  25.    Arrived  in  Dover,  we  found  the   people  collected 
at  the  meeting-house  so  numerous  that  they  could  not  be  well  ac- 


*»0  KEV-  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOVRNAL.  [liiUi 

commodated,  wc  therefore  adjourned  to  the  state-house,  where 
I  spoke  to  them  from  Haggai  ii.  5 — 9.  Brother  Whatcoat 
preached  at  the  chapel,  and  I  gave  an  exhortation — and  so  ended 
the  great  meeting  in  Dover  with  us.  My  mind  was  some- 
what taken  up  with  getting  another  horse,  and  he  did  not  please 
me.  I  went  to  Doctor  Cook's  to  see  Thomas  White's  only  survi- 
ving daughter,  and  Sarah  Cook.  I  preached  at  Duck-Creek  Cross- 
Roads  upon  1  Thess.  i.  7 — 12.  I  am  under  some  dejection  of 
spirits  ;  yet  I  know  of  no  cause  except  bodily  infirmity,  pro- 
duced by  excessive  labour,  and  speaking  long  and  tolerably  loud 
to  large  congregations.  My  foot,  and  my  fears  are  troublesome  to 
me.  In  the  afternoon  I  must  needs  go  to  attend  an  examination  of 
the  children  of  a  school  partly  under  the  Methodist  direction  :  I 
could  not  have  thought  the  scholars  would  so  greatly  improve  in  so 
short  a  time  :  their  improvement  reflects  honour  upon  their  teacher, 
a  Mr.  Hughes,  a  Methodist  from  Ireland.— The  master  had  provided 
a  medal,  but  the  committee  judged  it  proper  to  keep  it  for  a  future 
examination.  Indeed  the  master  himself  was  best  entitled  to  an 
honorary  reward  ;  and  this  being  the  general  sentiment,  a  subscrip- 
tion was  undertaken  for  money,  to  furnish  the  children  each  with 
a  small  silver  piece,  and  so  make  them  equal — in  a  free  country. 

Thursday  27.  At  Dickenson's  meeting-house  I  preached  upon 
IVTatt.  xxv.  46.  We  rode  home  with  Benjamin  Hersey,  at  Noxen- 
town  mill. 

Friday  28.  We  were  righteous  overmuch  in  riding  in  such  haste 
and  heat,  thirty  miles,  without  refreshment ;  but  we  had  fears  for 
the  Philadelphia  society.  At  six  o'clock  I  gave  a  discourse  at  Wil- 
mington on  1  Pet.  v.  7.  "  Casting  all  your  care  upon  him,  for  he 
careth  for  you."  First,  We  should  have  no  care,  as  ministers,  or 
as  Christians,  but  what  is  proper-— such  care  as  may,  with  humble 
confidence,  be  cast  upon  the  Lord.  Second.  How  we  should  cast 
the  whole  upon  the  Lord — by  faith,  by  prayer,  by  patience  and  re- 
signation.   "  That  the  Lord  careth  for  us"  as  a  God. 

Pennsylvania. — Saturday  29.  Most  excessive  heat,  through 
which  we  rode  to  conference  in  Philadelphia. 

Sabbath  30.  I  preached  in  Fourth-Street  on  John  iii.  19.  I  was 
very  lame.  On  Monday,  Tuesday,  Wednesday,  Thursday  and 
Friday,  I  attended  the  session  of  conference,  but  on  Saturday,  I  re- 
mained in  my  lodgings,  and  ministered  to  my  sore  foot.  Our  con- 
ference was  a  gracious  one.  It  appeared  as  if  the  preachers  were 
unwilling  to  elevate  their  voices  lest  there  should  be  an  appearance 


1801.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL,  31 

of  heat  or  anger,  yet  with  the  greatest  plainness  would  they  differ 
from  each  other,  calmly,  and  in  love. 

Sabbath,  June  7.  I  took  up  my  cross,  and  stayed  quietly  in  the 
house  with  a  blister  to  my  foot.  We  shall  see  if  another  operation 
will  be  necessary.  Minutes  and  letters  took  up  my  attention.  We 
elected  and  ordained  eight  deacons,  and  the  same  number  of  elders 
— on  account  of  my  lameness  it  was  done  at  my  lodgings.  We 
were  well  satisfied  in  the  stationing  of  the  preachers  ;  we  received 
one  from  Canada,  and  sent  three  thither.  My  soul  hath  great  peace  ; 
and  although  there  has  been  a  formidable  division  threatened,  we 
"humbly  hope  God  will  overrule  it  all  to  his  glory. 

Wednesday  10.  Doctor  Physick  applied  a  caustic  to  my  foot. 
I  wrote  to  Dr.  Coke.  My  mind  is  greatly  supported  under  my 
own  troubles,  and  the  afflictions  of  the  church  ;  nevertheless  the 
Lord  appears  glorious  upon  our  continent,  and  my  soul  exults  in 
Zion's  prosperity.  From  the  7th  to  the  16th  no  regular  journal. 
Our  conference  meets  this  day  in  New-York  ;  and  here  am  I  in 
Philadelphia,  and  here  must  I  remain  in  patience  and  in  pain. 

30.  No  journal  kept.  I  have  had  caustic  after  caustic  applied— 
now  1  have  hope  of  a  cure  on  my  foot. 

Sabbath,  July  5.  I  attended  at  Fourth-Street :  sermon  and  sacra- 
ment. I  spoke  from  1  Cor.  xi.  27,  28,  29.  I  stood  upon  one  knee 
and  one  foot,  about  an  hour  and  a  half.  I  was  much  assisted,  and 
great  solemnity  appeared  in  the  congregation.  I  have  little  inte- 
resting for  insertion  in  a  journal.  Letters  received  from  the  Ca- 
rolinas  advise  of  a  revival  of  religion. 

On  Wednesday  last  my  foot  began  to  feel  better.  Dr.  Physick, 
who  hath  so  kindly  attended  me,  gives  his  decided  opinion  that  my 
sore  is  a  sinew  strain  :  a  dead  part  of  the  sinew  must  still  come 
away. 

Sabbath  12.  I  preached  in  Fourth-Street  on  Luke  iv.  18.  there 
were  some  Sowings  of  life  to  myself  and  to  the  assembly.  In  the 
afternoon  I  spoke  at  Ebenezer  on  Isai.  Iv.  6,  7. 

July  20.  At  Georges  church,  Fourth-Street,  I  spoke  on  the  para- 
ble of  the  sower  :  my  congregation  was  small.  In  the  afternoon, 
at  the  Academy,  my  subject  was  James  i.  12. 

Why  should  I  continue  my  journal  while  here  ;  what  would  it  be 
but  a  tale  of  wo — the  society  divided,  and  I,  perforce,  shut  up  in 
Sodom,  without  any  communication  with  the  connexion  at  large. 

Sabbath  27.  At  St.  Georges,  I  spoke  on  1  Peter  iv.  17.  At  Be- 
thel, my  text  was  1  Peter  iv.  18, 


•  ^ 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1801. 


I  have  been  reading  my  papers,  for  a  second  volume  of  a  jour- 
nal. June  and  July  of  this  year  are  almost  blanks  with  me.  I  have 
had  my  own  bodily  and  soul  sufferings ;  and  some  violent  men  have 
divided  the  body  of  Christ  in  the  city  of  Philadelphia — let  such 
answer  for  it  in  this,  and  the  world  to  come. 

Friday  31.  After  a  serious  confinement  in  Philadelphia  of  two 
months  of  trouble  and  affliction,  I  took  my  departure  and  rode  to 
the  Wheatsheaf,  where  we  breakfasted,  and  thence  proceeded 
to  Wilmington,  Delaware ;  I  stopped  with  Allen  M'Lean.  I 
found  Mr.  Worrel  very  ill,  and  addressed  him  seriously  on  the 
concerns  of  his  soul,  commending  him  to  God  in  prayer.  After 
supper  we  went  to  John  Miller's,  in  Newport. 

Delaware.— August  1.  I  called  upon  Mr.  M'Intyre  ;  we  talked, 
we  prayed  and  rejoiced  together  in  the  work  of  God.  I  could  not 
pass  my  old  friend  Isaac  Hearsey,  without  calling.  We  could  with 
gratitude  review  the  past,  and  dwell  upon  the  present  dealings  of 
the  Lord  with  us  as  a  people,  and  say — what  hath  God  wrought  1 

Maryland. — Within  two  miles  of  North  East,  the  heavens  grew 
big  and  black  with  wind  and  rain  :  happily  for  us  brother  George's 
house  was  at  hand  :  there  we  talked,  prayed,  and  sheltered.  Sis- 
ter Howell  is  very  low  and  lauguid.  I  lodged  at  Daniel  Shere- 
dine's.  He  had  never  lost  sight  of  God  for  twenty-nine  years,  and 
now  he  is  united  to  us. 

Sunday  2.  I  preached  at  the  chapel  opposite  the  church,  so 
called  :  my  text  was  Luke  vii.  22,  23. ;  we  had  a  living  season. 

"Monday  3.  We  came  off  at  six  o'clock,  and  after  riding  twenty 
miles,  stopped  to  take  refreshment  at  Mr.  Stump's,  in  Bush.  I 
spoke  a  word  of  consolation  to  a  true  daughter  of  that  excellent 
woman,  Sally  Dallam,  now  with  Christ ;  it  was  a  time  of  great 
family  affliction,  but  the  mourner  enjoys  divine  love  for  her  sup- 
port. 

I  came  on  to  Perry-Hall.  Here  were  things  to  arrest  my  at- 
tentention — out  of  sixty  or  seventy  servants,  many  shouting  and 
praising  God.  My  dear  Mr.  Gough  was  somewhat  unwell.  Mrs. 
Carroll  seriously  ill,  and  her  mother  absent  in  attendance  on  ©Id 
Mrs.  Carrol],  at  the  Mount. 

I  continued  at  Perry-Hall,  from  August  3d,  to  Saturday  the 
15th.  An  intermittent  fever  came  upon  me  every  morning,  and 
indisposed  my  stomach  :  it  was  with  difficulty  I  could  attend  to  the 
performance  of  family  and  closet  duties,  being  much  unfitted  for 
reading  or  writing.     I  got  through  a  part  of  Doddridge's  Rise  and 


1801.]  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  33 

Progress,  and  some  of  Young's  Night  Thoughts.  The  great  en- 
gagedness  of  the  African  part  of  the  family  was  delightfully  pleas* 
ing.  Gough  Hollady  professed  to  find  the  Lord,  and  one  or  two 
more  of  the  family  appear  to  be  earnestly  seeking  him.  I  preached, 
read,  prayed,  exhorted,  and  conversed  ;  but  it  was  not  much  1 
could  do.  Our  family,  when  in  the  chapel,  makes  a  respectable 
congregation. 

Sunday  16.  I  spent  this  day  in  Baltimore.  My  indisposition  of 
body  was  amply  compensated  by  the  consolation  I  felt  whilst  hold- 
ing forth  upon  Matt.  v.  8.  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for 
they  shall  see  God." — 

I.  The  character  of  those,  who  by  justification,  are,  in  a  special 
manner,  called  to  be  pure  in  heart ;  called  by  promise,  by  privilege, 
by  duty. 

II.  The  purity  of  the  Gospel  in  authority,  in  example,  precept 
and  spirit;  in  its  operative  influence  on  the  understanding,  con- 
science, intentions,  will,  hopes,  fears,  joys,  sorrows  and  affections; 
producing  the  sanctiiication  of  the  soul  in  a  deliverance  from 
all  sin. 

III.  The  visions  ;  in  what  manner  the  pure  in  heart  should  see 
God  ;  they  shall  see  him  in  his  perfections,  in  his  providence,  in 
his  works  of  nature,  and  the  operations  of  his  grace  ;  and  they 
shall  see  him  in  his  glory  i 

I  had  a  desire  to  preach  in  the  market-house  upon  Howard's 
Hill.  I  spoke  to  hundreds,  perhaps  thousands,  upon  Luke  xiv.  21. 
"  Go  out  quickly  into  the  streets  and  lanes  of  the  city,  and  bring  in 
hither  the  poor,  and  the  maimed,  and  the  halt,  and  the  blind."  I 
thought  it  my  duty,  and  I  felt  it  a  delight  to  sanction  what  the 
preachers  do  in  preaching  abroad  :  I  wished  to  do  it  in  Philadel- 
phia, and  had  appointed  it,  but  some  of  my  brethren  made  strong 
objections,  and  it  was  abandoned.  We  have  peace,  health,  and 
union  in  Baltimore. 

Wednesday  19.  I  came  from  Baltimore  to  Robert  Carnan's, 
near  the  Stone  chapel.  This  was  a  day  of  great  and  good  news. 
I  heard  that  eight  souls  professed  to  find  the  Lord  at  a  prayer - 
meeting  in  the  city  ;  twelve  souls  at  Callison's,  in  the  Barrens, 
about  fifteen  days  past ;  and  by  letters  from  Thomas  Wilkerson, 
and  advices  from  William  M'Kendree,  forty  souls  were  happily 
made  subjects  of  converting  grace  at  a  late  meeting  held  in  Cum- 
berland, Tennessee — this  meeting  continued  from  Saturday  until 
Monday,  and  there  was  then  no  prospect  of  its  concluding  soon  : 

Vol.   III.  5 


ji  KEV.  FftANCIS  ASBlTRys  JOITftNAL.  [180L 

the  elder  was  under  the  necessity  of  coming  away  to  attend  to  his 
other  appointments. 

I  made  two  visits  to  a  beautiful  country-seat  belonging  to  Captain 
Yellott :  here  is  a  charming  house,  fine  gardens,  and  well  improved 
grounds — but  on  what  lease  !  Ah,  how  uncertain  are  all  our  earthly 
enjoyments !  my  business  was  with  the  sick :  Oh,  may  sweet 
Sophia  find  spiritual  wisdom — gold  tried  in  the  fire  ;  that  she  may 
be  rich  in  every  virtue  and  every  grace  that  can  adorn  the  woman, 
the  wife,  the  mother,  the  daughter,  and  the  Christian  S 

Thursday  20.  I  preached  at  the  Stone  chapel  at  a  short  notice, 
to  a  few  serious,  respectable  people,  on  1  John  iv.  15,  16,  17.  I 
spoke  next  day  at  Ryster's-Town  on  Isaiah  xxxv.  3 — 6.  although 
the  warning  was  short,  it  was  a  day  of  liberty  to  me.  We  dined 
at  Weis's  public  house,  and  proceeded  on  to  Henry  Willis's,  at 
Pipe-Creek  :  we  had  the  company  of  Jesse  Hollingsworth  and 
James  M'Cannon  :  we  felt  the  heat  and  feared  the  rain,  but  happily 
arrived  before  it  fell,  at  a  pleasant  shelter  and  a  Christian  family. 
Next  day  we  visited  the  Sulphur  Springs,  and  rested  the  body  a 
little. 

Sunday  23.  I  preached  at  the  Stone  chapel  on  Hebr.  xii.  25.  it 
was  a  gracious  season.     On  Monday  we  rested. 

Tuesday  25.  We  rode  to  Alexander  Warfield's,  on  Sam's  Creek. 
My  mind  is  variously  exercised  in  my  infirm  state  ;  but  I  plainly 
perceive  that  I  must  be  made  perfect  through  labour,  temptation, 
and  many  sufferings  in  the  flesh  and  spirit. 

Wednesday  26.  We  visited  John  Norris's  family  :  here  I  saw  the 
aged  mother  of  ninety  years  :  she  reminded  me  of  my  own.  I 
dined  with  the  household  of  Eli  Dorsey— the  children  of  my  once 
dear  friend  Sarah  Dorsey,  now  no  more.  At  James  L.  Higgins's  I 
gave  a  discourse  upon  2  Cor.  vi.  2. 

Thursday  27.  We  rode  up  to  Stephen  Shelmerdine's. 

Friday  28.  At  Fredericktown  I  spoke  on  Matt.  xi.  5,  6.  Here 
I  met  with  Bishop  Whatcoat  and  Sylvester  Hutchinson  :  we  formed 
a  plan  for  our  future  journies  and  labours.  They,  to  visit  Mary- 
land by  the  way  of  Baltimore  and  Annapolis,  and  thence  on  to 
Richmond  and  the  towns  on  the  route  to  Camden  in  South  Caro- 
lina, and  southward  to  Georgia:  I,  in  company  with  Nicholas 
Snethen,  go  out  to  the  western  conference  in  Nolachuckie,  then 
afterward  cross  over  to  the  South. 

Saturday  29.  The  evening  brought  us  to  Thomas  Keys's,  upon 
Shenandoah.    We  went  by  the  way  of  Samuel  Phillips's,  to  see  hi? 


UiOl.j  REV-  FRANCIS  ASBURY*S  JOURNAL.  cry 

dear,  afflicted  wife— perhaps  for  the  last  time  in  this  world  :  God  is 
still  gracious  to  this  family.  We  also  saw  Harper's  ferry,  and  be- 
held with  satisfaction,  the  good  plain  buildings  erected  there  by  the 
United  States. 

Virginia.— Sunday  30.  At  Charlestown  I  preached  under  the 
shady  oaks  to  perhaps  fifteen  hundred  people,  upon  Hebr.  x.  39.  it 
was  a  gracious  season  :  truth  had  its  dominion  in  some  minds.  We 
administered  the  sacrament.  I  ordained  to  the  office  of  deacons, 
John  M'Pherson,  and  Thomas  Littleton.  I  rode  home  with  John 
Davenport. 

Monday  31.  Reached  Winchester.  Since  I  left  Baltimore,  I 
suppose  I  have  rode,  by  crooks,  corners,  and  straight  lines,  one 
hundred  and  thirty  miles.  My  mind  in  general  has  been  sweetly 
stayed  upon  God. 

Wednesday,  September  2.  We  spent  this  day  at  Elijah  Phelps's 
• — the  old  place,  and  it  was  like  old  times. 

I  received  an  Address  from  the  most  respectable  citizens  of  Win- 
chester, praying  the  continuance  of  Mr.  Snethen  to  officiate  in 
the  ministry  amongst  them  ;  but  it  could  not  be  :  he  was  appointed 
at  Baltimore  to  travel  with  me,  and  I  could  not  get  another  at  this 
time  and  place  to  answer  as  well. 

Thursday  3.  We  rode  through  heat  and  drought  to  Woodstock. 
N.  Snethen  preached  upon,  "  Except  ye  repent  ye  shall  all  like- 
wise perish."  I  spoke  in  the  evening  on  Luke  xix.  10.  the  house 
was  full,  and  there  were  people  in  the  street.  We  lodged  at 
Madera's. 

Friday  4.  The  weather  as  yesterday,  we  nevertheless  made 
thirty  miles  to  Jacob  Huster's. 

Saturday  and  Sabbath  day  were  spent  at  Rockingham  quarterly 
meeting,  held  in  Harrisonburg  :  the  brethren  were  lively  in  the 
sacramental  meeting.  Many  came  from  far,  although  the  heat  was 
very  great.  N.  Snethen  preached  on  Saturday  upon  Rom.  xii.  17. 
and  Sabbath  day,  Rom.  xii.  1.  My  subject  was  1  Pet.  iv  17.  The 
house  could  not  at  all  contain  the  people,  we  therefore  took  to  the 
woods  ;  but  we  failed  in  shade,  and  felt  some  inconvenience  in  the 
sun. 

Monday  7.  I  was  very  unwell ;  but  I  rode.  The  route  led 
through  a  fine  shade,  sixteen  miles  as  computed,  but  really  twenty 
miles,  to  William  Young's,  formerly  an  elder  in  the  Presbyterian 
church.     We  had  a  gracious  season.     N.  Snethen  preached  on 


->(•>  KhV.  FRANCIS  ASBl'RY  S  JOURNAL.  [lBHi 

John  iii.   17.     I  believe  the  Lord  will  work  in  Augusta  county 
amongst  the  Presbyterians. 

Tuesday  8.  At  Moffit's  meeting-house  N.  Snethen  spoke  on  2 
Cor.  vi.  1,  2.  My  subject  was  1  Pet.  v.  7.  The  heat,  augmented 
by  the  long  drought,  was  very  oppressive  to  the  system  :  I  was 
very  unwell. 

Wednesday  9.  At  Staunton,  N.  Snethen  preached  at  eleven 
o'clock.  1  preached  from  Acts  iii.  26.  Ministers  Wilson  and 
Glendie  were  present.  N.  Snethen  and  P.  Bruce  held  night-meet- 
ing— heat !  heat ! 

Thursday  10.  We  passed  Greenville,  Fairfield,  and  came  to 
Lexington  to  lodge  at  Shield's  :  we  got  here  what  failed  us  on  the 
way — good  entertainment. 

Friday  11.  We  rode  by  the  Rockbridge  and  Springfield,  to  Pat- 
tensburg,  and  thence  on  to  James  Tapscote's  :  I  was  hungry  and 
unwell,  having  taken  cold  by  exposure  to  the  evening  air. 

Saturday  12.  We  came  to  Fincastle.  We  have  made,  I  pre- 
sume, one  hundred  and  twenty  miles  this  week;  and  some  rough 
roads.  I  have  felt  suffering  faith,  and  fervent  love  to  God  and 
souls. 

Sunday  13.  I  preached  from  1  John  i.  5,  6,  7.  I  had  taken 
cold,  attended  with  a  great  check  to  respiration,  which  made  my 
bodily  feelings  very  uncomfortable. 

Monday  14.  We  visited  Mr.  Phillips,  a  Baptist  minister,  who 
received  and  kindly  entertained  us  :  from  this  fifteen  mile  stage 
we  proceeded  to  Thomas  Raborn's,  making  thirty-three  miles  for 
the  day.     Greatly  desired,  and  much  needed,  rain  came  at  last. 

Tuesday  15.  We  preached  at  Raborn's,  brother  Snethen  and 
myself,  to  a  very  attentive  people.  I  had  to  excuse  my  non-atten- 
dance at  this  place  last  year:  the  failure  was  occasioned,  first,  by 
my  not  knowing  the  distance  :  secondly,  because  I  was  persuaded 
to  take  the  route  by  English's  ferry,  as  being  the  better  road  for  a 
chaise.  After  meeting  we  took  up  our  journey  across  the  Allegha- 
ny mountain,  but  finding  after  we  had  rode  nearly  ten  miles  that  it 
was  growing  late,  we  turned  up  towards  the  sun,  and  housed  for 
the  night,  with  John  M'Daniel,  upon  Tom's  Creek.  My  soul  is 
kept  in  great  peace  ;  and  I  have  grace  to  bear  and  suffer ;  my 
spirit  is  calm  and  pure. 

Wednesday  16.  We  came  to  Pepper's  ferry—behold  me  once 
more  on  New-River! 


■iiUl.1  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY3S  JOURNAL,  3i 


# 


Thursday  17.  We  held  a  meeting  at  Pepper's  chapel :  N.  Sne- 
then  spoke  upon  2  Peter  i.  10.  As  I  was  called  upon  by  recom- 
mendation to  ordain  Edward  Morgan  to  the  office  of  a  deacon,  my 
subject  was  2  Tim.  iv.  1,  2.     We  lodged  at  Mr.  Hance's. 

Friday  18.  We  stretched  along  to  Thadeus  Cooley's,  near 
Wythe  court-house,  and  next  day  came  to  Charles  Hardy's.  My 
companion's  horse  fell  to-day,  and  I  had  scarcely  time  to  reflect 
upon  the  probability  of  its  being  my  turn,  when  my  little  mare  also 
came  down  ;  but  the  Lord  preserved  man  and  beast. 

Sunday  20.  We  came  over  the  mountain  to  Saltsburg,  and 
preached  at  the  widow  Russell's.  N.  Snethen  was  greatly  en- 
larged upon  Luke  xi.  3,  4.  I  was  so  feeble  I  had  but  little  to  say 
upon  "  Behold,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation."  I  have  a  partial 
restoration  of  health  ;  but  the  fever  returns  every  morning,  added 
to  which,  the  severe  and  constant  riding,  with  want  of,  and  gene- 
rally, irregularity  of  meals,  becomes  in  a  great  degree  a  cause  of 
sickness.  I  was  pleased  to  see  our  local  brethren  come  forty  and 
fifty  miles  to  visit  me  :  we  met  with  joy,  and  parted  in  tears ! 

Monday  21.  We  had  to  try  Clinch  mountains — four  miles  over: 
I  continued  on  horseback,  ascending  and  descending  :  my  sore- 
backed,  slender-jointed  beast  wrought  it  but  badly.  We  made 
twenty-two  miles  this  day,  and  happily  escaped  the  showers  which 
fell  in  the  afternoon. — We  lodged  at  Francis  Browning's. 

Tuesday  22.  We  had  a  meeting  at  Elk-Garden  meeting-house  : 
we  felt  as  if  in  a  stove-room  while  N.  Snethen  was  speaking  upon 
"  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling."  f  spoke 
from  2  Peter  iii.  17,  18.  We  dined  at  Richard  Brice's  :  he  is 
now  growing  very  infirm. 

Wednesday  23.  We  rode  to  Castle's  woods.  I  was  amazed  at 
the  goodness  of  the  Lord  to  this  western  country  generally  ;  and 
was  surprised  and  gratified  to  observe  the  improvements  made  in 
Russell  county  particularly.  I  was  well  weary  of  riding  over  such 
an  uneven  surface  as  we  have  lately  passed — at  the  rate  of  about 
twenty  miles  a  day,  equal  to  many  more  on  level  land. 

Thursday  24.  We  rested  at  Charles  Beckley's.  N.  Snethen 
preached  upon  Coloss.  i.  21,  22.  I  spoke  from  2  Cor.  vi.  2. 
"  Behold,  now  is  the  accepted  time." 

Friday  25.   To  Copper-Creek  meeting,  fifteen  miles  :  we  had 

mountains,  vallies,  and  rocks,  as  usual :  there  was  a  cabin,  but  we 

delivered  our  testimony  in  the  woods.     After  meeting,  and  re- 

Vpshing  our  horses  with  a  bite,  we  pushed  on  to  Mockison-Creek, 


38  REV.  F^UNCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1801* 

crossing  it  nine  times  in  about  five  miles  :  the  roads  were  rough 
as  usual,  and  the  fords  at  the  stream,  rocks,  loose,  or  sideling  and 
slippery.     We  lodged  at  William  Lawson's. 

Saturday  26.  We  wrought  down  Mockison  to  the  Gap,  where 
the  accumulated  waters  of  the  stream  have  at  some  time,  appa- 
rently, burst  their  way  through  Clinch-Mountain.  After  recross- 
ing  the  north  branch  of  Holston,  we  stopped  at  John  Wadley's  and 
refreshed  man  and  beast.  Our  host  became  our  guide,  and 
tripped  over  the  hills  with  us  in  the  rain,  his  mare  barefoot,  and 
himself  without  a  saddle  to  ride  on,  or  a  great  coat  to  shield  him 
from  the  weather  :  at  length  we  reached  Charles  Baker's  upon 
Main  Holston  in  safety.  I  began  to  feel  and  to  fail.  I  have 
rode  about  on  hundred  miles  in  the  last  four  days  :  the  roads  equal 
to  any  in  the  United  States  for  badness.  My  bowels,  and  my  poor 
horse's  back  are  in  bad  order.  How  much  time  we  have  to  read, 
and  write,  and  pray,  those  who  travel  with  us  may  judge. 

Tennessee.- — Sabbath  day  27.  I  was  unwell,  and  willing  to  sit 
still. 

Monday  28.  Attended  by  John  Watson,  we  crossed  Holston 
and  Watawga,  near  the  junction,  and  came  to  Dungworth's. 

Tuesday  29.  I  preached  upon  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8.  and  then  rode 
on  through  Jonesborough  to  Cashe's. 

Wednesday  30  I  spoke  on  Hebr.  ii.  1.  and  hasted  on  to  Ebene- 
zer  to  attend  the  conference. 

Our  brethen  in  Kentucky  did  not  attend  :  they  pleaded  the 
greatness  of  the  work  of  God.  Twelve  of  us  sat  in  conference 
three  days  ;  and  we  had  not  an  unpleasant  countenance,  nor  did 
we  hear  an  angry  word  : — and  why  should  it  not  always  be  thus  ? 
— are  we  not  the  ministers  of  the  meek  and  lowly,  the  humble  and 
holy  Jesus  ? 

N.  Snethen  gave  us  two  sermons.  We  ordained  on  Friday, 
Saturday,  and  Sabbath  day,  and  upon  each  day  I  improved  a  little 
on  the  duties  of  ministers.  On  the  Lord's  day  we  assembled  in 
the  woods,  and  made  a  large  congregation :  my  subject  was  Isai. 
lxii.  1.  On  Friday  and  Saturday  evenings,  and  on  Sabbath  morn- 
ing there  was  the  noise  of  praise  and  shouting  in  the  meeting- 
house :  it  is  thought  there  are  twenty-five  souls  who  have  found 
the  Lord  ;  they  are  chiefly  the  children  of  Methodists — the  chil- 
dren of  faith  and  of  many  prayers. 

Monday,  October  5.  We  parted  in  great  love  :  our  company 
made  twelve  miles  to  Isaiah  Harrison's,  and  next  day  reached  the 
Warm  Springs  upon  French  Broad-River. 


1U0I.]  RUV.  FEANClS  asbury's  journal.  39 

Wednesday  7.  We  made  a  push  for  Buncomb  court-house  :  man 
and  beast  felt  the  mighty  hills.  I  shall  calculate  from  Baker's  to 
this  place  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles  ;  from  Philadelphia,  eight 
hundred  and  twenty  miles. 

Friday  9.  Yesterday  and  to-day  we  rest  at  George  Swain's. 

Sabbath  day  11.  Yesterday  and  to-day  held  quarterly  meeting 
at  Daniel  Killions's,  near  Buncomb  court-house.  I  spoke  from  Isai. 
Ivii.  6,  7.  and  1  Cor.  vii.  1.     We  had  some  quickenings. 

Monday  12.  We  came  to  Morrough's,  upon  Mud-Creek  :  here 
we  had  a  sermon  from  N.  Snethen  on  Acts  xiv.  15.  Myself  and 
James  Douthat  gave  an  exhortation.  We  had  very  warm  wea- 
ther and  a  long  ride.  At  Major  Britain's,  near  the  mouth  of  Mills- 
river,  we  found  a  lodging. 

Tuesday  13.  We  came  in  haste  up  to  elder  Davidson's,  refresh- 
ed man  and  beast,  commended  the  family  to  God,  and  then  struck 
into  the  mountain.  The  want  of  sleep,  and  other  inconveniencies, 
made  me  unwell.  We  came  down  Seleuda- River  near  Seleuda- 
Mountain :  it  tried  my  lame  feet  and  old  feeble  joints.  French- 
Broad,  in  its  meanderings,  is  nearly  two  hundred  miles  long :  the  line 
of  its  course  is  semicircular  ;  its  waters  are  pure,  rapid,  and  its  bed 
generally  rocky  :  except  the  Blue  Ridge  ;  it  passes  through  all  the 
western  mountains.  We  continued  at  John  Douthat's  on  Wednes- 
day, and  Thursday  furnished  a  meeting.  N.  Snethen  spoke  upon  1 
John  v.  10.     I  spoke  also  ;  my  subject  was  Hosea  x.  12. 

Friday  16.  We  reached  Sam.  Burdine's,  sixteen  miles.  N.  Sne- 
then spoke  from  1  John  v.  4,  5.     I  followed  from  Titus  ii.  11,  12. 

South-Carolina. — Sabbath  18.  Yesterday  and  to-day  we  attend- 
ed quarterly  meeting  at  Salem,  near  Staunton's  ferry,  upon  Seleuda- 
River.  N.  Snethen's  subject  was  Psalm  cxix.  59,  60.  I  came  off  with 
reading  a  letter  containing  an  account  of  the  revival  of  religion 
amongst  the  Presbyterians  and  Methodists  in  Cumberland.  On  the 
Sabbath  N.  Snethen  spoke  upon  Luke  xiv.  26.  ;  the  ground  I  took 
was  John  iii.  19,  20.  After  a  shower  on  Saturday  it  cleared  up 
cold,  with  the  wind  from  the  north-west.  The  house  would  not  con- 
tain our  Sabbath  congregation  ;  they  stood  in  front  of  the  cabin, 
under  whose  projecting  roof  we  found  shelter  from  the  sun.  Our 
situation  was  eligible,  because  the  voice  was  thrown  forward,  and 
because  we  were  protected  from  the  wind  whilst  speaking.  James 
Jenkin9  followed  with  a  call  to  backsliders.  The  people  were 
serious,  but  I  heard  of  no  conversions,  We  lodged  at  Henry  Par- 
riss's,  on  the  Grove. 


40  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUKYS  JOLIiNAL.  [lfcOi* 

Monday  20.  At  John  Bramblet's,  Greensville.  After  meeting, 
we  rode  to  Thomas  Terry's,  upon  Reedy- River. 

Tuesday  21.  Thanks  be  to  God  for  one  night's  rest.  I  calcu- 
late that  we  have  rode  eighty  miles  since  we  left  John  Douthat's. 

0  Lord  !  thou  preservest  man  and  beast.  We  attended  a  meeting 
at  a  Presbyterian  vacant  house.  N.  Snethen  preached  upon  Isai. 
Iv.  6.  I  read  James  M'Gready's  narrative  of  the  work  of  God  in 
Logan  county,  Kentucky. 

Wednesday  21.  We  rode  sixteen  miles  to  the  widow  Bramblet's 
meeting-house.  N.  Snethen  spoke  on  Matt.  v.  3.  I  followed  from 
2  Pet.  i.  4.  We  rode  four  miles  to  Daniel  M>Kee's,  where  we  held 
a  meeting  in  the  evening. 

Thursday  22.  We  came  twenty  miles  to  Casey's,  late  and  lost, 
and  arrived  whilst  Coleman  Carlisle  was  holding  forth.  I  only  read 
a  letter  and  gave  an  exhortation.  This  family  (the  Caseys,)  en- 
tertained us  when  we  were  few  in  number  in  these  parts. 

Friday  23.  We  rode  ten  miles  to  Bigg's  meeting-house  and  held 
a  meeting.  N.  Snethen  preached  from  1  Tim.  i.  5.  ;  I  only  exhort- 
ed— the  wind  all  the  while  blowing  freely  upon  my  naked  head. 
We  kept  on  ten  miles  to  Davis's  ;  here  we  held  an  evening  meet- 
ing: N.  Snethen  preached,  and  I  exhorted. 

Saturday  24.  We  had  to  attend  a  meeting  appointed  at  Broad- 
River  circuit.  N.  Snethen  spoke  from  2  Tim.  ii.  8.  I  only  exhort- 
ed, and  read  a  letter  giving  an  account  of  the  work  of  God  in  Ken- 
tucky. 

We  have  been  working  this  week  from  Seleuda  to  Reedy  River, 
down  the  Enoree,  crossing  and  recrossing  through  Pendleton, 
Greensville,  Laurens,  Spartansburgh,  and  Newbury-district  counties 
in  South  Carolina,  i  cannot  record  great  things  upon  religion  in 
this  quarter  ;  but  cotton  sells  high.  I  fear  there  is  more  gold  than 
grace — more  of  silver  than  of  "  that  wisdom  that  cometh  from 
above." 

Monday  25.  At  Beauford's  meeting-house  N.  Snethen  preached 
from  James  i.  4. ;  there  was  some  breathing  after  life.  We  lodged 
at  Mr.  Hardy's. 

Tuesday  27.  At  Bethel  N.  Snethen  preached  on  Ilebr.  x.  32. 

1  afterward  gave  a  discourse.  We  next  day  attended  a  meeting 
at  the  widow  Coate's,  in  the  Bush-River  circuit :  N.  Snethen  spoke 
on  Matt.  v.  20.  I  gave  a  few  words  on  Luke  viii.  18.  We  had  an 
open  season  ;  and  were  made  happy  al  John  Myers's,  the  steward  of 
the  circuit. 


18Q1.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY?S  JOUKlfAL,  41 

Thursday  29.  We  had  a  long  ride  to  Edgefield  court-house,  and 
were  kindly  entertained  at  Doctor  Fuller's  :  the  town  was  in  great 
disorder,  it  being  court  time. 

Friday  30.  We  came  in  haste  to  Daniel  Baugh's  :  here  we  met 
Bishop  Whatcoat,  and  Sylvester  Hutchinson,  who  had  come  along 
rapidly.  At  the  meeting-house,  where  we  spent  about  three  hours, 
we  were  joined  by  Stith  Mead,  John  Garven,  and  Lewis  Mycrel. 
.Now  we  formed  a  plan  for  future  labours  and  travel  :  it  was  conclu- 
ded that  Bishop  Whatcoat  should  go  from  the  centre,  east  to  Savan- 
nah and  St.  Mary's  ;  whilst  I  go  west,  in  Georgia. 

Georgia. — Saturday  31.  We  came  to  Augusta.  On  the  Sabbath 
day  N.  Snethen  preached  ;  after  which  I  gave  a  few  thoughts  upon. 
**  My  house  shall  be  called  a  house  of  prayer  for  all  people  ;"  N. 
Snethen  spoke  again,  in  the  afternoon,  on  the  choice  of  Moses. 
Bishop  Whatcoat  held  forth  at  night.  We  have  a  very  large  and 
most  elegant  house  in  this  place,  for  which  we  are  indebted,  chiefly, 
to  the  generosity  of  the  inhabitants.  Our  congregations  are  most 
respectable,  and  very  attentive  ;  but  I  heard  of  no  conversions— 
the  time  for  this  is  not  yet  come. 

We  have  travelled  this  week  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles. 
The  season  is  exceedingly  dry.  I  was  made  glad  to  find  one  who 
had  departed  from  God  for  fifteen  years,  happily  restored  to  the 
Lord  and  to  myself;  his  own  dear  wife  and  child,  and  a  family  of 
one  hundred  souls,  are  also  in  the  enjoyment  of  religion.  Maryland 
appears  as  if  it  would  feel  the  millennium  in  a  few  years. 

Monday,  November  2.  We  rested  in  Augusta.  In  the  evening  we 
rode  to  Mr.  Lacey's,  and  next  day  travelled  on  to  Columbia,  twenty 
miles,  and  stopped  with  brother  Allen,  a  local  preacher.  We  had 
our  brothers  Hutchinson  and  Mead  with  us. 

Wednesday  4.  At  Scott's  meeting-house,  upon  Little  River,  N. 
Snethen  spoke  on  the  Pharisee  and  publican.  We  came  home 
with  Mr.  Gaterel.  Here  we  parted  with  Bishop  Whatcoat  and 
his  assistant,  they  directing  their  course  south-west,  across  the 
state,  and  by  a  circle  to  Savannah  and  St.  Mary's. 

Thursday  5.  We  came  an  hour  too  late  to  the  Cross-Roads  :  N. 
Snethen  spoke  from  1  Tim.  iv.  8.  I  followed  from  Isai.  Ixi.  1, 2,  3. 
By  riding  a  little  in  the  rain  and  evening  damps,  we  arrived  at 
Richard  Easter's  in  Petersburg,  at  the  junction  of  the  rivers,  on 
which  are  the  towns  of  Lisbon  and  Vienna  in  South-Carolina. — 
Petersburg  is  beautifully  situated,  has  about  eighty  houses,  wel! 
constructed  for  stores,  and  about  one  hundred  buildings  in  all :  thev 

Vol.  W.  a 


i~  ttEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL,  [180L 

are  generally  one  story  in  height,  well  painted,  with  convenient 
shed  attached.  At  noon  we  held  a  meeting ;  the  day  was  cold,  and 
the  house  open.  At  night  I  preached  in  Richard  Easter's  house 
on  Isai.  xl.  31.  ;  the  people  were  very  attentive. 

Saturday  8.  At  Thompson's  meeting-house  N.  Snethen  preached 
from  Matt,  xviii.  19,  20.     We  also  held  meeting  on  the  Sabbath. 

I  suppose  we  have  now  travelled  twelve  hundred  miles  since 
leaving  Philadelphia.  I  often  have  it  whispered  in  my  ear,  what 
certain  folks  are  pleased  to  say  of  my  being  an  Englishman.  How 
can  I  help  that ;  I  am  not  ashamed  of  it. — But  I  am  seeking  souls, 
and  Zion's  glory  ;  heaven  is  my  country. 

"  There  is  my  home  and  portion  fair, 
My  treasure,  and  my  heart  is  there, 

And  ray  abiding  home : 
For  me  my  elder  brethren  stay, 
And  angels  beckon  me  away, 
And  Jesus  bids  me  come." 

Monday  9.  At  Pellum's  we  had  many  people,  to  whom  N.  Sne- 
then spoke  upon  Matt.  v.  8.     We  lodged  at  Captain  Blackman's. 

Tuesday  10.  N.  Snethen  spoke  at  Coldwater  on  Matt.  xi.  28,  29. 
and  next  day,  at  Oliver's  chapel,  again  upon  Psalm  Ixxxv.  8.  ;  I  fol- 
lowed with  a  few  words  upon  1  John  i.  6,  7.  We  lodged  at  Stinche- 
comb's  :  here  I  found  Maryland  people  who  heard  me  when 
children. 

Thursday  12.  We  came  to  Red  wine's.  Here  some  have  been 
awakened  amongst  the  Methodists,  and  have  joined  the  Baptists  ; 
thus  we  have  laboured,  and  others  reap  the  fruit. 

Friday  13.  At  Carroll's  meeting-house  N.  Snethen  preached  from 
Titus  ii.  14.  I  spoke  from  Acts  xx.  16,  17,  18.  We  have  had  large, 
lively  meetings.  We  lodged  at  Mr.  Allen's.  Here  N.  Snethen  left 
me  to  go  and  spend  five  or  six  weeks  in  Augusta,  at  the  desire  of 
the  citizens  ;  he  could  be  the  better  spared  now,  as  we  are  near 
the  frontiers,  and  the  congregations  are  small,  and  brother  Blanton 
is  with  me. 

Saturday  14.  We  came  to  Park's  meeting-house.  Brother  Blan- 
ton spoke  on  John  xii  35.  ;  my  subject  was  Hebr.  vi.  11,  12.  We 
have  travelled  about  one  hundred  miles  since  our  entrance  into 
Georgia,  passing  through  parts  of  Richmond,  Columbia,  Lincoln, 
Elbert,  and  Franklin  counties.  The  evenings  and  mornings  have 
been  cold  ;  the  people,  however,  are  extremely  kind.  I  have  ex- 
perienced great  sensible  enjoyment  of  God — our  cabins  are  courts, 
when  Jesus  is  there.     In  my  ministry  I  have  been  greatly  assisted. 


1801.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  43 

but  unless  I  am  more  temperate  in  my  talk,  in  tone,  and  time,  I 
shall  not  be  able  to  manage  more  than  every  other  day 

In  a  serious  conference  with  Bishop  Whatcoat,  N.  Snethen,  Lyle, 
Hutchinson,  and  myself,  it  plainly  appeared,  that  the  best  way  in 
future  would  be  to  meet  at  the  Virginia  conference,  and  thence 
continue  together  to  the  New- York  conference  ;  after  which,  one 
might  go  to  the  east,  and  the  other  to  the  western  conference  :  the 
bishop  who  went  east,  would  then  visit  the  eastern  states,  and  the 
lake  country,  and  thence  onward  to  Pittsburg,  and  the  Virginia 
districts  :  the  bishop  who  goeth  west,  will  visit  over  the  Blue-Ridge, 
Holston,  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  Georgia,  South,  and  North-Caro- 
lina, to  the  conferences  in  the  centre  of  the  work  ;  where  both 
will  meet  again  : — in  this  we  all  agreed. — It  was  also  determined, 
that  each  bishop  should  always  have  an  elder  as  a  travelling  com- 
panion. 

Sabbath  15.  I  spoke  on  Psalm  cxlvii.  2,  3,  4.  Brother  Blanton 
spoke  upon  redeeming  the  time.  We  lodged  at  Henry  Park's.  Seve- 
ral persons  of  the  Presbyterian  society,  upon  hearing  read  Mr. 
Hodges's  letter  to  me,  communed  with  us. 

Monday  16.  We  rode  to  George  Christian's.  Here  we  made  a 
stand  at  an  Ephrata  in  the  woods,  where  the  logs  were  laid  for  a 
meeting-house.  My  subject  was  Psalm  cxlv.  18,  19,  20.  On 
Tuesday  my  foundation  was  laid  upon  Zech.  xii.  10.  It  was  the 
voice  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  1st.  How  he  was  pierced  by  the  house 
of  David,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem—how  he  is  now  pierced 
by  open  sinners,  formal  and  false  professors  and  backsliders.  2d. 
The  effects  of  the  out-pouring  of  the  Spirit — prayers  and  sorrows. 
We  lodged  at  Mr.  Walker's,  .formerly  a  Presbyterian  :  his  father 
wishes  a  more  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  Methodists,  whom  he 
has  now  heard  for  the  first  time.  We  could  not  finish  our  meet- 
ing in  the  woods  the  second  day,  being  prevented  by  a  storm  of 
wind  and  rain. 

Wednesday  18.  We  rode  with  haste  into  Jackson — a  proper 
frontier  county.  We  halted  at  Prosser  Horton's.  I  was  very 
unwell,  but  spoke,  after  brother  Blanton,  upon  Luke  iv.  18,  19.— 
The  house  and  yard  held  the  people.  In  returning  from  an  upper 
room,  whither  I  had  retired,  being  slip-shod,  I  lost  my  feet,  and 
went  from  step  to  step,  until  the  turn  stopped  me — my  back  suffer- 
ed in  my  fall. 

Thursday  19.  We  found  at  Tid well's  a  very  open  house  in  the 
woods.— I  spoke  from  Acts  iii.  26.     At  Freeman's,  next  day,  we 


H  KHV.  FRANCJS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL,  [1801. 

had  another  open  house  lately  put  up,  where  brother  Blanton  held 
forth,  upon  "  the  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint." 
My  subject  was  Isaiah  xxxv.  3— C.  We  started,  hungry  and  cold, 
crossing  at  Malone's  mill  a  branch  of  Oconee,  and  came  to  Henry 
Pope's,  in  Oglethorpe.  We  have  rode  about  eighty  miles  this  week 
of  short  and  cold  days.  Why  should  a  living  man  complain  ! — 
but  to  be  three  months  together  upon  the  frontiers,  where,  ge- 
nerally, you  have  but  one  room  and  fire-place,  and  half  a  dozen 
folks  about  you,  strangers  perhaps,  and  their  family  certainly  (and 
they  are  not  usually  small  in  these  plentiful  new  countries,)  making 
a  crowd — and  this  is  not  all  ;  for  here  you  may  meditate  if  you 
can,  and  here  you  must  preach,  read,  write,  pray,  sing,  talk,  eat, 
drink,  and  sleep — or  fly  into  the  woods — Well !  1  have  pains  in  my 
body,  particularly  my  hip,  which  are  very  afflictive  when  I  ride  ; 
but  I  cheer  myself  as  well  as  I  may  with  songs  in  the  night — with 
Wesley's,  Watt's,  and  Stennett's  sight  of  Canaan,  in  four  hymns.  In 
this  country  are  seen  evident  traces  of  a  great  population,  which 
has  some  time  existed  before  the  present  discoverers  and  settlers 
of  America. 

Saturday  21.  Quarterly  meeting  was  held  at  Pope's  meeting- 
house. We  had  some  rain.  My  text  was  Matt.  xi.  28,  29,  30.  It 
was  an  open  time.  We  lodged  at  Henry  Pope's.  Hope  Hull 
came  in  dripping  in  the  evening,  to  meet  the  Lord  and  his  brethren. 

Sunday  22.  We  had  about  one  thousand  people  to  hear.  I  came 
forward  again  upon  Titus  ii.  15.  Hope  Hull  and  Stith  Mead  held 
forth  after  me.  It  was  an  open  season.  I  baptised  some  adults  and 
infants. 

Monday  23.  We  went  forward  to  the  widow  Stuart's,  upon  the 
branches  of  Little-River,  in  Oglethorpe  county  :  we  had  a  cold 
day,  but  a  blessed  meeting  which  held  eight  hours  ;  several  were 
converted,  and  a  society  was  formed,  consisting  of  fifteen  souls. 
I  lodged  at  General  John  Stuart's. 

Tuesday  24.  We  had  a  long  ride  on  a  cold  day,  and  arrived  at 
an  open  house  :  my  subject  was,  "  He  that  saith  he  abideth  in  him, 
ought  himself  also  so  to  walk,  even  as  he  walked."  Our  meeting 
continued  three  hours,  and  four  souls  professed  converting  grace. 
I  have  rode  thirty  miles  to  day  to  Wyatt's,  hungry  and  cold.  We 
frequently  breakfast  at  seven  o'clock,  and  dine  at  six  o'clock  in  the 
evening. 

Wednesday  25.  At  Liberty  I  spoke  on  Matt.  v.  8.  I  lodged 
with  Joshua  Moore  :  in  this  family  I  have  served  three  genera- 


1801.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURYS  JOURNAL.  45 

tions,  in  Delaware  and  in  Georgia.     In  Liberty  there  is  life — many 
souls  have  been  brought  to  God — even  children. 

Thursday  26.  My  subject  at  Butler's,  was  Rev.  xxii.  14.  a  cold 
day  this.  At  Chesnut-level,  a  beautiful  spot,  we  housed  with  Mr. 
Bush  :  this  is  an  agreeable  family,  for  whom  God  has  worked — and 
will  yet  work. 

Friday  27.  We  came  to  a  new  house,  in  Warren  county,  called 
Rehoboth,  built  by  the  zeal  of  brother?  Fontaine  and  Randall.  I 
felt  enlargement  upon  1  Peter  v.  7. 

Saturday  28.  At  Heath's  I  spoke  from  Psalm  cxxvi.  5,  6.  we  had 
an  open  time.  In  our  crowded  house  were  many  brethren  and 
sisters  from  far.  The  power  of  God  was  present  at  our  night 
meeting.  Georgia  promises  something  great,  under  the  president- 
ship of  Stith  Mead  ;  as  does  also  Maryland  (west)  under  that  of  Wil- 
son Lee.  It  is  of  great  consequence  to  have  men  in  the  spirit  of 
the  work,  as  president  elders  of  districts. 

Sunday  29.  I  spoke  in  the  woods  at  a  small  distance  from  the 
chapel,  which  the  society  held  in  possession :  their  love-feast 
began  at  nine  o'clock,  and  held  until  three  o'clock  :  eight  souls  are 
believed  to  have  found  peace  « ith  God  ;  among  whom  was  a  little 
daughter  of  Mr.  Bush's,  about  nine  years  of  age.  My  subject  was 
Isaiah  lxii.  6,  7.  I  was  often  interrupted  by  singing  and  shouting. 
I  was  comfortably  provided  with  lodging,  at  the  house  of  Lawyer 
Stith's,  whither  I  had  been  affectionately  invited — may  my  friends 
find  grace  here  and  glory  hereafter ! 

Monday  30.  I  called,  after  fervent  and  frequent  application, 
upon  Mr.  Noseworthy  :  he  was  once  in  the  possession  of  religion, 
and  in  the  exercise  of  the  ministry  ;  but  changes  and  worldly 
prosperity  have  wrought  an  unfavourable  change  upon  him  :  when 
in  distress  he  calleth  upon  God,  and  wisheth  to  have  the  prayers 
of  the  servants  of  God.  Lord,  save  him  and  his  family !  We 
found  Smyrna  meeting  house  deserted,  by  removals  to  other  neigh- 
bourhoods ;  but  I  had  an  open  season  upon  1  Cor.  vi.  2.  I  lodged 
with  James  Thweatt. 

Tuesday,  December  1.  At  Sparta,  after  various  excercises  of 
mind,  I  fixed  upon  2  Peter  iii.  17,  18.  Here  I  saw  several  ac- 
quaintances from  Virginia— Jarrattites  from  Dinwiddie  county, 
amongst  whom  I  was  kindly  entertained  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Lucas. 
Whilst  I  was  reading  Mr.  M'Gready's  letter,  a  Presbyterian-Me- 
thodist woman  shouted  and  warned  the  Spartans  to  flee  from  the 


46  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURVS  JOURNAL.  [1801. 

wrath  to  come.     I  lodged  with  Henry  Moss,  an  old  disciple  from 
Virginia. 

Wednesday  2.  At  Hathorne's,  many  attended  :  my  subject  was 
Titus  ii.  11,  12.     We  came  to  Henry  Harris's  that  night. 

Thursday  3.  At  Harris's  meeting-house  I  spoke  from  Psalm 
cxlvi.  5 — 9r 

Friday  4.  At  new  chapel,  Williams's  swamp,  my  ground  work 
was  John  iii.  16.  We  were  indebted  for  lodging  to  D.  Davis. 
Next  day  we  went  onward  to  New-Hope,  to  hold  our  quarterly 
meeting.  At  the  close  of  the  week  1  feel  that  I  fail ;  the  heat  of 
the  weather  and  the  want  of  water — good  water,  I  presume  to  be 
the  cause.  We  had  a  noise  and  a  shaking  under  brother  Mead's 
preaching  ;  but  I  was  unwell  and  dispirited.  We  have  been  tra- 
velling in  Hancock  and  Washington  counties,  and  have  made  about 
ninety  miles  this  week.  I  lodged  at  Richard  Burney's  ;  he  has  a 
wife  and  ten  living  children,  the  mother  of  whom  appears  to  be  as 
active  as  any  of  the  family. 

Our  love-feast  began  at  nine  o'clock,  and  held  until  three  o'clock 
in  the  afternoon.  Notwithstanding  the  wind  was  at  north-west,  my- 
self and  the  congregation  had  to  seek  an  open  place  in  the  woods  : 
my  improvement  was  upon  Matt.  xi.  5,  6.  Three  souls  professed 
to  be  converted  :  they  were  baptised,  and  joined  the  society.  I 
lodged  at  Jesse  Jordan's. 

Monday  7.  We  came  to  Father  Brett's. 

Tuesday  8.  We  crossed  the  stream  of  Williamson's  swamp,  the 
Central  Stream,  and  Rocky -Comfort  ;  these  three  streams  are  the 
principal  branches  of  the  Ogeechee,  and  make  their  junction  near 
the  seat  of  government.  I  preached  in  the  state-house  :  it  was  an 
easterly,  cold,  damp  day  :  my  subject  was  2  Cor.  v.  19,  20.  I 
dined  with  Doctor  Powell,  and  housed  for  the  night  with  Colonel 
John  Lewis. 

Wednesday  9.  I  preached  to  a  few  people  in  a  solitary  place 
amongst  the  pines,  on  Luke  xi.  13.  We  dined  at  Mr.  Pollitt's,  and 
came  on  to  Colonel  Johnson's. 

Thursday  10.  We  came  to  Coxe's  meeting-house  in  Burke 
county — it  was  an  open  house,  a  cold  day,  and  a  cold  people  in  the 
fullest  sense  of  the  word. 

We  came  on  across  Brier  and  M'Vean's  Creek  to  the  widow 
Brack's  :  here  I  preached  a  funeral  discourse  on  the  occasion  of 
the  death  of  her  late  husband  :  my  subject  was  1  Cor.  xv.  56,  57. 


1801.]  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBUftY'S  JOURNAL.  47 

Saturday  12.  We  came  to  Augusta,  and  arrived  whilst  N.  Sne- 
then  was  preaching.  Riding  in  the  cold,  and  writing  in  the  night 
has  occasioned  a  weakness  in  my  eye. 

Sabbath  13.  Ordaining  brothers  Joshua  Moore  and  Gilmore  to 
the  offices  of  deacons,  and  assisting  at  the  sacrament  made  all  my 
labours  for  this  day  We  had  an  excellent  discourse  from  N.  Sne- 
then  on  Rev.  ii.  4,  5.  The  Lord  hath  made  windows  in  heaven, 
and  he  can  do  it  again,  and  souls  may  be  converted  in  Augusta. 
Here  I  leave  the  state  of  Georgia. 

South  Carolina. — Monday  14.  I  found  Weatherly  meeting- 
house much  neater  than  I  expected  :  my  subject  here  was  2  Cor. 
iv.  14.  "  For  the  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us." — I  know  not 
what  beside  should  move  a  Christian  minister  to  travel  and  labour 
in  this  country. 

Tuesday  15.  Through  the  rain  to  Chester's.  Next  day  to 
Trotter's,  where  we  had  damp  weather,  an  open  house,  and  few 
people.     I  lodged  at  Mr.  Trotter's. 

Thursday  17.  At  Jacob  Barr's,  upon  Edisto,  1  spoke  from  2  Tim. 
iv.  7,  8. — few  people.  In  Georgia  "  1  groaned,  being  burdened  ;" 
but  my  congregations  were  considerably  larger,  my  rides  shorter, 
and  the  people  abundantly  more  feeling  and  fervent  than  they  are 
here.  I  have  rode  eighty  sand-hill  miles  :  the  weather  is  very 
changeable  ;  I  feel  my  old  age  and  infirmities  ;  my  eyes  and  feet 
are  feeble  ;  but,  glory  to  God  !  I  have  strong  faith  for  myself 
and  for  the  prosperity  of  Zion. — Glory,  glory,  glory  to  God  ! 
Amen  ! 

Saturday  19.  At  Cattle-Creek  my  text  was  Hebr.  vi.  11,  12. 
After  speaking  I  read  the  letters  narrative  of  the  work  of  God.  I 
lodged  at  Sebastian  Fanchesse's,  and  was  entertained  like  a  pre- 
sident. 

Sabbath  20.  I  attended  love-feast  and  sacrament,  and  preached 
on  Matt.  xi.  28,  29,  30.  the  people  were  very  still— a  few  tears 
were  the  only  signs  of  feeling  which  we  saw.  I  lodged  with 
Thomas  Simpson. 

Monday  21.  At  the  Indian  Fields,  I  spoke  from  Hebr.  x.  38. 
the  preachers  attended  with  me  and  bore  their  parts  in  the  religious 
exercises  of  the  meeting. 

Tuesday  22.  We  rode  in  a  damp  morning  to  the  Cypress,  with- 
in thirty  miles  of  Charleston  :  I  spoke  here  on  2  Cor.  vi.  1,2.  I 
felt  some  opening.  Next  day  I  returned  to  John  Moore's  and  gave 
a  discourse  on  Hebr.  ii.  3, 


4iJ  REV~  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802. 

Thursday  24.  The  Four  Holes  is  a  name  given  to  a  river  be- 
cause there  are  four  sinks  or  holes  upon  the  banks  :  here,  at  the 
White  meeting-house,  I  preached  on  2  Pet.  iii.  18.  "  But  grow 
in  grace." — 1.  We  should  have  grace  planted  or  sown  in  our  souls. 
2.  Grow  in  the  habits  and  exercises  of  grace.  3.  Rules  by 
which  we  sheuld  grow  in  grace.  4.  By  what  rules  we  may  judge 
of  our  growth  in  grace.     I  lodged  at  Jacob  Datzler's. 

The  Four  Holes  and  Wasmassaw  are  about  eighty  miles  long  ; 
the  former,  the  north,  the  latter,  the  central  branch  of  the  Edisto- 
River :  this  settlement  was  originally  peopled  by  the  Dutch  Pres- 
byterians :  they  have  declined  in  language  and  in  religion  :  the 
last  is  reviving  in  the  present  rising  generations,  many  of  whom 
have  joined  the  Methodists. 

Saturday  26.  We  came  to  Westone's  meeting-house  to  hold  our 
quarterly  meeting :  many  people  attended  at  noon  and  at  night.  I 
have  made  a  proper  visit  through  Edisto,  which  I  had  not  before 
done.  1  find  the  truth  of  an  observation  made  by  dear  John  Wes- 
ley to  Doctor  Coke,  upon  his  going  to  Nova  Scotia  :  the  Doctor 
said  he  did  not  think  highly  of  the  place — l*  That  is  because  you 
have  never  been  there,"  replied  Wesley  :  "  When  you  are  there 
you  will  think  and  feel  for  the  people."  I  have  now  rode  about 
seventeen  hundred  miles  upon  this  tour.  I  have  had  close  com- 
munion with  God,  and  enlargement  in  preaching  the  word  of  life 
to  saints,  seekers,  and  sinners. 

Sabbath  27.  Sylvester  Hutchinson  preached  ;  I  only  exhorted. 
As  we  had  seven  preachers  present,  who  were  on  their  way  to  con- 
ference ;  we  employed  the  day  and  the  night  in  the  work.  On 
Monday  we  crossed  the  Congaree  at  Hart's  ferry,  and  came  to 
Pickering's ;  and  next  day  continued  on  to  Camden,  crossing  Wa- 
teree,  at  English  ferry  ;  parts  of  our  route  led  over  deep  sands, 
and  all  through  was  barren.     I  wrote  answers  to  letters. 

Friday,  January  1,  1802.  We  opened  conference.  I  gave  a  dis- 
course upon  Isai.  lxvi.  1.  2,  3.  We  conducted  our  business  in  great 
peace,  and  upon  the  Sabbath  day  were  ready  for  the  ordination  of 
seven  elders,  and  seven  deacons.  The  members  of  our  conference, 
with  a  few  others,  made  up  our  congregations,  to  whom  we  preached 
at  noon  and  at  night  each  day.  N.  Snethen  spoke  on  "  Many  shall 
run  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge  shall  be  increased ;"  and  also  on 
the  hidden  leaven.  Our  finances  were  low  :  the  married  and  the 
single  preachers  were  paid  up ;  but  there  was  no  surplus  for  the 
children.     On  Tuesday  the  5th.  we  concluded  our  labours  in  the 


JoU2.j  REV.  FRAiN'ClS  ASBURY^S  JOURNAL-  49 

greatest  harmony.  It  was  thought  best  to  divide  South  Carolina 
into  two  districts  ;  one  called  Seleuda,  the  other  Camden  :  they 
were  placed  under  the  president  eldership  of  two  natives  of  the 
state — James  Jenkins,  and  George  Dougherty. 

Wednesday  6.  We  rode  through  heavy  damps  and  dews,  twenty 
miles,  to  James  Rembart's. 

Thursday  7.  We  made  a  heavy  stretch  to  Puder  Swamp  ;  but 
there  was  no  admittance  for  us  at  a  certain  house  which  shall  be 
nameless  :  we  were  as  kindly  entertained  as  heart  could  wish  at 
Mr.  Lesson's :  I  believe  the  providence  of  God  led  us  hither,  that 
preaching  might  be  brought  to,  and  a  society  formed  at  this  house. 
Friday  8.  We  had  rain,  and  came  dripping  by  Kings-Tree,  and  by 
the  lower  bridge  upon  Black-River:  we  were  made  comfortable, 
and  very  welcome  at  Mr.  Miller's. 

Saturday  9.  We  reached  Georgetown.  I  shall  put  our  pleasures 
and  our  pains  in  a  small  compass.  We  were  but  four  days  riding 
one  hundred  and  twenty  miles  ;  the  weather  is  like  April.  I  have 
now  made  one  thousand  nine  hundred  miles.  My  soul  hath  been 
surprisingly  stayed  upon,  and  devoted  to  Jehovah.  What  South 
Carolina  was,  as  to  Methodism,  when  I  came  first  to  Georgetown,  I 
know  ;  and  what  it  is  now  I  know  : — but  what  may  it  be  thirty  years 
hence  ? 

Sabbath  10.  At  Georgetown  N.  Snethen  spoke  upon  Philippians 
ii.  1,2.;  in  the  afternoon  I  spoke  upon  Galatians  vi.  9.  :  at  night? 
N.  Snethen  again  held  forth  upon  "  O  that  they  were  wise,"  &c. 

Monday  11.  We  took  the  path  ;  dined  on  the  fare  we  brought 
with  us  ;  and  lodged  with  Mr.  Rogers,  in  Kingston  ;  having  made 
the  distance  forty-two  miles  by  going  somewhat  out  of  the  way. 

Tuesday  12.  We  had  between  forty  and  fifty  people  to  hear  us 
in  an  open  house.  We  lodged  at  Mr.  Wilson's.  Next  day  we 
crossed  Wacamaw  at  Kingston,  came  on  to  Little-River,  fed  at  M. 
Hankin's,  and  reached  Abraham  Bessant's,  ivhere  we  housed  for 
the  night. 

North  Carolina. — Thursday  14.  N.  Snethen  came  forward  in 
the  name  of  his  Master  :  I  followed  upon  "  Consider  him  that  en- 
dured such  contradiction  of  sinners  against  himself,  lest  you  be 
wearied  and  faint  in  your  minds."  After  preaching,  we  rode  on  to 
the  house  of  my  once  dear  friend  William  Gause,  senior  ;  but  death 
had  stolen  a  march  upon  me  ;  the  body  of  my  friend  was  in  the 
dust,  his  soul  is,  I  hope  and  trust,  with  God. 
Vol.  III.  7 


50  llEV.  HIANCIS  ASBUBV5S  JOUHKAL.  [1802. 

Friday  15.  1  visited  old  Ocean  :  upon  my  return  I  made  out  a  plan 
for  fourteen  months  travelling. 

Saturday  16.  We  attended  a  meeting  at  Charlotteville  meeting- 
house :  N.  Snethen  spoke  upon  "  Faith,  hope,  and  charity  :"  I 
followed  on  "  Let  us  come  therefore,  boldly,  to  the  throne  of 
grace."  We  have  rode  a  solitary,  sandy  way,  about  a  hundred  and 
ten  miles  ;  and  in  three  meetings  there  were  not  many  more  than 
one  hundred  souls.  O  Lord,  can  these  dry  bones  live  ?  I  have 
been  kept  in  a  dependant,  praying  state  of  soul.  We  have  the 
most  delightful  weather,  kind  friends,  and  good  entertainment  for 
man  and  beast.  I  trust  the  seed  sown  in  the  hearts  of  some  will 
live  and  grow  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  good  of  generations  to 
come  to  the  end  of  time.  I  have  now  filled  up  two  thousand  miles 
of  the  three  thousand  I  had  calculated  to  be  the  distance  from  and 
back  again  to  Philadelphia  ;  hitherto  I  have  been  mightily  helped. 
Glory,  glory,  glory  to  the  Eternal  Trinity  in  eternal  unity !  We 
lodged  at  John  Gause's  ;  our  host  is  a  local  minister,  and,  I  trust,  a 
dear  child  of  God  :  I  hope  he  never  may  entail  the  system  of  slave- 
holding  upon  his  posterity. 

Sabbath  17.  At  Lockwood's  Folly  meeting-house  N.  Snethen 
spoke  upon  a  portion  of  Psalm  cxix.  I  followed  from  the  epistle 
general  of  John  iii.  1,2.  It  was  an  exceedingly  cold  day,  and  few 
people.  As  there  were  some  difficulties  in  our  way,  we  came  off 
to  Town-Creek,  and  housed  with  Charles  Gause :  we  made  our 
Sabbath  day's  journey  thirty  miles,  and  yet  had  time  to  dine  in  the 
woods. 

Monday  18.  Hearing  of  an  appointment  for  the  circuit  preachers, 
we  would  not  lose  time,  but  rode  down  to  New-Hope.  We  both 
spoke,  and  then  went  on  to  Rolks's,  where  we  lodged  for  the  night. 

Tuesday  19.  Could  we  have  crossed  the  creek  to  Edward  Sulli- 
van's, we  should  have  saved  ourselves  a  ride  of  seven  miles  round 
it.  N.  Snethen  went  forward  upon  "  Take  heed,  and  beware  of 
covetousness  :"  after  him  I  followed  with  a  warning  voice,  "  Where- 
fore the  Holy  Ghost  saith,  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden 
not  your  hearts." 

Wednesday  20.  At  Wilmington  I  found  not  matters  altogether  as 
I  could  wish,  neither  temporally  nor  spiritually — in  both  these  re- 
lations had  the  African  church  been  willed  to  my  care  ;  another  re- 
lation I  preserved  by  the  appointment  of  African  stewards.  N. 
Snethen  preached  on  2  Cor.  i.  3,  4.   I  gave  a  discourse  upon  "  He 


I;80£»]  hKV.  fhancjs  asbury's  journal,  51 

lhat  saith  he  abideth  in  him  ought  himself  also  so  to  walk,"  &c. 
N.  Snethen  again  held  forth,  his  subject  was  1  John  iv.  4. 

Friday  22.  We  came  to  Topsail,  and  dined  with  Mrs.  Campbell, 
a  gracious  soul,  and  so  also  is  her  daughter.  Thence  we  went  for- 
ward to  the  widow  Spicer's,  and  arrived  about  an  hour  in  the  night. 
The  sands  were  heavy,  and  our  horses  began  to  fail  greatly. 

Saturday  23.  We  rode  up  to  New-River,  where  we  found  Lot 
Ballard  out  among  the  woods  ;  with  his  own  and  his  father's  old 
mansion  moved  together.  Want  of  shoes,  rest,  and  food,  had 
almost  done  over  my  little  mare. 

Sabbath  24.  N.  Snethen  spoke  upon  Rom.  viii.  6,  7.  I  gave  an 
exhortation  upon  John  v.  39,  40.  It  was  not  at  all  agreeable  to 
me  to  see  nearly  a  hundred  slaves  standing  outside,  and  peeping 
in  at  the  door,  whilst  the  house  was  half  empty :  they  were  not 
worthy  to  come  in  because  they  were  black  !  Farewell,  farewell 
to  that  house  for  ever  ! 

I  have  close  communion  with  God.  If  we  spare  our  lungs,  yet 
must  we  work  our  bones  and  our  flesh  with  riding.  We  lodged  at 
B.  Wilder's.  Next  day  we  came  along  through  the  rain  to  Mr. 
Hargate's,  near  the  head  of  Trent- River. 

Tuesday  26.  We  arrived  in  Newbern.  Our  evening  lecture  by 
N.  Snethen  was  upon  Psalm  li.  "  Against  thee  only  have  I  sinned, 
and  done  this  evil  in  thy  sight."  He  again  spoke  on  Thursday,  and 
on  Friday  evening  also  :  I  concluded  each  meeting  with  prayer. 
We  were  crowded  every  night.  I  judged  it  needful  to  make  some 
temporal  and  spiritual  arrangements  for  the  society  in  Newbern ; 
that  a  travelling  preacher  shall  attend  every  Sabbath  is  one. 
Newbern  is  a  trading,  growing  town  ;  there  are  seven  hundred  or 
a  thousand  houses  already  built,  and  the  number  is  yearly  increased 
by  less  or  greater  additions,  among  which  are  some  respectable 
brick  edifices ;  the  new  court-house,  truly  so  ;  neat  and  elegant  ; 
another  famous  house,  said  to  be  designed  for  the  masonic  and 
theatrical  gentlemen  :  it  might  make  a  most  excellent  church.  The 
population  of  the  town,  citizens,  and  transient  persons,  may  amount 
to  three  thousand  five  hundred  or  four  thousand  souls. 

Sabbath  day  31.  Cold  and  cloudy.  I  gave  a  sermon  upon  Rom* 
ii.  7,  8.  N.  Snethen  spoke  from  Hebr.  xiii.  16.  and  in  the  even- 
ing on  1  John  iv.  10,  11.  We  made  a  public  collection  which 
amounted  to  nearly  sixty  dollars  ;  and  parted  from  our  brethren, 
whom  we  left  full  of  good  resolutions  to  finish  the  house  of  God : 
the  African  Methodists  also  were  about  to  build  a  place  of  worship, 


.V-  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBU&y's  SOURNAfc.  [180!-. 

Truly  we  are  encouraged  ;  our  own  people  are  stirred  up ;  and 
judges,  counsellors,  doctors,  and  ministers  attended  our  preach- 
ing, and  appeared  to  be  pleased  :  may  they  be  profited,  and  finally 
saved ! 

We  had  a  severe  ride  to  Washington,  thirty-five  miles,  crossing 
Neuse  and  Tar- Rivers  :  near  the  end  of  our  ride  the  rain  quick- 
ened our  pace,  and  drove  us  in  about  five  o'clock  to  the  hospitable 
shelter  of  Ralph  Potts,  (of  Alnwick,  Northumberland)  where  we 
had  all  things  richly  to  enjoy. 

Tuesday,  February  2.  Considering  the  inclemency  of  the  day, 
we  had  a  very  respectable  congregation  to  hear  us  :  who  can  tell 
what  God  will  do  for  these  people ! — At  our  evening  meeting  many 
attended  :  the  subject  spoken  from  was  Luke  xiv.  26. 

Wednesday  3.    We  came  up  to  's,  and  stopped  awhile, 

and  then  pushed  on  to  brother  Perry's  :  it  was  a  solitary  ride. 
Our  host  is  one  of  our  local  ministry  in  Pitt  county.  I  judged  it 
highly  expedient  that  Roanoke  and  Pamlico  circuits  should  be 
divided,  and  that  Washington  should  have  Sabbath  preaching 
every  week  :  it  is  a  growing  town  of  one  hundred  houses,  and  there 
is  here  a  good  house  for  public  worship. 

Thursday  4.  We  came  to  Garratt  Toole's  plantation  ;  but  the 
bird  was  flown — our  old  friend  had  removed  to  Franklin  county 
for  his  health  :  we  stayed  with  Mr.  Davidson,  the  steward  of  his 
estate. 

Friday  5.  At  Tarborough  we  held  our  meeting  in  the  neat  new 
chapel :  N.  Snethen  spoke  upon  "  This  day  is  salvation  come  to 
this  house  ;"  the  ground-work  of  my  discourse  was  "  My  house 
shall  be  called  a  house  of  prayer  for  all  people  :"  I  said  but  few 
words.  We  dined  with  Mr.  Guion,  and  lodged  with  Mr.  Bellamy. 
We  rejoiced  in  hope  that  Tarborough  and  Halifax  will  yet  hear  and 
receive  the  Gospel :  H.  Bradford  hath  been  preaching  in  the 
latter,  and  brother  Bellamy  in  the  former  with  some  success.  We 
attended  at  Prospect-Hill.  It  was  an  exceedingly  cold  day,  as 
need  be.  I  only  exhorted  after  N.  Snethen  had  described  the  new 
creature  in  Christ  Jesus.  We  fed  our  horses,  and  ourselves  ate  in 
the  woods,  and  then  went  forward  to  Henry  Bradford's.  My  soul 
is  continually  stayed  upon,  and  comforted  in  God  :  but  it  is  not 
needful  to  tell  all  my  outward  difficulties  and  inward  sufferings  : 
heaven  will  make  up  for  all — and  then  we  shall  know  all  we  wish 
nod  wait  to  know. 
Sabbath  7.  Was  a  very  cold  and  cloudy  day  :  we  held  our  meet- 


1802.]  KEY.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JdURNAL.  53 

ing  in  the  dwelling-house,  and  filled  both  rooms.     N.  Snethen 
spoke  on  2  Tim.  ii.  11,  12,  13.     My  text  was  2  Pet.  iii.  17,  18. 

Monday  8.  We  crossed  Roanoke  at  Pollock's  ferry,  and  came 
to  Richard  Whitaker's.  We  had  no  appointment  at  Rehoboth,  but 
on  Tuesday  we  called  a  meeting  : — N.  Snethen  spoke  on  Philip, 
ii.  5.  ;  I  followed  from  Matt.  v.  8.  At  Anthony  Moore's  we  called 
a  meeting,  where  each  of  us  delivered  our  testimony,  and  then 
rode  on  to  Mr.  People's  :  here  the  presiding  elder  made  an  ap- 
pointment, by  including  it  with  others,  but  of  this  there  was  no 
notice  given  except  by  our  coming  into  the  neighbourhood  the 
evening  before  :  we  would  not  neglect  our  duty,  but  at  Malone's 
we  faithfully,  according  to  the  grace  and  time  given,  discharged 
our  task  and  rode  on. 

Virginia. — Brunswick  county.  We  had  a  cold  damp  ride  to 
Matthew  Myrick's.  On  Friday  we  preached  at  Drommyreck 
new  meeting-house  :  N.  Snethen  spoke,  and  I  followed  :  at  Wool- 
sey  meeting-house  N.  Snethen  preached  ;  I  only  exhorted.  I 
called  upon  Doctor  Simm's,  who  cut  a  small  wart  from  my  hand 
and  applied  the  caustic  :  my  right  foot  was  also  wounded,  by  a 
splinter  of  lightwood  perhaps. 

Sunday  13.  We  attended  at  Hickesford,  alias  Bellfield :  in  the 
academy  we  had  a  large  congregation  of  the  rich  and  the  poor, 
to  whom  IS.  Snethen  preached  from  Deut.  xxxii.  29.  I  also  spoke 
on  Luke  xix.  10.     We  lodged  at  Miss  Jenny  Fisher's. 

N.  Snethen, preached;  I  only  exhorted  at  Peter  Pelham's  :  of 
the  children  of  this  family  I  could  say  many  favourable  things— 
but  Ah!  they  are  not  converted  ! 

Tuesday  15.  At  Hobb's  meeting-house  N.  Snethen  spoke  on 
Rom.  viii.  12,  13.  my  portion  of  the  word  was  Hebr.  ii.  3.  At 
Merritt's  chapel,  N.  Snethen  spoke  on  "  Recompense  no  man  evil 
for  evil."  I  followed  on  Hebr.  vi.  11,  12.  We  rode  home  with 
John  Easter,  and  made  our  ride  thirty  miles — nearly  a  day's  jour- 
ney. The  inflammation,  from  the  operation  on  my  hand,  was  at- 
tended with  pain  :  I  kept  it  down  by  bread  and  milk  poultice ;  and 
applied  spirits  of  turpentine  to  assuage  the  effects  of  the  caustic. 
We  have  been  received  with  great  affection  by  our  local  brethren, 
Drumgoold,  J.  Ellis,  H.  Saunders,  A.  Brown,  J.  Easter,  and  H. 
Merritt  :  but  the  travelling  preachers  and  presiding  elders  keep  at 
their  work  ;  we  seldom  see  them  as  we  travel  two  and  two.  My 
soul  is  very  solemn, 


"i-  KEV.  .FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL.  [100~\ 

On  Thursday,  at  John  Easter's,  we  had  many  people  for  the  day 
and  place.  N.  Snethen  always  speaks  first :  my  text  was  Hebr. 
xii.  25. 

Friday  17.  Was  a  cold  day,  at  Peter  Robinson's,  Dinwiddie 
county,  yet  many  attended.  I  saw  my  old  friend,  the  weeping 
widow  Jarratt.  My  text  was  James  i.  22.  Henry  Reece,  John 
Easter,  John  Jones,  and  Samuel  S.  Stuart,  preachers,  were  pre- 
sent.—-We  had  a  gracious  season. 

Saturday  18.  At  Maye's  meeting-house,  Nottaway  county,  I 
preached  from  Acts  ii.  42.  The  day  was  unpleasant.  We  came 
back  to  P.  Robinson's. 

Sunday  19.  It  began  to  rain  as  we  set  out ;  we  rode  into  Bruns- 
wick again  to  John  Rogers's  :  he  is  an  old  Jarrattite  Methodist ;  a 
few  attended  in  the  dwelling-house,  to  whom  N.  Snethen  first 
spoke  on  the  common  salvation;  I  followed  on  Hebr.  ii.  1.  We  had 
not  a  rapid,  mountain-like  rain  and  a  hard  lodging,  but  a  warm 
house  and  a  good  bed — fit  for  a  president :  it  rained  freely  in  the 
night — we  heard,  but  did  not  feel  it. 

On  Monday  we  had  a  snow  storm  ;  yet  with  a  few  hours'  notice, 
several  came  out  to  Thomas  Jordan's — I  hope  not  in  vain :  my 
subject  was  Hebr.  iv.  15,  16.  By  computation,  we  have  filled  up 
two  thousand  five  hundred  miles  to  Thomas  Jordan's.  On  Tuesday 
we  rested  :  my  hand  was  inflamed,  and  the  weather  was  cold. 

Wednesday  7.  At  Maye's  we  found  a  small  appointment  had  been 
made  for  the  circuit  preacher  :  I  spoke  upon  Matt.  xi.  28 — 30.  I 
sent  for  Doctor  Asa  Barnes,  who  probed  the  wound  in  my  hand,  and 
prepared  a  sublimated  plaister,  which  brought  on  a  discharge  in 
twenty-four  hours  :   I  give  him  credit  for  his  skill  and  friendship. 

On  our  route  to  Charles  Ogburne's  on  Thursday,  we  crossed 
Bleherrin  on  a  low  bridge,  whilst  the  water  in  places  flowed  over 
the  planks.  Next  day  1  spoke  on  "Faith,  hope,  and  charity;" 
and  on  Saturday,  at  Zion  Chapel,  on  "  Examine  yourselves 
whether  ye  be  in  the  faith." 

Sunday  28.  At  Salem. 

Monday,  March  1.  We  began  and  held  close  conference  four 
days ;  and  had  preaching  each  day  :  Bruce,  Lee,  Jackson,  and 
Snethen,  were  our  speakers  ;  and  there  was  a  shaking  among  the 
people.  Seven  deacons  and  one  elder  were  ordained.  I  was  well 
pleased  with  the  stations,  as  far  as  they  went ;  but  Portsmouth, 
Bertie.   Roanoke,  Haw-River,  Guilford,  and   Salisbury,  should 


1&02.J  REV.  FiUNCJS  ASBUIIY^S  JOUMAt,  55 

each  have  had  an  additional  preacher,  if  we  had  had  them  ;  yea, 
Petersburg,  Hanover,  Williamsburg,  and  Richmond  also  ;  but  the 
Lord  hath  not  sent  them,  and  how  can  we  make  them  ?  There  was 
great  strictness  observed  in  the  examination  of  the  preachers'  cha- 
racters :  some  were  reproved  before  the  conference  for  their  light- 
ness and  other  follies. 

Friday  5.  We  rode  to  Peter  Whyche's,  and  next  day  called 
upon  Jane  Fisher  in  our  way  to  Jones's. 

Sabbath  7.  At  Jones's  chapel  I  preached  on  Psalm  cxxiv.  1,  2. 
Ah  !  where  is  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah — the  God  who  once  answered 
him  with  power — with  fire  ? 

Monday  8.  At  Pennington's  N.  Snethen  preached  ;  I  only  ex- 
horted. We  came  in  haste  to  Brigg's,  to  see  the  children  ;  the 
dear  parents  had  both  died  in  the  space  of  one  week.  At  Lane's 
chapel,  next  day,  N.  Snethen  and  myself  both  preached  :  my  sub- 
ject was  Psalm  xlii.  5. :  it  is  remarkable  that  these  words  are  repeat- 
ed thrice,  like  Peter's  vision. 

Wednesday  10.  We  came  to  Joseph  Moody's,  Isle  of  Wight 
county  :  our  appointment  had  not  reached  this  place.  Next  day 
we  proceeded  to  Suffolk,  and  arrived  in  the  evening  at  the  house 
of  our  dear  friends,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Yerbury,  who  received  us  with 
great  affection.  The  house  was  small,  and  we  had  a  dripping  even- 
ing, which  kept  some  back  t  my  subject  was  Exodus  xx.  24.  Since 
my  last  visit  they  have  collected  money  and  materials  to  build  a 
chapel,  which  will  be  shortly  raised. 

Friday  12.  We  rode  down,  through  wet  woods  and  a  damp  day, 
to  Portsmouth,  resting  and  refreshing  on  our  route  at  David 
M'Keesy's,  on  the  Middle  Ground  :  in  the  evening,  N.  Snethen 
preached  on  "  For  we  walk  by  faith  and  not  by  sight."  On  Satur- 
day evening  it  was  my  turn  ;  I  spoke  on  James  i.  22. 

Sabbath  14,  As  the  wind  was  high,  I  thought  N.  Snethen  might 
as  well  speak  at  Norfolk  in  the  morning,  and  myself  at  Ports- 
mouth ;  my  text  in  the  forenoon  was  Matt.  v.  8.  in  the  afternoon,, 
"  For  it  is  God  that  worketh  in  you  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his 
good  pleasure."  I  confined  myself  to  experience  j  and  there  was 
a  melting  among  the  people. 

Monday  15.  We  came  to  brother  Denbigh's,  to  early  dinner ; 
thence  proceeded  to  Suffolk,  where  I  stepped  into  three  houses3 
and  continued  on  our  way  to  Charles  Murphy's  to  lodge.  1  felt  that 
I  had  injured  myself  by  laying  by  one  of  my  coats  too  soon. 

Tuesday  16.    We  called  at  Michael  Murphy's  and  proceeded 


Ot>  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S   JOURNAL.  |_lfc<J*» 

on  to  Blunt's  chapel :  N.  Snethen  gave  a  discourse  upon  brotherly 
love  ;  I  only  exhorted,  and  added  a  narrative  of  the  work  of  God  ; 
we  have  made  up  two  thousand  six  hundred  and  sixty  miles.  My 
mind  hath  been  sweetly  stayed  upon  God  at  all  times  and  in  all 
places. 

Wednesday  17.  We  came,  sixteen  miles,  to  Doctor  Bailey's,  in 
Surry  county.  N.  Snethen's  horse  was  taken  with  a  violent  cholic, 
and  rolled  upon  the  ground  in  great  agony  ;  he  was  relieved,  how- 
ever, by  drenching  with  sturgeon's  oil  and  clysters.  I  left  the 
man  and  horse,  and  came  on  to  William  Birdson's. 

Thursday  18.  I  dined  at  friend  Nixon's,  where  I  was  kindly  en- 
tertained ;  I  left  my  kind  host,  and  came  on  to  Petersburg. 

Next  day,  by  appointment,  1  preached  John  Lee's  funeral  ser- 
mon, my  text  was  Philippians  ii.  22.  "  But  *ye  know  the  proof  of 
him,  that  as  a  son  with  the  father,  hath  he  served  with  me  in  the 
Gospel." 

I.  The  excellency  of  the  Gospel.  II.  The  service  of  the  Gospel. 
III.  The  proof  of  Timothy — his  pious  parents  ;  his  education,  con- 
viction, conversion,  call,  and  ordination  ;  his  ministry ;  his  obe- 
dience as  a  son  with  a  father — in  mutual  love,  in  mutual  confi- 
dence ;  and  mutual  services  :  I  showed  the  excellency  of  a  patri- 
archal or  fatherly  government  in  the  church.  I  paralleled  John 
Lee's  character  with  Timothy's,  in  his  manner  of  living,  labouring, 
and  death.  N.  Snethen  came  up  and  preached  at  night.  On  Satur- 
day we  arrived  in  Richmond,  and  next  day  N.  Snethen  preached 
upon  the  epistle  to  the  church  of  Ephesus.  I  spoke  in  the  after- 
noon upon  Philip,  ii.  12,  13.  I  had  a  great  crowd  of  the  most  impo- 
lite, spiritually  impolite  hearers  I  have  seen  for  many  months  : — so 
much  for  the  capital  of  Virginia. 

Monday  22.  We  reached  Caroline,  and  the  next  day,  Fredericks- 
burg ;  here  N.  Snethen  gave  a  discourse  upon  the  work  of  righte- 
ousness— peace  ;  and  the  effect  of  righteousness,  quietness,  and 
assurance  for  ever.  I  spoke  upon  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he 
may  be  found."  We  started  next  day  for  Poick  :  and  the  day  after 
reached  William  Watters's ;  here  we  rejoiced  in  God  together.  On 
Wednesday  evening  there  was  a  thunder  storm,  which,  clearing  up, 
brought  an  excessively  cold  wind  on  Thursday.  On  Friday  it  snow- 
ed most  of  the  day  ;  nevertheless  I  rode  on  seven  miles  to  Henry 
Foxall's,  in  Georgetown,  where  I  found  a  shelter  from  the  storm. 
I  have  had  sore  temptations,  succeeded  by  great  consolations. — 
The  want  of  good  sleep  has  been  a  cause  of  suffering. 


18G2.J  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  57 

Maryland. — Saturday  26.  I  made  a  gentle  start,  and  a  steady 
ride  to  Baltimore.  On  the  route  I  called  in  to  see  the  widow 
Turner,  whom  I  found  rejoicing  in  the  Lord.  I  fed  at  Spurrier's 
tavern  ;  it  is  now  in  other  hands  than  formerly. 

Sabbath  27.  I  had  uncomfortable  feelings,  occasioned  by  a  cold  I 
had  taken.  Upon  my  watch-tower  in  Light-street,  I  stood  and  de- 
livered a  message  on  James  v.  19,  20.  I  wrote,  and  rested  until 
Thursday  the  1st  day  of  April,  when  our  yearly  conference  com- 
menced. We  went  on  with  our  business  smoothly  and  rapidly, 
and  had  preaching  each  noon  and  evening  in  every  Methodist 
house  for  public  worship  in  the  city. 

Sabbath  4.  I  administered  the  word  in  Light-street  from  Matt. 
v.  12.  :  in  the  new  chapel  at  Fells-Point  on  Isaiah  lvi.  7.  This  is 
the  neatest  house,  within  and  without,  that  we  have  in  Baltimore. 
Alexander  M'Kain  hath  been  very  attentive  to  the  temporal  and 
spiritual  interests  of  the  house  and  society. 

Monday  5.  We  had  a  day  of  fasting  and  humiliation  for  the  confe- 
rence, the  continent,  and  the  church  of  God  ;  I  improved  the  occa- 
sion, and  spoke  from  Acts  xiv.  23.  I  was  presented  with  a  new  im- 
pression of  my  journal  ;  it  is  very  incorrect ;  had  I  had  an  oppor- 
tunity before  it  was  put  to  press,  I  should  have  altered  and  ex- 
punged many  things  ;  the  inaccuracies  of  grammar,  and  imper- 
fections of  composition  incident  to  the  hasty  notices  of  a  manu- 
script journal  are  preserved  in  the  printed  copy.  On  Monday 
evening  the  conference  rose  :  all  the  demands  of  the  preachers 
were  answered ;  money  was  advanced  towards  the  purchase  of 
horses  ;  to  those  who  had  distant  circuits  and  far  to  go,  donations 
were  made  :  and  nearly  two  hundred  dollars  very  liberally  sent 
to  the  Monmouth  conference,  which  is  to  meet  in  July  next 
Within  the  circling  lines  of  this  conference,  we  report  to  this 
sitting  an  addition  to  the  society  of  three  thousand  souls  and  up- 
wards, besides  those  who  may  have  died  within  the  last  eleven 
months.  John  Pawson's  letter,  and  fifty  copies  of  a  volume  of 
sermons  came  safely  to  hand;  his,  and  other  letters,  concerning 
the  work  of  God,  I  read  to  my  brethren.  Whilst  in  Baltimore, 
I  received  an  account  of  the  death  of  my  mother,  which  I  fear  is 
true.  And  here  I  may  speak  safely  concerning  my  very  dear 
mother:  her  character  to  me  is  well  known.  Her  paternal  de- 
scent was  Welch  ;  from  a  family  ancient  and  respectable,  of  the 
name  of  Rogers.  She  lived  a  woman  of  the  world  until  the  death 
of  her  first  and  only  daughter,  Sarah  Asbury  :  how  would  the  be- 

Vol.  III.  *  8 


58  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1802. 

reaved  mother  weep  and  tell  of  the  beauties  and  excellencies  of 
her  lost  and  lovely  child!  pondering  on  the  past  in  the  silent 
Suffering  of  hopeless  grief.  This  afflictive  providence  graciously 
terminated  in  the  mother's  conversion.  When  she  saw  herself  a 
lost  and  wretched  sinner,  she  sought  religious  people,  but  "  in  the 
times  of  this  ignorance"  few  were  "sound  in  the  faith,"  or 
"  faithful  to  the  grace  given  :"  many  were  the  days  she  spent 
chiefly  in  reading  and  prayer  ;  at  length  she  found  justifying  grace, 
and  pardoning  mercy.  So  dim  was  the  light  of  truth  around  her, 
from  the  assurance  she  found,  she  was  at  times  inclined  to  believe 
in  the  final  perseverance  of  the  saints.  For  fifty  years  her  hands, 
her  house,  her  heart,  were  open  to  receive  the  people  of  God 
and  ministers  of  Christ ;  and  thus  a  Limp  was  lighted  up  in  a  dark 
place  called  Great  Barre,  in  Great  Britain.  She  was  an  afflicted, 
yet  most  active  woman  ;  of  quick  bodily  powers,  and  masculine 
understanding  ;  nevertheless,  "  so  kindly  all  the  elements  were 
mixed  in  her,"  her  strong  mind  quickly  felt  the  subduing  influences 
of  that  Christian  sympathy  which  "  weeps  with  those  who  weep," 
and  "  rejoices  with  those  who  do  rejoice."  As  a  woman  and  a 
wife  she  was  chaste,  modest,  blameless — as  a  mother  (above  all  the 
women  in  the  world  would  I  claim  her  for  my  own)  ardently  affec- 
tionate ;  as  a  "  mother  in  Israel"  few  of  her  sex  have  done  more  by 
a  holy  walk  to  live,  and  by  personal  labour  to  support  the  Gospel;, 
and  to  wash  the  saints'  feet ;  as  a  friend,  she  was  generous,  true, 
and  constant.  Elizabeth  Asbury  died  January  6th,  1802;  aged 
eighty-seven  or  eighty-eight  years.  There  is  now,  after  fifty 
years,  a  chapel  within  two  or  three  hundred  yards  of  her  dwelling, 
I  am  now  often  drawn  out  in  thankfulness  to  God,  who  hath  saved 
a  mother  of  mine,  and,  I  trust,  a  father  also,  who  are  already  in 
glory,  where  I  hope  to  meet  them  both,  after  time,  and  cares,  and 
sorrows,  shall  have  ceased  with  me ;  and  where  glory  shall  not 
only  beam,  but  open  in  my  soul  for  ever.     Amen. 

Wednesday  7.  I  came  to  Perry-Hall.  Wre  cannot  spend  more 
time  with  the  rich  than  with  the  poor ;  so  being  warned  by  a  very 
fine  day,  we  started,  stopped  to  dine  with  the  widow  Stump,  at 
Bush,  and  in  the  evening  reached  North- East.  Next  day  was 
stormy  ;  but  we  were  safely  housed  with  Mr.  Sheredine. 

Saturday  10.  We  rode  to  Back-Creek  ;  and  on  the  Sabbath  day, 
as  we  were  visited  with  a  gracious  rain,  1  improved  on  the  subject 
from  Isai.  lv.  10,  11.  At  the  Manor  chapel  brother  Whatcoat 
preached  in  the  afternoon  from  Rev.  xxi.  6. 


1302.]  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBUR¥5S  JOURNAL.  59 

Monday  12.  There  were  two  appointments — one  at  the  new 
chapel,  Cross-Roads,  and  the  other  at  the  brick  meeting-house. 
Rather  than  disappoint  any,  we  separated,  I  taking  the  former,  and 
brother  Whatcoat  the  latter.  As  it  was  the  first  time  of  preach- 
ing in  the  new  house,  I  chose  Isai.  lxvi.  1,  2.  That  evening  I 
came  on  to  Chester-Town,  the  wind  at  east — cold  and  damp. 

Tuesday  13.  We  had  a  rainy  day,  but  we  attended  the  house  of 
God,  noon  and  night.  Our  brethren  in  this  town  are  about  to  build  : 
by  a  train  of  strange  persons,  providences,  and  things,  they  have  a 
place  in  the  public  square,  where  the  market-house  stood :  the 
chapel  will  be  in  a  line  with  the  Episcopal  church  ;  its  size,  forty 
by  forty-eight. 

Wednesday  14.  The  morning  was  very  damp.  I  was  not  at  all 
prepared  for  speaking  :  my  subject  was  Tit.  ii.  2.  After  preach- 
ing we  rode  rapidly  down  to  Dr.  Allen's :  we  found  the  Doctor 
rapidly  declining. 

Thursday  15.  At  Easton  I  spoke  on  1  Peter  i.  3,  4,  5. :  brother 
Whatcoat  preached  at  night. 

Friday  16.  We  were  at  Bolingbrook  chapel :  it  was  an  exceed- 
ingly cold  day  for  the  season  ;  f  read  a  little,  and  added  a  short  ex- 
hortation ;  after  which  we  hasted  to  Wm.  Brown's  to  dine,  and  the 
wind  having  lulled,  crossed  Choptank,  at  Ennall's  Ferry.  The 
severity  of  the  weather  caused  uncomfortable  feelings  ;  neverthe- 
less, we  greatly  rejoiced  in  the  Lord,  because  of  his  glorious  work, 
which  is  spreading  along  like  a  moving  fire. 

Saturday  17.  At  Henry  Ennall's  I  spoke  on  Psal.  cxlv.  8,  9,  10. 
I  have  now  rode,  I  suppose,  three  thousand  miles  since  my  de- 
parture from  Philadelphia  on  the  last  of  July,  1801. 

Sunday  18.  We  had  a  full  house  at  Cambridge.  Our  new  chapel 
is  two  stones  high  ;  well  planned,  and  neatly  finished.  After  exhor- 
tations and  sacrament,  bishop  Whatcoat  preached.  Meeting  ended, 
we  rode  fourteen  miles  through  the  rain  to  B.  Ennall's. 

Monday  19,  Rain  coming  on,  we  were  detained  a  little;  but 
afterward  we  rode  within  two  miles  of  Q,uantico,  arriving  too  late. 
We  dined  at  Fletcher's,  and  rode  on  to  Salisbury,  making  thirty 
miles  this  day.     Bishop  Whatcoat  preached  in  the  evening. 

Tuesday  20.  Was  fair  time ;  yet  many  attended,  and  we  had  a 
gracious  season.     My  subject  was  Matt.  xxii.  5. 

Wednesday  21.  We  had  a  long  ride  to  Annamessex  chapel, 
nearly  thirty  miles,  this  day  before  we  came  to  our  lodgings  at 
Samuel  Smith's. 


*>to  REV.   FRANCIS   ASBURY'S   JOURNAL.  [18©2. 

Thursday  22.  We  rode  twenty  miles  to  Downing  meeting- 
house, in  Accomack  county  :  I  spoke  upon  Psal.  lxvi.  16.  it  was 
a  gracious  season.  We  had  only  time,  and  in  borrowed  carriages 
rode  afterward  about  twenty  miles  to  Captain  Watson's,  weary  and 
sleepy,  as  we  had  had  little  rest  night  or  day. 

Virginia. — Eastern  Shore.  Friday  23.  Bishop  Whatcoat 
preached  at  the  meeting-house  in  Diamond  Town  to  a  numerous 
audience.  That  evening  we  had  to  ride  twenty  miles  to  Mr. 
Watts's,  upon  Chingoteague ;  but  the  Lord  was  in  the  family,  and 
blessed  the  people.  We  have  a  most  pleasing  prospect  in  Aoco- 
mack  ;  a  general  revival  is  going  through  the  county.  Next  day 
we  had  a  heavy  ride  to  Snow-Hill:  our  new  meeting-house  not 
being  finished,  I  preached  in  the  court-house  to  many  serious  peo- 
ple upon  Phil.  i.  6.  After  worship  we  rode  on  to  Isaac  Bow- 
man's, fifteen  miles,  and  lodged  at  Dr.  Wilson's  plantation,  now  in 
the  possession  of  Mr.  White. 

Maryland. — Eastern  Shore.  Sunday  25.  We  had  a  great  time 
at  Bowen's  chapel ;  there  were  present  about  one  thousand  souls  ; 
to  whom  brother  Whatcoat  preached  :  I  read  a  letter  and  gave  an 
exhortation.  We  came  on  nine  miles  to  Wm.  Leicester's  that 
evening, 

Delaware. — On  Monday  we  had  to  ride  to  the  Sound  chapel, 
where  we  found  a  large  congregation  :  the  prospect  of  religion 
here  is  good.  In  the  evening  we  reached  Mr.  Lacey's,  near  the 
head  of  Indian-River,  making  little  short  of  thirty  miles  for  our 
day's  ride. 

On  Tuesday,  brother  Whatcoat  went  to  Lewistown  ;  whilst  my- 
self preached  at  Milford. 

Wednesday  27.  I  preached  at  Dover,  on  Ephes.  v.  1,  2.  thence 
I  hasted  to  Duck-Creek  Cross- Roads,  where  I  spoke  in  the  evening. 

Thursday  28.  We  had  a  blessed  rain — we  rode  through  it  to 
Wilmington,  in  judge  Bassett's  coachee  :  I  was  sick,  with  night- 
watching  and  fevers,  and  a  disturbed  stomach.  I  lodged  for  the 
night  with  Allen  M'Lean — my  fever  rose. 

Pennsylvania. — Saturday  ,30.  On  my  way  to  Philadelphia,  I 
called  once  more  upon  my  old  friend  Mary  Whitby.  In  the  city, 
I  found  many  things  I  cannot  here  relate — some  pleasing  and  some 
painful. 

Our  conference  opened  on  the  first  of  May.  We  had  an  in- 
crease of  probationers.  In  two  sittings  we  did  not  get  through  the 
first  question — Who  are  admitted  upon  trial  ?  We  appointed  a  com- 


1802.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL,  til 

mittee  at  jive  to  manage  the  temporal  concerns,  and  recommended 
a  day  of  fasting  and  prayer  to  be  observed  on  the  fourth  of  May, 
for  the  conference,  the  church  in  general,  and  the  continent  at 
large.  By  a  hasty  calculation,  I  find  1  have  rode  three  thousand 
three  hundred  and  three  miles,  from,  and  returning  to  Philadelphia. 

To  my  happy  surprise,  George  Roberts  and  John  M'Claskey 
came  forward  and  moved  that  the  brethren  of  the  city  who  had 
bought  the  Academy,  should  have  the  offer  of  a  preacher  :  the  con- 
ference at  once  agreed  that  the  superintendents  of  the  Methodists 
of  the  United  States  should  make  them  an  overture  upon  the  best 
terms — there  was  but  one  dissenting  voice. 

We  had  great  peace  throughout  the  sitting  ;  although  there 
were  many  things  to  occupy  our  thoughts  :  my  mind  was  taken  up 
in  entering  the  minutes ;  and  in  making  needful  changes.  After 
voting  the  next  sitting  of  our  conference  at  Duck-Creek,  we  rose 
on  Thursday  the  sixth  Inst. 

Sunday  9.  I  preached  at  St.  George's  upon  Rom.  xiv.  19.  At 
Ebenezer  upon  Philip,  ii.  12 — 16.  and  at  Bethel,  among  the  Afri- 
cans, on  Titus  ii.  11,  12. 

Monday  19.  I  had  a  sudden  thought  that  it  would  be  best  to  cross 
at  Gloucester ;  we  did  so,  and  had  a  sudden  passage,  in  a  noble 
boat,  to  the  Jersey  shore — we  sailed  over  in  eight  or  ten  minutes. 

New-Jersey. — We  came  on  to  Clemmell,  dined  at  Robert 
Neweli's,  and  attended  our  appointment  at  three  o'clock  :  brother 
Whatcoat  made  an  improvement  upon  Isaiah  xxv.  20,  21.  My 
mind  was  in  an  unexpected  manner  led  to  John  ii.  15.  I  wake 
myself:  I  had  probably  lost  thirty  hours  in  the  city. 

Tuesday  11.  We  rode  to  Henry  Frith's  and  dined  ;  after  which 
we  attended  our  appointment  at  Salem.  My  mind  here  was  over- 
ruled on  my  subject — I  made  a  sudden  choice,  whilst  I  was  singing 
a  hymn,  of  1  Cor.  vii.  29 — 31.  We  had  many  serious  people  at  Sa- 
lem.    We  returned  to  Henry  Frith's,  and  lodged  there. 

Pennsylvania, — Wednesday  12.  We  had  a  blessed  rain,  but  not 
pleasing  to  ride  through  to  Humphrey's  meeting-house  at  Pitts- 
grove.  Bishop  Whatcoat  preached  upon  the  abundant  entrance;  I 
only  exhorted  upon  the  seasons— natural  and  spiritual,  and  read 
Mr.  Hodges's  letter.     We  lodged  at  Joseph  Newkirk's. 

Thursday  13.  We  came  to  Bethel,  and  I  spoke  on  "  Be  thou 
faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life."  The  rain 
fell  upon  us  as  we  rode  to  Daniel  Bates's. 

Friday  14.  We  rode  to  Moores-Town,  and  held  a  meeting  at  Hugh 


<.>2  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  jj  180~. 

Hollinshead's.     Brother  Whatcoat  spoke  upon  "  The  kingdom  of 
God  is  not  in  word  but  in  power ;"  it  was  late,  and  I  therefore  occu- 
pied about  fifteen  minutes  in  exhorting  against  making  light  of  the 
Gospel. 

Saturday  15.  In  our  route  to  New-Mills  through  the  mount,  in 
the  hollow,  we  found  the  road  greatly  improved.  I  have  rode  about 
four  hundred  towards  the  four  thousand  miles — My  mind,  in  gene- 
ral, is  kept  in  great  peace.  After  thirty  one  years'  acquaintance, 
William  Budd  and  myself  still  live — and,  I  hope,  live  for  God,  and 
to  his  glory. 

Sunday  16.  At  New-Mills  I  preached  upon  Philip,  ii.  12 — 16. 
We  had  an  open  season  :  the  people  are  in  living  exercise,  and 
souls  are  coming  home  to  God. 

Monday  17.  Through  heavy,  continued  rain,  we  came  on  to 
Cross-Weeks.  We  dined  with  Mr.  Lovell ;  and  after  drying  our 
cloth,  about  two  o'clock  went  to  the  meeting-house.  Here  we 
found  a  fire  and  a  stove,  and  warmth  and  comfort :-— how  different 
this  from  visiting  an  open  house  in  the  woods,  with  wind  and  rain 
beating  upon  you,  and  sitting  in  your  damp  dress  and  a  damp  house 
for  three  hours,  after  which,  you  are  to  ride  five  or  ten  miles  to  a 
bad  lodging,  where  you  are  to  dry  yourself  and  find  comfort  if  you 
can  ! 

Tuesday  1 8.  At  Enley 's  I  spoke  on  Hebr.  xii.  1,2.;  after  preach- 
ing we  rode  to  Captain  Covell's,  an  old  English  Methodist  sea-cap- 
tain. 

New-Jersey. — At  Milford — a  cold  day  and  (ew  people.  We 
visited  Sylvester  Hutchinson,  in  an  afflicted  and  low  state  of  body. 

Thursday  20.  We  had  a  weary  ride  to  Brunswick  :  my  subject 
here  was  Rev.  xvii.  14.  Next  day  we  came  to  Drake's:  bishop 
Whatcoat  preached  to  the  preachers  present — Totten,  Mills,  Clark, 
to  which  I  add  the  family,  and  three  others. 

Saturday  22.  We  came  upon  Staten-Island  at  the  old  Blazing- 
Star.  I  called  at  the  mansion  of  Justice  Wright,  where  I  had 
been  entertained,  and  where  I  had  preached  almost  thirty  one  years 
past.  I  was  thankful  to  find  Mrs.  Wright  happy  in  God,  although 
afflicted  in  body.  Here  I  saw  the  third  generation  rising  into 
accountability  :  we  prayed,  and  were  comforted  together.  We 
housed  for  the  night  with  Joseph  Totten  upon  the  south  side. 

Sabbath  23.  N.  Snethen,  who  had  been  on  a  visit  home,  came  up 
with  us  to-day.  I  had  an  opportunity  of  reading  his  answer  to  Mr. 
O'KeMv's  Rejoinder  to  his,  N.  Snethen's,  Reply. 


TSQ2.}  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY;S  JOURNAL.  63 

Whilst  at  Milfbrd,  I  read  the  inscription  on  the  gravestone  of 
Ann  Hutchinson,  her  maiden  name  was  Simpson  ;  she  was  born 
upon  Long-Island,  and  married  in  the  county  of  Middlesex,  state 
of  New-Jersey.  She  was  the  mother  of  thirteen  children  ;  and 
the  great,  great  grandmother  of  upwards  of  three  hundred  chil- 
dren :  she  died,  aged  a  hundred  and  one  years,  nine  months,  and 
seven  days,  in  January,  1801.  About  eighty,  she  in  a  great  degree, 
lost  her  sight ;  about  ninety,  it  returned  ;  her  hair  changed  a  few 
years  ago  from  white  to  a  dark-brown.  I  have  seen  her,  and  con- 
versed with  her  :  at  this  advanced  age  she  did  not  appear  to  be 
weary  of  the  world. 

My  soul  hath  been  oppressed  with  deep  and  sore  temptations  : 
it  may  be  thus,  that  I  should  not  be  lifted  up  at  the  prosperity  of 
the  church,  and  increase  of  ministers  and  members.  I  have  a 
variety  of  letters,  conveying  the  pleasing  intelligence  of  the  work 
of  God  in  every  state,  district,  and  in  most  of  the  circuits  in  the 
Union.  Ride  on,  blessed  Redeemer,  until  all  the  states  and  nations 
of  the  earth  are  subdued  unto  thy  sacred  sway  ! 

Sunday  23.  At  the  meeting-house  upon  Staten-Island,  at  the  old 
Blazing  Star,  my  subject  was  Matt.  xxii.  5.  The  rain  probably 
deprived  us  of  half  our  congregation.  After  administering  the 
sacrament,  we  rode  in  the  rain  to  Nicholas  Crouchonson's,  at  the 
east  end  :  my  text  here  was  Acts  v.  30 — 32.  Several  came  for- 
ward and  joined  the  society.  I  have  visited  upon  the  island  for 
thirty-one  years  ;  and  I  am  pleased  to  find  there  is  a  revival  of 
religion. 

Monday  24.  I  came  to  Elizabethtown  : — unwell  as  I  had  been  on 
the  Sabbath  evening,  and  deprived  of  rest,  I  was  expected  to 
preach  at  eight  o'clock  :  my  subject  was  Ephes.  ii.  10.  Wonders 
v.'ill  never  cease. — Nothing  would  serve,  but  I  must  marry  Thomas 
Morrell  to  a  young  woman  :  such  a  solitary  wedding,  I  suppose, 
has  been  but  seldom  seen — behold  father  Morrell,  seventy-five— 
father  Whatcoat,  sixty-six — Francis  Asbury,  fifty-seven — and  the 
ceremony  performed,  solemnly,  at  the  solemn  hour  of  ten  at  night! 

New-York. — Tuesday  26.  We  came  to  New-York  ,  and  took  up 
our  lodging  at  Mr.  Suckley's. 

We  advance  towards  the  completion  of  four  thousand  miles  for 
the  present  yeSr.  I  have  had  great  exercises  in  going  through 
rain  and  continual  labour  ;  but  have  been  blest  with  great  peace  by 
my  good  and  gracious  God. 


64  BEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy'S   JOURNAL.  [1802. 

My  first  public  exercise  in  the  city  was  in  the  African  church, — 
a  very  neat  wooden  house,  but  by  far  too  small :  my  text  was 
Ephes.  ii.  11  —  14. 

Friday  28.  I  spoke,  in  John-street,  upon  1  Thess.  ii.  4 — 9. 

Sunday  30.  After  Bishop  Whatcoat  had  preached,  I  read  letters 
respecting  the  great  revival  of  religion,  westward  and  southward  ; 
the  death  of  Sarah  Hutchinson  gave  occasion  to  my  preaching  her 
funeral  sermon  at  the  Bowery  church,  in  the  afternoon.  The  de- 
ceased was  the  daughter  of  Frederick  Devoue,  whose  house  and 
family,  in  New-Rochelle,  were  the  first  to  receive  and  welcome 
the  Methodist  preachers  ;  and  thus  became  the  gate  by  which  we 
have  had  such  an  abundant  and  permanent  entrance  into  the  state 
of  New-York  :  after  sitting  under  the  ministry  of  the  Gospel 
above  thirty  years,  the  saint,  as  I  was  informed  by  her  sister  Hester 
Wilson,  died  very  happy  in  God. 

Tuesday,  Jiane  1.  We  opened  our  yearly  conference  in  John- 
street  meeting  house  ;  and  continued  our  labours  in  great  peace 
and  union.  We  have  a  large  admission  of  preachers  upon  trial  as 
travellers  :  at  this  conference  there  are  twenty-two ;  and  in  six 
conferences,  sixty-three. 

Saturday  5.  We  had  a  day  of  solemn  fasting  and  prayer  for  the 
church,  the  conference,  the  continent,  and  for  the  world  ;  upon 
the  eve  of  which,  I  preached  from  2  Cor.  ii.  14,  15.  with  great 
plainness,  and  so  much  fire  as  made  my  earthly  tabernacle  very 
restless  through  the  night.  John  M'Claskey  gave  us  the  first  ser- 
mon upon  Joel  ii.  15 — 17. 

Sunday  6.  We  had  a  love-feast  at  eight  o'clock,  preaching  at  ten 
o'clock,  and  sacrament  at  twelve  o'clock  :  some  good  shakings 
went  through  the  house,  but  there  was  nothing  very  signal.  The 
collection  for  the  preachers  gave  occasion  to  a  sermon,  which  I 
must  needs  preach  :  it  was  done  upon  1  Cor.  xvi.  14.  I  attended, 
and  read  a  letter  at  the  Bowery  church,  where  a  collection  for  the 
same  purpose  was  also  made.  At  six  o'clock  I  preached  in  the 
North-River  church  on  Luke  xi.  13.  and  so  we  closed  our  labours 
in  the  city.  But  instead  of  a  page,  it  would  require  a  volume  to 
tell  the  restless  tossings  I  have  had — the  difficulties  and  anxieties 
I  have  felt,  about  preachers  and  people,  here  and  elsewhere — alter- 
nate joy  and  sorrow — but  I  have  been  supported— R  am  done :  T 
am  gone — New-York,  once  more,  farewell ! 


1802.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY5S  JOURNAL.  65 

Monday  7.  We  had  a  very  warm,  dusty  ride  to  the  widow  Sher- 
wood's ;  where  we  held  meeting  at  four  o'clock. 

As  it  appeared  to  be  the  wish  and  will  of  this  conference  that  1 
should  be  at  that  of  Monmouth,  I  desired  N.  Snethen  to  go  upon 
my  appointments. 

How  sweet  to  me  are  all  the  moving  and  still-life  scenes  which 
now  surround  me  on  every  side  ! — The  quiet  country-houses  ;  the 
fields  and  orchards,  bearing  the  promise  of  the  fruitful  year ;  the 
flocks  and  herds,  the  hills  and  vales,  and  dewy  meads  ;  the  gliding 
streams  and  murmuring  brooks  :  and  thou,  too,  solitude — with  thy 
attendants,  silence  and  meditation — how  dost  thou  solace  my  pen- 
sive mind  after  the  tempest  of  fear,  and  care,  and  tumult,  and 
talk  experienced  in  the  noisy,  bustling  city  !  "  where  will  they 
send  me? — to  Hampshire — to  Rhode-Island — to  Connecticut — to 
Canada  ?"  One  preacher  wishes  to  go  where  another  dreads  to  be 
sent,  and  smiles  at  the  fears  of  his  more  timid  brother.  "  But," 
say  the  citizens,  "  how  shall  we  be  supplied  ? — "  such  an  one  will 
be  too  strict,  and  may  put  us  out  of  order — a  second  will  not  keep 
the  congregations  together  ;  and  our  collections  will  not  be  made— 
a  third  will  not  please  ;  because  he  is  not  a  lively  preacher  ;  and 
we  want  a  revival  of  religion."  Ah  !  the  half  is  not  told  of  the 
passions,  parties,  hopes  and  fears  amongst  the  best  of  men,  through 
ignorance  and  mistake.  This,  at  least,  may  be  said  of  the  Metho- 
dists of  New-York — they  are  righteous  over-much  in  their  kindness 
to  their  friends. 

Tuesday  8.  I  preached  at  New-Rochelle  meeting-house  on 
Psalm  cxlv.  8 — 11.     We  dined  at  Ramsen  Burtis's. 

Connecticut. — Wednesday  9.  We  were  at  James  Banks's,  By? 
ram-River  :  Bishop  Whatcoat  preached  :  I  only  exhorted,  and 
read  a  letter.  Next  day  I  preached  at  the  Old  Well,  at  Absalom 
Day's,  near  Norwalk,  upon  Acts  iii.  26.  I  had  to  walk  out  at  eight 
o'clock  in  the  night,  to  a  crouded  school-house.  There  has  been 
a  small  stir  here  ;  and  now,  amongst  Congregationalists,  Episcopa- 
lians, and  Methodists,  it  is  who  shall.  Brother  Whatcoat  was  very 
ill  with  a  bilious  fever  :  I  was  afraid  of  pushing  him  too  swiftly. 

Friday  10.  After  a  few  hours'  sleep  in  the  night,  we  came  off 
early  to  Joseph  Hall's,  in  Stratfield  :  here  we  dined,  prayedj 
and  parted,  continuing  on  through  Bridgeport,  (formerly  New- 
iields)  where  we  saw  an  elegant  Episcopal  meeting-house,  which 
some  would  call  a  church  :  in  Stratford  we  stopped  at  Elnathan 
Wheeler's,  where  our  weary  bodies  and  spirits  were  refreshed* 

Vol.  HI.  9 


00  rev.    FRANCIS   ASBURy'S   JOURNAL.  [1802. 

1 

Next  morning  we  moved  off  in  earnest,  expecting  to  reach  North 
Bristol,  but  at  the  ferry  our  courage  was  somewhat  damped — the 
boat  was  fast  aground,  and  the  tide  was  low  :  nevertheless,  the 
boat  from  the  other  side  came  to  our  relief,  and  handed  us  across 
Housatonic  in  six  minutes.  With  the  kind  family  of  Mr.  Jocelin 
•we  rested  two  hours  in  New-Haven.  I  was  pleased  to  hear  that 
\he  students  of  Yale  College,  as  many  as  ninety  or  one  hundred, 
ftad  been  under  gracious  impressions.  They  would  come  to  hear 
the  Methodists,  and  like  other  very  genteel  people,  mock  and  de- 
ride ;  but  God  Struck  some  of  the  vilest  of  them  by  the  ministry  of 
Samuel  Merwin  ;  this  may  be  denied  ;  but  it  is  known  to  God,  and 
to  their  own  consciences.  At  North  Guildford  we  stopped  at  Mr. 
Talman's,  fed,  and  continued  on  to  Josiah  Coan's,  where  we 
housed  for  the  night,  weak  and  weary. 

Sunday  12.  At  West  Haddam  I  preached  to  a  few ;  there  had  been 
no  notice.  Bishop  Whatcoat,  feeble  as  he  Was,  spoke  in  the  after- 
noon. I  read  some  letters,  giving  an  account  of  the  prosperity  of  the 
work  of  God,  south  and  west.  This  has  been  a  trying  week  to  body 
soul,  and  spirit :  I  have  made  out  four  hundred  and  twenty  miles, 
exceedingly  rocky  and  rude.  Should  I  live  to  be  as  old  as  Mr.  Wes- 
ley, and  travel  as  long  as  he  did,  yet  shall  I  never  see  a  Maryland 
in  Connecticut.  In  West  Haddam  our  people  have  nearly  finished 
their  meeting-house  :  it  has  a  most  excellent  pulpit,  and  a  neat 
sanctuary  round  it,  simply  enclosed.  We  lodged  with  John  Wil- 
cox ;  he  is  faint,  yet  faithful ;  and  waiting  for  the  consolation  of 
Israel,  in  holiness  and  glory.  My  soul  is  like  a  weaned  child,  to 
do  and  to  suffer,  to  make  rest  more  desirable  in  pursuit,  and  more 
abundantly  satisfying  in  the  enjoyment :  to  say  not  a  word  about 
earthly  things,  my  spirit  has  been  greatly  assaulted,  and  divinely 
supported  in  grace,  in  God,  in  Christ,  in  the  hope  of  rest,  rest,  rest, 
eternal  rest. 

Monday  14.  We  crossed  to  Connecticut  River,  and  came  to  Mid- 
dle Haddam,  lodging  at  Elisha  Day's  ;  but  it  is  night  in  this  place  : 
— a  little  meeting-house,  a  little  society,  and  little  religion. 

Tuesday  15.  I  preached  upon  Acts  viii.  6.  "  And  Philip  went 
down  to  the  city  of  Samaria,  and  preached  Christ  unto  them."  I 
inquired  how  the  apostles  "  preached  Christ."  To  sinndrs  the 
atonement ;  to  be  apprehended  by  faith,  preceded  by  repentance  : 
in  believers  the  "  hope  of  glory."  It  was  observed — it  appear- 
ed, according  to  the  divine  attributes  of  justice,  mercy,  truth,  and 
love,  that  there  must  be  a  general  provision  for  all ;  such  as  are  in 


1£02.]  REV.  FRAJNCIS  ASEURY's  JOURNAL,  G7 

God  prove  it  must  be  so.  "  Preached  Christ"  as  the  anointed  of 
God  ;  a  prophet,  priest,  and  king,  generally  and  personally,  in  his 
operations  of  grace.  The  people  were  attentive.  After  preach- 
ing, I  ordained  Jeremiah  Stocking  a  deacon. 

Wednesday  16.  We  dined  at  Lyme,  and  rode  on  to  New-London. 
Brother  Whatcoat  preached  on  2  Cor.  vi.  5.  the  house  was  crowd- 
ed, and  the  young  men  and  boys  very  disorderly.  We  lodged  at 
Richard  Douglass's. 

Thursday  17.  We  had  a  pleasant  ride  to  Norwich — behold!  the 
temple  hath  been  burnt  down,  and  more  elegantly  rebuilt  since  I 
was  here.  Thus  have  they  made  a  benefit  of  a  calamity.  Bishop 
Whatcoat  preached  upon  Christ's  love  for  the  church:  I  read  a  let- 
ter and  prayed. 

On  Tuesday  we  came  to  Nathan  Herrick's,  at  North-Preston  :  1 
read  some  letters,  and  then  preached  upon  Titus  ii.  11,  12.  :  we 
had  an  open  time.     I  made  two  simple  propositions— 

I.  The  operations  of  grace  upon  sinners  ;  and 

II.  The  operations  of  grace  upon  believers,  by  which  they  live 
in  self-denial  of  all  evil ;  and  bear  the  cross,  enjoy  the  life  of  God, 
and  exercise  themselves  in  Christian  temperance,  justice,  and 
holiness. 

Rhode-Island.— Saturday  19.  To  General  Lippet's,  at  Cran- 
ston, twenty-eight  miles. 

Sunday  20.  1  opened  the  meeting  at  half  past  ten  o'clock  ;  then 
followed  the  ordination,  then  the  sacrament ;  after  which  brother 
Whatcoat  preached  upon  Eph.  iii.  8.  My  subject  was  2  Cor.  iii. 
11,  12.  In  my  improvement  I  showed  the  character  and  offices  of 
Moses  compared  with  Christ :  the  glory  of  Moses  and  the  su- 
perior glory  of  Christ :  the  letter  and  spirit  of  the  law,  the  let- 
ter and  spirit  of  the  Gospel ;  and  I  dwelt  largely  upon  the  lat- 
ter. Plainness  of  speech,  simple  and  searching  ;  pointed  to  every 
case  and  character.  My  work  was  imperfect :  I  had  not  time,  and 
perhaps,  not  skill  to  finish  and  properly  apply  so  great  a  subject^ 
We  had  four  exhortations  ;  and  concluded  about  four  o'clock. 

Massachusetts. — Monday  21  We  dined  at  Mr.  Turpin's  iu 
Providence,  and  came  on  to  Joseph  Guild's  in  Attleborough  ;  mak- 
ing a  journey  of  about  twenty-six  miles.  Next  day,  after  a  heavy, 
hungry,  weary,  dusty  ride,  we  reached  Boston.  I  clpsed  the  la- 
bours of  the  day  by  a  sermon  from  1  Peter,  and  had  two  Baptist 
and  three  Methodist  preachers  to  hear  me.     It  was  an  open  time. 

Wednesday  23.  At  Lynn  I  spoke  on  Hoseax.  12. 

Thursday  24.   We  reached  Marble-Head.     Brother  Whatcoat 


r^.'  REV.  IRAN  CIS   ASKL'JIY's  JOUKJJAL.  [U'.Ol* 

preached;  I  gave  an  exhortation :  our  audience,  chiefly  females, 
nearly  filled  the  room.  Mr.  Boiler  is  our  good  friend,  (but  not  a 
brother)  in  lending  his  own  house,  and  assisting  us  largely  in  build- 
ing ours  for  the  worship  of  God. 

Friday  25.  We  rode  round  the  tomb  of  that  old  prophet  of 
the  Lord,  George  Whitefield.  We  stopped  at  the  sisters  Eaton's, 
in  Salisbury,  and  allow  ourselves  to  have  made  six  hundred  and 
twenty  miles. 

New-Hampshire. — In  Newburyport  are  great  improvements, 
and  beautiful  houses  in  and  around  :  as  in  Boston,  every  thing 
thrives  but  religion. 

Saturday  26.  At  Salisbury  brother  Whatcoat  gave  us  a  lecture 
on  1  John  v.  4. 

Sunday  27.  We  had  a  love-feast  at  Jemima  Eaton's  ;  a  sermon 
at  the  meeting-house,  and  administered  the  sacrament.  I  spoke  on 
Zech.  xii.  10.  Brother  Whatcoat  in  the  afternoon  from  2  Cor.  v. 
20.  Joshua  Taylor  preached  in  the  evening.  It  was  hard  labour, 
and  by  no  means  agreeable  to  me  to  preach  in  other  people's 
houses  ;  to  which  I  may  add,  that  I  was  under  bodily  and  spiritual 
infirmity.  It  is  our  duty  to  suffer  and  to  serve  :  and  it  is  true  that 
we  submit  to  the  one,  and  will,  by  grace,  do  the  other.  We  feel 
the  prejudices  of  the  people.  They  may  think  we  wish  to  invade 
their  rights  ;  but  indeed  they  are  mistaken,  for  I  would  rather 
preach  under  a  tree. 

Monday  28.  We  came  away  in  haste  to  Greenland,  breakfasted, 
resumed  our  journey,  passing  through  Berwick,  and  brought  up  at 
Deacon  Clarke's,  in  Wells  :  and  thus  one  day's  ride  of  fifty-one 
miles  brought  us  across  the  state  of  New- Hampshire. 

District  of  Maine — Tuesday  29.  We  stopped  at  Falmouth  ia 
the  District  of  Maine  ;  and  within  sight  of  Portland.  Although  we 
rode  thirty  miles  I  was  obliged  to  preach — my  subject  was  2 
Tim.  iv.  7. 

Wednesday  SO.  We  had  a  racking  ride  of  about  forty-five  milas 
to  Monmouth  ;  our  breakfast  we  took  at  Gray  ;  and  dined  with  Mr. 
Bradbury  at  New  Gloucester. 

Thursday,  July  1.  Our  conference  continued  three  days.  We 
held  it  in  the  upper  room  of  Sewell  Prescott's  house.  We  had  fif- 
teen members,  and  nine  probationers  ;  the  married  preachers  who 
came  deficient  to  our  conference  received  about  one  hundred  and 
twenty  dollars  ;  the  single  brethren  about  sixty-two  dollars  ;  and 
the  probationers  a  small  donation  of  two  dollars  each,  which  came 
from  far.     We  had  three  sermons.     The  whole  of  my  doing  wa.« 


Id02,]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's   JOURNAL.  6!J 

to  read  two  letters,  exhort  a  little,  and  examine  the  deacons, 
Samuel  Hillman,  John  Gove,  Gilman  Moody,  and  Joseph  Baker, 
whom  brother  Whatcoat  ordained.  The  business  of  our  confe- 
rence was  conducted  in  great  peace  and  order.  I  can  rejoice  that 
by  supplies  from  Baltimore  and  New- York  conferences,  added  to 
those  of  the  District  of  Maine  and  of  Boston,  we  have  a  goodly 
number  of  faithful,  zealous  young  men  :  in  seven  conferences  we 
Lave  taken  upon  trial  sixty-sev*en  probationers. 

Sunday  4.  We  concluded  with  a  love-feast,  sacrament,  and  the 
ordination  of  five  elders,  to  wit :  Comfort  Smith,  Epaphras  Kibley, 
Daniel  Webb,  Asa  Heath,  and  Reuben  Hubbard  :  they  kneeled 
outside  at  the  door  of  the  house,  and  received  the  imposition  of 
hands  from  myself  and  the  elders  present :  may  they  open  the  door 
of  the  church  of  God  in  discipline,  and  the  way  to  heaven,  by 
preaching  the  Gospel  !  Five  sermons  were  preached  through  the 
day  :  the  women  chiefly  occupied  the  inside,  whilst  the  men  stood 
without ;  it  was  an  open  time,  and  some  felt  the  word  :  of  (he  mul- 
titude congregated  on  the  occasion,  (allowed  to  be  between  two 
and  three  thousand)  we  hope  many  went  away  profited. 

Monday  5.  We  came  off  early  and  in  haste  ;  breakfasted  at  Mr. 
Hirrick's,  in  Lewistown  ;  crossed  Androscoggin  River  at  the  Falls  ; 
dined  at  Mr.  Ramsdale's,  in  Gray,  and  brought  up  at  Mr.  Baker's, 
in  Falmouth  ;  having  made  forty -five  miles. 

New-Hampshire. — Tuesday  6.  We  passed  through  Scarborough, 
Saco,  Kennebunk,  Wells,  Berwick,  and  Somerswor;h,  which  last 
is  in  New-Hampshire :  thence  onward  through  Dover,  Madbury, 
Lee,  and  Epping. 

Thursday  8.  We  held  a  meeting  at  Captain  Fogg's,  in  Epping  ; 
my  subject  was  Tit.  ii.  2.  George  Pickering  spoke  in  the  evening 
from  1  Cor.  xv.  34,  After  preaching  we  rode  twelve  miles  to 
Hawke.  On  our  route  next  day  to  Waltham  we  passed  through 
Kingston,  Plasto,  Haverhill,  Andover,  Wilmington,  Woburn,  Lex- 
ington and  Lincoln,  nearly  completing  another  thousand  miles. 
We  shali  have  a  great  opening  in  New-Hampshire  ;  and  a  district 
formed  there  in  a  few  years. 

Massachusetts. — I  crossed  New-Hampshire  from  Saybrook  to 
Berwick,  a  distance  of  thirty  miles,  and  recrossed  from  Berwick 
to  Plasto,  a  distance  of  forty  miles.  The  native  products  of  the  soil 
are  the  spruce,  pine,  cedar,  birch,  oak,  ash — it  is  a  rich  lumber 
country,  well  watered,  with  fine  streams  for  saw  mills.  The  face 
of  the  earth  is  not  pleasing  ;  but  it  is  well  improved  ;  the  pros- 


'70  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802. 

pects  for  Indian  corn  are  good,  the  clover-fields  luxuriant,  and  the 
meadows  beautiful :  the  dwellings  are  handsome,  and  the  meet- 
ing-houses stand  within  sight  of  each  other. 

Haverhill  bridge  engaged  my  attention.  It  is  thrown  across 
the  Merrimack  River  by  three  arches  ;  a  distance  of  probably  six- 
teen hundred  feet.  I  also  saw  the  grand  canal,  designed,  princi- 
cally,  to  float  lumber  from  the  Merrimack  to  Boston.  For  about 
twenty-seven  miles  they  have  rocksfand  swamps,  and  hills  to  wind 
and  labour  through  ;  nevertheless,  they  can  draw  a  raft  of  great 
length  along,  after  passing  the  locks,  which  admit  about  seventy 
feet  at  a  time  ;  they  link  the  disparted  fragments  together  again, 
and  move  forward.  This  navigation  will  be  a  vast  source  of 
wealth  to  the  country,  as  well  as  a  great  convenience  in  the  pas- 
sage outward  and  inward  of  domestic  and  foreign  products  of  every 
species — and  it  will,  doubtless,  also  be  profitable  to  the  company. 

Saturday  10.  I  rested,  fasted,  and  wrote  a  little.  I  have  passed 
so  rapidly  along,  that  lately  I  have  had  time  only  for  ordinary  and 
common  exercises. 

Mr.  Bemus's  family  is  singularly  blessed  in  four  successive 
generations  :  elder  Pickering's  two  children,  a  son  called  Francis 
Asbury,  and  a  daughter  named  Maria,  make  the  fourth. 

Sabbath  11.  I  spent  the  Sabbath  at  Waltham.  I  preached  on 
Matt.  vii.  14.  and  again  on  Gal.  i.  3,  4.  My  sensations  were  not 
very  pleasant,  and  the  young  people  seemed  very  wild  ;  there 
was  an  old  drunkard  too,  who  stood  up  and  spoke  once  and  again  : 
perhaps  they  will  behave  better  the  next  Sabbath  I  give  them. 

I  feel  that  fasting  at  my  time  of  life,  if  only  once  a  month,  brings 
on  such  a  dejection  of  spirits  I  can  hardly  bear  up  under  it.  I 
have  had  lately  two  official  cordials,  ironically  speaking.  They 
know  how  to  come  at  me  although  four  or  five  hundred  miles  dis- 
tant.— Lord,  help  me  to  do  and  suffer  all  I  ought  to  do  and  suffer 
for  Thee,  thy  church,  and  ministers  ! 

Wednesday  12.  We  came  through  Needham.  George  Picker- 
ing stopped  to  demand  the  church  rates  taken  from  the  Metho- 
dists, amounting  to  one  hundred  dollars  or  upwards  :  this  is  to  pay 
the  Independent  ministers,  whose  forefathers  fled  from  Episcopal 
tyranBy  :  yet,  be  it  known  unto  all  men,  their  children's  children  are 
risen  up  and  glory  iu  supporting  the  Gospel  according  to  lazv. 
Happy  the  descendants  who  condemn  not  themselves  by  doing  that 
which  their  ancestors  disallowed !  We  lodged  at  Mr.  Sterne's,  at 
Milford. 


1802.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL.  71 

Tuesday  13.  We  came  upon  th-  turnpike  road  through  to 
Thompson.  I  was  told  Mr.  Dow,  an  Independent  minister,  had  re- 
linquished his  legal  claim  of  salary,  trusting  to  the  willing  minds 
of  the  public,  who  gave  him  mor    by  voluntary  subscription. 

Connecticut. — I  had  to  preach  at  NicolPs  meeting-house,  but 
being  taken  with  a  bilious  headach,  I  said  but  little  :  my  subject 
was  Hebr.  iv.  14,  15,  16. 

Wednesday  14.  I  rode  to  Captain  Lyon's,  in  Canterbury:  after 
dinner  I  continued  on  over  the  rocks  and  hills  to  Windham.  We 
had  a  meeting  at  Robinson's  :  I  was  able  to  preach  upon  Isaiah  lv. 
6,  7.  Here  God  had  wrought,  and  the  people  appeared  to  be  very 
lively. 

Thursday  15.  We  scaled  the  hills  of  rocks,  passing  through 
Lebanon,  and  stopped  at  Joseph  Bass's.  Here  will  be  the  begin- 
ning of  a  society. 

We  came  to  Hebron.  Brother  Borroughs  attended  me.  The 
travelling  preachers  cannot  leave  their  appointments.  At  four 
o'clock  in  the  evening  our  new  house  in  Hebron  was  consecrated  : 
the  subject  on  this  occasion  was  chosen  from  Exod.  xx.  24.  It 
was  an  open  time. 

Friday  16.  We  rode  to  the  city  of  Hartford,  stopping  at  a  bro- 
ther's house  upon  Glastonbury  hills,  and  at  Mr.  Spencer's,  and  at 
Squire  Pitkin's  :  we  talked  and  prayed,  (it  was  all  that  we  could 
do)  and  pushed  on  to  Winstead.     We  lodged  with  Doctor  Lynde. 

Saturday  17-  We  came  up  the  turnpike  road  to  New-Hartford, 
upon  the  banks  of  Farmington  River. 

Saturday  17,  and  Sunday  18.  We  held  quarterly  meeting,  Litch- 
field circuit.  The  Sabbath  day  congregation  was  small,  owing  to 
the  rain  after  the  great  heat.  I  spoke  from  2  Thess.  iii.  1.  We 
had  feeling  times  and  hearts,  and  a  living  love-feast.  In  heat  and 
in  haste,  we  rode  on  to  Colonel  Burrell's,  in  Canaan,  and  there 
lodged. 

Monday  19.  We  came  to  brother  Church's,  near  the  Falls  of 
Housatonic- River.      Our    route    led    us     through    Salisbury    and 
Sharon,  across  the  line  into  the  state  of  New- York. 

New-York. — At  Sharon  and  at  Lewis's  we  called  in.  From 
the  eastern  to  the  western  line  of  Connecticut,  that  is,  from 
Thompson  to  Sharon,  I  calculate  the  distance  to  be  one  hundred 
and  thirty  miles — it  cannot  exceed  one  hundred  and  forty  miles. 
At  Rhinebeck  I  make  up  four  thousand  miles,  and  have  one  hun- 


7~  KLV.  FRANCIS  ASBUKY'S  JOUKNAL.  [1802. 

tired  in  advance  towards  the  fifth  thousand  I  shall  have  made 
since  the  last  of  July,  1801.  Of  the  little  time  we  have,  may  be 
judged,  by  the  length  of  our  rides,  day  after  day  ;  yet,  at  this 
speed  must  I  go  to  meet  the  conferences,  and  visit  the  principal 
societies.     My  soul  is  at  times  greatly  drawn  out  in  prayer. 

Tuesday  20.  We  rested  at  Traveller's  Rest,  upon  the  solitary 
banks  of  Hudson,  with  my  dear  friends  Freeborn  Garrettson,  and 
his  prudent,  pious  wife.     We  have  heat,  heat,  great  heat. 

Wednesday  21.  I  preached  upon  2  Cor.  iv.  7.  It  was  an  ordi- 
nation sermon  at  the  setting  apart  of  Billy  Hibbard  to  the  office  of 
an  elder.  It  is  exceeding  warm  ;  and  the  zenith  of  harvest  :  yet, 
we  had  a  congregation. 

Thursday  22.  I  had  to  tear  myself  away  from  these  precious  souls  : 
1  do  believe  God  dwells  in  this  house,  (Traveller's  Rest).  We 
came  on  to  Fishkill,  and  fed.  A  poor  intoxicated  creature  had 
sense  enough  left  to  insult  us,  and  curse  the  Methodists.  After 
feeding  at  brother  Warren's,  we  made  another  push  over  the  hills 
of  Peekskill,  and  came  to  Governor  Van  Courtlandt's.  I  have  re- 
ceived great  kindness  from  this  family.  We  have  made  forty-eight 
miles  this  day. 

Friday  23.  I  came  gently  along  down,  having  an  admirable  view 
of  the  North-River — the  indents  and  projections  of  its  lofty  and 
beautiful  banks.  1  called  on  a  brother  Anderson,  and  was  exceed- 
ingly well  treated.  For  twenty-two  miles  we  had  excessive 
heat.  I  came  to  Captain  Riqua's  by  surprise,  but  I  was  not 
therefore  made  the  less  welcome.  Religion  revives  in  New-Ro- 
chelle  circuit  :  they  have  general  prayer-meetings,  and  good  sea- 
sons of  grace  ;  that  is  the  way. 

Saturday  24.  I  came  into  New-York  about  two  o'clock  and  es- 
caped heavy  rain.  My  soul  hath  been  sweetly  stayed  upon  God 
whilst  riding  alone.  I  have  received  a  confirmation  of  the  death 
of  my  mother,  who  died  January  6,  1802.  Of  the  particulars  of 
her  last  moments  I  have  received  no  certain  account ;  but  I  learn 
that  a  certain  Mr  Emery  has  taken  all  her  property.  I  am  com- 
forted with  good  news  from  several  quarters — persecution  has 
ceased  in  Charleston,  and  the  Africans  are  growing  in  grace  :  our 
society  in  Philadelphia  becomes  more  united  :  anil  there  are  good 
appearances  in  Old  Brunswick  circuit,  Virginia. 

Sabbath  25.  In  New-York  I  preached  at  the  old  church  John- 
street,  on  Rev.  iii.   17 — 20.   at   three  o'clock,   at   the    Bowery 


1802. J  &EV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL,  4  0 

chuFch  on  Isaiah  lv.  6,  7.  at  the  African  church  at  six  o'clock  in 
the  evening  on  1  Thess.  i.  5.  It  rained  at  times  through  the  day, 
which  prevented  more  from  attending  :  it  was  a  day  of  life  to  me. 

Monday  26.  1  had  to  wait  in  the  boat,  tormented  by  heat  and 
flies — still  worse  for  my  poor  brute,  who  made  an  attempt  to  leap 
out  into  the  bay  ;  had  she  been  loose,  and  myself  at  a  distance, 
poor  Jane  would  probably  have  been  overboard.  It  came  into  my 
mind  that  we  had  preached,  and  should  yet  preach  to  little  pur- 
pose in  Newark :  this  I  mentioned  to  Mr.  Leecraft,  with  whom  I 
dined  in  New-York,  in  company  with  parson  Ogden  :  he  had 
thought  of  building  a  house  ;  and  a  small  one  parson  Ogden 
thought  he  might  well  do  himself — and  then  we  might  have  a 
church. 

New-Jersey. — I  stopped  at  Mr.  Crowell's,  in  Elizabethtown, 
and  then  came  on  to  Mr.  Piatt's,  Rahway. 

Tuesday  27.  I  stopped  in  Brunswick  at  Drake's,  and  then  push- 
ed on,  sultry  as  it  was,  and  made  it  thirty-eight  miles  to  Joseph 
Hutchinson's — with  his  new  house,  new  wife  :  will  he  not  by  and 
by  want  a  new  lease  of  his  life  1 

Wednesday  28.  I  stopped  at  Crosswick's.  I  felt  proper  sick  ; 
hut  I  was  soon  relieved  by  vinegar  and  water.  My  friend  Hewlet 
Hancock  housed  me  for  the  night.  I  found  my  dear  sister  Hancock 
feeble  and  unwell,  but  she  soon  grew  better,  and  at  family  prayer 
she  praised  the  Lord  with  a  loud  voice. 

Thursday  29.  I  stopped  at  Burlington  ;  had  a  word  or  two  with 
my  friends,  and  we  commended  each  other  to  God  in  prayer.  I 
came  on  in  haste  and  sickening  heat  to  Mr.  Manly's  traveller's  rest, 
arriving  about  twelve  o'clock.  The  fever  has  re-appeared  in  Phila- 
delphia. I  hear  great  times  have  been  known  in  Dover — above 
one  hundred  and  fifty  souls  have  felt  the  operations  of  divine  grace, 
at  the  annual  meeting  upon  the  day  of  Pentecost ;  and  great  times 
also  at  the  Milford  quarterly  meeting. 

I  thought  to  have  remained  with  my  friend  Manly,  and  take  a 
short  breathing  spell  ;  other  friends  wished  to  have  me  in  the  city, 
and  came  to  bring  me  in,  but  I  besought  them  to  let  me  stay  until 
Sabbath  morning. 

On  Sunday  morning,  according  to  appointment,  I    preached  for 

the  first  time,  in  the  college  church  (or  Academy  ;)  my  subject  was 

Exod.  xx.  24.  :  after  sermon  we  had  sacrament :  we  had  seriousness 

and  attention.     In  the  afternoon  I  preached  at  St.  George's  ;  a  gust 

Vol.  HI.  \n 


74  HLV .  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802. 

came  up,  and  few  attended.     In  the  evening  I   rode  out  to  Mr. 
Manly's. 

Monday,  August  2.  I  took  a  serious  leave,  with  fears  for  the 
health  of  the  city,  and  a  mind  impressed  with  concern  for  the 
church.  We  were  overtaken  by  rain  before  we  reached  Chester. 
After  dinner  with  Mrs.  Withy,  I  desired  Mr.  Manly,  who  had  very 
kindly  come  with  me  thus  far,  to  return.  I  proceeded  on  to  Wil- 
mington through  the  rain,  and  lodged  with  Allen  M'Lane. 

Maryland. — Tuesday  3.  I  resumed  my  journey  south,  came  as 
far  as  Isaac  Hersay's,  dined  with  him,  went  on  to  brother  George's, 
halted  awhile,  moved  forward  again,  and  brought  up  for  the  night 
with  brother  Howell,  in  Charlestown. 

Wednesday  4.  I  crossed  the  Susquehannah,  dined  with  Mr.  Smith, 
and  reached  Perry-Hall  in  the  evening.  Here  my  creature-con- 
solation was  in  part  gone — Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gough  were  absent  at  Bath. 
Nevertheless,  Mrs.  Carroll  was  here,  and  not  less  attentive  than 
her  mother.  Last  year  my  soul  travailed  for  her  health,  and  soul's 
salvation  ;  she  is  brought  to  the  experimental  knowledge  of  God, 
and  I  rejoice  over  her. 

I  have  one  day  I  can  call  my  own.  I  write,  I  read,  I  think,  and 
refit  for  the  mountains.  My  mind  is  in  great  peace,  and  has  so  been 
kept  in  all  my  labours  ;  and  my  trials,  which  come  from  almost 
every  point  of  the  compass,  shall  be  as  various  winds  to  waft  me 
to  the  haven  of  rest. 

Saturday  7.  I  came  to  Baltimore  through  excessive  warmth,  and 
lodged  with  Emanuel  Kent.  The  wife  of  our  brother  Samuel 
Coates  had  a  daughter  born  to  her,  whom  I  baptised,  naming  her 
Sophia. 

Sabbath  8.  I  preached  in  Light-street  chapel  on  Rev.  ii.  1 — 5. 
As  the  weather  was  changeable,  I  had  another  appointment  in  the 
house  ;  my  subject  was  Philippians  ii.  14,  15.  "  Do  all  things  with- 
out murmurings  or  disputing?  :  that  ye  may  be  blameless  and  harm- 
less, the  sons  of  God  without  rebuke."  First,  It  was  observed  how 
Christians  are  brought  into  the  relation  of  "sons  of  God."  Second, 
The  duties  and  privileges  of  that  relation.  Third,  The  purity 
and  sincerity  the  subjects  of  this  relation  are  called  to  experience. 
Fourth,  That  "  murmurings"  either  towards  God,  or  good  or  bad 
men,  ought  to  be  avoided  ;  and  perverse  "  disputings"  cautiously 
guarded  against ;  and  in  all  duties,  sulferings,  and  discipline,  true 
Christian  meekness  and  forbearance,  should  be  manifested. 


( a 


1802.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL. 

After  a  thunder  gust,  the  evening  cleared  away,  and  became  se- 
rene, i  preached  at  the  Howard's  Hill  market-house  at  five  o'clock, 
to  multitudes  of  people  from  Isai.  lv.  6,  7.  And  thus  ended  the 
duties  of  the  day. 

Monday  9.  I  rode  to  Robert  Carnans.  Still  intense  heat !  Next 
day  I  breakfasted  at  Charles  Carnan's  in  company  with  Nelson 
Reed  and  wife,  Joshua  Wells,  and  James  M'Cannon  ;  the  evening 
found  me  at  Henry  Willis's,  Pipe  Creek. 

On  Wednesday  I  made  an  improvement  on  Deut  x.  12.  We  only 
had  what  people  could  receive  notice  in  the  morning.  One  woman 
professed  to  find  pardon  and  peace,  and  came  forward  to  baptism, 
presenting  her  child  also. 

Thursday  12.  I  visited  Alexander  Warfield's  family  ;  and  next 
day  came  on  to  James  Higgins's,  and  preached  there  from  1  Tim. 
ii.  1 — 4.  On  Saturday  morning  I  rode  over  to  see  Edward 
Owings's  family,  and  was  comforted  in  finding  one  of  his  children, 
Miranda  Evans,  professing  to  have  found  redemption  ;  may  this 
be  a  solid  work,  and  an  earnest  for  the  whole  family!  In  the  even- 
ing  I  went  up  to  Stephen  Shelmerdine's.  My  mind  hath  been 
blessed  with  great  consolation.  I  rejoiced  to  find  the  work  of  God 
spreading  and  growing  in  Frederick  circuit,  under  the  ministry  of 
Curtis  Williams  and  Fielding  Parker. 

Sabbath  15.  At  Frederick  Town  1  once  more  spoke  ;  my  subject 
was  1  Cor.  i.  23,  24.  Here  then,  at  last,  after  more  than  thirty 
years  labour,  we  have  a  house  of  worship,  and  thirty  souls,  or  up- 
wards, in  fellowship.  In  speaking  this  morning,  I  had  some  assist- 
ance, and  I  laboured.  Some  thoughts  passed  in  my  mind  of  going 
to  the  court-house  steps  at  five  o'clock  ;  but  I  changed  my  mind,  as 
there  were  three  preachers  in  town,  to  wit,  our  brothers  Williams, 
Higgins,  and  Matthews,  I  assigned  them  the  duty,  in  the  hope  that 
their  superior  zeal  and  faith  may  be  the  means  of  converting  some 
souls  to  God  at  the  close  of  the  Sabbath. 

Monday  16.  We  held  evening  meeting  at  Samuel  Philips's :  I 
spoke  from  Philippians  iv.  6.  Sister  Philips  is  gone  :  she  was  a 
daughter  of  affliction  for  many  years,  and  died  in  peace  about  seven 
weeks  ago :  I  thought  when  I  saw  her  last  I  should  see  her  no 
more  in  time.  N.  Snethen  preached  her  funeral  sermon  :  the  text 
she  herself  had  chosen. 

On  Tuesday  we  came  through  heat,  and  over  hills,  to  Sheppard's 
Town,  Virginia.  I  found  Thomas  Boydstone,  and  Benjamin  Boyd- 
stone  and  his  wife  on  the  road  to  glory.     After  thirty  years  occa- 


76  kkv.  FUANcis  asbuhy's  JOURNAL.  [180-; 

sional  preaching  in  this  place,  wc  have  a  small  society  ;  and  by  the 
purchase  of  an  old  academy,  a  church — with  two  chimnies  in  it. 

Virginia. — Wednesday  18.  I  preached  on  Ephes.  ii  10,  Daniel 
Hitt,  and  Edward  Matthews  held  meeting  yesterday  evening  and 
this  evening.  I  have  formed  a  plan  to  go  next  fall  by  the  way  of 
Chilicothe  to  Limestone  ;  and  so  meet  the  western  yearly  confe- 
rence, should  it  be  held  in  Kentucky. 

Thursday  19.  At  Charlestown  I  preached  from  2  Cor.  vi.  1. ;  some 
souls  felt  the  energy  of  the  word.  We  dined  at  brother  Englishe's, 
and  rode  on  to  John  Davenport's  to  lodge. 

Friday  20.  We  called  at  John  Millburn's.  Next  day,  at  Millburn's 
meeting-house,  I  spoke  upon  Hebr.  x.  35,  36.  We  lodged  at 
William  Tyler's.  On  Sunday,  in  the  meeting-house  at  Winchester, 
at  eleven  o'clock,  I  preached  from  Titus  ii.  13,  14.  We  bad 
the  sacrament.  Many  felt,  and  gave  glory  to  God.  In  the  after- 
noon, under  the  shady  trees,  westward  of  the  town,  not  a  few  at- 
tended— rulers,  and  people  ;  I  read  two  letters,  and  preached  from 
Psalms  lvi.  16.  Mr.  O'Kelly  having  been  taken  ill  in  town,  I  sent 
two  of  our  brethren,  Reed  and  Walls,  to  see  him,  by  whom  I  sig- 
nified to  him,  that  if  he  wished  to  see  me,  I  would  wait  on  him  ;  he 
desired  a  visit,  which  1  made  him  on  Monday,  August  23.  We  met 
in  peace,  asked  of  each  other's  welfare,  talked  of  persons  and 
things  indifferently,  prayed,  and  parted  in  peace.  Not  a  word  was 
said  of  the  troubles  of  former  times  : — perhaps  this  is  the  last  in- 
terview we  shall  have  upon  earth.  At  Elijah  Phelp's  we  rested  on 
Monday,  and  part  of  Tuesday.  I  have  heard  of  the  flight  of  thou- 
sands from  the  city  of  Philadelphia  ;  and  that  all  the  churches, 
save  the  Episcopalian,  the  Quaker,  and  the  Methodist,  are  shut 
up.  George  Roberts  still  continues  in  the  city.  O  my  God,  keep 
him  and  his  family  alive  in  the  day  of  pestilence  ! 

Tuesday  24.  At  Stephensburg,  at  four  o'clock,  we  held  a  meet- 
ing ;  my  text  was  1  John  iii.  1 — 3. 

Wednesday  25.  Was  a  most  remarkable  day  of  heat  :  I  rested 
to  refit.  Sleep  and  appetite  failed  me.  Edward  Matthews  was 
intended  for  my  companion  to  the  Holston  district ;  but  two  of  the 
preachers  had  been  sick,  and  the  other  was  removed  ;  and  Fre- 
derick and  Berkley  circuits  had  been  neglected  at  a  time  of  the 
greatest  prospect  of  good.  We  had  a  comfortable  ride  to  Wood- 
stock, twenty  miles  :  there  was  a  gentle  rain,  and  the  weather  was 
pleasant.  My  mind  is  freely  stayed  upon  God — my  guide  in  life 
and  death.      On  Friday  we  rode  thirty-three  miles  to  brother 


4802.]  REV.  FIUNCI5  ASSl/Rr'S  JOURNAL*  77 

J.  Huysters :  some  rain  fell  on  us,  but  after  we  were  housed, 
there  came  on  an  atvful  storm  of  wind,  thunder,  lightning,  and  rain. 

Saturday  28,  Sunday  29,  and  Monday  30.  At  Rocktown.  On 
Saturday  I  spoke  in  our  house  on  1  Pet.  iii.  18.  On  Sunday, 
through  the  progress  of  the  love  feast,  there  was  great  shaking,  and 
shouting,  and  weeping,  and  praying  :  it  was  thought  best  not  to 
stop  these  exercises  by  the  more  regular  labour  of  preaching,  as 
most  of  the  persons  present  were  engaged  either  as  subjects  or 
instruments.  We  accepted  the  offer  of  the  Presbyterian  house, 
a  good  shade  not  being  near,  and  the  ground  damp,  in  which  I 
spoke  on  Zeph.  iii.  16,  17.:  there  was  great  attention,  and  some 
tenderness. 

Tuesday  31.  The  brethren  having  wish  to  continue  the  meeting 
another  day,  I  preached  on  Gen  xxxii.  26,  27.  By  way  of  intro- 
duction, 1  made  some  observations  on  the  peculiar  and  extraordi- 
nary features  in  the  life  and  character  of  the  patriarch— the  bless- 
ings of  a  temporal  nature  so  abundantly  bestowed  ;  and  the  spiritual 
blessings,  rich,  divine,  and  various,  so  freely  given  by  the  God-man 
Christ  Jesus,  with  whom  he  wrestled  and  prevailed.  Jacob  is 
asked  his  name — he  told  it :  when  he  was  justified  his  name  and 
his  nature  were  changed  ;  his  privileges  were  increased,  and  his 
power  enlarged  with  God  and  man  :  he  had  power  with  man  to 
stand  against  their  temptations  and  to  do  them  good — power  with 
God  to  ask  blessings  for  others,  and  to  receive  answers  to  prayer. 
It  was  thought,  that  in  this  three-days  meeting,  forty  or  fifty  souls 
were  converted  or  reclaimed,  and  quickened. 

In  the  afternoon  I  rode  to  brother  Young's,  in  Augusta;  I  was 
very  unwell  with  a  fever  and  headach,  and  had  a  restless  night. 

At  brother  Young's,  on  Monday,  I  spoke  on  Acts  xiii.  26.  :  meet- 
ing began  at  three  o'clock,  and  continued  until  seven  o'clock  : 
there  was  great  praying  and  shouting.  Sister  Jones  rose  up  and 
gave  an  exhortation  :  she  spoke  as  if  she  were  going  home  to  glory 
—I  felt  it :  she  reminded  me  of  sister  Jones  and  sister  Taylor,  those 
female  flames^  and  almost  martyrs  for  Jesus  :  one  of  them,  I  trust, 
has  long  been  in  glory  ;  the  other,  I  believe,  is  only  waiting  for 
her  call  to  eternal  rest.  I  found  it  was  time  for  me  to  be  off- 
preaching  for  four  or  five  days  together  was  enough  :  I  felt  weak 
in  my  breast. 

Wednesday,  September  1.  We  lodged  at  David  M'Nare's  ;  and 
next  day  came  over  the  bills,  crossing  the  branches  of  the  Shenan- 


78  REV.  FRANCIS  ASUUKv's  JOURNAL.  [1802. 

doah,  to  Brownsburg  :  night  coming  upon  us,  we  turned  aside  to 
lodge  at  Andrew  Weir's,  and  were  kindly  and  comfortably  enter- 
tained. 

On  Friday  we  passed  through  Lexington,  and  being  so  near,  I 
was  willing  to  gratify  my  curiosity  by  a  view  of  the  Natural  Bridge. 
I  walked  down  the  hill  to  look  at  the  arch  thrown,  in  a  regular 
ellipsis,  about  one  hundred  and  sixty  feet  above  a  stream,  which,  in 
the  rainy  season,  foams  and  roars  beneath  :  the  breadth  of  the 
bridge  may  be  sixty  feet,  and  the  distance  one  hundred  and  sixty 
feet  across.  On  one  side  of  the  road,  at  the  south-east  end,  large 
trees  are  growing.  Should  I  live  two  years  longer  1  may  preach 
under  the  arch.  We  dined  at  Mr.  Huston's,  and  were  honoured  as 
men  of  the  ministry. 

Hearing  that  the  circuit  preacher  was  at  Morris's,  we  turned 
aside  and  came  up — purgatory.  On  Saturday  we  crossed  James- 
River  at  Pattensburg,  dined  at  Mr.  Lockland's  upon  Back-Creek, 
and  came  on  to  Fincastle. 

Sabbath-day  5.  I  preached  upon  Matt.  xxv.  34 — 37.  My  mean- 
ing upon  the  text  was,  First,  To  show  the  blessedness  of  the  people 
of  God,  as  subjects  of  the  kingdom  of  grace  and  glory.  Secondly, 
The  evidences  of  their  being  blessed  to  others,  in  feeding  the  hun- 
gry, clothing  the  naked,  in  a  hospitable  reception  of  the  stranger, 
visiting  prisoners  and  the  sick,  doing  good  to  their  souls  as  well  as 
their  bodies  :  and  when  the  subjects  of  this  love,  and  mercy,  and 
benevolence,  are  pious,  persecuted  saints  ;  the  children  of  God 
would  not  hesitate  to  take  them  into  their  houses,  or  visit  them  in 
their  distress,  although  this  labour  of  love  might  subject  themselves 
to  persecution  and  death.  It  was  observed,  that  it  was  not  national 
fellow-feeling,  the  hospitality  of  politeness,  nor  family  attachments  ; 
no,  nor  yet  the  more  pure,  though  too  partial  affection  which  one 
religious  society  may  feel  for  another,  which  may  be  the  motive — 
it  is  because  they  are  the  suffering  members  of  their  common 
Lord — "  Ye  have  done  it  unto  me."  The  meeting  continued  four 
hours,  and  there  was  a  moving  among  the  people.  I  lodged  at 
Edward  Mitchell's.  I  drew  a  plan  of  a  house  forty  feet  long, 
thirty  feet  wide,  and  two  stories  high,  of  brick — to  be  built  in  Fin- 
castle ;  two  thirds  of  the  money  must  be  collected  before  we  begin. 
This,  like  many  more  of  mv  good  designs,  may  come  to  nought. 

Monday  6.    We  rode  to  Van  Lear's,   upon  Roanoke,  thirty-six 
miles,  and  next  day  crossed  New- River  at  Pepper's  ferry  ;  weary- 


1802.]  REV.  FRANCIS  asbury's  journal.  79 

yet  willing,  and  my  soul  in  close  communion  with  God.  We  have 
good  news  in  this  district — the  work  of  God  revives  in  all  the 
circuits. 

The  season  is  dry  ;  the  streams  are  consequently— but  there  is 
great  plenty  :  Oh !  good  Providence — Oh  !  ungrateful  people. 

Wednesday  8.  I  preached  at  Page's  meeting  house  upon  Ephes. 
ii.  10.  After  dinner  at  Edward  Morgan's,  I  went  on  to  brother 
Moorhead's  :  this  family  fed  the  Lord's  prophets  in  Rockingham, 
and  the  door  is  still  open  in  the  west. 

Thursday  9.  We  came  along  to  Crockett's  and  fed,  and  then 
hasted  through  the  town  and  housed  for  the  night  at  Cattoru's  :  the 
father  was  a  native  of  Germany — a  gracious  soul ;  and  his  children 
will  come  into  the  fold  of  Christ. 

Friday  10.  We  came  to  Charles  Hardy's,  upon  Holston.  I  found 
the  people  praising  God.  A  blessed  revival  had  taken  place. 
Fourteen  or  fifteen  times  have  I  toiled  over  the  mighty  mountains, 
and  nearly  twenty  years  have  we  laboured  upon  Holston  ;  and  lo ! 
the  rage  of  wild  and  Christian  savages  is  tamed,  and  God  hath 
glorified  himself 

Saturday  11.  I  rode  to  the  Salt  Works — perhaps  for  the  last 
time.  Alas  !  there  is  little  salt  here,  and  when  sister  Russell  is 
gone,  will  there  be  any  left  1  But,  a  few  miles  from  the  works,  up 
the  middle  ridge,  they  have  built  a  meeting  house  ;  and  there  is  a 
revival  of  religion. 

I  make  my  calculation  upon  four  thousand  nine  hundred  miles, 
from  July  30,  1801,  to  September  12,  1802.  If  a  living  man  and 
a  Christian  might  dare  to  complain . 

Sabbath  day  12.  Sweet  peace  fills  my  mind  ;  and  glorious  pros- 
pects of  Zion's  prosperity  cheer  my  heart :  we  have  not,  shall  not, 
labour  in  vain.  Not  unto  us,  not  unto  us  ;  but  to  Jehovah  be  all 
the  glory  on  earth,  and  in  heaven  for  ever ! 

Tennessee. — Monday  13.  I  rode  alone  to  Edward  Coxe's,  near 
Shote's  ford,  upon  Holston.  » 

On  Tuesday  and  Wednesday  we  rested  ;  and  on  Thursday  we 
rode  to  Cashe's,  near  Jonesborough,  Tennessee. 

Friday  16.  I  attended  a  camp-meeting  which  continued  to  be 
held  four  days  :  there  may  have  been  fifteen  hundred  souls  present. 
I  read  an  account  of  the  work  at  the  Dover  yearly  meeting  ;  and 
of  the  work  of  God  generally  :  my  text  I  found  in  Haggai  ii.  4,  5. 
We  had  a  shaking,  and  some  souls  felt  convicting  and  converting 
grace.     The  heat,  the  restless  nights,  the  water,  or  it  may  be,  all 


oU  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY?S  J0DRNAL.  [1S02* 

these  combined  made  me  sick  indeed.  I  crossed  Nolachuckie  at 
the  fording  place  of  Colonel  George  Gallespie,  who  very  kindly 
rode  over  with  me,  and  held  my  hand.  Main  Holston  was  before 
me,  I  came  safe  over,  and  stopped  with  Felix  Earnest,  making 
ninety  miles  this  week.  I  take  FothergilPs  medicine.  I  can  feel 
quite  resigned  to  end  my  days  here  :  thereby,  I  shall  avoid  great 
labours  and  trials  for  the  coming  year. 

Sunday  19.  The  house  at  Ebenezer  would  not  hold  the  peo- 
ple :  so,  from  my  stand  in  the  woods,  I  spoke  from  Genesis  xxxii. 
26 — 28.  I  was  very  unwell,  but  1  held  out  longer  than  I  expected ; 
I  also  felt  that  the  word  was  given  me,  and  applied  to  the  hearts  of 
the  people. 

Monday  20.  I  was  weak  and  very  unwell.  We  rode  down  to 
Green,  when  I  took  a  little  breakfast.  It  was  extraordinary,  that 
a  man  who  was  quite  a  stranger  to  me  appeared  very  uneasy  when 
he  found  that  we  had  paid  the  landlady,  it  being  his  wish  to  bear 
the  expense,  and  have  our  money  returned  to  us — his  name  is  Cox- 
The  day  was  excessively  warm.  We  came  on  to  Little  Nola- 
chuckie, and  lodged  at  Edward  Warren's.  I  had  little  rest  by  night 
or  day- 

Tuesday  21.  At  Bethel  I  spoke  on  Ephesians  iv.  1 — 3.  We  had 
a  close,  sultry  day,  a  small  house,  and  a  crowded  congregation  ;  an 
open  time,  and  the  triumph  of  truth. 

Wednesday  22.  We  rode  to  M'Cleary's,  upon  French-Broad, 
below  the  mouth  of  Nolachuckie — between  forty  and  fifty  miles. 

Thursday  23.  We  dined  at  Francis  Ramsay's,  and  lodged  at  Knox- 
ville  with  my  old  friend  Mr.  Greer. 

Friday  24.  I  rode  to  the  Grassy  Valley,  and  next  day  preached 
at  the  quarterly  meeting  at  Muddy  Creek,  Roan  county  :  my  sub- 
ject was  Col.  i.  9,  10.  On  the  Sabbath  day  we  had  sacrament  and 
love-feast  in  the  woods.  At  eleven  o  clock  I  spoke  upon  John  iii. 
16.  I  was  unwell ;  and  the  congregation  were,  to  appearance, 
cold  and  not  in  the  spirit  of  prayer  as  I  could  have  wished.  I 
dined  with  Mr.  Ramsey,  a  Presbyterian  minister,  at  his  own  house 
on  Friday  ;  and  he  with  me  to  day  at  my  lodgings  :  we  had  quite  a 
Christian  interview. 

Monday  27.  We  made  towards  West-Point,  and  lodged  at  Mr. 
Clark's  for  the  night :  in  the  morning  we  started  in  good  spirits. 
We  were  somewhat  shaken  in  going  the  old  path  down  Spencer's 
lull :  I  walked,  fearing  every  moment  a  fall  for  myself  or  my 
horse  :  it  was  a  very  noxious  evening  to  me.     It  was  Vate  when  we. 


1802.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  81 

arrived  at  Obee's- River,  and  I  imprudently  lay  too  far  from  our 
encampment  fire3  and  took  a  cold,  which   fixed  upon  my  throat. 
Late  the  following  evening  we  came  into  Shaw's,  where  we  lay  upon 
the  floor.     I  was  sick  indeed. 

Thursday  29.  We  called  at  Prim's,  and  continued  on  to  Doctor 
Tooley's.  My  throat  worse  and  worse — 1  was  unable  to  swallow. 
Next  day  we  stopped  awhile  at  Blackman's,  and  proceeded  on  to 
James  Douglass's.     I  had  an  awful  night. 

Saturday,  October  2.  We  rode  forward  to  Station  Camp,  and 
found  the  conference  seated.  By  this  time  my  stomach  and  speech 
were  pretty  well  gone.  1  applied  to  Mr.  William  Hodge,  and  to 
Mr.  William  M'Gee,  Presbyterian  ministers,  to  supply  my  lack  of 
public  service,  which  they  did  with  great  fervency  and  fidelity  : 
with  great  pleasure,  and  in  great  pain,  I  heard  them  both.  1  was 
able  to  ordain,  by  employing  brother  M'Kendree  to  examine  those 
who  were  presented,  and  to  station  the  preachers — 1  hope  for  the 
glory  of  God,  the  benefit  of  the  people,  and  the  advantage  of  the 
preachers.     The  conference  adjourned  on  Tuesday. 

Wednesday  6.  I  rested.  After  eight  days'  suffering  of  severely 
acute  pain,  the  inflammation  descended  to  my  feet. 

Friday  8.  I  rested  at  Shaw's,  and  bled  for  the  third  time,  and 
applied  bandages  and  sugar  of  lead  to  my  feet. 

At  Doctor  Tooley's  1  was  attacked  in  the  knee  with  a  most  tor- 
turing pain,  attended  with  a  swelling  ;  the  use  of  both  my  feet  I 
had  almost  entirely  lost  before.  On  Saturday  we  rode  fifteen  miles 
to  Prim's.  I  stopped  to  rest  at  Mr.  Walton's,  at  the  forks  of  Cum- 
berland-River :  here  I  was  treated  with  great  attention  and  kind- 
ness. At  Prim's  brother  M'Kendree  preached  ;  I  also  spoke— my 
subject  was  Hebr.  iii.  7,  8.  :  some  wept,  and  all  were  attentive, 
John  Watson  followed  with  a  warm  exhortation. 

Monday  18.  We  took  our  departure  at  five  o'clock,  and  rode  to 
Shaw's,  where  we  got  corn  in  the  ear  at  a  dollar  per  bushel.  We 
continued  on  until  half  past  six  o'clock,  then  stopped,  struck  a  fire, 
and  encamped  under  a  heavy  mountain  dew,  which,  when  the  wind 
shook  the  trees,  fell  like  rain  upon  us.  Brother  M'Kendree  made 
me  a  tent  of  his  own  and  John  Watson's  blankets,  and  happily  saved 
me  from  taking  cold  whilst  I  slept  about  two  hours  under  my  grand 
marquee.  Brother  M'Kendree  threw  his  cloak  over  the  limb  of  a 
tree  ;  and  he  and  his  companion  took  shelter  underneath,  and  slept 
also.  I  will  not  be  rash,  I  dare  not  be  rash  in  my  protestations 
against  any  country  ;  but  I  think  i  will  never  more  brave  the  wil- 
derness without  a  tent. 

Vol.   Ill  11 


8£  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBUKY'S  JOURNAL.  [lSOS?. 

On  Tuesday,  after  riding  fifty  miles,  a  part  of  ninety-three  miles 
in  two  days,  we  came  about  eight  o'clock  to  West-Point.  An  acci- 
dent, extraordinary  in  the  manner,  and  desperate  in  the  effect, 
happened  to  me.  At  a  rocky  run,  in  attempting  to  dismount,  my 
horse  gave  a  sudden  turn,  and  swung  me  against  the  rocks  in  the 
stream — the  rude  shock  to  my  tender  feet  made  me  roar  bitterly. 
My  horse  was  low  before,  tender-footed,  and  tired — the  hills  were 
steep  and  rugged,  and  I  was  sore  by  riding — these  circumstances 
combined  caused  so  much  pain,  that  when  we  came  on  Wednes- 
day to  the  Grassy  Valley,  I  cast  anchor,  with  a  determination  to 
give  up  Georgia,  and  go  by  a  straight  line  to  Camden  conference, 
to  be  held  January  1,  1803. 

I  sent  word  to  James  Douthat  to  explain  to  the  elders  of  Georgia 
and  South  Carolina  my  situation.  I  also  despatched  John  Watson 
to  meet  brother  Snethen,  and  give  him  my  plan  to  fulfil  the  ap- 
pointments in  Georgia — but  behold,  brother  Snethen  had  had  a  fall 
from  his  horse,  and  was  left  lame  upon  the  road  !  I  have  been 
sick  for  twenty-three  days  ; — Ah  !  the  tale  of  wo  I  might  relate. 
My  dear  M'Kendree  had  to  lift  me  up  and  down  from  my  horse, 
like  a  helpless  child.  For  my  sickness  and  sufferings  I  conceive  I 
am  indebted  to  sleeping  uncovered  in  the  wilderness.  I  passed  so 
quickly  along  that  many  people  scarcely  more  than  beheld  me  with 
their  eyes  ;  yet  these  were  witness  to  my  groans  ;  and  sometimes 
dumb,  I  opened  not  my  mouth.  I  could  not  have  slept  but  for  the 
aid  of  laudanum;  meantime,  my  spirits  and  patience  were  wonder- 
fully preserved  in  general,  although  I  was  sometimes  hardly 
restrained  from  crying,  "  Lord,  let  me  die  !" — for  death  had  no  ter- 
rors, and  I  could  not  but  reflect  upon  my  escape,  from  the  toil  and 
sufferings  of  another  year.  1  had  no  sad  forebodings  of  the  ills 
which  might  befall  the  church — it  is  the  Lord's,  not  mine  ;  nor  was 
I  anxious  about  father  or  mother — they,  I  trust  are  in  the  paradise 
of  God  ;  nor  did  1  say  to  myself,  what  will  become  of  wife  and 
children  ;  these  I  have  not.  But  what  am  I  to  learn  from  these 
ills  and  aches — "  these  are  counsellors  that  feelingly  persuade  me 
what  I  am."  I  am  no  longer  young — I  cannot  go  out  as  at  other 
times  :  I  must  take  the  advice  of  friends  who  say,  spare  thyself  I 
have  rode  about  five  thousand  five  hundred  miles  ;  and  in  the  midst 
of  all  I  am  comforted  with  the  prospects  of  the  western  confe- 
rence ;  we  have  added  three  thousand  members  this  year  ;  have 
formed  Cumberland  into  a  district,  and  have  sent  a  missionary  t<^ 
the  Natchez. 


2802.]  REV.  FRANCIS.  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  83 

Sunday  24.  For  three  days  past  I  have  been  at  John  Winton's. 
By  the  aid  of  a  chair  on  which  to  kneel,  I  preached  at  the  meeting  : 
my  subject  was  Joshua  xxiv.  15. 

Monday  25.  I  rode  through  Knoxville,  and  came  to  Francis 
Ramsey's,  and  by  losing  ourselves,  we  increased  the  distance  to 
thirty-two  miles.  Next  day  we  gained  Justus  Huffacres.  I  was 
bappy  to  hear  that  my  lame  brother  Snethen  had  gone  limping  on 
to  attend  my  appointments  in  Georgia. 

Saturday  30.  We  have  been  at  our  friend  Huffacres,  since  Tues- 
day last. 

Sunday  31.  At  Rehoboth  upon  French  Broad,  William  M'Ken- 
dree  stood  up  to  speak  upon  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that  endureth 
temptation."  My  text  was  2  Tim.  iii.  10 — 12.  1  ordained  Justus 
Huffacre  and  James  Sullivan  deacons.  Rain  having  fallen  abun- 
dantly, the  people  had  their  difficulties  in  getting  home  from  the 
meeting. 

Monday,  November  1.  The  snow  being  in  the  mountains,  and 
the  wind  at  west,  we  had  a  cold  ride  to  Little  Pigeon,  Sevier 
county.  At  Mitchell  Porter's,  I  spoke  to  a  full  house,  on  1  Peter 
v.  10.  William  MkKendree  followed  upon  "  Godliness  is  profita- 
ble," &c. 

Tuesday  2.  We  rode  through  New-Port,  the  capital  of  Cock 
county,  forded  French-Broad  at  Shine's  ferry,  and  came,  cold,  and 
ivithout  food  for  man  or  beast,  to  John  Ohaven's — but  Oh,  the  kind- 
ness of  our  open-hearted,  open-handed  friends. 

Wednesday  3.  We  laboured  over  the  Ridge  and  the  Paint-moun- 
tain :  I  held  on  awhile,  but  grew  afraid  and  dismounted,  and  with 
the  help  of  a  pine  sapling,  worked  my  way  down  the  steepest  and 
roughest  part.  I  could  bless  God  for  life  and  limbs.  Eighteen 
miles  this  day  contented  us  ;  ana1  we  stopped  at  William  Nelson's, 
Warm  Springs.  About  thirty  travellers  having  dropped  in  ;  I  ex- 
pounded the  Scriptures  to  them,  as  found  in  the  third  chapter  of 
Romans,  as  equally  applicable  to  nominal  Christians,  Indians,  Jews, 
and  Gentiles. 

Thursday  4.  We  came  off  about  the  rising  of  the  sun— cold 
enough.  There  were  six  or  seven  heights  to  pass  over,  at  the 
rate  of  five,  two,  or  one  mile  an  hour — as  this  ascent  or  descent 
would  permit :  four  hours  brought  us  at  the  end  of  twelve  miles 
to  dinner,  at  Barnett's  station  ;  whence  we  pushed  on  to  John  Fos- 
ter's, and  after  making  twenty  miles  more,  came  in  about  the  going 


B4  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1802. 

down  of  the  sun.     On  Friday  and  Saturday  we  visited  from  house 
to  house. 

Sunday  7.  We  had  preaching  at  Killion's.  William  M'Kendree 
went  forward,  upon  "  As  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 
they  are  the  sons  of  God  :"  my  subject  was  Hebr.  iii.  12,  13.  On 
Monday  I  parted  from  dear  William  M'Kendree.  I  made  for  Mr. 
Fletcher's,  upon  Mud-Creek  :  he  received  me  with  great  attention, 
and  the  kind  offer  of  every  thing  in  the  house  necessary  for  the 
comfort  of  man  and  beast.  We  could  not  be  prevailed  on  to  tarry 
for  the  night,  so  we  set  off  after  dinner,  and  he  accompanied  us 
several  miles.  We  housed  for  the  night  at  the  widow  Johnson's. 
I  was  happy  to  find  that  in  the  space  of  two  years,  God  had  mani- 
fested his  goodness  and  his  power  in  the  hearts  of  many  upon  the 
solitary  banks  and  isolated  glades  of  French  Broad  :  some  subjects 
of  grace  there  were  before,  amongst  Methodists,  Presbyterians, 
and  Baptists.  On  Tuesday  I  dined  at  Benjamin  Davidson's,  a 
house  I  had  lodged  and  preached  at  two  years  ago.  We  laboured 
along  eighteen  mountain  miles — eight  ascent,  on  the  west  side,  and 
as  many  on  the  east  side  of  the  mountain.  The  descent  of  Seleu- 
da  exceeds  all  I  know,  from  the  Province  of  Maine,  to  Kentucky 
and  Cumberland  :  I  had  dreaded  it,  fearing  I  should  not  be  able  to 
walk  or  ride  such  steeps  ;  nevertheless,  with  time,  patience,  la- 
bour, two  sticks,  and  above  all,  a  good  Providence,  I  came  in  about 
five  o'clock,  to  ancient  father  John  Douthat's,  Greenville  county, 
South  Carolina.  Here  I  found  myself  at  home,  amongst  kind  and 
attentive  friends.  On  the  Sabbath  day  I  preached  at  my  lodgings, 
upon  Joshua  xxiv.  15.  Surely  the  people  about  here  are  not  the 
worst  in  the  settlement ;  and  they  will  mend,  and  attend  the  minis- 
tration of  the  word  better  in  future.  I  have  heard  of  successful 
meetings  which  have  been  held  by  encampments  upon  the  Cataw- 
ba, at  Morgantown,  Swannino,  Pendleton,  Greenville — in  North 
and  South  Carolina :  ministers  of  the  different  denominations  had 
attended  :  more  circumstantial  accounts  1  have  not  yet  been  able  to 
obtain.  Mr.  Newton,  a  Presbyterian  minister,  in  Buncombe  county, 
appears  to  be  greatly  engaged  in  the  spirit  of  the  work.  Since  my 
being  in  this  house,  for  five  or  six  days  past,  I  have  been  afflicted 
with  painful  flatulencies.  Sit  still  I  could  not — to  read  and  write  I 
ivas  unable — but  I  could  wind,  reel,  and  pluck  out  cotton,  and  thus 
I  employed  my  fingers.  I  have  now  nearly  completed  the  sixth 
thousand  miles  since  the  last  of  July  of  the  last  year  : — Great  and 


1802.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUHy's  JOURNAL.  85 

fiery  trials— great  succeeding  consolations.  I  would  here  re- 
cord, that  James  Lowry,  an  agreeable,  pious  youth,  rode  with  me 
for  the  last  seventy  miles.  I  feel  truly  grateful  to  him  and  to  his 
family  : — mav  the  same  measure  of  kindness  be  always  meted  to 
him  and  his^  and  to  all  such  affectionate  young  men,  and  feeling, 
attentive  people  ! 

South  Carolina. — Tuesday  16.  After  resting  a  day,  I  lectured 
in  the  family,  upon  Luke  xi.  13.  and  on  Wednesday  left  this  affec- 
tionate househould,  directing  my  course  to  Solomon  James's,  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  George's  Creek,  Pendleton  county.  I  preached 
the  funeral  sermon  of  Polly  James,  the  daughter  of  my  host.  Here 
I  met  with  Major  James  Tarrant,  a  local  preacher,  riding  the 
circuit.  We  went  on  to  Samuel  Burdine's  and  lodged.  I  had  vainly 
questioned  in  my  mind  the  probable  cause  of  the  name  of  ninety- 
six — it  was  this,  it  seems :  During  an  Indian  war,  in  which  there 
was  an  expedition  against  the  Keewee  towns,  it  was  found  by 
measurement  that  it  was  ninety-six  miles  from  that  spot  to  twelve 
mile  Creek. 

Thursday  18.  I  rested  and  wrote. 

Friday  19.  1  preached  at  Samuel  Burdine's,  on  Hebr.  vi.  12. 
and  pretty  fully  explained  the  doctrine  of  Christian  baptism,  and 
Christian  perfection. 

Saturday  20.  1  gave  a  sermon  at  John  Wilson's,  in  which  I 
treated  largely  on  the  right  of  persons  who  were  awakened  to  re- 
ceive baptism  ;  and  also  upon  the  claim  of  infants  to  this  holy  rite 
of  the  church. 

Sunday  21.  At  Salem  upon  the  Seleuda,  I  preached  upon  Matt. 
xxviii.  19,  20.  In  the  first  general  head  of  my  discourse,  it  was 
considered  who  were  to  be  taught — all,  of  all  nations.  What  these 
were  to  be  taught — to  experience,  to  do  and  to  suffer.  In  the 
second,  Who  were  to  be  baptised — Men,  women,  children,  and  in- 
fants. The  form  of  the  rite — in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the 
Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost : — the  reasons  why,  it  might  be  pre- 
sumed, this  form  of  words  was  given— because  in  this  solemn  ex- 
position of  the  eternal  Trinity  in  eternal  unity,  is  shown  the  rela- 
tions which  the  Godhead  in  the  three  persons  bear  to  our  creation, 
redemption  and  spiritual  baptism,  of  which  the  rite  is  only  the  out- 
ward and  visible  sign.  The  claim  of  children,  it  was  stated,  arose 
out  of  the  general  love  and  benevolence  of  God,  and  the  general 
and  universal  influences  of  the  Spirit.  Baptism,  it  was  observed, 
was  taken  from  the  apostles,  and  practised  in  all  the  primitive,  and 


3t>  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURVS  JOURNAL.  [1802. 

in  all  the  first  reformed  churches  throughout  the  world.  Under 
the  third  head  I  tried  to  explain  the  nature  and  the  importance  of 
the  precious  promise,  *'  Lo  I  am  with  you  always,  even  to  the 
end  of  the  word."  I  went  home  with  James  Tarrant,  a  local 
preacher ;  my  friend  has,  for  two  quarters,  filled  a  travelling 
preacheVs  place,  and  a  very  acceptable  servant  he  has  proved 
to  be. 

Monday  21.  I  rode  to  Thomas  Terry's,  upon  the  forks  of  Reedy 
River. 

Tuesday  22.  My  mind  is  occupied  in  reading,  writing,  and  ex- 
ercises in  prayer,  in  which  I  have  intimate  communion  with  God. 
I  now  feel  as  if  it  were  my  duty  to  preach  more  particularly  on  the 
subjects  of  sanctification  and  baptism. 

I  have  nearly  finished  my  six  thousand  miles— to  God  be  all  the 
glory  !  But  Ah  !  what  small  fruit  of  my  labour,  since  August,  1801. 
How  little  do  I  speak  of  God  and  to  precious  souls.  God  be  mer- 
ciful to  me  a  sinner  1 

Wednesday  22.  At  Thomas  Terry's  I  gave  an  exhortation  in  the 
evening  on  1  Cor.  xv.  58.  Next  day  I  went  to  Nathan  Bramblet's. 
I  called  to  see  Mrs.  Price,  eldest  daughter  of  my  once  dear  old 
friend,  Alexander  Leith,  formerly  of  Baltimore.  1  feel  much  for 
those  dear  children,  for  whom  I  have  been  praying,  some  twenty, 
and  others  thirty  years  :  I  think  the  time  long  until  they  are  con- 
verted. I  was  made  as  welcome  by  the  children,  1  doubt  not,  as 
the  parents  would  have  made  me  had  they  been  living  and  present. 
In  the  evening  I  returned  to  Mr.  M'Kie's. 

Sunday  27    At  Bramblet's  chapel  I  spoke  on  Acts  ii.  37 — 39. 

Monday  28.  We  had  a  cold,  hungry  ride  of  thirty  miles  to  Henry 
Culvor  Davis's,  a  native  of  Maryland  ;  and  now  of  Newbury  Dis- 
trict, South  Carolina.  The  first  society  we  formed  at  this  place 
declined,  and  so  many  removed,  few  were  left  ;  this  year  they  re- 
paired the  meeting  house  ;  and  the  Lord  poured  out  his  Spirit, 
and  nearly  one  hundred  have  been  added.  I  found  the  labours  of 
L.  Myers  and  B.  Wheeler  had  been  greatly  blest  in  Broad  River 
circuit,  South  Carolina 

On  Tuesday  we  had  a  gracious  rain,  and  cool  weather  followed. 
On  Wednesday  I  preached  at  Odell's  meeting-house  on  2  Cor.  xiii. 
9.  1  rode  home  with  Benjamin  Herndon.  On  Thursday,  at 
Bethel,  I  heard  Lewis  Myers  preach  on  John  xvii.  15. 

December,  Friday  3.  I  rested,  and  read,  and  wrote.  1  find  that 
excessive  riding,  in  some  degree,  incapacitates  me  for  the  duty  of 


1802.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  87 

preaching.  At  Edward  Finch's,  George  Douthat  and  myself  were 
engaged  to  put  Mount  Bethel  School  in  operation  :  I  advised  to 
finish  the  house  for  teaching  below,  and  lodging  above. 

Sunday  5.  At  Bethel  I  spoke  on  Hebr.  vi.  1,2.  On  Monday  I 
rested,  and  on  Tuesday  passed  the  day  with  George  Clark,  and 
preached  there  on  2  Tim.  ii.  10 — 12. 

Wednesday  8.  We  had  the  first  snow.  I  was  very  unwell  with 
a  total  privation  of  appetite,  accompanied  with  a  high  fever. 

Thursday  9.  I  crossed  Tyger  River,  and  came  to  Major  Bird 
Beaufords's.  I  improved  upon  2  Tim.  iv.  7.  8.  I  rode  down  to 
Nathan  Glenn's,  at  Broad  River  :  we  had  a  severe  season  of  cold 
weather,  which  occasioned  very  uncomfortable  feelings. 

Sunday  12.    I  was  called  upon  by    recommendation   to    ordain 
Stephen  Shell,  John  Wallis,  and  David  Owen,  to  the  office  of  dea- 
cons.    There   were   seven   of  us  present  who  minister  in   holy 
things.     My  subject  was  2  Tim.  iv.  1,2.    "I  charge  thee  there- 
fore, before  God,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  shall  judge  the 
quick  and  the  dead  at  his  appearing  and  his  kingdom,  preach  the 
word  ;  be  instant  in  season,  out  of  season  ;  reprove,  rebuke,  ex- 
hort, with  all  long-suffering  and  doctrine."     It  was  observed  of  St. 
Paul,  that  before  finishing  his  course,  he  had  adopted  Timothy, 
ordained  him  and  left  this  charge,  a  dying  charge  given  by  a  dying, 
martyred  apostle  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  left  on  record  for 
all  who  ordain,  and  all  who  shall  be  ordained  to  the  ministry  to  the 
end  of  the  world  :  a  charge  given  as  in  the  immediate  presence  of 
God,  whose  attributes  and  perfections  are  great  and  glorious  ;  "  and 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  in  his  divine  character  ;  and  in  his  impor- 
tant offices  and  relations  to  mankind  ;  ministers  being  his  servants, 
the  people  his  flock,  and  the  word  his  own  eternal  word  of  truth 
and  salvation;  who  is  now,  and  shall  be  hereafter,  the  Judge  of  all 
our  actions.     "  Preach  the  word"— the  word  of  repentance,  of 
faith,  of  justification,  of  regeneration,  and  of  sanctification.     "  Re- 
prove ;"  there  are  special  uses  to  be  made  of  the  word  to  convince 
sinners  of    all   degrees,  classes,  characters,  and  modes  of  faith. 
"  Rebuke,"  rebuke  backsliders  ;  rebuke  errors  in  practice,  and 
negligence  in  duty.     "  Exhort,"  exhort  souls  rebuked  and   con- 
vinced, to  seek  the  restoring,  persevering  grace  of  God.     It  was 
shown  how  ministers  should  time  their  labours,  regulating  them  as 
favourable  or  unfavourable  seasons  would  seem  to  require  ;  and 
the  necessity  of  preserving  the  faith  and  meekness  which  might 
enable  them  to  labour  "  with  all  long  suffering  and  doctrine  " 


38  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1803. 

Monday  13.  We  crossed  Broad  River  at  James  Glenn's  flat :  we 
called  upon  the  aged  people,  prayed,  and  came  to  Benjamin  Row- 
ell's,  Chester  District. 

Tuesday  14.  I  preached  at  Robert  Walker's  upon  Phil.  ii.  12, 
13.  I  iuverted  the  order  of  the  text. — 

f.  It  is  God  who  worketh  in  the  hearts  of  sinners,  seekers,  and 
believers,  "to  will  and  to  do  of  his  own  good  pleasure,"  which  is 
their  personal,  present,  future,  and  eternal  salvation.  See  Ezek. 
xxxiii.  2.  Luke  xii.  32.  Hebr.  x.  38. 

II.  That  all  who  desire  this  salvation  should  be  active  in  peni- 
tence, faith,  and  regeneration  ;  using  every  means  of  grace,  and 
performing  every  duty  connected  with  holiness  here,  and  prepara- 
tory to  heaven  hereafter. 

Wednesday  15.  We  rode  until  evening,  and  lodged  at  Mr.  Wash- 
ington's, near  the  Wateree  Creek,  which  gives  the  name  to  the 
river. 

Thursday  16.  Crossed  at  Chessnut's  ferry,  and  came  into  Cam- 
den. It  is  but  a  trifle  to  ride  in  this  country  thirty  miles  without 
food  for  man  or  beast. 

On  Friday,  Saturday,  and  Sunday,  we  had  excessively  cold  wea- 
ther, and  sleet  and  snow.  We  held  our  meeting  in  Isaac  Smith's 
house,  and  I  preached  twice. 

Monday  20.  I  rode  down  to  James  Rembert's  upon  the  head  of 
Black  River  :  I  came  here  that  I  might  enjoy  a  little  solitude,  and 
find  time  to  answer  my  northern  letters.  Until  Friday  evening  I 
was  pretty  well  occupied  in  writing. 

Saturday  25.  Christmas  day.  I  preached  at  Rembert's  chapel, 
and  on  Sunday  James  Patterson  spoke  on  "  Enoch  walked  with 
God."  There  is  a  great  change  in  this  settlement;  many  attend  with 
seriousness  and  tears.  Whenever  our  preachers  gain  the  confi- 
dence of  the  lowland  planters,  (if  indeed  that  time  shall  ever  be) 
so  that  the  masters  will  give  us  all  the  liberty  we  ought  to  have, 
there  will  be  thousands  of  the  poor  slaves  converted  to  God.  The 
patient  must  be  personally  visited  by  the  physican  before  advice 
and  medicine  will  be  proper;  and  so  it  is,  and  must  ever  be,  with 
the  sin-sick  soul,  and  the  spiritual  physician.  Letters  from  the 
north  announce  very  pleasing  intelligence  of  a  great  work  of  God 
in  Maryland,  and  in  parts  of  Virginia. 

Tuesday  28.  Yesterday  and  to-day  I  have  been  busy  writing  let- 
ters.     My    general  experience   is  close    communion  with  God  -. 


1803.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL,  89 

holy  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  a  will 
resigned,  frequent  addresses  to  a  throne  of  grace,  a  constant, 
serious  care  for  the  prosperity  of  Zion  ;  forethought  in  the  ar- 
rangements and  appointments  of  the  preachers,  a  soul  drawn  out 
in  ardent  prayer  for  the  universal  church,  and  the  complete  tri- 
umph of  Christ  over  the  whole  earth.  Amen,  Amen,  so  be  it !  1 
have  finished  many  letters,  and  adjusted  some  plans.  For  my 
amusement  and  edification,  I  was  curious  to  read  the  first  volume 
of  my  journals.  I  compared  my  former  with  my  latter  self.  It 
was  little  I  could  do  thirty  years  ago  ;  and  I  do  less  now.  - 

Thursday  30.  Rode  to  Camden.  On  Friday  I  read  in  public 
some  letters  narrative  of  the  work  of  God. 

Thursday,  January  6,  1803.  1  wrote  three  large  letters  to  the 
north,  and  put  myself  in  order  for  travelling.  From  Saturday 
until  Wednesday  the  time  was  spent  in  conference,  and  in  public 
exercises :  we  had  preaching  every  noon  and  evening ;  seven 
elders  and  four  deacons  were  ordained.  Of  preachers,  two  were 
admitted  ;  one  had  located,  none  were  dead,  and  none  were  ex- 
pelled. We  had  great  peace  and  union  in  our  labours,  two  days 
of  which  were  directed  to  the  explanation  and  recommendation  of 
discipline,  as  it  respects  the  order  of  the  church.  We  have  added, 
in  this  conference,  three  thousand  three  hundred  and  seventy-one 
to  our  number. 

Friday  7.  A  cold  day.  We  came  to  Mr.  Evans'9,  on  Congaree, 
thirty  miles. 

Saturday  8.  We  crossed  Congaree  at  Howell's  ferry — almost 
abandoned.  The  flat  was  so  small,  that  our  horses,  had  they  not 
been  quiet,  might  have  endangered  us.  It  was  well  we  chose 
this  ferry,  for  we  should  have  had  a  more  round-about  road,  and 
more  swamp.  We  reached  John  Whetstone's  at  the  end  of  thirty- 
three  miles,  in  good  time,  and  were  most  kindly  and  comfortably 
entertained.  At  the  meeting-house  on  the  Sabbath  day  N.  Sne- 
then  spoke  on  1  Thess.  v.  9,  10. ;  my  subject  was  2  Cor.  xiii.  9. 
I.  Smith  exhorted,  George  Dougherty  prayed,  and  so  we  conclu- 
ded. The  cold  weather  prevented  many,  yet  the  house  was  full, 
and  on  the  sunny  side,  without,  there  were  numbers. 

Monday  9.  We  rode  twelve  miles  to  Dantzler's.  I  have  been 
greatly  supported  under  long  rides;  (by  my  computation  making 
six  thousand  miles,)  and  cold,  and  wet,  and  sufferings,  and  priva- 
tions, flly  soul  is  devoted  to  God.  As  there  are  many  who 
preach  upon  the  first  principles  of  the  oracles  of  the  Gospel  of 

Vol.  Ill-  12 


■10  RLV.  FKANC/S  ASKUAY?S  JOURNAL,  [loU3. 

Christ,  I  feel  it  my  duty  to  speak  chiefly  upon  perfection — and 
above  all,  to  strive  to  attain  unto  that  which  I  preach.  On  Tuesday 
I  spoke  at  the  white  meeting-house  on  2  Cor.  vii.  1.  We  lodged 
at  Mr.  Winningham's.  Next  day  N.  Snethen  preached  at  Cattle- 
Creek.  We  lodged  at  Mr.  Simpson's.  On  Thursday,  at  the 
Indian  Fields,  I  spoke  on  1  John  iv.  16,  17.  We  lodged  at 
Moore's  :  glory  to  God  for  a  natural  and  spiritual  birth  in  this 
family  since  my  last  visit !  On  Friday  at  the  Cypress  I  only  exhort- 
ed. Sister  Hare  is  dying  of  a  cancer  ;  but  she  appears  to  rejoice 
exceedingly  in  God,  day  and  night.  On  Saturday  we  rode  into 
Charleston.  On  the  Sabbath  day  I  preached  on  Romans  v.  20. 
I  was  blest  in  the  administration  of  the  word  and  ordinances.  I 
live  in  the  victory  of  the  grace  of  God  in  purity  of  mind  and  up- 
rightness of  intention. 

Tuesday  18,  and  Wednesday  19,  were  days  made  glorious  by 
the  visits  of  the  poor  Africans  who  came  to  visit  me  :  we  fre- 
quently prayed  together. 

Thursday  20.  We  came  to  Hadwells-Point  ;  dined  at  Mr. 
Pritchard's,  rode  up  to  Wappataw,  and  lodged  at  Mr.  Jones's, 
where  we  were  well  entertained.  Next  day,  it  being  very  stormy 
and  cold,  we  were  compelled  to  stop  at  Santee  lower  ferry. 

Saturday  22.  We  came  to  Georgetown — still  cold.  At  the  ferry 
we  could  scarcely  get  firewood  to  keep  us  warm  :  we  had  bad 
bedding  ;   and  I  suffered  in  my  body,  but  my  mind  was  at  peace. 

Sabbath  day  23.    I  preached  at  Georgetown  from  1  Tim.  iv.  10. 
N.  Snethen  preached  in  the   afternoon,  and  James  Mellard  in  the 
evening.     I  visited    Miss  Dick — Ah  !    how  changed  every  way  : 
had  I   not  expected  to  see  her,  I  might  not  have   known  her  :  I 
administered  the  sacrament  in  her  room. 

Monday  24.  At  Black-River  chapel  I  spoke  on  Matt.  vi.  31, 
32,  33.  We  crossed  the  river  at  Evans's  ferry,  and  lodged  at 
the  widow  M'Cantry's.  Next  day  I  preached  at  Jenkins's  cha- 
pel, and  after  meeting  rode  up  to  Port's  ferry.  We  lodged  at 
Thomas  Humpreys's. 

Wednesday  26.  I  preached  at  the  Bare-Ponds  upon  Hebr.  viii. 
10,  11.  We  dined  at  Mr.  Shackleford's;  and  thence  went  on  to 
Gaspero  Sweet's. 

Thursday  27.  N.  Snethen  preached  at  Rowell's  meeting-house  : 
I  added  a  few  words  on  St.  Paul's  triumphant  words  in  2  Tim.  iv. 
7.     We  lodged  at  the  widow  Davis's,  a  daughter  of  Mr.  Dunham. 


1803.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  91 

at  whose  house  I  had  lodged  some  years  back.     1  have  lived  to 
serve  three  generations  in  South  Carolina. 

Friday  28.  At  Wood's  meeting-house  N.  Snethen  preached  :  I 
onty  glossed  a  little  upon  2  Cor.  iv.  3.  We  lodged  at  old  Mr. 
Wood's,  Marion  district. 

Saturday  29.  We  rode  to  George  Shank's,  Marlborough  dis- 
trict, upon  Great  Pee-Dee.  I  have  rode  two  hundred  and  sixty 
miles  towards  the  seventh  thousand.  My  mind  hath  been  very 
calm  :  but  we  have  had  it  so  severely  cold,  and  the  meeting-houses 
are  so  open  between  this  and  Charleston,  that  I  fear  the  congre- 
gations have  profited  little  by  the  word. 

Sabbath  30.  At  Harris's  chapel,  at  the  head  of  Catfish,  1  preach- 
ed upon  Ephes.  ii.  8.  We  lodged  with  Captain  Nevell :  he  and 
his  wife  appear  to  be  seeking  the  Lord. 

Monday  31.  We  rode  a  muddy  path  to  Gibson's  chapel — pole 
chapel — open  as  a  sieve,  and  the  weather  very  cold.  N.  Snethen 
preached  upon  Phil.  iv.  8.  I  only  added  a  few  pointed,  scatter- 
ing shot  in  exhortation.  I  came  off  with  a  very  slim  breakfast, 
and  then  after  meeting  had  to  ride  on  lo  (north)  Britain,  Drake's, 
Robinson  county,  North  Carolina.  Here  is  a  settlement  of  Scotch, 
originally:  it  began  in  the  year  1771  ;  since  which  time  the  de- 
scendants of  these  emigrants  are  chiefly  in  Cumberland,  Richmond, 
and  some  in  Anson,  Robinson,  and  Bladen  counties  ;  and  some  are 
over  the  line  south  :  there  is  a  work  of  God  amongst  them,  and 
some  living  young  ministers  have  been  raised  up.  Perhaps  the 
rebellion  of  45  made  those  people  averse  to  all  opposition  to  the 
powers  that  be — and  they  were  tories  during  the  American  revolu- 
tion only  because  they  remembered  their  former  failures  and 
sufferings,  and  those  of  their  fathers.  The  open  dwellings,  only 
calculated  for  warm  weather,  occasion  the  people  of  South  Caro- 
lina to  suffer  more,  in  cold  spells,  than  those  of  the  east  or  north  : 
let  those  who  doubt  this  make  the  trial  for  one  winter.  I  have 
felt  great  lowness  of  spirits,  but  a  holy  resignation  in  the  midst  of 
cold,  hunger,  thirst,  labour,  and  temptations. 

North  Carolina. — Tuesday,  February  1.  I  preached  upon  the 
glorious  subject  of  Christian  perfection  :  my  text  I  found  in  Hebr. 
vi.  1.  Next  day,  (Wednesday,)  we  had  a  rainy  ride  of  fifteen 
miles  to  Lumberton,  which  I  had  not  visited  for  some  years. — I  was 
present  at  its  foundation  and  nomination  :  there  are  now,  I  sup- 
pose, about  twenty  families,  and  a  hundred  buildings  ;  an  academy, 
which  serves  also  as  a  church  ;  a  very  good  prison,  and  a  court- 


02  KKV.   I  KAKGIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL.  [lv>0~  = 


house,  it  being  the  county  town  of  Robinson.  Its  property  is 
much  owing  to  the  navigation  of  Drowning-Creek,  down  which 
lumber  and  other  articles  are  conveyed  to  Georgetown,  and  thence 
frequently  the  merchandise  is  sent  to  Charleston.  N.  Snethen 
preached  ;  I  only  exhorted  :  Presbyterian  ministers,  Brown  and 
M'Nare,  attended  ;  I  had  a  Christian  interview  with  them,  and  I 
learned,  with  pleasure,  that  their  labours  had  been  owned  and 
blessed  among  the  Scotch  Presbyterians.  We  lodged  at  Robert 
Haille's.  We  have  a  small  society  in  this  town.  Drowning- 
Creek,  (so  called  from  the  Drowning  of  some  Indians)  is  the  north- 
east branch  of  Pee-Dee-River;  it  rises  in  Cumberland  county, 
North  Carolina,  is  fed  by  Ten-Miles  and  Great-Swamp,  passes 
through  Robinson  county,  flowing  about  one  hundred  miles  before 
it  mingles  with  the  waters  of  Pee-Dee  ;  at  Ford's  bridge  Little 
Pee-Dee  unites  with  Great  Pee-Dee,  twelve  miles  below  Britain's 
ferry :  the  north-west  branch  of  the  first-mentioned  river  flows 
about  the  same  distance  as  Drowning-Creek,  but  its  navigation  is 
not  so  good. 

Thursday  3.  1  preached  at  Riggins's  chapel  in  a  powerful  gale 
of  wind  :  my  subject  was  Acts  xi.  23.  Daniel  Brown  gave  an 
energetic  exhortation.  I  ordained  William  Glover  to  the  office  of 
deacon.  After  dining  at  Joseph  Riggins's,  we  went  on  to  Frederick 
Miller's  at  Mine-Creek.  I  was  very  unwell  to-day  ;  I  could  not 
eat,  yet  I  was  compelled  to  labour  under  great  mental  dejection. 

Friday  4.  A  change  for  colder  weather.  We  had  to  ride  ten 
miles  to  Gray's  creek. 

It  was  my  day  to  preach  on  Saturday,  and  unwell  as  I  was,  I 
stood  up  and  spoke  on  1  Peter  iii.  15.  to  a  large  congregation  of 
Methodists,  Baptists,  and  people  of  the  world  :  it  was  a  very  cold 
day.  I  visited  John  Newberry,  an  afflicted  man,  and  his  wife,  a 
godly  woman. 

Sunday  G.  We  rode  twelve  miles  to  Fayetteville.  It  was  not 
known  whether  we  were  to  preach  at  our  own  meeting-house  or 
in  the  state-house  ;  so  we  ventured  into  a  Presbyterian  meeting- 
house :  it  was  only  free  for  me,  as  I  had  been  told  by  Mr.  Flinn, 
the  minister,  who  had  received  his  authority  from  the  magisterial 
eldership  ;  but  it  was  not  my  day,  so  James  Jenkins  and  Nicholas 
Snethen  went  into  the  pulpit,  and  the  latter  spoke  on  2  Cor.  vii.  10. 
I  came  off  without  saying  any  thing — well  for  me,  for  I  had  nearly 
lost  my  breath  in  walking  to  the  house.  We  were  kindly  and 
comfortably  entertained  at  Mr.  Lumsden's.     The  rain  came  on. 


\603,]  REV.  FRANCIS  AS9URY  S  JOURNAL.  1)3 

but  we  rode  on  seven  miles,  and  were  compelled  to  ferry  ourselves 
over  Cape-Fear  River,  after  being  detained  nearly  half  an  hour  in 
the  rain. 

Monday  7.  We  had  about  twenty- two  miles  to  make  to  reach 
Purdy's  chapel.  I  preached  upon  Titus  ii.  11,  12.  We  lodged 
at  Samuel  Richardson's.  I  have  had  a  day  and  night  of  tempta- 
tions. 

Tuesday  8.  We  came  down  the  north  side  of  the  river  to 
Elizabethtown  :  N.  Snethen  preached  in  the  court-house  :  I  was 
silent.  After  meeting  we  rode  on  fifteen  miles  to  the  widow  Clar- 
rida's.  Leaving  the  Brown,  next  day  we  came  to  the  White  Marsh  : 
I  preached  at  Clark's  on  1  Peter  v.  10.  ;  and  afterward  rode  to  the 
Lake  of  Wacamaw,  and  lodged  at  William  Wilkinson's. 

I  sometimes  smile  at  the  simplicity  of  our  friends — they  would 
love  us  to  death,  in  company  and  in  labours  too  :  they  cannot  do 
too  much,  it  would  seem,  to  express  their  kindness  ;  and  in  return, 
we  are  to  be  such  immortal  men  as  never  to  be  weary,  and  never 
to  complain.  I  feel. for  this  circuit,  having  rode  through  it :  they 
have  need  of  three  preachers  at  least.  At  the  Lake  chapel  N. 
Snethen  preached  :  we  concluded  with  prayer.  On  Friday  we 
had  a  long  ride  to  Livingston-Creek,  crossing  several  swamps 
whose  waters  supply  the  lake.  My  subject  at  Union  chapel  was 
1  Peter  v.  8.  :  the  day  was  cold  ;  but  we  had  a  full  house,  and  a 
feeling  season.  We  lodged  at  Mr.  Browning's.  Next  day  we  rode 
twelve  miles  to  the  ferry,  crossing  in  a  storm,  and  landing  where 
we  could  on  the  deep  bank,  out  of  which  my  mare  struggled  with 
difficulty  :  at  the  town,  (Wilmington)  another  ferry,  and  another 
storm  in  crossing  made  our  journey  for  the  day  unpleasant  enough  : 
we  arrived  however,  at  our  own  house  in  proper  time.  We  found 
the  church  ceiled,  and  the  dwelling  improved.  I  met  the  people 
of  colour,  leaders  and  stewards  ;  we  have  eight  hundred  and 
seventy-eight  Africans,  and  a  few  whites  in  fellowship.  N.  Snethen 
preached  on  Saturday  night ;  I  spoke  on  Sunday  morning  upon 
1  Peter  v.  7.  :  N.  Snethen  held  forth  at  eleven  o'clock  ;  I  preached 
again  at  half-past  three  o'clock  on  2  Cor.  xiii  9.  ;  and  N.  Snethen 
gave  another  discourse  at  night  :  thus  ended  the  public  labours  of 
this  day.  The  Africans  hire  their  time  of  their  masters,  labour, 
and  grow  wealthy  ;  they  have  built  houses  on  the  church  lots.  I 
hope  to  be  able  to  establish  a  school  for  their  children. 

Monday  14.     Was  so  cold  we  could  hardly  stand  it.     At  Walter 
Ni^ol's  I  preached  a  little  upon  Luke  viii.  2L     We  then  rode  on 


34  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy'S  JOURNAL.  [1U03. 

to  the  widow  Campbell's,  where  we  held  an  evening  meeting. 
Next  day  we  must  needs  ride  home  with  the  widow  Spicer,  living 
upon  the  Stump  Sound  ;  through  hail  and  wind  we  went,  and  little 
Jane  had  a  shoe  on  which  clogged  and  made  some  difficulty  We 
have  been  highly  favoured  hitherto  in  attending  our  appointments, 
and  being  attended  by  congregations. 

Wednesday  1G.  Hard  necessity  compelled  us  to  rest  with  the 
widow  and  the  fatherless  :  we  had  a  mere  storm  of  wind,  and  hail, 
and  snow. 

Thursday  17.  We  took  a  south-west  course,  through  ice,  and 
snow,  and  frost,  and  the  wind  in  our  faces  ;  and  arrived  at  Lot 
Ballard's  half-past  three  o'clock  ;  our  appointment  at  the  chapel 
was  for  twelve  o'clock.  I  conclude  1  shall  have  no  more  appoint- 
ments between  Wilmington  and  Newbern  ;  there  is  a  description 
of  people  we  must  not  preach  to  ;  the  people  of  Onslow  seem  to 
resemble  the  ancient  Jews— they  please  not  God,  and  are  contrary 
to  all  men. 

Friday  18.  Finding  it  was  but  forty-two  miles  to  Newbern,  we 
concluded  to  push  for  it.  1  rose  early,  ordained  J.  Wilden  to 
the  office  of  deacon,  and  started.  I  had  had  thoughts  of  calling  at 
a  certain  house,  but  being  fearful  we  had  not  the  time  to  spare, 
we  stopped  and  fed  on  the  ground  :  soon  after  we  met  the  master 
of  the  house,  and  dropped  a  hint  of  our  intention  of  being  his 
guests,  had  time  permitted  ;  he  did  not  say,  "  Will  you,"  or  "  Do 
call  at  my  house" — farewell!  farewell!  Oh  unhappy  people  of 
Jones,  and  Trent,  and  Onslow  !  With  a  little  cake  and  cheese, 
and  some  corn  for  our  horses,  we  came  in  fine  spirit*  to  Newbern, 
about  six  o'clock.  On  Saturday  I  rested  ;  and  Nicholas  Snethen 
preached  upon,  "  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear." 

Sabbath  day  20.  I  preached  at  seven  o'clock  upon  2  Peter 
iii.  14.  ;  N.  Snethen  spoke  at  eleven  o'clock  ;  I  held  forth  at  three 
o'clock  on  2  Cor.  vi.  2.  ;  we  were  exceedingly  crowded.  1  am 
grieved  for  this  society—  there  are  more  heads  than  agree  well 
together — want  of  harmony  and  want  of  discipline  are  too  evident : 
I  felt  as  if  I  wanted  to  see  them  no  more  until  affairs  wore  a  more 
pleasing  aspect. 

We  set  out  on  Monday  under  some  apprehensions  that  the  late 
rains  had  swelled  the  rivers  ;  but  we  found  no  difficulties,  either 
at  Neuce  or  Tar  rivers.  N.  Snethen  preached  at  Washington, 
Beaufort  county,  on  1  Thess.  v.  19,  20.  ;  the  chapel  was  crowded. 
On  Tuesday,  at  eleven  o'clock,  I  spoke  on  Luke  viii.   11 — \b. 


1803.]  R£1V.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  'Jo 

The  want  of  sleep  and  other  thing?,  made  me  unwell  and  unpleasant 
in  my  feelings.  N.  Snethen  spoke  at  four  o'clock  in  the  evening 
on  Luke  xiii.  5. 

Wednesday  23.    We   rode   twenty-two   miles,   to  Williamston, 
Martin  county  ;  I  had  not  been  at  this  place  since  January,  1792  : 
I  find  here  now  about  twenty  families,  and  about  forty   buildings. 
My  subject  at  the  court-house  was  Titus  ;  although  greatly  out- 
done by  fatigue  and   heat,    I   had  some  openings  of  mind.     I  was 
somewhat  surprised  to  see  so  many  called  together  by  twenty-four 
hours'  notice  ;  and  I  admired  the  patience  of  the  people,  many  of 
whom  were  obliged  to  stand  in  the  lobby  of  the  court-house — a 
house  and  a  half.     We  want  a  house  of  our  own.     John  Watts,  a 
local  preacher,  still  keeps  his  ground  as  a  minister  and  a  Christian, 
although  the  Baptists  are   very   numerous  here.     On  Wednesday 
we  rode  through  a  very  warm,  weather-breeding  day,  twenty-two 
miles,  to  Tarborough,  and  came  in   about   half-past  two  o'clock. 
Many  came  to  the  new  church,  and  were  attentive  to  hear,  whilst 
N.  Snethen  preached  upon  2  Cor.  v.  18 — 20.    I  had  strength  to  sit 
still  to  day.     We  dined  at  Mr.  Ryley's,  and  were  kindly  invited  to 
lodge  at  the   widow   Tool's,  the  first  which  was  opened  to  me  in 
Tarborough.     There  are  in  this  place  about  thirty-three  families  : 
the  people  have  more  trade  than  religion — more  wealth  than  grace. 
We  have  about  thirty  Africans  in   fellowship  ;  but  no  whites.     I 
may  notice  the  bridge ;  it  is  540  feet  long,  and  about  thirty  feet 
above  the  water. 

Friday  25.  It  rained  and  hailed  ;  and  through  the  night  snowed 
heavily,  and  continued  to  fall  on  us  after  we  set  out  until  we  came 
to  Prospect  Hill  :  we  fed,  and  went  on  to  Henry  Bradford's, 
twenty-five  miles.  The  snow  in  places  was  from  eight  to  twelve 
inches  deep,  and  as  my  horse  was  newly  shod,  he  clogged,  and 
kept  me  in  continual  fear.  On  Saturday  I  preached  at  our  host's 
from  2  Peter  i.  4. 

Sabbath  day  27.  We  came  to  Halifax.  The  rich  had  the  Gospel 
preached  to  them  by  N.  Snethen,  from  2  Cor.  15 — 17.  ;  I  had  to 
speak  a  little,  and  then  baptise  the  children.  The  respectable 
sisterhood  were  very  attentive  ;  in  short,  a  more  decent,  well-bred 
congregation,  need  not  be.  We  dined  at  D.  Fisher's,  who  treated 
us  in  a  most  serious  and  friendly  manner.  By  guess,  I  should  say 
there  were  forty  families  in  Halifax.  We  were  impressed,  as  if  by 
magic,  that  the  river  would   rise  rapidly ;  so  we  crossed  at  four 


96  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL.  [1803. 

o'clock,  and  rode  twenty  miles,  to  Seth  Peeble's,  whom  we  called 
from  his  downy  bed  to  take  in  poor  benighted  travellers. 

Saturday  5.  Ended  our  most  amicable  conference,  which  began 
on  Tuesday.  We  had  preaching  each  day  by  M'Kain,  Hull,  Lee, 
Snethen,  and  myself  on  the  last  day.  We  ordained  the  travelling 
and  local  deacons  upon  Friday,  and  the  elders  upon  Saturday. 

Sabbath  6.  N.  Snethen  preached  upon  2  Cor.  iv.  17,  18. ;  and  I 
followed  with  an  exhortation  ;  and  brother  Whatcoat  after  me. 
Our  stand  was  in  the  woods — our  congregation  consisted  of  about 
two  thousand  souls.  I  was  exceedingly  pleased  with  our  confe- 
rence love-feast — with  its  order,  solemnity,  and  life  ;  the  testimo- 
nies borne  appeared  to  be  all  given  under  the  immediate  impulse 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  both  in  ministers  and  members. 

Bishop  Whatcoat  being  ill,  the  burthen  of  the  conference  la- 
bours fell  upon  me. 

Monday  7.  At  Concord  meeting-house  I  spoke  on  2  Cor.  vii.  1. 
We  lodged  at  Sterling  Boykin's.  I  find  the  way  of  holiness  very 
narrow  to  walk  in  or  to  preach  ;  and  although  I  do  not  consider 
sanctification — Christian  perfection,  common  place  subjects,  yet  I 
make  them  the  burden,  and  labour  to  make  them  the  savour  of 
every  sermon.  I  feel — I  fear  for  my  dear  lowland  brethren — -so 
much  of  this  world's  wealth— so  much  fulness  of  bread,  and  idle- 
ness, and  strong  drink. — Lord,  help  ! 

Tuesday  8.  We  rode  in  the  evening  to  Edward  Saurey's.  The 
excessive  rains  in  the  morning  prevented  our  attending  our  ap- 
pointments, to  the  sad  disappointment  of  our  friends  in  Murfrees- 
borough — brethren  we  have  not,  for  we  have  no  society  there.  Next 
day  we  had  a  race  of  a  ride  to  Winton,  twenty-five  miles  :  brother 
Snethen  preached  in  the  court  house  at  twelve  o'clock.  We  dined 
at  Mr.  Bell's,  and  were  generously  entertained.  Gates  court- 
house, twenty  miles  further,  brought  us  up  for  the  night. 

Thursday  10.  At  the  court-house  N.  Snethen  insisted  upon  the 
one  thing  needful.  I  ordained  B.  Harrall  to  the  deacon's  office  :  he 
is  a  man  of  good  repute,  without  slaves. 

Virginia. — As  we  had  two  appointments  for  Friday,  I  preached 
at  Deacon  Haslet's,  to  many  people,  on  1  Pet.  v.  10.  We  had  a  con- 
soling, gracious  season.  Brother  Snethen  preached  at  Suffolk.  I  was 
surprised  to  hear  that  some  who  had  separated  from  us,  should  have 
reported  that  the  new  meeting-houses  would  belong  to  the  bishops, 
and  that  they  might  sell  them  :  these  reports  were  offered  by  some, 
not  of  the  connexion,  as  reasons  which  prevented  their  subscribing  ; 


1$03.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  97 

and  our  brethren  have  therefore  determined  to  build  without  the 
aid  of  others — what  our  enemies  accuse  us  of  intending  to  do,  they 
have  already  done  in  some  cases,  and  attempted  in  others — -Isle  of 
Wight,  Mooring' s  chapel,  Wells's  chapel,  and  Major  Ben,  in 
building  the  house  within  a  small  distance  of  the  Methodist  house, 
furnish  sufficient   proofs  of  their   principles  and  their   spirit. 

Saturday  12.  I  preached  at  M'Kee's  upon  Ephes.  v.  25,  26. 
We  rode  to  Portsmouth,  and  I  crossed  over  to  Norfolk,  where  I 
had  an  interview  with  the  official  members,  and  ordained  George 
Lee  Green  to  the  office  of  deacon. 

Sabbath  13.  I  preached  in  the  new  house,  (the  best  in  Virginia 
belonging  to  our  Society)  the  pulpit  is  high  with  a  witness — like 
that  awkward  thing  in  Baltimore,  calculated  for  the  gallery,  and  too 
high  for  that.  My  subject  was  Titus  ii.  13,  14.  At  Portsmouth, 
in  the  afternoon,  F  spoke  on  2  Cor.  vi.  2.  N.  Snethen  preached  at 
Denny's.  We  had  a  good  passage  over  the  river  at  Sleepy-Hole 
ferry,  and  came  to  Benjamin  Powell's  ;  the  parents  had  gone  to 
rest,  but  some  of  the  children  were  yet  up,  and  took  us  in.  I  felt 
solemn  whilst  I  look  upon  this  young  race,  who  make  the  third 
generation  whom  I  have  served.  I  ordained  their  father  to  the 
office  of  deacon,  and  I  have  preached  to  their  grandfathers,  Pinner 
and  Powell,  who,  with  the  Collins's,  were  the  three  first  families 
that  opened  their  houses  to  the  Methodist  preachers  in  this  part  of 
the  state. 

Tuesday  15.  At  Powell's  chapel  I  preached  on  Rom.  xii.  2.  In 
the  afternoon  N.  Snethen  held  forth  at  Murphy's  chapel  on  1  Cor. 
xii.  27.  :  I  concluded  the  meeting  by  exhortation.  There  is  a  re- 
vival of  religion  in  this  settlement.  Nest  day  N.  Snethen  spoke  on 
1  Cor.  iii.  11  —  15.     I  feel  myself  failing  and  unwell. 

Thursday  17.  We  rode  twenty-five  miles  to  Ellis's  chapel. 
There  has  been  a  great  mortality  in  this  neighbourhood  within  the 
last  twenty-six  years  :  only  a  few  of  my  first  female  friends  are 
now  living.     We  lodged  with  the  widow  of  Stephen  Andrews. 

Friday  18.  We  rode  to  Petersburg,  encountering  a  long,  intricate, 
muddy  path,  and  no  food  had  we,  for  man  or  beast,  until  we  came  to 
our  friend  Joseph  Harding's  :  by  erring  in  our  route  we  made  our 
day's  ride  thirty-five  miles.  If  my  information  be  correct,  the 
conference  congregation  meeting  continued  in  the  woods  until  nine 
or  ten  o'clock  on  Sunday  evening;  it  held  each  day  from  Saturday 
until  Monday  ;  and  it  is  believed  as  many  as  thirty-five  souls  pro- 
fessed to  find  mercy  and  faith  in  Christ.    By  letter  from  John  Pitts> 

Vol.  III.  13 


9S  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL.  [180S 

in  Fredericksburg,  I  learn  that  since  he  was  stationed  there  in  Octo- 
ber last,  thirty-five  have  joined  the  society,  which  now  consists  of 
seventy-three  members. — Glory,  glory  be  to  God  ! 

On  Saturday  N.  Snethen  preached  in  Petersburg  on  1  John  ii. 
15—17.  On  the  Sabbath  my  subject  was  2  Cor.  xiii.  2.  We  feel 
the  effects  of  intense  labour  in  the  low  lands  ;  our  habits  were  very 
feverish  ;  and  I  suffer  from  a  deep  cold  and  oppression  on  my 
breast.  We  contemplate  placing  a  proper  stationed  preacher  in 
Petersburg  ;  and  the  building  a  new  brick  church  sixty  or  seventy 
by  forty  feet,  and  two  stories  high ;  but  this,  like  many  other  of 
our  great  and  good  designs,  may  fall  through.  N.  Snethen  preached 
at  four  o'clock  on  2  Peter  iii.  8 — -10. 

Monday  21.  We  travelled,  very  unwell,  to  Mr.  Waltall's,  near 
Chesterfield  court-house  :  we  rested  in  part,  and  then  divided  our 
ride  to  Richmond  into  a  journey  of  two  days  :  we  arrived  on  Tues- 
day, and  I  preached  at  twelve  o'clock  to  many  serious  people  on 
Titus  ii.  10 — 13.  N.  Snethen  preached  at  seven  o'clock.  Next  day 
we  came  along  to  Caroline,  thirty-five  miles.  In  the  morning  it 
rained,  and  the  day  was  wintry  and  dreary  :  we  saw  the  wagons 
sinking  and  set  fast,  for  in  many  places  the  route  was  dreadful  :  we 
worried  through,  feeding  our  horses  once,  and  ourselves  not  at  all. 
Next  day  I  preached  once  more  at  Dickenson's  chapel ;  my  subject 
was  Hebr.  iii.  12—- 14. 

I  feel  my  infirmities,  and  the  labour  of  my  journeys  ;  but  my 
soul  is  cast  upon  the  Lord  in  unceasing  prayer  that  God  may  guide 
the  church,  and  give  the  spirit  of  wisdom,  and  love,  and  zeal  to 
our  conferences  :  we  only,  as  we  think,  want  more  useful  labour- 
ers in  the  vineyard,  and  thousands  will  be  brought  home  to  God  in 
the  cities,  circuits,  and  towns  this  year.  I  lodged  at  the  widow  Col- 
lins's. 

Friday  25.  We  rode  to  Fredericksburg  and  dined,  and  then 
pushed  on  to  Stafford  court-house,  making  forty  miles  this  day. 
Next  day  we  gained  Alexandria,  eating  nothing  between  seven 
o'clock  in  the  morning  and  seven  at  night. 

Sabbath  27.  I  preached  upon  John  i.  6,  7.  John  Chalmers 
spoke  in  the  afternoon,  and  N.  Snethen  at  night  ;  sermon,  love- 
feast,  and  sacrament,  Jheld  us  five  hours.  God  is  gracious  ;  the  peo- 
ple are  lively,  and  several  were  admitted  into  fellowship.  On 
Monday  it  blew  clear  and  strong,  and  cold  enough  :  I  hardly  stem- 
med the  blast,  chilly  and  trembling  as  I  was. 


1803.]  REV.  FRANCIS   ASBURY?S    JOUIttfAt,  9S 

I  preached  at   Georgetown  on   Hebrews  iv.  15,  16.  ;    it  was  a 
quickening  time.     Brothers  Chalmers  and  Snethen  exhorted. 

Maryland.— Tuesday  29.  We  reached  Baltimore,  forty-five 
miles,  stopping  an  hour  on  our  way  at  the  widow  Turner's.  We  have 
travelled  about  three  hundred  miles,  towards  eight  thousand  miles. 

April  12.  The  last  Tuesday,  Wednesday,  and  Thursday  in 
March,  were  occupied  in  reading  and  answering  letters,  and  in 
making  preparations  for  the  conference  :  its  sitting  commenced  on 
Friday  the  1st  Inst,  continuing  and  ending  in  great  peace  :  there 
were  sixty-four  preachers  appointed  to  their  several  stations  ;  most 
of  whom  were  present  at  the  session.  Except  four  hours  a  day  for 
the  transaction  of  our  own  business,  our  time  was  given  to  the  du- 
ties of  prayer,  and  the  pulpit— we  were  between  the  mount  and 
the  multitude,  and  the  conference  and  the  congregations  large,  live- 
fyj  and  serious,  to  whom  we  dispensed  the  word  of  life  at  eleven 
o'clock,  at  three  o'clock,  and  at  night,  and  we  hope  and  trust  much 
good  was  done  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  My  subjects  were, 
on  the  first  Sabbath,  Col.  iv.  2,  3.  ;  on  the  second,  Titus  iii.  9.  ;  at 
Fell's  point,  Luke  xxiv.  46.  The  reasons  why  I  did  not  speak 
oftener,  were,  First,  Because  there  were  many  zealous,  accep- 
table preachers  present ;  Secondly,  Because  I  wished  to  be  a  maa 
of  one  business,  and  to  have  my  mind  free  ;  and,  Thirdly,  Because 
I  had  neither  bodily  nor  mental  strength  to  preside  in  conference, 
and  to  take  so  great  a  part  in  my  particular  duties,  as  its  head  ;  to 
receive  the  continual  applications  of  so  many  preachers  on  so 
many  subjects  presented  to  me  at  this  time,  and  to  fill  my  place  re- 
gularly in  the  pulpit.     I  paid  no  visits  but  to  the  sick. 

It  is  sufficiently  proved,  that  upon  our  present  plan,  unless  the 
preachers  exert  themselves,  every  conference  in  the  union,  except 
that  of  Baltimore,  will  be  insolvent  in  its  finances  :  in  the  late  and 
last  year's  conferences,  they  have  had  a  surplus  here — they  have 
supported  wives,  widows,  and  children ;  and  in  the  present  instance, 
have  supplied  the  contingencies  of  those  preachers  who  have  gone 
to  distant  parts  ;  besides  giving  one  hundred  dollars  to  the  Phila- 
delphia, and  as  much,  each,  to  the  conferences  of  New-York  and 
Boston.  I  can  say,  hitherto  the  Lord  hath  helped  us  through 
deeps,  deserts,  dangers,  and  distresses  :  I  have  told  but  a  small  part 
of  our  labours  and  sufferings :  let  the  great  day  of  eternity  reveal 
the  rest !  Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Holy 
Ghost,  for  ever  and  ever  !   Amen. 


100  REV     FRANCIS  ASEURV'S  JOURNAL.  [1803. 

Yesterday  I  preached  at  Gatch's  chapel,  on  1  Peter  v.  10.  We 
then  came  on  to  Perry-Hall.  To-day  we  have  had  a  meeting 
here.  Brother  Whatcoat  preached  upon  Coloss.  ii.  6.  My  mind 
is  solemnly  stayed  upon  God. 

On  Wednesday  we  parted  with  the  elders  at  Perry- Hall :  I  had 
preached  on  2  Cor.  xii.  9,  10.  We  tode  on  to  Deer- Creek,  and 
halted  for  the  night  with  Harry  Watters. 

My  mind  is  in  a  great  calm  after  the  tumult  of  a  Baltimore  con- 
ference, and  the  continual  concourse  of  visitors  and  people  to 
which  my  duty  subjected  me  :  I  have  felt  deeply  engaged,  and 
much  self-possession  ;  indeed,  age,  grace,  and  the  weight  and  re- 
sponsibility of  one  of  the  greatest  charges  upon  earth,  ought  to 
make  me  serious.  In  addition  to  this  charge  of  superintendent,  to 
preach,  to  feel,  and  to  live  perfect  love  !  The  promise  of  the  year 
is  great — in  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  and  in  the  church  of  God  :  the 
trees  are  full  of  blossoms,  and  want  but  rains  and  sun  ;  and  so  with 
us,  we  want  spiritually  gracious  seasons  :  Lord,  hear,  and  help,  and 
enlarge,  invigorate,  sanctify,  and  bless  thine  inheritance. 

Thursday  14.  We  rode  to  Dublin,  upon  Deer-Creek  ;  and  next 
day  I  preached  upon  Hebr.  iii.  12 — 14.  in  a  neat  chapel,  and  many 
attended.  After  sermon  we  dined  with  our  brother  Evitt,  with 
whom  we  had  lodged,  and  then  rode  over  the  hills  of  Deer-Creek, 
through  a  great  storm,  twelve  miles,  down  to  the  widow  Stump's,  at 
Mount  Friendship  :  J.  W,  Dallam  and  three  ladies  were  in  com- 
pany, and  I  feared  for  them. 

Saturday  16.  Through  storms  of  snow,  we  pushed  on  to  the 
ferry j,  but  the  water  was  so  low,  and  the  winds  so  high,  we  could 
not  cross  ;  we  therefore  returned  to  the  widow  Stump's  and  rested, 
and  whilst  it  snowed  without,  we  performed  divine  worship  within 
doors  in  the  family.  On  Monday  we  succeeded  better  at  the  ferry, 
and  got  over  early  enough  to  reach  Back-Creek,  Cecil  county,  a 
distance  of  twenty-eight  miles,  by  ten  o'clock,  having  arrived  in 
time  to  dismiss  the  congregation  with  prayer.  We  dined  at  John 
Carnau's  ;  and  after  commending  his  afflicted  wife  in  prayer  to 
God,  we  rode  home  with  Richard  Bassett,  at  Bohemia  ferry. 

Tuesday  19.  I  spoke  at  the  Manor  chapel,  on  1  Cor.  xiv.  15. 
we  had  preaching,  singing,  exhorting,  shouting,  leaping,  and 
praising  God.  After  meeting,  we  crossed  Bohemia  and  Sassafras 
rivers,  and  housed  with  Robert  Moody.  My  mind  is  kept  in 
peace — 1  only  seek  to  please  God  ;  and  to  serve  my  fellow  men  as 


1803.]  HEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL,  101 

faithfully  and  impartially  as  I  can  :  I  cannot  accommodate  myself 
to  the  caprices  of  every  man  :-  what  a  strange  creature  should  I 
be,  were  I  to  suffer  myself  to  exist  in  such  a  continual  state  of  trans- 
formation as  some  people's  whims  might  require. 

Wednesday  20.  My  subject  at  the  new  chapel,  George-Town, 
Cross- Roads,  was  1  Tim.  iv.  2.  We  had  a  living  season.  Our 
brethren  from  Chester-Town  came  to  meet  us,  and  to  convey  us 
forward  with  more  ease.  Save  me  from  parade !  the  greatest  good 
will,  and  the  kindest  intentions,  will  never  make  it  acceptable  in 
my  eyes ;  I  choose  rather  to  go  on  in  my  own  way,  though  I  suf- 
fer for  it. 

The  new  chapel  in  Chester-Town  is  elegantly  planned  :  bro- 
ther Whatcoat  first  preached  in  it.  We  dined  at  Solomon  Bra- 
dy's. Blessed  be  God,  there  are  some  still  left  of  this  family  to 
show  us  kindness,  and  renew  the  remembrance  of  kindness  shown 
twenty-five  years  ago.  We  came  on  to  Doctor  Allen's  :  he  has 
been  strangely  kept  alive  for  about  seventy  years,  in  many  in- 
firmities. 

Saturday  23.  I  preached  at  Easton,  on  2  Thess.  iii.  1.  It  was  a 
gracious  season  for  preachers  and  people.  I  spoke  at  eleven 
o'clock ;  and  I  advised  the  brethren  to  have  preaching  at  three 
o'clock,  and  at  night.  My  subjects  for  the  past  week  have  been 
generally  prayer,  and  preaching  the  word.  On  the  Sabbath  day 
we  had  a  love  feast  :  our  exercises  were  closed  by  my  reading  the 
extraordinary  accounts  1  had  received  of  the  work  of  God  in  the 
south  and  west  of  our  continent.  Preaching  began  on  Hebr.  vi.  1. 
at  eleven  o'clock,  and  a  more  solemn  assembly  I  think  I  never 
saw.  Brother  Whatcoat  spoke  in  the  afternoon,  and  James  Moore 
exhorted— clothed  with  power,  and  full  of  love,  never  was  preach- 
er more  respected  in  Talbot  than  our  brother  Moore.  Doctor 
Allen's  was  our  lodging  place  for  three  nights.  It  seems  as  if  the 
whole  Peninsula  must  be  methodised :  twenty-five  years  of  faithful 
labours,  and  the  consistent  lives  of  our  brethren,  generally,  have 
worn  down  prejudice  ;  so  that  many  who  will  not  live,  will,  never- 
theless, when  they  are  sick,  send  for  the  preachers,  that  they  may 
die  Christians. 

Monday  25.  We  set  out  for  Dover-Ferry,  and  missing  our  way, 
rode  an  additional  twelve  miles  ;  arriving,  we  found  it  impassable, 
such  was  the  violence  of  the  weather  :  we  took  shelter  with  Mrs. 
Dickenson.  On  Tuesday  the  storm  increased  ;  and  on  Wednesda}r 
I  rode  to  Cambridge  and  crossed  Choptank.     I  preached  at  Cam- 


102  rev.  francis  aseury  s  journal.  [1803, 

bridge  on  2  Cor.  vi.  2.  and  returned  to  the  former  residence  of 
Henry  Ennalls,  deceased. 

Thursday  28.  I  preached  at  Foster's  chapel  on  1  Pet.  i.  4.  and 
came  along  to  Major  Mitchell's,  in  Caroline  :  the  wind  was  east, 
the  evening  cold,  and  I  unwell.  At  Denton,  I  took  to  bed  awhile  ; 
we  continued  on,  however,  and  reached  Choptank.  On  Saturday 
I  rode,  under  great  bodily  affliction,  to  Duck-Creek  town.  I  was 
under  the  necessity  of  submitting  to  bleeding,  tooth-drawing,  and 
the  operation  of  catharticks.  I  sat  in  our  conference,  held  in  the 
Friend's  meeting-house,  four  days.  We  had  nearly  one  hundred 
preachers,  travelling  and  local,  present  for  the  transaction  of  busi- 
ness. Twelve  elders  and  twelve  deacons  were  ordained.  On  Fri- 
day I  rode  over  on  a  visit  to  the  daughters  of  Thomas  White, 
Sarah  and  Anna.  I  found  the  children  of  my  once  dear  friend  at 
Mr.  Cook's. 

Saturday,  May  7. — I  went,  very  unwell,  to  Wilmington.  Next 
day  (Sunday,)  we  had  frost  and  snow.  I  was  very  unwell,  and 
kept  my  room.  On  Monday  I  attended  to  the  altering  of  the 
minutes,  with  Thomas  Jones  my  secretary. 

Pennsylvania. — Tuesday  10.  We  came  into  the  city  of  Phila- 
delphia :  the  rain  brought  on  my  intermitting  fever  ;  yet,  unwell 
as  1  was,  conditional  appointments  had  been  made  by  mv  friends  ; 
but  instead  of  the  pulpit,  I  took  to  my  room.  My  journey  from 
Baltimore  to  this  city  has  brought  me  over  about  three  hundred 
and  fifty  miles.     Wednesday,    Thursday,    Friday,   and  Saturday, 

1  remained  in  Philadelphia,  most  of  the  time  confined  to  my 
room.  The  spirit  of  contention  and  church  divisions  adds  dis- 
tress of  mind  to  my  bodily  afflictions  of  colds  and  intermittents.  I 
crept  out  upon  the  Sabbath  day,  and  preached  at  St.  George's,  on 

2  Peter  i.  5 — 9.  my  voice  was  weak,  and  some  could  not  hear  ; 
but  it  was  a  searching  sermon  and  in  season.  We  set  out  on  Mon- 
day, and  reached  Burlington  by  twelve  o'clock  :  1  crossed  over 
and  preached  in  our  new  house  in  the  solitary  town  of  Bristol :. 
James  Sterling  and  Thomas  Ware  accompanied  me. 

New- Jersey. — Tuesday  17.  We  rode  to  Joseph  Huchinson's, 
and  next  day  came  to  Elizabethtown,  and  lodged  at  Mr.  Crowell's. 
On  Thursday  we  reached  New-York.  My  weakness  continued. 
Many  subjects  and  persons  engaged  my  thoughts  and  my  attention : 
but  the  best  of  all  is,  God  is  with  me  in  all  my  troubles,  sharp  and 
strong. 

Neav-Yofk.  —  On  Friday  and  Saturday  I  did  a  little  in  writing. 


1 803 . J  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUBV'S  J©Ui;tiAL.  10S 

talking ',  planning,  and  thinking.  I  can  hear,  see,  or  feel,  no  more  of 
religion  here  than  there  was  last  year.  I  signed  a  memorial  for  the 
obtaining  in  the  court  a  legal  claim  to  £300  left  by  Miss  De  Peys- 
ter,  for  the  bishops  and  clergy  of  the  Methodist  church,  to  be  ap- 
propriated in  the  best  manner  for  the  good  of  the  society. 

Sunday  22.  I  preached  at  the  old  church,  John-street,  from 
James  iii.  17. — 

I.  "The  wisdom  that  cometh  from  above  is  revealed  and  inspir- 
ed," it  is  "  pure" — negatively :  it  is  not  mixed  by  its  Divine  Author 
with  that  wisdom  which  is  "  earthly,  sensual,  and  devilish  ;"  it  is 
not  mixed  with  the  policy,  or  pleasures,  or  profits  of  this  world  ;  or  of 
sin,  which  is  of  hell.  The  apostle  hath  written  "  pure  religion," 
and  thus  it  cannot  be  when  mingled  with  such  qualities,  all  of  which 
spring  from  men  or  devils. 

II.  "The  wisdom  that  cometh  from  above  is  pure," — positively . 
it  is  pure  in  conviction,  repentance,  faith,  regeneration,  and  sane- 
tification  :  it  is  the  operative  principles  of  grace  in  the  soul,  as  in- 
ternally, and  externally  manifested.  It  is  <k  peaceable"  in  relation 
to  God,  and  all  mankind,  to  the  church,  and  the  world,  and  the 
tranquil  state  of  the  soul.  It  is  "  gentle,"  soft,  amiable  in  all  its 
administrations,  never  stormy,  or  sour,  or  haughty,  or  overbear- 
ing. "  Easy  to  be  entreated,"  to  do  and  suffer  any  thing  that  is 
right  and  reasonable,  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  for  the  good  of  our 
own,  and  the  souls  of  others.  "  Impartiality,"  this  is  the  Christian 
dress  :  not  bound  and  pinched  by  countries,  names,  forms,  and 
opinions  ;  neither  does  it  envy  the  rich  on  account  of  their  riches? 
nor  neglect  the  poor  on  account  of  their  poverty."  "  Without 
hypocrisy,"  sincerity  is  the  incontestable  evidence  to  God  and 
man  of  our  possession  of  the  heavenly  treasure  of  "  that  wisdom 
that  cometh  from  above  ;"  and  people  may  go  upon  fancies,  and  be 
ready  to  die  with  raptures,  but  if  they  are  turbulent,  ungoverna- 
ble, self-willed,  and  false  towards  their  fellow  men,  or  towards  their 
God,  their  religion  is  vain  ;  whatever  it  may  once  have  been,  it  is 
not  the  gold  of  the  sanctuary  now,  but  a  counterfeit,  alloyed  by  a 
mixture  of  the  wisdom  of  this  world. 

After  brother  Whatcoat  had  preached  in  the  afternoon,  I  gave 
them  an  exhortation. 

A  bread  factory  caught  fire  and  occasioned  a  great  alarm  and 
bustle  ;  plenty  of  water,  and  the  great  activity  o^the  citizens  pre? 
vented  the  flames  from  spreading. 


304  rev.  FRANcrs  asbury's  journal-  [1803, 

Monday  23.  I  rode  twenty-two  miles  to  the  widow  Sherwood's, 
and  preached  at  four  o'clock  on  Hebr.  iv.  9 — 11.  Next  day 
we  called  at  Nicholas  Underbill's  and  dined,  and  exhorted  and 
prayed  with  the  family.  At  the  White-Plains  I  preached  on  1 
John  ii.  15.  It  was  the  time  of  the  court's  sitting,  which  together, 
with  a  want  of  information  respecting  the  appointment  made  for 
me,  caused  but  a  thin  congregation.  We  lodged  at  Moses  Fow- 
ler's, and  the  next  day  reached  Bedford,  where  brother  Whatcoat 
preached. 

Connecticut. — On  the  morrow  we  reached  Reading,  passing 
through  Ridgefield,  and  1  preached  in  Aaron  Hunt's  house  upon 
Coloss.  iii.  12,  13.  ;  the  text  itself  is  a  sermon. 

Friday  27.  Finding  the  road,  by  information,  to  be  rocky  and 
hilly,  we  were  persuaded  to  come  back  to  the  post  road  ;  we  there- 
fore directed  our  course  down  through  Greenfield  and  Bridgeport 
to  Stratford,  and  arriving  at  Elkanan  Wheeler's,  we  were  willing  to 
rest :  thirty  miles  of  our  journey  we  made  without  feeding  man  or 
beast.  My  health  is  better ;  but  the  labour  of  riding,  and  the  in- 
convenience occasioned  by  the  dust  raised  by  the  chaise  in  advance 
of  us,  made  me  feel  a  little  like  Jonah.  My  soul  is  often  led  out 
after  God  :  my  treasure  and  pleasure  is  Christ  and  the  service  of 
his  church.  The  Baptists  of  Connecticut  have  sent  their  petition 
from  the  Assembly  to  the  legislature  of  Connecticut,  to  the  bishops 
of  the  Methodist  church,  that  they  may  have  their  aid  in  obtaining 
toleration  :  what  can  we  do,  and  how  is  it  our  business  ?  We  are 
neither  popes  nor  politicians  :  let  our  brethren  assert  their  own 
liberties.  Besides,  who  may  now  be  trusted  with  power?  The 
Baptists  are  avowed  enemies  to  Episcopacy,  be  the  form  of  church 
government  as  mild  as  it  may  ;  now  it  seems,  popes,  as  they  would 
otherwise  term  us,  may  be  useful  to  them,  nor  are  they  too  proud 
to  ask  for  help  ;  but  our  people  will  not  be  pushed  into  their 
measures  ;  their  bishops  have  no  coercive  power  of  this  sort :  if  the 
Baptists  know  not  what  to  do  we  cannot  tell  them. 

Sunday  29.  We  came  to  Middletown  :  as  it  was  the  hour  of  de- 
votion, we  stepped  into  the  separate  meeting-house,  and  beard  a 
certain  Mr.  Greaves  preach.  At  five  o'clock,  brother  Whatcoat, 
after  some  demurring,  was  permitted  to  preach  :  when  he  was 
done,  the  old  women  controverted  his  doctrine  of  sanctification. 
J  told  you  so.  TbA work  of  God  revives  at  New-Haven  ;  and  Satan's 
emissaries  rage,  and  those  who  are  too  good  to  be  better,  oppose. 


1803.  j  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBVRY'S  JOURNAL.  105 

Monday  31.  We  crossed  Connecticut  River  at  Rocky  Hill,  and 
came  on  to  Kelsom,  twenty-five  miles  ;  I  preached  at#four  o'clock 
on  2  Pet.  v.  6 — 9.  and  ordained  Daniel  Burrows  a  deacon. 

Tuesday,  June  1.  We  came  to  Windham,  twenty  miles,  and  had 
some  rain.  Brother  Whatcoat  preached.  After  refreshing  our- 
selves with  Mr.  Harris  and  his  kind  family  at  Brooklin,  we  came 
on  through  Pomfret,  and  thence  to  Thompson,  where  I  preached 
at  four  o'clock  upon  Gal.  v.  22 — 26. ;  and  thus  ended  the  labours 
of  Wednesday. 

Massachusetts. — Thursday  3.  At  Millford  in  Massachusetts, 
brother  Whatcoat  preached  at  five  o'clock  ;  and  on  Friday  I  made 
at  Needham  an  improvement  on  1  Pet.  v.  10.  On  each  of  the 
two  last  days  we  have  travelled  thirty  miles.  I  have  read  some 
letters  giving  an  account  of  the  work  of  God  at  the  south  :  some 
in  our  eastern  congregations  wonder,  if  they  do  not  believe.  Since 
we  left  Baltimore  we  have  made  seven  hundred  and  twelve  miles. 

Saturday  5.  We  have  had  a  gracious  rain.  My  mind  is  in 
peace  ;  but  such  perpetual  motion  wearies  the  flesh,  and  flags  the 
spirits. 

Poor  New-England  !  she  is  the  valley  of  dry  bones  still !  Come, 
O  breath  of  the  Lord,  and  breathe  upon  these  slain  that  they  may 
live  ! 

Sunday  6.  Brother  Whatcoat  at  Waltham  spoke  upon  Hebr.  viii. 
10 — 12.  I  dropped  a  few  hints  upon  Hebr.  ii.  1 — 3.  We  receive 
good  news  from  the  south.  We  rest,  we  write,  we  read,  and  lay 
plans  for  the  Boston  conference. 

Wednesday  9.  We  came  through  dust  to  Boston ;  and  as  eigh- 
teen members  were  present,  we  opened  the  conference  in  our 
solitary  little  chapel.  We  sat  six  hours  a  day  for  the  despatch  of 
business ;  and  there  was  preaching  at  eleven  and  five  o'clock,  and 
in  the  evening  :  it  was  all  new,  but  nothing  special  appeared. 

Saturday  12.  We  ordained  Joshua  Soule,  and  Nathan  Emory  el- 
ders, and  Edward  Whittle  deacon  :  as  our  work  was  done,  and  we 
were  feeble,  we  came  away  to  Waltham.  It  is  no  time  to  journalize  ; 
but  I  may  remark  that  we  had  great  peace  in  our  conference,  and 
that  we  have  an  increase  of  five  hundred  members.  I  lodged  at 
Mrs.  Woodard's,  and  was  kindly  and  comfortably  entertained.  The 
great  wants  of  Boston  are  good  religion  and  good  water.  How 
can  this  city,  and  Massachusetts,  be  in  any  other  than  a  melancho- 
ly state ;  worse,  perhaps,  for  true  piety,  than  any  other  parts  of 

Vol.  III.  14 


10t?  m;v.  FRANCIS  ASBU'RV'S  JOURNAL.  [liiOu. 

the  Union  :  what !  reading  priests,  and  alive  ?    Oh  no  !  dead,  dead, 
dead,  by  nature — by  formality — by  sin  ! 

Sunday  13.  I  preached  at  Waltham  chapel  on  1  Pet.  iv.  18.    On 

Monday  I  rested,  and  made  ready  for  the  tour  to  Ashgrove. 
Long  wanted  rain  overtook  us  on  our  road  to  Havard,  and  we  came 
in  dripping  to  Caleb  Sawyer's  :  here  1  was  pleased  with  the  de- 
cency, piety,  and  simplicity  of  manners  of  both  parents  and  chil- 
dren. At  a  small  school-house,  two  miles  distant,  brother  What- 
coat  preached.  On  Wednesday  we  came  on  to  Lominster,  twelve 
miles,  and  dined  at  Silas  Willard's  :  at  four  o'clock  I  preached  on 
1  Cor.  i.  30.  It  is  in  this  town  we  crossed  the  Nashua  River, 
which  empties  into  the  Merrimack. 

I  will  not  mention  names,  but  I  could  tell  of  a  congregation  that 
sold  their  priest  to  another  congregation  in  Boston  for  the  sum  of 
one  thousand  dollars  ;  and  hired  out  the  money  at  the  unlawful  in- 
terest of  twenty-five  or  thirty  per  cent.  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  the 
priest  and  people  that  can  think  of  buying  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
with  money !  How  would  it  tell  to  the  South,  that  priests  were 
among  the  notions  of  Yankee  traffick  1 

New-Hampshire. — Thursday  17.  We  came  to  Ebenezer  Cole- 
burn's,  New-Hampshire;  and  I  preached  upon  Titus  ii.  11,  12. 
We  had  an  open  time,  a  baptism,  and  sacrament.  Next  day  we 
laboured  through  extreme  heat,  and  over  high  hills,  to  Marlborough, 
and  were  glad  to  rest  ourselves  at  Ebenezer  Herrick's,  opposite 
the  west  side  of  the  great  mountain  called  Monadnick.  This  por- 
tion of  the  state  of  New-Hampshire  is  full  of  hemlock  swamps  ; 
and  I  question  if  any  part  of  the  Alleghany,  south,  is  more  broken  : 
the  roads,  however,  are  greatly  improved,  and  there  is  a  turnpike 
extending  from  Boston  to  Keene.  The  soil,  though  barren,  ex- 
hibits in  its  abundant  productions  of  grass,  oats,  barley,  rye,  and 
potatoes,  what  the  arm  of  labour,  and  habits  of  economy  and  in- 
dustry will  do  :  out  doors  there  is  a  well  kept  stock  of  cattle, 
sheep,  and  hogs ;  and  in  doors  you  see  plenty  of  cheese,  butter, 
and  milk,  and  fish  from  the  mill  ponds,  which  are  wonderfully  fre- 
quent, producing  the  finest  trout  and  pike  :  the  people  are  pictures 
of  health,  and  appear  to  be  of  the  old  English  stamina. 

Saturday  19  We  journeyed  through  the  vale  and  pleasant  town 
of  Keene,  and  climbed  along,  height  after  height,  towards  Walpole  ; 
seven  miles  off,  upon  the  south-west,  we  turned  and  came  to  West- 
moreland, and  held  our  quarterly  meeting  for  Chesterfield  circuit 


1803.]  ft£¥.  FRANCIS  ASBURYfS  JOURNAL.  107 

at  Jonathan  Winchester's,  brother  to  the  famous  Universalist  of 
that  name.  I  opened  the  meeting  in  a  new  barn,  upon  Titus  ii. 
13.  14.  On  the  Sabbath  we  were  crowded  from  seven  o'clock  in 
the  morning  until  three  in  the  afternoon  ;  the  wind  from  the  south- 
east blew  in  at  the  door,  and  it  rained  withal.  Brother  What= 
coat  and  Elder  Ostrander  preached  before,  and  the  young  men 
exhorted  after  love-feast  and  the  sacrament. 

Monday  21.  We  came  over  the  mighty  hills  to  Chesterfield: 
here  we  called  upon  John  Bishop,  and  at  four  o'clock  a  few  were 
got  together,  to  whom  I  gave  a  lecture  upon  Hebr.  xii.  1,2,3. 
Next  day  we  crossed  the  Connecticut-River  at  Bennett's  ferry, 
and  came  into  the  city  of  Brattleborough,  stopping  at  Joseph 
Jacobs's.  We  are  now  in  Vermont.  The  stupendous  steeps  on 
each  side  of  the  river  resemble  those  at  Harper's  ferry,  and  the 
precipitous  heights  of  the  North-River.  We  have  rode  eight  hun- 
dred and  fifty  miles  since  we  left  Baltimore.  My  mind  enjoys  a 
great  calm  ;  and  I  have  faith  to  believe  that  as  God  is  working 
gloriously  in  other  parts  of  the  continent,  he  will  make  a  display 
of  his  power  even  here,  and  bid  the  dry  bones  live  : — I  hope  to 
hear  of  it  at  the  Ashgrove  conference. 

Vermont. — Wednesday  23.  We  had  a  meeting  at  a  school-house 
near  to  Joseph  Jacobs's,  in  Guilford  :  brother  Whatcoat  preached 
upon  the  perfect  law  of  liberty,  and  we  had  a  gracious  season.  As 
we  could  not  consent  to  wait  three  days  for  Whittingham  quarterly 
meeting,  we,  on  Thursday,  took  the  track  to  Bennington,  the 
mountain  notwithstanding :  we  had  been  advised  to  go  round 
nearly  one  hundred  miles.  We  passed  through  Brattleborough, 
Marlborough,  Wilmington,  and  the  skirls  of  several  other  small 
towns.  Our  dinner  we  took  with  D.  Mixen,  and  continued  on  to 
William  Perry's,  thirty-five  miles.  Our  journey  to-day  was  quite 
in  the  old  style — Braddock's  road,  over  the  Alleghany  mountain, 
On  Friday  evening  we  reached  Ashgrove,  twenty-eight  miles,  by 
four  o'clock — weary  men,  and  tired  horses.  I  have  good  health, 
severe  temptations,  but  no  murmuring  or  ill  temper.  I  am  once 
more  in  Cambridge,  state  of  New-York. 

New- York. — Saturday  25.  I  spend  in  reading,  writing,  and 
meditation,  and  prayer. 

Sabbath  26.  At  our  church  at  Ashgrove,  I  spoke  upon  Col. 
iv.  2,  3.  we  had  a  quickening  time.  When  I  came  across  the 
mountain  I  found  the  season  was  exceeding  dry,  and  was  led  out 
in  prayer  that  the  Lord  would  graciously  give  us  of  the  fruits  of 


108  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY^S  JOURNAL.  [1803, 

the  earth,  and  be  merciful  to  man  and  beast :  our  exercises  of  faith 
and  prayer  I  believe  were  not  unavailing.  On  Saturday  and  Sun- 
day we  had  rain  ;  and  riow  the  same  blessings  of  a  spiritual  nature 
are  wanting,  for  which  we  wrestle  with  our  God ;  and  I  believe 
souls  will  be  converted  at  this  conference.  Luther  Bishop,  a 
young  boy,  preached  on  the  Sabbath  day* — and  so  we  will  continue 
every  evening  until  next  Monday  or  Tuesday  week,  stroke  after 
stroke  with  the  rod  of  the  Lord,  like  Moses,  until  the  waters  of 
repentance  flow  from  hearts  of  rock.  On  Monday  brother  What- 
coat  preached :  my  subject  on  Tuesday  was  Rom.  ii.  7.  :  we  rest- 
ed at  John  Baker's.  On  Wednesday  the  elders  did  not  appear, 
and  I  was  obliged  to  hold  forth  again — my  text  Psalm  cii.  13 — 17. 
By  deaths  and  removals,  this  Ashgrove  society  is  diminished,  but 
there  will  be  a  revival  at  this  conference.  This  is  a  very  eligible 
place  for  Albany,  York,  Gennessee,  Pittsfield,  and  Vermont  dis- 
tricts, but  the  conference  ought  to  be  divided  between  the  two 
old  societies  of  York  and  Ashgrove.  On  Thursday  I  had  to  preach 
again. 

Friday,  July  1.  We  opened  our  conference  at  John  Baker's, 
in  the  Holloway,  prettily  environed  with  hills,  a  carpet  of  green 
spread  beneath,  and  here  and  there  around  us  fields  clothed  with 
the  promise  of  an  abundant  harvest.  We  finished  our  business 
on  Tuesday,  public  and  private :  there  were  nearly  seventy 
preachers  and  fifty  members.  On  the  Sabbath  day,  perhaps,  we 
had  two  thousand  hearers  ;  the  house  was  filled  with  women,  and 
the  men  stood  without :  I  stood  in  the  door,  and  spoke  to  them 
from  1  Tim.  iv.  11, 12. ;  but  I  had  been  overcome  by  twelve  hours* 
a  day  constant  attention  to  business  in  the  conference,  and  spoke 
with  pain. 

Wednesday  6.  We  came  to  Pitts- Town,  dined  with  Mr.  Follitr, 
and  came  on  to  the  Half-Moon,  thirty  miles,  and  lodged  at  John 
Barber's :  these  two  villages  increase.  On  Thursday  we  came 
through  Albany,  and  stopped  to  dine  at  Dole's  tavern,  three  miles 
beyond  :  here  brother  Whatcoat  discovered  that  he  had  left  my 
coat  and  my  cloak  behind  :  I  bore  the  loss  with  some  p'atience. 
Finding  we  had  two  hundred  miles  to  reach  Trenton,  and  only  six 
days  to  accomplish  the  distance  in,  we  continued  on  to  Blasdale's, 
at  Coeyman's  Landing:  reflecting  on  this,  and  the  journey  of  four- 
teen hundred  miles  still  to  Kentucky,  and  brother  Whatcoat's  in- 
disposition withal,  I  felt  somewhat  moved.  On  Friday  we  came 
to  John  Crawford's,  near  the  Catskill  mountains,   making  thirty- 


1803.]  &EV.  FKANCIS  asbtjry's  journal.  109 

five  miles,  without  food  for  man  or  beast.  On  Saturday  we 
reached  Cole's,  at  Hurly-Town,  on  Esopus-Creek.  The  drought, 
and  heat,  and  dust,  in  nine  hundred  and  ninety  miles  from  Balti- 
more to  this  place,  made  us  suffer  ;  but  my  mind  was  supported, 
and  my  health  preserved.  At  Hurly  we  called  a  few  attentive 
people  together,  to  whom  I  dispensed  the  word  of  life  on 
Hebr.  xi.  25. 

Wednesday  11.  We  rose  at  four  o'clock,  and  came  off  at  six, 
and  at  twelve  stopped  at  Mr.  Ostrander's  :  in  this  happy  family 
we  found  the  son  of  peace.  We  came  on  to  New-Windsor, 
(through  Newburgh)  to  John  Ellis's,  making  forty  miles.  Were 
I  to  listen  to  the  murmurs  of  people,  I  might  bring  myself  in- 
to dreadful  business  :  feeling  my  unworthiness,  I  the  more  rea- 
dily forgive  their  complaints  :  indeed  their  censure  is  far  more  safe 
for  me  than  their  praise.  I  have  travelled  about  two  hundred 
miles  through  the  state  of  New-York.  By  a  fair  and  accurate 
computation  I  judge  that  we  have  added,  exclusive  of  the  dead, 
the  removed,  and  the  expelled,  and  withdrawn,  17,300.  Our 
total  for  the  year  1803  are  104,070  members  :  in  1771  there  were 
about  300  Methodists  in  New-York,  250  in  Philadelphia,  and  a 
few  in  Jersey  ;  I  then  longed  for  100,000 ;  now  I  want  200,000— 
nay,  thousands  upon  thousands. 

Tuesday  12.  We  rested — but  we  shall  pay  for  it  before  we  reach 
Trenton.  On  Wednesday  we  started  for  Warwick  but  the 
tire  of  the  carriage  wheel  giving  way,  we  only  reached  Lymin- 
son's.  Next  day  we  dined  at  Sussex  court-house,  and  reached 
Mezener's,  on  the  mountain  ;  next  day  we  came  to  Asbury-Town, 
between  Sussex  and  Hunterdon  counties. 

New- Jersey. — Saturday  16.  We  were  driven  into  Jonathan 
Bunn's  by  a  blessed  rain.  On  the  Sabbath  day,  at  Trenton,  my 
subject  was  2  Cor.  xi.  17. 

Blonday  18.  We  went  forward  to  Bristol :  brother  Whatcoat 
preached  ;  I  had  spoken  at  Burlington  on  Tit.  ii.  14. 

Pennsylvania. — I  must  here,  in  Philadelphia,  labour  with  the 
pen,  and  answer  letters,  and  refit  for  the  western  conference. 

Friday  22.  We  left  the  city.  During  my  three  days'  stay,  I 
preached  once  at  the  Academy.  On  the  Great- Valley  road  we 
stopped  at  brother  Geiger's,  and  housed  for  the  night  with  an  ex- 
ceeding kind  German  family  by  the  name  of  Kenagee.  On 
Saturday  we  found  heat,  and  dust,  and  turnpike-gates,  (twelve  in 
seventy-five  miles,)  as  usual. 


HO  ret.  LftANClS  ASBURV's  JOURNAL.  [\H03. 

Sabbath  24,  we  spent  at  Soudersburg.  I  spoke  on  Psalm  li. 
9 — 12.  Here  Bishop  Whatcoat  concluded  he  must  stop  or  go  ob 
with  me  and  die  by  inches. 

Monday  25.  I  passed  through  Lancaster,  called  upon  John 
Shainer,  upon  Little  Conastoga,  dined  at  Columbia,  and  preached 
at  three  o'clock,  and  then  crossed  the  ferry  and  reached  Henry 
Stickler's  to  lodge  for  the  night.  We  stole  a  march  upon  our 
friends  at  York,  and  met  them  at  the  court-house  as  they  were 
coming  to  meet  us  :  we  stopped  awhile  at  brother  Lay's,  and  then 
came  on  to  brother  Pentz's.  On  Tuesday  1  had  a  little  leisure  to 
write  a  few  letters  ;  and  on  Wednesday  morning  I  preached  at  the 
chapel  ;  and  in  the  evening  went  to  James  Woiiey's.  On  Thurs- 
day I  preached  once  more  at  the  widow  Holspeter's  upon  Cone- 
wago  :  since  I  was  here  the  old  man  has  gone  to  rest.  My  mind 
is  under  a  great  calm.  I  hope  this  will  be  a  great  year  of  Gospel 
grace. 

Friday  29.  We  had  a  sultry  ride  to  Carlisle.  Henry  Boehm 
preached  in  the  evening.  Next  day,  at  eleven  o'clock,  I  gave  them 
a  sermon  from  Col.  iii.  12 — 14.  :  in  the  evening  Wilson  Lee  spoke. 

On  the  Sabbath  we  had  prayer-meeting  at  five  o'clock;  James 
Smith  preached  at  eight  o'clock ;  I  spoke  on  2  Cor.  vi  2.  :  and 
Wilson  Lee  in  the  afternoon  :  we  had  excessive  heat,  but  the  peo- 
ple were  very  attentive.  I  have  read  the  half  of  the  *'  Portrait  of 
St.  Paul :"  O  inimitable  Fletcher — in  preaching,  writing,  in  living, 
and  in  dying ! 

Monday,  August  1.  I  came  ten  miles  to  a  Mr.  Snyder's,  near  a 
village  called  New-Ville,  and  dined  about  eleven  o'clock  :  the  peo- 
ple gathered  together,  and  1  must  needs  preach  to  them.  We  pro- 
ceeded on  to  Shippensburg  in  haste,  and  here  I  ag;ain  stood  up  in 
my  Master's  name  :  we  had  a  crowded  house,  and  a  sick  preacher. 
There  is  a  meeting  house  here  on  shares  with  the  Presbyterians  and 
Seceders  ;  the  Methodists  have  one  of  their  own. 

On  Tuesday  morning,  at  four  o'clock,  we  set  out  to  scale  the 
mountains.  We  passed  a  little  town  called  Strasburg,  and  another 
called  Emmitsburg  :  here  we  stopped,  and  I  laid  myself  down  upon 
the  floor  to  rest ;  intense  heat,  rugged  mountains,  and  a  wasting  dy- 
sentery almost  overcame  me.  I  feel,  and  have  felt  thirty-two  years, 
for  Pennsylvania — the  most  wealthy,  and  the  most  careless  about 
God,  and  the  things  of  God  ;  but  I  hope  God  will  6hake  the  state 
and  the  churches.  There  are  now  upwards  of  twenty  German 
preachers  somehow  connected  with  Mr.  Otterbine   and  Martin 


1S03.]  ?,EV.  FRANCIS  ASEURY's  JOURNAL.  HI 

Boehm :    but  they  want   authority,   and  the  church   wants   dis- 
cipline. 

Wednesday  3.  We  came  to  David  Field's  and  fed.  After  prayer, 
Wilson  J>e  bade  us  farewell,  and  went  away  to  the  Littleton  quar- 
terly meeting  :  a  rumour  had  spread  that  I  also  was  to  be  there  ;«— 
strange,  that  they  should  expect  that  I  would  stay  one  hundred  miles 
in  the  rear  of  my  appointments  for  such  a  purpose  :• — what  must 
I  not  do  to  please  all  the  preachers  and  all  the  people ! 

Hard  and  slowly  did  we  toil  up,  through  intense  heat,  eight  miles 
of  the  Sideling-Hill  ;  we  stopped  at  a  house  of  entertainment,  kept 
by  Mr.  Head  ;  the  night  was  very  sultry,  and  my  lodging  room  very 
small. 

Thursday  4.  We  started  for  Berlin  :  passing  through  Bedford  and 
Somerset  counties,  and  crossing  the  Juniata,  we  came  into  pleasant 
Berlin  about  sun-set,  making  a  ride  of  forty  miles.  We  lodged  with 
'Squire  Johnston  ;  and  necessity  was  laid  upon  us  to  speak  both  in 
English  and  German — with  the  assistance  of  my  travelling  compa- 
nion, Henry  Boehm. 

Friday  5.  Forty  two  miles  over  hills  and  rocks,  brought  us  down 
upon  Connell's  town,  on  the  Youghiogeny-River,  where  we  lodged 
with  Anthony  Banning.  I  called  at  the  twenty  mile  house,  and  found 
a  daughter  of  Michael  King,  a  local  preacher  amongst  us  whilst 
living,  and  now,  1  trust,  a  glorified  spirit.  I  think  it  will  be  better 
for  me  never  to  ride  eighty  two  miles  in  two  days  again  :  a  wearied 
mare,  just  off  a  journey  of  thirteen  hundred  miles,  and  an  old, 
afflicted  man  ;  but  God  and  grace  is  sufficient.  On  Saturday  and 
Sabbath  1  rested  in  Connellstown,  and  preached  ;  my  subject  was 
Matt.  v.  13.  There  has  been  death  in  the  pot  here,  nor  do  we  know 
that  it  is  yet,  or  when  it  will  be,  out.  On  our  way  to  Jacob  Mur- 
phy's, we  noticed  Colonel  Mason's  superb  stone  mansion  on  mount 
Braddock. 

Tuesday  9.  At  Murphy's  barn  I  spoke  on  1  Cor.  vii.  29 — 31. 
Although  much  afflicted  in  my  bowels,  I  felt  wholly  given  up  to  do 
or  suffer  the  will  of  God — to  be  sick  or  well,  and  to  live  or  die  at 
any  time  and  in  any  place — the  fields,  the  woods,  the  house,  or  the 
wilderness  :  glory  be  to  God  for  such  resignation  !  I  have  little  to 
leave,  except  a  journey  of  five  thousand  miles  a  year,  the  care  of 
more  than  a  hundred  thousand  souls,  and  the  arrangement  of  about 
four  hundred  preachers  yearly,  to  which  1  may  add,  the  murmurs 
and  discontent  of  ministers  and  people:  who  wants  this  legacy? 
Tho^e  who  do  are  welcome  to  it  for  me-! 


H2  HEV.  F1UNC1S  ASBURVrS  JOURNAL.  [1S03, 

Thursday  11.  I  dined  with  the  aforesaid  Colonel  Mason — one  of 
the  great  men  of  the  west.  Next  day  I  came  to  Union-Town,  and 
returned  to  Jacob  Murphy's.  On  Saturday  I  came  to  the  quarterly 
meeting  ;  I  preached,  and  we  had  an  open  time  :  at  the  night  meet- 
ing it  was  a  shouting  time  ;  and  our  meetings,  I  believe,  were  warn- 
ing times  to  Union-Town.  I  believe  God  will  yet  work  in  the  Red- 
stone settlement  ;  he  has  already  begun  amongst  the  Presbyterians. 

Tuesday  16.  I  rode,  twenty  miles,  to  Harry  Stephens's,  upon 
Monongahela — weak  and  afflicted.  Next  day  I  attended  an  ap- 
pointment made  for  me  at  Maple-Town  ;  my  subject  was  2  Tim.  iv. 
7,  8.  :  many  heard  and  felt.  I  staid  with  Mr.  Jackson,  on  Muddy- 
Creek,  for  the  night. 

Thursday  18.  I  preached  at  Sheppard's  meeting-house  upon 
Rom.  viii.  9.  I  was  uncommonly  led  out  upon  both  my  last  sub- 
jects, and  I  suppose  I  had  one  thousand  hearers  in  the  two  congre- 
gations. After  dining  we  rode  down  the  heights  of  Tenmile,  to  a 
town  called  Frederick  ;  thence  to  the  Quaker  settlement,  and 
stopped  at  Alexander  Frew's.  Were  the  grounds  not  so  uneven, 
and  so  destitute  of  springs  and  streams,  I  should  give  the  Redstone 
settlement  the  preference  to  almost  any  in  America:  the  soil  is 
good,  the  timber  lofty,  and  there  is  plenty  of  iron,  coal,  and  lime- 
stone ;  and  would  the  settlers  generally  do  as  their  Quaker  neigh- 
bours, (the  only  people  here  who  manure  their  lands,)  the  soil 
would  never  be  exhausted.  The  great  promise  of  fruit  has  failed. 
It  is  mercifully  wise  in  Providence  to  check  our  plenty — particu- 
larly here  :  many  drunkards  will  now  be  kept  sober  in  this  distil- 
ling country,  and  I  hope  some  will  be  converted  to  God. 

Friday  19.  Our  camp-meeting  begins  to  day  :  the  ground  chosen 
was  William  Jackman's,  near  the  old  fort  upon  the  Monongahela ; 
it  was  upon  a  beautiful  eminence  ;  the  great  stand  was  erected,  and 
a  second  one  to  the  left,  concealed  by  the  trees.  On  Saturday  I 
preached  to  about  one  thousand  hearers;  my  text  was  Isai.  Iv.  12. 
The  Sabbath  was  wet  in  the  morning,  but,  clearing  away,  both 
stands  were  occupied,  and  there  might  be  in  the  two  congregations 
nearly  four  thousand  people  :  there  was  a  visible  impression  made 
upon  many,  and  we  hope  fifty  souls  were  converted  to  God.  On 
Tuesday  we  came  away,  whilst  others  were  coming  to  the  ground. 
Thornton  Flemming  and  James  Q,uinn  went  back  and  preached. 
We  came  to  Samuel  Hammond's. 

Wednesday  24.  At  the  Forks  meeting-house  I  preached  on  1 
Thess.  iii.  1.  Whilst  we  were  at  dinner  at  Benjamin  Fell's,  William 


1803.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  113 

Page  came  in  with  the  agreeable  intelligence  of  a  revival  at  Con- 
nellsville.  On  Thursday  we  crossed  Monongahela,  at  Elizabeth- 
town,  and  came  to  William  Jones's,  and  preached  to  an  unexpected 
congregation  :  I  was  unwell,  but  spoke  on  Acts  ii.  21.  A  woman, 
noted  for  being  a  mocker,  fell  down,  and  cried  for  mercy,  confess- 
ing her  sins  before  all  the  people.  Brother  Page  exhorted,  but 
the  people  would  not  disperse  until  he  had  given  them  a  sermon 
under  the  sugar-maple  trees  :  many  trembled  and  wept,  if  they  did 
not  pray      This  has  been  a  neglected  spot    On  Friday  we  rested. 

Saturday  27.  We  had  a  dry,  sultry  ride  to  Pittsburg.  In  the 
evening  William  Page  preached.  In  the  court-house  I  spoke,  on  the 
Sabbath  day,  to  aboui  four  hundred  people  ;  my  subject  was  1  Chron. 
vii.  14.  I  would  have  preached  again,  but  the  Episcopalians  occu- 
pied the  house.  I  come  but  once  in  twelve  years,  but  they  could 
not  consent  to  give  way  for  me.  It  is  time  we  had  a  house  of  our 
own. — I  think  I  have  seen  a  lot  which  will  answer  to  build  upon, 

Monday  29.  I  came  down,  and  crossed  at  the  old  fort,  the  point 
of  confluence  of  the  rivers  Monongahela  and  Alleghany,  whence 
these  united   waters  flow  under  the  appropriate   name   of  Ohio, 
beautiful.     I  crossed  Sawmill  and  the  Shirtee,  and  passed  the  lands 
of  General  Nevill.     At  John  Wrenshall's   I    found  an   agreeable 
hostess,  and  lovely  children.     Riding  up  the  road  1  met  an  aged 
Presbyterian,  who  told  me  that  religion  was  at  a  great  height  in 
Mr.  Wood's  congregation — that  yesterday  under  preaching  seve- 
ral fell  down  ;  he  asked  my  opinion  of  the  work  :  I  replied,  that 
in  my  judgment,  any  person  who  could  not  give  an  account   of  the 
convincing  and  converting  power  of  God,  might  be  mistaken  •  fall- 
ing down  would  not  do  :   we   agreed  in    sentiment.      I    stopped 
at  John  Fawcett's,  where,  although  very  sick,  I  preached  to  a  large 
congregation,  at  seven  o'clock  on  Tuesday;  my  subject  was  Matt, 
vii.  7,  8.     I  baptised  several  children.     On  the  same  day  I  rode, 
weak,  faint,  and  alone,  to  Washington  ;  it  was  the  time  of  the  court 
sessions  :  we  had  about  four  hundred  people  to  hear,  to  whom  I 
spoke  on  Titus  ii.  11,  12.     I  lodged  at  John  Crouch's  :  God  is  in 
this  house. 

Wednesday  31.  We  rode  seventeen  miles  to  Philip  Doddridge's, 
near  a  new-made  town  called  Middletown  ;  here  I  preached  next 
day  in  a  new  stone  house,  the  first  of  the  kind  I  have  met  with  in 
my  tour.  Although  faint  from  heat  and  a  dysentery,  I  was  long  and 
fervent,  and  the  people  were  attentive. 

Vol.  Ill  15 


114  KEV.     1KANCIS   ASBURV'S  JOURNAL.  [1803, 

Friday,  September  2.  We  found  a  spot,  and  made  a  pulpit 
between  two  sugar-maple  trees.  I  was  in  great  pain,  so  that  I  did 
not  attend  quarterly  meeting,  which  began  on  Saturday,  continued 
until  midnight,  re-commenced  on  the  Sabbath  with  love-feast  and 
sacrament,  and  at  eleven  o'clock  I  preached  on  Eph.  vi.  18, 
19,  20. 

I.  "  The  mystery  of  the  Gospel,"  in  redemption  and  salvation  ; 
in  what  Christ  hath  done  for  us,  and  in  what  is  wrought  in  us  by 
his  Spirit. 

II.  The  duty,  nature,  and  exercise  of  prayer — for  saints,  for  the 
ministry,  and  for  the  success  of  the  Gospel. 

III.  That  the  apostle  might  be  bold  as  a  prisoner  and  a  martyr. 
Many  things  were  said  of  the  mysteries  of  God — creation,  the 

winds,  and  our  own  existence  in  embryo  :  we  have  demonstration 
of  these  mysteries,  and  such  we  also  have  of  redemption,  convic- 
tion, conversion,  sanctification,  and  the  adorable  Trinity  ;  and  fre- 
quent and  obvious  demonstration  of  the  power  of  God  and  his 
word  instantaneously  manifested  :  we  do  not  know  how  these  things 
are,  but  we  know  that  they  do  exist. 

My  indisposition  was  such,  that  I  left  the  people  still  engaged  in 
worship,  much  ashamed  of  the  meanness  of  my  performance,  how- 
ever well  my  hearers  may  have  thought  of  it :  the  Lord  knew  my 
good  intentions,  but  I  saw  that  the  excellency  of  such  sublime  and 
interesting  subjects  were  beyond  my  reach  of  thought  or  expres- 
sion. The  Lord  blessed  our  gathering  together,  and  souls  were 
converted. 

Virginia.— Ohio  county.  Monday  5.  We  rode  ten  miles  to  John 
Beck's,  near  West-Liberty.  I  preached  on  Acts  iii.  26.  ;  one  soul 
who  had  been  convicted  at  our  quarterly  meeting,  professed  to  find 
peace  with  God,  and  shouted  glory !  with  a  loud  voice.  On  Tues- 
day I  preached  near  this  place  to  a  crowd,  at  John  Spaugh's.  I 
came  with  Rezin  Pomfry  down  the  great  hill,  to  the  Ohio.  Wed- 
nesday brought  us  to  Charlestown,  the  capital  of  Brook  county, 
situated  at  the  mouth  of  Buffalo,  eighty  miles  from  Pittsburgh.  We 
found  the  Ohio  so  low,  that  the  boat  of  Colonel  Lewis,  who  is 
going  to  explore  the  Mississippi,  would  not  float  over  the  flats. 

Ohio. — Thursday  8.  I  reached  Steubenville,  and  preached  on 
Luke  six.  10.  As  the  court-house  could  not  contain  the  people,  we 
went  to  a  Presbyterian  tent ;  for  which,  as  the  "  Jews  and  Samari- 
tans have  no  dealings"  in  this  country,  we  must  ask  pardon.     I  wa? 


S803.J  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBTJRY'S  JOURNAL.  115 

Invited  to  dine  with  Mr.  Bazaleel  Wells,  one  of  the  proprietors  of 
this  town,  and  the  rich  occupant  of  a  large  mansion,  which,  if 
rough-cast,  would  be  grand.  The  rivers  and  streams  were  never 
Sower  than  now.  My  mind  is  greatly  engaged  with  God  in  public 
and  in  private  ;  but  I  feel  the  power  of  Satan  in  these  little, 
wicked,  western  trading  towns. 

Friday  9.  At  Charlestown  I  preached  in  Brook  court-housenon 
Joshua  xxiv.  19.  We  came  to  Nicholas  Pomfrey's  to  lodge  in  the 
evening.  On  Saturday  we  crossed  at  Pomfrey's  ferry,  and  attended 
West- Wheeling  quarterly  meeting  at  Hopewell  chapel.  I  ordained 
brother  Wrenshall  to  the  office  of  deacon,  and  then  came  to  the 
stand,  and  preached  on  the  Sabbath  day  on  1  Peter  v.  10.  We  had 
love-feast  and  sacrament.  There  was  a  cry  raised  very  soon,  and 
it  was  tvith  difficulty  I  could  keep  the  thread  of  my  discourse 
whilst  they  were  singing  and  shouting  upon  the  top  of  the  hill.  At 
candle  light  the  cry  began  again,  and  continued  until  the  break  of 
day  on  Monday  morning  :  it  was  judged  there  were  twenty  souls 
converted  to  God.  J  came  away,  keeping  up  Indian  Short-Creek 
to  Isaac  Meek's,  ten  miles  ;.  on  this  stream  are  some  of  as  fine 
lands  as  any  in  America. 

Tuesday  12.  We  came  to  Morrison's  tavern,  twenty  miles,  our 
route  laying  along  upon  the  branches  of  Short- Creek,  Wheeling, 
and  Stillwater — the  land  still  fertile.  Next  day  we  reached  Will's 
Creek,  after  riding  thirty-seven  miles  ;  we  were  richly  entertained 
at  Mr.  Beatty's.  On  Thursday  morning  it  rained  about  two  hours  ; 
I  was  damped,  and  felt  a  touch  of  inflammation  in  my  throat.  We 
stopped  at  Zanesville,  and  found  good  entertainment  at  Mrs. 
Morrison's. 

Friday  15.  We  reached  John  Murphy's,  at  New-Lancaster. 
Since  Tuesday  morning  we  have  rode  one  hundred  and  twenty 
miles,  over  successive,  and  excessively  steep  hills.  My  mind  has 
been  calm.  Daniel  and  Benjamin  Hitt  have  been  my  companions. 
The  levels,  and  on  the  water-courses,  the  lands  in  this  state  are 
exceedingly  rich,  with  all  the  appearances  which  alluvial  soils  pre- 
sent. I  frequently  see  the  tumuli  or  barrows,  such  as  are  seen  in 
the  west  of  Georgia — most  probably  graves  of  the  Aborigines. 
Jonathan's  and  Brush  Creeks  are  branches  of  the  Hockhocking : 
there  is  fine  land  on  these  streams.  We  are,  I  judge,  six  hundred 
miles  from  Philadelphia. 

On  Saturday  I  preached  at  John  Murphy's,  on  2  Peter  i.  2.    We 
held  a  sacramental  and  social  meeting.     At  eleven  o'clock  Daniel 


Jill  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [l&Oo. 

Hitt  preached,  and  I  spoke  after  him  ;  we  had  the  attention  of  the 
people,  and  we  saw  some  tears,  but  there  was  nothing  special  done. 
On  Monday  I  preached  at  Edward  Teal's  once  more  :  this  brother 
I  knew  in  Maryland  thirty  years  ago  ;  he  is  now  settled  in  Fair- 
field, near  Rush-Creek,  and  has  1200  acres  of  land  under  his  feet, 
equal  to  any  in  the  United  States  :  what  will  not  a  little  enterprise 
do  for  a  man  in  this  highly  favoured  country  ! 

Tuesday  19.  Was  a  day  of  settled  rain  ;  we  sought  a  shelter  at 
Edward  Teal's.  Next  day,  having  two  appointments,  we  set  out 
and  got  bewildered  in  the  woods,  and  lost  our  way  upon  Mount- 
Pleasant  :  we  judged  it  best  to  take  the  path  to  New-Lancaster, 
and  try  to  secure  our  second  appointment,  at  Broad  Cole's.  After 
riding  about  20  miles,  and  again  missing  our  way,  we  came  in  at 
three  o'clock,  and  I  preached  upon  Luke  xi.  13.  I  took  lodging  at 
Mr.  Daniel  Van  Meeter's.  Mr.  Van  Meeter  told  me,  that  a  boy 
had  cultivated  about  twelve  acres,  which  would  yield  him  about 
seven  hundred  bushels  of  Indian  corn  :  now,  what  do  these  people 
want  with  slaves  ? — They  have  wisely  prohibited  their  introduction 
into  the  state.  The  Muddy  Prairie  is  five  miles  in  length,  and  a 
mile  wide,  more  or  less  ;  it  was,  doubtless,  once  a  lake ;  it  is  very 
fertile,  but  must  be  drained  before  it  can  be  well  cultivated.  New- 
Lancaster  has  nearly  one  hundred  houses  of  all  kinds,  ill  situated 
for  health  on  a  low,  rich  level,  through  which  creeps  the  still 
Hockhocking. 

Thursday  21.  We  came  thirty  miles  to  Brown's,  on  Deer-Creek, 
Ross  county.  Our  route  brought  us  over  the  Picaway  Plains, 
seven  miles  long,  three  miles  wide,  and  fertile  ;  little  hills  covered 
with  lofty  trees  here  and  there,  rise  from  the  level  and  give  a 
beautifully  picturesque  appearance  to  the  plains.  At  Thomas's  we 
crossed  the  Scioto,  now  dwindled  to  a  small  body  of  water.  On 
Friday  I  preached  at  Brown's  ;  my  text  was  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8. ;  it 
was  an  open  season,  with  about  three  hundred  hearers. 

Saturday  24.  I  rode  to  Chilicothe,  fifteen  miles,  through  lands 
generally  rich.  We  passed  some  of  those  mounds  and  intrench- 
ments  which  still  astonish  all  who  visit  this  country,  and  give  rise  to 
many  conjectures  respecting  their  origin  :  "  Shadows,  clouds,  and 
darkness  rest"  and  will  rest  "  upon  them."  In  the  state-house,  which 
also  answers  for  a  court-house,  I  preached  to  about  five  hundred 
hearers,  and  would  have  had  more  had  not  the  rain  prevented. 
Chilicothe  stands  upon  the  point  of  confluence  of  the  Scioto-River 
and  Paint-Creek.      On  Monday  we  came  away  from  Governor 


1803.]  REV.    FRANCIS    ASBURY's    JOURNAL.  .117 

Edward  Tiffen's  across  the  fat  lands  of  the  Paint :  at  the  end  of 
thirty  miles  we  stopped  at  Brancker's,  and  had  the  common  fare  of 
travellers,  with  other  travellers. 

Tuesday  27  We  stopped  at  Ohio  Brush-Creek,  fifteen  miles  ; 
dined  in  haste  with  George  Spurgin,  and  bent  our  course  to  George 
Rogers's,  at  Darlington's  ferry — this  was  a  stretching  ride. 

Kentucky. — Wednesday  28.  We  crossed  the  Ohio  into  the 
state  of  Kentucky,  Fleming  county,  stopping  at  Salathiel  Fitch's. 
It  is  wonderful  to  contemplate  the  effects  of  American  enterprise 
exhibited  in  the  state  of  Ohio  :  it  is  but  four  years  since  Zane 
opened  the  road  for  the  general  government  through  the  wilder- 
ness so  lately  called,  and  now  there  are  the  towns  of  Marietta  at 
the  mouth  of  Muskingum,  of  about  one  thousand  houses  ;  Cincin- 
nati, containing  as  many  ;  Hamilton  of  five  hundred  houses  ;  and 
many  others  whose  names  are  scarcely  fixed. 

Thursday  30.  We  came  through  Bourbon  county.  I  crossed 
Licking-River  by  the  Salt  Works,  and  rode  thirty-three  miles  to 
Benjamin  Coleman's,  at  Mount  Gerezim,  to  attend  the  Kentucky 
conference  ;  this  was  a  heavy  ride,  without  food  for  man  or  beast 
until  we  reached  home.     On  Friday  we  rested. 

Saturday,  October  1.  Barnabas  M'Henry  preached  upon  the 
divine  institution  of  the  Sabbath.  On  Sunday  I  had  to  preach  from 
a  stand  in  the  woods  to  about  two  thousand  people  ;  my  subject 
was  1  Thess.  iii.  1.     It  was  an  open  time. 

Monday  3.    We  entered  fully  upon  our  conference  work  ;  but  I 

had  to  preach  nevertheless.     We  had  preaching  every  day  ;  and 

the  people  continued  singing  and  prayer,  night  and  day,  with  little 

intermission.    On  Wednesday  the  meeting  closed.    We  hope  there 

were  twenty  souls  converted  to  God,  besides  five  who  are  reported 

to  have  been  converted  at  a  family  meeting.    Our  conference  ended 

on  Thursday  the  sixth.     I  had  taken  cold,  but  rode  twelve  miles 

to  Smith's,  and  was  driven  by  illness   early  to  bed.     Next  day  I 

rose  unwell,  and  continued  my  route  through  Paris,  standing  upon 

the  fork  between  Stono  and  another  stream,  useful   for   mills,   but 

apt  to  be  nearly  dry  in  Autumn.     Paris  is  the  capital  of  Bourbon 

county — a  growing  place  of  about  four  hundred  houses,  some  of 

brick,  and  a  stone  meeting-house  belonging  to  the   Presbyterians. 

The  day  was  excessively  warm,  but  I  made  twenty  miles  to  Doctor 

Hinde's,  Clarke  county  ;  brothers  M'Kendree,  Garratt,  Douthat, 

and  Granade,  were  with  me. 


IIS  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [loO.i. 

Saturday  8.  I  felt  my  mind  devoutly  fixed  on  God.  I  accom- 
plished two  things  in  conference  ;  viz.  1.  Forming  the  Ohio  cir- 
cuits into  a  district ;  2.  Sending  two  missionaries  to  Natchez,  and 
one  to  the  Illinois — as  the  minutes  of  the  present  year  will  show. 

Sunday  9.  At  Hynde's  chapel,  Clarke  county,  1  preached,  and 
thereby  paid  a  debt  which  I  had  contracted  last  year,  by  sending 
N.  Snethen  to  preach  in  my  place,  by  which,  it  may  be,  some  peo- 
ple were  disappointed  :  my  text  was  2  Pet.  i.  4 — 8.  On  Monday 
we  took  the  path  for  IVtadison,  crossing  the  Kentucky-River  at 
Combe's  ferry  :  we  put  in  at  Christopher  Irwine's.  On  Tuesday 
we  stopped  at  Wood's — in  the  woods  :  his  house  being  unfinished, 
there  were  masons,  and  carpenters,  and  gentlemen,  and  riflemen, 
and  whiskey  topers,  besides  the  gnats  and  bats,  which,  ever  and 
anon,  flew  in  and  out :  we  quitted  our  purgatory  upon  paying  two 
and  a  half  dollars  for  three  of  us. 

Wednesday  12.  It  rained  to-day.  We  encountered  the  rocks 
and  hills,  on  the  route  to  Rock- Castle  River,  and  stopped,  drip- 
ping and  willing,  at  Senior  Faris's  :  here  we  had  fire,  food,  pray- 
er, a  room,  and  a  bed.  On  Thursday  we  started  and  reached 
Richard  Ballinger's  :  our  host  gave  us  entertainment  gratis,  and 
we  had  prayer  at  night  and  in  the  morning.  I  think  seriously  of 
forming  a  wilderness  circuit  : — it  is  high  time  to  begin. 

Tennessee. — Friday  14.  We  came  to  Hunt's,  at  Claibornes 
court-house  ;  and  next  day  reached  Martin  Stubblefield's.  What  a 
road  have  we  passed !  certainly  the  worst  on  the  whole  continent, 
even  in  the  best  weather  ;  yet,  bad  as  it  was,  there  were  four  or 
five  hundred  crossing  the  rude  hills  whilst  we  were  :  I  was  power- 
fully struck  with  the  consideration,  that  there  were  at  least  as 
many  thousand  emigrants  annually  from  east  to  west : — we  must 
take  care  to  send  preachers  after  these  people.  We  have  made 
one  thousand  and  eighty  miles  from  Philadelphia — and  now,  what  a 
detail  of  sufferings  might  I  give,  fatiguing  to  me  to  write,  and  per- 
haps to  my  friends  to  read.  A  man  who  is  well  mounted,  will 
scorn  to  complain  of  the  roads,  when  he  sees  men,  women,  and 
children,  almost  naked,  paddling  bare-foot  and  bare-legged  along, 
or  labouring  up  the  rocky  hills,  whilst  those  who  are  best  off  have 
only  a  horse  for  two  or  three  children  to  ride  at  once.  If  these  ad- 
venturers have  little  or  nothing  to  eat,  it  is  no  extraordinary  circum- 
stance, and  not  uncommon,  to  encamp  in  the  wet  woods  after  night  : 
in  the  mountains  it  does  not  rain-)  but  pours.     I  too  have  my  suf- 


1803.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY3S  JOURNAL.  119 

ferings,  perhaps,  peculiar  to  myself:  pain  and  temptation — the  one 
of  the  body,  and  the  other  of  the  spirit :  no  room  to  retire  to — ■ 
that  in  which  you  sit  common  to  all — crowded  with  women  and 
children — the  fire  occupied  by  cooking — much  and  long  loved  soli- 
tude not  to  be  found,  unless  you  choose  to  run  out  into  the  rain, 
in  the  woods  :  six  months  in  the  year  I  have  had,  for  thirty-two 
years,  occasionally,  to  submit  to  what  will  never  be  agreeable  to 
me ;  but  the  people,  it  must  be  confessed,  are  amongst  the  kindest 
souls  in  the  world.  But  kindness  will  not  make  a  crowded  log 
cabin,  twelve  feet  by  ten,  agreeable  :  without  are  cold  and  rain  ; 
and  within,  six  adults,  and  as  many  children,  one  of  which  is  all 
motion  ;  the  dogs  too,  must  sometimes  be  admitted.  On  Saturday, 
at  Felix  Ernest's,  I  found  that  amongst  my  other  trials,  I  had  taken 
the  itch ;  and.  considering  the  filthy  houses  and  filthy  beds  I  have 
met  with,  in  coming  from  the  Kentucky  conference,  it  is  perhaps 
strange  that  I  have  not  caught  it  twenty  times  :  I  do  not  see  that 
there  is  any  security  against  it,  but  by  sleeping  in  a  brimstone 
shirt  : — poor  Bishop  !  But  we  must  bear  it  for  the  elect's  sake.  I 
have  written  some  letters  to  our  local  brethren,  and  read  the  book 
of  Daniel  since  I  have  been  in  this  house. 

Sunday  23.  My  soul  is  tranquil,  the  air  is  pure,  and  the  house  of 
God  is  near  ;  and  Jehovah  is  nearer.  At  Ebenezer,  I  preached 
on  James  i.  22.  *'  But  be  ye  doers  of  the  word,  and  not  hearers 
only,  deceiving  your  ownselves."  1.  By  introduction,  I  collected 
the  words  of  our  Lord,  and  those  of  the  apostle  Paul  upon  the 
same  subject,  and  brought  them  to  one  point.  In  opening  the  sub- . 
ject,  I  observed,  1.  What  we  are  taught  in  the  preaching  of  the 
Gospel :  First,  Christian  experience  ;  Secondly,  Christian  tem- 
pers ;  Thirdly,  Christian  perfection  ;  Fourthly,  Christian  duties. 
2.  General  head — How  people  should  hear  the  word — constantly, 
seriously ;  in  faith,  in  prayer — as  believing  it  promises  all  that  is 
good,  and  threatens  the  most  dreadful  evil.  3.  To  be  doers  of  the 
word,  is  to  seek  for  the  immediate  experience  and  practice  of  the 
word. 

North  Carolina. — On  Monday,  we  came  off  in  earnest ;  re- 
freshed at  Isaiah  Harrison's,  and  continued  on  to  the  Paint  moun- 
tain, passing  the  gap  newly  made,  which  makes  the  road  down  to 
Paint-Creek  much  better  :  I  lodged  with  Mr.  Nelson,  who  treated 
me  like  a  minister,  a  Christian,  and  a  gentleman, 


120  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1803, 

Tuesday  25.  We  reached  Buncombe.  The  road  is  greatly  mend- 
ed by  changing  the  direction,  and  throwing  a  bridge  over  the  Ivy. 

Wednesday  26.  We  called  a  meeting  at  Killion's,  and  a  gracious 
season  it  was  :  my  subject  was  1  Cor.  xv.  38.  Sister  Killion  and 
sister  Smith,  sisters  in  the  flesh,  and  kindred  spirits  in  holiness  and 
humble  obedience,  are  both  gone  *to  their  reward  in  glory.  On 
Thursday  we  came  away  in  haste,  crossed  Swamoat  at  T.  Foster's, 
the  French  Broad  at  the  High  Shoals,  and  afterward  again  at 
Beard's  bridge,  and  put  up  for  the  night  at  Andrew  Mitchell's  :  in 
our  route,  we  passed  two  large  encamping  places  of  the  Methodists 
and  Presbyterians  :  it  made  the  country  look  like  the  Holy  Land. 

Friday  28.  We  came  up  Little-River,  a  sister  stream  of  French 
Broad  :  it  offered  some  beautiful  flats  of  land.  We  found  a  new 
road,  lately  cut,  which  brought  us  in  at  the  head  of  Little-River, 
at  the  old  fording  place,  and  within  hearing  of  the  falls,  a  few  miles 
off  of  the  head  of  Matthews-Creek,  a  branch  of  the  Seleuda  :  the 
waters  foaming  down  the  rocks  with  a  descent  of  a  half  a  mile,  make 
themselves  heard  at  a  great  distance.  I  walked  down  the  mountain, 
after  riding  sixteen  or  eighteen  miles  before  breakfast,  and  came  in 
about  twelve  o'clock  to  father  John  Douthat's  :  once  more  I  have 
escaped  from  filth,  fleas,  rattlesnakes,  hills,  mountains,  rocks,  and 
rivers  :  farewell,  western  world — for  a  while  !  We  are  twelve 
hundred  and  seventy  miles  from  Philadelphia. 

South  Carolina. — Monday  31.  I  rode  to  Chastaine's,  twenty 
miles,  crossing  three  branches  of  the  Seleuda,  not  many  miles 
from  their  sources. 

Tuesday,  November  1.  At  the  meeting-house,  I  spoke  on  2 
Peter  v.  6 — 9.  after  meeting  we  rode  away  fifteen  miles  to 
Wood's  ;  and  next  day  preached  at  his  house,  to  a  lifeless  congre- 
gation, and  came  off  without  dining,  to  John  Foster's,  twelve  miles. 
In  this  route  I  crossed  the  three  branches  of  Tyger  River,  and 
passed  through  Greensville  and  Spartansburg  counties.  My  mind 
hath  been  in  great  peace  under  all  my  trials,  and  labours,  and  trou- 
bles. I  find  that  the  camp  meetings  in  this  state,  and  in  Georgia, 
have  been  conducted  in  great  order,  and  with  great  success. 

Thursday  3.  At  Foster's  meeting-house,  I  spoke  on  Matt.  v.  12. 
I  had  some  opening.  In  the  evening,  Moses  Matthews  and  G. 
Dougharty  had  a  lively  prayer-meeting.  I  find  we  have  lost 
Phoebe  Wells,  Mary  Hughs,  Eleanor  Parker,  (formerly  Owens,) 


1803.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL,  121 

and  William  Hazlewood,  members  of  our  society  in  Charleston; 
they  died  of  the  prevailing  fever. 

Friday  4.  We  re  crossed  the  branches  of  Tyger  and  Enoree 
rivers,  and  came  along  a  crippling  path  to  Thomas  Terry's,  near 
the  Fork  Shoals  of  Reedy-River.  We  have  a  new  frame  house, 
thirty  by  twenty-four  feet,  built  for  worship,  on  Mount  Terry  :  this 
has  been  erected  in  pursuance  of  my  last  year's  advice,  and  by  one 
man.     To-morrow  we  shall  open  our  new  house. 

Saturday  5.  I  spoke  on  2  Peter  ii.  1,2.  It  was  a  rainy  day,  but 
we  had  a  congregation.  On  the  Sabbath  day  I  preached  on  Isaiah 
xlvi.  7.  I  laboured  hard — I  fear  to  little  purpose  :  may  the  seed 
sown  in  great  weakness,  be  raised  by  the  power  of  God  !  On  Mon- 
day I  rode  to  the  Golden  Grove,  and  preached  upon  Gal.  v.  22 — 25. 
it  was  a  cold  day,  and  there  were  but  few  people  :  it  is  the  cotton, 
corn,  and  potato  harvest.  I  rode  that  evening  to  B.  Stanton's, 
upon  Seleuda.  On  Tuesday,  at  Salem,  I  preached  to  a  few  hear- 
ers upon  Ephes.  vi.  13 — 19.  We  made  James  Tarrant's  that  eve- 
ning. Wednesday  brought  us  to  David  Dunlap's,  and  Thursday 
to  Claiborne  Brown's.  We  met  people  coming  from  a  militia  mus- 
ter, drunk,  and  staggering  along  the  lanes  and  paths  ;  these  un- 
happy souls  have  had  their  camp-meeting,  and  shout  forth  the 
praises  of  the  god  of  strong  drink  :  glory  be  to  God,  we  have  our 
camp-meetings  too — of  longer  continuance,  and  more  and  louder 
shouting  of  glory,  and  honour,  and  praises  to  the  God  of  the  armies 
of  the  earth.  Go  on,  ye  servants  of  the  Lord  ;  and  Thou,  mighty 
Saviour,  extend  the  victories  of  Gospel  grace ! 

In  Laurens  county,  I  passed  the  Quaker  settlement  upon  Ra- 
bone's  Creek. 

Friday  11.  I  rode  in  haste  to  Bethel,  thirty-five  miles.  On 
Saturday  I  rested.  On  the  Sabbath  1  preached  at  Bethel  once 
more  :  my  text  was  Mark  xiii.  34.  to  the  end  of  the  chapter  :  after 
sermon,  I  rode  eight  miles  to  brother  Low's,  amongst  the  Dutch 
people,  and  enforced  Hebr.  iv.  4 — 16.  At  Mr.  Rolles's,  twenty- 
five  miles  distant,  I  had  on  Monday  a  gracious  season  whilst  ex- 
pounding Matt.  vii.  7 — 11 

We  crossed  Contee's  ferry  on  Tuesday,  and  I  entered  Colum- 
bia like  an  Indian  chief;  it  rained,  and  I  had  cast  a  blanket  round 
me.  John  Harper  came  to  meet  us  and  welcome  us  to  his  house, 
where,  although  the  weather  was  stormy,  we  held  a  family  meet- 
ing, and  the  rooms  were  filled  with  respectable  hearers  :  my 
choice  of  a  text  was  singular;  it  was  our  Lord's  most  affection- 

Vol.  III.  16 


122  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1803. 

ate  words  to  his  broken-hearted  disciples  when  giving  notice  of  his 
departure  from  them  ;  John  xiv.  18. 

Wednesday  16,  was  unfavourable;  but  we  took  the  path  man- 
fully for  Charleston.  After  crossing  the  ferry  at  Granby  the  rain 
came  upon  us  powerfully,  and  accompanied  us  to  the  widow  Gaig- 
ler's  ;  with  her  we  dined,  and  took  it  again  to  Wetstone's. 

Thursday  10,  was  a  clear,  warm  day.  We  dined  with  the  wi- 
dow Welsh,  and  pursuing  our  journey,  lodged  at  the  widow 
Heart's  ;  thus  we  have  been  cast  upon  the  distinguishing  kindness 
of  sisters  to  her  of  Sarepta. 

Friday  18.  We  came  to  Mr.  M'Quinn's,  and  next  day  reached 
Charleston,  after  riding  thirty  miles  without  rest  or  food  for  man  or 
beast.  I  took  possession  of  the  new  house  built  for  the  preachers, 
near  the  new  chapel. 

Sunday  20.  I  went  once  more  to  Cumberland-street  house,  and 
had  gracious  feelings  whilst  expounding  1  Pet,  v.  10.  My  stay 
being  short,  I  attended  in  the  afternoon,  and  spoke  upon  David's 
repentance  as  recorded  in  Psal.  li.  9 — 11.  this  also  was  a  seasona- 
ble time,  and  all  were  attentive.  Brother  Kendrick  spoke  in  the 
new  church  in  the  afternoon,  and  brother  Dougharty  in  the  old 
church  at  night,  whilst  the  new  church  was  occupied  by  brother 
Darley  ;  all  this  labour  was,  we  hope,  not  in  vain  :  some  appeared 
to  be  inf  distress:  who  knows  what  God  will  yet  do  for  wicked 
Charleston  ?  1  continued  a  week  in  Charleston,  lodging  in  our  own 
house  at  Bethel,  receiving  my  visiters,  ministers  and  people,  white, 
black,  and  yellow  ;  it  was  a  paradise  to  me,  and  to  some  others. 

Sunday  27.  1  preached  an  ordination  sermon  upon  Gal.  i.  15, 
16.  after  which  we  set  apart  Bennet  Kendrick  to  the  elder's  office; 
to  which  he  had  been  elected  by  the  Virginia  conference.  In  the 
afternoon  1  gave  them  my  farewell  discourse  in  Cumberland-street 
meeting-house  ;  my  subject  was  Eph.  iv.  1,2. 

Monday  28.    We  began  our  journey  to  Augusta,  on  our  way 

dined  at  Mr.  Carr's,  in  Dorchester,  and  stopped  for  the  night  with 

Mr.  Isaac  Perry,  upon  Cypress  Swamp,  by  whom  we  were  most 

affectionately  received,  and  most  comfortably  accommodated. 

Tuesday  29.    We  stopped  ,to   dine  with  Captain  Roger's,   and 

came  on  to  S 's  ;    next  day  to  Trotter's.     On  Thursday  to 

Pearce's,  Tinker-Creek. 

Georgia. — Friday,  December  2.  We  reached  our  place  of  desti- 
nation. My  mind  is  calm,  and  hath  been  kept  in  a  praying  frame :  I 
have  rode  one  thousand  six  hundred  and  fifty-four  miles  by  compu- 


1803.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY?S  JOURNAL.  123 

tation  since  I  left  Philadelphia.  By  letter  from  Philip  Bruce,  I  learn 
that  the  work  of  God  has  promising  appearances  in  the  eastern  and 
western  districts  of  North  Carolina  ;  but  abundantly  more  so  in  the 
south  district  of  Virginia  :  at  a  kind  of  camp-meeting,  held  at  Wool- 
sey  Barn,  (but  now  Ellis's  chapel  more  properly,)  there  have  been, 
report  says,  one  hundred  whites,  and  a  number  of  blacks  converted 
to  God  ;  at  Guildford  quarterly  meeting,  thirty,  and  as  many  with- 
in a  short  space  at  Norfolk,  brought  to  Christ :  but  still  larger  ac- 
counts are  received  of  the  work  of  the  Lord  in  this  state  ;  this, 
however,  may  be  more  fully  known  by  reference  to  Stith  Mead's 
narrative  letters  on  the  subject.  My  lodging  in  Augusta  is  with 
Peter  Cantalou,  a  friend  from  France. 

Sunday  4.  1  preached  upon  Coloss.  iv.  2,  3.  in  the  morning  ;  in 
the  afternoon  2  Cor.  vi.  2. :  I  had  satisfactory  openings,  but  I  have 
not  those  feelings  I  enjoyed  at  Charleston.  We  have  a  house  here 
sixty  feet  by  forty  ;  an  attentive  and  large  congregation,  and  seventy 
members  in  fellowship  :  I  hope  this  conference  will  give  us  one 
hundred  souls  converted. 

At  Thomas  Haynes's,  Uchee,  we  had  a  house  filled  ;  my  subject 
was  Colossians  ii.  6.  :  it  was  a  feeling  season.  Next  day,  at  White- 
Oak*  I  spoke  on  Hebr.  xii.  28,  29.  to  a  few  ;  we  rode  home  with 
Ignatius  Few,  whose  eldest  son  is  serious. 

Wednesday  7-  We  came  to  Scott's  meeting-house— an  irregular 
congregation  :  my  text  was  1  Cor.  xx.  58.  The  day  was  gloomy, 
the  preacher  sick,  and  part  of  the  congregation  very  inattentive. 
I  lodged  with  Mr.  Gatral.  On  Thursday  it  rained  ;  but  we  wormed 
through  the  scratching  woods  to  Mr.  Ware's,  where  I  stopped. 
Brother  Mead  went  to  one  appointment,  and  brother  Randle  to 
another,  with  small  expectation  of  meeting  many  people  at  either. 
For  myself,  let  me  move  which  way  1  may,  appointments  or  no 
appointments,  I  am  sure  to  be  brought  into  business  :— well— so 
best. 

Friday  9.  I  preached  at  Clendon's  chapel  on  Romans  iii.  2. 

I.  The  characters  of  "  believers." 

II.  The  nature  and  causes  of  their  sleep. 

III.  The  signs  of  the  "  time,"  and  the  knowledge  thereof,  that 
they  may  be  instructed  to  "  awake  out  of  sleep." — This  was  the 
general  plan  of  my  discourse  ;  and  we  had  a  gracious  season.  On 
Saturday  I  came  to  Petersburg.  The  text  for  to-day  was  1 
Thess.  v.  8,  9. 


124  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S    JOURNAL.  [1803. 

Sunday  11.  It  rained.  I  spoke  in  a  very  open  house  on  Ephes. 
vi.  18,  19.  I  lodged  at  Mr.  Oliver's.  The  face  of  affairs  here  is 
greatly  altered  for  the  hetter  ;  but  I  expect  greater  things  yet :  we 
have  a  society,  it  is  true  ;  but  we  want  a  house  of  our  own  to  preach 
in.  On  Monday,  at  Thompson's  chapel,  I  spoke  on  Hebr.  ii.  3,  4.  ; 
and  had  good  openings  on  the  text.  We  lodged  with  Judge  Tait. 
At  Freeman's  chapel  my  subject  was  Hebr.  ii.  3,  4.  :  I  spoke  with 
liberty.  We  lodged  with  Mr.  Freeman.  Wednesday  found  me  at 
Mark's  chapel  ;  my  subject  was  Hebr.  iii.  14.  When  brother 
Mark's  house  is  finished,  he  hopes  to  build  a  chapel,  which  he 
means  to  call  Sardis  ;  he  is  a  kind  master  to  his  slaves,  and  hints 
the  probability  of  his  liberating  them  by  will ;  but  he  may  change 
his  mind  before  he  dies. 

Thursday  15.  At  Hill's  chapel,  upon  Long-Creek,  1  chose  Rom. 
viii.  1,  2.  First,  Real  Christians  are  "  in  Christ  Jesus  ;"  and  Christ 
is  in  believers  :  see  2  Cor.  v.  17  "  Therefore  if  any  man  be  in 
Christ."— Gal.  vi.  15.  "  For  in  Christ  Jesus." — Romans  viii.  10. 
"  And  if  Christ  be  in  you." — Col.  i.  27.  "Christ  in  yon  the  hope 
of  glory."  Christ  contemplated  in  this  view,  must  mean  the  ope- 
rations of  his  grace,  and  the  privileges  of  Christians.  Second, 
What  Christians  should  do,  and  what  they  should  not  do — *  not 
walk  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit."  Third,  They  that  "  walk 
after  the  flesh"  were  in  a  state  of  condemnation  by  the  law,  the 
word  of  God,  and  their  own  consciences  :  and  they  who  "  walked 
after  the  Spirit"  were  in  a  justified  state.  I  showed  that  condem- 
nation supposed  guilt,  loss  of  privileges,  and  liability  to  punishment 
and  death  :  justification  was  present,  future,  and  eternal.  After 
preaching,  I  took  through  the  rain  about  twenty  miles  up  to  Henry 
Pope's,  upon  Long-Creek,  in  Oglethorpe  county.  I  have  passed  ra- 
pidly through  Richmond,  Columbia,  Lincoln,  Wilkes,  Elbert,  and 
Oglethorpe  counties,  in  Georgia. 

I  will  make  a  few  observations  upon  the  ignorance  of  foolish 
men,  who  will  rail  against  our  church  government.  The  Metho- 
dists acknowledge  no  superiority  but  what  is  founded  on  seniority, 
election,  and  long  and  faithful  services.  For  myself,  I  pity  those 
who  cannot  distinguish  between  a  pope  of  Rome,  and  an  old,  worn 
man  of  about  sixty  years,  who  has  the  power  given  him  of  riding 
five  thousand  miles  a  year,  at  a  salary  of  eighty  dollars,  through 
summer's  heat  and  winter's  cold,  travelling  in  all  weather,  preach- 
ing in  all  places  ;  his  best  covering  from  rain  often  but  a  blanket  ; 
the  surest  sharpener  of  his  wit,  hunger — from  lasts,  voluntary,  and 


1803.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY5S  JOURNAL.  125 

involuntary ;  his  best  fare,  for  six  months  of  the  twelve,  coarse 
kindness;  and  his  reward,  from  too  many,  suspicion,  envy,  and 
murmurings  all  the  year  round. 

Friday  16.  Rested.  Next  day,  at  the  chapel,  I  spoke  on  1  Cor. 
x.  12,  13.     The  weather  was  cold,  and  so  were  the  people. 

Sunday  18.  I  stood  without  doors,  fixed  my  blanket  to  screen  me 
from  the  sun,  and  my  cap  to  shelter  me  from  the  wind.  I  cried  in 
the  words  of  my  divine  Master,  "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men 
that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which 
is  in  heaven."  First,  The  light  of  vour  principles  and  doctrine. 
Second,  The  light  of  your  experience.  Third,  The  light  of  your 
tempers.  Fourth,  The  light  of  your  practice,  that  they  may  see 
it  manifested  in  virtue  and  piety,  and  be  converted  to  God.  On 
Tuesday,  at  Burke's  chapel,  I  spoke  upon  Gal.  vi.  9.  ;  we  had  a 
full  house,  a  spiritual  congregation,  and  a  quickening  season  :  after 
meeting  we  were  under  the  necessity  of  riding  in  our  wet  clothes 
twelve  miles  to  John  Stevens's. 

Wednesday  21.  Excessively  cold.  I  preached,  however,  a  ser- 
mon on  2  Peter  i  4.  We  came  away,  without  feeding  man  or  beast 
to-day,  and  bent  our  course  to  Mr.  Bush's. 

Thursday  22.  At  Heath's  Gap  I  spoke  on  Hebr.  vi.  11,  12.  ;  after 
meeting  we  went  on  to  Colonel  Stith's,  at  Ogeechee  ;  surely  there 
is  a  great  change  here  in  the  heads  and  members  of  the  family. 

Friday  23.  At  Spart,  notwithstanding  the  races,  we  had  a  full 
house  at  Lucas's  retreat.  On  Saturday  1  rode  down  to  Matthew 
Harris's.  I  passed  through  Warren,  Hancock,  and  Washington  ; 
and  have  rode  by  computation  nineteen  hundred  miles  from  Phila- 
delphia. There  are  many  hindrances  to  the  work  of  God  in  this 
section  of  the  country  ;  some  evitable,  and  some  inevitable  ; 
amongst  the  first  are  Sabbath  markets,  rum,  races,  and  rioting ;  of 
the  latter  may  be  enumerated,  necessary  business,  (so  called  ;)  the 
sudden  and  severe  changes,  more  peculiar  to  this  southern  climate, 
which  affect  people  powerfully,  and  against  which  they  have  not 
the  protection  of  warm  dwellings  ;  the  houses  are  universally  un- 
finished and  open,  and  the  churches  and  chapels  are  in  no  better 
state. — My  mind  is  kept  in  perfect  peace,  notwithstanding  my  daily 
labours,  and  my  sufferings  in  exposure  to  night  air,  and  day  damps, 
and  hard  fare,  and  hard  lodging. 

Monday  26.  At  New  Chapel  I  preached — lodged  at  Jesse  Jor- 
don's  :  at  Walnut  Branch  chapel  I  spoke  on  Rom.  xiii.  11,  12.  We 
lodged  at  Mr.  Brett's. 


12$  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  [lo(J<J. 

On  Wednesday  we  had  a  -proper  storm  of  rain  in  the  afternoon. 
Passing  through  Louisville,  we  stopped  with  Mr.  Floumoy,  a  new 
convert — his  wife  is  amongst  the  respectables—  so  !  On  Thurs- 
day I  preached  at  a  new  chapel  called  Bethel,  in  the  woods,  in  Jef- 
ferson county  ;  my  text  was  Actsxxvi.  17,  18.  On  Friday  we  rode 
to  Spirit  Creek.  We  had  an  appointment  for  Saturday  at  a  new 
chapel,  but  it  rained,  and  we  had  few  hearers  ;  there  being  several 
preachers  present,  I  chose  for  my  text  Rom.  ii.  21.  ;  after  meeting 
we  rode  thirteen  miles  to  Mr.  Beale's,  near  Augusta.  To  my 
surprise  I  find  Bishop  Coke  is  in  Augusta  before  me.  I  have  re- 
ceived letters  of  consequence  from  the  north. 

January  4,  1 '04.  We  met  for  conference  :  Bishop  Coke  preach- 
ed in  the  morning  ;  and  in  the  afternoon  at  John's  (the  old  house) 
Augusta. 

On  Monday  we  opened  our  conference  in  Mr.  Cantalou's  house. 
We  conducted  our  business  in  great  harmony,  and  did  it  hastily. 
There  was  preaching  every  evening ;  and  the  bishops  bore  their 
share  of  ministerial  labours.  Elders  and  deacons  were  ordained. 
I  found  little  difficulty  in  stationing  the  preachers.  The  conference 
rose  at  eleven  o'clock  on  Thursday,  and  I  took  the  road  to  Swear- 
ingham's,  eighteen  miles.  On  Friday  I  reached  Williams's  ;  and 
on  Saturday,  Columbia.  Sabbath  day  found  me  in  bed,  confined  by 
a  deep  cold,  and  an  affection  of  my  breast ;  nature  relieved  herself. 
A  cold,  hungry  ride,  brought  us  to  Camden  on  Monday.  I  gave 
Bishop  Coke  a  plan  for  a  journey  as  far  as  Boston,  before  the  gene- 
ral conference. 

Saturday  14.  I  continued  in  Camden,  occupied  in  writing  answers 
to  northern  letters,  and  reading  Hanies's  Church  History  :  this  is, 
perhaps,  amongst  the  best  I  have  seen  ;  but  his  partiality  to  good 
old  Calvinism  is  very  apparent.  I  have  been  unwell ;  but  1  am 
cheered  by  the  glorious  prospects  of  Zion's  welfare  :  I  mark  this 
year,  1804,  as  the  greatest  that  has  ever  yet  been  known  in  this 
land  for  religion. 

Sabbath  15.  I  preached  in  the  morning  and  afternoon  ;  and  James 
Jenkins  in  the  evening.  On  Monday  I  rode  as  far  as  Mr.  Rembert's, 
on  Black-River  :  here  I  retire  to  read  and  write  ;  my  body  is  weak, 
but  my  mind  is  stayed  upon  God. 

Thursday  19.  For  three  days  past  I  have  been  reading  Hawies  ; 
he  is  concise,  elegant  enough,  and  deserves  credit  for  his  abridgment 
of  the  Fathers,  purged  from  their  fables  ;  his  characters  of  White- 
field  and  Wesley  are  appropriately  great ;  but  O,  his  Calvinism  ' 


1804.]  REV-  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  121 

Saturday  21.  I  preached  at  Rembert's  chapel,  and  on  the  Sab- 
bath day  from  Luke  xx.  21.  "  In  that  hour  Jesus  rejoiced  in 
spirit,  and  said,  I  thank  thee,  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth, 
that  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast 
revealed  them  unto  babes  ;  even  so,  Father,  for  so  it  seemed  good 
unto  thee." — 

I.  What  things  they  are  that  are  hidden  from  the  wise  and  pru- 
dent :  the  things  of  the  Gospel,  the  great  things,  and  the  deep 
things  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  in  the  divine  operations,  and  sensa- 
tions, and  affections,  and  fruits  of  the  Spirit  of  grace  :  these  are 
revealed  to  simple-hearted,  ignorant,  poor,  and  unlearned  men  and 
women. 

II.  Why  are  they  hidden  from  the  "wise  and  prudent?"  1. 
Because  they  seek  the  knowledge  of  them  by  their  own  wisdom. 
2.  Because  they  will  not  submit  to  the  rules  of  discipleship  that 
they  may  learn.  3.  Because  they  have  chosen  the  world  for  their 
portion,  with  its  riches,  honours,  and  pleasures  ;  and  thus  living, 
they  cannot  learn.  4.  Because  they  will  not,  cannot  part  with 
their  darling  passions,  and  besetting  sins.  5.  Because  they  will 
not  submit  to  suffer  reproach.  Jesus  rejoiced  that  his  heavenly 
Father  had  made  foolish  the  wisdom  of  this  world,  so  contrary  in 
its  spirit  to  humble  faith,  and  holy  obedience  ;  and  that  so  many 
had  been  made,  and  that  millions  might  be  made  the  subjects  of 
the  grace  of  God,  that  wisdom  which  cometh  from  above.  But 
our  Lord  did  not  rejoice  in  the  spiritual  ignorance  and  damnation 
of  "the  wise  and  prudent:"  he  upraided  them  for  what  might 
have  been  prevented  ;  and  wept,  as  man,  with  Godlike  love,  over 
Jerusalem. 

Monday  33.  Reading,  writing,  and  planning  a  route  and  Sabbaih 
labours  from  now  until  January,  180o.  The  ninth  volume  of  Mr. 
Wesley's  Sermons  engaged  a  part  of  my  time. 

Tuesday  24.  We  braved  the  weather,  keen  and  freezing,  to  Pud- 
den  Swamp,  taking  a  cold  cut  in  the  cold  woods  ;  we  were  well 
warmed  at  Mr.  Chissam's  :  we  felt  powerfully  for  the  parents  and 
children  of  this  family. 

Wednesday  25.  By  riding  an  hour  in  the  night  we  reached  Jane 
Green's  ;  on  our  way  we  found  the  waters  of  Black-River  spread 
near  a  mile  over  the  low  grounds  about  the  bridge  at  Kingsiree, 
where  we  crossed  :  we  dined  at  Miller's,  and  baptised  a  child. 

Thursday  25.  At  Black-River  meeting-house  I  spoke  to  a  few 


128  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY*S  JOURNAL.  [1804. 

souls  on  1  Tim  ii.  1.  The  weather  became  cold,  but  I  had  good 
lodging  at  Mr.  Heideger's.  This  part  of  the  country  has  a  solitary 
appearance,  because  the  white  inhabitants  have  been  much  lessen- 
ed by  deaths,  more  especially  amongst  the  children,  and  by  re- 
movals to  a  fresher  country. 

Friday  26.  We  reached  Georgetown.  I  have  suffered  in  my 
flesh,  and  have  had  "  deep  waters"  of  a  temporal  and  spiritual  na- 
ture to  wade  through. 

If  I  should  die  in  celibacy,  which  I  think  quite  probable,  I  give 
the  following  reasons  for  what  can  scarcely  be  called  my  choice. 
I  was  called  in  my  fourteenth  year ;  I  began  my  public  exercises 
between  sixteen  and  seventeen  ;  at  twenty-one  I  travelled ;  at 
twenty-six  I  came  to  America  :  thus  far  1  had  reasons  enough  for 
a  single  life.  It  had  been  my  intention  of  returning  to  Europe  at 
thirty  years  of  age  ;  but  the  war  continued,  and  it  was  ten  years 
before  we  had  a  settled,  lasting  peace  :  this  was  no  time  to  marry 
or  be  given  in  marriage.  At  forty- nine  I  was  ordained  superin- 
tendent bishop  in  America.  Amongst  the  duties  imposed  upon  me 
by  my  office  was  that  of  travelling  extensively,  and  I  could  hardly 
expect  to  find  a  woman  with  grace  enough  to  enable  her  to  live 
but  one  week  out  of  the  fifty  two  with  her  husband  :  besides,  what 
right  has  any  man  to  take  advantage  of  the  affections  of  a  woman, 
make  her  his  wife,  and  by  a  voluntary  absence  subvert  the  whole 
order  and  economy  of  the  marriage  state,  by  separating  those  whom 
neither  God,  nature,  nor  the  requirements  of  civil  society  permit, 
long  to  be  put  asunder:  it  is  neither  just  nor  generous.  I  may 
add  to  this,  that  I  had  little  money,  and  with  this  little  administered 
to  the  necessities  of  a  beloved  mother  until  I  was  fifty-seven  :  if  I 
have  done  wrong,  I  hope  God  and  the  sex  will  forgive  me  :  it  is 
my  duty  now  to  bestow  the  pittance  1  may  have  to  spare  upon  the 
widows  and  fatherless  girls,  and  poor  married  men. 

Saturday  and  Sunday  I  rested  at  Georgetown.  I  preached  in 
Mr.  Hammett's  house,  now  fallen  into  our  hands :  Alexander 
M'Caine  attended  the  afternoon  and  evening  services.  The  Bap- 
tists have  built  an  elegant  church,  planned  for  a  steeple  and  organ  : 
they  take  the  rich  ;  and  the  commonality  and  the  slaves  fall  to  us— - 
this  is  well.  We  have  about  twenty  whites,  and  between  three 
and  four  hundred  blacks  in  society  here.  My  mind  has  been  deep- 
ly tried  by  my  friends  who  wi«hed  me  to  derange  appointments 
made  in  two  circuits,  that  one  station  might  be  supplied  :  I  do  not 


1804.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  129 

sport  with  preachers  or  people  ;  I  judge  for  the  Lord  and  his 
church  ;  I  stand  in  the  order  of  God,  as  well  as  the  appointment 
of  men. 

Monday  30.  We  crossed  Black-River  at  Evans's  ferry,  and 
lodged  at  Henry  Britton's,  where  we  were  most  kindly  enter- 
tained. 

Tuesday  31.  I  preached  at  Jenkin's  chapel  on  Hebr.  ii.  3.; 
We  dined  and  came  on  to  Port's  ferry,  an  hour  after  the  setting 
of  the  sun. 

Thursday,  February  2.  We  crossed  Great  and  Little  Pee-Dee  : 
over  the  latter  I  crossed  in  a  canoe.  At  Potato  Ferry,  a  forlorn 
place,  we  were  detained  three  hours.  At  Kingston  brother 
M'Caine  gave  us  a  sermon  ;  and  I  also  gave  an  exhortation  :  we 
lodged  at  Richard  Green's. 

Saturday  4.  We  came  to  Hullum's — a  curious,  fearful  road  we 
had  :  we  hardly  escaped  miring  several  times.  The  simple- 
hearted,  poor  people  have  built  a  house  since  I  was  here  last  : 
I  gave  them  a  sermon  from  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8.  After  meeting  we 
pushed  On  to  father  Hullum's,  dined  and  lodged  with  William  Norton. 
Brother  Benjamin  Jones,  who  had  come  on  Bladen  circuit,  about 
ten  days  back,  died  upon  the  road,  whether  by  fits,  to  which  he  was 
subject,  or  by  drowning,  we  have  yet  to  learn.  He  was  a  native 
of  South  Carolina,  near  to  Georgetown,  a  pious,  good  young  man  of 
unblemished  life  :  he  had  travelled  five  years,  and  is  now  gone  to 
rest.  Lord,  what  is  man  !  Lord,  what  is  life  !  Let  us,  let  me  be 
also  ready  ! 

North  Carolina. — Monday  6.  We  rode  eighteen  miles  to 
Ebenezer  :  there  were  about  thirty  souls,  to  whom  I  spoke  from 
Titus  ii.  13,  14.  We  came  to  Pieraway  Ferry  :  I  was  unwilling  to 
cross  ;  nevertheless,  we  all  got  into  a  small,  broken  flat ;  and 
scarcely  had  we  launched,  when  we  upset,  and  were  obliged  to 
back  out  bv  wading  :  had  this  been  in  the  middle  of  the  river — 
fifteen  feet  deep  !  Lord,  thou  preserves!  man  and  beast !  By  making 
three  trips  of  the  horses,  men,  and  baggage,  our  crazy  skiff  put  us 
safe  over.     At  the  widow  Cressett's,   we  were   well  entertained. 

Tuesday  7.  We  rode  to  little  John  Gaine's,  thirty  miles— no  food 
from  sun  to  sun. 

Wednesday  8.  We  rode  to  Smithville,  so  called  from  General 
Smith  :  we  rode  thirty-three  miles  through  the  rain.  We  lodged 
at  the  widow  Douyer's,  and  was  plagued  with  our  horses  breaking 
away. 

Vol.  III.  17 


130  ftEV.   FRANCIS   ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1804. 

Thursday  9.  Our  horses  were  taken  and  brought  to  us.  I 
preached  at  Smithville,  and  brother  M'Caine  also  in  a  house  in  the 
town.  This  is  the  old  fort  Johnson,  at  the  mouth  of  Cape  Fear 
river  :  it  is  partially  rebuilt. 

Friday  10.  We  came  to  Brunswick,  an  old  town;  demolished 
houses,  and  the  noble  walls  of  a  brick  church  :  there  remain  but 
four  houses  entire.  I  preached  at  Miss  Grimshaw's  on  2  Cor.  iv. 
5. ;  and  ordained  Nathaniel  Bell  to  the  office  of  deacon.  At  Ed- 
ward Sullivan's  I  found  that  the  cold  weather,  and  hard  labour  of 
riding  and  preaching  began  to  press  me  down. 

Saturday  11.  At  Rork's,  at  Town-Creek,  brother  M'Caine 
preached  :  I  also  spoke,  enforcing,  "  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death, 
and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life."  A  late  camp-meeting  upon 
Town-Creek  has  given  a  revival  to  religion  amongst  both  whites 
and  blacks.  I  thought  I  perceived  intimations  of  this  in  my  last 
visits.  About  the  going  down  of  the  sun  we  came  into  Wilmington, 
faint,  and  feeble. 

Sunday  12.  We  had  nearly  one  thousand  souls,  to  whom  I  spoke 
upon  Hebr.  xii.  25. 

Monday  13.  I  rested,  wrote,  and  regulated  some  matters  of  a 
temporal  nature. 

Tuesday  14.  1  preached  on  2  Pet.  ii.  10,  11,  12. 

Wednesday  15.  We  set  out,  and  made  Nixon's,  at  Topsail. 

Thursday  16.  Lodged  with  Lot  Ballard,  New-River. 

Friday  17.  Reached  Thomas  Lee's,  Trent-River. 

Saturday  17.  I  preached  in  Lee's  church  on  1  Cor.  xv.  58. 
after  meeting  we  had  a  cold  ride  to  Newbern. 

Sunday  19.  I  spoke  under  great  heaviness  :  my  subject  was 
Col.  iii.  12 — 16.  again  in  the  evening  on  Ezek.  xxxv.  2.  ;  my  load 
was  thrown  off,  and  we  had  life  springing  up  in  the  assembly. 

Monday  20.  We  moved  a  subscription  to  raise  one  thousand 
dollars  to  enlarge  and  finish  the  chapel  :  we  have  obtained  six  hun- 
dred dollars.  Brother  M'Caine  preached,  and  there  was  something 
of  a  shout. 

Tuesday  21.  I  spoke  from  Hebr.  iii.  15.  Our  official  brethren 
were  called  up  in  the  night  to  attend  two  gay  females ;  one  had  run 
to  call  the  brethren  to  pray  for  her  distressed  companion,  and  she 
also  was  stricken  :  they  both  professed  to  find  the  Lord. 

Wednesday  22,  and  Thursday  23.  We  called  assemblies  in  New- 
bern, and  unwieldy  congregations  came  together. 

Friday  24.  We  took  the  path  to  Washington :  it  was  clear  and 


1804.]  REV.  FRANCIS  asuury's  journal.  131 

cold:  at  Neuse  Ferry  it  blew  fresh:  at  Tar-River  the  gale  had 
subsided,  and  we  crossed  in  comfort. 

Saturday  25.  I  felt  the  effects  of  my  long,  and  very  cold  ride 
from  Newbern  :  nevertheless  1  gave  them  a  sermon. 

Sabbath  day  26.  I  spoke  at  Washington  on  2  Cor.  v.  11 — IB. 
I  collected  three  propositions  from  the  whole. 

I.  The  Gospel  is  an  universal  ministration  of  grace  and  truth  : 
"  we  persuade  men" — all  men,  every  where.  This  position  is 
proved  by  the  general  love  of  God ;  the  general  commission  given 
the  ambassadors  of  Christ  ;  the  general  atonement ;  general  offers 
of  grace  ;  the  general  judgment. 

II.  That  consequently,  the  Gospel  must  be,  in  all  its  adminis- 
trations, applicable  to  the  cases,  consciences,  and  characters,  of 
all  ;  and  thus  does  it  behove  the  ministers  of  the  Gospel  to  preach  it. 

III.  It  is  a  ministry  of  terror — "  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  we 
persuade  men:"  it  is  a  ministry  of  love — "the  love  of  Christ 
constraineth  us." 

Monday  27.  At  Gardener's  bridge  I  spoke  to  many  hearers  on 
Luke  iv.  18,  19.  ;  it  was  very  chilly.  In  the  evening  we  came  to 
John  Watt's  ; — thirty  miles  to-day,  without  fire  or  food,  from  seven 
to  five  o'clock  in  the  evening.  On  Tuesday,  being  unwell,  brother 
M'Caine  officiated  for  me.  "  I  groan,  being  burdened" — seven 
conferences  to  appoint  the  stations  in  ;  to  officiate  in  the  general 
conference  of  this  year ;  seventeen  states  to  visit,  requiring  a  ride 
of  five  thousand  miles>  at  the  rate  of  twenty,  thirty,  and  forty 
miles  a  day. — O  Lord,  give  me  support ! — for  every  day,  every 
hour,  and  every  moment  is  a  time  of  need  with  me  !  We  rode 
up  to  Colonel  Samuel  Williams's,  twenty  miles.  At  Williams's 
chapel,  Taylor's  ferry,  truly  the  great  ones  were  present  to  hear, 
and  I  preached  to  them  upon  the  great  salvation — to  little  purpose 
I  fear :  we  have  small  fruit  of  twenty  five  years  of  faithful  labours 
upon  the  rich  lands  of  Roanoke. 

Thursday,  March  1.  After  a  lonely  ride  of  fifteen  miles  in  the 
rain,  I  preached  at  the  widow  Ann  Whitmell's,  near  Edward's 
ferry  :  we  had  tiventy  females,  and  half  as  many  males  to  hear. 
The  Baptists  go  ahead  of  the  Methodists  in  this  settlement  :  if  it 
be  well  done,  it  matters  little  who  does  it.  My  mind  is  in  peace, 
but  my  body  is  weak,  and  in  pain. 

Friday  2.  After  preaching  at  Whitaker's  chapel  on  Rev.  ii.  10. 
I  ordained  Henry  Bradford,  Benjamin  Nevell,  and  William  Lind- 
say, deacons :  it  was  very  cold. 


132  REV.    FRANCIS    ASBURy'S    JOURNAL.  [1804, 

Saturday  3.  I  rode  twenty  miles,  crossed  Roanoke  to  Bridges- 
Creek,  and  lodged  at  Richard  Whitaker's. 

Sabbath  day  4,  was  extremely  cold.  I  preached  at  Rehoboth 
chapel,  and  ordained  Richard  Whitaker  a  deacon  ;  we  had  many 
more  people  than  I  expected — the  house  was  nearly  filled  with 
both  colours. 

Monday  5.  At  J.  Pinna's  my  subject  was  Rom.  x.  12.  We 
had  excessive  snow  on  Tuesday  :  I  ordained  E.  Everett  a  deacon. 
At  Montgomery's  old  house  about  two  dozen  souls  met  me,  to  whom 
I  spoke  on  James  ii.  6.  Twenty  miles  to-day  in  the  snow,  pitch 
and  drive — it  was  well  my  mare  had  no  shoes  behind  to  ball  her 
feet. 

Thursday  8.  I  preached  at  Wiseeon,  where  I  never  expected  to 
be  again  :  the  windows  were  open,  and  the  people  trembled  under 
the  cold,  if  not  under  the  word.  After  crossing  two  ferries,  we 
came  to  Gates  court-house,  twenty  miles  :  my  mind  is  in  peace  ; 
but  I  feel  for  the  people  of  these  low  lands  :  with  the  exception 
of  a  few  towns  and  select  places,  my  ministry  amongst  them  must 
be  near  its  end.— To  go  around  by  Norfolk  on  my  route  eastward 
is  objectionable  for  many  reasons  ;  and  I  may  find  it  expedient  to 
bid  this  part  of  the  country  farewell  for  ever. 

Friday  9.  At  Gates  court-house  I  spoke  on  1  Cor.  vii.  29,  30, 
31.  It  was  a  very  cold  day  :  we  held  our  meeting  in  the  house 
of  Daniel  Southall :  the  loss  of  a  favourite  child  has  awfully 
clouded  the  day  of  his  prosperity :  Ah  !  hair-hung,  breeze-shaken 
worldly  bliss,  what  art  thou  ! 

Saturday  10.  We  rode  to  Edenton,  and  lodged  at  a  tavern.  After 
nineteen  or  twenty  years,  I  preached  in  the  court-house,  and 
many  attended.  I  dined  with  Mr.  Beesly,  a  printer,  and  supped 
with  Mr.  Luton,  both  Baptists.  I  found  out  Caleb  and  William 
Manning,  nephews  of  my  ancient  friend  Caleb  Manning  :  these 
young  men  want  preaching  established.  I  now  know  why  I  came 
to  Edenton — that  I  might  feel  for  the  people,  and  make  an  appoint- 
ment of  a  preacher  for  them  :  but  we  must  get  a  house  of  tvorship 
here  of  our  own. 

Monday  12.  At  Yawpin  chapel  I  preached  on  Luke  xi.  9 — 13. 
I  had  a  very  serious,  attentive  people  to  hear  :  I  believe  God  is 
amongst  them. 

I  called  upon  Mr.  Ross,  a  Baptist  minister  of  the  Gospel — much 
thought  of:  I  found  him  in  a  feeble  state  of  body  :  we  prayed  and 
parted  in  great  affection.     We  had  rain,  and  night  came  on  before 


1804.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASEURY's  JOURNAL.  133 

we  reached  brother  Sutton's,  twenty-eight  miles  :  we  crossed  Per- 
quimons  upon  a  floating  bridge.  My  mind  is  in  great  peace. 
To-day  Humphrey  Wood  became  my  companion  in  travel. 

Tuesday  13.  At  Mr.  Muller's,  at  Maggshead,  I  preached  upon 
1  Peter  v.  10.  we  had  a  full  house,  and  the  truth  was  felt  ;  I  dined 
with  mother  Wood,  and  lodged  with  Mr.  Whedbees  ;  were  this  last 
family  as  good  as  they  are  kind,  they  might  be  perfect. 

Wednesday  14.  I  spoke  on  1  John  iii.  1,  2,  3.  at  Nixonton  cha- 
pel :  I  had  openings,  and  felt  as  if  God  was  about  to  visit  this  peo- 
ple.    In  the  prosecution  of  my  subject,  I  showed, 

I.  The  effects  manifested  by  divine  "  love"  in  the  fruits  pro- 
duced by  it,  and  the  consolations  flowing  from  it. 

II.  The  progress  of  becoming,  and  the  privileges  of  being  the 
"  sons  of  God." 

III.  The  evidences  furnished  by  the  "  sons  of  God"  of  their 
claim  to  sonship — they  "  purify  themselves"  from  all  sin  by  humble 
faith  and  holy  obedience. 

IV.  The  "  world" — blind  and  wretched,  "  knowing  not  God," 
nor  the  real  character  of  the  Eternal  Son  of  God,  and  mainly 
ignorant  of  the  hearts,  the  exercises,  the  sufferings,  the  trials,  and 
the  heavenly  consolations  of  the  "  sons  of  God." 

Thursday  15.  At  New-Began  meeting-house  I  preached,  and 
was  filled  with  my  subject :  the  rich  amongst  the  people  came  and 
offered  gifts,  but  we  did  no  receive  them  :  how  little  do  some  folks 

know  us  !     I  lodged  at  Mr.  F 's — a  cold  night  to  me  in  a  double 

sense. 

Friday  16.  At  the  court-house  in  Elizabeth-City,  Pasquotank 
county,  I  preached  upon  Matt.  vii.  7 — 11.  many  heard,  but  few 
felt.  I  dined  with  Mr.  Mitchell,  a  lone  Methodist  from  Cornwall, 
Great  Britain — Lot  in  Sodom.  The  site  of  this  place  is  beauti- 
ful for  its  land  and  water  prospects  ;  and  the  situation  is  good  for 
trade.  We  rode  on  to  Camden,  and  had  to  beg  a  lodging  of  Mr. 
Joseph  Sandlin,  who  belongs  to  the  Baptists  :  these  people  carry 
the  day  here  in  respectability  and  numbers. 

Saturday  17.  At  the  widow  Capp's  we  had  a  small  house,  but 
well  filled.  I  enlarged  much  upon  the  salvation  of  the  world, 
including  infants  and  adults  of  the  Christian  and  heathen  world  : 
a  Baptist  might  not  think  this  a  kind  return  for  my  night's  lodging ; 
but  it  was  the  truth.  I  lodged  with  Edward  Bunnell,  from  New- 
Jersey. 


134  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUR¥rS  JOURNAL.  [1804. 

Virginia.— Sabbath  18.  I  ordained  Joshua  Gambling  and  Na- 
thaniel Brook,  both  of  Currituck  county,  deacons  in  the  local  line. 
I  baptised  Mary  Forbush  :  she  had  been  brought  up  a  Baptist. 
At  William's  chapel  1  was  very  unwell  :  we  had  a  cold  house,  and 
cold  people.  After  meeting  I  retired  to  Zachariah  Morse's.  Eight 
hundred  miles  from  Augusta,  Georgia. 

Monday  19.  1  preached  at  James  Wilson's  ;  Tuesday  at  Cuthe- 
rell's  ;  Wednesday  at  Portsmouth  ;  Thursday  at  Norfolk  ;  and  on 
Friday  and  Saturday  I  was  housed.  At  a  meeting  of  the  women, 
we  laid  the  foundation  of  a  female  charitable  society  of  Norfolk  ; 
similar  in  plan  to  those  of  New-York  and  Baltimore,  but  more 
liberal :  may  this  live,  grow,  and  flourish  when  I  am  cold  and 
forgotten ! 

Sabbath  day  25.  I  preached  at  Norfolk,  upon  Matt,  ixviii. 
19,  20.  and  at  Portsmouth,  in  the  afternoon,  my  subject  was 
I  Peter  ii.  9—12. 

Monday  26.  I  preached  at  a  new  meeting  house  fourteen  miles 
up  the  road  towards  Suffolk  :  here,  after  thirty  years'  labour,  first 
and  last,  we  have  a  chapel  ;  1  named  it  Ebenezer.  At  Suffolk,  on 
Tuesday,  unwell  as  I  was,  labour  went  hard  with  me  :  I  had  an 
almost  total  obstruction  of  perspiration  ;  but  a  pulpit  sweat  relieved 
me  in  a  good  degree.     My  soul  is  calm. 

Wednesday  28.  1  preached  at  Powell's  chaf>el  :  on  Thursday 
at  Benn's  chapel,  Isle  of  Wight,  we  had  a  decent,  but  not  a  feeling 
congregation.  After  preaching  I  rode  up  to  William  Blunt's.  Oa 
Good  Friday,  so  called,  I  preached  at  Blunt's,  and  administered  the 
sacrament :  I  had  a  cloudy  day,  and  a  bad  house  to  speak  in.  I 
rode  to  Joseph  Moody's.  We  drew  a  plan  of  a  new  house,  forty 
by  thirty  feet,  two  stories  high:  but  will  it  ever  be  built?  I 
doubt  it. 

Sabbath  31.  I  preached  in  an  old,  abandoned  Episcopal  church 
in  Southampton  :  we  had  an  open  house,  and  a  cold  day.  1  lodged 
with  Philip  Davis.     I  have  made  a  thirty  miles  ride  to-day. 

Easter-day,  the  first  of  April,  and  of  the  week,  found  me  at 
Lane's  chapel :  my  subject  was  Colossians  iii.  1  —  4.  We,  after 
meeting,  rode  fifteen  mile*  to  Frederick  Pennington's.  The  time, 
and  electioneering,  increased  my  congregation  on  Easter  Monday. 
I  lodged  at  James  Rogers's.  On  Tuesday,  I  preached  at  Jones's 
chapel.  I  feel  feeble  in  body,  but  confident  in  mind.  I  know  not 
if  I  shall  not  take  leave  of  week-day  appointments  :    if  I  do  more 


1804.]  REV-  FRANCIS  ASBURY*S  JOURNAL.  135 

than  preach  on  the  Sabbaths,  it  will  be  in  towns,  or  at  a  called 
meeting,  where  I  wish  to  stop. 

Wednesday  4.  I  preached  on  1  Thess  iv.  13 — 18.  at  Mabry's 
chapel,  made  anew  ;  now  sixty  by*  twenty-five  feet.  I  was  a 
preacher  here  before  the  first  house  was  built,  thirty  years  ago  : 
first  an  addition  was  made,  now  it  is  rebuilt  in  another  form,  and  a 
gallery  added  for  the  blacks.  1  rode  home  in  the  rain  with  Peter 
Pelham  :  here  is  death  temporal,  and  life  spiritual — Thomas  Pel- 
ham  was  converted,  and  is  dead  since  my  last  visit :  and  there 
remain  three  living  children,  new-born  babes. 

Thursday  5.  I  preached  at  the  camp-meeting  house;  and  on 
Friday,  at  Hobb's  chapel,  although  very  weak,  1  administered  the 
Lord's  supper,  after  preaching  a  sermon  on  Titus  iii.  8.  I  went  in 
the  evening  to  the  widow  VYyche's. 

Saturday  7.  At  Wolsey's  Barn,  I  spoke  on  2  Cor.  iii.  12.  there 
were  few  people  :  we  had  a  stormy  day,  and  a  poor,  weary  preacher. 
I  dined  with  ira  Ellis,  and  rode  up  to  Edward  Drumgoold's.  The 
wife  of  my  old  friend  is  lingering  out  life. 

Virginia. — Sunday  8.  I  spoke  on  2  Pet.  iii.  7 — 1.1.  at  the 
Olive  Branch  chapel  ;  I  am  taking  leave  of  the  people  every  visit. 
I  have  made  up  one  thousand  miles,  from  Augusta,  Georgia,  to 
Brunswick  county,  Virginia.  In  old  Virginia,  I  have  administered 
the  word  thirty  years.  There  is  a  great  mortality  amongst  the  aged  : 
our  old  members  drop  off  surprisingly  ;  but  they  all,  by  account,  die 
in  the  Lord,  and  in  general,  triumphantly.  Now  I  have  finished  my 
awful  tour  of  duty  for  the  pa*t  month.  To  ride  twenty  and  thirty 
miles  a  day  ;  to  preach,  baptise,  and  administer  the  Lord's  supper; 
to  write  and  answer  letters,  and  plan  for  myself  and  four  hundred 
preachers— O  Lord,  1  have  not  desired  this  awful  day,  thou  know- 
est !  I  refused  to  travel  as  long  as  I  could,  and  I  lived  long  before  I 
took  upon  me  the  superintendency  of  the  Methodist  church  in 
America,  and  now  I  bear  it  as  a  heavy  load  ;  I  hardly  bear  it,  and 
yet  dare  not  cast  it  down,  for  fear  God  and  my  brethren  should 
cast  me  down  for  such  an  abandonment  of  duty.  True  it  is,  my 
wages  are  great — precious  souls  here,  and  glory  hereafter. 

Tuesday  10.  Our  Virginia  conference  began  in  Mecklenburg 
county,  Salem.  We  sat  six  hours  a  day,  and  wrought  with  great 
application.  We  had  an  addition  of  fifteen  preachers,  besides  two 
dead,  seven  located,  one  expelled  ;  so  there  was  a  gain  of  eight. 
I  liked  what  was  done  ;  only,  the  preachers  experiences,  the  state 


136  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1804. 

of  the  work,  and  the  circuits  were  not  given  ;  so  we  concluded  to 
recommend  a  session  of  six  days  for  the  next  yearly  conference, 
appointed  to  be  held  at  Edmund  Taylor's,  North  Carolina,  March 
1,  1805.  What  I  have  felt  was  only  known  to  the  Lord  :  what  I 
have  done,  was  for  God  and  his  church.  We  have  added,  after  a 
great  mortality,  one  thousand  members  to  the  Virginia  conference 
bounds. 

Saturday  14.  We  came  away  with  elders  Jackson,  George,  and 
Pinnel.  On  the  Sabbath  day  we  stopped  at  John  Rogers's,  Bruns- 
wick county,  and  I  preached  from  2  Cor.  xiii.  14.  after  sermon  we 
rode  to  Peter  Robinson's,  Notaway  county,  fifteen  miles. 

Monday  16.  We  stopped  at  John  Morgan's,  Amelia  county. 
Serious  times  in  this  family — two  sons  dead — young  men  !  We  put 
in  for  the  night  at  Nathan  Anderson's,  Chesterfield  county.  Next 
day,  a  long  ride  of  forty-five  miles  brought  us  to  Elisha  Maxey's. 
We  have  lately  had  moderate  rides,  but  heat  and  dust  :  our  meet- 
ings were  small,  as  the  people  had  but  partial  notice.  I  ordained 
Elisha  Maxey  deacon. 

Wednesday  18.  We  crossed  at  Judah's  ferry,  upon  James-River, 
and  came  on  to  Goochland  court-house,  forty-five  miles,  and  lodged 
with  Joseph  Perkins.  Next  day  brought  us  to  John  Lasley's,  Louisa 
county.  On  Friday  we  had  to  be  at  the  hills  of  Orange  and  Madison 
counties,  to  Robinson-River,  and  once  more  sheltered  under  the  roof 
of  our  brother  Henry  Fry.  He  was  labouring  under  a  weakness 
of  his  bowels  :  I  gave  him  Fothergill's  recipe.  It  is  thus  :  one 
ounce  of  bark  ;  half  an  ounce  rhubarb  ;  three  nutmegs — all  boiled 
together  in  a  gallon,  until  reduced  to  two  quarts  :  a  wine  glass  of 
this  to  be  taken  every  two  hours.  On  Saturday  we  had  a  power- 
ful rain  ;  but  we  were  under  the  lee  of  a  good  room.  Part  of  the 
Sabbath  day  was  taken  up  with  a  short  ride  of  fifteen  miles,  to 
Nicholas  Robler's,  Culpepper.  I  have  read  John  Smith's  View  of 
the  Last  Judgment.  I  think  it  elegant  and  spiritual.  Monday 
evening  brought  us  to  William  Suttle's,  in  Prince  William,  thirty- 
five  miles  ;  and  on  Tuesday  we  reached  William  Watters's,  after 
a  ride  of  nearly  forty  miles  without  food  or  rest,  as  we  were  disap- 
pointed at  the  place  we  had  expected  to  get  our  dinner  at.  I  had 
heedlessly  thrown  off  my  top-coat  for  a  few  hours,  and  caught  cold. 

Friday  27.  Our  conference  began  in  Alexandria.  On  Saturday, 
I  preached  in  the  new  chapel.  The  business  of  conference  was 
taken  up  on  Monday  and  Tuesday,  and  conducted  in  great  peace. 


IS04.]  rev.  francis  aseury's  journal.  137 

On  Wednesday  we  came  to  Georgetown,  and  I  visited  Wilson  Lee, 
ill  with  a  bleeding  of  the  lungs.  We  lodged  at  Biggerly's.  On 
Thursday  we  came  to  Baltimore. 

Maryland. — Monday,  May  7.  Our  general  conference  began. 
What  was  done,  the  Revised  Form  of  Discipline  will  show. 
There  were  attempts  made  upon  the  ruling  eldership.  We  had  a 
great  talk.  I  talked  little  upon  any  subject ;  and  was  kept  in 
peace.     I  preached  but  twice. 

Thursday  24.  I  came  off  to  Perry-Hall,  on  my  way  to  Souders- 
berg,  to  meet  the  Philadelphia  conference.  The  Lord  did  not  own 
the  ministerial  labours  of  the  general  conference  :  it  was  a  doubt 
if  any  souls  were  converted  ;  this  made  us  mourn  :  I  prayed  for 
hundreds  ;  but  God  did  not  answer  my  prayer. 

Pennsylvania. — Friday  25.  We  came  to  Jarratt's  and  dined, 
and  continued  on  to  Benjamin  Mannifold's.  On  the  Sabbath  we 
crossed  the  Susquehannah  at  M'Call's  ferry,  and  came  to  Martin 
Boehm's.  I  preached  at  Boehm's  chapel,  and  then  came  away  to 
Soudersburg.     The  conference  opened  on 

Monday  morning  28.  We  had  great  order.  We  sat  five  days 
and  a  half.  There  were  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  preachers 
present,  whose  characters  and  experiences  were  brought  before 
us.     I  preached  twice. 

Saturday,  June  2.  I  rode  through  the  rain  to  the  Valley, 
twenty-eight  miles.  On  the  Sabbath  day  I  reached  Radnor. 
Here  my  little  Jane  was  horned  by  a  cow,  and  lamed  :  she  is  done, 
perhaps,  for  ever  for  me  ;  but  it  may  be  all  for  the  best.  I  am  un- 
well, and  the  weather  is  bad,  but,  except  my  feelings  for  the  poor 
beast,  I  am  peaceful  and  resigned.  I  was  able  to  write,  but  not  to 
preach  on  the  Sabbath  day. 

On  Monday  morning  I  desired  Isaac  James  to  ride  thirty  miles, 
going  and  coming,  and  purchase  me  another  little  Jane,  at  eighty 
dollars  ;  he  did  so,  with  great  good  will.  I  came  to  Philadelphia, 
and  found  that  Richard  Allen  had  bought  me  a  horse  for  ninety 
dollars  ;  so  I  had  two,  one  to  sell  for  sixty  dollars  :  so  much  for  my 
haste. 

New-Jersey.— On  Tuesday  I  dined  at  Burlington,  and  lodged 
at  H.  Hamilton's.  Wednesday  evening  brought  us  to  Joseph 
Hutchinson's  ;  at  Brunswick  we  dined  next  day,  stopping  for  the 
night  with  Mr.  Flatt,  Rahway  ;  and  on  Friday  passed  through 
Elizabethtown  and  Newark,  and  reached  New-York. 

New- York.— Saturday    9.    Busy   answering  letters.      On  the 
Vol.  III.  18 


138  REV.    FRANCIS    ASBURy's    JOURNAL.  [1804. 

Sabbath  I  preached  in  our  house  in  John-street  on  Hebr.  x.  23 — 
25.  ;  it  was  an  open  season. 

Monday  1 1 .  We  spent  some  time  in  social  conference  with  the 
preachers.  To-day,  Mr.  Thomas  Lyell  spoke  out  in  a  letter  to  me, 
saying  that  he  wished  to  be  located.  1  thought  that  I  had  discovered 
his  designs,  and  those  of  Mr.  Dashiell,  during  the  sitting  of  the 
general  conference  in  Baltimore  :  1  am  willing  that  he  should  be- 
long to  the  Church  people  :  I  believe  they  have  more  need  of  him 
than  the  Methodists  have.  I  answered  Mr.  Lyell,  by  tiling  him 
that  I  would  do  what  I  could  to  procure  him  a  location  at  the  Bos- 
ton conference. 

It  may  suffice  to  say  that  our  present  conference  was  a  happy 
one,  and  a  conference  of  great  business.  We  had  sermons  every 
day  at  noon.  Fourteen  deacons,  and  eight  elders  were  ordained  ; 
these  last,  at  the  Bowery  church,  where  I  preached  upon  2  Tim. 
iv.  1 — 4.  By  hard  labour  I  read  off  the  stations  on  Saturday 
night,  and  our  conference  sat  on  Monday.  We  proclaimed  a  fast, 
with  prayer,  for  the  Methodists,  the  health  of  the  city,  the  general 
church,  and  the  continent.  N.  Snethen  gave  us  a  melting,  ner- 
vous discourse  on  the  occasion. 

Wednesday  20,  and  the  next  day,  I  was  kept  by  a  storm  within 
doors,  at  the  widow  Sherwood's.  I  wrote  letters.  I  read  brother 
Thacher's  answer  to  Mr.  Tagart's  book ;  it  is  said  there  is  a 
special  call  for  learned  men  to  the  ministry  ;  some  may  think  so  : 
but  I  presume  a  simple  man  can  speak  and  write  for  simple,  plain 
people,  upon  simple,  plain  truths. 

Friday  22.  It  still  continued  to  rain  ;  but  I  felt  uneasy,  and  came 
down  three  times  to  move  eastward.  William  Thacher  came  home 
and  told  me  Sylvester  Hutchinson  had  brought  his  horse  over  the 
North-River,  at  seven  o'clock  last  night,  to  accompany  me.  We 
set  off,  and  called  in  our  way  at  Mr.  Sheet's,  and  breakfasted  :  we 
found  sister  Basling  sick. 

Connecticut. — We  dined  at  Byram,  drank  tea  at  Stamford,  and 
lodged  with  brother  Day,  at  Norwalk  ;  the  rain  made  the  ride 
painful. 

Saturday  23.  We  rode  to  brother  Wheeler's,  dined,  and  rode 
on  to  New-Haven  :  we  have  a  good  turnpike  to  travel  on,  and  a 
good  bridge  to  cross  the  Housatonic. 

Sabbath  day  24.  I  preached  to  a  (ew  souls  in  our  small  house 
on  Hebr.  iii.  12 — 14.  My  chief  suffering  is  from  riding:  I  am 
under  the  necessity  of  riding  soft,  fearful  as  I  am  of  worse  effect?. 


1804.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  139 

and  my  blanket  makes  me  gall  sadly  ;  as  yet  I  have  been  little 
affected  with  the  piles,  thanks  to  my  good  God  !  Oh,  New-Haven  ! 
thou  seat  of  science  and  of  sin  !  Can  thy  dry  bones  live  ?  Lord, 
thou  knowest !  Brother  Branch  preached  this  afternoon  ;  and 
brother  Hutchinson  at  night.  I  have  little  leisure  to  journalise. 
My  soul  has  constant  peace  and  joy,  notwithstanding  my  labours,  and 
trials,  and  reproach — which  I  heed  not,  though  it  come,  as  it  some- 
times does,  from  the  good,  when  they  are  not  gratified  in  all  their 
wishes.  People  unacquainted  with  the  causes  and  motives  of  my 
conduct,  will  always,  more  or  less,  judge  of  me  improperly.  Six 
months  ago  a  man  could  write  to  me  in  the  most  adulatory  terms, 
to  tell  me  of  the  unshaken  confidence  reposed  in  me  by  preachers 
and  people  :  behold,  his  station  is  changed,  and  certain  measures 
are  pursued  which  do  not  comport  with  his  views  and  feelings  :  O, 
then  I  am  menaced  with  the  downfall  of  Methodism  ;  and  my  influ- 
ence, character,  and  reputation,  are  all  to  find  a  grave  in  the  ruins. 
First,  my  hill  is  made  so  strong  that  I  shall  never  be  moved  ;  anon, 
O  man,  thou  hidest  thy  face  and  changest  thy  voice,  and  I  must  be 
troubled,  forsooth!  But  I  am  just  as  secure  as  ever,  as  to  what 
man  can  do  or  say.  Should  this  journal  ever  see  the  light,  those 
who  read  it  when  I  am  gone,  may,  perhaps,  wonder  that  ever  I 
should  have  received  such  letters,  or  had  such  friends — yes,  gentle 
reader ;  both  have  been.  Who  then  shall  I  believe  ;  and  who 
shall  I  trust  ?  Why,  who  but  a  good,  and  true,  and  never- 
failing  God  ? 

On  Monday  the  25th,  we  took  the  path  to  Durham  :  here  we 
stopped,  as  there  was  room  for  us  in  the  inn  to  lodge.  On  Tues- 
day we  passed  through  Middletown,  and  found  that  our  brethren 
were  about  to  purchase  a  lot  on  which  to  build  a  chapel  on  a  small 
scale.  We  rode  on  to  Hebron.  1  have  made  four  hundred  and 
twenty  miles  since  1  took  my  departure  from  Baltimore.  At  Can- 
terbury we  lodged  at  Captain  Lyons'  :  the  day's  ride  brought  us 
through  Windham  and  Scotland. 

Friday  29.  We  came  through  Plainfield,  Stirling,  Scituate,  and 
Coventry,  to  Cranston  ;  and  stopped  at  General  Lippet's. 

Sabbath,  July  1.  I  preached  to  a  few  people  at  Lippet's  chapel  ; 
my  subject  was  1  John  i.  3 — 7.  It  was  a  gracious  season  to  the 
speaker  and  the  hearers.  Sylvester  Hutchinson,  my  travelling 
companion,  gave  them  a  sermon  in  the  afternoon.  I  came  this 
way  only  to  hear  bow  the  preachers  had  conducted  their  work. 


HO  REV.  FRANCIS  ASEURy's  JOURNAL.  [1804. 

Rhode-Island. — July  2.  We  rode  through  Providence,  dined 
five  miles  beyond,  towards  Attleborough,  and  housed  with  a 
Mr.  Guilds. 

Massachusetts. — Tuesday  3.  We  journeyed  through  Wrentham 
and  Medfield  to  Needham,  nearly  thirty  miles,  without  food  or  rest 
for  man  or  beast  :  we  passed  Weston,  and  came  into  Waltham  in 
the  evening.  On  Wednesday,  Thursday,  and  Friday,  I  rested  ; 
and  read  aud  wrote  as  my  failing  eyes  would  permit.  My  soul  is  in 
great  peace. 

Saturday  7.  A  very  sultry  ride  of  twenty  miles  brought  us  to 
the  pleasant  town  of  Lynn.  On  the  Sabbath  day  I  preached  upon 
1  John  iii.  1,  2,  3.  ;  the  state  of  the  society  in  this  town  is  more 
pleasing  than  formerly.  Peter  Jayne,  brought  up  amongst  them,  is 
an  acceptable  preacher.  A  house  is  begun  for  the  preachers  to  live 
in.  Sylvester  Hutchinson  preached  in  the  afternoon  :  I  spoke  also; 
and  read  letters  giving  an  account  of  the  work  in  the  south.  Oh, 
when  shall  we  see  such  things  in  New-England  ! 

Monday  9.  We  rode  to  Salem,  Beverly,  Windham,  Hamilton, 
Ipswich,  Rowley,  and  Newburyport,  and  so  on  to  Salisbury  :  we 
had  flies,  moschetos,  heat,  dust,  and  weariness.  We  lodged  at  the 
sisters  Eaton's. 

New- Hampshire. — Passing  through  Seabrook,  on  Tuesday,  we 
saw  one,  once  of  our  despised  order,  robed  in  his  gown,  and  sitting 
in  his  house  like  a  gentleman,  whilst  we  were  beating  along  like 
Jonah  :  well,  the  end  is  all.  Our  route  carried  us  through  Sea- 
brook,  Hampton-Falls,  Exeter,  (where  is  an  elegant  meeting-house) 
and  Epping.     To-day  and  yesterday  we  dined  at  taverns. 

Wednesday  11.  At  Epping  I  preached  on  Acts  xxvi.  18,  19.; 
we  had  an  open  time.  Thursday  brought  us  through  Lee,  Dover, 
and  Berwick,  to  Alfred.  On  Friday  we  passed  Doughty's  Falls,  on 
the  way  to  Standish,  and  landed  at  Buxton. 

Saturday  14.  We  opened  our  conference.  We  admitted  and 
elected  nine  deacons,  and  two  elders.  We  had  preaching  on  Fri- 
day and  to-day. 

Sabbath  15.  We  opened  by  prayer  and  exhortation,  at  eight 
o'clock.  At  half  alter  ten  o'clock  I  took  my  stand  in  the  woods, 
but  in  about  forty  minutes  the  rain  fell.  There  were  powerful 
exercises  in  the  meeting-house,  until  near  six  o'clock  :  the  Lord 
appeared — several  souls  were  brought  under  distress.  I  trust  the 
fruits  of  this  day's  labour  will  be  seen  in  eternity. 


1804.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  141 

Monday  16.  We  had  preaching,  and  the  ordination  in  the  woods  : 
any  subject  was  2  Tim.  iii.  1 — 7. ;  it  was  an  open  time  ;  and  the 
work  of  God  broke  forth  upon  the  right-hand  and  upon  the  left. 
On  Tuesday  we  hasted  the  work  of  the  conference,  and  concluded, 
after  appointing  our  next  session  at  Lynn,  July  12,  1805. 

Wednesday  18.  It  is  reported  there  were  fifty  souls  converted 
to  God  :  the  work  continued  last  night.  This  morning  we  took 
our  departure  ;  came  to  Lymington,  crossed  Socco-River,  dined  at 
Doctor  Cochran's,  and  came  on  through  Limerick  to  Effingham, 
the  first  town  in  New-Hampshire,  putting  up  for  the  night  at  Lord's 
tavern.  On  Thursday  we  passed  Ossippee  bridge,  and  came  nine 
miles  through  the  woods.  We  dined  at  Night's  house,  and  kept  on 
to  Sandwich,  rested  a  while  at  William  Webster's,  and  then  pushed 
on  to  Centre  lake  and  harbour  :  we  had  four  hours  of  heavy  rain, 
and  rocks,  hills,  and  dales,  to  Chamberlain's.  We  started  away 
through  New-Hamp(on,  Bridgewater,  and  New-Chester;  dined, 
and  went  forward  to  Alexander,  and  Grafton  :  we  felt  willing  to 
stop  at  deacon  Hoyt's  for  a  night.  The  morning  found  us  under 
way  over  the  Isingglass  hills,  which  furnish  the  windows  of  the 
country  with  lights  :  it  was  cold  to  purpose  ;  I  could  have  borne  a 
third  coat  very  well  on  this  July  21st.  We  dined  at  Mr.  Haynes's 
in  Canaan  :  at  a  short  warning  I  spoke  to  about  fifty  or  sixty  souls 
on  1  Tim.  iv.  7,  8.  We  came  on  through  Enfield  ;  upon  the  banks 
of  the  pond  I  saw  the  settlement  of  the  Shakers,,  Poor  souls  ! — 
they  have  landed  where  al!  other  sects  have  landed — Oh  this  love 
of  the  world  !  But  the  Shakers  are  near  the  end  of  the  world — 
they  forbid  to  marry — they  are  as  the  angels  of  heaven  !  I  came 
to  Hanover  town,  and  lodged  at  Mr.  Hall's.  I  have  travelled  by 
computation  seven  hundred  and  forty  sis  miles  from  Baltimore. 
Oh  New-Hampshire,  thy  perpetual  hills  and  rocks  !  Alas,  poor 
people  !     Alas,  poor  suffering  preachers  ! 

Sabbath  22.  I  preached  in  the  evening  at  Hanover,  on  Philip, 
iii.  8,9.  On  Monday  we  came  on  through  Lebanon  and  Plainfield, 
and  crossed  Connecticut  River  into  Vermont  at  Hartland. 

Vermont. — We  called  at  Windsor,  a  beautiful  town  upon  the 
river,  of  about  one  hundred  houses  Mr.  Spooner  entertained  us 
with  pleasure.  We  passed  through  Weathersfield  and  Springfield, 
and  stopped  at  Rockingham,  lodging  with  Captain  Williams  :  forty 
miles  to-day. 

Tuesday  24.  We  came  in  haste  to  Westminster,  to  breakfast ; 
(his  is  another  pleasant  little  town  ;  it  may  have  fifty  houses.     At 


142  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1804. 

Putney  we  found  a  stream,  mills,  a  store,  and  a  tavern.  Passing 
over  a  slate  ridge,  and  through  Dammerston,  we  came  to  Brattle- 
borough,  which  we  found  a  pleasant  place,  with  the  advantage  of 
a  stream,  well  employed  as  a  mill  power.  At  Guilford  we  rested 
with  Mr.  Jacobs  from  three  o'clock  in  the  evening,  until  VVednes- 
day  morning  at  five  o'clock,  when  we  took  our  departure  from  our 
host  and  from  the  state  of  Vermont.  At  Greenfield,  in  Massachu- 
setts, we  breakfasted,  having  passed  Barnardston,  the  first  village 
we  entered  in  the  state.  We  started  away  again  to  Deerfield,  and 
Conway,  and  Ashfield,  and  Plainfield,  and  Commington,  and  Wind- 
sor, and  Dalton,  and  Pittsfield,  and  Richmond,  and  so  out  of  the 
state  ;  but  I  was  glad  to  stop  fifteen  miles  short  of  Pittsfield,  after 
riding  over  dreadful  hills  and  rocks  forty-five  miles:  we  lodged 
at  a  tavern,  weary,  weary  enough  !  We  took  our  breakfast  with 
Robert  Green,  in  Pittsfield.  Here  we  crossed  the  head  branch  of 
the  Housatonnic- River,  that  winds  its  way  by  Stratford  down 
through  Connecticut  into  the  sea. 

New-York. — Thursday  26.  We  lodged  at  David  Wager's,  in  the 
state  of  New-York.  Nest  day  we  directed  our  course  through  Cla- 
verack,  and  came  in  to  Robert  Sands's,  Rhinebeck,  about  five  o'clock. 
My  mind  hath  been  cheerfully  happy,  and  mostly  in  prayer.  I  was 
sometimes  ready  to  wish  1  had  no  company,  and  no  observations 
to  make  to  hinder  my  constant  communion  with  God.  I  suffered 
from  hunger,  and  was  skinned  several  times.  Since  I  left  New- 
York,  I  have  spent  fifteen  dollars  feeding  man  and  beast  by  the 
way  ;  and  my  companions  were  also  obliged  to  do  so.  I  have 
seen  the  sufferings  of  our  preachers,  and  they  have  awakened  all 
my  sympathies.  Seventeen  times  we  dined,  fed,  or  supped  at 
taverns  ;  and  well  it  was  we  had  these  to  go  to,  else  we  had  been 
starved.  We  have  crossed  the  east  and  west  ends  of  Massachu- 
setts and  New- Hampshire,  and  have  rode  about  three  hundred 
miles  in  the  state  of  New- York. 

Saturday  28.  I  preached  in  the  chapel  at  Rhinebeck  on  Psalm 
cxxvi.  3 — 6.  It  was  a  good  beginning  of  the  quarterly  meeting. 
I  visited  the  family  of  F.  Garrettson. 

Sabbath  29.  We  had  our  feast  of  charity,  and  the  Lord's  supper 
followed.  I  preached  in  an  orchard  upon  Matt.  xi.  3 — 6.  We 
had  about  one  thousand  hearers.  I  rested  at  brother  Garrettson's. 
On  Tuesday  we  rode  forty  miles  to  Oliver  Ledue's,  Fishkill-Hook  : 
we  called  up  the  family  at  nine  o'clock,  and  went  to  rest  at  half 
after  ten  o'clock. 


1804.J  REV.  FRANCIS  ASEURY'S  JOURNAL.  143 

Wednesday,  August  1.  We  rose  at  five  o'clock,  and  rode,  fast- 
ing, over  the  rugged  hills  of  Peekskill  and  Fishkill ;  but  we  were 
willing  to  walk  at  times.  We  breakfasted  with  William  Likley, 
from  Aberdeen,  Scotland  :  he  has  been  about  forty  years  in  the 
new  world.  We  came  on  to  Esquire  Kirby's,  and  having  dined 
in  haste,  pushed  on,  and  came,  an  hour  in  the  night,  to  my  home 
at  the  widow  Sherwood's.  We  have  rode  fifty  miles  to-day,  over 
a  path  so  rough  and  uneven  we  could  not  get  along  fast :  this  hasty 
work  interrupts  that  close  communion  with  God  my  soul  longeth 
after.  I  have  made,  I  judge,  one  thousand  and  fifty  miles  since 
I  left  Baltimore  ;  and  there  still  remains  one  thousand  miles  be- 
tween me  and  Mount  Gerezim,  the  seat  of  our  conference  for  the 
1st  of  October  next.  Thursday  and  Friday  I  devoted  to  rest, 
reading,  writing,  meditation,  and  prayer.  On  Saturday  I  came 
alone  to  New- York. 

Sabbath  5.  I  preached  at  the  north  church  upon  Matt.  xvi.  24. 
to  the  end  of  the  chapter  :  I  felt  some  opening.  At  the  old  house 
in  John-street,  my  subject  was  1  Tim.  vi.  6,  7,  8.  York,  in  all 
the  congregations,  is  the  valley  of  dry  bones.  Oh  Lord,  I  will 
lament  the  deplorable  state  of  religion  in  all  our  towns  and  cities  ! 

New  Jersey. — Monday  6.  We  crossed  the  river  in  a  calm ;  but 
we  were  dripping  by  the  time  we  came  to  Newark  :  here  we 
rested  two  hours,  then  hastened  on  to  Elizabethtown,  dined,  and 
kept  on  to  Rahway  :  the  night  brought  us  up  at  Amboy  with  Ben- 
jamin Drake. 

Tuesday  7.  We  had  a  rainy  morning.  We  have  our  ancient 
seasons — plentiful  rains  and  cold  weather  :  this  will  prevent  the 
fevers.  Mr  Lyell  has  engaged  with  Mr.  Pilmore's  old  congre- 
gation at  £450  a  year  :  so,  f  <rewe!l  to  Tommy  Lyell !  1  hope 
it  may  end  well.     We  got  as  far  as  Joseph  Hutchinson's. 

Pennsylvania. — Wednesday  8.  1  had  a  sweet,  solitary  ride  to 
H.  Hancock's  ;  the  next  day  found  me  breakfasting  at  Burlington  ; 
and  by  two  o'clock  I  had  reached  Henry  Manly's  retreat.  My 
mind  is  devoted  to  God  :  I  had  a  pensive  letter  from  Elder 
M'Clasky  lamenting  the  death  of  his  son  :— but  one — but  only  one 
— alas !  I  wrote  to  Smith,  Chandler,  and  Colbert,  presiding 
elders.  I  preached  once  in  St.  George's  upon  Luke  xvii.  5.  at  the 
Academy,  in  the  afternoon,  on  1  Cor.  xv.  58. 

Delaware. — Monday  13.  1  come  away  from  the  city  to  break- 
fast with  sister  Withy.  I  dined  with  Allen  M'Lane,  and  lodged 
with  J.  Hersey  ;   fory-five  miles  to-day. 


144  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUUy's  JOURNAL.  [1804, 

Maryland. — Tuesday  14.  I  took  breakfast  at  North-East,  or- 
dained James  Cook  a  deacon,  and  came  on  to  Perry-Hall  ;  forty- 
five  miles  to-day.  I  found  the  family  of  P.  H.  absent ;  they  are 
gone  to  Bath. 

Wednesday  15.  I  rested,  being  stiff  and  sore  My  poor  beast 
should  have  had  three  days  to  perform  that  which  she  has  done 
in  two  :  she  shall  rest  three  days  in  Baltimore  ;  thence  to  Mount 
Gerezim  she  will  have  only  twenty  miles  a  day,  or  less,  to  travel. 
Next  day  I  came  alone  to  Baltimore  :  here  I  remained. 

Sabbath  19.  I  preached  in  Light-street  church:  my  subject 
was  Luke  xiv.  25,  26,  27.  At  three  o'clock  I  preached  at  Mr. 
Otterbine's  on  1  Tim.  vi.  6 — 10.  this  has  been  an  open  day  with 
me.  I  am  inclined  to  think  preaching  must  be  in  the  lanes  and 
streets  of  the  cities  : — I  advised  the  preachers  to  go  out  to  the 
church  yards  :  to  the  sisters  I  recommended  more  frequent  prayer- 
meetings.  I  revised  the  Revised  Form  of  the  spiritual  part  of  our 
Discipline  :  I  had  long  wished  to  separate  the  most  excellent  from 
the  excellent. 

Monday  20.  I  began  my  western  tour,  bending  my  course  up  to 
Cornelius  Howard's,  thence  to  Macklefresh/s,  and  lodged  with 
Alexander  Warfield,  upon  Sam's  Creek  :  the  heat  was  tempered 
in  some  measure  by  a  breeze  from  the  west.  My  appointment 
at  Linganou  chapel  was  not  generally  known  ;  I  preached  to  a 
few,  and  went  to  dine  with  Ephraim  Howard  ;  we  reached  friend 
Shalmudine's  in  the  evening. 

Virginia. — Wednesday  22.  We  hul  showers  to  brother  Rey- 
nold's :  we  passed  through  Sharpsburg,  and  lodged  at  Sheppards- 
Town.  I  was  informed  of  a  camp-meeting,  held  near  Charles- 
town,  Jefferson  county,  at  which  between  sixty  and  seventy  souls 
professed  to  be  converted  to  God  :  the  meeting  held  nine  days. 
On  Thursday  I  started,  and  next  day  breakfasted  with  Mrs. 
Gough  at  Bath.  I  found  Mr.  Lyell  here  ;  his  mind  deeply  en- 
gaged with  his  new  design  ;  he.  was  very  attentive  to  me.  After 
resting  three  hours,  I  came  away  to  William  Dimett's. 

Saturday  24.  Starling  at  six  o'clock,  I  made  fourteen  miles  to 
Clarke's  tavern,  to  breakfast,  through  mountain  rain,  and  over 
mountain  roads.  After  a  long  absence  I  came  once  more  to  John 
Jacobs's.  From  him  I  had  the  awful  account  of  the  awful  end  of 
Joseph  Cromwell.  He  had  walked  backward  according  to  his  own 
account:  three  days  he  lost  in  drunkenness;  three  days  he  lay 
sick  in  darkness — no  manifestations  of  God  to  his  soul :  and  thus 


1804.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL,  145 

he  died  !  We  can  only  hope  that  God  had  mercy  on  him.  Com- 
pare this  with  what  I  have  recorded  of  his  labours  and  his  faith- 
fulness in  another  part  of  my  journal.— Oh  !  my  soul,  be  warned! 
Brother  Jacobs  preached  his  funeral,  and  gave  a  brief  sketch  of  his 
life,  his  fall,  and  his  death  :  his  text  was,  "  Tell  it  not  in  Gath,  pub- 
lish it  not  in  the  streets  of  Askelon  :"'  how  appropriate  the  choice  ! 
I  have  travelled  through  great  heat  :  the  people  are  generally 
sickly  ;  but  I  have  got  along  one  hundred  and  sixty  miles  since  I 
left  Baltimore  ;  thank  the  Lord,  and  kind  friends  ! 

Sabbath  26.  1  had  a  meeting  at  Oldtown  at  four  o'clock :  my 
subject  was  1  Pet.  v.  10. ;  the  heat  for  some  minutes  was  so  intense 
that  it  appeared  as  if  flesh  could  scarcely  bear  it. 

Monday  27.  After  the  rain,  J.  Jacobs  rode  with  me  to  Joseph 
Cresap's,  upon  the  north  branch  of  the  Patowmac.  We  crossed 
this  water  three  times,  and  climbed  over  the  mountain,  but  not 
without  rain.  Now  I  have  left  the  travelling  preachers  to  mind 
their  own  work,  and  I  only  make  my  appointments  when  I  come 
to  the  places  :  the  local  preachers  are  my  guides,  and  good  guides, 
and  good  aids,  and  good  companions  they  are. 

Tuesday  28.  In  Cresap's  mill  I  preached  upon  Hebrews  viii. 
10,  11,  12.     We  had  many  people  at  a  short  warning. 

Wednesday  29.    I  was  prevented    setting  out  by  rain.     I  made 
feeble  attempts   to    make    peace  between    two    old    members  of 
the  society:  may  I   have  the  blessing,  and  they  have#the  peace 
—for  the  good  of  their  children    and  the  society.     I  came*  to  the 
Ten-Mile  house  ;  here  I  overtook  company— a  certain  Mr.  Doyne. 
We  wrought  our  passage  to   Tomlinson's,  dined,  and  came  on  to 
Simpkins's  stand.     Next  day  we  breakfasted  at  the   Great-Cross- 
ings— William  Smith's  ;  then  on  we   went  to  Mr.  Slack's — brisk 
enough  to  wait  upon  travellers.     At  four  o'clock  we  dined.     Once 
more  I  was  compelled  to   walk  down  the  Laurel-Hill.     We  came 
into  Union-Town  about  seven  o'clock,  wearied  by  the  heat  and 
the  toils  of  the  day.     Brother  and  sister  Fleming  are  gone  away 
two  hundred  and  seventy  miles  to  Philadelphia,  in  search  of  a  can- 
cer doctor  :  both  her  breasts  are  turned   black,  I   understand,  and 
she  has  a  babe  of  six  months  to  take  with  her  over  desperate  roads, 
and  through  heat  scarcely  supportable  : — dear  souls,  what  trouble 
have  they  in  the  flesh  !     The   husband  is  sick  in  the  wife's  dis- 
eased breast — the  fond,  anxious  wife  suffers   because  she  is  the 
cause  of  his  sufferings — and  Oh !  how  are  all  the  sympathies  of 

Vol.  III.  19 


146  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1804. 

nature  in  the  parents  awakened  by  the  sufferings  of  the  poor,  sore- 
ly-wearied babe  ! 

Friday  31.  I  ordained,  at  Jacob  Murphy's,  Mount  Braddock, 
William  Page  travelling  elder. 

September  1.  1  rested,  wrote,  read,  and  planned  a  little.  I 
appointed  James  Hunter,  who  has  been  seven  years  in  the  work, 
president,  pro  tempore,  of  the  Monongahela  district,  in  the  absence 
of  Thornton  Fleming  :  he  is  next  to  him  in  standing  and  reputation. 

Pennsylvania. — Sabbath  3.  1  rode  to  Union-Town,  and  preached 
upon  Matt.  x.  37,  38.  I  also  spoke  at  Murphy's  barn,  at  four 
o'clock,  on  Jer.  xxxi.  31 — 33. 

I.  The  "  house  of  Israel"  the  Jews — the  national  and  church 
privileges  of  that  ancient  people  :  the  term  when  applied  to  pro- 
fessing Christians — their  peculiar  and  important  privileges. 

II.  In  what  characters  God  "  writes  his  law  upon  the  heart" — 
conviction,  repentance,  faith,  and  all  the  evangelical  and  moral  vir- 
tues ;  "  Write  it  in  their  hearts,"  in  allusion  to  the  "  law"  written 
upon  tables  of  stone. 

Monday  4.  I  visited  Colonel  Mason — -may  it  be  for  his  good  ! 

Tuesday  5.  I  ordained  Andrew  Hemphill  a  deacon,  at  family 
prayer,  at  brother  Murphy's.  We  came  in  company  to  the  widow 
Hawthorn's  :  out  of  eight  children,  here  are  seven  subjects  of 
grace.  News  came  after  me  that  Bishop  Whatcoat  had  appeared 
at  Connellsville  :  as  I  had  failed  to  come  along  by  Carlisle,  he 
thought  I  might  be  sick,  or  lame,  or  dead  ;  and  that  it  was  time 
for  him  to  bestir  himself. 

Wednesday  5.  I  came  by  Bromfield  and  Geneva,  crossed  Mo- 
nongahela-River,  and  stopped  with  Stephen  Gapen,  Wayne  county, 
Pennsylvania.  The  wife  of  my  host  was  ill,  and  I  was  obliged  to 
prescribe :  she  rested  better.  I  was  greatly  outdone  by  walking 
down  the  rugged,  perpetual  hills.     Next  day  I  felt  stiff  and  sore. 

October  9.  After  thirty-four  days  of  afflictive  illness,  I  re-com- 
mence my  journal.  I  have  been,  during  my  sickness,  at  Harry 
Stevene's ;  kinder  souls  than  this  family  I  could  not  wish  ;  but 
there  were  many  of  them  and  others  continually  coming  and  going. 
I  had  two  doctors ;  but  at  last  was  happily  left  to  myself  and 
Charles  Conway.  The  fever  subsided  and  left  a  cough.  I  have 
not  had  a  more  severe  attack  since  I  have  been  in  America  :  the 
doctor  was  seldom  right,  and  medicines  were  not  to  be  had,  nor 
indeed,  the  comfort  and  alleviations  which  surround  a  sick  bed  in 
the  cities.     But  the  best  of  all  was,  God  was  with  us— God,  the 


1804.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  147 

glorious  Lord,  appeared.     I  was  led  into  the  visions  of  God  :  I 
shouted  his  praise. 

Wednesday  10.  We  took  our  departure,  and  came  to  Maple- 
Town.  The  work  of  God  revives.  Brother  Smalley's  daughter 
has  found  the  Lord.  On  Thursday  we  came  to  Jackson's,  Carmi- 
chael-Town.  Friday  brought  us  to  Crouch's,  near  Washington, 
and  on  Saturday  we  reached  Philip  Doddridge's. 

Sabbath  14.  I  preached.  Riding  brought  on  a  daily  fever,  and 
an  inveterate  cough.  Brother  Whatcoat  being  unable  to  ride  at  a 
greater  speed  than  a  walk,  1  exchanged  my  mare  for  his  horse ; 
we  made  more  speed  by  this  arrangement,  but  his  great  beast  jolted 
me  in  such  a  manner  as  I  could  not  have  borne  in  health  :  I  was 
pressed  above  measure,  so  that  I  despaired  of  life,  or  health,  or 
making  our  journey  in  this  manner.  We  have  lost  the  Kentucky 
conference,  and  have  about  eleven  weeks  for  our  trip  of  fifteen 
hundred  miles  to  Charleston.  We  were  compelled  to  spend  a 
week  at  John  Beck's. 

Sabbath  21  Brother  Whatcoat  preached  at  West  Liberty.  From 
thence  we  rode  to  John  M'Collock's,  within  a  mile  of  Ohio-River  : 
here  my  fever  rose,  and  1  had  to  quit  all  hopes  of  going  to  the 
westward  :  I  returned  to  John  Beck's.  As  I  was  my  own  doctor,  I 
resolved  to  breakfast  upon  eight  grains  of  Ipecacuanha  ;  thialclean- 
sed  my  filthy  stomach,  and  so  broke  up  my  disease  that  a  fever  of 
fifty  days  fled.  My  cough,  nevertheless,  is  very  distressing  at 
night.  I  have  submitted  to  have  a  large  grinder  extracted.  Should 
November  prove  favourable,  I  do  not  yet  despair  of  getting  along 
in  time.  Brother  Whatcoat  has  been  of  great  service  to  me  :  he 
was  still  urgent  to  go  on,  and  he  has  gone  on,  wandering  alone 
through  the  wilderness — I  am  afraid,  in  vain  :  he  said  he  had  a  mite, 
and  it  must  go.— I  fear  his  precious  life  will  go. 

Tuesday  23.  My  fever  abated.  I  applied  a  blister,  and  bled 
again.     I  begin  to  eat  and  gather  strength. 

Saturday  27.  The  weather  has  changed  greatly — we  have  the 
Indian  summer. 

On  the  Sabbath  day  a  small  meeting  :  and  what  must  I  do — go 
into  the  woods  ?  The  eyes  of  the  preachers  were  upon  me — I  was 
too  weak  to  travel,  but  not  to  preach.  We  had  a  melting  time  :  it 
was  so  unexpected  !  With  some  it  was  thejirst  time  :  with  others 
the  last,  perhaps,  they  would  ever  hear  me  or  see  me  in  this  part  of 
the  country.  It  was  so  pleasant  in  the  afternoon,  I  rode  down  to 
John  Casebears,  an  Israelite. 


14u  REV     FRANCIS  ASLUItv's  JOURNAL.  [1804. 

Monday  29.  A  summer's  day.     We  rode  twelve  miles,  near  to 
Washington.     Here  I  heard  of  a  suit  gained  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Birch 
against  the  Rev.  Mr.  M'Cullen  :  the  slander  was  a  charge  of  drun- 
kenness ;  the  damages  awarded   thirteen  hundred  dollars,  costs  in- 
cluded.    On  Tuesday  we  gained  Joseph    Taylor's,  near  the  Old 
Fort.     Wednesday   we  came   to  Union-Town,   seventeen   miles; 
Thursday  to  the  Crossings,  twenty-four  miles.     Friday  to  Mussel- 
man's,  thirty  miles  :  and  on  Saturday  to  Joseph  Cresap's  to  break- 
fast, making  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  miles   this  week  :  here 
we  rested  for  the  Sabbath.     It  is  wonderful  to  see  how  Braddock's 
road  is  crowded  with  wagons  and  pack-horses  carrying  families  and 
their  household  stuff  westward — to  the  new  state  of  Ohio,  no  doubt : 
here  is  a  state  without  slaves,  and  the  better  calculated  for  poor, 
industrious  families.     O  highly-favoured  land  !    I  saw  the  death  of 
Wilson  Lee  confirmed  in  the  Frederick  Gazette  :  he  died  at  Walter 
Worthington's,  in  Ann-Arundell  county,  Maryland.     Wilson  Lee 
was  born  near  Lewistown,  state  of  Delaware  :  he  was  of  a  slender 
habit  of  body,  but  active,  diligent,  and  upright  in  his  walk  ;  a  pat- 
tern of  neatness  in  his  habits  and  attire  ;  and  full  of  gentleness, 
meekness,  and  love  ;  his  presence  commanded   respect ;  his  zeal 
for  God  was  great,  and  his  labours  successful,  and  continually  so  ; 
few  expelled  him  in  the  duties  of  a  presiding  elder — it  is  not  im- 
possible, that  the  toils  of  this  important  office  have  been  too  great 
for  his  feeble  frame.     He  had  been  twenty  years  and  ten  months  in 
the  Methodist  connexion.  Sabbath  day  I  spoke  in  Cresap's  mill,  upon 
Hebr.  ii.  2,  3.     After  sermon  we  rode  to  James  Cresap's,  near 
Old-Town  ;  notwithstanding  what  had  passed  at  Cokesbury,  he  re- 
ceived me  as  a  father — that  matter  might  have  been  managed  better. 
We  were  to  have  the  boys  to  become  all  angels  !  I  sent  for  brother 
Jacobs  and  his  wife  ;  we  breakfasted,  and  prayed,  and  rejoiced  in 
God  together.     John  Hesselins  sent  me  a  note  of  invitation  to  call 
and  see  him  :  I  did  so.    He  reminded  me  of  his  respectable  father, 
who  took  me  to  his  house  thirty  years  ago  in  the  time  of  my  visit- 
ing Annapolis,  when  I  was  exposed  to  daily  reproach  and  contempt. 
I  have  reason  to  believe  the  old  gentleman  died  in  the  Lord. 

Virginia. — Monday  5.  We  forded  Patowmac  about  a  mile  above 
the  south  forks,  and  called  in  to  see  mother  Pool.  We  came  on 
to  Capon,  and  lodged  at  Mr.  Largeat's. 

Tuesday  6.  We  breakfasted  at  Quaker  Brown's,  and  then 
came  on  to  Winchester.  In  the  evening  I  preached  in  George 
Reed's  house  ;  and  next  day  in  the  house  of  Elijah  Phelps.     On 


1804.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  149 

Thursday  I  rested  and  refitted.  My  body  is  in  health  :  my  soul  esta- 
blished in  grace.  Sickness  has  been  very  common  below  the  moun- 
tains, and  there  are  many  deaths. 

Saturday  11.  The  weather  has  been  unpleasant;  and  our  clo- 
thing needed  improvement  and  increase  :  above  all,  1  wished  to  see 
Daniel  Hitt.  My  friends  were  solicitous  for  my  presence  at  the 
quarterly  meeting  at  New-Town.  On  the  Sabbath  day  1  preached, 
feebly,  upon  John  i.  50.  The  Superintendent  Bishop  of  the  Me- 
thodist church  in  America  being  reduced  to  two  dollars,  he  was 
obliged  to  make  his  wants  known. 

Monday  13.  We  came  to  Hand's  ferry,  went  on  to  Front 
Royal,  or  Luce-Town  ;  we  dined  at  J.  Moore's,  and  passed  over 
the  Ridge,  our  route  leading  near  the  head  spring  of  the  north 
branch  of  the  Rappahannock  ;  we  stopped  at  Justice  Clark's.  I 
came  in  un*vell ;  but  the  well-ordered  house,  and  its  solitude  ;  the 
social  family  and  their  polite  attentions,  and  great  kindness,  were 
very  consoling  :  the  old  folks  gave  me  their  room  and  bed — I  was 
overcome  quite — my  thoughts  and  feelings  were  all  gratitude.  On 
Tuesday  we  left  our  kind-hearted  hosts,  and  took  the  path  to 
Little  Washington  and  Woodville  towns,  in  Culpepper  county,  and 
met  with  a  kind  reception  and  good  entertainment.  Twenty-eight 
miles  over  rough  roads,  and  through  cold,  enough  to  make  me 
uncomfortable. 

Wednesday  15.  We  had  not  gone  above  fourteen  miles,  when 
the  threatening  snow  began  to  fall  :  it  made  a  heavy  damp  plaister 
for  our  garments :  we  came  to  Henry  Fry's,  Robinson-River, 
Madison  county.  I  felt  the  cold  of  yesterday's  ride  ;  the  horses 
were  to  be  shod,  and  it  was  meeting  day,  so  I  have  reasons  enough 
for  resting. 

Friday  17  We  rode  through  Orange  to  Louisa  county,  I  had  a 
comfortable  interview  with  John  Lasley,  his  good,  afflicted  wife, 
and  serious  daughter.  On  Saturday  we  came  on  to  Joseph  Per- 
kins's, crossing  the  grand  branch  of  Pomonky,  at  Colonel  Norris's 
five  story  new  mill.  The  weather  is  exceeding  pleasant.  We  had 
a  small  congregation  called  together  at  a  short  warning  :  I  spoke 
from  Hebr.  viii.  10 — 12. — not  in  vain,  I  hope. 

Monday  19.  We  rode  through  Goocnland,  crossing  James-River, 
at  Carter's  Ville — Satan's  Ville,  I  fear—  they  have  rejected  the 
Gospel : — Charles  Hopkins  is  their  priest — a  poor  wretch.  He 
was  once  with  us  ;  but  when  I  pleaded  for  a  suspension  of  ordi- 
nances, and  a  partial  conformity  to  the  ancient  Episcopal  Church,  he 


150  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S   JOURNAL.  [1804, 

raised  the  cry  of  Popery  :  but  behold  !  when  there  were  churches 
to  supply,  and  money  to  be  given,  there  was  no  Popery.  I  lodged 
with  Lewis  Isbett :  I  found  kind  people,  and  comfortable  enter- 
tainment. 1  heard  of  three  camp-meetings  in  Cumberland  cir- 
cuit ;  one  at  Charity,  one  in  Bucking-Lane,  and  one  in  Prince  Ed- 
ward :  the  first  was  greatly  successful. 

Tuesday  20.  We  came  to  Robert  Smith's, — a  very  damp  day. 
My  mind  was  greatly  engaged  with  God.  On  Wednesday,  through 
deep  damps,  we  came  to  David  Thompson's,  at  the  upper,  or  west 
end  of  Powhatan  county.  On  Thursday,  we  crossed  Appomatox 
at  Clement's  bridge,  near  a  mill  and  small  town  of  the  same  name. 
Our  route  led  through  Amelia — solitary  Amelia,  with  its  worn-out 
fields  of  hundreds  of  acres,  and  old  houses  falling  into  ruins.  We 
lost  our  way,  wandering  without  friends  or  food,  from  seven  in  the 
morning,  until  seven  at  night :  we  made  about  forty  miles,  and 
came,  fatigued  and  hungry,  to  John  RyalPs :  here  we  had  enter- 
tainment good  enough  for  a  president. 

Friday  23.  We  passed  Notaway  court-house,  crossed  at  the 
Fall's  bridge,  where  a  Morris,  owner  of  a  mill  and  saw-mill,  finely 
seated  on  the  stream,  gave  us  food  for  our  horses  gratis,  and  un- 
asked :  we  came  to  Zachariah  Davis's,  near  Lunenburg  court- 
house. On  Saturday  we  crossed  Meherrin  at  Saffold's  bridge  : 
by  accident  we  came  to  Mr.  Warner's,  the  son-in-law  of  Samuel 
Holmes  :  we  were  hungry  and  faint,  and  the  table  was  soon  spread. 
On  the  Sabbath  day  I  had  a  local  preacher's  congregation,  to 
which  I  discoursed  upon  1  Thess.  ii.  11,  12. 

Monday  26.  We  came  to  Allen  Young's  :  the  weather  was  un- 
usually sultry  ;  my  clothing  was  burdensome.  A  traveller  in  this 
iron  clime,  must  feel  almost  all  the  climates  in  the  world,  with  all 
their  extremes  ;  and  he  must  carry  with  him,  all  the  year,  as  many 
clothes  as  he  may  possibly  want  but  six  months  of  it :  in  November 
he  may  not  need  a  top  coat  ;  and  yet,  if  he  is  wise,  he  will  not  be 
without  his  cloak  in  July.  As  Tuesday  was  pleasant,  the  river 
low,  and  the  wind  moderate,  I  pushed  forward  to  Edward  Taylor's, 
Greenville  county,  North  Carolina — twenty-six  miles :  here  I 
rested  to  refit.  At  this  point,  Joel  Smith  being  unwell,  consented 
to  stop,  after  travelling  with  me  six  hundred  miles,  frequently 
afflicted  and  depressed  by  some  peculiarities  of  both  his  constitution 
and  country  :  I  wished  him  to  leave  me. 

North  Carolina. —  Thursday  28.    We  came  to  Edmund  Taj'- 
lor's.  senior :  the  aged  people  were  happy,  waiting  with  cheerful 


1804. J  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL,  151 

patience  for  the  moment  which  was  to  change  this  mortal  for  an 
immortal  state.  On  Friday  we  dined  at  Jesse  Carter's,  on  the 
banks  of  Neuse,  and  crossed  the  river  at  the  Fish-dam  Ford,  and 
pat  up  for  the  night  with  Lewis  Moores.  Our  road  led  us  by  the 
home  of  John  Kinsbrough,  whom  we  visited  :  I  was  pleased  to  find 
that  the  like  precious  faith  entailed  upon  the  children,  was  now  en- 
joyed in  reversion  by  the  children's  children  of  those  who  first 
trusted  in  God  thirty  years  ago. 

Saturday,  December  1.  We  came  to  Sihon  Smith's,  accompanied 
by  Nathaniel  Moore.  I  was  glad  to  house  here,  and  escape  the 
rain.  It  is  a  cordial  to  my  spirit  to  reflect,  that  although  we  had 
but  one  preacher  on  that  ancient  and  good  circuit  of  Tar,  and  that 
one  was  a  young  one,  and  esteemed  by  some  only  of  moderate 
abilities,  that  his  labours  have  been  signally  blest  :  it  is  true,  the 
local  brethren  helped  faithfully  ;  and  there  were  some  good  seasons 
at  camp-meetings.  My  mind  has  great  peace  and  consolation  in 
God. 

Sunday  2.  I  preached  :  my  subject  was  John  i.  50.  I  was  chilled 
for  an  hour  after  speaking  ;  a  fever  succeeded  this,  and  I  was  very 
ill  through  the  night. 

Monday  3.  I  baptised  three  children  of  Squire  Hinton's.  I 
breakfasted  with  them.  We  rode  on  to  the  Red-field  ferry,  upon 
Haw-River.  On  Tuesday  morning  we  breakfasted  fourteen  miles 
ahead,  with  brother  Reeves,  at  the  Hickory  Mountain  I  ordained 
William  Masters  a  deacon.  I  dined  and  lodged  with  him  :  God  has 
blest  him — his  twin  sons,  converted  at  the  same  time,  are  both 
called  to  preach  the  Gospel.  On  Wednesday,  we  came  away 
twenty  miles,  to  Bell's  house  and  mills,  to  see  Alexander  M'Caine  : 
we  had  a  night  meeting,  at  which  I  saw  extravagancies  frequently 
seen  among  our  people.  I  believe,  nevertheless,  that  the  young 
people  were  sincere.  On  our  way  to  Wiley  Harris's  we  stopped 
at  Mr.  Fuller's  to  dine.  On  Friday  I  rode  eight  miles  to  breakfast, 
with  Ethelred  Harris,  and  came  on  eighteen  miles  to  John  Ran- 
dle's.  On  Saturday  I  thought  it  well  to  rest.  I  have  rode,  since 
leaving  Baltimore,  nine  hundred  and  eighty-eight  miles.  At  Ran- 
dle's  1  preached  upon  Gal.  v.  9.  In  the  evening  I  visited  our 
former  brother,  my  friend  Tomkins  :  he  was  expelled  for  selling 
a  slave.  The  Lord  is  amongst  the  coloured  people  in  this  family. 
On  Monday  we  lodged  at  Thomas  Shaw's,  thirty-five  miles  dis- 
tant :  his  wife  still  lamented  the  loss  of  a  dear  child. 


152  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY:S  JOURNAL,  [1804. 

South  Carolina. — Tuesday  11.  We  reached  Lynch's  Creek; 
and  next  day,  twenty-eight  miles  brought  us  to  Camden  :  ory  friends 
receive  me  as  risen  from  sickness — tenderly  attentive.  On  the 
Sabbath  day  Alexander  M'Caine  supplied  my  place  ;  on  Friday, 
Saturday,  and  twice  upon  the  Sabbath  ;  this  last  day,  I  gave  the 
sacramental  discourse  upon  1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20.  Whilst  resting,  I 
wrote  some  letters,  and  received  some  persons  who  wished  to  con- 
verse with  me  upon  the  best  of  subjects.  I  felt  as  if  we  wanted 
more  living  religion  in  the  society  here. 

Monday  17.  I  came  to  James  Rembert's,  upon  Black-River, 
twenty  miles.  I  wish  I  could  be  more  solitary  this  week.  On 
Tuesday  I  kept  close,  that  I  might  finish  the  short  memoirs  of 
Nicholas  Watters,  and  Tobias  Gibson,  both  deceased  this  year. 

Wednesday  19.  I  preached  at  Rembert's  chapel  :  we  had  a  cold 
rain — it  chills  the  people  ;  they  cannot  hear  to  profit  :  my  subject 
was  1  Thess.  v  24  "  Faithful  is  he  that  calleth  you,  who  also  will 
do  it  :" — that  is,  give  you  entire  sanctification,  and  persevering 
grace  to  the  end. 

Thursday  4.  We  had  snow  four  inches  deep  :  I  felt  thankful  that 
I  had  a  house,  and  all  things  necessary  to  temporal  enjoyment  and 
comfort.  Next  day  it  cleared  away  ;  my  soul  is  happy  in  God ; 
purity  of  heart  is  my  joy,  and  prayer  my  delight.  1  feel  as  if  God 
would  sanctify  all  the  conferences  in  the  south  :  O  may  it,  in  an- 
swer to  my  unceasing  prayers,  be  a  great  time  with  the  Lord's  pro- 
phets. It  is  nine  hundred  miles  from  Wheeling,  on  the  Ohio,  to 
Charleston,  South  Carolina  :  from  Baltimore  thither,  by  this 
Foute,  about  twelve  hundred  miles. 

On  Thursday,  Saturday,  and  Sabbath  day,  I  rested  :  Jonathan 
Jackson  preached  at  Rembert's  chapel  on  Monday,  and  on  Tuesday, 
Christmas  day,  1  gave  them  a  sermon  upon  Isai.  ix.  6.  "  For  unto 
us  a  child  is  born,  unto  us  a  son  is  given,  and  the  government  shall 
be  upon  his  shoulders  :  and  his  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful, 
Counsellor,  the  Mighty  God,  the  Everlasting  Father,  the  Prince 
of  Peace.  A  "child,"  after  his  human  nature  :  a  "  son" — of  God. 
"  The  government  shall  be  upon  his  shoulders" — upon  the  shoul- 
der it  was  that  ancient  temporal  governors  carried  their  badge  of 
office.  His  "  shoulders" — shall  be  strong  enough  for  the  thou- 
sands of  his  faithful  ministers,  and  the  millions  of  his  faithful  peo- 
ple in  his  church  militant,  who  shall  confide  in  his  strength.  "His 
name  shall  be  called"5 — that  is,  he  shall,  in  reality  be  what  he  i? 


1804.1  liEV.  FRANCIS   ASBURy's   JOURNAL.  153 


•J 


called.  "  Wonderful" — that  is,  a  mysterious  and  miraculous  per- 
son in  his  manifestations — in  his  birth,  spiritual  and  holy  ;  and  in 
his  miracles,  notable,  perfect,  and  undeniable.  *k  Counsellor" — 
this  may  refer  to  his  ministry—  his  prophetic,  priestly,  and  kingly 
offices.  "  Mighty  God" — -mighty  in  the  power  of  his  grace. 
"  The  Everlasting  Father" — as  such,  giving  life,  and  life  eternal. 
"  Prince  of  Peace" — giving  and  preserving  peace  in  his  kingdom  ; 
and  thus  contradistinguished  from  temporal  princes,  who  are  so 
generally  promoters  of  war. 

Wednesday  26.  We  set  out  for  Charleston  ;  the  rain  overtook 
us,  and  we  passed  Sumpter  court-house  dripping.  We  dined  with 
Mr.  Bradford,  and  pursued  our  journey,  wet  as  it  was  :  stopping  at 
a  house  where  we  might  have  remained  for  the  night,  we  were 
driven  off  by  a  drunken  madman  who  went  on  like  a  fiend  :  it  was 
dark,  and  we  had  rain  above,  and  mud  and  water  below  ;  the  ele- 
ments appeared  to  be  at  war  uith  us  :  at  length  Mr.  Boyd  saw  us  in 
our  deep  distress,  and  led  ua  to  his  house,  and  treated  us  very 
kindly.     I  was  wet — I  was  blistered — I  was  skinned. 

Thursday  27.  We  came  on  to  contend  with  Santee  at  Nelson's 
ferry,  where  I  once  had  a  surge  with  Hope  Hull  in  company.  The 
mud  and  mire  were  bad  enough  in  the  road,  but  Oh !  the  swamps ! 
I  dipped  both  feet,  yet  I  came  off  pretty  well  :  the  water  was 
rising  ;  the  wind  blew  fresh  ;  but  happily  for  us,  James  Jenkins 
came  over  in  a  canoe  and  brought  the  flat  just  as  we  were  ready. 
We  pushed  on  to  Mr.  Herrin's,  and  came  in  before  the  sun  disap- 
peared. 

Friday  28.  We  came  thirteen  miles  to  Monk's  Corner  to  break- 
fast ;  thence  to  the  Ten-Mile  House,  fed  our  horses,  and  put  off 
again  and  reached  the  city.  I  think  it  may  go  for  one  hundred  and 
twenty  miles  from  Rembert's  to  Charleston. 

Saturday  29.  I  had  to  rest  indeed  :  1  was  sadly  sore.  Many  let- 
ters came  from  various  parts,  which  I  answered.  Daniel  Hall 
made  me  glad  by  his  account  of  the  Suffolk  camp-meeting  :  in  four 
days  they  calculate  there  having  been  as  many  hundred  converted 
to  God.  On  the  Sabbath  day  I  preached  at  Cumberland  street  on 
John  i.  50.  I  feel  comforted  in  spirit :  the  sitting  of  this  confe- 
rence will  not  be  iu  vain  in  Charleston.  Two  letters  from  Phila- 
delphia announce  to  me  that  nearly  one  hundred  souls  have  been 
converted  in  the  different  congregations  since  October :  Oh,  fire 
of  the  Lord,  come  down  and  consume  the  fire  of  contention  in  that 
Vol.  III.  20 


1^4  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy'S  JOUFiNAL.  [180J. 

unhappy  place  !     I  have  a  pleasing  account  also  of  the  success  of  a 
camp- meeting  in  the  state  of  New- York. 

Tuesday,  January  1,  1805.  We  opened  our  conference.  I 
preached  upon  Coios.  iv.  5.  "  Walk  in  wisdom  towards  them  that 
are  without,  redeeming  the  time."  To  "  walk  in  wisdom  towards 
them  that  are  without,"  is  to  purchase  the  present  and  future  time, 
both  of  which  are  in  our  power.  The  highest  "■  wisdom"  of  mi- 
nisters, is  to  propound  and  set  forth  faithfully,  the  end  and  motive 
of  thus  "  walking."  Christians  *'  walk  in  wisdom"  when  they  ear- 
nestly seek  perfection  by  the  best  and  only  means  ;  and  in  the 
highest  "  wisdom,"  when  in  the  possession  of  all  the  communica- 
ble fulness  of  perfect  love.  I  preached  the  ordination  sermon  of 
four  elders,  J.  Crowder,  H.  M.  Gaines,  J.  H.  Mellard,  and  Hugh 
Porter.  My  body  failed  a  little  in  these  exercises.  We  had  a 
sacrament ;  and  some  singing  and  tears  ;  but  for  want  of  more  and 
closer  exhortations,  there  was  nothing  special  done.  The  inten- 
dant  of  the  city  has  forbidden  our  prayer-meetings  with  the  blacks 
before  the  rising  sun  ;  nor  must  the  evening  meetings  be  held  later 
than  nine  o'clock.  The  preachers  are  seriously  occupied  with 
the  work  of  the  conference  ;  and  they  are  countrymen,  and  do  not 
speak  boldly  as  they  ought  to  speak ;  nevertheless,  I  hope  and  be- 
lieve real  good  has  been,  and  will  be  consequent  upon  the  sitting  of 
this  conference. 

Monday  7.  1  attended  to  the  entering  of  the  minutes ;  wrote  let- 
ters ;  packed  up  our  stuff  for  removing ;  received  visits,  and  bade 
farewell. 

Tuesday  8.  We  came  off  early  and  in  haste,  but  we  were  soon 
checked  ;  the  Causeway  was  bad,  and  the  flat  at  the  ferry  aground  : 
we  were  three  hours  getting  over.  At  Andrews's  tavern,  we  had 
to  beg  and  pray  to  be  taken  in  for  the  night  ;  aye,  and  pay  for  it 
too :  our  supper  and  lodging  were  three  dollars.  Next  day, 
at  a  lone  and  slow  ferry  we  waited  some  time,  and  lingered  on  the 
road  :  at  seven  o'clock  we  came  in  to  Moses  Miller's,  upon  Black 
River.  On  Thursday  we  crossed  the  bridge  below  Kingstree,  and 
called  upon  Captain  Charles  Williams,  who  generously  took  us  in, 
and  treated  us  kindly. 

Friday  11.  A  cold  day.  One  night  at  Port's  ferry,  and  away. 
We  have  fallen  short  in  our  calculations  of  reaching  Lumberton  on 
the  Sabbath  day.  On  Saturday  we  came  up  to  Robert  Dunham's  : 
here  brother  Whatcoat  thought  proper  to  stay  a  night.  My  mind 
has  been  in  great  peace.     In  a  day  and  a  half,  with  lodging,  food. 


1805.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  155 

and  ferries,  three  of  us  have  spent  nine  dollars.  I  will  here  ob- 
serve, that  we  have  admitted  upon  trial  eighteen  preachers  in  the 
western,  and  eleven  in  the  southern,  conference  ;  and  added  two 
thousand  members  within  the  bounds  of  each,  notwithstanding  a 
great  mortality,  and  the  constant  removal  to  new  lands. 

Sabbath  13.  We  rode  eleven  miles  to  James  Ford's,  a  stage  house, 
and  company  :  we  were  kindly  treated  gratis :  we  gave  them  our 
prayers  and  thanks. 

Monday  14.  We  came  to  Mr.  Lee's,  dined,  and  came  on,  lodging 
at  Lumberton,  a  town  of  about  twenty  families.  On  Tuesday  we 
had  another  cold  ride  to  Fayettville.  At  the  African  meeting- 
house, I  preached  upon  Hebr.  x.  38,  39.  :  it  was  a  time  of  feeling  ; 
but  eleven  o'clock  was  no  hour  for  some  folks.  I  was  invited  to 
preach  in  the  state-house,  but  it  did  not  suit  my  mind  at  all ;  the 
object  of  our  visit  was  a  Methodist  congregation  and  society.  Home 
is  home  :  ours  is  plain,  to  be  sure  ;  but  it  is  our  duty  to  condescend 
to  men  of  low  estate  ;  and  therefore  I  felt  justified  in  declining  the 
polite  invitation  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Flinn,  to  officiate  in  his  meet- 
ing-house. I  must  take  the  road  again.  Oh,  what  sweetness  I 
feel  as  I  steal  along  through  the  solitary  woods  !  I  am  sometimes 
ready  to  shout  aloud,  and  make  all  vocal  with  the  praises  of  His 
grace  who  died,  and  lives,  and  intercedes  for  me.  Brother  What- 
coat  preached  at  night :  I  added  a  few  words,  a  sort  of  gossiping 
exhortation. 

North  Carolina. — Thursday  17.  We  croseed  Cape-Fear,  dined 
at  Simpson's,  and  after  night  stopped  at  the  widow  Andress's,  a 
stage-house.  On  Friday  we  had  a  stormy  morning  ;  it  paid  us  off 
for  a  time,  and  then  cleared  away.  We  came  to  Moore's  creek  : 
we  were  so  near  swimming,  I  dipped  my  heels  :  we  stopped  at 
Parker's,  dined,  and  continued  on  to  Negro-Head  :  we  had  swamps 
and  springtides;  and  behold,  one  of  the  bridges  in  Mr.  Mellett's 
rice  field  was  gone.  Well  for  us,  the  overseer,  one  of  our  sheep, 
brought  a  ladder  for  us  to  walk  upon,  and  by  means  of  two  planks 
laid  together  lengthwise,  our  horses  passed  over.  We  asked  the 
housekeeper  to  let  us  stay  ;  she  consented,  little  thinking  who  we 
were,  which,  when  she  discovered,  the  poor  thing  was  surprised 
and  gladdened  :  we  had  a  room,  and  prayed  and  talked  with  the 
blacks,  and  exhorted  them.  On  Saturday  morning  we  crossed 
North-East  before  sunrise  :  we  came  to  our  own  house  to  break- 
fast. Our  chapel  in  Wilmington  is  elegant — sixty-six  by  thirty-sis: 
feet.     Brother  Whatcoat  preached  this  morning. 


3  5&  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  ['1805. 

Sabbath  20.  I  preached  on  Titus  xi.  14.  Brother  Whatcoat 
spoke  in  the  afternoon.  Our  enlarged  house  wa9  filled  with  both 
colours. 

Monday  21.  Many  attended  our  meeting,  though  the  weather  was 
severe. 

Tuesday  22,  we  came  on  to  Top-Sail.  Brother  Nixon  and  fa- 
mily are  preserved  in  the  midst  of  disease  and  deaths.  Dear  Mrs. 
Campbell  is  gone  home. 

Wednesday  21.  We  came  to  Lot  Ballard's,  forty-one  miles.  The 
weather  was  very  cold  in  the  morning,  and  there  was  so  much  ice 
in  the  way  we  could  scarcely  get  along.  Brother  Whatcoat  was 
afflicted  with  dysentery  and  bloody  urine.  On  Thursday  we  rode 
sixteen  miles  to  the  widow  Argate's  :  here  is  a  change — the  man  is 
dead  :  the  widow  was  very  attentive,  and  the  blacks  crowded  to 
prayers. 

Friday  25.  We  reached  Newbern,  twenty-six  miles.  On  Satur- 
day it  rained  :  we  have  happily  escape^  it.  We  have  made  two 
thousand  nine  hundred  and  eighty  miles  since  general  conference. 
We  lodged  at  the  widow  Jones's  ;  her  dear  James  is  gone  :  he  ap- 
peared to  be  as  healthy  as  any  man  in  Newbern  :  he  went  off  after 
a  few  days'  illness,  of  a  pleurisy  in  the  breast.  Lord,  and  am  I  yet 
alive  ! 

Sabbath  27,  was  an  awful  day  of  cold  rain :  few  attended  the 
worship  of  God.  In  my  zeal  1  preached  again  at  night :  I  exposed 
myself,  and  exerted  myself. 

Monday  28.  We  came  away  through  a  cold  wind  to  Neuse  Ferry  : 
Swift-Creek  swam  us  :  and  the  waters  of  the  greater  stream  float- 
ed us  across  in  a  tottering  canoe,  the  horses  along  side  swimming : 
a  twenty-eight  miles'  ride  brought  us  to  the  widow  Richard's  to 
lodge.  Arrived  at  Tar-River  we  found  it  was  blowing  a  storm  :  I 
was  unwilling  to  cross.  The  flat  was  nearly  filled  with  water 
shortly  after  we  put  off:  a  boat  came  out  to  take  us  up :  brother 
Whatcoat  stood  midleg  in  water  ;  I  had  gained  a  plank  and  kept  my 
feet  dry  ;  and  it  was  well,  as  I  had  a  touch  of  pleurisy,  and  had 
discharged  blood  yesterday  evening  ;  we  came  safe,  and  praised 
that  God  who  in  deaths  oft  had  delivered  us.  Brother  Whatcoat 
preached  at  Washington  in  the  evening. 

Wednesday  30.  I  preached  to  a  congregation  of  very  unfeeling 
people.  The  blacks  have  no  gallery.  The  whites  look  upon  us 
with  contempt.     Oh!  Washington,  Washington  ! 


ISOo.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY?S  JOURNAL.  157 

Thursday  31.  We  came  to  Williamstown.  I  preached  at  bro- 
ther Watts's  house  ;  my  subject  was  Rom.  v.  1 — 5.  Roanoake 
was  full. 

Friday,  February  1.  We  rode  up  to  General  Williams's,  forty- 
eight  miles  from  Washington.  We  must  yet  go  sixty  miles  out  of 
our  way  to  go  by  Norfolk  ;  poor  men,  and  weary  horses ! 

Saturday  2.  We  stemmed  the  north-west  wind,  twenty  miles,  to 
cross  the  awful  Roanoake.  For  a  mile  and  a  half  from  the  ferry 
the  fences  were  swept  away  ;  during  the  freshet,  cattle  and  hogs, 
and  some  slaves,  had  been  carried  off;  its  proud  waves  were 
stayed  when  we  arrived.  We  rode  thirty-two  miles  to  Joseph 
Penner's,  Northampton,  without  seeing  the  inside  of  a  house.  I 
was  most  severely  penetrated  with  the  cold  ;  and  my  bowels  were 
disordered.  We  had  snow  and  cold  on  the  Sabbath  day,  and  we 
were  glad  to  rest.  The  people  came  to  meeting,  and  we  deliver- 
ed our  testimony. 

Virginia. — Monday  4.  The  day  was  excessively  cold  ;  the  icy, 
frozen  roads  endangered  limbs  and  life  itself.  We  kept  on.  At 
Murphysburg  we  had  a  meeting  at  the  house  of  the  widow  Meri- 
deth  ;  I  spoke  to  them  from  1  Cor.  v.  13—17.  Next  day,  at  Somer- 
ton,  we  had  a  small  meeting  in  Hazlett's  house. 

Wednesday  6.  In  Suffolk,  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Yerbury  :  my  sub- 
ject  was  Rev.  iii.  11,  12. 

Thursday  7.  I  was  very  unwell ;  but  we  pushed  on  through 
water,  mud,  and  mire  to  Portsmouth,  where  we  arrived  about  an 
hour  in  the  night. 

At  eleven  o'clock  on  Friday  we  had  a  meeting  of  the  official 
members  for  business  ;  they  unanimously  wished  to  have  a  stationed 
preacher  :  this  was  a  great  difficulty  last  year.     Our  chapel  has 
been  enlarged  to  sixty  feet  by  thirty  ;  I  advised  the  addition  of 
galleries.     As  I  passed  over  the  bridge  to  Norfolk,  I  examined  and 
was  pleased  with  it :  it  is  more  upon  the  eastern  plan  of  such  im- 
provement than  any  I  have  seen  to  the  south  :  it  is  one  thousand 
one  hundred  feet  long  and  thirty  wide  ;  the  piles  coppered  to  high 
water  mark,  to  preserve  the  wood  from  the  worm  ,-  and  it  has  a 
draw-bridge  ;  the  cost  is  said  to  be  thirty  thousand  dollars,  and  it 
yields  five  per  cent,  to  the  company.     We  met  the  official  mem- 
bers of  the  Norfolk  society  ;  here  are  some  difficulties,  and  more 
poverty  ;  but  the  work  progresses  here  as  well  as  at  Portsmouth, 
where  the  society  has  growa   and  prospered  under  the  care  of 
Tohn  Pott's. 


158  HEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1805. 

Sunday  10.  I  preached  at  Norfolk  upon  Rom.  xiii.  11 — 14. 
"  That  knowing  the  time,"  &c.  Slumbering,  sleeping  professors 
are  called  by  the  signs  of  the  time  to  "  awake — to  cast  off  the 
works  of  darkness,"  as  they  would  clothes  which  no  longer  suited 
their  characters,  garments  no  longer  appropriate  to  their  profes- 
sion, and  "  to  put  on  the  armour  of  light,  the  whole  armour  of  God;'' 
to  "  walk  honestly,"  that  is,  decently — as  it  becometh  the  true, 
consistent,  dignified,  Christian  character,  to  avoid  the  sensualities  of 
the  world,  and  the  sins  and  indulgences  of  the  flesh  and  spirit ;  to 
"  put  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  to  be  dressed,  decked,  adorned 
with  Jesus  Christ,  and  filled  with  his  Spirit,  "  to  make  no  provision 
for  the  flesh,"  with  the  intent  and  desire  of  fulfilling  its  lusts.  At 
Portsmouth  I  preached  upon  Luke  iii.  6.  "  All  flesh  shall  see  the 
salvation  of  God." — 

I.  The  excellencies  of  this  salvation:  it  is  a  common  salvation, 
a  great  salvation,  the  salvation  of  God. 

II.  The  nature  of  this  salvation  :  in  its  degrees  of  justification, 
sanctification,  and  glorification. 

III.  The  present  subjects  of  salvation,  infants  and  believers. 
The  ample  means  furnished  to  all,  that  they  may  see  this  salva- 
tion ;  faithful  ministers,  faithful,  consistent,  praying  professors,  and 
all  the  holy  ordinances  of  the  church.  I  was  greatly  assisted  in 
speaking.  I  warmly  exhorted  our  friends  in  Norfolk  to  build  a 
tabernacle  in  some  part  of  the  town. 

Monday  5.  At  Joliff's  chapel  I  spoke  on  an  appropriate  text 
from  Isai.  xlix.  20.  ;  the  house  is  not  half  large  enough.  We  dined 
at  brother  Denbigh's,  and  came  on  to  the  widow  Reddick's  ;  she 
and  her  sister  are  both  professors. 

Tuesday  6.  At  Suffolk  brother  Whatcoat  preached  a  very  ap- 
propriate sermon.  At  Murphy's  the  work  revives  ;  a  new  house 
is  in  preparation  :  the  place  is  too  strait :  we  must  make  room  for 
them  to  dwell.     My  subject  here  was  1  Tim.  ii.  3,  4. 

Wednesday  7.  Brother  Whatcoat  preached  at  Joseph  Moody's. 
God  has  wrought  powerfully  at  Blunt's  and  Benn's  ;  they  are  pre- 
paring a  large  house  for  worship  at  the  former  place.  General 
Wells  and  family  have  returned  to  us  :  Willis  Wells  is  coming  back 
from  following  O'Kelly,  besides  twenty  other  members  who  had 
been  drawn  away  :  they  profess  to  have  had  enough  of  him.  Mr. 
O'Kelly  has  come  down  with  great  zeal,  and  preaches  three 
hours  at  a  time  upon  government,  monarchy,  and  Episcopacy ;  oc- 
casionally varying  the  subject  by  abuse  of  the  Methodists,  calling 


3805.]  »Ev\  FRANCIS  ASBURY*S  JOURNAL,  159 

them  Aristocrats  and  Tories  ;  a  people  who,  if  they  had  the  power, 
would  force  the  government  at  the  sword's  point.  Poor  man ! 
The  Methodists  have  but  two  of  their  very  numerous  society 
members  of  Congress  ;  and  until  these  democratic  times,  we  never 
had  one.  I  question  if  in  all  the  public  legislative  bodies  in  the 
seventeen  United  States,  there  are  more  than  twenty  members 
Methodists.  No ;  our  people  are  a  very  independent  people,  who 
think  for  themselves  ;  and  are  as  apt  to  differ  in  politics,  (so  do  the 
preachers)  and  divide  at  the  hustings,  as  those  of  any  other  deno- 
mination ;  and  surely,  they  are  not  seekers  of  the  offices  of  this 
world's  profit  or  honour  ;  if  they  were,  what  might  they  not  gain 
in  many  parts  of  the  United  States  ?  Whilst  one  rails  at  us,  others, 
who  are  always  fond  of  fishing  in  troubled  waters,  take  those  who 
are  already  in  our  net ;  or  hunting  on  forbidden  ground,  pick  up  our 
crippled  game  :  see  what  believers  their  church  is  composed  of! 

Thursday  8.  The  rain  held  us  in  doubt  until  eleven  o'clock, 
then  we  started,  and  about  two  o'clock  a  dreadful  storm  of  thunder, 
hail,  and  wind,  overtook  us  and  drove  us  to  a  house  for  shelter ; 
here  we  remained  an  hour,  and  then  came  on  to  Captain  Bird- 
song's :  it  blew  up  excessively  cold.  Oh!  death!  death!  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Ellis's  chapel,  where  we  have  held  conferences  too  ! 

Friday  9.  We  stopped  to  feed  our  horses  at  a  Quaker  preacher's, 
a  friend  Nixon  :  we  would  not  eat  ourselves,  where  it  was  not 
agreeable  we  should  pray.  We  found  the  wind  so  cold  and  cut- 
ting as  we  made  towards  Petersburg,  we  could  hardly  bear  up 
against  it. 

Saturday  16.  Colder  still!  snow  in  the  north,  five  and  six 
feet  deep  in  New-York.     Ice  !  ice  ! — awful  time  ! 

Sunday  17.  Calm  and  cold.  I  preached  upon  Rev.  iii.  3 — 5.  ; 
the  people  came  very  late,  and  my  mind  was  fettered.  I  will  here 
take  the  liberty  of  inserting  the  following  account. 

A  Sketch  of  the  Labours  and  Travels  of  Ira  Ellis. 

In  March  1781,  I  left  my  father's  house,  in  Sussex  county,  Vir- 
ginia, and  spent  some  time  with  Leroy  Cole,  in  Mecklinburg  cir- 
cuit. This  spring  and  part  of  the  summer  I  spent  mostly  with  the 
preachers  ;  and  occasionally  supplied  some  vacancies  in  one  or  two 
circuits.  About  November  I  attended  a  quarterly  meeting  at 
Rose-Creek  chapel,  Brunswick  circuit ;  and  from  thence  was  sent 
ys  a  travelling  preacher  into  Mecklinburg  circuit,  being  then  about 


160  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1805. 

twenty  years  of  age.  In  April,  1782,  I  attended  the  conference 
held  at  Ellis's  chapel,  Sussex  circuit.  From  thence  I  received  an 
appointment  to  Pittsylvania  circuit ;  where  I  continued  six  months: 
the  six  following  months  I  officiated  in  the  Yadkin  circuit.  In  the 
spring  of  1783  the  conference  was  again  held  at  Ellis's  chapel; 
and  I  received  an  appointment  to  Tar- River  circuit;  after  spend- 
ing two  quarters  there,  I  spent  the  remainder  of  the  year  in  Roan- 
oke circuit.  In  the  spring  of  1784  I  was  stationed  in  Bertie  cir- 
cuit :  six  months  I  laboured  there  ;  one  quarter  in  Cambden ;  and 
the  last  quarter,  excepting  the  time  spent  in  attending  the  general 
conference,  in  Baltimore,  in  Portsmouth  circuit.  At  the  conference 
held  in  April,  1785,  at  William  Mason's,  Brunswick  county,  I  was 
appointed  to  Philadelphia  circuit ;  here  I  continued  nearly  one 
year,  spending  one  third  of  the  time  in  the  city.  In  the  spring  of 
1786,  I  was  stationed  in  Dover  circuit,  in  the  state  of  Delaware, 
and  remained  one  year.  The  next  year  I  laboured  in  Kent  cir- 
cuit, on  the  eastern  shore  of  Maryland ;  whilst  here  I  received  a 
letter  from  bishop  Asbury,  informing  me  that  I  was  stationed  for 
the  ensuing  year  in  the  city  of  Charleston,  South  Carolina  ;  I  set 
out  in  May,  and  arrived  there,  and  took  my  station  in  July,  1788: 
except  one  tour  of  duty  of  about  three  months  through  the  district 
and  state  at  large,  I  continued  here  until  February,  1790.  After 
this  period  I  was  stationed  in  what  was  called  the  middle  or  centre 
district  of  Virginia,  lying  between  James  and  Rappahannock  rivers  ; 
in  this  district  I  remained  and  officiated  as  presiding  elder,  until 
the  general  conference  held  in  Baltimore,  in  November,  1792. 
James  O'Kelly  having  then  withdrawn  himself  from  the  Methodist 
connexion,  I  was  appointed  to  succeed  him  in  the  south  district  of 
Virginia,  which  station  I  filled  until  November  1795.  I  then 
changed  my  state  in  life,  and  became  located  ;  and  so  continue  to 
this  day. 

Brunswick,  Virginia,  Ira  Ellis. 

Feb.  24.  1805. 

The  above  named  Ira  Ellis,  being  about  to  travel  some  distance 
through  the  United  States  on  business,  Bishop  Whatcoat  and  myself 
gave  him  the  certificate  of  which  this  is  the  copy.— 

To  the  Ministers,  Members,  and  Friends  of  the  Methodist  Epis- 
copal church  in  the  United  States. 

With  our  Christian  salutations  we  send,  greeting.  Grace,  mercy, 
and  peace  be  multiplied  to  you,  through  Jesus  our  Lord.  We  have 


1805. j  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  161 

thought  it  proper  to  recommend  our  beloved  brother,  Ira  Ellis,  to 
your  pulpits  and  attentions.  One  that  has  travelled  fourteen  years 
extensively,  faithfully,  and  acceptably— nine  years  he  has  laboured 
locally,  preserving  always  a  good  ministerial  and  Christian  charac- 
ter :  he  hath  filled  the  various  stations  among  us,  having  exercised 
the  offices  of  preacher,  deacon,  elder,  and  presiding  elder.  We 
give  him  the  recommendation  we  think  his  standing  and  services 
have  merited  in  our  connexion  ;  he  is  going  upon  business  of  con- 
sequence to  himself;  he  may  also  be  as  attentive  as  circumstances 
will  admit  to  the  ministry  of  the  word  of  God  at  all  times  and 
places  where  he  can  have  a  congregation.  Given  under  our  hands 
this  22d  day  of  February,  1805. 

Brunswick  county,  Francis  Asbury- 

Virginia.  Richard  Whatcoat. 

I  desire  to  render  to  all  their  due.  Ira  Ellis  is  a  man  of  quick 
and  solid  parts.  I  have  often  thought  that  had  fortune  given  him 
the  same  advantages  of  education,  he  would  have  displayed  abili- 
ties not  inferior  to  a  Jefferson  or  a  Madison.  But  he  has,  in  an 
eminent  degree,  something  better  than  learning — he  has  undis- 
sembled  sincerity,  great  modesty,  deep  fidelity,  great  ingenuity, 
and  uncommon  power  of  reasoning.  His  English  schooling  has 
been  good  :  he  is  a  good  arithmetician,  and  expeditious  and  ready 
with  his  pen  :  when  asked  for  an  account  of  his  travels,  he  took 
his  pen  immediately,  and  without  a  recurrence  to  books  or  papers, 
gave  it  at  once  ;  in  the  conferences  and  elsewhere,  as  my  secre- 
tary, he  has  been  of  signal  service  to  me.  He  is  a  good  man,  of 
most  even  temper,  whom  I  never  saw  angry,  but  often  in  heaviness 
through  manifold  temptations  :  he  is  a  good  preacher  too. — O,  may 
he  finish  life  as  he  hath  continued  it — faithful,  and  acceptable,  and 
successful  in  the  travelling  and  local  line  !  Ira  Ellis  is  married  to 
an  agreeable  woman,  who  has  made  him  the  father  of  three  beauti- 
ful, serious  little  children. 

Monday  18.  We  rode  away  to  the  high  hills,  Notaway,  and  stop- 
ped with  Stith  Perham  :  on  Tuesday  we  came  to  Robert  Jones's  ; 
on  Wednesday  to  Peter  Pelham's  ;  on  Thursday  to  William  Ruf- 
fin's  ;  on  Friday  to  Sterling  Rutfin's,  where  I  preached,  and  then 
came  on  to  Ira  Ellis's.  On  Saturday  brother  Whatcoat  preached  at 
the  Olive-Branch.     We  visited  Matthew  Myrick,  who  was  sick. 

Sabbath  23.  I  had  a  most  serious  talk  at  the  Branch  chapel  on 
Rev.  ii.  1 — 5.     We  lodged  at  Ed.  Drumgoold's. 

Vol.  HI.  21 


162  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASEURY's  JOURNAL.  [1805. 

Monday  24.  We  rode  to  John  Seward's  through  the  rain.  Wil- 
liam and  Sterling  are  amongst  the  rich — so  called  :  they  had  been 
deistical  in  their  notions  ;  but  they  appear  to  be  sincere  and  zea- 
lous now.  Bishop  Coke  had  been  made  a  blessing  to  William  and 
his  lady.  We  have  passed  through  Norfolk,  Nansemond,  Isle  of 
Wight,  Surry,  Sussex,  Prince  Edward,  Brunswick,  Greenville, 
Mecklenburg  counties. 

North  Carolina. — Tuesday  25.  We  directed  our  course  to  Sa- 
lem, chiefly  to  see  sister  Taylor,  at  Howell  Taylor's  :  she  is  true 
yoke-fellow  to  Sally  Jones  :  one  is  gone  to  rest,  the  other,  confi- 
dent in  God,  is  suffering  on  patiently  until  she  is  released  from  her 
load  of  painful  affliction.  On  Wednesday  we  crossed  Taylor's 
ferry,  and  rode  twenty  miles  to  Edmund  Taylor's,  the  seat  of  the 
Virginia  conference  :  we  had  rain  part  of  the  way.  We  felt  a  lit- 
tle serious — thinking  our  elder  children  and  strong  sons  would 
leave  us  by  location  ;  and  that  we  should  have  none  but  old  totter- 
ing men,  and  green,  unpractised  boys  to  take  care  of  the  planta- 
tion :  but  we  have  a  great  husbandman,  Jesus,  and  a  good  God, 
On  Thursday  making  preparations  for  the  conference. 

Friday,  March  1.  We  opened  our  yearly  conference  for  Virgi- 
nia, at  Edmund  Taylor's,  Granville  county,  North-Carolina.  We 
closed  our  sitting  on  Friday  evening  following.  I  have  so  fre- 
quently noticed  the  affairs  of  conferences,  and  they  are  so  common, 
that  I  will  only  observe  of  this,  that  we  added  fourteen  preachers, 
and  located  four  ;  our  business  was  conducted  in  great  peace,  and 
we  had  preaching  as  usual.  Our  increase  is  one  thousand  nine 
hundred  members. 

Saturday  9.  We  came  to  John  Owens's,  and  spent  an  agreeable 
hour.     I  was  pleased  to  see  sister  Owens  ;  she  is  the  daughter  of 
my  old  good  friend  Daniel  Grant.     We  took  horse  again,  and  has- 
tened on  through  the  warmth  to  Doctor  R.  A.  Holland's,  making 
thirty-three  miles. 

Sabbath  10.  I  preached  upon  Isai.  xl.  5.  We  had  many  Bap- 
tists to  hear.  It  was  an  open  time  to  me,  although  1  was  unwell. 
Brothers  Mead  and  Bruce  exhorted. 

Monday  11.  We  came  away  to  brother  Pate's  ;  and  then  on  to 
father  ChapelTs.     We  lodged  with  Joel  Tucker. 

Tuesday  12.  We  crossed  Staunton- River  at  PannelFs  ferry. 
We  called  at  Mr.  Old's  to  warm  and  feed,  and  came  on  to  lodge  at 
Henry  Brown's,  having  made  thirty  miles  this  day— and  very  cold 
it  was. 


1805.]  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBUEv's  JOURNAL.  163 

Wednesday  13.  I  rested,  read  and  wrote,  whilst  brother' Mead 
copied  letters  narrative  of  the  work  of  God.  We  have  passed, 
since  conference,  Granville,  Pierson  in  Carolina,  and  Halifax  and 
Campbell  counties  in  Virginia.  I  find  that  nothing  so  interrupts 
my  communion  with  God  as  the  cold.  1  cannot  keep  my  mind 
fixed,  when  my  whole  system  seems  to  be  penetrated  and  stiffened 
with  the  cold  wind.  I  suppose  this  will  piss  for  a  very  long, 
hard  winter:  if  the  spring  is  backward,  the  harvest  will  be  late 
and  full.  O,  may  there  be  a  great  harvest  of  souls  gathered  in  to 
God! 

Virginia. — Thursday  14.  We  must  needs  ride  to  New-London. 
I  felt  the  cold  :  the  wind  gave  me  an  influenza.  We  had  a  meeting 
in  Doctor  Jennings's  house.     I  spoke  on  Rev.  ii.  8 — 10. 

Friday  15.  We  came  to  Lynchburg:  I  did  not  find  my  body  or 
mind,  or  the  circumstances  of  the  chapel,  or  the  state  of  the  society 
as  I  wished.  We  did  not  lose  time.  Brother  Whatcoat  spoke  at 
night.  On  Saturday  I  preached  upon  Ephes.  iv.  2 — 6.  I  was  very 
unwell  on  the  Sabbath  day.  Brother  Whatcoat  preached,  and  ad- 
ministered the  sacrament.  At  three  o'clock,  I  was  forced  to  duty 
by  the  wishes  of  the  people  ;  I  spoke  on  1  Cor.  vi.  1.  We  had 
about  one  thousand  or  fifteen  hundred  people  of  the  town  and  coun- 
try :  we  lodged  with  Mr.  Wyatt.  I  felt  very  willing  to  move 
along. 

On  Monday  we  came  to  Colonel  Meredith's,  New-Glasgow  :  we 
were  entertained  with  great  friendship  and  Christian  politeness. 
We  were  accompanied  hither  by  Lewis  Dawson,  whose  kind  atten- 
tions it  is  proper  I  should  acknowledge.  The  people  being 
gathered  at  a  short  warning,  brother  Whatcoat  gave  them  a 
sermon. 

Tuesday  19.  Brother  James  Floyd  led  us  along  with  as  much 
attention  as  he  would  have  paid  to  his  parents.  We  crossed  Pine- 
Creek  and  Tye  River,  passing  Amherst  court-house.  After  dining 
with  William  Breedlove,  we  mounted  and  pursued  our  way  across 
the  rocky  ford  of  Rockfish  :  we  stopped  at  Benjamin  Paine's.  God 
hath  wrought  amongst  the  children  of  these  families. 

Wednesday  20.  We  came  to  Tandy  Kee's  ;  here  we  found 
more  children  coming  to  Christ.  I  was  pleased  and  cheered  to 
hear  from  the  local  preachers  the  great  things  God  hath  done  in 
this  circuit.  Brother  Mead  is  coming  to  preside,  and  I  hope  he 
will  have  a  glorious  camp-meeting  in  every  circuit  in  the  district. 
Amherst  should,  by  all  means,  have  another  preacher—-!  hear—T 


(64  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBDILV  S  JOURNAL.  [1&05. 

see — I  feel.  The  Baptists  are  under  the  whip — straining  for 
victory  ;  Bedford  is  their  strong- hold.  We  shall  see.  I  must  be 
going ;  although  I  have  a  poor,  weak,  tripping  beast  ;  and  if  she 
makes  a  long  stumble  fifty  times  a  day,  I  bear  it  patiently.  My 
mind  is  in  great  peace — glory,  glory  to  God  ! 

Thursday  21.  We  came  to  Williams's  tavern  ;  dined,  and  passed 
the  elegant  seat  of  Mr.  Divers  ;  thence  to  Ray's  ford  upon  the 
north  fork  of  James- River,  called  Fluvanna  ;  thence  to  the  north 
branch  of  Swift- Run  :  we  lodged  at  Mr.  Fretwell's — three  score 
and  ten,  and  not  born  again ! — wretched  old  man  !  At  Stoners- 
ville,  on  Friday,  we  called  on  Doctor  Douglass,  formerly  a  travel- 
ling preacher,  halted  an  hour,  and  made  for  the  waters  of  Rapid- 
Ann — Staunton,  middle,  and  south  branches  :  after  scaling  an  arm  of 
the  ridge  over  to  Robinson's  River  (flowing  in  three  branches  from 
the  ridge,)  we  came  in  to  lodge  with  Mr.  Glower,  a  Baptist,  who 
was  very  hospitable  to  us.  On  Saturday  we  reached  T.  T.'s,  upon 
Hughes's  River  ;  and  thence  continued  on  to  Woodsville  ;  thence 
to  Washington,  a  small  town  under  the  south  mountain  in  the  west 
of  Culpepper  county.  We  have  made  one  hundred  miles  of  these 
roads  in  three  days  :  poor  men  !  poor  horses  !  We  are  housed 
with  Elias  Clark,  Esq.  near  Chester  Gap. 

Sabbath  24.  Having  taken  cold  in  my  head,  I  was  very  unwell ; 
I  was  merely  forced  to  preach  at  Pennell's.  On  Monday  we 
crossed  the  ridge  at  Chester  Gap,  passing  the  head  spring  of  the 
north  branch  of  the  Rappahannock  River.  We  stopped  at  Front- 
Royal  or  League-Town :  I  preached  at  three  o'clock  ;  and  brother 
Whatcoat  at  night.  My  subject  was  Rom.  xii.  1,2.  "I  beseech 
you,  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye  present 
your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  to  God,  which  is 
your  reasonable  service.  And  be  not  conformed  to  this  world,  but 
be  ye  transformed  by  the  renewing  of  your  mind,  that  ye  may 
prove  what  is  that  good,  and  acceptable,  and  perfect  will  of  God." 
It  was  observed,  that  the  apostle's  form  of  address  was  excellent, 
and  particularly  directed  to  the  Christian  believers — the  subjects 
of  grace.  That  the  people  of  the  "  world"  who  lived  in  confor- 
mity to  its  manners  and  maxims,  lived  in  their  proper  element — 
"  But  ye  (said  our  Lord  in  addressing  believers)  are  not  of  the 
world,  as  I  am  not  of  the  world,  because  I  have  called  you  out  of 
the  world."  The  apostle  had  in  view  one  thing,  in  two  parts,  viz. 
The  devotion  of  the  whole  man,  body  and  soul  to  God  :  without 
which  the  man  cannot  be  a  Christian,  perfect  and  entire.     "  Pre- 


1805.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBVRy's"  JOURNAL,  16i> 

sent  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice," — this  can  only  be  done^by 
abstaining  from  all  things  sinful  in  practice.  We  must,  not  only 
not  live  in  the  use  of  unlawful  things,  but  we  must  not  indulge  in 
the  unlawful  use  of  lawful  things  :  it  is  lawful  to  eat,  but  not  to 
gluttony  ;  it  is  lawful  to  drink,  but  not  to  drunkenness  ;  it  is  lawful 
to  be  married,  but  it  is  unlawful  for  either  husband  or  wife  to 
idolize  the  other.  We  ought  to  make  the  faculties  of  our  bodies 
subservient  to  the  worship  and  service  of  God — our  eyes  to  see 
for  God ;  our  ears  to  hear  ;  our  hands  to  be  liberal  ;  our  feet  to 
move  for  God,  so  as  to  do  or  suffer — this  is  "reasonable  service;" 
and  thus  occupied,  the  "  mercies  of  God"  excite  us  properly  ;  and 
we  are  "  not  conformed  to  this  world."  That  we  be  "  renewed 
in  our  minds" — that  all  the  powers  of  the  soul  be  given  in  love 
and  service  to  the  Lord  ;  in  conviction  for  indwelling  sin,  the 
repentance  of  believers  ;  in  sanctification  ;  persevering  grace  ; 
perfect  love  ;  and  the  fruition — perfect  and  eternal  glory.  We 
"  prove  the  will  of  God"  by  this— to  be  good — to  be  "  acceptable" 
to  our  own  souls  ;  and  to  be  "  perfect"  in  our  Christian  perfection, 
holiness,  and  happiness  eternal. 

Tuesday  26.  We  came  a  rugged  path  to  Elijah  Phelps's  once 
more.  On  Wednesday  I  was  busy  writing  and  fitting  for  confe- 
rence. Front-Royal  contains  about  sixty  houses,  a  Methodist 
chapel,  and  academy,  a  mill,  and  several  stores.  We  lodged  at 
James  Moore's.  It  was  very  agreeable  to  have  a  home,  a  room, 
and  every  thing  comfortable  for  a  day  or  two.  Our  poor  horses 
needed  rest  too. 

Saturday  30  We  came  to  Winchester.  I  ordered  a  room  fitted 
for  conference,  with  one  above  the  other.  On  the  Sabbath  day  I 
preached. 

Monday,  April  1.  We  opened  the  Baltimore  conference,  sitting 
five  days  in  very  great  order  and  peace  :  on  the  5th  instant  it 
rose.  We  bad  seventy-four  preachers  present.  We  had  preach- 
ing day  and  night,  and  some  souls  were  converted  to  God.  On 
Saturday  we  came  to  brother  Davenport's. 

At  Charlestown  my  Sabbath  day's  subject  was  1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20. 
We  lodged  with  Mr.  Key.  On  Monday  we  reached  Frederick- 
town  ;  on  Tuesday,  Joshua  Jones's,  Sam's  Creek  :  and  on  Wed- 
nesday 10,  came  into  Baltimore. 

Maryland. — I  have  been  greatly  supported,  but  afflicted  in  my 
breast — and  heart  :  it  will  not  last  long.  I  have  made,  I  calculate, 
three  thousand  eight  hundred  and  fifty  miles  from  the  1st  of  June, 


16fci  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY?S  JOURNAL.  [1805. 

1804,  to  the  10th  of  April,  1805.  L.  M'Combs  had  refused  to 
take  his  station  ;  after  some  alterations  were  made,  he  consented  to 
go  to  Philadelphia.  Thursday  was  occupied  in  writing  letters,  &c. 
On  Friday  1  preached  at  Oldlown. 

Sabbath  day,  I  preached  in  Light- street :  I  had  a  very  heavy 
congregation  :  I  fear  the  people  are  preached  to  death.  In  the 
afternoon  I  visited  the  Africans:  my  subject  was  Ephes  iv.  1 — 6. 
Lord,  look  upon  our  city  congregations,  for  they  are  a  valley  of 
dry  bones  ! 

Tuesday  16.  I  preached  at  Fell's  Point  ;  it  was  a  time  to  be 
remembered.  I  made  my  escape  from  Baltimore — low  in  religion. 
At  Perry-Hall  I  spent  a  night.  The  house,  spacious  and  splendid, 
was  newly  painted,  and  the  little  grandchildren  were  gay  and  play- 
ful ;  but  I  and  the  elders  of  the  house  felt  that  it  was  evening 
with  us. 

Thursday  18.  We  came  to  North-East,  and  called  a  meet- 
ing ;  the  notice  was  short ;  the  men  were  fishing.  On  Friday  we 
reached  Back-Creek,  Delaware.  Very  warm  and  dusty.  My 
mind  is  in  great  peace.  On  Saturday  I  was  at  Duck  Creek  ;  and 
on  Sunday  evening  I  preached  in  Dover  state  house  with  very 
little  life  :  in  the  morning  I  had  an  open  time  on  2  Cor.  vi.  16, 
17,  18. 

Delaware. — Monday  22.  I  rode  to  Milford  ;  on  Tuesday  to 
Z.  Hazzard's  ;  rested,  and  came  on  to  Lewistown,  where  we  called 
a  meeting,  and  preached  upon  Rom.  xiii  1 1 — 14.  :  I  was  assisted 
greatly,  and  the  people  were  engaged.  We  lodged  at  Caleb  Rod- 
ney's. There  may  be  in  Lewistown  one  hundred  and  twenty  houses, 
and  about  eight  hundred  souls.  We  came  thence  to  Georgetown,  the 
seat  of  the  courts  of  justice  for  Sussex  county  ;  containing  about  forty 
houses.  As  the  court  was  in  session,  we  were  offered  the  house, 
and  desired  to  hold  our  meeting  there  :  the  judges  and  counsellors 
attended  ;  and  brother  Whatcoat  spoke,  and  I  followed  upon  Psalm 
xli.  10. :  we  had  a  moving  season. 

Thursday  24.  We  came  on  to  Caroline;  dined  at  Caleb  Jacob's, 
and  lodged  with  Thomas  Foster.  I  was  gladdened  in  heart  to  find 
that  the  work  of  God  was  progressing  in  this  society. 

On  Friday  we  came  to  brother  Frazier's.  The  fierceness  of  the 
wind  made  Choptank  impassable :  we  had  to  rest  awhile — and  need 
I  had ;  being  sore  with  hard  service. 

Saturday  26.  We  crossed  at  Dover-Ferry,  and  came  through 
Gaston  to  Lebanon,  lodging  at  brother  Brown's. 


1805.]  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  16* 

Sunday  27.  I  preached  at  Lebanon  chapel — the  neatest  on  this 
shore;  my  subject,  Isaiah  xl.  19,20.  We  hasted  on  to  Easton  : 
brother  Whatcoat  preached  ;  brother  Biake  gave  us  lodging. 

Monday  28.  We  rode  forty-three  miles  through  Centreville  to 
Chestertown,  to  meet  the  Philadelphia  conference. 

Tuesday  29.  We  rested  and  prepared  for  our  work. 

Saturday,  May  4.  On  Wednesday  our  conference  began  :  one 
day  was  occupied  with  the  appeal  of  Caleb  Kendall.  On  the  Sab- 
bath I  was  called  to  duty  ;  1  spoke  on  Luke  iii.  4,  5,  6.  "  All  flesh 
shall  see  the  salvation  of  God." 

I.  The  perception— the  sense  in  which  this  object  is  seen. 

II.  By  whom?  "  By  all." 

III.  The  provision  made  for  this,  and  the  cause  of  its  operation. 
The  love  of  God  ;  the  general  atonement  ;  the  general  influences 
of  the  Spirit  ;  the  number  of  ministers,  and  the  general  commis- 
sion to  "  preach  the  Gospp  1  to  every  creature  ;"  the  number  of 
Christians  and  praying  souls.  The  hinderances  that  obstruct  the 
universal  and  efficacious  spread  of  the  Gospel ;  they  were  dia- 
bolical and  human.  We  ordained  elders  Boehm,  Aikins,  Polemuss 
Wiltbank,  Asa  Smith,  and  Benjamin  Hiff. 

Wednesday  8.  The  conference  rose,  after  seven  days'  close 
labour.  We  had,  as  usual  preaching  noon  and  night,  and  some 
souls  were  blessed. 

Thursday  9.  We  came  away  to  Wilmington,  and  lodged  at 
Collector  M-Lane's. 

Pennsylvania.— Friday  10.  We  reached  Philadelphia.  Eighty 
miles  in  two  days.  Sarah  Williams  has  left  £200  to  the  disposal 
of  Bishop  Whatcoat  and  myself;  we  ordered  its  application  to  the 
Chartered  Fund.  Thank  the  Lord  !  I  am  happy  in  the  midst  of 
the  murmurs  of  many  who  are  disappointed  because  I  do  not  meet 
their  strange  expectations:  Oh!  what  a  wonder  if  I  walk  offi- 
cially straight,  when  so  many  would  wish  me  to  incline  a  little  to 
the  right  or  left,  as  their  whims  and  fancies  would  lead  ! 

Saturday  11.  I  prayed,  read,  wrote,  and  conversed  with  friends. 

Sabbath  day  12.  1  preached  at  St.  George's  chapel,  and  again 
in  the  Academy  :  this  was  a  gloomy  day,  in  weather,  in  the  con- 
gregation, and  in  my  mind. 

Monday  13.  I  preached  in  the  new  house  at  Kensington  ;  I  had 
light  and  openings.  I  was  continually  in  prayer — after  breakfast, 
after  dinner,  after  tea  or  supper.  I  visited  Doctor  Magaw  ;  his 
whole  system  is  shattered,  but  he  has  intervals  of  reason  ;  and 


16&  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL.  [1805. 

although  he  wants  the  plenitude  of  witness  of  justifying  and  sanc- 
tifying grace,  he  appears  to  be  full  of  goodness,  full  of  God  :  I  felt 
that  God  was  eminently  with  him  :  I  had  confidence  and  power  in 
prayer  for  him. 

New-Jersey. — We  set  out  for  the  east  on  Tuesday  morning,  and 
came  as  far  as  Trenton  ;  I  was  unwell  with  fasting  and  riding,  so 
brother  Whatcoat  preached. 

Wednesday  15.    At  Kingston,  fifteen  miles,  we  fed  and  started, 
but  a  storm  drove  us  into  Mr.  Henry  Gulick's  :  we  again  set  out, 
but  I  was  afraid  of  riding  in  the  rain,  and  turned  in  under  the  roof 
of  a  Cornish  man  by  the  name  of  John  Rule. 

Thursday  16.  The  roads  heavy  and  damp.  We  came  on  to 
Brunswick,  dined,  and  reached  Drake's  for  the  night.  Next  day, 
we  dined  with  Thomas  Morrell  at  Elizabethtown,  and  lodged  with 
Mr.  Leecraft  at  Newark. 

New-York. — Saturday  18.  We  were  in  New- York  by  eight 
o'clock.  I  felt  a  desire  to  go  to  the  camp- meeting  at  Muscheto- 
Cove,  thirty  miles  from  Brooklyn,  on  Long- Island.  Brother  Rus- 
sel  took  me  there.  On  my  journey  I  felt  as  if  God  had  been,  and 
would  be,  and  was  at  camp.  We  arrived  about  nine  o'clock. 
The  Saturday's  exercises  continued  through  the  night  until  near 
the  break  of  day. 

Sabbath  morning  19.  I  preached  to  a  multitude  on  Acts  ii.  21, 
in  the  afternoon  Michael  Coate  spoke.  The  work  went  on  through 
the  whole  night.  Many  precious  souls  were  blessed.  On  Mon- 
day night  I  preached  at  Brooklyn.  I  gave  them  a  sermon  in 
John-street  church  in  New-York  on  Tuesday  morning. 

Wednesday  22.  We  came  away  to  the  widow  Sherwood's, 
where  I  preached  :  I  had  a  little  time  to  read.  In  this  state  the  sub- 
jects of  succession,  rebaptizing,  are  much  agitated.  I  will  tell  the 
world  what  I  rest  my  authority  upon.  1.  Divine  authority.  2. 
Seniority  in  America.  3.  The  election  of  the  general  conference. 
4.  My  ordination  by  Thomas  Coke,  William  Philip  Otterbine, 
German  Presbyterian  minister,  Richard  Whatcoat,  and  Thomas 
Vasey.  5.  Because  the  signs  of  an  apostle  have  been  seen  in  me. 
On  Saturday  I  lodged  with  Nicholas  Fisher  at  the  Plains.  At  the 
White-Plains  meeting-house  on  the  Sabbath  day  I  stood  up  once 
more  ;  my  subject,  1  Cor.  xv.  33,  34.  We  had  some  feeling  souls 
to  hear  ;  but  there  is  a  call  for  abundantly  more.  Brother  What- 
coat preached  at  four  o'clock.  This  was  a  sorrowful  day  to  me 
— 1  was  in  sackcloth. 


1805.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  169 

Monday  27.  I  called  to  see  Elder  Coleman's  wife,  who  was  ill — ■ 
or  expected  soon  to  be.  I  dined  with  James  Hall  :  we  rejoiced 
that  after  sixteen  years  we  were  bound  heavenward.  We  crossed 
Croton  to  Stephen-Town,  stopping  at  Thomas  Bailey's.  I  preach- 
ed at  five  o'clock. 

Tuesday  28.  We  made  our  way  across  the  Peekskill  mountains, 
by  Gilead  meeting-house  :  we  came  by  the  grand  encampment 
where  the  God  of  glory  appeared  last  autumn.  We  lodged  with 
Richard  Jackson. 

Wednesday  29,  was  a  day  of  rest.  We  called  a  meeting,  and 
hrother  Whatcoat  preached  upon  the  perfect  law  of  liberty :  I  ex- 
horted. Next  day,  through  an  unusually  cold  north  wind,  we  made 
a  laborious  journey  to  Rhinebeck.  We  stayed  with  our  brother 
Sands. 

Friday  31.  I  read  the  latter  part  of  Mr.  Wesley's  Journal: 
how  great  and  unceasing  were  his  labours  ;  how  various,  compre- 
hensive, and  just  are  his  observations  on  men,  women,  modes, 
manners,  doctrines,  opinions,  authors,  and  things  !  I  have  felt 
myself  strongly  urged  to  pray  after  every  meal,  where  the  fami- 
lies are  in  the  habit  of  praver  ;  but  I  believe  there  are  Methodist 
households  that  sometimes  fall  in  my  way,  who  never  pray  in  this 
way  :  and  is  this  our  poor  success  after  eighteen  years  of  faith- 
ful labours  ?  God  be  gracious  to  us,  and  to  such  families  and  un- 
faithful souls  ! 

Saturday,  June  1.   Reading  closely. 

Sunday  2.  I  spoke  at  Rhinebeck  chapel  on  Joel  ii.  28,  29.  "  It 
shall  come  to  pass  afterward,  that  I  will  pour  out  my  Spirit  upon 
all  flesh  ;  and  your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy,  your 
old  men  shall  dream  dreams,  your  young  men  shall  see  visions  ; 
and  also  upon  the  servants  and  upon  the  handmaids  in  those  days 
will  I  pour  out  my  Spirit."  The  preacher's  mind  was  somewhat 
clouded,  or  he  might  have  better  shown, 

I.  What  are  the  common  and  extraordinary  operations  of  the 
Spirit. 

II.  The  subjects  of  this  operation — the  children  of  God,  and 
their  children  ;  the  "  servants"  of  God,  and  their  servants  and 
slaves  ;  the  "  old  men"  of  the  first  generation  living,  down  to  the 
third  and  fourth  ;  "  young  men,"  gay  and  forgetful ;  "  young 
women,"  giddy  and  thoughtless;  rich  and  poor. 

III.  The  provision  that  is  made  for  this — in  the  love  of  God,  in 
the  death  of  Christ,  in  the  general  grace  of  God,  dispensed  by  men 

Vol.  Ill,  22 


}70  KEV.  1 fRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL.  [ItJUu, 

and  means.  Brother  Whatcoat  spoke  in  the  afternoon.  It  was  a 
heavy  day  with  me  ;  I  wearied  myself  in  vain  ;  but  my  judgment 
is  with  my  God. 

Monday  3.  I  rested  and  read  Mr.  Wesley's  Journal  and  the  last 
of  his  Life. 

Tuesday  4.  We  made,  through  heat  and  dust,  to  Gale's  tavern  : 
a  plentiful  rain  afterward  drove  us  into  Mr.  Booth's  at  Claverick. 
On  Wednesday  we  dined  at  Kinderhook,  and  lodged  witli  B.  Gos- 
lin,  Esq.  at  Greenbush. 

Thursday  6.  On  our  way  to  Stillwater,  we  passed  Troy,  Lansing- 
burgh,  and  Waterford,  crossing  the  North-River  upon  a  grand 
bridge.  We  got  within  a  mile  of  the  camp-meeting  ground : 
there  is  no  great  shade,  nor  many  tents  ;  but  we  expect  preachers 
from  Canada,  Vermont,  Massachusetts,  Connecticut,  New- York, 
and  New-Jersey. 

Friday  7.  We  opened  our  camp-meeting  exercises  in  the  pine 
woods  at  Stillwater  ;  it  continued  four  days  and  three  nights  :  there 
were  many  people,  many  sermons,  many  prayers,  many  sinners, 
many  saints,  and  little  intermission,  night  or  day,  of  labours  and 
praises.     The  particulars  may  be  printed. 

Tuesday  11.  We  came  twenty-five  miles  to  Ashgrove,  and  next 
day  opened  conference.  On  Tuesday  the  18th,  the  conference 
rose  at  noon.  We  had  blessed  harmony  and  order  ;  and  I  never 
heard  less  murmuring  about  the  stations,  of  which  there  were  sixty- 
two  upon  the  list,  and  two  having  no  appointments,  because  of  de- 
bility. The  committee  of  business,  and  the  committee  of  addresses, 
were  very  attentive  to  the  affairs  brought  before  them,  and  their 
labours  were  highly  approved.  By  allowing  the  usual  provision 
for  the  married  preachers  and  their  wives,  (no  supplies  given  for 
the  children)  the  conference  was  insolvent  seventeen  hundred  dol- 
lars. There  was  about  eight  hundred  dollars  in  money,  and  other 
things,  given  to,  and  given  away  by  the  conference.  We  had  a 
sacrament,  and  love-feast  on  the  Sabbath,  and  I  preached  :  the 
duty  was  performed  by  others  at  other  times,  as  usual ;  but  there 
were  no  special  marks  of  good  done. 

Wednesday  19.  We  came  to  the  Falls  of  Hoosack,  and  stopped 
at  George  Croye's  :  here  I  preached,  1  Cor.  ii.  29,  30,  31. 

Vermont. — Thursday  20.  We  came  through  Pownall,  in  Ver- 
mont, to  Williamstown,  the  seat  of  the  college  ;  containing  two 
houses,  one,  probably  sixty  by  forty  feet ;  the  other,  one  hundred 
by  fifty  feet,  four  stories,  of  brick.     We  dined  at  brother  Kinney 's. 


1805.}  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL.  171 

near  New- Ashford.  Thence  we  came  away  to  Lanesborough,  and 
on  to  Pittsfield.  We  have  passed  through  a  well  cultivated  land  of 
wavy,  well-watered  surface,  roughened  with  rocks,  and  broken 
often  enough,  by  hills.  We  have  had  two  days  and  nights  of  heat 
equal  to  that  of  Georgia.  Some  thunder-showers  cooled  the  air, 
and  our  ride  yesterday  was  pleasant,  though  laborious,  through 
Washington,  Becket,  and  Chester,  and  along  upon  the  head  springs 
of  Agawam  River,  whose  meanders  we  followed  upon  a  turnpike 
road, winding  amongst  the  hills  of  the  Green  mountain,  equal  to 
any  in  the  west :  forty  miles  brought  us  to  Westfield  ;  and  rested 
at  Joel  Farnam's.  Mr.  Knapp  invited  me  to  preach  in  the  Congre- 
gational temple ;  but  I  refused,  for  sundry  reasons  valid  to 
myself. 

Massachusetts. — Sabbath  23.  I  attended  at  a  Baptist  church  : 
my  first  subject  was  Isai.  lv.  6,  7.  ;  my  second,  Acts  xxvi.  18,  19. : 
it  was  hard  labour  indeed.  I  rode  home  with  Nathaniel  Phelps,  in 
Tatnam.  I  asked  an  aged  man  at  the  meeting,  how  many  souls 
were  computed  to  be  in  the  town  :  four  thousand  was  the  reply  : 
not  one-fourth  of  these  were  at  meeting :  here  is  room !  It  is  a 
day  of  feeble  things  ;  and  I  am  afraid  that  some  of  our  friends,  in- 
stead of  boldly  facing  them,  turn  their  backs  upon  their  enemies  ; 
whilst  others  join  them.  Here  Ralph  Williston  was  well  known— 
once  so  full  of  fire  ;  and  what  is  he  now  ? 

Monday  24.  We  set  out  after  mid-day — crossed  Connecticut  at 
Enfield,  and  came  on  to  Ellington,  housing  with  Doctor  Steel. 
Here  the  Standing  Order  have  built  a  grand  temple  to — fame  :  it 
is  feared  there  is  not  in  the  congregation  one  soul  alive. 

Connecticut.— Tuesday  25.  I  preached  in  the  school-house  to 
a  few  men,  women,  and  children.  I  went  home  with  Mr.  Ostrander 
at  the  Square-Ponds.  I  believe  Methodism  is  as  low  here  as  true 
religion  :  yet  there  is  hope  that  God  will  visit  New-England,  as  well 
as  every  part  of  the  continent,  before  long.  At  the  Square-Ponds 
meeting-house  I  preached  upon  Rom.  viii.  1,2.:  it  was  an  open 
season — the  best  time  I  have  had  in  New-England  :  several  felt. 
1  hope  it  is  a  prelude  to  a  revival  here.  I  am  resting,  writing,  and 
reading  our  form  of  discipline,  and  the  Jews'  Answer  to  Voltaire. 

Saturday  29.  At  Tolland  quarterly  meeting  my  subject  was 
Jude  20,  21.  :  it  was  a  gracious  time.  On  the  Sabbath  we  had 
love-feast  and  sacrament.  I  ordained  Nathan  Fox,  and  John  Nor- 
ris,  and  James  Hyde,  deacons  :  these  are  some  of  the  first-fruits. 
Tolland  revives— we  had  some  living  testimonies,  and  several  souls 


i  72  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1805. 

arc  brought  into  the  church.  At  ten  o'clock  we  went  into  an  or- 
chard adjoining  the  chapel  :  I  spoke  on  Hebr.  viii.  10.  11.  :  brother 
Washburn's  text  was  "  Blessed  are  they  that  hear  the  word  of  God 
and  keep  it."  Many  exhortations  followed,  and  prayers,  with  pow- 
er :  there  was  a  great  cry,  and  the  meeting  held  without  intermis- 
sion until  night. 

Monday  July  1.  We  set  out  to  Willington  ;  went  on  to  Mansfield  : 
thence,  after  dining  with  Mr.  Cyrus  Dow,  fifteen  miles  to  Thomp- 
son. On  Tuesday  we  passed  through  Douglass  and  Mandon,  and 
lodged  with  Mr.  Ball  at  Millford.  Our  Wednesday's  ride  brought 
us  through  Hopkinton,  Framingham,  Natick,  (where  we  dined  with 
Mr.  Jameson)  and  on  to  Needham  to  lodge.  The  two  last  days 
have  brought  us  through  heat  (occasionally  cooled  by  shade)  and 
dust,  and  the  kindness  of  friends,  several  miles  from  the  camp- 
ground. 

Massachusetts. — Thursday  4.  I  preached  at  N.  Bogle's  meet- 
ing-house on  John  viii.  30,  31.  We  stopped  Friday  night  at  Wal- 
tham.  On  Saturday  we  reached  Boston  :  Oh,  heat  and  dust !  I  felt 
like  Jonah  without  his  gourd. 

Sabbath  7.  I  preached  in  our  complete  little  meeting-house, 
well  filled  with  hearers,  from  I  Cor.  v.  7,  8.  :  it  was  an  open  time 
and  gracious  season.  In  the  afternoon  Joseph  Crawford  spoke 
upon  1  Tim.  i.  15.  :  the  word  of  the  Lord  appeared  to  strike  like 
sharp  arrows.  1  feel  as  if  Epaphras  Kibby  had  been  faithful  in 
Boston. 

Monday  8.  We  took  the  turnpike  for  Lynn,  passing  over  a  bridge 
three-quarters  of  a  mile  long,  said  to  have  cost  forty  thousand  dol- 
lars. It  is  rather  a  causeway,  thrown  over  a  marsh — plenty  of 
flies  and  moschetoes.  I  found  Peter  Jayne  in  the  new  house  built 
for  the  accommodation  of  the  stationed  preacher  at  Lynn.  God  is 
moving  amongst  the  people  here — they  are  prepared  for  the  con- 
ference. 

Tuesday  9.  At  Marblehead  I  spoke  on  Gal.  iv.  20.  "  I  desire  to 
be  present  with  you  now,  and  to  chnnge  my  voire  ;  for  I  stand  in 
doubt  of  you."  1st.  Evangelical  men,  or  aposiolic  witnesses  may 
feel  a  desire  to  be  present  with  societies  at  particular  times  when 
it  is  in  their  power.     They  will,  where  this  cannot  be  done,  write. 

2.  That  there  may  be  very  alarming  and  doubtful  cases  and  cha- 
racters in  the  congregation  and  church  ;  such  as  open  sinners,  hy- 
pocrites,   half-awakened    souls,    backsliders,    slothful     believers. 

3.  Changing  the  voice,  using  a  different  method,  as  to  matter  and 


1805.]  REV.  FRANCIS  asbury's  journal.  173 

manner  of  preaching  or  writing,  pointing  at  the  cases  and  charac- 
ters which  are  doubtful.  We  had  another  meeting  at  five  o'clock, 
and  then  returned  to  Lynn.  1  received  a  letter  from  Doctor 
Coke,  announcing  to  me  his  marriage  ;  and  advising  me,  that  he 
did  not  intend  to  visit  America  again  as  a  visitor,  but  rather  as  a 
sojourner,  (if  at  11)  could  work  be  appointed  him  to  do.  Mar- 
riage is  honourable  in  ill — but  to  me.  it  is  a  ceremony  awful  as 
death  :  well  may  it  be  so,  when  I  calculate  we  have  lost  the  tra- 
velling labours  of  two  hundred  of  the  best  men  in  America,  or  the 
world,  by  marriage  and  consequent  location. 

Friday  12.  We  had  a  full  conference.  Preaching  at  five,  at 
eleven,  and  at  eight  o'clock.  Sitting  of  conference  from  half-past 
eight  o'clock  until  eleven,  in  the  forenoon  ;  and  from  two  until 
six  o'clock,  in  the  afternoon  we  had  great  order,  and  harmony, 
and  strict  discipline  withal.  Sixteen  deacons,  and  eight  elders 
were  ordained. 

Sabbath  14.  We  held  our  meeting  in  a  grove  belonging  to  Ben- 
jamin Johnson,  a  beautiful  and  sequestered  spot,  though  near  the 
meeting-house.  My  subject  was  1  Thess.  ii.  6 — 9.  1st.  The 
system  of  imparting  the  "  Gospel  of  God" — which  is  preaching 
Christ.  2.  The  doctrines,  privileges,  precepts,  and  power  of  this 
"  Gospel."  3.  Apostolical  purity  of  intention,  disinterestedness, 
tempers,  manners,  labours,  and  travels.  The  affection  of  soul 
"  imparted" — manifested — in  preaching  and  prayer,  and  bowels  of 
mercies  and  sympathies.  There  were  many  exhortations  and  much 
prayer  ;  many  must  have  felt ;  some  were  converted  :  from  this  day 
forth,  the  work  of  God  will  prosper  in  Lynn  and  its  neighbourhood. 
On  Monday,  the  labours  of  conference,  and  public  religious  exer- 
cises were  continued.  On  Tuesday  evening  conference  rose  in 
great  peace.  On  Wednesday  I  gave  them  a  sermon,  and  immedi- 
ately set  out  to  Waltham — twenty  miles  :  wind,  heat,  dust! 

Thursday  18.  We  gained  Captain  Nichols's,  Shrewsbury.  Wil- 
braham  brought  us  up  on  Friday.  We  rested  with  Abel  Bliss  on 
Saturday. 

Sabbath  21.  At  Wilbraham  I  spoke  on  2  Tim.  iv.  5—8. 
"  But  watch  thou  in  all  things,"  &o.  Introduction — the  special  re- 
lation of  a  spiritual  father  and  son.  The  time  and  circumstances 
peculiar  to  Paul  and  Timothy.  "  Watch,  in  ail  things  :"  as  a  Chris- 
tian ;  as  a  Christian  minister  or  bishop  :  endure  afflictions  of  mind 
and  body,  as  a  Christian  and  a  minister — endure  heat,  cold,  hun- 
ger, thirst,  labour,  persecution,  temptations.     "  Do  the  work  of  an 


174  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL.  [1805. 

evangelist" — spread  the  Gospel  where  it  is  not,  support  it  where  it 
is.  Paul  knew  he  was  going  by  martyrdom  :  he  had  "  fought  a 
good  fight  of  faith  ;"  and  by  faith  he  had  "  kept"  justifying  "  faith," 
which  some  had  made  shipwreck  of:  the  "crown"  of  justifying, 
and  sanctifying,  and  practical  righteousness,  was  waiting  to  encircle 
his  triumphant  brows— a  "  crown"  thrice  radiant  with  the  three 
degrees  of  glory.  In  conclusion  I  said  many  things,  and  with 
great  plainness,  urging  the  necessity  of  being  civilized,  moralized, 
and  spiritualized  by  the  Gospel  in  the  plenitude  of  its  divine  ope- 
ration. I  ordained  Luman  Andrus  an  elder,  and  Urijah  Clough 
to  deacon's  orders.     After  two  hours  serious  labour  I  retired. 

Connecticut. — Monday  22.  We  came  in  heat  to  East- Hartford, 
and  lodged  with  Squire  Pitkins.  Tuesday  to  New-Haven  :  Wed- 
nesday to  Stamford     Friday  to  Peter  Bonnett's,  New-Rochelle. 

New- York. — We  have  rode  two  hundred  and  thirty  miles  in  six 
days — some  of  them  awfully  warm.  The  earlier  fruits  and  pro- 
ductions of  the  year  have  been  very  abundant ;  but  without  a  rain, 
the  latter  fruits  and  grain  must  fail.  I  took  a  day  to  refit  clothes, 
and  to  write  letters.  At  four  o'clock,  I  preached  at  Rochelle  meet- 
ing-house: the  subject  suited  the  state  of  the  town  :  the  men  were 
few,  the  women  many.  The  Lord  was  present  with  us.  I  lodged 
under  the  hospitable  roof  of  the  widow  Sherwood.  On  my  road 
hither,  I  thought  I  saw  what  would  make  a  good  camp-ground  :  I 
wrote  to  the  presiding  elder,  advising  him  of  this  circumstance.  I 
am  still  bent  on  great  designs  for  God,  for  Christ,  for  souls.  Satur- 
day brought  us  through  excessive  heat  and  dust,  to  New-York  I 
would  say;  but  we  were  barred  its  entrance  by  proclamation, 
having  passed  through  New-Haven,  afflicted  with  the  yellow-fever. 
1  stopped  at  George  Suckley's.  Being  a  little  unwell,  1  made  the 
best  use  of  the  day  I  could  by  writing  letters. 

New  Jersey. — Monday  29.  1  preached  in  our  very  neat  chapel, 
at  Second-River.  We  came  to  Elizabethtown  ;  and  on  Tuesday  to 
Joseph  Hutchinson's  ;  and  Wednesday  brought  us  up  at  Burlington. 

Pennsylvania. — Thursday,  August  1.  We  found  ourselves  pro- 
claimed at  Philadelphia  as  at  New-York.  We  directed  our  course 
to  Mr.  Manley's  seat,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  city.  I  received 
several  letters,  from  which  I  learn  that  there  was  great  order  pre- 
served at  Duck-Creek  camp-meeting;  and  that  great  good  was 
done — three  hundred  souls  were  blest !  On  Saturday  I  wrote  let- 
ters. I  redeem  a  day  by  hard  riding  for  this  service.  I  have 
bought,  for  one  hundred  dollars,  a  neat  little  Jersey  wagon.     On 


1805.]  &EV-  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  175 

the  Sabbath  day  1  preached  at  Germantown  on  Isaiah  xlix.  1,2.  I 
returned  to  Mr.  Manley's,  and  preached  at  five  o'clock,  at  Mr. 
Mauley's  :  this  day  appears  to  have  been  poorly  spent.  I  am  wait- 
ing for  the  minutes  of  conference,  and  my  little  wagon — then 
away  to  the  West. 

Monday  5.  I  visited  brother  Cook's,  and  Haskin's  family  ;  and 
rested  on  Tuesday. 

Wednesday  7.  We  set  out  and  reached  Radnor.  We  stopped  to 
dine  with  brother  Gyger,  and  had  a  serious  time  at  prayer  in  his 
new  house,  which  they  are  about  to  move  into.  We  lodged  with 
Daniel  Meredith,  an  old  disciple,  in  the  Valley.  Thursday  brought 
us,  through  heat  and  dust,  to  Soudersburg.  Sick  on  Friday,  and 
took  medicine.     Saturday,  wrote  a  great  deal. 

Sunday  11.  At  the  chapel,  in  Soudersburg,  I  preached  upon  2 
Thess.  i.  7  —  10.  "  And  to  you  who  are  troubled,  rest  with  us,"  &c. 
1.  The  sources  of  "  trouble"  to  the  people  of  God — temptation, 
persecution,  disorderly  walk,  and  backsliding  of  professors  ;  and 
the  wretched  state  of  sinners.  2.  The  present  and  future  "  rest"-— 
first  on  earth  ;  and  then  in  glory  :  the  cause  ; — "  the  Gospel  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ"  hath  been  obeyed  by,  and  hath  had  its  full  ope- 
ration on,  "  them  that  believe."  3.  The  revelation  "  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  :" — the  characters  of  those  whom  he  shall  judge,  and 
take  vengeance  upon,  ungodly  heathens  ;  disobedient  hearers  of  the 
Gospel.  k<  Vengeance" — for  God  ;  for  himself;  for  his  insulted 
Spirit ;  for  the  ministers  of  Christ,  and  the  people  of  God.  "  Pu- 
nished"— their  punishment  to  be  beyond  the  interference  of  mer- 
cy :  to  be  sufferings  of  body  and  soul  ;  and  these  to  be  eternal.  I 
was  considerably  assisted  ;  yet  I  left  the  subject  in  an  unfinished 
state,  after  speaking  a  full  hour. 

Monday  12.  We  came  off  with  courage,  passing  through  Lancas- 
ter, still  unpropitious  to  Methodism  :  seven  miles  beyond,  father 
Musselrnan  received  us  with  a  smiling  countenance,  a  willing  hand, 
and  ready  mind.  We  fed,  and  talked,  and  sang,  and  prayed,  and 
parted  in  the  Lord.  We  crossed  Anderson's  ferry,  the  best  I  know 
on  the  river,  and  came  into  Little- York.  I  stopped  a  day.  Oh! 
how  kind  our  friends  are,  at  their  beautiful  retreat  :  may  friend 
Pentz,  and  wife,  and  mother,  be  blest  of  the  Lord  ! 

Wednesday  14.  We  set  out  for  Carlisle,  but  I  changed  my  mind 
and  my  route  to  Berlin  :  we  put  up  with  Isaiah  Haars.  Thursday 
brought  us  to  Shippensburg,  thirty  miles.  On  Friday  we  bent  our 
course  towards  Pittsburg,  over  the  three  mountains,  to  J.  Thomp- 


176  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUHY'S  JOURNAL.  [1805* 

son's,  in  Burnt-Cabin  valley.  I  have  moved  swiftly,  but  in  my  flight 
have  written  to  five  of  the  preachers.  I  walked  down  the  mountains, 
which  fatigued  me.  My  soul  is  at  peace  ;  but  1  have  severe  trials 
at  times.  On  Saturday  we  rested,  refitted,  read  and  wrote  Sab- 
bath day,  at  Littleton  chapel,  1  spoke  upon  2  Cor.  iii.  12.  We 
had  a  feeling,  melting  season.  We  lodged  with  father  Ramsay— 
an  exceeding  kind  people. 

Monday  19.  We  reached  Bedford.  At  night  we  had  fiddle  and 
flute  to  enliven  our  prayers,  and  assist  our  meditations.  1  had  but 
little  rest.  On  Tuesday  we  rode  sixteen  miles  to  breakfast.  We 
stopped  at  Berlin,  and  I  gave  them  a  sermon.  Wednesday  brought 
us  over  awful  roads  to  Connellsville,  fortv-two  miles.  We  were 
nearly  wrecked.  A  very  serious  drought  prevails  west  and  east : 
Oh,  we  are  wicked— we  are  covetous  !  we  abuse  the  blessings  of 
abundance,  and  God  in  justice  withholds.  1  am  indebted  to  a  kind 
Providence  for  my  good  little  waggon,  and  my  excellent  and  active 
driver — and  good  preacher  too.  1  am  resolved  to  quit  this  moun- 
tainous, rocky,  rugged,  stumpy  route.  It  was  a  mercy  of  God  we 
were  not,  men,  horses,  and  wagon,  broken  in  pieces  ;  I  praise  God 
now,  but  I  hardly  had  time  to  pray  then. 

The  camp-meeting  begins  to-morrow,  at  Short-Creek,  near  the 
Great  River.  On  Friday  and  Saturday  we  laboured  onward  to 
Short-Creek :   1  foundered  my  mare  ;  and  had  many  trials. 

Sunday  24.  I  preached  at  the  camp-ground  :  it  was  a  moving 
time.  On  Monday  I  preached  again.  It  was  judged  there  were 
five  thousand  souls  present  to  hear  ;  and  that  one  hundred  souls 
were  converted  to  God. 

I  purchased  a  horse  ;  and  bent  my  course  through  Wheeling,  on 
the  banks  of  the  Ohio  :  we  crossed,  and  in  the  evening  came  to 
Morristown.  Friday  brought  us  to  Muskingum ;  Saturday,  we 
reached  John  Murphy's,  and  on  the  Sabbath  I  rested  with  Edward 
Teel.  Joseph  Crawford  is  sick.  I  have  had  little  rest  for  six 
nights  past.  I  have  rode,  by  computation,  sixteen  hundred  and 
eighty  miles  since  I  left  Baltimore. 

Ohio. —  Monday,  September  2  I  preached  at  Richland  chapeJ, 
on  1  Peter  v.  10.  the  subject  was  gracious  ;  and  so  was  the  season. 
I  find  here  the  children  of  Methodists,  according  to  the  flesh,  known 
elsewhere,  and  long  ago.  Jonathan  Jackson  is  married  :  O  thou 
pattern  of  celibacy,  art  thou  caught !  Who  can  resist  ?  Our  married 
man  was  forty  years  of  age  :  he  has  taken  to  wife  a  Mrs.  Roberts  ; 
a  poor,  pious  widow.     Joseph  Crawford  is  very  ill.     I  cannot  go 


1805.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASSURY5S  JOURNAL.  177 

on.  I  have  sent  sixteen  miles  for  a  bottle  of  wine  for  him.  We 
started  away  on  Tuesday,  and  came  to  judge  Vanmeeter's,  at  the 
Muddy  Prairie,  and  dined  and  prayed  :  brother  Crawford  still  ill  of 
a  flux  and  fever.  We  stopped  at  Grouse's  mill  for  the  evening. 
Edward  Tiffin's  brought  us  up  on  Wednesday.  Thursday  and  Fri- 
day, brother  Crawford  could  not  move  on.  Doctor  Tiffin,  the 
present  governor  of  the  state,  administered  some  relief.  I  was 
happily  employed  in  reading  the  portrait  of  St.  Paul,  by  divine 
Fletcher.  I  preached  at  Chilicothe — we  have  excessive  heat.  My 
mind  is  in  great  peace. 

Saturday  7.  We  rode  to  Deer-Creek,  and  dined  with  Mr.  Davis. 
The  evening  found  us  at  White  Brown's. 

Sunday  8.  I  preached  in  the  barn,  upon  1  Cor.  xii.  8,  9.  "  My 
grace  is  sufficient  for  thee."  A  view  was  taken  of  the  cases,  cha- 
racters, and  stations,  the  people  of  God  might  be  in,  and  their 
several  relations  to  each  other,  as  it  respected  their  duty  to  God,  to 
the  world,  to  themselves,  and  to  their  brethren.  It  was  attempted 
to  be  shown,  that  in  all  possible  situations  arising  out  of  the  faithful 
performance  of  this  duty,  the  grace  of  God  was  sufficient  for  them. 
The  manner  in  which  this  grace  is  to  be  obtained  : — by  fervent 
prayer,  three  times  a  day,  or  oftener  :  by  a  diligent  use  pf  all  the 
means,  and  a  faithful  improvement  of  the  grace  given. 

Monday  9.  We  missed  our  path,  and  went  out  of  our  way — we 
intended  for  the  falls  of  Paint,  and  went  to  Bullskin,  twenty  miles  : 
we  lodged  with  Michael  Hains,  who  rode  with  us  eleven  miles. 
We  passed  Franklin,  on  the  way  to  the  town  of  Newmarket,  con- 
taining eight  cabins.  We  lodged  at  Ross's,  and  were  kindly  and 
freely  entertained.  The  roads  were  heavy,  but  the  wagon  was  a 
covering  in  the  heavy  rain.  The  roads  were  dreadful  to  Williams- 
burg, Claremont  county.  We  had  a  beach  swamp,  mud  up  to  the 
hubs,  stumps  as  high  as  the  wagon  body,  logs,  trees  : — after  all, 
we  came  safe.  Wednesday,  we  lodged  with  Levi  Rogers,  once  a 
travelling  preacher,  now  a  physician.  We  were  greatly  outdone, 
but  we  called  a  meeting  at  Williamsburg.  Brother  Whatcoat 
preached,  and  I  exhorted.  I  saw  several  Jersey  friends.  On 
Thursday  we  rode  on  to  Mr.  Dimmitt's,  on  the  route  to  Little 
Miami :  we  have  made  one  hundred  miles  in  four  days.  I  was  made 
glad  to  hear  of  the  revival  of  the  work  of  God  in  the  new  settle- 
ments  :  the  local  ministry  have  shared  in  this  labour  with  the  tra- 
velling preachers.  On  Friday  we  came  down  the  east  branch  of 
the  Little  Miami,  to  judge  Gatch's.     On  Saturday  we  rested,  and  I 

Vol.   Ill,  23 


178  TIEV.  FUAMIIs  ASflliUY's  JOURNAL-  [l&Oy. 

read  and  wrote.  On  the  Sabbath  day  we  held  a  meeting  of  four 
hours  at  Philip  Gatch's  :  Brother  Whatcoat's  subject  was  "  Repent 
and  be  converted  :""  Joseph  Crawford's,  "  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the 
Gospel  of  Christ  ;"  and  F  Asbury's,  "  I  have  no  greater  joy  than 
this,  that  my  children  walk  in  the  truth."  We  felt  quickened  and 
comforted  in  God.  Our  route  on  Monday  led  through  Columbia, 
and  the  rich  lands  of  the  Miami.  William  Lives  sent  one  to 
meet  and  invite  us  to  his  house  in  Cincinnati ;  1  gave  them  a  dis- 
course upon  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  be   found,"  &c. 

Kentucky.— Next  day  I  called  on  Elijah  Sparks  at  Newport,  and 
baptised  two  of  his  children.  We  dined  with  the  widow  Stephens. 
I  rejoiced  to  find  that  a  new  circuit  had  been  formed,  and  there 
were  several  growing  societies — much  of  this  has  been  effected 
by  the  faithful  labours  of  Benjamin  Edge.  We  passed  Grant's 
Lick,  and  lodged  very  comfortably  with  William  Daniel.  On  Wed- 
nesday we  reached  Joshua  Jones's  ;  and  next  day  beat  along  to  Isaac 
Nevey's  ;  here  we  were  at  home.  In  Kentucky  we  passed  through 
Campbell,  Pendleton,  and  Harrison  counties.  Our  estimate  is  one 
thousand  nine  hundred  and  eighty  miles  from  Baltimore  to  Mount 
Gerezim. 

Friday  20.  We  attended  at  White's  chapel  ;  Bishop  Whatcoat 
and  myself  preached.  We  dined  at  brother  White's,  and  came 
through  Cynthiana,  the  capital  of  Harrison  county,  to  Jonathan 
Jaques^s. 

Saturday  21.  At  Benjamin  Coleman's.  On  the  Sabbath  day  bro- 
ther Crawford  and  myself  had  a  warm  time  of  it  at  Mount  Gerezim, 
where  we  have  already  held  our  conference  twice.  We  both 
preached  ;  we  exerted  ourselves  greatly,  and  I  hope  there  was 
good  done.  We  visited  Daniel  Grigg.  I  found  several  of  my  old 
friends  at  this  place  ;  among  them  Colonel  Barratt  of  Alleghany, 
and  his  wife  ;  Mrs.  Tittle  ;  and  some  from  Baltimore  county,  and 
the  state  of  Delaware — and  thus  our  people  are  scattered  abroad  ; 
but  thank  the  Lord !  they  are  still  in  the  fold,  and  on  their  way  to 
glory.     My  own  soul  is  closer  and  closer  united  to  God. 

Monday  23.  1  visited  John  Vernon,  an  early  member  of  society 
at  Lewis  Afree's,  near  Duck-Creek,  state  of  Delaware. — I  must 
look  up  our  old  sheep  and  lambs.  On  Tuesday  I  went  to  John 
Whitaker's,  Bourbon  county.  J.  Crawford  preached  at  J.  Robin- 
son's, on  Wednesday.  I  spoke  upon  1  Cor.iv.  1 — 5.  "  Let  a  man  so 
account  of  us  as  ministers  of  Christ,  and  stewards  of  the  mysteries 
of  God."     »  Of  Christ"— for  us,  and  Christ  in  us.     That  these 


1805.]  REV.    FRANCIS   ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  179 

"  mysteries"  are  not  subjects  of  reason,  but  revelation  and  inspi- 
ration— that  we  must  believe  them  upon  Divine  testimony.  The 
apostle  was  not  conscious  of  evil,  but  he  was  not  his  own  judge. 
Men  are  incompetent  judges  of  what  belongs  to  God  and  his  Spi- 
rit ;  it  will  be  found  in  the  judgment  day,  that  pride,  covetousness, 
and  backsliding  was  the  probable  cause  of  the  union  of  heresy  and 
schism.     A  divinity-doubter  was  present. 

Thursday  26.  I  visited  Luke  Hanson.  Nest  day  it  rained,  and  I 
rested.  On  Saturday  I  stopped  at  Madox  Fisher's,  in  Lexington. 
I  was  of  necessity  in  our  old  house  on  the  Sabbath  day  ;  we  could 
not  preach  abroad,  the  weather  was  damp.  My  sermon  was  the 
echo  of  my  text — "  Cry  aloud  and  spare  not."  Joseph  Crawford 
preached  twice.  On  Monday  I  was  unwell,  but  I  rode  to  Jesse 
Griffith's,  Scott  county      On  Tuesday  we  rested. 

Wednesday,  October  2.  We  opened  our  conference  in  great 
peace  ;  there  were  about  twenty-five  members  present  :  six  hours 
a  day  were  steadily  occupied  with  business.  The  committees  of 
claims  and  of  addresses  did  much  work,  and  it  was  done  well.  I 
completed  my  plan  for  the  coming  year,  and  submitted  it  to  the  pre- 
siding elders,  who  suggested  but  two  alterations  ;  m;iy  they  be  for 
the  best !  On  the  Sabbath  day  I  preached  to  about  three  thousand 
souls.  On  Tuesday,  after  the  rise  of  conference,  I  rode  to  Lex- 
ington ;  and  on  Wednesday  to  J.  S.  Hoard's,  Jessamine  county.  I 
was  under  affliction  of  body  ;  but  perfect  love,  peace  within,  and 
harmony  without,  healed  every  malady. 

Our  friend  Job  Johnson  gave  us  a  lodging  on  Thursday  night, 
and  at  Rock-Castle,  chance  furnished  us  with  another,  such  as  it 
was,  for  Friday  night  :— -but  we  had  peace  and  prayer. 

Saturday  12.  We  took  the  path  about  five  o'clock  in  the  morn- 
ing, and  came  eighteen  miles  to  dinner  at  Mr.  Freeman's.  We 
reached  Johnson's  upGn  Richland  Creek.  On  the  Sabbath  day  we 
were  under  the  necessity  of  moving  forward  slowly,  to  Ballen- 
ger's,  where  we  dined.  The  evening  brought  us  to  Dalton's— ~ 
crowded  with  company,  but  we  kept  good  order. 

Monday  14„  Our  trouble  began.  We  dined  at  Davis's  :  then 
came  on  to  Jesse  Dodson's.  Tuesday  morning  was  rainy,  and  the 
road  was  bad  before  we  came  to,  and  after  we  had  crossed 
Clinch- River  :  it  was  not  better  than  it  had  been  in  its  native  state. 
Our  carriage  had  nearly  upset.  I  am  decided  to  take  the  Cumber- 
land path  hereafter— at  least,   until  this  made  and  mended  road, 


180  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBUKY'S  JOURNAL.  [lu<».'>. 

the  worse,  perhaps,  for  making  and  mending,  is  in  a  better  condi- 
tion ;  the  turnpike  takes  fifty  dollars  a  day    for  having  made  bad 
worse.     At  the  Stubblefields   we  rested  a  day.     We  are  one  hun- 
dred and  forty  miles  from  Kentucky.      Sure  I  am  that  nothing  short 
of  the  welfare  of  immortal  souls,  and  my  sense  of. duty,  could  be 
inducement  enough  for  me  to  visit  the  west  so  often  :  O,  the  roads, 
the  hills,  the  rocks,  the  rivers,  the  want  of  water — even  to  drink  ; 
the  time  for  secret   prayer,  hardly  to  be  stolen,  and  the    place 
scarcely  to  be  had  !  My  mind,  nevertheless,  was  kept  in  peace  :  I 
prayed  in  every  house  I  lodged  in,  and  at  almost  every  place  I  stop- 
ped at.     We  have  heavy  rains  at  present  ;  and  another  wilderness, 
bad  as  this,  yet  to  pass.    We  meet  crowds  of  people  directing  their 
march  to  the  fertile  west  :  their  sufferings  for  the  present  are  great ; 
but  they  are  going  to  present  abundance,  and  future  wealth  for  their 
children  :  in   ten  years,  I  think,  the  new  state  will  be  one   of  the 
most  flourishing  in  the  union. 

Thursday  17.  We  crossed  Main  Holston,  and  came  into  Tennes- 
see, and  put  into  Colonel  Conaway's,  Little  Nolachucky  ;  we  rest- 
ed here  on  Friday.  At  Moses  Ellis's,  on  Saturday,  we  saw  Moses 
Black  and  his  wife  ;  he  about  forty,  and  she  fifteen :  such  are  the 
wise  contracts  Methodist  preachers  sometimes  make. 

Tennessee. — Sunday,  I  felt  very  unwell  from  cold  taken.  We 
passed  Quorton's  ferry  upon  Great  Nolachucky.  In  crossing  the 
Paint  Mountain,  on  Monday,  we  rode  up  and  walked  down  ;  and  I 
sprained  my  ancle. 

North  Carolina. — We  came  into  North  Carolina,  and  lodged 
with  William  Nelson  at  the  Hot  Sprwigs.  Next  day  we  stopped 
with  Wilson,  in  Buncombe.  On  Wednesday  1  breakfasted  with 
Mr.  Newton,  Presbyterian  minister,  a  man  after  my  own  mind  :  we 
took  sweet  counsel  together  We  lodged,  this  evening,  at  Mr. 
Fletcher's,  Mud-Creek.  At  Colonel  Thomas's  on  Thursday,  we 
were  kindly  received,  and  comfortably  entertained. 

South  Carolina.  We  came  into  South  Carolina  on  Friday,  and 
lodged  with  Captain  Edwards  ;  and  on  Saturday,  at  Staunton's, 
Staunton's  ferry,  Seleuda-River,  Greensville  district,  we  were  at 
home. 

Sabbath  27.  At  Salem  I  preached  upon  Hos.  x.  12.  "Sow  to 
yourselves  in  righteousness,"  &c. 

I.  The  great  and  glorious  end  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord  : — to 
rain  righteousness" — to  impart  his   grace  in  all  its  plenitude — to 


1805.]  HEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  ioi 

give  a  right  state  of  heart  in  justifying,  sanctifying,  experimental 
and  practical  holiness.  "  Reap  in  mercy"— -when  God  gives,  do 
you  give — do  all  the  good  in  your  power. 

II.  The  means  of  obtaining  this  grace,  and  the  blessings  conse- 
quent to  its  reception  and  improvement.  "  Break  up  your  fallow 
ground" — seek  deep  conviction.  "  Seek  the  Lord"  by  repentance 
and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  Rain  righteousness  upon 
you" — by  justifying  grace  ;  humble,  holy  obedience.  The  end, 
everlasting  life. 

Monday  28.  We  proceeded  on  our  way  to  Georgia,  winding 
along  some  crooked  paths  through  Pendleton  district  to  Eliab 
Moore's,  upon  Rocky-River  :  night  came  on,  and  we  missed  our 
way  into  the  plantation  ;  I  walked  up  a  hill,  and  called  for  help., 
and  was  relieved.  We  crossed  Rocky-River  four  times  on  Tues- 
day, and  came  to  Mr.  Dunlap's.  Wednesday  morning  we  rode 
twenty  miles  for  our  breakfast,  at  Petersburg.  We  lodged  with 
John  Oliver  ;  Joseph  Crawford  preached  two  evenings. 

Georgia. — Friday,  November  1.  I  preached  at  eleven  o'clock  on 
1  Cor.  vi.  19, 20.  Instead  of  building  a  small  convenient  house,  they 
have  bought  an  old  house,  and  fitted  up  a  room  for  every  body  :  this 
did  not  please  me,  I  have,  for  the  first  time,  seen  Judge  Marshall's 
Life  of  Washington  ;  1  have  read  four  hundred  pages  in  it.  Cri- 
tics may,  for  aught  I  know,  find  fault  (especially  on  the  other  side 
of  the  water)  with  the  style  and  general  execution  of  this  work ; 
I  like  both  :  the  early  history  of  the  country  very  properly  pre- 
cedes, and  is  connected  with  the  life  of  the  great  man  who  has 
been  so  justly  styled  the  father  (politically)  of  his  country.  There 
is  nothing  in  the  work  beneath  the  man  of  honour ;  there  are  no 
malevolent  sentiments,  or  bitter  expressions,  derogatory  to  the 
character  of  a  Christian.  The  author  deserves  credit  for  the 
pains  he  has  taken  to  furnish  authorities  and  authentic  records  in 
the  notes  to  his  work.  If  any  author  has,  in  America,  done  bet- 
ter than  Marshrdl,  it  is  Belknap,  perhaps. 

Saturday  2.  I  visited  Richard  Easter,  and  Judge  Tait.  On  the 
Sabbath  day  I  preached  at  Thompson's  chapel  on  Ezek.  xxxiii.  2. 
it  was  an  alarming  season.  Joseph  Crawford  spoke  after  me,  and 
we  then  rode  to  Mr.  Clark's,  fourteen  miles,  and  lodged.  At  three 
o'clock  on  Monday  we  held  meeting  at  Mr.  Mark's. 

Wednesday  6.  We  rode  to  Mr.  Pope's,  Oglethorp.  I  preach- 
ed at  the  new  chapel ;  Joseph  Crawford  preached  at  General 
Stewart's, 


182  REV.    FRANCIS    ASBUIVTS   JOURNAL.  [l!jU5. 

Thursday  7.  I  was  sick,  and  went  to  bed. 

Friday  8.  We  came  to  Joshua  Moore's,  upon  Shoulder  Bone  : 
we  were  benighted  in  the  woods ;  the  flesh  fails,  but  my  mind  is  in 
peace. 

Saturday  9.  We  reached  Sparta.  The  heat  was  great.  From 
Kentucky  to  Sparta,  five  hundred  and  sixteen  miles. 

Sunday  10.  1  preached:  my  subject  was  1  Pet.  iv.  17.  Joseph 
Crawford  gave  two  sermons, 

Monday  11.  We  came  to  Matthew  Harris's:  and  next  day  I 
preached  upon    1   Cor.    xi.  30,  31.      We  drove  back  to    Sparta 

that  evening.  I  have  rode  about  fifty  miles  to  preach  to  about 
twice  as  many  soub.  1  would  have  gone  down  to  the  state,  but  ap- 
pointments had  not  been  made,  and  brother  Crawford  grew  very  un- 
well :  I  judged  it  proper  for  him  to  go  through  a  course  of  physic  : 
and  the  weather  was  cold,  and  I  wanted  a  coat.  I  only  lamented 
that  I  could  not  see  my  poor  black  sheep  at  Buffaloe  Creek  ;  but  was 
glad  to  hear  that  Ethiopia  still  stretched  forth  the  hand  of  faith  and 
prayer.  I  feel  very  serious  about  the  supplies  of  preachers  for  the 
South  Carolina  conference  :  some  are  sick,  some  settling  in  life — 
men  of  feeble  minds.  But  let  the  Head  of  the  Church  see  to  his 
own  work — it  is  not  mine.  Why  should  I  despond.  Wh  <t  was 
the  work  thirty  seven  years  ago,  when  there  were  but  two  local 
preachers,  one  in  New- York,  and  one  in  Maryland?  Now  there 
are  two  thousand  local,  and  four  hundred  travelling  preachers. 

Friday  15.  We  rode  to  Rehoboth.  Next  day  Joseph  Crawford 
preached  on  "  The  foundation  of  God  staodeth  sure." 

Sunday  17.  Joseph  Crawford  held  forth,  and  I  followed  :  my 
subject  was  2  Pet.  ii.  20,  21.  "  For  if  after  they  have  escaped 
the  pollutions  of  the  world,"  &c. — 

I.  The  "  pollutions  of  the  world,"  the  sins  of  the  flesh  and  spirit, 
by  which  people  are  led  captive  by  the  god  of  this  world. 

II.  The  Gospel  method  of  salvation,  by  Jesus  Christ,  as  "  the 
way  of  righteousness,"  justifying,  sanctifying,  and  practical,  as  set 
forth  in  "  the  holy  commandments  delivered  unto"  believers. 

III.  How  persons  may  be  "  entangled"  and  overcome  by 
heresy,  schism,  and  sin. 

IV.  The  last  state  worse  than  the  first,  because  they  so  highly 
dishonour  God,  and  wound  the  cause  of  Christ ;  and  because  of 
the  great  difficulties  attending  their  recovery  ;  from  which  causes 
arise  the  great  danger  of  eternal  perdition. 

Monday  13.  At  the  new  chapel  at  Warrington  my  subject  was 


1805.  j  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  183 

Mark  xi.  17.     Joreph  Crawford  followed  upon  Mark  x.  9.     Next 
day  I  preached  at  Cowles's  iron  works. 

Wednesday  20.  We  reached  Augusta, 

Thursday  21.   I  rested.     I  preached  at  Spent  Creek  on  Friday. 

Saturday  23.  Joseph  Crawford  took  the  pulpit.  I  rode  twenty- 
five  miles  on  Friday,  to  preach  to  twenty-five  souls  ;  the  appoint- 
ment had  not  been  made  for  me. 

Sunday  24.  I  preached  in  Augusta. 

Monday  25.  I  bore  up  for  South  Carolina,  and  came  to  Barn- 
well court-house  :  I  was  kindly  entertained  by  Mr.  Powers. 

Tuesday  23.  We  reached  Jacob  Bar's. 

Wednesday  24.  We  reached  Mr.  Perry's  ;  and  next  day  came 
into  Charleston.  From  Augusta  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles,  heavy 
rides  ;  and  weary  men  and  horses.  I  was  under  some  dejection  of 
spirits.  I  have  lately  read  the  Life  of  David  Brainard  :  a  man  of  my 
make,  such  a  constitution,  and  of  great  labours  ;  his  religion  was  all 
gold,  the  purest  gold.  My  eyes  fail;  I  must  keep  them  for  the  Bible 
and  the  conferences. 

South  Carolina. — Friday  29.  Engaged  in  closet  exercises.  I 
do  not  find  matters  as  I  wish  :  one  preacher  has  deserted  his  sta- 
tion ;  and  there  are  contentions  amongst  the  Africans. 

Saturday  30.  My  soul  is  deeply  oppressed  with  a  heavy  sea  of 
troubles. 

Sunday,  December  1.  {{  Still  heavy  is  my  heart ;  still  sink  my 
spirits  down."  At  Cumberland-street  church  I  spoke  upon  Rev. 
vii.  13 — 17.     My  two  general  heads  of  discourse  were-— 

I.  The  gracious,  although  afflicted  state  of  God's  people  in  this 
world. 

II.  The  glorious  and  happy  state  of  the  righteous  in  heaven. 
Our  lower  floor  was  nearly  filled  with  communicants  ;  white  and 

black.  Do  they  all  indeed  "discern  the  Lord's  body?"  It  will 
never  do  for  me  to  record  all  I  fear,  hear,  and  think.  At  Bethel 
church  I  took  for  my  text  Rom.  xii.  9 — 12.  I  observed  that  the 
text  contained  evangelical  Christian  duties,  privileges,  promises, 
and  marks,  by  which  we  might  judge  of  ourselves  as  Christians. 
That  if  these  marks,  and  this  experience,  were  not  upon  us  and  in 
us,  we  could  not  be  Christians.  Within  twenty  years  I  have  visit- 
ed  this  place,  going  and  returning,  at  least  thirty  times. 

Saturday  7.  Since  Monday,  amongst  other  occupations,  I  have 
been  employed  in  reading  one  thousand  pages  of  Mr.  Atmore's 


184  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1805. 

Memorial,  and  Mr.  Wesley's  Journal ;  these  books  suit  me  best,  1 
see  there  the  rise  and  progress  of  Methodism. 

I  met  the  members  of  society,  white  and  black,  in  small  compa- 
nies in  our  own  house.  I  gave  my  advice  as  to  temporals.  I  re- 
commended the  painting  of  (he  new,  and  the  enlargement  of  the 
old  church  to  eighty  feet  by  forty  :  to  enlarge  the  preacher's  house., 
and  to  buy  another  burying  ground.  Besides  praying  regularly 
after  every  meal  in  our  own  house,  I  am  obliged  to  go  through 
this  exercise  many  times,  daily,  with  the  poor  negroes.  I  feel  that 
I  want  to  go  hence,  but  not  until  my  God  and  Guide  gives  me 
liberty.  I  wait  to  know  his  will  about  going  to  Georgetown,  two 
hundred  and  thirty  miles,  before  the  Camden  conference.  I  wrote 
a  letter  to  Mr.  Atmore  advising  of  affairs  of  the  society  and  of  my 
own  ;  and  counselled  him  to  pursue  the  good  work  he  is  engaged 
in,  and  bend  all  his  strength  to  the  Memorial. 

Sunday  8.  I  was  in  great  heaviness  through  manifold  tempta- 
tions, yet  I  preached  in  Cumberland-street,  in  the  morning,  and  at 
Bethel  in  the  afternoon.  I  was  happy,  and  hrid  great  openings.  I 
fear,  sometimes,  that  my  commission  will  wear  out  amongst  one  de- 
scription of  people  here.  Religion  of  a  certain  kind  must  be  very 
valuable,  since  we  spend  so  much  to  support  it.  There  must  be  a 
prodigious  revival  in  the  Independent  society,  a  building  of  theirs 
will  cost  fifty,  or  perhaps,  one  hundred  thousand  dollars  :  there  is 
a  holy  strife  between  its  members  and  the  Episcopalians,  who  shall 
have  the  highest  steeple  ;  but  I  believe  there  is  no  contention 
about  who  shall  have  the  most  souls  converted  to  God. 

Monday  9.  Reading  and  receiving  all  visitors  who  come  to  our 
house,  with  counsel  and  prayer,  from  room  to  room,  with  white  and 
black. 

Tuesday  10.  We  have  goodly  weather.  God,  by  his  Spirit  and  his 
providences,  tells  us  we  must  set  out  to-morrow  for  Georgetown.  I 
doubt  if  in  Charleston  we  have  joined  more  than  one  hundred  and 
seventy-eight  members  of  the  fair  skin  in  twenty  years  ;  and  seldom 
are  there  more  than  fifty  or  sixty  annually  returned  :  death,  deser- 
tion, backsliding  :  poor  fickle  souls,  unstable  as  water,  light  as  air, 
bodies  and  minds ! 

Wednesday  11.  We  rode  to  Monk's  Corner,  and  lodged  at  Mr. 
Hatchett's. 

Thursday  12.  We  pursued  a  blind  road  to  the  ferry.  We  came 
on  to  Murray's,  and  continued  along  to  Mr.  Coleman's,  a  German. 


1805.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASEURY5S  JOURNAL.  185 

Next  day  we  reached  Rembert  Hall.     We  had  hot  weather — man 
and  beast  felt  the  burden. 

Some  of  my  northern  letters  have  come  in  :  they  bring  good 
news — camp- meetings  at  Albany,  New- York  ;  at  Lebanon,  Ver- 
mont ;  in  the  New-Hampshire  districts— all  successful.  But  O,  the 
wonders  of  Doctor  Chandler's  report !  He  says  his  authority 
bids  him  say,  that  at  Duck-Creek  camp-meeting  five  hundred  souls  ; 
at  Accomack  camp-meeting  four  hundred  ;  at  Annamessex  chapel, 
in  the  woods,  two  hundred  ;  at  Somerset,  Line-chapel,  one  hundred 
and  twenty  ;  at  Todd's  chapel,  Dorset,  two  hundred  ;  at  Caroline 
quarterly  meeting  seventy-five :  all,  all  these  profess  to  have 
received  converting  grace  ! 

Saturday  14.  I  committed  the  remains  of  Abijah  Rembert  to  the 
dust.  He  was  sixty-two  years  of  age  ;  the  last  sixteen  years  of 
which  he  had  been  a  member  of  society.  He  was  visited  by,  and 
greatly  blessed  under  the  word  at  camp-meeting  :  in  his  last  illness 
he  was  patient,  happy,  and  confident :  he  died  in  the  Lord.  I  was 
unwell  on  the  Sabbath  day  ;  but  wrote  a  long  letter  to  Freeborn 
Garrettson.  My  soul  greatly  rejoiceth  in  the  Lord,  and  exults  in 
the  prosperity  of  Zion.  Brother  Crawford  preached  in  the  mor- 
ning, and  1  lectured  in  the  evening  in  Rembert-Hall.  On  Monday 
I  wrote  to  elders  Brodhead  and  Chandler.  This  week  writing 
letters  and  reading  Haweis's  Church  History.  By  this  work  I 
learn  it  is  the  author's  opinion,  that  the  evangelists  were  chief, 
superintending,  episcopal  men  :  aye,  so  say  I :  and  that  they  pre- 
scribed forms  of  discipline,  and  systematized  codes  of  doctrine. 
After  the  death  of  the  apostles,  it  would  appear  that  the  elders 
elected  the  most  excellent  men  to  superintend  :  this  course  was 
doubtless  the  most  expedient  and  excellent.  Every  candid  inquirer 
after  truth  will  acknowledge,  upon  reading  church  history,  that  it 
was  a  great  and  serious  evil  introduced,  when  philosophy  and 
human  learning  were  taught  as  a  preparation  for  a  Gospel  ministry. 
"  Hitherto,"  says  our  author,  in  his  observations  on  the  close  of 
the  second  century,  "  not  a  man  of  eminence  for  science  or  letters, 
had  appeared  in  the  church  ;  all,  of  this  time,  whose  works  have 
come  down  to  us,  give  thereby  no  evidence  of  human  attainments  ; 
they  bear  the  stamp  of  simplicity."  Yet  by  these  the  Gospel  had 
been  supported  in  its  purity,  spreading  it  by  their  labours  to  the 
ends  of  the  earth  ;  and  these  were  they  who  helped  to  fill  the 
bloody  ranks  of  the  noble  army  of  martyrs. 

Vol.  III.  24 


186  liEV.     FRANCIS   ASRURYS  JOURNAL.  [ISOti. 

On  the  Sabbath  day  I  preached  a  funeral  sermon  for  Abijah 
Rembert.  There  is  a  revival  in  the  society  here — so  much  for 
camp-meetings.  I  am  now  in  the  fortieth  year  of  my  labours  in 
the  ministry  :  thirty -four  years  of  this  time  have  been  in  America, 
counting  from  October  28,  1771,  to  October  28,  1805. 

On  the  Christmas  day  I  preached  at  Rembert's  chapel :  my  sub- 
ject, 1  Tim.  iii.  16.  "  Without  controversy,  great  is  the  mystery 
of  godliness,"  &c. 

I.  I  gave  a  pastoral  introduction. 

II.  A  brief  explanation  of  godliness — the  knowledge  of  God  in 
Christ  Jesus— confidence  in  God  ;  love  to  Him  ;  fear  of  offending 
Him.  To  this  were  added  a  tew  thoughts  on  the  six  cases  in  the 
text.  It  was  not  a  pleasant  season  :  Christmas  day  is  the  worst  in 
the  whole  year  on  which  to  preach  Christ — at  least  to  me. 

George  Dougherty  informs  me  that  the  wife  of  John  Randle, 
upon  Pee- Dee  (known  by  the  name  of  dumb  John)  died  in  great 
peace  and  joy,  after  a  thirty  years'  profession  of  religion  amongst 
the  Baptists  and  Methodists  :  safe  anchorage— clear  gains  !  But  I 
have  similar  accounts  from  various  parts  ;  my  soul  triumphs  in  the 
triumphant  deaths  of  these  saints.     Glory  be  to  God  S 

Thursday  26.  I  rested  and  read  ;  and  on  Friday  rode  into  Cam- 
den. I  was  favoured  with  a  number  of  letters  giving  accounts  of 
revivals  of  religion.  Saturday  employed  my  pen.  Sabbath  day 
1  preached. 

Monday  30.    We  opened  our  conference. 

January  4,  1806.  We  closed  our  conference  in  great  peace  and 
order  :  no  murmurs  about  the  stations  from  preachers  or  people. 
Since  we  came  here  we  have  had  twenty  six  sermons  ;  one  of 
which  I  preached  upon  1  Tim.  iv.  12.  "  Let  no  man  despise  thy 
youth."  Brother  Wrhatcoat  ordained  the  deacons.  We  see  no 
immediate  fruit  of  our  labours  ;  but  doubtless  we  shall  hear  of  it, 
following  our  many  prayers  night  and  day. 

Monday  6.  Seven  of  us  came  away  in  company  to  Mr.  Evans's, 
Lynch's  Creek  ;  and  next  day  I  parted  from  brother  M'Kendree, 
bending  my  course  to  Jerningham's,  in  Anson  county,  North 
Carolina. 

North  Carolina. — On  Wednesday  we  crossed  Well's  ferry 
after  waiting  an  hour :  a  snow  storm  kept  with  us  from  Pee-Dee 
to  Rockingham  ;  here  the  people  would  have  assembled,  but  there 
was  a  wedding  afoot ;  this  is  a  matter  of  moment,  as  some  men 


J8G6.]  I'.EV.  FRANCIS  ASBUR¥;S  JGUElUf.,  1ST 

have  but  one  during  life,  and  some  find  that  one  to  have  been  one 
too  many. 

On  Thursday  a  cold,  cold  ride  of  twenty  miles  without  stopping, 
was  as  much  as  we  could  well  bear  ;  after  warming  we  took  the 
rode  again,  and  came  to  Smith's,  twelve  miles.  This  week  we 
have  had  heat  for  the  1st  of  June;  and  cold  and  snow  for 
January. 

On  Friday  we  reached  Fayetteville  ;  putting  up  with  John 
Lumsden,  near  the  African  church.  1  felt  that  I  had  taken  a  deep 
cold.  I  was  busy  on  Saturday  in  answering  letters.  Joseph 
Crawford,  that  he  might  not  be  idle,  preached  to  the  Africans  in 
the  evenings. 

Sabbath  day  12.    Unwell  ;  nevertheless,  I  took  the  pulpit. 

Monday  morning  we  made  a  start  for  Wilmington,  and  came  to 
the  widow  Anderson's,  forty-six  miles.  Next  day  we  took  the 
round  about  way  by  the  bridges,  and  made  forty-five  miles  ;  to 
ride  ninety-one  miles  within  day-light,  in  two  days,  kept  us  busy-— - 
but  we  are  safe  in  Wilmington.  My  affliction  upon  my  breast 
was  great. 

Wednesday  15.  We  rest.  It  is  very  cold — ice  in  the  tubs 
and  pails. 

Sabbath  day  19.  I  preached  on  that  great  subject,  Coloss.  i. 
27,  28. ;  we  had  about  fifteen  hundred  hearers  in  our  house  of 
worship,  sixty-six  by  thirty-three  feet,  galleried  all  around.  There 
may  be  five  thousand  souls  in  Wilmington  ;  one  fourth  of  which 
number,  it  may  be,  were  present.  Joseph  Crawford  preached  in 
the  afternoon  and  at  night.  I  gave  order  for  the  completion  of  the 
tabernacle  and  dwelling-house,  according  to  the  charge  left  me  by 
William  Meredith. 

Monday  20.  On  our  way  to  Newbern  we  stopped  with  Mr. 
Nixon,  at  Topsail :  his  house  and  heart  are  always  open  to  the 
faithful  ministers  of  Christ.  I  have  been  greatly  afflicted  with 
cold  ;  but  exceedingly  happy  in  God — I  live  in  love. 

On  Tuesday  we  had  a  solitary  ride  to  Lot  Ballard's,  New-River. 
Hail  prosperity  ! — the  chapel  shaded — a  revival  amongst  white  and 
black  :  Lot  lives  in  Jerusalem. 

Wednesday  22.  A  heavy  storm  of  rain.  I  rode  to  Eli  Perry's, 
son  of  John  ;  here  is  a  son  of  faith  and  prayer  ;  I  walked  with  his 
dear  good  father  ;  now,  I  trust,  in  the  paradise  of  God.  I  met 
elder  Bruce  ;  all  our  talk  is — what  hath  God  wrought !  In  Beau- 
fort  the  Lord  hath  put  forth  his  power  :  the  whole  town  seems 


188  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURv's  JOURNAL.  [1306. 

disposed  to  bow  to  the  sceptre  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ;  after  being  left 
and  visited  again,  within  the  last  twenty  years,  by  his  faithful 
ministers. 

Thursday  23.  We  came  into  Newbern,  twenty-three  miles  :  the 
prospects  here  are  good.  The  providence  of  God  was  manifested 
in  our  preservation  to-day.  Our  horses  took  fright  whilst  in  the 
wagon,  and  went  off  like  fire  :  they  happily  struck,  and  locked  a 
wheel  on  a  poplar  ;  the  swingle-tree  snapped,  no  more  :  less 
damage,  if  any,  could  scarcely  have  been  done. 

Saturday  25.  I  have  read  the  Jewish  Antiquities.  I  have  read 
Mungo  Park's  Travels  in  Africa  ;  certain  parts  are  so  extraordi- 
nary, that  it  appeared  like  a  romance.  If  true,  he  experienced 
astonishing  hardships.  It  would  seem  by  this  narrative,  that  the 
Africans  are  in  a  state  so  wretched,  any  sufferings  with  the  Gospel, 
would  be  submitted  to  in  preference.     But  I  have  my  doubts. 

Sabbath  day  26.  I  preached  upon  Hebr.  x.  37,  38,  39. — it  was 
a  time  and  a  testimony  that  was  felt. 

Monday  27.  It  is  as  pleasant  as  May  :  the  rivers  are  very  low. 
We  came  with  great  ease  to  Washington  ;  and  lodged  one  night. 
Joseph  Crawford  did  not  let  that  awful   town  go  unwarned. 

On  Tuesday  we  took  the  road  and  came  to  James  Williams's, 
on  Tranter's  Creek.  G.  Floyd  died  in  the  Lord  a  few  days  ago  : 
he  was  a  man  of  affliction,  and  a  man  of  God — but  not  a  preacher. 
At  the  new  chapel,  I  spoke  on  Wednesday  on  1  Peter  iii.  14.  I 
was  very  warm  upon  death,  the  resurrection,  judgment,  and  glory. 
I  visited  brother  Knowis,  and  saw  sister  Hinton  and  the  widow 
Williams,  on  their  way  to  glory. 

Thursday  30.  We-  came  very  pleasantly  to  Williamstown.  I 
was  afflicted  with  a  severe  pain  in  my  foot.  On  Friday  1  was 
busy  planning;  but  in  pain. 

Saturday,  February  1.  We  came  twenty  miles  to  the  widow 
Williams's,  near  Taylor's  ferry.  On  the  Sabbath  I  preached  on 
Acts  xvii.  30,  31.  "  Now  he  commandeth  all  men  every  where  to 
repent." 

I.  The  nature  of  repentance — the  whole  of  religion. 

II.  The  universality  of  repentance — all  orders,  stations,  charac- 
ters, must  repent. 

III.  The  possibility  of,  and  the  provision  made  for,  repentance — 
the  gift  of  Christ — the  death  of  Christ— the  agency  of  the  Spirit — 
the  preaching  of  the  Gospel — the  means  of  grace. 


IUOQ.]  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  189 

IV.  Necessity  of  repentance — from  the  considerations  of  the 
fall  and  our  own  actual  transgressions— a  future  state  and  general 
judgment. 

V.  The  time  for  repentance — now — this  Gospel  day  of  grace. 
Monday  3.  We  lodged  at  B.  Pinner's,  on  the  east  side  of  Roan- 
oke, Northampton  county. 

Tuesday  4.  We  lodged  at  the  widow  Meredith's,  in  Murfreesburg. 
We  crossed  Mannu's  Ferry  next  day,  and  came  to  the  widow 
Baker's,  Notty  Pine. 

Thursday  6.  I  preached  at  Daniel  Southall's,  Gates  court-house  : 
my  subject  was  Rev  iii.  5.  I  was  pleased  to  see  so  many  come 
out  upon  so  short  a  notice  ;  may  they  overcome  !  From  Camden 
to  Gates  court-house  1  compute  four  hundred  and  eighty  miles. 

Friday  7.  We  came  to  Edenton.  At  Joshua  Manning's.  Satur- 
day, rested,  and  read,  and  wrote.  I  begin  to  prepare  my  mind  and 
my  papers  for  the  conference.  On  the  Sabbath  1  preached  in  the 
court-house  upon  2  Cor.  v    20. 

Monday  10.  We  started  and  came  rapidly  along,  calling  to  see 
Martin  Ross,  a  Baptist  minister,  by  the  way.  We  lodged  with 
Colonel  Hamilton,  Elizabeth  city.  On  Tuesday  we  reached  James 
Wilson's,  North-Wesi  Roads,  Norfolk  county.  It  takes  many  jolts 
to  ride  one  hundred  miles  over  rough  roads,  in  two  days  and  a  half. 
I  called  upon  John  Hodges  :  I  feel  seriously  for  his  soul's  welfare. 
I  saw  the  grave  of  sister  Wilson  :  these  were  profitable  visits  to  me. 

Virginia. — Friday  14.  Virginia  conference  began  in  Norfolk; 
progressed  peaceably,  and  ended  on  Thursday.  One  member  op- 
posed all  petitions  from  the  people  for  conference  sittings  :  he  also 
condemned  all  epistles  from  the  sister  conferences,  as  being  too 
long  and  pompons  ;  and  as  likely  to  make  innovations.  He  dictated 
an  epistle  himself  by  way  of  sample,  to  show  how  epistles  ought  to 
be  written  :  the  committee  of  addresses  wrote  one  too  ;  but  it  was 
rejected,  as  being  too  much  like  that  of  the  objecting  member, 
whose  epistle  was  rejected,  as  being  too  much  like  himself:  the 
conference  voted  that  none  should  be  sent.  Strange,  that  such  an 
affair  should  occupy  the  time  of  so  many  good  men !  Religion  will 
do  great  things  :  but  it  does  not  make  Solomons. 

We  had  preaching  morn,-  and  noon,  and  night;  large  congrega- 
tions, and  many  souls  engaged.  We  have  reason  to  hope  that  nearly 
one  hundred  souls  were  under  the  operations  of  grace.  I  ordained 
two  elders  ;  and  brother  Whatcoat  twelve  deacons. 


190  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [180G. 

We  have  a  rich  supply  of  preachers  for  every  circuit ;  and  an 
addition  of  two  thousand  three  hundred  and  ninety-eight  in  num- 
bers, exclusive  of  the  dead,  expelled,  withdrawn,  and  removed. 

Friday  21.  We  came  away  to  Suffolk  ;  next  day  came  to  Gerard 
Wills's,  Isle  of  Wight.  On  Sunday,  at  Blunt's  chapel,  1  spoke  on 
Hebr.  xiii.  13.  It  was  not  a  great  meeting  1  have  not  had  a  good 
night's  rest  until  last  night,  for  the  last  twenty  days  :  during  the 
sitting  of  conference,  five  hours  was  as  much  as  I  could  get  in  the 
twenty-four.     I  feel  happy  in  God  continually. 

Monday  24.  We  came  to  Bernard  Major's,  Surrey  county  ;  on 
Tuesday  to  Petersburg  ;  and  Wednesday  to  Richmond  :  I  had  no 
time  to  preach  ;  but  Joseph  Crawford  gave  them  a  sermon  in  each 
place.  On  Thursday  we  left  the  capitol,  and  came  on  to  Lyon's, 
Caroline  ;  on  Friday  got  to  Fredericksburg. 

Saturday,  March  I.  We  rode  to  brother  Samford's,  Poick,  within 
twelve  miles  of  Alexandria.  Cold  for  certain.  Sunday,  brother 
Whatcoat  preached  in  the  forenoon,  and  myself  in  the  afternoon, 
in  Alexandria.  The  cold  was  great,  and  the  wind  piercing.  On 
Monday  we  rode  to  Georgetown. 

Maryland. — Tuesday  4.  I  preached  ;  my  subject  was,  "Godli- 
ness is  profitable  unto  all  things :"  it  was  a  feeling,  quickening  time 
to  myself  and  others. 

Wednesday  5.  I  was  employed  writing  to  the  missionaries  in  the 
Mississippi  Territory.  Company  does  not  amuse,  congress  does 
not  interest  me  :  I  am  a  man  of  another  world,  in  mind  and  call- 
ing :  1  am  Christ's  ;  and  for  the  service  of  his  church  Some 
years  past,  I  called  at  Mr.  M  's,  in  Calvert  county  :  I  acted  as  I  do 
in  all  houses  :  now  I  have  found  one  of  his  son  s  a  member  of  the 
Georgetown  society.  Does  God  alway  hear  prayer,  and  answer 
it?  If  it  is  in  the  Spirit's  groaning,  and  in  purity  of  intention,  and 
in  faith,  doubtless  He  does. 

Friday  7.  We  set  out  to  Spurrier's — all  my  old  friends  are  dead 
or  removed.  Saturday  brought  us  to  Baltimore.  Sunday,  at 
Light-street,  my  subject  was  Col.  i.  28.  :  at  the  African  church, 
Col   i.  0— 12. 

Monday  10.  Rested,  wrote,  and  received  friends. 

Tuesday  II.  My  mind  is  wholly  for  God.  What  hath  the  Lord 
wrought,  and  what  is  he  still  doing  ?  Scarcely  a  letter  from  any 
one  that  does  not  tell  us  good  news  of  the  work  of  God,  as  our 
yearly  letter-book  will  testify. 


1306.]  BEV.  prancis  asburv's  journal.  191 

Friday  14.  Our  conference  began  in  great  peace. 

Friday  21.  The  stations  were  read  off,  and  all  concluded  in  great 
peace:  never  had  we  a  better  conference  in  Baltimore.  An  an- 
swer was  given  to  Doctor  Coke's  letter,  1  fear,  in  a  manner  that 
will  not  please  him.  An  order  was  passed  that  the  answer  should 
be  presented  to  all  the  annual  conferences.  It  was  also  recom- 
mended to  the  annual  conferences  to  consider  on  the  propriety  of 
having  a  select,  delegated  conference  :  the  eastern,  western,  and 
southern  conferences  were  counselled  to  take  such  measures  as 
they,  in  their  wisdom,  might  see  best,  to  produce  a  more  equal 
representation  from  their  several  bodies  to  the  general  conference. 

On  the  Sabbath,  (16th)  1  preached  at  Fell's-Point  :  my  subject 
Isai.  lxi.  1.  **  For  Zion's  sake  1  will  not  hold  my  peace."  Intro- 
duction.— Zion — the  interests  and  welfare  of  the  church  :  Jerusa- 
lem— the  interests  of  the  stale.  General  propositions. — On  what 
principles  we  should  calculate  the  true  interests  of  the  church  and 
state — who  are  concerned — what  are  the  ways  and  means  ;  and 
what  the  instruments  to  be  used  for  the  promotion  of  their  wel- 
fare. At  Oldtown  I  also  gave  them  a  talk:  my  subject  Psalm  li. 
"Then  will  1  teach  transgressors  thy  ways,  and  sinners  shall  be 
converted  to  thee."  On  Thursday  we  had  an  ordination  of  elders  : 
I  preached  on  the  occasion,  my  subject  was  1  Peter  v.  1 — 4. 
The  work  of  God  went  on  in  all  the  four  congregations,  night  and 
day  :  there  might  be  thirty  souls  converted  ;  but  I  hope  we  had 
one  hundred  under  the  operations  of  grace.  We  had  nearly  ninety 
members  On  the  conference  list ;  eighty-three  of  whom  were  sta- 
tioned. On  Saturday  I  went  to  Perry-Hall,  to  enjoy  a  calm  after 
such  a  storm  of  labour. 

Sunday  23.  I  preached  at  Perry  Hall ;  and  after  the  snow  ceased, 
came  away  to  Joseph  Dallam's,  twenty  miles. 

Tuesday  25.  We  crossed  Susquehannah.  Calm  and  cold.  Dined 
at  Howel's  North  ;  and  lodged  at  Mr.  Moody's,  having  called  in 
for  a  minute  at  Back-Creek  ;  by  riding  a  little  in  the  night,  we  have 
made  little  short  of  fifty  miles  to-day. 

Wednesday  26.  1  preached  at  Georgetown  Cross-Roads — Ah  I 
there  is  death  in  the  pot  here.  I  rode  on  to  Chestertown.  On  Thurs- 
day I  spoke  in  the  new,  neat  chapel  in  Kent;  and  was  long  and  la- 
boured. 1  visited  Cavil  Hynson  ;  after  a  twenty  years'  separation, 
we  who  were  left  were  comforted  in  God  together.  I  have  made 
twenty-four  miles  to-day — feeble,  and  afflicted  with  a  cold  and  sore- 
throat ;  but  happy  in  God.  The  appointment  for  Friday,  at  Centre- 


192  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL.  [1806. 

ville,  was  filled  by  Bishop  Whatcoat.  After  dining  with  Thomas 
Wright,  I  rode  on  to  Mr.  Lockerman's.  1  preached  at  Easton 
on  Saturday;  my  subject  Rom.  xiv.  19.  "  Let  us  follow  after  the 
things  that  make  for  peace,"  &c.  In  their  estimate  of  the  things 
of  the  world,  as  also  of  the  ceremonials  of  religion,  men  will 
widely  differ  : — these  objects,  to  a  divinely  illuminated  mind,  are 
not  worth  the  dispute  they  frequently  occasion.  But  the  things 
most  worthy  of  all  our  attention,  and  our  most  engaged  and  dili- 
gent following  after,  are  the  things  that  make  for  peace,  and  promote 
the  soul's  edification — and  these  are  the  great  things  of  God  ;  the 
love  of  God  ;  the  death  of  Christ  ;  the  operations  of  his  Spirit; 
and  the  deep  things  of  God,  respecting  *sanctification  and  eternal 
glory.  I  stay  at  Captain  Frazer's,  Caroline  county.  My  hoarse- 
ness is  afflictive,  but  my  soul  is  filled  with  God. 

Sabbath  29.  A  very  dry  season.  My  mind  was  greatly  engaged 
for  a  spiritual  rain — and  temporal  also.  The  Chesapeak  district, 
so  far,  is  not  promising  :  the  people's  minds  are  agitated  about 
stationed  preachers,  some  for,  and  some  against.  The  devil  would 
rather  they  would  do  something  worse  than  disagree  ;  but  this 
to  him  is  better  than  nothing.  1  only  exhorted  a  little  at  Frazer's 
chapel,  and  after  meeting  rode  home  with  Thomas  Forster — of  the 
old  stamp  and  steady. 

Monday  30.  I  rode  down  to  Cambridge,  and  preached  at  eleven 
o'clock  :  my  subject  Psalm  li.  9,  10.  ;  1  felt  assisted. 

Tuesday,  April  1.  We  returned  to  Thomas  Foster's.  I  saw 
Joseph  Everitt,  feeble,  but  faithful  ;  in  patient  waiting  for  his  Lord. 

Delaware. — Wednesday  2.  At  Brown's  chapel  I  spoke  on 
2  Cor.  vi.  1.  "  We  then,  as  workers  together  with  him,  beseech 
you  also  that  ye  receive  not  the  grace  of  God  in  vain." 

I.  The  Gospel  dispensation. 

II.  The  revival  of  religion. 

III.  The  operations  of  grace  in  enabling  believers  to  make 
advances  in  the  divine  life : — this  was  the  grand  point  urged,  to 
wit :  that  God  giveth  grace  to  prepare  for  more — grace  for  grace 
— convictions  for  sin  that  they  may  repent — repentance  that  they 
may  believe— justification  that  they  may  be  convinced  of  indwell- 
ing sin— this  convincement  will  evidence  to  believers  the  neces- 
sity of  sanctification  :  from  whence  follows  faithfulness  unto  death, 
and  the  crown  of  glory. 

The  work  of  God  revives  :  the  chapel  will  soon  be  neatly 
finished  ;  the  second  generation  are  filling  the  house,  and  joining 


1806/J  REV.  FRANCIS  asbury's  journal.  193 

their  labours  to  what  myself  and  their  fathers  did  in  the  days  of 
their  fathers. 

I  lodged  at  brother  Davis's.  They  have  built  a  good  chapel  at 
Deep-Creek.  I  exhorted  here  on  Thursday  after  Joseph  Craw- 
ford had  preached.  We  dined  at  brother  Baker's,  and  came  on 
to  Salisbury,  Maryland  ;  here  the  work  revives  ;  Joseph  Craw- 
ford preached  ;  I  was  unwell. 

Virginia. — Friday  5.  We  came  to  William  Downing's,  Virginia. 
At  Downing's  chapel  I  spoke  on  Rev.  ii.  10.  After  sermon  we 
rode  to  Accomack,  and  lodged  at  Mr.  Seymour's  :  here  Joseph 
Crawford  preached  in  the  evening. 

Sunday  6.  That  no  time  might  be  lost  we  started  away  at  eight 
o'clock  in  the  morning  to  brother  Watts's,  twenty-seven  miles  ; 
my  subjest  was  Isaiah  xxxiii.  14,  15,  16.  "  The  sinners  in  Zion 
are  afraid,"  &c.  I  preached  in  the  court-house,  Accomack  :  it 
was  an  alarming  season.  The  cold  was  great ;  and  the  winds  are 
high.     No  rain — it  is  judgment  weather — O  Lord,  arise  ! 

Monday  7.  At  Snow-Hill  my  subject  was  Hebr.  iii.  12,  13,  14. 
A  blessed  rain  came  on  before  sermon  and  continued  after  it.  We 
rode  fifteen  miles  to  brother  Hazzard's,  Poplar-Town,  state  of 
Dele  ware. 

Delaware. — Tuesday  8.  We  rode  forty  miles  to  Broadkiln- 
Town  :  I  spoke  on  1  Cor.  xv.  58. 

Wednesday  9.  I  preached  at  Milford,  and  then  rode  on  to 
Dover,  and  took  up  father  Whatcoat ;  on  the  way  he  was  taken, 
with  a  fit  of  the  gravel,  and  I  was  afraid  would  die.  I  preached 
in  Dover  next  day.  We  afterward  rode  to  Duck-Creek  Cross- 
Roads  in  a  snow  storm.  Here  the  people  are  all  very  fervent, 
and  the  children  praise  the  Lord  :  Joseph  Crawford  preached. 

Friday  11.  We  came  in  on  as  cold  a  day  as  one  would  wish  who 
was  fond  of  extremes,  to  Wilmington,  forty  miles.  Ah !  but  I 
must  preach — well.  I  gave  them  a  sermon  at  seven  o'clock. 
The  Africans  here  have  a  house  to  themselves,  of  stone,  and  equal 
in  size  to  that  of  the  whites. 

Pennsylvania. — Saturday  12,  brought  us  to  Philadelphia.  From 
Baltimore,  round  by  the  eastern  shore  hither,  has  cost  us,  by  com- 
putation, five  hundred  and  fifty  miles.  I  have  been  greatly  sup- 
ported in  body  and  mind  ;  glory  be  to  God  ! 

Sabbath  13.  I  preached  at  St.  George's  upon  2  Peter  i.  12,  13, 
14.  ;  at  the  Academy  I  spoke  on  James  v.  7,  8.  Many  of  the 
preachers  were  already  in  the  city  for  conference.     In  the  sitting 

Vol.  Ill,  25 


194  REV.  FRANCIS   ASBUIiv'S  JOURNAL.  [1806. 

of  conference  we  had  so  much  irregular,  desultory  work,  that  we 
went  on  slowly.  We  had  sixty-three  members  present  for  travel- 
ling, besides  those  to  be  received  in  locations,  and  as  supernume- 
rary and  worn  out.  Doctor  Coke's  letter  was  answered  by  a  com- 
mittee of  ten  preachers. 

Monday  21.  Conference  rose.  Of  seventy-six  preachers  sta- 
tioned, all  appeared  to  be  pleased  but  two  or  three,  and  they,  nor 
any  one  else,  can  know  the  difficulties  I  had  to  encounter  in  the 
arrangement  of  the  stations.  Brother  Whatcoat  was  left  very  ill 
at  Dover — perhaps  he  is  dead.  Eight  deacons  and  six  elders 
were  ordained.  I  preached  three  times.  I  hope  many  souls  will 
be  converted  in  consequence  of  the  coming  together  of  this  con- 
ference ;  having  had  great  peace  in  the  societies,  and  sound,  sure 
preaching  three  times  a  day. 

New-Jersey. — Tuesday  22.  We  came  to  Gloucester-Point,  and 
on  to  Carpenter's  bridge  ;  here  we  have  a  Quaker-Methodist 
meeting-house  :  I  preached  upon  2  Peter  i.  4. ;  heavy  as  I  was, 
I  had  some  openings.  I  visited  my  old  friends  Thomas  and  Mar- 
garet Taper.  At  Sharptown  on  Wednesday — no  appointment.  I 
walked  to  the  meeting-house  ;  in  the  burying-ground  I  9aw  the 
graves  of  some  of  the  faithful  ;  amongst  these  that  of  John  Vanne- 
man,  once  a  travelling  preacher.  We  rode  to  John  Frith's,  Salem 
— no  appointment. 

Thursday  24.  We  returned  to  William  Dilkes's. 

Friday  25.  Except  a  few  wandering  thoughts,  I  feel  great  peace 
and  holiness  to  God  in  my  soul.  I  preached  at  Bethel  upon  Rom. 
xii.  1,  2.  We  lodged  at  Daniel  Bates's.  I  spoke  upon  1  Cor.  x. 
12,  13.     We  had  a  ride  of  thirty- five  or  forty  miles  to-day. 

Sunday  28.  I  preached  at  Burlington  once  more  :  my  subject 
was  2  Peter  iii.  9.  c<  The  Lord  is  not  slack  concerning  his  pro- 
mise," &c.  The  characters  to  whom  repentance  is  essentially 
necessary — the  unawakened  ;  the  unfaithful ;  the  backslidden. 
The  repentance  of  believers — the  consciousness  of  indwelling  sin, 
improved  by  faith  and  prayer  is  productive  of  holiness.  The 
gracious  will  of  God  is,  to  furnish  means,  men,  and  opportu- 
nities, because  he  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  until 
they  have  a  suitable  trial.  The  coming  of  the  Lord  was  his  judi- 
dicial  appearing  to  say,  depart,  ye  cursed;  or  if  understood  as  some 
judicial  displays  of  his  wrath,  his  coming  will  not  be  the  less  cer- 
tain because  of  delay  ;  for  one  day  is  as  a  thousand  vear;?,  and  a 
thousand  years  as  one  day  with  the  Lord. 


1806.  J  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  195 

Monday  29.  I  spoke  at  New-Mills  on  1  Thess.  v.  23.  I  visited 
Richard  Swain  :  there  were  several  preachers,  and  some  others 
present,  and  the  Lord's  supper  was  partaken. 

Tuesday  30.  I  preached  at  Mount  Zion,  in  the  woods,  near  a 
little  town  called  Egypt.  We  dined  at  Fuller  Horner's,  and  rode 
on  to  Stephen  Brakelow's.  We  have  made  nearly  forty  miles 
to-day.     I  enjoy  great  evenness  of  mind,  and  life  in  my  labours. 

Wednesday  31.  I  preached  at  Lower-Freehold.  1  came  home 
with  Simon  Pyle  : — Ah  !  what  a  death  there  is  in  the  Leonard 
family  ! 

Thursday,  May  1,  I  breakfasted  with  Throckmorton  :  his  loss  is 
his  gain — he  has  lost  his  birth-right  as  a  citizen  of  the  state,  but  he 
has  the  blessing  of  God  on  his  soul.  I  preached  at  Cheesecake 
meeting-house  ;  here,  a  people  who  have  a  trick  of  claiming  a 
right  to  all  free  meeting-houses,  had  shouldered  the  Methodists 
out ;  but  the  earth  helped  the  woman — the  people  of  the  world  have 
built  a  house  for  us      We  lodged  at  Mr.  Wam's. 

Friday  2.  I  feel  the  effects  of  my  toil.  I  declined  preaching 
in  Brunswick;  Joseph  Crawford  supplied  my  place.  I  rode  on  to 
B.  Drake's. 

Saturday  3.  I  crossed  Long  Ferry  to  Staten-Island.  It  is  like 
winter  here  :  but  what  cannot  the  God  of  nature  and  of  grace 
do  physically  and  spiritually  ?  1  viewed  the  spot  where  I  first 
landed  on  the  island  in  October  1771  :  I  am  alive,  and  about  my 
Master's  work  still — Glory  !  glory  !  glory  ! 

Sabbath  4.  At  the  first  meeting,  Joseph  Crawford  preached,  I 
only  exhorted ;  at  the  second  meeting-house,  on  the  north  side,  I 
preached  :  we  lodged  at  Chushong's. 

Monday  5.  I  preached  at  Elizabethtown,  and  then  came  on  to 
Newark.  After  stopping  awhile,  we  moved  forward  to  Second- 
River,  and  called  a  meeting  at  which  Joseph  Crawford  preached. 
We  have  a  warm  day,  the  harbinger  of  spring  :  universal  nature 
seems  starting  into  innumerable  forms  of  promise  of  the  fruitful 
year — Oh,  that  it  may  be  so  spiritually  ! 

Tuesday  6.  I  preached  at  Belleville,  and  rode  on  to  New- 
York. 

New-York.— Wednesday  7.  I  viewed  the  ground  at  Philip's 
Manor,  selected  for  our  camp-meeting.  I  felt  as  if  God  would  be 
there,  in  answer  to  our  prayers  for  nine  months  past.  In  the  eve- 
ning we  came  to  Sherwood's  Vale,  and  at  night  I  went  to  the  camp- 


l-_>t>  p,|.;v.  FRANCIS  asbury's  journal.  [loOb. 

ground,  and  looked  on  at  the  people,  busy  clearing  the  ground,  fix- 
ing the  seats,  and  building  the  stand. 

Thursday  8.   I  rested  and  wrote. 

Friday  9,  began  with  a  storm  ;  but  the  people  came  through  it, 
bringing  their  tents  and  baggage,  weary  with  walking. 

Saturday  10.  The  weather  cleared. 

Sunday  11.  1  preached;  it  was  an  open  season;  companies 
here  and  there  dispersed,  kept  up  the  exercise  of  singing  and 
prayer  through  the  day,  and  far  into  the  night :  the  Brooklyn  tent 
was  all  prayer  the  greater  part  of  the  time.  A  marquee  had  been 
fixed  for  the  preachers  ;  and  provisions  came  in  from  both  town 
and  country  ;  the  brethren  from  both  delightfully  meeting  in  wor- 
ship and  affections.  On  Monday  the  people  of  the  world  seemed 
to  make  a  surrender,  there  was  no  longer  a  necessity  for  guards, 

There  were  between  eighty  and  one  hundred  official  members 
present ;  about  one  thousand  Methodists  ;  and  some  presumed, 
about  six  thousand  souls  were  on  the  ground  at  different  times  : 
the  people  were  so  dispersed,  and  there  was  such  a  continual 
coming  and  going,  I  had  no  means  of  judging. 

We  had  great  order  and  great  power  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end  :  I  judge  two  hundred  souls  were  made  the  subjects  of  grace 
in  its  various  operations  of  conviction,  conversion,  sanctification, 
and  reclamation.     Glory  !  glory  ! 

Wednesday  14.  We  came  to  New-York. 

Thursday  15.  I  recollected  myself  and  wrote  letters. 

Friday  16.  The  conference  commenced  its  sitting,  and  rose  on 
Thursday.  We  sat  seven  hours  in  each  day,  in  great  love,  order, 
and  peace.  A  paper  was  read,  setting  forth  the  uncertain  state  of 
the  superintendency,  and  proposing  the  election  of  seven  elders, 
from  each  of  the  seven  conferences,  to  meet  at  Baltimore,  July  4, 
1807,  for  the  sole  purpose  of  establishing  the  American  superin- 
tendency on  a  surer  foundation  ;  this  subject  will  be  submitted  to 
the  consideration  of  all  the  conferences.  The  answer  to  Dr. 
Coke's  letter,  by  the  conference  of  New-York,  was  read,  to  be  sub- 
mitted to  all  the  conferences.  1  preached  three  times,  and  ordain- 
ed three  African  deacons.  We  had  preaching  in  the  Park  as  well 
as  regularly  in  the  meeting-houses,  and  a  day  of  fasting  and  prayer 
for  the  health  of  the  city,  the  success  of  our  conference  labours,  and 
the  prosperity  of  Zion.  I  was  greatly  supported  and  blest.  The 
preachers,  were,  perhaps  never  better  satisfied  with  their  stations 


1806.]  R£V.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  197 

Connecticut. — Sunday  25.  I  preached  at  New-Haven.  After 
meeting  I  visited  sister  Thacher,  rejoicing  in  perfect  love  ;  per- 
haps she  is  near  her  end.  Since  the  16th  of  April,  1805,  I  have, 
according  to  my  reckoning,  travelled  five  thousand  miles  :  everlast- 
ing glory  be  to  my  all-sufficient  God  ! 

Monday  26.  I  dined  at  Mereden,  and  lodged  at  Mr.  Pitkins's, 
East- Hartford. 

Tuesday  27.  I  reached  Thompson,  forty-five  miles,  faint  yd 
pursuing. 

Wednesday  28.  At  Milford,  the  people,  young  and  old,  were  or 
the  green  ;  the  active  playing  at  ball,  the  aged  and  others  looking 
on  ;  it  was  election  day. 

Thursday  29.  We  dined  at  Mr.  Boyle's,  Needham,  and  rode  or 
to  Waltham  :  a  few  young  people  are  under  the  operations  of  grace 
here,  amongst  whom  are  the  two  children  of  George  Pickering, 
my  namesake  Asbury,  aged  about  ten,  and  Maria,  still  younger ; 
and  there  is  a  small  revival  of  religion  in  the  district.  We  rested 
here  on  Friday,  and  I  preached  at  night  on  Phil   i.  8 — 11. 

Massachusetts. — Saturday  31.  We  have  a  gracious  rain,  it  was 
greatly  needed.     In  the  evening  we  rode  to  Boston. 

Sunday,  June  1.  1  preached  in  Boston  ;  as  usual  with  me  in  this 
place,  it  was  an  open  season  ;  some  souls  were  powerfully  moved, 
myself  for  one. 

Monday  2.  I  took  a  walk  to  West  Boston,  to  see  the  new  cha- 
pel, eighty-four  by  sixty-four  feet.  The  upper  window  frames  were 
put  in.  We  came  to  Lynn  at  two  o'clock  :  I  preached  at  two 
o'clock  on  Haggai  ii.  8.  After  meeting  we  rode  as  far  as  Marble- 
head  :  here  Joseph  Crawford  preached.  I  find  that  David  Bache- 
lor has  been  useful  in  this  town  ;  a  revival  has  taken  place. 

Tuesday  3.  We  came  through  dust  and  heat  to  Enoch  Sand- 
bourn's,  East-Kingston,  forty-five  miles.  We  had  a  ride  of  about 
fifty  miles  to  Old  Wells  on  Wednesday  ;  eight  or  ten  of  these  we 
might  have  saved,  had  we  known  the  nearest  way  from  Exeter. 

Maine. — Thursday  4.  We  came  to  Portland  ;  Joseph  Crawford 
preached. 

Friday  5.  We  went  towards  Buxton  to  attend  the  camp-meeting. 
At  two  o'clock  we  came  on  the  ground  ;  there  were  twenty 
preachers,  travelling  and  local. 

Saturday  6.  I  preached;  and  on  the  Sunday  also.  Some  judged 
there  were  about  five  thousand  people  on  the  ground.  There 
were  displays  of  divine  power,  and  some  conversions.     Our  jour- 


198  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  [180t\ 

ney  into  Maine  has  been  through  dust  and  heat ;  in  toil  of  body, 
and  in  extraordinary  temptation  of  soul ;  but  I  felt  that  our  way 
was  of  God. 

Monday  9.  We  journeyed  on  through  Buxton,  Limerick,  Par- 
sonsfield,  Elfingham,  into  New-Hampshire,  stopping  at  Sandwich 
:o  lodge  with  Mr.  Webster. 

Tuesday  10.  Through  town  after  town  we  came  to  Dorchester, 
'.odging  at  Deacon  Blodgett's.  Canaan  brought  us  up  on  Wed- 
nesday. 

New-Hampshire. — Thursday  12.  We  opened  the  New  England 
conference,  and  went  through  our  business  with  haste  and  peace, 
sitting  seven  hours  a  day.  The  York  conference  address  respect- 
ing the  superintendency  was  concurred  in,  and  the  seven  elders 
for  this  conference  elected  accordingly.  We  did  not  (to  my  grief) 
tell  our  experiences,  nor  make  observations  as  to  what  we  had 
known  of  the  work  of  God  :  the  members  were  impatient  to  be 
gone,  particulary  the  married  townsmen. 

Sunday  15.  I  ordained  eleven  elders  in  the  woods.  At  three 
o'clock  I  preached  in  the  meeting-house  ;  it  was  a  season  of 
power. 

Monday  16.  I  lodged  with  John  Broadhead. 

Tuesday  17.  My  labour  is  great;  but  I  am  blest  with  a  great 
willingness  to  duty.  We  came  along  through  Enfield,  Hanover, 
Lebanon,  crossing  Connecticut  at  Lyman's  bridge  into  Vermont, 
and  kept  on  by  Hartford,  Sharon,  and  Ryaltown  :  we  brought  up 
with  Samuel  Curtis,  upon  White's  River,  for  the  night. 

Vermont. — From  New-Haven  to  White's  River  we  have  made, 
by  computation,  four  hundred  and  sixty  miles.  I  have  had  suffer- 
ings in  the  flesh,  but  perfect  peace  of  mind. 

Wednesday  17.  We  reached  Barnard  :  I  preached  at  Thomas 
Freeman's  on  Acts  xxvi.  17,  18.  :  here  is  a  lively,  large  society  ; 
we  had  a  full  house  at  a  short  warning.  Our  way  on  Thursday, 
led  through  Randolph,  Brookfield,  Williamstown,  Northfield,  and 
Berlin  ;  I  preached  at  Samuel  Smith's. 

Friday  20.  We  came  upon  Onion  River,  at  Montpelier,  the 
contemplated  seat  of  government  for  the  state.  I  think  it  eminent- 
ly well  selected  ;  for  a  site  of  this  kind  I  know  nothing  in  England 
or  America  more  suitable.  At  Palmer's  mill  I  preached  on  1 
Cor.  i.  30. 

Saturday  21.  Brought  us  over  the  heights  of  Onion  River  to 
Unci's  bridge  :  thence  to  Bolton  and  Williston,  dining  at  brother 


18Q6.]         REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL,  1 99 

Bradley's.  After  dinner  we  rattled  along  to  Burlington,  on  Lake 
Champlain  :  here  1  saw  a  grand  college,  equal,  in  exterior  to  that 
of  New-Haven,  a  state  house,  meeting  house,  and  other  elegant 
buildings.  We  passed  Shelbourne  into  Charlotte,  on  the  Lake 
and  put  up  with  Mr.  Fuller.  We  have  made  forty  miles  to- 
day. I  am  resolved  to  be  in  every  part  of  the  work  whilst  I  live 
to  preside.  It  will  be  the  best  plan  to  bring  on  the  sessions  of  all 
the  conferences  as  early  as  possible,  that  there  may  be  time  given 
to  all  the  preachers  to  go  to  work  in  the  dawn  of  spring  :  the  New 
England  conference  should  meet  about  the  middle  of  April,  and 
thus  be  ready  for  general  conference. 

I  feel  as  if  I  was  fully  taught  the  necessity  of  being  made  per- 
fect through  sufferings  and  labours.  I  pass  over  in  silence  cases 
of  pain  and  grief,  of  body  and  mind. 

From  appearances  it  would  seem  no  great  stretch  of  imagination 
to  suppose  there  have  been  many  lakes  dried  up  in  this  country. 
Onion  River  Falls,  for  instance,  must  at  one  time  have  been  a 
boundary  :  at  this  narrow  pass,  as  at  Harper's  Ferry,  on  the  Pa- 
towmac,  and  the  French  Broad  in  North  Carolina,  the  weight  oi* 
waters  has  broken  through  the  mountain  on  some  day  far  upward  h 
the  history  of  past  ages;  they  now  supply  Lake  Champlain. 

On  the  Sabbath  1  preached  in  an  upper  room  at  Fuller's,  to  abou; 
four  hundred  people  :  my  subject  was  Luke  iv.  18,  19.  :  and  God 
bore  witness  to  his  own  word.  Why  did  I  not  visit  this  countn 
sooner  ?  By  moving  the  conferences  to  an  earlier  period  in  the 
year,  it  might  have  been  done,  and  may  yet  be  done  :  what  ap- 
peared to  me  to  be  impossible,  I  see  now  is  very  practicable.  Ah 
what  is  the  toil  of  beating  over  rocks,  hills,  mountains,  and  deserts, 
five  thousand  miles  a  year — nothing  ;  when  we  reflect  it  is  done 
for  God,  for  Christ,  for  the  Holy  Spirit ;  the  church  of  God  ;  the 
souls  of  poor  sinners  ;  the  preachers  of  the  Gospel  in  the  seven 
conferences,  one  hundred  and  thirty  thousand  members,  and  one  o: 
two  millions,  who  congregate  with  us  in  the  solemn  worship  of 
God — Oh,  it  is  nothing! 

Monday  23.  At  Vergennes  court  house,  1  preached  upon  Mark 
i.  15.  I  had  to  walk  up  a  great  hill,  a  mile,  by  the  falls  of  Otter. 
At  Bridport  at  six  o'clock,  I  spoke  upon  Titus  ii.  11,  12. 

Tuesday  24.  Passing  through  Shoreham,  Benson,  and  other 
towns,  we  came  to  Hampton  church  at  six  o'clock  ;  I  gave  them  a 
sermon  upon  Hebr.  iii.  14,  15,  16. 


200  REy.  FRANCIS  aseury's  journal.  [1806. 

On  Wednesday  we  came  along  by  Granville  and  Salem,  down  lo 
Cambridge.  At  six  o'clock  at  Ashgrove,  I  preached  upon  Jude 
17  to  the  end.  I  have  travelled  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles 
through  New-Hampshire  ;  and  two  hundred  and  twenty  or  more, 
in  Vermont.  We  have  sustained  more  damage  than  I  can  tell,  by 
the  absence  of  the  preachers,  two  or  three  months,  at  every  con- 
ference :  this  is  an  evil  that  must  be  remedied.  Oh  !  how  1  felt 
for  the  people  :  this  was  worse  than  my  incredible  toil :  help,  Lord, 
for  vain  is  the  help  of  man  !  Was  it  not  for  the  aid  we  receive 
from  the  local  and  official  members,  the  suspensions  of  the  travel- 
ling preachers  would  ruin  us.  What  is  to  be  done  ?  1.  Meet  the 
conferences  early.  2.  Engage  the  official  members  to  more  engaged- 
ness  and  labour.  3.  Let  prayer-meetings  be  more  frequent.  4.  Let 
all  the  probationers  stay  on  the  circuits  ;  and  let  all  who  are  recom- 
mended stay  on  the  circuits  also,  until  they  can  be  admitted  into 
the  connexion. 

Thursday  26.  We  came  rapidly  down  the  pike  road  to  Pitts- 
town,  Housack,  Lansingbnrg,  Troy,  and  Greenbush  ;  on  Friday 
j;hrough  Scodack  and  Phillipstown,  breakfasting  at  Mr.  Bushe's  well- 
conducted  stage  tavern  ;  and  then  onward  through  Lebanon  and  Ca- 
iaan,  in  New-York  state  ;  and  Stockbridge,  Old-Barrington,  and 
Sheffield  in  Massachusetts.  On  Saturday  we  came  into  Connecti- 
cut, breakfasting  at  Salisbury  :  our  dinner  we  took  on  the  Sharon 
Damp-ground. 

Sabbath  28.    I  preached  in  camp  on  2  Cor.  vi.  2. 

On  Monday  we  pursued  our  route  through  to  Dover,  and  rested 
with  father  Rose  awhile  ;  dined,  and  went  on  to  Salem  in  New- 
5Tork  state,  and  slept  at  Franklin,  under  the  hospitable  roof  of 
father  Howes. 

New-York.— -Tuesday,  July  1.  We  came  to  Jeremiah  Miller's 
md  dined,  and  reached  Elijah  Crawford's  at  the  Plains.  We  have 
travelled  about  five  hundred  miles  in  the  state  of  New- York.  I 
may  remark  here,  now  that  I  have  time  to  make  the  remark,  that 
the  Lebanon  camp-meeting  was  great  as  to  the  numbers  which 
attended,  and  great  in  power.  We  are  now,  in  many  congrega- 
tions and  classes,  reaping  the  fruits  of  the  conference  camp- 
meetings,  all  through  the  circuit  of  New-Rochelle  :  and  the  Sha- 
ron camp-meeting  will  equal,  in  effect,  those  of  the  conferences. 
We  have  a  few  refreshing  rains  ;  the  promise  of  rich  crops  of 
wheat ;  and  abundant  spiritual  harvests.     Glory  to  God. 


1806.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  201 

Wednesday  2.  We  came  to  New-York.  I  had  left  my  little 
travelling  wagon  to  be  sold  at  the  Plains.  On  Thursday  I  came 
on  to  son  Aaron  Hunt's  :  Joseph  Crawford  came  over  the  ferry 
with  me  ;  when  about  to  part,  he  turned  away  his  face  and  wept  : 
Ah  !   I  am  not  made  for  such  scenes — 1  felt  exquisite  pain. 

New-Jersey. — At  Newark  I  lodged  with  brother  Leecraft  :  I 
felt  for,  prayed  with,  and  spoke  to  all  the  members  of  this  family. 

Friday,  July  4.  Noise,  parade,  seventeen  rounds — and  then  to 
breakfast.  1  stole  away  quietly  from  this  bsistle  towards  Rock- 
away.  I  stopped  at  brother  Searman's,  with  brother  M'Lena- 
han  and  wife.  At  Turkey  chapel  I  spoke  on  1  Cor.  xv.  58.  :  it 
was  an  open  season.  When  there  is  a  stir  amongst  the  Metho- 
dists, other  denominations  send  supplies,  if  they  have  not  a  sta- 
tioned minister : — the  process  is,  to  hold  a  week-day  meeting, 
perform  a  sacrament  or  a  baptism,  to  place  the  new  convert  within 
the  ark  of  safety — and  all  is  done  -,  now  we  may  stand  still,  or  sit 
still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  God!  I  rejoiced  to  hear  of  the  appoint- 
ment of  a  camp-meeting  on  Turkey,  in  August. 

Saturday  5.  1  cane  to  Germantown,  twenty-five  miles  through  a 
pleasant,  beautiful,  fruitful  land  of  hills  and  vales.  The  place  chosen 
for  the  encampment  on  Turkey  I  found  a  handsome  height,  ele- 
gantly sloping  to  the  north.  I  trust  four  hundred  souls  will  be  con- 
verted :  may  it  give  new  springs  and  tone  to  the  work  of  God 
in  the  Jerseys  ! 

Sabbath  6.  At  Minerd  Farley's  I  preached  upon  Gal.  vi.  9.  ;  in 
the  afternoon  again  upon  Acts  xx.  32.  I  was  led  out  in  an  uncom- 
mon degree.  May  it  be  the  prelude  to  better  days  !  My  first  visit 
here  was  during  the  revolutionary  war  ;  now  the  children  of  peo- 
ple not  then  married  are  born,  grown  up,  and  married.  After  meet- 
ing I  rode  on  to  Pennytown,  housing  for  the  night  with  Jona- 
than Burns. 

Tuesday  8.  I  was  on  the  road  at  five  o'clock.  The  bridge  over 
the  Delaware  is  said  to  have  cost  three  or  four  hundred  thousand 
dollars.  I  reached  Manly-Hall  about  four  o'clock.  From  New- 
Haven  to  Philadelphia,  1  judge  I  have  made  one  thousand  sixty- 
five  miles,  going  and  returning ;  and  about  one  thousand  eight 
hundred  miles  since  I  left  the  Philadelphia  conference  :  much  suf- 
fering and  much  toil  : — not  unto  me,  but  unto  Thy  good  providence, 
O  my  God,  be  all  the  glory !  After  writing  some  letters,  I  preached 
at  Kingston  at  five  o'clock,  on  Acts  xx.  24.  On  my  return,  I  found 
a  letter  from  Doctor  Chandler,  declaring  the  death  of  Bishop 
Vol.  Ill,  26 


202  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S    JOURNAL,  [1806. 

Whatcoat,  that  father  in  Israel,  and  my  faithful  friend  for  forty 
years — a  man  of  solid  parts  ;  a  self-denying  man  of  God  : — who- 
ever heard  him  speak  an  idle  word  ?  When  was  guile  found  in  his 
mouth  ?  He  had  been  thirty-eight  years  in  the  ministry  :  sixteen 
years  in  England,  Wales,  and  Ireland,  and  twenty-two  years  in 
America  ;  twelve  years  as  presiding  elder,  four  of  this  time  he  was 
stationed  in  the  cities,  or  travelling  with  me ;  and  six  years  in  the 
superintendency.  A  man  so  uniformly  good,  1  have  not  known  in 
Europe  or  America.  He  had  long  been  afflicted  with  gravel  and 
stone,  in  which  afflictions,  nevertheless,  he  travelled  a  great  deal, 
three  thousand  miles  the  last  year  :  he  bore  in  the  last  three 
months  excessively  painful  illness  with  most  exemplary  patience. 
He  died  in  Dover  on  the  5th  of  July,  and  his  mortal  remains  were 
interred  under  the  altar  of  the  Wesley  Dover  church  :  at  his  taking 
leave  of  the  South  Carolina  conference,  I  thought  his  time  was 
short.  I  changed  my  route  to  visit  him,  but  only  reached  within 
a  hundred  and  thirty  miles — dea|,h  was  too  quick  for  me. 

Delaware. — Friday  11.  I  came  to  Wilmington  ;  and  on  Satur- 
day to  North-East.  On  the  Sabbath  I  preached  Monday  brought 
me  to  Perry-Hall :  and  on  Tuesday  I  reached  Baltimore. 

Maryland. — Thursday  16.  Busy  writing  letters  to  the  south, 
and  to  England.  I  enjoy  great  peace,  and  am  in  the  spirit  of  prayer. 
On  Friday  I  visited  three  families  on  Elk- Ridge.  On  Saturday  I 
came  to  brother  Riggs's ;  dined,  and  went  on  to  Doctor  Watters's. 
I  preached  at  Goshen  meeting-house.  We  have,  it  is  said,  the 
greatest  drought  that  can  be  remembered  in  this  country  ;  the 
springs  seem  to  be  failing  every  where.  Monday  I  went  to  Rachel 
Hall's,  dined,  and  rode  on  to  Samuel  Howard's  :  here  I  had  a 
bilious  attack,  and  became  quite  bed-sick. 

Tuesday  22.  We  have  a  most  blessed,  glorious  shower  of  rain. 
I  received  it  as  an  answer  to  prayer.  The  oats  in  the  fields  are 
unpromising  ;  but  the  corn  looks  green,  and  the  people  are  dili- 
gent in  ploughing  and  dressing— a  fine  example  this  to  Christians  : 
O,  how  diligently  should  we  labour  !     The   heat  is  great. 

Wednesday  23.  I  called  upon  Joseph  Perkins,  the  superinten- 
dent of  the  U.  S.  armoury.  Here  is  a  factory  of  stores  of  instru- 
ments of  death,  tastefully  arranged  in  the  several  apartments  :  there 
may  they  remain  for  ever!  But  will  it  be  so  ?  Alas!  no.  I  was 
caught  in  a  rain  upon  the  river,  the  effects  of  which  I  felt  next  day. 
August  3.  I  am  here  at  John  Davenports.  I  have  been  sick,  and 
laid  up  since  Thursday  last.     Copious  bleeding,  emetics,  cathar- 


f 806.]  REV.  PEANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  203 

tics  and  bark  have  had  their  turns.     The  fever,  since  the  day  be- 
fore yesterday,  has  left  me.     I  have  been  providentially  favoured 
with  a  good  physician,  kind  friends,  and  temperate  heat ;  the  Lord 
hath  done  this  well.     I  might  have  been  taken  amongst  strangers, 
and  have  had  more  pain.     Rest  was  wanting ;  and  I  may  hereafter 
have  better  weather  for  the  toilsome  journey  before  me.    Happily 
I  laid  my  hands  on  Simpson's  Plea  for  Religion,  in  which  we  have 
a  wonderful  and  interesting  account  of  good  and  bad  men  for  three 
centuries.     The  author  has  drawn  aside  the  purple  curtains  of  the 
church  of  Rome,  and  the  black  robes  of  the  antichristian  church  of 
England,  to  lay  bare  the  abuses  of  bad  systems,  and  the  vices  of 
mitred  heads  :    he  has  raised  his  warning  voice  against  the  corrup* 
tion  of  manners  and  morals  in  all  orders,  which  will,   he  predicts, 
without  a  speedy  reformation,  cause  the  downfall  of  all  ecclesias- 
tical establishments  ;  he  has   magnanimously  renounced  his  living 
as  a  minister,  which  his  conscience  would  permit  him  no  longer  to 
hold  :   he  said  he   knew  not  where  to  go ;  but  the  Lord  has   taken 
him  to  the  church  of  the  first-born.     O,  what  a  warning  is  here  given 
to  all  churches,  to  all  ministers,  to  all  Christians,  and  to  thee,   O 
my  soul !  Recollecting  I  had  never  preached  in  the  neighbourhood, 
and  feeling  a  little  unwilling  to  pass   another  dumb  Sabbath,  we 
called  a  solemn  assembly,  as  much  as  if  we  had  come  to  the  funeral 
of  one  of  the  family  ;  my  subject  was  1  Kings  viii.  35—39.     I  was 
rapid  for  about  an  hour  ;  they  are  faithfully  warned — let  them  look 
to  it. 

Virginia. — Wednesday  6.  I  came  to  Winchester.  Wrote  to 
Myles  and  Dougharty.  Report  says,  that  a  copy  of  Dr.  Coke's 
letter  was  taken  by  stealth  :  the  British  are  irritated,  and  the  Ame- 
ricans are  not  pleased  ;  but  they  were  calm  in  counsel.  I  lodged 
at  sister  Phelps's. 

Thursday  7.  Came  to  the  camp-meeting  at  Crissman's  Springs, 
now  Stover's  Springs.  Necessity  compelled  them  to  come  here  for 
the  sake  of  the  water  in  this  great  general  drought.  I  moved  on 
to  Stoverstown. 

Friday  8.  I  breakfasted  at  Millerstown  ;  rode  to  Wire's  to  din- 
ner, and  by  driving  two  hours  in  the  night  reached  Rocktown,  or 
Rockingham,  and  put  up  with  Mr.  Williams.  I  have  travelled  fifty 
miles  to-day,  over  rough,  rocky  roads.  I  rested  my  feeble  body 
on  Saturday. 

Sunday  10.  Our  house  here,  forty  by  forty-eight  feet,  may  con= 
tain  fifteen  or  eighteen  hundred  people :  now  that  we  have  a  place 


204  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL,  [1806, 

of  worship  of  our  own,  I  hope  we  shall  have  another  revival.  I 
preached  the  first  sermon,  my  subject,  Isai.  lvi.  8.  We  had  an 
open  time. 

Monday  11.   I  rested. 

Tuesday  12.   I  came  away  to  Staunton  :  I  preached  in  the  court- 
house on  Isai    lv.  6    7. 

Wednesday  13,  brought  us  to  Fairfield  :  I  lodged  at  Mr. 
Moore's  tavern  At  Lexington  I  found  Mr.  Shield,  my  host,  sick  ; 
I  prayed  with  them  ;  it  was  a  time  of  tenderness.  I  set  out,  faint 
indeed,  for  M'Conkey's,  a  decent  house  :  here  1  prayed  as 
amongst  the  Methodists.  This  excessive  delicacy  of  feeling,  which 
shuts  my  mouth  so  often,  might  appear  strange  to  those  who  do  not 
know  me  ;  there  are  some  houses  in  which  I  am  not  sure  that  I 
could  speak  to  my  father  were  he  alive,  and  I  to  meet  him  there  : 
bystanders  might  have  cause  to  exclaim  with  wonder,  what  a  son ! 

Friday  15.  I  rode  fifteen  miles  and  breakfasted  with  Mr.  Top- 
cotts  ;  eleven  miles  farther  brought  me  to  Mr.  Thomas's,  near 
the  camp-ground,  at  a  little  town  called  Amsterdam.  I  have  been 
afflicted  ;  but  this  may  be  for  good.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  top 
of  the  sulky,  perhaps,  sultry  as  it  was,  I  should  have  been  obliged 
to  stop  :  faint  and  feeble,  the  kindness  of  good  men,  and  the  affec- 
tionate attentions  of  good  women  supported  me  :  may  a  gracious 
God  bless  those  who  were  thus  made  blessings  to  me  !  In  prayer 
I  have  had  uncommon  life  and  liberty  ;  but  I  had  not  strength  to 
talk  as  much  as  I  wished  about  God  and  religion.  On  Saturday  I 
felt  unwell. 

Sunday  17.  I  ventured  to  the  camp.  I  preached  at  eleven 
o'clock  to  about  three  thousand  souls  :  I  held  on,  loud  and  long;  it 
was  the  Lord,  not  me.  Notwithstanding  matters  were  not  as  I 
could  wish,  I  trust,  much  good  will  be  done. 

Monday  18.  I  rested  at  Mr.  Thomas's. 

Tuesday  19.  I  ventured  on  the  camp-ground  again,  and  preach- 
ed at  eight  o'clock  ;  1  was  weak  and  unwell,  but  was  divinely 
aided,  whilst  enlarging  on  Philip,  i.  1.  ;  may  this  weighty  subject 
rest  on  the  minds  of  the  preachers,  and  on  none  more  than  the 
heart  of  the  speaker!  I  came  away  with  Samuel  Mitchell. 
Friendship  and  good  fellowship  seem  to  be  done  away  between 
the  Methodists  and  Presbyterians  ;  few  of  the  latter  will  attend  our 
meetings  now  ;  well,  let  them  feed  their  flocks  apart ;  and  let  not 
Judah  vex  Ephraim,  or  Ephraim  Judah  ;  and  may  it  thus  remain, 
until  the  two  sticks  become  one  in  the  Lord's  hands ! 


1806.]  REV.    FRANCIS    ASBURY's    JOURNAL,  205 

Wednesday  20.  Being  unwell  I  rested. 

Thursday  21.  We  came  away  through  excessive  heat  to  Tho- 
mas Barrett's,  at  the  foot  of  the  Alleghany  mountain. 

Friday  22,  brought  us  over  the  rough,  rude  mountain  :  they 
are  making  a  turnpike  here.  After  breakfasting  at  brother  Hay- 
maker's, we  came  on  to^  Pepper's  ferry,  sometimes  directing  our 
route  by  chance.  Since  the  23d  of  May  to  this  dav,  I  believe  we 
have  not  had  a  steady  rain  for  six  hours  together ;  yet  it  is  a  mira- 
racle  and  mercy  that  the  prospects  of  corn  are  so  good.  We  rested 
for  the  day  at  Pepper's  ;  and  need  we  had  ;  weary  men  and  horses. 

Sunday  24.  At  Page's  chapel  1  spoke  on  2  Chron.  vii.  13,  14.  :  it 
was  an  awful  talk,  and  the  people  were  alarmed.  We  dined  at 
Mitchell's,  and  lodged  at  Whygler's,  that  we  might  lose  no  time. 

Monday  25.  I  was  in  danger  of  being  cast  away  on  my  route  to 
Crocket's,  but  was  mercifully  preserved  :  I  felt  exceedingly  grate- 
ful that  not  even  the  skin  of  either  horse  or  man  was  broken  :  I 
jumped  out  of  the  carriage.  Ah !  I  see  that  old  men  will  fail  in 
great  danger. 

Tuesday  26.  We  came  to  Wythe  court-house,  eighteen  miles, 
to  breakfast,  and  reached  David  Stewart's  to  lodge. 

Wednesday  27.  I  came  to  Charles  Hardy's.  I  have  not  slept 
well.  I  am  faint  with  toil,  and  excessive  heat — like  an  oven  in  the 
afternoon. 

Thursday  28.  Brought  us  over  the  dreadful  roads  to  the  Salt 
Works.  The  great  drought  has  not  prevailed  so  greatly  on  Hol- 
ston,  of  Tennessee. 

Tennessee. — Saturday  30.  I  preached  at  the  widow  Russell's  ; 
my  hostess  is  as  happy  and  cheerful  as  ever. 

Sunday  31.  I  preached  at  the  Manaham  meeting-house.  I  once 
thought  we  should  scarcely  ever  have  a  tabernacle  of  our  own  in 
these  parts  ;  we  have  now  three  in  a  triangle  of  eight  miles 
extent. 

Tuesday,  September  2.  I  was  weak,  but  attended  the  appoint- 
ment of  the  stationed  preacher,  A.  Houston  :  my  subject  was  1 
Thess.  v.  12 — 15.  :  strong  in  spirit,  but  feeble  in  body.  Next 
day  I  rode  thirty  miles  over  to  Edward  Cox's. 

Thursday  4.  I  preached  at  Bethel.  I  was  faint ;  and  felt  the 
effects  of  sickness  and  the  rough  roads.  I  lodged  at  the  widow 
Lewis's,  on  Beaver-Creek. 

Friday  5.  I  felt  that  1  was  done,  and  must  lay  by  awhile. 


'-'UO  RE\".    FRANCIS    ASBURY's    JOURNAL.  [180P. 

Saturday  6.  I  preached  at  Charles  Helton's,  upon  Main  Holston  : 
weak  as  I  was  it  was  an  open  time. 

Sunday  7.  We  crossed  Holston  at  the  mouth  of  Watauga  :  the  Sab- 
bath 1  do  not  often  employ  in  travelling — sometimes  when  1  fall  in 
with  the  circuit  preachers.  1  was  very  close  in  my  discourse  at 
Dingworth's  on  Psalm  li.  10 — IS  the  people  have  sat  under  a  Cal- 
vinistic  ministry.  1  lodged  at  William  Nelson's,  an  ancient  home 
and  stand  for  Methodists  and  Methodist  preaching.  1  have  gone 
oyer  rough  roads,  and  a  wild  country,  rocks,  ruts,  and  sidelong 
difficult  ways,  sometimes  much  obscured  ;  it  was  thus  I  lost  my 
way,  and  travelled  twenty  miles  farther  than  I  needed. 

Monday  8.  Prepared  for  conference. 

Saturday  13.  My  bowels  for  some  days  past  have  been  much 
disordered  ;  and  I  have  been  otherwise  ill ;  but  constant  occupa- 
tion of  writing,  reading,  and  praying  has  diverted  my  attention  from 
my  sufferings :  the  medicine  taken  to  day  has  done  good.  I  am 
obliged  to  avoid  the  sun  as  I  would  a  burning  fire. 

Sunday  14.  I  preached  at  the  stand  in  the  woods :  brother 
M'Kendree  followed  :  it  was  a  season  of  feeling. 

Saturday  19.  the  Western  conference  commenced  its  sitting,  and 
ended  on  Monday.  The  Mississippi  missionary  preachers  could  not 
be  spared,  they  thought,  from  their  work,  and  therefore  did  not 
come.  We  had  great  peace.  There  are  fourteen  hundred 
added  within  the  bounds  of  this  conference.  Of  the  fifty-five 
preachers  stationed,  all  were  pleased.  In  unison  with  the  pre- 
ceding conferences,  an  answer  was  given  to  Doctor  Coke's  letter. 
We  had  preaching  at  noon  and  night,  and  good  was  done.  The 
brethren  were  in  want,  and  could  not  suit  themselves ;  so  1  parted 
with  my  watch,  my  coat,  and  my  shirt. — By  order  of  the  confe- 
rence, I  preached  a  funeral  discourse,  on  the  death  of  our  dear 
friend  Whatcoat,  from  John  i.  47 — 50.  there  were  not  far  from  two 
thousand  people  present.  If  good  were  done,  which  I  trufit  and 
hope,  it  is  some  compensation  for  my  sufferings — thirteen  hundred 
miles  in  heat  and  sickness  on  the  road  ;  and  in  the  house,  restless 
hours,  the  noise  of  barking  dogs,  impatient  children,  and  people 
trotting  about,  and  opening  and  shutting  doors  at  all  hours. 

Wednesday  23.  We  came  to  Buncombe  :  we  were  lost  within  a 
mile  of  M  Killon's,  and  were  happy  to  get  a  school-house  to  shel- 
ter us  for  the  night :  I  had  no  fire,  but  a  bed  wherever  1  could  find 


1806.]  REV.  FPUNCIS  ASBURlfS  JOURNAL.  207 

a  bench  ;  my  aid,  Moses  Lawrence,  had  a  bear-skin,  and  a  dirt 
floor  to  spread  it  on. 

Friday  25.  My  affliction  returned  : — considering  the  food,  the 
labour,  the  lodging,  the  hardships  I  meet  with  and  endure,  it  is  not 
wonderful.  Thanks  be  to  God  !  we  had  a  generous  rain — may  it 
be  general  through  the  continent! 

Saturday  26    I  rode  twelve  miles  to  Turkey-Creek,  to  a  kind  of 
camp-meeting.     On  the  Sabbath  I  preached  to  about  five  hundred 
souls  :  it  was  an  open  season,  and  a  few  souls  professed  converting 
grace. 

Monday  27.  Raining.  We  had  dry  weather  during  the  meeting. 
i  There  were  eleven  sermons,  and  many  exhortations.  At  noon  it 
cleared  up,  and  gave  us  an  opportunity  of  riding  home  :  my  mind 
enjoyed  peace,  but  my  body  felt  the  effects  of  riding.  On  Tues- 
day I  went  to  a  school-house  to  preach  :  I  rode  through  Swanino 
River,  and  Cane,  and  Hooper's  Creeks. 

North  Carolina. — Wednesday,  October  1.  I  preached  at 
Samuel  Edney's  Nexf  day  we  had  to  cope  with  Little  and  Great 
Hunger  mountain.  Now  I  know  what  Mills  Gap  is,  between  Bun- 
combe and  Rutherford :  one  of  the  descents  is  like  the  roof  of  a 
house,  for  nearly  a  mile  :  I  rode,  I  walked,  I  sweat,  I  trembled, 
and  my  old  knees  failed  :  here  are  gullies,  and  rocks,  and  preci- 
pices ;  nevertheless,  the  way  is  as  good  as  the  path  over  the  Table- 
mountain — bad  is  the  best.  We  came  upon  Green-River,  crossed, 
and  then  hobbled  and  crippled  along  to  Martin  Edward's,  a  local 
preacher  :  my  host  had  waited  two  years  ;  I  ordained  him  to  dea- 
con's orders.  I  feel  as  if  I  ought  not  to  preach  one  sermon  with- 
out being  pointed  and  very  full  upon  the  doctrine  of  purity. 

Saturday  4.  Crossed  Green  and  Broad  rivers,  to  attend  a  meet- 
ing in  the  woods  in  Rutherford  county.  I  preached  on  the  Sab- 
bath, on  Psalms  li.  8 — 11.  and  on  Monday  at  eight  o'clock  in  the 
morning  on  1  John  i.  6,  7.  it  was  a  moving  season.  I  made  my 
lodging  with  brother  Driskells  on  Sunday  night,  and  on  Monda}'  at 
Major  George  Moore's,  twenty  miles  from  the  ground.  On  Tues- 
day we  came  rapidly  through  a  part  of  Lincoln,  to  South  Carolina, 
about  thirty  miles,  and  lodged  at  Alexander  Hill's  ;  and  next  day 
staid  with  Mr.  Fulton.  My  mind  is  in  constant  peace  under  great 
bodily  exertions.     I  preached  at  my  host's,  upon  Matt.  xxiv.  12,  13. 

South  Carolina. — Thursday  9.   At  the  Waxsaws      We  crossed 
Catabaw  at  M'Lenahan's  ferry,  and  came  to  Robert  Hancock's  to 


208  REV.    FRANCIS    ASBURY's    JOURNAL.  [1806. 

lodge.  We  hare  had  a  blessed  rain.  On  Friday  we  came  to  the 
Hanging  Rock — death!  death!  The  death  of  our  friend,  Daniel 
Carpenter,  makes  a  great  breach  :  but  he  has  gone  safe.  Satur- 
day, rain — rest — closely  occupied  in  writing.  On  the  Sabbath 
I  preached  at  the  Hanging  Rock — few  people  ;  but  a  good  season. 
On  Monday  I  copied  the  minutes.  I  feel  full  of  God,  glory  to 
God  !  On  Tuesday  1  went  over  to  Thompson's  Creek,  Anson 
county,  to  see  George  Dougharty  ;  but  his  friends  had  conveyed 
him  away  on  a  bed.  1  spent  Wednesday  in  reading,  meditation, 
prayer,  and  Christian  conversation  in  the  family  of  Thomas  Shaw. 

Thursday  16.  Rode  back  to  the  Hanging-Rock  :  I  felt  the  effects 
of  the  ride,  as  the  exercise  was  somewhat  new.  I  prayed  in  two 
out  of  three  families  we  visited  :  it  seemed  to  me  as  if  they  were 
cases  of  life  and  death.  It  is  the  duty  of  a  general  officer  to  be 
careful  of  all  his  men,  especially  those  composing  his  staff.  A 
drought  is  the  cause  of  want  and  affliction  :  in  such  seasons,  we 
should  use  humiliation,  fasting,  penitence,  and  prayer. 

Friday  17.  Closely  occupied  in  writing.  On  Saturday,  rode  to 
Camden.  I  have  received  a  full  account  from  Doctor  Chandler, 
Delaware  district,  of  the  work  of  God  from  May  third,  to  August 
twenty-fourth  ;  what  hath  God  wrought! 

Sunday  19.  I  preached  upon  1  Cor.  xi.  28.  Let  a  man  examine 
himself.  After  making  some  general  observations  on  the  sacrifice 
of  Abel,  of  Abraham,  and  the  nature  of  the  passover  and  the 
Lord's  supper,  I  enforced  the  necessity  upon  sinners,  seekers, 
backsliders,  believers,  and  ministers,  to  examine  themselves.  In  the 
afternoon,  I  heard  the  Rev.  Mr.  Flinn,  and  was  pleased  with  him 
as  a  Presbyterian  minister.  Mr.  Smilie,  a  Presbyterian,  preached 
for  us  in  the  tabernacle. 

Monday  20.  I  rode  to  Rembert  Hall,  eleven  hundred  and  twenty 
miles  from  Philadelphia — in  health,  and,  I  trust,  in  holiness. 
Glory  to  God  ! 

Tuesday  21.  Reading  closely.  Wednesday,  Thursday,  Friday, 
and  Saturday,  reading  the  eighth  and  ninth  volumes  of  Wesley's 
sermons  :  they  wake  the  powers  of  my  soul.  Abstinence  and 
prayer.  I  feel  my  mind  in  great  peace,  and  a  stayed  trust  that  the 
Lord  will  provide  for  the  South  Carolina  conference  :  let  the 
preachers  go,  as  they  have  done,  to  their  farms  and  their  merchan- 
dise, yet  I  am  greatly  confident  of  the  success  of  the  cause  of  God 
in  these  parts. 


1806.]  REV.  FRANCIS  A3BURy'S  JOURNAL.  209 

Sunday  25.  At  Rembert's  chapel  I  preached  on  1  Johniii.  1 — 3. 
1.  The  manner  of  love—  not  that  of  a  master,  a  father,  a  mother, 
or  a  Christian  ;  but  love  of  a  peculiar  character — the  love  of  God, 
demonstrated  in  Christ  for  our  redemption  and  salvation.  2.  A 
view  of  the  past,  present,  future,  and  eternal  state  of  believers — > 
First,  The  low  estate  ;  Secondly,  Adoption,  and  regeneration,  and 
aanctification.  Thirdly,  Glorification  of  soul  and  body.  Behold, 
and  wonder  whilst  ye  adore.  Lastly,  the  men  of  the  world  know 
not  the  Father,  how  then  should  they  know  the  children  of  God 
the  Father. 

Monday  26.  I  am  bound  for  the  city  of  Charleston.  We  sought 
lodging  at  two  houses  at  Bruton's  Lake  :  we  found  it  at  Mr. 
Martin's.  On  Tuesday  we  made  twenty-five  miles  to  Murray's 
ferry,  instead  of  fifteen  :  at  Long  Ferry,  to  which  we  were  obliged 
to  steer,  we  were  detained  five  hours  through  the  swamp  -. — heat, 
moschetos,  gallinippers — plenty.  We  rode  twenty  mile3  after 
sundown  to  get  to  Mr.  Hatchett's,  at  Monk's  Corner  ;  the  family 
being  sick,  we  went  to  Mr.  Jones's,  who  kindly  entertained  us  ;  we 
made  fifty  miles  to-day,  and  came  to  lodgings  about  ten  o'clock  at 
night.  On  Wednesday  we  came  through  heat  and  heavy  roads  to 
Charleston,  where  we  found  all  things  well,  and  in  good  order  : 
Lewis  Myers  is  an  economist. 

Sunday,  November  2.  At  Cumberland-street  church  I  preached 
in  the  morning  ;  and  at  Bethel  in  the  afternoon. 

Monday  3.  Neither  unemployed,  nor  triflingly.  If  we  call  for 
social  prayer  seven  times  a  day,  there  are  none  to  complain  ;  the 
house  is  our  own,  and  profane  people  board  not  with  us.  My  time 
is  spent  in  reading,  writing,  and  receiving  all  who  come,  whites  and 
Africans  :  I  am  sometimes  called  away  in  the  midst  of  a  letter. 
God  the  Lord  is  here.  I  am  happy  that  we  have  finished  our  new 
church,  and  bought  an  acre  of  ground  ;  should  I  live  long,  I  shall 
see  a  house  in  the  northern  liberties  of  Cooper-River.  On  Tues- 
day I  wrote  a  letter  to  Dr.  Coke,  giving  a  general  statement  of  the 
late  work  of  God  upon  our  continent. 

Sunday  9.  I  preached  again  in  Cumberland  church  on  2  Cor. 
iv.  17,  18.  I  spoke  under  serious  depression  of  body  and  mind  ; 
in  the  afternoon,  I  gave  them  a  discourse  at  the  Bethel  church, 
upon  Philip  i.  27 — 30.  I  have  read  many  pages  of  Church  His- 
tory, wrote  twelve  long  letters,  preached  four  sermons,  and  re- 
ceived all  visitors,  and  spoke  to  them  on  the  concerns  of  their  souls. 

Vol,  IIT.  ri 


210  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOUftNAL.  [1806, 

Monday  10.  It  appears  that  there  is  a  work  amongst  white  and 
black — some  have  found  the  blessing.  I  received  a  letter  from 
Daniel  Hitt,  giving  an  account  of  the  Long-Calm  camp-meeting,  in 
Maryland  :  it  held  from  the  eighth  to  the  fourteenth  of  October  ; 
five  hundred  and  eighty  were  said  to  be  converted ;  and  one  hun- 
dred and  twenty  believers  confirmed  and  sanctified.  Lord,  let  this 
work  be  general ! 

On  Tuesday  I  left  my  prison,  and  got  as  far  as  Captain  Perry's^ 
thirty  miles  ;  and  next  day,  by  riding  two  hours  in  the  night, 
reached  Barr's.  On  Thursday  we  rode  up  Edisto  to  Benjamin 
Tarrant's,  twenty-two  miles  :  next  day  we  reached  Weathersby's, 
twenty-five  miles. 

Georgia. — Saturday  brought  us  to  Angusta  :    we  have  made  a 

journey  of  about  six  days  in  five,  through  the  deep  sands. 

Sabbath  16.  The  morning  was  cold,  and  few  hearers  ;  my  subject 
was  Rom.  xiii.  2. — High  time  indeed.  In  the  afternoon  I  spoke 
again  on  Hebr.  xi.  25,  26.  I  wrote  to  Daniel  Hitt  on  things  sacred. 
I  am  grieved  to  have  to  do  with  boys.  Hugh  Porter  had  written 
to  this  town  about  a  station  ;  and  added  to  the  mischief  he  had  for- 
merly done  :  I  shall  take  care  of  these  youngsters.  And  behold, 
here  is  a  bell  over  the  gallery — and  cracked  too  ;  may  it  break  I 
It  is  the  first  I  ever  saw  in  a  house  of  ours  in  America  :  I  hope  it 
will  be  the  last. 

Monday  17.  Pleasant  ride  to  Sindall's,  sixteen  miles.  Here, 
after  the  second  generation  is  risen  up,  we  have  a  revival  in  Colum- 
bia county.  By  being  lost,  we  made  a  ride  of  thirty  miles  to 
Thomas  Haine's,  on  Tuesday.  A  few  met  for  prayer  :  I  spoke  to 
them  on  1  Peter  i.  3 — 6.  On  Wednesday  we  rested.  At  Foun- 
tain's on  Thursday  I  preached  on  1  Thess.  iv.  13,  14.  On  Friday 
I  rested,  wrote,  and  visited. 

Saturday  22.  Rode  to  the  west  end  of  Wilkes  county.  At 
Stevenson  meeting-house  we  held  a  three-days'  meeting  :  there 
were  present  four  travelling,  and  two  local  preachers  :  I  read  the 
letter  from  P.  Chandler,  in  Delaware,  and  exhorted  a  little. 

Sabbath  23.  I  preached  on  Luke  iv.  18.  ;  there  might  be  one 
thousand  souls.  We  hope  three  were  converted,  and  many  quick- 
ened— preachers  and  people.  I  ordained  James  Allen  a  local 
deacon. 

Tuesday  25.  Rained.  I  kept  close  ;  read,  wrote,  and  prayed. 
A  thought  struck  me  that  I  would  take  the  names  and  numbers  of 


1806.]  HEV.  FRANCIS  ASBl?IIY?S  JOURNAL.  211 

our  congregations  in  Georgia ;  this  I  effected  with  the  assistance  of 
Josias  Randall,  and  found  them  to  be  one  hundred  and  thirty  ; 
which  I  calculate  to  consist  of  one  thousand  souls  each  ;  so  that 
we  preach  to  one  hundred  and  thirty  thousand  souls  in  Georgia  : 
some  of  these  once  in  a  year,  others  once  in  a  quarter,  others  in 
four,  some  in  two,  and  by  the  labours  of  the  travelling  and  local 
ministry,  to  some  every  week.  The  return  of  members  for  this 
state  will  be  about  five  thousand  for  the  present  year.  It  is  quite 
probable  we  congregate  two  hundred  thousand  in  each  state,  on  an 
average  ;  and  if  to  these  we  add  those  who  hear  us  in  the  two 
Canadian  provinces,  in  the  Mississippi  and  Indiana  territories,  it 
will  perhaps  be  found,  that  we  preach  to  four  millions  of  people. 
What  a  charge  ! 

Wednesday  26.  A  clear  sky — and  a  soul  unclouded.  On  Thurs- 
day we  rode  to  Arthur  Matthews's,  a  healthy,  decent,  serious 
family  in  Warren  county.  Friday  brought  us  to  William  Hard- 
wick's,  Jefferson  county. 

Next  day  I  preached  at  Bethel  chapel  on  1  Thess.  v.  6,  7. 
I  took  lodging  at  Benjamin  Bryan's. 

Sabbath  30.  We  had  very  cold  weather  after  a  rain  :  the  house 
was  badly  calculated  for  the  change  :  my  subject  was  2  Cor.  iv.  2. 
I  lodged  at  Russell  Brown's. 

Monday,  December  1.  Came  back  to  Rehoboth.  I  have  rode 
eighty-four  miles  to  attend  this  meeting  at  Bethel — to  little  pur- 
pose, I  fear,  unless  for  the  trial  of  my  own  faith  and  patience  :  I 
was  greatly  chilled  in  my  system.  On  Tuesday  I  read  and  wrote  ; 
and  rode  through  a  storm  two  miles  to  see  Billy  Stith.  Next  day 
we  had  rain,  snow,  and  excessively  cold  weather  :  I  preached  upon 
Rom.  xii.  12,  13.  ;  there  were  twelve  souls  present.  On  Thurs- 
day we  had  our  horses  shod.  The  excessive  rains  and  freshets 
have  done  damage  :  the  bridges  on  Ogeechee  are  generally  carried 
away  ;  so  also  upon  Little- River. 

Friday  5.  We  passed  Williams's  Creek ;  and  afterward  Little- 
River,  where  the  bridge  once  stood  :  I  lodged  at  Thomas  Grant's, 
and  left  a  family  exhortation. 

*-  Saturday  brought  us  along  through  Washington  to  Petersburg, 
thirty-two  miles.  We  fed  our  horses  on  the  route,  though  we 
starved  ourselves.  I  preached  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening. 
Reverend Cummins,  and  Reverend  - — ■  Doke,  our  Presby- 
terian brethren,  were  present. 


•-12  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1806. 

Sabbath  7.  At  Tait's  meeting-house  I  preached  upon  Luke 
xii.  40.  It  was  a  very  cold  day  ;  and  the  house  was  so  open  we 
had  little  satisfaction.  I  visited  Charles  Tait,  a  judge  ;  'I  did  not 
present  myself  in  the  character  of  a  gentleman,  but  as  a  Christian, 
and  a  Christian  minister  :  I  would  visit  the  President  of  the  United 
States  in  no  other  character — true,  I  would  be  innocently  polite 
and  respectful — no  more.  As  to  the  Presbyterian  ministers,  and 
all  ministers  of  the  Gospel,  I  will  treat  them  with  great  respect, 
but  I  shall  ask  no  favours  of  them  :  to  humble  ourselves  before 
those  who  think  themselves  so  much  above  the  Methodist  preachers, 
by  worldly  honours,  by  learning,  and  especially  by  salary,  will  do 
them  no  goodA 

Monday tfTWe  had  cause  to  rejoice  at  James  Allston's  that 
parents  and  children  love  the  Lord  :  the  old  people  have  I  known 
for  twenty-seven  years.  I  preached  here  on  Monday  on  2  Pet. 
iii.  2.  On  Tuesday  I  came  to  Blackwell's  :  the  widow  is  my 
hostess — the  former  head  of  the  family  is  gone  to  rest. 

Wednesday  10.  At  Ralph  Banks's.  Where  shall  we  find  so 
healthy  and  happy  a  man  and  wife  as  we  have  here  ?  the  mother 
is  but  thirty-seven,  and  she  has  twelve  fine  children.  I  was  deter- 
mined to  go  to  the  meeting-house,  excessive  as  the  rain  was  :  we 
had  one  woman  and  thirty  men  :  we  rejoiced  in  God.  They  have 
had  a  camp-meeting  blessing  at  Coldwater— the  people  are  lively. 

Thursday  11.  We  rode  twenty  miles  to  James  Mark's,  Broad- 
River  quarterly  meeting.  Another  plentiful  and  powerful  rain. 
On  Friday  night  we  held  a  feeble  night  meeting.  On  Saturday  at 
the  meeting-house,  I  spoke  on  Galatians  vi.  9.  :  it  was  penetra- 
tingly cold.  We  held  a  meeting  in  James  Marks's  dwelling-house 
at  night. 

Sabbath  14.  At  ten  o'clock  we  had  prayer-meeting.  S.  Mat- 
thews preached  at  eleven  o'clock ;  and  I  held  forth  at  twelve 
o'clock  in  the  open  air  :  I  faced  the  sun,  but  my  glasses  saved  my 
eyes.     We  felt  cold  enough. 

Monday  15.  Rode  to  Oglethorpe,  and  put  up  with  Henry 
Pope.  Our  thirty  miles'  ride  was  made  without  feeding  man 
or  beast.  Reaching  Athens  on  Tuesday,  we  had  an  evening  lec- 
ture at  Hope  Hull's.  I  wished  to  have  crossed  the  river  into 
Jackson  county,  but  the  rain  came  on  and  we  returned  to  Blanton's 
and  Pope's.  General  Clarke  and  L.  Crawford  had  been  dwelling 
on  Indian  lands  :  they  and  their  company,  five  in  all,  lodged  at 


1806.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUftYJS  JOUBNAL,  213 

Pqpc's  with  us  ;  in  my  presence  they  restrained  their  wild,  fear- 
less, frontier  character,  and  behaved  with  great  decency  and 
politeness. 

Thursday  18.  Great  rain.  Reading  and  writing.  On  Friday 
I  visited  James  Freeman.  At  Blanton's,  on  Saturday,  I  spoke  on 
1  John  ii.  15,  16,  17.  I  preached  at  Pope's  church  on  Rom.  viii. 
7 — 9.  :  elders  Mead,  Hull,  and  Matthews  were  present,  and  bore 
a  part  in  the  public  religious  exercises.  John,  a  black  man, 
preached  in  the  evening. 

Monday  22.  We  rode  to  General  Steuarts.  Very  warm- — like 
a  summer's  day.  What  amazing  changes  we  have  in  this  country ! 
I  gave  them  a  sermon.  On  Tuesday  we  had  a  night  meeting  at 
John  Crutchfield's  :  I  spoke  on  1  John  ii.  1,  2,  3.  :  we  had  a  gentle 
gale  of  grace.  On  Wednesday  we  were  at  liberty.  Alas,  for 
poor  Samuel  Mayo,  the  son  of  pious  John,  a  local  Methodist 
preacher  in  England !  I  have  no  children  to  blot  my  name  by 
drunkenness  or  murder. 

Thursday  25.  Our  new  chapel  at  Liberty  is  thirty  by  fifty  feet. 
I  gave  them  a  sermon  in  it  on  1  Peter  iv.  3,  4,  5.  Lodged  at 
Joshua  Moore's.  On  Friday  1  found  Myles  Green  preaching ;  I 
ordained  him  immediately  ;  and  then  gave  a  discourse  on  Hebr. 
xii.  1,  2.  After  meeting  I  came  on  to  Sparta.  I  received  a  dozen 
letters  from  the  north.  More  good  news  from  Doctor  Chandler. 
The  work  of  God  is  wonderful  in  Delaware.  But  what  a  rumpus 
is  raised  !  We  are  subverters  of  government — disturbers  of  society 
— movers  of  insurrections.  Grand  juries  in  Delaware  and  Virginia 
have  presented  the  noisy  preachers— lawyers  and  doctors  are  in 
arms — the  lives,  blood,  and  livers  of  the  poor  Methodists  are 
threatened  :  poor,  crazy  sinners  ;  see  ye  not  that  the  Lord  is 
with  us  ? 

Sabbath  28.  Prayer  meeting  at  six  o'clock.  John  M'Vean 
preached  at  eight  o'clock.  At  twelve  o'clock  I  read  the  letters 
narrative  of  the  great  work,  and  preached  upon  Col.  iv.  7,  8.  Bro- 
ther Kendrick  occupied  the  pulpit  at  three  o'clock  ;  and  brother 
Mead  at  night. 

Monday  29.  We  began  our  conference.  The  subject  of  the 
delegated  conference  was  adopted,  with  only  two  dissenting 
voices  :  these  members,  however,  cheerfully  submitted,  and  one 
of  the  dissentients  was  elected  a  member.  All  was  peace  respect- 
ing the  stations.  We  had  prayer-meeting  at  six  o'clock  ;  at  eleven, 
at  three,  and  at  seven  o'clock  at  night  we  had  preaching.     J  was 


214  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASRURY's  JOURNAL.  [1807. 

called  upon  to  deliver  a  funeral  discourse  for  Bishop  Whatcoat. 
On  the  Sabbath  morning  we  had  a  band-meeting  in  the  conference, 
and  I  preached  in  the  open  air  at  eleven  o'clock ;  my  subject 
Mark  xvi.  19,  20.  From  Philadelphia  to  Augusta  I  count  it  one 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  twenty  miles,  the  route  we  have  made. 
We  have  fifty  travelling  preachers  in  this  conference  this  year, 
and  an  increase  of  one  thousand  members. 

South  Carolina. — On  Thursday,  January  1,  1807,  we  set  out  for 
Columbia,  dining  in  the  woods  on  our  route  :  it  was  excessively  cold. 
I  preached  in  Mr.  Harrison's  house  in  the  evening.  Next  day  we 
came  to  Camden.  Saturday  brought  us  to  Rembert-Hall.  We  have 
been  redeeming  time  by  riding  two  hundred  and  twenty  miles  in 
five  days.  It  has  been  so  cold,  I  have  not  been  able  to  pray  and 
meditate  as  I  ivished.  I  must  now  answer  thirteen  letters  in  two 
days.     My  body  is  afflicted,  but  I  am  kept  in  perfect  love. 

Sabbath  11.  We  attended,  as  was  meet,  at  Rembert's  chapel.  I 
gave  them  a  sermon  on  1  Chron.  xsviii.  9. 

Wednesday  14.  We  came  away  to  M'Collom's  ferry.  I  had 
finished  my  writing  on  Monday  and  Tuesday.  On  our  way  we 
dined  at  Woodham  and  lodged  with  Jeremiah  Heath.  On  Thurs- 
day we  crossed  Pee-Dee,  and  came  to  Colonel  Bathie's. 

North  Carolina. — Friday  brought  us  through  Lumberton  in 
North  Carolina,  lodging  with  Peter  Gautier.  We  found  our- 
selves obliged  to  ride  on  the  Lord's  day,  through  the  cold,  to 
Wilmington,  crossing  two  rivers  in  a  snow  and  hail  storm.  I  have 
rode  four  hundred  and  twenty  miles  in  ten  days  and  a  half — cold, 
sick,  and  faint :  it  was  as  much  as  I  could  well  bear  up  under. 

Monday  19.  Busy  making  extracts  from  letters,  and  planning  for 
conferences,.  Tuesday  occupied  as  yesterday  :  in  the  evening  I 
preached.  I  feel  that  God  is  here.  On  Wednesday  brother  Ken- 
drick  preached.  Thursday  reading  and  writing ;  Joshua  Wells 
preached. 

Friday  13.  I  preached  in  the  tabernacle  upon  Matt.  xi.  28 — 30. 
It  was  a  time  of  some  quickening.  On  Saturday,  reading  Wesley's 
Sermons,  1st  volume  ;  those  who  feel  disposed  to  complain  of  the 
brevity  of  his  notes  should  recollect  the  wonderful  amount  and 
variety  of  his  literary  labours,  polemical  and  practical,  besides  the 
care  of  all  the  churches  in  three  kingdoms. 

Sabbath  25.  A  high  day  on  Mount  Zion.  At  the  rising  of  the 
sun,  John  Charles  began  the  worship  of  the  day  ;  he  chose  for 
his  subject  Rom.  viii.  1.    At  eleven  o'clock  I  held  forth  on  Hebr. 


1807.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURYrS  JOURNAL.  215 

iii.  12—15.  I  spoke  again  at  three  o'clock  on  Tsaiah  Iv.  6,7.  Stith 
Mead  preached  at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening.  O  that  by  any  means 
we  may  save  some !  Oo  Monday  and  Tuesday  still  reading  Wes- 
ley's Sermons :  I  have  completed  thirty  nearly.  On  Tuesday 
evening  I  preached,  and  it  was  a  serious  time. 

Wednesday  28.  We  took  our  flight  from  Wilmington :  what  I 
felt  and  suffered  there,  from  preachers  and  people,  is  known  to 
God.  At  Nixon's,  Topsail,  I  preached  on  2  Pet.  iii.  14.  On 
Thursday  I  rode  forty  miles  to  the  Richlands,  and  preached  at  Lot 
Ballard's.  Friday  evening  found  us  at  Perry's.  Saturday  brought 
us  to  Newbern  :  we  had  an  awful  storm  of  rain. 

February  1.  I  preached  on  Sunday  at  eleven  o'clock. 

Wednesday  4.  We  have  used  great  diligence  in  our  conference 
labours,  and  have  been  faithful  to  the  pulpit.  I  preached  to-day  on 
1  Cor.  ii.  5.  On  the  Sabbath  I  preached  to  the  whites  on  John  iii. 
16.  :  and  to  the  Africans  on  Ephes.  vi.  5 — 8.  Much  might  be  said  ; 
I  will  only  observe  that  we  have  sixty-seven  preachers,  and 
have  added  three  thousand  one  hundred  and  fifty  nine  to  this 
conference  bounds ;  we  have,  since  our  sitting  here,  known  that 
there  are  twenty  whites  converted,  and  as  many  blacks  :  these 
blessings  on  our  labours  pay  all  expenses,  reward  all  toils  in  the 
midst  of  suflerng  and  excessively  cold  weather. 

Monday  9.  I  gave  them  my  last  discourse  on  Psalms  xxxiv.  15, 
16. ;  and  next  day  came  away  to  the  widow  William's.  On  Wed- 
nesday at  Pinner's.  The  Roanoke  had  broken  away  with  its  ice. 
Thursday  brought  us  to  Murfreesborough  :  I  preached  upon  1  John 
iii.  10,  11.  It  was  the  day  after  the  celebration  of  Washington's  fu- 
neral :  many  of  the  respectables  had  come  to  town  on  this  occasion, 
and  still  remained     these  attended.     I  lodged  at  Doctor  Key's. 

Virginia. — Friday  13.  We  came  to  Suffolk.  I  had  sent  on  a  mes- 
senger, and  found  a  congregation,  to  whom  I  spoke  a  few  words  on 
1  Pet.  iii.  10 — 12.  We  felt  a  present  God.  Brother  Yerbury — as 
dying  and  behold  he  lives — spiritually.  I  have  time  to  make  but  few 
observations.  We  have  had  rain  for  three  days  past ;  bad  roads 
for  two  hundred  miles.  Since  I  left  Philadelphia  I  calculate  having 
travelled  two  thousand  four  hundred  and  forty  miles.  At  Norfolk 
I  preached  for  them,  and  at  Portsmouth.  On  Monday  we  came 
away|  to  General  Wells's,  Isle  of  Wight  county  ;  and  next  day 
called  upon  Willy  Blunt  on  our  way  to  Birdsong's.  Wednesday 
brought  us  through  a  proper  storm  to  Petersburg  :  the  streets 
were  not  easily  passable.     We  lodged  on  Thursday  night  in  Rich- 


~lt>  REV.  FRANCIS  ASMJRY's  JOURNAL.  [1807. 

mond  at  the  house  of  the  widow  Tucker  :  the  roads  hither  had 
well  nigh  mired  us.  On  Friday  we  lodged  at  William  Smith's  : 
these  are  friends  to  camp-meetings,  and  gracious  souls.  A  long 
ride  of  forty-two  miles  brought  us  to  Fredericksburg  on  Saturday  ; 
we  got  a  little  fodder  for  our  horses,  and  took  a  cut  of  dry  bread 
on  the  cold  ground  ourselves.  My  mind  enjoys  great  peace  :  and 
yet  there  are  subjects  that  might  disturb  it — but  1  pass  them  over  ; 
I  am  not  fond  of  hurting  the  feelings  of  people. 

Sabbath  21.  1  preached  in  the  church  ;  and  then  came  away  to 
Aquia-Town,  sixteen  miles,  and  lodged  at  Mr.  Bailey's.  On  Mon- 
day I  went  over  to  Sandford's  on  Poick  ;  next  day  the  rain  followed 
us  to  Alexandria :  at  night  I  gave  them  a  discourse  on  Rev. 
xiv.  12,  13. 

Maryland. — Wednesday  24.  We  crossed  over  into  Maryland  at 
Georgetown. — Surely  the  roads  are  bad !  My  mind  is  in  great 
peace.  I  had  to  preach  a  kind  of  funeral  discourse  on  the  death 
of  Bishop  Whatcoat  on  Thursday  :  and  on  Friday  I  came  away  to 
Bladensburg.  Here  I  baptised  a  child,  and  prayed  with  the  afflicted, 
and  resumed  my  march  eastward  through  mud  and  mire,  arriving  in 
the  night  in  Baltimore. 

Saturday  28.  Snow.  I  rested  and  wrote. 

Sabbath,  March  1.  Light-street  chapel  ;  I  preached  upon  Hebr. 
xii.  2.     At  the  African  church  my  subject  was  Colossians  ii.  6. 

Saturday  3.  Our  conference  commenced  its  sitting  on  Monday, 
and  rose  this  evening.  There  were  a  hundred  and  one  members 
upon  the  list,  eighteen  of  these  were  additions  made.  We  sat  six 
hours  a  day,  and  did  much  work  in  great  peace.  In  the  multipli- 
city of  things  that  necessarily  came  before  me,  much  must  be  left 
in  shades  ;  there  were  few  complaints  about  stations.  The  increase 
within  the  bounds  of  the  Baltimore  conference,  is  two  thousand 
eight  hundred  and  seventeen  members.  We  had  a  great  deal  of 
faithful  preaching  On  the  Sabbath  1  preached  at  the  Point  ;  and 
at  Light-street  I  gave  them  my  last  discourse.  I  was  in  affliction 
and  unwell ;  but  always  in  peace — God  is  all  in  all. 

Tuesday  11.  I  left  Baltimore  for  Perry- Hall.  I  spent  one  night 
with  the  elders  of  the  house  and  my  old  friends  Jesse  Hollings- 
worth,  and  Daniel  Hitt,  the  faithful  companion  of  my  travels  for 
three  thousand  miles.  On  Wednesday  we  left  our  kind  friends, 
and  came  to  Bennett's.  Next  day  I  preached  in  brother  Howell's 
house,  and  came  to  North-East.  Friday  brought  us  through  rain 
and  snow  to  Georgetown  Cross-Roads  ;  here  we  called  a  meeting 


1007.]  REV.  FRANCIS   ASBURy's    JOURNAL.  217 

in  the  evening  ;  my  subject  was  2  Corinthians  xii.  9.     On  Saturday 
we  came  in  to  Chester  Town;  it  was  damp  and  cold. 

Sabbath  15.  Hail,  blessed  day  ! — The  Sun  of  Righteousness 
within  us  ;  and  the  material  sun  once  more  gladdens  the  earth  with 
his  beams !  Although  we  have  taken  five  days  to  come  from  Bal- 
timore to  this  place,  a  distance  of  one  hundred  miles,  the  stage 
drivers  can  tell  that  we  have  been  pretty  busy.  At  Chester  I  find 
that  unpleasing  prejudices  have  been  excited  by  the  publication  of 
a  pamphlet  on  succession  in  the  church ;  the  author  is  one  Kewley, 
who  went  from  us.  In  the  morning  I  preached  upon  Psalm  xxx. 
17.  "  Come  ye  children"  &c.  1.  Who  are  to  be  taught.  2.  What 
they  are  to  be  taught.  3.  Who  are  the  teachers.  4.  The  happy 
consequences  of  being  taught  aright,  and  receiving  and  practising 
the  instructions  given.  I  spoke  again  in  the  afternoon  on  Rev.  vi. 
13,  14.     My  mind  is  in  perfect  peace. 

Monday  16.  Came  to  Centreville,  and  I  preached.  After  dining 
with  Thomas  Wright,  the  brother  of  the  present  governor  of 
Maryland,  we  came  to  Easton,  and  lodged  with  Mr.  Lockerman. 
On  Tuesday  Daniel  Hitt  preached;  I  only  exhorted.  We  met 
Joseph  Everett,  who  conducted  us  to  William  Frazier's  to  dine. 
On  Wednesday  we  came  to  Thomas  Foster's.  I  was  unwell,  and 
Daniel  Hitt  preached.  We  rode  on  to  Cambridge  ;  Daniel  Hitt 
preached  in  the  evening. 

Thursday  19.  I  took  the  pulpit  at  eleven  o'clock — it  was  court- 
time,  it  was  cold,  and  the  notice  was  short.  My  subject  was  2  Cor. 
vi.  7.  "  The  word  of  truth" — the  grand  doctrines  of  the  Gospel, 
with  special  and  general  application.  "  The  power  of  God" — in 
operation  upon  the  souls  of  the  people  in  numbers  and  degrees. 
tc  Armour  of  righteousness" — such  as  described  in  Ephesians, 
helmet  of  salvation,  and  so  on.  But  more  fully  explanatory  of  the 
general  subject  in  its  analogy  to  the  justifying  and  sanctifying  ope- 
rations of  grace,  and  practical  righteousness  as  it  respects  our  rela- 
tion to  God  and  his  church.     We  returned  to  Thomas  Foster's. 

Friday  20.  At  Bethel,  Brown's  chapel,  Daniel  Hitt  preached,  I 
only  exhorted.  We  dined  at  Father  Davis's,  and  lodged  at  his 
son  William's.  The  weather  is  excessively  cold,  and  disagreeably 
windy.  On  Saturday  I  preached  at  Deep-Creek,  and  ordained  two 
local  preachers  to  the  office  of  deacon.  The  day  was  unplea- 
sant, and  the  house  open.  We  dined  with  Deacon  Baker,  and  then 
drove  to  George  Parker's,  within  four  miles  of  Salisbury,  for  the 
night.     I  suffered  so  much  in  the  two  last  days,  that  I  could  not 

Vol.  IIT.  28 


218  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY/'S  JOURNAL.  [1807- 

keep  my  mind  constantly  engaged  in  prayer ;  this  was  my  grief; 
but  my  patience  bore  me  up. 

Sabbath  22.  At  Salisbury  I  preached  upon  Ephes.  iv.  1.  The 
Episcopalians  have  had  their  day.  Our  appointment  had  not  been 
made,  nevertheless,  we  preached  ;  Daniel  Hitt  at  eleven  o'clock, 
and  at  night,  and  I  at  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  we  had 
people  to  hear  us. 

Virginia. — Monday  23.  We  came  to  dear  William  Downing's, 
Accomack  :  I  came  in  late  and  unwell. 

Tuesday  24.  When  I  should  have  gone  to  preach,  I  went 
to  bed  ill  with  a  bilious  cholic  and  fever.  We  came  to  Snow- 
Hill  on  Wednesday  ;  my  chill  and  sickness  continued,  and  Daniel 
Hitt  preached.  We  kept  on  to  Poplar-Town,  and  stopped  at  C. 
Hazzard's  :  still  unwell. 

Delaware. — Thursday  26.  We  called  to  see  brother  Davis  : 
he  seemed  to  be  dying  by  inches  in  a  close  room.  We  stopped 
at  Mr.  Clayton's,  Dogsbury,  in  Delaware  :  from  hence  we  fled 
with  speed  to  Lewistovvn,  stopped,  and  took  coffee.  1  preached 
on  1  Thessalonians  ii.  11,  12.  ;  we  had  a  crowded  house  and  a 
gracious  time. 

Friday  27.  At  Milford  Bishop  Whatcoat  preached  his  last  ser- 
mon, and  as  I  preached  here  upon  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8.  it  came  as  a 
matter  of  course  to  make  some  observations  on  his  character,  la- 
bours, piety,  and  death. 

Saturday  28.  I  preached  in  Dover,  and  the  numbers  present 
were  so  great,  that  I  stood  up  outside  to  speak  ;  the  wind  was  cold, 
and  I  uncovered.  I  preached  the  same  day  at  Smyrna,  at  four 
o'clock.  I  hear  many  things  of  the  weal  and  wo  of  the  work 
of  God. 

Monday  30.  I  gave  them  a  sermon  in  Wilmington. 

Tuesday  31.  Yesterday's  excessive  cold  is  explaining  itsejf  in  a 
snow-storm. 

Pennsylvania. — Wednesday,  April  1.  We  arrived  in  Philadel- 
phia. 

Friday  10.  Our  conference  commenced  its  session  on  Thurs- 
day the  2nd,  and  finished  to-day.  We  progressed  and  finished  in 
.great  peace.  The  impeachment,  trial,  and  examination  of  R. 
Lyon  took  up  most  of  a  whole  day  :  the  affair  was  managed  with 
prudence  and  impartiality,  and  after  a  patient  investigation  of  the 
case,  it  was  determined  not  to  give  him  the  charge  of  a  circuit  this 
year.     The    preachers    took   their   stations   very   willingly— for 


1807.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURYrS  JOURNAL.  21ft 

aught  I  know.  The  excessive  labour  of  the  two  last  days  drove 
me  to  my  bed  during  the  recess  of  the  sitting.  Seven  deacons  and 
four  elders  were  ordained.  I  may  mention  that  a  short  reply  was 
given  to  Doctor  Coke's  long  letter.  On  the  Sabbath  at  St. 
George's  I  preached  on  Rev.  ii.  10.  The  subject  of  Bishop 
Whatcoat  was  incorporated  into  my  discourse  at  the  Tabernacle : 
my  text  was  Rev.  xiv.  13.  There  was  preaching  in  our  houses 
as  usual  on  conference  occasions. 

New- Jersey. — Saturday  11.  I  came  into  Jersey,  and  lodged 
with  Daniel  Bates. 

Sabbath  12.  I  stood  up  once  more  at  Bethel,  and  spoke  on  Rev. 
xxii.  14,  15.  God  hath  been  in  this  society — in  the  last  year  forty 
converts  were  added  at  one  quarterly  meeting  :  the  people  cease 
to  oppose. — We  hope  there  have  been  three  hundred  souls  con- 
verted in  one  year  in  this  neighbourhood.  John  Duffield  is  buried 
to-day  :  he  had  fallen  away,  but  was  restored  at  the  last  quarterly 
meeting,  and  intended  to  have  rejoined  the  society  :  we  hope  he 
has  joined  the  church  triumphant. 

Monday  13.  A  great  storm  of  rain  located  us  to  the  house  at 
William  Dilkes's. 

Tuesday  14.  Rode  to  Salem,  and  preached;  I  was  still  very 
unwell.  At  Pitlsgrove  on  Wednesday  I  was  unable  to  preach  :  I 
rode  home  with  father  Early.  The  widow  Airs,  one  of  the  first 
Methodists  in  the  place,  has  lately  died  in  peace. 

Thursday  16.  I  gave  an  exhortation,  and  we  then  came  on  to 
Daniel  Bates's.  At  brother  Azail  Coates's  on  Friday  I  was  fit  for 
bed  only  :  Daniel  Hitt  preached  at  Lumberton. 

Saturday  18.  At  New-Mills  I  gave  a  kind  of  funeral  for  Bishop 
Whatcoat.  From  Baltimore  to  this  place  I  count  having  made  six 
hundred  and  thirty  miles.  Sick  or  well,  I  have  my  daily  labours 
to  perform.  I  am  hindered  from  that  solitary,  close,  meditative 
communion  with  God  I  wish  to  enjoy.  I  move  under  great  debi- 
lity. I  found  old  grandfather  Budd  worshipping,  leaning  upon  the 
top  of  his  staff" — halting,  yet  wrestling  like  Jacob. — Ah  !  we  remem- 
ber when  Israel  was  a  child ;  but  now,  how  goodly  are  thy  tents  0 
Jacob,  and  thy  tabernacles  (camp-meetings)  0  Israel !  Since  Octo- 
ber 1771  1  have  visited  Jersey,  but  never  have  I  seen  such  pros- 
pects :  to  God  the  Lord,  be  all  the  glory  ! 

Sabbath  19.  In  the  Baptist  chapel,  Mount-Holly,  I  spoke  on 
Rom.  x,  26.     I  preached  at  Burlington  at  six  o'clock. 


220  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1807. 

Monday  20.  I  gave  them  a  sermon  at  Trenton  ;  and  once  more 
at  Hopewell  I  stood  up  in  my  Master's  name.  We  had  one  hun- 
dred souls,  but  we  want  more  fire  :  the  time  will  surely  come  to 
favour  them. 

Wednesday  22.  We  came  to  Redding  :  I  spoke  to  an  insensible 
people  upon  Acts  ii.  21.  1  might  weary  myself  in  vain  to  heap 
up  spiritual  riches,  if  others  will  not  gather  them,  and  take  care 
of  them. 

Thursday  23.  At  Asbury-Town  I  gave  them  a  faithful  talk  upon 
Hebr.  ii.  3,  4.  There  are  about  forty  houses  in,  or  near  this 
village  of  all  descriptions.  In  Philip  Cummins's  kitchen  I  spoke 
to  a  few  souls  on  Friday  :  my  hearers  were  serious  whilst  I  com- 
mented on  Luke  xi.  9 — -13.  Rough  roads,  damp  weather,  and 
daily  preaching  has  brought  me  low  :  wherever  I  come,  being  a 
stranger,  people  expect  me  to  speak.  O  that  I  could  see  as  great 
a  prospect  in  east  as  in  west  Jersey  !  Come  thou  south  zviiid,  and 
How  upon  this  garden  • 

Saturday  25.  We  came  to  Andrew  Freeman's  :  our  route 
brought  us  by  the  Drowned  Lands  upon  Pequest-Creek  ;  this, 
doubtless,  has  once  been  a  lake.  1  preached  at  Freeman's,  and 
we  had  a  feeling  season.  About  twenty  years  ago  I  once  preached 
at  Log-Jail  church  :  I  spoke  once  more  on  the  Sabbath  :  my  sub- 
ject was  Rev.  iii.  20.  and  I  felt  some  enlargement.  Daniel  Hitt 
preached  after  me,  and  closed  the  meeting.  We  have  preached, 
I  suppose,  to  three  thousand  people  in  the  Jerseys  ;  and  had  we 
had  good  weather,  it  is  quite  probable  we  should  have  had  six 
thousand.  Next  week  we  shall  push  right  on  to  the  York  con- 
ference. 

New-York. — Monday  27.  We  rode  forty  miles  to  lodge  near 
Warwick. 

Tuesday  28.  We  came  to  Ellis's  at  Windsor. 

Wednesday  29.  As  we  pursued  our  journey  the  rain  came  on 
whilst  at  Major  Ostrander's,  and  we  halted.  At  New-Paltz  on 
Friday  we  found  there  was  no  passage  to  be  had  across  the 
river,  so  we  drove  six  miles  down  to  a  new  bridge  ;  we  dined, 
and  came  on  to  Kingston,  or  Esopus  ;  here  we  also  were  disap- 
pointed, so  we  turned  aside  to  Cornelius  Cole's,  at  Hurley.  On 
Friday  we  made  forty  miles  over  desperate  roads,  and  lodged  at  a 
tavern,  seven  miles  short  of  Coeman's  Patent,  where  the  confe- 
rence was  to  sit. 


1807.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  221 

Saturday,  May  2.  We  met  such  of  the  members  of  the  confe- 
rence as  were  present. 

Sabbath  3.  I  preached  once  more  on  the  subject  of  the  death  of 
our  dear  departed  brother  Whatcoat. 

Saturday  9.  We  concluded  our  labours.  The  preachers  took 
their  stations  with  the  simple  heartedness  of  little  children.  I 
find  two  thousand  and  one  added  to  the  bounds  of  this  conference. 
Eighteen  preachers  and  three  missionaries.  We  had  much  labour, 
and  great  peace  ;  and,  although  from  the  badness  of  the  weather, 
we  came  home  every  evening  through  damps  and  mud,  I  had  more 
rest  than  I  should  have  had,  had  we  convened  in  a  city.  We  had 
preaching  every  noon. 

Sabbath  10.  I  preached  at  Albany  on  John  iii.  17.  I  dined  with 
one  English  family  and  lodged  with  another. 

Monday  11.  We  set  out  on  the  turnpike  road  to  brother  Car- 
penter's, dined,  and  lodged  at  Cambridge. 

Vermont. — Tuesday  12,  brought  us  through  Salem  ;  we  dined, 
talked,  and  prayed  at  Ruput's  :  possibly  God  may  save  the  tavern- 
keeper.  We  lodged  at  Branch's  :  here  we  also  prayed,  but  there 
was  a  tavern  bar  :  we  left,  and  came  to  Mr.  Hireton  s  ;  here  the 
landlady  wept  and  talked,  but  my  faith  for  the  poor  woman  was 
not  strong.  We  came  to  Carpenter's,  at  Chittenden,  and  hearing 
that  Z.  Andrews's  was  a  home  for  preachers,  we  turned  aside  to 
tarry  for  a  night. 

Thursday  14.  We  boldly  engaged  the  Green-Mountain,  of 
which  we  had  heard  awful  accounts.  I  match  it  with  rude  Clinch, 
or  rough  Alleghany.  We  found  snow  in  the  gap.  A  tree  was 
laying  across  the  path  ;  in  leading  the  carriage  over,  it  upset,  but 
sustained  little  damage.  Having  dined  at  Pittsfield,  we  took  fresh 
courage  and  proceeded  on.  When  we  came  to  White's  River,  we 
were  obliged  to  lead  the  horses  as  they  dragged  the  carriage  up 
the  heights,  over  rocks,  logs,  and  cavings-in  of  the  earth  ;  arrived 
at  the  Narrows  we  found  that  the  bank  had  given  way  and  slidden 
down  •,  I  proposed  to  work  the  carriage  along  over  by  hand, 
whilst  Daniel  Hitt  led  the  horses  ;  he  preferred  my  leading  them, 
so  on  we  went,  but  I  was  weak,  and  not  enough  attentive,  perhaps, 
and  the  mare  ran  me  upon  a  rock  ;  up  went  the  wheel,  hanging 
balanced  over  a  precipice  of  fifty  feet — rocks,  trees,  and  the  river 
beneath  us  ;  I  felt  lame  by  the  mare's  treading  on  my  foot  :  we 
unhitched  the  beast  and  righted  the  carriage,  after  unloading  the 
baggage,  and  so  got  over  the  danger  and  difficulty.     But  never  in 


^22  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY\S  JOURNAL.  [1807. 

my  life  have  I  been  in  such  apparent  danger.  O  Lord,  thou  hast 
saved  man  and  beast!  We  gladly  stopped  in  Royal-Town  at  bro- 
ther Ayres's.  I  have  been  happy  under  great  temptations  and 
hard  labour.  In  every  house,  tavern  and  private,  I  have  prayed 
and  talked  ;  this  is  part  of  my  mission.  I  have  two  hundred  miles 
before  me  for  the  next  week — and  can  I  accomplish  this  labour  ? 
what  is  impossible  with  me  is  possible  with  God. 

Friday  15.  We  came  to  Cox's,  and  next  day  I  preached  at  Ber- 
nard, and  had  an  open  season.  I  ordained  five  deacons,  namely, 
Carpenter,  Currier,  Peck,  Sterling,  and  Perkins.  On  the  Sabbath 
day  I  preached  in  the  woods  :  my  text  was  1  Tim.  ii.  15.  It  hailed, 
and  in  the  afternoon  sn6wed.  We  had  three  discourses,  in  and 
out  of  the  house,  and  held  a  love-feast.  The  work  revives  in  this 
town. 

Monda}'  18.  We  came  down  White  s-River,  and  crossed  the  Con- 
necticut at  Lyman's  bridge.     We  have  made  forty  miles  to  day. 

New-Hampshire — Tuesday  19.  We  crossed  the  mountains  and 
came  into  New-Hampshire  at  Andover,  and  continued  on,  dining 
and  praying  at  Salisbury,  to  Concord,  forty  miles  :  we  lodged  at 
Mr.  Ambrose's  tavern  :  our  host  was  polite  and  attentive.  We 
came  on  Wednesday,  eighteen  miles  to  dinner  at  Mr.  Harvey's, 
Northwood  ;  then  through  Durham  and  Dover,  into  Berwick,  the 
first  town  in  the  district,  where  we  put  up  for  the  night.  On 
Thursday  morning,  we  came  sixteen  miles  to  breakfast,  but  I  had 
taken  medicine.  We  kept  on  through  Kennebunk,  Saco,  and  Scar- 
borough, into  Portland  :  I  was  unwell,  had  travelled  hard,  rising  at 
four  o'clock  every  morning,  yet  I  had  to  preach  here  at  eight 
o'clock  in  the  evening.  God  is  here  :  brother  Bacheller's  labours 
have  been  blest.     I  lodged  with  Major  lllsley,  still  our  great  friend. 

Friday  21.  We  took  up  our  journey  through  Falmouth  to  New- 
Yarmouth,  and  stopped  at  our  brother  Jabez  Bradburg's,  we  had 
six  hours'  rain.  It  is  an  awful  backward  spring,  and  there  is  a  great 
scarcity  of  hay.  The  wet  weather  prevents  ploughing  and  seed- 
ing.    Cold !  cold  ! 

Saturday  22.  We  lodged  with  Mr.  Dearborn,  in  Monmouth.  We 
count  having  made  two  hundred  and  thirty  miles  this  week,  over 
hard  roads  in  many  senses :  my  work  is  for  God — my  reward  from 
him  :  may  I  be  made  perfect  through  Christian  and  ministerial  trials 
and  sufferings  ! 

Sunday  23.  I  preached  in  Monmouth  on  Isaiah  xxxv.  3 — 6.  At 
Major  Cobb's,   where  I  lodged  in  Gray,  I  left  my  glasses  when 


KJ07.J  KEV.  FIlAIfCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  223 

starting  on  Tuesday  morning.  On  Tuesday  I  preached  at  Scar- 
borough at  five  o'clock  in  the  evening,  upon  Hebr.  iii.  12 — 14.  We 
sent  forward  the  preachers  to  call  a  meeting  in  the  town  of  Ber- 
wick in  the  District  of  Maine  :  on  Wednesday  I  preached  to  them, 
and  the  people  were  attentive  : — this  is  the  beginning  of  Methodism 
in  this  place. 

Thursday  27.  We  dined  at  Epping,  New-Hampshire,  and  came 
on  within  six  miles  of  Haverhill.  To  travel  forty  miles  a  day,  and 
be  under  the  necessity  of  going  into  dram  and  sin-infected  taverns  : 
it  is  such  a  journey  that  teaches  us  the  value  of  hospitality  in  the 
South,  and  the  excellency  of  Methodism  every  where  :  how  la- 
borious has  it  been — and  expensive  ;  and,  it  may  be,  unsuccessful  t 
But  my  work  and  my  judgment  is  with  the  Lord. 

Saturday  30.  At  Waltham,  I  gave  them  a  sermon  on  1  Cor.  x. 
12,  13.  ;  several  preachers  were  present  It  rained  on  the  Sabbath, 
My  Bible,  and  plans  for  conference  stations  occupied  my  mind,  and 
became  the  devotions  of  the  day. 

Massachusetts. — Monday,  June  1.  Came  to  Boston.  On  Tues- 
day we  opened  our  conference,  ninety-two  preachers  being  on  the 
list. 

Saturday  6.  Our  conference  rose.  There  were  eight  hundred 
dollars  paid;  and  we  were  nearly  three  thousand  insolvent.  \t\ 
kept  us  busy  to  preach  five  times  a  day,  ordain  fifty-nine  to  office, 
and  inquire  and  examine  into  characters,  graces,  and  gifts  ;  and  api 
point  the  numerous  stations.  I  preached  on  Wednesday,  and  a?/ 
ordination  sermon  on  Thursday,  and  on  Saturday  evening  cam 
away  to  the  pleasant  town  of  Lynn.  And  must  I  walk  through  thj 
seven  conferences,  and  travel  six  thousand  miles  in  ten  months  ? 

Sunday   8.    I  preached  in  Lynn,  administered  the  sacrament/ 
the  Lord's  supper,  and  came  to  Waltham.    At  Westbury  I  preach 
on  Monday,  on  Luke  xix.  10.     I  lodged  at  brother  Nicholas's, 
spite  of  heat  and  lameness,  we  were  favoured  to  reach  Wilbrah 
on  Tuesday.    To  Westfield  on  Wednesday,  crossing  the  new  bricjb 
at  Springfield.     I  am  in  peace — 1  dare  not  murmur,  though  in  p 
I  had  an  interview  with  a  Baptist  minister  :  he  started  at  prayer- 
he  called  it  talk  to  any  sinner  :  the  answer  is,  they  cannot  pra 

Connecticut — Thursday  12.  We  crossed  the  mountain  to  Pi 
field,   thirty-seven   miles  :  we  had  a  violent  wind,  excessive  c<|, 
and  I  was  very  lame.     Methodism  prevails  in  this  quarter  :  in  fo 
societies,  two  hundred  members  have  been  added.     A  camp-mii- 
ing  is  appointed  to  be  held  on  Monday  next.    On  Saturday  we  r^e 


224  REV.  FRANCIS  ASDURY's  JOURNAL.  [1807. 

a  great  ride  of  forty  miles  to  Watertown,  in  New-York  state.  I 
was  very  lame  on  the  Sabbath  day,  but  I  must  needs  preach  :  my 
subject  was  John  iii.  19. 

New-York. — Monday  15.  Faint,  sick,  and  lame.  I  made  twenty 
miles  to  Schenectady,  and  was  entertained  at  Isaac  Johnson's  :  he 
is  a  disciple  of  W.  Hickson's,  gained  by  preaching  in  the  streets  of 
Brooklyn,  Long-Island.  I  rejoiced  to  hear  that  Robert  Dillon 
preached  in  the  market-house  at  Troy.  On  Tuesday  it  rained, 
and  I  rested.  Wednesday  brought  us  over  Yankee  Hill  to  Frank's. 
We  came  to  Ellwood's  on  Thursday,  crossing  Schoharie  Creek.  O 
fruitful  banks  of  lovely  Mohawk  !  On  Friday  we  rode  ten  miles  out 
of  our  way,  and  made  a  long  journey  of  forty-five  miles  :  we  came 
in  at  nine  o'clock  at  night  to  Elijah  Davis's.  We  have  travelled 
one  hundred  miles  up  the  Mohawk.  My  feet  are  much  swelled, 
and  I  am  on  crutches  ;  but  I  have  been  supported  amongst  stran- 
gers. Oh  that  we  had  two  Low-Dutch  missionaries  for  the  parts 
of  Jersey  and  York  west  of  Hudson  ! 

Sunday  21.  After  E   White  had  preached  in  the  meeting-house, 
I  went  into  a  beautiful  grove,  where  I  spoke  to  about  fifteen  hun- 
dred people  on  Colo9sians  i    28,  29.     I  ordained  three  deacons, 
namely,  Stebbens,   Parker,  and  Trueman,  and  rode  to  Westmore- 
land.   1  retired  to  B.  Hannah's,  my  feet  highly  inflamed  and  painful. 
Monday  23.  At  B.  Holmes's,  in  Vernon,  I  preached  on  Rom.  x. 
13.     Next  day  I  rode  to  Silas  Bliss's,  in  Cazenovia.     On  Wednes- 
day, on  1  John  v.  14,  15.  ;  the  Lord  is  with  the  people.     Ten  years 
have  I  been  absent  from  this  kind  family  ;    and  Oh  !  the  kindness 
of  all  the  brethren  : — I  cannot  express  it,  nor  my  gratitude  for  the 
favours  shown.     I   came   home   to  Ebenezer  White's.     I  spoke 
it  brother  Nichols's,  in  Manlius,  on  Thursday,  my  text  was  chosen 
rom  John  xxi.  15 — 17.  it  was  an  open  time.     I  ordained  E.  White 
n  elder. 

Friday  25.  We  came  fourteen  miles  to  Onondaga  court-house  : 

ruly   we  saw  gapers   enow  :  my  text  was  John  xiii.  17.     After 

iking  a  cup  of  tea,  we  rode  to  Skaneateles  Lake,  about  sixteen 

liles  in  length,  and  three  in  breadth,  at  its  widest  part.     Six  more 

liles  brought  us  to  Awaskee  Lake,  about  the  same  size  :  the  outlet 

f  Aurelius- River  is  here.      We  have  had  a  day's  work  of  forty 

liles.     I  am  still  lame  on  both  feet.     Our  lodging  at  Brutus  was 

ith  B.  Upshire.     I  preached  on  Saturday,  in  the  widow  Carpen- 

r's  barn  :  in  the  afternoon  I  rode  fifteen  miles  to  David  Eddy's 

Scipio  :  here  we  were  quite  at  home. 


,1807.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY3S  JOURNAL.  225 

Sunday  27.  I  held  forth  to  about  five  hundred  souls,  in  Eddy's 
barn  :  my  subject  was  Hebr.  ii.  15,  16.  the  people  were  very  at- 
tentive, but  not  much  affected.  Bathing  my  feet  may  have  done 
good  :  they  begin  to  mend.  On  Monday  we  rode  to  Milton  Metho- 
dist meeting-house,  where  I  preached  to  about  two  hundred  souls 
on  Gal.  v.  7,  8.  I  was  faint,  yet  animated  in  speaking.  We  dined 
with  David  Hamilton,  and  came  back  to  Cayuga  Lake  :  this  sheet  of 
water  is  about  forty  miles  long,  and  four  miles  wide  :  it  feeds  the 
St.  Lawrence.  At  Samuel  Wayburn's  I  preached  on  Tuesday,  and 
on  Wednesday  we  came  by  Milton  to  Bailey's,  where  we  also  had 
meeting  :  my  subject  here  was  1  Peter  iv.  17.  it  was  a  most  insen- 
sible congregation  of  about  one  hundred  souls.  Daily  preaching, 
and  daily  affliction,  keep  me  very  low.  I  feel  with  sorrow  the  spi- 
ritual death  of  the  people — it  brings  on  great  heaviness  of  body 
and  mind, 

Thursday,  July  2.  We  dined  at  Geneva,  on  Seneca  Lake  :  the 
lake  is  about  forty  miles  in  length,  and  from  one  to  five  miles  wide. 
Our  entertainer,  Mr.  Hagley,  was  exceedingly  kind.  We  rode  on 
to  Daniel  Dorsey's,  late  of  Liberty,  Frederick  county,  Maryland, 
now  an  inhabitant  of  Lyon's  Town.  This  is  a  great  land  for 
wheat,  rye,  and  grass  ;  and  the  lakes,  with  their  navigation  of  ves- 
sels and  boats,  and  moving  scenes,  make  the  prospects  beautiful. 

Saturday  4.  We  were  greatly  crowded  in  a  small  house  in  Ly- 
on's Town  :  my  subject  was  Matt.  xvii.  5.  After  meeting  and  din- 
ner, we  rode  on  to  the  Sulphur  springs,  near  Canandaigua,  and 
lodged  at  the  widow  Ferguson's. 

Sunday  5.  I  preached  to  about  one  thousand  souls  assembled 
in  White's  barn  :  my  subject  was  2  Tim.  iv.  2.  "  Preach  the 
word." — 

I.  The  primitive  qualification,  the  call  and  commission  to 
"  preach  the  word" — the  Gospel. 

II.  The  right  use  of  the  Gospel,  to  convince,  to  reclaim  the 
backslidden  and  disorderly. 

III.  "  Exhort,"  all  characters,  "  with  long-suffering  and  doc- 
trine." Hear  ye  him ;  observe  the  dignity,  eloquence,  and 
power  of  the  speaker.  "  Doctrine,"  hear  him  on  this  point ; 
hear  him  all  men,  of  all  grades  and  characters.  My  congregation 
was  an  unfeeling  one.  Now  that  my  mind  is  in  a  great  measure 
lightened  of  its  load  of  thought  and  labour  for  the  conferences,  I 
feel  uncommon  light  and  energy  in  preaching:  I  am  not  prolix  ; 
neither  am  I  tame  :  I  am  rapid,  and  nothing  freezes  from  my  lips, 

Vol.  III.  29 


226  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL.  [1807. 

I  suppose  we  shall  preach  to  more  than  ten  thousand  souls  in  this 
district. 

Monday  6.  In  R.  Wrote's  barn,  fifteen  miles  from  Canandaigua,  I 
preached  to  about  four  hundred  unyielding  souls  on  Acts  iii. 
22,  23. 

Tuesday  7.  We  passed  the  lake,  sixteen  miles  long,  and  one 
mile  wide.  At  James  Stokes's,  Ninth  Town,  I  preached  in  the 
woods  to  a  more  attentive  people  on  Hebr.  x.  38,  39. 

Wednesday  8.  I  preached  in  the  Friend's  settlement  with  some 
power. 

Thursday  9.  At  Cresse's.  We  set  out,  dining  at  Dow's,  and 
came  to  Catrine,  at  the  head  of  Seneca  Lake,  thirty  miles ;  the 
swamps,  sloughs,  ruts,  and  stumps  made  it  awful  moving.  We 
lodged  at  Baldwin's  tavern. 

Friday  10.  We  directed  our  route  through  Newtown,  upon  the 
East  Branch  of  the  Susquehannah,  to  Showmang  ;  rested  a  while 
at  Jacob  Cresse's,  and  then  passed  the  narrows  of  the  river,  con- 
tinuing on  by  Shepherd's  mill  to  Taylor's  tavern  ;  it  was  ten 
o'clock,  and  I  was  fearful  of  driving  farther  in  the  dark. 

Saturday  11.  Brought  us  to  the  camp-meeting  on  Esq.  Light's 
ground :  we  found  it  had  been  in  operation  two  days  ;  God  is 
in  the  camp  and  with  us.  Since  the  last  Sabbath  we  have  tra- 
velled one  hundred  and  twenty  miles;  and  with  good  roads  and 
even  ground  we  might  have  made  three  hundred  miles  in  the  same 
time.  The  heights  of  the  Susquehannah  are  stupendous  ;  the  bot- 
tom lands  very  fertile  ;  but  this  river  runs  through  a  country  of 
unpleasing  aspect,  morally  and  physically ;  rude,  irregular,  uncul- 
tivated is  the  ground  ;  wild,  ignorant,  and  wicked  are  the  people  : 
they  have  not  been  wearied  by  my  labours  ;  except  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Lancaster,  and  by  what  I  may  once  have  done  in  a  visit  to 
Wyoming,  they  are  strangers  to  them.  I  am  now  on  my  first 
journey  of  toil  and  suffering  through  Genesee  and  Tioga. 

Saturday  18.  I  preached  on  the  camp-ground  from  Matt,  xviii* 
2.  :  some  sots  were  a  little  disorderly,  but  the  greater  part  of  the 
congregation  were  very  attentive  ;  weak  as  I  was,  I  did  not  spare 
myself,  my  subject,  or  my  hearers.  It  may  be,  I  spoke  to  one 
thousand  people. 

Sunday  19.  My  subject  was  2  Cor.  v.  20.  my  congregation  may 
have  doubled  in  numbers  to-day  ;  and  there  were  no  troublesome 
drunkards.  I  feel  as  if  God  would  own  this  meeting  now,  and  con- 
tinue to  own  it  many  days,  in  various  families  and  places.     I  or- 


1007.]  REV,  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  227 

dained  five  worthy  men,  local  preachers,  viz.  Daniel  Wilcox, 
John  B.  Hudson,  Samuel  Emmit,  John  M'Caine,  and  Nathaniel 
Lewis  to  the  office  of  deacon  :  had  I  not  made  this  visit,  these  men 
might  have  waited  a  long  time,  or  taken  a  long  ride  to  find  me.  In 
the  afternoon,  (Sabbath)  there  was  an  uproar  amongst  the  people. 
Some  intoxicated  young  men  seated  themselves  by  the  women,  and 
refused  to  move  until  compelled  ;  they  fought  those  men  who 
came  to  take  them  away,  and  when  the  presiding  elder  interfered 
they  struck  at  him,  and  one  of  the  guards  also,  who  was  helping 
by  order  of  the  constables.  There  were  magistrates,  (such  as 
they  were)  to  cry  peace.  The  Owego  gentry  fled  away  cackling 
falsehood  like  wild  geese.  One  Kemp,  chief  bully,  arrested  A. 
Owen,  on  Monday  morning,  for  the  Sabbath-breaking,  drunkenness, 
and  fighting  of  this  Kemp  and  his  crew.  The  presiding  elder  was 
charged  with  having  struck  Kemp,  and  then  running  away  ;  nor 
was  the  poor  bishop  spared  ;  he  too  had  been  fighting  :  it  was  well 
for  him  that  he  was  not  on  the  ground  at  the  time  :  I  was  quiet  in 
my  room. 

Monday  13.  We  rode  to  Tioga,  and  brother  Shippee  gave  us 
our  dinner.  A  ride  of  sixteen  miles  brought  us  to  Mineer's,  where 
we  lodged.  Tioga  Point,  at  the  junction  of  Shumang  and  the  river, 
is  a  pleasant  spot. 

Tuesday  14,  we  came  six  miles  to  Judge  Gore's :  here  I 
preached  upon  John  vii.  17.  When  we  set  out  on  Wednesday 
we  found  we  were  obliged  to  take  the  carriage  over  a  precipice 
by  hand.  The  road  to  the  ferry  was  rough  ;  and  behold,  the  boat 
was  gone,  and  the  bank  caved  and  washed  away ;  a  lock  upon  the 
wheel,  and  the  assistance  of  a  strap  enabled  us  to  pass  the  sulkey 
down  by  hand.  Major  Gaylor  at  Whalusing  lodged  us  well  and 
freely. 

Thursday  16.  We  came  eleven  miles  to  breakfast  at  Sturdivant's  ; 
and  eleven  miles  more  brought  us  to  Hunt's  ferry  :  after  dining  at 
Frosbury's,  free  and  kind,  we  went  on  to  Newton  Smith's,  ten 
miles  farther;  I  ordained  my  host  a  deacon  in  his  own  house. 

Friday  17.  To  Sutton's  ten  miles  ;  the  house  neat  as  a  palace  ; 
and  we  were  entertained  like  kings,  by  a  king  and  queen ;  it  was 
no  small  consolation  to  lay  down  on  a  clean  floor  after  all  we  had 
suffered  from  dirt  and  all  its  consequences.  Once  more  I  am  at 
Wyoming.  We  have  wearied  through  and  clambered  over  one 
hundred  miles  of  the  rough  roads  of  wild  Susquehannah.  Oh,  the 
precipitous  banks,  wedging  narrows,  rocks,  sideling  hills,  obstruct- 
ed paths,  and  fords  scarcely  fordable,  roots,  stumps  and  gullies  ? 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASKUKYrS  JOURNAL.  [180?. 

Pennsylvania. — Saturday  18.  I  must  take  medicine  ;  the  preach- 
ers wish  me  to  remain  in  my  lodging. 

Sunday  19.  I  went  to  the  woods  and  preached  and  ordained 
Thomas  and  Christian  Bowman,  deacons.  Before  I  got  through 
my  discourse  the  rain  came  on,  and  1  made  a  brief  finish  :  the 
people  were  attentive.  In  the  afternoon  the  preachers  and  many 
of  the  people  went  to  a  barn  ;  there  were  showers  of  rain  and 
thunder  whilst  service  was  performing.  My  first  visit  to  Wyo- 
ming was  in  great  toil  and  to  little  purpose  ;  I  am  afraid  1  shall 
have  no  better  success  now. 

Monday  20.  We  set  out  upon  a  turnpike  road,  but  Oh,  dreadful ! 
I  came  sliding  down  a  dug  road  precipice,  dark  and  deep,  but  safe. 
About  nine  o'clock  we  made  Mr.  Mawin's  tavern  ;  and  here  were 
drink,  and  smoke,  and  wagoners — but  we  closed  with  prayer.     We 
came  along,  early  on  Tuesday,  through  the  Wind  Gap,  seventeen 
miles  to  Haller's,  and  breakfasted.     I  took  a  look  at  the  Moravian 
town  of  Nazareth  ;  it  may  contain  forty  houses  built  in  the  Ger- 
man taste  and  style  ;  the  brethren's  house  is  a  large  building  of, 
possibly,  one  hundred  and  forty  feet  in  length,  and  fifty  feet  in 
width,  with  a  dutchified  tower  like  a  cupola,  in  the  centre  :  the 
whole  edifice  has  the  exterior  appearance  of  a  college.     The  land 
in  the  vicinity  was  not  so  fertile,  nor  the  grounds  as  highly  im- 
improved  as  I   expected  to  have   found  them.     Seventeen  miles 
farther   brought   us  to    far-famed    Bethlehem,   which  I  had  long 
wished  to  see.     The  stream  that  runs  west  of  the  town  is  pretty 
and  useful,  as  it  works  a  machine  which  raises  the  water  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  feet  into  two  reservoirs,  for  the  use  of  the  inhabitants. 
We  found  ourselves  at  the  grand  tavern  at  the  north  end,  the  pro- 
perty of  the  brethren  :  the  house  is  large,  but  a  plain  building : 
the  entertainment  good  at  a  dollar  a  night  for  man  and  horse.     On 
the  second  step  of  the  high  grounds  on  the  main  street,  which  be- 
gins on  the  hill  above,  stand  the  church  buildings  :  on  the  east  and 
west  are  rooms  appropriate  to  the  institution,  and  certainly  the 
west  end  has  a  grand  appearance.      On  the  same   street  below 
stands  the  brethren's  house,  one  hundred  feet  front,  five  stories 
high,  very  plain,  and  much  German  taste  discoverable  every  where  ; 
add  to  this  the  majestic  Lehigh,  and  you  have  the  most  striking  fea- 
tures of  this  celebrated  place.    But,  Ah  !  religion — Reader,  I  am  a 
Methodist.    I  asked  the  young  man  who  managed  the  tavern,  if 
they  ever  permitted  any  minister  to  preach  amongst  the  brethren  ; 
he  could  not  answer,  he  was  a  servant,  and  knew  not  how  to  answer. 
Next  came  the  master  of  the  ceremonies,   the    cicerone  of  the 


1807.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy'S  JOURNAL.  tt(d 

establishment  who  shows  the  wonders  of  the  place  ;  I  asked  him 
— I  was  told  that  on  that  night  there  was  private  worship  in  the 
church — the  minister  must  perform  himselbst.  Daniel  Hilt  and 
two  gentlemen  from  York,  who  had  given  money  for  the  sights 
shown  here  for  money,  went  to  the  church  meeting.  And  what 
did  they  see  and  hear?  A  man  read  in  German  they  knew  not 
what,  sung  and  placed  upon  the  four  thousand  dollar  organ  :  ser- 
mon or  prayer  they  heard  not.  1  doubt  much  if  there  is  any 
prayer  here,  public  or  private,  except  the  stated  prayers  of  the 
minister  on  the  Sabbath  day.  But  the  brethren  have  a  school  for 
boys  at  Nazareth,  and  one  for  girls  at  Bethlehem  ;  and  they 
have  a  store  and  a  tavern  ;  the  society  have  worldly  wealth  and 
worldly  wisdom  :  it  is  no  wonder  that  men  of  the  world,  who 
would  not  have  their  children  spoiled  by  religion,  send  them  to  so 
decent  a  place. 

Wednesday  22.  We  crossed  the  Lehigh  to  Allentown,  beautifully 
situated — superior  in  this  respect,  perhaps,  to  Bethlehem.  We 
breakfasted  at  the  end  of  twelve  miles,  and  came  on  to  Kuteztown. 
On  Thursday  morning  we  bent  our  course  through  Reading  ;  the 
views  of  meadows  and  fields  were  grand — beautiful.  Reading  may 
have  two  hundred  houses,  one  street  in  a  style  of  grandeur  ap- 
proaching to  that  of  Philadelphia,  as  it  respects  the  houses  ;  the 
rest  have  much  of  the  German  feature.  Through  Adamstown, 
where  we  breakfasted,  we  came  on  over  rocks  and  hills  to  New- 
Holland  ;  here,  as  at  Reading,  there  are  fine  new  churches  for  the 
German  Lutherans  and  the  German  Calvinists  :  these  are  the  cita- 
dels of  formality — fortifications  erected  against  the  apostolic  itine- 
racy of  a  more  evangelical  ministry.  Ah  !  Philadelphia,  and  ye, 
her  dependencies,  the  villages  of  the  state  of  Pennsylvania,  when 
will  prejudice,  formality,  and  bigotry  cease  to  deform  your  religious 
profession  ;  and  the  ostentatious  display  of  the  lesser  morals  give 
place  to  evangelical  piety  ? 

At  Soudersburg  we  rested  one  day.     I  wrote  three  letters. 

Saturday  25.  We  came  through  Lancaster  to  Columbia.  On  the 
Sabbath  day  I  preached  in  a  lot  near  the  river  :  we  may  have  had 
seven  hundred  people  :  my  subject  was  2  Cor.  v.  14.  The  mis- 
sionaries, Boehm  and  Hunter,  were  present.  On  Monday  I  came  to 
Little-York.  Here  I  met  with  Nelson  Reed.  This  week  I  am  oc- 
cupied in  writing  about  thirty  letters  ;  yet,  not  unmindful  of  the 
word  of  God  and  prayer.  It  is  but  too  manifest  that  the  success 
of  our  labours,  more  especially  at  camp-meetings,  has  roused  a 
spirit  of  persecution  against  us — riots,  fines,  stripes — perhaps  pri- 


-30  ru:v.  francis  asbury's  journal.  [1307. 

sons  and  death,  if  we  do  not  give  up  our  camp-meetings  :  we  shall 
never  abandon  them,  but  shall  subdue  our  enemies  by  overcoming 
evil  with  good.  What  hath  God  wrought  in  America  !  In  thirty- 
six  years  we  find  one  hundred  and  forty-four  thousand  five  hun- 
dred and  ninety  in  number  :  in  England,  after  seventy-seven  years, 
they  count  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  nine  hundred  and  se- 
venty-four :  they  may  have  thirty  millions  of  souls  in  the  three 
kingdoms  to  labour  amongst;  and  we  not  more,  perhaps,  than  five 
millions.  Our  travelling  preachers,  five  hundred  and  thirty-six,  at 
present;  the  rest,  local  and  official,  about  fourteen  hundred  ;  but 
all  these  are  poor  men,  and  unlearned — without  books,  money,  or 
influence.  Not  unto  us,  not  unto  us  ! — Oh,  Lord,  take  thou  the 
glory ! 

Saturday,  August  1.  Constant  application  whilst  here.  Reading 
the  Bible  and  writing  about  sixty  pages  of  letters  found  me  employ- 
ment. On  the  Sabbath  I  preached  at  eleven  o'clock  at  our  chapel 
in  York  :  I  spoke  on  Coloss.  i.  27,  28. — short  and  temperate.  We 
might  have  about  six  hundred  hearers.  In  the  afternoon  I  spoke 
on  Coloss.  iii.  12,  13.  :  I  spoke  longer  than  in  the  morning.  We 
have  the  form  of  the  power  of  godliness,  for  we  shout,  and  we  stamp, 
and  jump,  and  are  very  happy — who  but  we! — But  we  are  con- 
tentious, and  mingle  and  mix,  by  off-hand  marriages,  believers 
with  unbelievers,  and  other  things  we  do  :  but,  for  once,  I  have 
delivered  my  own  soul.  I  think  it  begins  to  be  time  for  another 
visitation  at  York. 

I  have  my  paradise  at  brother  Pentz's  ;  but  I  have  much  labour, 
and  some  temptations.  I  now  fare  sumptuously  every  day  ;  but, 
Oh!  what  is  before  me — three  thousand  five  hundred  miles  before 

1  reach  the  Georgetown  conference. 

Tuesday  3.  I  took  my  leave  of  my  kind  friends  at  Wierly  Pentz's, 
and  rode  to  dinner  to  George  Nailor's  :  that  night  we  passed  under 
the  roof  of  the  widow  Hollopeter.  On  Wednesday  I  preached  at 
Stickles  school-house:  the  room  was  full,  and  I  spoke  for  an 
hour  on  1  Peter  iv.  10,  11.  We  came  that  evening  to  Lewisburg. 
O  my  God,  help  me  in  soul  and  body,  through  my  approaching 
labours  and  sufferings  !  Thursday  brought  us  through  an  obscure 
town  to  brother  Weaver's  ;  our  host  and  his  wife  are  Germans — 
in  their  first  love. 

Friday  6.  At  Carlisle.  Saturday  occupied  in  reading  Burders 
Village  Sermons,  &c. 

Sabbath  8.  I  preached  upon  Gal.  v.  7 — 9.  ;  in  the  afternoon  on 

2  Cor.  iv.  1,2.:  my  body  faint ;  my  spirit  fervent.     On  Monday, 


1807. j  REV.  FRANCIS  ASTSURY'S  JOURNAL,  231 

at  Shippinsburg,  I  preached  upon  2  Peter  iii.  17,  18.,  and  ordained 
John  Davis  a  deacon  :  it  was  very  warm,  but  we  had  an  open  sea- 
son. We  lodged  with  brother  Scott,  one  of  my  hearers  thirty- 
years  ago,  in  Chester  county,  now  warm  in  the  cause  of  God. 
After  a  heavy  rain  had  passed  away  on  Monday,  on  Tuesday  we  be- 
gan our  mountain  toil :  we  crossed  three,  dined  with  the  junior, 
and  lodged  with  the  senior  Ramsay  :  no  people  need  be  kinder  than 
were  these. 

Wednesday  12.  We  set  out  again,  and  the  rain  attended  us  into 
Bedford.  We  lodged  at  the  stage-house :  Mr.  Graham,  my  host, 
had  known  me  in  my  early  visits — I  had  preached  at  his  father's  : 
the  son  was  kind  as  a  king  could  be,  and  charged  us  not  a  cent  for 
our  entertainment :  in  a  hundred  public  houses,  possibly,  that  I 
have  thus  stopped  at  in  the  year,  I  have  received  no  such  favours. 
We  reached  Berlin  on  Thursday,  and  found  friend  Johnson  and  his 
wife  kind  indeed. 

Friday  14.  We  dined  and  prayed  at  the  Twenty-Mile  house, 
and  were  obliged  to  stop  at  an  ordinary  twelve  miles  farther— 
drunken  people  ;  but  they  behaved  as  well  as  they  could  :  any  port 
in  a  storm.  On  Saturday  we  came  on  eight  miles  to  breakfast  at 
Anthony  Bailings  :  from  thence  we  rode  through  Ccnnellsville  to 
Union.  We  put  up  with  the  widow  Kenthorn,  intending  to  be  at 
the  camp-meeting.  And  now  1  have  rode  since  I  left  Baltimore  in 
March,  two  thousand  five  hundred  miles  ;  and  have  had,  as  usual, 
many  a  jolt  over  rocks  and  rocks  again  on  the  American  Alps,  and 
dangers  and  difficulties,  and  a  head  bruised  by  the  iron  rods  of  my 
carriage  :  I  have  been  enabled  to  suifer  patiently  pains  and  sick- 
ness for  the  good  of  souls. 

Sabbath  16.  I  ordained,  on  the  camp-ground,  Dobbins,  Fell,  and 
Wakefield,  to  the  office  of  deacons.  I  preached  on  2  Cor.  v.  IK 
"  Knowing  the  terror  of  the  Lord;"  I  made  two  general  heads, 
1.  The  Gospel  is  a  general,  gracious,  persuasive,  characteristic 
ministry  ;  in  which  the  ministers  thereof  are  manifest  to  God,  and 
to  the  consciences  of  their  hearers  in  their  characters,  their  sins, 
their  sayings,  ways,  &c.  2.  The  Gospel  was  armed  with  terror  to 
the  disobedient,  impenitent,  and  to  apostates  from  it.  Knowing 
the  terror  of  the  Lord — Knowing  how  God  is  to  be  feared — when 
insulted  by  disobedience,  the  Trinity  is  roused  into  indignation  ; 
every  attribute,  and  all  the  perfection  of  Deity  is  arranged  on  the 
side  of  vengeance  and  vindictive  wrath.  There  was  not  a  suffi- 
ciency of  seats  for  the  congregation  ;  but  they  behaved  as  well  as 
could  be  expected  ;  there  was  nothing  vicious  seen — no  plan  of  op- 


-32  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1807. 

position  was  discoverable.  On  Monday  I  went  to  camp  again,  and 
spoke  upon  Matt.  v.  46,  47.  What  the  followers  of  Christ  pro- 
fessed more  than  others  ;  and  what  God  had  done  for  them  more 
than  others,  aa  Christians  and  ministers  ;  that  therefore  God  the 
Father,  Son,  and  Spirit  require  more  from  them  than  from  others. 
By  application — to  a  variety  of  cases  ; — what  do  ye  more  than 
others  1  ' 

Tuesday  18.  We  found  our  horses  had  been  taken  or  had  stray- 
ed away.  I  read  Hervey  on  the  Tombs,  and  wrote  the  Station 
Book. 

Wednesday  19.  We  set  out  and  came  to  the  Old  Fort ;  crossed 
the  Monongahela,  and  lodged  with  Dr.  Wheeler,  he  and  his  lady 
are  Londoners  ;  and  Oh,  how  kind  they  were  !  How  did  the  sal- 
vation of  the  souls  of  these  kind  friends  rest  upon  me  !  The 
Doctor's  mother  had  been  in  band  society  with  Mr.  Wesley.  From 
six  in  the  morning  to  seven  in  the  evening  of  Thursday,  we  made 
about  forty  miles,  over  some  rough  roads  and  desperate  hills  :  we 
wished  to  redeem  time,  that  we  might  refit  at  John  Beck's,  near 
West  Liberty  ;  so  we  ate  not  on  the  route,  though  we  fed  the 
horses  twice.     I  had  had  pain  of  a  rheumatic  kind  for  some  days. 

Virginia.— Friday  21.  Marked  letters  to  transcribe,  read,  took 
medicine,  and  nursed  myself.  On  Saturday  1  preached  in  Beck's 
new  house  on  Philip,  ii.  12,  13.  On  the  Sabbath  I  preached  in 
an  excellent  stone  meeting-bouse,  at  Short-Creek,  to  about  one 
thousand  souls,  from  2  Cor.  iii  7,  8.  We  crossed  over  into  the 
state  of  Ohio  on  Monday  ;  and  I  gave  them  a  sermon  in  the  court- 
house at  St.  Clairsville. 

Ohio. — By  hard  labour  we  reached  Frankfort  on  Tuesday  ; 
thence  we  made  Spears's  on  Wednesday  ;  on  Thursday  came  to 
Densenbury's  ;  on  Friday  to  Teal's  :  in  four  days  and  a  half  we 
have  travelled  one  hundred  and  thirty  miles — mud,  gullies,  stumps, 
and  hills.  I  was  sick  with  an  inflammatory  sore  throat ;  my  trials 
were  great,  nature  failed,  but  grace  supported.  Every  family  shall 
know  me  by  prayer.  Saturday  I  devoted  to  rest.  I  have  hastily 
marked  above  two  hundred  hymns,  taken  from  the  congregational 
hymn-book,  to  add  to  a  new  American  edition,  which,  1  hope,  will 
be  as  good  as  any  extant. 

Sabbath  30.  At  the  stand  on  the  camp-ground  near  Hockhock- 
ing  I  spoke  on  Hebr  iv.  1.  "•  Let  us  therefore  fear."  There 
were  about  eight  hundred  hearers,  and  it  was  a  time  of  feeling  and 
solemnity  to  professors.  Monday  was  diligently  taken  up  with  my 
pen,  and  prayer  with  my  friends  :  the  hymns  for  a  new  collection 


I807.J  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  233 

occupied  my  mind  much.  My  poor  mare  is  worn  down,  and  my 
carriage  is  wrecked  somewhat,  and  must  be  repaired.  On  Thurs- 
day we  came  to  New-Lancaster  :  I  preached  in  a  school-house  on 
Luke  xix.  10.  We  afterward  came  on  to  Mr.  Vanmeter's,  and 
just  escaped  an  awful  storm  of  thunder,  hail,  and  rain. 

Friday,  September  4.  We  came  away  to  Chilicothe  :  O,  the 
mud  and  the  trees  in  the  path !  Reading  closely  on  Saturday.  In 
our  neat,  new  house  I  preached  on  the  Sabbath  morning  to  about  five 
hundred  hearers  on  1  Peter  iv.  17,  18.  ;  I  spoke  about  an  hour, 
There  are  some  pleasing  and  some  unpleasing  accounts  here — 
some  little  trouble  in  the  society  ;  but  great  prospects  all  around 
in  the  country.  The  sitting  of  conference  will  be  of  God  for 
good  to  souls  :  we  have  been  praying  the  whole  year  for  this.  By 
letters  from  brothers  Mead  and  Bruce  I  learn  that  prospects 
brighten  in  old  Virginia  :  they  have  had  blessed  camp-meetings. 

Monday  and  Tuesday  closely  reading.  On  Wednesday  we  rode 
to  Deer-Creek.  Thursday,  Friday,  and  Saturday  selecting  hymns 
and  reading  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington,  nearly  3000  pages  in 
four  volumes  :  only  as  a  Life  of  Washington  can  I  give  it  the  pre- 
ference to  Gordon's  History  of  the  Revolutionary  War. 

Sabbath  13.  At  the  Deer-Creek  camp-ground  I  gave  them  a 
discourse  on  2  Cor.  vi.  1.  In  the  evening  we  returned  to  Chili- 
cothe. 

On  Monday  we  opened  our  conference  in  great  peace  and  love, 
and  continued  sitting,  day  by  day,  until  Friday  noon.  A  delega- 
tion of  seven  members  was  chosen  to  the  general  conference. 
There  were  thirteen  preachers  added,  and  we  found  an  addition  of 
two  thousand  two  hundred  members  to  the  society  in  these  bounds  ; 
seven  deacons  were  elected  and  ordained,  and  ten  elders  :  two 
preachers  only  located  ;  sixty-six  preachers  were  stationed. 

Finding  my  work  done,  and  my  carriage  sold,  I  ventured  once 
more  to  take  horse,  with  a  determination  to  visit  the  frontier  settle- 
ments on  the  Great-Miami  River.  We  came  away,  leaving  fifty  or 
sixty  preachers  at  the  camp-meeting  near  the  seat  of  conference, 
and  got  to  brother  Waugh's  for  the  night. 

Saturday  we  reached  Hinkstone's  to  dine,  and  thence,  by  riding 
late,  got  into  Cesarsville,  and  stopped  with  Peter  Pelham :  we 
have  made  sixty-five  miles  from  Chilicothe.  A  great  rumour  is 
abroad  of  an  expected  Indian  war  ;  and  many  fled  for  fear  ;  but 
the  report  was  idle  wind.  The  whole  matter  was,  that  about  a 
thousand  Indians  had  assembled  upon  the  frontiers  for  social,  and  it 
may  be,  religious  and  moral  purposes.     General  Worthington  and 

Vol.  !U.  30 


234  REV.  FRANCIS  ASEURY\s  JOURNAL.  [1307. 

Colonel  M'Carthy  magnanimously  offered  to  take  a  talk  and  a  belt 
of  wampum  from  the  governor  to  the  congregated  savages  :  the 
ambassadors  found  peace  ;  and  brought  in  four  chiefs  as  hostages, 
with  assurances  that  no  ill  was  designed  to  the  whites.  It  is  said 
there  is  a  prophet  risen  up  among  the  Indians. 

At  Frederick  Bonner's  I  preached  upon  Hebr.  iv.  1,2.:  it  was 
an  open  season. 

Monday  20.  I  rested  at  John  Sale's.  Busy  writing.  On  Tues- 
day we  started  away  and  came  to  Samuel  Hitt's  ;  dined,  prayed, 
talked,  and  came  away  to  Lebanon :  we  found  the  court  in  session. 
We  lodged  at  Jeremiah  Lawson's.  There  is  now  a  great  talk  about 
the  Shakers  ;  they  are  said  to  consist  of  two  hundred  people  :  three 
Presbyterian  Ministers  have  joined  them — a  heavy  declension  ! 

Wednesday  22.  Webent  our  course  down  Little-Miami :  there 
are  many  fine  situations  for  mills  on  this  stream,  and  the  land 
appears  to  be,  generally,  very  fertile.  We  found  a  lodging  with 
Andrew  M'Grew,  lately  from  Baltimore  county,  Maryland.  I 
preached  on  Thursday  at  Philip  Gatch's,  on  Hebr.  iv.  2.  On  Fri- 
day we  stopped  in  Cincinnati,  and  dined  with  Mr.  Farris  :  Solomon 
and  Oliver  Langdon  had  come  on,  and  were  of  the  company. 

Saturday  25.  Rested,  read,  and  wrote.  I  am  young  again,  and 
boast  of  being  able  to  ride  six  thousand  miles  on  horseback  in  ten 
months  ;  my  round  will  embrace  the  United  States,  the  Territory, 
and  Canada — but  Oh,  childhood,  youth,  and  old  age,  ye  are  all 
vanity  !  My  companions  and  myself  are  busy  compiling  the  new 
hymn-book.  Our  brethren  here  have  built  a  proper  little  stone 
house  for  worship,  forty  feet  by  thirty. 

Sabbath  26.  I  preached  at  eleven  o'clock  :  many  could  not  get 
seats.  I  met  the  society.  I  also  ordained  W.  M'Neachan  and 
William  Whitaker  to  the  office  of  deacon.  Notwithstanding  oppo- 
sition from  more  than  one  quarter,  our  last  camp-meeting  was  suc- 
cessful ;  the  fruit  is  immediate  ;  and  where  it  is  not,  it  will  yet  be 
seen  :  we  live  by  faith  in  a  prayer-hearing,  soul-converting,  soul- 
sanctifying,  soul-restoring,  soul-comforting  God. 

Kentucky. — Monday  27.  Our  morning's  ride  brought  us,  hungry 
and  weary,  into  Kentucky  :  after  refreshing  at  the  widow  Stevens's, 
we  pushed  on  to  Grant's  Lick,  and  lodged  at  John  Daniel's.  In  the 
morning  we  came  away  across  the  forks,  and  over  the  hills  of 
Licking,  twenty-eight  miles,  to  sister  Ritchie's — a  widow  indeed. 
Our  evening's  ride  was  dark  and  rough,  along  an  unknown  path  to 
Cynthiana  :  we  stopped  at  J.  Jacques's.  I  judge  we  have  made 
fifty  miles  to-day. 


1807.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  235 

Whilst  resting  on  Thursday  and  Wednesday,  I  read  Atmore's 
Memoirs,  of  about  five  hundred  pages  ;  and  I  wrote  a  memoir  of 
George  Dougharty.  All  my  occupations,  however  toilsome,  are 
pleasant  when  I  enjoy  God  in  pure  and  perfect  love. 

Friday,  October  2.  Attended  the  camp-meeting  at  Mount  Geri- 
zim.  On  Saturday  I  spoke  on  2  Tim.  ii.  19.  On  Sunday  my  text 
was  Isaiah  xlv.  23.  Possibly  we  had  two  thousand  souls  to  hear 
us  :  there  were  fifteen  tents,  and  twenty  wagons.  We  had  a 
Sabbath  love-feast  and  sacrament ;  and  doubtless  there  were  pre- 
cious souls  converted,  (report  says  about  thirty,)  and  sanctified. 
I  conversed  with  Valentine  Cook  on  the  subject  of  a  mission ;  he 
held  back— Ah  !  how  hardly  shall  they  who  have  families  growing 
up,  enter  into  and  keep  in  the  travelling  connexion  !  I  came  from 
the  camp-ground  every  night  to  Samuel  Brodwell's.  My  host  has 
put  my  name  upon  one  of  his  sons  :  Lord,  put  thy  new  name  upon 
the  lad,  that  he  may  bear  it  for  generations  to  come,  and  to  be  born  ! 

Monday  5.  We  set  out,  and  stopped  at  Martin  Hitt's,  took  dinner 
and  continued  on  a  dark  ride  through  the  woods,  to  William 
Burke's,  thirty  miles.  On  Tuesday  we  held  a  hasty  meeting  at 
Irvine's,  Madison  county.  Wednesday  we  reached  Williams's  ; 
Thursday,  Freeman's  ;  Friday,  Dorton  s  ;  and  on  Saturday  came 
to  Peter  Huffacre's,  Powel's  Valley. 

Sabbath  11.  I  preached  on  Luke  iv.  18. — Oh  !  when  shall  this 
wilderness  rejoice !  1  have  perfect  peace,  but  great  toil.  Since 
the  conference  we  have  travelled  three  hundred  and  sixty  miles, 
there  is  a  serious  want  of  water,  generally,  in  the  western  lands. 

Monday  12.  We  had  a  heavy  ride  to  Holston,  forty  miles.  We 
stopped  with  Martin  Stubblefield. 

Tennessee. — On  Tuesday  we  rested  ;  and  it  may  be  allowed, 
considering  our  six  days'  ride  through  heat,  great  heat  and  drought. 
At  night  I  preached  from  1  Thess.  iv.  3.  ;  and  weary  and  faint  as  I 
was,  I  felt  strongly  disposed  to  sing  and  shout  away  as  loud  as  the 
youngest.     I  have  been,  and  am  happy  in  God. 

Friday  15.  We  reached  Wamping's.  I  suffered  much  to-day  ; 
but  an  hour's  warm  bath  for  my  feet  relieved  me  considerably. 
On  Saturday  we  rode  to  Killon's. 

North  Carolina. — Sabbath  18.  At  Buncombe  court-house  I 
spoke  from  2  Kings  vii.  13,  14,  15.  The  people  were  all  atten- 
tion. I  spent  a  night  under  the  roof  of  my  very  dear  brother  in 
Christ,  George  Newton,  a  Presbyterian  minister,  an  Israelite 
indeed.     On  Monday  we  made  Fletcher's  ;  next  day  dined  at  Ter- 


236  ilev.  FKANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1807. 

ry's,  and  lodged  at  Edwards's.     Saluda  ferry   brought  us  up  on 
Wednesday  evening. 

Sabbath  25.  For  three  days  past  I  have  been  busy  in  seeking 
appropriate  portions  of  Scripture  for  the  new  hymns  designed  to 
enlarge  our  common  hymn-book  Our  journey  hither  from  Chili- 
cothe  ha9  brought  us  through  five  states.  Report  says  there  is  an 
awful  affliction  in  Charleston — the  mortal  fever  !  I  preached  to-day 
at  Salem  on  2  Chron.  vi.  29,  30,  31.  ;  we  had  a  serious  time.  My 
mind  is  kept  in  great  peace  :  surely,  God  is  love  ! 

At  Elijah  Moore's  on  Monday  1  preached  on  Luke  xi.  9,  10.  ; 
my  labour  I  think  is  not  entirely  in  vain.  On  Tuesday  at  Jeremiah 
Robinson's,  we  had  but  twelve  souls  to  hear  us  :  the  people  are 
too  busy  with  their  fine  crops  of  corn.  My  body  fails,  but  1  have 
great  peace  of  mind. 

Georgia. — On  Wednesday  Daniel  Hitt  preached  at  John 
Oliver's  :  our  host  has  a  son-in-law  converted  at  camp-meeting. 
Our  preachers  have  passed  by  this  town,  but  the  Lord  will  not  pass 
by  Petersburg,  but  will  visit  precious  souls  here. 

Thursday  to  Tait's  :  here  1  spoke  to  a  few  persons  on  Rev. 
lii.  4,  5.  ;  and  God  was  with  us  of  a  truth.  On  Friday  I  preached 
at  James  Halston's  on  1  John  i.  6,  7.  :  it  was  not  in  vain  :  both 
colours  filled  the  house.     On  Saturday  we  rode  to  Coldwater. 

Sabbath  day,  November  1.  I  preached  on  1  John  ii.  17. :  I  had 
help. 

It  is  wonderful  to  see  how  flush  the  streams  are,  and  excellent 
the  crops,  considering  the  want  of  rain  for  three  months  past. 
In  the  sandy  lands  the  waters  do  not  fail  in  a  drought  as  they  do 
elsewhere.  My  soul  is  happy  in  God  continually  :  it  has  been  re- 
ported to  me  that  at  the  two  camp-meeiings  held,  the  one  in  Elbert 
county,  the  other  in  Franklin  counly,  about  one  hundred  souls 
professed  converting  grace. 

Monday  2.  We  came  to  James  Marks's. 

Tuesday  3.  Both  Daniel  Hitt  and  myself  preached. 

Wednesday  4.  We  were  diligently  occupied  with  our  projected 
hymn-book.  I  make  it  a  rule  where  I  stop  to  pray  after  every 
meal.  / 

Thursday^  I  felt  the  tears  and  sorrows  of  the  family  when 
parting.  We  crossed  Webb's  ferry  into  Oglethorpe  county,  pass- 
ing through  Lexington  to  James  Freeman's — a  ride  of  thirty  miles, 
through  wind  and  rain.  James  Halston  told  me  that  his  cousin, 
Colonel  Halston,  had  unfortunately  beaten  and  killed  a  pious  soldier 
during  the  war  of  the  revolution  :  the  Colonel  settled  in  Georgia 


1S07.J  REV.  FRANCIS  ASiiURY?S  JOURNAL.  23? 

and  whilst  every  thing  seemed  to  prosper  round  him,  he  was  one 
night  shot  in  his  bed  by  one  of  his  slaves  ;  the  child  which  lay  in 
his  arms  was  unhurt. 

Friday  6.  We  were  engaged  with  our  collection  of  hymns.  I 
preached  at  Henry  Pope's  at  night  :  it  was  a  time  of  power  and 
liberty. 

Saturday  6.  We  came  to  General  John  Stewart's. 

Sabbath  7.  Daniel  Hitt  and  myself  both  preached  :  we  felt  the 
state  of  the  people.  Oh  !  what  necessity  is  there  to  urge  the 
doctrine  of  sanctification  in  this  state — it  is  a  doctrine  almost  for- 
gotten here. 

Monday  3.    I  preached  at  John  Crutchfield's  on   1  Peter  i.  4. 
Oh  !  the  precious  promises  I     We  did  not  speak  without  a  present 
God.     Next    day    Daniel  Hitt   preached   at   B.  Bush's,   Liberty : 
there  has  been  a  good  and  gracious  work  in  this  society. 

Thursday  11.   I  was  taken  ill  with  an  influenza. 

Monday  22.  I  have  been  one  week  sick  at  Sparta.  This  even- 
ing I  arrived,  a  sick,  weak,  old  man,  at  Mr.  Bush's.  I  take  another 
emetic. 

Wednesday  24.  We  rode  to  W.  Bomer's  :  I  found  it  good  to 
stay  here  and  take  some  more  medicine.  My  complaint  is  a  pleu- 
risy,  and  deep  affection  of  the  breast. 

Monday  29.  It  was  much  as  I  could  this  day  do  to  reach 
Tindall's. 

Tuesday  30.  We  came  into  Augusta. 

Wednesday,  December  1.  I  rode  up  to  Martin  Hitt's,  on  Ste- 
phen's Creek. 

South  Carolina. — Thursday  2.  We  reached  Spann's.  I  judge 
we  have  travelled  nine  hundred  miles  since  the  western  conference. 
Judge  William  Stith  died  at  Milledgeville,  suddenl}',  and  I  believe, 
safely  called  home  in  peace.  The  mortality  has  been  very  general 
and  very  great  in  these  parts.  We  had  a  blessed  rain  in  Georgia. 
The  weather  and  indisposition  hold  me  at  Spann's.  My  soul  is  happy 
in  God  in  sickness  and  in  health. 

Sabbath  5.  I  preached. 

Monday  6.  We  started  away  to  Fridge's,  thirty-six  miles. 
As  it  was  a  day  of  general  parade  on  Tuesday  at  Columbia,  I 
returned  to  General  Huchinson's.  Next  day  we  reached  Camden, 
Thursday  I  preached  in  Camden.  I  spent  Friday  at  Rembert- 
Hall,  reading  and  writing. 

Sabbath  13.  I  preached  at  Rembert's  chapel.  Mr.  Rembert 
was  thrown  out  of  his  sulkey,  but  there  was  no  mischief  done,  ex 


238  R.EV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  [1808, 

cept  that  some  old  bruises  were  wakened  up.  My  subject  to-day 
was  Matt.  xxiv.  45.  The  good  servant — in  spiritual  wisdom,  in 
fidelity,  his  diligence  to  perform  his  duties.  The  wicked  servant 
backslidden,  false,  and  falsely  secure.  His  Lord  delayeth  his 
coming,  therefore  he  maltreats  his  fellow-servants  who  are  better 
than  himself.     He  is  sensual  ;  his  portion  hell. 

Sabbath  20.  At  Rembert's  chapel  I  spoke  on  Deut.  v.  29.  Oh 
that  God  would  visit  these  people !  Last  week  I  have  occasion- 
ally rode  out  for  exercise  ;  but  I  am  pretty  busy  with  writing, 
family  duty,  and  reading.  My  mind  is  wholly  devoted  to  God  and 
his  work. 

Monday  21.  It  rained.  On  Tuesday  we  went  to  Bradford's. 
Wednesday  evening  we  lodged  at  Simpson's  tavern.  On  Thurs- 
day at  Monk's  Corner.  Friday,  Christmas  day,  brought  us  to 
Charleston.     Saturday  was  devoted  to  reading  and  receiving  visits. 

Sabbath  27.  I  preached  at  the  old  church  on  Matt.  vii.  21.  At 
Bethel  on  Deut.  x.  12. 

Friday,  January  1,  1808.  Our  conference  began.  We  sat  six 
hours  a  day,  had  great  harmony,  and  little  or  no  trouble  in  station- 
ing the  preachers.  Preaching  every  noon  to  the  conference  and 
others.  In  my  sermon  on  Sabbath  day,  at  the  old  church,  I  took 
some  notice  of  the  life  and  labours  of  Bennett  Kendrick  and 
George  Dougherty.  The  increase  of  members  in  the  bounds  of 
this,  and  the  western  conference,  for  this  year,  is  three  thousand 
seven  hundred  members  ;  preachers  twenty-three. 

Wednesday  6.  We  rode  back  to  Rembert-Hall.  Busy  writing 
letters.  In  the  midst  of  restless  days  and  nights  of  pain,  my  mind 
enjoys  great  peace.     On  Saturday  1  rode  to  Camden. 

Sabbath  10.  I  preached  from  1  Cor.  i.  30.  I  had  some  open- 
ings of  mind,  but  there  was  little  unction  in  preaching  or  sacra- 
ment. Busy  writing  letters.  On  Monday  after  the  rain  we  went 
up  to  John  Horton's,  at  the  Hanging-Rock.  We  reached  Pressley's 
by  chance  on  Tuesday. 

North  Carolina. — Wednesday  13.  We  reached  Mecklenburg, 
and  stayed  with  our  friend  Mecham  Wilson,  a  Presbyterian  minis- 
ter, where  we  were  comfortably  and  kindly  accommodated.  On 
Thursday  we  found  the  main  branch  of  Rocky-River  unfordable  : 
we  stopped  at  Esquire  M'Curdy's.  Friday  brought  us  through  Con- 
cord to  Savage's.  Yesterday  was  very  damp  and  cold  ;  to-day 
there  is  ice  probably  an  inch  thick.  On  Saturday  we  set  out  over 
the  frozen  road*,  and  stopped  at  the  end  of  ten  miles  to  breakfast 
with  the  Rev.  John  Brown,  a  Presbyterian  minister  in  Salisbury 


1808.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY?S  JOURNAL.  £39 

thence  we  came  away  to  John  Hitt's.  I  have  preached  to  his 
father  and  mother,  who  have  now  fallen  asleep  :  the  grandson, 
Jacob,  son  of  John,  feeleth  as  if  he  had  a  call  to  preach.  In  this 
journey,  on  the  one  side  I  may  put  down  cold,  hunger,  rain,  floods, 
frost,  bad  roads,  and  a  lame  horse  ;  on  the  other,  prayer,  patience, 
peace,  love  :  the  balance  is  greatly  in  my  favour. 

Sabbath  17.  At  Hitt's  I  gave  them  a  sermon  from  Hebr.  iv.  9. 
Next  day  we  pushed  away,  thirty  miles,  to  Charles  Clayton's.  My 
spirit  is  greatly  grieved  with  the  ungodly  children  of  this  family, 
particularly  one  who  has  fallen  from  grace.  On  Tuesday  I  preach- 
ed at  Joshua  Clayton's  on  Hebr.  iii.  7,  8.  Joshua  Clayton  has 
no  children  to  grieve  me.  The  loving  old  souls  in  this  house  are 
early  Methodists  from  Maryland.  I  ordained  E.  Breyer  and  Ro- 
bert Field.  We  went  over  to  father  Doule's  on  Wednesday.  My 
ride  over  hard  roads  on  my  poor,  lame  mare  was  a  trial  to  me. 
We  crossed  the  Yadkin  at  Clement's  bridge — well  constructed, 
and  well  secured.  In  three  hours'  notice  at  Daub's  we  had  a 
large  congregation,  to  whom  I  spoke  a  few  words  on  Rom.  xii.  2. 
We  came  through  Haverstown,  (having  my  lame  mare  shod)  to 
Germantovvn  :  both  these  villages  are  small ;  the  first  may  have 
thirty  families  in  it,  the  other  about  half  the  number.  We  lodged 
at  Mr.  Ennally's,  where  we  have  a  small  society ;  the  grandfather 
left  us,  but  the  grandson  is  a  preacher  in  the  connexion.  On 
Friday  we  rode  through  the  rain  ten  miles  to  breakfast  at  Brooks's. 
Amidst  all  my  little  difficulties  my  soul  is  very  happy  in  the  Lord. 
The  prospects  in  the  highland  circuits  are  very  good.  On  Satur- 
day we  were  water- bound  by  the  Mayo  branches.  We  called  a 
congregation  at  night.  We  set  out  on  Sabbath  morning,  and  had  a 
most  severe  ride,  crossing  the  first,  second,  and  third  branches  of 
the  Mayo-River.  At  brother  Travis's,  in  Henry  county,  we  had 
a  congregation  at  a  short  warning.  I  ordained  Thomas  Piner  a 
deacon.  We  crossed  Smith's  River  on  Monday  morning,  at  Reed's 
ford,  bending  our  course  down  upon  Snow-Creek.  We  stopped 
with  one  Herman  Cook,  a  rich  man  and  a  kind  man. 

Virginia. — Tuesday  24.  Brought  us  over  Pig- River,  and  for- 
ward to  Anthony's  ford — fearful  to  the  sight  :  we  stopped  at  Staun- 
ton. I  endure  considerable  pain  :  my  beast  starts  and  stumbles. 
The  perpetual  changes  of  weather,  and  the  company  sometimes 
forced  upon  one  on  the  road  is  disagreeable  ;  but  it  is  much  worse 
in  the  cabins  crowded  with  men,  women,  and  children — no  place 
to  retire  to  reading,  writing,  or  meditation  :  the  woods  are  too 
cold  for  solitude  at  this  season.     We  are  weather-bound  :  I  em- 


-40  REV.  FRANCIS  ASEiURY's  JOURNAL.  [1800. 

ploy  my  time  in  reading,  writing,  praying,  and  planning.  I  ordained 
two  deacons.  On  Thursday  we  set  out  for  Murphy's,  on  Goose- 
Creek.  We  visited  brothers  Leftrich  and  Wheat,  and  then  made 
a  toilsome  march  over  Little  and  Big  Otter,  about  thirty  miles,  to 
Price's  :  we  arrived  late,  and  it  was  cold.  On  Saturday  we  reach- 
ed Lynchburg. 

Sunday  31.1  preached  at  Lynchburg  to  about  six  hundred  hear- 
ers. I  feel  paid  for  all  my  toil.  On  Tuesday  our  conference 
opened.  We  progressed  with  great  speed,  and  in  good  order, 
preaching  each  day.  I  ordained  nine  elders,  nine  deacons  of  the 
travelling  order,  and  as  many  local  deacons. 

Sunday,  February  6.  I  preached  on  2  Cor.  xiii.  5.  I  was  blest 
in  my  soul.  The  rainy  weather  and  miry  roads,  kept  our  congre- 
gations small  and  manageable,  except  on  the  Sabbath  day.  The 
people  of  the  town  honoured  us — they  were  attentive  to  hear,  and 
were  very  kind. 

My  company  came  away  on  Tuesday,  to  Colonel  Meredith's, 
New-Glasgow.  Wednesday,  to  Key's.  Thursday,  we  dined  at  the 
widow  Key's  ;  and  lodged  at  B.  Gillom's.  I  ordained  Nathan  An- 
derson a  deacon.  On  Friday  we  rode  twenty-four  miles  through 
mire,  and  a  heavy  cold  rain,  crossing  the  Rapid  Dan,  to  John 
Stocksdale's  :  our  host  made  us  comfortable  after  our  toil.  By  deep 
wading,  and  plunging  through  mud,  we  reached  Lott  Fry's  :  I  or- 
dained him  a  deacon.  It  was  the  day  appointed  for  preaching  ;  I 
spoke,  and  had  five  preachers  and  two  others  to  hear  me.  What 
will  become  of  the  children  of  this  household  : — I  cannot  predict 
much  good  for  either  their  souls  or  bodies.  I  could  not  willingly 
rest  here  on  the  Sabbath,  so  I  came  away  to  John  Kobler's,  and 
arrived  just  as  sermon  had  ended.  I  ordained  D.  M'Masters  a 
deacon.  Monday  brought  us  to  Beshaw's.  Next  day  we  got  in  to 
Father  Hitt's.  Oh,  the  rocks,  rivers,  mud,  frost,  hills,  cold,  and 
hunger !  Possibly,  we  have  rode  seven  hundred  miles  from  Charles- 
ton, in  twenty-two  days. 

Tuesday  24.  For  some  days  we  have  rested  under  the  roof  of 
Herman  Hitt :  he  is  now  eighty  six  :  he  has  lived  to  see  four  gene- 
rations :  he  is  the  head  of  eighteen  families  ;  three  of  his  sons  are 
preachers,  Martin,  Daniel,  and  Samuel,  and  his  grandson  William 
also.  I  am  occupied  in  reading  and  writing.  I  preached  at  the 
new  house  in  Rector-Town  :  the  wind  blew,  and  it  was  cold  ;  but 
we  had  an  open  season.  I  preached  to-day  to  a  full  house  at 
Mount's.  On  Wednesday  we  visited  the  widow  Rozsell,  and  her 
afflicted  children.     I  called  on  brother  Donaw — weak,  but  faithful. 


1808.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  241 

There  is  a  blessed  work  of  God  in  the  east  end  of  Loudon  county. 
Wednesday,  I  preached  at  Leesburg.  On  Thursday  we  came  to 
Doctor  Wright's,  and  thence  went  on  to  William  Watters's :  here 
I  rested,  and  read  and  wrote  on  Friday.  We  arrived  in  Alexan- 
dria on  Saturday. 

Sunday  28.  I  preached  on  1  Thess.  v.  16 — 18.  It  was  an  open 
time — l  was  helped  and  honoured  of  God  before  the  people. 

Wednesday,  March  2.  Our  conference  began.  We  laboured 
diligently,  and  in  great  peace.  On  the  Sabbath  I  preached,  and 
ordained  deacons  :  souls  have  been  converted  since  we  are  here. 

Maryland. — Wednesday  9.  Our  conference  ended  ;  and  I  came 
away  to  Annapolis.  We  came  into  the  city  about  six  in  the  eve- 
ning— have  travelled  all  day  without  fire,  food,  or  water.  Since  the 
twentieth  of  this  month  (1807,)  we  have  travelled  five  thousand  miles 
according  to  my  computation.  I  rested  on  Thursday,  and  preach- 
ed ;  and  next  day  went  to  Baltimore  :  it  was  excessively  cold,  but 
we  did  not  stop  on  the  road.  At  seven  o'clock  I  preached  at  Old- 
Town.     Saturday  was  a  day  of  rest. 

Sunday  13.  I  preached  at  Fell's  Point  in  the  forenoon  ;  and  at 
Light-street  in  the  afternoon.  I  hear,  see,  and  feel  many  serious 
things — but  I  must  take  care  of  my  own  soul  :  my  care  is  to  love, 
to  suffer,  and  to  please  God. 

Monday  14.  I  took  a  view  of  our  new  house- — large,  and  well 
constructed.  I  preached  to  the  African  congregation.  On  Tues- 
day we  moved  off  to  Bennett's.  Wednesday  noon  found  us  at 
Howell's  ;  at  night  we  were  in  Delaware,  at  Keagy's.  O  my  soul, 
rest  in  God !  I  am  sometimes  led  to  think  the  whole  world  will  rise 
up  against  the  pretensions  of  England  to  the  dominion  of  the  seas. 
Will  Buonaparte  conquer  the  world  ?  He.  may  :— bu.t  will  he  govern 
it,  and  reign  universal  emperor  over  sea  and  land  ?  no— no— no. 
Here  I  rest. 

Pennsylvania. — -I  preached  in  passing  through  Wilmington  on 
Friday,  and  on  Saturday  we  got  into  Philadelphia.  I  preached  at 
St.  George's  twice  ;  at  the  Academy,  at  Ebenezer,  and  at  Bethel, 
African.  We  sat  from  Sabbath  to  Sabbath  in  conference  ;  our  bu- 
siness was  conducted  in  great  peace  ;  but  I  did  not  please  every 
body  by  the  appointments  of  the  stations. 

Monday  28.  We  set  out  for  the  Jerseys,  through  which  we 
passed  swiftly  to  New-York  :  we  arrived  on  Wednesday  :  Jersey 
and  York  are  blest  with  revivals  of  religion. 

New-York. — Wednesday,  April  0.  Our  conference  for  New- York 
began  in  Amenia.    On  the  Sabbath  I  preached  ia  the  town  meeting- 

Vol.  HI.  3i 


242  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1808. 

house,  and  ordained  seren  elders.  It  was  a  time  of  solemnity,  and 
we  had  nearly  fifteen  hundred  people  to  hear.  This  conference  is 
pleasant  to  me  :  I  am  near  my  work ;  I  am  not  disturbed  by  com- 
pany, and  we  make  good  progress  with  our  business. 

Connecticut. — Wednesday  13,  We  rose.  I  stationed  eighty- 
eight  preachers.  We  came  away  to  Goshen,  twenty  miles,  and  lodged 
with  Mr.  Munson,  a  respectable  brother.  On  Thursday  we  made  it 
thirty-five  miles  to  East-Hartford  :  we  lodged  with  Esquire  Pitkins. 
Next  day  brought  us  to  New-London.  It  was  Good  Friday,  and  had 
been  appointed  a  state  fast  day  :  I  took  only  a  cup  of  coffee,  and  a 
small  bit  of  bread.  At  father  Lattimore's  we  were  kindly  re- 
ceived, and  comfortably  fixed.  My  two  last  days'  rides  were 
severe  ;  my  flesh  is  not  brass,  nor  my  old  bones  iron  ;  but  I  was  in 
peace  and  communion  with  the  Father  and  the  Son.  On  Saturday 
we  had  a  great  storm.  Confinement  in  doors  gave  me  an  opportu- 
nity of  preparing  papers  for  the  conference. 

Sunday  17.  Easter-Sunday.  I  preached  in  the  Baptist  meeting- 
house, the  Baptists  occupied  ours  ;  theirs  was  the  larger  building, 
and  we  had  it  crowded.  Conference  sat  until  Friday  ;  we  wrought 
in  haste,  in  great  order,  and  in  peace,  through  a  great  deal  of  busi- 
ness. There  were  seventeen  deacons,  travelling  and  local,  ordain- 
ed ;  and  nine  elders  ordained  in  the  Congregational  church,  before 
fifteen  hundred  or  two  thousand  witnesses.  I  know  not  where  large 
congregations  are  so  orderly  as  in  the  eastern  states.  There  was 
a  work  of  God  going  on  during  the  sitting  of  the  conference.  The 
general  conference  hastened  our  breaking  up,  -the  delegates 
thereto  requesting  leave  to  go.  There  were  deficiencies  in  money 
matters,  but  no  complaints. 

Monday  25.  We  came  in  haste  through  Milford,  Stratford, 
Bridgeport  and  Fairfield,  to  Stamford,  forty-two  miles.  On  Tues- 
day, a  thirty-eight  miles  ride  brought  us  into  New-York  :  we  had 
very  heavy  showers  on  the  way.  I  feel  my  shoulders  eased  a  little, 
now  that  I  have  met  the  seven  conferences.  1  have  lived  to  minute 
five  hundred  and  fifty-two  preachers  in  this  country.  The  increase 
this  short  year  is  7,500  in  round  numbers. 

New- York. — Wednesday  27.  I  preached  at  the  African  church, 
and  ordained  D.  Coker.  and  W.  Miller. 

Thursday  28.  We  set  out,  and  reached  a  place  ten  miles  beyond 
Brunswick,  in  New-Jersey.  On  Friday  we  reached  Hancock's. 
Saturday  brought  us  through  Burlington  to  Philadelphia,  where  we 
diped,  and  stopped.  At  Kensington  I  preached  a  Sabbath  sermon. 
At  the  African  Zoar  I  also  preached. 


1808.]  liar,  feancis  asbury's  sovksal.  £43 

Maryland.— Monday,  May  2.  We  set  out,  and  reached  Keagy's,, 
forty-two  miles.     On  Tuesday  we  arrived  at  Perry-Hall : — truly 
we  came  to  the  house  of  mourning — the  master  is  possibly  dying. 
Mr.  Gough  is  dead  :   I  saw  and  touched  his  dying  body.     When  the 
corpse  was  moved  to  be  taken  into  the  country  for  interment,  many 
of  the  members  of  the  general  conference  walked   in  procession 
after  it  to  the  end  of  the  town.     Harry   Dorsey  Gough  professed 
more  than  thirty  years  ago  to  be  convicted  and  sanctified  ;  that  he 
did  depart  from  God  is  well  known  ;  but  it  is  equally  certain  that 
he  was  visibly  restored  :  as  1  was  the  means  of  his  first  turning  to 
God,  so  was  I  also  of  his  return  and  restoration  :    certain  preju- 
dices he  had  taken  up  against  myself  and  others,  these  I  removed. 
In  his  last  hours,  which  were  painfully  afflictive,  he  was  much 
given  up  to  God.     Mr.  Gough  had  inherited  a  large  estate  from 
a  relation  in  England,  and  having  the  means,  he  indulged  his  taste 
for  gardening,   and  the   expensive  embellishment  of  his  country- 
seat,  Perry-Hall,  which  was  always  hospitably  open  to  visitors, 
particularly  those  who  feared  God.     Although  a  man  of  plain  un- 
derstanding, Mr.  Gough  was  a  man  much  respected  and  beloved  : 
as  a  husband,  a  father,  and  a  master,  he  was  well  worthy  of  imita- 
tion :  his  charities  were  as  numerous  as  proper  objects  to  a  Chris- 
tian were  likely  to  make  them  ;  and  the  souls  and  bodies  of  the  poor 
were  administered  to  in  the  manner  of  a  Christian  who  remember 
ed  the  precepts,  and  followed  the  example  of  his  divine  Master. 

Friday  6.  Our  general  conference  opened  in  peace.  On  Satur- 
day one  hundred  and  twenty-nine  members  took  their  seats.  The 
new  church  in  Eutaw-street  was  opened  on  the  Sabbath  day,  and 
I  gave  a  discourse  on  the  occasion  from  2  Cor.  iii.  12.  On  the 
26th  the  conference  rose.  We  have  done  very  little  except 
making  the  rule  for  representation  hereafter  :— one  member  to  the 
general  conference  for  every  six  members  of  the  annual  confe- 
rences ;  and  the  electing  dear  brother  M'Kendree  assistant  bishop  : 
the  burden  is  now  borne  by  two  pair  of  shoulders  instead  of  one — 
the  care  is  cast  upon  two  hearts  and  heads. 

Friday  27,    Heavy    rain    and   awful   thunder.     On  Saturday  I 

visited  Samuel  Owings  of  S -.     I  baptised  G.  Howard's  three 

pretty  children.  At  the  request  of  some  preachers  in  England, 
and  the  desire  of  the  general  conference,  I  sat  to  Mr.  Bruff,  who 
took  my  likeness  in  crayons. 

Sabbath  29.  I  preached  at  Old-Town,  and  visited  the  house  of 
mourning.  In  the  afternoon  I  gave  the  Africans  a  talk.  I  visited 
a  grandson  of  mother  Tribulet :-•— her  house,  in  my  first  and  early 


244  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1808. 

visits  to  Baltimore,  was  my  home.  The  young  man's  mother,  Mary, 
married  one  Killen  ;  she  died  in  peace  and  joy  ;  and  I  hope  the 
young  man  will  be  brought  home  to  heaven  and  to  God.  On  Tues- 
day I  rode  up  to  Daniel  Elticott's  and  preached  :  it  was  an  open 
season.  At  St.  James's  chapel  Doctor  Warfield  heard  me,  who 
had  heard  me  thirty-six  years  ago.  Ah  !  I  should  not  regret  riding 
many  miles  to  be  the  means  of  converting  this  dear  man  to  God. 
I  returned  to  Baltimore.  On  Friday  I  preached  at  Gatch's 
chapel. 

Sabbath,  June  5.  Harry  Dorsey  Gough's^  funeral  sermon  was 
preached  ;  there  might  be  two  thousand  people  to  hear.  George 
Roberts  spoke  first  on  "  He  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth 
himself:"  my  subject  was  Acts  xiv.  22.  I  spoke  long,  and  was 
obliged  to  speak  loud  that  all  might  hear :  my  subject  was  very 
much  a  portraiture  of  Mr.  Gough's  religious  experience  and 
character. 

Monday  6.  Bless  the  day  !  I  escape  from  a  month's  location  to 
the  pleasant  fields.  Never  were  my  friends  more  attentive,  kind, 
and  affectionate  :  but  Ah  !  the  death  of  religion — in  this  I  die.  I 
preached  at  Cole's  meeting-house  :  feeble  as  I  was,  the  people 
waited  and  heard  with  patience,  and  I  delivered  my  own  soul.  At 
Reister's  Town  I  gave  them  a  discourse  on  Romans  xii.  1,2.;  it  was 
a  time  of  freedom.  After  dining  at  Christopher  Carnan's  I  came 
away  to  James  M'Cannon's,  Richland.  On  Wednesday  I  preached 
at  the  stone  chapel.  1  went,  next  day,  to  see  the  wife  of  William 
Durbin  in  her  affliction  of  body  and  mind  :  thirty-six  years  ago  I 
visited  this  house  :  I  have  seen  three  generations.  We  dined  with 
Ann  Willis  and  her  aged  mother  Honour  Willis  :  I  prayed  with 
them,  and  embraced  the  six  children,  and  blessed  them  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord. 

Friday  10.  At  Alexander  Warfield's  on  Sam's  creek.  I  am  wholly 
for  God.  Our  fields  promise  abundant  crops ;  our  stores  and  barns 
will  be  filled  with  the  fruits  and  productions  of  field  and  tree  while 
they  are  starving  in  Europe. — O,  sin!  O,  ingratitude!  I  spent  the 
Saturday  with  Joshua  Jones. 

Sabbath  12.  At  Linganore  chapel  my  subject  was  Ephes.  v. 
15,  16.  In  the  afternoon  at  Liberty  new  chapel  I  gave  them  a 
short  discourse  :  I  was  feeble  but  fervent.  I  am  kept  at  work  by 
my  friends  ;  but  they  do  what  they  can,  Methodists  and  others,  to 
pay  me  in  affection,  in  attentions,  in  honour  ;  Lord,  keep  me  hum- 
ble and  holy  !  I  went  to  Stephen  Shelmerdine's  on  Monday,  preach- 
ed at  Frederick  on  Tuesday,  and  returned  to  this  afflicted  family. 


1808.]  EKV.    FRANCIS    ASBURY'75    JOURXAL.  245 

On  Wednesday  at  brother  Martin's,  in  Frederick,  I  met  with  my 
old  acquaintance  of  York,  Pennsylvania,  the  Rev.  Waggner ;  he 
is  now  fifty-eight ;  it  is  many  years  since  our  first  interview  ;  and 
this  may  be  our  last.  Our  meeting  ended  in  prayer,  and  when 
going,  I  gave  him  a  book  of  our  discipline,  and  recommended  to 
his  attention  the  Portrait  of  St.  Paul  by  Fletcher  :  O,  that  all  minis- 
ters would  read  it,  and  labour  to  impress  it  upon  their  hearts,  and 
show  a  likeness  in  their  lives  and  labours  !  After  the  rain  we  pressed 
on  to  Samuel  Philips's.  On  Thursday  my  companion,  Boehm, 
went  to  Middletown  :  I  staid  at  home,  and  read.  Friday,  rain.  I 
preached  on  Rev.  iii.  20.  :  brother  Boehm  also  spoke  in  German. 
Saturday  we  rode  to  Hagerstowo.  Our  German  brethren  of  Otter- 
bine's,  have  shouldered  us  out,  but  have  failed  to  establish  them- 
selves. 

Sabbath  19.  I  preached  on  Rom.  i.  16.  Henry  Boehm  spoke  in 
the  afternoon  and  at  night.  Death  without ;  but  there  are  some 
lively  souls  in  the  society.  I  feel  the  effect  of  riding  in  the  heat ; 
but  I  have  great  peace.  On  Monday  I  preached  at  St.  Leger 
Neale's,  and  on  Tuesday  at  Prather's.  The  heat  and  rough  roads 
have  brought  on  a  bilious  headach.  I  begin  to  fail.  Wednesday 
evening  brought  us  to  Richard  Dowler's,  at  the  mouth  of  Licking. 
I  preached  at  Hancock  on  Thursday : — the  people  were  very 
attentive.  Alas !  no  man  careth  for  these  people.  We  were  dri- 
ven by  a  storm  into  'Squire  Yates's  ;  I  talked,  prayed,  dined,  and 
left  a  book  :— Lord,  give  us  this  family  !  At  Clark's  tavern  on  Fri- 
day, where  I  gave  a  book,  and  prayed,  I  did  not  know  that  my  host 
was  a  Romanist — it  was  all  one  to  me.  We  lodged  with  Lenox 
Martin.  On  Saturday  we  came  to  J.  Jacob's. — Ah  !  because  he  saith 
the  old  wine  is  better.  King  James  used  to  call  for  his  old  shoes — 
they  Jit  me  best. 

Sabbath  26.  We  had  about  four  hundred  souls  at  the  chapel  in 
Old-Town.  I  spoke  on  Romans  xii.  1,  2.  :  brother  Boehm  concluded 
and  met  the  society — it  was  an  open  season  :  hot  as  it  was,  we  sung 
and  prayed  away  the  day.  On  our  way  to  Aquila  Brown's,  Evitt's 
Creek,  on  Monday,  we  were  glad  now  and  then.,  to  stop  and  shelter 
ourselves  under  the  trees  from  the  extreme  heat.  1  gave  advice  for 
the  body  and  soul  of  the  wife  of  my  kind  host.  At  the  Lutheran, 
church,  Cumberland,  on  Tuesday,  we  had  a  full  house  ;  my  subject 
was  2  Pet.  iii.  17,  18.  I  was  very  pointed  on  sinners  and  backslidden 
souls.  I  was  expected  to  dine  at  only  three  several  houses.  Only  let 
me  declare  myself,  and  work  is  soon  found  for  me  ;  a  serious  adult 
of  forty  years,  and  three  children  to  baptise— one  for  Bell,  one  for 


246  rev.  Francis  asbury's  journal.  [1808. 

Scott,  and  one  for  [Brown.  Brown  was  a  Deist  ;  he  19  now  a  bro- 
ther :  many  think  Bishop  Whatcoat's  prayers  were  heard  for  him. 
We  have  Georgia  heat.  I  preached  in  the  chapel  at  Cresaps- 
Town  on  Wednesday.  We  breakfasted  at  four  o'clock  on  Thurs- 
day, that  we  might  climb  the  Alleghany. 

Friday,  July  1.  Moved  at  four  o'clock,  after  breakfasting  :  at  five 
in  the  evening  we  landed  at  Jacob  Murphy's  ;  our  twenty  two  hours' 
ride  has  brought  us  seventy  miles.  I  have  suffered  much — I  am 
pained  and  sore,  and  poor  Jane  stumbled  so  often !  But  my  limbs 
and  my  soul  are  safe  :  Glory  !  Glory !  We  rested  on  Saturday. 

Pennsylvania. — Sabbath  3.  I  preached  at  Union-Town  on  James 
v.  19,  20.  We  started  away  for  the  widow  Henthorn's,  where  we 
gpent  a  solitary  fourth  of  July  in  reading,  and  drafting  conference 
plans  as  far  as  Baltimore.  My  mind  is  wholly  devoted  to  God.  On 
Tuesday  I  read  a  Kempis,  and  Gopied  off  a  list  of  preachers  for  the 
western  and  south-western  conferences.  Brother  Boehm  preached 
to  the  people  in  English  and  German  :  he  also  preached  at  Middle- 
town  on  Thursday  :  I  spoke  for  about  half  an  hour  at  the  widow  Ste- 
phens's on  Friday  ;  my  subject  was  1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20.  On  Saturday 
I  read  a  part  of  the  7th  volume  of  Wesley's  Sermons.  Confine- 
ment is  excessively  irksome,  but  the  rain  for  four  days  past  is  tremen- 
dous, and  I  feel  my  old  rheumatic  affections.  Edward  Drumgooid, 
from  old  Virginia,  is  just  on  his  return  from  a  visit  westward  :  he 
thinks  he  has  seen  an  end  of  all  perfection :  and  he  has  been  preach- 
ing at  the  camp-meetings  beyond  thetOhio  :  he  thinks  forty  souls  were 
converted. 

Sabbath  10.  At  Connellsville  I  preached  in  our  new  house,  sixty 
by  forty  feet.  Brother  Boehm  spoke  in  German.  The  inflamma- 
tion of  my  throat  I  laid  aside  as  well  as  1  could,  and  spoke  on.  Page 
Doughady  and  Boehm  each  added  a  few  words  ;  and  so  we  dedicated 
the  walls  of  the  house  of  God  ;  the  roof  was  not  yet  on.  On  Mon- 
day I  went  to  Colonel  Mason's,  and  was  kindly  received  in  his  splen- 
did, useful,  good  house.  I  was  constrained  to  put  a  blister  to  my  ear. 
At  William  Ball's  new  house  I  spoke,  on  Wednesday,  to  about  two 
hundred  people.  We  were  satisfied  to  stop  at  the  widow  Wood- 
field's  at  the  crossings  of  Monongahela.  One  of  my  feet  was  in- 
flamed, my  blister  was  running,  and  the  heat  was  excessive.  Brother 
Boehm  preached.  I  had  a  conversation  with  Asa  Shinn,  respecting  a 
removal  to  Baltimore.  On  Friday  I  preached  at  Taylor's  chapel. 
I  visited  Doctor  Wheeler — risen  from  a  dangerous  fall  from  his  horse, 
and  from  apparent  death.  Rested  on  Saturday  ;  I  am  lame  and  sen- 
sibly feel  the  great  heat. 


1SQB.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBVKY's  JOURNAL.  £47 

Sabbath  17.  With  the  aid  of  two  crutches  I  hobbled  into  meeting 
at  Brownsville,  and  preached  on  John  iii.  17.  I  am  sorely  lame.  I 
dined  with  Mr.  Hogg  ;  a  kind,  polite  English  family.  On  Monday  I 
had  an  awfully  severe  ride  to  Chalfant's  ;  and  then  on  to  John 
BrightwelPs.  I  am  fairly  arrested  in  my  course  ;  my  knees  and  feet 
are  so  disabled  that  I  am  lifted  to  bed.  I  can  neither  ride,  stand, 
or  walk. 

Sabbath  24.  I  feel  revived  this  morning  ;  but  O,  what  an  awful 
night  of  pain  !  The  people  gathered  in  the  house,  and  I  taught 
them  from  Acts  xxvi.  18.  I  have  a  clean  house,  an  esceilent 
nurse  as  any  in  the  country,  and  kindly  attentive  people.  How 
am  I  honoured  !  Thornton  Flemrning  paid  me  a  visit,  and  with  him 
came  Mrs.  Hebert,  and  a  daughter  of  Edward  Bailey,  of  Amherst, 
Virginia ;  these  dear  souls  came  sixty  miles  to  see  me.  I  suppose 
I  must  get  a  four-wheeled  carnage.  Wednesday  was  a  serious  day, 
but  prepare  to  move  we  must — pain  and  death  are  nothing  when  op- 
posed to  duty.  On  Thursday  we  set  off  to  Washington.  We  had 
two  hours  rain,  but  this  was  not  as  bad  as  pain  of  body.  Mr.  M'Fa- 
don  was  as  loving  and  kind  as  need  be.  We  found  a  home  at  John 
Beck's  on  Friday.     Saturday  rested. 

Sabbath  31.  At  Bethel  chapel,  Short-Creek,  I  gave  them  a  ser- 
mon.    I  spoke  in  great  weakness. 

Monday,  August  1.  I  preached  in  the  court-house  at  Whee- 
ling. I  have  great  pain.  At  Colonel  Zane's,  where  I  lodged,  the 
aged  people  were  kind  indeed.  At  Newellsville  I  gave  them  a  dis- 
course. We  first  stopped  at  Galbert's  on  Wednesday,  and  then 
went  on  to  Moore's  :  we  had  a  great  heat,  and  I  was  almost  over- 
done. On  Thursday  we  came  to  Will's  creek  to  dine,  and  then  rode 
on.  There  is  a  great  want  of  water.  I  rested  well  last  night,  but 
my  case  is  pretty  serious  :  1  am  so  disabled,  that  the  riding  and  the. 
long  hills  especially,  almost  make  me  cry  out. 

Ohio.— Sabbath  4.  On  Saturday  we  visited  the  camp-ground,  and 
returned  to  Daniel  Stevens's.  Wire  and  Layton,  two  young  preach- 
ers, died  lately  upon  their  circuits.  I  preached  to-day  at  Bush-Creek 
upon  1  Tim.  iii.  14 — 17.  I  ordained  James  Watts  an  elder.  It  was  a 
solemn  time.  Some  wagoners  attempted  to  sell  whiskey  on  the  camp- 
ground :  we  stopped  our  preaching — the  people  soon  knew  how 
deeply  we  felt  the  insult,  and  they  were  driven  away.  Henry 
Boehm  spoke  in  German.  We  had  about  a  thousand  people  to  hear. 
The  house  where  I  staid  was  much  crowded,  which  ill  suited  me  in 
my  afflicted  state.  I  paid  a  visit  to  John  Manly,  on  Monday  ;  staid 
there  to  rest  and  refit.     We  moved  to  the  widow  Tavlor's  on  Tues- 


~40  RET.  FAANCJS  ASIJURV  S  JOURNAL.  [1808. 

day  ;  and  on  Wednesday  came  into  Chilicothe.  On  Thursday  I 
preached  in  the  chapel  ;  it  was  quite  comfortabie  to  know  that  peo- 
ple dropped  the  scythe  and  laid  by  the  plane  to  come  to  the  house  of 
God.  Chilicothe  has  been  cursed  with  apostate  Methodist  preach- 
ers :  but  if  I  am  not  deceived,  God  wiil  yet  do  great  things  here. 
I  was  invited  to  pass  a  night  under  the  hospitable  roof  of  General 
Thomas  Worthington  at  Mount  Prospect  Hall.  Within  sight  of  this 
beautiful  mansion  lies  the  precious  dust  of  Mary  Tiffin  ;  it  was  as 
much  as  I  could  do  to  forbear  weeping  as  I  mused  over  her  speaking 
grave — how  mutely  eloquent !  Ah  !  the  world  knows  little  of  my 
sorrows— little  knows  how  dear  to  me  are  my  many  friends,  and  how 
deeply  I  feel  their  loss — but  they  all  die  in  the  Lord,  and  this  shall 
comfort  me.  I  delivered  my  soul  here  ;  may  this  dear  family  feel 
an  answer  to  Mary  Tiffin's  prayers  ! 

On  Friday  we  went  to  the  camp-ground  at  Deer-Creek.  Saturday 
rested—damp,  rain.  The  work  of  God  went  on  night  and  day, 
nevertheless.  There  were  twenty-three  travelling  and  local  preach- 
ers on  the  ground  :  perhaps  tents  and  wagons  one  hundred  and 
twenty-five  ;  and  about  two  thousand  people  :  forty  souls  professed 
converting  grace.  We  rested  on  Monday,  and  on  Tuesday  came  up 
Short-Creek.  We  found  the  family  of  Mr.  Wood,  at  the  New  Pur- 
chase, as  kind  as  need  be.  The  prairies  have  once  been,  I  suppose, 
lakes  of  water  ;  they  furnish  grand  and  beautiful  views  still.  O,  the 
(lies  !  the  heat !  We  dined  at  brother  Cutler's  on  Wednesday,  and 
came  on,  through  Xenia,  to  Frederick  Bonner's,  Little  Miami  j 
thirty-two  miles.  I  have  more  than  once  put  the  wrong  foot  fore- 
most in  my  journeys  to  the  west :  the  spring  wiil  not  do  because  of 
wet,  and  deep,  and  dismal  roads  :  the  summer's  extreme  heat,  and 
the  small  and  the  green  flies  make  disagreeable  travelling.  I  make 
a  decree,  but  not  of  the  Medes  and  Persians,  never,  in  future,  to 
cross  the  mountains  before  the  first  of  September,  nor  leave  Carlisle 
before  the  first  of  October.  On  Thursday  I  rested.  Friday  at  John 
Sale's.     Saturday  rested. 

Sabbath  21.  At  Xenia  court-house  I  preached  from  Colos.  i.  23.  ; 
we  had  about  five  hundred  souls  to  hear  ;  it  was  a  searching  season. 
On  Tuesday  left  Peter  Pelhani's,  and  came  to  Samuel  Hitt's. 

Wednesday  24.  I  preached  at  the  widow  Smith's.  On  Thursday 
we  passed  Lebanon,  journeying  down  the  Little  Miami,  calling  at 
Clark's  to  escape  the  rain.  It  cleared  away,  and  we  came  in  haste 
by  Walsmith's  mill,  to  M'G rue's.  Camp-meeting  commenced  at  Phi- 
ftp  Gatchell's  on  Friday  :  here  I  saw  many  whom  1  had  not  seen  fox 
years — how  delightful  to  see  our  old  friends  after  a  eeparation,  and  to 


1808.]  rev.  francis  asbury's  journal.  249 

find  them  still  on  the  Lord's  side  !  I  spoke  twice  :  then  much  faithful 
preaching,  and  we  believe  much  good  done  :  fifty  souls  professed 
converting  grace.  I  talk  more  than  is  truly  spiritual.  I  rejoice  to 
think  there  will  be  perhaps  four  or  five  hundred  camp-meetings  this 
year  ;  may  this  year  outdo  all  former  years  in  the  conversion  of 
precious  souls  to  God  !  Work,  Lord,  for  thine  own  honour  and 
glory  ! 

September  1.  I  preached  at  the  chapel,  Little  Miami ;  we  had  a 
full  house  at  a  short  notice.  I  was  grieved  to  see  an  unfeeling  man 
take  away  a  poor  widow's  horse  for  debt :  but  brother  Gatchell  soon 
relieved  me — he  paid  the  debt,  and  restored  the  horse  to  the  dis- 
tressed woman  to  be  hers  for  life. 

Friday  2. — Great  work  in  Spain — the  old  king  resigning  to 

his  son,  and  his  son  outwitted  by  Buonaparte.  The  old  king  is  per- 
suaded by  the  enemy  of  both  to  make  Murat,  duke  of  Berg,  his  vice- 
roy.—This,  I  hear,  is  the  news.  Ah!  the  poor  Spaniards  will  have 
blood  to  drink.  The  first  victims  will  be  the  priests  ;  and  the  House 
of  Mercy,  the  Inquisition,  what  will  become  of  it. — Is  Europe  pre- 
pared for  free  governments  and  freedom  in  religion  ?  Buonaparte  will 
establish  himself  for  one  year  ;  and  then  he  goes,  goes,  goes.  We 
cried  to  God  yesterday  for  rain  ;  to-day  we  have  it  in  abundance. 
After  one  o'clock  we  came  away  from  M'Grue's  to  Cincinnati.  The 
waters  of  the  rivers  have  failed  more  than  I  ever  knew  them  before. 
I  read  a  book  to-day,  and  wrote  two  letters.  I  have  advised  the 
society  here  to  invite  the  western  yearly  conference,  to  hold  their 
session  in  Cincinnati. 

Sabbath  4.  I  preached  at  ten  o'clock,  in  great  bodily  weakness  ; 
the  heat  was  great,  and  the  house  was  crowded,  but  I  felt  sensible  of 
divine  aid.  Brother  Boehm  spoke  after  me  in  German.  At  three 
o'clock  I  preached  again  at  brother  Lakin's :  brother  Boehm  also 
spoke  at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  in  English:  thus  we  improved 
the  day.  My  temptations  are  hidden,  but  great. — I  have  need  of 
great  strength,  for  I  am  greatly  responsible  :  Lord,  help  me  !  On 
Monday  we  had  plentiful  rain.  I  rested.  I  advised  the  brethren  to 
enlarge  the  house  to  eighty  feet.  On  Tuesday  we  took  our  flight ; 
it  was  not  pleasant  travelling.  We  stopped  and  dined  at  Murphy's, 
and  so  avoided  the  rain.  At  Judge  Simms's  new  improvement,  we 
crossed  the  Great  Miami.  We  saw  the  paroquet  here  as  upon  San- 
tee-River.  After  crossing  White- River,  we  came  to  Lawrenceburg, 
the  first  town  in  the  Indian  territory.  In  this  wild  there  may  be 
twenty  thousand  souls  already  :  I  feel  for  them.  Elijah  Sparks  re- 
ceived us  gladly.     We  dined  with  J.  Wilson,  and  stopped  at  Dick- 

Vor..  Ill,  32 


250  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [ioO«7. 

insou's  :  after   beating  the   shore  of  the   Ohio   for   two  hours,  we 
crossed  in  a  crazy  flat,  at  the  mouth  of  Kentucky-River. 

Kentucky. — On  Thursday  we  lodged  at  the  widow  Masterton's  :  I 
sighed  over  the  heaps  of  dust  raised  upon  the  bodies  of  her  husband 
and  children.  Nathan  Wyre,  a  promising  youth  upon  trial  on  the  cir- 
cuit, has  been  called  away — he  died  with  consumption.  Ah !  what 
blessed  numbers  have  gone  home  triumphantly  within  the  last  forty 
years  :  surely  we  may  praise  the  dead,  for  they  died  in  the  Lord! 
Friday  brought  us  through  Williamsport,  Gallatin,  Henry,  and 
Shelby :  we  brought  up  with  my  old  friend  Billy  Adams,  grand- 
son of  William,  son  of  Simon.  We  have  rode  about  one  hundred 
miles  in  three  days.  Our  fare  has  been  rough,  but  sister  Lakin, 
and  the  preachers  who  accompanied  us,  bore  the  fatigues  of  the  ride 
very  well.  I  feel  for  the  people  of  this  territory  ;  but  we  must  suf- 
fer with  them,  if  we  expect  to  feel  for  them  as  we  ought :  and  here 
are  the  disadvantages  of  a  local  episcopacy-— that  it  cannot  be  inte- 
rested for  its  charge  as  it  should  be,  because  it  sees  not,  suffers  not 
with,  and  therefore  feels  not  for,  the  people.  On  Saturday  at  Ed- 
ward Talbot's. 

Sunday  11.  At  the  brick  chapel  I  spoke  on  1  Cor.  xv.  58.;  a 
more  attentive  congregation  I  have  not  seen.  But  Ah  me !  to  pant 
for  breath,  and  unable  to  walk,  kneel,  or  stand  up  straight  to  preach, 
makes  public  speaking  serious  work  to  me  :  brothers  Lakin  and 
Boehm  spoke  after  me  ;  we  were  about  four  hours  in  the  house.  I 
see,  I  feel  what  is  wrong  in  preachers  and  people,  but  I  cannot  make 
it  right.  I  saw  some  dear  old  friends  from  Virginia  and  Maryland. 
We  rested  on  Monday  at  Edward  Talbot's.  On  Tuesday  wepassed 
Shelby,  and  came  to  Philip  Taylor's  ;  the  swelling  in  my  feet  had 
returned — I  was  weary  and  willing  to  rest.  We  called  a  meeting  on 
Wednesday,  and  I  gave  them  a  sermon  from  2  Cor.  v.  2.  Gabriel 
Mayo  received,  and  kindly  entertained  us  after  crossing  Salt-River. 
On  Thursday  we  hasted  away  to  Joseph  Ferguson's,  Nelson 
county.  I  met  Benedict  Swoap  by  accident — I  knew  him  at  first 
glance ;  but  he  would  not  have  recollected  me  :  it  was  pleasing  to 
meet  after  so  long  an  absence;  but  Ah!  how  time,  and  toil,  and 
suffering  have  worn  us  down,  one  of  us,  at  least ;  I  preached  at  Fur- 
guson's  on  Friday.  We  had  a  warm,  heavy  ride  to  Colonel  Tho- 
mas's, Haden-Creek,  Washington  county. 

Sunday  18.  At  the  new  chapel  1  spoke  on  1  John  iii.  1 — 4.  ; 
it  was  a  time  of  seriousness.  I  could  not  stand — I  sat  to  preach. 
My  kind  brethren,  M'Kendree  and  Thompson,  came  miles  to  see  me. 
On  Monday  I  parted  from  sister  Lakin,  wife  of  Benjamen  ;  so  far 


Il>U8.j  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  251 

from  being  a  troublesome  companion,  she  was  very  useful  to  me  as  a 
nurse  and  servant  for  Christ's  sake.  We  crossed  the  Rolling  Fork  of 
Salt  River,  passed  Merder's  hill,  dined  at  M'Murry's,  and  then 
hasted  on  to  Georgetown,  crossed  Green-River  by  fording,  and  stop- 
ped at  Noah  Lasley's.  We  have  made  forty  miles  to-day.  My  lame 
feet  were  in  a  poultice ;  it  was  unusually  warm,  but  I  enjoyed  great 
peace  in  my  soul.  I  preached  at  Lasley's.  On  Tuesday  we  had  a  full 
house  at  sudden  warning.  Here  1  saw  William  Price  and  family — 
great  joy,  as  if  we  were  risen  from  the  dead.  I  preached  at  Robert 
Price's,  Adam's  Creek,  upon  Coloss.  i.  7.  David  Rice  stepped  in 
whilst  I  was  speaking,  and  when  I  had  closed,  withdrew  without 
speaking  to  me.  On  Thursday  we  came  to  Glasgow,  where  I  visited 
brother  Crusenbury,  and  Henry  and  Edward  Cowell.  Friday  eve- 
ning brought  us  up  at  brother  Porter's,  from  Maryland,  now  of  War- 
ren county.  On  Saturday  we  came  in  upon  the  camp  with  bishop 
M'Kendree.  On  Sunday  we  had  preaching  as  usual,  and  a  gracious 
rain — in  mercy,  if  not  in  answer  to  prayer.  We  came  no  farther 
than  Woodard's,  twenty-two  miles,  on  Monda}'.  On  Tuesday  we 
passed  through  Nashville  :  this  town  has  greatly  improved  in  eight 
years  :  there  are  several  valuable  houses  built,  an  elegant  court- 
house, and  a  college.  We  put  in  at  Green  Hill's,  Williamson  county. 
We  have  important  business  here  to  engage  our  attention,  seven 
districts  there  are,  and  a  call  for  eighty  preachers. 

Tennessee. — Saturday,  October  1.  I  began  conference.  I  preach- 
ed twice  on  the  Sabbath  day ;  and  again  on  Tuesday.  Our  confe- 
rence was  a  camp-meeting,  where  the  preachers  ate  and  slept  in 
tents.  We  sat  six  hours  a  day,  stationed  eighty-three  preachers,  and 
all  was  peace.  On  Friday  the  sacrament  was  administered,  and  we 
hope  there  were  souls  converted,  and  strengthened,  and  sanctified. 
We  made  a  regulation  respecting  slavery  :  it  was,  that  no  member  of 
society,  or  preacher,  should  sell  or  buy  a  slave  unjustly,  inhumanly, 
or  covetously  ;  the  case,  on  complaint,  to  be  examined  for  a  member 
by  the  quarterly  meeting ;  and  for  a  preacher  an  appeal  to  an  annual 
conference.  Where  the  guilt  was  proved  the  offender  to  be  expelled 
The  families  of  the  Hill's,  Sewall's,  and  Cannon,  were  greatly  and 
affectionately  attentive  to  us. 

Saturday  8.  We  came  rapidly  to  Stone  River,  and  thence  to 
Crane's.  At  the  meeting-house  I  preached  on  the  Sabbath  day 
from  2  Pet.  iv.  17.  I  called  upon  Hardy  Hunt.  We  rose  at  four 
o'clock  on  Monday,  and  started  away  for  Henry  Tooley's.  The 
heat  is  great ;  we  may  give  it  five  months'  continuance  this  year. 
The  increase  of  the  western  conference  for  the  year  will  be  two 


-'•52  REV.  FRANCIS  ASIIURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1808. 

thousand  five  hundred.  On  Tuesday  we  rested  and  refitted,  pre- 
paring ourselves  to  breast  the  wilderness.  The  rain  caught  us  on 
Wednesday,  and  fell  on  us  with  little  intermission,  until  we  got  to  our 
home  at  Shaw's,  in  Carthage.  On  Thursday  evening  I  came  in  very 
unwell  to  Johnson's.  We  had  not  above  fifty  travellers  in  company  I 
At  Haily's,  next  night,  we  were  not  so  crowded,  and  did  better. 
There  is  order  observed  under  this  roof.  We  breakfasted  at  S. 
W-  Point  on  Saturday,  and  then  hastened  on  to  Winton's  ;  since  we 
left  the  conference  ground,  we  hare  made  two  hundred  miles.  My 
sufferings  have  been  great — I  had  the  piles,  and  pains  of  body,  and  sul- 
try weather,  crowded  houses  and  rough  roads,  and  bad  men  for  com- 
pany ;  but  my  mind  enjoyed  great  peace,  notwithstanding  my  start- 
ing, stumbling  horse,  that  ever  and  anon  would  run  away  with  me. 
I  preached  on  the  Sabbath  day  at  Winton's  chapel,  a  crowd  within 
-and  without ;  the  wind  prevented  our  taking  the  woods.  There  is  a 
special  revival  of  religion  in  the  society  here.  After  preaching  we 
crossed  Holston,  and  rode  ten  miles  to  meet  the  people  at  John 
Saffle's.  We  started  in  the  rain  on  Monday  to  Marysville,  called 
upon  Mark  Moore,  and  continued  forward  to  Esq.  Black's,  and 
lodged. 

Tuesday  18.  Came  to  Mitchell  Peter's,  on  Pidgeon-River.  Wed- 
nesday, rain  ;  Thursday,  rain ;  we  crossed  the  river  twice.  I 
preached  at  the  chapel  on  Matt.  v.  8.  On  Friday  James  Riggin 
came  twenty  miles,  breasting  the  rains,  and  plunging  through  the 
swoln  streams,  to  see  me  ;  he  wept  over  me  and  bade  farewell : 
but  shall  we  not  meet  where  all  tears  shall  be  wiped  from  all  eyes? 
We  started  away  on  Saturday,  wade  or  swim,  foul  or  fair,  across 
the  east  forks  of  Little  and  Great  Pidgeon  :  the  waters  were  full 
enough. 

Sunday  22.  At  Ohavers  a  camp-meeting  had  been  appointed  by 
the  preachers  and  people.  Bishop  M'Kendree  and  brother  Boehm 
spoke,  as  well  as  brother  Blackrnan  and  myself.  Brother  Bow- 
man spoke  at  night,  and  some  souls  were  affected.  On  Monday  I 
spoke  ag;un  ;  there  was  a  flood  of  speaking  to  about  three  hundred 
souls,  some  of  whom  joined  society.  It  was  very  cold  on  the  ground. 
Our  party  came  away  to  George  Wells's.  On  Tuesday  we  rode 
twenty  miles  to  the  Warm  Springs  ;  and  next  day  reached  Bun- 
combe, thirty-two  miles.  The  right  way  to  improve  a  short  day  is 
to  stop  only  to  feed  the  horses,  and  let  the  riders,  meanwhile,  take  a 
bite  of  what  they  may  have  been  provident  enough  to  put  into  their 
pocket.  It  has  been  serious  October  to  me;  I  have  laboured  and 
suffered;  but  I  have  lived  near  to  God. 


1608.]  rev.  fiuncis  asbury's  journal.  253 

North  Carolina.— Saturday  29.  We  have  rested  for  three  days 
past.  We  fell  in  with  Jesse  Richardson  :  he  could  not  bear  to  see 
the  field  of  Buncombe  deserted  by  militia  men,  who  fire  a  shot  and  fly, 
and  wheel  and  fire,  and  run  again  :  he  is  a  veteran  who  has  learned  to 
"  endure  hardness  like  a  good  soldier  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
On  the  Sunday  I  preached  in  Buncombe  court  house  upon  1  Thess. 
i.  7 — 10.  I  lodged  with  a  chief  man,  a  Mr.  Irwin.  Henry  Boehm 
went  to  Pidgeon-Creek  to  preach  to  the  Dutch.  On  Monday  I  went 
to  David  Jay's ;  I  thought  I  was  unknown,  but  the  woman  of  the 
house,  the  mother  of  seven  children,  quickly  told  me  1  had  join- 
ed her  in  matrimony  to  her  present  husband.  Here  we  met  with 
Daniel  Asbury ;  great  news  from  Georgia,  South,  and  North 
Carolina !  Thirty,  or  forty,  or  fifty  souls  converted  at  camp- 
meetings  ;  but  in  old  Virginia,  the  work  is  still  greater,  and  bro- 
ther Bruce's  labours  have  been  blessed  in  an  extraordinary  manner. 

November,  Tuesday  1,  Wednesday  2,  Thursday  3.  I  rested,  read, 
and  preached  but  once.  On  Friday  we  descended  the  heights  of 
Cooper's  Gap,  to  our  friend  David  Dickey's ;  fasting,  and  the 
labour  of  lowering  ourselves  down  from  the  mountain  top  has  made 
us  feeble.  Bishop  M'Kendree  preached  upon  "  Cast  not  away 
your  confidence."  On  the  Sabbath  brother  Boehm  spoke  in  the 
morning  at  eight  o'clock;  I  preached  from  Matt.  xvii.  5.;  exhorta- 
tions followed,  and  brother  Boehm  ended  our  Sabbath  labours  by 
preaching  at  night,  wheu  there  was  a  considerable  move.  We  came 
away  on  Monday  by  Rutherford  court-house  to  G.  Moore's.  At 
Bloore's  chapel  on  Tuesday  I  preached  from  Coloss.  ii.  6.  Henry 
Boehm  spoke  at  night  :  verily  we  had  a  shout !  Bishop  M'Kendree 
preached  at  Lucus's  chapel  upon  Little  Broad,  and  we  lodged  at 
Lucas's.  A  noble  ride  of  forty  miles  brought  us  next  day  to  Wil-* 
liams's,  in  Lincoln.  I  preached  on  Friday.  My  mind  hath  great 
peace,  but  my  body  is  weak.  The  prospects  are  reviving  and  cheer- 
ing in  the  South  Carolina  conference,  and  they  will  grow  better 
every  year.  On  Saturday  I  preached.  1  ordained  Samuel  Smith 
and  Enoch  Spinks.  The  Sabbath  day  was  windy  and  cold  ;  I  had 
taken  an  emetic,  and  kept  the  house. 

Monday  14.  Rode  thirty-three  miles,  hungry,  cold,  and  sick,  to 
Harrison's,  Mecklenburg  county.  I  came,  unwell  and  taking  medi- 
cine, to  Robert  Hancock's,  Waxaw's  :  I  suffer,  but  it  is  the  will  of 
God.  Eighteen  hundred  miles  since  leaving  Baltimore.  I  have  or- 
dained Robert  Hancock  a  local  deacon.  We  came  rapidly  to  Hang- 
ing-Rock on  Wednesday,  and  next  day  reached  Camden,  and  lodged 
with  Samuel  Matthews. 


254  REy.  FRANCIS  ASEURYS  JOURNAL.  [I0O8. 

South  Carolina.— Sabbath  20.  I  preached  in  the  tabernacle  in 
Camden  in  the  morning,  and  brother  Boehm  in  the  afternoon,  and 
Bishop  M'Kendree  at  night.  Letters  from  the  presiding  elders  an- 
nounce great  times  in  camp-meetings. 

Monday  21.  This  day  I  renew  my  covenant  with  God;  to  do 
nothing  I  doubt  is  not  lawful,  and  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places  to 
live  as  if  it  were  my  last  hour — may  God  help  me  so  to  do  !  On 
Wednesday  I  went  to  the  encampment,  four  miles  from  the  city. 
Bishop  M'Kendree  preached.  It  was  very  unpleasant  weather.  I 
took  cold  sitting  in  the  stand.  Thursday,  dwelling  under  curtains  : 
I  took  an  emetic :  wrote  two  letters  to  Elders  Soule  and  Beale, 
Province  of  Maine.  I  am  still  at  Rembert-Hall.  1  visited,  and 
preached\upon  the  camp-ground  ;  we  had  an  exceeding  strong  wind, 
but  the  people  were  very  attentive.  The  superintendency  had 
a  hut  with  a  chimney  in  it :  there  were  forty  tents  and  cabins  : 
Bishop  M'Kendree  was  three  days  and  nights  on  the  ground,  and 
there  was  a  powerful  work  amongst  white  saints  and  sinners,  and 
the  poor,  oppressed,  neglected  Africans. 

Sabbath  27.  At  Rembert  chapel  my  subject  was  Rev.  vii.  14 — 17. 
Brothers  Smith  and  Boehm  followed  with  energetic  exhortations. 
I  felt  dejected  in  mind,  and  my  soul  was  humbled.  I  suffer  much 
from  ill  health,  too  close  application  to  business,  and  from  having 
preached  in  the  open  air.  I  filled  an  appointment  made  for  Bishop 
M'Kendree  at  Rembert's.  On  Monday  I  rode  forty-five  miles  to 
Mr.  Keel's ;  we  crossed  Murray's  next  day  and  stopped  in  the  eve- 
ning at  the  widow  Kennedy's.  Wednesday  we  had  a  heavy  ride, 
and  I  felt  it  from  top  to  bottom;  Great  news  ! — Baltimore  taken 
fire — Bohemia  has  a  great  work — camp-meetings  have  done  this  : 
^lory  to  the  great  I  AM  ! 

Sunday,  December  4.  At  Cumberland  church,  we  had  a  sacra- 
mental day.  I  preached  at  Bethel  in  the  afternoon.  We  have  a 
great  change  and  a  glorious  prospect  here  in  Charleston,  and  in  the 
neighbourhood  among  both  descriptions  of  people  :  by  our  coloured 
missionaries  the  Lord  is  doing  wonders  among  the  Africans. 

Monday  5.  I  am  closely  employed  in  reading  and  writing  letters 
and  receiving  company  :  our  house  is  a  house  of  prayer  ten  or 
twelve  times  a  day.  I  read  Mr.  Wesley's  Journal :  Ah  !  how  little 
it  makes  me  feel — the  faithfulness— the  diligence  of  this  great  man 
of  God ! — I  cannot  meet  the  classes  like  him,  but  I  have  a  daily 
throng  of  white  and  black  who  apply  for  spiritual  instruction. 

Sabbath  11.  I  preached  in  Cumberland-street:  it  was  a  serious 
parting  time.     At  Bethel  I  also  gave  them  a  talk  in  the  afternoon  : 


1808.]  REV.  FRANCIS  asbury's  journal.  255 

this  was  a  heavy  day— I  felt  the  weight  of  souls.  Some  may  think 
it  no  great  matter  to  build  two  churches,  buy  three  lots,  pay  fifteen 
hundred  dollars  of  bank  debt,  and  raise  a  growing  society  :  this  has 
been  done  in  this  Sodom  in  less  than  twenty-four  years  : — O  Lord, 
take  thou  the  glory  !  We  dined  in  the  woods  on  Monday,  and  made 
it  thirty-two  miles  to  Perry's.  On  Tuesday  we  crossed  Edisto, 
dining  at  Coger's,  and  came  into  Benjamin  Risher's.  Next  day, 
at  the  Green-Ponds  chapel,  Bishop  M'Kendree,  brother  Boehm,  and 
myself,  all  spoke.  We  lodged  at  Lewis's,  niece  to  one  who  had  first 
received  the  Methodist  preachers.  Next  day  we  called  on  B. 
M'Lellan,  a  preacher,  and  lodged  with  Benjamin  Tarrant : — O  that 
it  was  with  him  as  in  years  past ! — once,  how  holy  and  innocent ! 
We  reached  Benjamin  Weatherby's  on  Friday  evening.  Cold, 
very  cold  weather.  We  came  into  Augusta  on  Saturday  evening ; 
we  dined  in  the  woods.  One  disorderly  man  has  given  great  trou- 
ble, and  awful  Osborn  Randall  has  shot  a  man  ! 

Georgia. — Sabbath  18.  I  preached  in  Augusta  chapel.  My  flesh 
sinks  under  labour.  We  are  riding  in  a  poor  thirty  dollar  chaise, 
in  partnership,  two  bishops  of  us,  but  it  must  be  confessed  it  tallies 
well  with  the  weight  of  our  purses  :  what  bishops  !  well :  but  we  hear 
great  news,  and  we  have  great  times,  and  each  western,  southern 
and  the  Virginia  conference  will  have  one  thousand  souls  truly  con- 
verted to  God  ;  and  is  not  this  an  equivalent  for  a  light  purse  ?  and 
are  we  not  well  paid  for  starving  and  toil  ?— yes  ;  glory  be  to  God  !  We 
came  away  to  Whysing's  on  Monday,  and  next  day  toiled  through  a 
very  heavy  rain  to  the  widow  Fountain's.  We  remained  Thurs- 
day and  Friday  in  Sparta,  and  went  on  Saturday  to  brother  Bush's. 

Sabbath  25.  Christmas  day.  I  preached  on  John  iii.  17.  We 
opened  our  conference  on  Monday.  We  had  great  labour,  which 
we  went  through  in  great  peace.  Between  sisty  and  seventy  men 
were  present,  all  of  one  spirit.  We  appointed  three  missionaries — 
one  for  Tombigbee,  one  to  Ashley  and  Savannah,  and  the  country 
between,  and  one  to  labour  between  Santee  and  Cooper  Rivers.  In- 
crease within  the  bounds  of  this  conference,  three  thousand  and  eighty- 
eight.  Preaching,  and  exhortations,  and  singing,  and  prayer — we 
had  all  these  without  intermission  on  the  camp-ground,  and  we  have 
reasons  to  believe  that  many  souls  will  be  converted.  The  number 
of  travelling  and  local  preachers  present  are  about  three  hundred. 
There  are  people  here  with  their  tents  who  have  come  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  miles.  The  prospects  of  doing  good  are  glorious, 
We  have  already  added  two  new  circuits,  and  gained  six  preachers. 
There  may  have  been  from  two  to  three  thousand  persons  assem 


256  REV..  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1305. 

bled.     I  preached  once  :  we  had  finished  our  conference  concerns 
the  evening  before. 

January  1,  1809.  We  came  away  on  Monday  morning  in  haste. 
We  stopped  to  dine  with  our  friend  Doughty  in  Powelton  :  this 
is  a  strong  hold  of  the  Baptists  ;  nevertheless,  we  have  a  house 
to  preach  in,  and  a  society.  We  went  as  far  as  W  Bonner's,  to 
lodge.  On  Tuesday  we  dined  at  pleasant  Tindell's,  and  reached 
Augusta  about  six  o'clock.  A  cold  rain,  and  freezing  ride  brought 
us  on  Wednesday  to  Speir's  :  next  day,  Arthur's,  near  Granby  : 
there  was  an  appointment  here  for  a  local  preacher,  and  1  filled  it 
for  him.  I  ought  to  record  that  the  good  old  folks  where  I  lodged  gave 
up  their  rooms  to  me.  A  hard  ride  on  Friday,  between  the  hours 
of  eight  and  five,  brought  us  into  Camden.  1  scarcely  have  time  to 
make  these  few  brief  journalizing  remarks. 

South  Carolina. — Sabbath  8.  I  preached  in  our  enlarged  meet- 
ing-house in  Camden  :  it  was  a  feeling  season — in  anticipation  of 
great  things  here.  We  came  away  on  Monday  morning  through 
clouds  and  a  cold  rain,  twenty-six  miles,  to  brother  Woodham  s,  on 
Lynch's  Creek.  I  ordained  Stephen  Thompson  a  deacon.  In  cross- 
ing Cashaway-Ferry  on  Tuesday,  it  was  a  mercy  we  were  not  thrown 
into  the  water,  like  poor  Billiard  Judge.  We  were  kindly  and  com- 
fortably lodged  by  Esquire  Nevil  :  ray  mind  most  deeply  felt  for  the 
salvation  of  this  amiable  family. 

North  Carolina — Wednesday  11,  was  cloudy  and  very  cold; 
but  we  took  horse  and  made  it  thirty-three  miles  to  Lumberton,  and 
stopped  at  the  widow  Thompson's  :  I  am  most  at  home  when  I  am 
housed  with  the  widow  and  the  orphan.  We  reached  Fayetteville 
on  Thursday.  My  limbs,  my  patience,  and  my  faith  have  been  put 
to  severe  trial. 

I  preached  in  the  morning  on  the  Sabbath,  and  Bishop  M'Kendree 
and  brother  Boehm  after.  Since  Friday  morning  I  have  been  oc- 
cupied in  writing,  forming  plans,  and  occasionally  reading.  I  bap- 
tised a  daughter  for  Mr.  Newby.  Eli  Perry  came  fifty-six  miles  for 
deacon's  orders :  I  advised  him  to  tell  his  father,  a  backslidden  Bap- 
tist preacher,  that  he  (Eli)  would  set  apart  once  a  month  a  day  of 
fasting  and  prayer  for  his  father's  restoration. 

We  set  out  on  Monday  the  solitary  path  on  the  north  side  of 
Cape  Fear,  to  the  widow  Andrew's,  forty-five  miles  :  we  were  in 
the  night,  and  I  was  very  much  disordered.  Tuesday  brought  us 
to  Wilmington,  forty-five  miles  ;  again  in  the  night,  and  my  pain 
extreme.  I  was  compelled  to  preach  on  Wednesday  at  eleven 
o'clock.     I  gave  them  a  sermon  also  on  Thursday.     My  body  is  in 


J 309.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  257 

better  health,  and  my  mind  enjoys  great  sweetness  and  peace.     We 
had  morning  preaching  on  Friday  at  five  o'clock,  to  about  two  hun- 
dred souls.     We  came  away  afterward,   and  a  ride  of  twenty  miles 
brought  us  to  the  widow  Nixon's  :  the  dear  old   man,   her  husband, 
died  in  Georgia — died  in  prayer.     I  gave  those  present  an  exhorta- 
tion and  my  evening  prayers.     Saturday  brought  us  to  New-River  ; 
and  next  day,  the  Sabbath,  I  preached  in  our  enlarged  chapel  on  1  Tim. 
ii.  3,  4.     It  was  unusually  warm,  and  so  great  a  wind  at  night  that  it 
frequently  waked  me.     We  were  most  kindly  and  comfortably  enter- 
tained at  Gains  Rowe's  :    God   is   worshipped  in  this  house  :  Oh  ! 
what  a  change  is  here  ! — the  poor  Africans,  once  oppressed,  have  now 
great  privileges  allowed  them.     We  came  to   Adonijah  Perry's  on 
Monday  :  may  he  follow  his  father,  who  followed  Christ !    Newbera 
brought  us  up  on  Tuesday.     I  preached  on  Wednesday,   and  it  was 
an  open  season  :  God  will  visit  Newbern  again.     A  cold  ride  brought 
us  to  Washington — a  disagreeable  place  to  me  ;  but  there  are  souls 
here,  and  God  can  convert  and  save  them.    We  have  a  neatly  finished 
house,  in  which  I  preached  on  Friday  in  great  heaviness  of  body- 
it  is  a  day  of  abstinence.     I  spent  my  Saturday   at  Williams's — a  se- 
cluded house,  and  social  family. 

Sabbath  29.  I  preached  at  Williams's  chapel  on  Habakkuk  iii.  2. 
I  felt  myself  in  the  spirit  of  the  work.  In  the  evening  we  had  snow 
and  hail.  We  set  out  on  Monday  and  had  a  very  disagreeable  ride 
through  deep  swamps  and  snow.  At  Williamston  I  preached  to  a 
few  people.  A  cold  ride  of  thirty-two  miles  brought  us  to  Tar- 
borough  on  Tuesday. 

Wednesday,  February  1.  Opened  the  Virginia  conference.  We 
had  eighty-four  preachers  present — sixty  of  them  the  most  pleasing, 
promising  young  men  ;  seventeen  preachers  were  admitted  ;  in  all 
the  conference  there  are  but  three  married  men.  The  high  taste 
of  these  southern  folks  will  not  permit  their  families  to  be  degraded 
by  an  alliance  with  a  Methodist  travelling  preacher  ;  and  thus,  in- 
voluntary celibacy  is  imposed  upon  us  ;  all  the  better — care  and 
anxiety  about  worldly  possessions  do  not  stop  us  in  our  course,  and 
we  are  saved  from  the  pollution  of  negro  slavery  and  oppression. 

Bishop  M'Kendree  preached  an  ordination  sermon  on  Friday.  On 
the  Sabbath  I  gave  them  a  discourse  on  humiliation  before  God. 
Bishop  M'Kendree  ordained  eight  elders,  and  I  thirteen  deacons.  I 
suppose  we  have  had  two  thousand  souls  to  hear  us  in  the  two 
churches,  and  our  friends  are  very  attentive  to  entertain  us  in  their 
houses,  abundantly  better  than  we  deserve.  Our  increase  in  mem- 
bers, unless  we  allow  for  a  great  waste  by  death,  and  loss  by  remo- 
Vol.  III.  33 


-58  REV.   FRANCIS    ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  [1809, 

vals,  is  not  very  encouraging  ;  the  west  and  south  have  given  more 
than  three  thousand  each  ;  whereas,  here  it  is  not  three  hundred. 
We  are  defrauded  of  great  numbers  by  the  pains  that  are  taken  to 
keep  the  blacks  from  us — their  masters  are  afraid  of  the  influence 
of  our  principles.  Would  not  an  amelioration  in  the  condition  and 
treatment  of  slaves  have  produced  more  practical  good  to  the  poor 
Africans,  than  any  attempt  at  their  emancipation  ?  The  state  of  so- 
ciety, unhappily,  does  not  admit  of  this  :  besides,  the  blacks  are 
deprived  of  the  means  of  instruction — who  will  take  the  pains  to 
lead  them  into  the  way  of  salvation,  and  watch  over  them  that  they 
may  not  stray,  but  the  Methodists?  Well;  now  their  masters  will 
not  let  them  come  to  hear  us.  What  is  the  personal  liberty  of  the 
African  which  he  may  abuse,  to  the  salvation  of  his  soul — how  may 
it  be  compared  ? 

We  adjourned  on  Wednesday,  to  hold  our  next  session  in  Peters- 
burg in  Virginia.  A  general  contentment  appeared  in  the  preachers 
with  regard  to  stations.  I  came  away  instantly,  and  had  a  rapid  ride 
of  twenty-eight  miles  to  Mr.  Lisiomes,  near  Edward's  ferry,  upon 
Roanoke.  We  next  day  crossed  the  river,  and  breakfasted  at 
Pinner's.  We  lodged  with  Jesse  Battle — forty-three  miles  to-day. 
Friday  brought  us  to  Isaac  Lumford's.  We  reached  Norfolk  on 
Saturday  by  ten  o'clock. 

Virginia.— -Sabbath  12.    I  preached  on  Psalm  xxxvii.  3,  4.  and  felt 
liberty  and  life.     Met  the   society ;    and   preached  at   Portsmouth. 
Preached  on  Monday  at  the  Western  Branch ;  and  at  night  again  at 
Suffolk.     I  found  Richard  Yerberry  greatly  afflicted  with  the  gout — 
his  hands  and  feet  had  burst  ;  but  he  was  resigned  and  patient.     On 
Tuesday  we  came  away   to   General   Wells's  :    his  brother  Willis 
Wells,  an  early  Methodist  and  local  preacher,  died  last  year — he 
died  in  great  peace.     He  had  been  led  away  by  the  misrepresenta- 
tions of  O'Kelly,  but  he  came  back  into  our  bosom.     I  expected  to 
have  found  religion  more  lively  in  this  district ;  but  we  are  on  our 
lees.     I  grieved  to  find  that  some  of  the  preachers  went  about  visit- 
ing instead  of  being  at  their  work  ;  the  spirit  of  the  world,  and  still 
worse,  politics — Oh,  death,  death  !  O  Lord  God,  keep  thy  ministers 
faithful  !     I  preached  at  William  Blunt's  to  a  few  people  who  had 
come  through  a  dark  night  at  a  short  warning.     We  had,  after  meet- 
ing, hail  and  rain.     I  rode  next  day,   very  cold,  to  Birdsong's,  in 
Sussex,  thirty  miles  in  six   hours  :    I  have  need   of  patience  and 
courage  for  the   roads  and  weather.     It  was  exceedingly  cold  on 
Thursday  ;  nevertheless  we  reached  Petersburg,  about  forty  miles. 
We  lodged  at  Edward  Lee's ;  Joseph  Handing  is  no  more.   He  joined 


1009.1  REV.  FRANCIS  ASEURy's  JOURNAL.  259 

us  in  Norfolk  in  1772  :  he  was  a  man  of  labour  and  sorrow  ;  meek 
and  benevolent.  I  had  hoped  to  find  religion  more  prosperous,  but 
I  find,  except  a  few  places  in  the  district,  there  is  great  languor  and 
indifference  observable  :  we  hope  for  better  times.  We  have  added 
fifty  probationers  in  the  three  conferences,  western,  southern,  and 
that  of  Virginia  ;  and  have  located  twenty.  Many  of  these  are  the 
most  elegant  young  men  I  have  seen,  in  features,  body,  and  mind — 
they  are  manly  yet  meek.  I  preached  in  Petersburg  on  Friday. 
After  meeting  I  rode  home  with  John  Ryall  Bradley,  now  warm  in 
his  first  love  :  he  was  strangely  brought  to  God.  He  was  alone  on  a 
Sabbath  day  and  was  reading,  what  he  indeed  seldom  read,  his  prayer- 
hook  ;  suddenly  he  was  powerfully  struck  with  keen  conviction  ;  he 
began  to  pray  without  book,  and  with  all  his  might  :  what  followed 
came  of  course.  At  his  conversion  he  had  a  stud  of  race-horses  to 
part  with.  We  reached  Richmond  on  Saturday,  and  1  preached  nest 
day  in  the  city  ;  and  at  Manchester  in  the  afternoon  :  there  is  a 
change  here  for  the  better.     I  lodged  at  A.  Foster's. 

Monday  19.  We  rode  twenty-four  miles  to  brother  Cross's — twenty- 
four  miles  of  heavy  roads.  I  preached  at  night  to  a  respectable  con- 
gregation on  1  Thess.  v.  14.  The  young  men  prayed,  and  there  was 
life  and  feeling.  C.  Hines  is  likely  to  be  an  instrument  of  great  good  in 
Hanover  circuit.  On  Tuesday  we  had  an  uncommonly  large  congre- 
gation for  a  two  hours'  notice  :  bishop  M'Kendree  preached  to  them. 
A  forty-five  miles  ride,  without  food  for  man  or  beast,  brought  us  in, 
after  being  twice  lost  in  the  woods,  to  brother  M^Gruder's.  We 
reached  Frederick  Gilliam's,  beyond  the  Green  Mountain,  on  Thurs- 
day. We  seldom  lodge  at  a  house  without  the  company  of  preachers  : 
we  are  pleased  to  see  them  ;  but  would  be  better  pleased  to  know 
they  were  on  their  circuits,  faithfully  at  work.  On  Friday  we  passed 
Charlotteville,  within  sight  of  fair  Monticello,  the  seat  of  Thomas 
Jefferson.  We  rested  at  Daniel  Mauppin's  :  his  father  and  mother 
are  gone  to  rest.  We  crossed  (he  ridge  at  Brown's  Gap,  and  came 
to  Port  Republic,  and  lodged  with  Doctor  William  Douglass. 

Sabbath  26.  I  preached  upon  Acts  ii.  21.  We  found  it  dangerous 
riding  through  the  snow  to  Harrisonburg  on  Monday. 

Thursday,  March  2.  Our  conference  opened.  Friday,  fast  day, 
We  wrought  with  order  and  industry,  and  did  much  in  a  little  time. 
There  were  travelling  and  local  deacons  ordained,  and  we  had  preach- 
ing three  times  a  day. 

Sabbath  4  In  the  morning  we  had  a  general  band-meeting.  I 
preached — «e  had  German  preaching  also  ;  and  a  sermon  at  night. 
On  Wednesday  we  closed   our  labours  in  great  peace.     We  came 


260  rev.  fiiancis  asbury's  journal-  [1809. 

away  on  Thursday  morning,  and  had  a  heavy,  cold  ride  of  thirty- 
six  miles  to  Woodstock.  We  took  a  by-road  on  Friday  to  Stephens- 
burgh.  We  called  a  congregation,  who  came  through  frost  and  snow, 
and  mud  ;  and  I  gave  them  a  talk  from  1  Thess  v.  16,  17.  There 
were  some  unhappy  contentions  in  the  society  here,  but  I  did  not 
know  it,  although  from  my  preaching,  some  of  the  congregation 
might  well  suppose  I  did;  God  maketh  the  mind  and  the  mouth 
of  man.  We  reached  Winchester  on  Saturday,  and  on  the  Sab- 
bath I  gave  them  a  discourse  on  Habakkuk  iii.  2.  :  it  was  a  sea- 
son of  freedom.  An  awful  storm  of  snow  overtook  us  on  our  way 
to  Thomas  Key's,  where  we  were  made  comfortable  for  the  night. 
We  crossed  Harper's  ferry  on  Tuesday,  and  came  to  Joseph  Per- 
kins's—my friend  and  neighbour  has  gone  to  rest.  Next  day  we  had 
deep  roads  to  Fredericktown.  I  had  scarcely  sat  down  when  I  heard 
the  bells  ring  ;  it  was  an  invitation  to  the  people  to  come  and  hear 
me  preach  ;  well,  go  I  must.  About  three  hundred  people  had  col- 
lected in  the  German  Presbyterian  church  ;  they  were  devoutly  at- 
tentive. Next  day  we  reached  Mr.  Helms's,  near  Patapsco  bridge  ; 
a  number  of  workmen  were  deeply  attentive  whilst  1  officiated  in  the 
family  evening  devotions.  We  reached  Baltimore  on  Thursday. 
Friday  and  Saturday  received  letters  and  visiters.  My  soul  is  greatly 
humbled  in  this  city  ;  I  tremble  for  the  ark,  and  fear  my  own  soul 
will  suffer  loss. 

Maryland. — Sabbath  18.  At  Light-street  my  subject  was  2  Chron, 
xv.  2.     In  the  evening  I  preached  again  upon  Hosea  vi.  1.     On  Mon- 
dajr  we  went  to  the  camp-meeting  near  Perry-Hall  ;  and  I  preached 
in  the  chapel  upon  Philippians  ii.  12 — 15.     As  I  rode  by  the  graves 
of  the  elders  of  the  Gough  family,  the  image  of  my  dear  departed 
Harry  Gough  was  very  present  to  me.     We  stopped  in  our  way  at 
B.  Bennett's ;  his  prodigal  son  has  enlisted,  and  gone  as  a  sergeant  to 
New-Orleans  :  the  mention  of  this  place  kindled  strong  desires  in  my 
mind  to  send  another  missionary  to  that  quarter ;  I  wrote  to  John 
M'Lure,  presiding  elder  of  the  Mississippi  district,  on  the  subject. 
Tuesday  was  cold.     We  crossed  the  wide  Susquehannah  with  a  gen- 
tle breeze.     There  was  no  appointment  for  us,  and   it  was  as  well 
thus.     On  Wednesday  I  preached  at  John  Carnan's,  Back  Creek  ;  my 
gubj^ct  was  1  John  iii.  1,2.     I   preached  at  Smyrna  on   Thursday. 
We  went  to  the  state  of  Delaware  on  Friday,  but  there  had  been  no 
notice  given  :  we,  however,  gathered  a  fewy  to   whom  we  gave  a 
word  of  exhortation,  and  went  on  to  Choptank.    I  preached  on  Satur- 
day from  Luke  xii.  40.     It  is  still  excessively  cold,  and  we  suffer 
much.     After  sermon  we  rode  twenty-six  miles  to  Milford. 


5809.]  REV.  francis  asbury's  journal.  26 i 

Sunday  27.  At  Milford  my  subject  was  Ezek.  ix.  4. — very  open 
and  alarming  time  to  saints  and  sinners.     On    Monday,  at  Barratt's 
chapel,   I  preached  and   baptised  some  children.      I  had   powerful 
feelings  of  sympathy  for  the  children  and  grandchildren  of  that  holy 
man  in  life  and  death,  Philip  Barrat.     We  felt  the  wind  on  our  way 
to  Dover  like  the  piercing  of  a  sword.     My  dear  friends,  Governor 
Basset  and  his  lady,  came  nearly  forty  miles  to  meet  me.    1  preached 
in  Dover,  and  baptised  James  Molison,  advanced  in  life.     I  have  suf- 
fered incredibly  by  the  cold  in  the   last  hundred  and  thirty  miles  : 
souls  and  their  Saviour  can  reward  me,  and  nothing  else  ! — Lord,  re- 
member Francis  Asbury  in  all  his  labours  and  afflictions  !  Friday  I 
preached  at  Keagy's.     Brother  M'Kendree  and  father  Boehm  met 
me  once  more,  and   we  greatly  rejoiced  in  God   together.     In  Wil- 
mington I  preached  on  Thursday.     On  Friday  I  spoke  at  the  Bethel 
chapel,  a  beautiful  new  house,  about  seven  miles  from  Wilmington  : 
brother  M'Kendree  in  the  evening.     I  preached  at  Matson's  chapel  ; 
this  is  a  house  of  much  the  same  kind  as  the  former.     I  sat   down  to 
teach  the  people,  and  we  had  an  open  season. 

Pennsylvania. — April  1.  I  forestalled  a  meeting  at  Derby  ;  but 
few  attended.  I  dropped  them  a  few  hints  on  the  shortness  of  time. 
I  suffer  by  the  unusual  heat,  and  by  soreness  from  riding.  We  came 
safe  into  the  city  of  Philadelphia.  I  found  letters  from  Savannah, 
Tombigbee,  Mississippi.  Ohio,  and  also  from  the  eastward. 

Sabbath  2.  At  St.  George's  my  subject  was  Haggai  i.  7.  I  was  fer- 
vent ;  we  had  a  sacrament,  and  the  Lord  was  present  of  a  truth.  On 
Monday  we  opened  our  conference  in  great  peace  and  good  order.  I 
preached  on  Wednesday,  and  it  was  recollected  that  I  had  preached 
on  the  same  subject  in  the  same  place  in  1771.  Friday  we  observed 
as  a  day  of  fasting  and  prayer.  Both  elders  and  deacons  were  or- 
dained. There  was  some  little  difficulty  with  respect  to  our  money 
concerns  ;  and  some  of  the  members  had  been  rather  warm  parti- 
zans  as  politicians  ;  this  is  always  wrong  for  them,  let  them  take 
which  side  they  please.  There  was  general  satisfaction  given  as  to 
the  stations — about  eighty-four  in  the  whole.  The  Philadelphia  con- 
ference has  subjected  itself  to  a  demand  for  twelve  preachers  who 
have  no  stations  ;  six  of  these  are  married,  and  there  is  a  widow's 
maintenance  to  be  added,  making  an  expense  of  two  thousand  dollars. 

Sabbath  11.  I  preached  at  Kingston  chapel  on  Habakkuk  iii.  2. 
Here  I  ordained  Jacob  Tapsco,  and  James  Champion,  both  Africans. 
I  gave  the  congregation  at  the  Academy  church  an  exhortation  in  the 
>evening.  With  difficulty  we  got  out  of  the  city  of  Philadelphia,  and 
ran  some  risk  in  crossing  the  river  into  Jersey.     I  preached  at  two 


26'2  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL.  [1809. 

o'clock  at  Carpenter's  bridge.  We  lodged  with  father  Early,  twenty- 
four  miles  from  the  city.  Here  I  take  a  little  rest.  I  am  not  con- 
scious of  indulging  or  feeling  wrong  tempers  in  the  mighty  work  at 
which  I  daily  labour  ;  but  I  never  wish  to  meet  the  conference  in 
the  city  of  Philadelphia  again — But  possibly  my  time  is  short  ! 

New-Jersey. — On  Wednesday  I  preached  at  Union  chapel ;  it  is  a 
neat  building,  two  stories  high,  forty  by  thirty-six  feet — built  on  the 
plan  I  furnished  them.  I  spent  a  night  with  J.  Abbott,  a  local 
preacher.  Snow  on  Thursday  ;  I  preached  at  Pittsgrove.  Lodged 
under  the  roof  of  Joseph  Niewkirk  ;  here  I  found  the  children  and 
grandchildren  of  Susanna  Ayars,  who  first  received  the  Lord's  pro- 
phets in  this  town.  There  was  no  proper  notice  of  our  appointment 
at  Broadneck  chapel  on  Friday,  so  that  we  had  but  few  people.  I 
lodged  at  Heyward's.     I  rode  away  to  Chohansee  on  Saturday. 

Sabbath  16.  At  the  chapel  I  spoke  on  Philippians  iii.  8.  "  Yea., 
doubtless,  and  I  count  all  things  loss,"  &c.  1.  The  object  of  the  apos- 
tle's knowledge,  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord.  2.  The  nature  and  degrees 
of  this  knowledge  in  the  apostle's  own  experience.  3.  The  excel- 
lency of  this  knowledge — a  saving  knowledge  ;  a  life-giving  and  sanc- 
tifying knowledge  ;  it  is  the  spiritual  and  experimental  knowledge  of 
repentance,  faith,  regeneration  and  sanctification,  producing  a  holy 
life,  a  triumphant  death,  a  joyful  resurrection,  and  a  crown  of  eternal 
glory.  I  had  certainly  part  of  a  gay  congregation  :  how  good  is  not 
for  me  to  say  ;  the}'  were  serious  and  attentive.  I  met  the  society. 
Brother  Boehm  preached  in  the  afternoon.  I  must  needs  hold  forth 
again  in  the  evening  :  I  preached  as  it  was  desired,  and  we  had  an 
open  season.  A  heavy  ride  brought  us  on  Monday  to  Port  Eliza- 
beth. 1  preached  on  2  Cor.  xiii.  5.  :  it  was  a  searching  season. 
This  is  a  new  town,  and  we  have  a  large  house  built  here  :  the  Bap- 
tists are  building  a  grand  house.  We  lodged  at  Benjamin  Fisler's. 
At  Tuckahoe  chapel  my  subject  on  Tuesday  was  Ephesians  iii.  8. :  I 
sat  down  and  taught  with  pleasure.  I  dined  with  N.  Swain  :  Richard 
has  gone  to  his  rest  and  reward.  The  people  told  me  that  my  time  of 
absence  on  this  path  was  twenty-five  years.  I  feel  the  heat  and  labour, 
and  painful  weary  nights  appointed  to  me  ;  but  God,  even  my  God  is 
with  me  !  I  hear  of  several  spots  where  the  work  of  the  Lord  is  revi- 
ving powerfully.  At  May's  Landing,  Great  Egg  Harbour,  there  was 
power  in  the  word  whilst  I  lectured  on  Hebr.  xii.  25.  We  hasted 
away  to  Blackman's,  to  be  there  at  three  o'clock,  but  we  lost  our 
way  in  the  woods,  and  after  riding  fifteen  miles  instead  of  eight,  we 
arrived  at  five  o'clock.  Tuesday  evening  closed  rather  uncomfor- 
tably upon  us  at  a  tavern  :  my  spirits  were  low  and  my  body  very  fee- 


1809.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASEURy's  JOURNAL.  263 

ble.  The  work  of  God  revives  in  the  society  here.  Learner  Black- 
man  has  been  raised  up  from  small  appearances — possibly,  to  very 
considerable  consequences.  At  Absecum,  on  Thursday,  I  gave  them 
a  discourse.  We  dined  in  haste  at  brother  Peacock's,  and  came 
on  to  George  Peterson's,  Pleasant  Mills.  At  the  Forks,  on  Fri- 
day, I  preached  in  our  elegant  chapel  on  John  xii.  38.  ;  it  was  an 
open  time.  Who  should  I  see  but  dear  aged  Jesse  Chew  and  wife  ! 
I  went  home  with  friendly  William  Puchards  :- — dear  Sarah,  his  former 
wife,  so  often  my  kind  and  attentive  hostess — I  only  saw  the  marble 
that  covered  her  dust !  Some  demur  was  sent  by  a  certain  preacher 
about  his  station  ;  these  things  give  me  more  pain  than  all  the  labour 
of  the  conferences.  On  Saturday  I  called  to  see  Rebekah  Sevior  on 
a  sick  bed,  praising  God  ;  she  is  a  true  daughter  of  Sarah  Richardson. 
I  rode  on  to  Tuckerton — very  damp  and  cold. 

Sunday  23.  At  Tuckerton  my  subject  was  2  Cor.   iv.  2.     In  the 
afternoon  I  preached  again.     On  Monday  I   preached  at  Waretown. 

1  staid  awhile  with  Samuel  Brown,  and  then  came  to  Thomas  Cham- 
berlain's :  I  was  compelled  by  uncomfortable  feelings  to  go  to  rest 
at  six  o'clock.     At  David  Woodmassie's,  on  Tuesday,  I  preached  on 

2  Tim.  ii.  15.  On  Wednesday,  after  a  rain,  I  set  out  for  Polemus 
chapel,  where  I  preached.  My  friends  were  exceedingly  kind,  and 
I  was  very  sick.  I  rose  unwell  on  Thursday,  and  took  medicine, 
and  set  out  for  Squam  River.  My  host  here,  Derrick  Longstreet? 
has  been  married  twenty-four  years  ;  his  wife  once  had  twins,  and 
she  has  made  him  the  father  of  sixteen  children,  all  of  whom  are  alive 
and  well.  I  had  a  noble  congregation  here  of  women  and  children  ; 
the  men  were  generally  gone  from  the  neighbourhood,  either  to  the 
waters  or  to  work.  1  was  seriously  unwell.  On  Friday,  at  New- 
man's, on  Shark-River,  I  had  women  not  a  few  :  I  suited  my  subject 
to  my  hearers,  and  preached  from  Luke  x.  41,  42.  Ah,  how  many 
Marthas  are  there,  and  how  few  Mary's.  In  the  afternoon  I  spoke 
again  at  P.  White's.  We  have  meeting  twice  a  day,  and  sometimes 
at  night  ;  and  the  prospects  are  pleasing.  The  weather  is  severely 
cold.  I  have  read  Simpson  lately — his  Plea  for  Religion,  how 
strong !  If  Simpson  is  right,  the  old  Church  of  England  has  the  mark 
of  the  Beast  in  her  bauds  at  least.  Great  news  !  The  British  Orders 
in  Council  are  withdrawn,  and  the  American  embargo  and  non-inter- 
Gourse  are  forthwith  to  cease.  I  fear  much  that  these  expected  good 
times  will  injure  us  : — the  prosperity  of  fools  will  destroy  ;  therefore 
affliction  may  be  best,  and  God  may  send  it,  for  this  is  a  favoured 
land  :  ^prd  save  us  from  ruin  as  a  people  !  I  rested  on  Saturday. 


264  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBl/RY's    JOURNAL.  [1809. 

Sunday  30.  At  Long-Branch  my  subject  was  Acts  iii  26.  it  was 
given  me  to  speak  strong  words — words  of  God,  and  from  God.  At 
three  o'clock  1  preached  in  the  Episcopal  church  at  Shrewsbury.  I 
came  home  with  John  Throckmorton. 

Monday,  May  1.  No  appointment  at  Mount  Pleasant  :  we  came  on 
to  James  Throckmorton's  ;  and  thence  through  Brunswick  to  Staten- 
Island  :  we  dined  at  Drake's  ;  and  supped  at  Elder  Totten's.  I  have 
had  great  peace  of  mind  ;  and  have  been  greatly  in  the  spirit  of 
preaching,  of  faith,  and  of  prayer.  God  has  visited,  and  will  yet 
powerfully  visit  Jersey  ;  probably  in  the  last  five  years;  five  hundred 
souls  have  been  converted  :  Glory  to  the  great  1  Am  1 — He  will  bare 
the  arm  of  his  power,  and  save  millions  in  the  world. 

New-York. — I  preached  on  Wednesday  at  the  tabernacle  on 
Staten  Island  :  my  subject  was  1  Peter  iii.  15,  16.  it  was  a  feeling 
season  :  my  mind  was  greatly  enlarged.  Lodged  at  Gilbert  Totten's. 
Episcopalians,  Presbyterians,  Baptists — all  upon  the  stretch  to  be 
greatest  upon  the  Island.  The  Methodists  have  a  stationed  preacher  ; 
and  they  have  a  camp-meeting  in  contemplation.  On  Thursday  I 
preached  at  the  old  meeting-house  :  there  was  some  tenderness 
manifested.  On  Friday  I  preached  in  our  meeting-house  at  North 
End.  I  found  brother  Cushon  in  a  languid  state  :  I  sought  to  administer 
consolation  to  his  mind  and  body.  Behold,  the  Low  Dutch  have  built 
a  church,  and  the  Episcopalians  one  at  the  North  End  near  them  : 
there  are  three  local  preachers  of  our  order,  and  a  presiding  elder  ; 
if  good  be  not  done,  the  people  must  be  hardened.  I  found  my  old 
friend  Morrell,  solitary — his  wife  is  called  home.  My  attention  was 
strongly  excited  by  the  steam-boat :  this  is  a  great  invention.  Brother 
M'Kendree  preached  at  Elizabethtown  ;  and  I  after  him  at  six  o'clock 
in  the  evening.  We  have  a  beautiful  house  here  two  stories  high, 
elegantly  finished,  forty-five  by  forty  feet ;  and  well  filled.  On 
Monday  I  came  to  York,  where  I  found  letters  bringing  good  news 
from  the  south  and  the  west. 

On  the  tenth  our  conference  began,  and  continued  until  the  fif- 
teenth ;  about  one  hundred  and  twenty  preachers  present :  we  had 
great  peace,  and  good  order.  We  had  an  ordination  of  elders  at 
John-street  church  on  the  Sabbath  day.  We  had  a  great  deal  of 
faithful  preaching.  As  I  wish  not  to  relate  the  trials  met  with,  I  will 
let  every  thing  but  what  is  printed  rest  in  shades  :  there  were  some 
critical  cases,  but  nothing  appeared  against  any  member  to  justify 
expulsion.  There  were  one  hundred  and  fifteen  preachers  stationed  ; 
and  there  were  few  complaints.     If  I  have  slumbered  five  hours  per 


I$09.]  kev.  frincis  asbury's  journal.  265 

night,  it  is  as  much  as  I  have  done  in  the  matter  of  sleep. — On 
Saturday  I  rode  through  excessively  warm  weather,  twenty  miles,  to 
J.  Sherwood's.  I  retire  to  sacred  solitude,  and  great  and  delight- 
ful communion  with  God  ;  but  want  of  sleep  comes  upon  me  like  an 
armed  man.  Hail,  holy  day  !  On  the  Sabbath  I  preached  at  Sher- 
wood's chapel;  afterward  at  New-Rochelle  chapel  :  we  had  an  open 
season  in  both  congregations.  The  Quakers  are  offended  because 
their  errors  in  sentiment  and  practice  are  spoken  against.  But  they 
have  a  higher  dispensation.  And  will  this  authorise  the  violation  of  a 
positive  law  of  the  land,  which  forbids  unnecessary  labour  on  the 
Sabbath  day  ?  Will  it  justify  the  putting  asunder  what  God  has  so 
solemnly  joined  together,  to  wit,  the  ordinances  of  God  and  the  in- 
fluences of  his  Holy  Spirit?  So  thought  not  the  eunuch,  when  Philip, 
sent  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  preached  unto  him  Jesus.  The  celebration 
of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  idolatry,  say  the  Quakers  :  so  thought  not- 
Paul,  when  exhorting  the  church  of  Corinth  to  the  worthy  com- 
memmoration  of  our  Lord's  death  and  passion,  he  says,  For  I  have 
received  of  the  Lord,  that  which  also  I  delivered  unto  you.  A  higher 
dispensation  ! — And  had  not  God  already  revealed  his  will  before  the 
appearance  of  George  Fox  ?  But,  hush  !  the  respectable  society  of 
people  called  Quakers — respectable  : — Ah  !  there  is  death  in  that  word  ; 
wo  unto  you  when  all  men  shall  speak  well  of  you.  I  fear  what  is  pro- 
perly the  reproach  of  Christ  has  long  been  wiped  away  from  this  re- 
spectable people :  O  Lord,  save  thy  now  despised  Methodist  children 
from  the  praises  of  the  people  of  the  world  ! 

On   Monday  I  dined  with  Bryan   B.  Banks,  and  then  moved  on, 
through  heavy  thunder-showers,  to   Norwalk.     I  had  wished  them 

to  build  a  house   here,  but   Mr.   G n   had  told  the   Methodists 

they  were  poor,  (poor  may  they  ever  be  !)  and  it  would  ruin  them. 
I  gave  the  good  folks  a  discourse  on  Rom.  xvi.  24. 

Connecticut. — On  Tuesday  I  came  to  Peck's,  Stratford,  a  faith- 
ful friend,  and  thence  on  to  father  Jocelin's,  New-Haven,  weary,  and 
sleepy,  and  glad  to  rest.  I  dined  with  W.  Griffin  in  Guildford  :  here 
is  a  lot  to  build  a  house  of  worship  on,  and  God  will  work  here. 
In  the  afternoon  I  preached  at  Jeremiah  Miner's,  in  Killingworth  ; 
thence  crossing  the  Connecticut-River,  came  into  New-London.  I 
have  had  great  temptations,  and  great  consolations.  The  weather 
has  been  extremely  warm,  and  my  clothes  are  too  heavy.  My  horse 
twice  attempted  to  run  away  with  my  chair,  so  I  was  obliged  to  quit 
it.  I  must  needs  preach  in  New-London  ;  I  gave  them  a  discourse 
on  1  John  ii.  6.  The  house  was  soon  filled,  and  many  went  away 
who  could  not  get  in :  surely  the  society,  and  preachers  too,  have 

Vol.  TIT  34 


266)  REV.  FRANCIS  asbury's  journal.  [1809. 

been  blind  to  their  own  interests,  or  they  would  have  occupied 
every  foot  of  ground  ;  but  we  have  never  taken  advantage  of  cir- 
cumstances as  they  offered  in  this  place,  and  have  lost  by  our  negli- 
gence. We  crossed  Naraganset  Bay  on  Friday,  and  came  into  New- 
port. Grand  house—steeple,  pews — by  lottery  :  the  end  is  to 
sanctify  the  means  — Ah  !  what  pliability  to  evil ! 

Sabbath  28.  I  preached  twice — in  the  forenoon  on  Col.  ii.  1,2.; 
1  John  iii.  3,  4,  5.  in  the  afternoon  :  I  spoke  with  difficulty  and  with 
little  order  in  my  discourses.  From  New-York  thus  far  we  have 
had  dust  and  rough  roads,  and  I  have  been  much  tried  and  greatly 
blessed.     We  have  rode  two  hundred  miles  in  six  days. 

Last  night  we  had  a  tremendous  storm  of  thunder,  lightning,  and 
rain.  This  morning  (Monday)  I  visited  Captain  Beall,  at  Fort 
Wolcott.  I  preached  to  the  soldiers  on  Isaiah  lvii.  6,  7. — baptised 
some  children — visited  the  school — prayed  with  the  sick  in  the 
hospital — exhorted  the  poor  sinners  to  turn  to  God  ;  but  Ah  !  I 
might  have  said  and  done  more. — Here  I  saw  discipline,  order,  cor- 
rectness—it was  grand  and  pleasing. 

What  changes  I  pass  through  !  How  hardly  shall  they  who  travel 
much  keep  a  constant  eye  on  duty,  the  cross,  holiness,  and  God  ! 

On  Tuesday  we  came  to  the  pleasant  town  of  Bristol.  The  Me- 
thodists here  have  a  house,  with  pews,  and  a  preacher  who  has  not 
half  enough  to  do  :  poor  work !  I  gave  them  a  discourse  on  1  Cor. 
xv-  58.  I  have  as  much  as  I  can  bear  in  body  and  mind.  I  see  what 
has  been  doing  for  nine  years  past  to  make  Presbyterian- Methodists. 
At  Warren  I  lodged  with  Samuel  Childs  ;  his  wife  is  a  Shunamite. 
We  had  freedom  in  our  meeting  here  :  I  preached  on  Hebr.  ii.  3. 

Thursday,  June  1.  I  had  a  feeling  season  at  Somerset  chapel 
whilst  speaking  from  1  Peter  iv.  2.  Brother  Brayton's  was  my 
home.  Levi  Walker  has  not  laboured  in  vain  ;  but  it  seemed  as  if 
there  had  been  three  preachers  to  do  one  man's  work.  There  are 
here  two  hundred  and  ninety  one  members.  We  reached  Easton, 
and  I  was  indeed  tired  ;  the  carriage  horse  was  too  wild  for  me  to 
drive,  and  the  saddle  horse  started  and  jolted  very  much. 

Massachusetts. — We  reached  Boston  on  Saturdav  :  our  route 
hither  from  New-York  has  cost  us  eight  dollars  for  turnpike-gates, 
ferries,  bridges,  &c.  ;  we  called  at  but  one  tavern.  The  family  who 
opened  the  door  for  us  here  is  gone  ;  but  the  house  is  in  the  posses- 
sion of  the  stationed  preachers  and  their  wives. 

I  preached  at  the  old  chapel  on  Sabbath  morning,  and  administered 
the  sacrament.  In  the  afternoon  I  gave  them  a  discourse  in  the 
new  chapel ;  it  was  an  open  time  of  much  feeling,  and  deep  atten- 


1809.]  HEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  267 

tion  was  paid  to  the  speaker.  Had  I  not  spoken  sitting,  pain 
and  weariness  would  have  prevented  my  finishing.  May  the  Lord 
water  his  own  word !  I  hear  of  a  considerable  revival  in  several 
places,  and  that  the  Lord  is  bringing  out  some  children  to  do  the 
work  of  men  :  "  out  of  the  mouths  of  babes" — so  let  it  be  ! 

On  Monday  we  had  a  great  show  ;  the  Governor  came  to  town. 
I  reached  wretched  Waltham  dripping  wet.  I  found  the  four  gene- 
rations in  health,  and  I  got,  (O,  how  sweet!)  a  comfortable  night's 
sleep,  the  first  I  have  had  for  many  nights.  How  good  is  rest  to 
soul  and  body,  after  hard  labour  for  the  good  of  the  souls  and  bodies 
of  our  fellow-men  ! 

Awaking  on  Tuesday  morning,  I  recollected  that  in  the  solemn 
hour  of  midnight  it  was  strongly  impressed  upon  my  mind  that  I 
must  go  by  Lynn  :  this  was  from  God.  I  preached  to  a  family  con- 
gregation. 

On  Wednesday  I  passed  through  Menotony,  Medford,  and  Maiden 
to  Lynn.  In  the  evening  I  preached.  There  have  been  awful  times 
here  for  two  years  past — the  preachers  are  a  burden  ;  they  do  not 
preach  evangelically,  do  not  visit  families,  neglect  the  classes.  I 
have  my  load  ;  but  leaning  to  one  side  :  one  story  is  good  until  ano- 
ther is  heard.  Our  hard  going  horses  brought  us  through  the  dust 
to  Marblehead  on  Thursday.  I  held  forth  on  John  viii.  31,  32. 
Poor  Bachelor  is  in  ill  health,  and  shortly  to  be  bound  to  a  wife  : 
so4  \%e  go.  We  rode  onwards  through  a  goodly  prospect  of  fine 
buildings  and  fine  meeting-houses.  At  Beverly  mine  host  did  not 
quite  understand  praying  in  the  daytime.  At  Joseph  Weak's  in  the 
evening  at  Greenland.  From  this  unpromising  place,  and  other  sur- 
rounding towns,  God  has  raised  up  a  society.  On  Saturday  I  found 
a  happy,  simple-hearted  society  at  brother  Gardener's.  The 
labours  of  George  Pickering  and  brother  Stevens,  have  raised  up, 
under  God,  a  promising  society  here. 

Sabbath  11.  Henry  Boehm  spoke  at  six  o'clock,  myself  at  ten 
o'clock,  H.  Boehm  again  at  two  o'clock,  when  the  holy  sacrament 
was  administered.  I  gave  another  discourse  in  the  evening.  We 
had  crowded  audiences.  We  returned  for  the  night  to  Gardener's. 
We  passed  through  Berwick  on  Monday  morning,  and  continuing 
on,  stopped  and  supped  with  one  Wells.  We  were  here  two  years 
ago  ;  we  then  prayed  earnestly  for,  and  with  this  kind  family.  It 
was  not  a  forlorn  hope  it  seems  :  the  young  woman  who  waited  on 
us  was  brought  out  last  August.  We  rode  on  through  Kennebunk 
to  Saco.  Lodging  in  a  tavern,  we  were  opposed,  but  persisted 
in  having  prayer  night  and  morning.     Asa  Heath  gave  us  our  break- 


~t>8  k£V.  FRANCIS  AS3URY5S  JOURNAL.  [I8Q&r 

fast,  and  we  pushed  on  to  New-Gloucester,  making  about  eighty-four 
miles  in  the  last  two  days.  On  Thursday  we  opened  our  conference, 
and  sat  closely  at  work. 

Sunday  18.  I  preached  to  about  three  thousnnd  deeply  attentive 
people,  from  Isaiah  xliv.  23.  ;  it  was  an  open  season.  We  have  eighty- 
two  men  to  do  the  work,  forty  of  whom  compose  the  conference.  I 
have  to  lament  my  want  of  information  respecting  both  the  preachers 
and  the  circuits.  We  have  ordained  twenty-one  deacons  and  seven 
elders.  We  have  located  eleven  elders,  re-admitted  one,  and  added 
seventeen  preachers  upon  trial.  There  is  a  small  increase  here,  and 
fair  prospects  for  the  future.     I  am  kept  in  peace. 

New-Hampshire. — On  Tuesday  we  came  away  through  New 
Gloucester  to  Bradbury's.  We  rested  a  few  minutes  at  Dennett's, 
Standish  Corner,  and  rode  onwards  to  Samuel  Bachelor's,  upon 
Saco  ;  making  forty  miles  for  our  day's  journey.  The  rain  overtook 
us  at  Brownfield  on  Thursday,  but  we  continued  on,  and  were  most 
kindly  entertained  at  Samuel  Foss's,  in  Conway.  On  Friday  I  forded 
Saco  :  the  rest  of  the  company  were  in  a  boat.  We  came  through 
Bartlelt  to  Judge  Hall's,  and  were  kindly  received.  We  hasted  on  to 
Rosebrook's,  supped  and  went  other  six  miles.  Oh  !  the  rocks,  roots, 
pole-bridges  and  moschetos.  We  fell  asleep  about  ten  o'clock,  and 
sprung  up  at  four  o'clock,  and  were  away,  without  breakfast,  towards 
Bethel ;  we  stopped  here  awhile.  Winding  down  along  a  river  bank, 
we  came  to  the  bridge  and  crossed  the  Connecticut  into  Vertaont, 
stopping  at  the  widow  Sias's,  in  Johnsbury.  On  Saturday  morning  we 
came  away  over  awful  roads,  and  made  about  forty  weary  miles  to 
Danville. 

Vermont  — Sunday  25.  In  the  court-house  I  preached  from  John 
vii.  17.  I  could  only  speak  sitting.  From  New-York  to  Danville, 
we  compute  our  ride  to  have  been  seven  hundred  miles  :  we  passed 
many  a  fertile  hill,  and  saw  many  fruitful  vales,  through  which  flowed 
noble  rivers.  We  refit,  expecting  to  fill  an  appointment  for  Tuesday. 
At  Danville  meeting-house  on  Tuesday,  1  attended  with  two  of  our 
preachers  :  I  took  a  pew  near  the  pulpit,  and  taught  from  thence, 
from  Hebr.  iii.  12 — 14.  The  court  was  in  session,  the  congregations 
were  large  nevertheless.  I  received  a  polite  inviiation  to  preach  to 
the  court,  but  I  had  no  strength  and  no  time  for  this.  We  took  a 
bite  at  the  widow  Sias's,  and  came  on  to  Cabot.  Near  Jok-Pond,  a 
heavy  storm  of  rain  and  thunder  overtook  us,  and  drove  us  into  shel- 
ter. 1  lodged  with  Mr.  Dana.  On  Wednesday  our  route  brought  us 
through  Marshfield,  Plainfield,  (exploring  to  the  head  of  Onion- 
River  as  we  went)  to  David  Parson's,  near  Montpelier.    I  preached  in 


1Q09.}  fc£V.  F-aiNGis  asbury's  journal.  269 

the  evening.  In  passing  through  Montpelier  on  Thursday,  we  re- 
marked their  fine  state  house,  worthy  of  the  seat  of  government  of 
Vermont ;  to  this,  the  Hotel  is  an  appropriate  appendage  Our  way 
lay  through  Middlesex,  Waterbury,  Richmond,  on  to  Williston,  where, 
about  mid-day,  a  storm  overtook  us.  On  Friday  I  preached  at  Ful- 
ler's, on  Lake  Champlain,  from  Titus  iii.  7,  8.  Here  1  ordained 
Joseph  Sampson,  a  native  of  Canada,  and  sent  him  a  missionary  to 
his  countrymen.  The  day  of  small  things  will  be  great  ;  but  the 
day  is  not  yet  come — rather,  it  is  still  afar  off:  patience,  my  soul  I 
Do  I  not  feel  for  the  lost  sheep  ?  yea,  verily. 

Sunday,  July  2.  We  had  this  day  a  crowded  audience  at  Bridport 
I  sleep  this  night  under  the  roof  of  Luther  Chamberlain,  near  Ticon- 
deroga  Fort.  On  Monday  I  spoke  in  Hampton  church  on  Galatians 
vi.  7—9. 

New- York. — On  Tuesday  we  kept  along  down  Burgoyne's  road, 
to  Fort  Edward.  At  four  o'clock  I  preached  in  Doctor  Lawrence's 
store,  to  about  five  hundred  attentive  hearers.  It  has  been  serious 
times  for  some  days  past ;  I  feel  the  effect  of  riding  thirty  or  forty 
miles  a  day,  fasting  Song,  and  expected  to  preach  every  evening.  I 
spoke  on  Romans  viii.  1.  at  M'Cready's  barn  :  It  was  an  open  season, 
but  the  flesh  suffered.  Thursday  brought  us  to  Father  Hart's,  on 
Saratoga  Lake,  to  dinner.  After  refreshing,  we  went  out  under  a 
plentiful  rain,  and  mounting  our  beasts,  directed  our  course  away  to 
General  Clark's  :  '^ere  1  preached  in  the  bar-room,  and  had  life  and 
liberty.  We  have  .ade  nine  hundred  miles  since  we  left  New-York, 
as  we  compute.  There  will  be  an  increase  of  eleven  thousand  this 
year.  On  Friday  I  rest  and  fast.  On  Saturday  I  visited  Ballston 
Springs  buildings — approximating  in  elegance  to  those  of  Bath  in 
England.  The  water,  a  taste  of  beer  of  lemon  juice,  and  of  salt  of 
tartar.  A  ride  of  about  forty  miles  brought  us  to  Kingsbury  in  the 
evening. 

Sunday  9.  We  took  the  wood  for  the  shade,  and  I  spoke  to  about 
a  thousand  people,  from  Matt,  xvii  5.  all  were  attention,  and  some 
felt  the  word  Brother  Boehtn  closed  a  meeting  of  three  hours  con- 
tinuance. There  were  twelve  travelling  and  local  preachers  present. 
There  is  a  contention  between  soul  and  body.  1  wish  to  fast  as  when 
young,  and  when  fast  day  comes,  the  body  has  a  journey  of  forty 
miles  to  make,  perhaps,  and  do  its  part  in  preaching  :  but  Christ  is 
strength  in  my  weakness.  At  the  end  of  a  thirty  miles  ride  on  Mon- 
day, I  preached  in  Favill's  barn.  The  young  man  here  is  pious,  but 
without  great  gifts.  Great  men  had  passed  them  in  the  way  to 
Canada.     They   were  disappointed  who  hoped   to  have  a  meeting- 


270  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1809. 

house,  and  congregations,  and  eminent  teachers.  Complaints  are  no 
new  things  to  us,  and  I  told  them  we  expected  such  treatment.  We 
tarried  a  minute  at  Morale's,  Fallstown,  and  pushed  up  the  turnpike 
to  Caleb  Willis's,  Deerfield,  where  I  preached.  It  was  an  open  time. 
We  passed  Utica  at  the  head  of  the  Mohawk  :  this  is  a  flourishing 
place,  and  we  shall  soon  have  a  meeting-house  there.  Our  route 
brought  us  through  Hartford  to  Westmoreland,  where,  at  four  o'clock, 
1  held  forth  from  John  vi.  66,  67.  We  had  a  number  of  travelling 
and  local  preachers  present.  My  body  is  afflicted,  and  sore  with  heat, 
long  rides,  and  labour.  I  preached  in  Silas  Bliss's  barn,  in  Zanovia, 
on  Thursday  ;  we  had  a  profitable  meeting.  My  bed  was  on  the  floor 
at  night — it  was  cooler  thus,  and  I  accommodated  my  friend.  Next 
day  I  again  held  forth  in  a  barn  in  the  village  of  Pompey.  Here 
brother  M'Kendree  left  me  to  serve  alone.  The  evening  brought  us 
up  at  Paddock's,  in  Manlius.  I  laid  along  the  floor,  in  my  clothes. 
There  was  a  lady  in  the  corner,  and  brother  Boehm  in  bed,  like  a 
gentleman.  The  female  could  not  possibly  occasion  reproach,  and 
so  I  was  persuaded  ;  but  I  wished  I  was  somewhere  else  :  my  fear 
was  not  commendable.  I  rode  to  Doctor  Holland's,  Onondaga,  on 
Saturday,  and  preached  in  the  court-house. 

Sunday  16.  Spoke  in  the  court-house  at  eleven  o'clock  ;  we  had 
a  full  house.  Contrary  to  my  usual  practice  1  directed  my  course 
away,  and  brought  up  at  friend  Young's,  at  Auburn.  No  food  or  rest 
to-day.  The  rain  and  Monday  morning  finds  us  at  our  friend 
Young's.  The  New- York  and  New-England  Presbyterians  are 
labouring  to  monopolize  this  country  by  building  meeting  houses,  and 
other  establishments.  They  will  flourish  awhile,  but  a  despised  and 
dispersed  people  will  possess  the  land  :  Oh,  the  terrors  of  a  camp- 
meeting  to  those  men  of  pay  and  show  !  In  the  evening  we  mounted 
our  beasts  in  the  rain,  and  came  six  miles,  dripping  wet,  to  Asa  Cum- 
ming's  cabin,  twelve  feet  square.  On  Tuesday  morning  we  were 
well  soaked  before  we  reached  David  Eddy's  ;  we  dried,  dined, 
prayed,  and  again  got  in  motion  and  reached  Milton,  making  thirty 
miles  for  the  day's  journey.  Lodged  at  Baker's.  We  learn  there  is 
a  revival  in  this  place.  We  called  upon  James  Egbert  on  Wed- 
nesday;  he  is  a  child  of  faith  and  prayer;  I  had  used  his  father's 
house.  We  had  an  awful  time  on  Thursday  in  the  woods,  amongst 
rocks  and  trees,  living,  and  dead,  and  prostrate,  and  barring  our  way  ; 
when  we  thought  the  bitterness  of  death  was  past,  behold,  the  back- 
water had  covered  the  Causeway.  A  kind  soul,  one  Hathaway, 
directed  us  over  the  point  of  a  hill,  and  so  we  got  safe  along  and 
come  to  Ludowick  Light's. 


1809.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURYJS  JOURNAL.  271 

Pennsylvania. — Friday  20  We  were  comfortable  while  resting  at 
Doctor  Hopkins's.  Arrived  at  the  ferry  bank,  no  boat  appeared,  so  I 
came  back  and  called  a  meeting.  Since  we  left  Baltimore  in  April,  we 
have  made,  we  compute,  two  thousand  miles.  Such  roads,  such  rains, 
and  such  lodgings !  Why  should  I  wish  to  stay  in  this  land  :  I  have 
no  possessions  or  babes  to  bind  me  to  the  soil :  what  are  called  the 
comforts  of  life  I  rarely  enjoy  ;  the  wish  to  live  an  hour  such  a  life 
as  this  would  be  strange  to  so  suffering,  so  toil-worn  a  wretch.  But 
God  is  with  me,  and  souls  are  my  reward  :  I  may  yet  rejoice,  yea, 
and  will  rejoice.  I  might  fill  pages  with  this  last  week's  wonders. 
We  are  eighty  miles  behind  our  Sabbath  appointment.  I  called  at  a 
certain  house — it  would  not  do — I  was  compelled  to  turn  out  again  to 
the  pelting  of  the  wind  and  rain.  Though  old,  I  have  eyes.  The 
hand  of  God  will  come  upon  them  ;  as  for  the  young  lady,  shame  and 
contempt  will  fall  on  her  ;  mark  the  event.  I  preached  on  Friday  at 
Tioga  Point.  We  were  at  Judge  Gore's  by  eight  o'clock  on  Satur- 
day morning.  We  took  thence  through  the  Narrows,  and  a  late  and 
rough  ride  brought  us  to  a  tavern  lodging. 

Sunday  23.  We  must  needs  ride  to-day.  Our  route  lay  through 
Walnut-Bottom,  but  we  missed  our  way,  and  the  preaching  of 
George  Lane.  A  twenty-four  mile's  ride  brought  us  to  breakfast 
at  Otis's.  Brother  Boehm  upset  the  sulky  and  broke  the  shaft. 
Night  closed  upon  us  at  Osterout's  tavern.  Passing  along  on  Mon- 
day, we  stopped  to  dine  with  Esq.  Sutton.  We  lodged  under  the 
roof  of  the  widow  Dennison.  On  Tuesday  morning  we  found  the 
ferry  at  Wilkesbarre  only  just  passable.  Mervine  gave  us  shelter  for 
the  night.  We  have  rode  thirty-eight  miles  to-day,  and  sore  trials 
have  we  passed  through.  On  Wednesday  we  rode  through  the 
beautiful  villages  of  Nazareth  and  Bethlehem,  and  put  up  for  the 
night  at  Allentown.  Here  are  gambling  sinners.  We  made  a  rapid 
ride  of  forty-two  miles  on  Thursday.  On  Friday  a  thirty  miles'  ride 
brought  us  to  Martin  Boehm's.  Delightful  rest!  but  it  may  not  be. 
Saturday  morning  put  us  into  motion  for  Lancaster,  where  we 
tarried  a  few  minutes,  as  also  at  Columbia,  and  continued  forward  for 
York,  where  I  preached  at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening. 

Sunday  30.  I  spoke  on  "  Let  your  light  so  shine."  I  have  at 
least  twenty  letters  to  answer,  and  but  one  day.  Monday,  company 
and  business  enough  ;  and  little  time  to  refit.  On  Tuesday  at  eight 
o'clock  at  night  I  preached  in  Carlisle.  Twice  on  the  road  hither 
we  alighted,  stopped,  talked,  ate,  and  prayed. 

Wednesday,  August  2.  At  Shippensburg.  I  have  been  simple 
enough  to  put  plaisters  too  powerful  to  my  knees ;  they  are  in  bjis- 


272  HEV.    FRANCIS    ASBURY?S    JOURNAL.  [18Q&. 

ters  ;  so  here  is  a  bishop  who  can  neither  stand  to  preach,  nor  kneel 
to  pray.  My  body  is  very  feeble,  but  my  soul  enjoys  perfect  love, 
and  perfect  peace.  Thursday  brought  me  and  my  sufferings  safe 
over  three  mountains  to  friend  Thompson's.  I  preached  at  Little- 
ton's on  Hebr.  iv.  12.  we  had  few  hearers,  but  it  was  a  liberal  sea- 
son. Lodged  at  the  old  place,  Ramsay's ;  it  is  James  Hunter's 
house  and  home.  We  must  attend  to  camp-meetings,  they  make  our 
harvest  times ;  the  prospects  just  now  are  discouraging,  On  Satur- 
day we  rode  rapidly  to  Bedford.  The  hand  of  God  was  manifested 
to-day  in  saving  man  and  horse  from  wreck  ;  the  danger  appeared 
exceeding  great.  1  had  Boehm  and  Hunter  for  my  escort.  Lodged 
at  Stephenson's.  I  calculate  the  distance  we  have  travelled  since 
January  9  to  this  day,  from  Georgia  to  Bedford,  Pennsylvania,  at 
three  thousand  miles.  We  are  generally  amongst  the  poor — too  fre- 
quently it  is  a  tavern  or  starvation  ;  many  a  time  and  oft  the  preach- 
ers crowd  us  ;  and  sometimes  we  are  wedged  among  the  people  in, 
such  a  way  that  we  can  neither  write  nor  think. 

Sunday  6.  I  spoke  to  a  very  decent  congregation  on  Acts  iv.  12. 
1.  By  original  and  actual  transgression,  sinners  altogether  born  in 
sin  ;  lost,  as  to  strength,  and  wisdom,  and  righteousness.  2.  The 
character  of  Christ,  the  only  Saviour  ;  in  Deity,  in  his  humanity, 
suffering,  resurrection,  ascension,  and  mediation.  3.  The  Gospel 
method  of  salvation.  4.  The  work  of  the  ministry.  I  spoke  in  the 
court-house  by  necessity,  not  choice.  There  was  but  one  indeco- 
rous thing  observed  ;  A.  P.  elder,  put  his  feet  up  upon  the  banister  of 
my  pulpit  whilst  I  was  preaching;  it  was  like  thorns  in  my  flesh  un- 
til they  were  taken  down.  Our  host  is  a  kind  Yorkshire  man.  On 
Monday  we  took  the  path  to  Berlin,  and  had  a  cool  ride.  Notice 
had  been  given  of  our  coming,  and  the  German  Presbyterian  priest- 
hood caused  the  bell  to  be  rung.  Brother  Boehm  preached  to  them  in 
high  Dutch.  My  rude,  rough  ride  made  me  more  fit  for  bed  than 
meeting.  We  encountered  a  mountain  rain  on  Tuesday,  which  held 
us  thirty  miles  and  sent  us  dripping  for  shelter  to  a  German  friend's 
house.  We  called  a  meeting,  and  our  exercises  were  in  German. 
We  gave  away  religious  tracts,  German  and  English.  We  have 
disposed  of  many  thousands  of  these  :  it  is  our  duty  to  do  good  in 
every  possible  way. 

I  preached  in  Anthony  Banning's  house  on  Wednesday.  I  bore  a 
faithful  testimony  to  the  truth  whilst  speaking  at  Murphy's  on  Rom. 
xii.  12.  I  was  unwell  and  chilly,  having  received  damage  by  the 
rain.  We  learn  that  a  camp-meeting  will  be  held  at  Dr.  Wheeler's 
in  expectation  of  the  two  superintendents.     Friday,  a  day  of  absti- 


1809.]  fcEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL.  273 

aence  :  we  are  halting  and  refitting  at  Mrs.  Stephens's.  On  Satur- 
3ay  we  rode  to  the  old  fort.  We  dined  with  a  Mr.  Hogg,  a  family  lately 
from  England,  and  as  kind  as  the  Methodists.  Rode  to  camp,  twenty 
miles  :  we  had  eight  local  preachers,  seventy-three  tents,  perhaps 
three  thousand  people.     The  religious  exercises  great  and  constant. 

Sabbuth  13.  I  held  forth  on  2  Cor.  vi.  20.  I  spoke  but  once  j 
Bishop  M'Kendree  four  times.  I  took  occasion  to  be  very  plain, 
giving  my  hearers  to  understand  that  frames  and  feelings  would  not 
supply  the  neglect  of  family  and  closet  worship,  and  the  duties  we 
)we  to  each  other  in  society  We  began  our  sacramental  feast,  but 
he  people  broke  out  into  prayer  and  singing  :  we  came  away  shortly 
ifi^er.  The  profligates  would  not  come  within  our  holy  limits,  but 
hey  drank  plentifully  of  strong  drink  without.  It  appears  that  the 
>ishops  will  hold  a  camp-meeting  in  every  district ;  we  are  encou- 
raged so  to  do  :  great  power  was  manifested  here,  and  much  good  was 
lone  :  I  will  not  say  how  I  felt,  nor  how  near  heaven.  2  Sam.  xi, 
II.  ;  this'  passage  came  strongly  to  my  mind  ;  I  must  take  the  field. 

We  came  away  to  Brightwell's  on  Wednesday,  and  I  gave  thern  a 
alk  on  Hebr.  iv.  2.  Mary  Brightwell,  my  beloved  nurse  last  year, 
required  my  attentions  in  turn  :  her  sufferings  from  a  bilious  cholic 
:aused  us  to  rise  at  midnight ;  she  grew  better  after  solemn  prayer 
:m  her  behalf.  My  subject  at  Fell's  meeting-house  on  Thursday  at 
eleven  o'clock  was  Titus,  ii.  12.  and  at  Philip  Smith's  in  the  evening 
Hebr.  ii.  7.  Want  of  rest  last  night,  and  hard  labour  to-day  has 
:ried  flesh  and  spirit.  I  would  not  dine  when  invited,  fearful  of  dis- 
appointing the  congregation  at  four  o'clock  ;  and  it  was  well  I  did  not, 
for  the  cross-bar  of  the  sulkjr  broke,  and  the  mending  and  the  rest 
Df  the  journey  just  left  me  time  enough  and  none  to  spare  :  the 
Lord  will  always  direct  those  who  look  up  with  humble  dependance. 
We  reached  John  Wrenshall's  in  Pittsburg  on  Friday  evening.  The 
Rev.  Mr.  Steel  offered,  unsolicited,  in  the  name  of  the  Presbyterian, 
eldership,  their  large,  elegant  house  for  my  Sunday's  exercises.  I 
preached  at  Thomas  Cooper's  on  Saturday. 

Sabbath  20.  I  accepted  the  offer  made,  and  preached  at  three 
o'clock  :  it  was  an  open  time.  Could  we  unite  nations  and  languages, 
as  well  as  spirits  and  tempers,  we  might  do  great  things  here.  Will 
the  Alleghany  and  Monongahela  ever  rise  so  high  as  to  inundate  the 
point  of  land  on  which  the  town  stands — is  such  a  thing  impossible  ? 
A  Baptist  family  by  the  name  of  Plummer  received  us  on  Tuesday. 
Young  Plummer  is  sick,  a  child  is  sick,  and  the  whole  family  feel 
awful.  Who  will  pray  with  young  Plummer  when  we  are  gone  ? 
the  young  man  is  certainly  under  convictions.  Twelve  miles  brought 
Vol.   III.  35 


74  REV.  FRANCIS  ASEURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1809. 


us  to  Fawcett's  on  Tuesday  morning  ;  I  gave  them  a  sermon  on  Eph. 
viii.  9.  The  weather  on  Wednesday  was  exceeding  warm,  never- 
theless we  started  for  Washington.  I  spoke  in  our  own  house  to  a 
goodly  congregation  as  to  numbers.  The  Rev.  Browne  was  present, 
and  some  Seceders,  as  I  was  told  ;  surely  the  Millennium  is  ap- 
proaching !  I  dined  at  Mr.  M'Fadon's,  and  came  on  to  Middletown. 
We  crossed  into  Virginia  and  preached  at  Brook  county  court-house 
on  the  evening  of  Thursday.  Our  lodging  was  the  stationed  preach- 
er's, William  Sandinin.  My  brethren  were  kind  enough  to  make 
appointments  for  me,  at  least  to  publish  in  the  public  prints  more  than 
I  had  designed  :  I  might  murmur  at  this,  and  perhaps  I  do ;  well, 
elders  must  be  better  and  do  more  than  other  men — granted.  I  can 
truly  say  my  life  is  like  a  daily  death.  God  is  my  refuge  and  ray 
reward.     I  preached  on  Saturday  at  Beck's. 

Sabbath  27.  At  Short-Creek  chapel  my  subject  was  1  Thess.  iv. 
3.  I  contemplate  two  chapels  ;  one  of  forty  feet  square,  and  the 
other  of  fifty  feet ;  the  first  in  Charleston,  Alexander  Wells  to  give 
the  lot ;  and  the  other  in  Wheeling,  the  ground  to  be  bestowed  for 
its  erection  by  Colonel  Zane.  Our  appointment  for  Monday  was 
in  Wheeling  court-house  ;  I  spoke  with  light,  and  life,  and  power. 
The  following  day,  (Tuesday)  brother  Boehm  spoke  at  St.  Clairs- 
ville. 

Ohio. — Wednesday  30.  We  found  the  roads  disagreeable  in  the 
Wills-Creek  bottoms.  While  tugging  forward,  crack  went  the  breast- 
band,  and  crack  went  the  shaft ;  we  were  two  hours  in  the  night,  and 
at  last  reached  Spears's  tavern.  Next  day,  (Wednesday)  we  made 
eighteen  miles  to  Springfield,  where  1  preached  by  appointment :  we 
had  about  four  hundred  people  :  I  wanted  my  breakfast,  1  wanted 
strength,  and  I  wanted  sleep.  Brother  Boehm  preached  at  Zanes- 
ville,  named  after  Colonel  Zane,  who  so  kindly  entertained  us  at 
Wheeling :  he  is  a  very  extraordinary  man,  and  the  history  of  his 
life  a  strange  one.  The  first  of  the  month  I  rode  thirty-five  miles 
to  Edward  TeePs.     Brother  Boehm  preached  on  Saturday. 

Sunday,  September  3.  I  preached  at  Teel's.  On  Monday  I  spoke 
in  the  elegant  court-house  in  New-Lancaster.  We  dined  with  Mr. 
Tougue,  and  went  forward,  sixteen  miles,  to  Laking's  :  I  was  weak 
and  weary  with  riding  on  horseback,  but  I  had  great  consolations  in 
God,tand  a  witness  of  holiness  in  my  soul.  We  have  our  difficulties 
with  the  married  preachers,  their  wives,  and  children  ;  but  whilst 
God  is  with  us  these  difficulties  may  be  well  borne.  I  pray  God 
that  there  may  be  twenty  camp-meetings  in  a  week,  and  wonderful 
seasons  of  the  Lord  in  every  direction.     I  preached  on  Wednesday 


1809.]  REV.  FRANCIS   ASBURY'S   JOURNAL.  275 

it  the  widow  Strode's  house.  Rest  on  Thursday.  Friday.  This  is 
any  covenant  day.  We  came  twenty  miles  to  Jefferson,  and  lodged 
with  Mr.  Nevill.  Doctor  Tiffin  received  us  kindly  on  Saturday. 
\fter  dinner  we  rode  on  to  Deer-Creek,  and  housed  with  White 
Brown. 

Sabbath  10.  I  preached  in  mine  host's  barn  :  my  subject  was 
I  Cor.  vi.  1,  2.  Brother  Lakin  added  an  exhortation,  and  brother 
3oehm  gave  them  a  discourse.  At  a  late  camp-meeting  I  learn  that 
leventy  joined  society  :  the  prospects  are  great. 

O  what  a  charming  view  presents  itself  from  Doctor  Tiffin's 
louse  ! — but  these  long  talks  about  land  and  politics  suit  me  not  ;  I 
ake  little  interest  in  either  subject  :  O  Lord,  give  me  souls,  and 
ceep  me  holy  !  Our  route  through  the  priaries,  the  weeds  as  high 
ts  our  heads  on  horseback,  showed  us  on  Monday  almost  every  desi- 
able  comfort  but  pure  water.  We  stopped  on  the  north  branch  of 
3aint-Creek.  At  Jacob  Cutler's,  on  Tuesday,  we  had  an  interview 
vith  M'Daniel,  Flood,  and  Trader,  official  men.  These  and  Hunt's 
ettlements  are  greatly  improved,  and  the  Methodists  have  increased. 
Thirteen  miles  was  the  extent  of  our  Wednesday  ride  ;  we  stopped 
:t  Petham's.  We  remain  Thursday  and  Friday  ;  my  study  of  divi- 
lity  is  Wesley's  sermons  ;  I  read  some  of  them  to-day.  As  I  can- 
lot  often  meet  Bishop  M'Kendree,  and  meeting,  we  cannot  be  alone 
or  talk,  1  wrote  a  letter  of  counsel  to  him.  I  preached  on  Saturday, 
felt  solemn  whilst  dining  at  Philip  Davis's  :  this  is  an  old  Virginia 
amily,  and  here  are  brethren  and  sisters  whom  I  have  known,  some 
wenty,  others  above  thirty  years.  Life  is  short.  We  set  out  for 
ilad-River,  and  reached  Andrew  Read's  ;  I  gave  them  a  discourse 
»n  John  iii.  17.  I  spoke  at  William  Hamar's  on  Tuesday  ;  my  sub- 
ect  was  Isaiah  xxxv.  3,  4,  5.  There  is  a  serious  affliction  in  the 
amily  ;  I  sympathize  with  them.  Dayton  is  a  growing  town  ;  we 
)assed  through  it  on  Weduesday.  1  found  the  son  of  a  Methodist 
rom  Gunpowder-Neck,  one  Horner,  and  lodged  with  him.  On 
Thursday  we  came  down  Little  and  Great  Miami ;  the  rich  lands  of 
hese  rivers  are  occupied  by  New-Lights,  Shakers,  Methodists,— 
md  sinners  to  be  sure.  I  was  glad  to  stop  at  Daniel  Baker's.  I 
lept  about  five  hours  last  night :  I  had  excessive  labour,  a  crowd  of 
company,  and  hogs,  dogs,  and  other  annoyances  to  weary  me.  I  am 
hankful  for  a  prospect  of  one  night's  quiet  at  John  Harden's,  near 
Hamilton,  Butler  county  ;  preached  for  them  on  Friday  ;  we  had  a 
arge  and  lively  meeting.  Saturday  brought  us  to  the  descendant  of 
t  German.     We  came  on  to  Millford,  Little  Miami.     Here  are  folks 


270  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL-  [1809. 

from  most  of  the  eastern  states,  and  of  all  professions  :  they  have 
good  land,  and  this  rarely  makes  people  any  better. 

Sabbath  23.  I  spoke  in  the  new  chapel  in  Millford  :  Brothers  Lakin 
and  Boehm  also  spoke.  I  feel  the  importance  of  the  approaching 
conference.  At  brother  Gatch's  on  Monday  1  filled  up  the  day  in 
planning,  writing,  and  reading.  We  visited  Andrew  Maguire's  fa- 
mily. Preached  on  Wednesday  ;  the  house  was  full,  and  the  wea- 
ther excessively  warm  :  faint  yet  pursuing.  My  aid  is  absent  amongst 
the  Germans.  I  lodged  at  M'Carmut's.  Thursday  I  stood  up  at 
Columbia,  and  gave  them  a  talk  on  Matt.  vii.  7 — 12.  the  heat  was 
extreme.  Fair  Cincinnati  brought  us  up.  The  house  here  is  en- 
larged and  the  society  has  increased.  Our  brother  West  is  sink  and 
cannot  come  to  the  conference  ;  many  of  our  brethren  will  be  absent. 
Friday,  humiliation  day.  Muskingum  district  will  have  four  camp- 
meetings.  At  Kauhaway  there  were  one  thousand  people  present ; 
at  St.  Clairsville  three  thousand  souls  at  least;  at  Rush-Creek  nearly 
as  many.  In  Miami  district  seventeen  camp- meetings  in  the  year; 
in  Scioto  circuit  four;  Hockhocking  two  ;  Deer-Creek  two  ;  Mad- 
River  three  ;    White-water  two  ;    Cincinnati  two  ;  and  White  two. 

Sabbath,  October  1.  Brother  Blackman  preached  at  nine  o'clock, 
brother  M'Kendree  at  twelve  o'clock,  and  brother  Burk  at  three 
o'clock  :  there  were,  it  is  judged,  three  thousand  souls  on  the  ground. 
I  may  add,  that  the  list  may  be  complete,  seventeen  camp-meetings 
for  Indiana  district.  I  thought  it  proper  to  render  an  account  of  all 
1  had  received,  and  all  I  had  expended  on  the  road  :  all  given  away 
came  out  of  my  own  pocket.  More  of  camp- meetings — I  hear  and 
see  the  great  eifects  produced  by  them,  and  this  year  there  will  be 
more  than  ever. 

Sabbath  8.  I  preached  in  the  morning;  and  in  the  evening  I  also 
spoke  again  by  way  of  exhortation.  The  conference  closed  its  la- 
bours, and  the  members  separated  on  Monday. 

Kentucky. — My  party  came  away  to  Carroll's.  Next  day  we 
stopped  with  Captain  John  Sterne,  from  Stafford,  old  Virginia.  At 
midnight  I  called  up  my  fellow-travellers,  and  set  out,  having  an  ap- 
pointment at  Mount  Gerizim  chapel.  We  arrived  in  time,  and  had 
an  ordination,  after  which  I  gave  an  exhortation.  Lodged  at  Whita- 
ker's.  Came  in  haste  next  day  to  Vlartin's  meeting-house,  where  I 
discoursed  on  Psalm  Ixxxv.  1 — 9.  We  held  a  conciliatory  conference 
with  several  of  the  local  preachers,  on  the  subjpet  of  the  ordination 
of  local  elders.  On  Friday  Bishop  M'Kendree  preached,  and  I  also 
spoke,  embracing  various  subjects  in  my  exhortation.  Lodged  at 
Major  Martin's.     We  moved  early  on  Saturday  morning,  breakfasting 


1809.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY93  JOURNAL.  £77 

at  Hoskett's,  and  crossed  the  Kentucky  by  fording.  Kind  John  Ben- 
nett's brought  us  up  for  the  evening.  We  have  stationed  about 
eighty  travelling  preachers  :  rejected  fourteen  ;  located  nine  :  there 
is  an  increase  of  two  thousand  three  hundred  and  sixty-9ix  members 
in  this  western  conference.  We  have  in  Mississippi,  fifteen  travelling 
and  eight  local  preachers  ;  and  three  hundred  and  sixty  members  : 
if  spared  and  so  directed,  I  shall  see  that  country  and  Canada  before 
I  die. 

Sabbath  15.  I  spoke  in  Bennett's  chapel  on  John  iii.  19.  I  spoke 
very  plain  to  a  gay  congregation.  Captain  Irwin  took  me  home 
with  him.  Our  way  led  through  Richmond  on  Monday,  and  over  the 
Long  Hill :  we  pressed  on  to  Dennis's— any  port  in  a  storm  A  rough 
ride  of  fifteen  miles,  on  Tuesday  morning,  brought  us  to  Howard's : 
twenty  years  ago  my  kind  host  received  me  in  Georgia.  Another 
rough  ride  of  twenty  miles  brought  us,  by  moonshine,  to  Mr.  John- 
son's, where  we  were  entertained  like  gentlemen.  An  early  start  on 
Wednesday  morning  gave  us  advantage  of  the  day,  and  we  came 
twenty  miles  to  breakfast ;  we  ate,  and  prayed,  and  went  forward  to 
Mr.  White's,  where  we  were  comfortably  lodged  and  entertained. 

Tennessee. — -Came  away  on  Thursday  across  Powell's  and  Clinch 
Rivers,  and  reached  Cheek's  for  the  night.  My  health  h.r>s  been,  be- 
yond expectation,  good  :  I  have  travelled  on  horseback  generally.  I 
am  continually  in  prayer ;  but  a  certain  fiend  assults  me  without 
ceasing — this  is  for  my  humiliation  Friday.  1  chasten  soul  and  body 
this  day.  Our  expenses  for  the  last  five  days  have  been  five  dollars 
thirty  cents.  We  were  favoured  in  two  houses,  or  the  sum  would 
have  been  greater.  We  crossed  Holston  at  Marshall's  ford  on  Satur- 
day. 'Squire  Read  has  built  a  neat  pirfe  chapel  in  a  short  time.  We 
lodge  with  him. 

Sabbath  22.  I  gave  them  a  discourse  on  Rom.  xii.  6 — 20.  Pattison, 
Stier,  and  Boehm  followed  :  (here  was  also  preaching  at  night.  I 
spoke  at  Benjamin  Vanpelt's  chapel  on  Monday.  At  Warrensburg, 
next  day,  my  subject  was  Rom.  vi.  1 — 5.  We  dined  with  the  elders 
of  the  house  of  Conway,  and  lodged  with  the  only  son,  Thomas  Con- 
way. Preached  at  Ohaver's  chapel  on  Wednesday.  Dined,  and 
came  on  to  friend  Ellis's.  We  suppose  we  have  made  three  hundred 
and  forty  miles  since  we  left  Cincinnati.  My  mind  and  body  have 
had  no  small  exercise  in  bringing  my  stiff-jointed  horse  over  the  rocks, 
and  rough,  and  deep  roads.  I  preached  at  H  rri*o>>  chapel  on  Gal. 
v.  7—10.  ;  the  text  is  a  sermon.  We  crossed  the  French  Broad, 
and  fed  our  horses  at  the  gate  of  Mr  Wootenpile  ;  he  would  accept 
no  pay  but  prayer  :  as   I   had    never  called  before,    he  may  have 


278  kev.  fr&ncis  asbury's  journal.  [1809. 

thought  me  too  proud  to  stop.  Our  way  now  lay  over  dreadful 
roads.  I  found  old  Mr.  Barnett  sick  :  the  ease  was  a  desperate  one, 
and  1  gave  him  a  grain  of  tartar  and  a  few  composing  drops,  which 
procured  him  a  sound  sleep.  The  patient  was  very  thankful,  and 
would  charge  us  nothing.  Here  are  martyrs  to  whiskey  !  1  delivered 
my  own  soul.  Saturday  brought  us  to  Killion's.  Eight  times  within 
nine  years  have  I  crossed  these  Alps.  If  my  journal  is  transcribed 
it  will  be  as  well  to  give  the  subject  as  well  as  the  chapter  and  verse 
of  the  text  I  preach  from.  Nothing  like  a  sermon  can  I  record. 
Here  now  am  I,  and  have  been  for  twenty  nights,  crowded  by  peo- 
ple ;  and  the  whole  family  striving  to  get  round  me. 

Sabbath  20.  At  Buncombe  I  spoke  on  Luke  xiv.  10.  It  was  a  sea- 
son of  attention  and  feeling.  We  dined  with  Mr.  Erwine,  and  lodged 
with  James  Patton  :  how  rich,  how  plain,  how  humble,  and  how 
kind  !  There  was  a  sudden  change  in  the  weather  on  Monday  ;  we 
went  as  far  as  D.  Jay's.  Tuesday,  we  moved  in  haste  to  Mud-Creek, 
Green-River  Cove,  on  the  other  side  of  Saluda.  Lodged  with  kind 
and  pleasant  Thomas  Edward.  On  the  first  of  the  month,  (Novem- 
ber) we  reached  Staunton  Ferry.  We  suppose  we  have  rode  five 
hundred  and  ten  miles  since  we  left  Cincinnati ;  what  heights,  what 
hills,  what  rocks  !  Lord,  thou  preservest  man  and  beast !  The  dis- 
agreeable part  of  this  western  wandering  is  the  necessity  of  stopping 
at  night.  Ah !  how  different  are  the  taverns  here  from  the 
houses  of  entertainment  in  the  Atlantic  states !  And  the  keepers  of 
these  poisonous  liquor  shops  —Is  there  one  who  fears  God  and  encou- 
rages prayer  ?  One  or  two  ;  the  rest  are  drunkards. 

South  Carolina. — We  are  at  father  Staunton's  on  the  Saluda. 
Our  host  is  an  Israelite  indeed,  and  the  wife  worthy  of  such  a  hus- 
band. Here  is  a  society  of  sixteen  souls.  I  gave  a  discourse  at 
Salem  chapel.  It  is  a  cloudy  day,  well  fitted  for  retreat.  I  wrote  a 
very  long  letter  to  Doctor  Coke.  We  have  a  quarterly  meeting  on 
Friday.     On  Saturday  I  preached  on  Luke  xviii.  1. 

Sabbath  5.  I  preached  in  the  open  air,  because  our  cabin  meeting- 
house was  small  and  open.  My  subject  led  me  out  on  the  antiquity 
and  truth  of  Holy  Writ :  the  characters  of  Moses  and  Christ,  calling 
the  attention  to  the  likeness,  but  superior  excellence  of  Jesus,  at  the 
times  of  the  presence  and  power  of  the  Almighty,  and  the  more  per- 
fect and  abundant  good  produced  by  this  latter  manifestation.  We 
had  a  sacramental  feast.  On  Monday  we  came  away,  and  attended  to 
the  mending  of  our  travelling  gear.  There  are  no  small  numbers  of 
the  preachers  about  here  married  this  last  year.  I  have  read  with 
satisfactien   the  Star  in  the  East:  Lord,   hasten    the  time  when  all 


1809.]  »Ef'  FBANCiS  ASBURV'S  JOU&NAL.  279 

shall  know  Thee !  O,  Reedy-River  circuit — spiritually  and  tempo- 
rally poor!  Tuesday,  Powell's— I  preached.  My  friend  has  taken  a 
new  wife,  and  built  a  new  house.  His  former  wife  was  kind  to  me  ; 
I  saw  where  her  remains  and  those  of  her  daughter  lay — they  fell 
asleep  in  Jesus.  We  rode  into  Aberville,  and  stopped  at  George 
Conner's.  Great  news — great  times  in  Georgia — rich  and  poor 
coming  to  Christ.  At  Connor's  chapel  I  spoke,  on  Thursday,  on  Rom. 
xii.  1,  2.  After  sermon  I  ordained  John  Stone  a  local  deacon.  Fri- 
day, covenant  day.  In  Edgefield  the  Baptists  are  carrying  all  before 
them  ;  they  are  indebted  to  Methodist  camp-meetings  for  this.  I 
preached  on  opening  the  new  chapel  on  Luke  six.  9. ;  we  had  an 
open  time.  The  Methodists  have  great  success  in  Camden  district ; 
surely  there  must  be  some  good  done — all  are  on  fire,  and  I  feel  the 
flame  :  God  is  with  preachers  and  people. 

Sunday  12>  1  preached  to  about  one  thousand  people  on  Titus  ii. 
1.  The  quarterly  meeting  engaged  our  attention  six  hours  every 
day.  Our  route  on  Monday  lay  over  Bush-Creek.  This  is,  or  was, 
a  Quaker  settlement  :  the  Friends  have  gone  to  rich  lands,  unpolluted 
by  slavery — they  have  formed  a  settlement  in  Ohio.  I  preached  in 
Tranquil  chapel  on  Tuesday— God  has  blessed  Stephen  Shell's  family. 
Grandmother,  ivho  was  waiting  in  great  peace  for  her  summons,  was 
called  away  in  August  last.  I  must  needs  preach  at  Major's  chapel  : 
my  subject  was  the  great  salvation.  Lodged  with  Colonel  H.  Hern- 
don.  O  how  kind  !  Thursday,  rode  to  Jeremiah  Lucas's.  I  was  in 
heaviness  of  mind,  and  suffered  in  the  flesh.  Brother  Boehm 
preached  in  the  chapel. 

Sunday  19.  I  preached  to  about  one  thousand  souls,  standing  in 
the  chapel  door.  The  house  could  not  contain  the  people  on  any 
day  :  some  came  to  see,  some  to  hear,  and  some  felt.  We  have 
laboured  for  three  days  about  six  hours  a  day  on  our  private  business. 
We  crossed  Picolet,  Theakiky  and  Broad-River,  on  our  way  to  Josiah 
Smith's  on  Monday.  On  Tuesday  I  preached  for  them,  and  Boehm 
and  Hill  exhorted  :  it  was  a  gracious  season.  Wednesday  we  came 
through  York  to  William  Gassaway's.  There  was  heavy  snow  for 
about  twelve  hours.  Brother  Boehm  preached  at  the  dwelling- 
house,  and  I  gave  them  a  sermon  in  the  chapel.  On  Friday  we  took 
the  road  to  Waxsaws,  and  with  some  difficulty,  kept  the  path,  and  the 
horses  their  feet.  In  about  nine  hours  we  made  our  way,  crossed 
Lenham's  ferry,  and  came  in  to  Robert  Hancock's,  stiff  and  chilled. 
Oh  for  patience  and  courage  ! 

On  Saturday  we  attended  a  small  congregation  of  thirty  souls. 


280  REV.  FRANCIS  asbury's  JOURNAL.  [18GP, 

Sunday  26.  At  the  Waxsaws  chapel  T  preached  to  four  hundred 
souls.  An  exhortation  followed,  and  the  sacrament.  Monday,  a  cold 
ride  to  William  Heath's,  on  Fishing-Creek.  I  met  a  congregation  on 
Tuesday,  in  a  log  cabin,  scarcely  fit  for  a  stable.  To  my  surprise,  a 
number  of  United  States'  officers  came  up  ;  1  invited  them  in  :  these 
gentlemen  are  attached  to  an  establishment  at  Rocky  Mount  ;  they 
behaved  with  all  the  propriety  I  expected  of  them.  Wednesday 
brought  us  where  a  sermon  was  expected,  and  I  gave  them  one.  J 
made  an  acquaintance  with  a  venerable  pair — Mr.  Buchannan  and 
wife,  Presbyterians,  and  happy  in  the  experience  of  religion.  A 
brick  chapel  is  building  at  Winusborough  for  the  Methodists.  We 
lodged  at  William  Lewis's, — but  late  emerging  into  light.  On  Thursday 
we  had  a  chilly  ride  of  twenty  five  miles  to  Mr.  Watson's.  It  rained 
excessively  on  Friday,  yet  1  visited  James  Jenkins,  and  baptised  his 
child,  Elizabeth  Anbury  Jenkins.      We  reached  Camden  on  Saturday. 

Sunday,  December  3.  I  preached  in  the  tabernacle  to  about  five 
hundred  people,  and  as  we  had  two  distinct  congregations  in  the 
bouse,  I  dropped  a  word  of  advice  to  the  poor  Africans  in  presence 
of  the  whites.  Brother  Boehm  preached  in  the  evening.  On  Mon- 
day I  was  seriously  afflicted  in  body.  In  much  weakness  of  flesh, 
and  solemnity  of  mind,  I  set  out,  on  Tuesday,  for  Black-River. 
There  are  great  changes  in  the  house  where  I  stopped — my  dear 
old  Mary  is  dead,  and  there  is  another  wife.  On  Wednesday  I  saw 
the  third  house  on  Black- River — fifty  by  thirty-six  feet.  I  spoke  in 
an  especial  manner  to  Henry  Young's  negroes,  who  were  called  to- 
gether for  that  purpose.  At  Samuel  Rembert's  on  Thursday.  My 
host  proposes  shortly  to  remove  to  Georgia.  We  preached  to  a  small 
meeting  on  Friday.  Henry  Boehm  preached  on  Saturday  at  James 
Caper's. 

Sunday  10.  We  had  a  five  hours'  meeting.  Tarpley  and  Hobbs 
prayed  after  I  had  preached  :  some  had  come  to  be  prayed  for.  We 
made  a  cold,  heavy  ride  of  forty  five  miles  on  Monday.  We  reached 
Kell's  tavern  in  the  night.  The  road  was  dreadfully  ploughed  up 
with  wagons  ;  the  ferry  was  wide,  and  we  had  the  swamp  to  pass,  and 
dip,  dive  and  go — we  laboured  through  it :  this  was  our  Tuesday's 
task.  Wednesday  evening  brought  us  rest  in  Charleston.  Where 
does  the  cotton  go,  that  arrives  in  such  quantities  ? — to  England  and 
France,  in  spite  of  the  non-intercourse.  I  am  mainly  ignorant  of 
these  things,  and  have  no  wish  to  be  wiser.  Our  old  church  is  en- 
larged, and  our  parsonage  completely  fitted  up.  I  am  busy  writing, 
or  occupied  with  ray  Bible  and  Ramsay's  History, 


1810.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY!8  JOURNAL.  23 J 

Sunday  17.  I  preached  in  Cumberland  chapel :  I  concluded  with  a 
close  application.  Bishop  M'Kendree  came  in  on  Tuesday.  1  re- 
ceived many  letters  with  pleasing  accounts  from  the  north.  Sarah 
Dickens  once,  now  Sarah  Baker,  in  Baltimore,  has  lost  her  child  ; 
and  God  has  converted  the  mother  :  is  not  this  another  answer  to 
prayer?  Father  Everitt  has  gone  in  glory  to  glory  :  God  be  glori- 
fied !  Four  hundred  people  attended  our  ministry  on  Friday.  I  have 
eighteen  letters  to  answer,  and  more  are  no  doubt  on  their  way.  We 
have  prayed  especially  and  earnestly  for  our  conference  :  surely  God 
will  hear !  It  is  all  peace  with  preachers  and  people.  On  Saturday 
conference  set  to  work  in  earnest,  and  in  great  order.  Thomas 
Glenn's  case  is  a  serious  one— he  is  suspended  for  imprudence,  but 
not  for  gross  immorality. 

Sunday  24.  We  had  a  gracious  feast  of  love.  I  preached  at  Cum- 
berland in  the  morning,  and  at  Bethel  in  the  evening.  We  laboured 
straight  onward  Monday,  Tuesday,  Wednesday,  and  Thursday  :  Fri- 
day was  set  apart  for  ordination  :  it  was  desired  that  I  should  preach  : 
it  was  a  season  of  tears.  We  came  out  of  Charleston  on  Saturday, 
and  lodged  for  the  night  at  Mrs.  Brian's  quarter,  with  Thomas  M'Ken- 
dree, who  fed  us  richly.  A  Sabbath's  journey  brought  us  to  a  sick 
man's  house.  I  prayed  with  our  host,  and  administered  some  medi- 
cine which  procured  him  ease. 

Monday,  January  1.  The  first  day  of  the  year  1810,  we  crossed 
Potato-Ferry.  Thomas  Lasley  was  ill,  and  we  stopped  at  Haydick- 
en  s,  and  gave  him  medicine  :  we  were  compelled  to  leave  him  at 
Blackmingo.  Missing  our  way,  we  dropped  upon  Mr.  John  Graham  ; 
he  was  a  Presbyterian,  and  showed  us  much  kindness.  On  Tuesday 
we  crossed  Porter's  ferry.  I  have  been  unspeakably  happy  in  God 
to-day.  The  people  of  Charleston  have  been  faithfully  warned  ;  and 
it  will  be  seen  not  many  days  hence,  how  God  was  with  the  confe- 
rence. We  were  kindly  entertained  on  Wednesday  by  Moses 
Smith — What  do  the  rich  do  for  us  but  spoil  us  ?  Ashpole  was  deep 
enough  on  Thursday  ;  we  got  over  in  safety,  and  stopped  at  Joseph 
Lpe's.  We  have  had  a  drop  of  rain  ncnv  and  then  ;  but  there  has 
fallen  much  all  around  us.  At  Fayetteville  on  Friday  I  was  very  un- 
well ;  but  I  laboured  through  five  letters. 

North  Carolina. — Sabbath  7.  I  preached  in  our  enlarged  house 
in  the  morning,  and  Bishop  M'Kendree  in  the  evening.  We  cam© 
rapidly  next  day  forty-five  miles  to  the  widow  Anderson's.  At  Wil- 
mington-1  spoke  in  the  new  chapel  on  Wednesday  :  I  find  the  work 
of  God  is  going  on  here.  We  are  well  in  temporals,  and  a  most 
Vol.  III.  3<5 


28-  REV.    FRANCIS    ASBWRY5S    JOURNAL.  [1810- 

correct  account  has  been  furnished  us  of  all  expenditures.  I  met  the 
African  elders,  and  gave  command  concerning  the  parsonage,  the 
painting  of  the  new  fences,  and  the  alteration  and  increase  of  the 
benches  in  the  chapel.  I  recommended  the  purchase  of  a  grave- 
yard, and  gave  a  special  charge  concerning  the  poor  : — Oh,  let  me 
ever  remember  these  !  A  general  fast  day  for  the  African  churches 
was  appointed.  Thursday  we  rode  forty- two  miles  to  George  Shep- 
perd's.  On  Friday  we  stopped  at  Lot  Ballard's,  for  refreshment  and 
prayer,  and  fled  away  to  Adonijah  Penn's  :  we  were  an  hour  in  the 
night.  We  reached  Newbern  on  Saturday  evening.  I  am  in  un- 
ceasing prayer.  Erasmus  Hill  may  possibly  sell  the  Gospel  for  a  rich 
wife,  as  three  or  four  others  have  done.  Should  I  say  here,  And 
thou,  Francis,  take  heed  ? — not  of  this  sin. 

Sabbath  14.  I  preached  in  the  morning  :  my  mind  enjoys  great 
peace.  Bishop  M'Kendree  spoke  in  the  afternoon.  Our  prospects 
here  are  not  very  encouraging.  On  Monday  we  hasted  away  across 
Neuse,  at  Street's  ferry,  to  Mr.  Allen's  :  we  dined  and  put  off  again, 
crossing  Swift-Creek,  and  came  in  after  night  to  the  widow  Carman's. 
A  hard  ride  next  day,  of  about  fifty  miles,  brought  us  to  the  widow 
Williams's  in  the  night — rain  in  plenty.  Rose  at  five  o'clock  to  our 
day's  work  ;  and  Joseph  Peppins  received  us,  and  sheltered  us  for 
the  night.  Thursday,  up  again  at  five  o'clock,  and  passed  through 
Murfreesborough  to  Jesse  Battle's.  Are  we  riding  for  life  ?  Nay  ;  but 
we  must  not  disappoint  people — we  are  men  of  our  words.  I  feel 
for  others  in  bad  travelling  ;  but  little  for  myself.  Our  horses  are 
always  well  fed,  and  never  fail  :  Lord  !  thou  preserves!  man  and 
beast,  I  may  truly  say.  My  soul  is  strong  in  faith,  and  constantly 
engaged  in  prayer.  On  Friday  we  crossed  Knotty-Pine  at  Manning's 
ferry  ;  stopped  a  few  minutes  at  Judith  Baker's,  to  talk  and  pray,  and 
came  in  to  D.  Southall's,  at  Gates  court-house.  It  is  pleasant,  but 
cold,  cold !  We  proceeded  with  borrowed  horses  to  Edenlon.  It  is 
still  excessively  cold.     Lodged  with  William  Hankins. 

Sabbath  30.  Snow  storm.  We  had  twelve  women  and  six  men  at 
the  new  chapel,  and  about  one  hundred  Africans.  I  preached  in  the 
evening  at  Hankins's  to  about  forty  women  ;  my  subject  was  a  com- 
ment on  our  Lord's  conversation  with  Martha.  E.  Jones,  by  provi- 
dence, has  built  us  a  house,  and  laid  the  foundation  for  an  African 
chapel.  Monday  brought  cold,  and  ice,  and  snow — it  was  well  the 
horses  were  rough.  We  came  in  safety  to  Gates.  We  had  dan- 
gerous travelling  on  Wednesday  :  lodged  with  D.  Duke.  On  our 
way  to  Norfolk  we  stopped  at  J.  Lunsford's :  came  into  Norfolk 
after  nisrht. 


1810.]  REV.    FRANCIS   ASBURv's   JOURNAJL.  283 

Virginia. — Thursday,  closely  employed  in  writing  letters.  I  called 
the  official  members  together  to  consult  upon  the  propriety  of  setting 
apart  a  day  for  fasting,  humiliation,  and  prayer.  Friday,  fasting  and 
humiliation.  I  gave  a  brief  discourse  at  the  chapel  on  Joel  ii.  12,  13. 
Saturday,  read  my  Bible  and  Marshall's  Life  of  Washington. 

Sabbath  27.  I  preached  and  met  the  society  of  both  colours  :  I 
said  many  things,  and  some  wept.  I  gave  them  a  discourse  at  Ports- 
mouth. Excessively  cold  on  Tuesday  ;  I  preached  at  Cox's  chapel. 
In  future  I  will  try  to  hold  the  meetings  in  private  houses.  At  Suf- 
folk in  the  evening — poor  Suffolk !  On  Thursday  I  gave  an  evening 
discourse  at  General  Wells's  :  the  house  was  full.  A  cold  ride 
brought  us  to  William  Blunt's  on  Friday  evening.  Mine  host's  wife 
and  son  are  in  affliction.  My  flesh  complains  of  cold  riding  and  the 
labour  of  preaching — may  I  be  made  perfect  through  sufferings ! 
Saturday  brought  us  through  rain  and  snow,  without  eating  or  prayer, 
although  we  stopped  twice,  to  William  Birdsong's.  Oh,  how  com- 
fortable ! — and  we  can  pray  here. 

Sabbath,  February  4.    The  day  is  serene  ;  and  so  is  my  soul.     I 
preached  at  mine  host's,  and  at  Wright  Ellis's.     Here  were  great 
times  thirty  years  ago  ;  many  are  fallen  asleep,  and  the  children  for- 
get God.     I  felt  awful  in  enlarging  amongst  these  people  upon  the 
great  salvation.      I  called   twice  at  Blackwater  church — shivering,, 
eating  a  morsel,  and  praying.    Our  people  preach  there  with  success, 
and  an  encouraging  society  is  formed.    Lord,  increase  our  faith  !    On 
Monday  we  wrought  our  solitary  way  through  the  woods  to  Allen's 
bridge  :  the  widow  Pennington  received  us  ;  her  husband  is  dead — 
she  is  sick— her  children  irreligious  :  Oh,  misery  !  Oh,  mercy  !    We 
went  on  to  James  Roger's,  where  I  gave  them  a  discourse,  and  spoke 
as  if  a  thousand  had  been  present.     We  have  passed   like  a  mail 
through  South  and  North  Carolina.     I  solemnly  sympathize  with  my 
dear  brother  Boehm — he  has  suffered  greatly  in  his  journey — an 
awful  cough  and   fevers :    Lord,   what   is  life !      Here  is  William 
Greaves  almost  gone  at  fifty-five  ;  Robert  Jones,  a  helpless  man  at 
seventy-two — sunk  to  second  childhood  :  God  is  with  him.     A  fast- 
ing, weary  ride,  brought  us  to  Petersburg.     Our  conference  began, 
on  Thursday  ;  and  rose  on  the  following  Thursday.    We  had,  Friday,, 
ordination,  and  preaching  in  abundance.     I  gave  an  answer  to  an  im- 
portant question — it  was,  Whether  the  bishops  had  a  right  to  form  the 
eighth,  or  Genesee  conference  ?  as  also  gave  an  answer  to  the  Vir- 
ginia conference.     At  mid-day  we  started*  for  Richmond,  and  arrived 
after  a  six  hours'  ride,  without  stopping.     We  stopped  on  our  route 


284  REV.     tRANCIS    ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1310, 

next  day  at  Caroline  court-house.     A  rapid  ride  through  cold  and 
snow  brought  us  to  Fredericksburg,  forty  miles. 

Sabbath  18.  I  preached  to  about  one  hundred  souls — a  day  of 
feeble  things.  After  meeting  the  society,  I  felt  a  freedom  in  my  mind 
to  travel  onwards.  We  stopped  at  Suttle's,  and  our  bill  was  three 
dollars,  without  wine  or  stronger  drink.  Monday  came  on  to  Dum- 
fries ;  where  we  stopped  to  visit  a  sick  man  and  administer  the  sacra- 
ment. Arrived  in  Alexandria,  and  housed  for  the  night  with  brother 
Sandford.  Tuesday  I  preached  to  a  few  souls.  Came  to  the  Fede- 
ral City  on  Wednesday,  and  rested  three  days.  Ah,  what  a  world  of 
bustle  and  show  have  we  here !  On  Friday  I  preached,  though 
taken  with  a  great  hoarseness.  We  rode  on  to  our  brother  Kinkey's 
in  Bladensburg.  Saturday  brought  us  through  desperate  roads  to 
Baltimore.     Fasting  to  keep  down  a  hoarseness  and  sore  throat. 

Maryland. — Sabbath  25.  At  Light-street  my  subject  was  James 
iv.  8 — 11.  In  the  afternoon  I  spoke  at  the  African  house  on  1  Peter 
v.  5,  6,  7.  I  have  had  little  rest  for  several  nights.  I  visited  Annapo- 
lis on  Monday,  and  preached  for  them.  The  affection  of  the  people 
is  great,  and  my  unworthiness  is  greater.  No  rest  for  Tuesday.  We 
crossed,  with  wind  and  cold,  South-River  ferry.  I  thought  of  taking 
down  my  wallet  and  eating  my  morsel  of  bread  under  the  lee  of  some 
favouring  tree,  when,  behold,  Colonel  Rawlins  and  Samuel  M'Cubbin 
joined  us — O,  the  case  is  altered  !  They  can  now  receive  a  Metho- 
dist in  their  houses.  Again  in  motion  ;  we  went,  cut  and  go,  through 
the  bleak  weather  to  brother  Wood's :  here  was  one  of  my  earliest 
stands  for  preaching  twenty-eight  years  ago.  Wednesday,  at  the 
widow  Tannehill's,  I  spoke  to  a  full  house.  The  work  of  God  pros- 
pers in  this  quarter.  I  lodged  once  more  with  mine  ancient  friend 
Captain  W.  Weems.     Oh,  my  jaws  and  teeth  ! 

Thursday,  March  1.  In  West  Maryland,  we  have  nine  circuits, 
five  stations,  twenty-five  preachers,  one  hundred  chapels,  eleven 
thousand  six  hundred  and  twenty-two  members;  and,  perhaps  one 
hundred  local  preachers.  I  am  kindly  and  comfortably  entertained 
by  Miss  Eliza  Skinner.  A  cold  Friday  :  we  had  about  four  hundred 
souls  at  Gray's  meeting;  they  were  deeply  serious  whilst  I  expound- 
ed 1  Cor.  xv.  58.  Lodged  at  the  widow  Skinner's.  I  spoke  on 
Saturday  at  Plumb  Point  to  five  hundred  atteutive  hearers ;  after 
dining  with  Samuel  Essex,  we  returned  to  William  Weem's.  I  have 
a  continual  pain  in  my  jaws,  so  that  I  chew  with  difficulty.  Our 
labour  is  not  in  vain  in  these  parts. 

Sunday  4.  I  held  forth   to  about  one  thousand  attentive  souls  in 
Teem's  chapel  on    "  the  great  salvation."      I  lodged  with  David 


1810.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  285 

Weem  :  his  wife  is  in  glory,  his  daughters  in  the  church,  and  his  sons 
in  the  world.  On  Monday  we  rode  fourteen  miles  through  damps  and 
thick  woods  to  Samuel  M'Cubbin's.  I  was  done  over.  I  blistered 
for  a  severe  inflammation  in  the  face.  Tuesday  morning,  sick  and 
suffering,  I  rode  sixteen  miles  and  filled  an  appointment  at  BicknelPs 
chapel.  I  hasted  on  to  Baltimore  on  Wednesday.  Thursday,  very 
sick :  I  need  bleeding  and  medicine.  I  was  scarcely  able  to  sit  in 
conference  on  Friday.  Day  of  fasting  and  humiliation  to  all  the  mem- 
bers.    Saturday,  busy. 

Sunday  11.  Bishop  M'Kendree  preached.  We  had  an  ordination. 
I  spoke  by  way  of  exhortation.  Saturday,  the  conference  went  for- 
ward with  order  and  despatch,  and  rose  at  ten  o'clock  this  morning. 
I  rode  to  Perry -Hall. 

Sunday  18.  Rode  ten  miles  to  the  new  chapel  in  Middle-River 
neck.  /  would  not  ride  in  the  coach.  Will  my  character  never  be 
understood  ?  But  gossips  will  talk.  If  we  want  plenty  of  good  eat- 
ing and  new  6uits  of  clothes,  let  us  come  to  Baltimore  ;  but  we  want 
souls.  A  damp  and  misty  Monday ;  but  we  set  out  for  Henry  Wat- 
ter's.  I  parted  at  Deer-Creek  (Ah,  where  to  meet  again  !)  with 
aged  father  Boehm,  and  my  ancient  friend  Watters.  We  found  the 
wind  fresh  from  the  south  in  crossing  the  Susquehannah ;  but  hard 
toil  and  a  kind  Providence,  brought  us  safely  over,  and  we  came  into 
North-East,  hungry  and  faint.  I  was  mortified  for  an  hour  with  one 
who  had  been  expelled  from  our  society.  On  Wednesday  I  once 
more  preached  at  North-East.  Bishop  M'Kendree  exhorted.  We 
hasted  away  fifteen  miles  to  Bohemia.  My  soul  enjoys  great  peace. 
Thursday,  at  Bohemia  chapel,  I  spoke  to  a  serious  congregation  ;  in 
the  evening  once  more  under  the  roof  of  Richard  Bassett. 

Delaware. — Friday  23.  I  gave  a  discourse  at  Union  chapel.  On 
Saturday  attended  the  preaching  of  brother  Pickering  at  Friendship. 
I  dined  with  Gideon  Emory  ;  his  father  received  me  thirty-three 
years  ago. 

Sunday  25.  At  Smyrna  my  subject  was  2  Chron.  xxxii.  25,  26. 
it  was  an  open  time.  G  Pickering  spoke  after  me.  We  collected 
liberally  for  Boston  chapel.  I  felt  solemn  while  walking  in  the  grave- 
yard :  here  moulder  my  friends  of  thirty  years  past.  The  Africans 
were  serious  and  attentive  in  the  afternoon  whilst  I  was  speaking  to 
them.  I  wrote  letters  to  the  south.  My  soul  is  full  of  confidence  in 
God.  On  Monday  I  preached  at  Dover  chapel ;  and  next  day  at 
Green's  chapel.  Most  of  my  old  friends  in  this  quarter  have  fallen 
asleep  ;  but  their  children  are  generally  with  me,  and  the  three  ge- 
nerations baptised.     We  hold  in  the  peninsula,  comprising  the  east- 


26G  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1810. 

ern  shore  of  Virginia  and  Maryland,  and  the  state  of  Delaware, 
about  one  hundred  houses  of  God,  twenty-two  thousand  nine  hun- 
dred and  thirty-five  members  ;  preachers,  travelling  and  local,  two 
hundred  and  thirty-eight.  Dined  with  Philemon  Green,  and  lodged 
with  Andrew  Barrett. 

At  Barrett's  chapel,  brother  Pickering  and  myself  preached.  On 
Thursday  we  had  a  cold  ride  to  visit  two  families.  Oh,  Milford, 
there  is  death  in  the  pot !  Friday,  at  Milton  I  preached  as  was  ex- 
pected ;  and  also  at  Lewistown  on  Saturday. 

Sunday,  April  1.  I  preached  at  Ebenezer.  An  awful  storm  pre- 
vented the  attendance  of  many.  1  spoke  to  the  Africans  in  the 
town  ;  and  gave  an  exhortation  in  the  church,  after  brother  Picker- 
ing's sermon  ;  we  hope  our  labours  for  the  day  have  not  been  in 
vain.  Brother  Pickering  spoke  again  on  Monday  ;  I  added  an  ex- 
hortation. There  was  a  crowd  at  the  Sound  chapel  on  Tuesday. 
We  lodged  at  Davis's.  Brother  Boehm  preached  at  Martin's  cha- 
pel :  I  added  a  few  words.  Lodged  at  Lester's.  At  Prideaux's  cha- 
pel, on  Sinipuxent,  on  Thursday.  Who  could  well  be  kinder  than  the 
proprietor  of  this  name  who  gave  us  the  land  !  I  was  led  to  be  very 
plain  on  Friday  at  Bowen's  chapel :  there  is  life  here.  Lodged  at 
Samuel  Porter's,  the  steward  of  the  circuit ;  he  is  a  solemn  man  in 
his  appearance,  as  an  official  character  ought  to  be.  I  have  had  in 
my  own  spirit  and  flesh  trials  and  sufferings,  and  also  strong  consola- 
tions.    Paid  a  visit  to  William  Q,uinton  on  Saturday. 

Sunday  8.  At  Snowhill  the  rain  prevented  more  from  attending 
than  just  filled  the  house.  After  preaching  I  met  the  society,  white 
and  coloured :  the  exercises  of  the  day  employed  three  hours. 
Lodged  with  B.  Dewer  :  I  spoke  to  a  feeling  people  at  Swan's  Gut 
meeting-house.  On  Monday  we  went  on  to  Hometown.  Methodist 
preachers  politicians!  what  a  curse!  This  is  a  rude,  cold  spring, 
and  I  feel  it  sensibly  :  my  jaws  are  still  painful,  and  I  cannot  eat  hard 
food.  Oh  for  faith  and  patience  !  Tuesday  morning  I  found  Bishop 
M'Kendree  had  begun  meeting.  In  the  evening  I  preached  on  Rom. 
viii.  1.  ;  it  was  a  very  solemn  time — doubtless  the  last  with  some  of  us. 
Virginia. — Wednesday  11.  I  preached  at  Newtown;  we  were 
crowded.  This  is  a  flourishing  little  place,  and  we  have  a  beautiful 
little  chapel.  We  came  on,  and  once  more  visited  Samuel  Smith  :  I 
found  him  calm  and  happy  in  God  after  strong  temptations.  I 
preached  at  Curtis's  chapel  to  a  crowded  and  attentive  house. 
There  is  a  great  change  for  the  better  in  the  morals  and  manners  of 
all  ranks  of  people  in  this  end  of  the  peninsula,  and  none  pretend  to 
deny  that  the  Methodists  have  wrought  it.     I  rode  down  to  Francis 


1810.]  REV-  FRANCIS  ASfEUftiTS  JOURNAL.  £87 

Watters's  in  Potato-Neck.  They  keep  me  busy  :  I  must  preach  ; 
I  am  senior  ;  have  been  long  absent ;  some  never  expected  to  hear 
me  again  ;  possibly  I  maj'  never  come  again  :  I  am  reminded  that 
such  and  such  I  dandled  in  my  lap:  the  rich,  too,  thirty  years  ago, 
would  not  let  me  approach  them  ;  now  I  must  visit  them  and  preach 
to  them  :  and  the  Africans,  dear,  affectionate  souls,  bond  and  free,  I 
must  preach  to  them.  O  God,  give  us  the  poor  !  Preached  at  the  cha- 
pel on  Friday  :  lodged  with  S.  Madox.  On  Tuesday  I  had  the  use  of 
the  Presbyterian  meeting-house ;  it  being  court-time  we  were 
crowded.  After  dining  I  faced  a  storm  of  wind  and  dust  in  our  route 
to  Salisbury. 

Maryland. — Sabbath  15.  At  Salisbury  I  preached  at  Quantico 
chapel  :  we  held  an  ordination  after  sacrament.  I  met  the  society, 
and  afterward  gave  a  long  exhortation  to  the  Africans.  On  Monday 
I  preached  at  Ennall's  chapel ;  dined  at  the  widow  Ennall's,  and  rode 
on  twelve  miles  to  Cambridge,  and  lodged  with  Doctor  White. 
Tuesday  I  gave  them  a  discourse  in  Cambridge.  Called  upon  G. 
Ward,  and  rode  forward  to  Thomas  Foster's  pleasant  cottage.  On 
Wednesday  I  had  a  meeting  at  Washington  chapel  :  it  was  a  quiet, 
solemn,  and  feeling  time.  I  met  the  society  to  my  great  comfort: 
they  are  faithful.  On  Thursday  we  opened  the  Philadelphia  confe- 
rence at  Easton,  and  went  with  despatch  and  great  harmony  through 
our  usual  work.  We  fcad  preaching  as  usual,  and  a  camp-meeting 
in  the  neighbourhood  :  the  stations  were  read  off  with  much  solem- 
nity, and  we  parted  in  peace.  What  a  grand  and  gracious  time  we 
have  had  !  how  kind  and  affectionate  the  people  !  There  have  been 
some  serious  changes  of  my  making: — may  1  please  the  Lord,  and 
all  men  to  edification  and  consolation  !  We  have  added  nine,  located 
nine,  and  stationed  seventy-four  preachers.  On  Saturday  we  came 
away  at  five  o'clock  to  Henry  Downs's  :  my  host  and  his  wife  are 
old  acquaintances  and  friends  ;  we  met  and  parted  with  the  feelings 
of  such.  I  went  on  and  dined  with  P.  Harrington  at  Greensburg, 
another  ancient  friend  :  we  reached  Dover  at  the  end  of  a  fifty  miles' 
ride  for  the  day.  Bishop  M'Kendree  preached  at  night ;  I  followed 
with  a  few  observations  on  real  discipleship  and  true  friendship  to 
the  Lord  Jesus.  Moved  to  Keagy's  on  Monday.  I  preached  at 
Salem  chapel  on  Tuesday  the  1st  of  the  month  :  on  Wednesday  at 
the  new  chapel,  and  in  the  evening  at  the  African  chapel  in  Wilming- 
ton. After  preaching  at  Bethel  chapel,  we  had  a  ride  through  the 
rain  to  Mount  chapel,  and  here  ended  our  Thursday's  labours  :  I 
hope  they  were  not  in  vain  ;  lodged  at  Aaron  Mattson's.  Friday 
unwell  ;  the  appointment  was  at  four  o'clock  by  information  ;  brother 


2vi'<  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [lcSlO. 

Boehm  attended  at  eleven  o'clock,  and  he  was  right.  At  Chester 
church  I  preached  the  funeral  of  Mary  Withy  on  Saturday  :  she  was 
awakened  to  a  deep  inquiry  respecting  the  salvation  of  her  soul 
whilst  I  officiated  in  her  house  at  family  prayer  :  this  was  in  the 
year  1772,  on  my  first  journey  to  Maryland.  She  had  lived  twelve 
years  a  wife,  forty-four  years  a  widow,  and  for  the  last  thirty  years 
kept  one  of  the  best  houses  of  entertainmeut  on  the  continent :  in 
her  household  management  she  had  Martha's  anxieties,  to  which  she 
added  the  spirit  and  humility  of  Mary.  Her  religious  experiences 
had  been  chequered  by  doubts  and  happy  confidence.  She  slept 
in  Jesus.     We  came  into  Philadelphia  late. 

Pennsylvania. — Sabbath  May  6.  Preached,  and  we  had  an  open 
time.  There  are  difficulties  here  ;  some  displeased  with  their  stations. 

New-Jersey. — -I  came  on  to  Burlington  on  Monday,  and  preached 
for  them.  Tuesday  gave  a  discourse  at  Brunswick,  in  the  court- 
house. Wednesday  spoke  in  the  new  chapel,  Rahway.  Lord,  what 
am  I ! — save  me  from  fainting  under  my  burden  !  As  we  came  out 
on  Thursday  a  man  overtook  us,  halted  G.  P.  to  tell  him  he  ought  to 
have  preached  against  the  iniquity  of  taking  twelve  per  cent,  interest 
on  loans.  T.  M.  and  he  may  preach  themselves  grey  before  they  will 
preach  the  people  good.  We  are  in  New-York.  Friday.  Great  times 
here — two  new  houses  within  the  year.  I  preached  at  old  John- 
street  :  this  is  the  thirty-ninth  year  1  have  officiated  within  the  walls ; 
this  house  must  come  down  and  something  larger  and  better  occupy 
its  place.  Saturday  at  the  widow  Sherwood's.  I  saw  William  Blag- 
burne,  a  member  of  the  British  conference  twenty-five  years,  and 
well  recommended  by  Doctor  Coke  and  others. 

New-York. — Sabbath  13.  At  the  White-Plains  we  had  a  cold, 
cloudy  day,  but  I  had  divine  help  whilst  I  commented  on  Hebr.  vi. 
9,  10.  ;  I  added  a  word  of  special  exhortation  to  the  Africans.  At 
N.  Purdy's  I  was  greatly  comforted  in  feeling  the  life  in  the  members 
of  the  little  society.  The  preachers  have  preserved  order  and 
discipline,  but  the  fire  has  been  kept  up  principally  by  others  of  less 
official  importance.  At  Bedford  chapel  on  Monday  ;  after  preaching 
we  came  on  to  Mr.  Williams's  :  I  baptised  his  child,  Francis  Asbury  ; 
may  all  such  be  the  real  children  of  God  !  Tuesday  a  long,  cold,  hilly, 
rough  ride  brought  us  by  the  widow  Sandford's  to  Prince  Howe's  : 
we  had  a  crowded  congregation.  Wednesday  we  passed  a  small, 
but  excellent  house  for  our  people.  I  dined  with  brother  Neice, 
Dover,  and  preached  at  Amenia.  A  heavy  ride  on  Thursday 
brought  us  to  E.  King's,  Egreemont :  brother  Crawford  preached, 
and  I  added  a  few  warnings  on  the  shortness  and  uncertaintv  of  life. 


1810.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  289 

Massachusetts. — Friday  18.  Came  through  Great-Barrington  : 
chiefly  of  the  Anglican  church  here.  Called  at  Mr.  Steam's — kind 
and  generous  ;  thence  by  Lenox  to  Pittsfield.  I  have  found  it  some- 
what difficult  to  keep  my  mind  in  continual  prayer  whilst  travelling 
these  rude,  rough,  rocky  roads.  On  Saturday  I  indulged  in  a  little 
rest :  wrote  some  letters. 

Sabbath  20.  I  opened  our  solemn  assembly  at  half  past  ten  o'clock 
on  Phil.  iii.  17 — 21.  ;  there  was  great  heaviness  in  the  congregation; 
Bishop  M'Kendree  spoke  in  the  afternoon  :  his  subject  was  well 
chosen  and  well  improved.  There  was  also  a  prayer-meeting,  and 
in  the  Congregational  house  George  Pickering  preached.  We  sat  in 
conference  until  Saturday  ;  amongst  the  ordinations  was  that  of  Ste- 
phen Bamford,  recommended  from  Nova-Scotia  for  elder's  orders. 
We  have  stationed  eighty-four  preachers,  sent  two  missionaries,  one 
to  Michigan,  and  one  to  Detroit.  There  was  a  considerable  defi- 
ciency in  our  funds,  which  left  the  unmarried  preachers  a  very 
small  pittance. 

Sabbath  27.  Daniel  Hitt  preached  in  the  morning,  and  Francis 
Asbury  in  the  afternoon.  We  came  away  on  Tuesday.  On  Wed- 
nesday we  crossed  the  perpetual  hills,  and  were  willing  to  dine  and 
rest  a  little.  After  refreshment  we  proceeded  on  over  the  beautiful 
Connecticut  bridge,  and  gained  Sunderland  for  the  evening.  Lodged 
at  Mr.  Leonard's.  I  resolved  to  send  a  missionary  among  these  rude 
wilds  :  my  feelings  are  strong  towards  the  souls  in  the  little  towns  on 
this  route.  We  reached  Northfield  in  twenty  miles  riding,  stopped 
at  Mr.  Houghton's,  and  reached  Chester  on  Thursday  evening. 
Dark,  dark  ! 

Friday,  June  1.  Fasted  from  six  o'clock  yesterday  until  this  eve- 
ning at  six  o'clock.     1  spent  some  time  in  prayer  and  exhortation  at 

Elias  Marble's.     Saturday,  close  application  to  writing  and  reading. 
New-Hampshire. — Sunday  3.     I    officiated    in    the  morning,    and 

Henry  Boehm  in  the  evening  :  I  think  my  words  pierced  the  hearts  of 
some  like  a  sword  I  neither  spared  myself  nor  my  hearers.  Monday, 
occupied  in  writing  and  reading.  On  Wednesday  we  opened  our  con- 
ference in  the  Presbyterian  church.  We  had  appointed  a  camp-meet- 
ing within  three  miles,  where  there  was  preaching  three  times  a  day. 
The  ordinary  business  being  gone  through,  I  read  off  the  stations  on 
Monday,  and  closed,  as  usual,  with  solemn  prayer.  There  was  a 
work  of  God  manifestly,  and  opposition  rose  powerfully  :  we  re- 
gretted we  could  not  stay  two  days  more.  Although  amongst  stran- 
gers, we  were  kindly  entertained.  And  shall  not  our  prayers  be 
Vol.  III.  *  37 


290  REV.  FRANCIS  asbury's  journal.  [t810, 

beard  on  behalf  of  these  people  ? — yea,  verily  ;  and  Methodism  shall 
raise  Zion  from  the  dust. 

Massachusetts.— We  came  away,  over  bleak  rocks  and  hills, 
through  Fitzwilliam  to  Winchester  :  I  preached  in  a  new,  neat  Metho- 
dist chapel  of  our  own  building.  Next  day  to  Waltham  ;  and  the 
day  after  to  Boston.  My  mind  has  enjoyed  much  of  God,  and  great 
consolation  :  I  only  want  every  minute  and  moment  to  be  in  prayer, 
mental  or  vocal. 

Sunday  18.  I  spoke  in  the  old  chapel  in  the  morning,  with  free- 
dom ;  in  the  evening  at  the  new  chapel,  with  less  liberty  ;  but  there 
was  manifest  power  in  the  word.  On  Monday  I  wrote  five  letters  of 
supplication  to  our  brethren  in  Baltimore,  Georgetown,  Alexandria, 
Norfolk,  and  Charleston,  for  a  congregational  collection  for  the  use  of 
the  new  chapel  here.  Set  out,  winding  my  way  through  the  crooked 
streets  of  the  city,  and  passed  through  country  villages  to  Easton.  A 
young  brother  has  lately  died  here  in  great  triumph.  Tuesday  at 
Somerset,  I  gave  them  a  discourse — it  was  close  preaching.  On 
Wednesday,  at  Warren,  my  audience  gave  me  little  of  their  attention. 
Our  preachers  get  wives  and  a  home,  and  run  to  their  dears  almost 
every  night :  how  can  they,  by  personal  observation,  know  the  state 
of  the  families  it  is  part  of  their  duty  to  watch  over  for  good  ?  We 
kept  on  our  way  to  Rhode-Island.  Oh,  the  death — the  formality  in 
religion !  Surely  the  zealous,  noisy  Methodists,  cannot  but  do  good 
here  !  At  Bristol,  on  Thursday,  the  truth  was  manifested,  whilst  I 
spoke  with  power  to  the  consciences  of  the  people.  The  favourite 
preacher  is  removed  hence  ;  sinners  and  saints  are  displeased  at  this ; 
my  labours  stand  for  nothing  ;  I  must  take  my  share  of  reproach. 
We  lodged  at  a  friend's  house,  and  sent  our  horses  to  a  tavern.  I 
thank  them  even  for  this — what  are  we  ?  Friday,  humbled  ourselves. 
I  preached  at  Zoar  chapel  :  I  spared  not,  and  the  truth  was  felt. 
Visited  T.  Barker,  and  lodged  with  friend  Ayerts.  We  are  on  our 
lees  here — no  riding  of  circuits — local  preaching,  and  stations  filled 
in  the  towns.  My  soul  is  bowed  down  by  the  consideration  of  the 
state  of  the  church. 

Sunday  25.  I  have  preached  three  times  to-day.  I  officiated  in 
the  evening,  because  it  was  observed  that  at  the  stated  hours  peo- 
ple ought  to  attend  their  own  places  of  worship  ;  and  because  I  knew 
there  were  not  a  few  who  were  ashamed  to  be  seen  going  to  a  Metho- 
dist meeting  : — eight  o'clock  screened  them  very  well.  I  indulged  a 
desire  I  felt  to  speak  to  the  soldiers  of  the  garrison  at  Fort  Wolcott — 
there  are  faithful  souls  there.     Colonel  Beall  had  received  orders, 


1810.]  REV    FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  291 

and  was  bidding  farewell,  to  go  and  take  a  command  in  Maryland  ;  I 
knew  not  which  felt  most,  but  I  think  the  Colonel  ;  the  soldiers  loved 
him  as  a  father  :  it  was,  indeed,  a  painful  parting.  Monday  we  set 
out.  Tuesday  evening  brought  us  to  New-London.  I  called,  on  my 
way,  to  see  Mr.  Rogers  :  we  refreshed  body  and  soul  by  eating,  talk- 
ing, and  prayer.  I  have  seen  Jesse  Lee's  History  for  the  fbst  time  :  it 
is  better  than  I  expected.  He  has  not  always  presented  me  under  the 
most  favourable  aspect  :  we  are  all  liable  to  mistakes,  and  I  am  un- 
moved by  his.  I  correct  him  in  one  fact.  My  compelled  seclusion, 
sn  the  beginning  of  the  war,  in  the  state  of  Delaware,  was  in  no  wise 
a  season  of  inactivity  ;  on  the  contrary,  except  about  two  months  of 
retirement,  from  the  direst  necessity,  it  was  the  most  active,  the  most 
useful,  and  most  afflictive  part  of  my  life.  If  I  spent  a  few  dumb 
Sabbaths — if  I  did  not,  for  a  short  time,  steal  after  dark,  or  through 
the  gloom  of  the  woods,  as  was  my  wont,  from  house  to  house  to  en- 
force that  truth,  I  (an  only  child,)  had  left  father  and  mother,  and 
crossed  the  ocean  to  proclaim,  1  shall  not  be  blamed,  I  hope,  when  it 
is  known  that  my  patron,  good  and  respectable  Thomas  White,  who 
promised  me  security  and  secrecy,  was  himself  taken  into  custody  by 
the  light-horse  patrole  :  if  such  things  happened  to  him,  what  might 
I  expect,  a  fugitive,  and  an  Englishman  ?  In  these  very  years  we 
added  eighteen  hundred  members  to  the  society,  and  laid  a  broad  and 
deep  foundation  for  the  wonderful  success  Methodism  has  met  with  in 
that  quarter.  The  children,  and  the  children's  children  of  those  who 
witnessed  my  labours  and  my  sufferings  in  that  day  of  peril  and  afflic- 
tion, now  rise  up  by  hundreds  to  bless  me.  Where  are  the  wit- 
nesses themselves  ?  Alas  !  there  remain  not  five,  perhaps,  whom  I 
could  summon  to  attest  the  truth  of  this  statement. 

Connecticut.— -I  gave  them  a  sermon  at  New-London  ;  and  many 
attended  at  a  short  notice.  We  reached  Colchester  by  twelve  o'clock 
on  Wednesday,  and  preached  in  the  evening  at  Hebron.  The  con- 
gregation was  small,  because  the  people  did  not  expect  us  to  come 
through  the  rain  :  they  will  know  us  better  by  and  by.  On  Thurs- 
day I  preached  at  Eastbury  in  the  woods,  and  had  a  gracious  time* 
We  passed  through  Hartford  on  Saturday,  and  continued  on  to  Mid- 
dletown.  There  was  no  appointment,  as  our  coming  was  unknown. 
We  hasted  away  on  Monday — little  sleep  in  an  awful  house.  I 
preached  at  Burlington  :  it  was  what  is  called  close  cutting.  There 
is  some  life  here.  Lodged  with  brother  West,  once  a  great  seventh- 
day  Baptist.  I  gave  them  a  sermon  at  Goshen  on  Tuesday. 
Preached  next  evening  at  Amenia  :  they  want  a  house  ;  I  gave  them 
a  plan.     Friday,  preached  at  Row's  chapel.     A  ride  of  twelve  miles 


292  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1810. 

farther  brought  us  to  brother  Garrettson's.  The  ride,  since  we  left 
New- York,  1  presume  to  be  six  hundred  miles.  Our  ease  in  Zion 
makes  me  feel  awful :  who  shall  reform  the  reformers  ? — Ah,  poor 
dead  Methodists !  I  have  seen  preachers'  children  wearing  gold — 
brought  up  in  pride — Ah,  mercy,  mercy  ! 

New-Yqrk.- — Sunday,  July  8.  I  preached  in  the  chapel  to  a  small 
congregation.  Monday,  crossed  the  North-River,  came  through  Eso- 
pus,  to  John  Crawford's,  hungry  enough. 

We  reached  New-Durham.  We  prayed  at  Runyan's,  and  gave  away 
books.  The  people  came  to  hear  me  :  spent  with  labour  and  sorrow, 
how  could  I  preach  ?  I  hope  the  truth  was  felt.  Lodged  with  father 
Hubbert.  We  bent  our  way  up  Catskill,  and  crossed  the  mountains 
to  Middleburg.  Some  foolish  boys  were  at  cards  ;  we  were,  how- 
ever, respectfully  treated.  I  prayed  heartily  for  the  family,  and 
gave  away  some  good  books,  and  blessed  the  household  in  the 
name  of  the  Holy  Trinity  : — shall  our  blessing  be  lost?  We  directed 
our  course  towards  the  New-Sharon  camp  meeting.  I  know  not  if 
the  people  might  not  starve  in  the  mountains,  were  it  not  for  the 
saw-mills  and  lumber.  We  came  into  the  camp.  On  Thursday  I 
preached  in  the  camp  in  the  morning,  and  Henry  Boehm  at  four 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  in  German.  1  took  occasion  to  direct  a 
special  exhortation  to  the  members  of  the  quarterly  meeting.  Fri- 
day, travelled  forward  to  Cherry-Valley,  and  rested  at  brother 
Farley's.  Our  sister  complained  that  I  could  not  often  be  seen— she 
wished  to  be  a  few  minutes  in  my  company  at  Trenton  ;  but  she  was 
afraid  I  was  crowded.  I  told  her  that  all  who  wished  to  see  me  might 
be  indulged  in  the  back- settlements — a  cabin  has  not  always  two 
rooms.  At  Litchfield  I  visited  the  pious  and  aged  Arnolds.  Our  ride 
of  fifty  miles,  with  abstinence,  has  made  us  faint.  Saturday,  through 
the  Eaton  of  Chenango  to  Cazanovia — a  ride  of  forty  miles.  I  pray 
always  :  prayer  is  my  life. 

Sabbath  16.  I  preached  in  Silas  Blass's  barn.  Wednesday,  I  arri- 
ved this  evening  at  Daniel  Dorsey's.  Friday.  Our  conference  began 
to-day. 

Sabbath  23.  Preached  at  the  encampment.  Wednesday.  Confe- 
rence ended — great  order  and  despatch  in  business — statioued  sixty- 
three  preachers.  Came  away  to  Geneva.  Thursday.  Went  round 
Seneca-Lake.  Friday.  Bread  and  water.  Came  to  Newton,  and 
stopped  at  the  widow  Dtinn's  a  few  minutes  for  prayer,  and  conti- 
nued on  down  to  Tioga  Point,  and  housed  with  Captain  Clark.  We 
have  made  forty-seven  miles  to-day.  Saturday.  We  must  needs 
come  the  Northumberland  road  ;  it  is  through  an  awful  wilderness  ! 


J810.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  293 

We  stopped  at  Eldred's;  they  are  English,  and  disciples  of  Priestley. 
Alas  !  Read  and  prayed  in  the  woods.  I  leave  the  rest  to  God.  If 
the  cry  of  want  of  order  came  from  God,  the  appointment  of  the 
Genesee  conference  was  one  of  the  most  judicious  acts  of  our 
episcopacy.  We  stationed  sixty- three  preachers,  and  cured  some, 
till  then,  incurable  cases.  In  the  last  three  days  and  a  half  we  have 
rode  one  huudred  and  forty  miles  :  what  mountains,  hills,  rockss 
roots,  and  ruts !  Brother  Bo«hm  was  thrown  from  the  sulky,  but, 
providentially,  not  a  bone  broken. 

Pennsylvania. — Sabbath  30.  In  the  wilderness  ;  but  God  is  with 
us.  Wretched  lodging,  and  two  dollars  !  Whilst  busy  in  writing 
John  Brown  came  and  took  us  to  his  cabin.  We  forded  the  swoln  and 
rapid  streams  three  times  ;  the  Loyalsock  was  the  worst.  We  have 
spent  the  remainder  of  the  day  in  reading,  singing,  and  prayer.  The 
rains  had  increased  the  streams,  so  that  we  kept  our  retreat  on  Mon- 
day. Tuesday.  At  the  fordings  we  found  drift  logs  obstructing  the 
way  :  the  stream  was  very  full,  and  our  toil  through  it  great.  Two 
active,  bold  men,  with  the  aid  of  a  canoe,  got  us  and  the  horses  safe 
over.  Thunder  and  rain,  and  an  awful  mountain,  was  now  before 
us  ;  but  God  brought  us  safe  to  Muddy-Creek.  Deep  roads  and 
swollen  streams  we  had  enough  of  on  our  route  to  Northumberland 
on  Wednesday.  After  waiting  two  hours  at  Morehead's  ferry,  on 
Thursday  morning,  we  got  over  the  Susquehannah,  and  dined  at  Fur- 
guson's  ;  these  are  Methodists  lately  from  Ireland.  Lodged  at  Mr. 
Folke's.  Friday,  to  Middletown.  We  here  broke  bread  with  Doc- 
tor Romer,  a  German,  who  has  translated  our  Discipline  for  his  coun- 
trymen. Mv  friends  came  in  haste  and  gladness  to  see  me  :  we 
prayed  and  parted,  for  time  was  precious.  At  Lancaster  I  was  un- 
well, Fifteen  letters  met  me  here,  and  they  were  to  be  answered, 
and  I  had  but  a  day.     I  preached  in  father  Boehm's  chapel. 

Sabbath,  August  3.  Preached  in  Lancaster  morning  and  evening. 
After  forty  years'  labour  we  have  a.neat  little  chapel  of  our  own, 
Monday,  away  for  Columbia,  and  preached  there  at  twelve  o'clock. 
Came  on  to  Little-York,  and  arrived  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening, 
Tuesday  morning,  rose  at  four  o'clock,  and  after  writing  four  letterSj 
started  away,  calling  on  friends  Naylor  and  Wall,  stopping  for  the 
night  at  friend  Weaver's.  Reached  Carlisle  on  Wednesday  ;  preach- 
ed in  the  evening.  I  drew  a  plan  for  a  new  chapel,  seventy  by  forty- 
five,  of  one  story  :  the  cost  about  two  thousand  dollars.  Shall  I  be 
able  to  answer  the  twenty  letters  that  have  met  me  here  ?  A  letter, 
which  I  saw,  written  by  one  of  our  preachers,  says  he  has  twenty- 
sight  appointments  to  fill  in  twenty-five  days,  besides  meeting  ope 


294 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASEURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1810. 


thousand  seven  hundred  in  classes— it  was  from  Allen  Green.  Thurs- 
day. A  very  warm  ride  brought  us  to  Shippensburg.  Lodged  with 
brother  Reid.  Preached  in  our  improved  chapel.  Friday,  came  to 
Chambersburg.  I  preached  in  the  court-house,  though  we  have  a 
neat  little  chapel ;  the  word  of  truth  shall  not  be  lost.  Saturday, 
was  awfully  warm,  and  we  had  a  heavy  ride  over  three  mountains. 

Sabbath  12.  At  Littleton  chapel  I  preached  ;  and  we  administered 
the  sacrament  ;  but  as  my  aid  was  lame,  the  labour  fell  on  me  : 
though  wearied  and  sore  with  travelling,  I  enjoyed  a  gracious  season. 
Monday.  We  encountered  the  steep,  rugged  path  over  Sidelong-Hill ; 
we  had  heat,  rocks,  dust,  and  then  rain.  Bloody-Run  is  henceforth 
New-Hope.  I  preached  at  Bomerdollar's  tavern.  The  Lord  has 
seven  in  this  family  who  fear  and  worship  him.  This  was  a  very 
wicked  place  ;  but  O,  what  hath  God  wrought !  Tuesday,  we  shod 
our  horses  and  came  away  to  Bedford.  Here  it  was  wished  I  would 
stop  and  preach,  but  time  did  not  permit.  I  dined  with  brother  Ste- 
vens, and  kept  on,  fourteen  miles,  to  Metzkeffer's.  Things  in  this 
house  were  not  as  they  should  be  :  brother  Boehm  prayed  in  German. 
We  were  well  treated.  Wednesday.  We  rode  eleven  miles  for  our 
breakfast  at  Wynn's  stone  tavern,  on  the  top  of  the  Alleghany  ;  thence 
to  Mrs.  Moore's  in  Somerset.  Hard  roads,  and  I  am  not  well.  Thurs- 
day. Our  road,  in  places,  was  very  bad  :  dined  at  Indian-Creek,  and 
reached  Connellsville  in  the  evening.  I  enter  my  protest,  as  I  have 
yearly  for  forty  years,  against  this  road.  Lodged  once  more  under 
the  roof  of  my  dear  brother  Banning,  junior,  and  christened  a  child 
for  him.  We  have  rode,  since  we  left  Ontario,  five  hundred  and 
forty  miles  by  computation.  O,  what  a  life  is  this  !  My  aid  is  lame, 
and  1  am  obliged  to  drive.  People  call  me  by  my  name  as  they  pass 
me  on  the  road,  and  I  hand  them  a  religious  tract  in  German  or  Eng- 
lish ;  or  I  call  at  a  door  for  a  glass  of  water,  and  leave  a  little  pam- 
phlet. How  may  I  be  useful  ?  I  am  old,  and  feeble,  and  sick,  and  can 
do  little.  I  am  grieved  to  find  that  little,  promising  Bedford  circuit 
is  likely  to  be  injured  by  one  I  was  afraid  would  not  do  his  duty  ; 
feeble  in  mind  and  body,  small  things  are  to  be  hoped  from  him. 
And  the  poor  Germans !  they  are  as  sheep  without  a  shepherd. 
Came  to  the  widow  Stevens's  on  Friday.  Saturday,  we  reached 
Brownsville,  and  dined  at  Mr.  Host's. 

Sabbath  19.  I  preached  at  the  camp-ground  morning  a*id  evening, 
the  congregation  might  have  amounted  to  three  thousand  souls. 
There  were  very  wicked  people  there  I  learned,  who  desperately 
libelled  brother  M'Kendree  and  the  preachers,  and  committed  other 
abominable  offences.     Monday  I  was  called  on  to  preach  in  the  morn* 


2810.3  B.EV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL,  295 

ing.  I  took  occasion  to  give  a  solemn  warning  to  certain  sons  of 
Belial,  that  they  would  be  watched,  and  their  names  published  :  I  felt 
much,  but  God  was  in  the  truth.  I  suffered  a  great  deal  from  hard 
lodging,  and  want  of  fire  in  the  damps  of  the  morning.  There  were 
about  one  hundred  tents,  besides  wagons.  To  night  a  watch  night. 
We  started  away  on  Tuesday.  Surely  this  camp-meeting  will  be 
remembered  in  time,  and  its  fruits  seen  in  eternity.  On  Thursday  I 
dined  with  Benjamin  Fell  and  family  :  the  old  pair,  about  seventy, 
are  patiently  waiting  for  the  consolation  of  Israel.  I  preached  at 
Philip  Smith's  at  four  o'clock,  after  beating  about  twenty  miles  over 
the  hills.  Friday  brought  us  to  Pittsburg.  Saturday,  O  what  a 
prize  !  Baxter's  Reformed  Pastor  fell  into  my  hands  this  morning. 

Sunday  26.  Preached  on  the  foundation  of  the  new  chapel  to 
about  five  hundred  souls.  I  spoke  again  at  five  o'clock  to  about 
twice  as  many.  The  society  here  is  lively,  and  increasing  in  num- 
bers. We  rose  at  four  o'clock  on  Monday,  and  started  early.  I 
called  011  Esquire  Johnson  ;  his  wife  is  a  daughter  to  my  special 
friend,  Barnabas  Johnson  :  how  affectionately  was  I  received  by  old 
and  young  ! — I  have  seen  three  generations  of  this  family.  We 
hasted  away  to  Washington  ;  and  had  heat  and  hard  toil  for  travelling 
companions.  I  gave  the  good  citizens  a  discourse  at  five  o'clock  : 
the  principal  members  were  gone  to  Short-Creek,  but  others  filled 
their  places.  Can  any  one  be  kinder  than  my  kind  host  M'Fadden  ? 
It  is  reported  that  at  Short-Creek  fifty  persons  were  applicants  for 
membership.  Three  hundred  and  thirty-five  communicants.  There 
were  at  this  camp-meeting  about  fifty  tents  and  forty  wagons.  I  have 
been  reading  Fox  ;  his  narrative  concerning  himself  and  others  is 
truly  wonderful.  Friday  we  rode  twenty-two  miles  to  Barnes ville, 
I  preached  in  a  private  house.  The  Methodists  and  Friends  have  a 
kindly  contest  for  supremacy  here.  Saturday,  to  James  Sherrock  s, 
a  local  preacher,  an  Englishman  from  Lancashire.  We  went  forward 
to  Leatherwood's  Creek. 

Sunday,  September  2.  Rested  and  preached  in  Queensbury  chapel, 
to  a  full  house  convened  at  a  short  notice.  I  was  very  plain.  The 
prospects  are  encouraging  in  Wills's  Creek  circuit.  I  can  read  and 
think  as  in  years  past.  My  health  is  good,  and  I  am  in  perfect  peace 
and  love  !  Oh,  the  goodness  of  God  to  me !  I  have  journalized  very 
little  of  my  life  and  exercises,  and  less  of  my  sufferings ;  but  the 
Lord  knoweth.  On  Monday  we  had  to  beat  the  path  to  Jesse 
Waller's.  Though  feeble  and  faint,  I  preached  and  baptised  some 
children.  We  had  one  room  to  lodge  in,  plenty  of  beds,  and  abun- 
dance of  food  for  man  and  beast,     Tuesday  we  passed  many  a  jolting 


toa 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASKURV'S  JOURNAL.  [1810. 


place,  rough  with  roots  of  trees  and  logs  :  we  were  willing  to  stop  at 
Polk's  and  take  a  little  food.  From  hence  we  were  politely  con- 
ducted to  Peter  Monroe's.  Elder  Boehm  preached  in  the  house  of 
Mr.  Reynold's.  Wednesday.  To  my  surprise,  I  was  asked  to  baptise 
Joseph  Asbury  Reynolds.  We  continued  on  by  the  Salt  Works  to 
Marietta,  where  I  lectured  to  a  few  people.  Thursday,  to  Mogg's- 
Creek.  We  tasted  neither  bread  nor  water,  until  we  reached  father 
Shumen's,  twenty-three  miles.  We  held  meeting  at  night,  and  I  gave 
them  a  discourse.  Friday,  to  Waterford,  and  Samuel  Miller's  fertile 
soil ;  but  he  has,  as  yet,  made  little  progress  in  improvement.  Here 
is  a  family,  the  grandfather  and  grandmother  of  which  died  in  the 
Lord  ;  so  the  father  and  mother  promise  to  do  ;  and  the  children 
have  begun  to  live  to  God  :  1  preached  for  them  and  their  neigh- 
bours. Saturday,  I  hear  of  a  camp-meeting  at  Little  Kenhaway,  and 
must  needs  go  there.  After  toiling  through  bad  roads,  and  accidents 
at  the  ferry  to  detain  us,  we  are  here  this  Saturday  night  at  nine 
o'clock,  safe  at  the  house  of  the  brother  of  Wilson  Lee.  Lord,  pre- 
pare me  by  thy  grace  for  the  patient  endurance  of  hunger,  heat, 
Jabour,  the  clovvnishness  of  ignorant  piety,  the  impudence  of  the 
impious,  unreasonable  preachers,  and  more  unreasonable  heretics  and 
heresy ! 

Ohio. — Sunda}'  9.  I  preached  at  the  camp  twice.    Souls  were  con- 
verted,  and   we  hope   much  good  was    done.     We   ordained  John 
Holmes  an  elder.    Monday,  came  away      At  B.  Wolf's,  we  gave  them 
Dutch  and  English  sermons.    Tuesday,  preached  at  the  Point- Wood's 
court-house,  to  a  large  congregation.    We  lodged  at  Mr.  Browning's, 
on  the   other  side  of  the  river.     On   Wednesday  I   preached  in  a 
school-house  on  a  bluff  opposite  Blannerhassetfs  island.     Colonel 
Putnam,  son  of  the  renowned  General  of  that  name,   invited  me  to 
the  house  of  Waldo,  grandson  of  the  old  chief:   I  had  a  very  interest- 
ing interview  with  several  revolutionary   officers,   emigrants  to  this 
country,  from  good  old  Massachusetts.     Thursday,  we  took  our  de- 
parture from  the  banks  of  the  beautiful  river*  (the  Ohio,)   beautiful 
indeed  !    How  rich  the  banging  scenery  of  its  wood-crowned  hills  ! 
Our  route  was  towards  and  near  the  flocking- River,  a  rude,  toilsome 
way  :  we  were  glad  to  stop  a  moment,  aod  dine  with   Esquire  Ril- 
shure's.     We  continued  on  to  Burch's  and  lodged.     I  feel  the  effect 
of  toil  in  every  bone  and  muscle,  but  1    have  great  consolations. 
Friday,  at  camp-meeting  at  Atkins's.     I   lodged  at  Barker's.     The 
dear  infant  died  :  Ah  !  what  a  cry — 'twas  a  mother  s  cry.     Saturday  I 
preached  in  the  camp,  a  humiliation  sermon.     Mr.  Lintlley,  a  Pres- 


1810.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY;S  JOURNAL.  297 

byterian  clergyman,  preached  after  me.     The  ground  for  the  camp 
is  beautiful  ;  order  is  preserved,  and  there  will  be  good  done. 

Sunday  16.  We  had  sinners  of  all  varieties  to  hear  us.  I  spoke 
plainly.  On  Monday  I  preached,  by  special  request.  Great  order 
has  been  preserved,  much  good  done,  and  the  hearts  of  many  pre- 
pared for  the  future  reception  of  the  truth.  Tuesday,  we  started 
away,  although  I  was  ill  fitted  to  drive  a  wilderness  road.  At  Don- 
nelly's, we  dined,  prayed,  and  gave  away  books.  Wednesday  we 
reached  Chilicothe,  and  put  up  with  our  old  friend,  Doctor  Tiffin  :  I 
was  happy  to  find  him  no  longer  in  public  life,  but  a  private  citizen, 
respectable  and  respected,  and  the  work  of  God  revived  in  his  soul. 
I  have  preached  to  many  souls  in  the  late  camp-meetings  :  Lord,  give 
thy  word  success !  My  own  soul  is  humbled  and  purified  :  Glory  be 
to  God  J  Thursday,  I  preached  at  Chilicothe  at  four  o'clock.  On 
Friday,  engaged  in  private  duties,  i  paid  a  visit  to  my  much  es- 
teemed friend,  Governor  Worthington,  at  Mount  Prospect  :  he  re- 
quested me  to  furnish  an  inscription  for  the  tomb-stone  of  his  sainted 
and  much-loved  sister,  Mary  Tiffin  ;  I  gave  him  Luke  x.  42.  second 
line  to  the  end.     Saturday,  closely  occupied  with  books  and  my  pen. 

Sunday  23.  Preached,  and  baptised  a  whole  family  of  Quaker 
descent :  I  took  occasion  to  give  a  lecture  on  the  expediency  of  this 
Christian  rite,  and  the  duty  and  additional  obligations  it  imposed  upon 
parents.  I  spoke  again  in  the  evening,  and  was  awfully  severe  ; 
perhaps  too  much  so.  On  Monday  we  came  away  to  Samuel  Davis's. 
Tuesday,  I  baptised  a  child,  Thomas  Asbury  Parvias.  Wednesday, 
we  have  had  a  hard  journey  to-day,  and  after  two  hour's  ride  through 
the  woods  in  the  night,  we  sheltered  ourselves  under  the  hospitable 
roof  of  Esquire  Miranda.  Thursday,  we  crossed  the  Little  Miami, 
dined  at  Taulman's  ;  and  came  into  Cincinnati  oppressed  and  faint 
with  sickness,  excessive  heat,  and  loss  of  rest.  Friday,  Henry 
Boehm  preached  in  German  :  I  added  an  exhortation  in  English. 

Sunday  30.  I  preached  morning  and  evening :  it  was  a  season  of 
deep  seriousness  with  the  congregations.  I  felt  an  intimate  commu- 
nion with  God  ;  and  a  great  love  to  the  people,  saints  and  poor  sin- 
ners. Monday,  met  the  society.  Tuesday,  we  bade  farewell  to  our 
attentive  and  affectionate  friends  in  Cincinnati.  The  great  river  was 
covered  with  mist  until  nine  o'clock,  when  the  airy  curtain  rose 
slowly  from  the  waters,  gliding  along  in  expanded  and  silent  majesty. 
We  laboured  around  the  rough  banks  and  over  the  dry  ridge  of  Bank- 
Lick  creek  to  Barnes's.  Alas  !  for  the  people — there  is  a  great  call 
for  missionaries  for  Eagle-Creek  and  the  Ridge.  Wednesday,  came 
to  Conge's  to  dine,  and  stopped  at  Mubury's  to  lodge.  Thursday,  to 
Vol.   III.  38 


208  rev.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S    JOURNAL.  [1310, 

Jesse  Griffin's.  Friday,  at  rest.  Preached  for  the  people.  There 
is  a  drought  prevailing  ;  and  the  heat  is  very  intense.  Saturday  we 
started  away  for  Lexington,  and  were  well  soaked  with  a  glorious 
shower  when  about  nine  miles  from  the  town.     H.  Boehm  preached. 

Kentucky. — Sunday,  October  7.  I  preached  at  eleven  o'clock,  and 
gave  an  exhortation  after  five  o'clock  sermon  in  the  evening.  Mon- 
day, reading  the  best  of  books,  and  writing  letters.  Tuesday,  at 
Winchester,  Clark  county,  we  stopped  at  Leroi  Coles's.  Wednesday, 
busily  occupied  in  my  room.  Thursday  I  preached  to  a  very  atten- 
tive congregation.  Friday,  Called  at  Major  Martin's.  I  have  time 
to-day  to  complete  Mark's  Gospel.  I  mark  well  that  all  the  Evan- 
gelists concur  in  this  ; — that  the  high  priest  delivered  Jesus  to  the 
Roman  governor  as  the  Son  of  God,  upon  his  own  confession.  Satur- 
day I  preached  at  Abraham  Cassell's,  brother  to  Leonard  Cassell,  of 
Maryland.  I  learn  that  Benedict  Swope,  my  old  acquaintance,  died 
last  winter :  he  was  a  man  of  more  than  common  mind  and  gifts,  and 
might  have  been  much  more  useful  than  I  fear  he  was. 

Sunday  14.  At  Nicholasville  I  preached  about  an  hour  to  Presby- 
terians, Methodists,  and  I  know  not  whom.  Monday,  this  has  been 
an  awful  day  to  me — I  visited  Francis  Poythress  :  "  If  thou  beest  he — 
but  O,  how  fallen  !" 

Tuesday  16.  After  a  ride  of  thirty  miles,  we  found  comfort  and 
a  welcome  with  Racliff,  in  Woodford  county. 

Wednesday  17.  Came  by  lowly-seated  Frankfort.  Here  are  ele- 
gant accommodations  provided  for  those  who  make  the  laws,  and 
those  who  break  them  ;  but  there  is  no  house  of  God.  Lodged  with 
Edward  Talbot.  Thursday,  writing.  Friday,  abstaining,  praying, 
and  writing.  Saturday,  at  Wiiiiam  Adams's  log-chapel  I  preached 
to  a  small  assembly. 

Sunday  21.  At  Shelby ville  I  preached  in  the  court-house:  we 
were  crowded.  M'Chord,  a  seceding  minister,  preached  two  sermons 
upon  the  Deity  of  the  Holy  Spirit  :  he  was  orthodox,  and  indulged 
in  some  fine  flights  of  eloquence.  Elder  Wilson  spoke  in  the  evening. 
Monday,  I  preached  at  Henry  Lyon's.  Lodged  with  Mr.  Harding. 
Tuesday,  I  preached  at  Philip  Taylor's.  My  mind  i«  in  great  peace. 
The  Methodists  are  all  for  camp-meetings  ;  the  Baptists  are  for  pub- 
lic baptisings  :  I  am  afraid  this  dipping,  with  many,  is  the  ne plus  ultra 
of  Christian  experience.  Wednesday,  I  rest  at  Taylor's.  Writing 
and  reading.  Thursday,  rode  to  Joseph  Ferguson's,  twenty-five 
miles.  Saturday,  we  have  spent  this  day  in  a  visit  to  the  family  of 
Captain  Cyrus  Talbot :  may  salvation  come  in  power,  and  suddenly, 
to  this  amiable  and  interesting  household  ! 


IS10.J  REV.    FRANCIS    ASBURY's    JOURNAL.  2.99' 

Sunday  28.  I  spoke  at  Ferguson's  chapel  for  an  hour,  and  the  wind 
beating  on  my  head  ;  may  the  word  of  truth  be  deeply  and  long  felt ! 
We  have  an  open  door  set  wide  to  us  in  Mississippi ;  the  preachers  there 
sent  but  one  messenger  to  conference — they  could  not  spare  more  ; 
they  keep  their  ground  like  soldiers  of  Christ,  and  men  of  God  who 
care  for  the  cause  and  work  of  the  Lord.  Good  news  from  the  south — 
great  prospects  within  the  bounds  of  the  South  Carolina  conference. 
Monday,  we  rode  rapidly  to  Philip  Taylor's.  Wednesday,  came 
sixteen  miles. 

Thursday,  November  1.  Began  conference  in  great  peace  and 
good  order.  Friday.  Day  of  humiliation  and  fasting.  I  preached 
in  an  open  house  to  a  cold  auditory.  Conference  progressed  well  ; 
there  were  twenty-six  admitted. 

Sabbath  4.  Bishop  M'Kendree  preached  ;  and  I  finished  the  meet- 
ing with  an  exhortation.  There  were  elders  and  deacons  ordained  to 
the  work.  On  Thursday  I  preached  ;  speaking  long,  and  with  great 
plainness.  We  have  minuted  ninety-five  as  stationed.  There  is  an 
increase  of  four  thousand  members  within  the  bounds  of  this  confe- 
rence. I  have  sold  my  sulky,  and  purchased  a  horse,  that  I  may 
more  easily  wind  my  way  through  the  wilderness  to  Georgia.  The 
reward  of  my  toils  is  not  to  be  found  in  this  world.  Friday,  came  to 
Philip  Taylor's.     Saturday,  to  Springfield  Hills,  a  long,  heavy  ride. 

Sabbath  11.  My  mind  enjoys  great  tranquillity.  Bishop  M'Kendree 
preached  in  the  morning  ;  the  Presbyterians  at  twelve  o'clock,  and  I 
spoke  in  the  evening.  There  have  been  unpleasant  times  for  the 
Presbyterians  and  Methodists  ;  but  they  are  more  united  now — their 
ministers  appoint  meetings  for  each  other.  Monday,  we  rode  to 
Noah  Lasley's,  on  Green-River.  To  Ament's,  twenty-five  miles. 
Wednesday,  twenty-five  miles  to  Gatton's.  My  body,  I  find,  is  still 
flesh  ;  my  mind  enjoys  great  peace.  Thursday,  a  damp,  heavy  ride 
brought  us  in,  about  three  o'clock,  to  James  Gwinn's.  Whilst  riding 
along  my  soul  enjoys  sweet  and  intimate  communion  with  God.  The 
advantage  of  being  on  horseback  is,  that  1  can  better  turn  aside  to 
visit  the  poor  ;  I  can  get  along  more  difficult  and  intricate  roads  ;  I 
shall  save  money  to  give  away  to  the  needy  ;  and,  lastly,  I  can  be 
more  tender  to  my  poor,  faithful  beast.  Friday,  rested,  fasted,  read, 
wrote  letters.  Saturday,  visited  James  M'Kendree,  lately  from  Vir- 
ginia. 

Sabbath  IB.  I  rode  to  Gwinn's  chapel — a  nice  building.  Behind  it 
the  cabins  and  the  ground  make  a  charming  square  for  a  camp-meet- 
ing. Monday,  we  had  a  damp,  muddy  ride  to  friend  Haines's.  His 
wife  was  surprised— she  recollected  me.     How  frequently  we  find 


JOG 


REV.   FRANCIS  ASL.UUY  S  JnLii?>AL.  [lolO, 


our  wandering  sheep  in  travelling  !  Since  I  am  on  horseback  my  fet- 
ters are  gone  :  I  meditate  and  pray  much  more  at  my  ease.  Lodged 
with  John  M' Gee.  Tuesday,  to  Doctor  Tooley's.  Wednesday.  A 
ride  of  thirty  miles  brought  us  to  Shaw's.  Thursday,  fifteen  miles 
to  breakfast  at  Quarles's  ;  twenty- five  miles  to  supper  at  elder  Ter- 
ry's. Friday,  to  the  Crab-Orchard  ;  and  thence  to  Major  Hailly's. 
Saturday,  to  Kingston,  thirteen  miles,  and  thence  to  Winton's,  twenty 
miles. 

Sabbath  25.  I  preached  at  Winton's  in  the  evening.  We  have 
hard  labour  and  suffering  ;  but  I  dare  not  complain  when  1  See  the 
wretched  fate  of  the  poor  Africans  in  slavery.  We  pass  along  so 
rapidly,  that  we  have  only  time  to  pray  in  the  houses  we  visit ;  this 
we  have  done  except  in  one  case.  A  damp,  cold,  dreary  ride  brought 
us  very  hungry  to  Joseph  Black's,  where  man  and  beast  were  fed, 
and  kindly  entertained.  Tuesday,  we  came  to  dinner  to  father  Oba- 
diah  Farlow's  ;  and  then  pushed  on  to  Porter's.  Snow  most  of  the 
day.  Glory  be  to  God  for  the  great  support  both  of  soul  and  body  I 
derive  from  Him !  Wednesday  I  rested,  and  gave  them  a  sermon. 
The  word  of  truth  found  its  way  to  the  hearts  of  some.  Thursday, 
we  were  in  doubt  whether  we  should  take  the  old  or  the  new  route  : 
we  took  Mahon's  road,  and  got  along  pretty  well,  thirty  miles,  to  the 
gate  :  the  woman  was  sick  ;  but  the  girls  of  the  house  were  attentive 
and  polite  at  Mr.  Mahon's.  Friday,  our  troubles  began  at  the  foam- 
ing, roaring  stream  which  hid  the  rocks.  At  Catahouche  I  walked 
over  a  log.  But  O,  the  mountain — height  after  height,  and  five  miles 
over  !  After  crossing  other  streams,  and  losing  ourselves  in  the 
woods,  we  came  in,  about  nine  o'clock  at  night,  to  Vater  Shuck's. 
What  an  awful  day  !  Saturday,  December  1.  Last  night  I  was  strongly 
afflicted  with  pain.     We  rode,  twenty-five  miles,  to  Buncombe. 

North  Carolina. — Sabbath  2.  Bishop  M'Kendree  and  John  M'Gee 
rose  at  five  o'clock,  and  left  us  to  fill  an  appointment  about  twenty-five 
miles  off.  Myself  and  Henry  Boehm  went  to  Newton's  academy,  where 
I  preached.  Brother  Boehm  spoke  after  me  ;  and  Mr.  Newton,  in  ex- 
hortation, confirmed  what  was  said.  Had  I  known  and  studied  my  con- 
gregation for  a  year,  I  could  not  have  spoken  more  appropriately  to 
their  particular  cases  ;  this  I  learn  from  those  who  know  them  well. 
We  dined  with  Mr.  Newton  :  he  is  almost  a  Methodist,  and  reminds  me 
of  dear  Whatcoat — the  same  placidness  and  solemnity.  We  visited 
James  Patton  ;  this  is,  perhaps,  the  last  visit  to  Buncombe.  Monday. 
It  was  my  province  to-day  to  speak  faithfully  to  a  certain  person  :  may 
she  feel  the  force  of,  and  profit  by  the  truth.  Tuesday,  came  thirty- 
three  miles  to  Murray's  at  Green-River.  Wednesday,  rode  thirty  miie^ 


IS  10. j  KEY.  FRANCIS  ASISURY's  JOURNAL.  -JOi 

to  the  Rev.  James  Gilliard's.  I  found  hitn  sick,  and  prescribed  for  him. 
On  inquiry  into  the  state  of  his  soul,  he  expressed  his  confidence  in 
God.  He  is  alone  with  a  growing  family,  and  the  charge  of  a  hundred 
and  forty  families.  Thursday,  discovered  that  my  horse  was  lame, 
and  felt  discouragement.  We  breakfasted  with  kind  and  attentive 
Anthony  Foster ;  and  continued  on  to  Robert  Hailes's.  Friday. 
Reached  the  Fish-Dam  in  the  evening.  Our  sister  Glenn  went  to 
glory  about  twelve  months  ago  ;  her  exit  was  made  in  the  full  triumph 
of  faith.  Saturday,  crossed  Broad-River  at  Clark's  ferry,  and  press- 
ed forward  to  Mr.  Mean's.  Here,  and  it  seldom  happens  that  I  seek 
such  a  shelter,  we  were  under  the  roof  of  a  rich  man  ;  we  were 
treated  with  much  politeness  and  kindness.  Great  fatigue,  my  lame 
horse,  and  unknown  roads  where  we  lose  ourselves,  are  small  trials  ; 
but  as  thy  day  so  shall  be  thy  strength.  We  are  not,  nor  have  we  been 
lately,  much  amongst  our  own  people  ;  but  it  has  made  little  diffe- 
rence in  the  article  of  expense — the  generous  Carolinians  are  polite 
and  kind,  and  will  not  take  our  money.  Sabbath.  At  Winnsborough 
I  preached  to  a  few  people.  We  have  a  pretty  chapel  here  ;  John 
Buchannan,  and  Jesse  Harris  are  chiefs  in  this  work.  On  Monday  we 
came  to  J.  Jenkin's  ;  after  six  years'  rest  and  local  usefulness,  he 
means  to  travel  again.  I  have  received  news  from  the  north  which 
makes  me  solemn — my  old  friends,  Jesse  Hollingsworth,  and  Peter 
Hoffman,  are  no  more  in  time.  And  John  Bloodgood  has  also  gone  to 
his  reward.  Tuesday,  at  Camden.  Close  application  in  reading  and 
writing  letters.  Sinclair  Capers,  one  of  our  first  disciples  at  Whap- 
pitau,  died  in  great  triumph  ;  the  impression  occasioned  by  witness- 
ing this  was  the  cause  of  conversion  to  some  persons  present.  J 
hope  his  son  James  will  be  a  great  and  holy  preacher.  I  am  under 
the  necessity  of  taking  emetics.  Wednesday,  reading.  Thursday,  I 
preached  in  the  evening.  Friday,  had  a  cold  ride  to  Black-River, 
where  I  was  compelled  to  take  to  my  bed  again.  Saturday,  engaged 
in  reading,  meditation,  and  prayer.  Very  much  afflicted  in  my 
bowels. 

South  Carolina. —  Sabbath  16.  I  knew  not  if  I  could  get  to  the  new 
house  ;  I  went,  and  was  helped  of  the  Lord  :  the  house  was  filled,  and 
I  spoke  plainly.  On  Monday  I  visited  Thomas  Boon  ;  his  father  was 
the  first  to  entertain  me  at  the  Lower  Santee  Ferry.  We  found  our 
dinner  at  Henry  Young's  ;  I  was  very  ill.  Tuesday,  though  ill  able 
to  ride,  I  set  out  for  Camden.  Wednesday,  reading,  writing,  and 
praying  with  those  who  visit  me.  Thursday  came  to  Columbia. 
Taylor,  of  the  senate  of  the  United  States,  lent  his  house  for  the  ses- 
sion of  our  conference;.  We  have  pleasing  letters  from  York,  Genesea. 


302  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1811. 

Jersey,  Maryland,  Virginia,  old  North  and  South  Carolinas  :  rich 
and  poor  corning  to  God.  Our  fund  here  for  special  relief  amounts 
to  more  than  we  had  expected.  Saturday  our  conference  began  in 
great  order,  peace,  and  love. 

Sabbath  23.  I  preached,  and  the  truth  exhibited  its  own  divine  au- 
thority. Bishop  M'Kendree  spoke  in  the  afternoon.  We  sat  seven 
hours  to  business  in  the  day,  and  had  preaching  at  noon  and  night.  Fri- 
day I  was  called  upon  to  preach  at  the  ordination  of  elders  :  my  sub- 
ject was  Hebr.  iii.  12,  13,  14.  and  was  applicable  to  at  least  one  of 
them.  Conference  adjourned  this  evening  :  we  have  stationed  about 
eighty  preachers.  Saturday  came  away  to  General  Rumph's  :  God 
has  repaid  this  family  for  its  kindness  to  the  poor  followers  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  :  there  are  four  sons  and  three  daughters,  gracious  souls  :  two 
of  the  sons,  Jacob  and  Christian,  are  preachers  of  the  Gospel. 

Sabbath  30.  I  must  consult  prudence  and  stay  at  home  to-day — 
it  is  stormy  and  I  am  sorely  attacked  in  the  viscera.  On  Monday  we 
ventured  away  through  rain  and  hail  storms.  We  made  about 
twenty  miles  to  brother  Sarley's. 

Tuesday,  January  1,  1811.  On  the  first  day  of  the  new  year  we 
rode  thirty-five  miles  to  the  widow  Davis's  :  I  failed  greatly  in  my 
ride.  Wednesday  came  by  the  new  road,  crossing  the  new  bridge, 
forty-five  miles,  to  Charleston. 

Sabbath  6.  Preached  in  Cumberland  and  Bethel  chapels.  Mon- 
day busy  in  writing  letters  :  sent  away  fifteen.  I  preached  on  Wed- 
nesday. Thursday  came  away  and  made  thirty-five  miles  to  Mr. 
Gale's  :  I  was  weary,  hungry,  and  sleepy.  Friday  we  crossed  Le- 
nus's  ferry,  and  made  a  ride  of  twenty-five  miles.  Saturday  reached 
Georgetown.  I  am  always  in  fetters  in  this  place  ;  and  were  they 
to  offer  me  twenty  such  towns  as  a  bribe  I  would  not  visit  it  again  ; 
but  I  must  do  my  duty  without  a  bribe. 

Sabbath  13.  I  preached  for  the  people  of  Georgetown  twice. 
Monday  S.  Dunwody  and  Thomas  Mason  set  out  with  us  ;  crossing 
Black-River  we  came  to  worthy  Samuel  Green's  ;  in  pleasing  man- 
ners and  sincere  friendship  an  evergreen.  We  visited  his  brother 
Francis  and  prayed  in  the  family,  exhorting  the  Africans.  Tuesday, 
reached  Port's  ferry,  and  found  mother  Port  keeping  house  at  eighty- 
seven.  Rafts  and  boats  in  quantities  passing  down  the  Pee-Dee. 
Wednesday  made  thirty  miles  to  Mr.  Mesome's,  where  we  were 
kindly  received  and  politely  entertained.  Thursday  came  early  in 
the  day  to  Priest's,  and  tarried  with  them  two  hours,  and  then  mount- 
ed and  continued  forward  to  the  widow  Rolland's.  Friday  came  to 
John  Martin's,  Lumberton,  and  here  I  was  willing  to  stay  awhile,  for 


1811. j  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASEURY'S  JOURNAL.  3t>  3 

the  rain  and  cold  had  chilled  me  to  the  heart.     Saturday,  I  am  very 
unwell. 

Sabbath  20.  I  preached  here,  possibly  for  the  last  time  ;  I  spoke 
in  great  weakness  of  body  ;  and  having  offered  my  service  and  sacri- 
fice, I  must  change  my  course,  and  go  to  Wilmington.  I  have  but  a 
few  days  to  make  the  one  hundred  and  eighty  miles  in.  I  am  happy 
— my  heart  is  pure,  and  my  eye  is  single  ;  but  I  am  sick,  and  weak, 
and  in  heaviness  by  reason  of  suffering  and  labour.  Sometimes  I  am 
ready  to  cry  out,  Lord,  take  me  home  to  rest!     Courage,  my  soul ! 

Monday  21.  We  began  our  march,  and  my  suffering  from  pain  in 
the  foot  was  sore  indeed.  Came  into  Amos  Richardson's  in  the 
evening.  The  parents  of  this  man  died  in  peace.  Tuesday,  a  ride 
of  thirty  miles  brought  us  on  to  Alexander  King's.  I  baptised  this 
family,  of  whom  the  greater  part  are  in  society.  The  old  people 
gave  satisfactory  evidences  of  a  peaceful  end.  Wednesday  we 
brought  a  storm  into  town  with  us.  Wilmington  is  alive  with  com- 
merce, and  there  is  no  small  stir  in  religion.  Thursday  brother 
Boehm  preached.  Friday,  it  was  my  duty  to  preach  to-day.  I  am 
applied  to  for  the  plan  of  a  new  meeting-house  :  this  is  a  business 
of  small  difficulty  ;  but  who  is  to  execute  ? 

Sabbath  27.  1  preached  in  the  morning  and  afternoon.  The  con- 
gregations were  large,  and  1  felt  my  heart  greatly  enlarged  towards 
them.  Monday,  rose  at  five  o'clock,  and  moved  off  pretty  soon  ;  we 
cautioned  the  ferryman,  who  had  placed  his  flat  so  as  to  be  upset; 
he  was  obstinate,  and  would  not  alter  her  position  :  in  jumped  the 
horses,  over  went  the  skiff;  our  lives  were  endangered  :  the  horses 
attained  to  the  opposite  shore  by  swimming  and  plunging  through 
the  mud  got  on  dry  land  :  our  clothes  and  some  of  our  books  and 
papers  were  wetted,  but  not  spoiled.  We  mounted  and  rode  for- 
ward to  Mount-Misery,  stopping  to  dry  at  Alexander  King's  :  here 
we  dined,  and  baptised  some  children.  The  evening  shades  closed 
upon  us  as  we  entered  under  the  hospitable  roof  of  pious  mother 
Turner,  who  lodged  and  fed  me  at  the  Wakkamaw  Lake  twenty-six 
years  ago.  Tuesday  we  pushed  on  to  Amos  Richardson's,  and 
thence  after  dinner,  to  James  Purdie's  :  1  preached  in  the  evening. 
I  have  been  deeply  afflicted  with  an  influenza,  but  God  is  with  me, 
and  supports  me.  Wednesday  we  had  a  cold  ride  to  Newberry's ; 
preached  to  a  few  people. 

North  Carolina. — Thursday,  February  1.  We  reached  this  place 

this  morning,  Faeytteville  ;  preaching  at  night.  Saturday  I  preached. 

Sabbath  4.    Preached  ;  our  house  is  too  small :  preached  in  the 

afternoon  ;  we  must  enlarge  our  house.     I  had  a  rude  fall  to-day, 


30-i  hKV.  FliANCiS  ASHUR,*  S  JGUKNAL.  [1811, 

and  it  was  a  mercy  that  my  back  was  not  broken.  Monday,  we  came 
over  Cape-Fear,  lodging  at  Morgan's,  on  a  solitary  road.  Tuesday 
we  came  into  Raleigh.  Wednesday,  I  enjoyed  some  very  agreeable 
interviews  with  my  brethren.  Thursday.  Conference  begins  this 
morning. 

Sabbath  11.  I  preached  in  the  state-house  to  two  thousand  souls, 
I  presume.  We  have  had,  and  mean  to  have  whilst  conference  is  in 
session,  preaching  three  times  a  day  :  meeting  sometimes  holds  till 
midnight.  Saturday  at  ten  o'clock  we  mounted  our  horses  in  the  rain, 
and  pushed  on  to  Powell's  bridge  on  the  Neuse-River :  we  stopped 
at  the  house  of  our  friend  Samuel  Alston,  who  married  the  daughter 
of  General  Williams  :  this  will  hereafter  be  my  stopping  place.  I 
believe  there  was  much  good  done  in  Raleigh  ;  and  we,  the  preach- 
ers, are  much  indebted  to  the  people  for  their  kindness  to  us. 

Sabbath  17.  I  started  on  my  journey  this  morning,  contrary  to  my 
usual  practice.  At  Benjamin  Sherwood's  we  stopped  a  minute,  and 
called  the  family  to  prayer.  Came  at  night  to  Major  Taylor's.  Mon- 
day, my  kind  entertainer  and  his  family  made  me  promises  to  be 
henceforth  for  God  ;  I  left  them  with  strong  feelings  of  interest  for 
their  welfare.  Tuesday,  we  reached  Warrington  :  I  must  needs 
preach  in  William  RufSn's  large  tavern  room.  Wednesday,  cold 
ride  to  John  Seward's,  Brunswick  county,  and  next  day  to  Charles 
Harris's,  where  we  were  kindly  and  comfortably  entertained.  My 
old  Virginia  friends  have  disappeared  from  the  earth  ;  but  it  is  no 
small  consolation  that  they  have  left  me  their  offspring — these  are 
the  children  of  faith  and  prayer. — Witness  the  Georges — the  Booths 
-—and  many  others.  And  God  has  heard  the  prayers  of  the  poor 
negroes  for  their  masters  :  surely  he  is  no  respecter  of  persons  ! 
Our  Saturday's  ride  was  cold  indeed  :  kind  Mr.  Bradley  came  out 
to  the  state  road,  and  took  us  home  with  him,  and  fed  us,  and  warmed 
us,  and  lodged  us. 

Sabbath  24.  I  preached  in  Richmond  in  the  morning.  Monday 
started  in  storm  and  snow,  and  made  twenty-five  miles,  and  willingly 
stopped  at  Mr.  Burroughs's  :  this  family  are  in  their  first  love.  The 
neighbourhood  begins  to  bow  to  the  sceptre  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
Tuesday  we  came  on  to  Todd's.  The  stage  arrived  late  in  the  even- 
ing, and  the  passengers  would  go  no  farther  that  night.  They  were 
a  motley  mixture — Georgia  speculators,  planters,  merchants,  and 
gentlemanly,  affable  Judge  Brooke  ;  I  was  chaplain  to  the  company. 
Wednesday  we  were  pretty  soon  laden  with  thick  clay,  nevertheless, 
we  got  on  with  speed  to  Dumfries,  and  lodged  at  the  widowed  house 
of  Mrs.  Mason.     Thursday,  reaching  Occoquan,  I  thought  I  should 


J8I1.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY3S  JOURNAL.  305 

prefer  my  dear  old  friend  William  Watters's  to  Alexandria  ;  thither 
we  bent  our  way  and  got  in  before  dark.     Friday  at  Georgetown. 

Maryland. — Sabbath,  March  3.  I  preached  for  half  an  hour,  and 
was  fervent.  At  the  sacrament  took  occasion  to  exhort  the  society. 
At  three  o'clock  visited  the  new  house  in  the  city  :  I  preached,  though 
very  unwell.  I  feel  great  consolation,  and  perfect  love.  Monday, 
preached  at  Bladensburg.  I  was  surprised  to  see  so  many  people. 
On  Tuesday  I  preached  at  Federal  chapel.  Wednesday,  a  violent 
snow-storm.  I  rode  twelve  miles  to  preach  at  Hopewell  to  an  atten- 
tive, respectable  auditory.  Lodged  with  Edward  Owens.  Thursday, 
we  have  had  a  trying  ride  to  Goshen  chapel.  I  had  a  few  people  to 
hear  me.  Lodged  at  the  widow  Harris's.  I  have  been  blessed  in 
mind,  whilst  administering  the  word  of  truth,  but  greatly  afflicted  in 
body.  At  Clarksburg,  on  Friday,  we  had  a  full  congregation,  and  an 
open  season.  Saturday,  at  Hyattstown,  the  chapel  was  crowded.  It 
was  a  very  liberal  season  to  the  speaker.  I  have  rode  sixteen  miles 
to  see  brother  Wilson  in  his  affliction  ;  the  family  were  greatly  atten- 
tive and  kind  :  the  aged  people  have  sat  under  our  ministry  for  forty 
years  nearly,  and  have  always  hospitably  entertained  our  preachers. 
We  came  back  to  Mr.  M'Elfresh's. 

Sabbath  10.  I  preached  at  Newmarket.  Many  knew  me,  never- 
theless I  frequently  feel  like  a  stranger  in  my  old  home  ;  (Maryland) 
such  changes  has  time  wrought !  I  went  home  with  James  Higgins. 
Tuesday,  I  preached  at  Liberty.  Lodged  at  E.  Howard's  :  when  will 
this  dear  family  embrace  religion  !  On  Wednesday  I  preached  at 
Linganore,  and  spoke  in  great  plainness.  I  saw  the  corpse  of  our 
dear  sister  Jones  in  the  coffin  !  Thursday,  we  came  to  Pipe-Creek. 
I  preached  for  them.  Nancy  Willis  is  a  widow  indeed,  with  six  chil- 
dren !  Henry  Willis-— Ah  !  when  shall  I  look  upon  thy  like  again! 
Friday,  came  through  heavy  dews  to  Aquila  Garreltson's  ;  halted 
awhile,  and  proceeded  forward  to  Providence  chapel ;  here  I  preach- 
ed. We  dined  with  friendly  Mr.  Stockdale,  and  came  on  to  our  bro- 
ther M'Elfresh's,  Reesters-Town.  O,  the  clover  of  Baltimore  circuit! 
Ease,  ease ! — not  for  me— toil,  suffering,  coarse  food,  hard  lodging, 
bugs,  fleas,  and  certain  etceteras  besides  !  Saturday,  we  had  a  solemn 
sitting  in  our  chapel  at  Reesters-Town.  We  called  at  Ellis  Jones's, 
ancient  Methodists  ;  from  thence  we  bent  our  course  over  to  Charles 
Carnan's.  Here  I  heard  the  mournful  news  of  the  death  of  Polly 
Yellott — gone  after  her  father  to  paradise. 

Sabbath  17.  At  the  chapel  I  found  preachers  in  abundance,  and  a 
larger  congregation  than  I  had  expected  ;  as  it  was  an  appointment 
for  me,  I  had  the  labour  to  perform.  How  hardly  shall  preachers  who 

Vol.  III.  39 


viOG  RliV-  FRANCIS  ASEURY's  JOURNAL.  [181  L 

are  well  provided  for,  maintain  the  spirit  of  religion  !  But  here  arc 
eight  young  men  lately  married  :  these  will  call  for  four  hundred  dol- 
dars  per  annum,  additional— so  we  go.  Monday,  preached  at  Hunt's 
chapel,  and  afterward  rode  into  Baltimore.  We  began  our  confe- 
rence in  great  peace  and  order  on  Wednesday  the  20th,  and  rose  on 
Thursday  the  28th.  I  took  my  share  of  the  labour  of  preaching. 
What  the  fruits  of  our  toil  have  been,  and  may  yet  be,  the  God  whom 
we  serve  can  tell :  but  we  have  reasonable  grounds  of  hope  that  it 
has  not  been,  nor  will  yet  be,  in  vain.  I  preached  this  morning  in 
Gatch's  chapel,  and  came  on  to  Perry-Hall.  Friday,  I  preached  to 
about  thirty  souls  in  the  private  chapel  at  Perry-Hall.  All,  to  me, 
seems  yet  to  be  in  sackcloth  here.  Saturday,  I  preached  at  the 
Fork  meeting-house  :  this  is  a  badly  planned  building.  I  dined  with 
Mr.  Gorsuch  ;  and  called  to  see  the  widow  Garrettson.  She  did  not, 
at  first,  recognize  me. 

Sabbath  31.  At  Old  Bush  chapel  I  preached,  and  the  word  was 
heard  and  felt.  I  saw  children  who  now  see  me  for  the  first  time, 
whose  fathers  received  me  forty  years  ago.  Once  more  to  Josias 
Dallam's.  I  baptised  his  little  daughter  Henrietta  Rogers.  I  visited 
his  son  Doctor  William,  and  baptised  his  son  Josias  William  Dallam. 
Monday,  visited  my  old  friend  Bennett.  There  was  such  a  violent 
storm  that  we  waited  four  hours  before  we  ventured  across  the  Sus- 
quehannah.  I  preached  at  North-East  chapel.  Tuesday,  it  is  court 
day  at  Elkton.  I  am  fitter  for  bed  than  the  pulpit ;  but  my  appoint- 
ment must  be  filled,  and  my  sacrifice  offered.  Eating  was  not  the 
business  of  this  day.  I  went  to  John  Carnan's,  Back-Creek.  Here 
I  swallowed  a  grain  and  a  half  of  tartar.  Wednesday,  I  preached  for 
them  at  Bethel  chapel.  I  called  the  society  together,  and  gave  them 
special  counsel,  and  also  information  respecting  the  spreading  of  the 
work  of  God.  Thursday,  I  preached  at  Bethesda  chapel.  It  was  a 
rainy  day.  Friday,  at  Bohemia  Cross-Roads  I  preached  to  a  small 
congregation.  We  had  a  time  not  soon  to  be  forgotten.  I  dined  with 
Doctor  Scott,  and  came  on  to  James  Course's.  Saturday,  it  rained, 
but  did  not  prevent  two  hundred  souls  from  attending  at  the  chapel : 
it  was  a  time  of  deep  seriousness  and  feeling.  We  had  nine  miles  to 
Chester  in  a  heavy  rain  ;  here  I  also  had  a  congregation. 

Sabbath  7.  I  preached  in  Chester,  and  met  the  society,  white  and 
coloured.  I  lodged  at  my  son  William  Burneston's  :  a  few  aged 
steadies  came  to  see  me,  and  dine  with  me,  and  talk  of  past  times. 
Monday,  we  had  a  cold,  easterly  day,  but  a  considerable  congrega- 
tion, to  whom  I  preached.  I  dined  with  Daniel  Burgess,  and  rode 
forward  to   Thomas  Wright's.     I  find  it  my  duty  to  convene  ♦!?... 


iSih]  JtEV.  FRANCIS  ASSURV'S  JOURNAL  .,  307 

societies,  and  give  them  my  advice,  possibly  my  valedictory.  Tues- 
day I  preached  in  the  new  brick  house  at  Centreville.  Dined  with 
John  Brown  in  company  with  aged  brethren  and  sisters.  Lodged  at 
James  Massy's.  Methodists  are  becoming  great  on  this  shore  :  Ah  I 
let  them  take  heed.  The  respectable  society  of  people  called  Metho- 
dists. "Wo  unto  you  when  all  men  shall  speak  well  of  you."  Save 
us  from  this  !  Never  in  any  past  period,  have  we  had  so  much  cause 
to  hope  or  to  fear  as  a  society.  Wednesday,  at  Wye  chapel  I  preach- 
ed, and  the  speaker  and  the  bearers  felt  seriously  and  deeply.  Wre 
dined  with  J.  W.  Boardley,  and  hasted  on  to  Easton,  lodging  with  Mr. 
Lockerman.  My  mind  enjoys  great  peace  and  Gospel  enlargement  ; 
but  I  am  not  so  ready,  upon  all  occasions,  to  speak  to  every  one  who 
comes  into  my  presence.  How  precious  are  their  souls,  and  O,  how 
precious  is  time  !  Thursday.  A  day  of  storms,  but  I  had  a  respec- 
table congregation  to  whom  I  preached  at  St.  Michael's.  Friday.  It 
was  a  solemn  time  at  Easton  whilst  I  was  preaching  from  Luke  xxiii. 

26 — 30  inclusive.     I  covenant  with  General  B n  to  pray  for  hiai 

every  day  ;  he  was  all  feeling  whilst  I  talked  with  him.  I  rode  to 
Tuckahoe  bridge.  Henry  Downs,  his  wife,  and  myself  are  nearly 
ali  who  are  left  of  the  early  Methodists  in  this  neighbourhood  ;  three 
and  thirty  years  make  great  changes  on  the  surface  of  this  world  of 
evanescent  existences.  Saturday,  at  Tuckahoe  chapel,  I  expounded 
Acts  ii.  21.  to  a  large  and  serious  congregation.  WTe  rode  twenty 
miles,  through  storms,  to  Joshua  Massey's. 

Sabbath  14.  A  serene  day,  and  my  mind  is  tranquil :  I  preached 
at  Dudley's  chapel.  We  dined  with  kind  Mr.  Elliott,  whose  father 
was  a  benefactor  to  this  chapel.  After  dinner  and  prayer  we  hasted 
to  the  head  of  Chester,  where  I  preached  in  Mr.  Ferrell's  house  : 
it  appeared  as  if  the  whole  town  came  out  to  hear  :  lodged  at  Christo- 
pher Spry's.  Monday  dined  with  Mr.  Brooke  at  Middletown,  and 
baptised  his  child  :  God  was  present.  I  have  lately  been  truly 
blest  in  my  soul  and  in  my  labours.  A  poor  afflicted  widow  called 
on  me.  For  what  do  I  live  but  to  do  good,  and  to  teach  others  so  to 
do,  both  by  precept  and  example  ?  Tuesday  I  preached  at  Salem, 
and  met  the  society.  It  is  a  day  of  rest  and  peace.  Wednesday  I 
preached  at  Newport  in  the  forenoon,  and  at  night  at  Wilmington. 
Thursday  gave  the  inhabitants  of  Darby  a  discourse,  dined  at  Lewis's, 
and  came  on  to  the  city  to  meet  letters,  preachers,  and  troubles. 
Saturday.   We  opened  our  conference  to-day. 

Pennsylvania. — Sabbath  21.    I  preached  at  Ebenezer  and  in  St, 
George's  chapel. 


308  ke.v.  FRANCIS  ASRUJIY'S  JOURNAL.  [1211. 

Monday  29.  Our  conference  adjourned  :  there  were  no  com- 
plaints, nor  grounds  for  any  :  there  was  preaching,  as  usual,  to  large 
congregations,  and  there  were  manifestations  of  the  power  of  God, 
especially  at  St.  George's.  I  visited  Landreth,  at  his  shruhbery  :  this 
is  a  pious  English  family.  Doctor  Logan  called  upon  me  ;  he  has 
lately  returned  from  England  ;  he  speaks  favourably  of  my  nation. 

Wednesday,  May  1.  I  preached  at  Germantown.  Doctors  Rush 
and  Physic  paid  me  a  visit.  How  consoling  it  is  to  know  that  these 
great  characters  are  men  fearing  God  !  I  was  much  gratified,  aye,  I 
ever  am,  by  their  attentions,  kindness,  and  charming  conversation  ; 
indeed  they  have  been  of  eminent  use  to  me,  and  I  acknowledge 
their  services  with  gratitude.  Thursday  I  preached  at  Homesburg  : 
there  was  a  great  rain,  yet  many  people  attended.  We  went  for- 
ward to  Mr.  Thompson's  through  the  rain,  the  effects  of  which  I  felt 
in  the  evening  ;  I  preached  nevertheless.  Friday  at  Bensalem  chapel 
I  preached  to  a  small  congregation,  dined  with  father  Rodman,  and 
continued  forward  to  Bristol,  where  I  preached  in  the  evening. 
After  forty  years  of  patient  labour  the  work  of  God  has  broke 
forth  gloriously  in  Buck's  county,  and  many  doors  are  now  opened 
to  receive  us.  Saturday  I  preached  at  John  Bailey's,  Marlborough  ; 
after  meeting  we  rode  on  to  Mahannon's,  at  the  Swamp,  where  we 
had  a  crowded  evening  meeting. 

Sabbath  5.  I  preached  under  an  apple-tree.  Came  into  Newtown. 
The  place  was  crowded  with  people  who  came  in  to  see  a  lady  dipt ; 
but  she  was  sick,  and  the  curious  were  disappointed.  At  seven 
o'clock  I  preached  in  the  court- house  ;  this  labour  shall  not  be  in 
vain.     I  lodged  with  Lawyer  Hugh  Ross,  now  a  Methodist  preacher. 

Monday  6.  I  preached  to  a  few  people  at  W.  Wherill's :  toil, 
toil !  Murmuring  flesh,  be  still !  Our  ride  has  been  through  exces- 
sive rain  to-day. 

Tuesday  7.  We  started  and  came  to  Henkle's  tavern  and  dined. 
Went  forward  to  John  Purcell's,  where  I  found  a  crowded  house  :  I 
preached,  and  the  truth  was  deeply  felt  by  some.  I  have  proclaimed 
the  truth  to  many  souls  lately,  and  I  feel  the  effect  of  my  labours  : 
my  reward  is  with  my  God. 

New-Jersey. — Wednesday  8.  Crossed  the  Delaware,  and  sat 
down  in  Godley's  school-room  and  taught  the  people  :  my  subject 
was  Acts  iii.  26. 

Thursday  9.  We  came  to  Asbury,  and  I  preached  and  added  a 
special  exhortation.  Were  it  not  for  the  brewing  and  drinking  mise- 
rable whiskey,  Asbury-Town  would  be  a  pleasant  place.     Friday,  to 


1811.]  HEV.  FRANCIS  asbuuy's  journal.  309 

James  Egbert's.  Bethel  chapel  has  been  bought  and  refitted  for  the 
Methodists  :  I  preached  in  it.  .  I  am  unknown  in  Jersey,  and  ever 
shall  be,  I  presume  :  after  forty  years'  labour  we  have  not  ten  thou- 
sand in  membership. 

Saturday  11.    At  Philip  Cummings's,  Sussex  county:  I  preached 
for  them.     A  damp,  cold  ride  of  seven  miles  brought  us  to  Albert- 


son's. 


Sabbath  12.  I  preached  to  a  crowded  house  at  Union  chapel. 
Twenty-three  years  ago  I  preached  here.  The  Moravian  brethren 
are  almost  extinct. 

Monday  13.  I  preached  at  the  stone  church. 

Tuesday  14.  I  preached  at  Father  Andrew  Freeman's. 

Wednesday  15.  I  preached  at  Sussex  court-house,  and  felt  as  if 
my  labour  was  not  in  vain  :  the  minds  of  the  people  were  open  for 
the  reception  of  the  truth.  We  went  to  Lockwood,  and  at  eight 
o'clock  1  preached  in  Jonathan  Hunt's  meeting-house. 

Thursday  16.  We  had  a  heavy  ride  to  father  Laursnat's,  and  such 
another  to  Morristown,  and  a  third  to  the  Turkey-Hills,  where  I 
preached.     I  have  met  the  societies  generally 

New- York. — Sunday  19.  As  we  were  preparing  to  go  to  the 
houses  of  God  a  dreadful  fire  broke  out,  consuming  about  one  hun- 
dred houses.  I  preached  to  some  serious  sisters  in  John-street.  1 
officiated  at  Greenwich  in  the  new  chapel  after  dinner. 

Thursday  25.  Ordained  deacons  ;  Bishop  M'Kendree  preached. 

Sabbath  27.  I  preached  in  the  African  church,  as  also  in  the  new 
and  in  the  Bowery  church :  I  met  the  societies  in  each  place  of 
worship.  Father  Blackborne's  case  occupied  us  two  days:  he  was 
taken  into  connexion  and  ordained  a  deacon,  although  he  brought  no 
recommendation  to  us  from  the  British  or  any  other  conference. 

Tuesday  29.  Conference  ceased  their  labours.  There  was  little 
trouble  in  the  business  of  appointments :  stationed  eighty-seven, 
superannuated  two,  and  supernumeraries  five  ;  increase  about  three 
hundred.  There  were  three  preachers  sent  to  other  conferences. 
Return  to  thy  rest,  O  my  soul !  The  society  in  New- York  has 
increased  ;  our  chapels  are  neat,  and  their  debt  is  not  heavy  :  they 
wish  to  rebuild  John-street  church,  and  to  build  a  small  house  at  the 
Two  Mile  Stone.  So  frequent  are  the  visits  of  the  people  to  talk  or 
to  do  business,  that  1  have  not  time  to  think  or  to  pray,  scarcely  : 
H  bear  it  all  patiently.  I  preached  at  the  Two  Mile  Stone,  and  retired 
to  George  Suckley's.  1  resemble  my  Master  in  one  thing — /  cannot 
he  hid -—they  find  me  out. 


310  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBUILY'S  JOI'JINAL.  [1811. 

Saturday,  June  1.  A  very  warm  ride  to  Sherwood's.   I  feel  nothing 
like  fretfulness — I  am  willing  to  listen  patiently,  and  endure  all  things. 

Sabbath  2.  At  Sherwood's  chapel  I  preached,  and  also  to  the  socie- 
ty at  New-Rochelle.    I  was  divinely  assisted  in  my  labours  this  day 

it  is  a  day  of  calm  and  liberty  to  my  soul.  Monday.  Twenty-five 
miles  to  Governor  Cortlandt's,  at  the  mouth  of  Croton  :  I  preached 
at  four  o'clock.  It  was  a  day  of  militia  training ;  this  circumstance, 
and  a  failure  of  early  notice,  gave  me  a  thin  congregation.  Ah  !  what 
need  of  watchfulness  in  the  houses  of  the  rich,  lest  we  defile  our  own 
souls,  and  more  than  lose  our  labour !  Tuesday,  I  felt  divine  liberty 
whilst  preaching  at  Somers-Town.  We  lodged  with  Samuel  Wilson 
— wealthy  and  kind.  At  Lemuel  Cliff's,  another  man  of  wealth  : 
here  I  preached  on  Wednesday.  On  Thursday  I  preached  in  the 
new  chapel,  Pauldings-Town.  We  lodged  with  Captain  Pierce,  a  man 
of  open  mind,  and  generous  soul.  Friday,  we  took  the  road  to  Nice's, 
dined,  and  went  forward  to  Amenia.     Saturday,  peace,  rest,  love. 

Sabbath  9.  I  preached  at  George  Ingraham's  ;  there  were  manv 
people,  although  the  morning  was  rainy.  I  met  the  society  after  some 
exhortations  had  been  given.  There  has  been,  and  will  yet  be  a  work 
in  this  town.  They  have  built  a  new  chapel.  Lansforth  Whiting, 
appointed  to  the  western  circuit,  in  returning  from  conference  at 
New-York,  was  taken  with  small-pox,  and  died  at  Poughkeepsie  ;  he 
was  solemn  in  deportment,  and  very  pious  :  he  has  gone  to  an  early 
crown.  How  many  triumphant  witnesses  for  Jesus  have  passed  away 
before  my  eyes,  I  might  almost  say,  within  the  last  forty  years  !  Mon- 
day, I  preached  at  Thomas  Heywood's  :  it  was  a  blessed  season. 
Great  accommodations  in  this  part  of  the  world  :  our  preachers  will  do 
well  to  take  heed.  Stephen  Sornborger  was  above  his  work;  so  he 
let  another  take  his  station.  I  read  Adam  Clarke,  and  am  amused  as 
well  as  instructed.  He  indirectly  unchristianizes  all  old  bachelors.  Wo 
is  me  !  It  was  not  good  that  Adam  should  be  alone  for  better  reasons 
than  any  that  Adam  Clarke  has  given.  How  will  our  commentator 
comment  on  Isaiah  lvi.  3,  4,  5.  ;  on  1  Corinthians  vii.  7,  8,  17,  27, 
32,  34.  ;  and  will  he  not  need  great  skill  to  manage  well  for  his  pur- 
pose Matthew  xix.  12.?  It  may  be  the  indispensible  duty  of  some 
men  and  women  to  marry  ;  the  necessity,  or  the  peculiarity  of  cir- 
cumstances which  would  impose  this  as  a  duty,  or  only  allow  it  as  an 
indulgence,  who  is  to  judge  of— the  parties  themselves  ?  could  they 
be  out  of  the  body  awhile,  we  might  allow  them  to  be  umpires  in 
their  own  cases.  Adam  does  not  seem  to  take  into  the  account  Mrs. 
Clarke,  so  much  as  the  wife.  Will  he  always  marry  as  often  as  the 
law  will  allow  ?    Tuesday,  at  Hillsdale  chapel  I  preached  and  mot 


1811.]  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASSUftr'S  JOURNAL,  31! 

the  society.  We  lodged  at  Reed's,  an  old  member  from  New- York. 
We  rode  thirty  miles  to  Lenox  in  Massachusetts,  passing  Barrington 
and  Stockbridge  :  I  preached  at  eight  o'clock.  Here  are  walls  of  op- 
position to  be  levelled  before  we  can  hope  for  success.  Lodged  at 
Mr.  Whiting's.  Thursday,  Pittsfield.  We  have  rode  two  hundred 
miles  since  we  left  New-York,  and  have  preached  every  day,  and  the 
preachers  there  are  hardly  starting  to  their  stations  ;  but  they  have 
wives.  I  preached  in  the  chapel,  and  the  truth  was  felt.  Friday  I 
preached  at  Lenox  in  the  evening.  Saturday,  we  came  through  Ben- 
nington to  Ashgrove. 

Vermont. — Sabbath  16.  I  preached  in  the  chapel.  Bishop 
M'Kendree  also  preached.  J  also  preached  at  Mr.  Nicholas's  ;  our 
labours  shall  not  all  be  lost.  Monday  came  on  to  Salem,  and  lodged 
in  Wells.  Tuesday,  to  Pittsfield.  Wednesday,  a  heavy  ride  of 
twenty  miles  brought  us  to  Barnard's.  Here  have  been  many  loca- 
tions, and  serious  failures  of  duty.  We  began  our  conference  on. 
Thursday  ;  worked  with  great  expedition,  and  finished  in  four  days 
and  a  half.  There  was  a  general  fast  on  Friday,  and  deacons  ordain- 
ed. On  the  Sabbath  I  preached  to  about  three  thousand  people-— 
some  of  them  were  wild  enough.  On  Monday  I  ordained  the  elders. 
George  Pickering  preached.  We  disposed  of  eighty-seven  preach- 
ers, and  each  man  took  his  station  at  once,  and  without  hesitancy", 
like  a  man  of  God.  Tuesday,  we  came  away,  as  conference  broke 
up  at  twelve  o'clock.  At  one  o'clock  many  of  those  hardy  soldiers 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  were  already  to  horse,  and  their  faces  set  to  the 
v.ilds,  or  wherever  else  their  duty  called  them.  On  Wednesday  we 
crossed  the  grand  mountain,  and  came  into  Middleburg.  Here  is 
college-craft,  and  priest-craft.  We  have  a  respectable  little  societv 
of  about  twenty  members,  but  no  chapel :  I  preached  in  the  court- 
house. I  have  moved  a  subscription  to  build  a  house  sixty-four  by 
fortv-four,  on  the  lot  fronting  the  college.  The  Lord  will  visit  Mid- 
dleburg. Thursday,  started  in  a  pealing  storm  for  Vergennes.  Fri- 
day, we  came  to  Charlotte,  and  crossed  Lake  Champlain  to  Sable- 
River.  We  were  welcomed  by  John  Moorhouse.  Saturday,  busv 
writing,  and  occasionally  reading. 

New-York. — Sabbath  30.  1  preached  in  the  new  chapel  to  one 
thousand  souls,  I  presume  ;  it  was  a  gracious  time — the  Spirit  gave 
and  applied  the  word.  I  hastened  to  Plattsburg  to  fill  an  appoint- 
ment at  four  o'clock,  where  I  preached  in  a  very  commodious 
tavern-room  ;  the  word  was  great  by  the  power  of  God,  although 
delivered  in  weakness  of  body  :  the  heat  and  the  labour  almost  over 
came  me.     Rode  five  miles  in  the  evening  to  Burdock.     Mondav, 


312  jtt;y.  francis  asbury's  journal.  [liiii^ 

breakfasted  with  William  Mitchell,  and  dined  with  Henrick  Johnson. 
We  have  made  forty-two  miles  through  open  woods,  and  over  despe- 
rate roads.  Tuesday,  dined  at  French-Mills.  Heat,  heat !  At  the 
Indian  village,  I  led  my  horse  across  the  pole  bridge  ;  careful  as  I 
was,  he  got  his  feet  in  an  opening,  and  sunk  into  mud  and  water  ; 
away  went  the  bags— books  and  clothes  wet  ;  and  the  horse  yet  fast. 
We  pried  with  a  pole  at  the  stern,  and,  he,  by  making  a  desperate 
effort  at  the  same  time,  plunged  forward,  and  came  out.  The  mos- 
chetoes  were  not  idle  whilst  we  were  busy.  We  got  to  the  town, 
and  saw  their  elegant  church.  At  eight  o'clock  we  set  sail,  and  cross- 
ed the  St.  Lawrence  by  rowing  :  the  river  here  is  three  miles  wide. 
We  rode  through  Cornwall  in  the  night,  and  came  to  Evan  Roy's, 
making  forty-four  miles  for  the  day's  journey.  It  is  surprising  how 
we  make  nearly  fifty  miles  a  day  over  such  desperate  roads  as  we 
have  lately  travelled  :  we  lose  no  time  :  Ah !  why  should  we— it  is 
so  precious  !  My  strong  affection  for  the  people  of  the  United  States 
came  with  strange  power  upon  me  whilst  I  was  crossing  the  line.  I 
suffer  much  from  my  lame  feet  and  the  great  heat ;  and  no  small  in- 
convenience because  I  had  not  been  instructed  how  to  prepare  my 
mind  and  body  for  the  change  I  discover  on  this  side.  Tuesday  I 
preached,  and  again  on  Wednesday  :  we  rode  along  the  banks  of  the 
river  ;  they  are  neatly  and  pleasantly  improved.  We  dined  with  Ste- 
phen Bajly,  and  went  from  thence  with  brother  Glassford,  in  his 
Calash.  I  asked  him  how  we  were  to  get  out  if  we  upset ;  his  an- 
swer was  actual  experiment :  the  saplings  on  the  side  of  the  path 
broke  the  fall,  so  that  we  escaped  unhurt.  Thursday,  on  the  oppo- 
site shore  they  are  firing  for  the  fourth  of  July.  What  have  I  to  do 
with  this  waste  of  powder  ?  I  pass  the  pageantry  of  the  day  unheed- 
ed on  the  other  side  :  why  should  I  have  new  feelings  in  Canada  ? 
Friday,  I  preached  at  the  German  settlement :  I  was  weak  in  body, 
yet  greatly  helped  in  speaking.  Here  is  a  decent,  loving  people  ;  my 
soul  is  much  united  to  them.  I  called  upon  father  Dulmage  :  and  on 
brother  Hicks — a  branch  of  an  old  Irish  stock  of  Methodists  in  New- 
York.  I  lodged  at  David  Brackenridge's,  above  Johnston.  Saturday, 
we  rode  twelve  miles  for  our  breakfast.  Reached  Elizabeth-Town. 
Our  ride  has  brought  us  through  one  of  the  finest  countries  I  have 
ever  seen  :  the  timber  is  of  a  noble  size  ;  the  cattle  are  well  shaped 
and  well-looking :  the  crops  are  abundant,  on  a  most  fruitful  soil: 
surely  this  is  a  land  that  God  the  Lord  hath  blessed. 

Upper  Canada. — Sunday  7.  I  rose  in  pain.  We  have  a  large,  unfi- 
nished house  ;  in  which  we  congregated  for  love-feast  at  eight  o'clock, 
and  sacrament :  I  could  not  speak  long.     We  had  about  one  thousand 


181L]  AEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL,  313 

souls  together.     Monday,  we  took  the  path  to  Mallory's,  where  we 
dined,  and  continued  on  to  Baldwin's,  and  from  thence  to  Joel  Stone's, 
at  the  mouth  of  Canadiguk.     The  pain  in  my  foot  is  so  severe  that  I 
cannot  much  enjoy  the  great  kindness  of  these  people.     Tuesday,  a 
heavy  ride  brought  me  to  Elias  Dulmage's.    My  foot  is  much  inflamed, 
and  my  whole  body  disordered.     Wednesday  I  preached  in  the  new 
chapel  at  Kingston.     I  have  applied  a  poultice  to  my  foot :  I  must  do 
something  to  hasten  a  cure,  or  I  shall  scarcely  reach  conference  in, 
time.     Wrote  six  letters.     Reading — amongst  the  rest,  Mr.  Wesley's 
sermon  on  "  If  the  light  which  is  in  thee  be  darkness."  If  a  rich,  serious 
young  lady  should  marry  a  rich  child  of  the  devil,  she  would  lose  her 
light  ;  and  though  she  might  not  be  willing  to  allow  that  it  was  extin- 
guished, her  pious  friends  would  soon  see  in  her  nought  but  dark- 
ness.    Why  not  marry  a  handsome  young  Methodist  preacher  ?  she 
would  then  have  something  for  her  money — she  would  have  good- 
ness ;  for  after  all,  who  are  good,  if  not  those  who  practise  goodness, 
and  who  teach  others  so  to  do.    But  Mr.  Wesley  meant  not  this  ;  for 
he  knew,  and  so  do  I  know,  that  it  would  scarcely  be  good  for  more 
than  one  of  the  parties  :  few  preachers,  if  any,   have  been  as  holy 
and  useful  in  after  as  in  former  life,  who  have  married  rich  women  • 
and  some  have  ended  in  apostacy.     I  write  and  read  in  great  pain. 

Sunday  14.  I  would  not  willingly  be  dumb  ;  so  I  sent  round  and 
got  a  congregation,  to  whom  I  preached  at  the  chapel.     I  met  the 
society,  and  baptised  two  children.     Alas,  for  us  !  we  want  help.     I 
learn  from  a  conversation  had  with   Catharine   Detlor,  that  Philip 
Embury  died  about  two  hundred  miles  from  York  :    he  was  much 
esteemed  by  his  neighbours,  and  an  esquire.     He  was  a  descendant 
of  the  Palatines  who  settled  in  Ireland.     Most  of  those  there,  and 
their  offspring,  have  given  themselves  to  the  Methodists.    He  injured 
himself  by  mowing,  and  died  somewhat  suddenly,  aged  forty-five^ 
greatly  loved  and  much  lamented.     Monday,  we  must  away  ;  and 
leave  good  houses,  grand  Roman  Catholic  church,  Episcopal  church, 
and  Kingston,  with  its  garrison  and  great  guns.    We  might  go  by  land, 
cross  three  ferry's,  and  travel  desperate  roads  ;  or  we  might  take  the 
packet  for  Sackets-Harbour  :  we  chose  the  latter.    A  tremendous  pas- 
sage we  had.     We  arrived  at  two  o'clock  next  day.     Here  we  dined 
and  set  forward  in  a  heavy  thunder  shower.     When  we  stopped  I 
must  preach  :  I  begged  it  might  be  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning,  for 
my  swelled  foot  was  very  painful.     Wednesday,  I  have  passed  a  night 
o    gr^at  pain  and  disquietude,  occasioned  by  my  foot,  and  afflicted 
viscera.     I  preached  at  six  o'clock,  and  was  blest  in  my  own  souL 
We  rode  on  thirty-eight  miles  to  Porter's  tavern  ■  where  we  wera 

Vol.  III.  10 


314  KKV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL.  [1811, 

well  nursed  and  entertained.  Friday,  sore,  lame,  weary.  I  got  safe 
to  Paris.  My  spirit  rejoiced  with  dear  bishop  M'Kendree  :  he 
nursed  me  as  if  I  had  been  his  own  babe.  In  all  my  toils  and  suffer- 
ings, I  am  thankful  that  I  failed  in  only  one  appointment.  Well  ;  I 
have  been  to  Canada,  and  find  it  like  all  stations  in  the  extremities — 
there  are  difficulties  to  overcome,  and  prospects  to  cheer  us.  Some 
of  our  labourers  have  not  been  so  faithful  and  diligent  as  we  could 
wish.  Doctor  Coke  says  fifteen  hundred  miles  in  nine  weeks  ;  I  may 
say  sixteen  hundred  miles  in  sixty  days.  He  writes  me  that  Parlia- 
ment, by  some  other  act,  is  about  to  explain  the  toleration  act,  and 
that  the  dissenters  have  taken  the  alarm.  This  is  exactly  what  the 
establishment  have  had  for  some  time  ;  and  no  marvel  ;  Whilst  the 
Methodists  are  labouring,  by  night  and  by  day,  from  village  to  village, 
through  the  whole  United  Kingdoms.  Saturday  we  opened  the 
Genesee  conference.     We  passed  thirty-eight  characters. 

New- York. — Sunday  21.  I  preached  in  the  woods  at  ten  o'clock, 
and  ag-ain  at  two  o'clock.  Bishop  M'Kendree,  brothers  Ostrander, 
Ryan,  Kelsey,  and  Paddock  also  preached.  There  might  be  two 
thousand  people,  who  were  very  attentive.  It  is  said  the  wise  men 
in  York  conference  have  discovered  that  it  will  be  far  better  to  elect 
the  presiding  elders  in  conference,  and  give  them  the  power  of  sta- 
tioning  the  preachers.     I  suppose  we  shall  hear  more  of  this. 

Friday  26.  Conference  rose.  All  went  on  at  fair  sitting  smoothly  : 
the  elections  came  on,  and  there  was  some  disposition  manifested  to 
reject  the  Canadians  and  presiding  elders.  The  stations  were  re- 
ceived in  great  peace.  We  have  about  forty  most  pleasing  young 
men.  There  are  six  hundred  and  sixty-three  on  the  present  minutes. 
We  came  away  to  Bridgewater.  Saturday,  reached  New  Berlin,  and 
lodged  with  Matthew  Coukin.  If  the  preachers  take  any  specific  power, 
right,  or  privilege  from  the  bishops  which  the  general  conference 
may  have  given  them,  it  is  clear  that  they  dissolve  the  whole  contract. 

Sabbath  28.  At  Matthew  Coukin's.  There  was  no  house  with  a 
room  large  enough,  so  we  took  to  the  woods.  About  five  hundred 
most  attentive  people  listened  whilst  I  expounded  1  Cor.  i.  29 — 31.  : 
I  was  long  and  loud.  My  bowels  are  in  a  bad  state,  and  1  am  fever- 
ish ;  but  I  bless  the  Lord  that  when  I  cannot  stand  I  can  lean  upon  a 
table  and  declare  his  truth.  Monday.  Crossed  Jericho  bridge  over 
the  Susquehannab,  four  miles  below  the  mouth  of  Unadilla.  We  came 
in  to  Samuel  Banks's,  before  a  rain  began  to  fall.  I  feel,  very  sen- 
sibly, the  least  irregular  motion  of  my  horse,  whether  of  start  or 
stumble.  I  must  needs  preach.  We  had  about  forty  men,  women, 
and  children  to  hear  us.     Tuesday.  We  rode  thirty  miles.  1  preach- 


1811.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  31£* 

ed  in  the  evening  at  eight  o'clock,  at  my  host's,  Jonas  Bush's.  We  got 
late  to  bed  I  was  in  great  suffering,  but  I  felt  that  God  is  love. 
Wednesday  we  found  shelter  from  the  rain  under  the  hospitable  roof 
of  Lawyer  Cattin. 

Thursday,  August  1.  At  brother  Paine's  I  preached  and  adminis 
tered  the  Lord's  Supper.  My  right  foot  is  lame.  Friday  we  came 
along  the  pleasant  banks  of  Tochannock.  My  lame  horse  grows 
worse.  We  stopped  at  Dickson's,  where  1  gave  ninety  dollars  for  a 
mare  to  supply  the  place  of  poor  Spark,  which  I  sold  for  twenty  dol- 
lars ;  when  about  to  start  he  whickered  after  us  ;  it  went  to  my  heart 
— poor  slave ;  how  much  toil  has  he  patiently  endured  for  me  !  We 
rested  a  few  minutes  at  father  Holmes's,  on  our  way  to  Keeler's 
ferry.  We  lodged  at  father  Sutton's.  I  limped  about,  sung,  talked, 
and  prayed.  Dear  M'Kendree  seemed  to  be  low  in  spirits.  Satur- 
day came  on  to  Kingston,  and  thence  to  Wyoming,  stopping  at  Mr. 
Shumaker's.  We  have  made  a  journey  of  twelve  hundred  miles 
since  leaving  New-York.  My  consolations  exceedingly  abound  in 
God,  though  my  sufferings  be  great.  The  eight  conferences  have 
furnished  us  with  twenty-fire  dollars  each,  making  two  hundred  dol- 
lars ;  our  expenses  hitherto  are  one  hundred  and  thirty  dollars. 

Pennsylvania. — Sabbath  4.  Preached  at  the  Methodistico-pres- 
byterian  church  at  Kingston  ;  it  was  a  time  of  freedom,  and  words 
were  given  me  to  speak  which  were  felt  by  preachers  and  people.  I 
also  preached  at  Wilksbarre,  and  had  a  liberal  season.  We  were  in- 
vited to  Judge  Fell's,  and  were  treated  kindly.  Monday  we  rode 
thirty-five  miles  to  Mervin's.  My  foot  is  highly  inflamed.  Tuesday, 
we  were  compelled  to  stop  at  Ritter's,  within  two  miles  of  Allentown. 
I  was  very  ill  with  a  high  fever.  Wednesday,  came  to  Echart's  ta- 
vern, thirty-five  miles.  Thursday.  I  wished  to  rest  to-day,  because 
of  the  inflamed  and  painful  foot,  but  it  might  not  be.  We  made 
twenty-seven  miles  to  Samuel  Davis's  ;  and  I  came  in  with  a  high 
fever.  Friday,  hard  labour.  We  had  rain.  We  reached  Martin 
Boehm's,  twenty  miles.  My  flesh  is  ready  to  think  it  something  for  a 
man  of  sixty-six,  with  a  highly  inflamed  and  painful  foot,  to  ride  nearly 
four  hundred  miles  on  a  stumbling,  starting  horse,  slipping  or  blun- 
dering over  desperate  roads  from  Paris  to  this  place  in  twelve   days 

Sabbath  12.  I  preached  in  Boehm's  chapel.  There  is  a  camp- 
meeting  thirty  miles  distant  from  hence  ;  but  I  cannot  be  there — I 
have  the  will,  but  I  want  time  and  strength.  Tuesday.  Yesterday  and 
to-day  I  have  written  fifteen  letters.  I  am  unspeakably  happy  in  God. 
Wednesday.  They  will  have  me  away  to  the  camp-meeting.  John 
Boehm  will  take  me  and  bring  me  back  in  the  carriage.    Thursday,  f 


316  REV,  FRANCIS  ASBURY?S  JOURNAL.  [1311. 

preached  to  about  two  thousand  souls.  Friday,  the  heat  was  exces- 
sive ;  and  O,  the  rocky  road,  the  flies,  and  my  dysentery !  I  had  a 
high  fever,  and  passed  an  awful  night.  I  have  an  appointment  to  fill 
this  day,  Saturday.  At  three  o'clock  I  preached  at  Strasburg,  and 
returned  again  to  father  Boehm's.  I  take  a  few  glasses  of  the  old 
man's  Rhenish  wine  to  check  my  bowel-complaint. 

Sabbath  18.  I  lectured  at  Lancaster  on  the  parable  of  the  sower. 
I  dealt  very  plainly  with  my  audience,  who  were  deeply  attentive. 
My  appointment  had  been  noticed  in  the  public  papers  of  yesterday. 
Returned  in  the  evening  to  father  Boehm's.  Monday,  I  preached  at 
Columbia  :  I  was  faint,  and  the  heat  excessive.  Wednesday,  I  preach- 
ed at  Little  York  ;  it  was  an  open  time.  Thursday,  we  dined  in  Berlin, 
and  came  on  to  the  twenty-five  mile  house.  Friday,  reached  Cham- 
bersburg.     Wrote  six  letters.     Saturday,  very  weak  indeed. 

Sabbath  24.  I  preached  at  our  old  church,  and  met  the  society.  I 
also  preached  in  the  Presbyterian  church  at  four  o'clock.  Jt  has  been 
a  day  of  God  to  my  soul.  We  are  strict  on  the  Lord's  day  in  this 
town — we  stop  wagons  which  may  attempt  to  travel  through.  Monday 
we  kept  our  faces  westward,  passing  through  Campbells- Town  and 
Connellsburg  to  Bedford.  Jacob  Bonnelt  was  exceeding  kind,  but 
strangely  shy  of  our  company.  Tuesday,  thirty-one  miles  to  Graft's. 
Wednesday  and  Thursday  at  John  Bonnett's  :  there  is  a  great  diffe- 
rence in  the  brothers,  in  some  particulars,  but  they  have  kindred  spi- 
rits. Friday,  to  Millar's,  a  German  descendant,  as  are  most  of  the 
families  where  we  stop  between  Lancaster  and  Pittsburg.  Sabbath  I 
preached  twice.     We  lodge  with  John  Wrenshall. 

Monday,  September  1.  Excessive  heat.  I  rest  to-day.  Wrote  to 
Doctor  Coke,  to  brothers  Hitt,  George,  Wells,  Gruber,  Jackson. 
Tuesday,  came  away,  thirty  miles,  to  the  Cross-Roads.  Wednesday, 
at  Steubenville  :  I  must  needs  preach  in  Basil  Wells's  fine  house  ; 
many  were  present  to  hear.  This  place  had  been  well  nigh  given  up  ; 
but  behold,  now  an  elegant  brick  chapel  fifty  by  thirty-five  feet,  on  a 
grand  eminence.  I  heard  of  a  camp-meeting  ten  miles  above  Jones- 
x  ille.  Thursday,  we  passed  through  Cadiz  to  father  Barrett's,  thirty- 
two  miles.  Friday,  a  rapid  march  brought  us  to  Seward's  in  Cam- 
bridge, on  Will's  creek.  Saturday  came  along,  through  Jonesville, 
to  camp-meeting,  where  I  found  Bishop  M'Kendree.  I  wet  my  feet, 
as  1  too  frequently  do  in  crossing  the  deep  waters  ;  nevertheless,  my 
body  is  not  prostrated,  and  my  mind  enjoys  great  peace. 

Ohio. — Sabbath  8.  I  preached,  and  others  preached,  and  there  were 
many  exhortations  given,  and  not  a  few  deep  and  sound  conversions, 
Monday,  came  away,  and  reached  David  Swayse'??  thirty-three  mi!": 


1611.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  317 

from  the  camp.  It  became  my  duty  to  visit  Mr.  Williamson  :  he  is 
alarmed  by  a  great  discharge  of  blood,  and  wishes  to  live  that  he  may 
lament  his  sins,  and  reconcile  himself  to  God.  Tuesday,  I  preached 
at  Edward  Seale's.  Wednesday,  We  have  rain — in  mercy,  if  not 
in  answer  to  prayer.  We  rode  to  Judge  Vanmeeter's,  the  first  house 
that  received  me  on  this  side  of  New-Lancaster.  My  mind  is  greatly 
given  to  God.  Thursday,  crossed  the  Picaway  Plains  to  White 
Brown's.  Friday,  Came  on  to  Wood's  ;  here  I  rest  indeed  :  how 
sweet !     Saturday  we  came  to  Pelhanrs.     Betsy   Pelham  still  lives. 

Sunday  15.  I  preached  at  the  camp-meeting;  and  laboured 
hard.  I  availed  myself  of  my  situation,  to  lay  a  twelve  days'  plan. 
Monday,  There  is  good  done  here.  I  do  not  like  the  disposition  of 
some  of  the  ground,  and  think  also  that  better  regulations  might  be 
made,  and  more  order  kept,  Tuesday,  we  have  an  eclipse.  I 
preached  at  Union  school-house.  Wednesday,  to  Robert  Boggesse's, 
near  Yellow-Springs  :  1  preached  here  to  a  small  assembly,  who  ap- 
peared to  be  somewhat  heavy  with  sleep.  Thursday  I  preached  at 
Carter's,  in  Springfield.  A  general  muster  of  militia  made  our  meet- 
ing smaller  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been  ;  but  it  was  a  time  of 
strength  to  the  speaker.  Friday,  1  preached  at  Urbanna  :  the  house 
was  open  ;  the  weather  bad,  yet  I  was  helped.  I  saw  Colonel  Bar- 
ratt's  third  son  in  fellowship  :  his  pious  father  went  in  joy  and  peace 
—doubtless  to  glory.    He  had  been  thirty  years  a  member  of  society. 

Saturday  21.  Bent  our  way  down  Mad-River  :  here  is  great  land. 
We  held  a  meeting  at  Lamb's,  in  New  Boston.  On  my  way  I  called 
at  Ross's,  at  whose  house  I  had  preached  on  the  south  branch  of 
Patomac,  thirty  years  ago.  Not  having  eaten  since  morning,  we 
relished  our  supper  at  William  Armour's,  mouth  of  Mad-River. 

Sunday  22.  I  preached  in  the  court-house  at  Dayton.  We  may 
have  had  one  thousand  people  to  hear  us.  Dinnerless,  we  came  in 
the  evening  to  Nathan  Horner's,  and  supped  and  lodged.  My  skin 
and  flesh  complains,  but  my  mind  is  undisturbed.  Monday,  I  preached 
in  a  storehouse  in  Franklin  :  I  was  not  at  home.  I  came  away  with 
George  Hantsberger.  Hail,  solitude,  and  peace,  and  plenty  !  Behold, 
I  had  to  dig  up  John  Death  and  hi9  wife — he  had,  indeed,  been  spi- 
ritually so  :  I  found  them  out  without  much  difficulty  :  they  were 
old  acquaintances  on  the  Monongahela,  in  early  times.  Tuesday,  at 
Lebanon,  I  preached  and  called  the  society  together.  We  devised 
the  building  of  a  chapel  of  brick,  forty  by  sixty  feet,  and  one  story 
high.  We  lodged  with  M'Greeves  :  we  were  hungry  and  weary,  and 
he  was  sick — bad  enough.  Frederick  Stiers  reports  that  there  was  a 
great  work  of  God  at  Blount  camp-meeting  in  the  Holston  district ;  at 


310  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOVRNAL.  [1811  = 

Lee,  at  Tazwell,  at  Washington,  at  Tennessee,  at  Green,  at  Hawkins, 
at  Winton,  at  Powell's  Valley,  at  Tennessee  Valley — at  all  these  there 
were  many  souls  converted  :  one  hundred  and  thirty-two  joined  in 
communion  with  the  Methodists,  besides  ten  half-breeds.  Wednes- 
day, after  the  rain,  we  made  a  rapid  ride  to  M'Grew's.  Thursday, 
I  preached  at  Milford  chapel.  Friday,  preached  at  Oliver  Longdon's. 
Saturday,  came  to  Cincinnati. 

Sunday  29.  I  preached,  and  ordained  M.  Geohagom,  Michael 
Rouse,  J.  Voice,  D.  Anderson,  J.  Evans,  J.  B.  Finley,  Thomas  Nel- 
son, S.  West,  Abraham  Cummins,  Samuel  Heliums,  John  H.  Thomp- 
son, John  Manley,  Francis  Travis,  John  Brown,  Abraham  Hunt,  John 
Clark,  R.  Rowe,  B.  Vanpelt,  I.  Smith,  and  Joshua  Holland.  We 
have  been  five  days  sitting  in  conference :  there  has  been  weighty 
and  critical  business  before  us,  but  we  wrought  with  industry  and 
great  order. 

Sunday,  October  6.  I  preached  ;  bishop  M'Kendree  preached,  as 
did  others,  and  our  labour  has  not  been  in  vain.  We  occupied  the 
market- house  as  well  as  the  chapel.  Friday,  after  a  session  of  ten 
days,  our  western  conference  rose.  I  had  little  trouble  about  the  sta- 
tions— I  heard  of  no  complaints.  There  were  one  hundred  and  two 
preachers  ;  one  hundred  of  whom  are  stationed  :  we  lack  twenty- 
two.     Saturday,  resting,  and  in  prayer. 

Sunday  14.  I  preached  once  more  in  the  chapel :  it  was  a  farewell 
warning  to  the  preachers.  I  met  the  society  ;  baptised  some  chil- 
dren, and  visited  the  sick.  Monday,  we  took  to  horse,  and  came 
away  to  Falmouth,  forty-two  miles.  Our  pack-horse  is  lame.  Wed- 
nesday, we  came  on  to  Martin  Hitt's.  Thursday,  arrived  in  the  night 
at  Colonel  Johnson's — a  forty  miles'  ride  to  day.  Friday,  a  ten  miles' 
ride  in  the  night,  added  to  our  day's  ride,  made  fifty  miles  to  Pitman's. 
Saturday,  we  came  in,  in  an  awful  storm,  to  Johnson's. 

Kentucky.— Sunday  21.  We  found  the  Cumberland  rising.  We 
rode  twenty-five  miles  to  White's,  and  rested.  Monday,  to  Cheek's. 
Tuesday,  to  Conway's.  It  is  hard  labour,  but  God  is  with  us.  Wed- 
nesday, to  Louisville.  Thursday,  We  started  at  seven  o'clock,  and 
came  in  at  seven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  and  have  made  no  great  way. 
We  put  up  at  L.  Bostwick's.  The  work  of  the  Lord  hath  been  manifest- 
ed here.  My  afflictions  of  body  are  very  great — the  Lord  is  pleased 
to  humble  me  :  perfect  through  sufferings  !  The  Lord's  will  be  done  ! 
Thursday,  I  preached  at  Louisville,  in  great  affliction  of  body  ;  but 
it  was  a  liberal  season  :  glory  be  to  God  for  that !  Friday,  a  heavy 
ride  to  Waynesborough  ;  stopped  at  Colonel  Milton's.  It  is  as  warm 
as  July.     Saturday,  after  preaching  in  the  old  church,  I  retired  to  thp 


1811.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  310 

house  of  the  late  Henry  Moore,  deceased.  Wrote  a  very  serious 
letter  to  Samuel  Dunwoody  on  his  taking  the  charge  of  the  Mississippi 
district.     What  a  field  is  opened,  and  opening  daily  in  this  new  world ! 

Georgia. — Sunday  24.  After  twenty  years,  I  preached  again  in 
the  old  church.  We  had  a  love-feast,  and  I  baptised  three  persons. 
The  weather  was  extremely  warm.     My  mind  is  in  perfect  peace. 

Monday  25.  We  came  to  Mr.  Lovell's,  on  Brier-Creek,  Schoen 
county. 

Tuesday  26.  I  preached  in  Blackburn's  chapel.  Cold,  compared 
with  yesterday.     Came  home  with  Thomas  Thorne. 

Wednesday  27.  Came  twenty  miles  to  sister  King's.  My  health 
has  somewhat  returned.     I  feel  nought  but  holy  desires. 

Thursday  28.  I  preached  at  the  new  chapel.  Lodged  at  Ken- 
nedy's. Friday,  I  preached  in  the  Lutheran  church.  Benjamin 
Wise,  reverend,  and  some  others  were  present.  Brother  Boehm 
gave  them  a  discourse  in  German.     Saturday,  Savannah. 

Sunday,  November  1.  I  preached  in  the  Lutheran  church.  We 
are  about  building  on  a  city  lot.  I  hope  the  time  will  come  to  favour 
us. 

Monday  2.  I  rest  to-day.  I  went  to  view  the  lot.  I  had  two  in- 
terviews with  the  Reverend  Kollock.  I  hope  when  I  come  again  t© 
find  a  chapel  and  preacher's  house  of  our  own. 

Tuesday  3.  Came  away,  and  made  a  day's  journey  of  forty-two 
miles.  Wednesday,  reached  David  Lovett's.  Thursday,  started  in 
the  rain.  The  roads  are  bad.  Friday,  came  to  the  widow  Jarvis's, 
Saturday,  reached  Augusta. 

Sunday  8.  I  preached  in  the  forenoon  and  afternoon,  and  we  had 
a  serious  night  lecture. 

Monday  9.  We  rode  to  Johnson's  house  of  entertainment.  Tues- 
day, to  Spahn's.  Wednesday,  to  the  widow  Hannon's.  Thursday, 
to  Colonel  Hutchinson's. 

Monday  16,  the  day  of  my  arrival,  my  knee  was  stricken  with 
acute  rheumatic  pain  ;  I  applied  a  strongly  drawing  blister,  and  re- 
mained still  and  quiet.  Yesterday  I  tried  a  poultice,  and  I  now  begin 
to  walk  with  some  ease. 

Tuesday  17.  I  am  something  easier  to-day.  I  employ  my  dumb 
Sabbath,  and  my  leisure  time  as  well  as  I  can,  and  as  pain  will  allow, 
I  have  despatched  eleven  official  letters.  Hilliard  Judge  is  chosen 
chaplain  to  the  legislature  of  South  Carolina  ;  arid  Oh,  great  Snethen 
is  chaplain  to  Congress  !  So  ;  we  begin  to  partake  of  the  honour  that 
eometh  from  man :  now  is  our  time  of  danger.  O  Lord,  keep  us 
pure,  keep  us  correct,  keep  us  holy  5 


320  rev.  Francis  asbury's  journal.  [1812. 

Monday  23.  We  had  a  serious  shock  of  an  earthquake  this  morn- 
ing— a  sad  presage  of  future  sorrows  perhaps.    Lord,  make  us  ready! 

Thursday  26.  We  took  to  horse,  and  rode  forty  miles.  It  is  bitter 
cold,  and  we  have  felt  it  the  more  sensibly  after  being  so  long  housed, 
Friday,  at  Camden,  to  preside  in  conference. 

Wednesday,  December  2.  I  preached  before  the  conference. 

Friday  6.  Our  conference  rose  this  day.  Scarcely  have  I  seen 
such  harmony  and  love.  There  are  eighty-five  preachers  stationed. 
The  increase,  within  its  bounds,  is  three  thousand  three  hundred  and 
eighty.  We  had  a  great  deal  of  faithful  preaching,  and  there  were 
many  ordinations.  I  received  letters  from  the  extremities  and  the 
centre  of  our  vast  continent,  all  pleasing,  all  encouraging.  Saturday, 
rode  to  brother  Young's,  on  Black  River. 

Sunday  29.  I  preached  at  Rembert's  chapel,  and  gave  an  exhor- 
tation to  the  Africans.  The  society  was  stayed  after  meeting,  and  I 
exhorted  the  members.  Our  labours  this  day  shall  not  be  wholly 
lost. 

Monday  30.  We  came  away  early  for  Charleston,  and  made  thirty- 
five  miles  to  Mr.  Pendergrass,  where  we  were  well  entertained. 

South  Carolina. — Tuesday  31.  Murray's  ferry  detained  us  an 
hour.  Down  poured  the  rain.  We  were  glad  to  stop  at  Mrs.  Ken- 
nedy's, and  it  was  no  small  comfort  to  be  entertained  so  well. 

Wednesday,  January  1,  1812. — A  steady  ride  of  thirty-eight  miles 
brought  us  into  Charleston.  The  highways  were  little  occupied  by 
travellers  of  any  kind,  which  was  the  more  providential  for  me,  for 
my  lameness  and  my  light  fly  cart  would  have  made  a  shock  of  the 
slightest  kind  disagreeable.  I  was  anxious  also  to  pass  this  first  day 
of  the  new  year  in  undisturbed  prayer.  Thursday,  Friday,  Satur- 
day, in  reading,  meditation,  writing,  and  prayer.  I  do  not  reject 
visiters. 

Sunday  5.  I  preached  at  Cumberland  chapel,  and  met  the  societies 
of  both  colours.  I  visited  the  fatherless,  and  some  widows.  My 
mind  enjoys  peace.  In  the  evening  I  preached  in  Bethel  chapel. 
We  made  our  exodus  from  Charleston,  at  eight  in  the  morning.  No 
passage  at  Clemmon's  ferry.  We  found  a  lodging  with  Mr.  Brind- 
ley  :  our  host  has  buried  one  Methodist  wife,  and  is  now  happy  with 
another.  I  am  consoled  to  know  that  our  dear  departed  sister,  ever 
kind  to  me,  died  in  the  Lord.  Tuesday  evening,  lodged  at  the  widow 
Boone's  :  this  family  have  received  Methodist  preachers  for  the  last 
six  and  twenty  years. 

Wednesday  8.  We  reached  Georgetown.  T  preached  in  our  en- 
larged chapel  on  1  Cor.  vik  29. 


1812.]  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASHURy's  JOURNAL.  o21 

Thursday  9.  We  came  away  to  James  Green's,  where  I  preached, 
and  then  rode  over  to  Francis  Green's  :  here  William  Capers  preached 
on  "  Blessed  art  thou,  Simon  Barjona,"  &c.  We  took  the  road  on 
Friday,  in  a  driving  snow,  but  missing  our  path,  we  got  back  to  James 
Green's,  and  there,  upon  entreaty,  consented  to  stay.  We  were  told 
on  Saturday  morning,  that  we  could  not  travel  ;  we  tried  it  neverthe- 
less, and  made  thirty  five  miles  in  nine  hours.  The  cold  was 
piercing. 

Sabbath  12.  No  rest  for  us.  We  toiled  over  Fee-Dee  swamp 
towards  Mary  Port's  :  she  had  gone  to  rest.  The  snow  was  about  a 
foot  deep,  and  I  could  not  see  where  they  had  laid  her.  We  came  in 
to  Mr.  Newsom's  five  hours  after  my  time;  so  I  delivered  a  message 
to  the  family  :  thirty-one  miles  to-day.  On  Monday,  at  General 
Benjamin  Lee's,  I  spoke  to  a  few  people 

North  Carolina. — -Tuesday.  We  dined  at  Lumberton,  and  went 
forward  to  Mark  Russell's,  where  I  spoke  to  a  few  people.  Wed- 
nesday came  to  Fayetteville.  We  have  had  a  rude  ride  of  great  bo- 
dily suffering  from  Georgetown  :  but  my  mind  has  enjoyed  perfect 
peace,  and  constant  prayer. 

Thursday  16.  We  made  this  a  sacramental  day.  What  will  not 
perseverance  and  management  do  !  Here  we  have  built  a  neat  little 
chapel,  costing  but  twelve  hundred  dollars,  one  thousand  and  fifty  of 
which  is  paid.  Friday  we  had  a  cold  ride  to  Amos  Richardson's. 
Saturday,  thirty  miles  riding  brought  us  to  King's. 

Sabbath  19.  We  crossed  the  river  in  a  storm  :  at  the  second  ferry  it 
was  worse,  and  we  hardly  escaped  the  deep,  as  it  would  seem  ;  we 
arrived,  nevertheless,  time  enough  at  Mount  Zion  chapel  to  bear  our 
testimony  from  Ephes.  v.  14 — 16.  :  it  was  open  vision.  I  had,  after 
meeting,  a  word  with  the  whites  and  Africans  of  the  society — plain 
talk :  Boehm  preached  in  the  evening.  We  were  cribbed  in  our 
quarters  at  night — a  narrow  bed  for  two  ;  this  is  no  novelty  to  us.  I 
gave  our  sister  Richards  a  grant  of  a  lot  thirty  feet  square,  in  the 
churchyard.  Baptised  Captain  Cameron's  son  Alexander.  A  ride 
of  twenty  miles  in  excessive  cold  brought  us  to  George  Shepard's 
hospitable  house  on  Tuesday.  Wednesday,  awfully  cold  :  we  made 
twenty  miles  to  S.  Ballard's.  Thursday,  another  ride  of  twenty  miles 
brought  us  to  A.  Perry's.  Our  host  was  sick,  and  I  prescribed  for 
him.  Friday,  a  day  of  abstinence :  wrote  letters.  Saturday,  we 
came  into  Newbern  in  the  rain. 

Sabbath  26.  I  preached  morning  and  evening,  and  met  the  whites 
and  Africans  of  the  society.     Monday.  A  powerful  rain  accompanied 

Vol.  III.  41 


322  rev.  FRANCIS  asbury's  journal.  [1812 

us  to  Guildford,  twenty-six  miles.  Here  I  baptised  a  Mr.  Marphy  and 
his  three  children.  1  feel  the  effects  of  our  damp  ride.  *  We  called 
a  meeting  at  Greenville  on  Tuesday,  at  our  sister  Brook's  :  as  there 
were  few  men  present,  I  adapted  text  and  sermon  to  the  women.  We 
have  no  chapel  here,  although  we  have  had  a  society  thirty  years. 
At  Mr.  Freeman's  we  dined,  talked,  and  prayed.  It  began  to  rain  at 
one  o'clock,  and  we  started  away  to  Edward  Hall's  ;  we  dare  not 
loiter  or  wait  for  fair  weather.  Thursday,  we  halted,  concluding  to 
give  up  Edenton  for  Tarborough.  There  are  great  freshets  in  the 
rivers,  as  we  hear.  Ah !  the  ferries !  we  shall  have  them,  sink  or 
swim.     Friday,  reading,  writing,  and  taking  medicine. 

Saturday,  February  1.  I  passed  the  day  in  prayer,  peace,  love, 
and  joy. 

Sabbath  2.  At  Tarborough  I  preached  to  a  serious,  attentive  con- 
gregation. I  preached  in  the  afternoon  also  at  brother  Hall's. 
Monday  I  breakfasted  with  Mr.  Austin,  an  English  Baptist ;  his  wife 
with  us ;  my  business  with  him  was  to  charge  him  most  solemnly  to 
hold  a  perpetual  prayer-meeting  every  Wednesday  evening  in  his 
house.  The  lowlands  about  Tarborough  bridge  are  under  water. 
We  came  thirty  miles  to  Colonel  John  Witaker's  :  here  I  had  occa- 
sion to  give  a  solemn  and  personal  testimony,  and  it  was  publicly  given. 
On  Tuesday  we  had  a  meeting  of  a  few  neighbours  in  Pinner's 
family.  We  have  made  seven  hundred  miles  since  we  left  Camden, 
through  frost,  floods,  cold,  and  hunger — poor  men,  and  poor  horses! 
Well,  this  life  is  not  eternal.  Wednesday  came  to  Murfreesborough, 
dined  with  the  respectable  widow  Meredith  and  her  children,  prayed, 
and  continued  forward  to  Jesse  Brattle's  ;  a  hail-storm  overtook  us 
on  the  way.  This  house  is  in  affliction.  Thursday  reached  Isaac 
Lunsford's,  forty  miles,  visiting  an  afflicted  family  on  our  route.  Ri- 
chard Yerberry  has  gone  from  poor  Suffolk  to  the  rich  inheritance  of 
glory ;  he  was  almost  a  prodigy  of  affliction  and  of  grace.  On  Fri- 
day we  held  a  meeting  at  Portsmouth,  and  preached  to  a  full  house. 

Sabbath  8.  I  preached  in  Norfolk,  and  met  the  society. 

Monday  9,  Came  to  Isaac  Lunsford's,  and  thence  to  Suffolk  ;  what 
a  sickly  country  is  this  !  I  have  heard  of  three  deaths  in  as  many 
days.  We  had  a  small  meeting  at  General  Wells's  widow's  :  the  head 
of  the  house  and  his  daughter  have  departed  in  peace  since  my  last 
visit.  I  visited,  as  is  my  custom,  the  graves  of  the  deceased.  On 
Wednesday  the  cold  was  excessive,  and  we  were  right  glad  to  house 
with  Andrew  Woodley,  who  treated  us  with  great  kindness.  I  preach- 
ed at  night  at  William  Blunt's. 


2812.]  IlEV.  FRANCIS  ASBI'Ry's  JOURNAL,  323 

Friday  13.  The  weather  was  clear,  but  chilly.  We  made  twenty- 
eight  miles  only,  to  our  friend  Birdsong's.  I  see  a  providence 
always  over  me,  and  I  am  always  stayed  upon  God. 

Saturday  14.  We  came  to  Bryant's,  twenty-five  miles,  and  could  go 
no  farther  ;  they  put  me  to  bed,  very  unwell.  Our  host  is  a  disobe- 
dient son  reclaimed — of  Methodist  parents.  Here  are  two  meeting- 
houses, and  the  Gospel  is  brought  back  to  the  vicinity  of  King-George 
court-house,  after  thirty  years'  absence.  No  time  was  to  be  lost— I 
took  tartar,  and  had  a  serious  spell  while  it  lasted. 

Sabbath  15.  I  rode  about  a  mile,  and  gave  a  sermon.  My  breast  is 
sore,  and  my  heart  is  in  pain  for  Petersburg.  Monday,  I  visited  my 
ancient  friends  Wood,  Tucker,  and  wife. 

We  came  to  John  Bradley's  on  Tuesday  night,  and  preached  on 
Hebr.  ii.  1 — 4.  Wednesday,  a  muddy  ride  brought  us  to  town.  Our 
conference  began  on  Thursday.  The  affair  of  James  Boyd  and  Henry 
Hardy  detained  us  two  days  from  other  business.  We  shall  not  sta- 
tion more  than  seventy-five  preachers  this  year,  a  less  number  than 
last.  A  charge  had  been  brought  against  me  for  ordaining  a  slave, 
but  there  was  no  farther  pursuit  of  the  case  when  it  was  discovered 
tbat  I  was  ready  with  my  certificates  to  prove  his  freedom  ;  the  subject 
of  contention  was  nearly  white,  and  his  respectable  father  would  nei- 
ther own  nor  manumit  him.  I  shall  mention  no  names.  Old  Virginia, 
because  of  the  great  emigrations  westward,  and  deaths,  decreases  in 
the  number  she  gives  to  the  Methodists  ;  but  New  Virginia  gains.  Doc- 
tor Jennings  was  at  conference,  and  preached  often  for  us,  and  was 
much  followed.  We  had  little  or  no  trouble  about  the  stations,  and 
conference  rose  on  Thursday.  I  started  away  and  came  in  great 
haste  to  Willis's  chapel  :  the  heat  was  oppressive,  and  man  and  beast 
gladly  stopped  at  the  widow  Sculley's.  Little  sleep  last  night.  Let 
me  suffer,  and  let  me  labour ;  time  is  short,  and  souls  are  daily  lost. 

Sabbath,  March  1.  It  blew  a  cutting  wind  at  North-East,  as  we 
made  our  way  towards  Roper's  chapel,  thirty  miles  distant.  I  preach- 
ed some  awful  truths.  Monday,  I  passed  a  night  of  great  suffering. 
We  came  off  this  morning  to  James  City,  and  preached  in  the  chapel  to 
many  people — we  had  an  evening  meeting.  Lodged  at  John  Taylor's. 
Tuesday,  we  came  to  Williamsburg,  where  I  preached  with  a  full 
mind,  but  failing  voice.  Wednesday,  we  rode  near  forty  miles  to 
breakfast  with  an  English  family,  the  Whitefields  ;  and  went  forward 
to  lodge  with  George  Hope,  a  ship-builder  from  Whitehaven. 

Thursday  5.  I  preached  in  the  new  brick  house,  Hampton,  ordain- 
ed Robert  Gillum  and  brother  Evans  local  deacons.     1  suffer  from  a 


JC1  REV.   FRANCIS.  ASBURY's    JOURNAL  [181- 

deep  cold.  On  Friday  I  had  an  opportunity  of  giving  the  two  fami- 
lies of  Lucas  and  Stubblefield  a  solemn  warning  and  charge.  We 
crossed  the  river  at  Yorktown,  now  like  many  other  towns,  declining 
in  numbers  and  in  wickedness,  because  of  the  decrease  of  trade  and 
strong  drink. 

Saturday  7.  At  Philip  T  abb's,  Esquire — a  great  farmer,  and  a  kind 
and  a  hospitable  gentleman. 

Sabbath  8.    It  rained,  and  we  had  two  hours  in  the  cold  house  to 
utter  our  testimony.    I  came  home  with  deacon  Bellamy,  a  witness  of 
the  sanctifying  power  of  grace.     We  rejoiced  in  God.     He   handed 
me  Michaelis,  which  1  read.     Monday,  came  on  to  Shackleford's  cha- 
pel, where  I  found  a  few  auditors  from  Gloucester. 

Tuesday  10.  To  Pace's  chapel — I  go  forward  in  rain,  and  in  tempta- 
tion and  affliction,  and  great  grief  for  souls.  I  find  that  Michaelis, 
contrary  to  Bengelius  and  Wesley,  has  left  it  doubtful  concerning  the 
three  that  bear  witness  in  heaven ;  the  doctrine  is  not  the  less  true. 

Wednesday  11.  At  Cole's  chapel  1  preached  on  Luke  xiii.  23 — 25. 
I  dined  with  father  Mann,  where,  I  presume,  I  preached  thirty- 
three  years  past ;  this  family  cleaves  to  us,  but  the  Baptists  have  the 
rule  in  Queen  Anne  and  Essex.  We  must  not  be  envious — we  have 
it,  and  are  getting  it,  and  will  continue  to  get  it  if  we  are  faithful,  still 
more  abundantly  throughout  the  whole  continent.  I  was  happy  in 
spending  a  night  under  the  roof  of  a  simple-hearted  poor  man,  Billy 
Carr  ;  he  travelled  four  years,  and  is  now  a  useful  local  preacher. 

Thursday  12.  I  preached  at  Hobbe's  Hole  :  it  was  damp  and  I 
was  cold,  but  I  felt  help  from  God.  This  labour  will  go  for  the 
Baptists.  Mother  Cox,  a  Baptist,  had  appointed  a  meeting  for  me, 
and  I  gave  them  a  sermon.  We  sow  here,  but  others  reap.  On 
my  way  to  Port-Royal,  on  Friday,  I  expounded  a  text  of  Scripture  to 
the  family  of  John  Rouzee's.  Saturday  evening  brought  us  into  poor 
Fredericksburg. 

Sabbath  15.  I  preached  for  them.  The  Methodists  have  done  great 
good  here  :  since  they  began  to  preach  the  Baptists  and  Presbyte- 
rians have  built  meeting-houses.  Mr.  Strebeck  has  the  Episcopal 
church.  We  were  off  on  Monday,  through  mud  and  mist,  to  Samuel's 
tavern,  twenty  miles  ;  here  we  fed  and  prayed  with  the  family.  At 
Grigg's  I  gave  a  night  lecture.  I  preached  at  Mrs.  Hooe's  to  a  full 
house  on  Tuesday  morning,  and  went  forward  to  Major  Newell's, 
making  a  ride  of  forty-six  miles.  I  called,  on  Wednesday,  on  my 
friend  Mr.  Carter,  who  has  now  six  children  in  society  :  surely  the 
time  to  favour  this  family  is  come.     We  laboured  along  to  Leesbunr, 


1812.]  UEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURVS  JOURNA|».  -32o 

stemming  the  cold  and  boisterous  north-west.  Friday  and  Saturday- 
were  spent  in  happy,  loving  conference.  My  task  it  was  to  ordain 
sixteen  deacons.     1  preached,  so  also  did  brother  M'Kendree. 

Wednesday  18.  Ordination  day  for  elders  ;  I  had  declined,  not 
wishing  to  preach  the  sermon  ;  but  I  officiated,  and  N.  Snethen 
preached.  We  have  had  a  solemn,  loving,  peaceful  conference.  Our 
labours  ended  on  Friday  morning,  and  we  separated.  Arrived  at  the 
ferry,  it  blew  a  hurricane.  I  lifted  up  my  heart  in  prayer  to  God. 
There  was,  in  a  few  minutes,  a  great  calm,  which  all  those  with  me 
witnessed,  but  I  will  not  say  it  was  in  answer  to  prayer.  We  lodged 
with  Howard,  upon  Carroll's  manor. 

Maryland. — Saturday  11.  We  called  and  dined  with  our  respect- 
able brother  Ignatius  Davis  :  Ah  !  he  ifi  rich  in  property  and  a  young 
wife !  It  blew  up  very  cold  as  we  came  into  Fredericktown. 

Sabbath  29.  Easter  Sunday.  I  was  three  hours  reading,  praying, 
preaching,  and  meeting  the  society,  white  and  coloured  ;  it  was  a  day 
of  God,  and  of  his  power.  My  congregation  chiefly  from  the  country, 
A  cold  ride  brought  us  to  Liberty ;  Monday  morning  I  preached  for 
them,  and  went  on  to  Ephraim  Howard's. 

Tuesday  31.  We  moved  forward,  calling  on  brothers  Jones  and  A, 
Warfield.  Lodged  under  the  roof  of  Nancy  Willis.  There  are 
many  late  converts  around  her:  Frank  Hollingsworth  and  his  wifey 
Henry  Willis,  and  a  young  lady  with  fifty  thousand  dollars — can  she 
get  and  keep  religion  ?     1  doubt. 

Wednesday,  April  1.  I  preached  at  Joshua  Tipton's  ;  this  is  an  an- 
cient friend  whom  I  had  not  visited  for  eight  years.  Boehm  preach- 
ed in  German.  Thursday,  dined  near  Union  chapel  at  Mr.  Matthews's, 
and  went  forward  to  Bleredith's.  Friday,  a  cold  disagreeable  ride 
brought  us  across  the  country  to  Samuel  Benkley's  :  here  I  received 
the  first  intelligence  of  the  death  of  my  dear  old  friend  Martin 
Boehm. 

Pennsylvania. — Sabbath  5.  I  preached  at  Boehm's  chapel  the 
funeral  sermon  of  Martin  Boehm,  and  gave  my  audience  some  very 
interesting  particulars  of  his  life.  Mopday,  busy  writing,  Tuesday, 
at  Jacob  Boehm's  :  I  preached  here. 

Wednesday  8.  We  called  on  Zeltenright ;  kinder  people  need  not 
be  :  we  fed  and  prayed  with  them.  I  went  forward  and  preached  at 
Church-Town,  and  housed  with  Owen  Brunner.  I  suffer  much  in 
my  feet  amongst  the  Germans,  and  I  greatly  dislike  stoves.  We  had 
a  blessed  meeting  on  Thursday  evening. 

Friday  10.  Rode  to  Coventry.    We  had  a  full  house.    Ah  !  when 


326  fjP*EV'  FRANCIS  ASBURY*S  JOURNAL.  I  1812. 

are  my  sisters  Richards,  Vanlear,  Potts,  Rutter,  Patrick,  North? at 

rest  in  Jesus  ;  and  I  am  left  to  pain  and  toil  :  courage,  my  soul we 

shall  overtake  them  when  our  task  is  done  !  I  visited  Mr.  May.  If 
they  wanted  the  plan  for  their  meeting-house,  here  it  is  ;  forty  by 
fifty  feet.  I  rejoiced  in  finding  three  of  sister  Rutter's  children  in 
the  way. 

Sabbath  12.  I  preached  at  old  Israel  Anderson's.  Our  friend  has 
been  in  fellowship  with  us  thirty-two  years,  and  has  been  honoured 
by  missions  from  his  county  and  district  to  the  legislature  and  to  con- 
gress :  his  family  of  children  are  pleasing.  Twice  only  have  I  ever 
visited  this  neighbourhood.     Monday.    Snow  and  cold. 

Tuesday  14.  I  preached  at  Radnor.  We  dined  at  B.  Gyger's, 
and  slept  under  the  roof  of  Isaac  James.  The  peace  and  consola- 
tions of  God  abound  towards  me. 

Wednesday  15.  Came  to  the  city  of  Philadelphia.  We  opened 
©ur  conference  in  great  peace  on  Saturday. 

Sabbath  19.  Preached  in  St.  George's  in  the  morning,  and  at  St. 
Thomas's  in  the  evening.  It  is  a  time  of  peace.  We  had  a  solemn 
time  at  the  ordination  of  deacons  on  Wednesday.  I  preached  at 
Union  chapel  on  Friday. 

Sabbath  26.  I  gave  them  a  sermon  at  Ebenezer  in  the  forenoon, 
met  the  society  at  Union,  and  ordained,  as  deacons,  Joseph  Ingles 
and  John  George,  venerable  and  pious  men.  On  Thursday  all 
the  honours  of  officiating  at  the  ordinations  fell  upon  me,  Bishop 
M'Kendree  being  sick.  I  closed  the  conference  on  Monday  morn- 
ing. Sister  Lusby's  lamp  is  nearly  extinct ;  I  visited  and  prayed 
with  her.  We  came  away  and  rode  in  the  afternoon  sixteen  miles  to 
father  Rodman's.  We  lodged  with  Mr.  Snyder  at  New-Brunswick  on 
Tuesday  night.     Wednesday,  a  cold  ride  brought  us  to  New-York. 

New-York, — Friday,  May  1.  Our  general  conference  began.  Du- 
ring the  session  I  saw  nothing  like  unkindness  but  once,  and  there 
were  many  and  weighty  affairs  discussed.  I  hope  very  few  rules  will 
be  made.     We  may  disquiet  ourselves  in  vain. 

Sabbath  11.  At  the  African  church  in  the  morning:  I  preached 
also  at  the  Hudson  chapel ;  it  was  an  awful  time.  A  subject  before 
the  conference  was  the  question,  If  local  deacons  after  four  years  of 
probation,  should  be  elected  to  the  eldership  by  two  thirds  of  the 
conference,  having  no  slaves,  and  having  them  to  manumit  them 
where  the  laws  allowed  it  ?  it  passed  by  a  majority.  On  Saturday  a 
motion  was  made  to  strengthen  the  episcopacy  by  adding  another 
bishop. 


1812. j  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUKV'S  JOURNAL.  327 

Sabbath  17.  I  preached  at  Brooklyn  in  our  elegant  house.  After  a 
serious  struggle  of  two  days  in  general  conference  to  change  the  mode 
of  appointing  presiding  elders,  it  remains  as  it  was.  Means  had  been 
used  to  keep  back  every  presiding  elder  who  was  known  to  be 
favourable  to  appointments  by  the  bishops  ;  and  long  and  earnest 
speeches  have  been  made  to  influence  the  minds  of  the  members : 
Lee,  Shinn,  and  Snethen  were  of  a  side  ;  and  these  are  great  men. 
Many  matters  of  small  moment  passed  under  review,  and  were  regu- 
lated. Mr.  Shaw  of  London  called  to  see  me,  and  I  had  seventeen  of 
the  preachers  to  dine  with  me  ;  there  was  vinegar,  mustard,  and  a 
still  greater  portion  of  oil  :  but  the  disappointed  parties  sat  down  in 
peace,  and  we  enjoyed  our  sober  meal.  We  should  thank  God  that 
we  are  not  at  war  with  each  other,  as  are  the  Episcopalians,  with  the 
pen  and  the  press  as  their  weapons  of  warfare. 

Sabbath  17.  At  the  Two  Mile  Stone  my  subject  was  1  Peter  iv. 
6 — 9.  I  preached  also  at  Greenwich,  and  at  John-street  chapel. 
On  Monday  I  took  an  emetic,  but  I  found  I  could  not  be  sick  in 
quiet,  so  unceasingly  was  I  pursued  by  visiters  and  letters  ;  so  I  made 
my  escape  to  George  Suckley's  and  took  to  my  bed.  On  Tuesday  I 
breakfasted  with  Colonel  Few.  Some  good  widows  collected  above 
two  hundred  dollars  for  the  poor  preachers  in  the  New-England  states  : 
sister  Seney  I  must  make  honourable  mention  of  as  being  very 
active  in  this  labour  of  love.  We  made  a  peaceable  ride  of  twenty- 
four  miles  to  mother  Sherwood's.  I  have  been  kept  from  sinning,, 
in  much  patience  and  affliction. 

Wednesday  20.  Came  to  Eben  Smith's  ;  the  host  kind  and  atten- 
tive ;  the  mother  holy  and  devout :  I  cannot  pass  my  old  friends 
without  a  call,  f  called  on  Joseph  Crawford,  and  took  to  my  bed  : 
I  suffer.  In  the  evening  I  preached  at  White  Plains  chapel  in  much 
affliction  of  body  :  we  lodged  at  brother  Fowler's. 

Thursday  21.  Rode  to  Croton  :  here  I  saw  once  more  the  elder 
of  90 — much  in  the  enjoyment  of  God  and  of  himself. 

Friday  22.  We  halted  on  our  way  at  Peekskiil.  I  prayed  in  Bur- 
rill's  small  house. 

Saturday  23.  I  saw  our  little  conventicle  in  Rhinebeck  :  we  stop- 
ped at  Mr.  Williams's  :  I  am  blest  with  patience.  I  preached  on. 
Wednesday,  and  administered  the  Lord's  supper :  I  am  in  weakness 
and  fear,  and  much  trembling. 

Monday,  June  1.  We  halted  awhile  at  Esopus  :  dined  at  the  widow 
Scott's.  We  have  had  a  home  here  many  years :  the  Lord  heard 
prayer  for  the  father,  who  died  in  peace.  We  lodged  at  John  Craw- 
ford's :  I  suffer  from  high  fevers.     On   Tuesday  we  rode  through 


o-i>  kev.  fuakcis  aseury's  journal.  [1811'. 

the  heat,  thirty-four  miles,  to  Coeman's  Landing,  and  preached  at 
six  o'clock.  The  blister  at  the  back  of  my  ears  broke  on  the  way. 
O,  for  patience  and  faith !  A  cold  ride  brought  us  to  Albany. 
The  Dutch  synod  and  the  Methodist  conference  are  about  to  sit 
here.  From  the  4th  to  the  10th  we  have  been  occupied  in  close 
conference. 

Sabbath  7.  I  preached  in  an  old  house  :  and  we  had  a  gracious  sea- 
son. I  gave  a  solemn  exhortation  on  the  spot  designated  for  our  new 
church:  the  situation  is  very  eligible.  Wednesday,  conference 
ended  its  labours.  Thursday,  we  rose  at  five  o'clock,  and  crossed  the 
river :  after  a  ride  of  five  hours  in  the  rain  we  were  willing  to  stop 
at  Mr.  Darling's. 

Friday  11.  Came  through  Shakerstown  ;  if  these  are  children  of" 
light,  they  are  wiser  in  their  generation  than  the  children  of  this 
world.  We  took  a  hasty  dinner  with  Gamaliel  Whitney,  and  came 
away  in  the  rain  to  Hawley's.  Saturday.  We  dined  on  our  route  at 
Merrill's,  and  came  in  to  lodge  with  'Squire  Pitkin. 

Connecticut. — Sabbath  13.  1  preached  at  Gassonbury,  and  met 
the  society.  Monday,  at  Hebron  we  visited  three  families,  and 
were  kindly  received  by  Doctor  Huntington,  with  whom  we  lodged  in 
Windham.  Tuesday,  we  dined  in  Abingdon,  and  lectured  to  a  few  peo- 
ple in  the  evening  at  John  Nichols's.  Wednesday,  a  ride  of  thirty 
miles  brought  us  to  father  Ball's,  where  we  lodged  ;  all  is  not  right 
here.  Thursday,  we  dined  at  Stone's  tavern  in  Farmington ;  they  had 
nearly  been  as  wild  as  Indians  when  we  prayed.  I  have  felt  sick  enough 
to  be  in  bed.     We  came  to  Lynn.     I  come  through  great  tribulation. 

Massachusetts. — Saturday  20.  Our  conference  began  and  pro- 
gressed in  much  peace  and  order.  Thursday,  I  gave  preachers  and 
people  a  sermon. 

Sabbath  20.  I  preached.  The  chapel,  saving  the  pews  and  the  stee- 
ple, is  beautiful.  We  had  an  ordination.  The  proclamation  of  the  pre- 
sident of  the  United  States  is  out  to  inform  us  that  there  is  war  between 
our  people  and  the  English  people  :  my  trust  is  in  the  living  God. 
Thursday  we  came  rapidly  through  a  storm  of  rain  to  father  Bogle's  in 
Needham  ;  we  were  well  steeped.  Friday,  we  took  the  Worces- 
ter rode  to  Brookfield.  Saturday,  we  came  off  at  four  o'clock,  and 
rode  seventeen  miles  to  breakfast  at  Belcherstown  and  continued  on- 
ward fifteen  miles  beyond  Warner's. 

Sabbath  28.  We  made  a  ride  of  twenty-five  miles  to  Pittsfield. 
Brother  M'Kendree  preached  at  two  o'clock  ;  and  1  ascended  the  pul- 
pit at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening.  Monday,  we  called  on  our  way  at 
father  Spicer's.     We  have  spent  on  this  journey  twenty-three  doL 


1812.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASEURy's  JOURNAL.  329 

krs.  There  is  a  serious  division  in  Pittsfield — about  thirty  members 
have  withdrawn.  They  have  built  a  neat  house  in  Lynn ;  but  I  am 
afraid  of  a  steeple  ;  and  if  they  put  this  foolish  addition,  it  must  not  be 
by  Methodist  order,  or  with  Methodist  money — they  may  pay  for 
their  own  pride  and  folly.  We  have  had  great  peace  and  order  in  the 
New-England  conference  ;  but  we  are  poor. 

New- York. — July  1.  We  came  away  to  Lansingbunj;.  We  must 
stand  still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  God  in  these  times  of  trouble. 

Sabbath  5.  At  Troy  I  preached  and  gave  an  exhortation  to  the  so- 
ciety. At  Lansingburg  I  preached  in  the  evening,  but  did  not  feel 
myself  at  liberty  as  in  Troy.  On  Tuesday  we  came  through  the  heat 
to  Beldin's,  twenty-two  miles  ;  here  we  had  grand  entertainment. 
Wednesday,  we  concluded  it  best  to  keep  on  our  way,  and  miss  the 
camp  meeting.  We  prayed  with  the  family  with  which  we  dined  on 
our  route.  Came  to  Little  Falls,  and  were  well  received  and  accom- 
modated at  Moralle's.  It  rained,  but  we  continued  on  to  Reuben  Ma- 
ther's. The  people  gaze  and  laugb  at  us  as  we  pass  :  surely  we  are 
men  to  be  wondered  at  and  hated  by  all  but  the  pious 

Sabbath  12.  We  hold  our  conference  in  Lyons.  Brother  M'Ken- 
dree  preached  in  the  morning,  and  I  gave  a  discourse  in  the  evening 
at  Westmoreland.  We  went  forward  to  David  Coe's,  where  I  preach- 
ed at  night.  My  host  had  entertained  me  at  Middlefield,  Connecticut, 
twenty-two  years  ago.  My  mind  enters  deeply  into  God,  his  provi- 
dence and  grace.  Consequential  W.  B.  Lacy  is  married  ;  and  why 
not  1 — he  has  left  us  ;  and  why  not  ?  Between  Albany  and  Lynn,  and 
Boston,  we  have  spent  thirty  dollars  and  fifty-six  cents — a  few  cents 
more  than  the  conference  furnished  for  our  expenses.  On  Saturday 
we  rode  over  to  our  brother  Hanna's,  from  Queens  county,  Ireland. 

Sabbath  12.  I  preached  at  Bethel  chapel,  standing  on  the  floor  to 
speak.  I  was  feeble,  yet  I  met  the  society,  baptised  a  child,  and  ad- 
dressed my  brethren  and  sisters  on  the  subject  of  singing  as  a  part  of 
the  worship  of  God.  The  solemn  fast  to  be  observed  on  the  first 
Friday  in  October  was  not  forgotten  to  be  mentioned.  I  called  up 
the  children  of  my  host  to  read  for  me,  and  had  a  serious  conversa- 
tion with  the  two  eldest,  the  only  son  and  eldest  daughter  :  the  tears 
witnessed  how  deeply  they  felt.  We  came  away  to  Holmes's  on 
Monday  morning,  and  thence  to  Forbisher's  :  here  we  have  a  chape]. 
We  called  a  meeting  at  night  at  father  Doolittle's. 

Tuesday  14.  A  long  ride  through  Maniius,  and  calling  at  Dodge's, 
brought  us  into  the  widow  Hocox's  neat  house.  We  dined  at  Horn- 
merman's,  in  Auburn,  on  Wednesday,  and  lodged  with  Eddy,  Scipio, 
On  our  way  we  were  mocked  by  some  men  in  a  harvest  field  :  this  k 

Vol.  III.  42 


;^t«  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  [1812. 

their  glory  of  wickedness  :  ours  is,  that  the  offence  of  the  cross  hath 
not  yet  ceased.  My  revenge  was  prayer  that  God  might  convert  and 
save  them  for  Christ's  sake. 

Sabbath  19.  I  preached  at  Lyons  town.  I  have  been  reading  Fa- 
ber ;  there  appears,  to  my  mind,  to  be  more  of  probability  in  his  ex- 
positions of  prophecy  than  in  those  of  any  other  commentator,  more 
especially  as  it  relates  to  the  Jews.  We  have  had  a  blessed  rain. — 
Lord,  pardon  the  sins  of  an  ungrateful  and  unholy  people  ! 

Thursday,  Friday,  and  Saturday,  were  employed  in  a  very  pleasing 
conference,  about  thirty  members  being  present :  our  brethren  of 
Canada  were  all  absent.  Elders  and  deacons  were  ordained:  the 
increase  of  members,  according  to  the  returns,  one  thousand. 

Sabbath  26.  I  preached  upon  the  camp-ground.  I  have  been  loca- 
ted in  Daniel  Dorsey's  family  eleven  days  ;  I  want  to  be  moving.  Had 
not  hostilities  existed  between  us  and  our  neighbours,  I  should  have 
spent  some  of  this  time  in  visiting  the  frontiers  on  Niagara.  Our 
funds  allowed  us  to  give  forty-nine  dollars  for  the  support  of  each 
single  preacher,  one  hundred  and  eighteen  dollars  for  those  married 
and  their  wives  and  children.  On  Monday  the  members  of  confe- 
rence communed  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  after  which  I  read  off  their 
stations,  and  we  parted  in  great  peace.  Through  two  showers  of 
rain,  after  dinner,  I  made  my  way  to  Geneva.  I  lectured  in  a  school- 
house  in  the  evening,  from  James  iv.  8—10.  I  was  directed  to  for- 
cible and  right  words. 

Tuesday  28.  The  heat  is  excessive,  yet  we  went  forward,  accom- 
panied by  our  local  brethren.  I  ordained  our  brother  Goodwin  under 
the  trees.  We  were  willing  to  halt  at  the  invitation  of  Mr.  Thomp- 
son to  dinner.  1  felt  like  Jonah  in  the  sun.  We  were  kindly  re- 
ceived for  the  night  by  Judge  Smith,  on  the  Seneca  Lake.  I  die 
daily.     I  live  in  God  from  moment  to  moment.     My  text  for  Friday 

0,  the  appointed  fast  day,  was  Isai.  lviii.  1.  :  I  was  weak,  but  truth 
•vas  strong.  I  will  leave  Newtown  this  afternoon.  There  must  be 
a  great  change  here.  We  came  away,  after  meeting,  to  Elijah  Gris- 
wojd's  :  my  host  is  a  brand  plucked  from  the  burning — strong  drink 
had  scorched  him  forty  years.  He  had  a  pious  son  who  watched 
over,  and  prayed  for  him ;  and  he  himself  never  closed  his  doors 
against  the  pious.  The  Lord  heard  prayer  on  his  behalf,  and 
has  entirely  delivered  him  from  the  love  of  whiskey.  I  hear  of 
mother  wonderful  emancipation  from  the  slavery  of  drunkenness. 

Pennsylvania. — Sunday,  August  2.  We  rest  at  Joshua  Kenney's, 
Walnut-Bottom.  My  congregation  might  amount  to  one  hundred, 
Our  host  was  a  whiskey  maker  ;  but  now  it  is  a  house  for  God.     In 


i 8 1  S.J  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  83* 

all  my  weakness  I  am  kept  in  perfect  peace.  Yesterday  I  visited^, 
conversed,  and  prayed  with  Mr.  Ourton's  family,  the  wife  and 
mother  :  the  people  are  serious,  but  the  head  is  a  man  of  the  world, 
For  forty  years  past  we  have  preached  the  Gospel  from  the  mouth 
to  the  branches,  and  up  them,  of  the  great  river  Susquehannah ;  the 
fruit  of  our  labour  has  began  to  appear  within  the  last  five  years  ; 
we  shall  see  it  yet  more  abundant. 

Monday  3.  We  came  away  to  John  Smith's,  and  continued  onward 
to  father  Smith's,  but  came  in  too  late  for  meeting. 

Tuesday  4.  We  dined  at  father  Bidlack's,  and  went  forward  to 
Wilkesbarre.  The  court  was  sitting,  and  a  meeting  was  expected. 
My  subject  was,  knowing  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men. 
They  gave  me  the  court-room. 

Wednesday  5.  We  came  along  down  the  turnpike,  and  rough  we 
found  it.  Farewell  to  Merwine's — I  lodge  no  more  there  :  whiskey — 
hell;  as  most  of  the  taverns  here  are.  Our  Thursday's  ride  brought 
us  rapidly  to  Lehigh  ;  we  crossed  at  the  ford,  and  had  little  time  to 
admire  the  beautiful  country  above  and  below.  The  Germans  are 
decent  in  their  behaviour  in  this  neighbourhood  ;  and  would  be  more 
so,  were  it  not  for  vile  whiskey  :  this  is  the  prime  curse  of  the 
United  States,  and  will  be,  I  fear  much,  the  ruin  of  all  that  is  excel- 
lent in  morals  and  government  in  them.  Lord,  interpose  thine  arm  i 
Lord,  send  thy  Gospel  to  these  Germans !  We  lodge  with  George 
Custos,  Wyoming. 

Friday  7.  I  am  still — I  abstain.  In  the  evening  we  had  an  assem- 
blage of  people,  and  brother  Boehm  spoke  to  them  in  German. 

Saturday  8.  We  visited  F.  Hyles,  on  our  way  to  A.  T.  BrobestV 
I  feel  a  deep  concern  for  the  old  and  new  world  ;  calamity  and  suf- 
fering are  coming  upon  them  both  :  I  shall  make  but  few  remarks  ob 
this  unhappy  subject  ;  it  is  one  on  which  the  prudent  will  be  silent ; 
but  I  must  needs  say  it  is  an  evil  day.  I  have  written  many  letters  of 
serious  warning  to  our  elders. 

Sunday  9.  Brother  Boehm  preached  in  Dutch.  I  gave  a  few 
words  of  exhortation  to  the  folks  at  J.  Brobest's,  at  the  Forge  ;  W, 
Fox  exhorted.  Monday,  on  our  way  to  Schuylkill  we  strayed  some- 
what. H.  Boehm  preached  at  our  kind  host's,  J.  Dondors,  a  German. 

Tuesday  11.  We  climbed  and  laboured  over  the  Furnace  hills,  to 
Peter  Albie's,  a  disciple  of  father  Boehm. 

Wednesday  12.  We  passed  through  Litetz,  a  second  Bethlehem. 
What  a  lovely  country  we  have  lately  seen !  no  slaves  here.  The 
river  Lehigh  has  three  branches,  flowing  from  the  Beach  or  Green 


332  REV.    FRANCIS    ASBURY's    JOURNAL.  [1812 

Swamp,  which  cross  the  Wyoming  turnpike  to  Bethlehem :  this  beau- 
tiful stream,  according  io  my  computation,  meanders  one  hundred 
miles  to  its  mouth,  making  its  way,  by  disruptive  force,  as  it  would 
seem,  through  what  is  called  the  Gap  in  the  Blue-Ridge.  Wednesday, 
Thursday,  Friday,  Saturday,  at  mother  Boehm's,  writing,  reading, 
and  prayer;  these  are  my  occupations  and  enjoyments. 

Sunday  16.  I  preached  at  Souderberg's  chapel  in  the  morning  ; 
and  at  Strasbnrg  at  two  o'clock  ;  and  again  at  Bethel  at  six  o'clock. 
Monday,  we  crossed  at  M'Call's  ferry  and  came  to  father  Jones's. 

Maryland. — Tuesday  18.  Rode  through  the  rain  to  John  Low's  ; 
dined,  prayed,  and  came  away  to  Manchester.  We  lodged  at 
flutter's,  a  Dutch  family.  Monday,  we  came  to  Pipe-Creek,  and 
dined  with  my  old  friend  James  M'Cannon.  Friday,  we  came 
into  the  camp.  The  meeting  began  yesterday.  I  preached  to  a 
great  crowd.  What  good  may  be  wrought  at  this  meeting,  time,  and 
especially,  eternity  will  show.  There  were  about  one  hundred  tents, 
and  often  five  thousand  people  on  the  ground.  In  four  nights  I  sup- 
pose 1  have  had  eight  hours  sleep.  1  was  greatly  blest  at  the  sacra- 
ment. Tuesday,  dined  at  Fredericktown  ;  and  went  forward  to  Mid- 
dletown.  After  forty  years'  labour,  we  have  a  small  society  in  this 
place.  We  gave  them  discourses  in  English  and  German  in  the  eve- 
ning. Wednesday,  toiling  over  the  South  mountain  to  Snevely's.  On 
Thursday,  I  preached  in  the  neat,  new  chapel  in  Hagarstown,  to 
about  one  hundred  hearers  ;  and  after  meeting  visited  and  tarried  for 
the  night  with  the  widow  Dowler  :  our  kind  hostess  is  an  afflicted 
woman,  unable  to  walk,  yet  she  enjoyeth  much  communion  with  God. 
On  Friday  we  ventured  upon  the  United  States'  road  to  Cumberland  ; 
dining  on  our  route  with  Rascer,  whom  I  warned  faithfully  ;  as  also 
Thomas  Pratt,  and  Major  Briscoe,  whom  we  visited,  exhorted,  and 
prayed  with.  Saturday,  a  fatiguing  ride,  through  oppressive  heat, 
brought  us  fasting  to  Aquila  Brown's. 

Sunday  30.  I  preached  in  Cumberland  to  an  attentive  people,  and 
went  on  to  Cressap's  town,  where  I  also  bore  my  testimony  :  there 
might  be  one  thousand  people  in  the  two  congregations.  I  have  little 
rest.  We  came  up  the  mountain,  dining  at  Mussulman's,  and  going 
thence  forward  to  Tomlinson's.  There  was  a  strange  medley  of 
preachers,  drovers,  beasts  on  four  legs,  and  beasts  made  by  whiskey 
on  two,  travelling  on  the  turnpike  at  one  time. 

Tuesday,  September  1.  A  rude,  rough  ride,  brought  us  to  Clark's, 
twenty-eight  miles.  Wednesday,  we  met  my  friend  Judge  Van- 
meeter,  at  the  bottom  of  Laurel  Hill,  with  five  hundred  fat  steers  from 


2812.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  333 

his  prairie  in  Ohio  :  if  he  can  undertake  this  labour  and  perform  it 
cheerfully  for  the  sake  of  gain,  why  should  I  complain  of  my  suf- 
ferings ?  There  are  very  distressing  rumours  abroad  :  my  mind  is 
fixed  on,  Ye  are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows.  After  losing  so 
much  rest,  I  could  have  wished  to  sleep  without  annoyance  from  fleas 
or  bed-bugs.  Two  innkeepers  on  our  route,  Besoon  and  Tomlinson, 
declare  against  keeping  or  selling  liquid  fire  :  this  is  great.  We 
moved  on  Thursday  to  the  widow  Henthorn's,  within  a  mile  of  the 
camp-ground.  I  preached  on  Friday  and  Saturday.  The  ministry 
are  instructed  to  be  careful  to  preach  to  the  soldiers,  wherever  op- 
portunity offers.  The  Union  Volunteers  desired  a  sermon,  so  I  gave 
a  discourse  on  the  ground  :  my  subject  was  Jer.  ii.  13. 

Monday  6.  We  eel  brated  a  solemn  sacrament ;  a  simple-hearted, 
weeping  people,  crowded  round  the  table.  My  soul  has  been  greatly 
blest  during  my  stay  on  the  camp-ground.  Good,  doubt  not,  has 
been  done.  I  have  been  pleased  by  reading,  at  intervals,  Benson's 
Life  of  Fletcher.  The  man  of  God  was  worn  out  before  he  mar- 
ried ;  and  where  else  might  he  have  found  such  a  nurse,  and  helper, 
and  shepherdess  in  a  wife  ?  but  possibly,  he  would  have  lived  longer 
had  he  travelled.  Comparing  myself  with  Fletcher,  what  am  I,  in 
piety,  wisdom,  labours,  and  usefulness  ?  God  be  gracious  to  me  ! 

Tuesday  7.  May  I  make  the  best  of  the  remains  of  life.  I  pre- 
sume we  had  ten  thousand  at  the  Liberty  camp-meeting,  and  five 
thousand  at  the  meeting  in  this  neighbourhood  of  Union-Town. 
Forty  persons  came  forward  to  enrol  their  names  in  society  with  us. 
We  came  away  to  George  Hogg's — kind  as  can  be  ;  so  indeed  are  the 
wife  and  sister.  We  entered  Brownsville  on  Wednesday,  and  drove 
to  Doctor  Wheeler's.  Notice  of  our  proposed  meeting  had  not  been 
generally  given,  and  we  had  not  many  hearers — perhaps  a  hundred. 
I  preached  in  Washington  on  Thursday,  on  1  Peter  iii.  10 — 15.  it 
was  a  solemn  time  ;  and  indeed  there  was  reason.  Samuel  Porter, 
a  Presbyterian  minister,  came  to  meeting ;  unable  to  sit  up,  he  lay 
down  upon  the  seat :  it  would  appear  that  he  is  not  long  for  this 
world  :  I  lent  him  Fletcher's  Life. 

Friday  10.  We  had  a  suffering  ride  of  thirty-two  miles  to  the 
Stone  chapel,  on  Short-Creek.  I  preached  at  four  o'clock,  and  there 
was  much  feeling  in  the  congregation.  I  want  strength,  and  food,  and 
rest.  We  have  serious  times — it  becomes  us  to  be  silent,  and  let 
God  judge  the  nations,  and  correct  the  guilty. 

Ohio. — Saturday  11.  We  directed  our  route  towards  the  Indiaa 
•short-Creek  camp-meeting. 


331  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL.  [181i^ 

Sunday  13.  We  had  a  solemn  meeting.  I  preached  to  about  three 
thousand  people,  as  I  judge.  Monday,  I  was  called  on  to  preach  ;  we 
have  had  eighty-four  tents  on  the  ground,  four  hundred  and  fifty  com- 
municants, and  forty  persons  have  joined  us.  The  work  of  God  was 
uninterrupted  night  and  day  ;  and  we  doubt  not  many  precious  souls 
were  converted.  I  shall  have  travelled  six  thousand  miles  in  eight 
months,  and  met  in  nine  conferences,  and  have  been  present  at  ten 
camp-meetings. 

Tuesday  15.  We  came  away  thirty  miles  to  Barnesville,  where  I 
delivered  my  testimony.  I  suffer  for  want  of  rest.  The  Methodists 
seem  to  have  almost  entire  influence  in  this  town.  Our  chapel  is 
forty  by  fifty  feet. 

Wednesday  16.  We  came  through  the  heat  to  Sherrock's,  dined, 
and  went  forward  towards  Wills-Creek — logs,  stumps,  ruts,  bushes — - 
rough  work  :  we  arrived  in  the  night  at  Waller's. 

Thursday  17.  We  set  out  in  the  rain,  and  came  thirty  miles  to 
Zanesville  ;  I  retired  sick  to  Spangler's.  We  have  a  meeting-house 
here,  and  at  Fairfields.  It  is  a  time  of  trouble  on  the  frontiers — 
the  Indians  have  killed  and  scalped  some  whites,  it  is  said. 

Friday  18.  We  attended  Rush-Creek  camp-meeting.  The  work 
of  God  during  the  night  was  awfully  powerful.  Many  Germans  pre- 
sent were  deeply  serious. 

Sunday  20.  I  preached.  The  whole  night  was  spent  in  prayer. 
We  had  a  sermon  on  Monday  morning,  and  the  sacrament  followed  : 
there  might  be  two  hundred  and  fifty  communicants.  I  had  been  un- 
well, but  an  emetic,  taken  on  Saturday  night,  prepared  me  for  use- 
fulness. I  lodged  with  Edward  Teel,  aged  seventy-seven.  I  had 
known  him  forty  years.  On  Tuesday,  we  passed  through  New-Lan- 
caster, to  Jesse  Spungeon's. 

Wednesday  23.  I  preached  at  Stroud's  chapel,  and  we  had  an 
open,  feeling,  gracious  season.  I  find  that  the  mother  of  my  host, 
Edward  Stroud,  went  safe  to  rest  last  April  :  she  was  a  disciple  of 
ours,  and  a  respectable  widow  in  Israel.  I  suffer  from  chills — the 
nights  are  cold,  and  I  have  been  much  exposed. 

Thursday  24.  We  rode  over  to  Judge  Vanmeeter's.  On  Friday  I 
preached  in  the  new  house  in  Jefferson  ;  we  visited  M'Dowell's,  and 
lodged  with  White  Brown  on  Saturday. 

Sabbath  27  I  preached  :  after  meeting  I  gave  up  and  stole  to  my 
bed.  My  rest  has  been  much  broken  for  the  last  month  in  various 
ways,  and  I  am  feverish  and  have  the  jaw  ache.  Could  I  be  less 
earnest  when  I  preach,  1  might  have  less  bodily  suffering;  but  it  ma\ 


1812.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL,  335 

not  be.  The  Ohio  conference  sat  from  Thursday,  October  the  1st, 
to  Wednesday  the  7th  ;  we  had  great  order.  The  writer  of  this 
journal  laboured  diligently,  and  was  much  assisted  by  the  eldership 
in  the  business  of  the  stations.  He  preached  three  times,  was  called 
upon  to  ordain  twelve  deacons,  and  also  to  ordain  elders  :  upon  the 
last  day  his  strength  failed.  I  want  sleep,  sleep,  sleep  :  for  three 
hours  I  lay  undisturbed  in  bed,  to  which  I  had  stolen  on  Wednesday  ; 
but  they  called  me  up  to  read  off  the  stations.  1  have  a  considerable 
fever  ;  but  we  must  move. 

Thursday  9.  We  made  a  pretty  rapid  ride,  thirty  miles,  te> 
Purrey's. 

Friday  10.  A  morning  ride  of  twenty-two  miles  brought  us  over 
trees,  stumps,  and  through  mud-holes  to  a  house  of  refreshment ; 
we  fed  hastily,  and  went  into  the  town  of  Miranda,  thirteen  miles 
farther. 

Saturday  11.  We  have  had  rain.  We  fed  on  our  way,  and  con- 
tinued onward  through  a  great  storm  of  thunder,  lightning,  and  rain, 
to  Cincinnati.  Oh,  let  us  not  complain  when  we  think  of  the  suffer- 
ing, wounded,  and  dying,  of  the  hostile  armies  1  If  we  suffer,  what 
shall  comfort  us  ? — let  us  see — Ohio  will  give  six  thousand  for  her 
increase  of  members  in  one  new  district. 

Sabbath  11.  I  preached  in  Cincinnati.     We  are  at  low  water  mark 

here  this  year  :  perhaps  they  will  raise  the  scaffolding  for  a  new  house. 

Kentucky. — We  came  over  to  Kentucky  on  Monday,  and  reached 

noisy  Lexington  :  there  was  company  enough,  and  little  quiet  through 

the  night. 

Tuesday  13.  We  rode  out  to  the  widow  Clark's  to  breakfast. 
Our  ride  of  twenty-six  miles  brought  us  to  lodge  under  the  roof  of 
the  widow  Hall. 

Wednesday  14.  We  returned  to  Lexington  in  the  forenoon.  The 
distance  gone  over  in  the  last  two  days  and  a  half  may  be  one  hun- 
dred miles.  I  preached,  but  the  notice  had  not  been  early,  and 
there  were  few  to  hear. 

I  attended  Ratcliff's  chapel  on  Thursday,  and  ordained  brother 
Cornelius  Ruddle  a  local  elder  :  he  officiated  in  my  place  in  the 
pulpit.  I  preached  at  the  house  of  his  father  in  1780  ;  how  strangely 
I  often  find  the  lost ! 

On  Friday  I  preached  in  the  representative-chamber  in  Frankfort, 
I  conversed  with  some  of  the  respectables,  and  found  one  who  had 
made  one  of  my  company  twenty-three  years  ago  in  a  journey 
through  the  wilderness.     We  reached  Edward  Talbot's  on  Saturday 


-'36  REV.   FRANCIS  ASRURy's  JOURNAL.  [1812- 

Sabbath  19.  I  preached  at  the  brick  chapel. 

Monday  20.  We  rode  twenty-four  miles  to  breakfast  with  James 
Ward,  Goose-Creek,  Jefferson  county  :  I  preached  the  funeral  of 
his  son.  Here  I  saw  some  of  my  ancient  brethren  and  sisters,  and 
the  children  of  others  of  them. 

Tuesday  21.  Came  to  Brunerstown  :  we  had  preaching  in  Ger- 
man and  English.  We  dined  with  Mr.  Conrad's  kind  family.  There 
are  some  of  Otterbine's  aud  Swoop's  people  hereabouts.  I  was 
called  to  visit  friend  Whips  in  a  dropsy.  We  came  down  to  Bare- 
grass- Creek.  What  is  called  the  Baregrass  Settlement,  is  the  garden 
of  the  state.  It  is  a  low,  level  country,  and  in  wet  seasons  must  be 
sickly,  as  it  is  now.  1  saw  a  native  of  Saxony  who  had  lately  ar- 
rived, and  had  joined  us  :  Oh  !  what  a  work  has  there  been  amongst 
the  Germans,  and  would  more  abundantly  have  been,  had  they  had 
the  discipline  of  the  Methodists ! 

Wednesday  22.  I  preached  in  Louisville  at  eleven  o'clock  in  our 
neat  brick  house,  thirty-four  by  thirty-eight  feet.  I  had  a  sickly, 
serious  congregation.  This  is  a  growing  town,  and  a  handsome 
place,  but  the  falls  or  ponds  make  it  unhealthy  :  we  lodged  at 
Farquer's. 

Thursday  23.  Breakfasted  at  B.  Shaveley's,  five  miles  on  our 
route  :  we  worried  and  plunged  through  deep  roads  thence  to- 
wards the  Barrens,  and  happily  took  the  road  newly  cut  through  the 
woods,  and  found  a  shelter  for  the  night  with  a  brother  Hawkins. 

Friday  24.  We  came  on  to  Elizabeth,  county  town  of  Harden  ; 
a  little  milk,  morning  and  evening,  served  us  for  food.  We  lodged 
beyond  Elizabeth  with  father  Gilliland,  whose  father  and  grandfa- 
ther were  killed  by  the  Indians  :  himself,  until  lately,  has  always 
been  a  frontier  man,  and  greatly  exposed. 

Saturday  25.  We  set  out,  and  reached  Mr.  Woodson's  to  lodge. 
I  am  greatly  supported  by  God  both  in  body  and  mind.  A  prize  ! — 
a  book  found  in  the  pocket  of  Mr.  Whits  after  his  death — Baxter's 
Poor  Marts  Family  Book  :  the  old  gentleman  had  a  good  guide,  and 
doubtless  died  in  peace  :  I  am  indebted  to  the  son  for  this  excellent 
work. 

Sabbath  26.  We  have  an  awful  storm  :  preached  in  Mr.  Wood- 
son's house.  A  Mr.  Locke  was  present ;  one  of  the  kindest  Bap- 
tists I  have  met  with.  Monday,  came  to  Allen's  to  dinner,  and  kept 
on  to  James  Strangfield's.  Tuesday,  we  crossed  Barren-River, 
rising  swiftly.  A  ride  through  the  rain  brought  us  to  Edward  Por- 
ter's.    Wednesday,  visited  David  Porter,  from  Elk-Ridge,  in  Mary- 


1812.]  REV.   FRANCIS  ASEURy's  JOURNAL.  337 

land.  Thursday,  we  rode  thirty  miles  to  brother  Gwinn's.  Friday, 
we  came  away  late  to  Nashville,  stopping  on  our  way  to  speak  to  the 
widow  Bo  wen,  the  daughter  of  my  ancient  friend,  the  late  General 
Russell  ;  this  lady  hath  three  daughters  who  profess  religion  ;  surely 
we  have  not  prayed  in  vain.  We  found  the  river  high  on  Saturday  ; 
Mr.  Hobbs,  the  jailer,  kindly  took  us  in  ;  but  we  are  not  prisoners, 
but  of  hope — but  of  the  Lord. 

Sabbath  31.  I  preached  in  the  new,  neat  brick  house,  thirty-four 
feet  square,  with  galleries.  Twelve  years  ago  I  preached  in  the 
old  stone  house,  taken  down  since  to  make  a  site  for  the  state-house. 
The  latter  house  exceeds  the  former  in  glory,  and  stands  exactly 
where  our  house  of  worship  should  by  right  have  stood  ;  but  we 
bear  all  things  patiently.  This  is  a  pentecostal  day  to  my  soul. 
Hail,  all  hail,  eternal  glory  ! 

Monday,  November  1.  We  left  our  lodging  in  the  jail-house,  and 
came  away  to  Green  Hill's.  Tuesday,  busy  in  writing  :  I  conclude 
next  year  that  we  shall  visit  and  hold  a  conference  in  Mississippi,  if 
so  directed  and  permitted.  Wednesday,  we  had  an  appointment  in 
the  neat  little  brick  house,  town  of  Franklin,  upon  Harper-River. 
After  meeting  the  society,  we  hasted  away  to  escape  the  rain  ;  the 
storm  in  the  night  was  made  awful  by  the  thunder  and  lightning. 
We  have  a  brick  house  in  the  town,  and  a  frame  one  five  miles  out. 
I  find  old  acquaintances  here  from  Virginia  and  North  Carolina.  I 
preached  on  Thursday  to  a  small  congregation  at  Green  Hill's.  Fri- 
day, after  meeting  at  Nashville,  we  went  forward  to  Benjamin 
Maxey's ;  we  held  a  meeting  here,  and  I  was  expected  to  occupy 
the  pulpit.  We  stayed  on  Saturday  at  the  widow  Bowen's,  on  Man- 
scoe's  Creek. 

Sabbath  7.  I  preached  at  Bowen's  chapel,  baptised  a  few  subjects, 
and  gave  three  exhortations  ;  I  had  aid  from  God.  If  the  Lord 
means  to  make  us  instruments  for  good,  we  are  wanted  here  and  at 
Natchez. 

Monday  8.  We  started  away  in  the  rain  to  James  Gwinn's.  Tues- 
day, we  opened  our  conference  in  great  peace  ;  forty  deacons  were 
ordained,  and  ten  elders ;  the  travelling  and  local  ministry  amounts 
to  sixty-two  ;  the  nett  increase,  after  allowing  for  death  and  removal, 
two.  We  came  away  after  a  peaceful  close  of  our  labours  on 
Tuesday  following,  to  John  M'Gee's,  thirty-three  miles  :  Wednes- 
day, to  Garratt's  :  Thursday,  to  Gibson's  :  Friday,  to  Jack's,  forty- 
five  miles,  arriving  in  the  night.  Oh,  the  rocks,  hills5  ruts>  and 
stumps !  My  bones,  my  bones  ! 

Vol.  III.  43 


•-^!>  REV.    FRANCIS    ASBUIIy's    JOURNAL.  [1812. 

Saturday  20.  We  had  a  quiet,  leisurely  ride  of  thirty-one  miles  to 
Winton's.  Driving  my  sulkey  over  such  roads,  and  through  such 
uncommon  colds,  causes  me  to  suffer  deeply  for  the  few  last  days. 
I  am  comforted  with  an  increase  of  eight  thousand  in  the  Tennessee 
conference.  If  we  meet  the  Mississippi  conference,  as  appointed,  in 
November  1813,  we  shall  have  gone  entirely  round  the  United  States 
in  forty-two  years  :  but  there  will  be  other  states  :  well  ;  God  will 
raise  up  men  to  make  and  to  meet  conferences  in  them  also,  if  we 
remain  faithful  as  a  people. 

Monday  22.  We  came  through  the  rain  to  Knoxville,  and  lodged 
with  father  Wagner,  one  of  Otterbine's  men.  Tuesday,  arrived  in 
Dandridge,  we  drove  to  Foute's.  It  is  excessively  cold.  It  was  my 
occupation  to  baptise  six  of  the  eight  children  of  our  host.  Wed- 
nesday we  crossed  French-Broad  at  Seaham's  ferry,  and  forded 
Pigeon-River  near  its  mouth  on  our  way  to  James  Gilliland's  ;  we 
came  into  our  station  for  the  night  almost  stiff  with  cold. 

Sabbath  29.  I  preached,  and  so  also  did  Bishop  M'Kendree  ;  Henry 
Boehm  exhorted.  I  found  a  relief  to  my  cold  in  a  few  grains  of 
tartar  emetic.  God  hath  wrought  upon  the  vilest  of  the  vile  in 
the  fork  of  Pigeon  and  French  Broad  Rivers,  and  He  will  yet  do 
wonders. 

Monday,  December  I.  We  stopped  at  Michael  Bollen's  on  our 
route,  where  I  gave  them  a  discourse  on  Luke  xi.  II,  12,  13.  Why 
should  we  climb  over  the  desperate  Spring  and  Paint  Mountains 
when  there  is  such  a  fine  new  road  ?  We  came  on  Tuesday  a 
straight  course  to  Barret's,  dining  in  the  woods  on  our  way. 

North  Carolina. — Wednesday  3.  We  went  over  the  mountain, 
twenty-two  miles,  to  Killion's. 

Thursday  4.  Came  on  through  Buncombe  to  Samuel  Edney's  ;  I 
preached  in  the  evening.  We  have  had  plenty  of  rain  lately.  Fri- 
day, I  rest.  Occupied  jn  reading  and  writing.  I  have  great  commu- 
nion with  God.     I  preached  at  father  Mills's. 

Saturday  4.  We  scaled  the  mountain— the  rise  may  be  a  quarter 
of  a  mile,  the  descent  much  more  gradual,  and  about  a  mile  in  length. 
We  had  a  keen,  cold  wind,  mingled  with  snow  Green-River  was 
full  and  rapid,  but  little  Fox  darted  like  a  fish  up  the  stream  :  we 
stopped  at  Marvell  Mills's,  chilled  indeed. 

South  Carolina. — Sabbath  6.  I  preached  at  Mills's  chapel  ;  after 
meeting  we  went  home  with  John  Mills,  White-Oak-Creek.  Ah, 
John,  thy  pious,  praying  mother!  think  often  of  her.  Monday,  a 
bitter  cold  ride  of  forty  miles,  brought  us  to  father  Francis  Watters's, 


1812. j  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV  s  journa;  .  33!) 

O  warm  room,  and  kind  old  Virginians !     Our  host  has  twelve  chil- 
dren of  eighteen  once  living. 

Tuesday  8.  Came  to  Broad-River.  We  found  Smith's  ford  deep 
enough,  but  Fox  turned  his  fearless  breast  up  the  stream,  and 
brought  me  swiftly  and  safely  through  the  swell  of  waters  :  he  is  a 
noble  beast.  We  dined  in  the  woods,  and  stopped  at  Esquire 
Leech's  ;  brandy  and  the  Bible  were  both  handed  me  :  one  was 
enough — I  took  but  one. 

Wednesday  9.  Came  to  Winsborough  late  at  night :  I  cannot 
easily  describe  the  pain  under  which  I  shrink  and  wreathe  :  the 
weather  is  cold,  and  I  have  constant  pleuretic  twinges  in  the  side. 
In  cold,  in  hunger,  and  in  want  of  clothing — mine  are  apostolic  suf- 
ferings. Jacob  Rumph  is  dead,  and  so  are  elder  Capers  and  James 
Rembert :  these  were  all  early  friends  to  the  Methodists  in 
South  Carolina,  and  left  the  world  in  the  triumph  of  faith.  We  are 
in  Camden. 

Thursday  10.  We  stay  at  father  Buchannan's  :  people  here  give 
little  encouragement  to  Methodism,  but  the  walls  of  opposition 
will  fall,  and  an  abundant  entrance  will  vet  be  ministered  to  us — the 
craft  of  learning,  and  the  craft  of  interested  religion  will  be  driven 
away. 

Friday  11.  A  cold  ride  brought  us  to  Duukin's.  Is  not  this  man  a 
brand  plucked  from  the  burning  ?  a  reclaimed  drunkard  !  Camp- 
meetings  have  done  this — they  do  great  good,  and  prosper  in  the  sand 
hills. 

Saturday  12.  We  lodged  in  Columbia  with  Colonel  Hutchinson. 

Sabbath  13.  I  preached  in  the  legislative  chamber,  and  had  the 
members  for  a  part  of  my  congregation.  Tuesday,  at  the  house  of 
the  widow  of  General  Jacob  Rumph  ;  the  father  and  son  both  died 
in  the  Lord.  This  house  has  been  open  to  the  Methodists  for  about 
twenty-seven  years,  whether  in  peace  or  persecution.  Jacob  tra- 
velled nearly  four  years  ;  so  meek,  so  mild,  diligent,  and  simple- 
hearted,  so  sincerely  good.  On  Tuesday  we  came  to  father  Carr's, 
a  Swiss  :  here  are  pious,  kind  souls.  Wednesday,  came  to  Stephen 
Swithen's,  within  twenty-three  miles  of  Charleston.  It  remains  in- 
tensely cold.  Thursday,  my  fingers  gave  out ;  then  the  axle-tree 
gave  a  crack,  seventeen  miles  from  the  city.  We  loaded  another 
whilst  I  rode  in  J.  B.  Glenn's  sulky,  he  and  Boehm,  with  the  aid  of 
cushions  and  bearskins,  rode  horseback  into  the  city.  These  are 
triSes.     Ah!  we  feel— we  fear  the  location  of  this  conference  will 


•i|5  REV.  FRANCIS  ASHUJIY's  JOI.'RNAr.  I  iC13. 

be  sixteen  in  number.     Saturday,  our  conference  began  its  session  in 
good  order. 

Sabbath  20.  I  preached  at  Cumberland  chapel  in  the  morning,  and 
at  Bethel  in  the  afternoon.  The  presiding  eldership  and  the  episco- 
pacy saw  eye  to  eye  in  the  business  of  the  stations  :  there  were  no 
murmurings  from  the  eighty-four  employed.  Christmas  day  was  a 
day  of  fasting,  and  we  dined  one  hundred  at  our  house  on  bread 
and  water,  and  a  little  tea  or  coffee  in  the  evening.  Our  funds  are 
low  ;  but  our  church  is  inured  to  poverty  ;  and  the  preachers  may, 
indeed,  be  called  the  poor  of  this  world,  as  well  as  their  flocks. 

Sabbath  27.  I  had  an  opportunity  of  meeting  the  society,  of  both 
colours,  and  my  exhortations  were  pointed,  and  in  season.  We  have, 
with  the  increase,  about  eighteen  thousand.  What  is  coming  ?  days 
of  vengeance,  or  of  Gospel  glory  ?  We  have  lost,  by  locations  and 
other  causes,  fourteen  of  the  itinerancy. 

Monday  28.  Letters — letters  to  write  !  We  send  two  missionaries 
to  Mississippi.  Religion  is  not  fashionable  in  Charleston.  Tuesday, 
receiving  visiters.  Our  house  is  a  house  of  prayer.  Wednesday, 
we  came  to  Readhammer's. 

Thursday  31.  Came  to  Georgetown  :  I  am  now  at  home  here  after 
twenty-nine  years  of  labour.  Many  letters  call  my  attention  :  I  am 
happy  in  God.  We  hear  of  a  blessed  work  in  James-River  district — 
camp-meetings  the  great  instrument.  According  to  Douglass's  account 
six  hundred  have  joined  us.  We  have  also  a  pleasing  account  in  a 
letter  from  Joel  Winch,  New-London  district,  Bristol,  Rhode-Island, 
of  a  work  of  God  ;  one  hundred  have  joined,  and  other  converts 
there  were  who  have  joined  the  Baptists  and  Episcopalians  ; — were 
these  stolen  from  us  ?     Saturday,  at  rest,  writing  letters. 

Sunday,  January  3,  1813.  I  preached  morning  and  evening.  It 
was  a  small  time — cold,  or  burning  the  dead.  We  have  about  one. 
thousand  blacks,  and  about  one  hundred  white  members  ;  most  of 
them  women  ;  the  men  kill  themselves  with  strong  drink  before 
we  can  get  at  them.  My  home  in  Georgetown  is  not  quite  so 
comfortable  ;  possibly  I  shall  hereafter  leave  it  to  better  men. 
Monday.  It  is  so  cold  I  have  a  small  fire  to  write  my  letters  by. 
Tuesday,  we  took  the  path  to  Coachman's,  Black-River.  My  even- 
ing talk  to  them  was,  "  Take  earnest  heed." 

Wednesday  6.  I  was  so  lame  I  stopped  at  Richard  Woodbury's. 
We  held  a  meeting  at  two  o'clock,  and  at  night.  Friday,  we  had  a 
meeting  at  Collins  Woodbury's ;  I  preached  in  the  evening — it  was 
excessively  cold,  and   I  was  lame. 


1213.]  REV.  FRANCIS   ASBIJUx  *S  JOURNAL.  341 

Sabbath  10.  I  preached  at  Rousome's,  on  Little  Pee -Dee.  Mon- 
day, a  bleak  ride  brought  us  to  General  Lee's.  I  took  an  emetic. 
My  foot  is  much  swelled.  Tuesday,  I  was  glad  to  stay  at  M'Neil's, 
in  Lumberton.  Applied  a  blister  to  my  foot :  Henry  Boehm  preach- 
ed. Wednesday,  came  in  great  pain,  and  very  unwell,  to  B.  Russell's. 
I  went  to  bed  in  a  high  fever  and  a  mild  medicine.  Thursday,  came 
on  to  Fayetteville  through  a  cold,  heavy  rain.  I  blistered  my  foot 
again.     The  Lord  blesses  me  with  patience. 

Sabbath  17.  They  carried  me  into  the  church.  I  ordained  two 
deacons  and  one  elder.  I  failed  in  strength  after  preaching,  and 
Rev.  Turner,  a  Presbyterian,  concluded  our  meeting  by  prayer.  I 
came  home,  applied  three  blisters,  and  retired  in  a  high  fever  to 
bed.  A  fourth  blister  completed  the  work.  Tuesday  and  Wednes- 
day, closely  confined. 

Thursday  21.  A  bitter  cold  ride  of  thirty  miles  brought  us  to 
Purdee's.  I  have  a  high  fever,  and  am  in  great  pain.  Friday,  a 
heavy  ride  of  thirty  six  miles  brought  us  to  King's.  I  anticipate  a 
night  of  fever  and  pain.  Saturday,  to  Wilmington  :  there  is  little 
trade  here,  and  fewer  people  ;  of  course  there  is  less  sin. 

Sabbath  24.  I  was  carried  into  the  church  ;  preached,  and  met  the 
society.  I  preached  again  in  the  evening.  A  bread  poultice  has 
procured  me  a  mitigation  of  pain.  Lord,  be  merciful  to  me  in  tem- 
porals and  spirituals  !  William  Capers  is  married — he  twenty-three, 
his  wife  eighteen. 

North  Carolina. — Tuesday  26.  We  made  a  journey  of  twenty- 
two  miles  to  the  widow  Nixon's — a  widow  of  Sarepta,  and  a  mother  in 
Israel.  I  have  a  fever,  and  swelled  feet.  We  had  a  small  congrega- 
tion.   Thursday,  we  took  the  road  in  the  rain. 

Friday  28.  Called  a  meeting  at  Mr.  Shepherd's.  Blessed  be  God  ! 
I  have  lived  to  see  the  third  generation  of  father  Ballard.  He  was 
the  first  man  that  joined  us  at  New-River  :  now  bis  grandson  is  in  the 
church,  and  in  Christ.  My  trials  lately  have  been  great.  We 
stemmed  the  cold  wind  to  Lot  Ballard's,  eighteen  miles.  I  suffer 
violent  pain  in  my  right  foot. 

Sabbath  30.  It  rained  heavily ;  nevertheless,  we  held  meeting  at 
Richland  chapel.  I  rested  above  an  hour,  on  my  knees,  preaching, 
and  in  the  ordination  of  Lot  Ballard,  a  deacon,  and  in  prayer.  We 
retired  from  the  meeting  to  G.  Rowe's,  a  son  of  affliction  and  conso- 
lation in  God.  We  are  in  a  palace — peace,  and  rich  accommodation. 
Was  it  with  us  as  in  former  times,  we  should  be  flying  north  ;  but  we 
are  fast  bound  by  lameness,     I  have  filled  all  my  appointments,  and 


342  REV.  FRANdS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1813. 

answered  the  letters  received.     I  neglect  not  all  opportunities  of  in- 
struction and  prayer. 

Monday,  February  1.  Lowering,  cold  day.  Tuesday,  I  preached 
at  Rowe's  to  about  sixty  souls.  What  a  land  is  this  of  widows  ;  and 
men  sick,  dying,  and  drunken  !  We  came  to  J.  Shineshe's  on  Wed- 
nesday ;  we  found  his  wife  ill,  and  prescribed  for  her  as  well  as  we 
might.  After  dinner  and  prayer,  came  away  to  the  widow  Bryan's. 
Her  husband  is  dead,  and  her  so-n  sick  :  we  prayed,  ventured  to  pre- 
scribe for  the  diseased  subject,  and  continued  onward  to  Adonijah 
Perry's. 

Thursday  4.  Once  more  I  put  on  my  leather  shoes.  O,  the  suf- 
ferings I  have  endured — patiently,  I  hope  !  One  more  warning  I 
gave  these  people  on  Hebr.  ii.  1 — 4.  ;  it  is  perhaps,  the  last.  I  am 
occupied  in  marking  for  reprint  about  three,  hundred  pages  of  Bax- 
ter.    Friday,  we  rode  round  to  Thomas  Lee's.     Saturday,  at  rest. 

Sabbath  7.  We  had  about  two  hundred  souls,  white  and  black,  to 
hear  us.  I  was  two  hours  preaching,  meeting  the  society,  baptising 
and  ordaining  Rasco  Lipsey.  I  gained  a  fever  and  a  clear  conscience 
by  my  labours.  Alas  !  it  is  the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble.  Monday.  I 
am  in  Newbern  on  crutches.  Tuesday,  reading,  receiving  the  visits 
of  presiding  elders,  and  writing  letters. 

Wednesday  10.  We  opened  our  conference  in  sister  Tenkard's 
elegant  school-room  :  we  had  great  order,  great  union,  and  great 
despatch  of  business.  The  increase  here  in  membership  this  year  is 
seven  hundred  ;  but  Ah  !   deaths  and  locations — then  the  preachers  ! 

Sabbath  14.  I  was  called  upon  to  preach.  Thursday,  conference 
rose,  and  we  came  away,  twenty-six  miles,  to  Murphy's.  Friday, 
excessively  cold.  A  ride  of  fifty  miles  brought  us  to  Edward  Hall's. 
Saturday,  we  started  in  the  rain,  crossing  Tar-River,  and  driving 
through  the  snow  driving  in  our  faces  :  we  were  glad  to  stop  at  James 
Hunter's  ;  my  feet  begin  to  swell  again. 

Sabbath  21.  Came  in  to  Halifax,  calling  upon  the  widow  Jones, 
mother  of  the  Shaker  of  that  name.  I  preached  to  a  few  whom  the 
weather  could  not  keep  back.  After  meeting,  and  takiDg  food,  we 
directed  our  course  to  brother  Barratt's.  We  wished  to  cross  the 
river  whilst  the  weather  would  permit:  I  fly,  and  a  strange  flight  it 
is  for  a  sick  cripple. 

Monday  22.  I  halted  at  James  Barratt's,  and  ordained  John  Moore, 
Edward  Price,  and  Edward  Drumgoold,  one  after  the  other,  as  they 
happened  to  drop  in  j  I  lectured  in  the  evening. 


1813.]  il£V.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  343 

Tuesday  23.  Came  away  to  Jane  Fisher's :  here  I  ordained 
Thomas  Drumgoold.  Wednesday,  I  ordained  John  Comber  at  Smith 
Parham's.  We  found  lodgings  for  the  night  at  Hall's  tavern.  We 
passed  through  Petersburg  to  Coxe's,  on  the  James-River.  Here 
flesh  failed,  and  I  wished  for  rest  and  found  it.  A  heavy  ride  on  Fri- 
day brought  us  to  Mr.  Bleaky's  happy  family  and  pleasant  mansion. 
I  have  looked  into  Whitehead's  Life  of  Wesley — he  is  vilified  :  O, 
shame  ! 

Sabbath  28.  I  preached  in  Richmond  old  chapel,  gave  counsel  to 
the  tarrying  society,  baptised  two  infants,  and  ordained  John  Sullivan, 
and  William  Whitehead  deacons.  I  spoke  again  in  the  afternoon  to 
a  congregation  made  up  of  the  young  and  the  aged.  The  Presby- 
terians and  Episcopalians  are  striving  to  have  places  of  worship. 

Monday,  March  1.  Came  away  to  Burrough's.  Tuesday,  came  to 
Carson's  ferry,  crossed,  and  kept  on  to  Mrs.  Alexander's.  After 
leaving  this,  we  became  entangled  in  the  woods,  and  had  a  gentle  up- 
set, which,  brought  us,  without  much  damage,  to  the  bottom  of  the 
hill  ;  a  ride  of  two  miles  on  horseback  brought  us  and  our  baggage  to 
our  lodgings  for  the  night.  My  mind  enjoys  great  peace  ;  but  I  am 
in  pain  of  body,  and  my  legs  are  swelled. 

Wednesday  31.  We  were  obliged  to  lie  by  until  the  shaft  of  the 
sulky  was  mended.  I  improved  this  opportunity  of  rest  to  take  me- 
dicine. I  exhort  the  family.  My  mind  mourns  over  the  citizens  of 
King  George  county — Oh  !  for  a  Gospel  day  and  work  1 

Thursday  2.  A  desperate  plunging  of  thirty  miles  through  the 
clay  brought  us  to  Dumfries.  We  stopped  at  mother  Mason's,  and 
lectured  in  the  family.  Friday,  to  Edward  Sandford's.  Saturday  came 
to  Georgetown,  dining  with  Jacob  Hoffman,  in  Alexandria. 

Maryland. — Sabbath  7.  1  changed  my  subject  after  getting  into 
the  church  ;  and  1  spoke  long  and  plainly.  We  have  news  from 
the  English  conference.  It  has  given  me  an  invitation  to  my  native 
land,  engaging  to  pay  the  expenses  of  the  visit. 

Monday  8.  I  sat  upon  the  carpet,  reading  and  writing.  William 
Walters  visited  me.  In  the  evening  I  performed  the  ceremony  of 
marriage,  uniting  two  young  people  in  the  house.  Wednesday,  I  vi- 
sited Doctor  Tiffin,  baptised  his  child,  Edward  Parker  Tiffin,  and  then 
came  on  to  Bell's  chapel,  and  had  here  a  very  respectable  congrega- 
tion ;  but,  Alas !  I  was  feeble  in  body  and  mind.  We  lodged  with 
brother  William  Revet.  Thursday,  we  visited  Colonel  Beale,  below 
Piscataway  ;  and  here  I  preached  to  a  very  genteel,  serious  people* 
Friday,  I   preached  at  Ford's   chapel  :   the   word   was  not .  wholly 


344  ftEVr.  FRAN-CIS  ASKURY'a  JOURNAL.  [181  J. 

lost.  We  lodged  under  the  hospitable  roof  of  the  widow  Ford. 
Saturday,  was  held  a  quarterly  meeting  at  Smith's  chapel.  We 
preached  to  a  full  house.  After  meeting  we  were  invited  to  the  house 
of  Mr.  Somerville. 

Sabbath  15.  I  suffer  extreme  pain  in  one  of  my  limbs,  and  move 
with  difficulty.  A  dumb  Sabbath  ;  but  there  is  no  lack  of  aid.  I  feel 
perfect  resignation,  knowing  that  it  is  all  for  the  best.  Monday,  we 
left  our  kind  host,  Captain  Somerville,  an  old  revolutionary  hero, 
who  lost  an  arm  in  the  contest.  We  crossed  Patuxent-River,  and  had 
a  cold  ride  from  Lower  Marlborough  to  Samuel  Essex's,  Plumb  Point* 
I  am  feeble,  and  have  to  endure  pain  and  cold,  and  perform  double 
labour  :  blessed  be  God,  for  the  support  I  receive  ! 

Tuesday  17.  I  preached  in  Child's  chapel,  and  was  assisted  by 
Wells,  Boehm,  and  Smith.  We  came  in,  chilled  by  the  cold  and  rain, 
to  Philip  Dorsey's,  and  lodged  there.  Wednesday,  faint  and  feeble, 
we  took  the  road  to  Tannyhill's,  and  gave  a  sermon  to  a  small  con- 
gregation. We  lodged  with  Samuel  Wood,  who  lives  where  Griffin 
formerly  lived,  and  has  married  the  widow  :  here  I  preached  thirty- 
six  years  ago. 

Thursday  18.  I  met  about  four  hundred  people  at  Weems's  cha- 
pel, to  whom  I  preached,  arid  we  hope  the  word  was  not  lost :  my 
congregation  was  serious  and  attentive.  But,  Ah !  there  is  death  in 
the  pot ;  will  my  exhortations  to  the  society  do  much  good  ?  We 
found  our  host,  William  Weems,  with  an  afflicted  family. 

Friday  19.  We  drove  through  a  storm  of  wind  to  Lamplin's  chapel, 
and  preached  to  about  two  hundred  attentive  hearers.  Dined  with 
Doctor  Murray's  family,  and  gave  them  some  plain  talk.  We  lodged 
with  Samuel  M'Cubbins.  I  was  feverish  and  in  pain,  and  worried 
through  a  night  of  affliction.  We  have  visited  Prince-George,  Cal- 
vert, and  Ann  Arundell ;  the  weather  and  roads,  how  unpleasant ;  and 
the  people,  how  decently  attentive  in  meeting  ;  and  how  kind  and  at- 
tentive in  their  houses  !  Saturday,  I  housed  with  my  friend  Absalom 
Ridgeley,  in  Annapolis  :  this  amiable  family  is  much  favoured. 

Sabbath  22.  There  was  a  serious,  solemn  attention  in  the  congre- 
gation whilst  I  tried  to  speak  on  Colossians  i.  27 — 29.  I  gave  the 
Africans  a  sermon  in  the  afternoon.  I  felt  the  pain  of  coughing,  and 
the  effects  of  the  blister.  Monday,  came  to  Sewall's.  I  preached 
on  James  i.  22 — 24.  A  heavy  ride  brought  us  to  Baltimore.  I  gave 
an  evening  to  the  great  Otterbine  :  I  found  him  placid  and  happy  in 
God.  He  says  the  commentators  are  mistaken— that  the  vials  are 
yet  to  be  poured  out.     Tuesday,  I  had  a  serious  interview  with  the- 


1813.]  REV.    FRANCIS    ASRURy's    JOURNAL,  34.5 

presiding  elders.     Wednesday,  we  opened  conference,  and  went  for- 
ward in  our  business  in  great  peace  and  order. 

Sabbath  28.  I  ordained  deacons  in  the  forenoon,  and  preached  in 
the  afternoon. 

Thursday,  April  1.  Conference  rose  in  great  order  and  peace.  I 
stationed  eighty-three  preachers.  This  conference  holds,  in  their 
several  relations,  ninety  preachers,  twenty  thousand  two  hundred  and 
seventy-two  members  white,  and  seven  hundred  and  ninety-nine 
coloured.     We  came  away  to  Perry-Hall  :  Alas  !  how  solitary  ! 

Friday  2.  To  Ewen's.  Saturday,  to  mother  Boehm's.  It  was 
necessary  to  put  seventy  miles  between  us  and  Baltimore  before  we 
could  write  a  line  :  must  we  always  thus  jly  away  to  he  at  rest  ? 

Sabbath  4.  At  Boehm's  chapel  I  expounded  2  Tim.  ii.  15.  Henry 
Boehm  preached  in  German  ;  James  Norton  in  English.  The  soci- 
ety received  an  exhortation.  Monday,  I  wrote  a  letter  to  my  British 
brethren,  thanking  them  for  their  kind  invitation  to  visit  them.  Tues- 
day, I  preached  at  Strasburg.  Wednesday,  desperate  roads  to  New- 
ark kept  us  late.  We  had  about  two  hundred  people  to  hear  us,  to 
whom  we  spoke  upon  the  great  salvation. 

Thursday  8.  I  preached  at  Salem,  and  went  home  to  dine  with  A, 
Keagy.  After  dinner  went  down  with  Judge  Richard  Bassett  to  Bohe- 
mia. Spring  has  at  last  returned — a  treble  spring — natural,  spiritual, 
and  political.  What  a  winter  we  have  gone  through  !— what  weather 
for  five  months  '.—  what  roads  ! 

Friday  9.  We  rode  down  to  Smyrna  :  and  preached  at  night,  re- 
membering to  exhort  the  society.  I  visited  sister  Davis  ;  near  her 
end :  but  calm  and  waiting  for  deliverance.  Saturday,  went  to 
Dover. 

Sabbath  11.  I  spoke  at  Wesley  chapel  plain  words  in  the  forenoon, 
and  I  spoke  again  in  the  afternoon  at  Farra's  chapel.  We  dined  with 
Denny,  and  finding  them  at  the  table  when  we  afterward  called  at 
Doctor  Sykes's,  we  sat  sociably  down  and  ate  there  also.  I  called 
upon  Judge  Cooper,  who  is  a  subject  of  great  affliction  :  he  felt  much 
whilst  I  prayed  with  him.  The  evening  was  very  cold,  nevertheless 
we  came  away,  thirteen  miles,  to  lodge  at  Purnell's. 

Monday  12.  A  rapid  ride  brought  us  to  Collins's  in  Caroline.     I 
preached  at  three   o'clock,  and  went  home  to  lodge  with  Peter  T 
Causey.     Tuesday,  rode  fifteen  miles  to  preach  in  Frazier's  chapeL 
I  preached  in  the  evening  at  James  Harris's.     Thomas  Foster  took 
us  in  for  the  night. 

Wednesday  15.  We  came  to  Cambridge 

Vol.  HI  H 


316  KEV.     FRANCIS   ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1813. 

Thursday  15.  There  was  an  alarm  from  the  enemy,  and  of  course 
no  preaching.  We  came  back  to  Foster's.  I  preached  in  Newmar- 
ket, and  ordained  George  Ward  to  deacon's  orders.  Friday,  retired 
to  humiliation  and  prayer.  Saturday,  I  preached  at  Washington  cha- 
pel, and  ordained  Henry  Baine  a  local  deacon.  We  Visited  Eccleston 
Brown,  now  a  subject  of  grace,  and  lodged  with  Lemuel  Davis,  an 
old  disciple. 

Delaware. — Sunday  18.  I  preached  at  Brown's  chapel,  and  had  a 
serious,  attentive  congregation.  I  preached  also  in  the  evening  at 
Bridgeville.  What  a  change  is  here ! — the  children  and  grandchil- 
dren are  left,  but  few  of  the  first  generation.  I  baptised  Daniel 
Polk's  son— Monday,  to  Millford,  and  preached  for  them. 

Tuesday  20.  I  preached  in  Barratt's  chapel,  dined  at  Dover,  and 
slept  at  Smyrna  ;  making  a  journey  of  forty  miles. 

Wednesday  21.  There  was  a  high  wind,  and  I  set  out,  feeble  and 
faint,  and  reached  Wilmington.  I  lodge  with  Governor  Bassett.  My 
peace  flows  like  a  river.  I  suppose  we  have,  in  sixteen  circuits, 
ten  chapels  in  each.     I  preached  for  the  folks  in  Wilmington. 

Friday  23.  A  heavy  ride  brought  us  to  Philadelphia. 

Pennsylvania. — Saturday  24.  We  opened  our  annual  conference, 
ninety  preachers  present :  much  order,  and  great  peace. 

Sunday  25.  I  preached  in  the  Academy  chapel  in  the  morning ; 
and  at  night  at  St  George's.  My  congregations  were  large.  We 
continued  in  conference  until  Saturday,  the  first  of  May.  We  had 
speakers  in  plenty  ;  but  peace  and  union.  There  is  a  falling  off  in 
numbers,  occasioned  by  locations,  and  the  retirement  of  the  super- 
annuated, and  other  causes  ;  so  that  the  increase  of  effective  preach- 
ers is  but  two. 

Sunday  2.  I  preached  at  Ebenezer,  and  exhorted  to  union  ;  and 
again  at  the  tabernacle.  I  shall  throw  all  the  troubles  of  the  times, 
the  church,  and  the  conference,  into  shades  ;  nor  will  I  record  these 
tales  of  wo. 

Tuesday  4.  We  set  out  in  an  easterly  storm  up  the  Bristol  road, 
and  reached  Burlington. 

New-Jersey.— Wednesday  and  Thursday,  still  raining.  Busy 
writing  letters.  The  increase  in  six  conferences,  is,  in  members, 
twenty-one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  thirty-four  ;  in  preachers 
seventy-nine  ;  but  of  these  there  are  only  thirty-three  travellers. 
The  Baltimore  conference  paid  up  without  any  charitable  dividend. 
J  preached  in  Burlington  on  Thursday  ;  many  attended,  although  it  wa? 
damp.     Will  this  place  and  Trenton  ever  be  famous  for  vital  religion  ° 


1813.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  347 

Friday  7.  Stormy,  I  preached  at  Mount  Holly.  After  meeting, 
visited  William  Richards,  a  friend  of  ours  for  many  years  :  his  wife 
and  daughter  departed  in  peace,  and  are  gone  safe. 

Saturday  8.  I  preached  in  Lumberton.  Here  we  have  a  good 
house,  after  forty  years'  labour.  I  dined  with  Mr.  Moore  :  his  mother 
is  a  public  speaker  ;  yet  she  attended  our  Methodist  meeting,  and 
told  me  she  found  it  a  blessing  to  her.  We  rode  to  New-Mills,  to 
shorten  our  distance  to  the  city.  My  mind  is  greatly  in  God  ;  but 
my  body  is  feeble. 

Sunday  9.  I  preached,  and  it  was  an  open  season.  We  met  the 
society  after  preaching,  and  said  many  things  to  them. 

Monday  10.  Dined  at  the  widow  Banting's,  Crossweeks.  At  Allen* 
town,  I  preached  nearly  two  hours,  and  had  gracious  access  to  God 
and  to  truth.     We  lodged  with  John  Hughes.     I  am  filled  with  God. 

Tuesday  11.  We  came  to  Brunswick,  thirty  miles,  and  a  despe- 
rate road.  I  was  weary  and  faint ;  yet  I  went  to  the  meeting-house 
in  the  eyening,  delivered  my  testimony,  and  retired  sick  to  bed  to 
take  medicine. 

Wednesday  12.  We  came  fifteen  miles  to  Plait's,  Rahway,  without 
breaking  bread.  I  preached  in  our  unfinished  house  in  Bridgetown, 
at  noon  ;  and  at  Elizabeth  at  night.  There  are  distressing  accounts 
from  the  sea  coasts,  and  from  the  north-west.  God's  people  must  flee 
to  the  strong  hold  of  Divine  protection. 

Thursday  13.  Dined  at  Newark.  Preached  at  Belville.  Friday* 
preached  at  Paramo's  :  the  rain  was  abundant ;  the  people,  never- 
theless, attended.  Lodged  at  Wilson's.  Saturday,  preached  at  Sher- 
wood's ;  we  had  an  open  season. 

New-York. — We  toiled  over  the  rocky  road  to  Haverstraw, 
sixteen  miles  ;  and  I  delivered  my  testimony  in  great  feebleness  of 
body.  We  lodged  with  Peter  Noyelle  :  our  host  built  his  house 
for  a  tavern,  but  it  was  turned  into  a  church.  At  Philipstown  we 
have  an  elegant  new  chapel  :  I  preached  in  it  on  Monday,  and  felt 
liberty  in  the  word. 

Tuesday  18.  Came  to  Richard  Jackson's,  twenty-five  miles.  I 
was  required  to  preach  at  a  minute's  warning,  as  I  found  an  assembly 
ready.  It  would  seem  as  if  the  preachers  think  they  are  committing 
sin  if  they  do  not  appoint  preaching  for  me  every  day,  and  often  twice 
a  day  :  Lord,  support  us  in  our  labour,  and  we  will  not  murmur. 

Wednesday  19.  A  cold,  uncomfortable  ride  brought  us  to  Amenia. 
We  dined  with  brother  Ryder,  an  ancient  disciple  and  local  preacher. 


348  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1C13. 

Thursday  20.  We  opened  the  New-York  conference  in  great  peace 
and  good  order.  Friday,  day  of  abstinence  :  I  ordained  twelve  dea* 
cons  after  sermon  :  my  text  was  2  Tim.  iv.  5. 

Saturday  22.  King  Gordius  had  well  nigh  been  amongst  us  ;  but 
the  knots  were  untied  peaceably,  and  not  cut  in  rashness. 

Sunday  23.  Bishop  M'Kendree  preached.  It  appeared  to  me  as  if 
a  ray  of  divine  glory  rested  on  him  :  his  subject  was,  Great  peace 
kave  they  that  love  thy  law ;  and  nothing  shall  offend  them.  My  sub- 
ject was  Ephes.  iv.  1 — 3.  The  appearance,  manner,  and  preaching 
of  brother  M'Kendree  produced  a  very  powerful  effect  on  Joshua 
Marsden.  a  British  missionary,  who  has  been  present  at  our  confe- 
rence. 

Wednesday  26.  I  preached  the  funeral  sermon  of  Robert  Hibbard  : 
he  was  drowned  in  the  St.  Lawrence,  on  his  way  to  his  former  cir- 
cuit. Our  conference  concluded  in  peace,  and  the  bishops,  upon 
reading  the  stations,  gave  a  valedictory  address,  in  which  our  bre- 
thren were  assured  that  the  plan  of  their  future  labours  was  delibe- 
rately formed  with  the  aid  of  the  collected  and  re-collected  wisdom  of 
judicious  counsel,  and  in  much  prayer.  We  heard  no  complaint, 
and  there  was  no  appeal. 

Connecticut. — Friday  28.  We  travelled  this  day  ten  hours.  I 
preached  in  the  evening  in  a  school-house  ;  but  had  not  much  free- 
dom. Saturday,  we  made  a  tedious  day's  ride  to  the  widow  Pease's. 
In  our  way  we  called  in  to  see  a  sick  brother,  and  prayed  with  him. 

Sunday  30.  I  preached  in  Piitsfield.  Monday,  preached  at  M'Far- 
lan's.  Sickness,  death,  and  judicial  blindness,  are  the  miseries  of 
this  part  of  the  world.  We  called  upon  John  Leland,  late  from  the 
margin  of  the  grave  :  we  found  him  pleasant  and  kind.  Hereabouts 
we  scattered  some  pamphlets  on  discipline,  and  the  supper  of  the 
Lord.  But  baptism  is  all  in  all  still  with  them  :  we  avoided  con- 
troversy. 

Tuesday,  June  L  We  have  a  fine  prospect  of  the  Hoosack  River, 
and  the  Green  mountain,  bleak  as  January.  After  dinner  at  Tin- 
ney's,  (kind  souls,)  we  descended  the  precipice,  crossing  by  a  slight 
bridge.  We  lodged  with  Deacon  Allis  :  the  good  Presbyterian  of- 
ficiated for  his  family  ;  but  in  the  morning  we  settled  the  matter,  and 
5  prayed. 

New- Hampshire — Wednesdav  2.  We  reached  Winchester,  m 
New-Hampshire,  stopping  to  dine  with  the  nice  Websters,  in  Green- 
5;eM     My  knee  is  swelled  again.     Like  priest,  like  people,  in  these 


2813.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  349 

parts ;  both  judicially  blind.  We  lodged  two  nights  in  Winchester 
with  Caleb  Alexander,  whose  father  I  followed  to  the  grave.  The 
dust  I  visited,  afterward  the  widow,  and  came  away.  This  town  is 
not  reformed  by  Methodist  conference  or  Methodist  preaching.  We 
ahall  direct  our  course  straight  forward  to  New-London,  to  meet  our 
conference  there.  Studiously  employed,  Thursday,  Friday,  Satur- 
day, at  brother  Marble's. 

Sunday  6.  I  preached  in  the  morning  and  afternoon  with  little  free- 
dom. May  we  not  expect  increasing  days  of  distress  ?  Methodism  in 
the  East,  is  as  likely  to  be  any  thing  else  as  that  which  it  ought  to 
be,  unless  we  have  great  displays  of  the  power  of  God,  and  a  strict 
discipline.  We  have  a  gracious  rain  in  mercy,  if  not  in  answer  to 
prayer.  Knowing  the  uncertainty  of  the  tenure  of  life,  I  have 
made  my  will,  appointing  Bishop  M'Kendree,  Daniel  Hitt,  and  Henry 
Boehm,  my  executors.  If  I  do  not  in  the  mean  time  spend  it,  I  shall 
leave,  when  I  die,  an  estate  of  two  thousand  dollars  1  believe  :  I 
give  it  ail  to  the  book  concern.  This  money,  and  somewhat  more,  I 
have  inherited  from  dear  departed  Methodist  friends,  in  the  state  of 
Maryland,  who  died  childless  ;  besides  some  legacies  which  I  have 
never  taken.  Let  it  all  return,  and  continue  to  aid  the  cause  of 
piety. 

Monday  7.  I  preached  in  Winchester  village — a  plain  discourse, 
Tuesday,  came  on  to  Orange,  and  preached  at  Asa  Lord's.  We  have 
had  pleasing  rains,  and  nature  begins  to  put  on  her  charms,  flly  mind 
enjoys  a  constant  serenity,  whether  labouring  or  at  rest,  in  ease  or 
in  pain.     To  me  to  live  is  Christ;  to  die  is  gain. 

Wednesday  8.  We  came  in  haste  to  Ashburnham,  and  attended  a 
prayer- meeting  at  the  widow  Barrel's  :  I  lectured  upon  Luke  xviii.  1. 
We  came  to  Howard  about  mid-day.  Here  are  good  houses  of 
wood  ;  the  country  around  barren,  but  partly  improved  by  the  culti- 
vation of  grass.  Thursday,  was  cold.  Surely  we  shall  rise  in  New 
England  in  the  next  generation.  I  believe,  for  one,  that  there  has 
been  more  true  Gospel  preaching  in  the  other  states,  than  in  the  five 
New  England  states,  after  all  their  boasting.  God  is  my  all.  I 
preached  in  Howard  at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening — plainly,  and  point- 
edly.    Ah!  there  is  death  in  the  pot. 

Friday  11.  At  Waltham.  we  stopped,  lectured,  and  prayed;  and 
came  away  to  Needham.  Faint,  yet  pursuing.  I  endure  heat  and 
abstinence,  in  patience,  and  in  hope. 

Saturday  12.  We  had  a  pleasant  rain — came  away  to  breakfast, 
tight  miles,  in  a  tavern,  praying  at  the  table.     Sixteen  miles  through 


35U  REV.  FKANOIS  ASUUKY'S  JOURNAL.  [1813. 

dust  and  heat,  made  us  willing  to  stop  for  dinner  at  Easton  ;  and  con- 
tinuing on  to  Taunton,  we  sought  rest  with  father  Prattson  ;  a  Lot 
in  Sodom. 

Sunday  13.  We  rose  at  four  o'clock,  to  gain  twelve  miles  for 
Somerset  quarter  meeting.  1  lectured  on  the  Lord's  prayer.  Dined 
with  Captain  Reed,  and  gave  an  exhortation  in  the  afternoon.  I  am 
told  there  is  a  revival  of  the  work  of  God  here,  and  at  Warren,  and 
at  Bristol.  1  have  difficulties  to  encounter,  but  I  must  be  silent.  My 
mind  is  in  God.  fTn  New  England  we  sing,  we  build  houses,  we  eat, 
and  stand  at  prayer.  Here  preachers  locate,  and  people  support 
them,  and  have  travelling  preachers  also.  Were  I  to  labour  forty- 
two  years  more,  I  suppose  I  should  not  succeed  in  getting  things 
right.  Preachers  have  been  sent  away  from  Newport  by  an  apos- 
tate—so we  go.  '  O  rare  steeple-houses,  bells  !  (organs  by  and  by  ?) 
- — these  things  are  against  me,  and  contrary  to  the  simplicity  of 
Christ/}   We  lodge  with  our  brother  Brayton. 

Rhode-Island. — Monday  14.  We  visited  the  Reeds,  senior  and 
junior,  and  Doctor  Winsler  and  family.  I  preached  in  Warren  in  the 
evening,  and  lodged  with  kind  Smith  Bowen.  I  preached  at  Bristol 
at  six  o'clock :  we  did  not  trouble  the  people  with  ourselves  or 
horses.  My  congregation  was  large.  A  pious  sister  had  gone  in 
triumph  :  we  committed  her  earth  to  parent  earth. 

Wednesday  16.  Storm-bound.  Writing,  planning,  and  reading, 
Thursday,  we  came  in  haste,  along  to  Providence.  An  African  gave 
me  his  hand  in  the  street,  having  seen  me  in  New-York.  George 
Pickering  turned  me  aside,  and  presented  me  to  the  Governor, 
Jones,  who  gave  me  his  hand  :  we  were  entertained  splendidly. 
Here  are  grand  buildings  ;  but  no  chapel  for  the  Methodists.  We 
rode  on  to  Lippelt's  factories :  what  a  population  here  is  !  Friday, 
fast  and  physic.  Reached  Kayser's,  in  Canterbury.  Nature  is  now 
in  all  her  grandeur  and  loveliness.  When  alone,  1  am  allprayer 
and  praise.  Saturday,  to  Colchester,  dining  with  Williams  on  the 
route. 

Sunday  20.  Brother  M'Kendree  preached  at  eleven  o'clock  ;  and 
1  in  the  afternoon.  Was  it  ever  known  before,  that  the  stations  could 
be  ready  in  four  days  ?  Two  cases  in  committee  delayed  us  nearly 
a  day. 

Thursday  24.  We  rose  in  peace.  Here  was  an  account  of  the 
expenditure  of  six  hundred  dollars  in  a  charity ;  and  the  bishops 
knew  nothing  about  it  :  mark !  let  us  have  no  more  fellowship  in 
giving  or  receiving  money.     We  rose  in  peace,  with  satisfaction,  ge- 


1813.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  551 

nerally,  as  it  respected  the  stations  ;   and  this  has  been  the  case 
throughout  the  eastern  states. 

Friday  25.  Moved  forward  to  East-Hartford  ;  and  lodged  once 
more  under  the  roof  of  Esquire  Pitkins. 

Saturday  26.  Came  the  Hartford  Bridge  road  to  Jonathan  Coe's, 
Winstead.  Hail  home  ! — Rest  my  heart !  We  have  made  a  stand  in 
the  New  England  conference  against  steeples  and  pews  ;  and  shall 
possibly  give  up  the  houses,  unless  the  pews  are  taken  out,  and  the 
houses  made  sure  to  us  exclusively.  The  conference  now  pursue  a 
coupse  which  will  surely  lead  to  something  decisive  :  we  will  be 
flattered  no  longer. 

Sunday  27.  Bishop  M'Kendree  preached  in  the  morning,  I  spoke 
in  the  evening.  I  did  not  go  out  at  night,  but  staid  at  home  to  nurse 
myself,  and  to  meditate. 

Connecticut. — Monday  28.  A  heavy  ride  brought  us  to  Bene- 
dict's, in  Canaan  ;  and  thence  onward  to  brother  King's,  in  Egremont. 
Tuesday,  to  father  Merwin's  to  lodge. 

Wednesday  30.  A  long  ride  brought  us  to  Daniel  Ostrander's,  in 
the  Holloway.  It  is  surprising  to  see  the  improvement  of  the  city  of 
Hudson  in  twenty  years.  We  have  spent  about  ten  dollars  a  month, 
as  road  expenses  ;  but  where  is  our  clothing  and  our  horses  to  come 
from — what  have  we  left  for  charity  ?  It  must  be  gotten  from  two 
hundred  dollars,  allowed  us  by  the  conference.  But  may  we  not 
beg  ?  For  ourselves — no. 

Thursday,  July  1.  I  preached  in  a  school-house  :  the  weather  was 
sultry,  and  I  was  weak  and  in  pain. 

New-York. — Friday  2.  Came  to  Rensselaerville,  and  called  a 
solemn  meeting.   Saturday,  I  was  greatly  afflicted,  and  staid  at  home. 

Sunday  4.  I  rose  unwell ;  but  the  appointment  had  been  made  for 
me.  I  spoke  an  hour,  and  officiated  in  love-feast  and  at  the  sacra- 
ment :  the  meeting  held  about  three  hours.  My  dinner  and  supper 
to-day,  has  been  tartar  emetic.  I  never  knew  the  state  of  the  Me- 
thodist chapel  in  New  Durham  until  now.  It  was  bought  of  the  Pres- 
byterians, carried  five  miles,  and  rebuilt  or  replaced  within  hearing 
of  the  Independents'  church  :  there  is,  surely,  little  of  the  mind  of 
Christ  in  all  this,  and  I  will  preach  no  more  in  it,  if  I  can  avoid 
it.  Should  the  Methodists  have  imitated  the  Low  Dutch,  who  treated 
them  exactly  thus  in  Albany  ? 

Monday  5.  At  Sharon — Caukin's  :  the  aged  father  is  dead.  Tues- 
day, a  ride  through  the  heavy  rain  brought  us  to  Springfield. 


352  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURYS  JOURNAL.  [1813, 

Wednesday  7.  Came  on  to  Litchfield,  and  thence  to  Richards'g,  a 
pleasant  home. 

Thursday  8.  To  Westmorland  :  in  the  last  two  hundred  and 
seventy  miles  I  have  suffered  much  from  hunger,  heat,  and  sickness. 
If  we  were  disposed  to  stop  at  taverns,  (which  we  are  not,)  our 
funds  would  not  allow  it  always  when  we  need  refreshment  and  food  ; 
we  have  not  brethren  at  every  place,  and  the  east  is  not  hospitable  : 
Maryland,  or  the  south  ! 

Friday  9.  We  opened  our  conference  in  peace  in  our  house,  sixty 
by  fifty  feet ;  built  by  the  Independents,  and  bought  by  the  Metho- 
dists. We  progressed  two  days  in  much  union  and  sweetness,  having 
one  day  the  presence  and  company  of  our  Canadian  brethren. 

Sabbath  12.  Daniel  Hitt  preached  at  nine  o'clock.  I  preached 
and  ordained  nine  deacons  ;  Bishop  M'Kendree  ordained  six  elders, 
and  preached  also.  We  had  sermons  inside  and  outside  of  the 
house,  and  in  the  woods  :  we  might  have  three  thousand  souls  to 
hear.  Shall  our  labour  all  be  lost  ?  By  sitting  in  an  open,  cold 
house  I  have  taken  the  influenza. 

Tuesday  13.  Our  conference  adjourned  in  great  peace,  and  all 
satisfied  with  their  stations. 

Wednesday  14.  Tried  medicine.  I  preached  on  a  short  notice  a', 
our  little  chapel  at  Paris-Green.     We  lodged  at  Richards's. 

Thursday  16.  We  had  four  hours'  rain  to  fall  upon  us  in  our  eight 
hours'  ride  to  Brookfield.  Brother  Pierce  was  sent  in  the  name  of 
the  bishops  to  communicate  to  W.  B.  Lacey  what  conference  had 
done  in  his  case,  and  to  demand  his  parchment ;  the  culprit  refused 
to  deliver  up  his  credentials  in  a  very  ^eremtory  manner  :  after  de- 
grading himself,  and  despising  our  authority,  it  is  said  he  means  to  be 
re-baptised. 

Friday  17.  We  called  at  our  brother  Clark's  house  :  our  friend 
and  his  wife  lay  in  the  same  grave.  We  talked  and  prayed  with  the 
grandmother  and  daughters,  one  of  whom  is  in  society.  We  have 
travelled  some  rugged  roads  since  we  left  conference,  and  we  have 
had  two  hair-breadth  escapes  for  life,  both  horse  and  rider,  each 
one.  O  Lord,  thou  preservest  man  and  beast !  Came  to  Corkin's. 
Behold,  Elder  Strait  is  crooked  enough — gone  off  with  things  not- 
his  own. 

Saturday  18.  A  thirty  miles'  ride  brought  us  to  Jericho  bridge 
where  the  family  of  Banks  generously  entertained  us. 

Sabbath  18.    Bishop  M'Kendree  stopped  to  preach  ;  I  rode  on 


1813.]  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY\S  JOURNAL  3r>3 

thirty  miles  to  Brush's.  We  stopped  with  a  poor  family  on  our 
route,  fed,  and  prayed  with  them,  and  were  blest  indeed.  Kext  day 
began  our  trials.  It  had  rained  in  the  night.  We  set  out  and  en- 
souDiered  the  logs,  stumps,  rocks,  and  torrents,  which  came  down 
upon  lis  from  the  hills  above.  We  put  into  a  bouse  at  the  Great- 
Bend,  and  stopped  to  dine  :  here  I  lectured,  sung,  and  prayed  with 
the  poor  infidels  in  the  house  ;  some  stared,  some  smiled,  and  some 
wept.  The  lady  asked  me  to  call  again  as  I  passed  : — yes,  madam,  on 
;ondition  you  will  do  two  things — read  your  Bible,  and  betake  your- 
self to  prayer. 

Tuesday  20.  On  our  way  we  stopped  to  visit  and  pray  with  the 
widowed  family  of  our  brother  Smith,  who  is  called  away.  As  we 
:ame  into  Shawnee  the  drunkards  welcomed  us  with  a  dreadful  roar. 
E  fail  here — my  foot  is  much  swelled  and  very  painful. 

Thursday  22.  The  horse  in  the  sulky  has  his  shoulder  swelled. 
Brother  M'Kendree's  beast  dragged  me  over  a  rough  path  to  Bow- 
man's.    My  face  and  teeth  are  in  great  pain  and  disorder. 

Friday  23.  Great  suffering  from  pain  in  my  face.  Saturday,  1 
preached,  and  retired  in  a  high  fever  to  take  medicine,  and  to  blister 
my  face.  And  this  is  Briar-Creek  camp-meeting !  I  am  alive,  how- 
ever ;  and  some  of  the  good  folks  of  Philadelphia  and  Jersey  have  said 
they  should  never  see  Francis  again.  In  the  midst  of  all  our  suffe- 
ring and  disappointment,  God  is  with  us. 

Sabbath  25.  I  must  preach  again  :  my  subject  was  Acts  xx.  2 1 . 
The  testimony  of  the  ministry — in  holiness  of  life  ;  unwearied  labour ; 
in  suffering,  and  in  martyrdom.  It  was  the  fidelity  of  this  testifying 
which  led  the  first  martyrs  to  the  stake  ;  and  the  unfaithfulness  of 
this  testifying  will  lead  ministers  to  hell.  Repentance — of  sinners  ; 
of  believers  ;  of  backsliders  ; — the  difference  in  their  nature.  Faith 
towards  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ — of  seekers  of  salvation— -of  believers 
in  sanctification  ; — in  backsliders.     I  suffer  greatly  at  night. 

Monday  26.  Wre  came  through  the  heat,  twenty-two  miles,  to  Dan- 
ville. The  wife  of  Daniel  Montgomery  is  my  old  friend  Molly 
Wallis.  Yes,  I  saw  her  ;  but  Ah  1  how  changed  in  forty-two  years 
— time  has  been  eighty  years  at  work  upon  her  wrinkled  face.  We 
crossed  the  river  to  Jacob  Girhart's.  My  company  went  to  bed, 
and  I  sat  up  helping  to  hull  peas.  And  am  I  to  preach  at  six 
o'clock?  be  it  so.  But  behold,  the  saddle-horse  broke  away  whilst 
John  French  was  washing  him,  and  off  he  went  as  if  Satan  drove 
him. 

Vol.  TIL  45 


o54  REV.  FRANCIS  ASEURlTS  JOURNAL.  [1813, 

Wednesday  28.  Our  run-away  was  brought  home  yesterday  at  noon. 
We  started  at  six  o'clock,  bending  our  course  down  the  Reading 
turnpike.  We  halted  at  an  inn,  prayed,  and  kept  forward  to  Shoe- 
maker's :  here  we  prayed  and  exhorted  in  the  evening. 

Thursday  29.  We  bear  our  trials  patiently.  John  French's  sick 
horse  is  foundered.  Crossed  the  Schuylkill  at  Sewey's.  We  asked 
for  food,  and  were  told  the  tavern  was  near.  Our  money  was  scarce 
— we  had  borrowed  five  dollars,  which  will  be  barely  enough,  per- 
haps, to  bring  us  through  this  inhospitable  district.  We  bent  our 
way  along  the  mountain,  stopping  at  Francis  Zellar's,  where  we  were 
partially  welcome.  He  had  a  son,  a  Lutheran  priest,  who  refused 
to  read  or  pray  in  the  family  :  Alas  !  so  stupid  and  so  wicked  : — 1 
would  rather  be  a  slave  in  South  Carolina  with  the  Gospel  and  a 
good  master. 

Friday  30.  Our  saddle-horse  was  stiff  enough.  We  breakfasted 
richly  in  Shafferstown  for  sixty  cents — man  and  beast.  We  pressed 
forward  to  Abraham  Bee's,  Warwick  township.  We  have  great 
toils  and  great  peace. 

Saturday  31.  We  halt  and  limp  forward,  through  Lititz  to  Lancas- 
ter. Happily  we  met  H.  Boehm,  who  had  appointed  a  meeting  at 
Boehm's  chapel. 

Sabbath,  August  1.  I  preached  in  the  forenoon  and  afternoon. 
Rest,  man  and  beast!  Monday,  Tuesday,  and  Wednesday,  busily 
employed  in  writing  letters,  reading,  and  in  prayer.  I  addressed  a 
valedictory  statement  of  my  opinion  to  Bishop  M'Kendree,  on  the 
primitive  church  government  and  ordination  ;  I  shall  leave  it  with 
my  papers. 

Thursday,  we  paid  a  visit  to  Jacob  Boehm.  Friday — fast  day,  we 
went  a  rough  road  to  the  camp-meeting,  forty-five  miles  distant. 
Feeble  though  I  was,  the  stand  was  ready  for  me.  I  delivered  my 
testimony  in  great  weakness  of  body.  On  Saturday,  we  had  a  Sab- 
bath congregation  :  I  preached  at  three  o'clock. 

Sabbath  8.  I  did  not  preach  a  sermon,  yet  I  had  often  occasion  to 
speak.  There  was  singing  and  prayer  through  the  whole  night  ; 
possibly  we  slept  three  hours.  There  were,  I  suppose,  three  thou- 
sand people  on  the  camp-ground,  most  of  them  tolerably  attentive. 
Amongst  these  were  some  drunkards,  but  so  deeply  laden  that  they 
could  not  have  done  much  mischief,  had  they  been  so  disposed.  We 
have  gone  forty  miles  out  of  our  way  to  be  here,  and  to  do  good  ;  God 
will  bless  this  coming  together  of  his  humble  worshippers.     Richard 


1813.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY?S  JOURNAL,  355 

Bassett  and  wife,  and  sister  Bruff  came  forty  miles  to  see  me.  Tues- 
day. The  flies  plague  us.  The  bridge  at  Columbia  is  begun  on  both 
sides  of  the  river.     We  reached  Little  York. 

Wednesday  11.  A  tiresome  ride  brought  us  to  our  home  at  the 
widow  Willis's.  From  the  door  I  saw  the  tomb  of  dear  Henry  Wil- 
lis— Rest,  man  of  God  !  Thy  quiet  dust  is  not  called  to  the  labour  of 
riding  five  thousand  miles  in  eight  months — to  meet  ten  conferences 
in  a  line  of  sessions  from  the  District  of  Maine,  to  the  banks  of  the 
Cayuga — to  the  states  of  Ohio,  of  Tennessee,  of  Mississippi — to  Cape 
Fear,  James-River,  Baltimore,  Philadelphia,  and  to  the  completion  of 
the  round.  Thou  wilt  not  plan  and  labour  the  arrangement  of  the 
stations  of  seven  hundred  preachers  ;  thou  wilt  not  attend  camp-meet- 
ings, and  take  a  daily  part  in  the  general  ministration  of  the  word ; 
and  often  consume  the  hours  which  ought  to  be  devoted  to  sleep  in 
writing  letters  upon  letters !  Lord,  be  with  us,  and  help  us  to  fulfil 
the  task  thou  hast  given  us  to  perform !  Thursday.  The  Pipe- 
Creek  camp-meeting  begins  to-day. 

Sabbath  15.  I  lectured  on  the  Lord's  prayer,  at  the  camp  stand. 
We  might  have  three  thousand  hearers.  I  have  sufficient  exercise 
by  riding  six  miles  backward  and  forward  to  the  ground,  and  speaking 
a  little.  We  are  told  there  are  between  forty  and  fifty  converts,  and 
many  professors  powerfully  quickened  ;  the  poor  Africans,  abandoned 
by  all  sects  to  us,  were  greatly  engaged. 

Friday  20.  We  started  for  Ohio,  passing  through  Frederick  and 
Middletown,  to  Williamsport.  Called  on  father  Everhard,  and  shel- 
tered under  his  shade  from  the  excessive  heat.  The  old  saint  has  a 
son  and  a  son-in-law,  local  labourers.  We  have  encouraging  accounts 
from  the  encampment  near  Winchester,  Virginia. 

Sabbath  22.  Our  new  chapel  here  (Williamsport)  is  too  small.  I 
preached  to  a  large  congregation  for  a  short  notice.  I  felt  that  I  was 
commissioned  by  the  anointing  of  the  Holy  Spirit :  surely  the  day's 
labour  will  not  go  for  nothing. 

Wednesday  25.  At  Cumberland  I  preached  in  the  chapel,  and  or- 
dained J.  I.  Jacobs,  Thomas  Lakin,  and  William  Shaw,  holy  men,  to 
the  office  of  elders.  A  day  of  toil  over  the  desperate  mountains 
brought  us  to  Brownsville.     We  have  had  our  trials  and  afflictions. 

Sabbath  19.  1  preached  strong  words  from  Examine  yourselves ;  and 
after  the  congregation  was  dismissed,  gave  counsel  to  the  society. 

Wednesday,  September  1.  We  opened  our  conference — about 
thirty  members  present.     On  Saturday  deacons  and  elders  were  or- 


obG  HEY.  FRAISCIS  ASBURV's  JOURNAL.  [1813. 

dained.     We  have  had  preaching  four  times  in  the  day.     My  mind  is 
at  peace,  and  my  body  at  ease  ;  glory  be  to  thee,  O,  my  Creator ! 

Sabbath  5.  In  Bezaleel  Wells's  grove  I  may  have  had  one  thousand 
souls  to  hear  me.  Bishop  M  Kendree  preached,  and  the  exercises 
closed  with  the  sacrament.  The  people  were  attentive  to  hear  with 
much  solemnity. 

Sabbath  12.  I  preached  in  Chilicothe.  We  pass  on  swiftly  from  ta- 
vern to  tavern,  for  we  are  in  great  haste,  and  dare  not  turn  aside  to 
seek  our  brethren.  Mrs.  Wells,  after  painful  anxiety,  was  speedily 
and  happily  delivered  of  a  man-child — in  answer  to  prayer,  she  says  ; 
she  calls  it  Francis  Asbury.  I  lament  my  loss  of  public  labours,  es- 
pecially on  the  Sabbath  :  but  can  I  preach  more  than  once  a  day, 
constantly  engaged,  as  I  am,  in  conference,  in  writing  answers  to  let- 
ters, and  receiving  those  who  come  for  counsel  ?  Let  candid  and 
thinking  minds  answer. 

Tuesday  14.  Reached  West-Union,  with  a  swelled  face.  I  preach- 
ed to  the  people  here  for  the  first  time  ;  may  it  not  be  for  the  last 
also  ?  I  was  turned  into  another  man — the  Spirit  of  God  came  pow- 
erfully upon  me,  and  there  was  a  deep  feeling  amongst  the  people, 
Wednesday,  we  came  to  Limestone,  where  I  consecrated  our  new 
house  by  bearing  testimony  to  the  truth  of  God  on  Luke  xix.  10. 
I  saw  the  foundation  of  our  new  house  in  Paris  with  the  more  plea- 
sure because  of  the  interesting  little  history  attached  to  it.  An  ho- 
nest brother  had  failed  in  business,  moved  away,  recovered  his  loss, 
came  back,  paid  his  creditors,  and  moved  a  subscription  to  build, 
and  is  now  building  a  Methodist  chapel. 

Kentucky. — Sabbath  19.  I  preached  in  our  enlarged  Ebenezer 
church  in  Clark  county.  Once  more  I  see  Doctor  Hinds,  from  the 
other  side  the  flood,  rejoicing  in  Jesus  ;  he  will  never  again,  I  presume, 
put  a  blister  on  his  wife's  head  to  draw  Methodism  out  of  her  heart ; 
this  mad  prank  brought  deep  conviction,  by  the  operation  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  upon  his  soul.  His  children,  some  of  them,  already  rejoice  with 
him,  having  the  same  joy,  and  faith,  and  hope.  We  came  rapidly 
through  Danville  to  Mulder's.  Next  day  to  Thompson's.  Next  day 
to  Wallis's  ;  and  next  day  to  father  Bracken's,  near  the  camp-ground. 
What  a  flight  we  have  had  ! 

Sabbath  26.  I  preached  in  the  camp.  Our  ride  from  Steubenville 
has  been  through  pleasant  rains,  welcome  to  the  before  parched  earth. 
We  read  the  word  of  God,  and  prayed  in  every  house  in  which 
we    stopped.     The  tavern  keepers  were  kind  and  polite,  as  sou- 


1813.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUR¥'S  JOURNAL.  357 

thern  folks  should  be,  and  as  southern  folks  ought  not  to  be  ;  they 
were  sometimes  two  sheets  in  the  wind.  Oh,  that  liquid  fire  !  The 
thing  I  have  for  some  time  greatly  feared  is  come  to  pass — the  Creek 
nation  have  taken  up  the  hatchet :  unhappy  people  !  the  whites  will 
take  vengeance,  cruel  vengeance  on  them  for  their  barbarian  war- 
fare on  unoffending  women  and  children.  O  God,  save  thy  people 
from  rage  of  the  heathen  ! 

Tennessee. — We  came  to  the  Tennessee  conference.  I  lodged 
under  the  hospitable  roof  of  mother  Roscoe.  Our  progress  daily  was 
great,  and  made  in  great  peace  and  order. 

Sabbath,  October  3.  I  preached,  and  ordained  about  twenty  dea- 
cons. We  rose  on  the  6th  inst.  finding  very  few  difficulties  objected 
to  the  stations.  The  families  in  the  neighbourhood  have  not  been 
left  unvisited,  and  we  hope  our  prayers  and  exhortations  will  not  be 
in  vain  to  and  for  the  Walkers,  the  Maxeys,  the  Saunderss,  the 
Reeses,  the  Blackmans.  Will  it  be  believed  that  the  races  agitate 
the  public  mind  notwithstanding  the  alarms  of  Indian  wars  ?  if  in  the 
midst  of  such  terrors  the  people  will  not  forsake  the  race-course, 
why  should  the  people  of  God  neglect  to  frequent  their  meetings  : 
in  this  case  they  may  learn  from  the  example  of  sinners.  The  Ten- 
nessee conference  were  not  willing  to  let  the  bishops  go  to  the  Mis- 
sissippi conference.     Sabbath  10.  I  preached  at  John  M'Gee's. 

Sabbath  17.  Last  night  preached  at  Porter's  chapel.  At  Marys- 
ville,  the  whole  city  came  out  to  hear  us.  Our  travels  have  beea 
through  toil,  and  crowds,  and  storms.  It  is  our  business  to  read,  ex- 
hort, and  pray,  wherever  we  stop. 

Monday  18.  We  came  away,  having  first  taken  an  emetic.  A  thirty 
miles'  ride  over  unpleasant  paths,  and  through  heat,  brought  us  to 
our  lodging  for  the  night  with  more  endurable  feelings.  I  preached 
at  Ohaver's  on  Wednesday,  and  ordained  Joshua  West  an  elder. 
We  visited  the  Bolings,  the  Nelsons,  and  the  Barnets.  I  feel  pleu- 
retic  pains  in  the  breast ;  but  they  must  wear  themselves  away. 

Sabbath  24.  I  preached  in  great  weakness.  I  am  at  Killion  s 
once  more.  Our  ride  of  ninety  miles  to  Staunton  bridge  on  Saluda- 
River  was  severely  felt,  and  the  necessity  of  lodging  at  taverns  made 
it  no  better. 

Friday  29.  On  the  peaceful  banks  of  the  Saluda  I  write  my  vale- 
dictory address  to  the  presiding  elders.  At  Staunton  bridge  we  rest 
five  days  ;  my  horse  and  his  master  both  disabled.  I  preached  but 
twice.  My  leisure  has  permitted  me  to  read  Sellon  :  I  hesitate  not 
to  recommend  this  work  to  our  book  concern.     James,  the  son  of 


358  REV.    FRANCIS    ASBURY's   JOURNAL.  [16  io. 

John  Douthat  gave  me  an  interesting  account  of  his  father  :  John 
Douthat  was  born  in  Maryland  ;  left  his  native  place  and  settled  on 
the  Yadkin,  became  a  member  of  the  Methodist  society,  and  was 
honoured  as  a  class  leader,  making  his  house  a  house  of  God  for  the 
assemblies  of  his  brethren.  An  infamous  woman  had  found  her  way 
into  the  society,  and  seduced  Douthat  away,  and  he  departed  from 
his  brethren  and  from  God.  Some  years  after  this,  the  family  re- 
moved to  the  Table  Mountain,  Pendleton  district  :  the  preachers 
came  to  the  house,  the  father  was  reclaimed,  and  his  two  sons,  James 
and  Samuel,  joined  the  Methodists,  and  were  useful  and  respectable 
travelling  preachers  ;  the  former  labouring  twelve,  the  latter  seven 
years  in  the  ministry.  But  the  elder  Douthat  had  a  failing — he  was 
fond  of  liquor,  and  indulged  himself,  and  backslid  a  second  time  ; 
retaining,  nevertheless,  his  character  for  strict  integrity  and  his  babit 
of  private  prayer,  occasionally  hearing  the  Gospel.  Last  summer  he 
fell  ill,  and  came  to  lie  down  and  die  at  his  son  James's ;  here  he 
became  a  true  penitent,  was  blest  with  justifying  and  sanctifying 
grace,  and  slept  in  peace  in  the  seventy-third  year  of  his  age. 

Tuesday,  November  2.  We  visited  Talieferos,  and  went  forward 
to  B.  Lyon's. 

Thursday  4.  Called  a  meeting  at  Edward  M'Craw's  :  I  spoke  with 
enlargement  of  mind  on  Hebr.  x.  38,  39.  We  saw  Henry  Gains,  a 
disciple  since  1777  ;  now  feeble,  but  wishing  to  be  faithful  unto 
death.     Came  forward  to  Conner's,  Abbeville  district. 

Sabbath  7.  I  preached  in  the  tabernacle  on  2  Cor.  v.  11.  If  the 
people  say  it  was  like  thunder  and  lightning  I  shall  not  be  surprised. 
I  spoke  in  power  from  God,  and  there  was  a  general  and  deep  feel- 
ing in  the  congregation  :  thine,  O  Lord,  be  all  the  glory !  Came 
home  with  James  Cox. 

Monday  8.  I  gave  an  alarming  lecture  at  John  Branan's.  There 
is  a  serious  mortality  on  the  middle  and  lowlands  of  South  Carolina 
and  Georgia. 

South  Carolina. — Tuesday  9.  We  rode  through  the  heat,  crossing 
the  Little-River  to  Mr.  Shield's,  twenty  miles. 

Georgia. — Wednesday  10.  I  tried  live  grains  of  tartar,  and  felt  the 
good  effects  of  medicine.  We  continued  on  to  Petersburg  into  Georgia. 
Into  what  house  may  I  enter  without  finding  two  cold  professors,  and 
live  or  ten  impious  persons  ?  Yet  God  will  favour  a  righteous  cause, 
though  there  may  be  thousands  as  wicked  as  fiends. 

Sabbath  14.  I  preached  at  Thompson's  chapel,  and  had  a  pleasant 
*eason.  We  lodged  at  senator  T  ait's,  and  I  retired  to  bed  with  a  fever 


1813.]  REV.  FRANCIS   asbury's  JOURNAL,  oa'j 

Here  are  two  sick  families.  There  is  a  great  drought  ;  these  are 
judgment  days.  I  preached  at  Peter  Oliver's  :  my  host  and  wife  are 
both  sick. 

Sabbath  21.  I  preached  in  the  new  chapel  at  James  Mark's — El- 
bert's— in  folly  called  Asbury.  We  visited  Doctor  Bradly,  recover- 
ing from  his  affliction  ;  a  miracle  of  grace.  We  have  visited  about 
thirty  families.  Imprudent  man  that  I  am,  to  take  off  my  flannel,  and 
ride  in  the  damps  after  sunset !  I  preached  at  Sparta,  and  ordained 
two  deacons.  A  journey  of  six  days  brought  us  to  Savannah  :  we 
were  careful  to  leave  our  testimony  and  to  pray  with  every  family 
Tvhere  we  stopped.  Kind  widow  Bonnell  sent  her  chaise  after  me. 
I  must  change  my  mode  of  travelling,  I  suppose.  I  preached  twice  in 
the  Wesley  chapel.  This  is  a  good,  neat  house,  sixty  feet  by  forty. 
I  enjoy  great  peace.  Our  chapel  cost  five  thousand  dollars  :  others 
would  have  made  it  cost  twice  as  much,  perhaps.  We  are  in- 
debted to  Myers  and  Russell  for  much  of  this  saving.  The  Presby- 
terian church  hath  changed  its  form  to  Independent — Doctor  Kollock 
must  be  the  same. 

Mondajr  22.  Rode  to  Mr.  Tiebout's  plantation  :  sweet  retreat ! 
Tuesday,  we  rode  forty-six  miles  to  Wainer's.  I  am  again  in  a 
chaise  :  James  Russell  insisted  upon  giving  me  an  old  gig  worth  forty- 
five  dollars.  We  are  safe  in  Charleston,  visiting  black  swamp,  and 
some  families  as  we  came  along.  We  have  had  cold,  hungry  travel- 
ling. My  mind  is  holiness  to  the  Lord.  We  found  our  family  here 
in  health. 

Sunday,  December  12.  I  preached  in  Trinity  church  :  we  have  it 
now  in  quiet  possession.  I  also  officiated  in  Cumberland  and  Bethel 
churches.  The  society  is  not  so  lively  as  formerly.  In  visiting  six 
families  I  found  but  two  that  acknowledge  God  in  his  word  and  wor- 
ship :    Ah,  wo  is  me  ! 

Thursday  16.  We  attended  the  funeral  of  Doctor  Keith,  suddenly 
called  away,  and  greatly  lamented  by  all,  especially  by  the  people  of 
colour  :  he  had  been  twenty-six  years  a  minister  of  the  Independent 
church.  Most  of  the  clergy  of  the  city  were  present,  and  there  was 
great  solemnity  observed.  We  had  no  gloves  or  scarfs  given  us  : 
this  was  well  ;  but  I  could  have  wished  there  had  been  prayer  in 
the  house  before  the  corpse  was  removed.  We  lecture  morning  and 
evening.  We  labour  to  live  in,  and  for  God  ;  we  desire  to  receive 
rich  and  poor,  people  and  ministers  ;  and  to  consecrate,  in  the  order 
of  faith  and  prayer,  every  room  and  every  heart  in  the  house,  to 
God. 


360  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY?S    JOUKNA!..  [1814. 

Sunday  19.  I  preached  in  Cumberland  chapel,  in  Trinity,  and  in 
Bethel.  How  much  good  will  my  ten  days'  visit  do  here  ?  I  preach, 
lecture,  and  pray.  I  invited  the  stewards  of  Bethel,  and  the  trustees 
of  Trinity  came  to  see  me  on  Tuesday,  we  dined  and  prayed  together, 
and  parted  in  love  and  peace. 

Wednesday  22.  In  a  cold  day  we  left  Charleston,  and  came  thirty 
miles  to  preach  to  preachers  at  Nichols's.  We  lodged  with  Eccles. 
Friday,  my  mind  is  in  peace  in  bodily  affliction.  Weather,  roads, 
swamps— -we  heed  them  not.  On  our  way  to  Black-River,  we  visited 
many  families  :  Oh,  let  me  do  some  good  whilst  I  may  !  time  is  short. 

Thursday  30.  At  Rembert's  settlement.  How  my  friends  remove 
or  waste  away  !  yet  I  live  :  let  me  live  every  moment  to  God  !  On 
the  first  day  of  the  new  year,  1814,  I  preached  at  Rembert's  chapel. 

North  Carolina. — Sunday,  January  2.  I  preached  in  the  chapel. 
On  Monday  we  came  away,  in  company  with  Myers  and  Norton,  to 
Fayetteville,  one  hundred  and  forty  miles,  visiting  many  families 
in  our  route. 

Friday  7.  I  received  seven  letters :  the  contents  of  some  of  them 
make  me  feel  serious.  We  learn  that  Bishop  Coke,  with  seven 
young  preachers,  have  sailed  for  the  East  Indies.  The  British  So- 
ciety is  poor  as  well  as  ourselves,  it  would  appear  :  this  is  a  good 
sign.  In  less  than  one  hundred  years,  Methodism  has  spread  over 
three  quarters  of  the  globe  ;  and  it  is  now  about  to  carry  the  Gospel 
of  salvation  into  Asia.  Amen.  I  am  divinely  impressed  with  a 
charge  to  preach  sanctification  in  every  sermon. 

Sunday  9.  We  had  rain.  Bishop  M'Kendree  preached.  I  preached 
on  Isaiah  lxiv.  7.  We  have  had  a  spiritual,  heavenly,  and  united 
conference.  There  were  twenty  deacons  ordained,  eighty-five 
preachers  stationed  :  twelve  have  located,  and  one  has  died,  sud- 
denly ;  and  fifteen  are  added. 

Sunday  16.  I  preached.  Thursday,  we  came  away.  On  our  way 
we  called  on  Hodges,  Shaw,  and  Saunderson  ;  exhorting  and  praying 
with  their  families.     I  enjoy  great  peace  of  mind. 

Sunday  23.  I  preached  in  our  chapel,  fifty  by  sixty  feet,  to  a  small 
congregation.  Am  I  not  a  child,  to  have  been  looking  for  summer? 
William  Glendenning  and  I  met,  and  embraced  each  other  in  peace. 
I  visited  sister  Perry,  the  former  wife  of  John  King,  one  of  the  first 
Methodist  preachers.  After  all  reasonable  allowances  for  drawbacks, 
we  cannot  yet  tell  all  the  good  that  was  done  by  our  conference  in 
Raleigh  in  1811.  We  started  away  northward.  Not  half  a  mile 
from  Samuel  Alston's,  we  got  entangled  in  the  woods.     We  left  th? 


1814.]  iuF.V.  FRANCIS  ASEUB.Y?S  JOURNAL.  361 

gig  in  the  woods  till  morning,  and  found  our  way  by  torch  light  to  the 
house.  I  preached  at  my  kind  host's.  On  our  way  to  Doctor  Bro- 
die's,  in  Lewisburgh,  we  called  to  dine  with  our  friend  Thomas 
Alston,  junr. 

Virginia. — Sunday,  February  20.  I  am  at  Norfolk.  1  have  had 
a  serious  attack  of  pleuretic  fever,  with  little  intermission  of  pain 
until  the  fifteenth  day.  I  have,  during  this  illness,  been  moving  about 
amongst  the  families  of  the  Williams',  the  Harris',  the  widow 
Weavers',  the  Bennetts',  and  the  Merediths'  ;  and  Oh  !  what  kind- 
ness and  nursing.  I  preached  at  Henry  Williams's,  quarter  meeting, 
and  occasionally  elsewhere. 

Our  conference  in  Norfolk  rose  ©n  Tuesday,  March  1st.  We 
have  been  mighty  in  talk  this  session.  I  dare  not  speak  my  mind  on 
the  state  of  this  place — its  church,  or  its  ministry.  1  endure  all 
things  for  the  elect's  sake  ;  and  rejoice  that  peace  is  again  happily 
restored  to  the  society.  Shall  we  not  drop  and  locate  more  labourers 
than  we  receive  ?  We  had  a  great  many  sermons  preached,  as  usual  ; 
and  we  have  reason  to  hope  souls  were  converted.  I  ordained  dea- 
cons, and  assisted  my  brethren  in  the  ministration  of  the  word. 

Tuesday,  March  1.  We  came  out  of  the  borough  :  it  was  keen  and 
cold  to  Shoulders  hill. 

Wednesday  2.  Came  to  Andrew  Woodville's.  We  reached  Rich- 
mond on  Saturday.  Our  journey  hither  has  been  through  snows  and 
excessive  cold  ;  I  felt  it  deeply.  We  were  careful  to  pray  with  the 
families  where  we  stopped,  exhorting  all  professors  to  holiness. 

Sunday  6.  I  preached  in  the  old  chapel ;  our  labour  shall  not  all 
be  in  vain.  Doctor  Jennings  has  removed  to  Richmond  ;  to  be  use- 
ful, we  hope,  to  the  society  and  to  himself.  A  journey  of  suffering 
by  bad  roads,  and  exposure  to  excessive  cold,  brought  us  to  George- 
town, Maryland.  In  the  year  1774  I  first  visited  Virginia  and  North 
Carolina  :  in  the  year  1780  I  repeated  my  visit ;  and  since  that  time, 
yearly.  In  the  year  1785  I  first  visited  South  Carolina  and  Georgia ; 
and  to  these  states  have  since  paid  (except  one  year)  an  annual  visit, 
until  now,  (1814.)  I  suppose  I  have  crossed  the  Alleghany  mountains 
sixty  times. 

Maryland. — Sunday  13.  I  preached  in  our  church  in  George- 
town, and  met  the  society.  We  do  not  labour  in  vain.  My  mind 
is  deeply  impressed  with  the  worth  of  souls  and  value  of  time. 

Thursday  24.   Baltimore   conference  hath  been  sitting  in  great 
order  seven  days.     My  strength  and  labour  was  to  sit  still. — I  was 
sick  during  the  whole  session  :  I  preached  in  Oldtown,  and  ordained 
Vol,   III  4G 


'62  B.LV.  FRANCIS  ASEURY/S  JOURNAL.  {1314. 

nine  deacons.  We  have  stationed  eighty-six  ministers.  By  request, 
I  discoursed  on  the  character  of  the  angel  of  the  church  of  Philadel- 
phia, in  allusion  to  P.  W.  Otterbine — the  holy,  the  great  Otterbine, 
whose  funeral  discourse  it  was  intended  to  he.  Solemnity  marked 
the  silent  meeting  in  the  German  church,  where  were  assembled  the 
members  of  our  conference,  and  many  of  the  clergy  of  the  city. 
Forty  years  have  I  known  the  retiring  modesty  of  this  man  of  God  ; 
towering  majestic  above  his  fellows  in  learning,  wisdom,  and  grace, 
yet  seeking  to  be  known  only  of  God  and  the  people  of  God  ;  he  had 
been  sixty  years  a  minister,  fifty  years  a  converted  one. 

March  28.  I  am  at  Perry-Hall,  where  I  have  been  for  three  days 
very  ill.  The  Sabbath  was  an  awful  and  dumb  day.  I  took  an 
emetic. 

Friday,  April  I.  I  crossed  the  Susquehannah.  At  North  East  I 
visited  Daniel  Sheredan,  a  son  of  deep  affliction  in  body,  mind,  and 
circumstances.  He  is  one  of  my  spiritual  children,  and  has  remained 
a  disciple  forty  years  :  we  prayed  together,  and  God  was  with  us  of 
a  truth. 

Delaware. — Sunday  3.  I  preached  in  Wilmington.  Monday,  we 
had  great  consolation  in  visiting  Mary  Withy's  children  and  grand- 
children :  she,  though  dead,  is  yet  spoken  of.  One  of  these  last  is 
in  society.  I  baptised  the  children  of  Allen  and  Lewis  M'Clean  : 
these  people  have  not  forgotten  the  holy  living  and  dying  of  their 
mother,  nor  her  early  and  constant  friend,  the  writer  of  this  journal. 
Joseph  Pilmore  is  yet  alive,  and  preaches  three  times  every  Sabbath. 

Pennsylvania. — Philadelphia,  Tuesday  5.  This  is  the  eve  of 
conference. 

Sunday  10.  I  preached  in  the  Academy  chapel,  and  at  St.  George's. 
Our  conference  opened  and  progressed  four  days  in  great  peace  and 
Gospel  order.  We  doubt  not  but  that  souls  have  been  convinced, 
converted,  comforted,  and  sanctified  by  the  ministry  of  the  word  ; 
we  had  crowded  houses,  both  in  the  day  and  at  night.  The  bishops 
wrote  a  serious  letter  to  New-England,  remonstrating  On  the  neglect 
of  family  worship. 

Thursday  13.  The  Philadelphia  conference  rose  in  the  spirit, 
power,  and  peace  of  God,  in  which  they  had  been  sitting  seven  days. 
Friday,  crossed  in  a  steam-boat  to  the  Jersey  shore — I  am  very 
unwell. 

New-Jersey.— -Tuesday  18.  I  rode  twenty  miles  from  Woodbury 
to  Perkinton,  to  see  the  people  :  we  gave  an  exhortation  in  great 
weakness,  but  the  power  of  truth  was  felt. 


1314.}  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL,  36-^ 

Sunday  25.  I  preached  at  Penns  Neck,  at  Salem,  and  at  Cohanzy 
Bridge.  I  preached  also  at  Pitts  Grove.  We  may  say,  that  when  we 
are  weak,  we  are  strong  in  the  strength  of  God  :  yea,  Lord,  thou  art 
our  strength  !  I  preached  at  Union  chapel,  and  the  Lord  gave  power 
to  his  own  truth.  I  preached  at  Bethel.  We  had  a  rainy  day,  and 
my  flesh  failed.  I  rested  at  Bates's,  greatly  spent  with  labour.  We 
should  have  failed  in  our  march  through  Jersey,  but  we  have  re- 
ceived great  kindness  and  attentions,  and  have  had  great  accommoda- 
tions. I  return  to  my  journal  after  an  interval  of  twelve  weeks.  I 
have  been  ill  indeed,  but  medicine,  nursing,  and  kindness,  under  God, 
have  been  so  far  effectual,  that  I  have  recovered  strength  enough  to 
sit  in  my  little  covered  wagon,  into  which  they  lift  me.  I  have  clam- 
bered over  the  rude  mountains,  passing  through  York  and  Chambers- 
burg  to  Greensburg. 

Tuesday,  July  19.  I  would  not  be  loved  to  death,  and  so  came  down 
from  my  sick  room  and  took  to  the  road,  weak  enough.  Attentions 
constant,  and  kindness  unceasing  have  pursued  me  to  this  place,  and 
my  strength  increases  daily.  I  look  back  upon  a  martyr's  life  of  toil 
and  privation,  and  pain  ;  and  I  am  ready  for  a  martyr's  deaths  The 
purity  of  my  intentions  ;  my  diligence  in  the  labours  to  which  God  has 
been  pleased  to  call  me  ;  the  unknown  sufferings  I  have  endured  ; 
what  are  all  these  ? — the  merit,  atonement,  and  righteousness  of 
Christ  alone  make  my  plea.  My  friends  in  Philadelphia  gave  me  a 
light,  little  four-wheeled  carriage  ;  but  God  and  the  Baltimore  con- 
ference made  me  aTtcher  present — they  gave  me  John  Wesley  Bond 
for  a  travelling  companion  ;  has  he  his  equal  on  the  earth  for  excel- 
lencies of  every  kind  as  an  aid?  I  groan  one  minute  with  pain,  and 
shout  glory  !    the  next. 

July  23.  Pittsburg.  We  have  made  three  hundred  and  fifty  miles 
since  we  left  Jersey.  What  roads!  It  was  the  mercy  of  Providence, 
or  we  should  have  been  dashed  to  pieces.  My  body  is,  nevertheless, 
in  better  health  ;  and  my  mind  and  soul  happy  and  confident  in  God. 
Glory,  glory,  glory  be  to  the  Triune  God ! 

Monday  27.  We  bent  our  way  down  the  west  side  of  the  Ohio  to 
Sewickly  ;  here  we  were  detained  two  days.  John  Wesley  Bond 
preached  to  the  people,  and  1  added  a  few  feeble  words  of  exhorta- 
tion. We,  having  foundered  one  of  our  horses,  bought  a  clever  little 
mare  for  sixty  dollars.  Crossed  Great  and  Little  Beaver.  At  J.  Hemp- 
hill's we  were  told  that  no  person  would  be  more  willing  for  prayer, 
did  business  permit,  Alas  !  On  our  way  we  got  fast  in  a  gully  :  Mr. 
Lyon,  a  merchant  hereabouts,  came  up,  dismounted  in  a  moment,  and 


ot>4  REV.  FRANCIS  asluhy's  JOURNAL.  [1J^' 

sprang  to  my  relief,  lifted  me  out  of  the  carriage,  and  bore  me  up 
the  hill :  there  was  something  peculiarly  engaging  in  this  man's  face, 
whole  appearance,  and  manners. 

Friday  31.  We  came  to  Thomas  Fawcett's,  fasting.  Surely  you 
may  stay  a  night,  it  was  observed. — But  no — time  presses — though 
sick  and  feeble  ;  we  started  away  at  three  o'clock.  It  might  not  be  : 
about  a  hundred  yards  from  the  house  crack  went  the  pole.  It  is  all 
for  the  best,  said  pious  Gilpin,  when  his  leg  was  broken  ;  and  he  lived 
to  prophesy  in  after  times  and  better  days,  whilst  the  execrated  Mary, 
who  would  have  burnt  him  at  the  stake,  was  mouldering  in  the  dust. 

Sabbath.  Brother  Bond  preached  upon  a  mount  crowned  with 
sugar  trees.  I  spoke  a  few  words  in  exhortation.  Had  we  not 
chained  the  wheel,  we  should  have  gone  souse  into  Yellow-Creek. 
Tuesday,  we  had  crooked  work — we  splintered  the  axle-tree,  and 
stopped  at  the  widow  Pritchard's.  We  held  two  meetings — one  at 
noon,  and  again  at  night. 

Ohio. — Wednesday,  August  5.  Came  to  Steubenville.  AtBezaleel 
Wells's  we  have  every  accommodation  that  a  president  might  wish  for, 
with  great  kindness  and  polite  attentions  from  all  the  members  of 
the  house.  I  keep  my  room,  and  listen  to  the  storms  of  wind  and  rain 
abroad.  My  occupations  are,  reading  Saurin,  the  oracles  of  God,  and 
prayer.  My  health  is  better,  although  I  still  cough.  I  live  in  patience, 
in  purity,  and  the  perfect  love  of  God.  Being  disappointed  on  the 
Sabbath,  I  must  of  necessity  meet  the  people  of  Steubenville  on 
Monday.  I  preached,  and  there  were  those  who  felt,  beside  the 
speaker 

Tuesday  11.  We  made  a  valiant  start  forwards.  It  was  racking 
work  over  Creek-Hill.  Here  crack  went  the  bolt  ;  it  had  been 
badly  mended  before.  Wo  to  us  had  it  given  way  on  the  last  hill. 
We  lodged  at  Snyder's.  I  spoke  at  Cadiz  with  a  feeble  voice,  and 
addressed  the  society  after  preaching.  We  rode  forward  to  a  bro- 
ther's, where  we  found  a  large  family  and  small  house.  Within  eight 
miles  of  Cambridge  we  were  glad  to  stop  :  here  is  a  purgatory,  if 
fleas  can  make  one. 

Friday  14.  We  strove  hard  to  get  forward  through  the  heat  to 
Will's  creek.  It  is  as  deep  as  ever,  but  this  is  not  the  first  time  I 
have  tried  it ;  it  is  better  now  it  is  said  :  bad  is  the  best,  say  I.  We 
reached  James  Browne's. 

Sunday  16.  At  Zanesville  brother  Bond  preached,  and  met  about 
fifty  souls  in  class.    I  gave  an  exhortation  ;  it  is  my  first,  and  m;vy  be 


1814.]  REV.    FRANCIS    ASBURY's    JOURNAL.  365 

my  valedictory.  We  have  a  well-designed  house  here.    This  country 
is  in  a  general  state  of  improvement.     Monday,  to  Middletown. 

Tuesday  18.  To  James  Teel's.  My  infant  weakness,  and  entire 
dependance  upon  the  aid  of  others ;  the  excessive  heat  and  rough 
roads ;  together  with  certain  cases  and  things,  are  trying  to  body  and 
mind  :  Lord,  thou  dost,  and  thou  will  support  a  worm,  and  no  man ! 
Make  me,  O  Lord,  make  me  perfect! 

Wednesday  19.  To  Jesse  Spurgeon's.  Thursday,  rest.  I  com- 
mitted to  paper  some  observations  on  a  book  written  by  B.  J.  Smith, 
an  elected  deacon,  against  our  doctrine,  discipline,  and  administra- 
tion. 

Friday  21.  We  came  through  Gircleville.  What  surprising  mounds 
of  earth!  Who  hath  done  this?  The  larger  circle  must  have  had 
water.  Stopped  at  Jeffersonville.  Saturday,  to  William  M'Dowell's  ; 
we  found  the  family  sick  with  the  autumnal  fever. 

Sabbath  23.  I  preached  at  M'Dowell's.  Tuesday  I  preached  in 
great  weakness  in  Chilicothe  ;  but  my  help  was  with  me  ;  in  God 
will  I  make  my  boast.  From  the  24th  to  the  30th,  we  are  at  senator 
Worthington's.  I  pay  my  mite  of  worship  in  this  amiable  family  in 
great  weakness.  The  kind  attentions  I  receive  are  greatly  beyond 
my  deserts.  Mrs.  Worthington  has  taught  her  boys  and  girls,  ser- 
vants and  children,  to  read  the  holy  Scriptures,  and  they  are  well  in- 
structed :  I  heard  them  more  than  one  lesson  with  much  satisfaction. 
O  that  all  mothers  would  do  likewise  !  I  presume  the  worship  of 
God  is  kept  up  in  this  house,  though  neither  of  the  heads  thereof 
have  attached  themselves  to  any  society  of  professing  Christians : 
doubtless  God  will  bless  them,  and  their  children  after  them.  We, 
ever  and  anon,  halt  and  listen  for  dear  M'Kendree,  but  as  yet  we  are 
without  tidings  :  we  are  somewhat  anxious  to  see  him.  Tuesday,  we 
came  away  to  Merchant's. 

Sabbath,  September  4.  I  made  a  feeble  attempt  at  Lebanon  on  2 
Pet.  iii.  14.  I  also  spoke  last  night.  Tuesday,  we  arrived  in  Cincin- 
nati. There  is  distress  every  where — in  the  church,  and  abroad 
in  the  United  States.     I  have  discharged  blood  in  coughing. 

Monday  5.  I  made  an  attempt  to  speak  a  few  words  on  Philip,  ii. 
2 — 5.  We  have  progressed  in  our  conference  business  very  well,  al- 
though deprived  of  the  presence  of  the  bishops  to  preside.  Bishop 
M'Kendree  had  been  thrown  from  his  horse,  and  was  severely  wound- 
ed in  the  hip  and  ribs.  John  Sale  presided  with  great  propriety.  We 
lost  two  days  by  impeachment  of  elders  ;  one  of  whom,  in  vindicating 


366  rev.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.'  [1814, 

his  character,  injured  as  he  thought,  had  not  done  it  becomingly  ;  there 

was  a  more  excellent  way.     The  other  case  was  that  of  S.  P r, 

who  had  checked  the  administration  of  one  whom  he  had  employed 
for  a  time  ;  these  investigations  were  painful  to  our  feelings,  and  gave 
rise  to  some  sturdy  debating.  On  Friday  I  retired  to  bed  with  a  chill 
and  fever.  John  Sale  finished  the  plan  of  the  stations  from  a  gene- 
ral draft  I  furnished  him.  We  closed  our  labours  in  peace.  One 
thing  I  remark — our  conferences  are  out  of  their  infancy  ;  their  rulers 
can  now  be  called  from  amongst  themselves.  The  dividend  of  the 
Ohio  conference  was  seventy-four  dollars  to  the  unmarried,  and  one 
hundred  and  forty-four  dollars  to  the  married  preachers  and  their 
wives.  But  two  hundred  dollars  were  drawn  from  the  book  concern, 
and  fifty  of  that  sum  was  returned.  I  have  preached.  We  lodge  at 
William  Lines's.  The  news  has  reached  us  of  the  descent  of  the 
British  in  Maryland,  and  the  burning  of  the  public  buildings  at 
Washington. 

Monday  12.  We  hasted  away,  as  the  river  was  still  rising,  night  and 
necessity  housed  us  at  Norton's.  Next  day  to  Fisher's.  We  dined 
in  Georgetown  at  the  Eagle  Tavern,  and  after  our  meal  called  the  fa- 
mily to  prayer  :  the  landlady  was  a  finished  lady  in  her  manners,  and 
kind  as  she  was  clever — peace,  peace,  peace,  be  upon  her  ! 

Wednesday  14.  I  gave  a  serious  charge  to  the  widow  Ratcliffe  and 
Sier  family  ;  the  venerable  man  of  the  house  has  gone  to  rest.  Thurs- 
day, at  Edward  Talbot's.     The  gloomy  days  of  J.  B r,  B m, 

W.  B — — e  are  over  ;  peace  is  restored,  a  society  increased,  a  fa- 
mily blessed  with  a  son  a  preacher  ;  a  house  is  built,  and  a  society 
united  in  Shelbyville — for  all  these  we  give  glory  unto  thee,  O 
God! 

Kentuckv.— Friday  16.  To  Miller's  in  haste.  Saturday,  we  came 
through  Bairdstown,  to  Elizabeth,  Hardin  county — so  called  after  my 
serious  friend  Colonel  Hardin.  I  travelled  many  miles  with  brother 
Hardin  towards  Lexington,  when  he  was  going  up  to  take  his  command  : 
he  was  very  solemn  ;  a  martyr  to  Indian  massacre,  I  doubt  not  but  that 
he  went  to  glory.  We  lodged  at  the  house  of  Stephen  Rawlings,  son 
of  Stephen,  formerly  of  Back-Creek,  Berkley  county,  Virginia  ;  in 
the  year  1776  I  preached  in  the  grandfather's  house. 

Sabbath  25.  I  preached  the  funeral  sermon  of  the  wife  of  Stephen 
Rawlings.  In  this  family  of  Rawlings's,  I  have  officiated  for  three 
generations,  and  have  witnessed  their  profession  of  religion ;  may 
they  continue  to  be  in  Christ  to  the  latest  posterity  !  We  reached 
M'Gatcbin's  on  Monday  ;  it  is  all  love  and  union  here  :  two  of  the 


1814.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY?S  JOURNAL.  367 

children  have  joined  the  society.    Woodsons,  at  the  ferry,  were  very 
friendly  :  they  are  Anti-pedobaptists. 

Tuesday  27.  We  were  kindly  entreated  to  stop  by  our  sister  Gat- 
wood,  and  were  well  entertained.  The  dust  and  heat  are  oppressive, 
and  I  am  sick. 

Wednesday  28.  At  Major  Bibb's.  Twenty-si*  years  past  I  was  at 
a  brother  Williams's,  Prince  Edward  county,  Virginia — a  brand 
plucked  from  the  burning. 

Thursday  29.  We  came  upon  the  camp-ground,  where  we  are  to 
hold  our  conference. 

Sabbath,  October  2.  I  ordained  about  twenty  deacons,  and  gave  a 
sermon  and  an  exhortation.  Our  encampment  cook  is  brother  Doug- 
lass. We  are  two  hours  in  the  chapel,  four  hours  at  the  preaching- 
stand,  and  then  come  home.  We  sit  six  hours  a  day  in  conference. 
Poor  bishops — sick,  lame,  and  in  poverty  I  I  had  wished  to  visit  Mis- 
sissippi, but  the  injury  received  by  Bishop  M'Kendree  being  so  great; 
that  it  is  yet  doubtful  whether  he  will  so  far  recover  as  to  be  present 
at  the  South  Carolina  conference,  I  must  decline  going  :  I  live  in 
God. 

Thursday  6.  We  closed  our  labours  in  great  peace  and  love. 
The  families  have  been  kind  to  us,  but  we  were  much  crowded.  We 
have  lost  members  from  the  society,  and  gained,  perhaps,  one 
preacher  in  the  itinerancy  in  two  years  ;  the  local  ministry  is  en- 
riched :  may  we  expect  more  help  ?  Ah  S  the  labour  is  too  hard,  and 
the  wages  too  low.  We  cannot,  like  the  Quakers,  take  abroad  whee 
we  get  tired  of  home,  and  go  feasting  about  from  one  rich  friend's 
table  to  another's,  and  bark  or  be  dumb,  as  the  fit  may  take  us.  Our 
discipline  is  too  strict :  we  cannot  leave  four  or  five  thousand  congre- 
gations unsought,  like  the  Church  of  England,  the  Presbyterian,  Inde- 
pendent, and  Baptist  churches.  Go,  says  the  command  ;  go  into  all 
the  world — go  to  the  highway  and  hedges.  Go  out — seek  them. 
Christ  came  seeking  the  lost  sheep.  Seek  me  out,  says  the  parson,  or 
advertise  and  offer  a  church  and  a  good  salary,  and  I  will  seek  you. 
And  is  this  all  these  pretenders  can  do  ?  If  we  send  but  one  tra- 
velling preacher  into  a  four  weeks'  circuit,  we  aid  him  by  the  labour 
of  our  local  ministry,  good  men,  and  some  of  them  great  men. 

Sabbath  9.  I  would  have  preached  to-day  at  Fountain-Head,  but 
I  was  bed  sick.  Thomas  Logan  Douglass  supplied  my  place.  We 
came  away  to  Doctor  Porter's  on  Monday,  forty-six  miles. 

Tuesday  11.  We  reached  Harvey's,  thirty-five  miles.  The  fami- 
lies of  Shaw  and  Walton  were  visited  as  we  came  along.  Ob,  the 
heat,  the  dust ! 


368  REV.  F11ANC1S  asbury's  JOURNAL.  [1814. 

Wednesday  12.  We  called  upon  the  weeping  widow  Quarles, 
whose  husband  was  beaten  to  death  :  the  supposed  murderer,  Phil- 
lips, is  condemned  to  death :  it  was  a  sad  scene.  Lodged  at  Terry's, 
and  were  pleased  with  our  entertainment. 

Thursday  13.  At  Holt's,  junr. ;  I  preached  and  baptised  an  infant. 
Forward  we  jolted  over  the  turnpike  (for  which  they  made  us  pay 
a  dollar,)  to  Dunlap's. 

Friday  14.  We  had  heat  in  the  extreme  to  Holt's,  senior,  forty-six 
miles.  Saturday  I  had  a  very  painful  cholic.  In  the  families  of  Holt 
we  have  served  four  generations. 

Sabbath  16.  Hearing  there  was  a  Presbyterian  congregation,  we 
asked  to  preach  and  hear  :  we  did  both.  Mr.  Nelson  spoke  first, 
and  I  addressed  Methodists  and  others  on  1  John  viii.  31,  32.  "Ye 
shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free."  How  to 
know  the  truth  1 — By  continuing  under  a  Gospel  ministry,  and  using 
Gospel  means.  Ye  shall  know  the  truth — of  the  Gospel  ;  feelingly, 
experimentally,  practically.  Make  you  free.  What  the  freedom 
wrought  consists  in.  It  is  an  entire  deliverance  from  sin — from  its 
guilt,  power,  and  inbeing.  A  freedom  embracing  the  privileges  of 
pardon,  peace,  patience,  meekness,  perfect  love,  joy  on  earth,  and 
everlasting  glory  in  heaven.  We  hasted  away,  after  meeting,  to  Wil- 
liam Cunningham's. 

Monday  17.  We  came  rapidly  through  Dandridge  to  William 
Turnley's  :  here  are  kind  souls.  I  was  sick  and  soon  in  bed,  but 
John  Bond  preached  for  them. 

South  Carolina. — Tuesday  18.  Our  ride  brought  us  to  Jarratt's,  on 
Pigeon- River.  O  my  excellent  son,  John  Bond  !  A  tree  had  fallen 
across  our  way — what  was  to  be  done  ?  brother  Bond  sprung  to  the  axe 
fastened  under  our  carriage,  mounted  upon  the  large  limbs,  hewing 
and  hacking,  stroke  after  stroke,  without  intermission,  until  he  had  cut 
away  five  of  them,  hauling  them  on  one  side  as  he  severed  them,  so 
that  we  passed  without  difficulty.  Is  there  his  equal  to  be  found  in 
the  United  States  ?  He  drives  me  along  with  the  utmost  care  and  ten- 
derness, he  fills  my  appointments  by  preaching  for  me  when  I  am  dis- 
abled, he  watches  over  me  at  night  after  the  fatigue  of  driving  all 
day,  and  if  when  he  is  in  bed  and  asleep,  I  call,  he  is  awake  and  up 
in  the  instant  to  give  me  medicine,  or  to  perform  any  other  services 
his  sick  father  may  require  of  him  ;  and  this  is  done  so  readily,  and 
with  so  much  patience,  when  my  constant  infirmities  and  ill  health 
require  so  many  and  oft-repeated  attentions  !  We  have  had  a  great 
drought — I  think  I  never  saw  the  rivers  so  low.  The  asthma  presses 
sorely  upon  my  panting  breast :   Lord,  sanctify  all  my  afflictions ! 


1814.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  369 

The  work  of  God  groweth  in  this  neighbourhood  ;  there  is  a  house 
thirty-five  by  forty  feet  built  in  the  fork  of  Pigeon-River.  Ought 
we  not  to  have  a  Holston  conference,  and  unite  with  the  circuits 
west  of  the  Blue  Ridge,  Bottetourt  and  New-River,  the  circuits  in 
North-Carolina  ? 

North  Carolina. — Wednesday  19.  Rode  to  Boling's.  Behold 
Richard  Bird  came  one  hundred  miles  to  hasten  us  to  camp-meeting 
away  on  the  bleak  hills  of  Haywood.  I  was  forced  by  misery  to  re- 
tire to  my  room  and  bed  at  Boling's  ;  but  son  John  held  a  meeting  and 
preached. 

Thursday  20.  We  came  by  Nelson  Spring's  to  Rarnett's  gate,  for, 
poor  man !  some  wicked  people  had  burnt  his  barn  ;  his  house  es- 
caped. Does  Wootten  Pile  pray  ?  I  asked.  You  called  upon  him  ; 
and  God  did  bless  the  word  and  prayer  to  his  soul  : — this  was  the  an- 
swer  in  remembrance  he  sent  me  by  Richard  Bird.  We  came  on 
the  camp-ground  Friday  21.  Saturday,  1  preached,  and  ordained  W. 
Span  and  J.  Evans  deacons. 

Sabbath  23.  Ordained  two  elders,  Thomas  Bird,  and  Samuel  Ed- 
ney,  after  preaching.  In  our  tent  we  contrived  a  hearth,  and  had  a 
fire.     Monday,  we  visited  the  house  of  Richard  Bird. 

Tuesday  25.  I  preached  in  the  house  of  the  father,  Benjamin 
Bird  ;  there  was  much  feeling  manifested.  We  collected  liberally 
on  the  mite  subscription  to  help  the  suffering  ministry.  I  had  for 
twenty  years  past  wished  to  visit  the  cove  ;  it  is  done,  and  1  have 
seen  my  old  tried  friends,  dear  Richard  and  Jonah  Bird,  and  William 
Fulwood,  who  sheltered  and  protected  me  when,  during  the  war  of 
independence,  I  was  compelled  to  retire  to  the  swamps  and  thickets 
for  safety. 

Wednesday  2G.  Our  ride  brought  us  to  Rutherford's.  I  paid  them 
as  well  as  I  could,  for  their  kindness  and  attentions,  by  exhortation 
and  prayer. 

Thursday  27.  To  M'Hathing's,  forty-one  miles.  D.  A.  wished  me 
to  take  Catabaw,  above  Ladies  Ford,  and  crossed  at  the  Horse-Ford, 
where  a  former  journal  will  show  my  life  to  have  been  in  danger  some 
years  ago.  I  preached  in  the  evening  at  Daniel  Asbury's,  Lincoln 
county,  near  Sherwells  Ford.  These  are  kind  spirits,  who  say, 
"  You  make  your  rides  too  long  ;"  vet  they  will  scarcely  be  denied 
when  invited  to  their  houses,  making  my  rides  longer  still ;  here  am 
I,  ten  miles  out  of  my  way,  to  see  these  dear  people.  And  now  that 
limbs,  lungs,  strength,  and  teeth  fail,  I  must  still  go  my  round  of  six 
thousand  miles  within  the  year. 

Vol.  III.  47 


370  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1814. 

Sabbath  30.  I  passed  a  restless,  feverish  night ;  yet  as  1  was  expect- 
ed to  preach  on  the  camp-ground,  I  discoursed  to  a  large,  simple- 
hearted  congregation  on  Acts  xxx.  32.  I  sat  in  the  end  of  my  little 
Jersey  wagon  screened  by  the  drawn  curtain  behind  me.  It  was  no 
common  time  to  either  speaker  or  hearers.  We  retired  after  meet- 
ing, to  Jonathan  Jackson's.  What  a  rich  table  was  provided  !  not 
for  me — I  retired  to  bed  with  a  high  fever.  My  spiritual  consola- 
tions flow  from  God  in  rich  abundance — my  soul  rejoices  exceedingly 
in  God. 

Monday  31.  To  Robey's,  near  Catabaw  springs. 

Tuesday,  November  1.  I  preached  to  a  very  attentive  people  r 
surely  the  speaker  and  hearers  felt  the  power  of  the  word  of  God. 
After  a  hasty  dinner,  we  rode  on  to  Nathan  Sadler's,  steward  of  the 
Lincoln  circuit. 

Wednesday  2.  I  spoke  with  very  unpleasant  feelings  on  Luke  xi. 
13.  We  hasted  to  Featherston  Wells's.  Here  were  all  comforts  for 
a  sick  man — good  food,  beds,  and  nursing.  This  family  is  blest. 
Sister  Wells  is  the  granddaughter  of  my  ancient  friend,  father  May, 
of  Amelia,  and  her  children  are  in  the  way  to  heaven  :  here  is  the 
fruit  of  my  labours.  What  a  comfort  is  it  to  see  the  fourth  genera- 
tion growing  up  under  our  eyes,  living  in  the  fear  of  God,  and  fol- 
lowing in  the  same  path  those  who  are  gone  to  glory ! 

Thursday  3.  Crossed  the  north  fork  of  Catabaw  to  Bethesda  cha- 
pel :  the  day  was  damp,  and  there  was  a  damp  upon  preacher  and 
people.  We  went  forward  to  John  Cameron's,  where  I  was  expect- 
ed to  preach,  and  I  did  try,  but  the  people  were  so  wonderfully  taken 
up  with  the  novel  sight  of  the  little  carriage,  and  still  more  of  the 
strange  looking  old  man  who  was  addressing  them,  that  the  speaker 
made  little  impression  on  his  hearers.  Who  neglects  me?  Not  the 
kind,  loving  Damerons.  We  came  to  John  Watson's,  Allison's  creek, 
on  Friday. 

Sabbath  6.  At  Sardis  chapel.  The  weather  was  unpleasant.  My 
congregation  might  have  tried  my  patience.  Monday,  we  came  to 
Henry  Smith's,  an  Israelite — he  is  a  native  of  East- Jersey.  Tuesday, 
to  Winnsborough. 

Monday  7.  I  am  here  since  last  Tuesday.  I  enjoy  constant  peace 
and  consolation. 

Sabbath  13.  I  preached  at  Winnsborough  a  long  discourse  on  1  Pet. 
xiv.  17.  Monday,  to  widow  Means's.  We  shall  ride  about  two  hun- 
dred and  twenty  miles  out  of  the  way  to  Georgia,  but  in  the  way  of 


iul4.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  37! 

our  duty.     Tuesday,  I  preached  at  Bethel  :  we  hope  good  was  done 
Edward  Finch,  a  son  of  affliction,  is  still  on  crutches. 

Wednesday  16-.  Dined  with  elder  Stephen  Shell,  Lodged  with 
Frederick  Foster.  Thursday,  we  had  a  crowded  house  at  Hopewell 
chapel  :  the  speaker  stood  in  weakness,  but  truth  came  in  power  to 
the  hearts  of  the  people.  Ordained  John  Molineaux  a  deacon. 
Lodged  at  John  Leek's  :  the  master,  a  local  labourer,  is  gone  to 
his  rest  and  reward. 

Friday  18.  Rain.  We  got  bewildered,  and  were  glad  to  stop  with 
Mr.  Morrow,  a  Presbyterian,  who  kindly  received  and  entertained  us. 
Saturday,  we  came  to  Staunton  bridge. 

Sabbath  20.  Bishop  M'Kendree  preached  and  J.  W.  Bond.  I  spoke 
a  few  words  from  my  carriage  :  we  hope  the  testimony  of  three  men 
will  be  believed.  God  is  with  me  in  all  my  feebleness.  We  have 
visited  North  Carolina  to  Catabaw,  South  Carolina — and  Fairfield^ 
Newberry,  Laurens,  and  Greenville  districts.  Monday  and  Tuesday, 
we  are  at  rest  at  father  Staunton's,  an  active  and  holy  man — an  Israel- 
ite indeed  of  seventy-seven  years. 

Wednesday  23.  We  gave  an  evening  lecture  at  Taliefero's  ;  the 
night  was  damp,  and  (ew  people  attended.  Nights  of  suffering  are 
appointed  to  me  ;  but  God  is  with  us.     Thursday,  rested. 

Friday  25.  Rode  twenty-five  miles  to  widow  King's,  Pendleton 
district.  I  am  reading  Saurin's  vth  volume  ;  he  is  ^'reat  in  his  way  ; 
but  it  is  not  Wesley's  way,  which  I  take  to  be  the  more  excellent  way. 
Saturday,  damp,  rainy  day.     I  enjoy  my  private  devotions. 

Sabbath  27.  It  broke  away  clear  for  a  while,  and  1  took  a  stand 
outside  of  the  door,  and  spoke  to  the  people  on  Galatians  v.  6.    Mon 
day,  to  John  Power's  ;  here  are  new  disciples,  and  they  are  all  love, 
Tuesday,  to  Benjamin  Glover's. 

Georgia. — Wednesday  30.  I  preached  at  Samuel  Rembert's  :  I  was 
feeble,  and  could  not  speak  with  much  energy.  Here  I  met  with 
Thomas  Asbury,  born  in  Burslem,  Stafford,  Old  England,  formerly 
a  member  of  the  British  conference.  God  is  gracious  to  us.  Alas  ! 
we  cannot  tell  the  people  of  so  many  things  which  they  do  not  know, 
as  we  can  of  those  which  they  neither  feel  nor  do.  On  inquiry  of 
Joseph  Tarpley  of  the  work  of  God  in  the  Ogechee  district,  of  which 
he  is  presiding  elder,  he  gave  me  the  following  account.  At  Little- 
River  camp-meeting,  the  number  which  attended  were  thought  to  be 
three  thousand,  the  converts  about  thirty.  At  Apalacha,  number 
attending  two  thousand  five  hundred,  the  converts  twenty-five.  At 
Grove  camp-meeting  two  thousand  attended,  the  converts  might  be 
twenty.     At  Louisville  camp-meeting  there  were  scarcely  more  thao 


372  IlEV.  1RA.NCIS  ASBUKYJS  JOURNAL.  [1814. 

one  thousand,  there  mi«;ht  be  ten  converts.  At  the  Warren  two 
thousand  five  hundred  persons  to  hear,  and  but  few  converts  :  each 
camp-meeting  continued  four  days. 

Saturday,  December  2.  1  preached  in  Thompson's  chapel  :  the 
Lord  was  present.  We  collected  the  official  brethren  into  the  school- 
house,  where  I  gave  them  a  talk  on  the  doctrines  and  discipline  of 
our  church. 

Sabbath  3.  I  preached  at  Thompson's  chapel.  Monday,  rode 
from  J.  Alston's  to  J.  Mark's,  Elbert  county.  Tuesday,  I  preached 
in  the  chapel :  widow  Gilmore  received  us  under  her  roof  for  the 
night-  Wednesday,  we  reached  Prospect,  and  I  preached ;  the 
speaker's  mind  is  too  strong  for  his  body.  It  was  a  sacramental  day. 
Thursday,  resting  at  Archibald  Pope's.  The  weather  has  occa- 
sioned me  much  suffering,  notwithstanding  the  great  kindness  and  the 
good  dinners  of  our  friends,  and  the  convenience  of  my  covered 
cradle  upon  wheels. 

Friday  9.  I  preached  at  Bethlehem  to  about  three  hundred  souls  : 
the  house  was  unfinished,  and  damp,  and  cold.  Lodged  at  the  house 
of  the  widow  of  Henry  Pope.  By  letter  from  John  Earley  we  have 
great  accounts  of  the  work  of  God  at  camp-meetings  in  Amelia 
and  Prince-Edward.  Saturday,  came  to  Athens,  accompanied  by 
Hope  Hull. 

Sabbath  11.  Preached  in  the  college  chapel;  the  people  were 
very  attentive  in  that  open  penance  house.  The  state  of  things  is 
strangely  changed  since  Doctor  Brown  has  had  the  presidency  :  he 
is  a  man  of  piety  and  order,  and  will  render  unto  all  their  due, 
Monday,  to  Joseph  Floyd's  on  Apalachee.  Tuesday  I  preached  at 
J.  Floyd's  house  :  the  people  appeared  somewhat  like  the  preacher, 
sickly  and  slender.  I  ordained  Samuel  Patallo  a  deacon,  and  bap- 
tised three  children.  The  lands  here  are  good  ;  but  the  price  paid 
for  quiet  possession  has  been  great — sickness,  deaths,  and  murders 
by  Indians. 

Wednesday  14.  Rode  twenty  miles  to  N.  Ware's.  When  I  see 
mother  Steward's  children  I  rejoice.  Holy  woman  !  thou  didst  not 
believe,  and  live,  and  weep,  and  pray,  and  die  in  vain — neither  for 
thyself,  nor  for  thy  children,  nor  thy  children's  children.  Verily, 
there  is  a  reward  for  the  righteous. 

Thursday  15.  To  Thomas  Scott's— a  brand  re-plucked  from  the 
burning. 

Friday  16.  At  the  new  chapel,  called  after  me,  I  preached,  and  hope 
the  word  of  truth  was  not  lost.  Lodged  at  John  Turner's.  Satur- 
day, at  brother  Holt's. 


1315.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL,  373 

Sabbath  19.  Great  rain.  Every  post  almost  is  a  messenger  of  the 
tidings  which  ought  to  make  me  serious.  John  M'Claskey  is  no 
more.  He  was  a  native  of  Ireland,  born  in  Londonderry — a  man  of 
strong  mind,  a  plain,  but  useful  preacher,  and  laboured  with  us  about 
thirty  years.  Mother  Kent  is  dead— forty  years  a  subject  of  grace. 
My  aged  friends  Henry  and  Kezia  Moss  have  gone  to  their  reward, 
but  they  leave  me  their  daughter  Freeman  to  receive  me  ;  I  trust 
she  will  fill  her  parents'  place  here,  and  follow  them  as  they  followed 
Christ.  Henry  Boehm  sends  me  great  accounts  of  the  work  of  God 
at  camp-meetings. 

Wednesday  21.  Our  conference  began  and  continued  until  the 
27th.  There  were  nearly  one  hundred  characters  examined  and  six 
admitted  upon  trial.  Twelve  are  located.  Ten  elders  have  been 
ordained,  and  twenty-two  deacons  ;  eighty-two  preachers  have  been 
stationed  :  none  are  dead,  and  none  have  been  expelled.  I  preached 
at  the  ordinations,  but  with  so  feeble  a  voice  that  many  did  not  hear  : 
[  had  coughed  much,  and  expectorated  blood.  We  had  great  peace, 
union,  and  love  in  our  session.  Wednesdaj',  we  rode  to  Sparta  in 
:he  afternoon.  Thursday,  we  had  crowded  lodging,  and  I  passed  a 
painful  night.     Friday,  to  Sweet- Water.     Saturday,  to  Augusta. 

Sunday,  January  1,  1815.  I  preached  in  Saterman's  house.  Mon- 
day, dined  at  M'Cleary's,  and  came  on  to  Ubank's.  Tuesday,  to 
Button's.  Oh  that  God  may  bless  my  last  labours  in  this  family  ! 
Wednesday,  to  Roger's.  Thursday,  to  Captain  Perry's.  Friday, 
we  had  a  cold,  hungry  ride  of  thirty-six  miles.  Saturday,  busy 
writing. 

Sabbath  8.  I  spoke  in  much  feebleness  upon  part  of  Psalm  xxxvii. 
and  gave  a  charge  to  the  society.  My  labours  were  followed  with 
much  coughing  and  a  restless  night.  Monday,  I  bled  in  the  arm  to 
relieve  the  spitting  of  blood.  This  place  calls  for  great  labour  and 
I  am  not  fit  for  it :  I  must  go  hence.  Tuesday,  I  filled  an  appoint- 
ment made  for  me  in  Bethel  chapel :  I  was  divinely  assisted.  The 
care  of  the  societies  comes  with  weight  upon  my  mind.  Here  are 
liberal  souls  at  home  and  abroad  :  we  have  added  nearly  two  hun- 
dred dollars  to  our  mite  subscription.  Thursday,  came  to  Straw- 
berry Ferry.  Grand  accommodations  at  Mr.  Lesane's.  Friday,  to 
Hale's  ;  we  had  an  appointment  here  which  we  knew  not  of:  the 
people  assembled,  and  I  spoke  to  them.  Saturday,  came  to  the  San- 
tee,  and  crossed  the  Long-Ferry  in  fifty  minutes.  Away  with  the 
false  cant,  that  the  better  you  use  the  negroes  the  worse  they  will 
use  you  !  Make  them  good  then—teach  them  the  fear  of  God,  and  learn 


374  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1815. 

to  fear  Him  yourselves,  ye  masters  !  I  understand  not  the  doctrine 
of  cruelty.  As  soon  as  the  poor  Africans  see  me,  they  spring  with 
life  to  the  boat,  and  make  a  heavy  flat  skim  along  like  a  light  canoe  : 
poor  starved  souls — God  will  judge  ! 

Sabbath  15.  A  sacramental  day  :  I  preached  and  gave  a  word  of 
exhortation  to  the  society.  I  cannot  preach  more  than  once  a  day. 
I  wrote  two  letters,  having  no  other  leisure  to  do  it  in. 

South  Carolina. — Monday  16.  A  great  storm  without.  I  glanced 
at  Echard.  I  find  history  of  the  Jews  and  the  Romans,  and  very 
little  of  the  pure  church.  We  have  presided  in  three  conferences 
in  seven  months.  We  had  planned  a  ride  of  one  thousand  and  three 
hundred  miles  into  Virginia  conference,  but  Providence  forbad  it  by 
affliction. 

Tuesday  17.  We  started  away  in  company  with  W.  M.  Kennedy, 
and  I.  Norton,  with  the  last  of  whom  we  parted  at  the  ferry  over 
Black-River.  Lodged  with  Mr.  Rogers — his  father  has  gone  to  rest. 
On  our  route  we  visited  Bethel  Durant,  and  saw  his  brethren,  John 
and  Henry  :  their  simple-hearted,  kind  father  entertained  me  thirty 
years  ago  on  my  returning  from  my  visit  to  Charleston. 

Wednesday  18.  Crossed  the  lakes  and  Wakkamaw,  and  got  in  after 
eight  o'clock  to  brother  Frink's.  At  William  Guse's,  I  saw  my  kind 
mothers  in  Israel,  Guse  and  Rogers.  I  continue  to  expectorate  blood. 
Is  it  possible  that  the  children  of  the  French  Protestant  martyrs  to 
the  tyranny  of  Louis  XIV,  and  his  bloody  priesthood,  can  ever  for- 
get the  God  of  their  fathers  ?  Noble,  holy  men,  may  God  gather  in 
your  children  to  the  latest  generations  ! 

Friday  20.  A  dash  of  rain  stopped  us  awhile,  but  we  went  for- 
ward thirty  miles  to  Wilmington.     I  feel  the  effect  of  the  damps. 

North  Carolina. — Sabbath  22.  I  preached  in  the  chapel.  Oh ! 
wretched  appearance  of  broken  windows.  It  was  a  sacramental  day. 
Were  I  a  young  man  1  should  not  wish  to  be  stationed  in  Wilming- 
ton.    Our  funds  are  low  here,  and  our  house  a  wreck. 

Monday  23.  We  came  away  to  widow  Nixon's.  Tuesday,  to 
Shepherd's.  Doctor  Lomas  has  been  suddenly  called  away  by  death. 
Wednesday,  to  Lot  Ballard's.  Shall  the  Gospel  be  taken  from  Go- 
shen ?  Thursday,  dined  at  Joseph  Bryan's ;  lodged  at  Hardy's. 
We  dashed  through  Muscle-Shell-Creek  in  a  swim— it  was  serious 
work. 

Friday  27.  Dined  at  Hatch's  :  our  reception  kind  ;  and  our  host 
is  in  bed  with  a  leg  broken.  We  reached  Newbern  in  the  evening. 
Here  is  weeping  and  lamentation  for  poor  me — the  leading  cha- 


1815.]  REV.  FRANCIS   ASEUHY'S   JOURNAL.  315 

racters  of  the  society  cannot  speak  to  each  other,  or  of  each  other 
without  bringing  heavy  accusations — yet  all  very  glad  to  see  the 
bishop. 

Saturday  28.  My  trust  is  in  a  faithful  God — he  hath  never  deceived 
me  nor  forsaken  me.  I  am  scarcely  an  hour  free  from  pain,  and  all 
that  I  do  is  in  the  strength  of  Jesus. 

Sabbath  29.  I  preached,  and  there  was  a  trembling  from  first  to 
last  under  the  word — but  it  was  with  cold.  Ah  !  people  hard  and 
dull !  John  Bond  preached  three  times  :  possibly  in  my  short  exhor- 
tation to  the  society  I  talked  down  the  tempers  of  some  of  the  mem- 
bers :  Ah  !  wretched  use  of  liquid  fire  !  '* 

Monday  30.  Cold  indeed  ;  my  feet  suffer.  We  made  twenty-six 
miles  to  a  house — no  wood  at  the  door,  and  none  to  cut  wood. 

Tuesday  31.  A  heavy  storm  took  us  at  Greenville.  We  put  the 
remains  of  a  poor,  pious  slave  in  the  ground  who  had  reached  one 
hundred  years.     Brandy  in  a  cold  is  like  laudanum. 

Wednesday,  February  1.  We  came  twenty-two  miles :  I  was 
nearly  done.  Had  we  followed  our  first  plan,  and  gone  by  Norforlk, 
it  would  have  probably  cost  me  my  life.  It  was  time  to  lower  our 
sails  and  drop  anchor  at  Edward  Hall's,  near  Tarborough :  it  is  para- 
dise regained  for  a  few  days.  The  weather  has  been  excessively 
cold,  and  keenly  felt  by  an  old  man  of  seventy,  deeply  wounded  in 
the  limbs,  breast,  and  lungs. 

Sabbath  5.  I  spoke  to  a  gathering  of  serious  people  in  Edward 
Hall's  large  dining  room  :  the  speaker  was  led  to  some  awful  truths. 
I  am  occupied  in  reading,  writing,  and  patching  and  propping  up  the 
old  clay  house  as  well  as  I  may  :  God  be  gracious  to  us  still ! 

Monday  6.  We  breakfasted  with  Mrs.  Austin.  Oh !  the  look  ex- 
pressive of  the  workings  of  her  soul  she  gave,  when  in  the  trying 
hour  she  said,  "  pray  for  me."  Shall  a  Methodist  conference  assem- 
ble, a  society  be  gathered,  and  a  chapel  be  built  in  Tarborough  ? 
Dined  with  Exum  Lewis  and  wife  :  this  favoured  pair  have  been  re- 
newed  and  quickened.  The  house  of  their  father  was  amongst  the 
first  in  former  days  to  receive  the  Methodists,  and  the  children  now 
open  their  house,  and  hearts,  and  hands  to  them  :  may  the  Lord 
convert,  and  own,  and  bless  their  children's  children  to  the  latest 
generations  !  Amen  !  amen  ! 

Came  to  James  Hunter's  at  Fishing-Creek— a  cold  ride.  I  sent 
for  dear  Henry  Bradford  and  his  wife,  and  we  renewed  our  cove« 
nant  with  God.  Tuesday,  to  Halifax  ;  mother  Long  would  by  no 
means  take  a»/:  honourable  woman  I     I  gave  an  evening  lecture 


376  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  [1815, 

to  some  serious  souls,  and  John  Wesley  Bond  exhorted  after  me  with 
energy. 

Wednesday  8.  Crossed  the  bleak  ferry  to  sister  Sarah  Weaver's, 

Virginia. — Saturday  11.  We  are  at  Matthew  Myrick's,  Virginia — - 
to  rest  the  horses,  not  ourselves.  The  alarms  of  the  wasting  sickness 
are  very  serious.   I  wrote  an  epistle  to  Norfolk,  and  another  to  Suffolk. 

Sabbath  12.  I  preached  in  Drumgoold's  house.  Doctor  Simmons 
kindly  officiated  and  drew  two  ounces  of  blood  from  my  arm.  I  or- 
dained Edward  Drumgoold  an  elder  in  the  church  of  God.  E.  D. 
was  born  in  Sligo  ;  joined  the  Methodists  in  1770  ;  began  to  exhort 
in  1774  ;  gravelled  in  America  from  1774  until  1785  ;  since  then  has 
been  a  faithful  local  preacher,  respected  and  beloved  :  he  has  six 
children  living,  two  of  whom,  Edward  and  Thomas,  are  local  deacons, 

Monday  13.  Came  away  in  company  with  P.  Brice,  John  Early, 
and  William  Barnes,  to  Lewis  Gregg's,  calling  on  fllajor  Thomas  on 
our  route. 

Tuesday  14.  A  great  storm  of  snow  blew  for  eight  miles  in  our 
eyes  on  our  way  to  S*  Holmes's.  I  saw  Francis  Hill  once  more  :  thirty 
years  has  he  been  a  backslider  from  God  ;  may  he  be  speedily  re- 
stored !  Sister  Gregg  is  sick,  and  sister  Holmes  near  the  last  great 
change.  To  Osborne's,  we  went  forward  twelve  miles  ; — we  have 
seen  some  of  our  early  acquaintances  once  more. 

Wednesday  15.  To  FennelPs,  forty  miles.  Behold,  we  have  a 
daughter  a  disciple,  in  the  ancient  house  of  Bedford  :  the  kindness 
shown  to  God's  people  He  hath  repaid.  To  father  Jude's  on 
Thursday,  where  I  was  willing  to  rest,  for  I  felt  very  ill. 

Friday  17.  We  came  into  Lynchburg  in  great  weariness,  having 
dined  at  Mr.  Reed's. 

Sunday  19.  I  preached  in  the  new,  neat  brick  chapel,  forty  feet 
by  fifty.  Monday  and  Tuesday,  we  progressed  well  in  our  business. 
Doctor  Jennings  preached  us  a  great  sermon  on  /  am  the  vine,  ye  are 
the  branches. 

Friday  24.  We  ordained  elders,  and  I  tried  to  speak  on  Phil,  ii, 
19— -22.  I  failed — I  have  been  almost  strangled  with  an  asthmatic 
cough,  and  vomiting  of  blood. 

Sunday  26.  I  keep  the  house,  and  busy  myself  to  organise  the 
stations.  Thanks  to  the  God  of  peace  I  we  are  confirmed  in  the 
belief  that  a  treaty  has  been  made  between  the  United  States  and 
Great  Britain.  We  have  ordained  twenty  deacons  and  eight  elders. 
Is  there  not  a  declination  in  gifts,  as  well  as  members  ?  We  settled 
at  seventy-one  dollars  each  man. 


1815.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  377 

Monday  27.  Came  away  from  Lynchburg  to  Amherst  court-house, 
lodging  with  a  local  preacher  who  keeps  a  public  house  :  may  he  dis- 
appoint all  my  fears,  and  exceed  all  my  hopes! 

Tuesday  28.  I  preached  at  Meredith's.  Shall  we  have  to  cross 
Buffdoe,  Pine  and  Tye  rivers,  after  the  thawing  of  the  great  snow  ? 

Wednesday,  March  1.  Came  to  S.  Garland's,  Nelson  court-house. 
Thursday,  to  the  widow  Gentry's. 

Friday  3.  As  we  passed  Monticello,  a  cloud  rested  upon  it:  the 
day  was  clear.  We  crossed  the  north  branch  of  James- River,  near 
Charlottesville.  Sheltered  for  the  night,  under  the  roof  of  the  widow 
Gillum.  We  have  had  roads,  and  I  am  feebleness  itself.  We  crossed 
Rapid-Dam  at  the  Race-Ford,  and  came  to  my  dear  John  Stockdale's 
on  Saturday  evening.     Hail,  rest ! 

Sunday  5  We  had  preaching  in  the  morning,  and  I  spoke  a  few 
minutes  in  the  evening  ;  water  the  seed,  O  Lord  ! 

Monday  6.  To  Henry  Fry's.  I  have  passed  a  painful  night — the 
last  in  this  house,  perhaps.  Tuesday,  to  Culpepper.  Would  I  not 
stay  and  preach  to  them  ?  Oh,  that  I  was  able  :  to  will,  is  always  pre- 
sent with  me.  We  went  forward  to  Rix's.  This  was  a  gentleman 
who  kept  private  accommodation  ;  the  law  being  against  private  en- 
tertainment :  his  bill,  in  the  morning,  amounted  to  five  dollars,  save 
two  shillings.  Wednesday,  dined  at  Bashaw's,  and  lodged  at  New 
Baltimore. 

Thursday  9.  Came  to  Fairfax  court-house,  dining  on  our  route,  at 
Alexander  Wangho's.  Friday,  to  Georgetown.  Saturday,  writing 
official  letters. 

Maryland. — Sunday  12.  In  the  chapel  I  lectured  on  a  chapter  of 
Hosea.  My  mind,  perhaps,  partakes  of  the  weakness  of  my  body — I 
let  fly  a  few  scattering  shot — I  keep  up  a  kind  of  running  fire  with  my 
small  gun  sermonizing.  Our  ranks  are  thinned,  if  one  hundred  have 
died  in  the  Lancaster,  Virginia  circuit.  I  behold  the  ruins  of  the 
Capitol  and  the  President's^  house  ;  the  navy  yard  we  burned  our- 
selves.    Oh,  war  !  war! 

Monday  13.  A  cold  ride  brought  us  to  Elk  Ridge  ;  and  our  old 
friend,  widow  Honor  Dorsey,  gave  us  a  shelter  and  a  welcome, 
Tuesday,  came  in  to  Baltimore.  My  kind,  inquiring  friends,  are 
coming  in  from  morning  till  night.  I  am  with  my  old  friend  the 
widow  Dickens. 

Saturday  18.  I  preached  at  the  Point.     Our  conference  began  on 
Monday,    and  prudence  restrained  me  to  one  session  per  day  ;  per 
haps  I  did  not  speak  officially  six  times  during  the  continuance  oi 
Vol.  III.  48 


37o  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL,  [1815. 

conference.  When  it  was  understood  that  the  ancient  superintendent 
did  not  attend  in  the  afternoon,  the  visits  to  him  were  renewed. 
Stationing  about  eighty-five  preachers  we  found  to  be  no  small  work. 
Friday,  we  ordained  the  deacons  in  Light-street  church.  Being 
good  Friday,  a  fast  was  appointed,  and  1  spoke  a  few  words  on  the 
sufferings  of  Christ. 

Sunday  26.  At  Eutaw  chapel  I  spoke  upon  the  apostolic  order  of 
things.  Monday,  conference  rose.  Tuesday,  I  retired  to  Perry- 
Hall.  The  stormy,  damp  weather,  is  hard  upon  me  ;  but  1  abound 
here  in  comforts  above  millions  :  Lord,  make  me  grateful  and  hum- 
ble !  What  a  preacher  and  writer  was  Samuel  Davies  !  His  sermons 
are  very  Methodistical.  We  have  sent  Samuel  Montgomery  to 
Montreal,  and  Samuel  Burgess  to  Chenango  district :  they  have  had 
our  counsel,  and  our  prayers. 

Sunday,  April  2.  In  great  weakness,  I  gave  my  farewell  exhorta- 
tion at  the  Fork  chapel.  Came  back  to  Perry-Hall  :  all  here  is 
solitary  to  me  ! 

Monday  3.  At  Havre  de  Grace,  I  see  the  fourth  generation  of  the 
Jarratt's  ;  but  some  are  still  out  of  Christ.  We  crossed  the  ferry  in 
six  minutes.  At  North  East  chapel  I  gave  them  a  farewell  discourse. 
I  passed  a  restless  night.  Oh,  the  kindness  of  the  people  to  a  poor 
sinner  saved  by  grace  alone  !  Wednesday,  James  Smith  went  for- 
ward and  preached  in  the  Elk  chapel :  at  one  o'clock  we  came  up, 
exhorted,  sung  and  prayed.  We  must  attend  to  our  appointments, 
though  we  should  speak  but  little,  for  the  people  wish  to  see  us  :  we 
have  lived  and  laboured  so  long,  that  we  have  become  a  spectacle  to 
men.  This  place,  Elkton,  has  been  founded  about  fifty  years  :  it  may 
be  visited  of  the  Lord  in  the  fourth  or  fifth  generation.  The  speaker 
remembered  that  although  the  British  were  all  around  them,  that 
they  escaped  a  visit.  In  great  weakness  of  body  we  came  on  to  the 
comfortable  retreat  of  Nicholas  Chambers. 

Thursday  6.  Stopped  at  Bethel,  spoke  a  little  and  prayed.  We 
dropped  anchor  at  Richard  Bassett's,  until  better  weather.  Satur- 
day, 1  sent  forward  John  Smith  to  fill  my  appointment.  My  unplea- 
sant cough  still  clenves  to  me.  Bohemia  manor  was  formerly  the 
field  in  which  the  Whitefield  Methodists,  called  New  Lights,  laboured 
with  success:  the  Wesleyan  Methodists  are  heirs  to  these,  according 
to  the  Gospel. 

Sunday  9.  We  would  have  attended  meeting  to  day,  but  we  wished 
not  to  ride  fourteen  miles.    We  called  a  meeting  at  Richard  Bassett's> 


1815.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  379 

and  took  occasion  to  speak  of  the  work  of  God  in  the  days  of  the 
New  Lights,  sixty  years  past. 

Delaware. — Monday  10.  We  came  away  in  the  rain  to  Smyrna, 
stopping  by  the  way  at  A.  Short's  :  we  lodged  with  Israel  Pe- 
terson. 

Tuesday  11.  At  Dover  my  dear  friends  who  had  not  seen  me  for 
one  and  two  years  visited  me  and  led  me  into  conversation  the  whole 
afternoon.  It  is  hard,  think  they,  that  we  cannot  see  him  ;  so  it 
might  be  thought  in  every  place  ;  but  do  they  always  remember  the 
hardship  they  impose  on  me  ?  so  we  go. 

Wednesday  12.  We  came  to  Camden,  the  first  upon  the  line  of  my 
appointments.  I  spoke  a  few  words,  and  came  to  James's,  son  of 
David  Owens,  my  old  disciple.  We  called  on  James  Bateman  as  we 
oame  along. 

Thursday  13.  I  preached  once  more  at  Johnstown  :  the  day  had 
been  set  apart  for  a  general  thanksgiving  for  peace,  and  I  remem- 
bered it  in  the  pulpit.  We  dined  with  P  Wells,  and  rode  back  to 
Milford.  Dust,  fever,  and  too  much  company,  these  are  my  trials  : 
peace,  and  perfect  love,  these  are  my  consolations. 

Friday  14.  I  preached,  and  hasted  to  Frederica,  lodging  with 
Andrew  Dill  :  here  we  saw  dear  Doctor  Edward  White,  who  hath 
known  and  followed  the  Methodists,  since  1778.  I  preached  at  Bar- 
ratt's  chapel,  in  great  feebleness  of  body.  Must  I  needs  dine  with 
Judge  Andrew  Barratt  ?  "Ah!  I  know  that  my  father  and  mother 
thought  more  of  him,  than  of  any  man  upon  the  earth  ;  and  well 
does  it  become  their  son  to  respect  him."  And  is  this  all  ?  God 
forbid  ! 

Sunday  16.  I  preached  in  Wesley  chapel,  Dover,  and  the  truth 
was  felt.  Monday,  after  delivering  a  short  exhortation  at  Smyrna,  I 
rode  on  to  Smith's,  Newcastle  county. 

Tuesday  18.  Reached  Wilmington.  Wednesday,  to  Landrefh's. 
Thursday,  I  sat  in  conference  awhile,  but  became  sick.  Friday,  I 
tried  it  again.  Saturday,  a  chill  overcame  me,  followed  by  burning 
heat.     I  continued  at  Richard  Bowyer's. 

Pennsylvania. — Sunday  23.  Instead  of  filling  an  appointment,  I 
was  taken  with  a  chill,  followed  by  high  fever.  I  have  groaned 
away  the  whole  week.  I  was  lodged  beyond  the  first  gate,  and  few 
knew  where  I  was  :  attentions  overcome  me. 

Friday  28.  Feeling  no  fever,  I  ventured  to  whisper  a  few  words  : 
perhaps  I  shall  be  able  to  say  something  in  the  New  chapel  in  Tenth- 
street,  Philadelphia. 


380  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1815. 

Sunday  30.  At  three  o'clock  1  preached  in  the  chapel  in  Tenth- 
street  :  what  a  noble  building!  Monday,  Tuesday,  Wednesday,  rest- 
ing at  Thomas  Haskin's.     Thursday,  at  Trenton. 

New-Jersey— Friday,  May  4.  We  came  through  bad  roads  thirty- 
seven  miles,  to  Mr.  Baker's  tavern — wearied  down.  Our  host  was 
very  attentive,  and  we  had  prayer  in  course.  Saturday,  called  upon 
Thomas  Morrell.  Had  an  interview  with  Mr.  M'Dowell,  the  sta- 
tioned minister  of  the  Presbyterian  congregation  in  Elizabethtown  : 
he  is  modest  and  pious — Oh  !  for  such  men  in  all  protestant  churches. 
We  drove  up  to  George  Suckley's,  Greenwhich.  The  weather  is 
most  distressing  to  my  feelings. 

New-York. — Sunday  14.  I  attended  the  North  church,  and  gave 
a  discourse — it  was  something  between  talking  and  preaching  ;  yet 
we  had  a  time  of  much  feeling. 

Monday  15.  To  Croton,  forty  miles.  The  dear  aged  man,  Gover- 
nor Van  Courtlandt,  has  gone  to  his  rest,  having  attained  to  ninety 
years,  and  upward. 

Tuesday  16.  A  twenty  miles  painful  ride  brought  us  to  War- 
ren's tavern,  where  we  were  made  comfortable.  Wednesday,  to 
Rhinebeck,  forty  miles.  Thursday,  to  Judge  Van  Ness's,  forty  miles 
- — in  rain,  cold  and  suffering.  The  lady  kind  ;  the  sister  all  atten- 
tion— Oh !  how  goodness  outshines  the  vain  glories  of  this  world  ! 
Friday,  a  cold  rain  dogged  us  into  Albany.  Saturday,  I  paid  an 
hours's  visit  to  my  brethren  in  conference. 

Sunday  21.  By  vote  of  conference,  I  preached  the  funeral  sermon 
for  Doctor  Coke — of  blessed  mind  and  soul — of  the  third  branch  of 
Oxonian  Methodists — a  gentleman,  a  scholar,  and  a  Bishop,  to  us — and 
as  a  minister  of  Christ,  in  zeal,  in  labours,  and  in  services,  the  great- 
est man  of  the  last  century.  Poor  wheezing,  groaning,  coughing 
Francis  visited  the  conference  chamber  on  Tuesday  and  Thursday. 
Although  confined  to  my  room,  I  was  not  prevented  from  entering 
deeply  into  the  consideration  of  the  plan  of  the  stations  :  the  elders 
thought  I  came  out  well.  Alas !  what  miseries  and  distresses  are 
here.  How  shall  we  meet  the  charge  of  seventy  married  out  of 
ninety-five  preachers — children — sick  wives — and  the  claims  of  con- 
ference ?  We  are  deficient  in  dollars  and  in  discipline. 

Friday  29,  We  closed  our  labours  in  great  peace  and  union.  Sa- 
turday, we  rode  out  of  Albany  to  brother  Spicer's,  New  Canaan. 
The  Bishops  here  saw  eye  to  eye,  with  hearts  and  souls  in  perfect 
ynion. 


1815.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  381 

Massachusetts. — Sabbath  31,1  gave  an  evening  lecture.  Monday, 
came  away  through  Lebanon  to  Pittsfield.  Elder  Case  came  up  to 
go  with  the  bishop  ninety  or  a  hundred  miles  to  Unity,  the  seat 
of  the  New-England  conference:  the  providence  was  plain — we 
must  part.     Came  to  Chester,  thirty-six  miles. 

Tuesday  June  2.  To  Westfield,  and  continued  on  nineteen  miles 
farther.  In  Wilbraham  they  think  they  have  had  a  very  general  work 
of  God,  and  an  increase  of  the  society  :  may  it  grow  exceedingly  ! 
Wednesday,  we  came  on  to  Leicester,  greatly  outdone. 

Thursday  4.  To  Needham  :  there  is  a  revival  in  several  of  the 
societies  in  this  circuit,  and  a  house  has  been  built.  Orlando  Hinds 
- — his  praise  is  in  all  the  churches. 

Saturday  6.   I  am  patiently  suffering  affliction  in  Boston. 

Sabbath  7.  John  Wesley  Bond  attended  all  day  at  the  chapel.  I 
preached  in  the  evening  in  weakness  and  in  much  trembling. 

Monday  8.  We  passed  towns  and  villages  making  forty  miles. 

Wednesday  10.  At  Unity,  poor  Francis  was  shut  up  alone  as  at  Al- 
bany. George  Pickering  presided  over  conference  :  our  business  pro- 
gressed well  :  I  ordained  twelve  deacons  and  twelve  elders.  Thurs- 
day, rain  and  snow.  We  made  about  twenty-nine  miles  this  day. 
The  taverns  in  New  England  are  good — good  attention  and  moderate 
charges.  Friday,  I  came  very  sick  to  B.  Pawlett's.  Saturday,  to 
Cambridge  :  I  must  reduce  my  projected  tour  of  sixteen  hundred 
miles  to  a  straight  ride  of  three  hundred  and  eighty  miles  to  New- 
York,  and  thence  through  Philadelphia  to  Little-York,  and  my  son 
Francis  Hollingsworth.  As  I  passed  through  Ashgrove  I  preached 
in  the  chapel.  Monday,  to  Pittsfield.  Here  we  have  given  up 
weekly  preaching  for  two  sermons  a  day  every  other  week.  Tues- 
day, to  Troy  ;  Wednesday,  to  Judge  Van  Ness's  ;  Thursday,  to 
Freeborn  Garrettson's. 

New- York. — Sabbath  14.  I  preached  for  them — very  feeble. 
Wednesday,  we  started  away  for  Poughkeepsie,  lodging  in  a  tavern. 
Thursday,  we  had  a  heavy  ride  over  Peekskill  Mountains.  At  the 
landing  I  providentially  called  upon  a  brother  who  had  been  offended, 
?md  had  withdrawn  himself  from  us  ;  I  seriously  set  life  and  death 
before  him  in  a  spirit  of  love  and  pity. 

Friday  19.  Came  rapidly  to  York,  forty-two  miles.  Saturday.  I 
have  had  company  enow. 

Sabbath  21.  Attended  at  Fourth-street  chapel  ;  my  subject,  Zepb* 
i.  12. j  time  was  when  I  could  have  preached  upon  this  text. 


382  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  [1815. 

Tuesday  23.  I  spoke  a  few  words  at  the  African  chapel,  both  co- 
lours being  present.  We  hasted  to  Elizabeth  that  evening.  Wed- 
nesday, to  Barkelow's.  Thursday,  to  James  Stirling's,  Burlington  : 
my  old  friend  has  felt  a  severe  shock  in  his  system,  but  there  is  some 
mind,  and  there  is  grace  yet  left.  Friday,  to  Philadelphia — great 
heat.     In  the  evening  rode  to  Thomas  Haskin's. 

Pennsylvania. — Sabbath  28.  I  preached  in  the  City  Road  chapel. 
Monday,  we  arrived  late  in  the  evening  at  a  tavern  beyond  Down- 
ings-Town. 

Tuesday  30.  Happy  at  mother  Boehm's.  A  pleasing  providence, 
according  to  my  wishes,  had  brought  Henry  in  a  few  minutes  before 
us. — Wednesday,  I  rest  a  day.  Ah  !  the  changes  we  witness,  and 
the  difference  of  being,  in  relation  to  others,  I  remark  in  this  end  of 
time — to  me  at  least.  My  long-loved  friend,  Judge  Bassett,  some 
time  past  a  paralytic,  is  lately  restricken  on  the  other  side,  and  suf- 
fers much  in  his  helpless  state. 

Thursday,  July  1.  How  the  new  bridge  stretches  its  pride  of 
length  across  the  wide  Susquehannah  !  Will  not  the  father  of  eastern 
waters  some  day  rise  in  the  fury  of  a  winter  flood,  and  tear  away 
this  slight  fetter  which  the  puny  art  of  man  has  thrown  over  him  ? 
Columbia  bridge  is  surely  a  noble  work.  We  came  to  son  Francis 
Hollingsworth's,  Little-York.  My  kind  countrywoman  gave  me  up 
her  own  room.  I  tried  to  preach,  but  wanted  strength  :  my  audi- 
ence was  partly  composed  of  the  respectables  of  the  borough,  and 
were  no  doubt  disappointed.  I  sit  seven  hours  a  day,  looking  over 
and  hearing  read  my  transcribed  journal  :  we  have  examined  and 
approved  up  to  1807.  As  a  record  of  the  early  history  of  Metho- 
dism in  America,  my  journal  will  be  of  use  ;  and  accompanied  by 
the  minutes  of  the  conferences,  will  tell  all  that  will  be  necessary  to 
know.  I  have  buried  in  shades  all  that  will  be  proper  to  forget,  in 
which  I  am  personally  concerned  ;  if  truth  and  I  have  been  wronged, 
we  have  both  witnessed  our  day  of  triumph.  Friday,  we  came  away 
to  Carlisle. 

Sabbath  11.  I  spoke  in  the  new  chapel,  and  the  truth  was  felt. 
Monday,  came  to  Shippensburgh.  My  health  is  better  this  hot  wea- 
ther and  rough  ride.  Oh  !  how  deeply  my  soul  feels  for  ours,  and 
all  churches  ;  for  ours,  and  all  ministers  :  I  smite  with  my  hands, 
and  would  lift  up  my  voice  like  a  trumpet  : — is  there  not  a  cause  ? 
We  lodge  with  Deacon  John  Davis  :  this  brother  hath  been  with  us 
in  single  life ;  now  he  hath  five  sons  and  a  daughter :  his   eldest 


2815.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  383 

Samuel,  is  given  to  God  in  the  ministry,  and  travels.  The  old  man's 
heart  is  still  in  the  work.  Tuesday.  So  crowded  was  the  road  that 
we  hardly  escaped  being  wedged  in  the  narrows  of  the  mountains  on 
our  way  to  Tbanetsburgh.  Lodged  at  Anderson's.  Wednesday,  we 
came  over  the  third  mountain  to  James  Hunter's.  My  health  is  much 
better,  and  I  have  lately  written  more  than  I  had  for  weeks.  We 
are  later  in  this  neighbourhood  than  last  year  ;  so  also  is  the  harvest 
O,  what  abundance  in  our  houses,  our  barns,  and  in  our  fields!— 
"  more  than  we  can  well  manage,'*  cries  the  husbandman.  For 
peace,  liberty,  and  plenty.  Oh,  to  grace  and  to  God,  what  debtors! 
What  man  can  live  to  himself  amidst  the  evidences  of  heavenly,  and 
the  enjoyments  of  social  goodness  ?  We  could  not  work  ourselves, 
but  we  lent  our  horses  to  help  to  hale  in  the  harvest.  We  left  our 
kind  friends  to  beat  across  the  mountains  on  Saturday,  and  made 
thirty  miles  to  Bloody-Run.  The  stones  of  this  stream  are  tinged 
red  as  with  blood,  and  the  story  is,  that  three  men  were  killed  in  it 
by  the  Indians  shortly  after  Braddock's  defeat.  My  meditations  lead 
me  to  make  some  observations  on  Col.  i.  26,  27,  28.  Colosse  was  a 
city  of  Phrygia,  near  to  Laodicea.  Paul  had  not  then  visited  this 
church,  yet  in  apostolic  power  and  authority  he  wrote  them  the 
epistle.  And  for  what  purpose?  To  teach  and  to  exhort.  Why, 
then,  not  preach  as  well  as  write  to  churches,  in  all  parts,  and  in  any 
part  of  the  world,  since  the  end  of  preaching  is  instruction  and  ex- 
hortation ?  Oh,  say  the  Baptists,  this  is  my  church.  Oh,  this  is  my 
congregation,  says  the  stationed  minister.  And  must  no  other  ministers 
preach  to  these  souls  ?  No,  says  sectarian  prejudice  ;  no,  says  bigot- 
ed pride  ;  no,  says  the  wool-shepherd,  who  is  afraid  his  flock  may 
become  too  wise  for  him.  "  The  mystery  which  hath  been  hid  from 
ages  and  from  generations."  1.  The  mystery  of  God  the  Eternal 
Son,  hid  till  the  expiration  of  four  thousand  years,  from  ages  and  from 
generations ;  yet  not  hid  from  the  obedient,  not  hid  from  Abel  in  the 
bleeding  lamb,  from  Enoch,  from  Noah,  nor  from  Abraham — not  hid 
from  the  Israelites,  but  typically  shown  in  the  passover,  the  serpent 
in  the  wilderness,  the  release  of  captives  and  debtors  on  the  death 
of  the  high-priest— not  hid  from  the  prophets — from  Jonah  when  in 
the  belly  of  the  great  fish — not  hid  from  Job,  from  David,  nor  from 
Isaiah,  who  had  a  fuller  manifestation  of  the  glories  of  that  day, 
whose  corning  in  the  order  of  time  should  thereafter  be  fixed  by 
Daniel.  But  now  is  made  manifest  to  his  saints — the  Holy  Ghost  car- 
rying to  the  soul  the  conviction  of  the  truth,  begetting  in  obedient, 


oBi  REV-  FRANCIS  ASEURY'S  JOURNAL.  [13  1 5^ 

gracious  souls  this  hope  of  glory.  Christ  formed  within  them  the  riches 
of  the  glory  of  this  mystery — the  only  foundation  of  the  hope  of  ever- 
lasting glory — the  first  moving  cause  in  grace,  and  the  meritorious 
cause.  Warning  or  admonishing  every  man,  and  teaching  every  man, 
according  to  the  universal  commission  in  the  Gospel.  In  all  wisdom  : 
but  those  who  have  been  taught,  and  are  negligent  in  teaching  and 
giving  this  warning :  Oh,  pity,  pity,  pity  that  there  are  such  !  Do 
you  work  faithfully  ?  Continue  to  do  it  in  the  name  and  by  the  au- 
thority of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit :  tell  this  rebellious  genera- 
tion they  are  already  condemned,  and  will  be  shortly  damned  :  preach 
to  them  like  Moses  from  Mount  Sinai  and  Ebal.  like  David — the 
wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  and  all  the  nations  that  forget  God  ; 
like  Isaiah — who  amongst  you  shall  dwell  with  devouring  fire  ?  Who 
amongst  you  can  dispell  with  everlasting  burnings :  like  Ezekiel — Ohy 
wicked  man!  thou  shalt  surely  die!  Pronounce  the  eight  woes 
uttered  by  the  Son  of  God  near  the  close  of  his  ministry,  and  ask 
with  Him — Ye  serpents,  ye  generation  of  vipers,  how  can  ye  escape  the 
damnation  of  hell  ?  Preach  as  if  you  had  seen  heaven  and  its  celes- 
tial inhabitants,  and  had  hovered  over  the  bottomless  pit,  and  beheld 
the  tortures,  and  heard  the  groans  of  the  damned.  Perfect  in  Christ 
Jesus — in  experience,  in  obedience,  in  love. 

We  went  up  into  the  little  chapel  in  the  state  it  was,  and  said  a  few 
words  to  a  few  people.  Lodged  at  a  grand  tavern  at  night,  and  paid 
pretty  well  for  our  shelter  :  but  I  wish  not  to  be  under  any  obliga- 
tions to  tavern  keepers.  The  heat  is  so  great  that  it  requires  pru- 
dence to  avoid  its  effects.  A  drover  who  had  for  many  days  eat  dust 
like  a  serpent  in  following  his  cattle,  broke  bis  leg  about  seven  miles 
below  the  town  :  poor  man  it  will  be  well  if  he  saves  his  life. 

Monday  12.  Came  into  Bedford,  overcome  with  the  heat :  brother 
Bond  preached. 

Wednesday  14.  To  Somerset.  We  found  that  on  the  last  Sabbath, 
a  notice  had  been  politely  given  of  our  expected  arrival.  Many  at- 
tended at  the  court-house,  and  the  Lord  spoke  his  own  truths  through 
a  tottering  tenement  of  clay,  accompanied  with  conviction  in  many 
minds.  William  Ross,  with  whom  we  lodged,  stepped  round  the  town 
with  our  mite  subscription,  and  the  citizens  were  liberal. 

Thursday  15.  We  came  across  Laurel-Hill  to  the  stone  mill  upon 
Jacob's  creek.  We  know  not  what  others  may  think,  but  we  esteem 
the  western  Pennsylvania  roads  to  be  the  roughest  on  our  continent : 
my  poor  arm3  feel  them,  and  wil!  for  days  to  come. 


1815.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  305 

Friday  21.  To  John  Brightwell's,  Freeport.  Here  we  will  rest 
and  refit.  We  left  Philadelphia  July  3,  and  have  travelled  three  hun- 
dred miles  in  twelve  days. 

Sabbath  23.  At  Brightwell's  I  preached  upon  Galatians  iv.  19,  20. 
The  apostle's  labour  and  success  at  the  first.  The  falling  away  of  the 
converts — being  drawn  aside  in  search  of  an  easier  way,  or  going  off 
to  avoid  persecution.  The  fervent  desire  of  the  apostle  to  be  with, 
and  to  pass  a  second  travail  of  soul  for  the  whole  of  religion — inward, 
practical,  and  experimental.  I  spoke  about  thirty  minutes.  John 
W.  Bond  met  the  classes.     He  preached  in  the  afternoon. 

Monday  24.  Ordained  John  Philips,  of  Union,  a  local  deacon.  The 
heat  is  such  that  all  flesh  seems  to  groan  under  it. 

Tuesday,  August  1.  Left  Brightwell's,  fording  the  Monongahela  at 
Freeport.  We  ascended  the  dreadful  hills  to  Brigg's,  and  saw  him 
and  his  brother,  to  whom  we  failed  not  to  give  our  parting  charge 
Briggs  is  a  Marylander,  and  an  ancient  Methodist.  Down  went  the 
fence,  and  through  the  flax  and  corn  he  conducted  us,  and  onward  we 
toiled  to  Newkirk's  mill — a  clean  house,  and  kind  souls.  We  might 
not  stay.  Forward  we  drove  up  the  valley  to  Rock  meeting-house,  a 
handsome  edifice,  and  thence  along  the  Williamsport  road  to  Wash- 
ington. We  were  lodged  like  a  president  at  Haslett's.  Is  it  possible  1 
can  it  be  true  ? — a  revival  at  Steubenville !  Not  far  from  two  hundred 
converts  there,  mostly  young  people.  1  rejoice  exceedingly.  The 
book  concern  have  sent  out  Horneck — the  dagger  to  the  hilt,  almost 
at  every  stroke.  I  wrote  my  valedictory  to  J.  Young.  Wednesday 
and  Thursday  at  Washington.  A  Baptist  missionary  came  into  town 
collecting  for  foreign  lands  :  we  labour  for  those  at  home.  Feeble  as 
I  was,  the  necessity  of  bearing  testimony  to  the  truth  pressed  upon 
me.  A  very  unpleasant  circumstance  had  taken  place — an  illicit  in- 
tercourse between  a  lady  and  gentleman  had  become  public,  involving 
the  innocent  as  well  as  the  guilty  in  distress  ;  they  were  members  of 
the  Presbyterian  church.  Another  distressing  event  in  the  same 
church  was  talked  of.  A  very  respectable  merchant  and  citizen  had 
lost  two  of  his  children  dying  in  doubt,  and  thought  to  have  been 
somewhat  deranged  :  this  visitation  fell  upon  him  in  a  still  greater  de- 
gree. It  may  be  said  that  he  had  put  himself  on  the  unfavourable 
side  of  election  ;  the  case  was  possible,  but  we  cannot  say  that  it  was 
so.  I  remembered  these  things  when  I  preached  in  Washington 
court-house.  The  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure.  This  foundation 
of  God,  laid  for  the  redemption  of  mankind,  involves  their  repentance, 
justification  and  sanctification ;  and  its  consummation  is  eternal  life. 

Vol.  HI.  49 


336  RKV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL,  [1015* 

The  word  to  Adam  was,  Obey,  and  live.  The  Gospel-covenant  shall 
stand  sure  in  the  wisdom,  justice,  power,  grace,  truth,  love,  goodness, 
and  mercy  of  God,  manifested  in  the  atonement  and  righteousness  of 
Christ,  and  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  whereby  men  are  made 
able  to  repent,  believe,  and  obey.  This  covenant  is  conditional  to 
all  who  hear  the  Gospel.  Because  men  are  unfaithful  is  the 
foundation  less  sure  ?  It  is  the  foundation  of  God,  laid  in  Christ,  and 
known  to  the  patriarchs  and  prophets.  "  Have  you  heard  what  Mr. 
— — ,  a  Presbyterian,  has  done  ?"  "  Have  you  heard  what  John  Doe 
and  Richard  Roe,  both  Methodists,  have  done  ?"  "  I  am  done  with 
religionr" — Have  you  ever  began  with  it?  Had  these  people  conti- 
nued faithful,  would  it  have  saved  you  ?  Have  you  done  with  Christ  ? 
Do  you  want  to  experience,  in  your  own  person,  the  awful  certainly 
of  damnation ! 

As  our  Baptist  brother  talked  and  read  letters  upon  missions  to 
foreign  lands,  I  thought  I  might  help  with  a  few  words.  I  related  that 
a  few  years  past,  a  London  Methodist  member,  in  conversation  had 
complained  to  me  that  the  kingdom  and  the  church  had  given  so  large- 
ly to  support  distant  missions.  I  observed  in  reply,  that  the  Metho- 
dist preachers,  who  had  been  sent  by  John  Wesley  to  America,  came 
as  missionaries  ;  some  of  them  returned,  but  all  did  not.  And  now, 
behold  the  consequences  of  this  mission.  We  have  seven  hundred 
travelling  preachers,  and  three  thousand  local  preachers,  who  cost  us 
nothing.  We  will  not  give  up  the  cause — we  will  not  abandon  the 
world  to  infidels  ;  nay,  we  will  be  their  plagues — we  will  find  them 
herculean  work  to  put  us  down.  We  will  not  give  up  that  which  we 
know  to  be  glorious,  until  we  see  something  more  glorious.  Nor  will 
we  concede  an  inch  to  schismatics  and  heretics,  who  say,  "  Do  away 
your  forms,  and  leave  your  peculiar  doctrines,  and  we  shall  show  you 
something  better."  Show  it  to  us  first  in  the  book  of  God.  We  are 
not  ignorant  of  Satan's  devices. 

Friday  4.  We  came  away  to  J.  Beek's,  West  Liberty.  It  is  said 
there  were  about  three  thousand  people  to  hear  the  word  last  Sab- 
bath at  Steubenville  :  there  was  great  preaching,  a  great  love-feast, 
and  sacrament ;  Bishop  M'Kendree  was  there.  I  had  an  interview 
with  R.  Brown,  and  much  talk  about  the  work  of  God,  and  the  neces- 
sity of  energetic  preaching  to  wake  the  slumbering  generation. 

Sabbath  6.  I  preached  at  John  Beck's,  at  four  o'clock  ;  my  subject 
was  1  Cor.  vii.  28 — 30.  The  time  is  short.  It  might  have  been  true, 
considering  how  uncertain  persecution  then  made,  and  was  about 
more  abundantly  to  make,  life,  to  all  the  followers  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ; 


1815.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBVKy's    JOURNAL.  387 

it  may  be  especially  true  in  pestilences,  famines,  and  desolating  wars. 
But  the  proverbial  uncertainty,  in  all  ages  and  in  all  lands,  of  the  sub- 
lunary things  which  so  deeply  engage  the  thoughts  and  affections  of 
unthinking  mortals,  shoivs  the  propriety  of  the  apostolic  admonition  ; 
for  verily,  in  this  respect  also,  the  time  is  short. 

How  many  newly  married  pairs — parents  with  children,  upon  whom 
they  have  just  discovered,  in  their  matured  characters  and  upright 
conduct,  the  qualities  and  virtues  which  justify  all  their  strength  of  af- 
fection— speculators  upon  the  probabilities  and  possibilities  of  fortune, 
who  risk  credit  and  estate  to  become  richer  than  their  fellow-mortals 
— covetous  persons,  idolators,  who  labour  and  starve  to  make  the 
golden  heap  a  little  higher ;— ■  how  many  of  these  find  that  the  time  is 
short ;  Alas !  too  short  for  them.  O,  sinner,  the  time  is  short ! 
Seeker,  the  time  is  short !  strive — agonize  to  enter  in.  Backslider, 
surely  to  thee  the  time  is  short !  Believers,  O,  remember  the  time  is 
short !  And  if  you  are  daily  bearing  your  cross,  faithfully  combating 
under  the  great  Captain  of  your  salvation,  you  will  rejoice  to  remem- 
ber that  the  time  is  short.  O,  joyful  consideration  to  those  who  have 
put  on  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  shall  love  his  appearing—^/.?  time  of  suf- 
fering is  short ! 

Monday  .  Came  to  Mount-Pleasant. 

Ohio. — Friday  11.  Came  to  Zanesville.  There  is  a  camp-meeting 
now  in  operation,  five  miles  from  this  town.  We  reckon  that  since 
the  20,th  of  June,  we  have  passed  through  New-Hampshire,  Vermont, 
New-York,  New-Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  and  Ohio,  to  Mus- 
kingum river,  making  nine  hundred  miles  ;  two  hundred  of  which, 
ought,  in  our  opinion,  to  be  called  the  worst  on  the  continent.  O, 
the  goodness,  providence,  and  love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  to  us. 

Sabbath  13.  I  preached  on  the  camp-ground.  My  subject  was  2 
Cor.  v.  2.  "  Knowing  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men. 
"  The  Lord" — that  is,  the  Son  of  God,  in  all  his  attributes  and  per- 
fections ;  his  offices  and  character ;  his  perfect  Deity  in  heaven,  and 
humanity  on  earth  ;  the  Maker  and  Redeemer  of  mankind  ;  and  as 
their  Judge,  manifesting  his  uprightness  in  the  eternal  punishment  of 
bad  angels  and  bad  men.  "  Terror  of  the  Lord" — in  death,  the  re- 
surrection, and  general  judgment.  "  Terror" — in  the  recollection  of 
what  the  sinner  had  done  to  offend  God,  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit — what 
he  had  done  to  bring  contempt  upon  religion  and  its  ministers,  and 
the  unoffending  followers  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  "  Terror" — in  the  consi- 
deration of  the  certainty  of  his  punishment  being  eternal.  "  Per- 
suade men"-— to  submit  to  the  conditions  of  salvation  ;  the  use  of  the 


388  rev.  francis  asf.ury's  journal,  [1815. 

means  of  grace  ;  and  to  a  life  of  Gospel  obedience.  "  Persuade 
men" — by  all  that  is  desirable  in  religion,  and  all  that  the  truly  pious 
enjoy— by  all  the  glories  of  heaven,  and  all  the  horrors  of  remediless 
perdition  in  hell. 

By  the  judgment  of  charity,  we  are  bound  to  believe  the  statement 
of  David  Young  :  that  at  Kenhawa  camp-meeting  there  were  twenty- 
five  converts  ;  at  Marietta  forty  ;  at  Fairfield  twenty-four  ;  at  Zanes- 
ville  twenty-three.  Glory  be  to  our  God !  now  we  live,  if  our  peo- 
ple stand  fast  in  the  faith. 

Sabbath  20.  I  preached  to  a  small  congregation  in  the  chapel  at 
Chilicothe.  There  is  a  camp-meeting  within  nine  miles,  and  some 
are  sick,  some  dying,  and  some  are  dead.  My  subject  was  Luke  xxii. 
61,  62.  "  And  the  Lord  turned  him,  and  looked  upon  Peter."  The 
Gospels  will  harmonize  here  by  John,  who  was  witness  to  the  whole. 
Peter  denied  thrice  ;  First,  to  the  damsel  who  kept  the  door  ;  John 
having  asked  leave  of  the  high-priest  to  bring  in  Peter. — Secondly, 
when  the  kinsman  or  cousin  of  Malchus,  whose  ear  Peter  had  cut 
off,  witnessed,  possibly,  by  the  young  man,  asked  him,  "  Did  not  I  see 
thee  in  the  garden  with  him  ? — Thirdly,  wben  the  conversation  is  taken 
up  in  company  with  the  servants  of  the  high-priest,  and  one  of  them 
asks,  "  Art  thou  not  one  of  his  disciples  ?"  The  previous  character 
of  Peter  may  be  noticed— a  married  man  ;  not  a  youth  ;  forward, 
ardent,  as  was  seen  on  many  occasions.  When  faithfully  warned,  he 
pledged  himself  with  overweening  confidence.  His  offence  was, 
First,  taking  unallowed  means  of  defence — like  his  pretended  succes- 
sors, the  popes  :  Secondly,  following  too  far  off  :  Thirdly,  denying  his 
Lord  ; — the  lie,  the  oath,  and  their  repetition,  follow  of  course. 
What  was  the  subject  of  Peter's  denial  ?  Did  he  deny  that  Christ 
was  the  eternal  Son  of  God — the  Saviour  of  the  world  in  all  his 
sacred  offices  ?  No  :  Peter's  crime  was,  that  he  denied  his  disciple- 
ship  ;  and  this  is  the  crime  of  which  so  many  modern  apostates  are 
guilty.  Who  now  deny  the  Lord?  Backsliders,  baptised  inBdels, 
careless  seekers  of  salvation,  slothful  believers,  and  those  who  have 
fallen  from  sanctification  by  the  neglect  of  the  works  of  mercy, 
charity  and  piety.  "  The  Lord  turned,  and  looked  upon  Peter." 
Ah!  he  was  obliged  to  go  out  with  disgrace,  he  had  entered  with  ho- 
nour. But  he  could  not  weep  and  repent  in  wicked  company  :  no, 
he  sought  a  solitude — for  three  days  and  three  nights,  it  may  be. 
But  lo,  Jesus  sendeth  the  word  of  comfort  that  he  may  not  break 
his  heart.  "  Go,  tell  my  brethren,"  said  he  to  Mary  Magdalen. 
Thrice  did  Peter  deny  his  Lord  ;   and  thrice  did  our  Lord  question 


1815.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  389 

his  disciple,  "  Lovest  thou  me  ?"  O,  how  great  is  the  love  of 
God  ;  the  love  of  Christ ;  the  love  of  the  Holy  Spirit :  redemption  is 
love. 

Monday  21.  We  visited  from  house  to  house  with  our  mite  sub- 
scription, which  seemed  to  all  well-pleasing :  the  citizens  were  libe- 
ral.    Hearing  that  Eleanor  W n  was  ill,  and  wished  to  see  me,  I 

delayed  not,  but  went  in  the  evening.  When  we  entered  the  room, 
I  found  her  ill  indeed — an  attack  highly  inflammatory,  accompanied 
by  a  deep  cough.  On  Tuesday  I  repeated  my  visit ;  and  in  private 
examination  found  that  God  had  shown  her  the  vileness  of  her  nature 
in  a  great  degree,  and  that  she  had  received  consolation,  and  only 
wanted  and  waited  for  the  Spirit  to  give  assurance  of  his  own  work 
by  his  witness  in  her  heart.  I  told  her  that  it  was  very  common  for 
persons  to  be  sure  that  God  had  blessed  them  :  Oh  !  how  her  eyes? 
her  face,  her  tongue  spoke.  She  was  an  Episcopalian  of  the  English 
Church.  Her  mind  had  been  much  exercised  upon  receiving  the 
sacrament :  it  was  administered  to  her.  I  find  I  am  about  such  a 
feverish  coughing  subject  as  the  lady  I  have  been  visiting — I  coughed 
nearly  the  whole  night. 

Wednesday  23.  We  left  Chilicothe  in  the  rain.  Some  folks  are 
fond  of  railing  out  against  Methodists,  taking  the  worst  as  a  sample  ; 
but  bad  as  they  are,  I  would  not  take  the  best  of  the  railers  without 
a  change  in  sentiment,  in  heart,  and  in  manners.  Ah  !  let  us  take 
heed  that  party  and  politics  do  not  drive  out  our  piety — they  do  not 
mingle  well.  Can  it  be  that  Bonaparte  is  finally  overthrown  1  The 
time  is  coming  that  all  kings  and  rulers  must  acknowledge  the  reign  of 
the  King  of  kings,  or  feel  the  rod  of  the  Son  of  God.  But  will  forms 
do  for  the  United  States  of  America  ?  Foolish  people  will  think  they 
have  a  right  to  govern  themselves  as  they  please  ;  aye,  and  satan 
will  help  them.  Will  this  do  for  us — is  not  this  republic,  this  land, 
this  people,  the  Lord's  ?  We  acknowledge  no  other  king  but  the  eter- 
nal King.  And  if  our  great  men  will  not  rule  in  righteousness,  but 
forget  God  and  Christ,  what  will  be  the  consequence  ?  Ruin. 

Saturday   26.    We  changed  our  course,  to  go  to  the  Mechanics- 
burgh  camp-meeting.     As  soon  as  we  came  upon  the  ground,  I  felt 
that  God  was  with  the  meeting.     Give  its  a  chimney,  that  we  may  have 
fire  :    it  was  done.     God  was  wifh  us,  and  souls  were  converted. 

Friday,  September  1.  At  John  Sale's. 

Sunday  3.  I  preached  on  Romans  xiii.  12.  The  night  is  far  spent. 
What  constitutes  the  natural  night — absence  of  light—ignorance  ;  in- 
security ;    uncertainty.     The  Gospel  watchman  crieth  the  hours. 


390  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL.  [1815. 

The  Scripture  night — from  Adam  to  Moses.  The  patriarchal  stars, 
and  those  who  preceded  them  as  dim  lights,  Adam,  Abel,  Enoch, 
Noah,  Abraham.  The  moon-light  of  the  law,  the  sabbaths,  the  sa- 
crifices. But  this  night  was  about  to  pass  away,  although  darker 
just  before  the  dawn  of  the  Gospel  day  ;  and  it  is  thus  in  nature. 
The  Jews  had  corrupted  themselves  in  religion  and  in  manners.  The 
night  of  Judaism  and  Paganism  had  nearly  passed  away.  When  Paul 
wrote  in  the  year  sixty,  the  Gospel  had  obtained  in  Europe,  Lesser 
Asia,  Greece,  in  the  city  of  Rome  ;  and  had  spread  from  the  Euphrates 
to  the  Mediterranean.  This  night  has  returned  occasionally.  It  came 
upon  the  Asiatic  churches  because  of  their  unfaithfulness  :  where  once 
were  the  Gospel  and  its  martyrs,  are  now  Greek  papas,  and  Greek  su- 
perstitions. From  the  third  to  the  thirteenth  century,  the  church 
of  Rome  brought  darkness  upon  Europe  by  prohibiting  the  Bible,  and 
by  the  introduction  of  her  own  mummeries  and  idolatries.  Philoso- 
phy, so  called,  with  Voltaire  for  its  high-priest,  brought  night  and  de- 
struction upon  France — judicially,  to  avenge  on  the  bloody  house  of 
Bourbon,  the  blood  of  the  Protestant  martyrs.  And  would  not  some 
of  our  great  men,  if  they  dared,  bring  a  night  of  infidelity  on  this 
land  ?  Who  sees  them  in  regular  attendance  on  the  house  of  God  ? 
Let  us  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness — Let  us  not  sin  in  practice.  Let 
us  cast  off  evil  tempers,  desires,  and  affections.  Tlie  armour  of  light. 
See  Ephesians  vi.  11 — 17.,  perfect  faith,  perfect  hope,  perfect  obedi- 
ence, perfect  love.  On  our  route  we  called  upon  many  of  our  old 
friends,  Buck,  Sale,  Bonner,  Smith,  Butler — they  treated  us  like 
presidents. 

Monday,  September  4.  I  have  been  under  the  necessity  of  apply- 
ing four  blisters  for  a  great  inflammation  in  my  face  and  jaws.  I  have 
taken  medicine.  As  a  member  of  the  Bible  society  in  Philadelphia, 
I  have  distributed  many  hundreds  of  Testaments.  We  do  great 
things  with  our  mite  subscription.  John  Wesley  Bond  reads  many 
times  in  the  Testaments  distributed  to  the  poor.  I  have  visited  the 
families  of  Butler,  Owens,  Beale,  Heath,  Wright,  Fowler  and  Davis. 

Sabbath  10.  I  preached  on  the  campground.  My  subject  was 
Hebr.  iii.  7,  8.  "  His  voice." — What  is  the  voice  of  God  to  us — to 
every  case  and  character  ?  The  Gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,  in  all  its 
blessings,  promises,  means,  ordinances,  doctrines,  and  precepts. 
"  His  voice" — in  power,  in  mercy,  in  providence,  in  love.  "  Harden 
not  your  hearts."  We  may  harden  our  hearts  against  the  former, 
latter,  and  present,  impressions  the  powerful  Gospel  may  have  made 
upon  our  hopes,  our  fears,  and  our  consciences.     In  what  manner  ? 


1815.]  EKV.  FRANCIS  asbvry's  journal.  391 

By  open,  notorious  sinning  ;  by  secret  wickedness  ;  by  sinful  tem- 
pers indulged  ;  by  a  wilful  neglect  of  Gospel  men  and  Gospel  means. 
The  greatness  of  our  rebellion. — We  sin  against  the  infinite  love  of 
God  ;  the  infinite  merit  of  Christ ;  the  Spirit  of  infinite  holiness.  To- 
day, if  ye  will  hear  his  voice — to- day :  this  is  both  the  true  reading  and 
meaning.  Not  to  morrow — no  :  it  may  never  come.  To-day,  then, 
speaker  and  hearer  do  all  you  can  for  God. 

On  Tuesday  the  12th,  we  began  our  journey. 

Thursday  14.  Our  Ohio  conference  began,  and  all  our  fears  vanish- 
ed. We  have  great  peace,  abundance  of  accommodation,  and  com- 
fortable seasons  in  preaching,  noon  and  night  in  the  chapel  and  court- 
house. Great  grace,  and  peace,  and  success  have  attended  our 
coming  together.  We  hold  in  Ohio  conference  sixty-eight  preach- 
ers, sixty-seven  of  whom  are  stationed.  Ten  delegates  have  been 
chosen  for  the  general  conference.  The  settlement  with  the  mar- 
ried and  unmarried  was  made  according  to  the  funds,  in  which  the 
mite  subscription  aided  :  the  children  of  the  preachers  were  remem- 
bered in  the  distribution  of  the  funds 

Thursday,  we  came  away  to  Cincinnati.  Bishop  M'Kendree  and 
myself  had  a  long,  and  earnest  talk  about  the  affairs  of  our  church 
and  my  future  prospects.  I  told  him  my  opinion  was,  that  the  west- 
ern part  of  the  empire  would  be  the  glory  of  America  for  the  poor 
and  pious — that  it  ought  to  be  marked  out  for  five  conferences,  to  wit : 
Ohio,  Kentucky,  Holston,  Mississippi,  and  Missouri ;  in  doing  which, 
as  well  as  I  was  able,  I  traced  out  lines  and  boundaries.  I  told  my 
colleague,  that  having  passed  the  first  allotted  period,  (seventy 
years,)  and  being,  as  he  knew,  out  of  health,  it  could  not  be  ex- 
pected I  could  visit  the  extremities  every  year,  sitting  in  eight,  it 
might  be,  twelve  conferences,  and  travelling  six  thousand  miles  in 
eight  months.  If  I  was  able  still  to  keep  up  with  the  conferences,  I 
could  not  be  expected  to  preside  in  more  than  every  other  one.  As 
to  the  stations,  I  should  never  exhibit  a  plan  unfinished,  but  still  get 
all  the  information  in  my  power,  so  as  to  enable  me  to  make  it  per- 
fect, like  the  painter  who  touches  and  retouches  until  all  parts  of  the 
picture  is  pleasing.  The  plan  I  might  be  labouring  on  would  always 
be  submitted  to  such  eyes  as  ought  to  see  it ;  and  the  measure  I 
meeted  to  others,  I  should  expect  to  receive. 

Sabbath  24.  I  preached  at  Lebanon,  by  request  of  conference, 
a  memorial  sermon  for  Doctor  Coke  :  my  subject  was  Matt.  v.  16. 
*'  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men."  The  Gospel  light — in  all  its 
fulness  of  grace  and  power— the  reflected  light  of  that  light  of  the 


392  REV.  FRANCIS   ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  [1815. 

world,  manifested  in  faith,  and  in  obedience  in  every  grade  and  class 
of  believers.  Ministers  should  be  resplendent  like  a  city  illumi- 
nated in  the  night ;  a  great  light  amidst  churches  in  darkness  and 
slumber;  like  Doctor  Coke,  whose  effulgence  beamed  forth  in  mis- 
sions, in  labours,  in  Europe,  in  America,  in  the  isles  of  the  sea,  and 
in  Asia.  I  took  occasion  to  particularize  the  abundant  labours  of 
this  distinguished  man  of  God. 

Wednesday  27.  We  came  rapidly  to  Cincinnati.  Friday,  Bishop 
M'Kendree's  fractures  are  all  repaired,  and  bones  strong  again,  I 
suppose,  for  he  has  flown  away  like  a  bird  with  the  boys.  We  must 
stay  and  distribute  the  word  of  God  to  the  poor,  collect  a  little  mite 
money,  and  then  away,  preaching  in  every  town  we  pass  through. 

Sabbath,  October  1.  I  preached  in  the  chapel :  my  subject  was  Phil, 
i.  27.  Wednesday,  I  preached  in  the  court-house  in  Georgetown  ; 
my  subject  Acts  xiii.  26.  "  To  you  is  the  word  of  this  salvation  sent." 
This  salvation — the  Gospel,  to  be  sure.  Who  the  author,  what  the  na- 
ture, means,  conditions,  spirituality,  and  degrees  of  this  salvation. 
From  whom  it  is  sent,  by  whom,  and  td  whom  it  is  sent.  It  was  sent  to 
Jews  first,  afterward  to  the  Gentiles,  and  continued  to  be  sent,  and 
is  still  sent  to  the  children  of  men  by  the  written  word,  by  the  mi- 
nisters of  that  word,  and  by  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The 
consequences  of  its  reception — eternal  life  :  of  its  rejection — ever- 
lasting damnation.  We  came  into  Lexington.  My  soul  is  blest  with 
continual  consolation  and  peace  in  all  my  great  weakness  of  body, 
labour,  and  crowds  of  company.  I  am  a  debtor  to  the  whole  conti- 
nent, but  more  especially  to  the  north-east  and  south-west ;  it  is 
there  I  usually  gain  health,  and  generally  lose  in  the  south  and 
centre.  I  have  visited  the  south  thirty  times  in  thirty-one  years.  1 
wish  to  visit  Mississippi,  but  am  resigned.  I  preached  in  Lexington 
on  Zephaniah  iii.  12,  13.  "1  will  also  leave  in  the  midst  of  thee  an 
afflicted  and  poor  people,  and  they  shall  trust  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord."  The  true  character  of  God's  people — tempted,  grieved, 
poor  in  spirit.  Their  strong  confidence  in  Jehovah — in  all  his  attri- 
butes, perfections,  promises,  in  all  his  sacred  offices  and  near  rela- 
tions to  his  owq  people.  Well  guarded  by  a  supreme  love  of  God, 
and  a  love  to  their  fellow-men,  this  people  shall  not  transgress  the 
law  in  its  word  nor  in  its  spirit.  Nor  shall  they  deceive,  for  the 
deceitful  tongue  is  changed  by  the  grace  that  changed  the  deceitful 
lieart.  As  a  flock,  their  souls  shall  feed  and  fatten  on  the  privileges 
and  ordinances  of  the  Gospel,  whilst  other  flocks  of  the  hireling 
shall  starve  and  be  scattered  :  the  flock  of  God  shall  be  led  into 


1815.]  JREV.  FRANCIS    ASBURy'S  JOURNAL.  3S3 

green  pastures  by  the  Great  Shepherd,  and  they  shall  lie  down*  un- 
disturbed by  that  which  shall  distress  others,  assured  that  they  shall 
never  perish*  neither  shall  any  be  able  to  pluck  them  out  of  his 
hand. 

On  Monday  we  came  into  the  Shakers'  town  :  are  these  children 
of  light  ?  They  are  wiser  than  millions  of  the  children  of  this 
world.  Welt  built  houses,  two  grand  gardens — every  thing  well 
planned  for  comfort  and  money.  But  why  should  1  say  any  harm  of 
this  people,  who  am,  I  suppose,  the  last  man  in  the  world  to  envy  or 
to  imitate  them. 

Tuesday  10.  At  James  M'Kendree's  :  Nathaniel  Moore  has  come 
to  take  away  our  sister,  Frances  M'Kendree  :  all  parties  are  pleased, 
Wednesday,  I  took  counsel  of  my  elder  sons,  who  advise  me  not  to 
go  to  Mississippi  this  year. 

On  Thursday  I  officiated  at  the  marriage  of  Nathaniel  Moore  and 
Frances  M'Kendree  ;  we  believe  it  is  of  the  Lord— they  are  a  wor- 
thy couple  and  nearly  of  an  age.  We  have  given  away  many  Tes- 
taments to  the  poor  on  our  route  hither,  and  they  were  in  all  cases 
received  with  thankfulness  :  we  accompany  our  gifts  with  prayer 
and  exhortation  when  opportunities  offer. 

Sabbath  15.  I  attended  the  funeral  of  the  little  son  of  James 
M'Kendree,  and  spoke  a  few  words ;  James  Gwinn  spoke  on  David's 
words,  "  I  shall  go  to  him,  but  he  shall  not  return  to  me."  I  bap 
tised  Frances  Elizabeth  Mabry.  So  here  have  been  a  marriage,  a 
funeral,  and  a  baptism  ;  and  must  I  be  honoured  and  burthened  with 
them  all  ?  well ;  make  the  best  of  me  whilst  you  have  me  ;  it  will 
not  be  often. 

Wednesday  17.  Brother  M'Kendree  preached  a  funeral  sermon 
for  Mrs.  Crabb,  daughter  of  S.  Mitchell.  I  added  an  exhortation. 
Our  brother  Blackman  had  improved  his  house  and  estate.— -Ah !  sad 
estate  of  human  frailty.  The  body  of  the  first  husband  rests  in  a 
tomb  near  the  dwelling  ;  the  body  of  the  second  may  yet  float  in  the 
Ohio.  Go,  disconsolate  sister — thou  art  prepared  to  weep  for  the 
wretched^  for  thou  thyself  knowest  what  is  sorrow  of  heart  1  Thurs- 
day, at  Bibb's. 

Friday  20.  We  opened  our  conference.  Saturday,  great  peace,, 
great  order,  and  a  great  deal  of  business  done. 

Sabbath  21.  I  ordained  the  deacons,  and  preached  a  sermon,  in 
which  Doctor  Coke  was  remembered.  My  eyes  fail.  I  will  resign 
the  stations  to  Bishop  M'Kendree— -I  will  take  away  my  fret.     It  ?s 

Vol,  III.  ^ 


304  HEV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL  [1815 

my  fifty-fifth  year  of  ministry,  and  forty-fifth  year  of  labour  in  Ame- 
rica. My  mind  enjoys  great  peace  and  divine  consolation.  My 
health  is  better,  which  may  in  part  be  because  of  my  being  less 
deeply  interested  in  the  business  of  the  conferences.  But  whether 
health,  life,  or  death — good  is  the  will  of  the  Lord  :  I  will  trust  him ; 
yea,  and  will  praise  him :  he  is  the  strength  of  my  heart  and  my 
portion  for  ever — Glory  !  glory  !  glory  !  Conference  was  eight  days 
and  a  half  in  session—  hard  labour.  Bishop  M'Kendree  called  upon 
me  to  preach  at  the  ordination  of  elders. 

Sabbath  28.  At  a  little  place,  called  a  meeting-house,  I  preached 
by  appointment.  The  notice  given  had  been  short,  and  rather  un- 
certain, nevertheless  many  attended — more  than  was  at  all  expected. 
We  had  a  feeling  time  :  1  spoke  awful  words. 

November  1.  We  came  upon  the  turnpike— a  disgrace  to  the 
state  and  to  the  undertakers,  supposing  they  had  any  character  to 
lose.  It  is  a  swindling  of  the  public  out  of  their  money  to  demand 
toll  on  such  roads  as  these.  We  are  told,  why,  they  make  you  pay  on 
the  turnpikes  to  the  eastward.  Yes,  so  they  do  ;  and  they  make  them 
fine  roads.  Thursday,  to  father  Holt's,  forty-three  miles  :  we  came 
in  two  hours  after  night.  This  will  not  do — 1  must  halt,  or  order 
my  grave.  Saturday,  I  am  very  unwell,  Friday,  rest  and  physic. 
J  felt  that  keeping  three  men  and  four  horses  three  days  and  four 
nights,  not  with  my  friends  but  with  me,  was  too  great  a  burden  to 
impose.     Oh  !  what  kindness  and  attentions  I  receive. 

Virginia. — Sabbath  5.  I  declined  preaching,  being  so  exceedingly 
weak.  Tuesday,  we  stopped  with  Wesley  Harrison,  son  of  Thomas 
Harrison,  in  Harrisonburgh  ;  the  father  was  the  first  man  under  whose 
roof  I  lodged  on  my  first  visit  to  that  town :  his  pious  wife,  and  sim- 
ple-hearted pious  Robert  Harrison,  are,  I  trust,  both  in  glory.  I 
have  received  a  statement  from  James  Axley  of  the  work  of  God  in 
the  different  places  within  his  knowledge,  at  quarter  and  camp-meet- 
ings ;  and  it  appears  there  were  upwards  of  one  hundred  and  fifty 
souls  who  professed  to  have  found  justifying  grace  :  there  were 
powerful  rains  at  some  of  these  meetings  to  interrupt  the  preaching, 
and  drive  the  people  from  their  seats  ;  but  the  work  of  God  prospered 
in  the  tents. 

Monday  6.  We  came  to  Captain  Hill's — very  kind  and  attentive, 
Tuesday,  came  to  Thomas  Harrison's,  son  of  Thomas.  Thursday, 
at  Boling's,  we  were  greatly  annoyed  by  a  brigade  of  Kentuckians  ; 
—can  fiends  be  more  wicked  ?    The  drunkards  kept  the  house  in  an 


1815.]  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUHY'S  JOURNAL.  395 

uproar.  Friday,  at  Barnett's,  there  was  a  dance — such  fiddling  and 
drinking !  I  delivered  my  testimony  :  I  am  clear  from  Barnett's 
blood.     A  rapid  ride  brought  us  to  Mills's  on  Saturday. 

Sabbath  12.  I  attended  the  quarterly  meeting  at  Samuel  Edney's, 
and  bore  a  feeble,  but  a  faithful  testimony  to  the  truth.  I  have  read 
with  dim  eyes,  Joseph  Moore's  dialogue  ;  it  is  not  elegant,  but  argu- 
mentative— it  seems  to  have  silenced  the  Baptists. 

Sabbath  19.  I  preached  upon  Acts  xxvi.  17,  18.  Many  were  the 
instances  of  deliverance  ;  they  bound  him  and  scourged  him,  yet 
had  the  Jews  no  power  over  his  life,  which  they  so  often  sought. 
And  the  Gentiles,  to  whom  he  was  especially  sent  by  the  Son  of 
God,  what  a  description  is  given  of  their  deplorable  state  !  what 
blindness  of  mind,  ignorance,  idolatry,  superstition,  complicated  and 
unaccountable  wickedness  !  "  The  power  of  Satan" — completely 
in  his  possession,  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  in  all  their  powers  and  pas- 
sions— in  infidelity  and  impenitence,  and  under  the  guilt  of  actual 
transgression.  Thus  Gospel  truth  and  Gospel  ministers  find  sinners  ; 
and  they  must  be  preached  to  with  energy.  And  these  ministers 
must  be  sent;  and  to  be  qualified  for  this  mission,  they  must,  like 
Paul,  be  convinced,  convicted,  and  converted,  and  sanctified.  Like 
him  they  must  be  preserved  from  the  violence  of  the  people ;  but 
especially  from  their  indulgences  and  flatteries.  "  Turning  them 
from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God." 
A  faithful  minister  will  have  these  signs  to  follow  him. 

I  die  daily— am  made  perfect  by  labour  and  suffering,  and  fill  up 
still  what  is  behind.  There  is  no  time  or  opportunity  to  take  medi- 
cine in  the  day  time,  I  must  do  it  at  night.  I  am  wasting  away  with 
a  constant  dysentery  and  cough. 

Monday  20.  At  Benjamin  Glover's.  At  Allen  Glover's,  on  Tues- 
day.    Wednesday,  my  children  will  not  let  me  go  out. 

Thursday  23.  Came  to  Thomas  Child's,  near  Cambridge,  twenty 
miles.  Friday.  To  Doctor  William  xMoon's.  Saturday.  The  Doc- 
tor urges,  and  I  have  consented  to  take  digitalis  : — O,  the  powerful 
expectoration  that  followed  ! 

Sabbath  26.  I  preached,  and  we  had  a  time  of  great  feeling.  Mon- 
day, heavy  rain.  We  came  away  to  Hezekiah  Arrington's,  a  cold, 
damp  ride.  Tuesday,  to  the  widow  Means's  ;  the  lady  was  not  at 
home  ;  but  the  servants  are  attentive.  John  Wesley  Bond  preached 
in  the  kitchen.  We  try  to  do  good.  Wednesday,  to  Sterling  William- 
son's, thirty  miles  in  eight  hours.  A  damp,  rainy  day,  by  no  mean? 
pleasant  to  me.     Thursday,  rested.     Friday,  at  Columbia. 


396  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  [1815. 

South  Carolina. — Saturday,  December  2.  A  melancholy  and  aw- 
ful scene  has  been  witnessed  here.  Doctor  Ivey  Finch,  about  thirty 
years  of  age,  in  driving  a  violent  horse  out  of  Columbia  in  his  chair, 
was  dashed  between  the  shaft  and  wheel,  and  his  scull  fractured.  The 
unhappy  man  was  the  only  son  of  my  dear  friend,  Edward  Finch.  How 
many  Gospel  sermons  had  he  heard,  and  how  many  prayers  had  been 
offered  up  for  him  !  I  preached  on  the  Sabbath.  I  have  passed  three 
nights  at  B.  Arthur's,  two  at  friend  Alexander  M'DowelPs,  and 
one  night  at  Colonel  Hutchinson's.  My  consolations  are  great.  I  live 
in  God  from  moment  to  moment.  The  poor  colonel  is  like  myself— - 
broken  to  pieces.  I  feel  deeply  upon  my  mind  the  consequence  of 
this  charge  (Columbia.) 

Thursday  7.  We  met  a  storm  and  stopped  at  William  Baker's, 
Granny. 

— »©«- 

A  SHORT  ACCOUNT  OF  HIS  DEATH. 

Here  the  journal  of  Bishop  Asbury  closes.  And  having  followed 
him  through  such  a  laborious,  and  useful,  and,  very  often,  suffering 
life,  it  is  thought  the  reader  would  be  gratified  in  following  him  to 
his  grave,  that  he  might  witness  the  end  and  final  triumph  of  this 
apostolic  minister  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  editors,  therefore,  take 
the  liberty  of  subjoining  a  short  account  of  the  last  moments  of  this 
great  and  good  man.  His  character,  as  it  was  exhibited  in  the  vari- 
ous relations  of  life  he  sustained,  we  leave  to  his  biographers,  whos 
it  is  hoped,  will  soon  favour  the  Christian  world  with  a  faithful  por- 
trait of  Bishop  Asbury,  both  living  and  dying. 

The  following  sketch  of  the  closing  scene  of  his  life,  is  taken 
chiefly  from  the  minutes  of  the  conferences  for  the  year  1816  ;  the 
only  document  now  in  our  possession  from  which  authentic  informa- 
tion, in  reference  to  this  subject,  can  be  derived. 

It  seems  that,  notwithstanding  his  extreme  debility,  which  could 
not  be  witnessed  without  awakening  the  liveliest  sensibilities,  he  flat- 
tered himself  with  the  prospect  of  meeting  the  ensuing  general  con- 
ference, which  was  to  assemble  in  Baltimore  on  the  2nd  of  May, 
1816.  In  this  expectation  he  was,  however,  disappointed  ;  the  dis- 
ease with  which  he  was  afflicted  terminating  in  the  consumption, 
made  such  rapid  progress  as  to  baffle  the  power  of  medicine,  and  to 
prostrate  the  remaining  strength  of  a  constitution  already  trembling 
under  the  repeated  strokes  of  disease,  and  worn  down  by  fatigue  anc1 


A  SHORT  ACCOUNT,  &C.  39? 

labour.     He  appeared,  indeed,  more  like  a  walking  skeleton,  that* 
like  a  living  man. 

His  great  mind,  however,  seemed  to  rise  superior  to  his  bodily 
weakness,  and  to  bid  defiance  to  the  hasty  approaches  of  dissolution, 
Hence,  impelled  on  by  that  unquenchable  thirst  to  do  good,  by  which 
he  had  been  actuated  for  more  than  fifty  years,  he  continued  with 
his  faithful  travelling  companion,  John  W.  Bond,  in  a  close  carriage, 
to  journey  from  place  to  place,  as  his  exhausting  strength  would  per- 
mit, frequently  preaching,  until  he  came  to  Richmond,  Virginia, 
where  he  preached  his  last  sermon,  March  24,  1816,  in  the  old  Me- 
thodist church.  Previous  to  his  entering  upon  this  last  pulpit  exer- 
cise, perceiving  his  great  weakness  of  body,  some  of  his  friends  en- 
deavoured to  dissuade  him  from  preaching  ;  but  he  resisted  their 
dissuasions  by  saying,  That  he  must  once  more  deliver  his  public  tes- 
timony in  that  place  :  yielding  their  own  tenderness  for  his  temporal 
welfare,  to  his  desire  to  proclaim  once  more  the  counsel  of  his  God, 
they  carried  him  from  his  carriage  in  which  he  rode, — for  he  was 
unable  either  to  walk  or  stand, — to  the  pulpit,  and  seated  him  on  a 
table  prepared  for  that  purpose. 

Though  he  had  to  make  frequent  pauses  in  the  course  of  his  ser- 
mon for  the  purpose  of  recovering  breath,  yet  he  spoke  nearly  an 
hour  with  much  feeling  from  Rom.  ix.  28.  "  For  he  will  finish  the 
work,  and  cut  it  short  in  righteousness  :  because  a  short  work  will 
the  Lord  make  upon  the  earth."  This  closed  his  public  labours 
on  the  earth.  The  audience  were  much  affected.  Indeed  how 
could  it  be  otherwise  ?  To  behold  a  venerable  old  man,  under  the 
dignified  character  of  an  ecclesiastical  patriarch,  whose  silver  locks 
indicated  that  time  had  already  numbered  his  years,  and  whose  pallid 
countenance  and  trembling  limbs  presaged  that  his  earthly  race  was 
nearly  finished  :  to  see  in  the  midst  of  these  melancholy  signals  of 
decaying  nature,  a  soul  beaming  with  immortality,  and  a  heart 
kindled  with  divine  fire  from  the  altar  of  God  : — to  see  such  a  man, 
and  to  hear  him  address  them  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  on 
the  grand  concerns  of  time  and  eternity  !  what  heart  so  insensible  as 
to  withstand  the  impressions  such  an  interesting  spectacle  was  calcu- 
lated to  produce  ? 

After  having  delivered  his  testimony,  he  was  carried  from  the  pul- 
pit to  his  carriage,  and  he  rode  to  his  lodgings. 

On  Tuesday,  Thursday,  and  Friday,  he  journeyed,  and  finally  came 
to  the  house  of  his  old  friend,  Mr.  George  Arnold,  in  Spottsylvania. 
It  was  his  intention  to  have  reached  Fredericksburgh,  about  twenty 
miles  farther,  but  the  weather  being  unfavourable,  and  his  strength 


398  A  SHORT  ACCOUNT  OF  THE 

continuing  to  fail,  he  was  compelled  to  relinquish  his  design,  and 
accordingly  he  remained  under  the  hospitable  roof  of  his  friend, 
Mr  Arnold.  Hearing  brother  Bond  conversing  with  the  family  res- 
pecting an  appointment  for  meeting,  he  observed  that  they  need  not 
be  in  haste.  A  remark  so  unusual  with  him  gave  brother  Bond 
much  uneasiness.  As  the  evening  came  on  his  indisposition  greatly 
increased,  and  gave  evident  intimations  that  his  dissolution  could  not 
be  far  distant.  About  three  o'clock  next  morning  he  observed  that 
he  had  passed  a  night  of  great  bodily  affliction. 

Perceiving  his  deep  distress  of  body,  and  anxious  to  retain  him  as 
long  as  possible  on  the  shores  of  mortality,  his  friends  urged  the 
propriety  of  sending  for  a  physician  ;  but  he  gave  them  to  under- 
stand it  would  be  useless,  saying,  That,  before  the  physician  could 
reach  him  his  breath  would  be  gone,  and  the  doctor  could  only  pro- 
nounce him  dead  !  Being  asked  if  he  had  any  thing  to  communicate, 
he  replied,  That,  as  he  had  fully  expressed  his  mind  in  relation  to  the 
church  in  his  addresses  to  the  bishop  and  to  the  general  conference, 
he  bad  nothing  more  to  add. 

About  eleven  o'clock  on  Sabbath  morning,  he  inquired  if  it  was 
not  time  for  meeting ;  but  recollecting  himself,  he  requested  the 
family  to  be  called  together.  This  being  done  agreeably  to  his  re- 
quest, brother  Bond  sung  prayed,  and  expounded  the  twenty-first  chap- 
ter of  the  Apocalypse.  During  these  religious  exercises  he  appeared 
calm  and  much  engaged  in  devotion.  After  this,  such  was  his  weak- 
ness, he  was  unable  to  swallow  a  little  barley  water  which  was  offer- 
ed to  him,  and  his  speech  began  to  fail.  Observing  the  distress  of 
brother  Bond,  he  raised  his  dying  hand,  at  the  same  time  looking  joy- 
fully  at  him.  On  being  asked  by  brother  Bond  if  he  felt  the  Lord 
Jesus  io  be  precious,  exerting  all  his  remaining  strength,  he,  in  token 
of  complete  victory,  raised  both  his  hands.  A  few  minutes  after,  as 
he  sat  on  his  chair  with  his  head  reclined  upon  the  hand  of  brother 
Bond,  without  a  struggle,  and  with  great  composure,  he  breathed  his 
last  on  Sabbath  the  £lst  day  of  March,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord 
1816,  and  in  the  seventy-first  year  of  his  age  ; — after  having  devoted 
to  the  work  of  the  ministry  about  fifty-five  years,  forty-five  of  which 
were  spent  in  visiting  the  cities,  villages,  and  wildernesses  of  North 
America ;  during  thirty  of  these  he  had  filled  the  highly  responsible 
office,  and  conscientiously  discharged  the  arduous  duties,  of  general 
superintendant  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church. 

His  immortal  spirit  having  taken  its  flight  to  the  regions  of  the 
blessed,  his  body  was  committed  to  the  earth,  being  deposited  in  the 
family  burying-ground  of  Mr.  Arnold^  in  whose  house  he  died,     His 


DEATH  OP  THE  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY.  399 

remains  were,  by  order  of  the  general  conference,  and  at  the  re- 
quest of  the  society  of  Baltimore,  taken  up  and  brought  to  that  city* 
and  deposited  in  a  vault  prepared  for  that  purpose,  under  the  recess 
of  the  pulpit  of  the  Methodist  Church  in  Eutaw-street.  A  vast  con- 
course of  the  citizens  of  Baltimore,  with  several  clergymen  of  othei 
denominations,  followed  the  corps  as  it  was  carried  from  the  general 
conference  room  in  Light-street  to  the  place  prepared  for  its  recep- 
tion in  Eutaw-street ;  being  preceded  by  Bishop  M'Kendree  as  the 
officiating  minister,  and  brother  Black,  a  representative  from  the 
British  to  the  American  conference,  and  followed  by  the  members  of 
the  general  conference  as  chief  mourners.  The  corpse  was  placed 
in  Eutaw  church,  and  a  funeral  oration  pronounced  by  the  Rev.  Wil- 
liam M'Kendree,  the  only  surviving  bishop  ;  after  which,  the  body  of 
this  great  man  of  God  was  deposited  in  the  vault,  to  remain  until  the 
resurrection  of  the  just  and  unjust. 

It  is  needless  to  make  reflections  here,  or  to  pass  encomiums 
upon  his  character,  not  only  because  it  would  be  anticipating  his 
biography  which  is  now  preparing  for  the  press,  but  because 
the  preceding  journal  speaks  for  itself,  and  loudly  proclaims  the 
man  deeply  devoted  to  God,  exerting  all  his  powers  of  soul  and 
body  to  promote  "  peace  on  earth  and  good  will  to  men  ;"  and  who 
ceased  not  his  labours  until  compelled  by  the  command  of  Him  who 
first  called  him  into  being.  Let  those  now  denominated  missionaries 
read  this  journal,  and  learn  from  the  example  of  its  author  what  it 
is  to  "  endure  hardness  as  good  soldiers  of  the  Lord  Jesus." 

May  that  Church  which  so  long  enjoyed  the  services  of  this  emi- 
nent minister  of  the  sanctuary,  and  for  whose  prosperity  he  so  dili- 
gently and  conscientiously  toiled  and  suffered,  not  only  cherish  a 
grateful  remembrance  of  his  Christian  and  ministerial  virtues,  but 
be  long  blessed  with  a  succession  of  ministers  who  shall  make  his 
virtues  their  exemplar,  and  transmit  to  posterity  unsullied  those  pure 
doctrines  of  Christ  which  Francis  Jlshury  so  faithfully  and  so  success- 
fully proclaimed. 

New- York,  April  .23, 1821 , 


A   CHRONOLOGICAL  INDEX  TO  THE 
PRECEDING  JOURNAL, 


'<?(?#< 


VOLUME  L 

PAGE 

ATTENDS  the  conference  in  Bristol  and 

Aug. 

V, 

1771. 

offers  himself  for  America          .         .           1 

Sept. 

2, 

Leaves  England        ....                     2 

Oct. 

27, 

Arrives    in    Philadelphia            ...            4 

Nov. 

13, 

Comes  to  New-York       ....           5 

April 

2, 

1772. 

Pennsylvania              .....          13 

New- Jersey     .         .         .         .         .         .         15 

May 

7, 

Pennsylvania             .....          16 

20, 

New- Jersey     .         .         .         .         .         .          17 

31, 

Pennsylvania    ......          18 

June 

16, 

New- Jersey              .         .         .         .         .         19 

26, 

Pennsylvania             .....         20 

29, 

New-Jersey              .....       ibid 

July 

17, 

Pennsylvania             .         .         .         .         .         21 

Aug. 

7, 

New- York       ......         22 

Sept. 

6, 

Holds  a  meeting,  and  adopts  rules  for  govern- 
ing the  society           ..."         25 

Oct. 

22, 

New-Jersey     ......         30 

26, 

Pennsylvania             .....       ibid 

Dec. 

8, 

Delaware          ......         35 

Jan. 

3, 

1773. 

Maryland          ......         39 

April 

14, 

Pennsylvania             .....         47 

24 

New- York        ......       ibid 

May 

2, 

Pennsylvania            ......         49 

10, 

New-Jersey    ......         50 

13, 

Pennsylvania             .....       ibid 

June 

6, 

New-Jersey     ......         52 

12, 

New-York       ....         .         .       ibid 

July 

14, 

Pennsylvania,  held  a  conference        .         .         55 

Aug. 

9 

Maryland         ..,..-         W 

Voi 

,.  Til. 

5! 

4Q£ 


INDEX. 


FaG* 


May     18, 

1774. 

Pennsylvania            ..... 

80 

June       1, 

New-York       ...... 

81 

July      24, 

Account  of  his  conversion 

87 

Nov.       2, 

New-Jersey     ...... 

101 

4, 

Pennsylvania   ...... 

ibid 

March    5, 

1775. 

Maryland          .....         ; 

108 

May      16, 

Pennsylvania.            ..... 

114 

29, 

Virginia            ...... 

ibid 

Feb.     23, 

1776. 

Maryland          .".... 

131 

March  19, 

Pennsylvania             .         .         . 

132 

June     15, 

Maryland          .         .         .         .         . 

140 

Dec.     19, 

Narrative    of    the    revival    of   religion    in 

Virginia          .... 

157 

Jan.        2, 

1777. 

North  Carolina         • 

175 

Feb.      13, 

Maryland         . 

178 

April       5, 

Awful  death  related           .... 

183 

May      12, 

Conference  at  Deer-Creek 

186 

Sept.    22, 

Informed  that  Mr.  Rankin  and  Mr.  Rhoda  had 

left  the  continent  for  England 

196 

Feb.       5, 

1778. 

Awful  death  of  a  wicked  youth 

204 

March  10, 

Not  being  permitted  to  preach  in  Maryland,  he 

retires  to  Delaware      .... 

20S 

June       1, 

1779. 

Maryland          ...... 

239 

Nov.       4, 

Imprudent  act  of  parents  towards  their  daugh- 

ter, and  its  effects         .... 

257 

Feb.     20, 

1780. 

An  account  of  the  Nicolites 

270 

March  11, 

Imprisonment  of  F.  Garrettson  and  Crumwell 

274 

April    21, 

Maryland         ...... 

280 

25, 

Held  conference  in  Baltimore 

281 

May        3, 

Virginia           ...... 

9, 

Meets  the  dissenting  brethren  in  conference 

283 

June     16, 

North  Carolina         ..... 

Of|l 

August   3, 

Virginia            ...... 

302 

Oct.      31, 

Maryland          ...... 

316 

Nov.       3, 

Delaware         ...... 

ibid 

Feb.     11, 

1781. 

Pennsylvania 

325 

14, 

New-Jersey    ...... 

ibid 

March    3, 

Pennsylvania             ..... 

326 

April      9, 

Delaware         .         .         .         .         .         . 

327 

19, 

Maryland          .....* 

328 

24, 

Conference      ...... 

ibid 

Sept.    25? 

Pennsylvania            ..... 

335 

fNDEX. 

403 

PAGE 

Oct. 

28, 

1781. 

Delaware 

*                                  ■•                                  •                                   •..                              6 

336 

Dee. 

2, 

Maryland 

o                              •                              *                              •                              s 

337 

19, 

Virginia 

•                         •                        •                         •                        * 

ibid. 

Feb. 

1, 

1782. 

North  Carolina 

•                      •                      •                      «                      * 

340 

9, 

Virginia 

•                       •                       •                      •                       • 

ibid 

20, 

North  Carolina 

•                       •                       •                      •                      • 

342 

24, 

Virginia 

•                   •                   •                   •                   • 

ibid 

March 

3, 

North  Carolina 

•              *               .               .               • 

ibid 

May 

21, 

Maryland 

«                         •                         »                         •                        « 

346 

June 

23. 

Virginia 

*                          a                          •                         *                           • 

347 

July 

21, 

Maryland 

•                                         •<!•• 

349 

Aug. 

13, 

Pennsylvania 

•                                        •                                        •                                         O                                         • 

ibid 

Sept. 

3, 

New-Jersey     . 

•                                         •                                         •                                        •                                         « 

350 

5, 

Was  examined  by  an  officer  concerning  a  pass 

ibid 

16, 

Pennsylvania 

•                                         •                                        •                                         •                                         • 

351 

28, 

Delaware 

•                                        •                                         •                                        •                                        * 

352 

Dec. 

8, 

Virginia 

«                                       •                                        •                                         •                                         t 

ibid 

Feb. 

17, 

1783. 

North  Carolina 

•                                          *                                        •                                         *                                          • 

354 

April 

6, 

Hears  the  news  of 

peace  between  England 

and  America 

•                        •                         •                        a                        » 

355 

17, 

Virginia           , 

a                          m                           b                           •                           • 

356 

May 

22, 

Maryland 

•                                  0                                   *                                  •                                  • 

ibid 

June 

18, 

Virginia 

•                        a                        »                        •                        • 

357 

27, 

Pennsylvania 

»                                   •                                  9                                  •                                   • 

358 

Aug. 

27, 

New-York 

f>                      m                     «                      a                       * 

360 

Sept. 

10, 

New-Jersey     . 

*                     »                      *                      t^-                   • 

ibid 

27, 

Delaware 

•                      «                      •                       •                      * 

ibid 

Oct. 

H, 

Maryland 

a 

361 

Nov. 

3, 

Delaware 

«                       •                      »                      •                       « 

362 

28, 

Virginia 

•                                   »                                   9                                  •                                   • 

ibid 

Jan. 

4, 

1784. 

North  Carolina 

•                                   »                                   •                                   •                                   • 

364 

April 

5, 

Virginia 

•                                  «                                   •                                   •                                   • 

366 

July 

8, 

Pennsylvania 

s                                   t,                                   •                                  *                                  • 

369 

189 

Maryland 
Remarkable  accoun 

•                       •                      •                       •                      • 

t  of  the  capture  by  the  In- 

ibid 

dians,*and  final  d< 

sliverance  of  R.  Williams 

370 

Aug. 

16, 

New-Jersey     . 

p                        •                        •                        «                        • 

373 

27, 

New- York 

«                        *                        •                         •                        • 

ibid 

Sept. 

13, 

New-Jersey 

•                        •                         •                        •                         * 

ibid 

Oct. 

2, 

Delaware 

9                                 •                                  •                                  •                                  » 

374 

7, 

Maryland 

0                                        •                                        «                                       B                                        * 

ibid 

Nov. 

1, 

Virginia 

V 

375 

lJ>i 


Nov. 


8,   1784. 
15, 


Dec.     25, 


l,fff>EX< 

Maryland  ...... 

In  Barratt's  chapel  in  Delaware,  met  Doctor 
Coke,  who  had  came  over  from  Eng- 
land, invested  with  powers  to  conse- 
crate ministers,  &c.      . 

Conference  in  Baltimore,  where  he  was 
ordained  deacon,  elder,  and  Superinten- 
dent 


PAGE 

376 


Jan. 

6, 

1785.  Virginia           , 

20, 

North  Carolina 

Feb. 

17, 

South  Carolina 

March 

19, 

North  Carolina 

April 

30, 

Virginia 

May 

30, 

Maryland 

July 

27, 

Virginia 

31, 

Maryland 

August  28, 

Pennsylvania 

31, 

New-York 

Sept. 

9, 

New-Jersey 

26, 

Pennsylvania 

30, 

Delaware 

Oct. 

8, 

Maryland 

Nov. 

M, 

Virginia 

Dec. 

20, 

North  Carolina 

Jan. 

4, 

1786.  South  Carolina 

March 

28, 

Virginia 

April 

26, 

Maryland 

June 

2, 

Virginia 

23, 

Pennsylvania 

20, 

Virginia 

July 

3, 

Maryland 

ibid 


378 

ibid 

379 

381 

383 

384 

385 

387 

ibid 

388 

ibid 

ibid 

389 

ibid 

ibid 

390 

392 

393 

397 

ibid 

398 

399 

ibid 

400 


VOLUME  II. 


July      15,  1786.    Maryland 


13, 

Virginia 

August    2, 

New-Jersey 

20, 

Maryland 

New-York 

Oct.      15, 

Pennsylvania 

16, 

New-Jersey 

"3, 

Delaware 

1 

ibid 

ibid 
3 

ibid 
5 

ibid 

ibid 


INDLX. 

4  Or, 

PAG* 

Nov. 

16, 

1786. 

Virginia 

. 

■                                                £,                                               O 

€ 

24, 

Delaware 

• 

•                     •                     • 

ibid 

28, 

Maryland 

« 

4                                  »                                 t> 

ibid 

Dec. 

30, 

Virginia 

• 

*                                  •                                  • 

8 

Feb. 

9, 

1787. 

North  Carolina 

• 

•                                  •                                  » 

10 

March 

24, 

Met  Doctor  Coke 

at  Charleston 

11 

April 

11, 

North  Carolina 

' 

•                                  «                                 #           ^ 

12 

18, 

Virginia 

• 

•                           t*                           <a 

ibid 

29, 

Conference  at  Ba 

Itimore 

13 

May 

H, 

New-Jersey 

. 

i                        a                        • 

ibid 

15, 

New-York 

• 

. 

ibid 

June 

20, 

New-Jersey     . 

. 

0                       *                         • 

16 

27, 

Pennsylvania 

. 

. 

17 

July 

16, 

Virginia 

. 

. 

ibid 

20, 

Maryland 

. 

*                       » 

18 

August  31, 

Virginia 

. 

J                « 

in 

Sept. 

7, 

Maryland 

. 

- 

ibid 

Pet. 

0, 

Delaware 

, 

. 

21 

26, 

Maryland 

• 

. 

OCT 

Jan. 

20, 

1788. 

North  Carolina 

• 

•                        b                        *i 

25 

Feb. 

21, 

South  Carolina 

• 

e                      o                       » 

27 

April 

2, 

Georgia 

• 

. 

•                   xj  C- 

13, 

South  Carolina 

* 

ft                        e                        » 

30 

22, 

North  Carolina 

• 

a                        •                         * 

ibid 

May 

6, 

Virginia 

« 

*                          a                           * 

3£ 

June 

2, 

North  Carolina 

. 

o                                   o                                  • 

Jo 

8, 

Virginia 

„ 

•                        •                        « 

.    ■      34 

10, 

Crossed  the  Alleg 

iany 

mountains 

35 

Sept. 

10, 

Maryland 

- 

c                                         ■■                                          • 

37 

21, 

Pennsylvania 

.  *                   *                   • 

38 

28, 

New-Jersey 

« 

•                        *                        • 

ibid 

29, 

New-York 

„ 

»                                  3                                  0 

,       ibid 

Oct. 

5, 

New-Jersey 

c 

»                           t                           e 

ibid 

12, 

Delaware 

* 

*                              u                              * 

ibid 

Maryland 

» 

. 

39 

Nov. 

1, 

Virginia 

*r 

. 

ibid 

7, 

Maryland 

V 

, 

ibid 

14, 

Delaware 

•                              «                              • 

ibid 

Dec. 

19, 

Virginia 

«                               *                              • 

41 

Jan. 

17, 

1789. 

North  Carolina 

•                             *                              • 

42 

Feb. 

3, 

South  Carolina 

. 

43 

March 

2, 

Georgia 

•                              *                              * 

44 

15, 

South  Carolina 

„ 

Q                                        * 

45 

4Ut> 

INDEX 

*, 

PAGE 

April       1,   1789. 

North  Carolina, 

»                  * 

•                   •                    * 

46 

11', 

Virginia 

•                 • 

- 

46 

SO, 

Maryland 

<.                 * 

•                   •                    « 

47 

May      21, 

New- Jersey 

*                              a 

•                    •                     « 

ibid 

28, 

New-York 

: 

•                     • 

48 

June       5, 

Dr.  Coke  sails  for 

England 

*                    •                    • 

ibid 

25, 

New-Jersey 

«                 • 

•                    •                    • 

50 

July        1, 

Pennsylvania 

•                           m 

•                    •                    • 

ibid 

30, 

Maryland 

•                           m 

•                     •                    • 

52 

August   7, 

Virginia            < 

•                           • 

•                    *                    * 

53 

Sept,       1, 

Maryland 

•                          • 

•                    •                    • 

64 

Oct.         6, 

New-Jersey     . 

•                          • 

•                        a 

55 

16, 

Delaware 

•                              .• 

oca 

56 

Nov.       9, 

Maryland 

•                              • 

•                      1 

57 

Dec.       4, 

The  first  council  sits  in  Baltimore 

59 

20, 

Virginia 

»                              • 

•                      •                      • 

60 

Jan.       12,  1790. 

Receives  a  letter  c 

f  complaint 

from  James 

O'Kelly 

•                 • 

•         •         * 

62 

15, 

North  Carolina 

»                  .« 

• 

ibid 

31, 

South  Carolina 

»                 • 

m                     * 

64 

March    1 , 

Georgia 

0                                        • 

.*                      •                      • 

67 

17, 

South  Carolina 

•                        o 

O                                   •                                   ■ 

68 

26, 

North  Carolina 

•                        • 

>                                  •                                   • 

ibid 

April      5, 

Tennessee,  narrowly  escapes 

being  killec 

[         69 

21, 

Virginia 

•                     • 

•                  •                 • 

71 

May        9, 

Kentucky 

*                        » 

•                 •                  • 

73 

Accounts  of  massacres  hy  Indians 

74 

27, 

Tennessee 

»                       m 

«                 •                  i 

75 

-'  une       1 , 

North  Carolina 

»                                  0 

•                  ■                  • 

76 

% 

Virginia 

•                                  • 

w                           • 

ibid 

14, 

Conference 

•                                 • 

•                         •                        • 

ibid 

August    1, 

Pennsylvania 

»                                  * 

•                       •                      • 

80 

12, 

Virginia 

*                                 • 

. 

81 

31, 

Maryland 

•             v  • 

•                       •                      • 

82 

Sept.    21, 

Pennsylvania 

•                           » 

•                      •                      • 

83 

28, 

New-Jersey 

•                           • 

. 

84 

Oct.         3, 

New-York 

•                           * 

•                        •                        « 

ibid 

10, 

Pennsylvania 

•                           * 

»                        • 

ibid 

15, 

Delaware 

•      , 

•                    • 

85 

31, 

Virginia 

•                           • 

• 

86 

Nov.       4, 

Maryland 

•                           • 

»                        * 

87 

Dec.      11, 

Virginia 

•                           • 

ft                      •                      • 

89 

Jan.        6,  1791. 

North  Carolina 

c                     e 

,» 

.91 

INDEX. 

407 

PAGE 

Feb. 

8,  1791. 

South  Carolina 

•                 « 

3              ,             »                           a 

94 

23, 

Doctor    Coke  arrives  in  Charleston 

95 

March 

7, 

Georgia 

•                 • 

•                          «                           • 

96 

21, 

South  Carolina 

6                        « 

a                        a                        a 

97 

April 

10, 

Virginia 

•                         ft 

0                    '          •                              « 

<     98 

May 

5, 

Maryland 

o 

, 

100 

16, 

Pennsylvania 

»                  •                           o 

o                        •                        a 

ibid 

New-Jersey     . 

.                        » 

»                        »                        • 

101 

26, 

New -York 

.                        » 

•                        #                        • 

ibid 

June 

4, 

Connecticut 

*                        • 

o                                        •                                       • 

102 

9, 

Curious  reception  at  New-Haven 

104 

15, 

Rhode-Island 

.                         a 

•                    •                    * 

106 

23, 

Massachusetts 

»                        o 

»                   •                    • 

108 

July 

17, 

Connecticut 

,                        . 

,J>                        * 

111 

Curious  account  of  Dorcas  Bi 

cown     , 

112 

28, 

New-York 

»                              0 

■i                 ,                  , 

ibid 

August    8, 

Connecticut 

•                      « 

, 

113 

New- York 

•                           . 

•                  o                 * 

114 

Sept. 

5, 

New- Jersey 

* 

•                                  o                                  » 

115 

20, 

Pennsylvania 

' 

*                                  4                                  • 

116 

28, 

Delaware 

. 

>                                  •                                   » 

117 

Oct. 

21, 

Maryland 

. 

•                                 •                                  « 

ibid 

Dec. 

9, 

Virginia 

•                                                           • 

•                                  •                                  » 

118 

Jan. 

8,  1792. 

North  Carolina 

• 

•                           »                           a 

120 

Feb. 

1, 

South  Carolina 

a                        a 

»                           •                           • 

121 

11. 

Account  of  Mr. 

Hammett 

•                          •                           t> 

122 

26, 

Georgia 

•                                  9 

•                           »                           * 

123 

Marcli 

i    6, 

South  Carolina 

•                                   « 

• 

124 

13, 

North  Carolina 

9                                   9 

9 

•                                       0 

ibid 

23, 

Virginia 

•                                   * 

>                           o                           * 

225 

30, 

Tennessee 

•                                   • 

• 

ibid 

April 

4, 

Kentucky 

. 

J                                               •                                               3 

126 

May 

1, 

In  great  danger 

from  Indians 

o 

127 

6, 

Virginia 

. 

u                           a                           • 

128 

June 

1, 

Pennsylvania 

. 

i                              o                             • 

130 

14, 

Maryland 

j                 « 

. 

13! 

19, 

Virginia 

•                  • 

j                          «                           » 

ibid 

28, 

Pennsylvania 

•                        a 

•                           i                          • 

1  \J/*> 

July 

13, 

New-Jersey     . 

*                        * 

*                                  d                                  Q 

133 

16,' 

New-York 

*                        • 

*                                  *                                  ■ 

ibid 

Account  of  his  birth>  conversion^  and  call  to 

the  ministry 

.. 

, 

;!>'d 

4  ot 


INDEX. 


■k(,t 


July 

2o,   1792. 

Connecticut     . 

•                 f                 » 

•                  « 

137 

28, 

Massachusetts 

•                  •                  • 

•                  • 

137 

Aug. 

3, 

Holds  conference 

in  Lynn 

♦                       a 

ibid 

14, 

New-York,  visits 

the  medical 

springs   a 

t 

Lebanon 

.          .          . 

•                 « 

139 

16, 

Holds  conference 

in  Albany 

•                 • 

ibid 

28, 

Conference  in  Ne 

w-York 

•                 • 

141 

Sept. 

4, 

New-Jersey 

*                   •                   • 

•                 t 

142 

6, 

Arrives  in  Philadelphia,  where 

he  holds 

conference 

•                   •                   • 

• 

.      ibid 

10, 

Delaware 

♦                   *                   • 

*                 t 

143 

28, 

Virginia 

•                          •                          4 

• 

144 

Oct. 

2, 

Maryland 

•                      a                      • 

*                 1 

145 

Nov. 

h 

Attends  a  general 

conference  in 

Baltimore 

146 

James  0' Kelly  withdraws 

• 

147 

17, 

Virginia 

• 

•                  * 

ibid 

Dec. 

op: 

South  Carolina 

»         *         * 

9                                  4 

151 

'an. 

8,    1793. 

Georgia 

. 

• 

lo2 

10, 

Held  conference 

•                  •                  • 

• 

-       ibid 

Feb. 

3, 

South  Carolina 

•                           o                          • 

• 

154 

51  arch  18, 

North  Carolina 

•              • 

• 

159 

Unkind  treatment  from  O'Kelly 

's  party  . 

160 

oq 

Tennessee 

»                       •                      • 

•                 i 

161 

April 

10, 

Kentucky 

»                      •                      • 

m 

162 

May 

8, 

Perilous  journey 

through  wilderness 

164 

12, 

Tennessee 

•                  •                 • 

• 

165 

27, 

Virginia 

•                  •                  ♦ 

• 

.       ibid 

June 

17, 

Maryland 

•                  •                 • 

•                      « 

167 

July 

9, 

New-Jersey     . 

•                  •                  • 

•                      « 

169 

12, 

New-York       * 

•                 • 

. 

170 

21, 

Connecticut 

•                  »                  • 

■ 

171 

26, 

Massachusetts 

•                  *                  * 

• 

ibid 

Aug. 

9, 

Connecticut 

•                  • 

» 

173 

20, 

New- York 

•                  •                  • 

•                      i 

174 

Sept. 

h 

New-Jersey 

•                  *                  • 

• 

.       ibid 

6, 

Pennsylvania 

•                          •                          w 

. 

175 

n, 

Maryland 

•               •             <• 

•                                  4 

ibid 

Oct. 

28, 

Virginia 

•                 .      •                      • 

• 

178 

J>e,v 

Q 

North  Carolina 

•                        •                         » 

•                                  « 

181 

South  Carolina 

•                         •                         • 

. 

182 

Awful  account  of 

an  apostate 

. 

184 

Marcl"1 

2".    1794. 

North  Carolina 

•                                    • 

188 

INDEX. 

409 

PAGE 

April 

21,   1794 

.    Virginia 

0                                   »                                  .                                  . 

190 

June 

17, 

Maryland 

*                     •                      •                      . 

194 

29, 

Pennsylvania 

«... 

195 

30, 

New-Jersey 

•                        .                        •                        • 

ibid 

July 

4, 

New-York 

* 

.       ibid 

10, 

Connecticut     . 

*                    •                    •                    s. 

196 

21, 

Massachusetts 

•                        •                        •                        t, 

197 

Aug. 

1, 

Rhode- Island 

•                      •                      •                      • 

198 

2, 

Connecticut 

*                        •                        •                        • 

ibid 

Sept. 

15., 

New-York 

«                           •                           »                           e 

204 

30, 

New-Jersey     . 

•                           •                           •                          • 

205 

Oct. 

4, 

Pennsylvania 

•                              •                              •                              0 

205 

16, 

Maryland 

•                           •                           •                          • 

206 

30, 

Virginia 

•                           ■                           •                           * 

207 

Dec. 

13, 

North  Carolina 

*                           •                           •                          • 

210 

Jan. 

1,  1795, 

to  March  5,  in  Charleston 

212 

April 

4, 

North  Carolina 

•                           •                           • 

220 

27, 

Tennessee 

.             . 

222 

May 

3, 

Virginia 

• 

.       ibid 

20, 

Maryland 

•             .             . 

223 

Death  of  Judge  White     . 

.       ibid 

June 

17, 

Delaware 

•                              »                              ■-                              a 

225 

21, 

Pennsylvania 

«                               •                              • 

226 

27, 

New-Jersey 

•                               *                              .                              • 

ibid 

29, 

New-York 

*                              .                              #                              • 

ibid 

July 

8, 

Connecticut 

•                               ♦                              .                              . 

227 

27, 

Massachusetts 

•                              «                              .                              .                              « 

229 

Aug. 

21, 

Vermont 

"                              •                              •                              .                              « 

231 

24, 

Connecticut  and  New-York 

ibid 

Sept. 

25, 

New-Jersey 

• 

234 

Oct. 

3, 

Pennsylvania 

*                                                           •                                                           •                                                           •                                                           • 

ibid 

14, 

Maryland 

•                                                          -                                                              -                                                           • 

235 

Nov. 

5, 

Virginia 

•                                                             •                                                            •                                                           •                                                            • 

236 

Dec. 

7 

North  Carolina 

•                                                           ♦                                                             •                                                            •                                                           • 

238 

24, 

South  Carolina 

'                                                            •                                                           •                                                          •                                                           * 

239 

Jan. 

4,  1796. 

Account  of  the   destruction  of  Cokesbury 

college. 

•                                                            •                                                            •                                                           •                                                           • 

241 

March  11, 

Georgia 

•                                                           *                                                            •                                                          •                                                           » 

246 

oq 

South  Carolina 

•                                                           •                                                          •                                                           •                                                           • 

247 

April 

6, 

North  Carolina 

• 

248 

17, 

Tennessee 

•                                                           *                                                            *                                                          «                                                           « 

249 

26, 

North  Carolina 

•                                                            •                                                            •                                                          * 

ibid 

Vol 

.  III. 

410 


May 


5,  1796 


H, 


June 

2, 

15, 

July 

28, 

Aug. 

7, 

15, 

Sep. 

6, 

29, 

Oct. 

4, 

8, 

16, 

19, 

Nov. 

5, 

Dec. 

2, 

26, 

Jan. 

1,  1797, 

March  11, 

25, 

April 

6, 

June 

10, 

July 

15, 

18, 


Oct. 


Nov. 
April 
June 


July 


9, 

16, 
5, 

24,   1798. 
o 

12, 

17, 


INDEX. 

.    Virginia  .... 

Tennessee       ..... 

Account  of  the  captivity  by  the  Indians 
release,  conversion,  and  death  of  Mrs 
Scott 

Pennsylvania 

Maryland 

Pennsylvania 

New-Jersey 

New- York 

Connecticut     . 

New-York 

New-Jersey 

Pennsylvania 

Delaware 

Maryland 

Virginia 

Vindicates  himself  from  the  accusations  of 
James  O'Kelly     . 

North  Carolina 

South  Carolina 
to  Feb.  27,  in  Charleston 

Death  of  Mr.  Wells  of  Charleston 

North  Carolina 

Tennessee— greatly  afflicted 

Virginia — affliction  continues     . 

Maryland  .... 

Pennsylvania 

New-Jersey 

New-York       .... 

Is  confined  by  sickness  at  Mr.  Sherwood's 
New-Rochelle,  for  about  eight  weeks. 

New-Jersey 

Delaware  .... 

Maryland         .... 

Virginia  .... 

Maryland  .... 

Pennsylvania 

New-Jersey  .... 
New-York  .... 
Connecticut  .... 
Mistake  of  James  O'Kelly  corrected 


FAOE 

250 

250 


251 

255 
ibid 
257 
258 
259 
262 
265 
266 
ibid 
267 
ibid 
268 

270 
ibid 
274 
275 
276 
283 
286 
287 
288 
289 
290 
ibid 

291 
294 
ibid 
ibid 
296 
S15 
317 
ibid 
318 
320 
ibid 


INDEX. 

411 

PAGE 

July 

26,  1798. 

Rhode-Island 

•                  •                 • 

321 

Aug. 

5, 

Massachusetts 

•                 •                 • 

323 

15, 

New-Hampshire 

«                 •                  • 

324 

17, 

District  of  Maine 

•                 •                 • 

.       ibid 

Sept. 

3, 

New-Hampshire 

•                 •                 • 

327 

6, 

Massachusetts 

•                 •                  • 

.       ibid 

22, 

Connecticut     . 

•                 •                  • 

ibid 

23, 

New-York 

•                  •                 • 

328 

29, 

New-Jersey     . 

«                 •                 ■ 

329 

Oct. 

6, 

Maryland 

•                 •                 • 

ibid 

Character  of  Rev.  J.  Dickens 

.       330 

13, 

Virginia 

•                 •                 • 

.       ibid 

Nov. 

6, 

North  Carolina 

•                 •                 • 

.       332 

30, 

South  Carolina 

•                  »                 • 

.       333 

Feb. 

9,   1799. 

North  Carolina 

•                        •                        o 

336 

Marc) 

i  19, 

Virginia 

•                 • 

.       341 

May 

1, 

Maryland — Anecdote 

•             • 

.       343 

26, 

Delaware 

•                      •                      * 

345 

June 

6, 

Pennsylvania 

»                        •                        « 

346 

12, 

New-Jersey     . 

•                        •                        • 

ibid 

16, 

New-York 

•                      ♦                      » 

ibid 

July 

19, 

New-Jersey     . 

*                                                  • 

348 

24, 

Pennsylvania 

•                      «                     • 

349 

Aug. 

6, 

Maryland 

•                    J>                    • 

350 

13, 

Virginia 

•                           c                           • 

.       351 

Sept. 

/WV» 

North  Carolina 

•                        a                          • 

.       355 

Timothy   and    Titus    exercised    episcopa' 

powers 

•                        •                        • 

.       357 

Nov. 

1, 

South  Carolina 

•                        •                        •                        • 

359 

17, 

Georgia 

•                                   •                                  o                                   ■ 

361 

Account  of  the  death  of  Washington 

ibid 

Dec. 

22, 

South  Carolina 

*                   •                   «                   ■ 

365 

Feb. 

25,   1800. 

North  Carolina 

*                      •                      •                      • 

368 

March  15, 

Virginia — Contempt  of 

riches 

371 

May 

5> 

Attends  general  confere 

nee  in  Baltimore— 

Richard  Whatcoat  elected   and  ordained 

Bishop 

•                  •                   •                   >> 

375 

26, 

Delaware 

•                           •                           o                          e 

376 

June 

8, 

Pennsylvania 

•                                       •                                        O                                       *• 

377 

10, 

New-Jersey     . 

•                     •                    •                    « 

378 

17, 

New-York 

■                    •                   •                   « 

ibid 

30, 

Connecticut 

•                   •                   •                  • 

380 

Simplicity  and  frugality 

of  New-England 

381 

412 


INDEX. 


July 


I'AOi 


Aug. 


Sept. 


Oct. 


13,  1800. 

Rhode-Island 

.       ibid 

15, 

Massachusetts 

382 

27, 

Connecticut      . 

.       383 

Death  of  Madam  Livingston 

384 

4, 

New-York       .... 

.       385 

19, 

New-Jersey              , 

.       386 

22, 

Pennsylvania 

.       ibid 

27, 

Maryland         .... 

.       387 

Account  of  a  revival  of  religion 

.       388 

3, 

Virginia             .... 

.       389 

28, 

Kentucky         .... 

393 

Account  of  Bethel  school 

394 

16, 

Tennessee       . 

.       395 

Journey  through  the  wilderness 

,       398 

VOLUME  III, 


Nov. 

8, 

29, 

1800. 

Dec. 

15, 

Jan. 

15, 

22, 

1801. 

Feb. 

14, 

March  25, 

April 

May 

Aug. 

Sept. 
Oct. 

Dec. 


26, 
29, 

1, 

30, 
27, 
18, 
31, 


Jan.       14,  1802. 
Feb.     12, 

March  26, 


nst  complaints 


North  Carolina 

Georgia 

South  Carolina 

North  Carolina 

South  Carolina 

Justifies  himself  agai 

North  Carolina 

Reflections  upon  the  sea 

Virginia  .... 

Reflections  on  church  government 

Death    and    funeral    of   Rev.    Devereux 

Jarratt 
Maryland 
Pennsylvania 
Delaware  and  Maryland 
Virginia  . 

Tennessee 
North  Carolina 
Georgia 
South  Carolina 

Anecdote  of  Wesley  and  Coke 
North  Carolina 
Virginia 

Funeral  of  John  Lee 
Maryland — Account  of  his  mother's  death— 

Her  character       ..... 


1 
4 

8 
11 
12 
13 

16 
ibid 

21 
23 

25 
26 
30 
32 
35 
38 
39 
41 
47 
48 
49 
53 
56 

57 


April    23,   1802. 

25, 

26, 

30, 
May      11, 

12, 

18, 

26, 
June       9, 

19, 

21, 

26, 
29, 

July        9, 

13, 

19, 

26, 

August    3, 

18, 


Sept.     13, 


Nov. 

16, 

Feb. 

1,  1803 

March  1 1 , 

29, 

May 

10, 

17, 

20, 

24, 

June 

3, 

17, 

23, 

.«  O  j 

INDEX. 

Virginia  

Maryland  ..... 

Delaware         ..... 

Pennsylvania  .... 

New- Jersey  .... 

Pennsylvania  .... 

New-Jersey     ..... 

Account  of  Ann  Hutchinson 
New-York       .         .         .         .         . 

Reflections  upon  retirement 
Connecticut      ..... 

Revival  among  students  at  Yale  College 
Rhode-Island  .... 

Massachusetts  .... 

New- Hampshire       .... 

Maine      ...... 

Account  of  a  conference  at  Monmouth 

Massachusetts 

Reflections  upon  the  state  of  the  country 

Connecticut 

New -York 

New-Jersey 

Maryland 

Virginia 

Has  an  interview  with  Mr 

Description    of  a   natural 

ington 
Tennessee 

Suffers  great  affliction 
South  Carolina 
North  Carolina 
Virginia 
Maryland 
Pennsylvania 
New-Jersey     . 
New-York 
Connecticut 

Remarks  on  religious  liberty 
Massachusetts 

New-Hampshire.     Anecdote 
Vermont 
New -York 


O'Kelly 


bridge   at  Lex 


413 

PAGK 

60 
ibid 
ibid 
ibid 

61 
ibid 

62 

63 
ibid 

65 
ibid 

66 

67 
ibid 

68 
ibid 
ibid 

69 
ibid 

71 
ibid 

73 

74 

76 
ibid 

78 

79 

82 

85 

91 

96 

99 

102 

ibid 

ibid 

104 

ibid 

105 

106 

107 

ibid 


414 


INDEX. 


June     25,  1803.   Comparative  view  of  the  increase  of  Metho 

dists  in  the  United  States 
July      16,  New-Jersey 

21,  Pennsylvania 

Sept.      5,  Virginia  .... 

8,  Ohio        . 

28,  Kentucky         .... 

Oct.       14,  Tennessee.     Curious  reflections 

24,  North  Carolina 

31,  South  Carolina 

Dec.       2,  Georgia  .... 

Observations  on  church  government 

« — on  Hawie's  Church  History 

Apology  for  his  celibacy 
1804.   North  Carolina 
Virginia 

Mortality  in  Virginia 
Maryland 
Pennsylvania 
New-Jersey 
New-York 
Connecticut     . 
Security  amidst  reproaches 
Massachusetts 
New-Hampshire 
Remarks  on  Shakers 
Vermont 
New-York 
New-Jers3y 
Pennsylvania 
Delaware 
Maryland 

Virginia.     Awful  end  of  J.  Cromwell 
Pennyslvania — severely  afflicted 
Virginia.     Death  and  character  of  Wilson 

Lee 
North  Carolina 
South  Carolina 
Revival  in  Philadelphia     . 
North  Carolina 
Danger  of  being  drowned 
Virginia  .   .      * 


Feb. 

6,  1804 

March 

i  18, 

May 

7, 

25, 

June 

5, 

9, 

22, 

July 

3, 

10, 

23, 

26, 

August 

,    6, 

8, 

13, 

14, 

22, 

Sept. 

3, 

Oct. 

5, 

Nov. 

28, 

Dec. 

11, 

.'an. 

17,    1805 

Feb. 

4, 

PAGX 

109 

ibid 

ibid 

114 

ibid 

117 

118 

119 

120 

122 

124 

126 

128 

129 

134 

135 

137 

ibid 

ibid 

ibid 

138 

139 

140 

ibid 

141 

ibid 

142 

143 

ibid 

ibid 

144 

ibid 

14G 

148 
150 
152 
153 
155 
156 
15? 


June     20,  Vermont 

23,  Massachusetts 

25,  Connecticut 

July        4,  Massachusetts 


164 
165 

166 

167 
168 


INDEX.  415 

PAGE 

Feb.        4,  1805.   A  sketch  of  the  labours  and  travels  of  Ira 

Ellis  .         .      ■    .         .         .         .159 

25,  North  Carolina         .         .         .         .         .162 

March   14,  Virginia 163 

Distinction  between    lawful   and  unlawful 
things 
April       1,  Maryland 

22,  Delaware 

May      10,  Pennsylvania 

14,  New  Jersey 

18,  New-York.   Vindicates  his  official  authority      ibid 

170 
171 
ibid 
172 

Receives  a  letter  from    Doctor  Coke         ,       173 
22,  Connecticut  and  New- York       .         .         ,174 

29,  New-Jersey  .....       ibid 

August   1,  Pennsylvania  .....       ibid 

Sept.      2,  Ohio        .  ,         .         .         .  .         .176 

Kentucky         .         .         .         .         .         .178 

Oct.      18,  Tennessee,  North  and  South  Carolina       .       180 

Nov.       1,  Georgia.    Remarks  on  Marshall's   Life   of 

Washington  .  181 

Remarks  on  Hawie's  Church  History         .       185 

Jan.        8,    1806.    North  Carolina         .         .         .         .         .186 

Remarks  on  Mungo  Park's  travels  in  Africa       188 
Feb.     14,  Virginia  .         .         .         .         .         .189 

March    4,  Maryland  .         .         .         .         .         .190 

April      2,  Delaware         .         .         .  .         .192 

5,  Virginia  .         .         .  .193 

8,  Delaware         ......       ibid 

12,  Pennsylvania  .....       ibid 

May        7,  New- York        .         .         .         .         .         .195 

25,  Connecticut      ......        197 

31,  Massachusetts  ....  ,       ibid 

June       4,  Maine  ......       ibid 

12,  New- Hampshire       .  .         .         .  398 

17,  Vermont  .......       ibid 

July        1,  New- York       ......       20» ; 

3,  New-Jersey  .....       201 

Delaware  and  Maryland.  Death  and  charac- 
ter of  Bishop  Whatcont  ,         ,       SOS 


41(> 


INDEX. 


PAGE 


July 

3, 

1806.  Remarks  upon  S 

tmpson's  Plea  for  Religion 

203 

August    6, 

Virginia 

•                 •                 • 

•                 • 

ibid 

30, 

Tennessee 

•                 •                  • 

•                        a 

205 

Oct. 

1, 

North  and  South  Carolina 

•                        • 

207 

Curious  remark 

*                  *                 • 

•                        « 

210 

Number  of  members  and  hearers 

in  the 

United  States 

•                 0                 « 

•                 « 

211 

How  a  minister 

should  visit     . 

•                 • 

212 

Jan. 

1, 

1807.    South  Carolina 

•                  »                 • 

•                 • 

214 

16, 

North  Carolina 

•                  •                 • 

»                 • 

ibid 

Feb. 

13, 

Virginia 

•                 • 

•                 • 

215 

24, 

Maryland 

•                 •                 • 

•                 • 

216 

March  23, 

Virginia 

•                 •                 • 

•                 • 

218 

26, 

Delaware 

•                  »                 • 

• 

ibid 

April 

1, 

Pennsylvania 

•                 •                 • 

•                 • 

ibid 

11, 

New-Jersey     . 

•                  •                 • 

. 

219 

27, 

New-York 

•                  •                  # 

•                 • 

220 

May 

12, 

Vermont 

*                  •                 • 

,                  « 

221 

Dangerous  passag 

e  over  Green-Mountain 

ibid 

19, 

New-Hampshire 

•                 •                 • 

• 

222 

June 

1, 

Massachusetts 

•                 *                 • 

• 

223 

12, 

Connecticut 

•                 • 

•                 • 

ibid 

15, 

New- York 

•                  •                  • 

•                 ■ 

224 

July 

18, 

Pennsylvania 

•                 •                 • 

•                  • 

228 

Remarks  on  the  Moravian  town  of  N 

azareth 

ibid 

August 

21, 

Virginia 

*                 ♦                  • 

0 

232 

op; 

Ohio 

*                 •                 • 

•                • 

ibid 

Sept. 

27, 

Kentucky 

•                 •                  • 

•                    • 

234 

Oct. 

14, 

Tennessee 

•                 •                  • 

*                         • 

235 

18, 

North  Carolina 

•                 •                 • 

•                         1 

ibid 

27, 

Georgia 

•                  •                 • 

w                         • 

236 

Dec. 

2, 

South  Carolina 

*                    *                  • 

«                      • 

237 

Jan. 

lo, 

1808.   North  Carolina 

•'                 »                 • 

,                   • 

238 

24, 

Virginia 

•                 •                  • 

• 

239 

March 

9, 

Maryland 

•                 •                 • 

•                        ■ 

241 

Remark  on  Buonaparte 

. 

ibid 

Pennsylvania  and  New-York 

•                          r 

ibid 

April 

13, 

Connecticut 

•                  •                  • 

• 

242 

07 

New-York 

•                 •                  • 

• 

ibid 

May 

2, 

Maryland 

•                  •                  • 

•                           • 

243 

Death,  and  character  of  Mr.  Gough 

ibid 

July 

3, 

Pennsylvania 

•                  •                  • 

•                           • 

246 

August 

4, 

Ohio 

*                 •                  • 

. 

247 

INDEX. 

417 

PAGE 

August 

4,    1808. 

Buonaparte — his  downfall  predicted 

249 

Sept. 

10, 

Kentucky 

• 

250 

Oct. 

1, 

Tennessee  conference 

251 

29, 

North  Carolina 

•                 •               .  •                 • 

.       253 

Nov. 

20, 

South  Carolina 

•                 •                 •                  • 

254 

Renews  his  covenant  with  God 

.       ibid 

Dee. 

18, 

Georgia 

•                 •                 *                 * 

255 

Jan. 

8,    1809. 

South  Carolina 

•                 •                 *                 • 

256 

U, 

North  Carolina 

•                 •                 •                 • 

ibid 

Feb. 

12, 

Virginia 

4                                  •                                 •                                  • 

258 

March  18, 

Maryland 

•                                  •                                 •                                 • 

260 

April 

1, 

Pennsylvania 

•                                 »                                  •                                  • 

.       261 

12, 

New-Jersey     . 

•                                   •                                  •                                  • 

262 

Simpson's  Plea  for 

Religion — great  new 

s           263 

May 

3, 

New-York 
Quakers  censured 

*                 *                 •                 • 

264 

265 

Connecticut 

•                 • 

.       ibid 

June 

3, 

Massachusetts 

»                 •                 ♦                 • 

266 

20, 

New-Hampshire 

•                  •                 •                 • 

268 

25, 

Vermont 

a                        •                        •                        • 

ibid 

July 

4, 

New-York 

•                        •                        •                       • 

269 

20, 

Pennsylvania 

a                       •                        •                        a 

271 

No  worldly  attachments 

.       ibid 

August  30, 

Ohio 

•                         •                        •                        • 

274 

Oct. 

9, 

Kentucky 

*                        a                        *                        • 

.       276 

18, 

Tennessee 

•                          a                           • 

277 

South  Carolina 

•                          •                           • 

.       278 

Jan. 

7,  1810. 

North  Carolina 

•                           •                           *                           * 

.       281 

26, 

Virginia 

•                           a                           •                           * 

283 

Feb. 

25, 

Maryland 

■•                            •                           •                           * 

284 

March  23, 

Delaware 

•                          *                           *                           • 

285 

April 

11, 

>                                * 

Virginia 

•                           <.                           •                           * 

.       286 

15, 

Maryland 

*                                   a.                                    a                                  • 

287 

Death  and  character  of  Mary  Withy 

288 

May 

6, 

Pennsylvania 

a                      •                      •                      • 

ibid 

7, 

New-Jersey 

. 

ibid 

13, 

New-York 

•                        a                        » 

ibid 

18, 

Massachusetts 

•                       *                        •                        • 

.       289 

June 

3, 

New-Hampshire 

a                        •                       •                        a 

.      ibid 

17, 

Massachusetts 

•                        a                        a                        8 

290 

Remarks  on  Jesse  Lee's  History 

291 

Connecticut 

a                           *                          •                           * 

.       ibid 

Vo 

L.  III. 

63 

418 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

July 

o, 

1810. 

New-York         .                          . 
Genesee  conference           . 

292 
293 

30, 

Pennsylvania               .... 

ibid 

Sept. 

o, 

Ohio — remarks  on  the  river 

296 

Oct. 

7, 

Kentucky           .          .          .         .         . 

298 

Dec. 

2, 

North  Carolina          .... 

300 

16, 

South  Carolina           .... 

301 

Feb. 

1, 

1811. 

North  Carolina          .... 

303 

March 

3, 

Maryland          ..... 
Warning  to  Methodists 

305 
307 

April 

21, 

Pennsylvania              .... 

.      ibid 

May 

8, 

New-Jersey              ..." 

308 

19, 

New-York — Blackborne's  case  noticed 
Critique  upon  Adam  Clarke's  Commentary 

.  309 
310 

June 

16, 

Vermont           ..... 

311 

30, 

New- York         ..... 

.       ibid 

July 

7, 

Upper  Canada            .... 
Danger  of  backsliding        . 
Philip  Embury           .... 
Reflections  on  the  Canada  stations 

.  312 
313 

.  ibid 
314 

£1, 

New-York        .         .  -      . 

ibid 

Aug. 

4, 

Pennsylvania             . 

315 

Sept. 

8, 

Ohio         ...... 

.       316 

Oct. 

Kentucky — great  sufferings 

318 

24, 

Georgia             ...... 

319 

Dec. 

31, 

South  Carolina          .... 

320 

Jan. 

14, 

1812. 

North  Carolina          . 

321 

April 

11, 

Maryland — Pennsylvania 

325 

May 

1, 

New-York — general  conference 

326 

June 

13, 

Connecticut                . 

328 

20, 

Massachusetts              .... 

.      ibid 

July 

1, 

New -York        ..... 

329 

Aug. 

2, 

Pennsylvania              . 

330 

18, 

Maryland           .*.... 

332 

Sept. 

11, 

Ohio        ..•„... 

333 

Oct. 

i<9 

J.  *»t  a 

Kentucky          ...... 

335 

Dec. 

3, 

North  Carolina          .         .         . 

338 

6, 

South  Carolina           .          .         . 

.      ibid 

Jan. 

26, 

1813. 

North  Carolina          . 

341 

March 

7, 

Maryland           ...... 

343 

April 

18, 

Delaware          .          .         . 

346 

24, 

Pennsylvania 

ibid 

May  5, 
14, 
28, 

June       2, 


14, 

28, 
July       2, 

Sept.     19, 


Nov.      9, 

10, 
Jan.  2, 
Feb.     20, 


March  13, 


April      3, 

13, 


Aug.       5, 


Sept. 

16, 

Oct. 

13, 

19, 

Nov. 

30, 

Jan. 

16, 

22, 

Feb. 

11, 

Marcl 

l  12, 

INDEX. 

1813.  New- Jersey 

New- York 

Connecticut  .... 

New-Hampshire         .... 
Makes  his  Will         . 

Difficulties  in  New-England 

Rhode- Island  .... 

Connecticut      . 

New-York       . 

Apostrophe  to  Henry  Willis 

Kentucky — conversion  of  a  persecutor 

The  Creek  Indians  at  war 

Tennessee        ..... 

Account  of  John  Douthat 

South  Carolina  .... 

Georgia  ..... 

1814.  North  Carolina  .... 
Virginia  ..... 
Account  of  his  visits  to  Virginia,  North  an 

South  Carolinas,  and  Georgia 

Maryland  ..... 

Death  and  character  of  Rev  P.  W.  Otter- 
bine  ..... 

Delaware  .         .         .         .         . 

Pennsylvania  .... 

New-Jersey      ..... 

His  sickness  and  recovery,  sufferings  and 
hopes  ..... 

Ohio         ...... 

Maternal     instructions — hears     of   Bishop 

M'Kendree's  illness 

Kentucky  P         I 

Hard  labour  of  Methodist  preachers 

South  Carolina — kind  attentions    of  John 

W.  Bond 

North  Carolina         .... 
Georgia  ..... 

Revival  at  camp-meetings 

1815.  South  Carolina  .  .  . 
North  Carolina          .... 
Virginia            ..... 
Maryland           . 


4W 

PAGS 

346 
347 
348 
ibid 

349 

350 
ibid 

OO  l 

ibid 
.  355 
356 
357 
ibid 
358 
ibid 
ibid 
360 
361 

ibid 
ibid 

362 
ibid 
ibid 
ibid 

363 

364 

385 
36C 
367 

o-jo 

3,u9 
371 
ibid 

O  i  4 

ibid 
378 
37 :? 


420  INDEX. 


P.      K 


April    10,    1815.  Delaware 379 

23,  Pennsylvania  .....  ibid 

May       4,  New-Jersey 380 

14,  JNew-York — preaches  the  funeral  sermon  of 

Dr.  Coke  ibid 

31,  Massachusetts 381 

June     14,  New-York ibid 

28,  Pennsylvania — revises  his  journal  up  to  the 

year  1807 382 

Outlines  of  a  sermon         ....  383 

Success  of  Methodist  missionaries  in  America  386 
Aug.      11,              Ohio — shortness  of  time — and  terror  of  the 

Lord 387 

Peter's  fall  and  recovery  .         .         .  388 

Night,  natural  and  spiritual         .         .         .  390 

Interview  with  Bishop  M'Kendree  .  391 

Nov.       5,  Virginia 394 

Dec.       2,  South  Carolina 396 

A  short  account  of  his  death      .         .         .  ibid 


H.  B.  In  reviewing  the  preceding  journal,  several  errors  in  the  dates  have  been  dis- 
covered, which,  however,  are  not  of  sufficient  importance  to  require  an  Errata,  except 
it  be  the  one  on  page  3G5,  Vol.  II,  where  read  1799,  the  year  in  which  General 
Washington  died,  instead  of  1797. 


