Title: The Journal of the Rev. Francis Asbury, Bishop of the
  Methodist Episcopal Church, from August 7, 1771, to December 7,
  1815. In Three Volumes. Vol. I, from August 7, 1771, to July 4,
  1786
Creator: Francis Asbury
Publisher: N. Bangs and T. Mason, for the Methodist Episcopal
  Church, New York
Publication Date: 1821
Rights: Public Domain
Source: Internet Archive, identifier 00612616.emory.edu (Pitts
  Theology Library / Emory University digital collection; the
  item's own online notice states "the online edition of this book
  in the public domain ... has been produced by the Emory University
  Digital Library Publications Program"). Fetched directly (curl,
  raw bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text derivative,
  2026-09-25.
Provenance note: OCR full-text derivative; no long-s or thorn/eth
  encoding artifacts found. Nothing else altered. Rights basis: 1821
  publication, well over 95 years before this session (2026) --
  public domain by date. Note (do-not-cite-as-current-scholarship
  flag): this is the original 1821 first American edition, NOT the
  modern critical edition (Elmer T. Clark, J. Manning Potts, and
  Jacob S. Payton, eds., The Journal and Letters of Francis Asbury,
  3 vols., Epworth Press/Abingdon Press, 1958) -- that edition is
  still in copyright and is not vendored here.
______________________________________________________________________

THE 


JOURNAL 


OF    THE 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY, 


BISHOP 


OF 

FROM 

AUGUST  7,  1771,  TO  DECEMBER  7,  181$, 

VOL.  I, 

FROM' AUGUST  7,  1771,  TO  JULY  4,  1786 


NEW-FORK: 

PUBLISHED   BY    N.    BANGS    AND   T.    MASON,    FOR    THE    METHODIST 

EPISCOPAL     CHURCH. 

— ^>@«— 
AV.-.Vam  Paul,  Printer,  182  Water-Street , 

ia2i„ 


Southern  District  ofJTete-York,  ss. 

BE  IT  REMEMBERED,  that  on  the  thirtieth  day  of  April,  in  the  forty-fifth  year  of  the  Inde- 
pendence of  the  United  States  of  America,  N.  Bangs  and  T.  Mason,  of  the  said  district,  have  de- 
posited in  this  office  the  title  of  a  book,  the  right  whereof  they  claim  as  Proprietors,  in  the  wordj 
following,  to  wit : 

"The  Journal  of  the  Rev.  Francis  Asbury,  Bishop  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  from 
August  7,  177],  to  December  7,  1815.     In  three  volumes." 

In  conformity  to  the  Act  of  the  Congress  of  the  United  States,  entitled  "  An  Act  for  the  Encou- 
ragement of  Learning,  by  securing  the  Copies  of  Maps,  Charts,  and  Books  to  the  Authors  and  Pro- 
prietors of  such  Copies,  during  the  times  therein  mentioned."  And  also  to  an  Act  entitled  "An  Act 
supplementary  to  an  Act  entitled,  An  Act  for  the  Encouragement  of  Learning,  by  securing  the 
Copies  of  Maps,  Charts,  and  Books,  to  the  Authors  and  Proprietors  of  such  Copies,  during  the  times 
therein  mentioned,  and  extending  the  Benefits  thereof  to  the  Arts  of  Designing,  Engraving,  and 
Etching  historical  and  other  Prints." 

G.  L.  THOMPSON, 
Clerk  of  the  Southern  District  ofJVevi-York. 


ADVERTISEMENT- 

"  ■  ^^©^*  ■ 

The  folio-wing  is  the  preface  which  Mr.  Asbury  prefixed  to  the 
first  number  of  the  second  volume  of  his  Journal,  which  was 
printed  during  his  lifetime. 

XN  the  month  of  September,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand 
seven  hundred  and  seventy-one,  I  embarked  in  England  for  America  ; 
at  which  time  the  memoirs  I  have  written  of  my  life  commenced. 
As  I  considered  my  station  on  the  American  continent,  in  the  order 
of  Divine  Providence,  as  a  situation  in  which  I  should  frequently  be 
exposed  to  censure  and  jealousy  -7  I  thought  it  highly  expedient,  for 
my  own  satisfaction  and  the  confirmation  of  my  friends,  to  keep  an 
impartial  diary  of  my  intentions,  resolutions,  and  actions,  as  a  Chris- 
tian and  a  minister,  that  I  might  have,  through  this  medium,  a  con- 
stant and  reasonable  answer  for  mine  accusers.  From  the  nature 
and  design  of  the  work,  it  must  have  in  it  many  things  both  unpleasing 
and  uninteresting  to  curious  and  critical  readers  :  and  perhaps  some 
things  exceptionable  even  to  those  who  enter  into  its  spirit,  and  read 
it  with  affection.  In  keeping  a  journal  of  my  life,  I  have  unavoi- 
dably laboured  under  many  embarrassments  and  inconveniences  ; 
my  constant  travelling,  the  want  of  places  of  retirement  and  conve- 
niences to  write,  my  frequent  calls  to  the  pulpit,  my  extensive  epis- 
tolary correspondence,  and  my  debility,  and  sometimes  inability  of 
body,  have  all  been  inseparable  from  my  station  in  the  Church,  and 
so  many  impediments  to  the  perfection  of  the  account  of  my  labours 
and  sufferings  in  this  country.  The  first  volume  of  the  extract  of 
my  journal  was  published,  many  years  after  it  was  written,  under  the 
management  of  others,  it  being  out  of  my  power  to  attend  the  press* 


IV  ADVERTISEMENT 

or  even  to  read  over  the  copy  before  jt  was  printed  :*  several  incon- 
veniences attending  that  volume  will  be  avoided  in  this. 

For  many  years  I  did  not  determine  to  publish  a  second  volume  of 
the  extract  of  my  journal  :  but  the  advice  of  ray  friends,  and  the 
prospects  of  my  approaching  dissolution,  have  determined  me  on  its 
publication. f 

As  I  have  had  no  certain  dwelling  place  in  America,  my  manu- 
scripts have  frequently  been  exposed  to  be  lost  and  destroyed  ;  but, 
by  the  permission  of  Divine  Providence,  I  have  collected  them 
together. 

The  Methodists  of  late  years  have  become  a  more  numerous  body, 
consequently  more  obnoxious  to  their  enemies,  The  Scripture  is 
fulfilled  even  amongst  us,  "  Also  of  your  own  selves  shall  men  arise, 
speaking  perverse  things,  to  draw  away  disciples  after  them."  Some, 
who  were  for  a  long  time  our  confidential  friends  and  fellow-labourers, 
are  now  become  our  most  inveterate  foes,  and  have  written  and  pub- 
lished books  against  our  characters,  government,  and  discipline.  And, 
as  I  am  considered  the  most  ostensible  character  in  the  Methodist 
Church  in  America,  1  have  frequently  to  bear  the  greatest  weight  of 
their  invectives.  But  impartial  readers  will  not,  I  am  persuaded., 
give  an  implicit  assent  to  the  asseverations  of  those  who  may  be  under 
personal  resentment  against  the  body,  or  individuals,  without  duly  con- 
sidering the  possibility  of  their  being  influenced  by  self-interest,  jea- 
lousy, or  prejudice.  And  as  I  have  been  (under  God  and  my  bre- 
thren) the  principal  overseer  of  the  work  in  America,  and  have 
constantly  travelled  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference  of  the  con- 
nexion, 1  flatter  myself  that  reasonable  men  will  acknowledge  that  I 
have  always  had  an  opportunity  of  obtaining  better  information  rela- 
tive to  the  true  state  of  the  whole  work  than  any  other  man  could 
possibly  have.  Would  it  not  then  be  highly  injudicious  to  prefer  a 
history  of  Methocjism,  written  by  men  of  small  and  contracted  infor- 

*  This  volume,  now  reprinted,  was  corrected  by  the  author. 

t  This  determination  was  not  carried  into  effect,   except  one  small  numbe^ 
which  is  now  republished  with  the  corrections  of  the  author. 


ADVERTISEMENT.  V 

mation,  (and  apostates  from  its  principles)  to  such  a  history  of  its  pro- 
gress as  will  be  presented  to  the  public  in  my  journals  ?  And,  if  I 
may  be  credited,  I  can  declare,  that  in  the  critical  and  delicate  circum- 
stances that  I  have  been  necessitated  to  stand  in  relative  to  the  cha- 
racters of  men,  I  have  never  knowingly  deviated  from  the  principles 
of  that  sacced  charity  which  obligates  us  to  treat  each  other  with  all 
possible  tenderness. 

If  I  have  injured  the  character  of  man,  woman,  or  child,  in  jour- 
nal representation,  I  have  done  it  inadvertently  •  and  sincerely  ask 
their  pardon.  In  stationing  the  preachers  I  have  known  no  man 
after  the  flesh  ;  but  have,  to  the  utmost  of  my  power,  endeavoured  to 
keep  an  eye  to  the  glory  of  God,  the  usefulness  of  the  ministry,  and 
the  benefit  of  the  people.  I  have  attempted  to  give  a  simple  narra- 
tion  of  facts  in  the  integrity  of  my  heart,  and  in  the  fear  of  God. 

My  intention  is,  as  much  as  possible,  to  remove  every  hinderance 
out  of  the  way,  and  to  give  no  occasion  for  offence  to  any  man.  But 
if,  after  all,  my  attempts  prove  unsuccessful,  I  can,  in  the  approbation 
of  my  own  heart,  and  in  the  company  of  my  old,  faithful,  and  constant 
American  friends  and  brethren,  through  the  medium  of  my  journal 
look  back  upon  what  God  has  wrought,  and  say,  "  Hitherto  the  Lord 
hath  helped."  We  can  thus  comfort  and  console  ourselves  with  the 
past  loving  kindness  of  the  Lord  ;  and  the  years  in  which  his  right- 
hand  hath  been  bare,  will  thus,  to  us,  be  rendered  more  delightful. 
» I  had  thoughts  of  leaving  my  manuscripts  to  the  executors  of  my 
will,  to  be  published  by  them  after  my  death,  but  found,  upon  recon- 
sideration, that  their  contents  respecting  persons  and  things  were  of 
such  a  nature  that  no*  person  could  do  it  so  well  as  myself*  Should 
my  life  be  spared,  the  volumes  will  be  brought  forward  in  course. 
As  soon  as  one  is  disposed  of,  another  will  be  put  to  press,  until  the 
whole  is  published. 

FRANCIS  ASBURY. 

*  The  greater  part  of  the  journal  which  follows,  was  left  in  manuscript, 
but  revised  under  the  author's  inspection  as  far  down  as  the  year  1807.  Set 
*h,e  Transcriber's  Notice,  and  page  382,  Vol.  iii.  of  the  following  journal- 


NOTICE  OF  THE  TRANSCRIBER. 


-SM&V' 


m 

.1  HE  name  of  the  venerable  author  of  the  following  journal  will 

create  for  the  work  so  deep  and  enduring  an  interest,  in  the  hearts 
and  minds  of  those  for  whom  it  was  more  especially  prepared,,  that  it 
becomes  proper  the  transcriber  should  give  some  account  of  the 
manner  in  which  he  conducted  the  work  of  transcribing,  so  that  those 
who  are  concerned  may  have  satisfactory  assurances  of  its  genuine- 
ness. The  ill  health  by  which  Bishop  Asbury  was  so  much  of  his 
Fife  a  sufferer ;  the  crowds  in  which  he  was  too  often  compelled  to 
live  in  the  west  and  south  ;  the  succession  of  visiters  he  thought  it 
his  duty  at  all  times  of  leisure  to  receive  ;  his  ministerial  labours  ; 
and  above  all,  the  constant  occupation  of  mind  on  the  important  con- 
cerns of  a  Church  so  great  in  membership,  so  widely  extended  and 
rapidly  increasing,  necessarily  occasioned,  left  the  First  Superinten- 
dant  of  that  Church  few  means  of  rendering  his  journal  more  perfect. 
The  transcriber  has  not  attempted  to  improve  it  by  giving  his  own 
for  the  author's.  Some  things  in  the  original  work  he  has  taken  the 
liberty  of  leaving  out  of  the  transcript ;  but  there  are  not  many  of 
these,  and  they  are  most  of  them  in  that  part  of  it  which  the  bishop 
himself  examined  during  his  life.  The  transcriber  not  unfrequently 
found  a  confusion  of  dates  ;  and  sometimes,  as  he  thinks,  a  mistake  in 
the  names  of  persons  and  things;  more  especially  in  the  author's 
geographical  notices  of  the  districts  through  which  he  made  his  an- 
nual tour  ;  the  emendations,  in  this  last  particular,  are  not,  it  is  to  he 
feared,  always  correct.  In  places  where  the  author  has  left,  by  in- 
advertence, a  sentence  unfinished,  a  thing  not  uncommon,  the  tran- 
scriber has  always  tried  to  supply  what  was  wanting ;  and  where 


NOTICE    OF    THE    TRANSCRIBER.  Vll 

hurry  has  occasioned  evident  mistake,  as  is  the  case  in  a  few  instances, 
he  has  ventured  upon  correction ;  but  he  is  not  sure  that  in  every 
attempt  he  has  been  successful.  To  those  persons  yet  living,  who 
had,  by  habits  of  intimacy  with  Bishop  Asbury,  become  acquainted 
with  the  peculiarity  of  his  conversational  and  epistolary  manner  of 
expressing  himself,  the  style  of  the  present  work  may  not  be  so 
pleasing  ;  because  it  is  not  so  exactly  the  style  they  expected — not  so 
decidedly  the  bishop's.  But  they  must  recollect  that  the  author's  in- 
tention in  keeping  his  journal  was,  to  make  a  faithful  record  lor  pos- 
terity ;  and  the  transcriber  never  forgot  that  its  value,  in  this  respect, 
would  be  better  understood  and  more  highly  appreciated  by  those  who 
can  only  know  the  author  by  his  work.  The  abruptness  of  sentence 
in  its  beginning  or  its  break — the  sudden  light  flashed  upon  a  subject 
by  a  suggestion  conveyed  in  words  few  and  strong — the  names,  de- 
scriptive as  painting,  he  was  wont  to  bestow  upon  persons  and  things 
- — all  these  live  only  in  the  memory  of  his  surviving  friends  ;  and 
with  them  must  pass  away  :  but  that  which  is  of  more  importance — 
the  identity  of  Bishop  Asbury  in  the  commencement,  the  continuance, 
and  wonderful  increase  of  Methodism  in  this  country,  will  give  a 
perpetuity  of  interest  in  the  record  here  offered  which  nothing  else 
can  give.  The  transcriber  would  not,  however,  have  it  supposed 
that  he  had  entirely  departed  from  Bishop  Asbury's  style  ;  on  the  con- 
trary, he  presumes  he  has  been  enough  observant  of  this  to  satisfy 
most  readers,  inasmuch  as  the  bishop  himself,  when  he  examined 
what  had  been  transcribed  up  to  ll!07,  altered  but  once,  and  then  not 
much.  The  public  may  rest  assured  that  the  work  is  the  author's  :  but 
here  the  transcriber  must  be  permitted  to  speak  in  the  first  person.™ 
When  I  give  this  assurance,  I  must  be  understood  to  mean  from  the 
year  1780  to  the  end  of  the  journal ;  the  original  manuscript  of  all 
that  preceded  that  date,  I  never  saw :  I  only  know  that  when 
printed  it  did  not  please  the  author.  The  journal  of  Bishop  As- 
bury might  have  been  better.  I  once  ventured  to  express  my  un- 
availing wishes  to  him  that  he  had  left  out  many  of  the  uninteresting 
incidents  and  travelling  notices  we  find  in  it,  and  had  put  in  more  of 


tai  NOTICE    OF    THE    TRANSCRIBER. 


the  deep  reflections  and  acute  remarks  on  men,  books,  and  passing 
events  continually  afloat  in  his  powerful  and  observant  mind  ;  and 
that,  for  the  sake  of  his  brethren  in  the  ministry  who  should  follow 
him,  he  had  made  the  skeletons  of  his  sermons  more  perfect,  and 
had  added  many  more.  His  reply,  uttered  with  much  feeling,  would 
have  satisfied  every  candid  mind  that  it  was  by  no  ordinary  effort  so 
much  had  been  done. 

F.  HOLLINGSWORTH 

March  28,  1821- 


THE 


5©w3Bma» 


OF  THE 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY. 


o 


N  the  7th  of  August  1771,  the  conference  began  at  Bristol,  in 
England.  Before  this,  I  had  felt  for  half  a  year  strong  intimations 
in  my  mind  that  I  should  visit  America ;  which  1  laid  before  the 
Lord,  being  unwilling  to  do  my  own  will,  or  to  run  before  I  was 
sent.  During  this  time  my  trials  were  very  great,  which  the  Lord, 
I  believe,  permitted  to  prove  and  try  me,  in  order  to  prepare  me 
for  future  usefulness.  At  the  conference  it  was  proposed  that  some 
preachers  should  go  over  to  the  American  continent.  I  spoke  my 
mind,  and  made  an  offer  of  myself.  It  was  accepted  by  Mr.  Wesley 
and  others,  who  judged  I  had  a  call.  From  Bristol  I  went  home 
to  acquaint  my  parents  with  my  great  undertaking,  which  I  opened 
in  as  gentle  a  manner  as  possible.  Though  it  was  grievous  to  flesh 
and  blood,  they  consented  to  let  me  go.  My  mother  is  one  of  the 
tenderest  parents  in  the  world  :  but,  I  believe,  she  was  blessed  in 
the  present  instance,  with  divine  assistance  to  part  with  me.  I 
visited  most  of  my  friends  in  Staffordshire,  Warwickshire,  and  Glou- 
cestershire, and  felt  much  life  and  power  among  them.  Several 
of  our  meetings  were  indeed  held  in  the  spirit  and  life  of  God. 
Many  of  my  friends  were  struck  with  wonder,  when  they  heard  of 
my  going ;  but  none  opened  their  mouths  against  it,  hoping  it  was  of 
God.  Some  wished  that  their  situation  would  allow  them  to  go  with 
me. 

I  returned  to  Bristol  in  the  latter  end  of  August,  where  Richard 
Wright  was  waiting  for  me,  to  sail  in  a  few  days  for  Philadelphia. 
When  I  came  to  Bristol  I  had  not  one  penny  of  money  :  but  the  Lord 
soon  opened  the  hearts  of  friends,  who  supplied  me  with  clothes,  and 

Vol.  I.  1 


2  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL, 

ten  pounds  :  thus  I  found,  by  experience,  that  the  Lord  will  provide 
for  those  who  trust  in  him. 

On  Wednesday,  September  2,  we  set  sail  from  a  port  near  Bris- 
tol ;  and  having  a  good  wind,  soon  passed  the  channel.  For  three 
days  I  was  very  ill  with  the  sea-sickness  :  and  no  sickness  I  ever 
knew  was  equal  to  it.  The  captain  behaved  well  to  us.  On  the 
Lord's  day,  September  8,  brother  W.  preached  a  sermon  on  deck, 
and  all  the  crew  gave  attention. 

Thursday  12th.  I  will  set  down  a  few  things  that  lie  on  my 
mind.  Whither  am  I  going  ?  To  the  new  world.  What  to  do  t 
To  gain  honour  ?  No,  if  I  know  my  own  heart.  To  get  money  ? 
No,  I  am  going  to  live  to  God,  and  to  bring  others  so  to  do.  la 
America  there  has  been  a  work  of  God  :  some  moving  first  amongst 
the  Friends,  but  in  time  it  declined  :  likewise  by  the  Presbyterians, 
but  amongst  them  also  it  declined.  The  people  God  owns  in  England^ 
are  the  Methodists.  The  doctrines  they  preach,  and  the  discipline 
they  enforce,  are,  I  believe,  the  purest  of  any  people  now  in  the 
world.  The  Lord  has  greatly  blessed  these  doctrines  and  this  disci- 
pline in  the  three  kingdoms  :  they  must  therefore  be  pleasing  to  him. 
If  God  does  not  acknowledge  me  in  America,  I  will  soon  return  to 
England.  I  know  my  views  are  upright  now — May  they  never  b& 
otherwise  ! 

On  the  Lord's  day,  September  16,  I  preached  on  Acts  xvii.  3Ct 
"  But  God  now  commandeth  all  men  every  where  to-  repent."  The 
sailors  behaved  with  decency.  My  heart's  desire  and  prayer  for 
them  was,  and  is,  that  they  may  be  saved  :  but  Oh  !  the  deep  igno- 
rance and  insensibility  ©f  the  human  heart ! 

The  wind  blowing  a  gale,  the  ship  turned  up  and  down,  and  from 
side  to  side,  in  a  manner  very  painful  to  one  that  was  not  accus- 
tomed to  sailing  :  but  when  Jesus  is  in  the  ship  all  is  well.  O 
what  would  not  one  do,  what  would  he  not  suffer,  to  be  useful  to 
souls,  and  to  do  the  will  of  his  great  Master !  Lord,  help  me  to 
give  thee  my  heart  now  and  for  ever  ! 

Our  friends  had  forgotten  our  beds,  or  else  did  not  know  wc 
should  want  such  things  ;  so  I  had  two  blankets  for  mine.  I  found 
it  hard  to  lodge  on  little  more  than  boards.  I  want  faith,  courage, 
patience,  meekness,  love.  When  others  suffer  so  much  for  their 
temporal  interests,  surely  I  may  suffer  a  little  for  the  glory  of  God, 
and  the  good  of  souls.  May  my  Lord  preserve  me  in  an  upright 
intention  !  1  find  I  talk  more  than  is  profitable.  Surely  my  soul  is 
among  lions.  1  feel  my  spirit  bound  to  the  new  world,  and  my 
heart  united  to  the  people,  though  unknown  ;  and  have  great  cause 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  § 

to  believe  that  I  am  not  running  before  I  am  sent.  The  more 
troubles  I  meet  with,  the  more  convinced  I  am  that  I  am  doing  the 
will  of  God. 

In  the  course  of  my  passage  I  read  Sellon's  Answer  to  Elisha  Cole* 
on  the  Sovereignty  of  God  :  and,  I  think,  no  one  that  reads  it 
deliberately,  can  afterward  be  a  Calvinist. 

On  the  Lord's  day,  September  22,  I  preached  to  the  ship's  com- 
pany on  John  iii.  23.  but  alas  !  they  were  insensible  creatures.  My 
heart  has  been  much  pained  on  their  account.  I  spent  my  time 
chiefly  in  retirement,  in  prayer,  and  in  reading  the  Appeals,  Mr. 
De  Renty's  life,  part  of  Mr.  Norris's  Works,  Mr.  Edwards  on  the 
Work  of  God  in  New-England,  the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  the  Bible, 
and  Mr.  Wesley's  Sermons.  I  feel  a  strong  desire  to  be  given 
tip  to  God,  body,  soul,  time,  and  talents,  far  more  than  heretofore. 

September  30.  I  preached  to  the  ship's  company  again,  on  these 
words,  "  To  you  is  the  word  of  this  salvation  sent."  I  felt  some 
drawings  of  soul  towards  them,  but  saw  no  fruit.  Yet  still  I  must 
go  on.  Whilst  they  will  hear,  I  will  preach,  as  I  have  opportunity. 
My  judgment  is  with  the  Lor^.  I  must  keep  in  the  path  of  duty. 
On  the  6th  of  October,  though  it  was  very  rough,  I  preached  on 
deck  to  all  our  ship's  company,  from  those  very  important  words  in 
Hebr.  ii.  3.  "  How  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  sal- 
vation." The  Lord  enabled  me  to  speak  plainly,  and  I  had  some 
hopes  that  the  interesting  truths  of  the  Gospel  did  enter  into  their 
minds.  I  remember  the  words  of  the  wise  man,  "  In  the  morning 
aow  thy  seed,  and  in  the  evening  withhold  not  thy  hand."  As  to  my 
own  mind,  I  long  and  pray,  that  I  may  be  more  spiritual.  But  in 
this  I  comfort  myself  that  my  intention  is  upright,  and  that  I  have 
the  cause  of  God  at  heart.  But  I  want  to  stand  complete  in  all  the 
will  of  God,  "  holy  as  he  that  hath  called  me  is  holy,  in  all  manner 
of  conversation."  At  .times  I  can  retire  and  pour  out  my  soul  to 
God,  and  feel  some  meltings  of  heart.  My  spirit  mourns,  and 
hungers,  and  thirsts  after  entire  devotion. 

October  13.  Though  it  was  very  windy,  I  fixed  my  back  against 
the  mizen-mast,  and  preached  freely  on  those  well-known  words, 
2  Cor.  v.  20.  "  Now  then  we  are  ambassadors  for  Christ,  as  though 
God  did  beseech  you  by  us :  we  pray  you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye 
reconciled  to  God."  I  felt  the  power  of  truth  on  my  own  soul,  but 
still,  alas!  saw  no  visible  fruit:  but  my  witness  is  in  heaven,  that 
I  have  not  shunned  to  declare  to  them  all  the  counsel  of  God. 
Many  have  been  my  trials  in  the  course  of  this  voyage,  from  the 
want  of  a  proper  bed,  and  proper  provisions,  from  sickness,  and 


4  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

from  being  surrounded  with  men  and  women  ignorant  of  God, 
and  very  wicked.  But  all  this  is  nothing.  If  I  cannot  bear  this, 
what  have  I  learnt  ?  O  I  have  reason  to  be  much  ashamed  of 
many  things,  which  I  speak  and  do  before  God  and  man.  Lord, 
pardon  my  manifold  defects  and  failures  in  duty. 

October  27.  This  day  we  landed  in  Philadelphia,  where  we 
were  directed  to  the  house  of  one  Mr.  Francis  Harris,  who  kindly  en- 
tertained us  in  the  evening,  and  brought  us  to  a  large  church,  where 
we  met  with  a  considerable  congregation.  Brother  Pilmore  preach- 
ed. The  people  looked  on  us  with  pleasure,  hardly  knowing  how 
to  show  their  love  sufficiently,  bidding  us  welcome  with  fervent  affec- 
tion, and  receiving  us  as  angels  of  God.  O  that  we  may  always  walk 
worthy  of  the  vocation  wherewith  we  are  celled  ?  When  I  came 
near  the  American  shore,  my  very  heart  melted  within  me,  to  think 
from  whence  I  eame,  where  I  was  going,  and  what  I  was  going  about. 
But  I  felt  my  mind  open  to  the  people,  and  my  tongue  loosed  to 
speak.     I  feel  that  God  is  here  ;  and  find  plenty  of  all  we  need. 

November  3.  I  find  my  mind  drawn  heaven-ward.  The  Lord 
hath  helped  me  by  his  power,  and  my  soul  is  in  a  paradise.  May 
God  Almighty  keep  me  as  the  apple  of  his  eye,  till  all  the  storms 
of  life  are  past!  Whatever  I  do,  wherever  I  go,  may  I  never  sin 
against  God,  but  always  do  those  things  that  please  him  ! 

Philadelphia,  November  4.  We  held  a  watch-night.  It  began 
at  eight  o'clock.  Brother  P  preached,  and  the  people  attended 
with  great  seriousness.  Very  few  left  the  solemn  place  till  the 
conclusion.  Towards  the  end,  a  plain  man  spoke,  who  came  out 
of  the  country,  and  his  words  went  with  great  power  to  the  souls 
of  the  people  ;  so  that  we  may  say,  "  Who  hath  despised  the  day  of 
small  things  ?"  not  the  Lord  our  God  :  then  why  should  self- 
important  man  ? 

November  5.  I  was  sent  for  to  visit  two  persons  who  were 
under  conviction  for  sin.  I  spoke  a  word  of  consolation  to  them, 
and  have  hopes  that  God  will  set  their  souls  at  liberty.  My  own 
mind  is  fixed  on  God  :  he  hath  helped  me,  glory  be  to  him  that 
liveth  and  abideth  for  ever. 

Tuesday,  November  6,  I  preached  at  Philadelphia  my  last  sermon, 
before  I  set  out  for  New-York,  on  Rom.  viii.  32.  "  He  that  spared 
not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not 
with  him  freely  give  us  all  things."  This  also  was  a  night  of  power 
to  my  own  and  many  other  souls. 

November  7.  I  went  to  Burlington  on  my  way  to  York,  and 
preached  in  the  court-house  to  a  large,  serious  congregation.     Here 


AKV.  FftANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL,  5 

also  I  felt  my  heart  much  opened.  In  the  way  from  thence  to 
York  I  met  with  one  P.  Van  Pelt,  who  had  heard  me  preach  at  Phila- 
delphia. After  some  conversation  he  invited  me  to  his  house  on 
Staten-Island  ;  and  as  1  was  not  engaged  to  be  at  York  on  any  par- 
ticular day,  I  went  with  him  and  preached  in  his  house.  Still  I 
believe  God  hath  sent  me  to  this  country.  All  I  seek  is  to  be  more 
spiritual,  and  given  up  entirely  to  God,  to  be  all  devoted  to  him 
whom  I  love. 

On  the  Lord's  day,  in  the  morning,  November  11,  I  preached 
again  to  a  large  company  of  people,  with  some  enlargement  of 
mind,  at  the  house  of  my  worthy  friend  Mr.  P  In  the  afternoon 
preached  to  a  still  larger  congregation  ;  and  was  invited  to  preach 
in  the  evening  at  the  house  of  justice  Wright,  where  I  had  a  large 
company  to  hear  me.  Still  evidence  grows  upon  me,  and  I  trust 
I  am  in  the  order  of  God,  and  that  there  will  be  a  willing  people 
here.  My  soul  has  been  much  affected  with  them.  My  heart 
and  mouth  are  open,  only  I  am  still  sensible  of  my  deep  insuffi- 
ciency, and  that  mostly  with  regard  to  holiness.  It  is  true,  God 
has  given  me  some  gifts,  but  what  are  they  to  holiness.  It  is  for 
holiness  my  spirit  mourns.  I  want  to  walk  constantly  before  God 
without  reproof. 

On  Monday  I  set  out  for  New-York,  and  found  Richard  Boardman 
there  in  peace,  but  weak  in  body.  Now  I  must  apply  myself  to  my 
old  work,  to  watch,  and  fight,  and  pray.     Lord  help  ! 

Tuesday,  13.  I  preached  at  York  to  a  large  congregation  on 
1  Cor.  ii.  2.  "  I  determined  not  to  know  any  thing  among  you 
save  Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified,"  with  some  degree  of  freedom 
in  my  own  mind.  I  approved  much  of  the  spirit  of  the  people  : 
they  were  loving  and  serious  :  there  appeared  also  in  some  a 
love  of  discipline.  Though  I  was  unwilling  to  go  to  York  so  soon, 
I  believe  it  is  all  weH,  and  I  still  hope  I  am  in  the  order  of  God. 
My  friend  B.  is  a  kind,  loving,  worthy  man,  truly  amiable  and 
entertaining,  and  of  a  child-like  temper.  I  purpose  to  be  given 
up  to  God  more  and  more,  day  by  day.     But  Oh  !  I  come  short. 

Wednesday  14,  I  preached  again  at  York.  My  heart  is  truly 
enlarged,  and  I  know  the  life  and  power  of  religion  is  here.  O 
how  I  wish  to  spend  all  my  time  and  talents  for  him  who  spilt  his 
blood  for  me  I 

The  Lord's  day  18,  I  found  a  day  of  rest  to  my  soul.  In  the 
morning  I  was  much  led  out  with  a  sacred  desire.  Lord,  help 
me  against  the  mighty.  I  feel  a  regard  for  the  people,  and  I  think 
the   Americans    are   more   ready   to   receive    the   word   than  the 


6  REV.  TRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL. 

English  :  and  to  see  the  poor  negroes  so  affected  is  pleasing  :  t® 
see  their  sable  countenances  in  our  solemn  assemblies,  and  to  hear 
them  sing  with  cheerful  melody  their  dear  Redeemer's  praise, 
affected  me  much,  and  made  me  ready  to  say,  "  of  a  truth  I  per- 
ceive God  is  no  respecter  of  persons." 

Tuesday  20.  I  remain  in  York,  though  unsatisfied  with  our  being 
both  in  town  together.  I  have  not  yet  the  thing  which  I  seek — a 
circulation  of  preachers  to  avoid  partiality  and  popularity.  How- 
ever, I  am  fixed  to  the  Methodist  plan,  and  do  what  I  do  faithfully 
as  to  God.  I  expect  trouble  is  at  hand.  This  I  expected  when  I 
left  England,  and  I  am  willing  to  suffer,  yea,  to  die,  sooner  than 
betray  so  good  a  cause  by  any  means.  It  will  be  a  hard  matter  to 
stand  against  all  opposition  as  an  iron  pillar  strong,  and  steadfast 
as  a  wall  of  brass :  but  through  Christ  strengthening  me  I  can  do 
all  things. 

Thursday  22.  At  present  I  am  dissatisfied.  I  judge  we  are  to 
be  shut  up  in  the  cities  this  winter.  My  brethren  seem  unwilling 
to  leave  the  cities,  but  I  think  I  shall  show  them  the  way.  I  am  in 
trouble,  and  more  trouble  is  at  hand,  for  I  am  determined  to  make  a 
stand  against  all  partiality.  I  have  nothing  to  seek  but  the  glory  of  God , 
nothing  to  fear  but  his  displeasure.  I  am  come  over  with  an  upright 
intention,  and  through  the  grace  of  God  I  will  make  it  appear  :  and 
I  am  determined  that  no  man  shall  bias  me  with  soft  words  and 
fair  speeches  :  nor  will  I  ever  fear  (the  Lord  helping  me)  the 
face  of  man,  or  know  any  man  after  the  flesh,  if  I  beg  my  bread 
from  door  to  door  ;  but  whomsoever  I  please  or  displease,  I  will  be 
faithful  to  God,  to  the  people,  and  to  my  own  soul. 

Saturday,  Nov.  24.     I  went  with  brother  S.  and  brother  W    t& 
West-Chester,  which  is  about  twenty  miles  from  New- York.     My 
friends  waited  on  the  mayor  for  the  use  of  the  court-house,  which 
was  readily  granted.     On  the  Lord's  day  morning  a   Considerable 
company  being  gathered  together,  I  stood  up  in  the  Lord's  power  ; 
yea,  I  felt  the  Holy  One  was  nigh.    I  judged  that  my  audience  needed 
to  be  taught  the  first  principles  of  religion,  so   I  spoke  from  those 
words,  "  Now  he   commandeth  all   men  every  where  to  repent." 
Seriousness  sat  on  the  faces  of  my  hearers,  and  the  power  of  God 
came  both  on  me   and  them,  while  I  laboured  to  show   them  the 
nature  and  necessity  of  repentance  ;  and  the  proper  subjects  and 
time  for  it.     In  the  afternoon  the  congregation  was  increased,  both 
in  number  and  seriousness  :  some  of  the  chief  men  of  the  town — 
the  mayor  and  others,  were  present.     I  delivered  my  thoughts  on 
those  words,  "  This  is  his  commandment,  that  we  should  believe  o® 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  7 

the  name  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  love  one  another."  I  felt 
warmth  in  my  soul  while  I  set  forth  the  nature  and  necessity  of 
faith,  and  much  enlargement  towards  my  hearers.  In  the  evening  I 
preached  at  one  M.'s,  at  a  place  called  West-Farms,  to  many  persons, 
on  the  love  of  God.  The  next  day  I  preached  at  West-Chester  again 
to  a  large  company,  and  felt  a  sense  of  God  resting  on  my  heart, 
and  much  love  to  the  people.  Being  detained  another  day  by  the 
roughness  of  the  weather,  I  preached  another  sermon  on  this  text, 
"  Knowing  therefore  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men.'* 
In  the  evening  we  went  to  the  mayor's,  where  we  lodged  that  night ; 
and  the  next  day  at  noon  set  out  for  York. 

The  Lord's  day,  December  2,  I  found  a  day  of  rest  to  my  soul, 
and  much  liberty  both  in  the  morning  and  evening,  among  the 
people.  O  that  I  may  live  to  God  and  not  to  myself,  and  keep  myself 
free  from  all  worldly  entanglements. 

Saturday,  December  8.  As  brother  B.  was  still  at  New- York, 
I  thought  it  best  to  make  another  visit  to  West-Chester.  I  spent 
the  evening  and  lodged  at  the  house  of  one  Dr.  White,  who  appears 
to  be  an  understanding  man  in  the  things  of  God.  His  wife  is 
also  of  an  amiable  disposition,  and  is  touched  with  a  sense  of  her 
own  state,  and  that  of  her  neighbours.  I  spoke  to  her  freely  of 
the  willingness  of  Christ  to  save  now,  but  unbelief  still  prevailed. 
The  next  morning  I  went  to  the  court-house  to  preach,  but  the 
noise  of  the  children,  and  the  ill-behaviour  of  the  unhappy,  drunken 
keeper,  caused  much  confusion.  In  the  afternoon  my  friend  M. 
informed  me  that  the  door  of  the  court-house  was  shut  against  me. 
I  felt  myself  at  first  a  little  troubled,  but  soon  after  a  tavern-keeper 
gave  me  the  offer  of  an  upper  room  in  his  house,  where  I  spoke 
on  those  words,  "  If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to 
forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness." 
The  power  of  God  was  with  us,  and  many  of  the  vilest  of  those 
present,  will,  I  trust,  remember  it  as  long  as  they  live.  In  the 
evening  I  made  another  visit  to  West-Farms,  and  preached  there ; 
and  my  heart  was  there  also  touched  with  the  power  of  God.  I 
lodged  that  night  at  the  house  of  one  Mr.  O — y.  After  supper 
I  asked  the  family  if  they  would  go  to  prayer.  They  looked  at 
one  another  and  said,  there  was  need  enough.  TMe  next  morning, 
when  I  asked  a  blessing  before  breakfast,  they  seemed  amazed.  I 
told  them,  they  wanted  nothing  but  religion.  The  old  father  said, 
it  was  not  well  to  be  too  religious.  The  son  said,  he  thought  we 
could  not  be  too  good.  I  soon  afterward  took  my  leave  of  them,  and 
preached  in  the   evening  at  East-Chester  to  a  few  who  seemed 


8  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

willing  to  hear,  on  those  words,  "As  for  me  and  my  house,  we  will 
serve  the  Lord."  I  found  myself  straitened  and  shut  up  ;  but  the 
Lord  knoweth  what  he  hath  to  do  with  me. 

Tuesday,  December  10,  I  rode  to  New-Rochelle,  and  was  re- 
ceived with  great  kindness  by  Mr.  Devoue  and  his  family,  and  preached 
there  to  a  few.  The  next  day  also  I  preached  to  a  large  company, 
and  found  liberty,  and  believe  the  power  of  God  was  amongst  us. 
From  thence  I  rode  to  Rye,  where  a  few  people  were  collected 
together  to  hear  the  word  :  and  the  next  day  preached  to  them 
again.  On  Sunday  14,  1  rode  back  to  East-Chester,  and  preached 
to  a  large  company,  and  ^found  some  satisfaction  in  speaking  on 
"  The  one  thing  needful."  On  the  Lord's  day  I  preached  at  New- 
Rochelle  in  the  church.  My  text  was,  "  All  have  sinned  and  come 
short  of  the  glory  of  God."  I  felt  an  opening,  and  was  satisfied. 
I  published  myself  to  preach  again  in  the  afternoon,  and  those 
who  had  most  opposed  me  before,  came  to  hear,  and  behaved  well. 
In  the  evening  I  preached  in  the  house  of  my  friend  Mr.  D.  The 
next  day  I  preached  again  at  Mr.  D.'s,  and  on  Tuesday  went  to  Rye, 
where  I  had  many  to  hear  me,  and  felt  some  freedom  of  spirit. 
The  next  day  I  preached  at  Mairnock,  to  a  company  of  people 
who  at  first  took  but  little  notice  of  the  worship  of  God,  but  I 
trust  some  of  them  felt  the  power  of  truth  in  their  hearts.  On 
Thursday  I  returned  to  York,  and  found  my  friends  in  peace. 

Lord's  day,  December  22,  I  preached  to  a  large  company  in  the 
evening,  and  felt  much  power.  I  know  that  God  was  with  us 
indeed,  yea,  was  nigh  to  bless  the  people.  On  Christmas  day,  we 
had  a  yery  comfortable  time.  On  Friday  the  27th,  I  set  off  with 
two  of  my  friends  for  Staten-Island.  On  the  28th,  we  arrived  at 
justice  W  's,  where  we  were  entertained  with  the  best  his  house 
afforded.  From  thence  I  went  to  my  old  friend  V  P.'s,  who 
received  me  with  his  former  kindness,  and  collected  a  congregation 
for  the  evening,  to  whom  I  preached,  but  had  a  violent  pain  in 
my  head.  After  service  I  went  to  bed,  and  was  very  ill.  However, 
the  next  day,  being  the  Lord's  day,  1  preached  in  the  morning 
and  also  in  the  afternoon,  with  some  freedom  of  mind.  In  the 
evening  I  returned  and  preached  at  justice  W  's.  Having  received 
an  invitation  to  preach  at  the  house  of  one  Mr.  W — d,  at  the  east 
end  of  the  Island,  I  visited  that  place  on  my  return  to  New-York, 
where  I  had  a  comfortable  time. 

On  Tuesday  we  arrived  in  New-York.  We  have  been  favoured 
here  with  a  very  solemn  watch-night.  Many  felt  the  power  of 
God. 


REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 


January  1,  1772.  I  find  that  the  preachers  have  their  friends 
in  the  cities,  and  care  not  to  leave  them.  There  is  a  strange  party- 
spirit.  For  my  part  I  desire  to  be  faithful  to  God  and  man.  On 
Thursday  evening,  I  preached  my  last  sermon  for  a  time,  on  1  Thess. 
v.  6.  "  Let  us  not  sleep  as  do  others,  but  let  us  watch  and  be 
sober." 

On  Friday,  brother  S.  and  myself  set  out  for  West-Farms,  and 
I  preached  in  the  evening.  On  the  Lord's  day  I  preached  at  brother 
M — y's  at  half  past  nine,  in  West-Chester  at  three,  and  at  West- 
Farms  at  six  in  the  evening.  A  person  showed  me  much  kindness 
at  West-Farms,  favouring  me  with  a  man  and  horse  all  the  time 
I  was  there,  acknowledging  the  word  came  home  to  his  heart, 
and  that  he  was  wicked.  My  friend  Hunt,  who  was  a  Quaker, 
said  he  never  was  so  affected.  The  next  day  I  went  to  West- 
Chester,  but  had  only  a  few  to  hear  me.  On  Wednesday  1  preached 
at  H — t's,  and  felt  much  divine  power  in  my  soul,  and  an  opening 
among  the  people.  I  have  found  many  trials  in  my  own  mind, 
but  feel  determined  to  resist.     I  see  the  traps  set  for  my  feet. 

Thursday,  I  preached  at  D.'s  and  had  an  attentive  people  to  hear, 
and  felt  myself  warm  and  zealous.  On  Friday  I  went  to  Mairnock, 
had  a  large  congregation,  and  felt  the  divine  presence.  Many  of 
the  people  also  felt  the  power  of  truth,  and  sunk  under  the  word  : 
it  was  laid  home  to  the  hearts  of  the  people  ;  but  some  contradicted 
and  blasphemed.  1  believe  God  has  a  work  to  do  among  the  people 
in  this  place.  Lord,  keep  me  faithful,  watchful,  humble,  holy,  and 
diligent  to  the  end.  Let  me  sooner  choose  to  die  than  sin  against 
thee,  in  thought,  word,  or  deed. 

Saturday  13,  I  preached  at  one  friend  B — g's,  where  many  at- 
tended to  the  truth,  and  showed  a  willingness  to  hear.  On  the 
Lord's  day  I  preached  at  D.'s  at  ten  in  the  morning,  at  three  in  the 
afternoon,  and  at  six  in  the  evening.  Many  attended,  but  I  fear  few 
felt  such  deep  concern  as  will  induce  them  to  leave  their  sins,  and 
flee  from  the  wrath  to  come.  At  brother  H.'s  on  Monday 
evening,  the  house  would  not  hold  the  congregation  :  there  1  felt 
liberty  and  power.  I  hope  God  will  visit  them.  I  have  had  many 
trials  from  Satan,  but  hitherto  the  Lord  hath  helped  me  against  them 
all.  1  stand  a  miracle  of  mercy  !  O  that  I  may  always  be  found 
faithful  in  doing  his  will. 

On  Tuesday  the  14th  I  went  to  Rye  :  but  the  people  here  are  in- 
sensible. They  cry,  "  The  church,  the  church."  Tee  re  are  a 
few  Presbyterians ;  but  they  have  suffered  their  meeting-house  to  go 
to  ruin,  and  have  lost  the   power  of  religion,  if  they  ever  had  it 

Vol.  I.  %,. 


10  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL. 

I  was  not  a  welcome  messenger  to  this  people.  On  Wednesday 
the  15th  I  preached  at  two  in  the  afternoon  at  Mairnock  with  some 
power,  and  in  the  evening  returned,  preached  at  Rye,  to  a  large 
company,  and  felt  my  Master  near.  Thursday  16,  I  was  taken 
ill  with  a  cold  and  chill.  The  next  morning  1  rode  to  New-City, 
but  the  cold  pinched  me  much.  On  New-City  Island  a  congrega- 
tion was  assembled  to  receive  me.  I  spoke  to  them  with  some 
liberty,  and  they  wished  me  to  come  again.  A  wise  old  Calvinist 
said,  he  might  experience  all  I  mentioned,  and  go  to  hell.  I  said 
Satan  experienced  more  than  I  mentioned,  and  yet  is  gone  to  hell. 
After  preaching  1  rode  to  Mr.  B.'s,  though  in  much  pain.  When 
I  had  preached  there  I  went  to  bed.  During  the  whole  night  I  was 
very  ill.  My  friends  behaved  very  kindly,  and  endeavoured  to 
prevail  upon  me  to  stay  there  till  I  was  restored  :  but  my  appoint- 
ment required  me  to  set  off  for  East-Ghester,  where  I  preached, 
and  rode  near  eight  miles  in  the  evening  to  New-Rochelle.  On 
the  19th,  the  Lord's  day,  I  preached  three  times,  though  very  ill. 
Many  attended,  and  I  could  not  think  of  disappointing  them.  Mon- 
day the  20th,  I  rode  to  P.'s  Manor,  and  preached  there  at  noon, 
and  at  six  in  the  evening  at  P  B.'s  in  Rochelle.  The  next  day 
I  rode  to  D.'s,  but  the  day  was  extremely  cold.  In  the  night  I 
had  a  sore  throat,  but  through  the  help  of  God  I  go  on,  and  cannot 
think  of  sparing  myself: 

"  No  cross,  no  suff 'ring  I  decline, 
Only  lei  all  my  heart  be  thine  !" 

Tuesday  the  21st,  I  preached  at  my  friend  D.'s  for  the  last  time, 
on,  "  Those  things  that  ye  have  both  learned,  and  received,  and 
heard,  and  seen  in  me,  do."  The  people  seemed  deeply  affected 
under  the  word.  In  the  morning  of  the  22d,  1  set  out  for  the  New- 
City,  and  preached  there  in  much  weakness  and  pain  of  body,  and 
in  the  evening  went  to  my  friend  P  's.  That  night  I  had  no  rest  : 
and  when  I  arose  in  the  morning,  the  pain  in  my  throat  was  worse. 
On  the  23d  I  came  in  a  covered  sleigh  to  my  friend  B.'s,  where  I 
took  up  my  lodging,  being  unable  to  go  any  farther.  I  then  applied 
to  a  physician,  who  made  applications  to  my  ears,  throat,  and  palate, 
which  were  all  swelled  and  inflamed  exceedingly.  For  six  or  seven 
days  I  could  neither  eat  nor  drink  without  great  pain.  The  physi- 
cian feared  I  should  be  strangled,  before  a  discharge  took  place  : 
but  my  God  ordered  all  things  well.  I  am  raised  up  again,  and 
cannot  help  remarking  the  kindness  with  which  my  friends  treated 
me,  as  if  I  had  been  their  own  brother.  The  parents  and  chil- 
dren attended  me  day  and  night  with  the  greatest  attention.     Thus, 


fcEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL*  11 

though  a  stranger  in  a  strange  land,  God  has  taken  care  of  me. 
May  the  Lord  remember  them  that  have  remembered  me,  and  grant 
to  this  family  life  for  evermore  ! 

February  5,  1772.  Still  I  feel  myself  weak.  It  is  near  a  fort- 
night since  I  came  1o  my  friend  B.'s.  Dr.  W  has  attended  me  in  all 
my  illness,  and  did  all  he  could  for  me  gratis.  Yesterday  was  the 
first  day  of  my  going  out.  I  went  to  West-Chester  to  hear  a  friend 
preach.  My  kind  friends  S.  and  W  brought  up  a  sleigh  from  York 
on  Monday  last,  but  my  friends  at  this  place  would  not  suffer  me 
to  go  with  them.  In  the  course  of  my  recovery,  I  have  read  much 
in  my  Bible,  and  Hammond's  Notes  on  the  New^Testament.  I 
have  also  met  with  a  spirited  piece  against  predestination.  I  did 
not  expect  to  find  such  an  advocate  for  general  redemption  in 
America.  This  day  I  ventured  to  preach  at  Mr.  A.  B.'s  to  his  family 
and  a  few  other  people.  In  the  evening  returned  home,  and  found 
Mr.  D.  L.  the  former  governor's  son  there  ;  who  lives  in  the  woods 
near  Salem,  and  invited  me  to  his  house.  We  spent  the  evening 
comfortably  together.  On  Thursday,  February  7,  I  preached  as 
I  had  appointed,  the  man  of  the  house  being  in  a  consumption. 
Though  1  had  not  many  people  to  hear  me,  yet  I  have  reason  to 
hope  that  my  sermon  did  good  to  the  poor  invalid.  I  felt  affected 
for  my  friends  in  this  place,  who  had  been  in  some  measure  moved 
by  the  word  on  my  former  visits,  but  are  now  returned  to  their  old 
ways  and  company.  I  found  myself  weak  and  unfit  to  preach,  but 
believe  there  were  some  who  felt  the  word  come  close  to  their 
hearts.  May  God  help  them  to  profit  by  it!  On  Friday  the  8th, 
I  set  out  for  York  in  a  sleigh,  and  my  friends  seemed  glad  to  see  me. 
I  want  to  be  less  concerned  about  any  thing  except  my  own  work, 
the  salvation  of  souls.  At  present  I  seem  determined  to  consecrate 
my  all  to  God  ;  body,  soul,  time,  and  talents. 

On  the  Lord's  day  found  myself  weak,  but  brother  P.  being  ill, 
I  preached  in  the  morning,  and  found  life.  Stayed  at  home  on 
Monday,  and  read  in  Mr.  Wesley's  Notes  on  the  Old  Testament.  On 
Monday  the  11th,  I  went  to  the  gaol,  and  visited  a  condemned  cri- 
minal, and  preached  to  him  and  others  with  some  tender  feelings  of 
mind,  on  those  words,  "  Joy  shall  be  in  heaven  over  one  sinner  that 
repenteth."  Tuesday  the  12th.  This  day  I  have  visited  many  of 
my  friends  from  house  to  house,  and  did  not  find  much  evil  or 
much  good  stirring  among  them.  Now  I  retire  to  hold  communion 
with  God,  and  to  feel  his  power. 

In  the  evening  my  strength  increased,  and  I  preached  with   some 
freedom.     On  Wednesday  I  walked   out,  but  caught  cold,  and  re* 


12  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

turned  home  chilled  and  very  ill.  In  the  evening  when  I  went 
into  the  pulpit,  my  every  limb  shook  ;  and  afterward  went  to  bed 
with  violent  pains  in  my  bones.  The  sickness  continued  for  three 
days,  and  kept  me  at  home  for  above  a  week.  On  Thursday  the 
20th,  I  gave  an  exhortation  in  public.  Having  a  desire  to  visit  my 
friends  on  Staten-Island,  I  set  off  in  the  afternoon  of  the  21st,  con- 
trary to  the  persuasions  of  my  friends  in  York.  S.  S.  who  was 
tender  towards  me  in  my  illness,  and  took  care  of  me  as  if  I  had 
been  his  father,  accompanied  me. 

Justice  W  received  us  and  entertained  us  kindly  ;  and  though 
weak  and  weary,  I  preached  at  P  V  P  's  to  a  few  persons,  with 
much  satisfaction.  Mr.  D.  invited  me  to  preach  in  his  house,  to 
which  I  consented  ;  and  Justice  W  sent  us  there  on  the  Lord's 
day,  with  several  of  his  family.  I  preached  twice  at  that  gentleman's 
house  to  a  large  company.  Some  it  appeared  had  not  heard  a  ser- 
mon for  hn)f  a  year  ;  such  a  famine  there  is  of  the  word  in  these 
parts,  and  a  still  greater  one  of  the  pure  word.  I  returned  in  the 
evening  to  justice  W  \s,  and  preached  to  a  numerous  congregation 
with  comfort.  Surely  God  sent  me  to  these  people  at  the  first,  and 
I  trust  he  will  continue  to  bless  them,  and  pour  out  his  Spirit  upon 
them,  and  receive  them  at  last  to  himself!  Feb.  23,  I  preached 
again  at  justice  W's  to  many  people,  and  the  Lord  was  with  me. 
My  labours  increase,  and  my  strength  is  renewed.  Though  I  came 
here  weak,  yet  after  preaching  three  times  I  felt  myself  strong ; 
thanks  be  to  God,  who  hath  raised  me  up  from  so  low  a  state. 
On  the  24th,  I  preached  at  A.  W  's,  at  two  in  the  afternoon,  to  a 
large  company,  and  had  an  invitation  to  go  to  the  south  part  of  the 
island  :  in  the  evening  also  I  preached  at  the  same  place.  On  the 
26th,  I  preached  at  the  ferry,  on  my  way  to  New-York,  to  a  few 
people,  though  some  came  two  miles  on  foot.  After  preaching 
I  visited  a  young  man  who  seemed  to  be  at  the  point  of  death  :  he 
wss  full  of  unbelief,  and  I  fear  it  was  through  his  Calvinistic 
notions. 

Thursday  the  27th,  we  arrived  in  York.  I  found  brother  P,  had 
set  T  for  Philadelphia  in  the  morning.  In  the  evening  I  met  the 
society,  and  felt  myself  assisted  and  enlarged .  At  night  I  slept 
with  holy  thoughts  of  God,  and  awoke  with  the  same,  than-ks  be 
to  God. 

After  having  preached  in  a  large  upper  room,  at  Mr.  T.'s  in 
Amboy,  where  many  came  to  hear,  and  I  was  much  favoured  in  my 
own  soul  ;  an  inn-keeper  invited  me  to  his  house,  and  was  kind 
enough  to  desire  that  I  would  call  on  him  when  I  came  again. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  13 

Friday  27.  I  set  off  on  a  rough-gaited  horse,  for  Burlington  ;  and 
after  being  much  shaken,  breakfasted  at  Spotswood  ;  fed  my  horse 
again  at  Crosswick's,  and  then  thought  to  push  on  to  Burlington  ; 
but  the  roads  being  bad,  and  myself  and  horse  weary,  I  lodged  with 
a  Quaker,  on  whom  I  called  to  inquire  the  way.  He  not  only 
invited  me  to  tarry  all  night,  but  also  treated  me  with  great  kind- 
ness. The  next  day  I  rode  to  town  very  weary  ;  and  on  the  Lord's 
day  preached  in  the  court-house  to  many  hearers. 

Monday  30.  After  riding  to  New-mills,  in  company  with  some 
friends  in  a  waggon,  I  preached  in  a  Baptist  meeting-hou3e,  and  was 
kindly  received. 

Tuesday  31.  Finding  the  people  were  divided  among  them- 
selves, I  preached  from  these  words,  "  This  is  his  commandment, 
that  we  should  believe  on  the  name  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  love 
one  another  ;"  and  humbly  hope  my  labour  was  not  in  vain.  The 
same  night  we  came  to  Burlington. 

April  2.  I  came  to  Philadelphia,  and  finding  brother  B.  and 
brother  W  there,  was  much  comforted.  Brother  B.'s  plan  was, 
that  he  should  go  to  Boston  ;  brother  P  to  Virginia  ;  brother  W- 
to  York;  and  that  I  should  stay  three  months  in  Philadelphia.  With 
this  I  was  well  pleased. 

Friday  4.  We  dined  with  Mr.  R.  who  cannot  keep  negroes  for 
conscience  sake  ;  and  this  was  a  topic  of  our  conversation. 

Saturday  5.     This  morning  my  mind  was  composed  and  serene. 

April  7.  In  the  evening  I  preached  to  a  very  large  audience  in 
the  church,  after  preaching  in  the  day  to  many  poor  mortals  in  the 
Betlering-house. 

April  8.  Set  out  for  Bohemia  to  find  Mr.  W  (who  had  been  at 
his  own  discretion)  that  he  might  wait  on  Mr.  B.  in  order  to  go  to 
York  for  five  months.  Stopping  at  Mrs.  Withey's*  in  Chester,  to  feed 
myself  and  my  horse,  I  inquired  about  preaching  in  that  town,  and 
found  this  to  be  the  house  where  Mr.  B.  and  Mr.  P.  put  up  ;  and 
that  the  people  were  pleased  with  Methodist  preaching.  After 
leaving  word  that  I  would  call  to  preach  there  on  my  return,  I  set 
off  for  Wilmington,  expecting  to  meet  Mr.  W  there  ;  but  we  acci- 
dentally met  just  as  he  was  turning  off  to  Mr.  T.'s  for  lodging,  about 
four  miles  from  the  town.  He  seemed  glad  to  see  me,  and  willing 
to  be  subject  to  order. 

The  next  morning  Mr.  W.  went  on  his  way  to  Philadelphia. 
Having  a  desire  to  go,  and  see,  and  hear  how  things  went,  I  desired 

*  She  kept  th«  b«st  inn  on  the  continent,  and  always  received  the  Methodist  preacher*. 


14  REV  Francis  asbury's  journal. 

him  to  call  and  preach  at  Chester  ;  and  I  proceeded  to  the  house  of 
Mr.  S.  a  friend  of  the  Methodists  ;  and  then  rode  on  to  Newcastle, 
and  stopped  at  the  house  of  brother  F.  a  tavern-keeper,  but  a  good 
man.  Preached  there  to  a  few  people,  but  met  with  opposition,  and 
found  the  Methodists  had  done  no  great  good.  The  court-house  here 
is  shut  against  us  ;  but  it  is  open  for  dances  and  balls  :  and  brother  F. 
has  lost  his  company  by  receiving  us.  However,  we  were  com- 
forted together. 

April  10.  Set  out  for  Bohemia,  where  I  found  that  some  mis- 
chievous opposers  had  thrown  the  people  into  confusion. 

I  have  had  serious  thoughts  of  going  to  Baltimore  ;  but  the  dis- 
tance, which  is  90  miles,  seems  too  much  at  present. 

April  1 1 .  Found  an  inattention  to  study,  an  unsettled  frame  of  mind, 
much  insensibility  of  soul,  and  a  backwardness  to  prayer.  Lord  !  help 
me  with  an  active  warmth  to  move  ;  and  with  a  vigorous  soul  to  rise. 

Visited  an  old  man  who  was  sick,  with  whom  I  had  some  conver- 
sation, though  not  much  ;  but  came  away  without  prayer  ;  and  was 
justly  blamed  both  by  my  friends  and  myself.  I  would  have  prayed 
with  him,  but  two  men  came  in,  whose  countenances  I  did  not  like  ; 
and  therefore  neglected  my  duty  through  the  fear  of  man.  I  have 
nothing  to  plead  to  palliate  my  omission.  It  is  true,  that  to  intro- 
duce prayer  among  prayerless  people  is  not  an  easy  matter  ;  yet 
this  is  no  excuse  for  me.  Lord !  forgive  both  my  secret  and 
open  faults  ;  my  failings  of  omission  and  commission  :  help  me  to 
have  reppect  to  all  thy  commandments ;  and  to  be  blameless  before 
thee  in  all  things. 

Lord's  day  11.  Preached  to-day  at  my  friend  H.'s,  as  also  the 
evening  before.  The  house  was  filled  both  before  and  after  dinner. 
The  Lord  gave  me  great  liberty  and  power  ;  and  I  humbly  believe 
that  some  trembled  under  the  word.  Oh,  that  it  may  not  wear  off! 
I  preached  from  these  words,  "  The  wicked  shall  be  turned  into 
hell,  and  all  the  nations  that  forget  God."  After  describing  the 
wicked,  and  showing  wherein  they  forget  God  ;  I  attempted  to 
prove  the  torments  to  be  real  and  eternal,  from  the  real  joys  and 
duration  of  heaven. 

Monday  12.  Visited  E.  T,  and  saw  his  father,  who  is  a  hundred 
years  old,  or  more.  He  had  lately  lost  his  wife,  who  was  younger 
than  he  ;  and  in  her  he  lost  his  nurse  and  earthly  comfort. 

Tuesday  13,  was  advised,  and  invited  to  preach  at  Wilmington; 
which  I  did,  though  there  were  but  few  to  hear. 

Wednesday  14.  Rode  to  Chester,  and  preached  in  the  court- 
house.    The   church  minister   and   many  Quakers   were   present ; 


REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  15 

but  the  congregation  appeared  to  be  the  wildest  I  had  seen  in 
America.  But  I  humbly  hope  the  labour  was  not  all  in  vain.  In  the 
morning  I  visited,  and  spoke  with  great  freedom  to  four  men  who 
were  under  sentence  of  death. 

Thursday  15.  I  rode  through  a  heavy  rain  to  Philadelphia,  and 
preached  the  next  morning  with  some  freedom. 

Tuesday  20.  My  mind  is  quiet  and  serene.  I  am  now  free  from 
company,  which  is  very  pleasing  to  me,  having  found  that  much 
company  is  both  disagreeable  and  dangerous. 

Wednesday  21.  Met  the  society,  and  found  both  life  and  liberty 
among  the  people.  This  night  brother  W.  came  in  from  Virginia. 
He  gives  a  flaming  account  of  the  work  there.  Many  of  the  people 
seem  to  be  ripe  for  the  Gospel  and  ready  to  receive  us.  I  humbly 
hope,  before  long,  about  seven  preachers  of  us  will  spread  seven 
or  eight  hundred  miles,  and  preach  in  as  many  places  as  we  are 
able  to  attend.  Lord  !  make  us  humble,  watchful,  and  useful  to  the 
end  of  our  lives. 

April  23.     Brother  W   set  off  for  New-York, 

April  24.     I  preached  at  Philadelphia  with  freedom  and  power. 

April  25.  Preached  to  the  people  with  some  sharpness.  In  the 
evening  I  kept  the  door,  met  the  society,  and  read  Mr.  Wesley's 
epistle  to  them. 

Tuesday  28.  I  intended  to  go  out  of  town  ;  but  could  not  get 
a  horse.  So  I  stayed  for  brother  W  and  heard  that  many  were 
offended  at  my  shutting  them  out  of  society-meeting,  as  they  had 
been  greatly  indulged  before.  But  this  does  not  trouble  me.  While 
I  stay  the  rules  must  be  attended  to  ;  and  I  cannot  suffer  myself 
to  be  guided  by  half-hearted  Methodists.  An  elderly  Friend  told 
me  very  gravely,  that  "  the  opinion  of  the  people  was  much  changed, 
within  a  few  days,  about  Methodism  :  and  that  the  Quakers  and 
other  dissenters  had  laxed  their  discipline  ;  that  none  but  the  Roman- 
Catholics  kept  it  up  with  strictness."  But  these  things  do  not 
move  me. 

Wednesday  29.  Set  out  for  Burlington,  where  I  met  with  brother 
W  and  brother  K.  and  found  the  people  there  very  lively.  Two 
persons   have  obtained  justification  under  brother  W   and  a  certain 

Dr.   T 1,   a   man    of   dissipation,   was    touched    under    brother 

B.'s  preaching  last  night.  I  admire  the  kindness  of  my  friends  to 
such  a  poor  worm  as  me.  Oh  !  my  God !  remember  them  1  remem- 
ber me  ! 

Thursday  30.  I  humbly  hope  the  word  was  blest  to  a  large 
number  of  people  who  attended  while  I  preached  at  the  court-house. 


18  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL. 

Set  out  for  Philadelphia  ;  but  about  a  mile  from  the  city  found 
that  the  bridge  could  not  be  crossed  on  horseback  ;  so  I  left  my  horse 
and  walked  to  the  ferry.     Brother  W   took  the  horse  and  went  to 
Burlington,  on  his  way  to  York.     Was  desired  to  attend  the  execu- 
tion of  the  prisoners  at  Chester,  and  J.  K.  went  with  me.     We 
found  them  penitent ;  and  two  of  the  four  obtained  peace  with  God, 
and   seemed    very  thankful.     I   preached    with   liberty   to   a   great 
number  of  people  under  the  gaol   wall.     The  sheriff  was  friendly 
and  very  kind.     J.  K.  preached  at  the  gallows  to  a  vast  multitude  -7 
after  which  I   prayed  with   them.     The  executioner  pretended  to 
tie  them  all  up,  but  only  tied  one,  and  let  the  rest  fall.     One  of  them 
was  a  young  man  about  15.     We  saw  them  all  afterward,  and  ex- 
horted them  to  be  careful.     We  returned  to  Philadelphia  the  same 
night,  and  I  gave  an  exhortation. 

Tuesday,  May  5.  Set  out  for  Burlington  again,  and  preached  to 
a  serious  people.  But  how  is  my  soul  troubled  that  I  am  not  more 
devoted  !     O  my  God  !  my  soul  groans  and  longs  for  this. 

May  6.  My  heart  was  much  humbled  ;  but  the  Lord  enabled  me 
to  preach  with  power  in  my  soul. 

Thursday  7.  Visited  some  prisoners  ;  and  one  of  them,  who  is  to 
be  tried  for  his  life,  seemed  much  affected.  In  the  evening  I 
preached  and  felt  my  heart  much  united  to  this  people.  Next  morn- 
ing set  off  for  Philadelphia  ;  and  got  in  time  enough  for  interces- 
sion ;  after  which,  I  visited  a  sick  friend,  who  rested  her  soul  on 
God  ;  and  then  I  preached  in  the  evening. 

Sunday  10.  Preached  in  the  morning;  attended  two  places  of 
worship  in  the  day  ;  preached  again  at  night ;  and  had  a  comfortable 
time  in  meeting  the  society. 

Monday  11.  Was  much  stirred  up,  and  found  an  increase  of  life 
in  visiting  the  society  ;  and  then  preached  in  the  evening. 

Tuesday  12.  Set  off  for  the  Jerseys.  My  mind  enjoys  sweet 
peace  and  the  love  of  God.  It  is  my  desire  to  be  entirely  devoted 
to  God,  who  opens  the  hearts  of  the  people  to  receive  me,  and  my 
heart  to  deliver  his  counsel  to  them. 

Wednesday  13.     Preached  at  3  o'clock  on,   "  Behold  I   stand  at 
the  door  and  knock."     Oh!  what   a  time  of  satisfaction  and  power 
was  this  to  my  own  soul.     Went  afterward  to  Mr.  T.'s  and  many 
friends  came  at  8  o'clock,  when  I  was  enabled  to  preach  with  life. 

Thursday  14.     Went  to  the  new  church.     Surely  the  power  of 
God  is  amongst  this  people.     After  preaching  with  great  assistance, 

I  lodged  at  I — c  J s's,  and  in  the  morning  he  conducted  me  to 

Gloucester ;  and  thenc*  we  went  by  water  to  Philadelphia.    Here 


REV.  FRANCIS  AS&URy's  JOtJRNAL.  If 

I  found  a  chaoge.  Brother  Pilmore  was  come,  and  the  house  was 
given  up  ;  which  pleased  me  well,  as  it  was  a  burden  to  the  people. 
Brother  P— — e  went  to  Mr.  W  's,  and  I  went  to  Mr.  W— r's.  On 
Friday  night  I  was  heavily  afflicted  ;  and  dear  sister  W — r  took  great 
care  of  me.  The  next  morning,  through  the  mercy  of  God,  I  was 
something  better,  and  preached  in  the  evening. 

Lord's  day  17.  After  preaching  in  the  morning  I  went  to  see 
G.  H,  who  was  ne;ir  to  eternity,  He  had  peace  in  his  soul. — Some 
slight  me  in  this  place  on  account  of  my  attention  to  discipline  ;  and 
some  drop  off.     But  my  work  is  to  please  God. 

Tuesday  19.  Went  about  16  miles  into  the  country,  and  preached 
at  1 1  o'clock,  with  energy  of  souL  A  Presbyterian  minister,  who 
attended  my  preaching  this  morning,  accompanied  me  part  of  the 
way  back.  We  conversed  by  the  way,  on  the  evidences  of  religion 
the  work  of  God,  and  sending  out  preachers. — This  morning  I 
arose  with  more  spiritual  strength,  and  felt  a  great  desire  to  do 
the  will  of  God  with  all  purity  of  intention,  desire,  and  thought ; 
that  in  all  things  God  may  be  glorified  through  Jesus  Christ. 

Wednesday  20.  Went  to  Trenton,  but  as  the  court  was  sitting, 
I  was  obliged  to  preach  in  a  school-house  to  but  few  people;  and 
as  there  were  soldiers  in  the  town  I  could  hardly  procure  lodging. 

Thursday  21.  Preached  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  to  a  few 
simple  people  ;  and  in  the  evening  at  Burlington,  where  the  congre- 
gation was  also  small  on  account  of  the  fair. 

Friday  22.  In  the  morning  I  rode  home  in  great  pain  ;  but  after 
dinner  went  10  miles  down  the  river. 

Sunday  24.  We  rode  down  to  Greenwich,  where  I  preached  at 
10  o'clock  to  near  300  people,  collected  from  different  parts  ;  we 
then  rode  back  to  friend  P — 's  where  we  dined  ;  and  thence  to 
Gloucester,  which  made  near  15  miles.  I  preached  there  at  three 
o'clock  to  about  200  people,  and  then  went  up  the  river  in  a  boat  to 
Philadelphia,  where  I  preached  at  7  o'clock. 

Monday  25.  Was  unwell,  but  went  to  Burlington,  and  preached  in 
the  evening,  though  very  sick. 

Tuesday  26.  Found  myself  very  unwell  in  the  morning  ;  but 
visited  a  prisoner  under  sentence  of  death,  and  strove  much  to 
fasten  conviction  on  his  heart.  Through  the  mercy  of  God,  I  hope 
the  poor  man  was-  humbled. 

Wednesday  27.  Went  to  New-mills,  where  I  preached  at  four 
o'clock  ;   and  again  at  10  o'clock  the  next  morning. 

Friday  29.     I  preached  under  the  gaol  wpJI  ;  and  for  the  benefit 
of  the  prisoner,  attended  him  to  the  place  of  execution.     When  he 
Vol.  I.  3 


18  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL. 

came  forth,  he  roared  like  a  bull  in  a  net.  He  looked  on  every 
side,  and  shrieked  for  help  ;  but  all  in  vain.  O  how  awful  !  Die 
he  must.  I  fear  unprepared.  I  prayed  with  him,  and  for  him. 
How  difficult  it  is  (if  I  may  use  the  term;  to  drench  a  hardened 
sinner  with  religion!  I  saw  hi«i  tied  up  ;  and  then  stepping  on  a 
waggon,  I  spoke  a  word  in  season,  and  warned  the  people  to  flee 
from  the  wrath  to  come,  and  improve  the  day  of  their  gracious  visi- 
tation, no  more  grieving  the  Spirit  of  God,  lest  a  day  should  come 
in  which  they  may  cry,  and  God  may  refuse  to  hear  them.  We  then 
rode  home  to  Philadelphia,  where  I  exhorted  in  the  evening,  and 
found  myself  much  more  drawn  out  than  I   expected. 

Lord's  day  31.  Preached  morning  and  evening  with  some  life  ; 
but  found  that  offences  increased.  However,  I  cannot  help  it. 
My  way  is  to  go  straight  forward,  and  aim  at  what  is  right. 

June  1.  Preached  this  morning  at  5  o'clock  ;  and  this  day  I 
wrote  to  Mr.  Wesley,  and  experienced  a  great  degree  of  purity 
in  my  soul. 

Tuesday  2.  Rose  this  morning  between  4  and  5,  and  was  much 
quickened  in  preaching  ;  then  went  to  Haddonfield  about  noon- 
Satan  assaulted  me  this  day,  but  the  Lord  helped  and  delivered  me, 
for  his  mercy  and  truth's  sake,  and  granted  me  life  in  my  soul. 

Wednesday  3.  Preaching  at  5  at  Manta  creek  :  I  was  favoured 
with  an  opening  and  great  power.  After  preaching  there,  about 
100  people  went  .to  Mr.  TVs,  one  and  a  half  mile  off,  and  there 
also  1  preached  with  life. 

Thursday  5.  At  Greenwich  I  was  weak  in  body,  but  had  some 
liberty  in  preaching  to  about  200  willing  people  ;  but  at  Gloucester, 
I  preached  only  to  a  few  dead  souls,  from  this  striking  passage — ■ 
"  The  word  preached  did  not  profit  them,  not  being  mixed  with 
faith  in  them  that  heard  it."  I  must  observe,  that  in  this  journey  I 
have  been  kept  in  peace,  and  had  more  freedom,  life,  and  power, 
than  I  ever  experienced  in  the  city. 

Saturday  6.  Sailing  4  miles  up  the  river,  I  came  to  Philadelphia 
in  great  comfort. 

Lord's  day  June  7.  After  preaching  in  the  morning,  I  was  at  the 
table  with  Mr.  S.  and  many  felt  the  power  of  God,  though  I  felt  but 
little  myself.  We  had  a  love-feast  to-day,  and  several  could  testify 
that  God  was  with  us  :  some  of  our  Jersey  friends  spoke  of  the 
power  of  God  with  freedom. 

Monday  8.  With  much  disagreeable  company  I  set  off  for  Tren- 
ton, where  many  felt  the  divine  power  accompanying  the  word 
preached. 


RBV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY5S  JOURNAt.  19 

Wednesday  10.  After  preaching  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  I 
returned  to  Philadelphia  and  preached  in  the  evening. 

Thursday  11.  Set  off  in  the  stage  for  Bristol,  and  crossed  the 
water  to  see  a  man  suspected  of  murder  ;  but  found  him  very  igno- 
rant of  things  relating  to  his  soul ;  I  then  returned  to  Philadelphia 
very  unwell. 

Friday  12.  I  was  a  little  better,  and  rose  to  preach  at  5  o'clock. 
The  Lord  was  with  me  this  day  at  intercession. 

Saturday  13.  Hitherto  the  Lord  hath  helped.  Praised  be  his 
dear  name. 

Lord's  day,  June  14.  After  preaching  in  the  morning  with  some 
freedom  of  mind,  I  went  to  St.  Paul's,  and  afterward  spent  the  after- 
noon in  my  room  ;  then  preached,  and  met  the  society  in  the 
evening  ;  but  felt  great  dryness,  and  was  grieved  to  see  so  much  con- 
formity to  the  world,  in  the  article  of  dress,  among  our  people. 

Tuesday  16.  Set  off  for  Burlington  ;  and  though  weak  and  infirm, 
I  preached  at  night  with  liberty. 

Wednesday  17.  I  bent  my  course  for  New-mills  ;  but  still  groan 
for  more  life,  and  want  to  be  more  holy. 

Thursday  18.  After  preaching  twice  at  New-mills  with  great 
liberty  and  life,  I  returned  to  Burlington  ;  but  was  very  ill  that  night ; 
and  though  quite  unwell  the  next  morning,  yet  proceeded  on  my  way 
to  Philadelphia. 

Lord's  day,  June  21.  Finding  myself  much  recovered,  I  preached 
with  some  animation. 

Monday  22.     This  day  my  heart  was  in  deep  exercise. 

Tuesday  23.  Walked  down  to  Gloucester-point,  and  then  rode  to 
brother  C.'s  ;  and  though  very  weak,  weary,  wet,  and  low,  while  it 
rained  very  hard,  I  preached  with  some  power  to  many  people  from 
these  words — "  As  the  rain  cometh  down,  and  the  snow  from  heaven, 
and  returoeth  not  thither,  but  watereth  the  earth,  and  maketh  it 
bring  forth  and  bud,  that  it  may  give  seed  to  the  sower,  and  bread  to 
the  eater  ;  so  shall  my  word  be  that  goeth  forth  out  of  my  mouth  ;  it 
shall  not  return  unto  me  void,  but  it  shall  accomplish  that  which  I 
please,  and  it  shall  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  I  send  it." 

Wednesday  24.  At"Greenwich,  1  met  with  Mr.  S.  who  preached 
and  baptised  several  people  that  seemed  deeply  affected.  We  then 
rode  together,  and  had  some  conversation  on  the  insult  which  Mr. 
S— y  had  given  Mr.  W— y.  As  Mr.  S.  knew  that  Mr.  S— y  had 
preached  for  Mr.  W — y,  and  was  well  acquainted  with  his  doctrine, 
he  was  surprised  at  his  conduct.  He  said  Mr.  W— y  was  undoubtedly 
a  good  man,  and  had  been  useful  to  thousands. 


20  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL. 

Thursday  25.  Travelling  back  towards  Gloucester,  I  called  at 
'Squire  P  s  ;  and  presented  him  with  a  petition  for  raising  £150 
to  discharge  the  debt  on  our  preaching-house  at  Philadelphia.  He 
promised  both  to  give  himself,  and  to  propose  it  to  others. 

Friday  26.  Returned  to  Philadelphia,  and  preached  at  8  with  some 
power.  I  find  that  Satan  strives  to  sow  discord  among  us  ;  and  this 
makes  me  desirous  to  leave  the  city. 

Saturday  11  -  Felt  a  great  desire  to  live  more  to  the  glory  of  God  ; 
and  preached  at  night  with  some  life.  Received  a  letter  from  Mr. 
Pilmore  replete  with  accounts  of  his  preaching  abroad,  in  the  church,  to 
large  congregations,  and  the  like.  My  heart  is  still  distressed  for  wont 
of  more  religion.  I  long  to  be  wholly  given  up,  to  seek  no  favour 
but  what  cometh  from  God  alone.  I  want  to  breathe  after  the  Lord 
in  every  breath. 

Lord's  day  28.  This  was  a  day  of  sweet  rest  to  my  soul  ;  and  the 
Lord  gave  me  power  to  speak  with  some  affection. 

Monday  29.  Set  out  for  Trenton  with  some  loose  and  trifling  com- 
pany in  the  stage.  After  preaching  in  the  evening  with  some  life 
and  energy  ;  I  went  the  next  day  to  preach  in  the  field,  and  then  re- 
turned and  preached  with  freedom  to  many  people  in  the  court- 
house. 

July  1st.  Went  over  the  ferry  and  preached  to  many  people  ; 
among  whom  were  some  fine  women,  who  behaved  with  airs  of  great 
indifferency.  Returning  to  Trenton,  I  preached  at  night,  and  the 
next  morning  at  5,  after  which  I  set  off  for  Philadelphia  with  unpro- 
fitable company  ;  among  whom  I  sat  still  as  a  man  dumb  ;  and  as  one 
in  whose  mouth  there  was  no  reproof.  They  appeared  so  stupidly 
ignorant,  sceptical,  deistical,  and  atheistical,  that  I  thought  if  there 
were  no  other  hell,  I  should  strive  with  all  my  might  to  shun  that. 
Came  home  late  and  weary  ;  but  preached  whh  some  comfort.  I 
have  lately  been  blest  with  much  purity  of  intention,  and  fervour  of 
spirit ;  but  greatly  thirst  after  living  more  in  God. 

Saturday,  July  4.     Went  to  Burlington  in  order  to  attend  the  exe- 
cution of  one  S.  a  murderer  ;  and  declared  to  a  great  number  of 
people   under  the  gaol-wall — "  He   healeth  the  broken   in  heart." 
The  poor  criminal  appeared  penitent,  behaved  with  great  solidity, 
and  expressed  a  desire  to  leave  the  world. 

Then  returned  to  Philadelphia,  gave  an  exhortation  that  night,  and 
found  the  Lord's  day  a  day  of  sweet  peace. 

Monday  6.  Set  out  for  Burlington  again,  and  spent  three  days 
labouring  among  them.  Many  seemed  much  stirred  up  to  seek  the 
kingdom  of  God. 


KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY?8  JOURNAL.  21 

Thursday  9.  Returned  and  fouDd  some  inward  liberty  in  Phila- 
delphia. 

Saturday  11.     Was  a  day  of  peace  and  love  to  my  soul. 

Lord's  day  12.  Went  through  the  usual  exercises  of  the  day, 
and  enjoyed  some  peace  of  mind  Our  congregations  here  are  small, 
They  cannot  bear  the  discipline  and  doctrine  ;  but  this  does  not 
move  me. 

Monday  morning  I  preached  with  life,  and  long  to  be  as  an  even 
rising  flame  of  fire. 

Tuesday  14.  Went  to  the  Jerseys  and  preached  at  friend  T  's  to 
near  100  people,  though  in  the  time  of  harvest  ;  and  while  preach- 
ing from  these  words,  "  Ye  were  sometimes  darkness,  but  now  az-e 
ye  light  in  the  Lord  :"  many  felt  the  power  of  truth,  uhen  the  dark- 
ne«s  and  its  properties  were  explained.  After  describing  true  reli- 
gion to  about  100  souls,  at  J,  C.'s,  1  went  on  Wednesday  to  Green- 
wich, and  felt  much  shut  up  while  preaching  to  about  the  Sdme  Tim- 
ber, on,  "  Fear  not,  little  flock,  &c."  1  then  proceeded  to  Gloucester, 
which  is  one  of  the  dullest  places  I  have  seen  in  this  country.  The 
same  night  went  to  Haddonfield  ;  and  the  next  day  preache  '  -n  J.  T  's 
to  a  few  attentive  hearers,  who  seemed  somewhat  affected  by  the 
truths  of  God  ;  especially  one  S.  K,  who  was  greatly  concerned  on 
account  of  his  past  life  ;  as  he  had  been  much  devoted  to  company 
and  liquor.  I  felt  afraid  that  his  concern  would  not  be  permanent. 
However,  he  accompanied  me  to  the  ferry. 

Friday  17.  Returned  to  Philadelphia  time  enough  for  interces- 
sion, and  found  it  a  good  time  both  then  and  at  the  evening  preaching. 

Lord's  day  19.  After  preaching  in  the  morning,  I  set  off  in  the 
afternoon  for  Trenton,  came  thither  on  Monday  by  noon,  and  found 
life  in  preaching  at  night. 

Monday,  July  20.  Met  with  brother  S.  from  New-York,  who 
informed  me  that  I  was  to  go  to  York  ;  which  was  what  I  did  not 
expect  ;  but  feel  myself  quite  easy,  not  being  fixed  in  any  place. 
He  gave  me  an  account  of  Mr.  W  's  good  behaviour  ;  though  I  fear, 
after  all,  he  will  settle  at  Bohemia. 

Wednesday,  July  22.  In  meeting  the  small  society  of  about  19 
persons,  1  gave  them  tickets,  and  found  it  a  comfortable  time.  They 
are  a  serious  people  ;  and  there  is  some  prospect  of  much  good 
being  done  in  this  place.  After  preaching  on  Tuesday  morning  over 
the  ferry,  and  in  the  evening  at  Trenton,  I  took  leave  of  them  on 
Wednesday  morning,  and  set  off  for  Philadelphia.  Left  Philadelphia 
on  the  Lord's  day  evening,  after  preaching  on  these  words,  "  If  I 
come  again,  I  will  not  spare  ;"  and  on  Monday  met  with  brother  B. 


22  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

Went  thence  to  New-mills,  where  I  preached  on  Tuesday  night  and 
Wednesday  morning,  and   found  the  people  there  very  affectionate  ; 
then  returned  to  Burlington,  and  found  many  friends  from  Philadel- 
phia.    We  hud  power  among  us  at  night,  and  the   next  morning  at 
3  I  set  off  for  Amboy,  and  on  the  way  had  some  conversation  with 
one  of  Jacob  B.'s  disciples.     We  came  to  the   stage-house  through 
much  rain  and  bad  roads,  about  7  o'clock  :   thence  we  went  to  Am- 
boy,  and  took  lodging  at  a  tavern.      Have  been  kept  in  peace  through 
this  journey,  felt  great  courage  in  the  work  of  God,  and  go  towards 
York  in  faith. — The  congregation  at  Am  boy  was  small,  and  they  ap- 
peared to  be  such  as  cared  but  little  for  the  Gospel  ;  so  that  my  hope 
of  that  place  is  but  slender.     On  Saturday  evening,  1  preached  with 
some  power,  to  a  large  congregation   of  rich  and   poor,  from  these 
words,  "  Even  from   the   days  of  your  fathers,  ye  have  gone  away 
from  mine  ordinances,  and  have  not  kept  them  :  return  unto  me,  and 
I  will  return  unto  you."     After  preaching  with  great  liberty  on  the 
Lord's  day,  to   many  people  at  P    V  's  and  justice  W  's  on  Staten- 
Island  ;  1  set  off  on  Monday  in  a  boat   for  New  York  :  and  arriving 
about  5  o'clock,  found  Mr.  W   who  that  night  had  preacned  his  fare- 
well sermon  ;  and  told  the  people  that  he  did  not  expect  to  see  them 
any  more.     I  have  always  dealt  honestly  with  him,  but  he  has  been 
spoiled  by  gifts.     He  has  been  pretty  strict  in  the  society,  but  ended 
all   with   a  general   love-feast  ;  which  I  think  is   undoing  all  he  has 
done.     However,  none  of  these  things  move  me.     My  mind  is  calm, 
and  my  soul   under  a  comfortable  sense  of  God  ;  and  I   am   deter- 
mined, by  his  grace,  to  keep  on  in  the  way  of  my  duty,  if  it  should 
be  my  lot  to  stand  alone. 

August  4.  My  soul  felt  life,  and  power,  and  renewed  courage. 
Discovering  the  unfaithfulness  of  some,  who  first  spoil  a  man,  and  then 
condemn  him,  I  intend  to  keep  such  at  a  proper  distance.  In  the 
love-feast  this  evening,  I  found  that  the  living  could  not  bear  the 
dead.  Mr.  W  rose  up  and  spake  as  well  as  he  could,  against  speak- 
ing with  severe  reflections  on  his  brother.  But  all  this  was  mere 
talk.     I  know  the  man  and  his  conversation. 

August  G.  Felt  satisfaction  and  life  in  meeting  the  society  last 
night,  and  spent  this  day  in  retirement. 

Thursday  7.  Preached  in  York,  from  Phil.  i.  24,  25.  "  To  abide 
in  the  flesh  is  more  needful  for  you.  And  having  this  confidence,  I 
know  that  I  shall  abide  and  continue  with  you  all,  for  your  further- 
ance and  joy  of  faith."  Found  liberty  in  my  mind  while  addressing 
the  people,  and  am  determined,  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord,  to  aim 
at  promoting  his  glory,  and  to  seek  nothing  but  him. 


asv.  Francis  aseury's  journal.  23 

Friday  3.  After  preaching  in  the  morning,  I  found  the  Lord  near, 
and  had  great  peace  at  intercession.  It  pleases  me  much  to  see  the 
people  diligent  in  attending  the  word  ;  and  find  myself  favoured  with 
liberty  and  the  power  of  God  in  my  labours  among  them  ;  and  hum- 
bly hope,  that  God  will  make  known  his  power  among  this  people, 
and  drive  Satan  from  them  ;  and  that  we  shall  yet  see  good  days  in 
this  place. 

Saturday  9.  I  found  a  degree  of  life  in  my  soul  ;  and  on  the 
Lord's  day  had  power,  and  light,  and  life,  and  love,  in  speaking  on 
those  words,  '"  Ye  were  sometimes  darkness,  but  now  are  ye  light 
in  the  Lord  :  walk  as  children  of  light."  The  congregations  are 
steady,  and  we  look  for  the  power  of  God  both  in  our  own  souls  and 
among  the  people.  O,  my  God,  make  bare  thine  arm  !  After 
preaching  in  the  evening  of  the  Lord's  day,  with  some  opening  of 
heart,  and  to  a  full  house,  I  met  the  society  ;  and  then  set  out  on 
Monday  morning  for  New-Rochelle,  and  preached  the  same  night  at 
friend  D.'s,  about  30  miles  from  York. 

Tuesday  12.  My  soul  does  not  forget  God  ;  but  my  desire  is  still 
towards  him,  and  the  remembrance  of  his  name.  On  Wednesday  I 
found  my  mind  somewhat  engaged  ;  hut  on  Thursday  had  some  fears 
of  coming  short  of  eternal  life.  A  clou  !  rested  on  my  mind,  which 
was  occasioned  by  talking  and  jesting  ;  1  also  feel  at  times  tempted 
to  impatience  and  pride  of  heart  ;  but  the  Lord  graciously  blest  me 
with  life  and  power  in  preaching  at  night  ;  and  1  afterward  found 
jny  mind  fixed  on  God,  and  an  earnest  longing  to  be  always  holy  in 
heart  and  life.  After  preaching  on  Friday  at  New-Rochelle,  from 
these  words,  "  We  ought  to  give  the  more  earnest  heed  to  the  things 
which  we  have  heard,  lest  at  any  time  we  should  let  them  slip,"  I  set 
out  for  York  on  a  bad  horse,  and  met  with  indifferent  fare  on  the 
road  ;  but  reached  York  on  Saturday,  and  there  received  a  letter 
from  my  father  and  friend,  Mr  xMuther,  who  informed  me  of  the 
preachers'  returning  to  England.  Preached  also  this  evening  with 
some  satisfaction,  but  found  broken  classes,  and  a  disordered  society, 
so  that  my  heart  was  sunk  within  ine  ;  but  it  is  still  my  desire  to  com- 
mit myself  to  God. 

Lord's  day  17.  Preached  in  the  morning,  and  then  went  to  preach 
at  New-Town,  about  12  miles  distant,  in  the  evening.  Friend  S. 
was  in  company  with  me,  and  we  were  obliged  to  lodge  at  a  tavern  ; 
but  we  were  more  serious  than  usual,  and  spent  our  time  in  useful 
conversation.  As  it  rained,  we  had  but  few  people  at  preaching  in 
the  morning  ;  we  then  returned  to  York  about  10  o'clock.  In  this 
journey  I  have  found  my  soul  comfortable  and  alive  to  God,  a  sacred 


-4  REV.  FRANdS  ASBU11Y  S  JOURNAL. 

nearness  to  God,  and  power  to  withstand  temptations  ;  though  in  the 
afternoon  of  the  next  day,  I  had  cause  to  blame  myself  for  trifling 
conversation  at  noon. 

Monday  18.  This  has  been  a  day  of  distress  to  my  soul.  I  was 
opposed  for  meeting  the  society,  because  one  or  two  classes  met  at 
that  time  ;  which  seemed  to  me  a  very  weak  objection,  as  those  clas- 
ses might  meet  at  another  time. 

August  21.  Preached  this  morning  with  great  life  in  my  soul,  and 
felt  a  strong  desire  to  be  devoted  to  God,  and  more  and  more  enga- 
ged to  promote  his  glory  both  in  heart  and  life.  O  that  my  soul 
could  be  more  intimately  and  sweetly  united  to  the  Lord !  In 
the  evening  I  preached  with  power  ;  but  have  found  my  soul  trou- 
bled within  me  on  account  of  a  party-spirit  which  seems  to  prevail 
too  much  in  this  place.  But  they  must  answer  for  their  own  con- 
duct. My  business  is,  through  the  grace  of  God,  to  go  straight  for- 
ward, acting  with  honesty,  prudence,  and  caution,  and  then  leave  the 
event  to  Him. 

Lord's  day,  August  24  Preached  morning  and  evening,  and  had 
peace  in  my  own  soul.  In  the  evening  I  met  the  society,  and  read  Mr. 
Wesley's  letter. 

Monday  25.  Early  in  the  morning  we  crossed  the  North-river,  in 
order  to  go  to  Staten-Island.  Many  people  attended  the  word  ;  but 
I  know  not  what  to  make  of  them,  for  though  they  seem  fond  of  hear- 
ing, yet  they  do  not  appear  to  be  much  affected.  On  Tuesday  I  went 
to  Amboy,  and  dined  with  a  mixed  company  of  Assembly-men, 
Church-men,  Quakers,  &c.  many  of  them  came  to  hear  me  in  sport, 
but  went  away  very  still.  On  m}r  return  I  preached  at  Mr  W — s; 
to  many  people  ;  on  Thursday  returned  to  York,  and  preached  in 
the  evening  with  some  life.  Friday  my  soul  was  kept  in  peace  and 
love  ;  and  while  preaching  at  night,  both  myself  and  others  felt  the 
power  of  God  in  our  souls. 

Saturday  30.  I  preached  with  liberty,  and  can  rejoice  in  God  my 
salvation,  finding  an  increasing  desire  to  live  to  him  alone.  Lord's 
day  31.  Found  life  both  morning  and  evening,  and  had  many  people  ;  I 
also  went  to  church,  and  heard  Dr.  O.  preach  on  the  divinity  of  Christ. 

Tuesday,  September  2.  My  heart  was  fixed  to  seek  the  Lord  ; 
and  found  some  nearness  to  him,  and  life  in  my  soul  :  I  preached 
also  in  the  evening  with  some  comfort. 

Wednesday  3.  Preached  at  5,  and  found  my  soul  this  day  fixed 
to  do  the  will  of  God. 

Thursday  4.  Preached  in  the  morning,  and  found  this  a  blessed 
day.    My  soul  was  lively,  and  my  heart  was  rilled  with  holy  thought* 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL*  25 

of  God,  and  felt  a  strong  and  pure  desire  to  pray,  and  mourn,  and 
long  for  God.  In  the  evening  I  preached  from  these  words  "  Who- 
so ver  shall  confess  me  before  men,  him  will  I  confess  before  my 
Father  who  is  in  heaven." 

Friday  5.  Found  mv  soul  grieved  at  the  discovery  of  such  parties 
among  the  people      Who  can  find  a  faithful  man  ? 

Saturday.  September  6.  Found  peace  in  my  -oul.  and  held  a  meet- 
ing for  the  better  ordering  of  the  spiritual  and  temporal  affairs  of 
the  society.      In  this  meeting  I  propounded  the  following  queries  : 

I.  How  often  shall  there  be  public  preaching  ?  Agreed,  that  it 
should  be  on  Tuesday,  Thursday,  and  Friday  nights,  besides  the 
Lord's  day  ;  and  exhortation  on  Saturday  night. 

II.  Shall  we  have  morning  preaching?     This  was  agreed  to. 

III.  Shall  we  have  the  Society  meetings  private  ?  This  was 
doubted  by  some  ;  but  I  insisted  on  it,  from  our  rules  and  Mr.  Wes- 
ley's last  letter. 

IV  Shall  we  make  a  weekly,  and  quarterly  collection  ?     Agreed. 

V  Can  any  other  means  be  devised  to  lessen  the  debt  ?  The 
debt  was  £1100  ;   but  no  other  means  could  be  found  to  relieve  it 

VI.  Ought  we  not  to  be  more  strict  with  disorderly  persons?  Very 
little  was  said  in  answer  to  this. 

VII.  Shall  we  have  three  stewards,  for  the  satisfaction  of  the  so- 
ciety ?     The  majority  voted  against  it. 

VIII.  Are  we  as  frugal  as  we  can  be  ?     It  was  thought  we  were, 

IX.  Will  the  stewards  meet  me  once  a  week?     Agreed. 

X.  Do  we  endeavour  to  avoid  all  partiality  in  the  things  of  God  1 

XI.  Can  we  come  at  the  balance  of  our  accounts  now  or  soon? 
It  was  thought  we  could. 

XII.  Who  will  stand  at  the  door  ?    Not  determined. 

XIII.  Shall  we  meet  the  society  on  Sunday  nights  ?  This  was 
opposed  by  some.  But  I  insisted  upon  its  being  the  best  time  ;  and 
at  last  it  vvas  agreed  to  for  a  season. 

XIV  Who  shall  be  the  collectors  ?  This  was  not  determined, 
though  debated. 

XV  Can  the  preacher  meet  the  children  ?     Agreed. 

XVI.  Can  we  spread  the  books  ?  There  was  but  little  said  on 
this  head,  and  it  was  left  undetermined. 

Monday,  September  7.  R.  S.  C.  W  and  myself  set  off  for  Nevv- 
Rochelle.  At  night  I  felt  myself  unwell,  and  my  mind  under  a  cloud? 
but  gave  an  exhortation   at  Mr.  D.'s  in  the  evening. 

Tuesday  8.  This  was  a  day  of  heaviness,  much  trouble,  sore 
temptation,  and  sorrow  of  heart ;  but  In  the  evening  I  was  happy  in 

Vol.  I.  4 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 


God,  and  spoke  with  power  and  feeling.  On  Wednesday  my  mind 
Avas  warmly  engaged,  and  I  preached  to  many  people,  both  at  three 
o'clock  and  seven. 

Thursday  10.  Mr.  D.  accompanied  me  as  far  as  Kingsbridge,  on 
my  way  to  York,  where  S.  S.  met  me,  and  rode  with  me  the  rest 
of  the  way. 

I  preached  in  the  evening,  and  rose  to  preach  next  morning  at  5. 
It  appears  to  me  that  trouble  is  at  hand,  but  I  fear  nothing  ;  being 
conscious  of  having  acted  uprightly  before  them  all,  and  having  no 
by  ends  in  view.  Whoever  has,  must  answer  for  it.  Whatever 
comes,  1  am  determined,  while  here,  by  the  grace  of  God,  to  pro- 
ceed according  to  the  Methodist  doctrine  aud  discipline. 

Friday  11.  I  met  the  people  in  the  morning  to  discourse  with 
them  about  their  temporal  matters,  and  appointed  Mr.  C.  to  take  an 
account  of  the  weekly  and  quarterly  collections.  But  the  two  other 
stewards  refused  an  exact  entry  of  the  money  that  is  not  settled. 
However,  the  people  must  have  the  same  satisfaction  concerning  the 
other  collections.  Saturday  morning  I  felt  a  strong  desire  to  live  to 
God,  and  act  with  a  single  eye  to  his  glory  in  all  that  I  do.  On  Satur- 
day evening  we  had  a  comfortable  meeting.  After  preaching  to 
many  people  on  the  Lord's  day  at  7,  I  prepared  to  approach  the  table. 
There  was  a  great  drawing  among  the  people  while  these  words 
were  enforced,  "  This  do  in  remembrance  of  me."  Lord,  prepare 
my  heart.  My  bleeding  Lord  !  let  my  soul  feel  thy  melting  love. 
Lord,  make  all  thy  people  glad  together  in  thee,  that  thou  may  est  be 
glorified  in  and  by  us  both  now  and  ever.  At  the  table  I  was  deeply 
affected  with  the  sight  of  the  poor  negroes,  seeing  their  sable  faces 
at  the  table  of  the  Lord.  In  the  evening  I  had  a  full  house  and  much 
divine  assistance. 

Monday  14.  I  had  liberty  and  love  in  preaching  at  5,  and  this 
day  felt  power  to  live  to  God. 

Tuesday  15.  I  spent  great  part  of  my  time  in  company,  and 
preachpd  with  some  life  to  a  small  company  at  Bloomingdale.  Preach- 
ing at  5  the  next  morning,  I  had  many  people,  and  a  comfortable 
sense  of  God. 

Wednesday  16.  I  set  off  for  New-Town,  and  found  nearness  to 
God,  and  more  constancy  of  mind.  Our  journey  was  wet  and  trou- 
blesome ;  however,  there  was  a  small  company  of  people,  and  I 
preached  with  courage,  disregarding  my  fatigue,  if  any  good  can  be 
done.  We  returned  to  York  in  the  night,  which  was  very  dark  : 
but  He  to  whom  the  darkness  is  known,  conducted  us  in  safety.  Fri- 
day morning  I  found  great  peace.     Lord,  help  me  to  be  always 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  27 

guarded,  and  fly  the  very  appearance  of  evil  ;  so  that  in  thy  strength 
I  may  every  moment  conquer. 

Saturday  19.  I  felt  comfortable  in  preaching  this  morning  at  5 
o'clock.  Oh,  my  God  !  help  me  this  day  to  eye  thy  glory.  We  had 
a  melting  power  this  evening  also  in  public  exhortation. 

Lord's  day  20.  In  the  morning  we  had  a  good  time  while  I  spoke 
from  the  latter  part  of  the  eighty-first  psalm  ;  and  in  the  evening  we 
had  a  very  full  house,  and  the  Lord  favoured  me  with  warmth  and 
power  while  I  addressed  the  people  from  Rom.  vi.  17,  18.  After 
preaching  on  Monday  morning,  I  went  to  Staten-Island.  Justice  W. 
met  me  and  informed  me  that  the  people  were  very  busy  at  that  time 
in  court ;  so  I  went  and  preached  to  many  attentive  people  at  the  ferry. 
Hitherto  the  Lord  hath  helped.  1  will  endeavour  to  praise  him  with 
my  whole  heart,  and  glorify  him  more  and  more.  Tuesday  I  crossed 
the  bay,  and  preached  in  the  evening  at  York. 

Wednesday  23.  In  the  morning  I  preached,  and  felt  a  measure  of 
peace,  and  stronger  confidence  in  my  soul  towards  God. 

I  am  now  twenty-seven  years  of  age,  and  have  had  a  religious  con- 
cern on  my  heart  about  fourteen  years  ;  though  I  felt  something  of 
God  as  early  as  the  age  of  seven. 

Thursday  24.  I  preached  in  the  morning  from  Psalm  Ixxxvi.  17  ; 
and  found  myself  enlarged  in  the  evening  on  the  subject  of  the  good 
Samaritan.  This  day  my  soul  has  felt  much  love  towards  God,  and 
my  mind  has  been  bent  on  doing  his  will. 

Friday  25.  Attending  the  lecture  to-day,  I  heard  the  doctor  with 
much  satisfaction  ;  and  in  the  evening  preaching  I  laid  open  the  plague 
of  the  human  heart  as  I  had  felt  it.  It  was  a  solemn  time.  This 
day  we  received  tidings  from  Philadelphia  of  their  doing  well  both 
in  spiritual  and  temporal  matters.  Some  have  been  much  dissatisfied 
with  private  society-meetings,  and  collections  in  the  classes.  But  in 
the  midst  of  every  trial;  the  Lord  keeps  me  in  peace.  On  Saturday 
morning,  though  it  was  cold,  we  had  many  people,  and  a  moving  time 
at  5  o'clock  :  and  a  comfortable  season  in  the  evening  exhortation. 

Lord's  day  27.  Preaching  this  morning  on  "  building  the  tower." 
I  had  some  assistance  ;  but  experienced  some  heavy  exercises  of 
mind  this  day.  In  the  evening  I  was  enabled  to  preach  with  power, 
on  the  awful  subject  of  judgment :  attempting 

I.  To  prove  that  the  judgment  will  be  universal. 

II.  To  describe  the  person  of  the  Judge. 

III.  To  describe  the  awful  events  preceding  and  attending  thai 
period. 

IV    To  point  out  the  business  of  the  day. 


.2  (J  REV.  IJRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 


V    To  show  the  decision  and  consequences. 

Monday  28  Many  people  attended  the  preaching  at  5  o'clock,  anfi 
brother  S.  and  myself  set  off  in  the  forenoon  for  New-Rochelle.  As 
we  came  unexpectedly  on  the  people,  I  improved  the  occasion  by 
preaching  on  these  words,  "  In  such  an  hour  as  ye  think  not  the 
Son  of  man  cometh." 

Tuesday  29.  At  friend  D.'s,  1  preached  with  fervency  from  Ezek. 
xxxiii.  4.  1  have  been  much  assaulted  this  day  with  temptations. 
But  have  been  kept  by  the  power  of  God.  I  find  a  degree  of  effemi- 
nacy cleaving  to  me,  but  abhor  it  from  my  very  heart.  The  reading 
of  Mr.  Wesley's  journal  has  been  made  a  blessing  to  me. 

Wednesday  SO.  I  was  led  to  speak  very  closely  at  P  B.'s,  to  a 
congregation  in  which  were  many  old  people  ;  and  then  returned 
to  Mr.  D.'s,  where  I  preached  again,  and  enforced  the  duty  of 
meeting  together  among  themselves. 

October  1.  I  set  off  for  York;  and  preached  to  a  small  company 
at  Kingsbridge  on  my  way.  This  day  I  received  a  letter  from  my 
mother,  informing  me  she  was  weak  in  body,  and  had  an  earnest  de- 
sire to  see  me  once  more  before  she  dies. 

October  3.  Though  i  preached  with  liberty  last  night,  yet  my  mind 
was  troubled  to-day  :  but  1  earnestly  desire  to  renew  my  covenant 
with  God.  Mr.  W  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Wesley,  enforcing  our 
rules  and  discipline.  My  desire  is  to  sit  loose  to  every  created 
object. 

Lord's  day  4.  I  felt  divine  assistance  in  preaching  both  morning  and 
evening  ;  but  was  grieved  at  society-meeting,  to  see  the  steward  de- 
sirous to  let  strangers  in. 

On  Monday  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Wesley,  and  communicated  the  true 
sentiments  of  my  mind. 

Tuesday  6.  This  was  a  day  of  peace  and  rest  to  my  soul.  After 
preaching  at  night  with  some  power,  1  spoke  to  our  steward,  whose 
conduct  did  not  altogether  please  me — frequently  avoiding  to  speak  to 
me— r-absenting  himself  from  the  meeting  of  the  leaders — the  appear- 
ance of  dissimulation — opposing  our  rules — and  consulting  persons 
who  were  not  members  of  our  society.  He  appeared  to  be  some- 
what affected  by  the  conversation. 

Thursday  8.  In  preaching  both  morning  and  evening,  I  had  an 
opening  of  soul  towards  the  people  ;  I  met  the  society  this  evening, 
and  told  them  plainly  my  mind  relative  to  their  9tate  as  a  collec- 
tive body. 

Friday  9.  I  met  the  leaders,  and  there  were  some  sharp  debates. 
After  much  had  been  said,  I  was  charged  with  using  Mr.  N—  ill,  m 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  20 

saying  he  opposed  my  meeting  the  society.  Mr.  L —  told  me  I  had 
alrendy  preached  the  people  away  ;  and  intimated  that  the  whole 
work  would  be  destroyed  by  me.  Perhaps  this  was  because  I  spoke 
so  freely  to  Mr.  N — ,  and  desired  him  to  take  care  what  company 
he  kept. 

Saturday  10.  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Wesley,  in  which  he 
required  a  strict  attention  to  discipline  ;  and  appointed  me  to  act  as 
assistant.  He  also  enjoined  that  Mr.  W  might  not  print  any  more 
books  without  his  consent.  I  likewise  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  W" 
informing  me  of  the  state  of  matters  in  Maryland  ;  and  that  it  was 
appointed  for  me  to  winter  there      For  this  I  intend  to  prepare. 

Lord's  day  11.  Preached  with  power  in  the  morning,  and  spoke 
freely  to  a  large  congregation  in  the  evening.  My  soul  is  blest  with 
peace  and  love  to  God. 

Monday  12.  Read  one  of  Mr.  Wesley's  sermons  to  the  people, 
and  believe  some  felt  it  reproving  them  for  evil  speaking.  My  mind 
is  serene  and  comfortable.  Part  of  Monday  was  spent  in  meeting 
classes  ;  and  on  Tuesday  morning  at  5,  I  had  many  people.  My  in- 
tention is  to  deal  faithfully  with  all  ;  and  it  is  my  real  opinion,  that  1 
am  not  so  sensible  of  faults  in  any  other  person  as  in  myself.  Lord, 
help  me  to  be  faithful,  and  in  all  1  do  to  glorify  thee  more  than  ever- 
Felt  assistance  this  evening  in  preaching. 

Wednesday,  I  went  to  New-Town,  but  was  not  expected.  How- 
ever, we  collected  many  people  to  hear  the  word.  I  then  returned 
to  York,  and.  after  preaching  in  the  morning,  was  engaged  in  settling 
the  classes,  making  up  some  bands,  and  meeting  the  children.  I  have 
reason  to  be  thankful  ;  though  my  trials  have  been  great  from  many 
quarters,  they  have  not  moved  me. 

Friday  16.  Preached  in  the  morning,  and  felt  resigned  to  any  thing* 
having  no  choice  ;  but  am  willing  to  go  to  the  end  of  the  world,  if  I 
can  be  holy  and  useful. 

Lord's  day  bii.  Preached  in  the  morning  with  some  sensibility,  and 
then  went  to  hear  Mr.  I.  who  delivered  a  profitable  discourse  on  the 
education  of  children.  He  proved  the  necessity,  antiquity,  and  human 
authority  of  catechising  ;  and  made  it  evident,  that  in  the  primitive 
church,  the  best  and  ablest  men  were  appointed  for  this  work. 
He  gave  some  account  of  the  school  in  Alexandria  ;  and  told  the  au- 
dience, that  in  this  duty  there  should  be  both  precept  and  example, 
and  sometimes  severity.  In  the  evening  I  was  enabled  to  speak 
plainly  to  a  large  congregation,  on  Deut.  xxx.  19.  "I  call  heaven 
and  earth  to  record  against  you  this  day.  that  I  have  set  before  you 
life  and  death,  blessing  and  cursing  :  therefore  choose  life,  that  both 


3©  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL. 

thou  and  thy  seed  may  live."  This  day  we  had  a  love-feast.  Many 
people  spoke  freely,  but  not  long.  This  I  have  observed  more  here 
than  in  England,  that  the  people  speak  short,  and  yet  very  full. 

Monday  19.  Set  off  in  the  stage  for  Philadelphia.  The  company 
was  all  pretty  quiet,  except  one  young  man,  who  frequently  profaned 
the  name  of  the  Lord.  It  was  my  intention  to  reprove  him  ;  but  wait- 
ing for  a  proper  time,  I  found  an  opportunity  when  there  was  only 
one  person  with  him,  and  then  told  him  how  he  had  grieved  me.  He 
received  the  admonition  very  well  ;  and  excused  himself  by  saying^ 
he  did  not  think  of  what  he  was  doing.  Afterward  he  seemed  more 
careful.  After  dining  at  Brunswick,  we  came  to  Princeton,  a  place  I 
had  long  wished  to  see  for  the  sake  of  the  pious  Mr.  D.  late  president 
of  the  college  there.  Here  I  met  Mr.  B.  and  we  both  agreed  in  judg- 
ment about  the  affairs  of  the  society  :  and  were  comforted  together. 
The  next  day  I  came  to  Trenton  ;  but  a  drunken  sailor  had  locked 
up  the  court-house,  so  I  was  obliged  to  preach  in  a  school-house> 
where  we  had  a  comfortable  meeting  ;  and  also  at  5  the  next  morning. 

Thursday,  October  22.  In  the  morning  I  preached  over  the  river, 
and  in  the  evening  at  Trenton,  with  some  assistance.  And  many 
young  people  attended. 

Saturday  24.  Learing  my  horse  at  Bristol,  I  went  to  Burlington  ; 
and  on  the  Lord's  day  my  spirit  was  much  dejected,  though  in  preach- 
ing I  felt  greatly  assisted  :  and  divine  truth  reached  the  hearts  of 
the  people. 

Monday  26.  After  preaching  at  5,  I  left  them,  and  preached  in  the 
evening  at  Philadelphia.  All  things  considered,  the  people  here 
seemed  to  be  quiet  and  in  good  order. 

On  Tuesday  preached  both  morning  and  evening.  R.  S.  and  my- 
self set  out  on  Wednesday  for  Bohemia,  and  on  our  way  we  found  a 
few  friends  at  Newcastle  that  had  not  deserted  the  cause.  In  this 
journey  1  called  at  Chester  gaol,  and  saw  the  prisoners,  who  all 
seemed  hardened  to  a  man,  and  among  them  were  the  wretched  three 
that  I  saw  escape  the  gallows  before  ;  two  of  these  had  behaved  so 
badly  they  were  now  in  chains.  Lord,  what  is  man  ?  And  what  am 
I  without  thy  grace  ?  Keep  me,  keep  me,  holy  Lord,  and  never  let 
me  go  !  Let  me  die  rather  than  live  to  sin  against  thee.  I  spoke 
freely  to  one  of  them,  who  was  a  murderer. 

Thursday  20.  We  reached  Bohemia,  where  we  found  Solomon 
Hersey,  a  man  hearty  in  the  cause,  and  of  a  good  understanding  ;  but 
his  spirit  is  too  warm  and  easily  moved. 

On  Friday  I  visited  E.  and  R.  T  and  saw  their  father  in  his  hun- 
dredth year,  eating,  drinking,  smoking,  and  talking.    He  appeared  as 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  31 

forgetful  of  eternity  as  if  he  had  been  at  the  most  secure  distance 
from  its  brink.  I  think  he  told  me  that  his  father  lived  to  be  a  hun- 
dred and  nine,  and  never  used  spectacles. 

Saturday  31.  Rose  early  this  morning,  and  purpose,  through  ..grace, 
to  devote  this  day  to  God.  I  have  travelled,  since  Monday  week,  one 
hundred  and  fifty  miles. 

Lord's  day,  November  1.  After  preaching  at  H.'s  in  the  morning,  I 
intended  to  preach  in  the  school-house  in  the  afternoon  ;  but  it  would 
not  contain  half  the  people  ;  so  I  stood  at  the  door,  and  the  people 
without.  Went  to  bed  very  unwell  this  evening  ;  but  rose  at  5,  and, 
feeling  better,  set  off  for  Susquehannah.  The  next  morning  my  soul 
longed  for  God.  I  felt  a  comfortable  sense  of  his  love  in  my  heart, 
and  can  rejoice  in  him  as  my  all  sufficient  portion.  In  the  afternoon 
we  rode  in  company  to  the  bay  side.  A  few  people,  who  came  strag- 
gling after  the  time  at  friend  Nathaniel  Giles's,  felt  themselves  affected 
by  the  power  of  God.  At  friend  G.'s  the  family  was  called  together  in 
the  evening,  and  R.  W  gave  a  moving  exhortation.  One  person 
seemed  affected.  The  next  morning  I  rose  at  5,  my  usual  time,  and 
spent  one  hour  in  solemn,  secret  prayer.  Friend  G.  treated  me  with 
great  kindness,  and  pressed  me  to  call  again.  I  then  went  to  Rocky- 
Run,  and  preached  with  freedom  to  a  number  of  people,  among  whom 
were  many  Friends.  For  some  days  past  my  mind  has  been  blest 
with  much  peace  ;  so  that  I  experience  a  present  salvation,  and  hope 
to  experience  that  which  is  eternal.  Thanks  be  to  God  for  what  I 
feel  !     Glory,  glory  be  given  to  my  dear  and  gracious  Saviour ! 

Wednesday  4.  This  evening  I  had  a  very  solemn  family  meeting  ; 
and  spoke  separately  and  pointedly  to  every  one,  both  black  and  white. 

On  Thursday  morning,  rising  at  my  usual  time,  I  had  a  comforta- 
ble sense  of  God  upon  my  heart.  Glory  be  to  thee,  O  Lord !  After 
breakfast,  Mrs.  G.  her  brother,  and  myself  set  out  for  Deer-creek. 
We  called  at  a  Friends'  meeting,  and  heard  two  men  and  a  woman 
speak.  They  all  spoke  to  purpose.  We  then  proceeded  to  Mr.  M.'s, 
and  unexpectedly  found  the  people,  at  2  o'clock,  waiting  to  hear  the 
word.  I  preached  with  liberty,  and  the  power  of  God  was  felt  in  the 
hearts  of  many,  though  some  of  them  were  principal  men.  The 
man  of  the  house  looked  very  earnestly  at  me  while  I  was  preaching. 
I  then  published  preaching  at  S.  L 'e ;  where  we  had  also  a  com- 
fortable time.     S.  L himself  was  deeply  affected.     He  had  been 

a  ranting  Quaker,  and  a  rebellious  man  ;  but  God  hath  touched  his 
heart,  and  wrought  a  good  work  on  him  and  several  others  here. 
The  next  day  we  proceeded  to  Henry  Walters',  whose  brother  is  an 
exhorter,  and  now  gone  with  Mr.  W  to  Virginia.     The  Lord  hath 


O'Z  REV.  KRANOIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL. 

done  great  things  for  these  people,  notwithstanding  the  weakness  of 
the  instruments,  and  some  little  irregularities.  Mf,n  who  neither 
feared  God,  nor  regarded  man, — shearers,  liars,  cock-fighters,  card- 
players,  horse  racers,  drunkards,  &c.  are  now  so  changed  as  to  be- 
come new  men  ;  and  they  are  filled  with  the  praises  of  God  This 
is  the  Lord's  work,  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes.  Not  unto  us,  O 
Lord,  not  unto  us  ;  but  unto  thy  name  be  all  the  glory  ! 

Saturday  7.  We  had  a  powerful  meeting  at  H.  W  's  ;  several  from 
Mr.  M.'s  followed  me,  and  seemed  to  give  good  attention  to  the  things 
of  God.  Here  1  met  with  Nicholas  Walters  an  exhorter,  who  appears 
to  be  a  serious  and  sensible  man.  After  appointing  to  meet  the  ex- 
horters  at  my  return,  I  went  to  S.  F  's  and  preached  to  many  people  ; 
then  preached  at  a  place  about  three  miles  on  my  way  back,  and  came 
to  H.  W's  again  ;  where  we  had  a  verv  comfortable  time. 

Lord's  day  8.  We  had  a  very  melting  time  indeed,  while  I  preached 
to  about  two  hundred  souls,  from  Rom  vi.  17,  18.  We  had  also 
many  people  at  R,  W  's  while  I  preached,  with  liberty  in  my  soul, 
from  1  Cor.  iv.  20.  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  word,  but  in 
power."  This  day  I  have  been  free  from  evil,  happy  and  joyfl  in 
my  God.  At  the  widow  B.'s  there  were  many  people,  both  black 
and  white,  rich  and  poor,  who  were  all  exhorted  to  seek  the  Lord 
while  he  may  be  found.  Some  of  the  young  women  of  this  family 
are  serious  and  thoughtful. 

Tuesday  10.  I  enjoy  peace  and  life  in  my  soul  ;  and  am  determined, 
through  grace,  to  love  and  seek  nothing  but  God.  Preached  to  many 
people,  both  at  C.  B.'s  in  the  morning,  and  at  I.  M.'s  in  the  evening ; 
and  was  favoured  with  much  freedom. 

Wednesday  1 1.  Many  people  attended  preaching  at  Mr.  S.'s,  among 
whom  were  some  Baptists,  who  went  away  displeased.  The  congre- 
gation was  also  large  at  friend  S.'s.  I  have  read  Dr.  S.  on  the  uon- 
eternity  of  hell  torments.  But  by  his  arguments,  we  may  as  well 
prove  the  non-eternity  of  heavenly  joys  ;  for  he  calls  it  an  utmtov 
life.  Now  if  the  utavtov  life  of  saints  arise  from  a  principle  of 
spiritual  life  derived  from  Christ ;  then  the  otiavtov  death  of  the  wicked 
arises  from  a  principle  of  spiritual  death  in  them  ;  and  the  one  will 
come  to  an  end  as  soon  as  the  other. 

Thursday  12.  Preached  at  friend  G.'s.  There  are  some  Baptists 
in  this  neighbourhood,  who  oppose  the  work  under  us  ;  and  perplex 
and  trouble  our  young  beginners ;  though  they  let  me  alone.  Then 
returning  to  friend  C.'s,  the  word  flowed  freely,  while  I  preached  to 
many  people,  at  6  o'clock,  from  2  Cor  v.  20.  «'  Now  then  we  are 
ambassadors  for  Christ,  as  though  God  did  beseech  you  by  us ;  we 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  33 

pray  you,  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled  to  God."  Spoke  on 
God's  being  reconciled  to  sinners,  and  showed  on  what  terms  they 
might  be  reconciled  to  God,  and  that  none  but  Christ  could  bring 
about  the  reconciliation.  My  mind  was  greatly  enlarged  while  descri- 
bing the  character  of  Gospel  ministers.  Friday  morning  my  soul  was 
happy  in  God.  I  rode  about  eight  miles  to  meet  J.  K.  Many  people 
attended  the  word  at  Mr.  G — 's  ;  and  after  preaching  J.  K.  came. 
We  went  together  to  town  and  staid  all  night.  The  next  morning 
I  returned  to  J.  C — 's,  where  the  congregation  was  large  at  12 
o'clock.  This  mans  friends  have  rejected  him  on  account  of  his  reli- 
gion. The  family  seem  very  serious  ;  and  I  hope  there  will  be  a 
great  and  good  work  here.  Then  rode  to  Richard  Owing's,  where 
some  people  came  to  see  me,  with  whom  we  sung  and  prayed. 

Tuesday  17.  This  morning  I  found  some  peace  and  life  in  my  soul ; 
but  want  more  retirement.  My  desire  is,  to  be  ever  before  the  Lord. 
Many  people  attended  the  preaching,  both  in  the  forenoon  and  in 
the  evening,  when  the  congregation  was  much  affected.  The  next 
morning  I  went  to  friend  S.'s,  and  found  his  family  well.  Here  we 
had  Dr.  Warfuld,  and  several  polite  people  to  dine  with  us.  I  spoke 
to  the  ladies  about  head-dresses  ;  but  the  Doctor  vindicated  them,  ob- 
serving that  religion  did  not  consist  in  dress.  1  quoted  the  words  of 
St.  Peter  ;  I  staid  about  an  hour,  and  then  departed.  We  then  rode 
to  Friend  D.'s,  and  spent  some  time  with  his  family. 

Thursday  19.  Friend  D.  and  I  set  off  for  Frederica.  We  came  to 
G.  S.'s,  where  I  expected  to  have  preached,  but  there  was  a  disap- 
pointment ;  so  we  pursued  our  way,  though  my  little  horse  was  un- 
well and  very  weary.  A  poor  unhappy  man  abused  me  much  on  the 
road  :  he  cursed,  swore,  and  threw  stones  at  me.  But  I  found  it 
my  duty  to  talk  to  him,  and  show  him  his  danger.  Frederica  is  a  neat 
little  town,  having  one  main  street  and  three  cross  streets.  It  con- 
tains about  a  thousand  houses,  and  the  inhabitants  are  chiefly  Germans 
There  are  two  German  churches,  one  Calvinist,  and  one  Lutheran, 
There  is  also  one  English  church,  and  one  Roman  chapel.  Many 
people  came  to  hear  me  in  this  town. 

Friday  20.  Found  some  peace  of  mind  in  the  morning  ;  but  was 
sorely  buffeted  by  Satan  in  the  course  of  the  day  ;  I  had  but  few 
people  in  the  evening,  and  but  little  power. 

Saturday  21.  My  mind  was  greatly  depressed.  Not  on  account  of 
any  outward  known  sin  ;  but  partly  from  the  state  of  my  body,  and 
partly  from  a  deep  sense  of  the  very  great  work  in  which  I  am  em- 
ployed. I  do  not  know  when  I  sunk  into  deeper  distress  :  though, 
thank  God,  there  was  no  condemnation. 

Vol.  I.  5 


3±  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

Lord's  day.  After  preaching  in  the  morning,  brother  J.  H.  friend 
B.  and  myself,  set  off  to  a  place  where  I  had  to  preach  at  2  o'clock. 
Friend  B.  was  awakened  by  the  instrumentality  of  friend  S.  and  he 
told  me  that  he  had  been  much  opposed.  I  heard  him  give  an  exhor- 
tation greatly  to  the  purpose ;  and  gave  him  a  note  of  recommenda- 
tion, to  do  all  the  good  he  could.  Happened  in  company  with  an  old 
stupid  Quaker  woman,  who  supposed  me  to  be  a  half  Quaker,  and 
thought  the  Friends  were  the  only  people  in  the  world,  and  that  they 
were  not  fallen  from  their  former  lively  and  spiritual  state.  A  man 
came  twenty  miles  for  me  to  go  and  preach  a  funeral  sermon.  I 
accordingly  complied,  and  had  many  people  to  hear  me.  Then  went 
about  two  miles,  to  preach  at  Mr.  D.'s ;  and  met  with  a  German  mi- 
nister, Mr.  Benedict  Swope,  who  heard  me  preach  at  both  places.  We 
had  some  conversation  about  the  ordinances  administered  by  Mr.  S. 
He  advanced  some  reasons  to  urge  the  necessity  of  them,  and  said 
Mr.  W  did  not  do  well  to  hinder  us  from  the  administration  of  them. 
I  told  him  they  did  uot  appear  to  me  as  essential  to  salvation. 

Tuesday  23.  Preached  at  Winchester,  in  an  unfinished  house  ;  and 
while  the  rain  beat  in  upon  me,  many  people  looked  and  wondered  at 
the  stranger.  However,  I  delivered  my  message  with  some  energy, 
and  then  rode  3  miles  to  Richard  Owing's,  where  the  Lord  enabled 
me  to  preach  with  much  feeling  to  a  great  number  of  people. 

Wednesday  24.  We  rode  about  20  miles  to  my  old  friend  Joshua 
Owing's,  the  Forest-home  for  the  Methodists  at  that  time,  and  found 
a  very  agreeable  house  and  family.  The  old  man  is  "  an  Israelite 
indeed."  He  was  once  a  serious  church-man,  who  sought  for  the 
truth  ;  and  now  God  has  revealed  it  to  him.  The  Lord  has  also  begun 
to  bless  his  family.  He  has  one  son  a  preacher,  and  the  rest  of  his 
children  are  very  thoughtful.  Though  it  was  a  very  rainy  day,  there 
were  many  people,  and  my  heart  was  greatly  enlarged  towards  them 
in  preaching. 

Thursday  25.  The  congregation  was  also  large  at  Mr.  Samuel 
Merryman's,  and  the  Lord  was  with  me.  But  on  Friday,  at  Mr.  E.'s, 
the  congregation  was  small,  and  I  was  much  straitened.  The  same 
evening  I  rode  to  Baltimore.  Saturday  28.  Preached  at  the  Point 
the  first  time. 

Lord's  day  30.  It  was  a  rainy  day,  but  I  rode  to  the  Point,  and  after 
preaching  to  a  large  congregation,  returned  to  town  and  dined  at  W 
M.'s  :  I  preached  in  town  both  at  3,  and  at  6  o'clock. 

Monday,  December  1.  Rode  in  company  with  Mrs.  Rachel  Huliogs, 
Mrs.  R.  and  the  widow  W  to  Nathaniel  Perrig's,  and  preached  to  a 
large   number  of  people.     Then  I   rode    to  William  Lynch's.   to 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  35 

whom  I  was  introduced  by  Mrs.  H.  and  had  many  to  hear  the  word 
of  truth. 

The  next  day,  at  Joppa,  there  were  many  people  from  the  country, 
and  some  from  the  town. 

Thursday  2.  Preached  at  James  Presbury's  to  many  people  who 
could  feel  the  word,  and  with  much  power  in  my  own  soul.  Then 
rode  3  miles  into  the  Neck,  and  had  a  solemn,  heart-affecting  time, 
while  preaching  from  Rev.  ii.  11.  a  passage  which,  it  seems,  just 
suited  their  case:  afterward  returned  to  J.  P 's.  Friday  5.  After 
preaching,  Joseph  Dallam  conducted  me  to  his  house,  and  treated  me 
with  great  kindness.  Preached  at  his  house  at  3  o'clock  ;  and  on 
Saturday,  at  M.  B.'s,  about  3  miles  off. 

Lord's  day  7.  Went  about  5  miles  to  preach  in  our  first  preaching- 
house.  The  house  had  no  windows  or  doors  :  the  weather  was  very 
cold  ;  so  that  my  heart  pitied  the  people  when  I  saw  them  so  exposed. 
Putting  a  handkerchief  over  my  head,  I  preached,  and  after  an 
hour's  intermission  (the  people  waiting  all  the  time  in  the  cold)  I 
preached  again. 

Monday  8.  J.  K.  and  I  went  about  5  miles  to  lodge  ;  and  the  next 
morning  set  off  for  Bohemia.  We  passed  through  Charlestown,  and 
dined  at  the  head  of  Elk.  We  lodged  at  R.  T  's,  where  I  spoke 
closely  to  the  poor  negroes,  who  took  some  notice  of  what  was  said. 
Since  I  went  from  here  last,  my  travels  have  been,  perhaps,  as  much 
as  300  miles  in  about  six  weeks.  And,  glory  to  God  !  I  have  been 
favoured  with  the  presence  of  the  Lord  ;  and  with  zeal  and  power  in 
my  public  exercises.  Rode  to  B.'s  tavern  for  my  trunk  and  box  of 
books  ;  and  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  P —  which  surpassed  every 
thing  1  ever  had  met  with  from  a  Methodist  preacher.  The  Lord 
judge  between  him  and  me  !  Then  T  went  to  S.  H.'s,  and  after 
preaching  to  a  few  people,  I  spoke  to  them,  one  by  one,  concerning 
the  state  of  their  souls. 

Tuesday  9.  I  intended  to  have  preached  at  Georgetown  ;  but  in  my 
way  found  a  large  house  belonging  to  a  certain  Mr.  B.  in  which  Mr. 
Whitefield  had  preached  some  years  ago,  to  some  Hollanders,  who 
were  eminent  for  religion  :  but  the  old  people  are  now  dead.  Then 
I  proceeded  on  my  way  to  Georgetown,  and  lodged  at  the  house  of 
a  Quaker.  He  treated  me  with  great  kindness  ;  and  appeared  to  be 
an  understanding  man.  His  wife  was  somewhat  tender  in  religious 
conversation.  In  the  evening  the  negroes  were  collected,  and  I 
spoke  to  them  in  exhortation.  In  the  morning  3  or  4  white  people 
also  attended  at  prayer,  to  whom  I  spoke  about  their  souls.  The 
Friend  went  with  me  in  the  morning,  and  when  I  asked  him'  what 


36  REV-  FIUNC1S  ASBURY's    JOURNAL. 

satisfaction  he  required,  he   told   me,   no  more  than    what  he  had 
received. 

Wednesday  10.  Preached  to  many  people,  rich  and  poor,  at  J.  R.'s 
and  at  another  place  in  the  evening. 

Friday  12.  Went  12  miles  into  Kent  county,  and-  had  many  great 
people  to  hear  me.  But  before  preaching,  one  Mr.  R.  a  church 
minister,  came  to  me  and  desired  to  know  who  I  was,  and  whether  I 
was  licensed.  I  told  him  who  I  was.  He  spoke  great  swelling  words, 
and  told  me  he  had  authority  over  the  people,  and  was  charged  with 
the  care  of  their  souls.  He  also  told  me  that  I  could  not,  and  should 
not  preach  ;  and  if  I  did,  he  would  proceed  against  me  according  to 
law.  I  let  him  know  that  I  came  to  preach,  and  preach  I  would  ;  and 
farther  asked  him  if  he  had  authority  to  bind  the  consciences  of  the 
people,  or  if  he  was  a  justice  of  the  peace  ;  and  told  him  I  thought 
he  had  nothing  to  do  with  me.  He  charged  me  with  making  a  schism. 
I  told  him  that  I  did  not  draw  the  people  from  the  church  ;  and  asked 
him  if  his  church  was  then  open  ?  He  told  me  that  I  hindered  peo- 
ple from  their  work  ;  but  I  asked  him  if  fairs  and  horse-races  did  not 
hinder  them  ?  And  farther  told  him  that  I  came  to  help  him.  He 
said,  he  had  not  hired  me  for  an  assistant,  and  did  not  want  my  help.  I 
told  him,  if  there  were  no  swearers  or  other  sinners,  he  was  sufficient. 
But,  said  he,  what  did  you  come  for?  I  replied,  to  turn  sinners  to 
God.  He  said,  cannot  I  do  that  as  well  as  you  ?  I  told  him  that  I  had 
authority  from  God.  He  then  laughed  at  me,  and  said,  you  are  a  fine 
fellow  indeed !  I  told  him  I  did  not  do  this  to  invalidate  his  authority  ; 
and  also  gave  him  to  understand  that  I  did  not  wish  to  dispute  with 
him  :  but  he  said  he  had  business  with  me,  and  came  into  the  house 
in  a  great  rage.  I  began  to  preach,  and  urged  the  people  to  repent, 
and  turn  from  all  their  transgressions,  so  iniquity  should  not  prove 
their  ruin.  After  preaching  the  parson  went  out,  and  told  the  people 
they  did  wrong  in  coming  to  hear  me  ;  and  said  I  spoke  against  learn- 
ing. Whereas,  I  only  spoke  to  this  purpose — when  a  man  turned 
from  all  sin,  he  would  adorn  every  character  in  life,  both  in  church 
and  state.     I  left  him,  and  preached  at  John  R.'s  at  seven  o'clock. 

Lord's  day  14.  Preached  twice  with  very  little  intermission,  to  many 
people  collected  at  a  school-house  near  R.  T  's  ;  and  then  rode  to 
S.  H.'s,  and  found  it  a  comfortable  time  while  preaching  at  6  o'clock. 
On  Monday  I  rode  to  New-Castle,  and  preached  to  a  large  company. 
My  soul  has  lately  been  much  bowed  down. 

Tuesday  1G.  There  were  but  few  people  attended  preaching  at  Mr. 
S.'s  ;  and  as  the  next  day  was  wet,  I  staid  and  had  a  family-meeting. 
On  Thursday  I  went  to  Mr.  T.'s.     My  mind  has  been  much  affected 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  37 

lately.  May  the  Lord  support  and  teach  me  !  After  preaching  at  Mr. 
T.'s,  I  went  to  hear  a  New-Light  minister,  and  found  but  little  satis- 
faction. 

Lord's  day  21.  Though  it  rained  much,  yet  many  people  attended 
preaching  at  I.  H.'s.  Then  I  preached  at  a  place  about  five  miles 
off;  and  rode  thence  to  New-Castle,  where  many  people  attended  at 
night.     The  Lord  favoured  me.     My  mind  is  now  full  of  divine  peace. 

Monday  22.  I  set  out  for  Bohemia  ;  and  though  my  body  was  much 
fatigued  with  the  ride,  and  my  head  ached  violently,  yet  in  the  evening 
I  enforced  these  words — "Be  diligent,  that  ye  may  he  found  of  him  in 
peace,  without  spot,  and  blameless  ;"  and  endeavoured  to  show  them, 
that  in  justification  we  have  peace;  in  sanctification  we  are  without 
spot;  and'in  perfect  love  we  are  blameless  ;  and  then  proceeded  to 
show  them  wherein  we  must  be  diligent. 

Tuesday  23.  On  my  way  to  Susquehannah,  a  person  came  for  me 
to  visit  Mrs.  T.  in  a  dropsy.  I  then  proceeded  to  J.  D.'s  ;  and  the 
next  day  set  off  for  J.  P  's,  to  attend  our  quarterly  meeting.  Many 
people  attended,  and  several  friends  came  many  miles.  I  preached 
from  Acts  xx.  28.  "  Take  heed  therefore  unto  yourselves,"  &c. 
After  showing  to  whom  the  charge  was  given,  I  proceeded  to  enforce 
the  subject  thus  ; 

I.  Take  heed  to  your  spirits. 

II.  Take  heed  to  your  practice. 

III.  Take  heed  to  your  doctrine. 
IV  Take  heed  to  the  flock. 

1.  Those  that  are  under  deep  conviction. 

2.  Those  that  are  true  believers. 

3.  Those  that  are  sorely  tempted. 

4.  Those  that  are  groaning  for  full  redemption. 

5.  Those  that  have  backslidden. 

I  then  urged  the  motives  to  this  duty.  We  afterward  proceeded 
to  our  temporal  business,  and  considered  the  following  propositions. 

1.  What  are  our  collections  ?  We  found  them  sufficient  to  defray 
our  expenses. 

2.  How  are  the  preachers  stationed  ?  Brother  S.  and  brother  O.  in 
Frederick  county.  Brother  K.  brother  W.  and  I.  R.  on  the  other 
side  of  the  bay  ;  and  myself  in  Baltimore. 

3.  Shall  we  be  strict  in  our  society  meetings,  and  not  admit 
strangers  ?  Agreed. 

4.  Shall  we  drop  preaching  in  the  day-time  through  the  week  ? 
Not  agreed  to. 


38  B.&V.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

5.  Will  the  people  be  contented  without  our  administering  the  sacra- 
ment ?  J.  K.  was  neuter  ;  brother  S.  pleaded  much  for  the  ordinances  ; 
and  so  did  the  people,  who  appeared  to  be  much  biassed  by  him.  I 
told  them  I  would  not  agree  to  it  at  that  time,  and  insisted  on  our  abid- 
ing by  our  rules.  But  Mr.  B.  had  given  them  their  way  at  the  quar- 
terly meeting  held  here  before,  and  I  was  obliged  to  connive  at  some 
things  for  the  sake  of  peace. 

6.  Shall  we  make  collections  weekly,  to  pay  the  preachers'  board 
and  expenses?  This  was  not  agreed  to  :  we  then  inquired  into  the  mo- 
ral characters  of  the  preachers  and  exhorters.  Only  one  exhorter 
was  found  any  way  doubtful,  and  we  have  great  hopes  of  him.  Brother 
S.  received  £8  quarterage  ;  brother  K.  and  myself  £6  each.  Great 
love  subsisted  among  us  in  this  meeting,  and  we  parted  in  peace. 

I  then  went  to  Jos.  Dallam's  ;  and  on  Christmas  day  attended  the 
church,  and  heard  parson  West  preach  a  plain  useful  sermon,  which 
contained  much  truth  ;  and  afterward  received  the  sacrament.  Then 
rode  5  miles  to  Bush  ;  but  as  Mr.  S.  did  not  give  public  notice,  few 
people  attended,  and  the  preaching  was  late.  The  next  day  I  rode  to 
B.  P  's,  where  we  had  a  large  congregation,  and  a  very  comfortable 
meeting.  On  the  same  day  at  the  house  of  H.  W  Nicholas  Watters 
spoke  with  great  care,  but  with  little  depth.  He  may  improve  and 
make  a  useful  preacher  in  time. 

Lord's  day  27.  Rode  to  the  widow  Bond's  and  preached  twice,  with 
very  little  intermission,  to  a  great  number  of  people.  Appointing  a 
meeting  in  the  evening,  1  had  an  opportunity  of  hearing  Isaac  Raw- 
ling  exhort.  His  exhortation  was  coarse  and  loud  enough,  though 
with  some  depth.  I  gave  him  a  little  advice,  which  he  seemed  willing 
to  take. 

Monday  28.  Many  people  of  various  kinds  attended  at  A.  S.'s. 
Preached  afterward  at  I.  M.'s  in  the  evening,  and  went  thence  to  I. 
B — 's  and  met  the  class. 

Tuesday  29.  At  Mr.  S.'s  I  found  great  peace  of  mind,  and,  thanks 
be  to  God,  had  power  in  preaching,  though  the  people  were  dead  and 
stupid.  The  next  day  at  Mr.  C.'s  I  had  many  people,  and  preached 
with  freedom  ;  then  went  to  G.'s,  where  we  had  great  consolation. 

January  1,  1773.  My  body  has  been  weak  for  some  time,  but  my 
mind  has  enjoyed  a  good  degree  of  peace  ;  and  I  have  a  strong  desire 
to  be  kept  in  the  meekness  of  Jesus  Christ.  My  heart  has  been 
affected  by  reading,  lately,  part  of  Sewel's  history  of  the  Quakers. 
How  great  was  the  spirit  of  persecution  in  New-England,  when  some 
were  imprisoned,  some  had  their  ears  cut  off,  and  some  were  hanged  ! 
O  that  our  God  would  arise,  and  bow  the  nations  to  himself! 


REV.  FRANCIS    ASBURY'S  JOURNA.L.  39 

January  2.  After  preaching  to  several  people  at  J.  M.'s,  a  new 
place,  I  then  rode  back  to  Mr.  C.'s,  and  preached  in  the  evening. 

January  3.  Rode  to  Baltimore,  and  had  a  large  congregation  at  the 
house  of  Captain  Paten,  at  the  Point.  Many  of  the  principal  people 
were  there  ;  and  the  Lord  enabled  me  to  speak  with  power.  At 
night  I  preached  in  town.  The  house  was  well  filled  with  people, 
and  we  have  a  comfortable  hope  the  work  of  the  Lord  will  revive  in 
this  place.  Bless  the  Lord,  O  ye  saints  !  Holiness  is  the  element  of 
my  soul.  My  earnest  prayer  is,  that  nothing  contrary  to  holiness  may 
live  in  me. 

Monday  4.  Rode  to  S.  S.'s,  and  was  much  affected  in  preaching  to 
the  people.     I  then  met  and  regulated  the  class. 

Tuesday  5.  They  were  kind  enough  to  offer  me  the  court-house  in 
town;  but  judging  it  unfit,  I  preached  in  another  house  ;  then  met 
the  society,  and  settled  a  class  of  men. 

Wednesday  6.  We  had  a  pretty  good  gathering  at  N.  Perrig's,  about 
6  miles  from  town  ;  I  then  rode  back  to  town,  and  after  preaching 
with  comfort  in  the  evening,  I  formed  a  class  of  women. 

Thursday  7.  Rose  with  a  determination  to  live  more  to  God. 
Preached  twice  in  the  country,  met  two  classes,  and  settled  them  as 
well  as  I  could.  The  class  at  Mr.  S.'s  were  lively,  and  had  the  power 
of  God  among  them.  They  were  the  fruit  of  N.  P — 's  labours,  and 
many  of  them  could  give  a  good  account  of  their  experience. 

Friday  8.  My  mind  is  fixed  on  God.  I  both  desire  and  purpose  to 
exercise  fasting,  prayer,  and  faith.  After  some  exercise  of  mind,  the 
Lord  enabled  me  to  preach  with  warmth  at  Mr.  M.'s  from  these  words, 
"  Be  not  ye  partakers  with  them."  I  showed,  First,  whom  the  words 
were  spoken  to.  Secondly,  with  whom  they  were  not  to  be  parta 
kers.  Thirdly,  how  they  were  not  to  partake  with  them,  viz.  In 
spirit — in  judgment — in  practice. 

Lord's  day,  January  10.  Many  people  attended  at  J.  P.'s,  to  whom 
I  preached  twice,  with  some  life,  and  then  went  3  miles  into  the  Neck 
and  felt  much  power  while  preaching  on  perfect  love.     The  more  1 
speak  on  this  subject,  the  more  my  soul  is  filled  and  drawn  out  in 
love.     This  doctrine  has  a  great  tendency  to  prevent  people  from  set 
tling  on  their  lees. 

Monday  11.  Preached  with  great  plainness  to  many  people  at  D, 
R.'s,  and  then  rode  to  Mr.  D.'s. 

Tuesday  12.  Rode  to  M.  B.'s,  but  as  they  had  no  previous  notice, 
we  collected  but  few.  However,  I  preached,  and  afterward  returned 
to  Mr.  D.'s,  and  preached  to  his  family, 


40  KtV-  MIAKCIS  ASBURY  S  J.OUilNAL. 

Thursday  13.  It  was  late  before  I  reached  S.  L.'s,  and  as  there 
was  much  rain  and  snow,  the  company  was  small.  Young  Doctor 
Andrews  took  me  home  with  him.  The  young  man,  with  his  sister 
and  mother,  seemed  tender  ;  but  his  father  appeared  to  be  a  stiff  old 
man,  and  I  did  by  no  means  like  his  spirit. 

Friday  14.  Many  people  attended  preaching  at  S.  F — 's.  I  was 
shut  up  in  speaking,  and  afterward  rode  home  with  friend  P 

Saturday  15.  This  morning  I  rose  to  glorify  God,  with  a  determi- 
nation to  do  his  will,  and  that  only  ;  to  be  wholly  devoted  to  the  Lord, 
in  spirit,  soul,  and  body.  Many  people  came  to  hear  the  word  of  life 
to-day,  though  it  was  very  cold. 

Lord's  day  1G.  Preaching  to-day  at  friend  P.'s,  on  the  barren  fig- 
tree,  I  first  showed  that  it  was  applicable  to  the  Jews,  and  secondly 
to  the  Protestant  church  ;  at  the  same  time  described  the  barren  fig- 
tree  as — one  without  leaves — or,  one  without  blossoms — or,  one 
without  fruit — or,  one  that  did  not  bear  so  much  fruit  as  another 
might  bear. — I  then  rode  to  Jos.  Dallam's,  and  preached  to  his  family 
with  a  few  others.  On  Monday  but  few  people  attended  at  B.'s  ;  and 
in  the  evening  I  preached  at  Mr.  D.'s,  but  was  shut  up.  The  next 
day  many  country  people  came  to  hear  the  word  at  Joppa,  though  but 
few  from  the  town.  There  are  about  forty  houses  in  this  town,  and 
it  stands  on  a  neck  of  land  near  the  water  ;  but  the  people  seem  to  be 
buried  in  trade,  sensuality,  and  superstition. 

Wednesday  19.  The  weather  being  cold,  there  were  but  few  at 
J.  B.'s  ;  nevertheless  I  preached — If  Israel  be  not  gathered,  yet  I 
hope  to  be  the  Lord's. 

Thursday  20.  After  preaching  with  liberty  at  Mr.  C.'s,  I  went  to 
A.  G.'s,  and  found  life  in  preaching  there.  The  next  day,  at  J.  M.'s, 
I  preached  to  a  stupid  company,  and  then  rode  to  J.  C.'s.  I  was 
favoured  with  liberty  in  dispensing  the  blessed  word  in  the  evening 
at  J.  Owing's.  How  pleasant  and  profitable  it  is  to  feel  divine  power 
in  public  exercises  !  Saturday,  I  rode  to  Baltimore  and  had  a  large 
congregation. 

Lord's  day  23.  I  preached  twice  at  the  Point,  and  once  in  town. 
On  Monday  my  heart  felt  great  sorrow.  This  day  1  wrote  to  my 
mother  ;  and  in  the  evening  found  great  consolation. 

Tuesday  25.  My  mind  was  wholly  given  up  to  God,  and  I  have  a 
great  hope  that  the  Gospel  will  yet  spread  in  this  town.  On  Wednes- 
day there  was  a  moving  among  the  people  while  I  preached  at  N.  P  's  ; 
and  afterward  returning  to  town,  preached  in  the  evening.  On  Thurs- 
day I  felt  power  and  life  in  my  soul,  while  preaching  to  a  large  nunv 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  41 

ber  of  people  at  Mr.  G.'s.     On  Friday  I  preached  in  the  Neck  and 
at  Joppa. 

Saturday  29  Perceiving  the  great  wickedness  of  the  people  who 
were  swearing  and  drinking  in  a  tavern,  great  struggles  arose  in  my 
mind  about  preaching  there  ;  however  1  broke  through  every  diffi- 
culty, and  felt  both  life  and  power  in  dispensing  the  word  among 
them. 

Lord's  day  30.  This  was  a  day  of  power  and  comfort.  I  rode  to 
Jos.  Presbury's,  preached  three  times,  and  met  the  classes.  Many 
of  the  people,  through  grace,  were  able  to  give  a  good  account 
of  their  experience. 

February  1.  Was  favoured  in  preaching  to  a  number  of  people  at 
D.  R.'s  ;  and  my  mind  has  been  kept  by  the  grace  of  God. 

Tuesday  2.  Was  greatly  assisted  in  preaching  to-day,  both  at  Swan- 
Creek  and  Mr.  Dallam's.  The  next  morning  I  breakfasted  with 
Richard  Dallam,  and  found  that  he  was  very  fond  of  Mr.  Law's 
works.  He  treated  me  with  great  kindness.  After  preaching  and 
meeting  the  society  at  the  ferry,  I  went  to  Jacob  Giles's,  a  man  much 
talked  of,  but  what  he  is,  I  know  not.  In  principle  he  appeared  to 
be  a  Quaker.  He  was  much  troubled  with  the  gout,  which,  he  told 
me,  his  father  had  before  him.  He  said,  his  father  cured  himself  of 
the  gout  by  milk  and  moderate  diet  ;  but  threw  himself  into  a  dropsy, 
On  Thursday,  after  preaching  at  Deer-Creek,  I  rode  to  B.  P.'s.  My 
present  purpose  is,  to  put  all  the  people  who  are  fit  for  it  into  bands. 

Friday  5.  Many  people  attended  at  F.'s,  and  my  soul  was  enlarged 
in  preaching  to  them.  I  then  rode  back  to  B.  P.'s,  and  put  the  peo- 
ple into  bands  as  I  had  designed. 

Saturday  6.  My  mind  was  calm  and  serene  this  morning.  I 
preached  with  some  power,  and  we  had  a  comfortable  meeting, 
W  D.  a  lad  about  16  or  17  years  of  age,  exhorted  the  people.  He 
appeared  to  be  a  promising  youth,  and  I  gave  him  a  license  to  exhort. 

Lord's  day  7.  Some  great  critics  attended  at  the  preaching-houso 
to-day  ;  but  I  preached  twice,  and  spoke  freely. 

Monday  8.  Though  the  weather  was  very  cold,  I  went  to  W  B.'s, 
and  enforced  on  a  dull  congregation  these  awful  words  of  our  Lord, 
"  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and 
lose  his  own  soul."  I  went  afterward  to  the  widow  Bond's,  and  spoke 
closely  to  the  girls,  who  appeared  to  be  somewhat  serious. 

Tuesday  9.  After  preaching  to  more  people  than  usual,  at  A.  S.'s3 
I  went  to  B.'s  in  the  evening,  and  both  met  the  class  and  formed  some 
bands.  I  also  gave  them  a  copy  of  the  proper  deed  for  securing 
their  preaching-house. 

Vol.  I.  6 


'kZ  REV.  FRANCIS  ASSURES  JOURNAL. 

Wednesday  10.  I  went  to  C.'s  and  preached.  This  perhaps  will 
be  the  last  time,  for  it  is  a  disorderly  house.  I  then  went  to  Aquila 
Galloway's  and  preached  with  some  comfort.  There  is  room  to  hope 
that  the  Lord  will  do  something  for  the  people  here. 

Thursday  11.  The  congregation  was  large  at  J.  M.'s,  and  I  preach- 
ed with  plainness,  so  that  the  sleepy  people  seemed  to  awake.  I 
then  went  back  to  C.'s  and  preached  with  some  satisfaction  ;  but 
Satan  was  close  at  my  heels ;  however,  the  Lord  gave  me  power  to 
resist  him. 

Friday  12.  The  Lord  enables  me  to  stand  fast  in  the  midst  of 
temptations.  My  soul  possesses  inward  and  spiritual  power.  Many 
people  attended  preaching  to-day  at  J.  O.'s  ;  I  afterward  met  the  class, 
and  then  gave  an  exhortation  in  the  evening. 

Lord's  day  14.  Many  country  people  came  to  hear  the  word  of 
God  at  the  Point ;  some  came  12  miles  before  those  of  the  town  had 
left  their  houses  ;  perhaps  before  some  of  them  had  left  their  beds. 
I  found  some  life  and  power  in  preaching  both  at  the  Point  and  ia 
Baltimore. 

Monday  15.  Rose  this  morning  with  holy  thoughts  of  God  ;  and 
we  had  a  good  time  in  public  worship. 

Wednesday  17.  I  preached  and  met  the  society,  and  employed  Mr. 
M.  to  draw  up  a  deed  for  the  house  in  Gunpowder-Neck. 

Thursday  18.  Preached  with  power,  both  at  N.  P  's  and  Mr. 
Galloway's. 

Friday  19.  A  few  people  attended  at  Mr.  M.'s  :  going  afterward 
about  4  miles  to  Mr.  D.'s,  I  preached  and  met  the  society  ;  most  of 
them  appeared  to  be  under  a  good  work  of  grace. 

Lord's  day  21.  The  weather  was  excessively  severe,  yet  many 
people  came  to  hear  the  word  at  J.  P.'s-  I  rode  about  6  or  7  miles 
to  preach  in  the  Neck,  but  never  felt  colder  weather.  The  water 
froze  as  it  ran  from  the  horse's  nostrils  ;  and  a  friend  said,  the  water 
froze  as  it  came  from  his  eyes.  However,  after  preaching  to  a  £ew 
people  I  returned. 

Monday  22.  I  had  sixteen  miles  to  ride  to  preach  to  a  few  people, 
and  5  more  to  J.  D.'s  to  get  my  dinner.  I  have  suffered  a  little  by 
lodging  in  open  houses  this  cold  weather  ;  but  this  is  a  very  small  thing 
when  compared  to  what  the  dear  Redeemer  suffered  for  the  salvation 
of  precious  souls. 

Tuesday  23.     Glory  to  God !  I  had  peace. 

Wednesday  24.  After  preaching  with  plainness  to  a  considerable 
number  of  people,  I  then  went  to  J.  D.'s,  where  many  people 
attended,  and  we  had  a  comfortable  time.     My  old  opponent,  Mr.  E. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  43 

met  me  here,  but  he  did  not  appear  so  forward  as  he  had  been.  I 
rode  thence  to  Rocky-Run,  and  preached  there  with  satisfaction. 
Mr.  G.  and  his  wife  treated  me  with  great  kindness. 

Thursday  25.  I  had  a  good  time  and  many  people  at  Mr.  L.'s. 
Two  letters  came  to  hand  to-day,  one  from  York,  and  one  from  Phila- 
delphia. They  entreat  me  to  return,  and  inform  me  that  trouble  is  at 
hand.  But  I  cannot  fear  while  my  heart  is  upright  with  God.  I 
seek  nothing  but  him  ;  and  fear  nothing  but  his  displeasure. 

Lord's  day  28.  After  preaching  yesterday  at  S.  F  's,  I  returned 
to  friend  P  's,  and  preached  twice  to-day.  Then  rode  to  Mr.  D.'s, 
and  spent  the  evening  comfortably. 

Monday,  March  1.  Mr.  D.  and  myself  rode  to  B.'s,  where  I  spoke 
with  great  plainness  of  speech.  There  appears  to  be  some  reason 
to  doubt  of  the 'people  in  general  here  ;  though  the  young  women 
seem  to  be  deeply  serious  and  thoughtful.  I  then  went  to  Captain 
S — 's  ;  but  found  very  little  satisfaction.  The  man  and  his  wife  are, 
I  fear,  too  fond  of  their  own  opinions.  After  preaching  here,  I 
went  to  B.'s  again,  and  spent  some  time  in  serious  conversation  ;  I 
afterward  prayed  and  gave  an  exhortation.  I  then  rode  to  M.'s  and 
preached  ;  and  returned  to  C — 's  and  preached  there  :  but  found  the 
old  man  too  much  of  a  Quaker  in  principle.  He  objects  against 
prayer  in  his  family  ;  and  greatly  discourages  his  daughter,  who 
strives  to  live  in  the  fear  of  God. 

Friday,  March  5.  Went  to  J.  O.'s,  where  we  had  a  melting. time ; 
and  the  people  seemed  much  affected  both  in  the  day  and  in  the 
evening.  Satan  has  assaulted  me  very  much  of  late  :  but  hitherto 
the  Lord  hath  helped  and  delivered  me.  I  came  next  to  Baltimore, 
and  had  many  to  hear  the  word. 

Saturday  6.     Went  to  the  Point,  but  the  people  seemed  very  hard 
in  their  minds.     In  the  evening  at  Baltimore,  we  had  a  moving,  melt 
ing  season.     I  humbly  believe  the  labour  was  not  in  vain. 

Monday  8.  Rose  this  morniDg  with  a  determination  to  fight  or 
die  ;  and  spent  an  hour  in  earnest  prayer.  Lord  keep  me  ever 
watchful.  I  was  also  much  comforted  by  a  letter  which  1  lately  re- 
ceived from  R.  O.  part  of  which  was  as  follows,  "  I  know  not  what 
it  will  come  to.  Almost  every  person  seems  to  be  under  a  religious 
concern.  There  are  about  22  persons  already  joined  in  society  at 
Seneca.  At  Georgetown  four  have  been  lately  enabled  to  rejoice  in 
God  ;  and  one  at  Rocky-Creek.  Blessed  be  God  ;  who  hath  not  for- 
gotten to  be  gracious."  * 

Tuesday  9.  This  was  a  day  of  sweet  peace  to  my  soul.  Went  to 
dine  with  one  Mr.  L — ,  and  found  him  and  his  wife  both  serious. 
Preached  in  the  evening  with  power. 


*  '  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S-  JOURNAL. 

Wednesday  10.  I  went  to  N.  P — 's.  It  was  a  rainy  morning ;  but 
a  time  of  power  to  those  who  were  present.  In  going  thence  to  Mr. 
G.'s,  it  was  with  great  difficulty  we  crossed  the  water.  The  next 
morning  I  set  off  for  Gunpowder-Neck  ;  but  found  the  Great- Falls 
very  high  ;  however,  I  got  there  about  one  o'clock,  and  found  it  a 
good  time  while  preaching  the  word  of  God. 

Friday  12.  Preached  a  funeral  sermon  at  J.  W  's  from  Isaiah  lvii. 
1,  2. — "  The  righteous  perisheth  and  no  man  layeth  it  to  heart ;  and 
merciful  men  are  taken  away,  none  considering  that  the  righteous  is 
taken  away  from  the  evil  to  come.  He  shall  rest  in  peace  :  they 
shall  rest  in  their  beds,  each  one  walking  in  his  uprightness." 
This  was  a  solemn  time  indeed.  What  melting  and  weeping  appeared 
among  the  people !  There  was  scarce  a  dry  eye  to  be  seen.  O  that 
it  may  not  be  as  seed  sown  by  the  way-side !  After  preaching  1  rode 
to  Mr.  D.'s,  and  met  with  brother  K.  and  brother  W  and  found  my- 
self abundantly  comforted  in  their  company. 

Lord's  day  14.  Preached  at  Bohemia.  There  were  but  few  peo- 
ple ;  though  it  was  a  melting  time.  Rode  then  to  S.  H.'s,  but  was 
much  shut  up  in  preaching. 

Monday  15.  Found  my  mind  this  morning  free  to  do  the  will  of 
God  ;  and  was  more  than  ever  strengthened  in  prayer.  But  set  out 
for  Worton  to-day,  with  my  mind  depressed  in  such  a  manner  as  I 
hardly  ever  felt  it  before.  In  my  journey  my  heart  sunk  within  me  ; 
and  I  knew  not  why.  At  a  certain  Mr.  D.'s,  at  the  Cross-Roads, 
many  people,  who  appeared  to  be  strangers  to  the  truth,  were  wait- 
ing to  hear  the  word.  I  stood  at  the  door  and  declared — "  The  time 
is  fulfilled,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  at  hand."  I  spoke  with  great  feel- 
ing, and  exerted  myself  much,  but  could  not  get  my  spirit  free. 
They  persuaded  me  to  stay  all  night ;  but  it  was  as  if  I  had  been 
bound  in  chains. 

Tuesday  16.  Went  to  R.'s,  and  found  myself  delivered  from  my 
shackles  ;  but  still  my  spirit  is  not  altogether  at  home  ;  it  longs  for 
God.  I  do  humbly  and  confidently  hope  to  live  more  to  God  than 
ever.     Lord,  keep  me  every  moment ! 

Wednesday  17.  Went  down  to  the  lower  church,  but  with  some 
backwardness  of  mind.  However  there  were  many  people  who 
were  still  and  attentive  ;  and  I  felt  a  melting  sense  of  God  in  my  own 
soul. 

Friday  18.  I  spoke  with  power  to  many  people  at  New-Castle. 
Went  thence  to  Wilmington,  and  spoke  to  a  few  people  with  great 
feeling. 

Lord's  day  20.  But  few  attended  at  I.  H.'s,  because  of  the  rain  ; 
but  I  felt  myself  greatly  assisted.     Went  thence,  through  the  rain  to 


IlEV.    FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  45 

Newport,  where  many  people  attended  in  the  evening.  They  ap- 
peared to  have  very  little  sense  of  religious  things, 

Monday  21.  Being  a  rainy  day,  we  set  out  late  for  Marlborough. 
There  was,  notwithstanding,  a  large  congregation  waiting.  Though 
unwell  1  gave  them  an  exhortation  at  night,  and  I.  R.  preached.  He 
has  been  of  some  use  to  the  people  here. 

Tuesday  22.  My  mind  was  serene  ;  and  I  felt  a  nearness  to  God— * 
a  determination  to  live  to  him  alone. 

Went  to  T.  E.'s,  and  felt  much  life  while  preaching  to  a  large  com- 
pany there  ;  but  was  afflicted  with  a  violent  pain  in  the  head. 

Wednesday  23.  Many  great  people  attended  the  preaching  at 
W  's  ;  and  we  had  a  comfortable  time.  Rode  thence  to  S.  H.'s  ;  many 
Quakers  were  present,  and  it  was  a  moving  season — I  then  went 
about  twenty  miles,  through  wet  weather  and  bad  roads,  to  Mr.  T.'s. 
The  night  was  very  dark,  the  road  was  through  the  woods,  and  it  was 
late  before  we  reached  the  place  j  but,  by  the  help  of  a  good  guide, 
I  got  there  safe  at  last. 

"  In  all  my  ways,  thy  hand  I  own, 
Thy  ruling  providence  I  see  : 
O  help  me  still  my  course  to  run, 
And  still  direct  my  paths  to  thee." 

I  was  somewhat  troubled  to  hear  of  Mr.  W —  who  had  printed 
some  of  Mr.  Wesley's  books  for  the  sake  of  gain.  This  will  not  do. 
It  does  by  no  means  look  well. 

Friday  25.  Many  young  people  attended  among  others,  at  Chris- 
teen-Bridge,  while  I  preached  from  Eccles.  xi.  9.  "  Rejoice,  O  young 
man,  in  thy  youth,  and  let  thy  heart  cheer  thee  in  the  days  of  thy 
youth,  and  walk  in  the  ways  of  thy  heart,  and  in  the  sight  of  thine 
eyes :  but  know  thou,  that  for  all  these  things  God  will  bring  thee  into 
judgment."  Deep  seriousness  sat  on  the  faces  of  all ;  and  the  mouths 
of  many  gainsayers  were  in  a  great  measure  stopped. 

Saturday  27.  Rode  to  Bohemia,  and  lodged  with  a  Presbyterian 
elder.  The  next  day  I  preached  in  the  school-house.  But  these 
people,  who  profess  religion,  could  scarce  be  serious  during  the  time 

of  preaching.     Mr.  B ,  and  some  other  great  opposers  of  our 

doctrine,  were  present  at  S.  H.'s  at  three  o'clock  :  I  therefore  chan- 
ged my  purpose,  and  preached  from  John  iii.  23.  "  Andjhif  is  his 
commandment,  that  we  should  believe  on  the  name  of  his*&ii  Jesus 
Christ,  and  love  one  another  ;  as  he  gave  us  commandment."  And  I 
had  great  hope  that  it  was  well  received, 


46  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAi  • 

Monday  29.  Rode  twenty  miles  to  Susquehannah  ;  and  just  got  in, 
almost  spent,  time  enough  to  preach  at  3  o'clock.  Hitherto  the  Lord 
hath  helped.     Praised,  for  ever,  be  his  dear  and  blessed  name. 

Tuesday  30.  Our  quarterly  meeting  began.  After  I  had  preach- 
ed, we  proceeded  to  business  :  and  in  our  little  conference,  the  fol- 
lowing, queries  were  propounded,  viz. 

1.  Are  there  no  disorderly  persons  in  our  classes  ?  It  was  thought 
not. 

2.  Does  not  dram-drinking  too  much  prevail  among  our  people? 

3.  Do  none  contract  debts  without  due  care  to  pay  them?  We 
found  that  this  evil  is  much  avoided  among  our  people. 

4.  Are  the  band-meetings  kept  up  ? 

5.  Is  there  nothing  immoral  in  any  of  our  preachers  ? 

6.  What  preachers  travel  now,  and  where  are  they  stationed  ?  It 
was  then  urged  that  none  must  break  our  rules,  under  the  penalty  of 
being  excluded  from  our  connexion.  All  was  settled  in  the  most 
amicable  manner.  Mr.  S.  preached  a  good  and  useful  sermon  from 
Joel  ii.  17.  "  Let  the  priests,  the  ministers  of  the  Lord,  weep  between 
the  porch  and  the"  altar,"  &c.  Many  people  were  present  at  our 
love-feast,  among  whom  were  some  strangers  :  but  all  were  deeply 
serious,  and  the  power  of  God  was  present  indeed.  Brother  O. 
preached  a  very  alarming  sermon,  and  brother  S.  gave  a  moving  ex- 
hortation. The  whole  ended  in  great  peace.  And  we  all  went,  in 
the  strength  of  the  Lord,  to  our  several  appointments. 

Saturday  3.  Preached  at  Baltimore,  where  we  had  a  comfortable 
meeting.  Lord's  day  4.  I  delivered  a  funeral  discourse,  but  was  much 
shut  up  in  my  mind.  Went  thence  to  the  Forest,  and  preached  at  7 
o'clock,  with  great  comfort.  Several  rich  people  attended  preaching 
the  last  three,  days,  and  did  not  seem  displeased  with  the  plain  truths 
of  the  Gospel.  One  or  two  persons  here  seem  to  be  groaning  for  full 
redemption.  My  heart  is  grieved  that  I  have  not  been  entirely  devo- 
ted to  God  ;  but  have  great  reason  to  be  thankful  that  I  feel  more 
and  more  desire  after  God. 

Thursday  8.  I  left  Baltimore.  J.K.  and  three  exhorters  being 
present,  we  held  a  watch-night  at  P  's,  and  the  Lord  was  powerfully 
with  us. 

Friday  9.  Preached  at  L.'s  with  power.  But  found  it  a  heavy 
cross  while  preaching  at  Mr.  G.'s. 

LolMftay  11.  Preached  at  Bohemia;  but  the  people  there  seemed 
to  be  but  little  affected.  Rode  thence  to  S.  KL's,  where  many  people 
attended,  and  I  was  enabled  to  speak  with  solemnity  from  Dent.  xx*. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY?S  JOURNAL.  47 

19.  "I  have  set  before  you  life  and  death,"  &c.  Went  thence  to 
New-Castle,  but  found  them  out  of  order.  Then  rode  to  Red-Clay 
Creek,  where  I  preached  with  power. 

Tuesday  13.  Many  people  came  to  hear  the  word  at  Mount-Plea- 
sant. 

Wednesday  14.  Came  very  weary  to  Philadelphia;  but  the  sight 
of  my  friends  greatly  revived  me  ;  and  all  seem  to  be  in  peace. 

Tuesday  proved  to  be  a  day  of  peace  to  my  soul  ;  part  of  which  1 
spent  in  visiting  the  people.  The  next  day  I  was  employed  in  writing 
to  England  ;  and  after  preaching  in  the  evening  with  power,  I  went 
to  rest  in  sweet  peace,  and  awoke  in  the  morning  in  the  same  frame 
of  spirit. — May  this  day  be  spent  to  the  glory  of  God !  and  may  my 
soul  yet  praise  him  more  and  more ! 

On  Wednesday,  after  spending  a  part  of  the  day  in  visiting,  I 
preached  in  the  evening  from  these  words,  "  So  we  see  that  they 
could  not  enter  in  because  of  unbelief :"  and  humbly  hope  it  was  not 
labour  in  vain,  while  unbelief,  that  destructive  root  of  all  other  sin, 
was  exposed  to  the  people. 

On  Thursday  there  was  an  appointment  for  me  to  preach  at  New- 
town. Brother  S.  and  myself  crossed  the  East  River  ;  but  it  was  with 
difficulty  that  we  obtained  horses.  We  then  attempted  to  proceed 
on  our  way  ;  but  it  was  a  severe  morning,  with  much  snow  and  wind. 
The  snow  came  full  in  our  faces,  so  that  after  riding  a  few  miles  we 
were  lost  in  the  storm,  and  imperceptibly  turned  our  course  back 
towards  New- York  ;  which  we  never  discovered  till  we  overtook 
some  people  on  the  road,  We  then  crossed  the  river  back  to  the 
city,  where  I  continued  till  Monday. 

Friday,  I  preached  at  York  on  these  words,  "  The  Lord  is  good, 
a  strong  hold  in  the  day  of  trouble  ;"  and  felt  life  and  power  in  dis- 
pensing the  word.  On  Saturday  I  visited  the  sick,  and  gave  an  ex- 
hortation to  the  people. 

Lord's  day  4.  After  preaching  in  the  morning  on  Hebr.  xii.  15. 
I  went  in  the  afternoon  to  church,  and  heard  Mr.  E.  preach  a  useful 
sermon :  in  the  evening  I  preached  with  much  freedom  on  Eccles, 
xi.  9.  "  Rejoice,  O  young  man,  in  thy  youth,"  &c.  The  young 
people  appeared  deeply  serious.  May  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  attend 
it,  and  great  fruit  appear  in  time  to  come !  The  next  day  I  rode  to 
Bloomingdale,  and  preached  with  satisfaction;  and  then  returned  home, 
and  found  it  a  blessing  to  labour  in  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord,  both  in 
season  and  out  of  season.  On  Tuesday  morning  my  mind  was  clear, 
my  heart  was  fixed  on  God,  and  Christ  was  precious.  Bless  the 
Lord,  O  my  soul !     New-York  is  a  large  city,  and  well  situated  for 


4'6  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy'S  JOURNAL. 

trade  ;  but  the  streets  and  buildings  are  very  irregular.  The  inha- 
bitants are  of  various  denominations,  but  nevertheless  of  a  courteous 
and  sociable  disposition.  There  are  several  places  of  divine  worship : 
the'Episcopalians  have  three  ;  the  High  Dutch,  one  ;  the  Low  Dutch, 
three  ;  the  Lutherans,  two  ;  the  French  Protestants,  one  ;  the  Pres- 
byterians, two ;  the  Seceders,  one  ;  the  Baptists,  one ;  the  Mora- 
vians, one  ;  the  Methodists,  one ;  and  the  Jews  one.  The  city, 
abounds  with  inhabitants  ;  but  the  exact  number  I  could  not  ascertain. 

Wednesday.  My  soul  enjoyed  great  peace,  and  the  day  was 
partly  spent  in  religious  visits.  The  next  day  my  mind  was  in  the 
same  comfortable  frame  ;  and  holy  thoughts  of  God,  with  strong  de- 
sires to  do  all  things  with  a  single  eye  to  his  glory,  as  well  as  to  follow 
his  divine  precepts,  possessed  my  peaceful  heart. 

Friday  9.  This  day  was,  as  yesterday,  a  day  of  peace  ;  and  it  was 
with  great  satisfaction  I  preached  in  the  evening,  though  cold,  to  a  con- 
siderable number  of  people,  on  the  much-neglected  duty  of  self-denial. 

Lord's  day  11.  I  went  through  my  morning  exercises  in  church  as 
usual,  and  in  the  afternoon  heard  Mr.  C.  preach  a  good  sermon  ;  but 
a  more  gay  and  indevout  congregation  I  have  seldom  seen  ;  they 
were  talking,  laughing,  bowing,  and  trifling  both  with  God  and  their 
minister,  as  well  as  with  their  own  unawakened  souls.  On  Tuesday 
I  took  my  leave  of  York,  after  preaching  from  Philippians  i.  9.  with 
an  intention  to  spend  some  time  on  Staten-Island,  on  my  way  to  Phi- 
ladelphia. During  my  stay  on  the  island  I  preached  several  times, 
with  power  and  satisfaction  ;  but  was  sometimes  greatly  assaulted  by 
Satau.  Hitherto  the  Lord  hath  helped  me.  Glory  to  his  name  !  He 
preserves  and  blesses  my  soul — he  supplies  me  with  all  things  neces- 
sary for  the  preservation  and  health  of  my  body.  May  I  be  ever  care- 
ful to  please  him,  and  devote  all  the  powers  of  body  and  soul  to  his 
service ! 

Thursday  15.  I  preached  for  the  first  time,  on  this  visit,  in  Phi- 
ladelphia, on  Ruth  ii.  4.  Many  people  attended,  and  the  Lord  filled 
my  heart  with  holy  gladness.     All  things  are  in  peace  here. 

From  Saturday  17  till  Thursday  the  22  was  spent  in  the  Jerseys ; 
where  I  preached  at  different  places,  and  often  to  large  congregations. 
The  Lord  was  frequently  with  me  in  mercy  and  power  ;  and  my  heart 
was  greatly  enlarged.  How  I  long  to  be  more  holy — to  live  more 
with  God,  and  for  God.  Troubles  encompass  me  about ;  but  the 
Lord  is  my  helper.  Before  my  return  to  Philadelphia  I  had  the 
pleasure  of  seeing  the  foundation  laid  of  a  new  preaching-house,  35 
feet  by  30.  Then  1  returned  and  preached  on  Thursday  evening, 
*he  Lord  being  with  me. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  49 

Friday  23.  This  morning  my  mind  was  in  a  calm  and  even  frame- 
sweetly  fixed  on  God  as  its  prime  object.  But  I  greatly  long  for  more 
grace — to  receive  esteem  or  disesteem  with  equal  cheerfulness— to 
be  something  or  nothing,  as  God  would  have  me  to  be.  My  heart 
was  at  liberty,  while  employed  in  speaking  for  God  this  evening. 

Tuesday  27.  The  Lord  has  graciously  assisted  me  in  preaching 
every  day ;  and  my  desires  to  be  entirely  devoted  do  still  increase. 
But  alas  !  what  cause  have  I  to  mourn  the  want  of  life  and  zeal,  both 
in  public  and  private  duties.  Nevertheless,  it  is  my  determination  to 
offer  all  I  have  to  God.  May  he  give  me  more  to  offer,  and  graciously 
accept  the  offering  made  !  Had  much  conversation  with  A.  W.  but 
found  him  unwilling  to  spend  all  his  time  in  travelling.  However,  he 
agreed  to  take  a  part  with  I.  K.  So  my  intention  is  to  send  them  to 
the  upper  part  of  the  Jerseys,  where  they  may  labour  alternatively, 
a  fortnight  at  a  time. 

Thursday  29.  Mr.  S.  is  just  come  from  England,  with  strange  ac- 
counts of  their  Calvinistic  disputes.  My  mind  is  rather  low,  but 
serene  and  spiritual,  and  determined  to  follow  Christ.  How  greatly 
do  I  long  to  die  to  every  object  which  does  not  lead  me  to  God ! 
Blessed  Master,  hasten  the  time  when  I  shall  love  thee  according  to 
the  full  extent  of  that  desire  which  thou  hast  given  me. 

Saturday  31.  This  was  a  day  of  delightful  rest  to  my  soul.  After 
preaching  in  the  morning,  I  spent  part  of  the  day  in  visiting  some 
souls  in  distress.  In  the  evening  preached  again  on  these  words,  "Cut 
it  down,  why  cumbereth  it  the  ground."  My  mind  was  much  enlar- 
ged, perhaps  to  the  offence  of  some,  while  showing  the  particular 
marks  of  such  as  do  but  cumber  the  ground  in  the  Lord's  vineyard. 

Lord's  day,  May  2.  My  soul  was  favoured,  both  yesterday  and  this 
morning,  with  delightful  and  intimate  accesses  to  God.  In  preaching 
this  morning  from  these  words,  *w  Try  the  spirits  whether  they  be  of 
God,"  I  took  occasion  to  show,  1st,  That  this  is  the  duty  of  all  that 
profess  religion  ;  and  2dly,  That  they  should  bring  their  experience 
and  practice  to  the  word  of  God,  to  know  if  they  be  genuine. — After 
preaching  to  a  large  congregation  in  the  evening,  I  met  the  society, 
and  thought  it  necessary  to  deal  closely  with  the  members. 

Thursday  6.  After  spending  a  few  days  in  a  country  tour,  preach- 
ing to  many  people  at  Goshen,  Marlborough,  and  other  places,  with 
some  assistance  ;  I  returned  and  preached  in  Philadelphia  this  even- 
ing, on  the  subject  of  the  stony-ground  hearers.  Some  perhaps 
were  displeased  with  me.  But  I  must  declare  the  whole  counsel  of 
God,  and  leave  the  event  to  him.  This  day  a  letter  from  Mr.  Wesley 
came  to  hand,  dated  March  2,  in  which  he  informs  me,  that  the  time 

Vol.  I,  7 


'0  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

of  his  coming  over  to  America  is  not  yet,  being  detained  by  the  build- 
ing of  the  new  chapel. 

Lord's  day  9.  My  heart  Was  much  affected  last  evening,  while 
many  of  the  people  felt  the  power  of  God.  And  this  day  my  soul 
was  filled  with  sweet  peace.  I  had  also  the  pleasure  of  hearing  Mr. 
T.  preach  with  great  sensibility. 

Monday  10.  Visiting  several  families  to-day  afforded  me  great 
comfort  of  mind  ;  and  in  preaching  this  evening,  with  close  applica- 
tion to  those  who  pursue  earthly  more  than  heavenly  pleasures,  my 
soul  was  filled  with  peace. 

Travelling  through  the  Jerseys  I  met  with  W  B.  a  man  who  has  a 
great  regard  for  us,  but  seems  to  be  too  much  taken  up  with  worldly 
cares.  But  speaking  faithfully  and  closely  to  him,  I  showed  him  the 
deceitfulness  of  riches,  in  producing  a  spirit  of  independence  towards 
God,  hardness  of  heart,  and  pride  in  its  various  forms,  while  they  pro- 
mise us  safety  and  happiness. 

Thursday  13.  Through  much  rain  I  returned,  wet  and  weary,  to 
Philadelphia,  after  having  preached  at  several  places  in  the  Jerseys, 
and  sometimes  with  much  freedom  and  power.  Many  people  attended 
this  evening,  while  I  described  an  honest  and  good  heart,  under  the 
similitude  of  the  good  ground  which  received  the  seed  and  brought 
forth  fruit.  This  was  free  from  the  hardness  of  the  way-side,  from 
the  shallowness  of  the  stony  ground,  and  from  the  obstructions  of  the 
thorny  ground.  The  honesty  of  the  heart  appears  in  its  conduct  to- 
wards God,  towards  all  mankind,  and  towards  itself.  As  our  Lord  is 
pleased  to  denominate  such  a  heart  good  as  well  as  honest,  is  it  not 
very  wrong  for  a  Christian  to  say  he  has  a  bad  heart  ?  Is  not  all  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  produces  good?  And  so  far  as  that  blessed  Spirit  has 
changed  the  heart  of  a  believer,  is  it  not  good?  Through  the  unme- 
rited grace  of  God,  I  have  no  desire  to  seek  any  thing  but  Him,  and 
that  which  may  lead  me  to  him. 

Lord's  day  16.  In  preaching  this  morning  from  Gen.  xviii.  19.  I 
strongly  enforced  the  great  necessity  of  relative  duties  ;  and  very 
pointedly  pressed  the  same  in  meeting  the  society  at  night. 

Monday  17.  All  this  day  I  was  very  unwell  with  a  sore  throat  and 
violent  pain  in  my  head  ;  but  I.  K.  providentially  came  in  and  supplied 
my  place.  My  indisposition  continued  also  on  Tuesday,  so  that  I  had 
but  little  power  to  read  or  think  ;  but  on  Wednesday  I  found  myself, 
through  mercy,  much  better.  Although  my  body  is  weak,  my  soul 
is  strong  in  the  grace  of  God.  May  my  heart,  my  lips,  my  hands,  my 
life,,  my  strength,  my  all,  be  constantly  devoted  to  God. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  61 

Monday  24.  Sweet  peace  pervaded  ray  soul ;  and  my  whole  heart 
desired,   prayed,  longed,  and  panted  to  live  a  more  spiritual  life  by 
faith  in  the  blessed  Son  of  God.     In  the  evening  I  preached  from  Isa. 
Ixii.  6.  "  I  have  set  watchmen,"  &c.  and  took  occasion,  First,  to 
show  that  the  Lord  calls,  authorizes,  and  qualifies  all  faithful  mi- 
nisters.    Secondly,  delineated  their  character  as  watchmen.    Thirdly, 
observed  that  they  were  to  keep  watch  on  the  walls.     Fourthly,  the 
duties  enjoined,  "  they  shall  not  hold  their  peace.  Keep  not  silence." 
While  opening  this  passage  the  Lord  greatly  comforted  my  soul.— 
The  next  morning  I  expatiated  on  Canticles  i.  7.  and  considered,  First, 
the  address,  "  Tell  me,  O  thou  whom  my  soul  loveth."     Secondly, 
the  request,  "  where  thou  feedest,"  &c.     This  denotes  the  sincere 
desire  of  a  true  believer,  in  the  time  of  division  or  persecution,  or 
general  declension  of  true  piety.     Thirdly,  the  humble  query,  "  Why 
should  I  be  as  one  that  turneth  aside  by  the  flocks   of  thy  compa- 
nions ?"     This  indicates  a  fear  of  being  exposed  to  false  teachers^ 
who  name  the  name  of  Christ,  but  deny  him  in  experience,  doctrine, 
and  practice.     How  fearful  is  a  pious  soul  of  turning  aside  as  a  for- 
lorn, neglected  creature,  exposed  to  the  malice  and  designs  of  devils 
and  ungodly  men. — Glory  to  God  !  notwithstanding  all  the  assaults  of 
Satan,  my  soul  is  preserved  in  peace,  and  my  heart  is  fixed,  trusting 
in  the  Lord.     My  chief  desire  is  to  be  found  obedient  and  faithful  at 
all  times,  and  all  occasions. 

Thursday  27.  My  text  was  Isaiah  xxiii.  16.  "  He  shall  dwell  on 
high.  His  place  of  defence  shall  be  the  munition  of  rocks,"  &c. 
First,  I  inquired  to  whom  this  promise  is  made.  Secondly,  How  "  he 
shall  dwell  on  high."  High  in  faith,  love,  and  church-privileges — 
above  the  power  of  Satan,  the  world,  and  all  dangers  ;  so  that  none  of 
them  shall  injure  his  soul. — Thirdly,  "  his  defence  shall  be  the  mu- 
nition of  rocks," — Christ  shall  be  the  rock  of  his  defence— and  the 
love,  truth,  faithfulness,  mercy,  and  power  of  God  shall  enclose  him 
on  every  side. — Fourthly,  "  his  bread  shall  be  given  him" — all  things 
needful  for  life  and  godliness. 

Friday  28.  It  was  a  gracious  season  at  intercession  to-day.  My 
soul  was  favoured  with  love  and  power. 

Monday  31.  I  went  to  Germantown,  and  preached  with  freedom 
and  comfort  to  a  large  congregation  assembled  in  the  Dutch  Presby- 
terian Church.  I  take  God  for  my  sufficient  portion  ;  and  Christ 
is  all  in  all  to  me. 

Tuesday,  June  1.  This  day  my  soul  was  under  gracious  exercises  ; 
and  went  out  in  ardent  desires  after  God.  He  has  engrossed  all  my 
affections  ;  and  my  heart  is  taken  up  with  him. 


52  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy'S  JOURNAL. 

Thursday  3.  To  my  great  comfort  arrived  Mr.  R.  Mr.  S.  Mr.  Y 
and  Capt.  W      Mr.  R.  preached  a  good  sermon  on  these  words,  "  I 
have  set  before  thee  an  open  door,  and  no  man  can  shut  it."     He 
will  not  be  admired  as  a  preacher.     But  as  a  disciplinarian,  he  will  fill 
his  place. 

Lord's  day  6.  After  preaching  both  yesterday  and  this  morning  at 
Burlington,  I  went  to  church  in  order  to  receive  the  sacrament.  But 
the  parson  gave  us  a  strange  discourse,  full  of  inconsistency  and  rail- 
lery. Leaving  him  to  answer  for  his  own  conduct,  I  took  no  farther 
notice  of  it,  but  preached  at  night  from  these  words,  "  The  natural 
man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God,"  Sic.  and  showed 
First,  what  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God  are — Secondly,  described 
the  natural  man — and  Thirdly,  showed  how  they  appear  to  be  foolish- 
ness to  him  ;  and  that  he  cannot  know  them,  by  the  strength  of  his 
natural  or  acquired  abilities.  The  little  society  in  Burlington  appears 
to  be  in  a  comfortable  and  prosperous  state. — On  my  way  to  Trenton, 
I  met  A.  W  on  the  road.  We  stopped  at  a  house,  and  in  the  course 
of  conversation  I  found  he  was  much  dejected  in  his  mind  ;  but  before 
we  parted  he  appeared  to  be  somewhat  comforted.  Many  people 
attended  the  preaching  at  Trenton,  though  the  notice  was  but  short. 

Thursday  10.  My  soul  has  been  much  assaulted  lately  by  Satan  ; 
but  by  the  grace  of  God  it  is  filled  with  divine  peace.  My  heart 
thirsteth  for  God,  even  for  the  living  God.  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Wesley 
to-day,  and  in  the  evening  addressed  my  discourse  chiefly  to  the 
young  people.     May  the  Lord  apply  it  to  their  hearts  ! 

Friday  11.  Mr.  R.  came  to  Trenton.  After  dinner  and  prayer,  we 
setoff  together  for  Princeton.  On  Saturday  we  reached  New-York  ; 
and  our  friends  there  having  previous  notice  of  our  coming,  kindly 
met  us  on  the  dock  where  we  landed.  The  sight  of  Mr.  W  with 
some  other  concurring  circumstances,  affected  Mr.  R.  so  that  he  ap- 
peared to  be  rather  cast  down  in  his  mind. 

Lord's  day  13.  I  preached  this  morning  to  a  considerable  number 
of  people.  Mr.  R.  found  his  spirits  raised,  and  was  much  comforted. 
In  the  afternoon  Mr.  R.  Capt.  W  Mr.  W — t  and  myself  went  to  St. 
Paul's  church,  and  received  the  sacrament.  At  night,  Mr.  R.  dispen- 
sed the  word  of  truth  with  power.  It  reached  the  hearts  of  many, 
and  they  appeared  to  be  much  quickened. 

Monday  14.  Many  were  present  while  I  preached  from  2  John  4. 
"  I  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that  my  children  walk  in  truth." 
The  Lord  favours  me  with  great  discoveries  of  my  defects  and  unfaith- 
fulness. But,  blessed  be  God,  my  soul  is  humbled  under  these  disco- 
veries.    My  soul  panteth  for  more  of  the  Divine  nature.    When  shall 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  63 

1  be  fully  conformed  to  his  blessed  will  ?    I  received  a  letter  this  day 
from  that  venerable  father  in  Christ,  Mr.  Wesley. 

Wednesday  16.  Captain  W  set  out  for  Albany,  and  I  for  New  Ro- 
chelle.  On  Thursday,  Mr.  L.  preached  at  Mr.  D.'s  on  these  words, 
"  To  them  that  have  obtained  like  precious  faith  with  us."  He  spoke 
plainly  and  much  to  the  purpose ;  though  he  did  not  show  the  neces- 
sity of  assurance.  We  had  some  free  and  friendly  conversation  after- 
ward ;  in  which  I  gave  him  to  understand  how  we  hold  this  point : 
that  assurance  is  suspended  on  an  evangelical  act  of  faith,  by  which 
we  apply  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ  for  the  removal  of  our  guilt ; 
and  that  we  then  receive  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit,  Rom.  viii.  16* 

Lord's  day  20.  Satan,  that  malicious  enemy  of  mankind,  is  fre- 
quently striving  to  break  my  peace.  And  the  Lord  graciously  shows 
me  all  my  involuntary  defects  ;  so  that  my  soul  is  bowed  down  as  in 
the  dust ;  but  Christ  is  precious,  and  the  Spirit  of  all  grace  comforts 
my  heart.  This  day  I  preached  three  times  at  Mr.  D.'s.  The  word 
reached  the  hearts  of  many,  with  Divine  power.  Our  labours  here 
have  not  been  in  vain.  Many  have  a  relish  for  religious  exercises, 
and  experience  the  spiritual  benefit  of  frequently  meeting  together 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord.     My  intention  is  to  form  a  society  here. 

Monday  21.  While  preaching  at  Mr.  B.'s,  the  Lord  favoured  me 
with  sweet  liberty  ;  and  there  was  no  small  moving  amongst  the  peo- 
ple.    Several  seemed  willing  to  meet  in  society  here  also. 

Tuesday  22.  I  received  an  account  of  the  case  of  S.  D.  She  is 
about  16  years  of  age,  and  has  been  lately  brought  under  serious  and 
deep  concern  for  the  salvation  of  her  soul.  A  few  days  after,  she 
was  taken  ill,  and  was  frequently  troubled  with  fits  ;  which,  while 
they  were  on  her,  deprived  her  of  her  reason.  About  three  days 
after  she  was  taken  ill,  she  was  justified  by  faith,  and  had  peace  with 
God.  She  continued  weakly  in  body  about  five  weeks  ;  but  fasted, 
prayed,  and  sang,  to  the  astonishment  of  all  about  her.  After  her 
recovery,  she  manifetsed  a  sound  conversion — she  had  a  settled  peace, 
was  conscientiously  serious,  meek,  and  patient  in  all  her  conduct ;  and 
the  word  of  God  was  precious  food  to  her  soul. 

Wednesday  23.  After  preaching  with  some  power  on  these  words 
"  Blessed  are  they  that  hear  the  word  of  God,  and  keep  it,"  I  joined 
a  few  in  society,  and  then  set  off  for  New-York.  I  called  on  Mr.  B. 
in  my  way,  who  renewed  his  former  kindness,  and  treated  me  with 
great  cordiality.  On  my  return  to  New-York,  I  found  Mr.  R.  had 
been  well  employed  in  settling  matters  pertaining  to  the  society. 
This  afforded  me  great  satisfaction,  and  more  especially  the  revival 
of  religion,  which  has  lately  taken  place  in  this  city. 


54  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

Saturday  26.  Having  preached  a  few  times  in  New-York,  since  my 
return,  I  set  off  for  Staten-Isiand ;  but  the  heat  was  so  extremely 
powerful,  that  I  stopped  at  my  old  friend  J.  W  's,  and  on  the  Lord's 
day  heard  Mr.  P.  a  Presbyterian  minister,  preach  twice.  But 
thought  he  was  too  metaphysical  and  superficial.  In  the  evening  I 
preached  in  Mr.  W  's  yard,  from  Hebr.  v.  12.  "Ye  have  need  that 
one  teach  you  again  which  be  the  first  principles  of  the  oracles  of 
God." — My  mind  is  filled  with  the  peace  of  God,  and  is  drawn  out  in 
love  to  Him  and  all  mankind.     Blessed  be  the  Lord  ! 

Monday  28.  While  preaching  to-day  on  Isaiah  lxii.  6.  Mr.  P,  the 
minister,  made  one  of  the  congregation.  After  service  we  had  some 
conversation  on  religious  subjects.  He  had  imbibed  that  absurd 
scheme  of  Mr.  B.'s,  viz.  that  we  are  born  again  before  we  repent 
and  believe.  How  strange,  that  any  man  should  suppose  the  effect 
is  produced  before  the  instrumental  causes  exist !  But,  by  the 
grace  of  God,  none  of  these  things  shall  move  me  from  the  Gospel- 
plan  of  salvation — Glory  to  God !  He  blesses  me  with  the  graces 
and  comforts  of  his  holy  Spirit  in  my  own  soul !  The  next  day  Mr. 
P  attended  preaching  again.  I  had  lent  him  Mr.  Fletcher's  Second 
Check.  He  approved  of  the  latter  part,  though  not  of  the  first. 
May  the  truth  of  God  spread  here  and  in  every  place.  Had  some 
serious  conversation  with  Mr.  D.  and  his  wife.  They  both  seem 
to  have  desires  to  be  instructed  in  the  ways  of  God.  But  the  peo- 
ple in  these  parts  appear  in  general  to  be  ignorant  of  their  own 
hearts  ;  and  are  in  danger  of  resting  in  the  superficial  knowledge  of 
religion,  without  the  power. 

Wednesday  30.  Preached  at  the  house  of  A.  W.  to  more  people 
than  were  expected,  and  my  soul  had  near  and  sweet  access  to  God, 
being  filled  with  that  peace  which  passeth  all  understanding. 
a    Thursday,  July  1.  Set  off  for  New-York,  and  having  a  tedious  pas- 
sage over  the  North  River,  I  spent  some  time  in  serious  conversation 
with  two  men  in  the  boat,  and  hope  it  was  not  in  vain.     Then  I  came 
§afe  to  York,  and  preached  from  Habakkuk  iii.  "  O  Lord,  revive  thy 
work  in  the  midst  of  the  years."     On  Friday  arrived  the  sorrow- 
ful news  of  the  destruction  of  Mr.  Whitefield's  Orphan-house.     As 
there  was  no  fire  in  the  house,  it  was  supposed  to  have  been  set  on 
fire  by  lightning,  which  had  been  in  the  morning,  as  some  say,  accom- 
panied with  a  sulphureous  smell.     It  broke  out  in  a  rapid  flame  about 
7  or  8  o'clock  at  night,  and  consumed  the  whole  building,  except  the 
two  wings. 

Lord's  day  4.  Many  people  attended  preaching  both  morning  and 
night.     In  our  love-feast  to-day,  many  were  touched  to  the  heart, 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV's  JOURNAL.  55 

and  some  were  greatly  comforted.  Lord,  let  it  not  be  as  the  morn- 
ing dew  !  On  Monday,  my  soul  was  in  a  delightful  frame—my  peace 
flowed  as  a  river. — I  had  power  to  resist  every  temptation  of  Satan 
before  it  could  disturb  my  mind — and  my  heart  was  sweetly  drawn 
out  in  love  to  all  men. 

Tuesday  6.  Having  reason  to  fear  that  I  had  been  rather  too  much 
elevated,  my  heart  was  humbled  before  the  Lord  ;  and  was  now  fixed 
on  him  as  its  all  sufficient  good.     When  shall  1  appear  before  Him  I 

Wednesday  7.  My  soul  is  happy  under  a  comfortable  sense  of  God. 
May  his  grace  always  enable  me  to  devote  myself  without  reserve  to 
him. — The  power  of  God  was  present  while  I  preached  to-day, 
behind  the  barracks,  to  a  number  of  soldiers  and  others.  Afterward 
I  met  a  class,  and  preached  again  in  the  evening.  But  my  spirit  has 
been  grieved  by  the  false  and  deceitful  doings  of  some  particular  per- 
sons. Blessed  be  God!  All  are  not  so;  some  are  faithful.  But 
what  is  the  chaff  to  the  wheat?  One  undertook  to  reprove  me, 
because  I  went  in  at  a  quarter  after  eight,  and  came  out  at  20  minutes 
after  nice.  What  reason  have  I  to  be  thankful,  that  this  is  the  worst 
man  can  reprove  me  for.  O  that  I  had  more  zeal  to  preach  the  word 
in  season  and  out  of  season  ! 

Friday  9.  After  intercession  I  went  to  see  Mr.  L — .  Mr.  S.  Mr.  W 
and  myself  were  charged  with  winking  at  the  follies  of  some.  We 
had  a  little  debate  on  the  subject ;  and  Mr.  L.  was  pleased  to  say, 
"  he  did  not  know  but  the  church  door  would  be  shut  against  me  ;" 
and  that  "  some  persons  would  not  suffer  matters  to  go  on  so."  He 
moreover  told  me,  "  the  preachers'  gifts  were  taken  away." — How 
dangerous  it  is  to  be  addicted  to  pride  and  passion,  going  from  house 
to  house,  speaking  perverse  things  ! 

Saturday  10.  After  preaching  this  evening  I  enjoyed  a  comfortable 
time  in  meeting  the  leaders  and  band-society. — My  heart  was  blessed 
with  a  lively  sense  of  God's  gracious  presence. 

On  the  Lord's  day  1  preached  twice  with  great  plainness  to  a  large 
number  of  people  ;  and  then  set  off,  in  company  with  Mr.  J.  towards 
Philadelphia.  Came  safe  to  the  city  on  Thursday,  but  did  not  find 
such  perfect  harmony  as  I  could  wish  for. 

Wednesday  14.  Our  general  conference  began :  in  which  the  fol. 
lowing  propositions  were  agreed  to  : 

1.  The  old  Methodist  doctrine  and  discipline  shall  be  enforced  and 
maintained  amongst  all  our  societies  in  America. 

2.  Any  preacher  who  acts  otherwise,  cannot  be  retained  amongst 
us  as  a  fellow-labourer  in  the  vineyard. 


66  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

3.  No  preacher  in  our  connexion  shall  be  permitted  to  administer 
the  ordinances  at  this  time  ;  except  Mr.  S.  and  he  under  the  particu- 
lar direction  of  the  assistant. 

4.  No  person  shall  be  admitted,  more  than  once  or  twice,  to  our 
love-feasts  or  society-meetings — without  becoming  a  member. 

5.  No  preacher  shall  be  permitted  to  reprint  our  books,  without 
the  approbation  of  Mr.  Wesley,  and  the  consent  of  his  brethren. 
And  that  R.  W  shall  be  allowed  to  sell  what  he  has,  but  reprint  no 
more. 

6.  Every  assistant  is  to  send  an  account  of  the  work  of  God  in  his 
circuit,  to  the  general  assistant. 

There  were  some  debates  amongst  the  preachers  in  this  confe- 
rence, relative  to  the  conduct  of  some  who  had  manifested  a  desire  to 
abide  in  the  cities,  and  live  like  gentlemen.  Three  years  out  of  four 
have  been  already  spent  in  the  cities. — It  was  also  feared  that  money 
had  been  wasted,  improper  leaders  appointed,  and  many  of  our  rules 
broken. 

Friday  16.  I  set  off  for  Chester,  and  had  a  comfortable  time  in 
preaching.  Mrs.  W  and  two  young  women  in  her  house,  appeared 
to  be  under  some  religious  concern.  May  the  Lord  make  bare  his 
holy  arm,  and  revive  his  glorious  work !  I  understand  that  some  dis- 
satisfied persons  in  New- York,  threaten  to  shut  the  church  door 
against  Mr.  R.  If  they  should  be  bold  enough  to  take  this  step,  we 
shall  see  what  the  consequence  will  be  ;  and  no  doubt  but  the  Lord 
will  bring  all  their  evil  deeds  to  light.  O  that  it  may  be  for  the  sal- 
vation of  their  precious  souls  ! 

Lord's  day  18.  My  soul  has  enjoyed  great  peace  this  week,  in 
which  I  have  rode  near  100  miles  since  my  departure  from  Philadel- 
phia, and  have  preached  often,  and  sometimes  great  solemnity  has 
rested  on  the  congregations. 

On  Monday,  brother  Y.  rode  in  company  with  me  to  Mr.  S.'s, 
where  I  preached  with  sweet  freedom  to  a  few  attentive  people — 
We  took  friendly  counsel  together,  and  our  time  was  profitably  and 
comfortably  spent. — On  Tuesday  morning  my  heart  was  still  with  the 
Lord,  and  my  peace  flowed  as  a  river.  Glory  be  given  to  God  ! — On 
Wednesday,  at  New-Castle,  the  company  was  but  small,  though  great 
power  attended  the  word.  Perhaps  the  Lord  will  yet  visit  this  peo- 
ple, though  at  present  too  many  of  them  appear  to  be  devoted  to 
pride,  vanity  and  folly. — But,  through  abundant  mercy,  my  heart  is 
devoted  to  God  and  to  his  work.  O  that  it  may  never  depart  from 
him ' 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  57 

I  received  a  letter  from  my  dear  brother  W— t,  written  in  Ireland, 
with  his  usual  plainness  and  honesty  of  heart. 

Thursday  I  came  to  R.  T  's,  when  the  Lord  enabled  me  to  p.^ss 
home  the  word  on  the  consciences  of  the  people,  many  of  whom  h-d 
never  heard  us  before. — Set  off  the  next  day  for  Susquehannah,  and 
met  with  I.  R.  who  gave  me  an  account  of  a  considerable  prospect  of 
the  work  of  God  in  Kent.  In  the  evening  we  came  very  wet  and 
weary  to  I.  D.'s.  We  were  kindly  entertained,  and  soon  forgot  our 
fatigue  and  pains. 

Lord's  day  25.  I  first  preached  in  this  neighbourhood,  and  then 
rode  hard  to  reach  Deer-Creek  in  time.  Was  very  unwell  with  a 
violent  headach,  but  after  preaching  to  many  people,  and  meetiag  a 
large  class,  1  felt  myself  much  recovered.  Thus  the  Lord  graciously 
helpeth  me  ?  My  soul  is  filled  with  peace,  and  drawn  out  in  love  to 
God  and  man. 

Monday  26.  My  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord  ;  and  fully  bent, 
through  grace,  to  obey  his  holy  will.  How  sweet  is  the  peace,  and 
how  great  is  the  power  with  which  the  Lord  blesseth  me  !  Part  of  the 
forenoon  was  spent  in  settling  the  class.  Then  brother  W  rode 
with  me  to  S.  L.'s,  where  I  met  two  more  classes,  and  found  them  in 
a  prosperous  way.  Then  rode  back  to  H.  W.'s  in  great  peace  ;  and 
the  next  day  I  found  the  class  increased  in  number  at  S.  F  s. 
Preached  also  in  the  evening;  and  found  it  a  comfortable  time.  The 
young  women  in  the  house  seem  determined  to  seek  the  salvation  of 
their  souls. 

Wednesday  28.  R.  W  set  off  with  me  for  his  house.  But  before 
we  rode  far,  a  violent  clap  of  thunder,  which  appeared  to  be  just  over 
my  head,  shook  every  limb  of  my  body,  and  frightened  my  horse  so 
much  that  I  found  it  difficult  to  keep  my  saddle.     But  my  body  and 

mind   soon  recovered  the  shock,  and  my  soul  was  comforted.- 

Thus  we  see, 

"Dangers  stand  (hick  through  all  the  ground, 
To  push  us  to  the  tomb." 

But  the  Lord  is  the  preserver  of  all  that  put  their  trust  in  him. 
Glory  be  given  to  God  for  ever  ! 

Thursday  29.  Met  the  class  at  J.  P. 'a,  in  Gunpowder  Neck,  and 
found  the  enemy  had  attempted  to  get  in  amongst  them  ;  but  through 
their  vigilance  and  the  grace  of  God,  he  was  repelled,  and  could  gain 
no  admittance. 

On  Thursday  I  intended  to  go  to  Baltimore,  but  was  prevented  by 
a  lameness  in  one  of  my  feet;  so  my  time  was  spent  at  J.  P.'s.     The 

Vol.  T.  8 


bo  UEV.  FRANCIS  ASBLRy's  JOURNAL, 

Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  the  people  in  this  neighbourhood '■; 
many  of  them  are  very  happy  in  religion,  and  some  thirsting  for  full 
salvation.  On  Saturday  J.  K.  met  me.  I  attempted  to  speak  a  little 
in  public,  but  was  afterward  very  unwell,  and  had  a  troublesome 
pain  in  my  head.  However,  I  was  enabled  to  preach  the  next  day 
with  some  energy. 

Monday,  August  2.  We  began  our  quarterly  meeting.  After  our 
temporal  business  was  done,  I  read  a  part  of  our  minutes,  to  see  if 
brother  S.  would  conform  ;  but  he  appeared  to  be  inflexible.  He 
would  not  administer  the  ordinances  under  our  direction  at  all.  Many 
things  were  said  on  the  subject ;  and  a  few  of  the  people  took  part 
with  him.  At  the  conclusion  of  our  quarterly  meeting,  on  Tuesday, 
we  had  a  comfortable  season,  and  many  were  refreshed,  especially  in 
the  love-feast. — On  Wednesday  I  set  off  for  Baltimore,  but  was  taken 
very  sick  on  the  road  ;  however,  I  pursued  my  way,  though  it  was 
sometimes  through  hard  rain  and.  heavy  thunder ;  and  preached  ia 
Baltimore  on  Thursday,  in  Mrs.  Tribulet's  new  house,  which  she 
freely  lent  for  that  purpose.  There  appeared  to  be  a  considerable 
moving  under  the  word.  After  preaching  the  next  morning  at  the 
Point,  I  went  to  see  a  woman,  once  happy  in  several  respects,  but 
now  under  distressing  circumstances.  Her  husband  was  driven  from 
her  ;  and  she  was  left  with  four  children  for  three  months. 

Many  people  in  general  attend  the  preaching  in  Baltimore,  espe- 
cially after  we  have  been  long  enough  in  town  for  the  inhabitants  to 
receive  full  knowledge  of  our  being  there.     And  I  have  a  great  hope 
that  the  Lord  will  do  something  for  the  souls  in  this  place,  though  the 
little  society  has  been  rather  neglected,  for  want  of  a  proper  person 
to  lead  them — I  rode  to  Patapsco  Neck,  and  after  preaching,  reduced 
the   class  to  some   order.     Nathan  Perrig   told    me,   he  had   been 
grieved  by  some  who  had  manifested  too  great  a  forwardness  to  speak 
in  public.     I  then  returned  to  Baltimore,  and  went  thence  to  Back- 
river-Neck,  where  I   found  contention  in   the  class  ;  but,   through 
grace,  was  enabled  to  bring  them  to  peace  and  order. — Then  I  went 
to  Charles  Harriman's,  and  settled  two  classes  in  that  neighbourhood. 
While  preaching  there,  the  Lord  favoured  us  with  a  lively  and  profi- 
table season.— My  mind  has  lately  been  much  tortured  with  tempta- 
tions ;  but  the  Lord  has  stood  by  and  delivered  me.     Oh,  my  God  I 
when   will  my  trials  end  ?     At  death — Lord,  be  ever  with    me  and 
save  me,  or  my  soul  must  perish  at  last.     But  my  trust  is  still  in  God., 
that  he  will  ever  help  me  to  conquer  all  my  foes. 

Preached  and  met  the  society,  on  Wednesday,  at  Joseph  Presbury's, 
and  on  Thursday  set  off  for  Kent  county,  but  was  troubled  with  a  verr 


'REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  69 

uncommon  pain  in  my  head.  In  public  worship,  at  Mr.  G.'s,  a  serious 
negro  was  powerfully  struck ;  and  though  he  made  but  little  noise, 
yet  he  trembled  so  exceedingly  that  the  very  house  shook — I  then 
rode  to  Mr.  H — 's,  and  was  kindly  entertained.  Here  we  saw  a  little 
woman  with  neither  hands  nor  feet  ;  yet  she  could  walk,  card,  spin, 
sew,  and  knit.  And  her  heart  rejoiced  in  God  her  Saviour — But 
what  is  she  at  this  time  ? 

Friday  13.  The  spirit  of  holy  peace  reigns  in  my  heart.  Glory 
be  given  to  God  !  I  received  information  to-day  of  W  F.  who  had 
threatened  to  stone  one  of  our  preachers,  but  was  taken  sick  and  died 
in  a  few  days — Also  of  another  person  who  had  been  under  convic- 
tion for  sin,  but  resisting  and  shaking  it  off,  he  left  the  house,  and  died 
in  the  dark,  speaking  evil  of  the  ways  of  God — Likewise  of  Mrs.  H. 
who  was  under  conviction  from  the  Spirit  of  God,  but  going  from  the 
house  and  indulging  a  trifling  spirit,  she  •  soon  after  died — Thus  it 
seems,  when  men  slight  the  mercies  of  God,  he  visits  them  with  his 
judgments !  The  congregation  to-day  at  Mr.  G — 's  was  very  large, 
but  they  looked  like  fat  bulls  of  Bashan,  though  they  sat  pretty  still 
while  I  endeavoured  to  prove  that  the  spirit,  doctrine,  sufferings,  and 
practice  of  the  holy  apostles  are  exemplified  in  the  people  of  God  at 
this  time — The  Lord  favoured  me  with  freedom  and  power,  as  also 
in  the  evening  at  Mr.  H — :'s. 

On  Saturday  a  multitude  of  people  attended  the  preaching  of  the 
word,  and  the  Lord  was  with  us  of  a  truth. 

Lord's  day  15.  For  some  time  past,  the  Lord  has  blessed  me  with 
abundant  peace  and  love  ;  but  my  soul  longs  for  all  the  fulness  of 
God,  as  far  as  it  is  attainable  by  man.  O,  when  shall  it  once  be  ! 
When  shall  my  soul  be  absorbed  in  purity  and  love  I — The  congrega- 
tion assembled  under  a  tree  at  Mr.  G — 's,  and  in  the  time  of  the  first 
prayer,  a  woman  fell  down  and  laid  there  all  the  time  of  the  sermon. 
The  people  here  appear  to  be  much  affected  with  prejudice  against 
I.  R.  They  will  not  bear  with  his  rough  address.  But  I  know  not 
what  to  do  with  them.  If  some  other  preacher  could  visit  them  in 
his  stead,  perhaps  the  work  of  God  would  prosper  much  better. 
But  most  of  the  society  appear  to  be  under  a  genuine  work  of  grace  ; 
though  a  few  of  their  cases  are  doubtful.  The  clerk  of  the  church 
desired  to  be  present  in  the  class  meeting ;  and  was  considerably 
affected. 

Tuesday  17.  After  preaching  to  a  number  of  people  at  Mr.  H — 's, 
I  was  much  delighted  with  the  simple  account  of  the  work  of  God, 
related  and  experienced  by  T  L.  who  I  believe  is  saved  from  in- 
dwelling sin.     He  was  born  at  Thornsbury,  near  Bristol  in  England  ; 


UU  RET.   FRANCIS  ASBURv's  JOURNAL- 

and  came  over  to  America  about  19  or  20  years  ago.  He  was  lirst 
brought  to  know  God  in  Gunpowder  Neck  ;  and  was  soon  after  in 
great  distress  for  purity  of  heart.  He  said,  he  prayed  and  wept  till 
his  tears  lay  in  small  lakes  on  the  floor  ;  but  was  at  last  suddenly  filled 
with  spiritual  glory.  He  was  blessed  with  wonderful  communications 
of  peace  and  love.  He  appeared  to  be  a  holy,  serious,  happy  man  ; 
and  artless  without  colouring  ;  so  that  there  is  no  room  to  doubt  but 
it  is  a  genuine  work  of  God. 

Wednesday  18.  Several  friends,  both  men  and  women,  accom- 
panied me  to  the  bay  ;  and  when  we  came  to  the  water  side,  we 
kneeled  down  and  prayed,  recommending  each  other  to  the  grace 
of  God. 

Thursday  19.  I  felt  myself  unwell,  but  my  heart  longs  to  overflow 
with  love  to  God.  My  resolution  is,  through  grace,  to  make  a  total 
and  perpetual  surrender  of  myself  to  him,  and  his  service — At 
D.  R — 's  on  Friday,  many  people  attended  to  hear  the  word,  which 
was  dispensed  with  some  power  ;  but  my  soul  longs  and  pants  for  more 
of  Ood.  My  heart  rejoices  in  God,  but  I  am  troubled  with  too  much 
freedom  of  temper,  which  may  proceed  from  a  great  flow  of  animal 
spirits  ;  but  it  has  the  appearance  of  levity.  I  long  to  be  so  guarded 
as  to  have  a  solemn,  constant  sense  of  the  omnipresent  God  resting 
on  my  my  mind — Saturday  21.  F  H.  invited  me  home  with  him  ; 
and  I  called  to  see  R.  D.  but  found  him  too  wise  for  me  to  do  him 
much  good.  Rode  to  H.  W — 's,  and  preached  with  life  and  power 
from  the  first  Psalm  ;  and  afterward  met  the  class. — Preached  on  the 
Lord's  day  at  H.  W — 's  in  the  morning  at  five,  at  S.  L — 's  at  ten.  and 
at  S.  F — 's  in  the  evening.  My  soul  has  been  kept  in  tranquillity 
and  peace. 

Tuesday  24.  My  heart  swells  with  strong  desire  to  live  to  God  ; 
and  to  trust  constantly  in  him  that  he  may  direct  my  paths.  I.  I.  au 
honest  old  Friend,  came  to  hear  me.  Oh  !  that  names  and  parties 
were  done  away  !  that  Christians  were  all  but  one  body  !  that  pure 
love  might  reign  alone  in  every  heart!  Lord,  hasten  the  happy  and 
desirable  period. 

Wednesday  25.  My  body  was  very  weak,  but  my  soul  was  strength- 
ened and  blest  with  a  delightful  sense  of  God,  while  preaching  to  a 
large  congregation  at  Mr.  B — *s  :  and  I  afterward  met  the  class — God 
is  the  portion  of  my  soul  ;  and  to  do  his  will  is  my  constant  desire 
and  determination — I  spoke  with  two  exhorters  at  Mr.  C — 's,  and  gave 
them  license  to  act  in  that  character. — Friday  27.  At  Mr.  C — 's  we 
had  a  comfortable  time  ;  and  the  work  of  God  seems  so  be  reviving 
here.     Satan  is  still  haunting  m^  mind,  but  the  Lord  gives  me  power 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBETRY's  JOURNAL.      '  61 

to  resist  him,  and  keeps  me  in  constant  peace — On  Saturday,  all  my 
soul  was  love.  No  desire  for  any  thing  but  God  had  place  in  my 
heart ;  keep  me,  O  Lord  !  in  this  delightful,  blessed  frame — This  day 
I  met  with  P  E.  who  has  set  out  to  preach,  but  I  am  doubtful  of  his 
call.  D.  R.  who  lodged  with  me  to  night,  is  under  great  exercises  of 
mind,  from  a  conviction  that  it  is  his  duty  to  preach.  He  ventured 
to  open  his  mind  to  me  on  the  subject,  after  he  was  in  bed  :  and  so 
exceedingly  was  he  agitated,  that  the  bed  shook  under  him,  while  he 
was  relating  the  exercises  of  his  mind. 

Lord's  day.  After  preaching  at  Mr.  O.'s  in  the  morning,  and  at  Mr. 
E.'s  in  the  afternoon,  1  rode  thence  to  town  under  heavy  exercises 
of  mind.  Surely  there  will  be  good  done  here,  or  the  place  must 
be  given  up. 

On  Monday  I  spent  part  of  my  time  in  reading  Poole's  account  of 
the  downfal  of  Antichrist.  Lord,  hasten  the  time  !  While  preach- 
ing this  evening  in  town,  there  was  a  gracious  moving  amongst  the 
people. 

On  Tuesday  I  rode  to  Mr.  D.'s,  where  a  few  attended,  and  I  trust 
not  in  vain  ;  then  returned  to  town  groaning  in  spirit.  I  was  in  com- 
pany with  Br.  W  and  Br.  S.  on  Wednesday,  but  was  much  distressed 
on  account  of  so  few  preachers  well  qualified  for  the  work,  and  so 
many  who  are  forward  to  preach  without  due  qualifications.  My 
foolish  mind  felt  rather  disposed  to  murmuring,  pride,  and  discontent, 
Lord,  pardon  me,  and  grant  me  more  grace.  The  next  day  my  con- 
science checked  me  for  the  appearance  of  levity.  How  seriously 
should  we  coasider  the  presence  of  the  Deity  !  and  ever  remember 
that  we  must  render  an  account  of  all  our  conduct ! 

Friday  3.  After  enjoying  a  comfortable  season,  with  a  few  friends, 
at  Mr.  H.'s,  about  twelve  miles  from  Baltimore  ;  I  preached  at  4 
o  clock  at  Mr.  A.'s,  in  Middle-river  Neck,  where  there  is  a  good  pros- 
pect, and  lodged  with  M.  A.  whose  heart  the  Lord  hath  touched  ;  and 
on  Saturday  returned  to  town. 

Lord's  day  5.  In  the  morning  I  preached  at  town,  and  then  at  the 
Point,  where  the  people  seem  more  attentive  ;  and  afterward  re- 
turned to  town,  and  preached  at  night  to  a  large  congregation  It 
is  matter  of  great  grief  to  me,  to  see  the  inhabitants  of  this  town  so 
much  devoted  to  pride,  spiritual  idolatry,  and  almost  every  species  of 
?in.  Lord,  visit  them  yet  in  tender  mercy,  to  reform  and  save  their 
souls.— On  Monday  I  went  to  visit  W  L.  in  Patapsco  Neck.  How 
is  the  scene  changed  there  !  He  is  no  more  ashamed  of  the  truth  as 
it  is  in  Jesus.  His  wife  has  lately  experienced  great  agonies  of  soul  ; 
and  was,  in  a  wonderful  manner,  delivered,  being  filled  with  the  peace 


€2  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL, 

and  love  of  God.     This,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  has  produced  a  gv& 
cious  effect  on  his  heart.     The  next  day  he  accompanied  me  to  G. 
P  's,   and  thence  to  Gunpowder  Neck,  where  we  had  a  comfortable 
time. — Hitherto  the  Lord  hath  helped  ! 

Wednesday  8.  I  crossed  Bush-River,  and  then  rode  to  I.  D — 's ; 
my  heart  was  filled  with  peace  and  power  :  but  what  sore  conflicts 
have  attended  me  !  I  am  weary  of  all  that  is  wrong  within  me.  Lord, 
purify  my  heart,  make  me  wholly  thine,  and  fill  me  with  all  the  ful- 
ness of  thy  love !  The  next  day  I  visited  F.  H.  who  treated  me 
kindly.  We  entered  into  a  close  conversation  on  religious  subjects  ; 
but  1  found  he  had  been  reading  Mr.  M — 's  mystery  of  errors  more 
than  the  Gospel.  He  has  some  good  qualities.  But  how  weighty  is 
his  charge  !  He  has  a  family  of  not  less  than  eighty  souls  under  his 
care!  They  were  collected  in  the  evening  to  join  in  prayer,  and 
receive  a  word  of  exhortation.  I  rode  to  Deer-Creek  on  Friday, 
and  had  a  refreshing  season,  as  also  at  Henry  Watters's  in  the  evening 
«t  4  o'clock.  The  Lord  is  still  my  friend,  and  fills  me  with  peace 
and  pure  desire. 

Monday  13.  Found  it  necessary  on  a  particular  occasion  to  go  to 
Pipe-Creek;  and  while  preaching  to   a  large  number  of  people  at 
Richard  Owings',  the  power  of  the  Lord  was  present.     My  mind  has 
been  much  stayed  on  God  for  some  time  past,  and  my  body  has  felt 
but  little  weariness,  though  on  some  days  I  have  preached  four  times, 
Came  to  William  Lynch's,  and  found  Mr.  L.  in  spiritual  trouble ;  but 
I  hope  the  Lord  will  soon  deliver  him,  and  give  him  the  "  oil  of  joy 
for  mourning."     Glory  to  God  !  my  mind  is  kept  in  sweet  peace,  and 
deeply  engaged  in  every  duty.     Preached  on  Thursday  at  Mr.  L.'s, 
and  there  appeared  to  be  some  small  awakenings  amongst  the  people. 
Thence  rode  to  Nathan  Perrig's.     He  appears  to  be  a  man  that  fears 
God  in  some  degree  ;  but  is  very  stiff;  and  in  some  things  full  of  self- 
will.     My  mind  was  as  it  were  in  chains,  while  preaching  at  Mr.  H.'s  ; 
but  my  soul  was  greatly  blest  while  dispensing  the  word  to  a  large 
congregation  at  Mr.  A.'s,  in  Middle  River-Neck.     There  is  a  pros- 
pect of  some  good  being  done,  by  the  grace  of  God,   in  this  place. 
After  preaching  on  Saturday  with  freedom  and  satisfaction,  to  a  num- 
ber of  people  in  Gunpowder  Neck,  I   was  taken  very  unwell  :  and 
after  a  very  restless  night,  with  much  profuse  sweating,  I  rose  in  the 
morning  exceedingly  indisposed,  and  in  much  weakness  of  body  went 
through  the  public  duties  of  the  day  ;  but  the  Lord  was  graciously 
and  powerfully  with  me,  both  in  preaching  and  society-meeting. 

Monday  20.  My  soul  was  refreshed  with  the  love  of  God.     Ho\r 
do  I  long  for  a  mind  thoroughly  refined,  filled  with  perfect  purity. 


REV.    FRANCIS    ASBTJRy's    JOURNAL.  63 

sfhd  constantly  devoted  to  God  !  The  prospect  and  hope  of  this  fre- 
quently transports  my  soul — Lord  hasten  the  blessed  period  !  Let  all 
my  soul  be  swallowed  up  in  love !  I  have  lately  been  reading  Mr. 
W.  on  the  ruin  and  recovery  of  man  :  he  is  a  judicious  writer,  in  the 
main,  and  generally  illustrates  his  subjects  well ;  but  some  of  his 
sentiments  relative  to  infants,  I  think,  are  very  exceptionable. 

Tuesday  21.1  crossed  the  bay,  in  company  with  a  few  friends,  to 
Kent  county.  After  a  good  passage  we  reached  the  shore,  sat  down 
to  rest  and  refresh  ourselves  ;  and  then  joined  in  prayer.  We  walked 
to  John  RandalPs,  where  we  were  informed  of  the  opposition  which 
one  of  our  preachers  met  with.  But  the  work  is  the  Lord's,  and 
they  that  oppose  his  work  oppose  his  omnipotence.  On  Tuesday  my 
soul  was  kept  in  peace  and  rest.  After  preaching  with  some  comfort, 
I  was  seized  with  a  quartan  ague,  which  was  attended  with  much  pain 
in  my  back  and  limbs.  Mr.  Kennard  asked  me  home,  and  treated  me 
with  much  civility  and  kindness.  I  now  read  Smollet's  description  of 
the  Methodists  :  and  cannot  wonder  that  his  readers  who  have  no 
personal  knowledge  of  them,  should  treat  the  Methodists  with  con- 
tempt. But  the  day  is  coming  when  every  one  will  appear  in  his  true 
colours ;  and  be  constrained  to  render  an  account  of  all  his  conduct 
to  God.  A  high  fever  and  heavy  sweats  were  my  companions  in  the 
night ;  and  the  nest  morning  I  was  too  unwell  to  speak  in  prayer; 
but  I  ventured  to  ride  in  a  carriage  as  far  as  Mr.  Hinson's  in  the 
afternoon. 

Thursday  23.  At  Mr.  Hinson's  the  Lord  was  with  me  while  preach- 
ing from  Acts  xiv.  10.  observing  in  J.  R.  the  odious  appearance  of 
speaking  too  freely  of  absent  persons,  I  felt  a  sense  of  my  own  im- 
prudence ;  and  saw  both  the  propriety  and  necessity  of  retaining 
every  such  matter  in  my  own  breast,  till  an  opportunity  may  offer  of 
conversing  with  the  person  immediately  concerned,  face  to  face.  Lord, 
pardon  me  in  every  thing  that  is  wrong  in  the  least  degree  ;  and  grant 
me  more  fortitude  and  evangelical  wisdom  for  the  time  to  come. 

Friday  24.  My  trials  and  exercises  have  been  somewhat  peculiar. 
May  the  God  of  mercy  communicate  more  abundant  power  and  love  ! 
Though  this  was  the  day  in  course  for  my  ague  to  return,  I  preached 
to  a  small,  serious  congregation  with  inward  power.  My  ague  came 
on  afterward  with  a  severe  pain  in  my  back.  I  drove  off  the  cold 
fit  by  walking  and  running,  but  went  to  bed  in  a  high  fever.  The 
next  morning  my  frame  felt  weak  ;.  but  my  heart  was  sweetly  resigned. 

Saturday  25.  While  preaching  to  a  large  company  at  Mr.  Gibbs's^ 
we  had  a  moving,  melting  time.     After  preaching  at  9  o'clock  the 


04  UEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

next  morning  at  the  same  place,  I  went  to  church,  and  thought  the 
minister  intended  to  point  at  me,  by  speaking  against  idleness,  and 
people  who  follow  an  unwarrantable  employment,  and  doing  what 
they  have  no  business  with.  But  can  any  employment  be  more  un- 
warrantable, than  the  charge  of  souls  without  any  real  concern  for 
their  salvation?  And  bad  as  idleness  is,  it  is  far  preferable  to  leading 
immortal  souls  astray.  The  world  can  judge  whether  he  is  most  like 
an  idle  man  who  reads  a  dry  harangue  every  Lord's  day,  or  he  who 
toils  and  labours  both  day  and  night  to  save  the  souls  of  men.  But 
these  things  I  leave  with  the  Lord.  Many  people  attended  my 
preaching  in  the  evening,  while  I  took  occasion  from  2  Cor.  v.  20.  to 
show,  amongst  other  things,  the  evangelical  mission  and  life  of  a  true 
ambassador  of  Christ. 

Monday.  We  crossed  the  bay,  and  rode  to  Jos.  Presbury's.  My 
ague  coming  on  I  went  to  bed  in  great  torture  ;  and  thought  my  frame 
could  not  long  endure  it.  My  body  is  greatly  weakened  by  this  dis- 
order ;  and  perhaps  I  shall  be  dumb  for  a  season,  either  for  my  own 
unfaithfulness,  or  the  unfaithfulness  of  the  people.  May  the  Lord 
fortify  my  soul  with  patience  ! 

Thursday  28.  Though  very  weak  and  low,  the  Lord  favoured  me 
with  a  good  opportunity,  life,  and  liberty,  at  Daniel  Ruff's. 

Friday  29.  I  was  exceedingly  ill  at  Mr.  D.'s  ;  and  now  began  to 
think  my  travelling  would  be  interrupted.  This  is  my  greatest  trou- 
ble and  pain,  to  forsake  the  work  of  God,  and  to  neglect  the  people, 
whose  spiritual  interest  and  salvation  I  seek  with  my  whole  soul. 
The  next  day,  finding  myself  too  weak  to  travel,  I  sent  brother  E.  in 
my  place  :  and  must  content  myself  to  abide  here  awhile,  where 
they  treat  me  with  the  greatest  care  and  kindness.  My  present  pur- 
pose is,  if  the  Lord  spares  and  raises  me  up,  to  be  more  watchful  and 
circumspect  in  all  my  ways.  O  Lord,  remember  me  in  mercy  ;  and 
brace  up  my  feeble  soul ! 

Lord's  day,  Oct.  3.  Every  day  I  have  endeavoured  to  use  what  lit- 
tle strength  I  had  for  God  ;  and  this  day  I  felt  something  better  in  my 
body,  and  quite  serene  in  my  mind.  Rode  to  Bush,  and  preached  to 
many  people  with  considerable  power.  But  had  a  violent  fever  at 
night,  which  held  me  nine  hours.  It  is  my  desire  to  be  resigned  to 
the  will  of  God  in  all  things.  Sent  brother  W.  in  my  place  to  supply 
the  appointments. 

Wednesday  G.  My  disorder  returned,  and  my  body  was  in  great 
pain  for  many  hours.  Felt  some  patience,  but  not  enough.  Oh,  that 
this  affliction  may  answer  the  intended  end  !  My  will  is  quite  resigned 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  66 

to  the  will  of  God,  so  that  I  cannot  ask  ease  in  pain  ;  but  desire  to  be 
truly  thankful,  and  leave  the  disposal  of  all  things  entirely  with  him. 

It  is  undoubtedly  a  gracious  providence,  that  my  lot  should  be  cast 
in  the  family  of  J.  D.  during  my  indisposition  to  travel.  I  shall  never 
forget  the  kindness,  or  discharge  the  obligations  I  am  under  to  Mrs. 
Sarah  Dallam,  who  watched  and  waited  upon  me  day  and  night. 
God  grant,  that  the  same  measure  which  she  has  meted  to  me,  may 
return  upon  herself  and  her  children !  On  Thursday  and  Friday  my 
mind  was  kept  in  peace,  though  I  could  do  very  little  but  read.  The 
language  of  my  heart  is,  Lord,  thy  will  be  done  ! 

My  disorder  has  increased,  and  for  several  days  my  indisposition 
has  been  so  great  that  I  kept  no  Journal.  My  friends  wept  around, 
and  expected  my  dissolution  was  near.  But  the  Lord  thought  on  both 
them  and  me,  to  raise  me  up  from  the  borders  of  death.  Oh  that  my 
few  remaining  days  may  be  spent  to  his  glory  !  That  every  valuable 
end  may  be  answered  by  my  future  life  ! 

Wednesday  27.  Mr.  D.  was  so  kind  as  to  conduct  me  in  a  carriage 
to  my  friend  Barnet  Preston's,  at  Deer-Creek.  On  Friday  I  found 
myself  much  better,  and  my  soul  was  kept  in  peace  and  purity.  May 
the  Lord  ever  keep  me  near  to  himself! 

November  4.  Our  quarterly  meeting  came  on,  and  I  attended  the 
private  business,  though  in  much  weakness  of  body.  Some  of  my 
brethren  did  not  altogether  please  me.  My  hand  appears  still  to  be 
against  every  man.  Mr.  Rankin  conducted  the  meeting.  At  the 
close  of  the  whole,  I  discovered  the  affectionate  attachment  which 
subsisted  between  many  of  my  dear  friends  and  me.  It  cut  me  to 
the  heart  when  we  came  to  part  from  each  other.  They  wept  and 
I  wept ;  especially  brother  L.  and  his  wife.  May  the  gracious  Lord 
remember  them  in  mercy  and  love  ! 

November  6.  Was  able  to  sit  up  and  write  to  my  dear  friend  Mr. 
S— y.  It  is  but  little  I  can  do,  but  thanks  be  to  God  for  any  help. 
Heard  brother  W  preach,  and  thought  it  my  duty  to  blame  him  for 
speaking  against  the  knowledge  of  salvation.  Was  better  on  Thurs- 
day ;  but  threw  myself  into  a  violent  fever  by  my  own  imprudence. 

Tuesday  9.  My  disorder  seems  to  be  going  off,  though  I  mend  but 
slowly.  On  Wednesday  I  went  to  Mr.  D.'s  in  a  carriage,  and  met 
with  Mr.  R.  who  preached  there.  The  next  day  Mr.  R.  set  off  for 
Philadelphia  and  left  me  still  poorly. 

Saturday  13.  Though  I  have  not  preached  for  a  month,  yet  I  ven- 
tured to  attend  the  funeral  of  J.  Gallin,  a  Presbyterian,  but  a  man 
who  had  borne  a  Christian  character.    As  they  could  get  no  preacher 

Vol.  I.  o 


't>  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy'S    JOURNAL. 

of  their  own  profession,  they  made  application  to  me.     Many  peo- 
ple attended  on  this  solemn  occasion  ;  and  it  was  a  very  moving  time. 

Monday  15.  Found  myself  much  better  in  health,  and  concluded 
to  set  off  on  my  Master's  business  as  soon  as  I  should  be  properly 
equipped.  On  Thursday  my  heart  was  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord, 
and  as  my  body  was  gathering  strength,  I  set  out  on  Monday  for  Bal- 
timore ;  and  on  Friday  reached  William  Lynch's,  who  entertained 
me  with  the  greatest  kindness.  Here  1  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing 
our  new  church  begun  on  Back-river  Neck.  The  next  day  he  con- 
ducted me  in  his  carriage  to  the  Point,  where  I  was  enabled  to  preach 
with  some  power.  Then  returned  to  the  Neck  and  met  with  Mr.  J. 
He  heard  the  word  of  God  with  great  freedom  of  mind  ;  and  I  believe 
his  false  peace  was  broken.  My  spirit  was  greatly  refreshed  by 
meeting  brother  Y  at  Baltimore,  on  Monday  ;  and  the  next  day  I  was 
much  assisted  in  preaching  to  a  large  number  of  people  in  town,  both 
rich  and  poor.  May  the  Lord  God  arise  and  show  himself  gracious  to 
these  people  !  Through  abundant  grace  I  feel  nothing  contrary  to  the 
purest  intention ;  nor  the  least  desire  for  any  thing  but  God.  Bless 
the  Lord,  O  my  soul ! 

Thursday  25.  Had  occasion  to  go  to  Annapolis,  and  found  some  de- 
sire to  preach  there.  But  perceiving  the  spirit  and  practice  of  the 
people,  I  declined  it.  A  tavern-keeper  offered  me  the  use  of  his 
house  for  preaching  ;  but  he  was  a  Deist,  and  I  did  not  feel  free  to 
open  my  mouth  in  his  house. 

After  my  return  to  Baltimore,  Mr.  J.  the  person  mentioned  a  few 
days  ago,  came  and  invited  me  to  his  house.  The  next  morning  at 
breakfast,  he  showed  much  freedom  in  conversation,  and  there  was 
great  appearance  of  a  change. 

Monday  30.  Have  been  able  to  officiate  at  the  town  and  Point  every 
day  ;  and  the  congregations  rather  increase.     Lord,  make  me  hum- 
ble and   more  abundantly  useful ;    and  give  me  the  hearts   of  the 
people  that  I  may  conduct  them  to  thee.     I  feel  great  hopes  that  the 
God  of  mercy  will  interpose,  and  do  these  dear  people  good.    This 
day  we  agreed  with  Mr.  L.  to  undertake  the  brick-work  of  our  new 
building  at  the  Point.     At  night  I  was  seized  with  a  violent  fever ; 
and  as  many  of  my  friends  thought  it  improper  for  me  to  go  imme- 
diately into  the  circuit,  I  concluded  to  abide  for  a  season  in  town. 
Many  are  under  some  awakenings  here  :  and  they  are  very  kind  and 
affectionate  to  me.     My  heart  is  with  the  Lord.     He  is  my  all  in  all. 

Wednesday,  Dec.  1.    Preached  at  Nathan  Perrig's  and  William 
Lynch's.    At  the  latter  place  many  more  people  attended  than  wr 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  G7 

could  expect,  considering  the  conduct  of  Abraham  Rawling,  who  in 
his  preaching  had  behaved  more  like  a  madman  than  any  thing  else. 
Rode  the  next  day  to  Richard  Owings's,  where  a  few  attended  the 
word  who  understood  the  things  of  God.  My  soul  is  in  peace.  But 
I  wish  to  bear  all  things  with  perfect  patience  :  and  feel  less  affected 
by  all  that  men  may  say  of  me,  and  every  act  of  disagreeable  con- 
duct towards  me. 

Saturday  4.  I  returned  to  Baltimore  ;  and  the  house  of  Mr.  William 
Moore*  was  crowded  with  people  who  attended  to  hear  the  word ; 
and  the  next  day  I  felt  great  satisfaction  in  preaching  to  a  large  num- 
ber of  people  at  the  Point ;  most  of  them  gave  good  attention  ;  but 
some  were  unruly. 

Tuesday  7  Yesterday  I  was  very  ill  all  the  day  with  a  fever  ;  but 
feel  something  better  to-day.  God  is  the  portion  of  my  soul.  He 
favours  me  with  sweet  peace,  and  sanctifies  all  my  afflictions.  Lord, 
evermore  keep  me,  and  conduct  me  in  safety  to  thy  blessed  presence 
above  !  I  had  a  fever,  and  kept  my  bed  on  Wednesday  and  should 
have  thought  the  day  had  been  lost,  had  it  not  been  a  season  for  the 
exercise  of  my  patience. 

Preached  on  Friday  with  some  satisfaction,  though  in  great  weakness 
of  body,  having  been  very  ill  in  the  preceding  night.  On  Saturday 
my  mind  was  serene  ;  though  I  greatly  long  to  have  a  deeper  sense 
of  God  continually  resting  on  my  heart.  My  soul  pants  earnestly  for 
closer  communion  with  the  Lord  ;  and  to  die,  to  be  crucified,  to  every 
other  object. 

Lord's  day  12.  While  preaching  at  the  Point,  there  was  great 
solemnity  very  visible  in  the  congregation.  The  power  of  God  was 
eminently  present,  and  one  person  fell  under  it-  Such  numbers  of 
people  attended  to  hear  the  word  to-day  in  town,  that  we  knew  not 
how  to  accommodate  them  ;  and  there  appeared  to  be  more  serious- 
ness than  usual  amongst  them. 

Tuesday  14.  We  had  a  comfortable  time  at  William  Lynch's.  The 
next  day  Mr.  Chase,  a  church  minister,  was  present  at  preaching. 
We  had  some  conversation  afterward,  in  which  we  did  not  disagree. 
But  poor  man !  one  more  ignorant  of  the  deep  things  of  God,  I 
have  scarcely  met  with,  of  his  cloth.  He  knew  brother  K.  and  ap- 
pearing to  be  angry  with  him,  he  abused  him  for  preaching  in  the 
church.  Though  very  unwell,  I  rode  20  miles  on  Thursday  to  preach 
at  William  Worthington's,  where  a  few  of  them  felt  the  power  of 
God.     Mr.  W  and  his  wife  in  particular  were  tenderly  affected. 

*  He  became  a  Methodist,  and  afterward  fell  away, 


68  REV.  FIIANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL. 

Saturday  18.  Though  in  a  high  fever,  I  rode  20  miles  through  the 
rain  to  Baltimore.  But  the  Lord  preserved  me  ;  and  1  was  able  to 
preach  to  a  small  company  at  night.  Being  unwell  on  the  Lord's 
day,  I  did  not  attempt  to  preach  till  night.  But  then  the  people 
were  serious,  and  the  power  of  God  was  present. 

Monday  20.  Mrs.  Huling  introduced  me  to  the  family  of  Mrs. 
Rogers,  where  they  treated  me  with  great  kindness  and  care.  Oh '. 
that  plenty  may  not  hurt,  nor  ease  destroy  me — Lord,  help  me,  in  all 
things,  to  desire  nothing  but  thee  ! 

Thursday  23.  R.  O.  informed  me  that  the  work  of  God  was  gain- 
ing ground  in  Frederick  county.  I  preached  at  John  Dearer's,  in  the 
old  town,  and  had  a  wild,  staring  congregation.  On  Friday  the  Lord 
graciously  blessed  me  with  sweet  peace,  and  much  love.  My  heart  is 
greatly  affected  at  times,  for  the  town  of  Baltimore  ;  and  I  am  almost 
ready  to  doubt  whether  it  is  my  duty  to  tarry  here.  Yet  the  serious- 
ness of  the  people  appears  to  increase,  and  a  few  are  concerned  for 
their  salvation. 

Monday  27.  My  soul  was  happy  in  God.  Brother  W  brought 
good  accounts  from  the  country,  where  the  congregations  are  large, 
and  some  coming  to  the  Lord.  I  have  great  hopes  that  my  acquain- 
tance with  the  family  of  Mrs.  Rogers  will  be  rendered  a  blessing  to 
them  ;  and  I  expect  to  see  the  mother  and  son  bow  to  the  cross  of 
Christ. 

Tuesday  28.  Guise's  paraphrase  has  lately  afforded  me  great  de- 
light. It  is  a  pity  that  such  a  man  ever  imbibed  the  Calvinistic  prin- 
ciples. My  soul  was  kept  in  peaceful  composure  to-day  ;  and  at 
night  I  made  a  religious  visit,  which  I  hope  will  not  be  labour  lost. 
On  my  return  home,  I  had  great  hopes  that  Philip  Rogers  will  yet 
become  a  disciple  of  Jesus  Christ.  I  still  pray,  and  long,  and  wait, 
for  an  out-pouring  of  the  blessed  Spirit  on  this  town.  O  that  the 
time  were  come !  Lord,  hasten  it  for  thy  mercy  sake  ! 

Tuesday,  January  4,  1774.  My  body  has  been  indisposed  for  some 
days  past ;  but  the  grace  of  God  has  rested  on  my  soul ;  and  I  have 
been  enabled  to  preach  several  times  with  freedom,  power,  and  great 
boldness,  the  Lord  being  my  helper.  Feeling  rather  better  to-day,  I 
ventured  to  ride  in  a  chaise  ten  miles  to  Mr.  L — 's,  where  we  had 
some  agreeable,  Christian  conversation.  Returned  the  next  day,  and 
continued  unwell ;  sometimes  being  confined  to  my  bed  for  a  day 
together ;  yet  I  preached  at  other  times  to  large  congregations.  It 
frequently  appears  as  if  almost  the  whole  town  would  come  together 
to  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord.  Surely  it  will  not  be  altogether  in 
vain.     The  Lord  giveth  me  great  patience,  and  all  things  riehly  to 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL.  69 

eDjoy,  with  many  very  kind  friends,  who  pay  great  attention  to  me  in 
my  affliction.  Amongst  others,  Mr.  Swoop,  a  preacher  in  high 
Dutch,  came  to  see  me.  He  appeared  to  be  a  good  man,  and  I 
opened  to  him  the  plan  of  Methodism. 

Friday  14.  Though  this  was  the  day  for  the  return  of  my  disor- 
der, yet  I  felt  much  better.  A  blister  under  my  ear  has  removed 
the  pain  in  my  head.  A  great  sense  of  God  rested  on  my  heart, 
while  meeting  the  class  to-day.  There  is  an  apparent  alteration  in 
this  family  ;  and  I  must  conclude  the  Lord  directed  my  steps  among 
them. 

Saturday  15.  My  body  is  still  weak,  though  on  the  recovery. 
Lord,  if  thou  shouldst  be  pleased  to  raise  me  up,  let  it  be  to  do  more 
good  !  I  desire  to  live  only  for  this  !  Lord,  I  am  thine,  to  serve  thee 
for  ever,  with  soul  and  body,  time  and  talents  !  O  my  God  !  now  all  I 
am  and  have  is  devoted  to  thee !  Mercifully  assist  me,  by  thy  grace, 
to  persevere  in  all  well-doing.     Amen. 

Lord's  day  16.  While  preaching  in  town  this  evening,  two  young 
men,  in  the  midst  of  the  sermon,  came  in,  and  broke  the  order  of  the 
meeting.  On  Monday  my  heart  felt  an  uncommon  burden,  on  account 
of  the  inhabitants  of  this  place.  And  sometimes  I  despair  of  ever 
doing  them  much  good.  But  a  constant  sense  of  God  resteth  on  my 
own  soul. 

Wednesday  18.  My  mind  is  kept  in  peace,  though  my  body  is 
weak ;  so  that  I  have  not  strength  sufficient  for  travelling :  neverthe- 
less, I  can  read  and  think.  O  that  it  may  be  to  the  glory  of  Him, 
who,  in  his  great  wisdom,  thinks  proper  to  confine  me.  Lord,  ever 
draw  my  heart  after  thee  !  May  I  see  no  beauty  in  any  other  object, 
nor  desire  any  thing  but  thee  !  My  heart  longs  to  be  more  extensively 
useful,  but  is,  at  the  same  time,  filled  with  perfect  resignation  to  God 
in  all  my  affliction. 

Therefore,  I  cannot  choose  for  myself,  but  leave  all  to  him.  A 
young  man,  who  disturbed  the  congregation  on  the  evening  of  last 
Lord's  day,  has  seen  it  expedient  to  excuse  his  conduct,  as  almost  the 
whole  town  thought  him  culpable.  Thus  doth  God  bring  good  out 
of  evil,  and  make  the  fierceness  of  man  turn  to  his  praise. 

Lord's  day  22.  Great  numbers  of  people  attended  while  I  preached 
on  the  parable  of  the  prodigal  son. 

Tuesday  24.  This  was  a  day  of  sweet  peace.  I  held  a  private 
conference  with  William  Moore  and  Captain  Stone,  who  both  ap- 
peared to  be  convinced  of  sin. 

Thursday  26.  Many  people  attended  this  evening,  to  hear  an 
account  of  the  rise,  discipline,  and  practice  of  the  Methodists  ;   on 


70  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY*S  JOURNAL. 

which  subject  I  enlarged  with  a  warm  exhortation,  and  had  great 
liberty  and  satisfaction.  If  my  labours  should  be  in  vain  for  the  peo- 
ple, the  Lord  gives  me  a  gracious  reward  in  my  own  soul. 

Friday  27.  My  heart  was  fixed  on  God,  and  a  great  part  of  my  time 
spent  in  reading.  1  also  met  a  class,  and  received  seven  probationers 
into  the  society.     May  the  Lord  give  them  grace  to  stand  ! 

Lord's  day  29.  It  appears  that  the  people  here  have  a  great  desire 
to  know  the  truth  ;  for  though  it  rained,  and  froze  as  it  fell,  yet  a 
great  many  attended  to  hear.  It  was  a  very  solemn  time  at  night, 
while  I  discoursed  on  the  awful  day  of  judgment.  Samuel  Owings  is 
tenderly  affected  for  the  salvation  of  his  soul.  And  William  Moore 
and  Philip  Rogers,  seem  to  be  in  earnest  about  this  important  matter. 
Glory  to  God  for  these  things !  Set  out  on  Monday  for  our  quarterly 
meeting,  and  met  the  preachers  at  brother  Owings's.  They  all  ap- 
peared to  have  their  hearts  fixed  on  promoting  the  work  of  God  for 
the  ensuing  quarter  ;  and  we  consulted  together  with  great  freedom 
and  love.  On  the  first  day  I  inquired  into  the  moral  character  of  the 
local  preachers,  appointed  them  their  work,  and  gave  them  written 
licenses  to  officiate.  The  preachers  who  spoke  at  this  meeting,  ma- 
nifested great  earnestness  and  zeal  for  the  salvation  of  souls  ;  and 
many  of  the  people  were  much  affected ;  all  was  harmony  and  love. 
For  the  next  quarter  we  had  our  stations  as  follows  ;  P  Eberd,  E. 
Drumgoole,  and  Richard  Owings,  in  Frederick  circuit ;  brother 
Yerbery  and  brother  Rawlings,  in  Kent  circuit ;  Henry  Watters  and 
brother  W  in  Baltimore  circuit ;  and  myself  in  Baltimore  town. 
We  appointed  our  next  quarterly  meeting  to  be  held  in  Baltimore  on 
the  1st  of  May  next.  Much  fatigued  in  my  feeble  frame  by  various 
exercises,  I  returned  to  town,  and  visited  Mrs.  Moore,  who  was 
afflicted  in  body  and  distressed  in  mind. 

Thursday,  Feb.  3.  Last  night,  while  we  were  all  below  stairs,  my 
bed  took  fire  by  some  unknown  means,  though  it  stood  three  yards 
from  the  fire-place.  We  happily  came  up  in  due  time,  and  finding  the 
room  full  of  smoke,  we  discovered  the  fire,  and  extinguished  it. 
Surely  there  was  a  kind  providence  in  this  !  This  day  I'  wrote  a 
letter  to  Mr.  O.  a  German  minister,  relative  to  his  settling  in  Balti- 
more town.  Though  the  weather  was  very  disagreeable,  yet  maDy 
attended  at  night  to  hear  the  word.  God  is  still  my  chief  object  ; 
and  my  desire  is  to  glorify  and  serve  him.  On  Saturday,  Mr.  S. 
came  to  consult  me  in  respect  to  Mr.  O.'s  coming  to  this  town.  We 
agreed  to  promote  his  settling  here  ;  and  laid  a  plan  nearly  similar  to 
ours — to  wit,  that  gifted  persons  amongst  them,  who  may,  at  any 
time,  be  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  speak  for  God,  should  be  en- 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURYJS  JOURNAL.  71 

couraged  ;  and  if  the  Synod  would  not  agree,  they  were  still  to  per- 
severe in  this  line  of  duty. 

Lord's  day  6.  We  had  a  moving  time  at  the  Point,  and  after  dining 
with  Mr.  Swoop,  the  German  minister,  many  people  attended  at  Mrs. 
Trebalet's,  to  hear  me  preach  ;  but  a  company  of  men,  who  would 
wish  to  support  the  character  of  gentlemen,  came  drunk,  and  at- 
tempted an  interruption  :  however  Philip  Rogers,  once  their  inti- 
mate associate  in  sin,  had  courage  enough  to  defend  the  cause  of 
God:  nevertheless,  I  thought  it  expedient  to  dismiss  the  congrega- 
tion ;  and  know  not  how  this  will  end  :  but  this  I  know,  Satan  and 
his  emissaries  are  greatly  displeased. 

Monday  7.  According  to  appointment,  I  went  to  Elk-Ridge,  and  was 
kindly  received  by  Mr.  I.  Wortbington.  I  spent  part  of  three  days, 
labouring  for  the  salvation  of  souls.  In  this  place  there  are  many 
wealthy  and  wicked  pe6f)le,  destitute  of  all  true  religion.  Numbers 
attended  to  hear  the  word,  and  some  were  affected.  Lord,  let  it  not 
be  as  the  seed  sown  by  the  wayside!  Returned  to  Baltimore  on 
Wednesday,  and  the  next  day  I  advised  the  widow  T  to  seek  redress 
of  a  magistrate,  for  the  late  riot  made  in  her  house.  But  they  ad- 
vised her  to  put  up  with  it  for  this  time.  As  Mr.  M.  offered  the  use 
of  his  house,  I  met  the  people  there  on  Friday  night,  and  found  the 
disturbance  had  not  diminished  the  congregation,  but  increased  it. 
Thus  Satan  prepares  a  weapon  to  wound  his  own  cause.  After  read- 
ing to  the  congregation  part  of  the  "  Plain  Account  of  the  People  called 
Methodists  ;"  I  told  them  we  were  a  united  body,  and  as  such  would 
defend  our  own  cause  ;  that  I  had  qualified  myself  according  to  the 
act  of  toleration,  and  had  a  legal  right  to  preach  the  Gospel. 

Friday  11.  Endeavoured  to  raise  something  by  subscription,  to- 
wards building  a  Methodist  church ;  but  as  the  whole  lieth  on  my 
shoulders,  1  find  the  burden  rather  too  heavy.  However,  God  is  my 
support,  and  my  heart  is  with  him. 

Tuesday  15.  A  lively  sense  of  God  rested  on  my  soul,  while  preach- 
ing  to  a  number  of  attentive  people  collected  at  W  L.'s  ;  and  in  meet- 
ing the  class  at  night,  I  found  the  members  steady. 

Wednesday  16.  Returning  to  the  Point,  I  received  a  melancholy 
account  of  a  poor  abandoned  wretch,  who  staggered  into  a  brothel  at 
night,  and  was  found  dead  the  next  morning.  He  was  found  at  the 
door  of  Mr.  L.  and  there  were  reasons  to  suspect  he  was  murdered. 
Thus  we  see  the  vengeance  of  God  frequently  overtakes  impenitent 
sinners,  even  in  this  life.  How  awful  the  thought !  that  a  soul,  in 
such  a  condition,  should  be  unexpectedly  hurried  to  the  judgment- 
seat  of  a  righteous  God  \  Let  every  poor  drunkard  take  the  warn- 


72  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL. 

iDg ;  lest  the  next  time  he  brutifies  his  immortal  spirit,  by  depriving 
it  of  the  proper  use  of  its  rational  powers,  it  should  be  suddenly  dri- 
ven out  of  the  reach  of  divine  mercy.  On  my  return  to  town  at 
night,  W.  M.  gave  me  a  pleasing  account  of  the  unspeakable  peace 
with  which  God  had  blest  him.  But,  let  him  that  most  assuredly 
standeth,.take  heed  lest  he  fall.  The  next  evening,  I  finished  read- 
ing the  "  Plain  Account  of  the  People  called  Methodists  ;"  and  then 
exhorted  the  congregation  with  much  warmth  of  heart. 

Friday  18.  While  preaching  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Moore,  his  father 
and  mother  were  moved  by  the  word  of  God.  But  after  lying  down 
at  night  to  rest,  my  heart  was  oppressed  with  inexpressible  feelings 
for  the  inhabitants  of  Baltimore.  I  am  pressed  under  them  as  a  cart 
full  of  sheaves  ;  and  would  rather  be  employed  in  the  most  servile 
offices,  than  preach  to  them,  if  it  were  not  from  a  sense  of  duty  to 
God,  and  a  desire  to  be  instrumental  in^saving  their  souls.  If 
honour  and  worldly  gain  were  held  out  as  motives  to  this  painful 
work,  they  would  to  me  appear  lighter  than  vanity.  But,  Lord,  thou 
knowest  my  motives  and  my  ends  !  O  prosper  thou  the  work  of  my 
heart  and  my  hands  ! 

Saturday  19.  This  day  was  chiefly  spent  in  reading  and  prayer. 
Peace,  purity,  and  a  spirit  of  warm  devotion  filled  my  heart.  Glory 
to  God,  the  author  of  all  my  blessings  !  The  next  day  the  congre- 
gation at  the  Point  were  but  little  affected  ;  but  at  night  the  attention 
of  the  people  in  town  was  much  struck,  while  I  preached  from  Matt, 
iii.  7. 

Monday  21.  I  rode  8  miles  and  preached  at  Mr.  G.'s.  Rode  after- 
ward to  Middle-River,  and  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  our  new 
house  raised  and  covered  in.  An  opposer  of  the  truth  has  been 
lately  and  suddenly  summoned,  by  the  smallpox,  to  answer  for  his 
conduct  at  the  bar  of  Almighty  God.  Rode  to  N.  Perrig's  the  next 
day,  and  found  some  whose  hearts  were  tender.  S.  W  gave  me  an 
account  of  the  happy  departure  of  his  brother,  John  Watters,  from 
this  wicked  and  dangerous  world.  He  had  acted  in  the  capacity  of  a 
steward  amongst  us  ;  and  was  a  serious,  faithful  man. 

"  Happy  soul,  who  free  from  harms, 
Rests  within  his  Saviour's  arms." 

N.  P.  tode  in  company  with  me  to  W.  L.'s.  where  we  spent  the 
evening  comfortably.  After  preaching  a  few  times,  I  returned  on 
Thursday  to  town,  and  was  much  pleased  to  hear  of  the  success  which 
W  M.  had  met  with  in  raising  a  subscription  of  more  than  a  hun- 


liEV.  FRAtfCIS   ASBURY  S  JOURNAL.  73 

dred  pounds  for  our  building.  Thus  doth  the  Lord  give  us  favour  in 
the  sight  of  the  people.  Mr.  R.  took  up  two  lots  of  ground  for  the 
purpose  of  building ;  and  Mr.  M.  seemed  determined  to  prosecute 
the  work  at  all  events.  Surely  the  Lord  hath  stirred  up  their  minds 
to  this  pious  enterprise,  and  will  bless  them  therein.  As  my  body  has 
now  gained  a  little  strength,  I  am  determined  to  rise  early,  and  make 
the  most  of  my  precious  time. 

Lord's  day  27.    I  rose  with  a  solemn  sense  of  God  on  my  heart  ; 
and  had  many  to  hear  both  in  town  and  at  the  Point. 

On  Tuesday  29  several  went  with  me  to  John  Waters's,  where  we 
found  a  large  company  of  people  collected,  who  appeared  both  igno- 
rant and  proud.  While  attempting  to  preach  to  them  from  these 
words,  "  May  we  know  what  this  new  doctrine,  whereof  thou 
speakest,  is  ?"  my  mind  was  oppressed  above  measure  ;  so  that  both 
my  heart  and  my  mouth  were  almost  shut :  and  after  I  had  done,  my 
spirit  was  greatly  troubled.  O  my  soul !  if  confined  to  the  society  of 
the  wicked,  what  couldest  thou  find  but  vexation  and  grief?  But, 
"  where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty."  Having  fre- 
quently 16  or  20  miles  to  ride,  and  then  to  preach  before  dinner, 
which  is  often  as  late  as  four  o'clock,  it  shakes  my  constitution,  and 
is  painful  to  the  flesh.  But  I  cheerfully  submit  to  these  things  for 
the  sake  of  precious  souls.  What  did  the  blessed  Jesus  suffer  for  me  S 
The  next  day,  a  champion  in  sin,  a  man  who  had  been  a  famous  ring- 
leader in  absurd  and  diabolical  sports,  was  deeply  wounded  by  the  Spi- 
rit of  God,  while,  in  the  course  of  my  sermon,  I  was  describing  the 
horrible  torments  to  which  those  would  be  exposed  in  hell,  who  had 
been  instruments  in  the  hands  of  Satan,  to  train  up  others  in  sin  and 
disobedience.  He  afterward  invited  me  home  ;  and  we  had  some  se~ 
rious  conversation.     I  then  returned  to  Baltimore. 

Friday,  March  4.  1  was  closely  employed  all  this  day,  and  enjoyed 
peace  in  my  soul.  But  oh!  how  does  my  spirit  pant  for  more  of 
God !  The  next  morning  my  mind  was  somewhat  dejected  by  the 
weight  of  my  strong  desires  for  more  pure  and  undefiled  religion.  In 
reading  the  works  of  Mr.  Brandon,  especially  his  meditations,  my 
heart  was  greatly  melted.  Through  grace,  I  feel  a  fixed  determina- 
tion to  live  more  than  ever  to  the  glory  of  God.  On  the  Lord's  day 
I  laboured  for  my  Master,  both  in  the  town  and  at  the  Point. — Set  off 
the  next  morning  for  Gunpowder-Neck,  and  on  Tuesday  preached  at 
the  funeral  of  W  P  who  had  waited  for  the  consolation  of  Israel, 
and  departed  in  peace,  triumphantly  declaring,  "  I  have  fought  the 
good  fight,  I  have  finished  my  course,  I  have  kept  the  faith."  Here 
we  have  a  lively  and  steady  class.     O  that  they  may  remain  so  !  The 

Vol-  I-  10 


'H  rev.  FRANCIS  asbury's  journal. 

next  day,  many  people  attended  while  1  preached  at  the  funeral  of 
I.  M.  who  also  died  in  the  Lord.  My  text  was,  "  Blessed  and  holy 
is  he  that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection."  The  power  of  the 
Lord  was  present,  and  it  was  a  melting  time.  The  Spirit  of  God  was 
present  with  us  also  at  the  upper  ferry,  while  I  preached  to  a  large 
congregation  from  Psalm  cxxvi.  3.  "  The  Lord  hath  done  great 
things  for  us,  whereof  we  are  glad."  Honest,  simple  Daniel  Ruff,  has 
been  made  a  great  blessing  to  these  people.  Such  is  the  wisdom  and 
power  of  God,  that  he  hath  wrought  marvellously  by  this  plain  man, 
that  no  flesh  may  glory  in  his  presence. 

Friday  11.  On  my  way  to  Joseph  Presbury's  my  horse  tired,  and 
fell  down  with  me  on  his  back  ;  but  I  was  not  in  the  least  hurt.  Call- 
ing at  Dr.  Henderson's,  I  met  with  I.  R.  a  Quaker,  who  said  it  gave 
him  pain  to  think  that  Joseph  Pilmore  should  go  home  for  ordination, 
and  expressed  his  disapprobation  of  our  going  to  the  chruch  for  the 
ordinances,  supposing  we  might  have  them  amongst  ourselves.     But 
this  was  all  a  farce.     He  would  rather  that  we  should  drop  them  alto- 
gether.   And  in  the  course  of  conversation,  he  laboured  to  overthrow 
them  entirely.     But  when  I  told  him  it  might  appear  to  me  as  a  duty 
to  use  them,  though  I  should  not  suppose  that  all  went  to  hell  who 
did  not  use  them  ;  he  asked,  why  we  use  them  if  they  are  not  essen- 
tial to  salvation  ?  What  weak  reasoning  is  this  !  Do  they  think  laying 
them  aside  is  thus  essential,  or  wearing  their  clothes  in  such  a  shape, 
or  using  (as  they  call  it)  the  plain  language  ?  Why  then  do  they  follow 
these  practices  ?     But  what  makes  them  so  contracted  and  bitter  in 
their  spirit  as  some  of  them  are  ?  There  is  One  thatknoweth. 

After  preaching  the  next  day  at  brother  P — 's,  and  having  the  plea- 
sure to  find  that  the  society  there  had  increased  both  in  number  and 
grace,  I  then  returned  to  Baltimore,  and,  though  much  fatigued, 
spoke  at  Baltimore  in  the  evening. 

Blessed  be  God!  S.  O.  seems  determined  to  give  up  all  for  Christ. 
And  the  little  society  in  town  are  still  pressing  on.  The  Lord  has 
been  the  keeper  of  my  soiil  in  this  journey ;  my  peace  has  been 
great,  and  my  intention  pure. 

Monday  14.  Set  out  to-day  with  some  agreeable  company,  for  Mr. 
W~-'s  ,  and  though  it  rained,  a  small  congregation  attended  ;  but  they 
discovered  very  little  sensibility  in  the  things  of  God.  My  frame 
seems  lately  much  affected  by  nervous  disorders.  But  let  the  will  of 
the  Lord  be  doue!  After  feeling  much  dejection  of  mind,  and 
preaching  on  Tuesday  at  the  house  of  J.  O wings,  on  Wednesday  I 
visited  Joseph  Cromwell,  a  very  stiff,  old  churchman.  But  as  his 
parson,  Mr.  E.  disagreed  with  him  in  the  doctrine  of  predestination. 


UEV.  FRANCIS  ASBlfRY3S  JOUR?,  A.  ;  75 

he  was  much  displeased  with  him,  and  willing  to  receive  us.  1  preach- 
ed at  his  house  in  the  day  with  some  freedom,  and  expounded  at  night. 
May  the  Lord  apply  the  word  to  their  conviction  and  conversion ! 

Returned  on  Thursday  to  Baltimore,  and  was  favoured  with  liberty 
and  power,  while  preaching  to  a  considerable  congregation  at  night. 

Saturday  19.  The  Lord  blessed  my  soul  with  sweet  peace  in  the 
day,  and  with  the  aid  of  his  Holy  Spirit  in  preaching  at  night.  My 
heart  is  with  God.  The  Lord  Jehovah  is  my  strength  and  my  song  : 
He  also  is  become  my  salvation. 

Satan  assaulted  me  powerfully  with  his  temptations  on  Monday  ; 
but  by  calling  on  the  name  of  the  Lord,  I  was  delivered.  How  faith- 
ful and  gracious  is  God  !  He  will  not  suffer  his  people  to  be  tempted 
above  that  they  are  able  to  bear  ;  but  will  with  the  temptation  make 
a  way  to  escape.  Precious  truth !  Sometimes  we  are  tempted  to 
the  uttermost  of  our  strength,  but  never  beyond  it.  We  always  stand, 
at  least,  on  equal  ground  with  Satan  :  and  by  faith  in  Christ  we  may 
be  more  than  conquerors. 

Tuesday  22.  I  rode  a  few  miles  into  the  forest,  and  preached  at 
Mr.  E — 's.  The  people  were  much  quickened  ;  and  there  were  great 
appearances  ot  real  good. 

Wednesday  23.  At  the  house  of  W  L.  I  preached  a  funeral  ser- 
mon on  the  death  of  his  brother  Joshua.  Many  of  his  friends  and 
neighbours  were  present.  It  was  a  very  solemn,  awful,  warning  sea- 
son. May  the  people  retain  the  impressions  they  then  received  ; 
and  be  found  prepared  for  their  own  departure.  The  next  day  I 
rode  to  meet  Mr.  W  but  took  cold,  as  the  weather  was  severe,  and 
found  myself  much  indisposed.  Mr  W  preached  an  animating  dis- 
course from  Rev.  vi.  17.  There  is  a  great  probability  that  his  coming 
will  be  made  a  particular  blessing  to  many. 

Being  much  indisposed  on  Friday,  Mr.  W.  preached  to  a  large 
congregation.  There  is  something  very  singular  in  his  manner ; 
nevertheless  the  Lord  owns  and  blesses  his  labours.  Though  I  con- 
tinued very  unwell  the  next  day,  I  went  to  church,  and  heard  Mr. 
Chase  deliver  a  good  discourse  on  retirement  and  private  devotion  ; 
and  afterward  I  attempted  to  preach  at  the  Point ;  but  found  myself 
much  worse  at  my  return  to  town.  My  indisposition  and  weakness 
of  body,  have  so  pressed  me  down  for  some  time  past,  that  I  do  not 
expect  to  abide  long  in  this  world  of  danger  and  trouble  ;  neither  do 
I  desire  it.  But  come  life  or  come  death,  let  the  will  of  the  Lord  be 
done !  After  the  physicians  had  given  over  I.  I.  and  thought  they 
could  do  him  no  more  service,  we  had  recourse  to  that  old-fashioned 


iD  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL* 

remedy,  prayer;  and   had   reason   to   believe   the  Lord   in  mercy 
heard  us. 

Thursday  29.  My  illness  has  been  so  severe  that  I  have  preached 
but  little  for  some  days  past;  but  felt  myself  rather  better  to-day» 
As  Captain  Webb  had  appointed  to  preach  at  Mr.  W — 's,  and  was 
accidentally  prevented,  lest  the  people  should  be  disappointed,  I 
ventured  to  go  in  his  stead.  But  after  preaching  was  taken  very  ill, 
and  obliged  to  go  immediately  to  bed. 

Lord's  day,  April  3.  Though  still  very  unwell,  I  attempted  to  preach* 
How  difficult  it  is  for  a  man  who  longs  for  the  salvation  of  souls  to  be 
silent !  Gratitude  urges  me  to  acknowlege  the  providence  of  God» 
and  the  kindness  of  my  friends.  The  people  who  have  had  the  chief 
trouble  with  me  in  my  late  afflictions,  have  shown  remarkable  care, 
tenderness,  and  concern.  May  the  Lord  reward  their  work,  and 
labour  of  love  ! 

Wednesday  6.  My  indisposition  has  been  so  great  this  week,  that  I 
have  been  incapable  of  all  public  exercises.  Severe  chills  and  burn- 
ing fevers  have  been  my  portion  both  day  and  night.  Oh  !  that  I 
may  wisely  and  diligently  improve  these  seasons  of  affliction  !  When 
shall  I  be  all  glorious  within  !  My  soul  longs  for  the  complete  image 
and  full  enjoyment  of  God.  Satan  too  often  takes  the  advantage  of 
my  constitution,  and  betrays  me  into  such  a  degree  of  cheerfulness, 
as  has,  at  least,  the  appearance  of  le?ity.  But  my  prevailing  and 
earnest  desire  is,  to  live  and  act  as  in  the  immediate  presence  of  a  holy 
and  glorious  God.    Lord,  make  me  more  serious,  watchful,  and  holy! 

Ventured  on  Thursday  to  ride  in  a  carriage  12  miles  to  town  ;  but 
was  very  ill  most  of  the  night.  On  Saturday  Captain  W  intended  to 
have  sailed  in  the  packet ;  but  when  he  saw  the  entertainment  he  was 
to  have,  he  returned  to  abide  with  us  for  a  short  season  In  great 
weakness  of  body,  I  met  the  congregation  this  evening,  without  any 
intention  to  preach  ;  but  seeing  a  great  number  of  people  collected, 
my  spirit  was  moved  within  me,  and  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  exert 
what  little  strength  I  had,  and  preach  to  the  people.  But  I  was  in- 
disposed and  confined  all  the  next  day.  However,  Captain  W-  sup- 
plied my  place. 

Monday  1 1.  I  was  somewhat  better.  But  I  find  myself  assulted  by 
Satan  as  well  in  sickness  as  in  health,  in  weakness  as  in  strength. 
Lord,  help  me  to  urge  my  way  through  all,  and  fill  me  with  humble, 
hoty  love,  that  I  may  be  faithful  until  death,  and  lay  hold  on  eternal 
life.  On  Tuesday  I  ventured  to  go  as  far  as  Mr.  L.'s,  and  my  soul 
was  kept  in  peace  :  though  the  next  day  my  spiritual  adversary  as- 


KLV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL.  Vj 

saulted  me  in  a  soft  and  artful  way  ;  but  the  Lord  delivered  me.  May 
he  ever  grant  me  grace  to  confide  in  him,  and  devote  my  body  and 
soul  entirely  to  his  service. 

Thursday  14.  Rode  back  to  town  and  was  enabled  to  preach  with 
freedom  and  comfort,  from  the  case  of  Naaman  the  leper.  My  heart 
is  much  drawn  out  after  God,  with  a  determination  to  be  more  devo- 
ted to  him,  and  more  fervent  in  prayer. 

Lord's  day  17.  Both  yesterday  and  to-day  my  soul  enjoyed  more 
peace  and  more  love.  May  these  graces  never  be  interrupted.  A 
great  number  attended  at  the  Point,  while  I  enforced  these  awakening 
words,  "O  earth,  earth,  earth,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord.'"  After 
meeting  the  class  of  young  men,  I  returned  and  spoke  in  town  from 
Prov.  xxiv.  30.  Was  much  fatigued,  but  desire  to  be  thankful  to 
God  that  I  am  gathering  some  strength  for  duty.  We  have  reason 
to  think  the  spirits  of  hartshorn  have  been  serviceable  in  my  dis- 
order. 

Monday  18.  My  soul  was  in  peace,  but  my  body  weak.  This  day 
the  foundation  of  our  house  in  Baltimore  was  laid.  Who  could  have 
expected  that  two  men,  once  amongst  the  chief  of  sinners,  would 
ever  have  thus  engaged  in  so  great  an  undertaking  for  the  cause  oi 
the  blessed  Jesus  ?  This  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is  marvellous  in 
our  eyes.  He  hath  touched  and  changed  their  hearts.  He  hath 
moved  them  to  this  acceptable  undertaking  ;  and  he  will  surely  com- 
plete it ;  and  raise  up  a  people  to  serve  him  in  this  place. 

Tuesday  19.  My  soul  was  in  a  comfortable  frame  ;  but  I  did  not 
employ  all  my  time  in  so  useful  a  manner  as  I  might  have  done. 
This  was  partly  owing  to  my  bodily  weakness.  But  in  class-meeting 
this  evening,  we  had  a  happy  and  blessed  time  indeed.  Hitherto 
the  Lord  hath  helped.     So  my  labour  hath  not  been  in  vain. 

Wednesday  20.  Poor  Mr.  B.  arrived  here  to-day  from  England. 
In  great  distress  he  applied  to  me  for  a  little  money.  And  is  it  come 
to  this!  Ah!  what  will  be  the  end  of  those  that  forsake  God,  for 
wealth,  a  wife,  or  any  thing  else  !  O  my  soul,  keep  these  things 
always  in  remembrance  as  a  perpetual  caution  !  And  may  the  Lord 
keep  me  ever  humble,  and  dead  to  all  created  good.  I  read  the  rules 
and  met  the  society  in  the  evening  ;  and  it  was  a  melting,  happy  time, 

Thursday  21.  My  heart  was  fixed  on  God,  and  kept  in  peace.  I 
was  able  to  walk  some  distance  to-day,  and  believe  the  Lord  is  about 
to  restore  me  to  health.     May  it  be  to  serve  Him,  and  Him  only. 

Saturday  23.  Though  weak  in  body,  I  have  been  able  for  a  few 
days  past  to  go  through  my  public  exercises  ;  and  was  both  instructed 
and  delighted  to-day  in    reading  the   Revelation    with  its  comment 


(b  REV.  FhANClS  ASBURVS  JOJ  H>.»  i 

There  we  see  the  rise  and  spread  of  the  Christian  religion  through 
the  extensive  and  idolatrous  empire  of  the  Romans  :  the  wars  of  the 
Saracens  ;  the  gradual  rise  and  artful  progress  of  Popery.  What  an 
amazing  prophetic  history  is  this,  of  all  people  and  nations  in  epi- 
tome !  How  expressive  are  the  differently  coloured  horses,  and  sur- 
prising representations  seen  by  St.  John  !  In  this  book,  extraordi- 
nary events  are  foretold,  as  well  as  the  proper  rule  of  our  faith  and 
practice  revealed.  If  this  deep  book  were  fully  understood,  need  we 
go  any  farther  after  knowledge  ? 

Monday  25.  The  Lord  favoured  me  yesterday  with  liberty  in 
preaching  to  large  companies  both  in  town  and  Point.  And  this  day 
my  soul  experienced  a  sweet  mixture  of  peace,  and  joy,  and  grief. 
We  had  a  very  comfortable  time  at  the  class  in  the  evening. 

Wednesday  27.  We  were  all  quickened  by  the  grace  of  God  in  class 
meeting  last  night.  Blessed  be  God !  Calm  serenity  fills  my  mind  ; 
and  my  body  recovers  a  little  strength. 

Friday  29.  What  a  miracle  of  grace  am  I !  How  unworthy,  and 
yet  how  abundantly  blest !  In  the  midst  of  all  temptations,  both  from 
without  and  from  within,  my  heart  trusteth  in  the  Lord.  I  was 
greatly  delighted  to-day  in  reading  Dr.  Guise  on  the  reign  of  Christ, 
which  on  earth  will  be  spiritual,  and  in  glory  personal  and  eternal. 
O  the  beauties  and  joys  of  which  I  have  some  prospect  in  that  celes- 
tial world  !  It  seems  rather  strange  that,  till  lately,  I  could  discover  no 
beauties  in  the  Revelation  of  St.  John.  But  now  I  think  it  is  the 
grand  key  of  all  mysteries,  whether  pure  or  impure  ;  opening  to 
view  all  the  revolutions,  persecutions,  and  errors  of  the  church  from 
that  time  till  the  end  of  the  world.  And  then  it  favours  us  with  a 
glimpse  of  what  shall  remain  for  ever.  In  preaching  to-night  from 
these  words,  "  Bodily  exercise  profiteth  little  ;  but  godliness  is  pro- 
fitable unto  all  things  ;"    I  took  occasion  to  show, 

I.  That  bodily  exercise,  or  what  is  called  religious  actions,  cannot 
change  a  sinful  heart,  or  purchase  love. 

II.  Wherein  godliness  consisteth,  viz.  In  repentance,  faith,  love 
to  God  and  man,  meekness,  resignation,  chastity,  and  the  pure  spiri- 
tual worship  of  God. 

III.  Wherein  this  is  profitable,  viz.  In  all  states,  in  all  commerce, 
in  the  felicity  of  the  possessor,  in  the  general  benefit  of  others,  and 
finally  in  eternal  glory.  My  mind  has  been  grieved  by  some  who  have 
spoken  evil  of  ministers.  But  I  must  be  sure  to  take  care  of  my 
own  soul  ;  that  is  more  to  me  than  all  the  world,  and  all  the  men  in 
it.  And  blessed  be  God  !  he  fills  me  with  peace  and  purity.  Lord. 
grant  that  this  maybe  my  portion,  increasing  for  ever! 


RW.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  79 

Lord's  day,  May  1.  Preached  twice  and  met  two  classes.  In  the 
morning  at  the  Point  I  had  some  feeling  ;  but  found  myself  rather 
shut  up  at  night  in  town. 

Monday  2.  My  soul  loveth  the  Lord  God  !  What  a  great  and  blessed 
portion  is  he  for  worthless  man  !  This  evening  was  spent  in  com- 
pany with  two  German  ministers  who  are  very  friendly,  and  intend  to 
be  present  at  our  quarterly  meeting  to-morrow. 

Tuesday  3.  Our  quarterly  meeting  began.  I  preached  in  the 
morning  ;  and  in  the  afternoon  we  settled  our  temporal  business, 
with  great  order  and  much  love.  When  inquiry  was  made  relative  to 
the  conduct  of  the  preachers,  there  were  some  complaints  of  a  few, 
who  had  been  remiss  in  meeting  the  societies,  and  catechising  the 
children.  The  next  day  several  of  us  spoke  in  public,  and  then  we 
parted  in  peace. — Had  a  friendly  intercourse  with  Mr.  O.  and  Mr.  S. 
the  German  ministers,  respecting  the  plan  of  church  discipline  on 
which  they  intended  to  proceed.  They  agreed  to  imitate  our  methods 
as  nearly  as  possible. 

Friday  6.  I  preached  from  Matt.  xii.  50.  ;  but  felt  my  mind  deject- 
ed. Not  meeting  with  such  success  in  this  town  as  my  soul  ardently 
longs  for,  I  rather  feel  a  desire  to  depart,  and  to  try  some  other  peo- 
ple. But  let  the  will  of  the  Lord  be  done.  My  heart  has  been  deep- 
ly  affected  by  reading  the  life  of  Col.  Gardiner.  Blessed  be  God  for 
so  many  who  experience  the  same  work  of  grace  which  we  preach, 
and  at  the  same  time  are  not  of  us  !  This  is  a  great  confirmation  of 
the  work  of  God.  And  "  whosoever  doeth  the  will  of  my  Father 
who  is  in  heaven,"  of  every  denomination,  "  the  same  shall  be  my 
brother,  and  sister,  and  mother." 

Saturday  7.  My  soul  longeth  for  God.  My  heart  and  my  flesh  cry 
out  for  him.     O  that  I  were  wholly  devoted  to  my  God  ! 

Lord's  day  0.  Several  appeared  to  feel  something  of  the  power 
which  attended  the  word,  both  at  the  Point  and  in  town.  On  Monday 
my  soul  was  in  peace,  and  God  was  the  object  of  my  love.  Mr.  G\ 
attended  our  class-meeting,  and  expressed  his  approbation.  The 
Lord  was  with  us,  and  we  were  greatly  blessed.  Mr.  W  arrived  to- 
day from  Virginia.  He  gave  us  a  circumstantial  account  of  the  work 
of  God  in  those  parts.  One  house  of  worship  is  built,  and  another 
iu  contemplation ;  two  or  three  more  preachers  are  gone  out  upon 
the  itinerant  plan ;  and  in  some  parts  the  congregations  consist  of  2 
or  3000  people.  But  some  evil-minded  persons  have  opposed  the 
act  of  toleration,  and  threatened  to  imprison  him.  May  the  Lord 
turn  their  hearts,  and  make  them  partakers  of  his  great  salvation  ! 


30  REV  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURjVaL, 

Wednesday  11.  I  went  to  Mr.  L.'s,  and  preached  to  a  large  con- 
gregation ;  then  called  at  N.  P  's,  and  preached  a  funeral  sermon  on 
the  death  of  his  sister,  who  was  once  happy  in  religion.  Returned 
to  town  on  Thursday,  and  preached  with  freedom  to  an  attentive 
audience. 

Friday  13.  I  packed  up  my  clothes  and  books  to  be  ready  for  my 
departure  ;  and  had  an  agreeable  conversation  with  Mr.  O.  The 
next  day  some  of  my  friends  were  so  unguarded  and  imprudent  as 
to  commend  me  to  my  face.  Satan,  ready  for  every  advantage,  seized 
the  opportunity  and  assaulted  me  with  self- pleasing,  self-exalting  ideas. 
But  the  Lord  enabled  me  to  discover  the  danger,  and  the  snare  was 
broken.  May  he  ever  keep  me  humble,  and  little,  and  mean  in  my 
own  eyes ! 

Lord's  day  15.  About  to  take  my  leave  for  a  season,  I  went  to  the 
Point  and  enlarged  on  these  words,  "  I  am  afraid  of  you  lest  1  have 
bestowed  upon  you  labour  in  vain  ;"  and  trust  some  felt  at  last  the 
worth  and  weight  of  divine  truths.  My  subject  at  night  in  town 
was  this  :  "  I  take  you  to  record  this  day,  that  I  am  pure  from  the 
blood  of  all  men."  In  preaching  from  these  words  my  mind  was 
under  some  embarrassment.  Perhaps  my  foolish  heart  desired  to 
end  with  honour  :  and  the  Lord  in  mercy  prevented  it.  May  I  ever 
be  contented  with  that  honour  which  cometh  from  God  only  ! 

Monday  16.  When  the  time  of  parting  came,  I  felt  some  unwilling- 
ness to  leave  my  kind  and  valuable  friends  ;  however,  I  took  horstf 
and  rode  16  miles  to  Mr.  G.'s,  where  a  large  company  attended  to 
hear  the  word.  Many  were  also  present  at  Mr.  C.'s.  In  examining 
the  leaders,  I  found  them  steady  ;  but  refused  to  give  a  license  to  an 
exhorter,  who  had  been  too  unwatchful.  After  a  long  prejudice,  Mr. 
I.  G.  invited  me  to  his  house,  and  treated  me  kindly.  In  preaching 
at  Mr.  B.'s,  my  heart  was  troubled  within  me  for  the  dulness  and  un- 
belief of  the  people. 

Wednesday  18.  Rode  to  Susquehannah,  and  many  of  the  leading 
men  were  present,  with  a  large  congregation.  Simple  D.  R.  has 
been  an  instrument  of  real  and  great  good  to  the  people  in  these 
parts. 

Thursday  19.  I  am  happy  in  God  after  all  my  labours.  But  when 
amongst  my  friends,  my  mind  inclines  to  a  degree  of  cheerfulness 
bordering  on  levity.  O  for  more  watchfulness  ! — a  more  constant, 
striking  sense  of  an  omnipresent  God!  Preached  to-day  in  the 
market-house  at  Charlestown.  The  congregation  was  somewhat 
large,  and  many  of  them  very  attentive.     The  company  was  large 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV  S  JOURNAL.  81 

at  Bohemia  on  Friday,  and  my  own  heart  was  deeply  affected,  and 
much  drawn  out  while  speaking  from  Rev.  iii.  3.  At  New-Castle 
on  Saturday,  Satan  was  there  diverting  the  people  by  a  play.  How- 
ever, several  came  to  hear  me  enforce  these  words,  "  Be  not  ye 
partakers  with  them." 

Monday  22.  After  preaching  yesterday  at  Newport  and  Red-clay- 
Creek,  I  rode  to-day  to  Chester  :  and,  though  weary,  spoke  from 
Gal.  vi.  14.  Here  my  old  friends,  Mr.  M.  and  Mr.  S.  from  New- 
York,  met  me  ;  and  the  next  day  we  rode  to  Philadelphia.  Hitherto 
the  Lord  hath  helped. 

Wednesday  25.  Our  conference  began.  The  overbearing  spirit 
of  a  certain  person  had  excited  my  fears.  My  judgment  was  stub- 
bornly opposed  for  a  while,  and  at  last  submitted  to.  But  it  is  my 
duty  to  bear  all  things  with  a  meek  and  patient  spirit.  Our  confe- 
rence was  attended  with  great  power  ;  and,  all  things  considered, 
with  great  harmony.  We  agreed  to  send  Mr.  W  to  England  ;  and 
all  acquiesced  in  the  future  stations  of  the  preachers.  My  lot  was 
to  go  to  York.  My  body  and  mind  have  been  much  fatigued  during 
the  time  of  this  conference.  And  if  I  were  not  deeply  conscious  of 
the  truth  and  goodness  of  the  cause  in  which  I  am  engaged,  I  should 
by  no  means  stay  here.  Lord !  what  a  world  is  this  !  yea,  what  a 
religious  world  !  O  keep  my  heart  pure,  and  my  garments  unspotted 
fromthe  world  !  Our  conference  ended  on  Friday  with  a  comfortable 
intercession. 

Lord's  day  29.  This  was  a  day  of  peace,  and  the  Lord  favoured 
me  with  faith  and  energy  while  preaching  to  the  people.  I  visited 
Mr.  W-  who  is  going  to  England  ;  but  found  he  had  no  taste  for  spi- 
ritual subjects.  Lord,  keep  me  from  all  superfluity  of  dress,  and 
from  preaching  empty  stuff  to  please  the  ear,  instead  of  changing  the 
heart!  Thus  has  he  fulfilled  as  an  hireling  his  day.  We  had  a  very 
solemn  love-feast  to-day  ;  and  on  Monday  my  friends  and  I  set  off  in 
the  stage  for  New-York,  where  we  arrived  on  Tuesday  evening 
about  eight  o'clock.  We  had  some  trifling  company  on  the  way, 
who  talked  much  to  but  little  purpose.  My  old  friends  in  York  were 
glad  to  see  me.  But  I  still  fear  there  is  a  root  of  prejudice  remain- 
ing in  the  hearts  of  a  few.  May  the  Lord  prepare  me  for  all 
events,  that  I  may  act  and  suffer, in  all  things,  like  a  Christian.  Cap- 
tain W.  preached  a  good  sermon  in  the  evening. 

June  1st.  Considering  my  bodily  weakness,  and  the  great  fatigue 
through  which  I  have  gone,  it  seems  wonderful  that  my  frame  should 
support  it,  and  be  still  so  capable  of  duty.  My  mind  is  also  kept  in 
peace.     My  heart  was  much  drawn  out  both  towards  God  and   the 

Vol,  I.  n 


b'Z  MiV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL 

people,  while  preaching  this  evening  from  Sam.  vii.  12.  But  too 
much  of  the  old  spirit  is  still  discoverable  in  my  few  prejudiced 
friends.  Mr.  C.  not  contented  with  his  unkind  and  abusive  letter,  is 
still  exerting  all  his  unfriendly  force.  I  feel  myself  aggrieved  :  but 
patiently  commit  my  cause  to  God.  Therefore,  their  contention  may 
subsist  among  themselves.     I  shall  not  contend  with  them. 

Thursday  2.  In  the  public  exercise  of  the  evening,  my  heart  was 
warmed  with  affection  for  the  people.  And  except  a  very  small 
number  of  dissatisfied,  restless  spirits,  the  hearts  of  the  people  are 
generously  opened  towards  me.  My  heart  is  still  fixed  on  God  ;  and 
determined,  through  grace,  both  to  serve  him,  and  promote  the  pros- 
perity of  his  cause. 

Friday  3.  Christ  is  precious  to  my  believing  heart.  Blessed  be 
God  for  this  !  it  is  infinitely  more  to  me  than  the  favour  of  all  man- 
kind, and  the  possession  of  all  the  earth.  The  next  day  my  soul  was 
also  sweetly  drawn  out  in  love  to  God ;  and  found  great  freedom  and 
happiness  in  meeting  the  leaders  and  the  bands.  I  told  them  that 
the  Spirit  and  providence  of  God  would  certainly  assist  in  purging 
the  society  ;  that  the  time  would  come,  when  such  as  were  insincere 
and  half-hearted  would  have  no  place  among  us. 

Lord's  day  5.  Attended  the  old  church,  as  usual,  but  clearly  saw 
where  the  Gospel-ministry  was.  The  Spirit  of  grace  mercifully 
assisted  me  in  the  public  duties  of  this  day.  On  Monday  I  preached 
with  great  plainness  and  power  in  the  Meadows  ;  but  while  preaching 
on  Tuesday  evening,  my  ideas  left  me,  though  I  felt  myself  spirited 
in  addressing  the  people  by  way  of  exhortation. 

Wednesday  8.  The  fire  of  divine  love  glowed  in  my  heart.  My 
soul  was  in  peace.  My  affections  were  pure,  and  withdrawn  from 
earthly  objects.  But  I  fear,  lest  self-complacency  should  have  any 
place  in  me.  May  the  Lord  keep  me  in  the  spirit  of  humility, 
prayer,  and  loving  zeal ! 

Thursday  9.  While  reading  a  sermon  of  Mr.  Brandon's  on 
"  Quench  not  the  Spirit,"  in  company  with  a  few  friends,  both  they 
and  I  were  much  quickened.  Blessed  be  God  !  my  soul  is  kept  in 
peace,  and  power,  and  love.  Had  great  liberty  this  evening  in  point- 
ing out  the  causes  why  we  have  not  more  of  the  spirit  of  devotion — 
neglect  or  dulness  in  prayer — too  much  heart-attention  to  the  world 
— the  want  of  more  faith  in  the  realities  of  eternity,  and  the  pro- 
mises of  God — not  looking  more  earnestly  to  God  in  humble  expec- 
tation of  receiving  his  grace,  &c. 

Lord's  day  12.  Both  my  body  and  mind  are  weak.  As  Mr.  R. 
was  thought  by  many  to  be  a  great  preacher,  I  went  in  the  afternoon 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  83 

to  hear  him.  He  was  very  stiff  and  studied  in  his  composition,  and 
dwelt  much  on  their  favourite  doctrine  of  imputed  righteousness. 
He  appeared  to  have  very  little  liberty,  except  in  a  short  application- 
With  great  enlargement  of  heart,  I  spoke  in  the  evening  from  these 
words,  "  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither  will  they 
be  persuaded  though  one  rose  from  the  dead."  In  meeting  the  soci- 
ety at  night,  I  spoke  plainly  of  some  who  neglect  their  bands  and 
classes  ;  and  informed  them  that  we  took  people  into  our  societies 
that  we  might  help  them  to  become  entire  Christians  ;  and  if  they 
wilfully  neglected  those  meetings,  they  thereby  withdrew  themselves 
from  our  care  and  assistance.  The  next  day  many  people  attended 
the  preaching  at  the  Meadows. 

Tuesday  14.  My  heart  seems  wholly  devoted  to  God,  and  he 
favours  me  with  power  over  all  outward  and  inward  sin.  My  affec- 
tions appear  to  be  quite  weaned  from  all  terrestrial  objects.  Some 
people,  if  they  felt  as  I  feel  at  present,  would  perhaps  conclude  they 
were  saved  from  all  indwelling  sin.  O  my  God,  save  me  and  keep 
me  every  moment  of  my  life  !  The  next  day  my  soul  was  under 
heavy  exercises,  and  much  troubled  by  manifold  temptations  ;  but, 
still,  all  my  care  was  cast  on  the  Lord.  I  find  it  hurtful  to  pore  too 
much  on  myself.  True,  I  should  be  daily  employed  in  the  duty  of 
self-examination,  and  strictly  attend  both  to  my  internal  and  external 
conduct ;  but  at  the  same  time  my  soul  should  steadily  fix  the  eye  of 
faith  on  the  blessed  Jesus,  my  mediator  and  advocate  at  the  right 
hand  of  the  eternal  Father.  Lord,  cause  thy  face  to  shine  upon  me  ; 
and  make  me  alwavs  joyful  in  thy  salvation. 

Thursday  16.  My  soul  was  more  and  more  delighted  in  God.  I 
felt  myself  uneasy  to-day  on  account  of  riding  out,  though  I  was  con- 
scious it  was  intended  for  my  health.  Yet  to  some  it  might  have  the 
appearance  of  pleasuring,  and  encourage  them  to  seek  their  carnal 
pleasure  in  such  things. 

Saturday  18.  The  Lord  was  my  helper  ;  and  my  mind  was  in  peace. 

Lord's  day  19.  This  was  a  blessed  and  delightful  day  to  my  soul. 
The  grace  of  God  was  eminently  with  me  in  all  my  public  duties. 
Heard  Mr.  E.  at  St.  Paul's  church  preach  from  these  words,  "  Put  on 
the  new  man,  which  after  God  is  created  in  righteousness  and  true 
holiness."  He  spoke  well  on  man's  fallen  state,  and  the  new  crea- 
tion :  and  brought  good  reasons  to  prove  that  we  must  be  renewed 
in  order  to  dwell  with  God.  But  he  did  not  insist  on  the  necessity  of 
repentance  and  faith  in  order  to  obtain  this  change. 

Monday  20.  Mr.  S.  Mr.  W  and  Mr.  T.  bore  me  company  as  far  as 
Kingsbridge,  on  my  way  to  New-Rochelle.     Was  much  indisposed 


■''-?-*  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY:S  JOURtfAl 

when  I  reached  the  house  of  my  friend  Mr.  D.  nevertheless,  thought 
it  my  duty  to  preach  to  the  people.  The  Lord  is  doing  something  for 
several  souls  in  this  place.  Though  they  have  had  but  very  few 
sermons  for  twelve  months,  yet  the  class  is  lively  and  engaged  with 
God. 

Thursday  23.  After  preaching  as  often  as  I  could  to  many  people 
who  attended  at  New-Rochelle,  I  set  off  for  York,  and  was  met  at 
Kingsbridge  by  Mr.  S.  and  Mr.  J.  But  on  my  arrival  in  the  city  I 
found  myself  very  unwell,  and  had  a  painful,  restless  night. 

Friday  24.  Found  myself  better  ;  and  was  much  refreshed  by  let- 
ters from  Mr.  L.  and  Mr.  S — y  in  Maryland.  But  one  of  these  letters 
informed  me  that  Mr.  S — e  was  very  officious  in  administering  the 
ordinances.  What  strange  infatuation  attends  that  man  !  Why  will 
he  run  before  Providence  ? 

Saturday  25.  My  fever  was  very  high  last  evening,  so  I  took  an 
emetic  this  morning.  I  found  liberty  in  my  own  soul,  and  great  melt- 
ings amongst  the  people,  while  preaching  on  the  Lord's  day.  Though 
my  disorder  has  a  tendency  to  oppress  my  spirits,  yet,  blessed  be 
God  !  I  am  favoured  with  power  to  conquer  every  spiritual  foe  ; 
and  my  heart  is  sometimes  wonderfully  raised  as  on  the  wings  of  faith 
and  love. 

Monday  27.  R.  S.  who  accompanied  me  a  few  miles  into  the  coun- 
try to-day,  was  very  near  being  drowned.  He  went  into  a  stream  of 
water  to  wash  his  horse  and  chaise,  but  accidentally  got  out  of  the 
horse's  depth,  and  they  must  all  have  been  unavoidably  lost,  had  not 
two  men  swam  in  and  dragged  them  to  the  shore.  Thus  the  Lord 
preserveth  both  man  and  beast.  I  went  to  bed  this  evening  in  much 
pain,  and  had  an  uncomfortable  night. 

Tuesday  28.  Many  of  my  good  friends  kindly  visited  me  to-day  ; 
and  in  the  afternoon  I  took  another  emetic.  My  heart  is  fixed  on 
God,  as  the  best  of  objects,  but  pants  for  more  vigour,  and  a  perma- 
nent, solemn  sense  of  God.  Rose  the  next  morning  at  five,  though 
very  weak,  and  spent  a  great  part  of  the  day  in  reading  and  writing. 
Many  people  attended  the  public  worship  in  the  evening,  though  I  was 
but  just  able  to  give  them  a  few  words  of  exhortation.  Seeing  the 
people  so  desirous  to  hear  now  I  am  unable  to  say  much  to  them, 
Satan  tempts  me  to  murmuring  and  discontent.  May  the  Lord  fill  me 
with  perfect  resignation  ! 

Thursday  30.  My  body  was  very  weak  and  sweated  exceedingly. 
If  I  am  the  Lord's,  why  am  I  thus  ?  But  in  his  word  he  hath  told  me, 
"  If  I  be  without  chastisement,  then  am  I  a  bastard  and  not  a  son." 
O  that  this  affliction  may  work  in  me  the  peaceable  fruits  of  internal 


BE V.    FRANCIS  ASBURY S  JOURNAL.  85 

and  universal  righteousness  !     An  attempt  to  speak  a  little  in  exhor- 
tation this  evening,  greatly  augmented  my  disorder. 

Friday,  July  1.  In  prayer  to  day  with  I.  B.  a  soldier  in  the  23d  regi- 
ment, the  Lord  greatly  refreshed  and  strengthened  my  soul.  My 
mind  was  strongly  impressed  with  a  persuasion,  that  God,  through 
mercy,  would  restore  me  to  health.  If  so,  I  am  determined,  by  his 
assistance,  to  be  more  than  ever  intent  on  promoting  his  cause  and 
his  glory.  Gave  an  exhortation  at  night,  and  met  the  leaders  :  but 
the  next  day  I  was  much  indisposed  ;  nevertheless,  I  spent  part  of 
my  time  in  reading  the  afflicted  condition  of  the  Waldenses,  when  so 
wickedly  persecuted  by  the  Dominicans ;  with  the  rise  of  those  bru- 
tish men. 

Lord's  day  3.  Poor  Mr.  H.  came  to  me  in  great  distress.  He  is  a 
native  of  Stowbridge,  where,  as  he  supposes,  he  has  a  wife  now  living  ; 
and  he  has  been  so  unwatchful  as  to  suffer  his  affections  to  stray* 
May  the  Lord  deliver  him  out  of  this  dangerous  snare  of  Satan  !  If 
not,  he  may  be  undone  !  I  spoke  with  freedom  this  morning  from 
Job  x.  2.  and  spent  part  of  the  day  in  reading  of  the  holy  war  which 
was  carried  on  against  the  Waldenses  and  Albigenses,  by  the  devil> 
the  pope,  and  their  emissaries.  Though  my  body  is  still  weak,  my 
soul  is  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  joyful  in  his  salvation.  And  at  night 
I  was  able  to  preach  with  spirit,  and  found  myself  happy  in  addressing 
a  large  and  attentive  audience. 

Monday  4.  I  spent  part  of  this  day  in  visiting  a  few  friends,  and 
found  my  heart  much  united  to  I.  S.  a  musician  of  the  23d  regiment. 
Was  much  better  to  night  than  I  had  been  for  some  time,  and  en- 
joyed a  good  night's  rest. 

Tuesday  5.  In  reading  the  life  of  Calvin,  it  appeared  that  many,  in 
his  day,  had  opposed  the  doctrine  of  predestination ;  and  all  who 
opposed  it  were  spoken  of  by  him  and  his  followers,  as  bad  men. 
My  fever  returned  this  evening,  and  it  was  a  painful,  restless  night. 
But  the  will  of  the  Lord  be  done  !  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I 
trust  him!  Found  very  great  lassitude  of  body  the  next  day  also  ; 
but  my  soul  hungered  and  thirsted  for  more  of  God.  In  reading 
Clark's  life  of  Origen,  I  felt  a  strong  desire  to  imitate  that  great  and 
good  man,  as  far  as  he  went  right. 

Thursday  7.  My  disorder  was  much  abated,  and  I  had  power  to 
speak  plainly  and  pointedly  to  both  saints  and  sinners. 

Lord's  day  10.  My  bodily  weakness  has  been  such,  for  a  few  days 
past,  as  to  prevent  my  officiating  much  in  public  ;  however,  I  ventured 
to  preach  twice  to-day,  but  in  the  evening  was  so  weak  that  I  could 
scarce  stand  in  the  pulpit;  but  while  preaching  on  the  parable  of  the 


86  i:ev    FRANCIS  asbury's  journal. 

prodigal  son,  the  Lord  greatly  refreshed  and  strengthened  me  ; 
though  I  went  to  bed  very  ill  at  night.  Satan  tempted  me  to-day,  to 
think  much  of  my  gifts.  Alas  !  what  poor  creatures  we  are  ;  and  to 
what  dangers  are  we  exposed !  What  are  all  our  gifts,  unless  they 
answer  some  good  purpose  ?  Unless  properly  improved,  they  neither 
make  us  holier  nor  happier.  We  have  nothing  but  what  we  have 
received  ;  and  unless  we  are  humble  in  the  possession  of  them,  they 
only  make  us  more  like  devils,  and  more  fit  for  hell — How  wonder- 
fully is  the  language  and  behaviour  of  Mr.  L.  changed  towards  me. 
Before,  I  was  every  thing  that  was  bad.  But  now  all  is  very  good. 
This  is  a  mistake  :  my  doctrine  and  preaching  are  the  same ;  and  so 
is  my  manner.  But  such  is  the  deceitfulness  of  the  man.  His  fa- 
vourite Mr. is  now  gone.     Had  I  preached  like  an  archangel  it 

would  have  been  to  no  purpose,  while  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  oppose 
him. 

Monday  11.  My  soul  is  not  so  intensely  devoted  to  God  as  I  would 
have  it  ;  though  my  desires  for  more  spirituality  are  very  strong* 
Lord,  when  shall  my  poor  heart  be  as  a  rising,  active,  holy  flame  ? 
Blessed  be  God  !  my  illness  is  more  moderate  to-day  than  it  has 
been  for  some  days  past.  On  Wednesday,  a  letter  from  S.  0. 
informed  me  that  the  house  in  Baltimore  was  then  ready  to  be  in- 
closed. He  also  expressed  a  great  desire  to  persevere.  May  the 
Lord  give  him  grace  so  to  do. 

Thursday  14.  My  mind  is  in  peace.  I  have  now  been  sick  near 
ten  months  ;  and  many  days  closely  confined.  Yet  I  have  preached 
about  three  hundred  times,  and  rode  near  two  thousand  miles  in  that 
time  ;  though  very  frequently  in  a  high  fever.  Here  is  no  ease, 
worldly  profit,  or  honour.  What  then,  but  the  desire  of  pleasing 
God  and  serving  souls,  could  stimulate  to  such  laborious  and  painful 
duties  ?  O  that  my  labour  may  not  be  in  vain  !  that  the  Lord  may 
give  me  to  see  fruit  of  these  weak,  but  earnest  endeavours,  many 
days  hence !  After  preaching  this  evening  with  some  warmth  of 
heart,  I  was  very  close  and  pointed  in  meeting  the  society. 

Saturday  16.  My  heart  was  much  taken  up  with  God.  Letters 
from  my  dear  friends,  Mr.  F  and  Mr.  R.  gave  me  great  satisfaction. 
In  meeting  the  band  society,  I  showed  them  the  possibility  of  using  all 
the  means,  and  without  sincerity  and  spirituality,  they  might  still  be 
destitute  of  true  religion. 

Monday  18.  The  Lord  assisted  me  in  yesterday's  duties  ;  and  he 
is  the  keeper  and  comforter  of  my  soul  to-day.  A  poor  unhappy 
young  woman,  who  had  abandoned  herself  to  the  devil  and  wicked 
men,  being  at  the  point  of  death,  and  expecting  to  go  shortly  ar 


BKV.  FRANCIS  ASBUflY'S  JOURNAL,  87 

render  an  account  of  herself  to  God,  sent  for  me  to  visit  her.  I  felt 
some  reluctance  ;  but  considering  the  danger  her  soul  was  in,  thought 
it  my  duty  to  go.  She  was  very  attentive  while  I  spoke  plainly  to 
her,  and  made  prayer  to  God  in  her  behalf— Strange  infatuation  !  that 
men  will  not  seriously  think  of  preparing  for  death,  till  it  comes  upon 
them  !  If  we  were  sure  of  dying  in  a  few  hours,  most  men  would  think 
it  their  duty  to  labour  for  a  preparation  :  but  when  no  man  is  sure  of 
living  a  few  hours,  very  few  think  seriously  about  it.  So  does  the 
god  of  this  world  blind  the  minds  of  mankind  ! 

Thursday  21.  My  heart  enjoys  great  freedom,  with  much  peace 
and  love  both  towards  God  and  man.  Lord,  ever  keep  me  from  all 
sin,  and  increase  the  graces  of  thy  Holy  Spirit  in  my  soul.  A  letter 
from  Mr.  R.  brought  melancholy  tiding  of  A.  W  Alas  for  that  man  2 
He  has  been  useful,  but  was  puffed  up,  and  so  fell  into  the  snare  of 
the  devil.     My  heart  pitied  him  :  but  I  fear  he  died  a  backslider. 

Lord's  day  24.  Ended  the  parable  of  the  prodigal  son.     Does  it  not 
appear  from  this  parable,  that  some,   who,  comparatively  speaking, 
have  all  their  life- time  endeavoured  to  please  God,  and  are  entitled 
to  all  his  purchased,  communicative  blessings,  are  nevertheless  not 
favoured  with  such  rapturous  sensations  of  divine  joy  as  some  others 
— I  remember  when  I  was  a  small  boy  and  went  to  school,  I  had  serious 
thoughts,  and  a  particular  sense  of  the  being  of  a  God  ;  and  greatly 
feared  both  an  oath  and  a  lie.     At  twelve  years  of  age  the   Spirit  of 
God  strove  frequently  and  powerfully  with  me  :  but  being  deprived 
of  proper  means  and  exposed  to  bad  company,  no  effectual  impres- 
sions were  left  on  my  mind.     And,  though  fond  of  what  some  call 
innocent  diversions,  I  abhorred  fighting  and  quarrelling  :  when  any 
thing  of  this  sort  happened,  I  always  went  home  displeased.     But  I 
have  been  much  grieved  to  think  that  so  many  Sabbaths  were  idly 
spent,  which  might  have  been  better  improved.     However,  wicked  as 
my  companions  were,  and  fond  as  I  was  of  play,  I  never  imbibed  their 
vices.     When  between  thirteen  and  fourteen  years  of  age,  the  Lord 
graciously  visited  my  soul  again.     I  then  found  myself  more  inclined 
to  obey  ;  and  carefully  attended  preaching  in  West  Bromwick  ;  so 
that  I  heard  Stillingfleet,  Bagnel,  Ryland,  Anderson,  Mansfield,  and 
Talbott,  men  who  preached  the  truth.     I  then  began  to  watch  over 
my  inward  and  outward  conduct ;  and  having  a  desire  to  hear  the 
Methodists,  I  went  to  Wednesbury,  and  heard  Mr.  F.  and  Mr.  I.  but 
did  Dot  understand  them,  though  one  of  their  subjects  is  fresh  in  my 
memory  to  this  day.     This  was  the  first  of  my  hearing  the  Methodists. 
After  that,  another  person  went  with  me  to  hear  them  again  :  the  text 


88  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY;S  JOURNAL. 

was,  "  The  time  will  come  when  they  will  not  endure  sound  doc- 
trine." My  companion  was  cut  to  the  heart,  but  I  was  unmoved. 
The  next  year  Mr.  M — r  came  into  those  parts.  I  was  then  about 
fifteen  ;  and  young  as  I  was,  the  word  of  God  soon  made  deep  impres- 
sions on  my  heart,  which  brought  me  to  Jesus  Christ,  who  graciously 
justified  my  guilty  soul  through  faith  in  his  precious  blood  ;  and  soon 
showed  me  the  excellency  and  necessity  of  holiness.  About  sixteen 
I  experienced  a  marvellous  display  of  the  grace  of  God,  which  some 
might  think  was  full  sanctification,  and  was  indeed  very  happy, 
though  in  an  ungodly  family  At  about  seventeen  1  began  to  hold 
some  public  meetings  ;  and  between  seventeen  and  eighteen  began  to 
exhort  and  preach.  When  about  twenty-one  I  went  through  Stafford- 
shire and  Gloucestershire,  in  the  place  of  a  travelling  preacher ;  and 
the  next  year  through  Bedfordshire,  Sussex,  &c.  In  1769  I  was 
appointed  assistant  in  Northamptonshire  ;  and  the  next  year  travelled 
in  Wiltshire.  September  3,  1771,  I  embarked  for  America,  and  for 
my  own  private  satisfaction,  began  to  keep  an  imperfect  journal. 

To-day  Dr.  O.  preached  a  pertinent  discourse  on  the  shortness  of 
time.  The  Lord  favoured  me  with  great  liberty  in  the  evening,  while 
preaching  to  a  large  congregation  from  Gen.  xix.  17.  And  I  was 
enabled  to  speak  plainly  and  closely  in  meeting  the  society  at  night. 

Tuesday  26.  My  soul  is  in  peace.  But  I  long  to  be  more  spiritual 
— to  be  wholly  devoted  to  God.  Some  circumstances  make  me  fear 
that  we  have  a  few  bad  characters  in  the  society  here.  These  are 
the  people  that  injure  the  cause  of  God.  Like  Judas,  they  betray  the 
Lord  with  a  kiss.  It  is  not  easj'  to  conceive  how  such  characters 
counteract  the  most  faithful  preaching.  If  their  conduct  is  not  fully 
know  n  to  the  preachers,  it  is  so  known  to  many  of  their  acquaintances  ; 
that  Satan  takes  the  offered  advantage,  and  hardens  the  hearts  of  many 
against  all  the  power  of  religion.  Of  all  characters,  that  of  a  design- 
ing sinner  under  the  fair  appearance  of  religion,  is  the  most  odious. 
O  that  the  Lord  may  strip  all  such  unsound  professors,  in  every  place, 
of  their  covering  ;  and  show  them  to  his  servants  in  their  own  proper 
colours,  that  Israel  may  be  able  to  put  away  the  accursed  thing  from 
among  them  ;  and  so  increase  both  in  strength  and  number. 

Wednesday  27.  I  rose  early  this  morning  to  see  my  Christian  bre- 
thren, the  soldiers,  go  off;  but  was  much  affected  at  parting  with 
those  worthy  men,  I.  S.  and  I.  B.     May  the  Lord  go  with  them! 

Thursday  28.  The  Lord  shows  me  the  snares  of  Satan,  and  ena- 
bles me  to  avoid  them.  He  favours  me  with  the  light  of  his  counte- 
nance, and  fills  me  with  holy  love.     Surely  we  stand  in  jeopardy 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURYS  JOURNAL  8l 

every  hour  !  This  day  the  thunder  and  lightning  struck  four  people 
dead  on  the  spot.  Awful  scene  !  And  will  man  still  venture  to  be 
careless  and  wicked  ?  I  made  some  improvement  on  the  subject  in  the 
evening. 

Friday  29.  I  rose  unwell  this  morning,  and  received  a  melancholy 
account — that  the  daughter  of  I.  S.  was  beat  overboard.  Poor  man  ! 
He  bas  lost  both  his  children  by  going  to  sea.  I  was  much  blessed 
at  intercession  to-day,  but  shut  up  in  preaching  at  night.  My  sou? 
is  determined  to  live  more  to  God. 

Lord's  day  31.  We  had  a  feeling  time  this  morning  while  I  preached 
from  Psalms  1.  13.  After  the  various  duties  of  the  day,  I  met  the 
society,  and  showed  them  the  utility  of  our  economy,  the  advantages 
of  union,  and  the  fearful  end  of  leaving  our  fellowship. 

August  1.  Some  of  my  good  friends  accompanied  me  as  far  as 
Kingsbridge,  on  my  way  to  New-Rochelle.  I  visited  my  little  flock 
with  some  satisfaction.  Here  are  some  of  the  offspring  of  the  French 
Protestants,  who,  on  account  of  their  religion,  fled  from  Rochelle 
in  France.  And  God  has  mercifully  remembered  them  unto  the 
third  and  fourth  generation. 

I  have  great  discoveries  of  my  defects  and  weaknesses.  My  soul 
is  not  so  steadily  and  warmly  devoted  to  the  Lord  as  it  might  be. 
Lord,  help  me,  and  supply  me  with  grace  always.  In  preaching 
from  Ephesians  ii.  12,  13.  I  had  great  freedom.  It  seems  strange, 
that  sometimes  after  much  premeditation  and  devotion,  I  cannot  ex- 
press my  thoughts  with  readiness  and  perspicuity  ;  whereas  at  other 
times,  proper  sentences  of  Scripture  and  apt  expressions  occur  with- 
out care  or  much  thought.  Surely  this  is  of  the  Lord,  to  convince 
us  that  it  is  not  by  power  or  might,  but  by  his  Spirit  the  work  must 
be  done.  Nevertheless,  it  is  doubtless  our  duty  to  give  ourselves  to 
prayer  and  meditation,  at  the  same  time  depending  entirely  on  the 
grace  of  God,  as  if  we  had  made  no  preparation.  Rose  early  the 
next  morning,  but  found  myself  weak  both  in  body  and  mind.  In 
this  tabernacle  I  groan,  earnestly  desiring  to  be  clothed  upon  with 
the  house  which  is  from  heaven.  My  soul  longs  to  fly  to  God,  that 
it  may  be  wer  with  him.  O  happy  day,  that  shall  call  a  poor  exile 
home  to  his  Father's  house  !  But  I  must  check  the  impetuous  cur- 
rent of  desire,  for  it  is  written,  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make 
haste."  After  preaching  to  a  large  auditory  in  the  evening  at  P.  B.'s, 
I  rested  in  peace.  Visited  Mr.  B.  a  partial  friend,  the  next  day,  and 
had  some  serious,  weighty  conversation  with  him.  I  then  went  to 
Mr.  D— 's  very  unwell,  and  in  trouble  and  pain  spoke  from  Job  xxi 
15.  After  a  very  restless  night,  I  rose  the  next  morning  much  indis 
Vol.  I.  12 


30  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

posed,  and  was  obliged  to  go  to  bed  again.     However,  on  Friday  5,  I 
set  off  for  New-York  ;  and  there  met  with  W   W— s. 

Saturday  6.  My  mind  is  calm  and  comfortable,  but  grieved  by  the 
imprudence  of  some,  and  the  loose  conduct  of  a  few  others. 
Though  much  afflicted,  I  met  the  band-leaders  and  body-bands  ;  and 
we  had  a  singular  blessing. 

Lord's  day  7.  We  had  a  solemn,  happy  love-feast.  Though  very 
weak,  I  made  out  to  preach  in  the  evening  with  some  enlargement  of 
heart — Brother  W    has  much  courage  in  preaching. 

Tuesday  9.  My  soul  was  assaulted  by  trials  of  a  very  severe  kind  : 
but  the  Lord  was  my  keeper.  I  have  been  reading  Newton  on  the 
prophecies.  He  is  pretty  clear  in  his  views,  and  affords  a  good  key 
for  many  passages  ;  but  confines  himself  too  much  to  the  literal 
meaning  of  the  Revelation. 

Wednesday  10.  My  frame  is  much  afflicted.  But  it  is  worse  to  be 
afflicted  in  mind  by  the  misconduct  of  professors.  It  grieves  me 
much  to  see  the  deceit  of  a  few  persons  who  have  crept  in  amongst 
us.  It  is  a  thousand  pities  that  such,  whose  hearts  are  not  right  with 
God,  should  ever  thrust  themselves  in  amongst  the  people  of  God. 
They  are  too  apt  to  make  all  they  are  connected  with  as  a  rope  of 
sand.  I  clearly  see  that  professors  who  are  rotten  at  heart,  are  a 
hinderance  and  curse  to  the  rest.  May  the  Lord  thoroughly  purge 
his  floor  ! 

Wednesday  10.  I  was  very  low,  but  met  my  class,  and  preached  in 
the  evening.  There  appeared  to  be  but  little  depth  of  religion  in 
the  class.  It  is  a  great  folly  to  take  people  into  society  before  they 
know  what  they  are  about.  What  some  people  take  for  religion  and 
spiritual  life,  is  nothing  but  the  power  of  the  natural  passions.  It  is 
true,  real  religion  cannot  exist  without  peace,  and  love,  and  joy. 
But  then  real  religion  is  real  holiness.  And  all  sensations  without  a 
strong  disposition  for  holiness,  are  but  delusive. 

Thursday  11.  My  soul  is  in  peace  ;  and  longs  to  be  more  devoted 
to  God.  My  heart  was  enlarged  and  happy  in  exhorting  the  people 
this  evening. 

Friday  12.  This  was  a  day  of  trouble  and  dejection  of  mind.  But 
committing  my  cause  to  God  by  faith  and  prayer,  I  have  a  hope  that 
he  will  always  stand  by  and  deliver  me.  My  soul  was  greatly  strai- 
tened in  public  speaking.  I  received  several  letters  to-day  ;  some  of 
which  revived  my  spirits  ;  but  one  from  Mr.  R.  gave  me  pain.  Satan 
makes  use  of  all  his  cunning  and  tricks.  But  the  Lord  will  rebuke 
him.  My  duty  is  clear— to  bear  all  things  patiently,  and  silently 
Gommit  my  cause  to  God.    Even  in  this  city  there  are  some  restless 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy'S  JOURNAL,  91 

minds,  who  are  not  much  disposed  to  spiritual  union.  Going  into  the 
pulpit  this  evening,  I  found  an  inflammatory  letter  without  a  name. 
My  trials  are  multiplied  and  weighty  :  but  glory  to  God  !  he  strength- 
ens and  comforts  me  b}'  an  abundant  manifestation  of  his  love.  O, 
how  is  my  soul  taken  up  with  God  !  He  is  all  in  all  to  me  1  And  if  he 
is  for  me,  I  need  not  care  who  is  against  me. 

Lord's  day  14.  Mr.  P — y  visited  and  dined  with  the  rector  to-day, 
and   what  the  event  will   be,  I  know  not.     Attending  at  church,  as 

usual,  I  heard  Dr. blow  away  on,  "  This  is  the  day  that  the 

Lord  hath  made."  He  makes  a  strange  medley  of  his  preaching  ; 
though  he  delivers  many  good  things,  yet  for  want  of  some  arrange- 
ment of  his  ideas,  all  appears  to  be  incoherency  and  confusion.  The 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  was  with  me,  while  declaring  bis  counsel  to  a 
large,  listening  audience.  O  that  I  could  bring  them  to  the  arms  of 
Christ  by  thousands  ! 

Monday  15.  I  felt  some  conviction  for  sleeping  too  long  ;  and  my 
mind  was  troubled  on  account  of  a  conversation  which  had  past 
between  Mr.  R.  Mr.  S.  and  myself.  But  the  great  Searcher  of 
hearts  knoweth  my  mtentions,  and  to  him  I  submit  all  future  events. 
Mr.  L.  waited  on  Mr.  P— y,  and  told  him  he  appeared  to  be  more 
taken  up  in  reading  Mr,  Berridge's  Christian  world  unmasked,  than 
the  Bible.  Mr.  Berridge  kept  his  room,  in  a  very  gloomy  state  of 
mind,  about  5  years  ago  ;  and  now  he  is  come  forth  with  his  facetious 
pen  to  dictate,  to  the  Christian  world.  But  Mr.  Fletcher  in  his  Fifth 
Check,  has  fully  answered  all  his  witty  arguments.  Mr.  Berridge 
was  a  good  man,  no  doubt;  but  unfortunately  drank  deep  into  the 
principles  of  Antinomianism. 

Wednesday  17.  My  mind  is  free  ;  and  my  soul  delighteth  in  God. 
He  taketh  such  possession  of  my  heart,  as  to  keep  out  all  desire  for 
created  objects.  In  due  time,  I  humbly  hope,  through  Jesus  Christ,  to 
enter  into  the  full  fruition.  O  blessed  day,  when  my  soul  shall  be 
swallowed  up  in  God  ! 

"  In  hope  of  that  immortal  crown, 
I  now  the  cross  sustain  ; 
And  gladly  wander  up  and  downs 
And  smile  at  toil  and  pain." 

Friday  19.  I  was  very  unwell  ;  and  in  much  pain  of  body  spoke 
to  the  people  at  night.  Thus  it  seems,  at  present,  weakness  and  pain 
are  a  part  of  my  portion.  O  that  my  soul  may  be  made  perfect 
through  sufferings ! 


32  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBUIW'S  JOURNAL. 

Lord's  day  21.  My  body  is  afflicted,  and  my  wav  is  rough  ;  never5- 
Iheless,  I  cheerfully  submit  to  the  will  of  God.  And  though  very 
unwell,  I  met  a  class  and  preached  at  night. 

Monday  22.  My  heart  panteth  for  God,  even  for  the  living  God. 
A  letter  came  to  hand  to-day  from  E.  B.  giving  an  account  of  the 
work  of  the  Lord  in  Gibralter,  and  inviting  me  to  go.  But  my  way  is 
not  open. 

Tuesday  23.  A  degree  of  the  peace  and  happiness  of  heaven  pos- 
sessed my  soul  to-day.  And  although  it  was  a  rainy  evening,  many 
people  attended  while  I  preached  from  2  Kings  v.  14,  15,  1G. 

Wednesday  24.  My  mind  is  much  exercised  about  going  to 
Gibralter.  May  the  Lord  direct  my  steps.  On  Friday,  at  interces- 
sion, my  heart  was  greatly  moved  by  the  power  of  God. 

Lord's  day  28.  My  soul  was  expanded  and  filled  with  love,  while 
preaching  from  Isaiah  lv.  i.  Mr.  P — y  attended  at  the  church  to-day, 
but  was  not  invited  to  preach. 

Monday  29.  I  visited  Second  River,  where  a  number  of  Low- 
Dutch  people  attended  the  word,  which  was  delivered  with  a  bless- 
ing. J.  K.  one  of  our  local  preachers,  has  been  made  useful  to  the 
inhabitants  of  this  neighbourhood. 

Thursday,  Sept.  1.  My  system  gathers  strength  -T  and  though  va- 
riously and  sorely  exercised,  the  Lord  is  graciously  with  me,  blessing 
both  my  soul  and  my  labours.  I  clearly  see  that  I  must  be  cut  off" 
from  every  creature,  to  do  the  will  of  God  with  an  undivided  heart. 
May  the  Lord  sanctify  me  wholly  for  himself,  and  every  moment 
keep  me  from  all  appearance  of  evil. 

Saturday  3.  Calm  serenity  sat  on  my  mind,  and  all  my  soul  was- 
fixed  on  God,  and  sweetly  inclined  to  do  his  will  in   all  things.     In 
the  afternoon  I  felt  unwell,   but  met  the  leaders  and  bands.     The 
next  day,  though  my  body  was  very  feeble,  I  went  through  my  pub- 
lic duties. 

Monday  5.  I  visited  Mrs.  D.  who  hardly  escaped  falling  into  ruin, 
both  of  body  and  soul.  She  opened  the  matter  to  me  and  found  de- 
liverance. A  solemn  report  was  brought  to  the  city  to  day,  that  the 
men  of  war  had  fired  on  Boston.  A  fear  rose  in  my  mind  of  what 
might  be  the  event  of  this.  But  it  was  soon  banished  by  considering 
- — I  must  go  on  and  mind  my  own  business,  which  is  enough  for  me ; 
and  leave  all  those  things  to  the  providence  of  God. 

Tuesday  6.  I  rose  very  early  this  morning  in  great  peace,  and  de- 
termined not  to  let  an  hour  of  the  day  slip  without  earnest  prayer  to 
God.    Went  the  next  day  to  hear  Mr.  P — y  preach  at  Flat-Bush.    He 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  93 

spoke  pretty  well,  though  very  tenderly,  on  the  fall  and  recovery  of 
man.  And  the  report  of  his  great  abilities  exceeds  the  reality.  We 
returned  just  time  enough  for  preaching  :  I  spoke  with  great  liberty 
from  2  Kings  v.  17,  18,  19.  but  afterward  found  myself  very  unwell. 

Thursday  8.    Am  both  grieved  and  ashamed  that  my  soul  is  now 
more  steadily  and  fervently  devoted  to  God, 


"And  shall  I  ever  live 

At  this  poor  dying  rate  ? 
My  love  so  faint,  so  cold  to  thee, 
And  thine  to  me  so  great  ?" 

No  :  I  will  both  labour  and  strive  to  be  more  swallowed  up  in  the 
holy  will  of  God.  My  determination  is  strong  ;  may  divine  grace 
make  it  stronger  and  stronger  every  day  ! 

Friday  9.  My  soul  was  happy  in  God  :  yet  I  felt  some  grief  on  ac- 
count of  the  weakness  and  deceit  of  a  few  who  profess  religion. 

Saturday  10.  God  is  still  my  principal  object.  Tidings  came  to-day, 
of  some  dissatisfaction  between  Mr. and  the  people  in  Phila- 
delphia. But  my  duty  is  before  me — I  have  my  own  business  to 
mind. 

Lord's  day  11.    Dr. went  on  with  his  trumpery  in  his  old 

strain  ;  and  the  great  Mr.  P— y  had  crowds  to  hear  him  in  the  French 
church.  We  also  had  a  crowded  audience  and  solemn  time  in  the 
evening.  A  young  woman  of  our  society,  who  was  seated  in  the  con- 
gregation last  Lord's  day,  is  now  a  corpse.  How  short,  how  preca- 
rious is  life  !  and  yet  what  awful  and  weighty  things  depend  upon  it ! 
On  Monday  evening  I  spoke  on  the  occasion  from  Job  xix.  25,  26. 
We  have  lost  a  promising  disciple  of  22  years  of  age  ;  but  her  flesh 
resteth  in  hope.  When  will  the  Saviour  extend  the  arms  of  his 
mercy  to  make  me  perfectly  and  eternally  free  ?  I  heard  the  cele- 
brated Mr.  P— y  again  to-day.  He  insisted  on  eternal  election— the 
gift  of  the  Father  to  the  Son— the  renewal  of  the  little  flock  by  grace  ; 
and  the  Father's  good  pleasure ;  from  Luke  xii.  32.  He  detained 
us  two  hours  ;  and  had  many  devoted  admirers.  He  spoke  to  the 
sinners  with  great  words,  but  to  little  purpose. 

Wednesday  14.  My  mind  is  in  great  peace,  and  my  body  in  better 
health.  And  though  my  heart  cleaveth  to  the  Lord,  yet  1  long— 
Oh  !  I  greatly  long  to  be  more  swallowed  up  in  the  will  of  God, 

Thursday  15.  All  my  desire  is  unto  the  Lord,  and  to  the  remem- 
brance  of  his  name.  To  please  him  is  my  chief  delight ;  but  there 
's  more  in  view  for  which  I  pant : 


3-1  REV  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL. 

"  A  heart  in  every  thought  renew'd, 
And  fill'd  with  love  divine  : 
Perfect,  and  right,  and  pure,  and  good : 
A  copy,  Lord,  of  thine." 

Friday  1G.  I  rose  this  morning  dejected  in  mind.  But  my  pur- 
poses to  be  wholly  given  up  to  God,  are  stronger  than  ever.  And  I 
hope  to  live  to  him  in  a  more  devoted  manner  than  heretofore. 
Peace,  and  power,  and  love  filled  my  soul,  while  speaking  at  night 
from  Hosea  xii.     Glory  be  given  to  God ! 

Saturday  17.  My  affections  are  raised  from  earth  and  all  its  objects. 
My  treasure  is  above,  and  there  also  is  my  heart.  In  meeting  the 
bands,  I  showed  them  the  impropriety  and  danger  of  keeping  their 
thoughts  or  fears  of  each  other,  to  themselves  :  this  frustrates  the 
design  of  bands — produces  coolness  and  jealousies  towards  each  other 
— and  is  undoubtedly  the  policy  of  Satan. 

Lord's  day  18.  Losing  some  of  my  ideas  in  preaching,  I  was  asha- 
med of  myself,  and  pained  to  see  the  people  waiting  to  hear  what  the 
blunderer  had  to  say.  May  these  things  humble  me,  and  show  me 
where  my  great  strength  lieth  !  In  meeting  the  society  I  urged  the 
necessity  of  more  private  devotion,  and  of  properly  digesting  what 
they  hear.  Set  off  the  next  morning  for  New-Rochelle,  and  found 
£.  D  in  distress  of  soul.  This  is  an  agreeable  family,  and  the  chil- 
dren are  both  affectionate  and  obedient  to  their  parents.  I  hope  she 
and  the  rest  of  them  will  become  true  Christians,  and  be  finally  bound 
up  in  the  bundle  of  life.  I  preached  from  2  Tim.  iv.  2.  and  many 
strangers  were  present.  Satan  is  frequently  assaulting  me  with  his 
temptations  ;  but  the  Lord  enables  me  to  discover  and  resist  his  first 
attacks. 

Tuesday  20.  Christ  was  precious.  At  P.  B.'s,  I  spoke  too  plainly 
for  some  who  were  present.  The  next  evening  at  F  D.'s,  we  had  a 
heart-affecting  time  ;  and  I  trust  it  will  not  be  forgotten  by  all. 

Thursday  22.  The  Lord  has  graciously  visited  E.  D.  and  turned 
all  her  mourning  into  joy.  Her  soul  is  happy  in  the  love  of  God. 
May  the  Lord  carry  on  his  work  of  grace  through  this  family  and 
neighbourhood ;  turning  all  their  hearts  unto  himself.  The  power  of 
God  was  present  in  the  congregation  to-night,  while  I  took  my  leave 
for  a  season  from  Isai.  lxvi.  2. 

Friday  23.  I  set  off  for  New-York,  and  met  some  of  my  good 
friends  at  Kingsbridge.  They  brought  me  a  letter  from  T  R.  who 
thought  himself  injured  ;  but  I  am  determined  to  drop  all  disputes  as 
far  as  possible.  Mr.  P— y  is  going  on  in  York  with  his  Antinomianism 
unmasked.    How  prone  is  man  to  do  what  is  wrong!    And  what 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBTTRy's  JOURNAL.  95 

watchfulness  and  diligence  are  necessary  for  a  man  to  be  right  both  in 
sentiment  and  practice  ! 

Lord's  day  25.  According  to  the  particular  request  of  sister  G.  I 
preached  her  funeral  sermon  from  Isaiah  xlix.  10.  She  had  been, 
brought  up  a  Calvinist ;  but  when  she  found  peace  with  God,  she 
renounced  all  her  Calvinistic  principles,  which  she  said  had  been  a 
check  to  her  industry  in  seeking  the  Lord.  In  the  time  of  her  last 
illness,  she  manifested  a  great  degree  of  patience,  and  expressed  a 
strong  desire  for  entire  purity  of  heart.  A  little  before  her  death, 
she  was  filled  with  perfect  love  ;  and  seemed  to  want  more  strength 
and  language  to  praise  God.  However,  she  did  it  to  the  uttermost  of 
her  power. 

Monday  26.  My  soul  is  sweetly  drawn  out  after  God,  and  satisfied 
with  him  as  a  sufficient  portion.  But  Oh  !  how  I  long  to  be  more 
spiritual  i 

"  Come  and  possess  me  whole, 
Nor  hence  again  remove  ; 
Settle,  and  fix  my  wav'ring  soul, 
With  all  thy  weight  of  love." 

Thursday  29.  W  L.  gave  me  an  account  of  the  manner  of  Mr. 
R.'s  treating  him,  because  he  would  not  go  to  Schenectady.  But  my 
mind  is  bent  on  loving  God,  and  doing  his  will  in  all  things.  I  have 
had  frequent  calls  of  late  to  visit  the  sick.  May  it  prove  a  blessing 
both  to  them  and  me  !  My  heart  was  warm  while  addressing  the  con- 
gregation this  evening,  and  I  hope  it  was  not  labour  lost.  At  2  o'clock 
in  the  night,  we  were  all  alarmed  by  a  fire  which  burned  down  a 
house  in  Peck  Slip.  What  a  resemblance  of  the  general  judgment! 
But,  if  the  cry  of  fire  alarms  us,  how  much  more  shall  we  be  alarmed 
by  the  archangel's  trump !  When  all  the  ungodly  shall  have  ten  thou- 
sand times  more  cause  to  fear,  than  the  loss  of  houses,  and  goods,  and 
life ;  how  will  they  endure  the  cutting  anguish  ?  But  they  are 
after  the  flesh ;  therefore  they  mind  the  things  of  the  flesh,  and 
them  only. 

Lord's  day,  Oct.  2.  Though  I  have  lately  heaud  several  preachers 
of  some  fame,  I  am  fully  of  the  opinion  that  there  is  room  enough  for 
us  to  preach  repentance,  faith,  and  all  the  work  of  God  on  the  soul 
of  man.  They  almost  leave  this  field  entirely  our  own.  We  had  a 
solemn  love-feast  to-day  :  though  some  imposed  on  us  who  will  not 
meet  in  class. 

Monday  3.  My  soul  was  in  peace,  but  assaulted  by  Satan.  The 
next  Axy  Mr-  P  sent  for  me,  and   requested  permission  to  preach  in 


90  REV.  FRANCIS  ASEURy's  JOURNAL. 

our  house.     I  told  him  that  as  he  had  refused  it  at  first,  our  people 
did  not  take  it  well. 

Wednesday  5.  1  rose  early  this  morning,  and  found  my  soul  devo- 
ted to  God.  But  it  troubles  my  mind  that  I  am  not  more  so.  Lord. 
Come  and  save  me  now  with  all  thy  great  and  glorious  salvation  !  0 
hasten  the  time  ! 

"  Jesu,  see  my  panting  breast 
See  I  pant  in  thee  to  rest ! 
Gladly  would  I  now  be  clean  , 
Cleanse  me  now  from  every  sin.'' 

Friday  7.  Mr.  P — y  had  appointed  to  preach  in  our  house,  and  8 
very  large  congregation  attended  on  the  occasion.  He  spoke  on  the 
chaff  and  wheat  from  Matt.  iii.  12. ;  and  perhaps  felt  himself  under 
some  obligation  to  come  as  near  to  our  doctrine  as  his  principles  would 
admit  of;  and  thereby  gave  tolerable  satisfaction. 

Saturday  8.  My  heart  was  enlarged  towards  God.  I  saw  a  letter 
from  Mr.  P  filled  with  his  usual  softness.  Poor  man  !  he  seems  blind 
to  his  own  conduct.  We  had  a  very  happy  time  in  meeting  the  bands 
this  evening. 

Lord's  day  9.  The  Lord  assisted  me  in  my  public  exercises  both 
morning  and  night :  and  going  to  church  to-day  as  usual  I  heard  a  stran- 
ger preach  ;  but  he  was  a  workman  that  needed  to  be  ashamed.  At- 
tended Mr.  P — y  on  Monday,  and  found  him  very  affectionate.  The 
elders  of  the  French  church  wept  over  him  with  much  tenderness. 
Several  friends,  with  myself,  conducted  him  across  the  river  ;  then, 
after  singing  a  parting  hymn,  he  prayed  very  feelingly,  and  we  took 
our  leave  of  each  other.  I  afterward  went  to  preach  in  the  Swamp, 
where  we  had  many  people  and  a  good  time. 

Tuesday  1 1.  Last  night  my  soul  was  greatly  troubled  for  want  of 
a  closer  walk  with  God.  Lord,  how  long  shall  I  mourn  and  pray,  and 
not  experience  all  that  my  soul  longeth  for !  And  this  day,  my  mind  is 
in  nearly  the  same  frame. 

Wednesday  12.  The  Lord  blessed  me  with  great  peace.  I.  M. 
brought  a  letter  from  New-Rochelle,  containing  an  agreeable  account 
of  the  work  of  God  there.  With  much  enlargement  of  heart,  I 
preached  to  night  from  1  Kings  six.  11. ;  and  hope  it  was  made  a 
blessing  to  many  present. 

Thursday  13.  My  soul  is  not  so  intensely  staid  on  God  as  it  might 
be.  O,  that  he  would  bring  me  nearer  to  himself;  and  so  transform 
me  into  his  divine  likeness,  that  there  may  be  no  diversity  of  will ;  but 
that  it  may  be  my  meat  and  drink  to  promote  his  glory  from  moment 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL.  97 

to  moment  in  all  I  do  !    I   had  much  company  in  the  course  of  this 

day. 

Friday  14.  My  heart  was  much  devoted  to  God.  But  having  been 
here  now  four  months,  preaching  or  exhorting  every  day,  and  twice 
on  the  Lord's  day,  besides  society  meetings  ;  it  seems  to  be  too  much; 
for  both  the  people  and  the  preacher.  We  have  now  more  unity  in 
the  society  here  than  we  have  had  for  some  time  past.  But  we  want 
more  of  the  life  and  power  of  religion  amongst  us. 

Lord's  day  16.  Yesterday  Satan  assaulted  me  powerfully  ;  but  the 
Lord  was  my  keeper;  so  that  1  may  with  great  propriety  adopt  the 
language  of  the  poet, 

"  In  all  my  temptations  he  keeps  me  to  prove 
His  utmost  salvation,  his  fulness  of  love." 

This  day  the  Spirit  of  grace  assisted  me  in  my  public  exercises. 
Mr.  S.  T  once  a  silversmith  of  this  city,  preached  a  good  sermon  at 
church,  though  his  voice  was  so  low  that  he  could  scarce  be  heard. 

Monday  17.  Many  people  attended  preaching  in  the  Swamp  ;  and 
my  soul  was  greatly  blessed  in  the  discharge  of  my  duty.  But  Oh  ! 
my  heart  is  bowed  down  within  me  ;  and  I  feel  strongly  determined  to 
be  more  watchful  and  diligent  in  pleasing  God. 

Tuesday  18.  My  heart  was  much  taken  up  with  God.  I  drank  tea 
this  afternoon  with  an  old  Moravian,  who  belonged  to  their  fraternity 
in  Fetter-Lane,  at  the  time  when  Mr.  Wesley  was  so  intimate  with 
them. 

Wednesday  19.  Capt.  W  informed  me  by  letter,  the  house  in 
Baltimore  was  so  far  finished  that  he  had  preached  in  it.  With  great 
liberty  and  satisfaction,  I  both  met  class  and  preached  in  the  evening  j 
and  feel  more  encouragement  to  hope  for  the  people  here. 

Thursday  20.  Notwithstanding  all  my  grievous  temptations,  God  is 
still  the  object  of  my  faith,  my  hope,  my  love,  my  joy.  O  that  he 
may  fill  me  always  with  filial  fear,  and  give  me  grace  to  die  to  all  but 
him  !  My  soul  abounds  with  sweet  peace  ;  and  an  exhortation  which 
I  gave  this  evening,  was  made  a  blessing,  I  trust,  to  several  that 
heard  it. 

Friday  21.  A  solemn,  comfortable  sense  of  God  rested  on  my 
mind,  and  he  has  kept  me  from  what  I  hate.  And  though  Satan  made 
some  attempts  upon  my  soul,  yet  the  Lord  gave  me  power  to  with- 
stand him.     The  next  day  we  had  a  refreshing  time  in  band-meeting. 

Lord's  day  23.  Dr.  M.  from  D.  preached  to-day  at  church,  on 
fellowship  with  God.  He  spoke  well  on  the  subject,  as  far  as  it  relates 
to  the  fruits  and  eifects  of  the  Spirit ;  but  was  deficient  in  respect  to 

Vol.  I  IS 


98  REV.    FRANCIS    ASBURY's    JOURNAL. 

the  witness,  supposing  that  some  may  be  in  favour  with  God  and  not 
know  it.  Our  carnal  hearts  are  too  prone  to  draw  destructive  con- 
clusions from  such  a  doctrine  as  this  Dr.  O.  as  usual,  made  a  mighty 
clutter  in  the  pulpit  about  Noah's  ark.  Our  congregation  was  large, 
and  we  were  not  left  without  a  blessing. 

Monday  24.  I  still  look  to  Jesus,  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  my 
faith,  and  trust  in  him  for  supplies  of  strength  and  consolation.  But 
Oh !  when  shall  my  attention  be  so  fixed,  that  nothing  may  divert  it 
a  single  moment  from  its  beloved  object !  We  are  informed  that 
three  of  our  preachers  are  coming  over  from  England,  and  that  we 
may  look  for  them  every  day. 

Tuesday  25.  This  morning  my  spirit  wrestled  with  principalities 
and  powers  ;  but  in  the  duty  of  prayer  the  Lord  delivered  me.  After 
preaching  at  night  from  Matt.  xxiv.  12.  a  man  from  Morristown  came 
to  me  to  inquire  into  my  principles  ;  and  told  me  the  Lord  was  bring- 
ing souls  to  himself  in  his  neighbourhood,  and  that  more  than  100 
were  converted  there. 

Wednesday  26.  My  soul  is  in  peace,  but  longs  to  be  more  spiritual. 
After  meeting  a  class  and  preaching  in  the  evening,  I  found  myself 
indisposed  with  a  cold  and  fever.  The  next  day  my  disorder  con- 
tinued, attended  with  a  sore  throat,  so  that  it  was  with  difficulty  and 
pain  I  spoke  to  the  people. 

Friday  28.  I  do  not  sufficiently  love  God,  nor  live  by  faith  in  the 
suburbs  of  heaven.  This  gives  me  more  concern  than  the  want  of 
health. 

44  'Tis  worse  than  death  my  God  to  love, 
And  not  my  God  alone." 

I  was  not  able  to  preach,  and  obliged  to  go  to  bed  early  ;  but  could 
not  sleep.  On  Saturday,  as  my  disorder  continued,  I  felt  a  strong  de- 
sire for  more  patience.  Mr.  J.  his  wife,  and  daughter,  are  all  very 
ill ;  brought  on  chiefly  through  fatigue. 

Lord's  day  30.  I  kept  close  house  till  evening.  And  Oh !  what 
happiness  did  my  soul  enjoy  with  God  !  So  open  and  delightful  was 
the  intercourse  between  God  and  my  soul,  that  it  gave  me  grief  if 
any  person  came  into  my  room,  to  disturb  my  sweet  communion  with 
the  blessed  Father  and  the  Son.  When  my  work  is  done,  may  1 
enter  into  that  fulness  of  joy  which  shall  never  be  interrupted,  in  the 
blissful  realms  above  !  In  the  evening  I  ventured  to  preach  from  1 
Cor.  i.  21. ;  and  spoke  with  great  freedom  and  plainness  ;  and  felt 
better  afterward  than  could  have  been  expected.  Found  myself 
something  better  on  Monday,  and  met  two  classes. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  99 

Tuesday,  November  1.  My  soul  was  in  a  lively  frame,  and  sweetly 
inclined  to  live  to  God,  and  to  do  all  his  holy  will.  Many  people  ap- 
peared to  feel  the  word,  while  I  preached  in  the  evening  from  Luke 
viii.  18. 

Wednesday  2.  My  friends  in  this  eity  concluded  to  write  to  Mr.  R. 
requesting  that  I  might  continue  some  time  longer  in  New-York  and 
the  country  adjacent,  supposing  it  would  endanger  my  life  to  go  into 
the  low  countries.  But  to  stay  or  go,  I  submit  to  Providence.  As 
my  legs,  hands,  and  feet  were  swollen,  it  was  thought  proper  to  con- 
sult a  physician,  who  sent  me  a  certain  mixture  of  bitters. 

Thursday  3.  My  mind  was  much  taken  up  with  God  ;  but  I  must 
lament  that  I  am  not  perfectly  crucified  with  Christ.  I  visited  Mr. 
J.  who  appeared  to  be  near  death  ;  and  am  ready  to  say,  Art  thou 
he?  O  how  changed  !  The  next  morning  about  8  o'clock  he  died, 
being  about  42  years  of  age,  leaving  a  wife  and  six  children  behind 
him.  At  present  a  spirit  of  harmony  subsisteth  amongst  our  lea- 
ders ;  but  I  want  to  see  them  also  deeply  engaged  to  take  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  by  violence. 

Lord's  day  6.  Both  my  body  and  mind  were  afflicted  to-day.  In 
the  morning  I  showed  the  congregation  the  danger  of  settling  on  their 
lees  ;  as  all  do  who  rest  in  dead  formality  ;  or  trust  in  any  past  expe- 
rience. In  the  evening,  I  addressed  the  people  on  the  heart-felt  in- 
quiry of  the  trembling  jailer,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?" 

Monday  7.  My  body  was  weak,  and  my  mind  was  much  tempted. 
Lord,  support  and  comfort  me  under  every  trial !  I  met  the  class  of 
Mr.  J.  deceased  :  found  much  love  amongst  them  ;  and  by  general 
consent,  appointed  R.  S.  to  act  as  their  leader.  I  found  much  satis- 
faction in  preaching  the  next  evening  ;  but  had  sore  conflicts  with 
Satan  in  the  course  of  the  day. 

Wednesday  9.  My  soul  is  strengthened  with  might,  and  filled  with 
peace.  But  I  see  the  propriety  and  great  necessity  of  living  every 
moment  more  and  more  to  God.  We  are  informed  from  Philadel- 
phia, that  it  is  eight  weeks  since  the  preachers  sailed  from  England  ; 
though  they  are  not  yet  arrived. 

Friday  11.  My  heart  is  grieved  and  groaneth  for  want  of  more 
holiness.  A  letter  from  E.  D.  at  New  Rochelle,  informs  me  of  a  gay 
young  woman,  and  one  or  two  more,  who  are  turning  to  God  through 
Christ  Jesus.  They  call  aloud  for  preachers  to  come  amongst  them. 
On  Saturday  we  had  a  blessed  time  in  band-meeting  ;  though  my 
mind  had  been  somewhat  depressed  by  finding  one  or  two  of  my  besf 
friends  drawn  into  a  measure  of  party-spirit. 


100  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

Lord's  day  13.  Dr.  E.  at  St.  Paul's,  was  on  his  old  tedious  subject 
of  the  Lord's  supper.  He  cannot  be  at  any  great  loss  in  saying  the 
same  thing  over  and  over  again  so  frequently.  Many  people  attended 
at  our  church  in  the  morning  ;  and  in  the  eveniog  there  were  about 
a  thousand  who  seriously  listened,  while  I  preached  from  Psalm  i.  12. 

Monday  14.  I  set  off  for  New-Rochelle  ;  but  by  the  disagreeable 
gait  of  the  horse,  was  exceedingly  wearied  at  my  arrival  :  neverthe- 
less, I  gave  an  exhortation  to  some  serious  people  who  were  collected 
there.  The  next  day  my  mind  was  troubled  by  turning  on  political 
subjects,  which  are  out  of  my  province.  Alas  !  what  a  small  matter 
may  interrupt  our  communion  with  God  ;  and  even  draw  away  our 
affections  from  him.  Though  we  had  a  profitable  time,  while  I 
preached  from  Psalm  i.  2. 

Wednesday  16.  I  went  to  P  B.'s,  where  we  had  many  people  and 
some  power.  There  is  a  very  perceivable  alteration  in  the  people 
of  these  parts — They  both  hear  and  understand,  in  some  measure, 
the  things  of  God ;  and  can  feel  his  awful  truths.  I  had  some  con- 
versation with  a  certain  Mr.  B.  a  sensible  man,  though  he  is  tainted 
with  the  indolent  spirit  of  Quakerism. 

Thursday  17.  All  my  desire  was  after  God,  and  him  alone  :  though 
my  spirit  was  grieved  by  some  involuntary  thoughts  which  crowded  in 
upon  me.    But  in  the  midst  of  all,  there  was  a  calm  and  settled  peace. 

Friday  18.  Unguarded  and  trifling  conversation  has  brought  on  a 
degree  of  spiritual  deadness.  But  by  the  grace  of  God,  I  will  rouse 
myself,  and  endeavour  to  be  more  watchful  and  spiritual  in  all  my 
ways  ;  and  in  all  things  please  him  whom  my  soul  loveth  far  above 
every  other  object. 

Saturday  19.  I  set  off  with  an  intention  to  go  to  York,  but  at  the 
bridge  was  informed  that  Mr.  D — r  had  come  to  the  city.  There- 
fore I  returned  to  Mr.  B.'s  ;  and  preached  twice  there  the  next  day 
as  also  once  at  Mr.  D.'s  :  and  am  persuaded  that  the  power  of  God 
attended  the  word  at  both  places.  We  have  here  a  small  class  of 
about  thirteen  persons,  most  of  whom  enjoy  peace  and  consolation  in 
Christ  Jesus.  I  met  them  on  Monday,  and  we  were  greatly  com- 
forted together. 

Thursday  24.  My  heart  is  weaned  from  visible  objects  ;  and,  by 
grace,  raised  to  its  best-beloved  above.  But  Oh !  I  greatly  long  for 
more  solid,  lasting  union — to  be  inwardly  adorned  with  all  the  vir- 
tues and  graces  of  evangelical  religion.  We  were  this  day  informed 
of  the  death  of  Mr.  O.  May  the  Lord  help  me  to  be  faithful,  lest  I 
should  not  live  out  half  my  days.     I  set  off  the  next  day  for  New 


REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  101 

York,  and  met  brother  S.  at  Kingsbridge.  When  we  got  within 
about  ten  miles  of  York,  we  found  that  about  fifteen  minutes  before 
a  man  had  been  robbed  of  his  money  and  his  coat  from  off  his  back. 
One  of  the  rogues  pursued  us,  but  we  were  too  far  before  him.  We 
reached  our  church  just  as  Mr.  D.  began  to  preach. 

Monday  28.  After  taking  my  leave  of  my  good  friends  in  York  the 
last  evening,  from  Phil.  i.  27.  Captain  W  and  myself  set  off  this 
morning  for  Amboy.  We  met  with  a  person  who  came  a  passenger  with 
us  from  England  in  the  character  of  a  gentleman,  by  the  name  of 
Wilson,  but  now  he  calls  himself  Clarkson  ;  and  since  then  he  has 
called  himself  Lavingston.  He  has  been  apprehended  for  passing  a 
counterfeit  bill,  for  which  he  was  both  imprisoned  and  whipped. 
When  he  saw  me,  he  knew  me  and  I  knew  him  :  but  he  was  in  such 
perplexity  that  he  could  eat  no  breakfast,  and  went  off  in  the  first 
waggon  he  could  meet  with.  To  what  fears  and  anxiety  are  poor 
sinners  exposed  !  And  if  the  presence  of  a  mortal  man  can  strike 
such  terror  into  the  minds  of  guilty  sinners,  what  must  they  feel 
when  they  stand  without  a  covering  before  a  heart-searching,  and 
righteous  God  ?  On  Tuesday  we  arrived  at  Burlington,  very  weary  ; 
and  were  saluted  with  the  melancholy  news,  that  two  unhappy  men 
were  to  be  hung  on  the  Monday  following ;  one  for  bestiality,  and  the 
other  for  abusing  several  young  girls  in  the  most  brutish  and  shocking 
manner.  Alas,  for  the  dignity  of  human  nature !  The  next  day  I 
visited  them  ;  and  found  one  of  them,  who  was  a  Papist,  a  little  atten- 
tive ;  but  he  wanted  to  know  if  he  might  not  trust  for  pardon  after 
death.  The  other  was  a  young  man  who  appeared  to  be  quite  stupid. 
Both  Captain  W  and  I  spoke  freely  and  largely  to  them  ;  though  there 
was  very  little  room  to  hope  that  we  should  do  them  any  good.  Here 
Mrs.  H.  gave  an  account  of  the  triumphant  death  of  her  sister,  whose 
heart  the  Lord  touched  about  two  years  ago  under  my  preaching. 
In  preaching  this  evening,  I  showed  the  people  the  emptiness  of  mere 
externals  in  religion  ;  and  the  absolute  necessity  of  the  inward  power 
and  graces  thereof. 

Friday,  November  2.  My  soul  enjoys  great  peace  ;  but  longs  for 
more  of  God.  We  visited  the  prisoners  again  ;  and  Captain  W  en- 
forced some  very  alarming  truths  upon  them,  though  very  little  fruit 
of  his  labour  could  be  seen.  Mr.  R.  came  to  Burlington  to-day,  and 
desired  me  to  go  to  Philadelphia.  So,  after  preaching  in  the  evening 
from  Prov.  xxviii.  13.  1  set  off  the  next  morning  for  the  city;  and 
found  the  society  in  the  spirit  of  love. 

Lord's  day  4.  I  preached  twice  with  some  freedom  ;  and  went  to 
hoar  Mr.  S.  but  it  was  the  same  thing  over  again.     The  next  day  my 


102  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL, 

mind  was  in  a  sweet,  calm  frame,  and  I  felt  a  strong  determination  te 
devote  myself  wholly  to  God  and  his  service.  I  spoke  my  mind  to 
Mr.  R.  but  we  did  not  agree  in  judgment.  And  it  appeared  to  me, 
that  to  make  any  attempt  to  go  to  Baltimore  would  be  all  in  vain. 

Tuesday  6.  Visited  some  of  my  friends  in  the  city  ;  and  wrote  a 
letter  to  Mr.  Wesley,  which  I  read  to  Mr.  R.  that  he  might  see  I  in- 
tended no  guile  or  secret  dealings.  It  is  somewhat  grievous  that  he 
should  prevent  my  going  to  Baltimore,  after  being  acquainted  witr 
my  engagements,  and  the  importunities  of  my  friends  there.  How- 
ever, all  things  shall  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God— 
The  next  day  Mr.  R.  appeared  to  be  very  kind  ;  so  I  hope  all  things 
will  give  place  to  love. 

Lord's  day  1 1.  Mr.  R.  preached  a  close  sermon,  on  the  neglect  o 
public  worship.     At  church  Mr.  S.  had  the  same  thing  over  again 
but  the  power  of  the  Lord  attended  our  preaching  in  the  evening 
from  2  Thess.  i.  7,  8. 

Tuesday  13.  Yesterday  my  heart  was  fervently  engaged  in  acts  ol 
devotion  ;  and,  with  some  enlargement  of  heart,  I  gave  an  exhorta- 
tion at  a  private  house  near  my  lodging.  But  to-day,  my  cry  is,  0 
for  more  spirituality  ! — more  purity  of  heart !  Lord,  form  me  by  the 
power  of  divine  grace,  according  to  all  thy  righteous  will,  that  my 
soul  may  enjoy  thee  in  glory  for  ever.  Though  concurring  circum- 
stances required  me  to  speak  this  evening,  in  a  manner  unprepared. 
yet  we  were  blessed  with  a  comfortable  season. 

Wednesday  14.  Mr.  R.  was  sick,  and  Captain  W  was  busy,  so  I 
spent  my  time  in  study  and  devotion  ;  and  enjoyed  a  blessed  sense  ol 
the  divine  presence.  But  what  need  can  there  be  for  two  preachers 
here  to  preach  three  times  a  week  to  about  sixty  people  ?  On  Thurs- 
day night  about  sixty  persons  attended  to  hear  Captain  W.  preach. 
This  is  indeed  a  very  gloomy  prospect.  But  my  heart  delighteth 
in  God.  He  is  the  object  of  my  hope ;  and  I  trust  he  will  be  my 
portion  for  ever. 

Lord's  day  18.  My  soul  was  happy  while  preaching  in  the  morn- 
ing. Mr.  S.  gave  us  an  old  piece  at  church ;  and  Mr.  R.  was  very 
furious  in  the  evening. 

Monday  19.  My  body  was  indisposed,  but  my  soul  enjoyed  health. 
The  Lord  gives  me  patience,  and  fills  me  with  his  goodness.  In 
meeting  sister  T  s  class  we  had  a  mutual  blessing. 

"  0  that  I  could  all  invite, 

His  saving  truth  to  prove  ! 
Show  the  length,  and  breadth,  and  height, 
And  depth  of  Jesu's  love." 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  103 

Wednesday  21.  I  began  to  read  NeaPs  history  of  the  Puritans. 
The  Lord  keeps  me  from  all  impure  desire,  and  makes  me  to  abound 
with  divine  peace.  In  prayer-meeting  this  evening,  all  present  were 
greatly  blest. 

Friday  23.  Mr.  Neal,  in  his  history,  is  tolerably  impartial ;  though 
he  seems  rather  inclined  to  favour  the  Non-conformists.  But  how 
strange  !  that  the  reformation  should  be  carried  on  in  such  a  reign 
as  that  of  Henry  VHIth,  and  in  the  time  of  Edward  Vlth,  while  he 
was  but  a  child.  The  good  bishops,  no  doubt,  carried  the  matter  as 
far  as  they  could ;  but  it  was  not  in  their  power  to  disentangle  them- 
selves and  the  nation  from  all  the  superstition  of  Popery.  But  queen 
Elizabeth  and  her  friends  bore  hard  for  the  supremacy.  It  seems 
the  dispute  began  at  Franckfort ;  and  Calvin  was  in  the  consultation — 
In  the  evening  I  preached  from  these  words,  "  Neither  give  place  to 
the  devil :"  and  believe  it  was  good  for  some  that  they  were  present. 
Took  my  lodging  the  next  day  at  Mr.  W.'s. 

The  next  day,  as  the  snow  was  near  two  feet  deep,  I  did  not  go  out, 
but  had  a  comfortable  time  at  home. 

Thursday  29.  My  soul  is  happy  in  the  love  of  God.  He  gives  me 
grace  to  die  daily  to  the  world,  and  all  the  desires  of  the  flesh.  Dr. 
S.  delivered  a  good  discourse  from  Isaiah  xxvi.  20,  21.  on  the  solemn 
occasion  of  a  fast  and  preparation  for  the  Lord's  supper.  I  spoke  at 
night  from  John  i.  12,  13. 

Monday,  January  2.  I  see  the  great  necessity  of  always  beginning 
to  glorify  God,  with  fresh  vigour  of  soul.  So  prone  is  man  to  grow 
languid  in  devout  exercises,  that  without  fresh  and  powerful  exer- 
tions he  will  soon  sink  into  dead  formality.  At  Mr.  B.'s,  where  we 
dined  to-day,  I  was  much  grieved  at  the  manner  of  Mr.  R.'s  conver- 
sation :  but  let  it  be  a  caution  to  me  to  be  prudent  and  watchful.  The 
next  day  my  soul  was  greatly  alive  to  God.  And  the  people  here  are 
so  kind  to  me  that  it  fills  me  with  astonishment  and  gratitude. 

Thursday  5.  For  several  days  my  throat  has  been  much  disor- 
dered, but  it  is  now  something  better.  Glory  to  God !  he  sweetly 
draws  my  heart  into  close  and  comfortable  communion  with  himself. 
In  reading  the  history  of  the  Puritans,  I  am  surprised  at  the  conduct 
of  archbishop  Laud.     A  monster  of  a  man  indeed  ! 

Friday  6.  Find  myself  free,  through  grace,  from  all  impure  affec- 
tions ;  but  I  am  troubled  on  account  of  my  disposition  to  trifle  in 
conversation.  Yet  it  is  the  will  of  God  to  save  me  from  this  also. 
May  the  happy  hour  speedily  arrive  when  I  shall  be  altogether  such 
as  ray  Lord  would  have  me  to  be  ' 


104  RLV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL 

Saturday  7.  1  had  some  conversation  with  that  pious,  good  woman, 
the  widow  of  G.  T — t.  She  greatly  lamented  the  condition  of  hei 
son,  wholvas  in  the  Jersey  college  ;  a  youth  of  about  seventeen  years 
of  age,  but  under  no  deep  impressions  for  the  salvation  of  his  soul. 
How  grievous  must  this  be  to  a  pious  parent!  While  carnal  parents 
regard  only  the  worldly  prosperity  of  their  children,  truly  religious 
parents  are  chiefly  concerned  about  the  eternal  salvation  of  theii 
souls.  I  was  informed  to-day  that  poor  A.  W  is  living  with  his  wife, 
and  appears  to  be  industriously  inclined. 

Lord's  day  8.  The  Lord  was  pleased  to  bless  my  soul  with  thai 
peace  which  passes  understanding.  A  letter  from  my  friend  W.  L, 
informed  me  that  three  of  my  friends  were  coming  to  conduct  me,  il 
possible,  to  Baltimore.  But  it  is  a  doubt  with  me  if  I  shall,  with  con- 
sent, be  permitted  to  go.  May  the  Lord  give  me  wisdom,  patience, 
and  faith,  that  in  all  cases  I  may  know  how  to  act  or  suffer,  according 
to  his  will  and  my  duty  ! 

Thursday  12.  The  conduct  of  Mr.  ■ is  such  as  calls  for  patience. 

He  has  reported  that  I  was  the  cause  of  A.  W  's  becoming  a  preacher- 
Whereas  when  he  was  appointed  it  was  by  the  conference.  And  the 
time  when  1  wanted  him  to  travel  was  a  year  before  his  appointment, 
when  his  heart  was  right  with  Go/d.  Moreover,  at  the  last  confe- 
rence I  was  doubtful  of  him,  and  so  expressed  myself  both  by  word 
and  letter. 

Friday  13.  As  my  throat  was  worse,  I  staid  at  home  and  took  phy- 
sic. Part  of  my  time  was  spent  in  reading  the  history  of  the  Puritans  : 
and  I  found  my  affections  pure,  and  fixed  on  their  proper  object ; 
though  Satan  did  not  fail  to  assault  me  with  many  temptations. 

Lord's  day  15.  1  visited  the  Quaker  meeting;  but  wondered  to 
see  so  many  sensible  men  sit  to  hear  two  or  three  old  women  talk. 
In  the  latter  part  of  the  day  I  was  much  indisposed,  and  kept  at  home. 
But  the  next  morning  I  found  myself  something  better  ;  and  earnestly 
longed  for  purity  of  heart,  and  perfect  resignation  to  all  the  will 
of  God. 

Wednesday  18.  In  the  night  my  throat  was  bad,  attended  with  a 
smart  fever.  My  mind  is  variously  exercised  at  different  times. 
Sometimes  thinking  that  my  affliction  is  judicial ;  other  times  thinking 
that  natural  causes  produce  natural  effects.  But,  blessed  Jesus,  I 
must  be  still  and  know  that  thou  art  God.  From  this  time  till  Lord's 
day  23d  I  had  a  putrid  sore  throat,  and  two  persons  sat  up  with  me 
every  night ;  but  I  found  relief  from  purges,  and  a  mixture  of  nitre 
and  fever  powder.     Mr.  — — — —  keeps  driving  away  at  the  people, 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S -JOURNAL.  105 

telling  them  how  bad  they  are,  with  the  wonders  which  he  has  done 
and  intends  to  do.  It  is  surprising  that  the  people  are  not  out  of  pa- 
tience with  him.  If  they  did  not  like  his  friends  better  than  him,  we 
should  soon  be  welcome  to  take  a  final  leave  of  them. 

From  the  23d  of  January  till  the  first  of  February,  my  affliction  was 
so  severe  that  I  was  not  able  to  write.  There  were  several  small 
ulcers  on  the  inside  of  my  throat ;  and  the  pain  of  the  gatherings  was 
so  severe  that  for  two  weeks  I  could  not  rest  of  nights.  My  friends 
were  very  kind,  and  expecting  my  death,  they  affectionately  lamented 
over  me.  But  on  the  29th  of  January  I  was  happily  relieved  by  the 
discharge  of  near  a  pint  of  white  matter.  For  a  while  my  mind  was 
in  great  heaviness  ;  but  after  some  severe  conflicts  with  the  powers 
of  darkness,  I  was  calmly  resigned  to  the  will  of  a  wise  and  gracious 
God.  O  Lord,  how  wonderful  are  thy  works !  It  is  my  desire  to 
know  the  cause  of  this  affliction,  that,  if  it  is  in  my  power,  I  may 
remove  it.  Is  it  that  I  may  know  more  of  myself,  and  lie  in  the  dust  ? 
Or,  for  my  past  unfaithfulness  ?  But  whatever  may  be  the  cause,  I 
humbly  hope  that  all  those  painful  dispensations  will  work  together 
for  my  good.  In  the  course  of  this  affliction  I  found  that  when  my 
spirit  was  broken,  and  brought  to  submit  with  cheerfulness  to  the 
will  of  God,  then  the  disorder  abated,  and  I  began  to  recover  ;  though 
Satan  was  very  busy,  and,  like  Job's  impious  wife,  suggested  to  my 
mind  that  1  should  curse  God  and  die  ;  nevertheless,  through  grace, 
I  am  more  than  conqueror,  and  can  give  glory  to  God.  The  gargle 
which  I  used  first,  to  scatter,  if  possible,  the  inflammation,  wa9  sage 
tea,  honey,  vinegar,  and  mustard ;  then  that  which  was  used  to  acce- 
lerate the  gathering,  was  mallows  with  a  fig  cut  in  pieces  :  and  lastly, 
to  strengthen  the  part,  we  used  a  gargle  of  sage  tea,  album,  rose 
leaves,  and  loaf  sugar.  On  Monday  the  30th  some  letters  came  from 
Baltimore,  earnestly  pressing  me  to  go.  And  Mr.  R.  was  so  kind  as 
to  visit  me  ;  when  all  was  sweetness  and  love. 

Wednesday,  February  1.  I  am  once  more  able  to  write,  and  feel  a 
solemn,  grateful  sense  of  God's  goodness  resting  on  my  soul.  My 
all  of  body,  soul,  and  time,  arc  his  due  ;  and  should  be  devoted, 
without  the  least  reserve,  to  his  service  and  glory.  O  that  he  may 
give  me  grace  sufficient! 

Thursday.     I  am  still  getting  better,  but  not  able  to  speak  in  puo 
lie;  though  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  like  fire  within  me,  and  I  am 
almost  weary  of  forbearing.     The  next  day  my  mind  was  much  taken 
up  with  God,  and  several  of  my  friends,  who  were  so  kind  as  to  visit 
me,  were  melted  in  conversation  and  prayer. 

Vol  I.  14 


iytf  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASSURES  JOU&ftAL. 

Saturday  4.  My  mind  was  filled  with  pure,  evangelical  peace.  I 
had  some  conversation  with  Capt.  W.  an  Israelite  indeed,  and  we 
both  concluded  that  it  was  my  duty  to  go  to  Baltimore.  And  I  feel  wil- 
ling to  go,  if  it  is  even  to  die  there ;  but,  at  present,  am  not  permitted. 
I  was  confined  to  the  house  all  the  next  day  ;  but  Oh  !  how  painful  are 
these  dumb  Sabbaths  to  me  !  However  it  is  my  duty  to  submit  to  the 
providence  of  a  wise  God. 

Monday  6.  My  body  is  but  weak,  and  my  mind  is  somewhat  dis- 
tressed, lest  I  should  be  too  much  concerned  about  the  ark  of  the 
Lord  ;  and  wish  to  take  the  cause  out  of  his  hand.  How  frail  a  crea- 
ture is  man !  How  little  can  he  penetrate  into  the  designs  and  works 
©f  God ! 

Tuesday  7.  Mr.  T — r  took  me  in  a  chaise  to  dine  with  Mr.  R — n 
and  Mr.  R — a.  My  mind  is  somewhat  troubled  with  temptations,  but 
still  I  have  peace.  I  am  weak  in  body  ;  and  want  more  patience  and 
resignation  to  submit  to  the  will  of  God,  till  he  is  pleased  to  restore 
roe.     What  is  life  ?  Lord,  help  me  to  be  always  ready  to  end  it  here  ! 

Wednesday  8.  From  the  state  of  my  body  to-day,  I  feel  great  ex- 
pectation of  being  restored  to  health  But  Oh  !  how  my  soul  long- 
eth  for  more  spiritual  health  !  This  day  I  wrote  to  Mr.  R.  at  Balti- 
more, to  come  for  me. 

Thursday  9.  My  body  continues  to  recover.  But  I  discover  many 
weaknesses  and  failures  in  my  inner  man.  When  shall  my  soul  be 
adorned  as  a  bride  for  her  bridegroom  ?  When  shall  all  within  and  all 
without  be  holiness  to  the  Lord  ?  Notwithstanding  my  illness,  1  have 
read  Neal's  History  of  the  Puritans,  consisting  of  four  volumes,  in 
about  two  months. 

Friday  10.  How  great  a  blessing  is  health!  Though  of  late  it  is 
but  seldom  enjoyed  by  me.  But,  through  mercy,  my  body  now  feels 
like  being  restored  ;  and  I  am  afraid  of  being  thereby  too  much  elated. 
The  Lord  shows  me  the  excellency  of  affliction,  and  enables  me  to 
exercise  resignation  in  all  conditions  of  life.  I  am  now  reading  Mo- 
sheim's  Ecclesiastical  History  ;  but  as  a  writer  he  is  too  dry  and  spe- 
culative. 

Tuesday  14.  My  heart  pants  to  labour  for  God — to  be  once  more 
employed  in  building  up  his  spiritual  house.  O  that  he  may  strengthen 
me,  set  me  to  work,  and  greatly  bless  my  poor  endeavours.  Preach- 
ing the  glorious  Gospel  seems  to  be  my  proper  employment  ;  and 
when  I  am  long  detained  from  it,  I  appear  to  be  out  of  my  element. 
But  hope,  a  blessed  hope  revives,  that  before  long  I  shall  be  of  some 
service  in  the  church  of  Christ. 


flEV.  FJUNCTS  ASBTTRy'S  JOURNAL,  i 07 

Thursday  16.  My  mind  has  been  kept  in  great  peace  :  but  I  am 
somewhat  troubled  on  account  of  my  defects  in  usefulness  and  spiri- 
tuality. May  the  Lord  make  me  more  serious  and  more  spiritual  in 
all  my  internal  and  external  actions.  And  though  my  mind  was 
much  taken  up  with  God  on  Friday,  yet  I  was  too  free  in  conversa- 
tion. My  earnest  desire  is,  to  have  full  power  over  every  thought, 
word,  and  action  I  now  ventured  to  preach  from  Psalm  cxxvi.  3. 
"  The  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  us,  whereof  we  are  glad.5' 
R.  S.  wrote  me  a  letter  with  his  usual  kindness  ;  and  informed  me 
that  Mr.  D.  concurred  in  sentiment  relative  to  my  going  to  Balti- 
more. And  it  is  thought  by  many,  that  there  will  be  an  alteration  in 
the  affairs  of  our  church-government 

Lord's  day  19.  Mr.  R.  preached  his  farewell  sermon  from  Deut 
xxx.    19.     He  has  now  been  here  ten  months. 

Monday  20.  Most  of  this  day  was  spent  in  private  devotion  and 
reading.  I  am  full  of  humble  expectation  that  the  Lord  will  restore 
me  to  better  health  and  greater  usefulness.  May  my  eye  be  single, 
aiming  at  nothing  but  the  glory  of  God,  that  my  whole  body  may  be 
full  of  light. 

Wednesday  23.  I  received  a  letter  from  Miss  G.  at  Antigua  ;  in 
which  she  informed  me,  that  Mr  G.  was  going  away  ;  and  as  there 
are  about  300  members  in  society,  she  entreats  me  to  go  and  labour 
amongst  them.  And  as  Mr.  Wesley  has  given  his  consent,  I  feel 
inclined  to  go,  and  take  one  of  the  young  men  with  me.  But  there  is 
one  obstacle  in  my  way — the  administration  of  the  ordinances.  It  is 
possible  to  get  the  ordination  of  a  presbytery  ;  but  this  would  be  in- 
compatible with  Methodism :  which  would  be  an  effectual  bar  in  my 
way.  It  appears  very  strange,  that  after  so  much  affliction,  my  heart 
should  be  so  languid  and  dull.  This  day  Mr.  R — -— n  set  off  for 
New- York. 

Thursday  24.  Mr.  R— -f  and  Mr.  R— — a  came  to  town.  I 
preached  in  the  evening  from  Rom.  i.  16.  "  I  am  not  ashamed  of  the 
Gospel  of  Christ,"  &c.  And  showed,  First,  Of  what  he  was  not 
ashamed — the  experience,  precepts,  and  blessings,  of  the  Gospel — - 
to  preach  it  in  its  purity — to  suffer  for  it.  Secondly,  Why  he  was 
not  ashamed  of  this — Because  it  is  the  power  of  God  to  salvation 
from  the  guilt,  power,  and  remains  of  sin — the  power  of  God  is  dis- 
played in  preaching  the  simple  truths  of  the  Gospel.  Thirdly,  To 
whom  it  became  so — to  them  that  believe,  first,  the  threatenings, 
precepts,  and  invitations  ;  and  then  in  Jesus  Christ  for  this  preset 
salvation.. 


*'A'  RKV.  FRANClt  ASBURYS  JOURNAL. 

Saturday  26.  I  packed  up  my  clothes  in  order  to  depart  on  Monday 
morning  for  Baltimore.  And  while  giving  a  few  words  of  exhortation 
in  the  evening,  we  found  it  a  solemn,  feeling  time.  We  also  had  a 
very  powerful  season  the  next  evening,  while  I  preached  to  a  full 
house  on  the  awful  subject  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus. 

Monday  28.  My  dear  children  in  the  Lord,  P  R.  and  S.  O.  with 
several  other  kind  friends,  accompanied  me  out  of  town.  We  stop- 
ped at  Chester,  where  I  preached  from  these  piercing  words  of  our 
Lord,  "  Thou  knowest  not  the  day  of  thy  visitation."  There  are  but 
little  hopes  of  this  place  at  present.  Though,  if  they  do  not  fill  up 
the  measure  of  their  iniquity,  the  time  to  favour  them  may  come. 
The  Lord  hasten  it,  before  the  present  generation  drops  into  eter- 
nity !  As  it  is  some  time  since  I  have  been  accustomed  to  labour  and 
fatigue,  my  body  was  exceedingly  weak  and  weary  at  night. 

Tuesday  29.  Stopping  at  Wilmington  to  preach  in  the  evening,  a 
barber  came  to  shave  me,  who  once  professed  religion,  and  had  been 
a  soldier  in  the  23d  regiment  ;  but  now  he  is  a  deserter  both  from 
God  and  man.  On  our  way  to  Susquehannah  trte  next  day,  we  acci- 
dentally called  on  Mr.  I.  H.  whose  heart  was  much  affected  while  we 
prayed  with  him  and  his  family.  When  we  came  to  the  ferry,  we 
had  an  agreeable  time,  several  joining  us  while  we  called  on  the  Lord 
by  prayer  in  our  room. 

Thursday,  March  2.  WTe  called  at  the  house  of  Mr.  J.  D.  and  rest- 
ed about  an  hour.  Sister  D.  has  treated  me  with  all  the  tenderness 
of  a  mother  towards  a  son  :  and  may  He  that  will  not  forget  a  cup  of 
water  given  in  his  name,  abundantly  reward  her !  We  then  pursued 
our  journey  to  Baltimore  ;  and  my  heart  was  greatly  refreshed  at  the 
sight  of  my  spiritual  children  and  kind  friends  there,  for  whose  wel- 
fare my  soul  had  travailed  both  present  and  absent.  The  next  day 
I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  our  new  house,  and  my  old  friends  with 
some  new  ones  added  to  their  number.  Here  are  all  my  own  with 
increase. 

Lord's  day  5.  Both  in  town  and  at  the  Point,  large  numbers  attend- 
ed to  hear  the  word.  The  power  of  God  was  present  ;  and  I  had  an 
inward  witness  that  it  was  the  will  of  God  I  should,  at  that  time,  be 
amongst  those  people.  N.  I.  is  come  home  to  God,  and  R.  M.  is  on 
his  way. 

Monday  6.  My  mind  was  peaceful  and  calm.  The  next  day  I  set 
out  in  a  carriage  for  Mr.  T  's,  about  nine  miles  from  town,  and  found 
a  large  congregation,  many  of  whom  came  from  Elk-Ridge.  On 
Wednesday  I   returned  to  town,  and  was   potverfully  assaulted  by 


ItEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL,  Itj'j 


Satan.  But,  glory  to  God  !  He  is  my  sun  and  my  shield  ;  he  disco- 
vers to  my  mind  the  temptations,  and  keeps  me  from  their  power.  May 
I  ever  feel  my  obligations,  and  delight  in  giving  all  my  strength  and 
time  to  his  service. 

Thursday  9.  My  spirit  was  grieved  within  me  to  see  the  wicked- 
ness of  mankind  in  this  town — to  see  how  they  oppose  the  truth  of 
God.  The  power  of  Satan  is  only  checked  in  a  small  degree :  but 
when  shall  he  be  quite  cast  out  ?  Before  he  will  suffer  his  kingdom  to 
be  entirely  overthrown,  he  will,  no  doubt,  do  all  he  can  in  stimula- 
ting his  trusty  servants  to  defend  his  cause.  Preaching  on  Friday  at 
W  L.'s,  the  wealthy  Mr.  C.  R.  was  present.  And  who  can  tell  but 
the  Lord  may  reach  his  heart! 

Saturday  11.  My  body  is  somewhat  unwell  ;  but  my  soul  is  in  health 
and  peace.  Though  I  have  some  cause  of  lamentation,  for  being  too 
free  in  conversation  with  my  friends. 

Lord's  day  12.  Much  of  the  power  of  God  was  felt  at  the  Point* 
and  a  divine  energy  went  forth  amongst  the  people  that  night  in  town, 
while  1  discoursed  from  that  awakening  scripture,  Romans  ii.  8,  9,  10. 
"  But  unto  them  that  are  contentious,  and  do  not  obey  the  truth,  but 
obey  unrighteousness,  indignation  and  wrath,  tribulation  and  anguish, 
upon  every  soul  of  man  that  doeth  evil,"  &c.  Christ  was  precious 
to  my  soul,  which  was  filled  with  divine  peace.  I  saw  brother  S.  and 
entered  into  a  free  conversation  with  him.  His  sentiments  relative  to 
Mr.  R.  corresponded  with  mine.  But  all  these  matters  I  can  silently 
commit  to  God,  who  overrules  both  in  earth  and  heaven. 

Monday  13.  After  preaching  at  O.  C.'s,  about  five  miles  from  town., 
in  a  comfortable  frame  of  mind,  I  returned.  The  next  day  I  parted 
with  brother  S.  and  felt  my  mind  depressed  by  temptations.  But  a 
holy  flame  glowed  in  my  heart,  while  discoursing  at  night  on  the 
"  cloud  of  witnesses."  Believing  that  some  souls  were  benefited,  I 
commended  myself  to  the  divine  protection,  and  slept  in  peace. 
Though  it  rained  on  Thursday  evening,  yet  many  attended  whilst  I 
enforced  the  apostolic  injunction,  "  Let  us  lay  aside  every  weight, 
and  the  sin  which  doth  so  easily  beset  us."  It  is  to  be  feared  that 
many  Christians  do  not  "  lay  aside  every  weight"  which  impedes 
their  spiritual  progress.  If  they  did  they  would  not  halt  and  go  on 
as  if  they  were  weary  ;  but  be  enabled  to  run,  and  that  with  patience, 
the  race  that  is  set  before  them. 

Friday.  The  glory  of  God  and  the  salvation  of  men  were  my  prin- 
cipal objects.  I  went  to  preach  at  the  Point,  but  they  were  training 
the  militia,  so  that  the  town  seemed  all  in  confusion. 


HO  UKV.  FRANCIS  A^BL'RY  S  JOURNAL. 

Saturday  18.  Peace  and  pure  desires  filled  my  soul  ;  and  Christ 
was  the  object  of  my  love.  Glory  be  to  thee,  O  Lord.  The  next 
day  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  was  with  me  in  preaching  at  the  Point ; 
and  with  great  pathos  1  was  enabled  to  deliver  the  truth  at  nigh'  in 
town.  Many  of  the  audience  felt  the  weight  of  God's  word.  May 
they  yield  to  the  sacred  touch  and  be  saved !  On  Monday  and  Tues- 
day, I  made  a  small  excursion  into  the  country,  and  laboured  to  bring 
souls  to  Christ  at  Mr.  R.s  and  Mr.  T  's-  It  seems  C.  D.  has  not  lost 
all  the  concern  he  felt  some  time  ago.  I  afterward  returned  safe  to 
town  in  the  evening ;  and  spent  a  part  of  the  next  day  in  reading 
Taylor's  Treatise  on  Holy  Living.  This  book  was  made  a  blessing 
to  me  above  seven  years  ago.  I  preached  in  the  evening  from  1  Sam. 
x.  6.  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  will  come  upon  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
prophesy  with  them,  and  shalt  be  turned  into  another  man."  Here  I 
took  occasion  to  show, 

I.  The  operations  of  the  Spirit  on  the  heart  of  man — to  convince, 
convict,  convert,  and  sanctify. 

II.  The  effects  of  these  operations. 

1.  A  strong  inclination  to  speak  for  God.  This  is  the  duty  of 
every  Christian. 

2.  A  great  change — in  judgment,  desire,  spirit,  temper,  and  practice. 
I  found  myself  much  indisposed  when  I  returned  to  my  lodgings, 

and  the  disorder  of  my  body  depressed  my  spirits. 

Friday  24.  I  ventured  to  Patapsco  Neck,  and  had  a  full  house  at 
Captain  R.'s,  whose  wife  is  brought  bv  grace  to  the  knowledge  of 
God  in  Christ  Jesus. 

Lord's  day  26.  My  heart  was  delightfully  taken  up  with  God.  In 
the  time  of  preaching  at  the  Point  this  morning,  my  spirit  was  tender, 
and  many  of  the  audience  were  much  melted.  1  also  found  myself 
greatly  drawn  out  in  preaching  at  night  in  town. 

Tuesday  27.  Mr.  O.  the  Dutch  minister,  accompanied  me  to  I.  O.'s, 
where  we  had  a  blessed  and  refreshing  season.  The  next  day  at 
town  I  met  with  brother  W  from  Virginia  ;  who  gave  me  a  great 
account  of  the  work  of  God  in  those  parts— five  or  six  hundred  souls 
justified  by  faith,  and  five  or  six  circuits  formed  :  so  that  we  have 
now  fourteen  circuits  in  America  ;  and  about  twenty  two  preachers 
are  required  to  supply  them.  Thus  we  see  how  divine  Providence 
makes  way  for  the  word  of  truth,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  attends  it. 
May  it  spread  in  power  and  cover  these  lands  !  Brother  W  is  a  very 
singular  man,  but  honest  in  his  intentions,  and  sincerely  engaged  for 
the  prosperity  of  the  work— I  dined  with  Mr.  O.  the  minister  men- 


ItEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL,  1 1 1 

tioned  above,  and  spent  the  afternoon  with  him  and  Mr.  S.  another 
minister  of  the  same  profession.  They  both  appear  to  be  sincerely 
religious,  and  intend  to  tmke  proposals  to  the  German  synod  this  year, 
to  lay  a  plan  for  the  reformation  of  the  Dutch  congregations. 

Friday  31.  This  was  a  day  of  joy  and  great  consolation  to  my  soul. 
I  clearly  saw  the  propriety  and  necessity  of  devoting  every  faculty 
and  every  hour  to  God. 

Lord's  day,  April  2.  Many  people  attended  to  hear  the  word,  and 
there  appeared  to  be  much  feeling  amongst  them.     I  had  a  desire  to 

hear  for  myself,  Mr. ,  the  Presbyterian  minister.     His  discourse 

was  quite  systematical  and  amusing,  but  if  he  had  studied  to  pass  by 
the  consciences  of  his  hearers,  he  could  not  have  done  it  more  ef- 
fectually. Monday  and  Tuesday  I  spent  comfortably,  in  labouring 
on  a  short  tour  in  the  country  :  and  was  graciously  assisted  on  Tues- 
day night  at  town. 

Wednesday  5.  I  experienced  the  benefit  of  visiting  the  sick,  and 
found  much  satisfaction  in  my  own  soul,  while  speaking  plainly  to  a 
carnal  young  man.  The  next  day  Satan  assaulted  me  with  great  vio- 
lence, but  he  found  my  heart  fixed  on  God. 

Friday  7.  After  visiting  two  sick  persons,  I  went  to  brother  L.'s, 
and  was  enabled  to  speak  freely  and  feelingly  to  a  large  number  of 
rich  and  poor  assembled  there.  On  Saturday  1  returned,  and  found 
that  a  young  man  who  had  turned  his  back  on  the  Gospel,  and  de- 
voted himself  to  sin,  had  been  suddenly  snatched  away  by  death. 
How  awful !  Does  not  this  appear  like  the  judicial  hand  of  God  ? 
Does  it  not  seem  as  a  powerful  warning  to  surviving  sinners,  especially 
such  as  answer  his  character  ?  And  yet  it  is  to  be  feared,  many  will 
not  hear  the  rod,  nor  regard  him  that  appointed  it. 

Lord's  day  9.  Though  my  body  was  weak,  and  my  mind  grieved  by 
the  wickedness  of  the  wicked,  yet  I  was  enabled  to  speak  powerfully 
both  at  the  Point  and  town.  The  blessing  of  the  Lord  attended  us 
both  at  Mr.  E  's  on  Monday,  and  at  O.  C.'s  on  Tuesday.  Here  I 
met  with  brother  S.  and  found  we  were  of  one  heart  and  of  one 
mind.  Lord,  grant  that  all  the  preachers  may  be  thus  united  in  sen- 
timent  and  affection ! 

Thursday  13.  Had  some  conversation  with  Mrs.  J.  from  Phila- 
delphia. She  appeared  to  be  in  distress  about  her  soul,  and  said  she 
was  convinced  of  her  lost  estate  the  last  Lord's  day. 

Saturday  15.  God  is  my  portion,  and  my  all-sufficient  good.  He 
fills  me  with  pure,  spiritual  life  My  heart  is  melted  into  holy  love, 
and  altogether  devoted  to  my  Lord.  Many  came  to  hear  the  word 
of  life  in  the  evening,  and  my  soul  was  supplied  with  strength- 


112  UEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL. 

Lord's  day  16.  The  Spirit  of  God  attended  our  endeavours  both 
in  town  and  Point.  My  heart  was  greatly  enlarged  in  town  espe- 
cially. There  is  a  very  apparent  alteration  in  this  place.  There  is 
not  so  much  drunkenness  and  neglect  of  the  ordinances,  as  in  former 
times  ;  and  the  people  are  much  more  inclined  to  attend  the  places 
of  public  worship.  So  that  on  the  whole,  I  entertain  a  lively  hope 
that  the  Lord  will  yet  raise  up  for  himself  a  large  society  in  the  town 
of  Baltimore.  On  Monday  my  frame  was  weak  and  weary,  never- 
theless I  had  to  preach  once  in  town,  and  once  in  the  country,  about 
seven  miles  off. 

Wednesday  19.  Having  preached  at  several  places  in  the  country, 
I  returned  to  town  ;  and  find  that  the  Lord  assisteth  me  from  time  to 
time.  He  frequently  revives  both  body  and  soul,  when  I  am  almost 
ready  to  give  over. 

Thursday  20.  Just  before  preaching  at  the  Point,  six  men  were 
accidentally  shot  in  the  militia  exercise.  I  will  not  venture  to  assert, 
the  captain  collected  them  for  exercise  because  it  was  preaching 
night.  However,  I  visited  one  of  the  wounded,  and  prayed  with 
him. 

Saturday  22.  I  dined  with  Captain  R.  who  appeared  to  be  under 
some  small  awakenings  Afterward  came  to  town,  when  brother  R. 
and  1  met,  like  Jacob  and  Esau  ;  and  all  was  love  and  peace.  In  the 
evening  Mr.  R.  preached  a  good  sermon  on  John  xii.  36.  "  While 
ye  have  the  light  believe  in  the  light,  that  ye  may  be  the  children  of 
light." 

Lord's  day  23.  Our  congregations  were  large  ;  amongst  whom 
were  Mr.  G.  Mr.  C.  and  others.  In  the  evening  Mr.  R.  preached  an 
alarming  sermon.  On  Monday  I  visited  a  sick  woman,  who  soon 
after  went  into  eternity  ;  and  then  I  went  to  Mr.  E.'s,  where  many 
found  it  beneficial  to  them  that  they  were  present  to  hear  the  word 
of  the  Lord.  By  particular  invitation,  I  lodged  on  Tuesday  night  at 
Captain  R  's  ;  and  in  the  course  of  a  free  conversation,  he  told  me 
that  he  was  brought  under  his  first  conviction  at  Mr.  T  's,  from  Prov. 
xxviii.  13. 

Saturday  29.  I  have  not  been  unassisted  in  the  public  exercises  of 
this  week,  and  now  find  my  soul  in  a  peaceful  frame,  though  not  with- 
out a  serious  concern  for  the  cause  of  the  country.  Lord,  turn 
aside  thy  displeasure,  and  mercifully  interpose  ! 

Lord's  day  30.  I  preached  three  times,  and  the  cup  of  my  blessing 
was  full.  What  shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  his  benefits  ? 
But  we  have  alarming,  military  accounts  from  Boston,  New-York, 
and  Philadelphia.      Surely  the  Lord  will  overrule,  and  make  all 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL,  11$ 

these  things  subservient  to  the  spiritual  welfare  of  his  church.  On 
Monday  I  visited  the  country,  and  having  preached  at  a  few  places, 
returned  on  Tuesday  night  to  town ;  and  found  the  people  all  in- 
flamed with  a  martial  spirit. 

Thursday,  May  4.  My  soul  longs  for  a  perfect  conformity  to  the 
image  and  will  of  God,  in  all  things.  I  desire  nothing  but  him,  and 
he  causeth  my  heart  to  overflow  with  peaceful  joy.  I  preached  at 
the  Point  this  evening,  but  have  more  hope  for  the  inhabitants  of  the 
town  than  for  those  of  the  Point.  O  that  I  could  learn  the  holy  art 
of  doing  more  good  for  precious  souls  !  It  troubles  me  to  think  of 
being  so  unprofitable. 

Friday  5.  At  the  appointed  time  for  preaching  we  had  an  awful 
storm  of  thunder  and  lightning  which  killed  3  horses.  However,  I 
began  in  the  midst  of  it,  and  spoke  with  liberty  of  spirit,  and  confi- 
dence in  God. 

Saturday  6.  I  was  grieved  to-day  that  I  did  not  feel  myself  more 
steadily  devoted  to  God.  In  the  evening  I.  K.  preached  a  good  and 
profitable  sermon,  but  long  and  loud  enough. 

Lord's  day  7.  I  preached  twice  and  held  a  love-feast  ;  but  heavi- 
ness is  brought  upon  my  mind  by  some  that  would  once  (compara- 
tively speaking)  have  plucked  out  their  eyes,  and  have  given  them 
to  me  ;  but  now  they  slight  me  !  "  Cursed  is  the  man  that  trusteth  in 
man,  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm  ;  whose  heart  departeth  from  the 
Lord  !"  May  my  heart  trust  in  the  Lord  ! 

Monday  8.  Several  friends  set  out  in  company  with  me  to  the 
quarterly  meeting.  When  we  came  to  J.  G.'s,  he  did  not  appear  to 
be  so  open  and  free  as  he  was  about  a  year  ago.  Prayer  is  almost 
neglected,  and  both  his  children  and  servants  are  almost  like  wild, 
untaught  Indians.  Ah  !  what  is  all  the  substance  of  this  world,  with- 
out the  love  and  fear  of  God  ?  I  proceeded  the  next  morning  to  meet 
the  preachers  and  stewards..  At  10  o'clock  we  held  our  love-feast ; 
though  my  mind  was  under  some  exercises,  so  that  I  spoke  but  little. 
However,  at  4  o'clock  I  preached  from  Isaiah  xli.  13.  with  great 
enlargement,  and  to  a  large  concourse  of  people.  But  was  confined 
in  the  evening  to  the  company  of  men  who  were  destitute  of  religion, 
and  full  of  sin  and  politics.  My  brethren  and  myself  were  glad  to 
have  prayer  in  the  morning  and  leave  them.  If  there  were  no 
other  hell  than  the  company  of  wicked  men,  I  would  say,  From  such 
a  hell,  good  Lord,  deliver  me  ! 

Thursday  11,  was  appointed  as  a  general  fast :  I  preached  on  the 
occasion,  and  the  Lord  made  it  a  solemn,  heart-affecting  time,  so  that 
we  did  not  conclude  till  about  3  o'clock.     The  next  dav  I  reached 

Vol.  h  1-5 


114  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

Bohemia  ;  but  as  it  was  late,  some  of  the  congregation  had  departed  ; 
I  therefore  exhorted  those  that  were  left ;  and  then  proceeded  to 
New- Castle. 

Lord's  day  14.  Both  last  night  and  this  day,  1  hope  my  skirts  were 
clear  of  the  blood  of  the  people  in  this  little  town,  whether  they  re- 
ject or  accept  of  an  offered  salvation.  After  stopping  to  preach  at 
Chester  the  next  day,  I  then  went  on  to  Philadelphia. 

Tuesday  16.  I  had  some  friendly  and  close  conversation  with  the 
preachers,  in  which  we  spoke  plainly  of  our  experience  and  doc- 
trines. Mr.  R— a  preached  in  the  evening.  From  Wednesday  till 
Friday  we  spent  in  conference,  with  great  harmony  and  sweetness  of 
temper.  If  the  Lord  spares  me,  I  am  now  about  bending  my  course 
towards  Norfolk,  to  preach  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  perishing 
sinners  there. 

Monday  22.  Having  preached  the  last  evening  with  some  sweet 
enlargement,  I  left  Philadelphia  this  morning,  and  set  off  for  Norfolk. 
Preached  at  night  to  a  few  people  in  Chester,  and  was  conducted  the 
next  morning  in  a  friend's  chaise  to  Cecil  court-house,  where  I  em- 
barked for  Norfolk. 

Monday  29.  With  a  thankful  heart  I  landed  at  Norfolk,  after  having 
been  much  tossed  about  by  contrary  winds  in  the  bay.  My  accom- 
modations on  board  the  vessel  were  also  very  indifferent,  so  that  i* 
was  a  disagreeable  and  fatiguing  passage  ;  but 

"  In  hopes  of  that  immortal  crown, 
I  now  the  cross  sustain  ; 
And  gladty  wander  up  and  down, 
And  smile  at  toil  and  pain." 

Here  I  found  about  30  persons  in  society  after  their  manner;  but 
they  had  no  regular  class- meetings.  However,  here  are  a  few  who 
are  willing  to  observe  all  the  rules  of  our  society.  Their  present 
preaching-house  is  an  old  shattered  building,  which  has  formerly 
been  a  play-house.  Surely  the  Lord  will  not  always  suffer  his  ho- 
nour to  be  trampled  in  the  dust.  No;  I  entertain  a  hope  that  we 
shall  have  a  house  and  a  people  in  this  town.  My  heart  is  filled  with 
holy  thoughts,  and  deeply  engaged  in  the  work  of  God.  On  Tues- 
day evening  about  150  souls  attended  to  hear  the  word,  and  about  50 
at  5  o'clock  on  Wednesday  morning,  which,  by  the  presence  of  the 
Lord,  was  found  to  be  a  good  time.  I  then  went  over  to  Portsmouth, 
and   found  my  spirit  at  liberty  in  preaching  to  a  number  of  souls 

there. 

Friday,  June  2.  The  Lord  is  pleased  to  show  me  the  danger  which 
a  preacher  is  in  of  being  lifted  up  by  pride,  and  falling  into  the  con^ 


HEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  115 


o 


demnation  of  the  devil.  How  great  is  the  danger  of  this  !  A  con- 
siderable degree  of  ballast  is  highly  necessary  to  bear  frequent  and 
sudden  puffs  of  applause.  Lord,  fill  me  with  genuine  humility,  that 
the  strongest  gusts  from  Satan  or  the  world  may  never  move  me. 

Saturday  3.  My  body  is  weak,  but  my  soul  is  in  a  sweet,  pacific 
frame.  I  see  the  need  of  constant  watchfulness  and  entire  devotion 
to  God.  My  heart  was  staid  on  God  while  preaching  in  the  evening 
from  Psalm  Ixviii.  18. 

Lord's  day  4.  Many  seemed  willing  to  hear  both  morning  and  even- 
ing at  Norfolk  ;  but  in  the  afternoon,  at  Portsmouth,  the  congrega 
tion,  though  large,  seemed  to  have  very  little  sensibility.  On  Mon- 
day I  found  myself  better  than  could  be  expected,  after  preaching  3 
times  and  meeting  the  society  the  day  before.  May  the  Lord  brace 
up  my  feeble  frame,  and  by  his  grace  I  am  determined  to  use  it  for 
his  glory  and  the  service  of  his  church.  The  congregation  were 
attentive  in  the  evening  while  I  enlarged  on  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit. 

Tuesday  6.  I  went  to  the  farthermost  part  of  Portsmouth  parish, 
through  such  a  swamp  as  I  never  saw  before,  and  partook  of  a  bles- 
sing with  the  people,  some  of  whom  are  of  a  simple  heart.  After 
haying  preached  at  Mr.  F.'s,  in  St.  Bride's  parish,  then  at  Mr.  M.'s 
and  Mr.  R.'s,  I  returned  to  Portsmouth  on  Thursday  evening,  and 
found  my  soul  in  peace.  I  have  lately  read  Mason  on  Self-knowledge. 
This  book,  with  Franks  on  the  Fear  of  Man,  and  Thomas  a  Kempis, 
are  most  excellent  books  for  a  Christian. 

Wednesday  14.  I  have  continued  labouring,  with  different  degrees 
of  encouragement,  between  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth  ;  but  have  not 
met  with  that  success  which  my  soul  longs  for-  Our  friends  set  a 
subscription  on  foot  to-day,  for  building  a  house  of  worship,  and 
have  raised  only  about  £34.  Had  they  the  same  spirit  of  liberality 
which  they  have  in  Baltimore,  they  might  easily  accomplish  it. 

Thursday  15.  I  found  13  serious  souls  in  society  about  6  miles 
from  town  on  the  Suffolk  road  ;  but  poor  brother  O.  is  subject  to 
great  heaviness  through  manifold  temptations.  The  congregation 
here  was  but  small ;  however,  some  of  them  were  much  affected.  I 
gave  a  close  and  pointed  exhortation  in  the  evening  at  Portsmouth  ; 
and  there  was  a  melting  of  heart  amongst  the  people.  I  preached 
again  the  next  day,  and  met  both  the  classes,  and  felt  my  hopes  for 
Portsmouth  begin  to  revive. 

Monday  19.  Yesterday's  labour  of  preaching  3  times,  &c.  was  not 
too  much  for  me.  And  this  day  my  soul  enjoys  delightful  communion 
with  God.     Satan  assaults  ;  but  He  that  is  for  me  is  stronger  than  he 


that  is  against  me. 


116  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY5S  JOURNAL. 

"  Be  thou  iny  strength,  be  thou  my  way, 
Protect  me  through  my  life's  short  day ; 
In  all  my  acts  may  wisdom  guide ; 
And  keep  me,  Saviour,  near  thy  side." 

Tuesday  20.  T  preached  at  New  Mill  Creek,  and  joined  two  persons 
to  the  small  society  there.  Went  thence  to  Northwest  Woods,  and 
preached  at  the  house  of  Mr.  A.  and  after  preaching  at  two  or  three 
more  places,  I  returned  on  Thursday  to  Portsmouth. 

Monday  26.  The  God  of  hope  fills  me  with  joy  and  peace  in  be- 
lieving. About  70  souls  sat  under  the  word  this  evening,  and  some 
of  them  were  very  deeply  affected.  But  too  often  it  is  as  the  morn- 
ing cloud,  and  as  the  early  dew.  How  irrational  it  is,  that  rational 
beings  should  employ  their  thoughts  with  readiness  on  every  trifling 
subject,  when  they  can  hardly  be  brought  to  think  seriously  on  the 
things  of  eternity,  although  the  Holy  Spirit  awakens  their  sensibility 
and  alarms  their  fears.  O,  the  strange  perverseness,  the  deadly 
depravity  of  man  ! 

Tuesday  27.  Preached  at  five  in  the  morning,  but^am  depressed  in 
spirit,  to  see  such  an  insensibility  to  the  things  of  God  amongst  the 
people.  Surely,  I  am  now  in  a  dry  and  barren  land,  but  hope  it  will 
not  be  so  long. 

Thursday  29. 1  preached  at  Mr  B.'s,  a  new  place,  and  a  large  com- 
pany was  collected.  The  Lord  stirred  the  hearts  of  the  people 
under  the  preaching  of  the  word  at  H.'s,  and  on  Friday  I  returned 
and  preached  at  night  in  Portsmouth.  After  I  had  met  the  classes  and 
put  them  into  bands  the  next  day,  I  then  set  off  for  Crany  Island  ;  but 
found  the  weather  excessively  hot,  such  as  I  had  never  known  in 
England.  On  my  return  some  of  the  members  appeared  a  little 
refractory  in  submitting  to  discipline.  But  without  discipline  we 
should  soon  be  as  a  rope  of  sand  ;  so  that  it  must  be  enforced,  let  who 
will  be  displeased. 

Lord's  day,  July  2.  Our  congregations  consisted  of  many  people 
from  the  country  as  well  as  the  towns  ;  and  I  knew  by  experience 
that  *c  where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty." 

Monday  3,  was  spent  in  writing  to  the  preachers,  and  reading ; 
and  I  was  much  contracted  in  my  ideas  while  preaching  at  night. 
Bet  all  my  soul  is  taken  up  with  God  ;  so  that  my  desire  is  unto  the 
Lord,  and  the  remembrance  of  his  name. 

"  Give  me  thyself;  from  every  boast, 
From  every  wish  set  free  ; 
Let  all  I  am  in  thee  be  lost, 
But  give  thyself  to  me.'' 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOflRNAL.  117 

Friday  7.  The  three  last  days  I  have  laboured  at  different  places 
m  the  country,  and  preached  this  evening  in  Portsmouth.  Though  I 
feel  some  concern  for  the  souls  of  my  fellow  men,  yet  not  enough. 
If  we  could  but  see  by  faith  the  danger  to  which  poor  unpardoned 
sinners  are  continually  exposed,  if  we  could  but  have  a  realizing 
view  of  that  unquenchable  fire  into  which  they  must  be  plunged, 
dying  in  their  present  state,  how  could  we  rest  day  or  night  from 
using  all  possible  endeavours  to  prevent  their  eternul  damnation  ?  O 
unbelief!  thou  most  destructive  sin  !  how  dost  thou  destroy  the 
vigour  of  Christians'  endeavours,  as  well  as  the  souls  of  the  unre- 
generate  ! 

Tuesday  11.  After  preaching  at  five  o'clock  in  Norfolk,  I  went  to 
Portsmouth,  met  the  classes,  and  read  and  explained  the  rules  ;  tell- 
ing them  that  every  civil  society  has  their  proper  rules,  and  persons 
appointed  to  see  them  kept ;  and  that  every  member  forfeited  his 
right  to  membership  if  he  wilfully  transgressed  them.  If  men  see 
the  necessity  of  being  thus  subject  to  order  for  the  sake  of  tempo- 
rary advantages,  how  much  more  cheerfully  should  we  be  subject 
for  the  eternal  advantages  which  attend  the  salvation  of  our  souls ! 

Friday  14.  I  returned  to  town  after  a  short  tour,  and  preaching 
several  times  in  the  country.  In  this  tour  I  lodged  at  the  house  of 
brother  O.  mentioned  some  time  ago,  a  man  of  a  gloomy  spirit,  but 
solid  piety.  In  his  house  there  is  a  true  spiritual  church — three 
souls  all  of  one  mind,  and  sincerely  intent  on  seeking  and  serving  the 
Lord.  I  met  the  classes  in  town  and  found  my  soul  sweetly  staid  on 
the  Lord,  though  my  animal  spirits  flagged  by  reason  of  the  extreme 
heat.  Friend  L.  is  opposed  to  our  rules  ;  but  no  man  can  expect  to 
abide  with  us,  unless  he  is  so  satisfied  with  our  rules  as  to  manifest  a 
proper  respect  and  conformity.  He  may  be,  as  I  hope  he  is,  a  well- 
meaning  man,  but  he  is  deficient  in  religious  judgment. 

Thursday  20.  I  have  now  been  a  few  days  doing  my  Master's  busi- 
ness in  the  country  ;  but  have  taken  cold,  and  am  afflicted  with  a  severe 
beadach,  so  that  I  am  almost  ready  to  lie  by.  However,  the  next 
day  I  found  myself  something  better,  and  ciune  to  Portsmouth,  met 
the  classes,  and  preached.    My  heart  and  my  flesh  cry  out  for  God, 

"  Fulfil,  fulfil  my  large  desires, 
Large  as  infinity .' 
Give,  give  me  all  my  soul  requires, 
All,  all  that  is  in  thee." 

Lord's  day  23.  There  appeared  to  be  many  wild  people  in  the  con- 
gregation, though  the  grace  of  God  is  sufficient  to  make  them  tame 


J  it;  SIEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURYS     JOURN.ii. 

But  the  Almighty  dealeth  with  man  as  with  a  rational  creature  ;  there- 
fore we  may  go  on  in  our  folly,  like  the  wild  ass's  colt,  till  we  drop 
into  endless  perdition,  unless  we  yield  to  the  sacred  touch  of  grace, 
and  become  workers  together  with  God. 

Wednesday  26.  I  preached  to  a  small  company  at  brother  W  's  ;  and 
before  the  congregation  was  dismissed,  an  honest  Christian  who  had 
been  justified  about  twelve  months  before,  rose  up  and  spoke  a  few  bro- 
ken words,  which  affected  the  people  more  than  all  that  had  been  said. 
What  an  excellent  thing  is  simplicity  of  heart !  How  ready  is  God  to 
own  and  bless  it!  It  would  be  well  for  professors  of  some  standing 
to  inquire  impartially  if  they  have  not  lost  their  first  simplicity.  Old 
professors  are  very  apt  to  become  wise  in  their  own  esteem,  and  fools 
in  God's  esteem.  I  have  constant  inward  fevers,  and  drag  a  cum- 
bersome body  with  me  ;  but  my  soul  is  united  to  Jesus ;  though  I  ar- 
dently wish  to  feel  more  fervent  love  to  my  God  and  Saviour.  Calling 
at  brother  O.'s,  in  this  little  excursion,  I  found  his  wife  exceedingly 
happy  in  the  love  of  God,  and  I  know  not  but  she  is  sanctified  wholly. 

Friday  28.  At  my  return  to  town  I  found  the  people  in  some  com- 
motion— their  trading  to  the  West-Indies  was  prohibited.  However, 
the  little  society  seemed  determined  to  cleave  to  the  Lord.  The 
next  day  I  went  down  the  river  to  Mr.  E.'s,  and  preached,  (perhaps 
to  but  little  purpose,)  to  a  company  of  ignorant,  careless  people. 

Lord's  day  30.  I  was  greatly  assisted  in  my  public  exercises  both 
in  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth.  If  it  were  in  my  power,  and  consistent 
with  the  will  of  God,  every  soul  of  them  should  be  brought  to  Christ. 
But  alas  !  these  are  vain  thoughts  ;  for  the  Almighty  has  an  infinitely 
greater  desire  for  their  eternal  welfare.  But  the  whole  of  the  matter 
is  this,  they  Cl  will  not  come  to  Christ,"  in  the  way  he  has  appointed, 
"  that  they  might  have  life  :"  and  thus  many  will  eternally  perish  in 
their  sins. 

Friday,  August  4.  I  spent  the  preceding  part  of  this  week  preach- 
ing in  the  country  as  usual,  and  with  various  prospects  of  success ; 
but  came  back  to-day,  met  the  classes,  which  appeared  to  be  much 
more  engaged  for  heaven  ;  and  preached  in  the  evening. 

Saturday  4.  My  spirit  was  a  little  dejected,  but  blessed  with  the 
peace  of  God.  I  had  some  conversation  with  Mr.  S.  who  said  the 
people  should  be  kept  in  society,  if  they  did  not  meet  in  class ;  and 
intimated,  that  instead  of  preaching  the  Gospel,  I  had  been  exposing 
their  faults.  So  this  is  part  of  what  I  have  gained  by  my  labour. 
But  I  let  him  know  that  our  rules  were  intended  for  use. 

Monday  7.  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  T  R.  in  which  he  »n- 
formed  me  that  himself,  Mr.  R.  and  Mr.  D.  had  consulted,  and  de- 


REV.  FRANdS  ASBURY3S  JOURNAL. 


Kberately  concluded  it  would  be  best  to  return  to  England.  But  I 
can  by  no  means  agree  to  leave  such  a  field  for  gathering  souls  to 
Christ,  as  we  have  in  America.  It  would  be  an  eternal  dishonour  to 
the  Methodists,  that  we  should  all  leave  three  thousand  souls,  who 
desire  to  commit  themselves  to  our  care  ;  neither  is  it  the  part  of  a 
good  shepherd  to  leave  his  flock  in  time  of  danger  :  therefore,  I 
am  determined,  by  the  grace  of  God,  not  to  leave  them,  let  the  con- 
sequence be  what  it  may.  Our  friends  here  appeared  to  be  dis- 
tressed above  measure,  at  the  thoughts  of  being  forsaken  by  the 
preachers.  So  I  wrote  my  sentiments  both  to  Mr.  T,  R.  and  Mr. 
G.  S. 

Tuesday  8.  I  set  out  on  my  little  country  tour,  and  after  preaching 
at  Mr.  B.'s,  brother  W  's,  and  a  few  other  places,  returned  on  Fri- 
day to  Portsmouth  and  preached  in  the  evening,  though  much  indis- 
posed. This  week  we  have  had  such  thunder  and  lightning  as  I 
never  knew  before.  Thus  by  going  from  one  climate  to  another,  we 
may  meet  with  things  of  which  we  had  very  little  idea.  Then  how 
will  it  be  when  we  change  worlds,  instead  of  climates  ?  And  how  sur- 
prised will  impenitent  sinners  be,  when  they  go  from  earth  to  hell  t 
That  God  whose  power  produces  the  thunder  and  lightning,  of  which 
the  inhabitants  of  some  parts  of  the  earth  have  very  little  conception^, 
is  undoubtedly  able  to  produce  the  unquenchable  fire,  of  which  many 
impenitent  sinners  have  very  little  belief. 

Lord's  day  13.  My  own  soul  was  enlarged  in  preaching,  but  the- 
people  were  too  little  affected.  On  Monday  I  spoke  both  morning 
and  evening;  but  we  were  interrupted  by  the  clamour  of  arms,  and 
preparations  of  war.  My  business  is,  to  be  more  intensely  devoted 
to  God.     Then, 

"  The  rougher  our  way, 
The  shorter  our  stay ; 
The  tempests  that  rise 
Shall  gloriously  hurry  our  souls  to  the  skies." 

Wednesday  16.  Preaching  at  Mr.  H.'s,  about  sixteen  miles  from 
town,  I  met  with  Mr.  P  from  North  Carolina,  who  invited  me  to  go 
and  form  a  circuit  in  Currituck  county,  where  they  have  very  little 
preaching  but  what  they  pay  for  at  the  rate  of  three  pounds  per 
sermon.  I  accepted  the  invitation,  and  appointed  the  10th  of  Sep- 
tember for  the  time  to  visit  them.  A  letter  from  brother  G.  S.  which 
came  to  hand  on  Friday,  gave  an  account  of  about  two  hundred  souls 
brought  to  Christ,  within  the  space  of  two  months.  Glory  to  God 
&r  the  salvation  of  sinners !  Surelv.  I  am  in  a  drv  and  barren  place  I 

r/  v-  a 


120  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY:S  JOURNAL. 

And  there  is  but  little  prospect  of  doing  good  ;  though  the  Spirit  of 
holiness  possesses  my  own  heart.  But  Oh  !  how  it  pants  for  more 
faith  and  love !  How  it  longs  to  be  more  useful  in  the  church  of 
Christ  ! 

Saturday  19.  My  body  is  weak ;  but  this  does  not  concern  me  like 
the  want  of  more  grace.  My  heart  is  too  cool  towards  God  :  I  want 
to  feel  it  like  a  holy  flame.  I  am  also  sometimes  afraid  that  I  shall 
never  do  any  more  good. 

Lord.'s  day  20.  1  preached  three  times  as  usual ;  and  heard  a  ser- 
mon on  the  dignity  of  human  nature.  Vain  philosophy  !  "  Every 
imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  the  heart  (in  an  unrenewed  man)  is 
only  evil  continually."  Then  what  is  the  dignity  of  depraved  human 
nature  ?  Received  a  letter  from  Mr.  T  R.  expressing  a  change  in 
his  intention  of  returning  to  England.  Rode  to  Mr.  B.'s,  on  Tues- 
day, where  many  of  the  people  were  much  affected  under  preaching. 
Lord,  water  the  seed  sown,  that  sooner  or  later  it  may  bring  forth 
fruit  to  thy  glory !  The  weather  is  now  so  hot,  that  my  body  is 
greatly  enfeebled,  and  my  mind  almost  unfit  for  every  exercise.  Bui 
I  desire  in  patience  to  possess  my  soul.  I  went  to  Mr.  E.'s  on  Satur- 
day, but  there  was  so  little  prospect  of  doing  them  any  good,  I  took 
my  leave  of  them.  My  body  was  fatigued,  my  soul  was  tempted  and 
cast  down  ;  but  in  meeting  the  people  at  night  in  town  my  spirit  was 
refreshed. 

Lord's  day  27.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  wrought  powerfully  in  our 
congregations,  and  some  were  deeply  affected.  On  Monday  I  set  off 
for  Mill-Creek,  to  hold  our  quarterly  meeting.  We  found  it  a  peace- 
ful, comfortable  time.  Mr.  S.  discovered  his  independent  principles, 
in  objecting  to  our  discipline.  He  appears  to  want  no  preachers  : 
he  can  do  as  well  or  better  than  they.  But  it  is  likely  self-sufficiency 
is  the  spring  of  all  this.  After  preaching  at  a  few  other  places  on 
the  way,  I  returned  to  Portsmouth  on  Friday ;  and  on  Saturday  we 
had  a  most  remarkable  storm  :  the  wind  at  north-east,  and  blew 
several  vessels  on  shore  ;  and  among  others  the  Mercury  man  of-war. 
Houses  were  blown  down  ;  docks  torn  up  ;  bridges  carried  away  ; 
abundance  of  trees  broken  and  torn  up  by  the  roots :  and  several 
tracts  of  land  overflowed  with  water.  What  a  peculiar  blessing  is 
.true  religion  ! 

"  Who  in  the  Lord  confide, 
And  feel  his  sprinkled  blood, 
In  storms  and  hurricanes  abide, 
Firm  as  the  mount  of  God." 

A  more  awful  scene  than  this  will  be  unfolded,  when  God  shall  jutto 


REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURYS  JOURNAL-  121 

the  world  by  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  How  then  will  poor  sinners 
quake  and  tremble,  when  "  the  heavens  shall  pass  away  with  a  great 
noise,  and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat !  O  that  they 
were  wise,  that  they  understood  this,  that  they  would  consider  their 
latter  end  !" 

Monday,  September  4.  I  was  taken  very  ill  with  the  fall  fever,  and 
being  able  to  take  but  little  nourishment,  was  much  reduced.  How- 
ever, I  put  my  trust  in  the  Lord,  and  committed  all  my  concerns  to 
him  ;  but  was  not  able  to  keep  any  journal  till  the  25th  instant,  and 
then  felt  myself  but  very  little  better. 

Tuesday  26.  Brother  W.  died.  The  Lord  does  all  things  well : 
perhaps  brother  W  was  in  danger  of  being  entangled  in  worldly 
business,  and  might  thereby  have  injured  the  cause  of  God.  So  he 
was  taken  away  from  the  evil  to  come. 

Wednesday  27.  My  body  is  still  very  weak,  and  there  is  too  much 
weakness  in  my  soul,  which  passionately  longs  for  more  spirituality;, 
and  more  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus, 

"Come,  O  my  God,  thyself  reveal ; 
Fill  all  this  mighty  void  : 
Thou  only  canst  my  spirit  fill : 
Come,  O  my  God,  my  God  !" 

Thursday  28.  I  ventured  to  preach  a  funeral  sermon  at  the  burial 
of  brother  W  He  has  been  a  very  useful,  laborious  man,  and  the 
Lord  gave  him  many  seals  to  his  ministry.  Perhaps  no  one  in  Ame- 
rica has  been  an  instrument  of  awakening  so  many  souls,  as  God  has 
awakened  by  him. 

Friday  29.  My  body  recovers  a  little  health  and  strength.  Lord, 
help  me  so  to  use  my  strength  for  thee,  as  never  to  provoke  thee, 
in  thy  displeasure,  to  deprive  me  of  either  my  life  or  my  strength ! 
Wrote  to  Mr.  T    R.  informing  him  of  brother  W  's  death. 

Lord's  day,  October  1.  Preached  in  Portsmouth,  for  the  first  time 
since  my  illness,  and  the  hearts  of  many  were  touched. 

Tuesday  3.  My  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord.  I  sincerely 
desire  to  be  entirely  his — to  spend  the  remnant  of  my  days  and 
strength  altogether  for  God.  A  company  of  marines  have  been 
ashore  at  Norfolk,  ransacked  the  printing-office,  and  taken  the 
printers  and  press  with  them.  The  inhabitants  soon  after  embo- 
died aud  got  under  arms.  The  people  are  also  repairing  the  fort, 
which   if  put  in   order   may  sink  all   the  3hips  that  shall  attempt  to 

come  into  theharbour.— -But  if  it  is  thought  expedient  to  watch  and 
vol.  J.  j 6 


122  REV-  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

fight  in  defence  of  our  bodies  and  property,  how  much  more  expe- 
dient is  it  to  watch  and  fight  against  sin  and  Satan,  in  defence  of  our 
souls,  which  are  in  danger  of  eternal  damnation!  But  small  dangers 
at  hand  have  a  greater  effect  on  fallen  man,  than  the  greatest  dangers 
which  are  thought  to  be  at  a  distance.  But  alas !  the  one  may  be 
as  near  as  the  other ! 

Saturday  7.  1  ventured,  though  weak,  on  a  small  excursion  into  the 
Country  this  week,  and  preached  several  times. 

Lord's  day  8.  Was  greatly  enlarged  in  preaching  both  at  Norfolk 
and  Portsmouth,  and  I  venture  to  hope  some  good  was  done.  But 
martial  clamours  confuse  the  land.  However,  my  soul  shall  rest  in 
God  during  this  dark  and  cloudy  day.  He  has  his  way  in  the  whirl- 
wind, and  will  not  fail  to  defend  his  own  ark. 

Wednesday  11.  Satan  assaults  me,  but  cannot  break  my  peace. 
My  soul  is  staid  on  the  Lord,  and  I  find  great  sweetness  in  reading 
the  Bible  and  comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual.  Other  books 
have  too  great  a  tendency  to  draw  us  from  this,  the  best  of  books ; 
I  therefore  intend  to  read  more  in  this,  and  less  in  all  others. 

Friday  13.  Preached  at  Mr.  F.'s,  where  I  always  find  consolation 
in  my  soul  :  then  I  returned  to  Portsmouth,  and  found  my  spirit 
at  liberty  in  preaching  at  night. — Well  may  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
be  compared  to  a  net,  which  is  cast  into  the  sea,  and  gathereth  all, 
both  good  and  bad  ;  we  had  collected  twenty-seven  persons  in  our 
little  society  here,  when  I  first  came ;  but  I  have  been  obliged  to  re- 
duce them  to  fourteen  ;  and  this  day  I  put  out  a  woman  for  excessive 
drinking.  Here  we  see  the  necessity  and  advantage  of  discipline. 
No  doubt  but  Satan  will  nse  all  his  endeavours  to  thrust  in  some  who 
are  unsound  and  insincere,  so  that  they,  by  their  ungodly  conduct, 
may  help  him  to  bring  reproach  on  the  spiritual  church  of  Christ. 
And  unless  the  discipline  of  the  church  is  enforced,  what  sincere 
person  would  ever  join  a  society,  amongst  whom  they  saw  ungodli- 
ness connived  at  ? 

Friday  20.  Having  spent  several  days  preaching  in  different  parts 
of  the  country,  I  returned  to  Portsmouth,  and  was  comforted.  We 
have  a  few  as  faithful  and  happy  souls  in  this  place,  as  perhaps  in 
any  part  of  Virginia ;  and  unless  divine  justice  has  determined  de- 
struction on  these  two  towns,  I  hope  the  Lord  will  undertake  for 
them,  and  increase  their  number. 

Lord's  day  22.  A  painful  swelling  in  my  face  prevented  my 
preaching  this  morning ;  but  it  broke  and  gave  me  ease  before  night. 
50  I  exhorted  in  the  evening. 


JlEV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  123 

Monday  23.  As  I  expect  to  go  to  Brunswick  shortly,  my  heart  re- 
joices in  hopes  of  seeing  good  days,  and  many  souls  brought  to  God, 
in  those  parts.     True  Gospel  preachers  may  say  with  the  poet, 

"  The  love  of  Christ  our  hearts  constrains, 
And  strengthens  our  unwearied  hands, 
We  spend  our  sweat,  and  time,  and  pains, 
To  cultivate  Immanuel's  lands." 

Preaching  at  Mr.  B.'s  to-day,  some  who  had  treated  me  with  un- 
kindness,  were  now  affected  and  wept  much  at  the  thoughts  of  part- 
ing. The  word  went  with  power  to  the  hearts  of  many  at  Mr.  H.'s 
on  Tuesday  ;  as  it  did  also  the  next  day  at  the  widow  I.'s ;  where 
they  prevailed  on  me  to  tarry  all  night  and  preach  again  for  them  on 
the  Thursday,  which  I  did.  Here  is  a  prospect  of  doing  good,  and 
a  preacher  is  acceptable  ;  for  they  have  no  minister  in  the  county, 
except  one  who  is  occasionally  hired  at  the  extravagant  rate  before- 
mentioned.  I  explained  something  of  our  discipline  and  method  of 
support  to  Mr.  P,  and  he  seemed  desirous  that  we  should  go  amongst 
them.  I  then  went  to  the  Northwest  Woods,  and  preached  at  the 
funeral  of  a  certain  Mr.  M.  who  had  desired  that  we  should  perform 
this  last  office  for  him.  Many  people  were  present,  who  seemed 
serious,  and  some  of  them  were  much  affected.  On  Friday  I  returned 
to  Portsmouth. 

Saturday  28.  I  feel  determined,  by  the  grace  of  God,  to  use  more 
private  prayer.  And  may  the  Lord  make  me  more  serious,  more 
watchful,  and  more  holy. 

Lord's  day  29.  There  was  great  tenderness  of  heart  amongst  the 
people  at  Norfolk,  while  I  enlarged  on  these  words  of  our  Lord,  "  I 
will  not  leave  you  comfortless  ;  I  will  come  unto  you."  It  was 
also  an  affecting  time  at  Portsmouth  while  preaching  from  Deut. 
xxx.  19. 

Monday  30.  I  am  now  bound  for  Brunswick.  Some  that  had  been 
displeased  with  my  strictness  in  discipline,  were  now  unwilling  to 
let  me  go  ;  but  I  fear  they  will  not  soon  see  me  again,  if  they  should 
even  say,  "  Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  I 
am  deficient  in  many  things;  but  my  conscience  beareth  me  witness 
that  I  have  been  faithful  to  these  souls,  both  in  preaching  and  disci- 
pline. After  taking  leave  of  my  friends,  I  set  out  for  Brunswick  ; 
and  having  preached  at  Mr.  B.'s  in  the  way,  lodged  at  Mrs.  W  's. 

November  1.  After  we  had  passed  Southampton  court-house,  we 
were  stopped  by  one  who  had  an  order  from  the  committee  to  exa- 
mine strangers.    When  we  had  given  him  an  account  of  ourselves,  he 


i24  REV     FRANCIS  ASBURYS  JOURNAL. 

treated  us  with  great  kindness,  and  invited  us  to  dine  with  him,  which 
we  did.  My  body  is  a  little  fatigued,  but  my  soul  is  blessed  with 
health  and  vigour.     Hitherto  hath  the  Lord  helped  ! 

Thursday,  November  2.  By  the  good  providence  of  God  I  entered 
Brunswick  circuit  at  the  house  of  Mr.  M.  and  am  now  within  a  few 
miles  of  dear  brother  G.  S.  God  is  at  work  in  this  part  of  the  coun- 
try ;  and  my  soul  catches  the  holy  fire  already. 

Friday  3.  God  is  my  rest  and  my  portion  ;  my  soul  delighteth  in 
him.  My  heart  is  elevated  in  flames  of  sacred  fire,  both  in  private 
and  public  prayer. 

"  Let  others  stretch  their  arras  like  seas, 
And  grasp  in  all  the  shore, 
Grant  me  the  visits  of  thy  face, 
And  I  desire  no  more." 

Lord's  day  5.  Rode  about  ten  miles  to  S.  Y.'s  chapel,  and  met 
brother  G.  S.  My  spirit  was  much  united  to  him,  and  our  meeting 
was  like  that  of  Jonathan  and  David.  We  had  a  large  congregation, 
and  I  was  much  comforted  amongst  them. 

Monday  6.  I  moved  on  towards  our  quarterly  meeting  ;  but  in  ford- 
ing Meherring  river,  the  water  was  so  deep  as  almost  to  swim  my 
horse  and  carriage.  On  Tuesday  our  quarterly  meeting  began,  at 
which  there  might  be  seven  hundred  people.  What  great  things  hath 
the  Lord  wrought  for  the  inhabitants  of  Virginia !  Great  numbers 
of  them  manifest  a  desire  to  seek  salvation  for  their  souls.  At  this 
meeting  we  admitted  F.  P  T  F  and  J.  H — y  as  travelling  preachers. 
I  had  great  satisfaction  in  preaching  both  Tuesday  and  Wednesday, 
and  was  much  pleased  with  the  manner  and  matter  of  the  Christians' 
testimony  in  the  love-feast ;  having  a  correspondent  witness  of  the 
same  in  my  own  breast. 

Thursday  9.  Spent  this  day  profitably  and  comfortably  with  brother 
G.  S.  Happy  are  they  who  can  open  their  minds  freely  to  each 
other,  as  we  have  done. 

Friday  10.  I  preached  at  B.  J.'s,  and  the  power  of  the  Lord  was 
present,  melting  the  hearts  of  the  audience  ;  and  in  class-meeting 
both  believers  and  penitents  were  all  in  tears.  I  have  now  a  bloom- 
ing prospect  of  usefulness,  and  hope  both  to  do  good  and  get  good. 
My  heart  goes  out  in  grateful  thanksgiving  and  praises  to  God. 

Lord's  day  12.  Was  much  shackled  in  my  ideas,  and  tempted 
against  the  place  and  people,  while  preaching  a,t  I.  M.'s.  But  on 
Monday  I  found  an  attentive  feeling  people  at  I.  J.'s.  The  preaching 
appeared  to  be  very  seasonable,  as  the  Baptists  are   creeping  in 


KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  125 

amongst  our  societies  in  these  parts.  My  soul  possesses  more  and 
more  of  the  divine  life  and  love,  and  is  strongly  bound  to  Jesus  Christ 
my  Lord.     But  still  I  hunger  and  thirst  for  more  of  the  grace  of  God. 

Tuesday  14.  Preached  at  Mr.  C.'s  and  Mr.  B.'s,  and  met  with  a 
few  inquisitive  people.  It  is  a  just  observation,  that  those  matters 
which  are  the  least  disputed  in  religion  are  the  most  essential ;  and 
those  who  are  most  fond  of  controverted  trifles  have  the  least  real 
religion.  Satan  will  help  us  to  the  shell,  if  we  will  be  satisfied  with- 
out the  kernel. 

Wednesday  15.  The  congregation  at  Mr.  H.'s  was  but  small  : 
though  I  hope  it  was  not  labour  in  vain.  The  next  day  there  was  a 
a  good  prospect  at  Mr.  F.'s,  and  a  class  of  about  fifty  simple,  faithful 
souls.  The  word  was  blessed  on  Friday  at  friend  S.'s,  and  on  Satur- 
day I  came  to  S.  Y.'s,  a  serious,  sensible  man. 

Lord's  day  20.  I  began  and  ended  the  day  with  God.  I  had  much 
liberty  at  the  chapel  in  discoursing  on  the  subject-matter,  manner, 
and  end  of  the  apostles'  preaching. 

Monday  21.  My  soul  is  pure  and  peaceful  ;  and  blest  with  a  more 
solid  sense  of  God  than  heretofore.  At  V  W  's  we  had  a  blessing 
both  in  preaching  and  class-meeting. 

Wednesday  23.  After  preaching  I  met  with  brother  I.  L.  and  Mr. 
K.  who  were  on  their  way  to  Portsmouth,  but  could  not  pass  the 
guards.  Lord,  help  thy  people  to  redeem  their  time,  for  the  days  are 
evil.  I  see  the  necessity  of  living  to  God,  and  improving  our  present 
privileges. 

Thursday  24.  My  soul  was  blessed  with  a  delightful  sense  of  the 
goodness  of  God  this  morning;  and  after  1  had  preached  at  W.'s,  bro- 
ther R.  L.  gave  an  exhortation.  Then  rode  to  F  S.'s,  and  went  to 
bed  with  a  fever  on  me  ;  and  in  the  morning  felt  so  much  pain  that  I 
thought  of  not  going  to  the  Court-house.  However,  I  went  and  found 
a  large  congregation,  and  believe  it  was  a  profitable  season.  Thus  we 
see  the  propriety  of  dragging  a  feeble  body  to  duty,  as  far  as  it  can 
bear:  and  if  there  be  a  willing  and  sincere  mind,  God  will  either 
give  us  strength  for  a  profitable  performance  of  duty,  or  accept  of 
what  we  are  able  to  do.  At  this  time  the  Lord  rewarded  my  weak 
endeavours  with  liberty,  power,  and  consolation.  So  I  kept  on  my 
way,  and  preached  the  next  day  at  B.  S.'s,  and  on  the  Lord's  day  at 
I.  M.'s  to  about  four  hundred  souls;  where  one  person*  was  struck 
with  convulsive  shakings.  After  preaching  at  L.'s  on  Monday,  I  met 
the  class,  but  had  not  a  satisfactory  confidence  in  the  testimony  of 
some  of  the  members.  My  own  soul  was  in  a  comfortable  frame,  and 
felt  a  strong  desire  to  glorify  God  more  than  ever.     My  mind  was 


12t>  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBT)RYJS  JOURN.ii 

also  strongly  impressed  with  a  desire  to  warn  and  stir  up  the  people 
to  work  out  their  salvation,  in  these  dangerous  and  difficult  tiroes. 

Tuesday  28  The  rain  detained  me  in  the  house,  to  hold  close  and 
sweet  communion  with  my  God.  But  the  next  day  I  found  many 
collected  at  Mr.  B.'s.  Here  Mrs.  J— t  met  me,  and  entreated  me  to 
go  into  their  parish.  Pursued  my  way  on  Thursday  to  Mr.  P— m's, 
and  found  an  unsettled  society.  And  on  Friday  preached  to  a  dry  con- 
gregation at  Mr.  P  's,  and  the  next  day  went  on  to  Petersburg. 
Here  I  was  unexpectedly  pleased  with  the  sight  of  some  of  my  friends 
from  Norfolk.  I  preached  twice  in  Petersburg  on  the  Lord's  day, 
and  though  many  of  the  people  seemed,  like  Gallio,  to  care  for  none  of 
those  things,  yet  I  hope  there  will  be  some  faithful  souls  found  here. 

Monday,  December  4.  I  am  frequently  checking  myself  for  the 
want  of  more  solemnity  in  my  conversation  ;  but  still  my  heart  is  with 
the  Lord. 

'•  In  the  heavenly  Lamb 
Thrice  happy  I  am, 
And  my  heart  doth  rejoice  at  the  sound  of  his  name." 

Preached  at  I  R.'s  on  Tuesday,  and  rode  in  company  with  a  few 
friends  to  G.  B.'s,  and  preached  in  the  evening.  We  had  a  melting 
time  in  preaching  the  next  day,  but  especially  in  the  class-meeting. 
Satan  still  assaults  me  with  his  temptations,  but  the  Lord  is  on  my 
right-hand,  that  I  may  not  be  moved,  if  I  trust  in  him.  We  must 
expect  to  be  tempted,  as  our  Lord  was,  while  we  are  within  the  reach 
of  the  fallen  spirits  ;  but  it  is  our  duty  to  keep  ourselves  that  the 
wicked  one  touch  us  not.  And  if  we  yield  in  the  least  degree,  even 
in  desire  or  temper,  we  must  expect  to  suffer  for  it. 

Thursday  7.  I  saw  brother  I.  K.  whose  heart  seem3  to  be  yet  in 
the  work  of  God.  We  had  a  good  time  to-day  at  T.  A.'s,  both  io 
preaching  and  class-meeting.  My  soul  resteth  in  the  love  of  God  ; 
and  all  my  powers  are  engaged  to  do  his  will  I  also  found  my  soul 
devoted  to  God  in  faith  and  prayer,  the  next  day.  And  after  preach- 
ing atF   A.'s,  met  the  society,  which  consisted  chiefly  of  penitents. 

Saturday  9.  Found  a  few  simple  souls  at  Mr.  E.'s,  and  we  were 
comforted  together.  A  man  came  to  the  house  at  night,  asked  for 
me,  gav,e  a  curse,  and  went  away. 

Lord's  dl$  10.  Rode  to  friend  L.'s  and  preached  twice  in  their 
new  house  30  feet  by  24.  My  own  heart  was  enlarged,  and  many  of 
the  people  were  moved  and  melted  under  the  word.  We  have  about 
sixty  persons  in  society  here.  Friend  L,  who  had  been  ill  for  some 
time,  departed  from  this  vale  of  wo,  full  of  faith,  and  love,  and  joy: 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  \f7 

about  one  o'clock  on  Monday  morniog.  What  a  noble  and  delightful 
employment  is  ours,  to  be  nursing  immortal  souls  for  the  realms  of 
eternal  glory.  And  now  and  then  we  have  the  inexpressible  comfort 
of  seeing  a  soul  depart  in  peace,  triumphing  over  the  power  of  death. 
Is  there  joy  among  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repent- 
eth  ;  and  is  there  not  joy  among  them,  over  one  soul  that  has  finally 
escaped  the  snare  of  the  devil  ?  Doubtless  there  is  ;  and  we  will  par- 
ticipate of  their  joy.  Lord,  help  me,  in  all  humility  and  love,  in  all 
purity  and  faithful  obedience,  to  devote  all  my  days  to  thee  ;  that  I 
may  finally  join  all  the  glorious  company  of  heaven,  and  praise  thee 
eternally  there  ! 

Wednesday  13.  I  left  my  circuit,  and  came  back  to  preach  friend 
L.'s  funeral.  There  were  many  people,  and  a  great  melting  among 
them.  But  I  found  myself  very  unwell  at  night,  through  much  ex- 
ercise, and  went  to  bed  in  a  high  fever.  My  mind  was  also  dejected 
and  tempted,  so  that  I  have  not  had  such  a  day  these  six  weeks. 
Lord,  give  me  patience,  that  in  the  midst  of  all  I  may  possess  my 
soul  ! 

Friday  15.  Was  able  to  preach  at  N.  M.'s,  and  met  with  brother  I. 
K.  and  his  wife,  who  were  married  yesterday-  Found  a  happy  peo- 
ple at  Mr.  T  's  on  Monday  ;  and  was  greatly  blessed  with  the  people 
on  Tuesday  at  Mr.  B.'s. 

Wednesday  20.  I  have  now  been  12  years  a  preacher,  3  years  in 
a  local  capacity,  and  9  years  in  the  travelling  connexion  ;  about  4 
years  and  8  months  in  England,  and  about  4  years  and  4  months  in 
America. 

Thursday  21.  By  a  mistake  of  brother  G.'s  I  rode  12  miles  to  R. 

J.'s,  and  then  had  to  ride  13  miles  more  to  O.'s,  and  met  the  people 
at  night. 

Monday  25.  Being  Christmas-day,  I  preached  from  1  Tim.  i.  15, 
"  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ 
Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners."  My  spirit  was  at  liberty, 
and  we  were  much  blessed  both  in  preaching  and  class-meeting. 
Hitherto  the  Lord  hath  helped  me,  both  in  soul  and  body,  beyond  my 
expectation.  May  I  cheerfully  do  and  suffer  all  his  will,  endure  to 
the  end,  and  be  eternally  saved  ! 

Wednesday  27.  We  have  awful  reports  of  slaughter  at  Norfolk 
and  the  Great-Bridge  ;  but  I  am  at  a  happy  distance  from  them,  and 
my  soul  keeps  close  to  Jesus  Christ.  And  as  we  know  not  what  a 
day  may  bring  forth,  I  can  say  with  St.  Paul,  "  For  me  to  live  is 
Christ,  but  to  die  is  gain."     Found  a  warm  and  lively  society  of  about 


} 28  KEV.  1RANCIS   ASBUUVS  JOURNAL. 

fifty  souls  at  W  F  's,  on  Thursday  ;  but  the  company  was  small  at 
friend  S.'s  on  Friday. 

Lord's  day  31.  Being  the  last  day  of  the  year,  we  held  a  watch- 
night  at  S.  Y.'s  chapel,  beginning  at  6  and  ending  at  12  o'clock.  It 
was  a  profitable  time,  and  we  had  much  of  the  power  of  God. 

Monday,  January  1,  1776.  I  am  now  entering  on  a  new  year,  and 
am  of  late  constantly  happy,  feeling  my  heart  much  taken  up  with 
God,  and  hope  thus  to  live  and  thus  to  die.  Or  if  there  should  be 
any  alteration,  may  it  be  for  the  better,  and  not  for  the  worse !  This 
is  my  earnest  desire  and  prayer  to  God. 

"  My  residue  of  days  or  hours, 

Thine,  wholly  thine,  shall  be ; 
And  all  my  consecrated  powers 

A  sacrifice  to  thee  ; 
Till  Jesus  in  the  clouds  appear 

To  saints  on  earth  forgiven, 
And  bring  the  grand  sabbatic  year. 

The  jubilee  of  heaven." 

On  Wednesday  my  soul  was  in  a  sweet  and  humble  frame,  and  my 
heart  was  expanded  both  in  preaching  and  meeting  the  class.  1  re- 
turned to  O.  M.'s  for  lodging,  and  the  next  day  after  preaching  spoke 
to  about  thirty  lively  souls  at  W-'s. 

Wednesday  10.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  J.  met  me  at  friend  B.'s,  and  gave 
me  a  long  narrative  of  a  great  work  under  Brother  G.  S.  We  held 
a  watch-night,  and  Mr.  J.  and  I  stood  about  two  hours  each.  There 
appeared  to  be  a  great  degree  of  divine  power  amongst  the  people. 
Mr.  J.  accompanied  me  to  W  P  's,  where  I  preached,  and  then  pur- 
sued my  way  to  Mr.  P  's  in  Chesterfield,  a  good  old  saint  of  God. 
The  Lord  was  with  us  there  ;  and  I  afterward  went  on  to  Peters- 
burg ;  and  was  glad  to  see  my  friends,  though  they  were  in  some 
trouble  about  the  times.  To  the  great  loss  of  many  individuals,  we 
are  informed  that  Norfolk  was  burnt  by  the  Governor. 

Lord's  day  14.  I  found  myself  at  liberty  in  preaching  in  the  morn- 
ing, and  then  went  to  hear  parson  H.  who  preached  a  good  sermon. 
He  came  in  the  evening  and  heard  me  preach  on  the  Jubilee,  Lev. 
xxiv.  9,  10.     Brother  G.  S.  then  met  the  class  with  great  animation. 

Monday  15.  We  had  many  people  at  friend  L.'s  :  I  have  been  read- 
ing Prideaux's  Connexions,  and  my  soul  possesses  peace  and  purity  in 
Christ  my  Redeemer. 

Wednesday  1G.  The  Lord  is  graciously  working  on  the  hearts  of 
the  people  at  F    A.'s  :   but  the  Baptists  endeavour  to  persuade  the 


IltV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL*  129 

people  that  they  have  never  been  baptised.  Like  ghosts  they  haunt 
us  from  place  to  place.  O,  the  policy  of  Satan  !  Some  he  urges  to 
neglect  the  ordinances  altogether  ;  others  he  urges  to  misunderstand 
them,  or  make  additions  to  them.  Christ,  speaking  of  children,  says, 
"  Of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  But  the  practice  of  the  Bap- 
tists says,  They  may  be  of  the  kingdom  of  glory,  but  they  cannot  be 
of  the  kingdom  of  grace.  But  knowing  that  they  who  seduce  souls 
must  answer  for  them,  I  shall  not  break  my  peace  about  it,  but  leave 
them  to  God.  I  look  on  them  as  objects  of  pity,  rather  than  objects* 
of  envy  or  contempt.  The  people  also  appeared  to  be  much  alive, 
on  Thursday,  at  the  widow  A.'s.  Had  a  blessing  in  class-meeting, 
and  find  my  heart  quite  given  up  to  God. 

Friday  18.  Thanks  be  to  God  for  his  unspeakable  love  ;  my  soul 
enjoys  it  in  a  greater  and  greater  degree.  Many  people  attended  to 
hear  the  word  to-day  at  the  widow  L.'s.  The  society  consisted  of 
about  sixty  souls,  who  appeared  to  be  very  lively  and  spiritual. 

Lord's  day  20.  It  was  a  powerful  time  while  I  preached  from 
Isaiah  lxiii.  5.  "  The  day  of  vengeance  is  in  my  heart,  and  the  year 
of  my  Redeemed  is  come."  Brother  J.  who  was  obliged  to  fly  from 
Portsmouth,  distressed  by  the  late  fire,  met  me  here.  On  Monday 
we  were  all  deeply  affected  with  a  sense  of  our  unworthiness  at  friend 
P.'s,  while  I  discoursed  on  the  barren  fig-tree. 

Tuesday  22.  My  soul  was  happy  in  God,  and  sweetly  engaged 
in  prayer  and  reading.  Several  people  were  affected  under  the 
word  at  Mr.  L.'s. 

Wednesday  23.  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  T.  R.  informing  me 
that  he  had  administered  on  brother  W.'s  will,  and  desiring  me  to 
pay  attention  to  his  affairs  in  these  parts,  and  then  return  to  Philadel- 
phia by  the  first  of  March.  Virginia  pleases  me  in  preference  to  all 
other  places  where  I  have  been  ;  but  I  am  willing  to  leave  it  at  the 
call  of  Providence.  We  were-  much  comforted  together  at  R.  J.'s 
on  Thursday ;  but  the  thought  of  having  my  mind  taken  up  with 
borther  W.'s  affairs  gives  me  some  concern.  I  want  no  temporal 
business  of  any  kind. 

Tuesday  29.  The  weather  has  been  very  cold,  though  I  have  at- 
tended every  place  in  course  ;  and  both  the  people  and  myself  have 
been  frequently  blessed.  I  have  been  reading  Burnet's  History  of 
his  Own  Times,  and  am  amazed  at  the  intrigues  of  courts,  and  the  trea- 
chery of  men.  There  is  reason  to  fear,  the  same  cause  produces 
the  same  effects  at  this  time.  For  there  is  no  probability  of  peace, 
and  a  great  army  is  expected  from  England  in  the  spring.  May  the 
Lord  look  upon  us  and  help  us  ! 

Vol.  F.  17 


i30  KEV.  FRANCIS  A8BURY  S  JOURNAL. 

Monday,  February  5.  Having  attended  the  several  appointments 
in  the  way,  I  came  to  S.  Y.'s,  and  met  the  preachers  collected  for 
the  quarterly  meeting.  With  mutual  affection  and  brotherly  freedom 
we  discoursed  on  the  things  of  God,  and  were  well  agreed.  After 
Mr.  J.  had  preached,  he  and  Mr.  C.  administered  the  Lord's  supper. 
There  was  much  holy  warmth  of  spirit  in  our  love- feast.  On  Thurs- 
day I  intended  to  have  set  off  for  Philadelphia,  but  my  horse  is  lame  ; 
so  I  must  patiently  submit  to  the  providence  of  God. 

Saturday  10.  Went  to  O.  M.'s,  and  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  and 
encouraging  some  of  my  friends  from  Portsmouth. 

Monday  12.  Rode  about  forty  miles  to  Mr.  J.'s.  I  found  him  a  man 
of  an  agreeable  spirit,  and  had  some  satisfaction  in  conversing  with 
him.  He  has  agreed,  if  convenient,  to  attend  our  next  conference. 
The  people  were  much  affected  at  White-Oak  chapel  on  Friday ; 
and  after  preaching  I  returned  very  weary  to  Mr.  J.'s.  All  my 
desire  is  for  the  Lord,  and  more  of  his  divine  nature  impressed  on 
my  soul.     I  long  to  be  lost  and  swallowed  up  in  God. 

■ ;  My  soul  and  all  its  powers, 

Thine,  wholly  thine,  shall  be ; 
All,  all  my  happy  hours 

I  consecrate  to  thee  : 
Me  to  thine  image  now  restore, 
And  I  shall  praise  thee  evermore." 

Saturday  17.  Mr.  J.  went  with  me  to  Captain  B.'s,  and  opened 
their  new  chapel  with  a  discourse  from  these  words,  "  In  all  places 
where  I  record  my  name,  I  will  come  and  bless  thee."  I  spoke  at 
night,  and  we  found  the  Lord  with  us. 

Lord's  day  18.  I  preached  twice  at  Petersburg.  The  last  subject 
was  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,  which  struck  the  people  with  great 
solemnity  ;  and  many  seemed  to  feel  the  power  of  God.  On  Mon- 
day there  were  two  Baptist  preachers  amongst  the  congregation. 
After  the  sermon  was  ended,  they  desired  to  speak  with  me.  So  we 
conversed  about  three  hours  on  experimental,  practical,  and  contro- 
versial divinity  ;  but  ended  where  we  began.  I  thank  the  Lord,  my 
mind  was  kept  in  peace  and  coolness.  No  doubt  but  Satan  is  very 
active  in  promoting  religious  controversies.  Many  take  a  controver- 
sial spirit  for  the  spirit  of  religion  ;  while  others  dispute  away  what 
little  religion  they  have.  "  Only  by  pride  cometh  contention.  The 
wisdom  that  cometh  from  above  is  pure  and  peaceable." 

Wednesday  21.  Deep  seriousness  sat  on  the  minds  of  the  people 
under  the  preaching  at  friend  L.'s.     And  my  preaching,  for  five  timee 


REV-.  FRANCIS  ASBUilY;S  JOURNAL,  131 

together,  has  been  attended  with  blessed  effects.  But  let  all  the  glory 
be  given  to  God !  I  am  only  as  a  pen  in  the  hand  of  a  writer.  My 
soul  longs  for  more  spirituality,  and  to  be  totally  dedicated  to  God. 

Friday  23.  I  set  off  for  Philadelphia  ;  and  after  meeting  with  vari- 
ous occurrences,  heavy  rains,  and  much  fatigue,  reached  Leesburg 
on  Thursday  March  1st.  On  Friday  my  soul  seemed  to  fix  again  on 
its  centre,  from  which  it  had  been  measurably  removed  by  a  variety 
of  difficulties,  and  found  sweet  peace  with  God.  A  company  of 
lively  people  attended  the  word  at  T.  A.'s,  where  I  met  with  bro- 
ther W  W  The  attention  of  the  audience  was  also  much  engaged 
on  the  Lord's  day  at  the  court-house,  while  I  discoursed  with  great 
affection  and  clearness  of  ideas.  I  afterward  visited  a  poor  unhappy 
man  imprisoned  for  murder,  but  found  him  very  ignorant ;  though  he 
was  brought  under  some  concern  before  we  parted.  Left  Leesburg 
on  Monday  4,  and  by  the  good  providence  of  God,  arrived  safe  at 
Baltimore  on  Thursday  ;  but  found  the  people  greatly  alarmed  by  the 
report  of  a  man-of-war  being  near.  Many  of  the  inhabitants  were 
moving  out  of  town.     Brother  W   preached  in  the  evening. 

Thursday  7.  My  heart  mounts  heaven-ward  on  wings  of  strong 
desire  for  more  of  God  ;  and  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  un- 
derstanding, keepeth  my  spirit  in  his  knowledge  and  love.  Here  I 
met  with  brother  R.  and  found  him  under  some  exercises  of  mind 
towards  Mr.  T  R.  However,  the  temptation  was  removed  before 
we  parted.  On  Friday  the  town  was  all  in  commotion.  It  was  re- 
ported that  the  man-of-war  was  in  the  river,  which  excited  the  seri- 
ous attention  of  all  the  inhabitants  ;  so  that  some  were  moving  off, 
while  others  were  getting  under  arms.  Alas,  for  fallen  man !  He 
fears  his  fellow  creatures,  whose  breath  is  in  their  nostrils,  but  fears 
not  Him  who  is  able  to  destroy  body  and  soul  in  hell.  If  fire  and 
sword  at  a  small  distance  can  so  alarm  us,  how  will  poor  impenitent 
sinners  be  alarmed  when  they  find,  by  woful  experience,  that  they 
must  drink  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  God,  poured  out  without 
mixture  ? 

Lord's  day  10.  The  congregations  were  but  small,  so  great  has 
the  consternation  been.  But  I  know  the  Lord  governeth  the  world  ?_ 
therefore  these  things  shall  not  trouble  me.  I  will  endeavour  to  be 
ready  for  life  or  death,  so  that  if  death  should  come,  my  soul  may" 
joyfully  quit  this  land  of  sorrow,  and  go  to  rest  in  the  embraces  of 
the  blessed  Jesus.  O,  delightful  felicity  !  There  is  no  din  of  war  ; 
no  unfriendly  persecutors  of  piety  ;  no  enchanting  world  with  con- 
cealed destruction  ;  no  malevolent  spirit  to  disturb  our  peace  ;  but 
:dl  is  purity,  peace,  and  joy.     Adapting  my  discourse  to  the.  occasion, 


i3~  REV.  FRANCIS  ASJiURVS  JOURNAL. 

I  preached  this  evening  from  Isaiah  i.  19,  20.  "  If  ye  be  willing  and 
obedient,  ye  shall  eat  the  good  of  the  land  :  but  if  ye  refuse  and  re- 
bel, ye  shall  be  devoured  with  the  sword  :  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord 
hath  spoken  it." 

Monday  11.  Pursued  my  way  as  far  as  Mr.  H.  Gough's,  and  was 
treated  with  great  kindness.  May  this  family  evince  that  all  things 
are  possible  with  God  ;  though  their  salvation  should  be  attended 
with  as  much  apparent  difficulty  as  the  passage  of  a  camel  through 
the  eye  of  a  needle.  If  they  prove  faithful  stewards  they  will.  I 
preached  here  the  next  day  to  a  large  congregation,  amongst  whom 
were  some  of  my  old  friends  from  the  Forks  ;  and  the  Lord  gave  us  a 
blessing  together. 

Wednesday  13.  Came  to  J.  D.'s,  and  found  his  pious  wife  under 
hysterical  complaints,  and  full  of  doubts  about  the  state  of  her  soul. 
Preached  the  next  day,  at  a  place  by  the  way,  with  holy  warmth  of 
affection,  to  a  considerable  number  of  people. 

Tuesday  19.  Under  the  divine  protection,  I  came  safe  to  Phila- 
delphia, having  rode  about  3000  miles  since  I  left  it  last.  But  heaven 
is  my  object,  not  earth.  This  springs  my  mind,  and  makes  my  bur- 
den light. 

"  The  things  eternal  I  pursue, 
A  happiness  beyond  the  view 

Of  those  that  basely  pant 
For  things  by  nature  felt  and  seen: 
Their  honours,  wealth,  and  pleasure  mean, 
I  neither  have  nor  want." 

Here  I  met  with  Mr.  T  R.  in  the  spirit  of  love  ;  and  receiveu  a 
full  account  of  what  related  to  the  unhappy  Mr.  D.  I  also  received 
an  affectionate  letter  from  Mr.  Wesley,  and  am  truly  sorry  that  the 
venerable  man  ever  dipped  into  the  politics  of  America.  My  desire 
is  to  live  in  love  and  peace  with  all  men,  to  do  them  no  harm,  but 
all  the  good  I  can.  However,  it  discovers  Mr.  Wesley's  conscien- 
tious attachment  to  the  government  under  which  he  lived.  Had  he 
been  a  subject  of  America,  no  doubt  but  he  would  have  been  as  zea- 
lous an  advocate  of  the  American  cause.  But  some  inconsiderate 
persons  have  taken  occasion  to  censure  the  Methodists  in  America,  on 
account  of  Mr.  Wesley's  political  sentiments. 

Wednesday  20.  By  the  power  of  God  my  soul  is  kept,  in  the  mids 
of  all  company,  sweetly  reposed  on  Jesus  Christ.     My  desire  is,  with 
the  most  fervent  love,  to  devote  myself  to  Him  that  died  for  me. 

Thursday  21.  A  perfect  calm  pervaded  my  soul :  and  I  found  my- 
self at  full  ^liberty  in  preaching  from  2  Cor.  vi.  2. 


REV.  FRAtfClS  ASBtRY's  JOURNAL.  133 

Friday  22.  How  changeable  are  all  things  here,  and  especially  in 
these  precarious  times  ;  but  my  determination  is,  to  cast  all  my  care 
on  the  Lord,  and  bear  with  patience  whatsoever  may  occur.  May  the 
Lord  make  me  more  indifferent  both  towards  persons  and  things,  and 
only  intent  on  doing  his  will.  On  Saturday  I  visited  Mrs.  M.  above 
eighty  years  of  age,  and  very  infirm  ;  she  is  a  friend  to  all  Gospel 
preachers,  and  opens  her  house  to  make  them  welcome.  If  she 
should  at  last  receive  the  Lord  into  her  heart,  it  will  be  well. 

Lord's  day  24.  Brother  W  preached  in  the  morning.  Mr.  S.  at 
the  Episcopal  church  was  very  severe  upon  the  Quakers,  but  to  little 
purpose.  Two  of  their  leading  men,  G.  D.  and  A.  B.  came  very 
kindly  to  see  Mr.  T  R. 

Monday  25.  I  had  an  opportunity  of  speaking  to  J.  W  relative  to 
his  leaving  the  work ;  and  he  manifested  some  inclination  to  return. 
My  soul  was  greatly  blessed  in  meeting  sister  W.'-s  class,  and  all  pre- 
sent seemed  to  partake  of  the  same  blessing. 

"  The  op'ning  heavens  around  me  shine 
With  beams  of  sacred  bliss, 
Tf  Jesus  show  his  mercy  mine, 
And  whispers  I  am  his." 

Tuesday  26.  My  soul  was  blessed  with  divine  serenity  and  consola- 
tion. May  I  ever  be  able  to  conduct  myself  with  evangelical  pru- 
dence, and  so  keep  under  my  body,  that  I  may  always  be  the  temple 
of  God,  by  his  Spirit  that  dwelleth  in  me.  The  next  day  also,  my 
soul  enjoyed  the  same  delightful  sense  of  the  divine  favour,  and  was 
fixed  on  God  as  on  its  centre,  though  in  the  midst  of  tumult.  Glory 
to  God  !  I  can  leave  all  the  little  affairs  of  this  confused  world  to  those 
men  to  whose  province  they  pertain  ;  and  can  comfortably  go  on  in 
my  proper  business  of  instrumentally  saving  my  own  soul  and  those 
that  hear  me. 

Friday  29.  Have  been  graciously  assisted  every  time  1  have  at- 
tempted to  preach  this  week  ;  and  found  a  particular  blessing  to-day 
in  speaking  at  the  funeral  of  sister  L.  an  old  follower  of  Christ. 

Saturday  30.  I  persuaded  J.  W  to  decline  his  thoughts  of  study- 
ing and  settling,  and  return  to  his  circuit.  We  had  a  powerful  time 
in  prayer-meeting  this  evening. 

Monday  April  1.  My  soul  panted  after  God.  We  had  a  sudden  and 
dreadful  alarm  of  fire,  which  threatened  a  store-house,  malt-house, 
and  brewhouse.  It  was  not  extinguished  without  great  difficulty,  and 
aftfir  much  damage  had  been  done.     Man  can  neither  defend  his  per- 


}.J4  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL. 

son  nor  his  property  in  many  cases,  and  yet  how  unwilling  to  commit 
himself  and  his  property,  in  a  proper  manner,  to  God! 

Tuesday,  April  2.  My  mind  felt  some  dejection,  but  my  peace  was 
not  interrupted.  Amongst  others  in  the  congregation  this  evening, 
there  was  a  woman  of  ninety  years  of  age.  The  next  day  I  was  much 
employed  in  reading,  and  severely  tempted  by  Satan,  but  was  kept 
from  all  injury  by  the  power  of  God. 

Friday  5.  I  heard  a  Moravian  preach  ;  but  it  was  only  a  historical 
faith.  And  this  being  Good  Friday,  I  preached  from  these  pathetic 
words  of  Christ,  "  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me  ; 
nevertheless,  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."  What  mortal  can  form 
any  idea  of  the  blessed  Saviour's  feelings  at  that  time,  when  his  agony 
was  so  great  as  to  express  from  his  sinless  body  great  drops  of  blood 
and  water  1  Was  it  ever  heard  before,  that  any  man  sweat  blood  ?  If 
Jesus  found  the  punishment  due  to  sin  to  be  so  severe,  how  will  poor 
sinners  themselves  bear  the  eternal  damnation  of  hell? 

Lord's  day  7.  The  Lord  graciously  assisted  me  in  my  public  exer- 
cises both  morning  and  evening.  And  on  Monday  my  soul  was  in  a 
pure  and  spiritual  state. 

Tuesday  9.  We  had  a  large  congregation,  and  my  heart  was 
greatly  expanded,  while  I  discoursed  on  "  the  cloud  of  witnesses" 
from  Hebr.  xii.  1.  The  power  of  God  was  eminently  displaced  on 
the  minds  of  several ;  and  one  in  particular  was  struck  with  deep 
conviction. 

Thursday  11.  My  soul  was  all  on  stretch  for  God  both  yesterday 
and  to-day.  I.  B.  came  to  see  me,  and  appeared  to  be  in  some  dis- 
tress. I  prayed  with  him  more  than  once,  and  he  roared  out  for 
very  anguish  of  spirit.  Instead  of  being  surprised  that  an  awakened 
sinner  should  weep  and  cry  aloud  for  mercy,  we  ought  to  be  infi- 
nitely more  surprised,  that  an  unforgiven  sinner  should  manifest  but 
little  or  no  concern.  If  a  man  expected  to  lose  all  his  property,  and 
be  put  to  bodily  torture,  could  he  be  unconcerned  ?  But  what  is  all 
this  to  the  loss  of  God  and  heaven,  and  the  torture  of  unquenchable 
fire  ?  Truly,  if  it  were  not  for  unbelief,  we  should  see  sinners  on 
every  side,  weeping  and  roaring  aloud  both  day  and  night. 

Saturday  13.  Was  desired  to  visit  a  prisoner  under  sentence  of 
death.  I  found  he  was  an  Englishman,  had  been  an  old  soldier,  and 
had  experienced  the  pardoning  love  of  God  in  Ireland  about  20 
years  ago.  under  Mr.  B.  Thus  we  see  that  although  a  soul  has  been 
blest  with  the  favour  of  God,  yet  unfaithfulness  may  provoke  the 
Mmightv  to  give  up  such  a  person  to  work  all  kinds  of  sin  with  gree- 


KKV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV/S  JOURNAL.  135 

diness.  Then  "  let  him  that  standeth,  take  heed  lest  he  fall."  On 
the  Lord's  day  my  mind  was  shut  up  in  preaching,  and  I  felt  the  want 
of  more  faith  for  Philadelphia. 

Monday  15.  I  am  not  without  a  comfortable  sense  of  the  favour 
and  presence  of  God,  but  labour  under  a  lassitude  of  both  body  and 
mind.     I  went  to  the  gaol  to  visit  the  prisoners  again,  but  could  not 

obtain  admittance.     Mrs.  C.  formerlv  the  wife  of  G.  T 1,  attend- 

ed  our  class-meeting  to  day,  and  my  soul  was  much  blessed  amongst 
them. 

Tuesday  16.  My  heart  was  sweetly  enlarged  towards  God,  both  in 
my  private  exercises  and  my  public  preaching.  A  friend  from  New- 
York  informed  us,  that  troops  were  raised  and  entrenchments  made  in 
that  city.  O  Lord,  we  are  oppressed  ;  undertake  for  us.  I  received 
a  letter  from  friend  E.  at  Trenton,  complaining  that  the  societies  in 
that  circuit  had  been  neglected  by  the  preachers. 

Wednesday  17.  My  soul  loves  God  and  all  mankind,  but  I  cannot 
please  all  men.  However,  my  conscience  is  void  of  offence  both 
towards  God,  and  towards  man.  On  Thursday  we  heard  of  a  skirmish 
between  the  Philadelphia  fleet  and  the  Glasgow  man-of-war.  What 
will  be  the  end  of  these  things  ?  Lord,  think  upon  us  for  good,  and 
show  us  mercy  !  Preaching  this  evening,  the  powers  of  my  soul 
were  at  full  liberty,  and  I  trust  it  was  made  a  blessing  to  many. 

Friday  19.  Satan  has  been  thrusting  at  me,  but  by  grace  I  am  still 
kept ;  and  my  soul  is  employed  in  holy  and  heavenly  exercises,  with 
constant  and  delightful  communion  with  God.  Oh !  how  1  long  to 
find  every  power  of  soul  and  body  one  continual  sacrifice  to  God 


'to 
t 


"  If  so  poor  a  worm  as  I 

May  to  thy  great  glory  live, 
All  my  actions  sanctify, 

All  my  words  and  thoughts  receive  : 
Claim  me  for  thy  service  :  claim 
All  I  have  and  all  I  am." 

With  great  warmth  of  affection  I  went  through  the  public  exercises 
of  the  evening.  On  the  Lord's  day  my  soul  was  given  up  to  God  ; 
and  it  appeared  to  be  a  searching  time  in  the  public  congregation. 

Monday  22.  I  found  Christ  in  me  the  hope  of  glory  :  but  felt  a 
pleasing,  painful  sensation  of  spiritual  hunger  and  thirst  for  more  of 
God.  On  Tuesday  I  rode  to  Burlington,  and  on  the  way  my  soul 
was  filled  with  holy  peace,  and  employed  in  heavenly  contempla- 
tions :  but  found,  to  my  grief,  that  many  had  so  imbibed  a  martial 
spirit  that  they  had  lost  the  spirit  of  pure  and  undefiled  religion.     I 


1JG  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL. 

preached  from  Rom  xiii.  1 1  but  found  it  was  a  dry  and  barren  time. 
And  some  who  once  ran  well  now  walk  disorderly.  On  Wednesday 
I  rode  to  Trenton  ;  and  found  very  little  there  but  spiritual  coldness 
and  deadness.  Had  very  little  liberty  in  preaching  among  them  ; 
thus  has  the  Lord  humbled  me  amongst  my  people.  But  I  hope, 
through  grace,  to  save  myself,  and,  at  least,  some  that  hear  me. 

Thursday  25.  I  rode  about  eleven  miles,  and  preached  to  a  people 
who  were  but  very  little  moved:  but  at  I.  B.'s  the  next  day  there 
was  more  sensibility  amongst  the  congregation  :  and,  though  very 
unwell,  I  found  my  heart  warm  and  expanded  in  preaching  to  them.  It 
is  my  present  determination  to  be  more  faithful  in  speaking  to  all  that 
fall  in  my  way,  about  spiritual  and  eternal  matters.  The  people  were 
very  tender  at  friend  F  ;s  on  Saturday.  And  on  the  Lord's  day  I  spoke 
feelingly  and  pointedly  to  about  300  souls  at  the  meeting-house. 
Afterward  I  returned,  through  the  rain,  to  Trenton,  and  was  well 
rewarded  in  my  own  soul,  while  preaching  to  the  congregation  at 
night.  I  felt  every  word,  which  seemed  to  cut  like  a  two-edged 
sword,  and  put  me  in  mind  of  some  of  my  former  visits.  May  the 
Lord  revive  his  work  amongst  them  again  ;  and  make  the  time  to 
come  better  than  the  former  time  ! 

Monday  29.  Satan  beset  me  with  powerful  suggestions,  striving  to 
persuade  me  that  I  should  never  conquer  all  my  spiritual  enemies, 
but  be  overcome  at  last.  However,  the  Lord  was  near,  and  filled  my 
soul  with  peace.  Blessed  Lord,  be  ever  with  me,  and  suffer  me  not 
to  yield  to  the  tempter,  no,  not  for  a  moment ! 

Tuesday  30.  Went  about  nine  miles  to  our  quarterly  meeting  at 
Hopewell ;  and  we  had  much  of  the  power  of  God  in  our  love-feast, 
in  which  many  declared  their  experience.  I  lectured  in  the  evening 
at  I.  B..'s,  though  very  weary  :  but  my  heart  is  with  God  ;  and  1  know 
we  cannot  tire  or  wear  out  in  a  better  cause.  On  Wednesday  rode 
back  to  Trenton,  where  I  preached  to  about  a  hundred  souls,  and  then, 
went  about  thirty  miles  more  to  W   B.'s. 

Thursday,  May  2.  Some  melted  under  the  word  at  Mount-Holly, 
though  at  first  they  seemed  inattentive  and  careless.  The  grace  of 
God  kept  my  spirit  this  day  in  sweet  seriousness,  without  any  mixture 
of  sourness. 

Saturday  4.  At  New-Mills  I  found  brother  W  very  busy  about  his 
chapel,  which  is  36  feet  by  28,  with  a  gallery  15  feet  deep.  I 
preached  in  it  from  Matt.  vii.  7.  with  fervour,  but  not  with  freedom, 
and  returned  to  W   B.'s  the  same  night. 

Lord's  day  5.  I  preached  at  New  Mills  again,  and  it  was  a 
heart-affecting  season  :    then   returned   to   Philadelphia,  but   went 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S    JOURNAL.  KTJ 

under  a  heavy  gloom  of  mind,  and  found  my  spirit  much  dejected 

and  shut  up. 

Monday  6.  My  mind  was  in  a  dissipated  frame  to-day  :  and  we 
were  alarmed  with  a  report  that  ships  of  war  were  then  in  the  river. 
However,  I  was  blessed  in  meeting  a  class  at  night.  My  mind  was 
more  composed  and  comfortable  the  next  day,  but  not  so  spiritual  and 
heavenly  as  I  desire  it  should  be. 

"  Come,  Lord,  from  above 

The  mountains  remove, 
Overturn  all  that  hinders  the  course  of  thy  love  : 

My  bosom  inspire, 

Enkindle  the  fire, 
And  wrap  my  whole  soul  in  the  flames  of  desire." 

Preached  at  night  from  a  text  which  corresponded  with  my  own  feel- 
ings— "  These  are  they  which  came  out  of  great  tribulation,"  &c. 

Wednesday  8.  My  spirit  is  much  assaulted  by  Satan,  but  the  Lord 
is  my  keeper.  About  ten  o'clock  to-day  tidings  arrived  that  there 
had  been  a  skirmish  off  Christiana,  between  thirteen  row-gallies  and 
the  Roebuck,  man  of  war  ;  that  after  an  encounter  of  three  or  four 
hours,  the  man  of  war  withdrew,  as  it  was  thought,  much  shattered. 
At  this  news  the  inhabitants  of  the  city  were  all  in  commotion  ;  and 
the  women  especially  were  greatly  shocked.  Lord,  what  a  world  is 
this  !  Give  me  wisdom  and  patience,  that  I  may  stand  still  and  see  the 
salvation  of  God. 

Thursday  9.  My  mind  was  free :  and  in  meeting  two  classes  we 
had  much  of  the  solemn  power  of  God.  At  night  I  preached  from 
these  words,  which  are  so  applicable  to  the  circumstances  of  the  peo- 
ple— "  We  have  no  continuing  city  here."  Many  people  seemed  to 
feel  the  weight  of  this  divine  truth,  so  suitable  to  their  present 
condition. 

Friday  10.  My  soul  is  in  sweet  peace  ;  and  I  only  want  to  feel  my 
heart  continually  flaming  with  pure  love  to  God,  carrying  every  de- 
sire and  every  thought  towards   heaven.     Brother   B 1  arrived 

here  to-day  ;  and  we  are  now  informed  that  some  men  were  killed 
in  the  gallies,  and  the  man  of  war  was  much  damaged. 

Lord's  day  12.  Divine  grace  assisted  and  comforted  me  in  all  the 
exercises  of  the  day.  And  although  1  spoke  in  strong  and  plain 
terms  at  night,  yet  the  very  soldiers  bore  it  well.  But  the  next  day 
I  was  seized  with  a  severe  chill,  and  was  carried  to  my  lodging  very 
sick.  I  was  in  a  heavy  sweat  till  four  o'clock  the  next  morning,  but 
nevertheless  set  out  the  next  day,  if  possible,  to  reach  the  confe- 
rence :  and  came  to  Chester  that  night. 

Vol.  I.  18 


ITS8  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's   JOURNAL. 

Wednesday  15.  I  am  still  afflicted,  but  not  forsaken,  the  Lord  fills 
me  with  peace  and  consolation.  Attempted  to  reach  a  quarterly 
meeting,  but  when  I  got  to  the  place  was  obliged  to  go  to  bed. 
Though  the  next  day,  weak  as  I  was,  I  went  and  held  a  love-feast^ 
and  afterward  preached.  And  the  Lord  gave  me  strength  in  my 
inward  man. 

Saturday  18.  My  poor  frame  is  much  afflicted  and  shattered  ;  but 
my  mind  is  full  of  divine  tranquillity,  ardently  desirous  to  submit  to 
the  providence  of  God  with  inflexible  patience.  How  amazing  is 
the  goodness  of  God !  He  raiseth  up  the  best  of  friends,  such  as 
love,  for  Christ's  sake,  to  show  the  kindest  care  for  me  in  my  afflic- 
tion. In  as  much  as  they  have  done  it  unto  me,  one  of  the  least  of 
his  servants,  they  have  done  it  unto  Christ.  And  may  he  crown 
their  kindness  with  an  eternal  reward.  Was  very  unwell  all  the 
Lord's  day,  but  my  great  desire  to  be  at  conference  induced  me  to 
make  an  attempt,  on  Monday,  to  travel.  But  by  the  time  I  had  rode 
three  miles,  I  found  if  I  travelled,  it  would  be  at  the  hazard  of  my 
life  :  and  was  therefore  obliged  to  decline  it,  though  the  disappoint- 
ment was  very  great.  Let  it  be,  Lord,  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt  1 
Brother  W  went  to  a  Quaker  meeting,  and  began  to  speak ;  but 
some  of  the  Friends  desired  him  to  sit  down. 

Tuesday  22.  My  disorder  seemed  to  be  broken ;  but  1  was  taken 
j^ith  a  bleeding  at  the  nose.     The  devil  still  bends   his  bow,  and 
makes  ready  his  arrows  on  the  string  ;  but  the  Lord  suffers  him  not 
to  wound  me. 

Tnursday  24.  Visited  Mrs.  G.  an  old  disciple  of  Mr.  Whitefields  ; 
but  now  she  entertains  the  Methodists.  And  on  the  Lord's  day  I  ven- 
tured to  preach  to  a  small  company  of  people. 

Monday  28.  Expecting  the  preachers  were  on  their  return  from 
the  conference,  I  appointed  preaching  at  my  lodgings,  but  had  to 
preach  myself,  to  a  small,  attentive,  tender  company,  and  felt  much 
quickened  in  my  own  soul.  At  night  brother  R.  arrived  and  informed 
me  that  I  was  appointed  for  Baltimore  :  to  which  I  cheerfully  sub- 
mit, though  it  seems  to  be  against  my  bodily  health. 

Wednesday  29.  My  whole  soul  is  devoted  to  God,  and  desires 
nothing  but  more  of  him.  Brother  R.  and  I  both  spoke  to  the  con- 
gregation collected  at  night,  and  the  power  of  God  was  eminently 
present.  On  Thursday  I  wrote  a  letter  to  Mrs.  W  who  has  de- 
parted from  God,  and  feel  great  hopes  it  may  be  the  means  ol 
restoring  her. 

Friday  31.  Though  far  from  being  in  a  good  state  of  health,  I  se' 
off  for  my  appointment,  and  reached  I.  Dallam's  at  night. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  139 

Lord's  day,  June  2.  Went  to  the  chapel,  and  preached  after  brother 
S.  S.  and  the  people  appeared  to  be  deeply  affected.  But  brother 
S.  does  not  seem  to  enter  into  the  Methodist  plan  of  preaching.  He 
uses  a  few  pompous,  swelling  words,  which  pass  for  something  great 
with  short-sighted  people  ;  but  are  not  calculated  to  do  them  much 
spiritual  good.  Ou  Monday  my  soul  enjoyed  the  peace  of  God  ;  but 
I  am  frequently  ashamed  before  the  Lord,  for  indulging  too  great  a 
flow  of  spirits  in  the  company  of  my  friends.  Though  I  purpose, 
through  grace,  to  begin  anew.  Lord,  succour  me  by  thy  mighty 
power !  We  had  a  melting  time  amongst  the  people  on  Monday,  at 
I.  D.'s. 

Tuesday  4.  Went  to  the  widow  P  's,  and  after  I  had  done  preach- 
ing, met  a  small  class  of  about  thirteen  souls,  who  appeared  to  be  sin- 
cere. My  body  is  still  very  weak  ;  but  it  is  my  determination  to 
spend  all  the  little  remains  of  my  strength  for  God,  and  the  salva- 
tion of  precious  souls. 

Wednesday  5.  Some  felt  the  word  of  truth  at  the  widow  B.'s,  while 
I  was  showing  what  it  is  to  walk  after  the  flesh.  But  there  appears 
to  be  a  general  flatness  amongst  the  members  of  the  class  :  they  are 
neither  so  attentive  nor  so  tender  as  they  were  two  years  ago.  What 
a  pity  !  that  the  nearer  souls  approach  to  eternity,  the  more  unfit 
they  should  be  to  enter  into  that  unchangeable  place] 


» 


"  Help  me  to  watch  and  pray, 
And  on  thyself  rely  ; 
Assur'd  if  I  my  trust  betray, 
I  shall  for  ever  die." 

Satan  hunts  my  soul  continually,  and  attacks  me  at  times  with  the  most 
powerful  temptations  ;  but  he  does  not  get  any  advantage,  nor  break 
my  peace ;  but  on  the  contrary  drives  me  nearer  to  my  Almighty 
Protector.  And  I  feel  all  my  powers  more  abundantly  given  up  to 
God,  to  serve  him  with  all  sincerity,  fervency,  and  diligence. 

Thursday  6.  Was  greatly  blessed  in  meditation  and  prayer,  on  my 
way  to  Mr.  Harry  Gough's  ;  and  there  met  with  my  good  friend  Mr. 
Philip  Rogers  and  his  wife.  The  next  day  my  spirit  was  in  heaviness 
through  manifold  temptations.  I  see  the  need  of  always  standing 
sword  in  hand,  against  my  adversary  the  devil.  Our  Lord  displayed 
both  great  wisdom  and  great  mercy,  when  he  commanded  us  to  watch 
and  pray  always.  May  I  show  mercy  on  my  own  soul  by  always 
attending  to  this  command  ! 

Lord's  day  9.  Yesterday  I  preached  with  some  satisfaction  at  Mr. 
Giles's  ;  and  rode  to-day  about  twelve  miles  to  the  Forks,  where  I 


*40  REV-  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S   JOURNAL. 

preached  from  Col.  i.  28.  and  then  met  part  of  several  classes.  My 
feeble  body  was  much  fatigued  with  the  exercises  of  the  day,  but  my 
soul  was  delightfully  taken  up  with  God.  On  Monday  the  congre- 
gation at  A.  G.'s  appeared  as  if  they  both  understood  and  felt  the 
two-edged  sword  of  the  word.  I  see  the  need  of  having  my  thoughts 
constantly  employed  on  the  things  of  God  ;  that  no  vacant  moment  may 
be  left  for  Satan  to  fill  up. 

Tuesday  11.  Rose  with  a  deep  sense  of  God  resting  on  my  mind 
and  set  off  for  Mr.  L.'s,  which  is  about  twenty  miles  from  the  house 
where  I  lodged ;  but  by  losing  our  way,  we  made  it  about  thirty  miles 
and  did  not  reach  the  place  till  about  two  o'clock.  The  Lord  thei 
rewarded  me  for  my  toil,  while  I  was  preaching  to  a  serious,  tendei 
people ;  and  I  afterward  endeavoured  to  unite  the  society,  whicl 
Satan,  by  his  diabolical  wiles,  had  divided.  On  Wednesday  the  con- 
gregation at  I.  O.'s  were  so  impenetrable,  that  neither  promises  noi 
threats  could  move  them.  Nor  did  the  people  at  Mr.  W  's  seem  to 
have  much  more  sensibility,  though  I  was  greatly  affected  myself 
while  preaching  to  them  from  2  Corinthians  vi.  2.  The  Lord  has 
blessed  me  of  late  with  much  assistance  in  preaching,  and  with  pu- 
rity of  heart. 

Thursday  13.  Both  the  people  and  myself  were  moved  by  the  word 
at  J  C.'s.  My  feeble  frame  is  much  fatigued  with  preaching  twice 
.a  day  ;  but  it  must  drag  on  as  long  as  it  can  j  for  it  is  my  meat  and 
drink,  yea  it  is  the  life  of  my  soul,  to  be  labouring  for  the  salvation  of 
mankind.  I  desire  nothing  but  God,  and  to  spend  the  remainder  of 
my  strength  in  suffering  and  labouring  for  him.  Who  that  knows 
God,  would  be  weary  of  such  a  master !  And  who  that  knows  the 
worth  of  souls  would  be  weary  of  striving  to  save  them  ! 

Saturday  15.  After  preaching  in  the  Dutch  church,  and  meeting 
the  class,  I  rode  about  five  miles,  through  a  heavy  rain,  and  the  wind 
was  so  powerful  that  it  blew  down  trees,  barns,  and  houses ;  so  that 
it  was  with  difficulty  I  could  urge  my  way  through  the  woods  ;  but  at 
length  came  safe  to  the  widow  M.'s,  and  enjoyed  a  comfortable  hour  in 
preaching  from  Luke  xiv.  18,  19.  On  my  coming  to  Baltimore,  I  met 
Mr.  T  R.  and  heard  him  preach.  On  Monday  I  rode  to  W.  R.'s, 
where  we  had  a  large  company  of  people,  and  amongst  the  rest  were 
two  Baptist  preachers.     All  this  day  my  soul  was  happy  in  God. 

Tuesday  18.  Though  temptations  hung  upon  my  spirit,  yet  I  found 
myself  greatly  enlarged  at  Mr.  E.'s,  while  enforcing  these  striking 
words,  "  The  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand,  be  ye  therefore  sober, 
watching  unto  prayer."  Returned  on  Wednesday  to  Baltimore,  and 
spent  some  time  with  Mr.  Otterbine.    There  are  very  few  with  whom 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  141 

I  can  find  so  much  unity  and  freedom  in  conversation  as  with  him. 
At  night  the  word  was  a  blessing  to  myself,  and  no  doubt  to  others, 
while  I  expatiated  on  2  Corinthians  iv.  5.  I  can  rejoice  in  God,  and 
cast  all  my  care  upon  him. 

Thursday  20.  Went  to  Nathan  Perrig's,  and  was  fined  five  pounds  for 
preaching  the  Gospel.  But  found  my  soul  at  liberty  both  in  preaching 
and  class-meeting.  We  then  went  to  W  L.'s,  and  found  N.  L.  under 
uncommon  exercises  of  mind. 

Saturday  22.  Returned  to  Baltimore  ;  and  although  my  peace  is 
not  broken,  neither  is  any  wrong  temper  or  desire  indulged,  yet  I 
lament  the  want  of  more  spirituality.  My  soul,  like  the  rising  flame, 
would  continually  ascend  to  God. 

Lord's  day  23.  After  preaching  at  the  Point,  I  met  the  class,  and 
then  met  the  black  people,  some  of  whose  unhappy  masters  forbid 
their  coming  for  religious  instruction.  How  will  the  sons  of  oppres- 
sion answer  for  their  conduct,  when  the  great  Proprietor  of  all  shall 
call  them  to  an  account !  We  had  a  serious  audience  in  the  evening 
at  town. 

Monday  24.  Spoke  plainly  on  the  nature  of  our  society,  and  the 
necessity  of  discipline  ;  which  perhaps  was  not  very  pleasing  to  some 
who  do  not  choose  to  join.  I  told  them,  we  could  not,  would  not,  and 
durst  not  allow  any  the  privileges  of  members,  who  would  not  come 
under  the  discipline  of  the  society.  I  desire  to  know  no  man  after  the 
flesh.     My  soul  is  in  peace. 

Tuesday  25.  I.  F.  who  has  lately  come  from  Virginia,  gave  me  an 
agreeable  account  of  the  glorious  spreading  of  the  work  of  God  in 
Virginia  and  North  Carolina.  The  Lord  is  fulfilling  his  promises, 
and  pouring  out  his  holy  Spirit  on  the  people — Satan  is  still  busy  in  his 
attempts  to  disturb,  if  he  cannot  destroy  me  :  but  my  soul  stays,  and 
waits,  and  hangs  on  God,  who  makes  me  more  than  conqueror  over  all 

the  assaults  of  the  enemy.    I  preached  to-day  at  the  house  of ,  a 

man  who  has  much  talk,  and  but  little  religion.  The  whole  congregation 
appeared  to  be  very  stupid.  Rode  thence  to  K.'s,  and  found  a  simple- 
hearted  people.  Here  I  met  with  poor  M.  who  is  keeping  a  school, 
which  may  perhaps  be  his  last  and  best  shift. 

Wednesday  26.  This  was  a  general  fast  day;  and  my  heart  was 
fixed  on  God.  I  preached  at  three  o'clock  at  Mr.  S.'s,  and  the  power 
of  God  was  displayed  among  the  poorer  part  of  the  congregation.  I. 
F.  then  met  the  class,  like  another  G.  S. 

Thursday  27.  This  was  a  day  of  trials.  Satan  drew  ray  thoughts 
into  n  train  of  reasoning  on  subjects  which  were    out  of  my  reach  ; 


142  ilEV.  FRAkCIS  asbury's  journal. 

for  secret  things  belong  to  God,  but  things  which  are  revealed  belong 
to  us  and  our  children.  Thus  while  I  was  soaring  out  of  the  region 
of  my  duty,  1  became  inattentive  to  what  immediately  concerned  me, 
and  oversetting  my  chaise,  broke  it  very  much.  Though,  blessed  be 
God,  my  body  was  preserved.  May  the  Lord  keep  my  soul  united 
to  himself,  as  its  proper  centre  !  However,  I  was  greatly  blessed 
in  speaking  to  the  people  ;  and  the  power  of  God  rested  on  the 
congregation. 

Friday  28.  Going  to  my  appointment,  it  rained  much,  and  I  got 
wet,  which  brought  on  a  sore  throat,  and  laid  me  up  till  July  9.  For 
the  greatest  part  of  the  time  I  could  neither  eat,  drink,  nor  sleep,  till 
the  tumour  broke.  But  glory  to  God,  I  possessed  my  soul  in  pa- 
tience under  the  whole  of  the  affliction.  Though  my  heart  complains 
of  its  own  ingratitude  to  my  gracious  Lord,  who  not  only  supported 
both  soul  and  body  under  all  my  trouble,  but  provided  tender  friends, 
who  treated  me  with  the  greatest  affection.  As  a  kind  father  dealeth 
with  an  afflicted  son,  so  the  Lord  dealeth  with  me.  What  shall  I 
render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  his  benefits  ?  I  will  render  thanksgiving 
and  praise,  and  devote  both  body  and  soul  to  the  Most  High.  During 
this  affliction  my  abode  was  at  Mr.  G.'s. 

I  have  now  come  to  a  determination,  God  willing,  to  go  to  the  warm 
springs,  and  make  a  trial  of  them  for  the  recovery  of  my  health  ; 
perhaps  my  strength  may  be  thereby  so  restored  for  future  services, 
that  upon  the  whole  there  may  be  no  loss  of  time.  R.  W.  W-  L.  and 
I.  F.  will  supply  the  circuit  in  the  mean  time. 

Thursday,  July  11.  My  body  is  in  some  small  measure  restored, 
and  God  himself  is  the  portion  of  my  soul.  May  he  ever  keep  me  from 
every  desire  which  does  not  directly  or  indirectly  lead  to   himself! 

Saturday  13.  My  heart  has  been  humbled  and  melted  under  a 
sense  of  the  goodness  of  God.  This  day  I  set  out  for  Baltimore  on 
my  way  to  the  springs  ;  but  by  the  time  I  reached  the  town  I  felt  a 
great  disposition  to  weariness  in  my  shattered  frame,  and  my  soul, 
which  seemed  to  sympathize  with  the  body,  had  not  such  a  lively  and 
steady  sense  of  God  as  at  some  other  times  ;  though  there  was  no 
desire  after  any  thing  else.  I  ventured  to  preach  both  this  evening 
and  the  next  day  ;  and  humbly  hope  the  word  was  made  a  blessing  to 
many. 

Monday  15.  We  set  off  for  the  springs.  Mr.  D.  overtook  us  in 
the  evening ;  and  that  no  opportunity  might  be  lost,  I  lectured  at 
night  in  the  tavern  where  we  lodged.  And  both  the  tavern-keeper 
and  his  wife  appeared  to  have  some  thoughts  about  their  souls.     On 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  143 

Tuesday  we  reached  Frederick,  and  collecting  as  many  people  as 
we  could  by  a  short  notice,  I  preached  from  2  Corinthians  vi.  2.  and 
found  my  spirit  at  liberty.  My  body  complains  of  so  much  travelling, 
for  which  it  is  almost  incompetent.  But  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  the 
support  and  comfort  of  my  soul.  I  was  thrown  out  of  my  chaise  the 
next  day,  but  was  providentially  kept  from  being  much  hurt.  When 
we  came  to  Hagerstown,  it  seemed  as  if  Satan  was  the  chief  ruler 
there.  The  people  were  very  busy  in  drinking,  swearing,  drumming, 
&c.  &c.  My  mind  was  disburdened  and  much  comforted  after  I  had 
delivered  myself  from  Mark  i.  Id.  though  it  seemed  to  answer  but 
little  purpose  with  the  people.  It  is  one  thing  for  the  preacher  to 
do  his  duty,  and  another  thing  for  the  audience  to  do  theirs. 

Thursday  18.  After  riding  forty  miles  to-day,  we  reached  the 
springs  :  and  at  first  we  found  it  difficult  to  obtain  lodgings.  But  af- 
ter a  while  I  procured  a  good  lodging  with  Mr.  M.  Here  was  work 
enough  for  a  preacher,  if  he  desired  to  be  faithful.  My  soul  was 
happy ;  and  I  felt  myself  totally  delivered  from  the  fear  of  man ; 
determined,  by  the  grace  of  God,  to  discharge  my  duty. 

Friday  19.  My  soul  was  in  peace  ;  but  the  burden  of  the  Lord 
rested  upon  me.  I  could  not  be  satisfied  till  I  declared  to  the  peo- 
ple their  danger  and  duty  :  which  I  did  from  Isaiah  lv.  6,  7.  They 
all  behaved  with  decency,  though  it  is  more  than  probable  that  some 
of  them  had  enough  of  my  preaching. 

Saturday  20.  We  had  a  meeting  in  the  evening  (which  we  intend 
to  have  every  evening  at  Mr.  Gough's  and  Mr.  Merryman's  alter- 
nately) for  prayer  and  exhortation ;  at  which  about  twenty  people 
attended.  My  spirit  was  grieved  within  me  at  the  conduct  of  poo? 
sinners  ;  but  in  Jesus  my  Lord,  I  had  peace. 

Lord's  day  21.  A  church  minister  attended  the  public  exhortation 
in  the  morning  ;  and  in  the  afternoon  a  dissenting  minister  preached 
from  these  excellent  words,  "  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
thou  shalt  be  saved.1'  His  discourse  was  very  methodical,  but  dry 
and  full  of  academical  stiffness.  It  was  very  unlikely  to  bring  souls 
either  to  faith  or  repentance.  I  preached  in  the  evening  from  Acts 
xiii.  26.  But  my  spirit  was  so  stirred  up  within  me,  by  a  desire  that 
the  people  who  were  in  their  houses  might  hear,  that  by  speaking 
too  loud  I  hurt  myself.  We  afterward  had  a  good  time  in  our  prayer- 
meeting. 

Monday  22.  My  soul  enjoys  sweet  communion  with  God  ;  but  I 
am  obliged  to  exercise  patience  in  bearing  with  the  manners  of  poor* 
blinded,  hardened  sinners, 


144  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY3S  JOURNAL. 

"  O  might  they  at  last  with  sorrow  return 

The  pleasures  to  taste,  for  which  they  were  born ; 
Our  Jesus  receiving,  our  happiness  prove, 
The  joy  of  believing,  the  heaven  of  love  !" 

Tuesday  23.  The  peace  of  God  abideth  constantly  with  me.  I 
preached  again  by  the  side  of  a  hill,  near  the  bath  ;  and  the  word 
had  a  melting  influence  on  some  of  the  congregation.  The  dissent- 
ing minister  attended  our  prayer-meeting  in  the  evening,  and  prayed 
with  us.  By  the  blessing  of  God,  my  body  began  to  feel  the  benefit 
of  the  waters.  May  the  Lord  bless  these  means  for  the  entire 
restoration  of  my  health  !  and  in  all  my  ways  may  I  acknowledge  him, 
and  ever  study  to  serve  him  with  all  1  have,  and  all  I  am !  Reading 
the  lives  of  Halleburton,  Walsh,  and  De  Renty,  has  had  a  great  ten- 
dency to  quicken  my  soul.  Our  not  growing  in  grace  is  seldom  for 
the  want  of  knowledge  concerning  our  duty  ;  but  generally  for  want  of 
using  proper  means  to  bring  the  knowledge  we  have  into  spiritual  use. 
Our  dull  spirits  must  have  line  upon  line,  and  precept  upon  precept. 

Wednesday  24.  The  congregation  was  rather  increased  ;  many 
were  affected,  and  one  man  fell  down.  It  clearly  appears  that  I  am 
in  the  line  of  my  duty,  in  attending  the  springs :  there  is  a  manifest 
check  to  the  overflowing  tide  of  immorality,  and  the  prejudices  of 
many  people  are  in  a  great  degree  removed.  So  that  I  hope  my 
visit  to  this  place  will  be  for  the  benefit  of  the  souls  of  some,  as 
well  as  for  the  benefit  of  my  own  body.  Though  preaching  in  the 
open  air,  to  a  people  who  are  almost  strangers  to  a  praying  spirit,  is 
more  disagreeable  to  my  feelings,  and  a  much  greater  cross  than 
travelling  and  preaching  in  a  circuit. 

Friday  26.  My  confidence  was  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  accompanied 
with  sweet  consolation.  My  company  and  myself  were  quickened  in 
our  own  souls,  by  a  diligent  use  of  the  means  ;  and  the  hearts  of 
several  others  were  under  some  religious  impressions.  But  the 
zealous  conversation  and  prayers  of  Mr.  Gough  seem  to  move  and 
melt  the  hearts  of  the  people  more  than  my  preaching  does.  Lord, 
send  by  whom  thou  wilt :  only  send  to  the  conviction  and  salvation  of 
immortal  souls.  1  have  found  both  reproof  and  instruction  in  read- 
ing the  life  of  Mr.  Walsh.  At  this  time  Christ  is  all  in  all  to  me.  My 
heart  is  sweetly  occupied  by  his  gracious  Spirit.  But  alas  !  I  am  not 
watchful  enough  to  keep  up  the  spirit  of  prayer. 

"  The  praying  spirit  breathe, 

The  watching  power  impart ; 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  145 

From  all  entanglements  beneath 
Call  off  my  peaceful  heart." 

Saturday  27.  There  were  many  to  hear  the  word  at  three  o'clock  ; 
and  the  Lord  was  with  us  in  the  evening  when  we  were  assembled 
for  pmyer  and  exhortation. 

Lord's  day  28.  My  soul  is  kept  in  the  love  of  God,  but  longs  for  an 
increase  of  the  divine  gift.  The  workers  of  iniquity  are  not  so  bold 
as  they  were  :  some  of  them  have  had  convictions,  but  lost  them. 
Others  seem  stiffly  to  oppose  the  influences  of  divine  grace.  Mr.  H. 
who  is  commonly  called  the  high-priest,  on  account  of  his  height, 
preached  to-day,  and  i  stood  clerk  for  him  ;  but  he  seemed  much 
dashed,  and  it  was  with  difficulty  he  proceeded  in  his  discourse, 
which  was  very  dry.  While  I  was  preaching,  my  heart  was  drawn 
out  in  compassion  to  the  people,  and  as  the  word  was  pointedly  ap- 
plied to  their  consciences,  I  believe  some  good  was  done.  So  much 
public  speaking  is  almost  more  than  my  frame  can  at  present  bear, 
but  the.  Spirit  within  me  constraineth  me.  1  feel  indeed  the  want  of 
retirement  in  this  place,  yet  I  make  a  substitute  of  family  exercises, 
and  find  communion  with  God.  My  soul  has  lately  been  much  drawn 
out  towards  God  in  reading  the  life  of  Mr.  Brainard,  and  longs  to  be 
like  him  and  every  other  faithful  follower  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Monday  29.  My  present  mode  of  conduct  is  as  follows — to  read 
about  a  hundred  pages  a  day  ;  usually  to  pray  in  public  five  times  a 
day  ;  to  preach  in  the  open  air  every  other  day  ;  and  to  lecture  in 
prayer-meeting  every  evening  And  if  it  were  in  my  power,  I  would 
do  a  thousand  times  as  much  for  such  a  gracious  and  blessed  Master. 
But  in  the  midst  of  all  my  little  employments,  I  feel  myself  as  no- 
thing, and  Chri?t  to  me  is  all  in  all. 

Tuesday  30.  My  spirit  was  grieved  to  see  so  little  of  the  fear  of 
God.  and  such  a  contempt  o/  sacred  things  as  appeared  in  many  of 
the  people  in  this  place.  An  enmity  against  God  and  his  ways  reigns 
in  the  hearts  of  all  the  unawakened,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest. 
The  Rev.  Mr.  W  attended  in  the  congregation  to  hear  the  word 
preached  to-day. 

Wednesday  31.  Spent  some  time  in  the  woods  alone  with  God, 
and  found  it  a  peculiar  time  of  love  and  joy  O  delightful  employ- 
ment !  All  my  soul  was  centered  in  God  !  The  next  day  I  unexpect- 
edly met  with  brother  W  and  while  preaching  at  3  o'clock  to  an 
increased  company,  the  word  produced  great  seriousness  and  atten- 
tion. And  we  had  a  happy,  powerful  meeting  in  the  evening  at  Mr. 
G.'s.     But  my  mind  is  in  some  degree  disturbed  by  the  reports  of 

Vol.  I.  19 


146  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

battles  and  slaughters.  It  seems  the  Cherokee  Indians  have  also 
begun  to  break  out,  and  the  English  ships  have  heen  coasting  to  and 
and  fro,  watching  for  some  advantages  :  but  what  can  they  expect  to 
accomplish  without  an  arrny  of  two  or  three  hundred  thousand  men  ? 
And  even  then,  there  would  be  but  little  prospect  of  their  success. 
O  that  this  dispensation  might  answer  its  proper  end  !  that  the  people 
would  fear  the  Lord,  and  sincerely  devote  themselves  to  his  service  1 
Then,  no  doubt,  wars  and  bloodshed  would  cease. 

Friday,  August  2.  My  soul  was  in  a  serious,  solemn  frame,  but 
earnestly  desired  to  be  more  universally  devoted  to  God.  Brother  W 
preached  to-day,  and  seemed  a  little  abashed  ;  but  the  Lord  was  with 
us  in  our  evening  exercises.  How  difficult  it  is  to  be  much  amongst 
men  of  the  world,  and  not  imbibe  their  spirit  in  a  greater  or  less  de- 
gree. I  am  afraid  my  friends  begin  to  grow  somewhat  languid  in  their 
spirits.  How  watchful,  devout,  and  heavenly  should  we  be,  to  keep 
up  the  power  of  inward  religion,  in  the  midst  of  such  a  company  of 
sinners  of  diverse  principles  and  manners !  For  my  own  part,  I  have 
had  cause  to  lament  the  want  of  more  watchfulness.  Lord,  help  us  to 
be  faithful  in  all  things,  to  all  persons,  and  in  all  places ! 

Lord's  day  4.  My  heart  was  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord.  Brother 
W.  preached  much  to  the  purpose,  though  there  were  some  little  in- 
accuracies in  his  language.  I  preached  in  the  afternoon,  and  brother 
W   again  at  night  ;  and  it  appeared  to  be  a  time  of  power. 

Monday  5.  Having  withdrawn  to  the  woods  for  the  purpose  of  self- 
examination,  and  pouring  out  my  heart  in  prayer  to  God,  I  found  my- 
self much  melted.  Glory  to  God,  for  a  comfortable  sense  of  the 
divine  favour!  But  alas!  how  serious,  how  solemn  should  I  be, 
when  so  many  immortal  souls  on  every  side  are  posting  down  to  ever- 
lasting fire  ! 

On  Tuesday  but  few  of  the  gentlemen  attended  to  hear  ;  but  I  wat 
enabled  to  deliver  my  message  faithfully  and  freely  ;  and  the  common 
people  heard  me  gladly.  The  next  day  also  many  attended,  and  I 
hope  my  labour  will  not  be  altogether  in  vain. 

Thursday  8.  My  heart  was  sweetly  resigned  to  the  will  of  my 
Lord.  I  was  willing  to  do  or  suffer  whatsoever  be  might  see  proper 
to  require  of  me.  Met  with  a  man  to-day  who  came  from  a  place 
about  eighteen  miles  from  the  springs.  He  never  heard  a  Methodist 
before,  nor  saw  one  ;  yet  he  appeared  to  be  a  Methodist  in  principle., 
experience,  and  practice.  He  was  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  him- 
self and  of  God,  by  the  means  of  sore  afflictions  of  body,  prayer,  and 
reading.  Thus  we  see  the  Lord  works  where,  and  in  what  manner 
he  pleases.     My  spirit  has  been  much   united   to  the  faithful  pec 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  147 

pie  of  God  of  every  denomination,  and  at  this  time  I  felt  a  spirit  of 
unity  with  Mr.  H.  a  Geraian  minister,  though  the  Germans  in  general 
who  dwell  in  these  parts  seem  very  insensible  to  the  things  of  God. 
On  Thursday  night  we  had  a  mixed  company  of  Germans  and  English  ; 
Mr.  H.  preached  in  German  and  I  in  English.  Our  exercises  in  the 
evening  were  as  usual.  Many  have  been  much  affected  lately,  under 
the  word  which  I  have  delivered  from  time  to  time  for  God. 

Lord's  day  11.  A  fine,  sensible,  polite  gentleman  delivered  a  dis- 
course on  the  new  birth;  he  described  it  by  its  effects,  but  appear- 
ed to  be  at  a  total  loss  in  respect  to  the  manner  in  which  it  is  wrought. 
I  had  spoke  in  the  morning,  and  in  the  evening  preached  again,  press- 
ing religion  on  the  young  people  especially,  and  showing  the  supe- 
rior advantages  and  satisfaction  arising  from  it  even  in  this  life. 

Monday  12.  1  rode  seventeen  miles  to  see  a  saint  indeed — a  wo- 
man confined  to  her  bed  for  fifteen  years,  and  quite  happy  in  the 
love  of  God,  though  she  had  never  seen  a  Methodist,  or  any  other 
truly  religious  people.  Where  are  the  free-thinkers  ?  Is  this  priest- 
craft ?  How  can  that  be  priestcraft,  which  no  priest  ever  had  a  hand 
in  ?  No,  this  is  the  effect  of  divine  power  and  goodness  :  and  so  is  all 
real,  heart-felt  religion.  But  if  poor  impenitent  sinners  will  not 
give  all  diligence  to  know  the  comfort  of  enjoving  religion,  they  will, 
they  must,  though  much  against  their  will,  know,  in  due  time,  the 
misery  of  rejecting  it.  After  1  had  preached,  with  some  divine  assis- 
tance, to  about  one  hundred  people  collected  from  the  country  parts 
around,  we  returned  and  had  a  comfortable  time  in  our  evening  meet- 
ing. 'The  house  in  which  we  live,  at  the  springs,  is  not  the  most 
agreeable  :  the  size  of  it  is  twenty  feet  by  sixteen  ;  and  there  are 
seven  beds  and  sixteen  persons  therein,  and  some  noisy  children. 
So  I  dwell  amongst  biiars  and  thorns  ;  but  my  soul  is  in  peace. 

Tuesday  13.  1  found  the  parson  had  been  encouraging  the  gentle- 
men to  oppose,  me,  and  intimating  that  it  was  very  improper  to  permit 
me  to  preach.  My  soui  is  amongst  lions,  but  the  God  of  Daniel  is 
with  me.  I  attempted  to  preach  in  the  day,  but  my  mind  was  shut 
up  ;  though  my  spirit  was  revived  in  the  evening  lecture.  Is  it 
strange  to  see  a  priest  conducting  a  persecution  against  the  people  of 
God  ?  When  did  a  persecution  take  place  in  which  men  of  that  cha- 
racter had  no  hand  ?  But  although  Satan  may  be  permitted  to  trans- 
form himself  into  an  angel  of  light  for  a  season  ;  yet  he  will  not  always 
have  his  own  way^in  thi-*  matter. 

Thursday  15.  My  throat  grew  worse,  and  it  was  a  rainy  day,  so  I 
was  obliged  to  be  dumb  ;  but  having  faithfully  declared  to  them,  from 


148  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUIIY'S  JOURNAL. 

time  to  time,  the  whole  counsel  of  God,  both  in  his  promises   and 
threatenings,  I  felt  myself  contented  as  having  delivered  my  own  soul. 

Friday  16.  My  throat  growing  worse,  they  put  a  blister  behind  my 
ear  ;  but  my  conscience  was  pure,  and  I  quietly  submitted  to  the  will 
of  heaven.  May  the  Lord  keep  me  pure  in  heart,  and  hamble  at  his 
feet,  till  he  shall  make  up  his  jewels,  and  bring  them  into  his  glorious 
presence,  where  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  be  done  away  !  Glory  to 
God.  nothing  has  lately  broken  the  peace  of  my  tranquil  breast ! 

Lord's  day  18,  Found  myself  better,  and  felt  a  desire  to  preach, 
which  I  did,  after  having  heard  parson  W  and  found  myself  at  liberty 
while  showing,  1.  The  natural  state  of  the  Gentile  world  :  2.  Their 
spiritual  state  :  3.  The  means  and  manner  of  their  change  ;  and 
lastly,  I  applied  it  to  the  Christian  world,  so  called,  heathens  in  their 
hearts  and  practices  ;  and  showed  how  vain  it  is  to  substitute  heathen 
morality,  or  religious  forms  and  ceremonies,  for  true  religion.  My 
friend  Mr.  B.  and  his  wife,  from  Portsmouth,  arrived  here  to-day. 

Thursday  22  My  soul  has  been  daily  grieved  by  the  practices  ol 
poor  blinded  sinners  ;  but  the  Lord  has  supported  and  comforted  me. 

1  have  not  spared,  but  preached  plainly  and  pointedly  every  day  this 
week  ;  and  to  day  Mr.  S.  a  German  minister,  went  with  me  about 
nine  miles  to  a  German  settlement,  where  we  both  preached  in  our 
proper  tongues. 

Friday  23.  I  had  some  serious  conversation  with  a  Quaker,  on  the 
subject  of  the  holy  Scriptures  as  the  grand  criterion  of  all  inward  and 
outward  religion.  But  to  deny  this,  is  to  oppose  the  present  dictates 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  its  former  dictates  :  which  would  be  a  most  dan- 
gerous absurdity.  How  strange,  how  presumptuous,  to  exalt  the  dig- 
nity of  modern  speakers  beyond  that  of  the  prophets  and  apostles, 
who  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  have  given  us 
a  sure  word  of  prophecy  ;  whereunto  we  do  well  that  we  take  heed ! 

2  Pet.  i.  19.     But  we  must  come  to  the  law  and  to  the  testimony  ;  if 
they  speak  not  according  to  this  word,  it  is  because  there  is  no  light 
in  them.     Isaiah  viii.  20.     We  are  sure  that  the  sacred  Scriptures  are 
of  God  ;  and  we  are  as  sure,  if  any  man  speak  contrary  to  them,  he  is 
not  of  God. 

Lord's  day  25.  I  have  had  strong  confidence  towards  God,  but  my 
heart  has  not  been  so  constantly  and  fervently  employed  in  the  spirit 
of  prayer  as  it  might  have  been  After  preaching  to-day,  I  fell  in 
with  one  of  the  wildest  Antinotnians  I  had  ever  met  with.  He  under- 
took to  prove  that  love  is  not  love  ;  and  said,  "  they  that  are  born  of 
God  do  not  sin  ;  but  that  they  may  sin  in  all  manner  of  ways,  and  fre- 


REV.  FRANTCIS  ASBTTRY*S  JOURNAL.  149 

quently  do  so."  But  what  was  most  surprising,  he  said,  "  he  valued 
not  my  God  and  Christ  ;  tor  they  could  neither  save  nor  damn  him." 
Such  language  is  enough  to  make  a  man  shudder  in  repeating  it. 

Tuesday  27.  Having  taktn  my  leave  yesterday,  in  discoursing  on 
the  parable  of  the  sower,  I  this  day  turned  my  hack  on  the  springs, 
as  the  best  and  the  worst  place  that  I  ever  was  in— good  for  health,  but 
most  injurious  to  religion.  We  then  rode  about  twenty-five  miles,  and 
called  to  see  friend  R.  but  had  to  lodge  on  the  boards.  The  next  day 
a  minister  attended  to  hear  the  word  at  Dr.  C.'s,  and  gave  us  a  kind 
invitation  to  his  lodging. 

Saturday  31.  I  met  brother  L  and  brother  F.  at  Mr.  G.'s.  Thus 
hath  the  Lord  preserved  me  through  various  trials,  and  his  providence 
hath  conducted  me  back  in  safety.  I  enjoy  more  health,  and  perhaps 
possess  more  grace  than  before  I  went  to  the  springs.  Now,  O  Lord, 
only  make  and  keep  me  pure  ;  and  let  me  be  wholly  and  only  thine! 
My  soul  was  enlarged  in  preaching  to-day,  and  many  were  melted 
under  the  word.  I  strove  to  prevail  with  brother  F.  to  go  to  Balti- 
more, but  could  not. 

Lord's  day,  September  1.  I  rode  to  Gunpowder-Neck,  and  preach- 
ed twice.  My  soul  was  exceedingly  happy  in  God,  both  in  preach- 
ing and  meeting  the  class  ;  as  it  also  was  the  next  day  at  I.  D.'s. 
But  alas  !  we  hear  of  bloodshed  and  slaughter.  Many  immortal  souls 
are  driven  to  eternity  by  the  bloody  sword.  This  is  a  grief  to  my 
soul !  Lord,  scatter  them  that  delight  in  war,  and  thirst  for  human 
blood!  It  is  well  for  the  righteous  that  this  is  not  their  home.  No  : 
they  are  blessed  with  a  pacific  spirit,  and  are  bound  for  a  kingdom  of 
peace,  where 

"  No  horrid  alarum  of  war 

Shall  break  our  eternal  repose  ; 
No  sound  of  the  trumpet  is  there 

Where  Jesus's  Spirit  o'erflows  : 
Appeas'd  by  the  charms  of  thy  grace, 

We  all  shall  in  amity  join, 
And  kindly  each  other  embrace, 

And  love  with  a  passion  like  thine." 

Friday  6.  Having  been  much  fatigued  by  long  rides,  and  preaching 
and  meeting  classes  every  day.  though  for  the  most  part  both  the 
people  and  myself  were  much  quickened  ;  I  came  to-day  to  my  old 
and  faithful  friends,  H.  W  and  the  people  felt  the  two-edged  sword 
of  the  .word.  Glory  to  God!  I  find  a  constant  sense  of  his  divine 
love,  though  still  blame  myself  for  being  too  free  in  conversation 
when  amongst  my  friends. 


150  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

Lord's  day  8.  The  congregation  at  Bush-Forest  preaching-house, 
appeared  to  be  very  insensible  ;  and  it  seemed  as  if  they  had  opposed 
the  truth  so  long,  that  they  could  feel  it  no  more.  But  at  Deer- 
Creek,  my  heart  was  warm,  and  the  people  were  moved.  On  Mon- 
day I  also  preached  twice  ;  but  on  Tuesday  it  seemed  as  if  my  laboirt 
was  too  much  for  my  strength.  I  have  scarce  had  time  to  enter  a 
few  lines  in  my  journal,  but  have  been  almost  constantly  employed 
in  riding  from  place  to  place,  and  speaking  to  the  people. 

Wednesday  11.  The  people  were  serious  at  W.  B.'s.  Here] 
saw  the  son  of  the  famous  Dr.  F  but  how  unlike  his  father  both  ir 
respect  to  grace  and  good  sense.  My  soul  now  hangs  on  the  Lord 
and  dwells  in  the  element  of  purity  ;  desirous  of  nothing  but  to  en- 
joy more  of  God,  and  to  be  entirely  dedicated  to  his  service.  Or 
Thursday  I  found  a  loving,  simple  people  at  T  B.'s,  and  was  com- 
forted in  meeting  the  class  ;  though  I  had  been  undesignedly  led  tc 
reach  beyond  their  capacity  in  my  preaching.  Friday  13.  I  came  U 
Mr  G.'s,  and  met  with  brother  I.  M.  from  New-York,  who  broughl 
painful  accounts  of  bloodshed  and  slaughter.  On  Saturday  I  felt  un- 
well, and  was  apprehensive  that  my  return  to  Baltimore  might  bring 
on  my  old  complaints.  We  had  a  large  company  and  a  refreshing 
season  at  Mr.  G.'s,  where  brother  F   exhorted  after  I  had  preached. 

Monday  16.  This  was  an  abasing  season.  My  soul  was  cast  down 
and  deeply  humbled,  under  a  consciousness  of  my  spiritual  wants.  1 
did  not  enjoy  such  a  cheerful  sense  of  the  divine  goodness  as  at 
other  times,  but  ardently  panted  for  more  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ. 

Tuesday  17.  Both  rich  and  poor  came  out  to  hear  the  word  at  Elk- 
Ridge,  and  some  of  the  young  and  gay  were  made  to  weep.  It  will 
be  well  for  them,  if  they  prefer  Jesus  Christ  and  his  cross  to  all  the 
wealth  and  vanity  of  this  world.  I  went  home  with  Caleb  Dorsey, 
who  was  once  convinced  of  sin,  but  has  now  grown  worse  than  ever. 
He  had  about  forty  souls  in  his  family,  untaught  as  the  Indians  in  the 
forest.  They  seem  to  roll  in  plenty  :  but  "  there  is  no  peace,  saith 
my  God,  to  the  wicked."  At  Mr.  R.'s  on  Wednesday,  we  had  but 
few  to  hear.  But  m.my  or  few,  it  makes  no  difference  with  me. 
The  Lord  filled  me  with  divine  consolation  while  I  was  dispensing  the 
word  of  life  to  them. 

Friday  20.  Returned  to  Baltimore,  and  found  that  a  work  which 
had  cost  some  thousands  of  pounds,  was  burnt  down.  How  easily 
'can  divine  Providence  strip  us  of  all  our  earthly  objects.  Are  not 
such  occurrences  loud  calls  from  a  gracious  God  ?  "  Lay  not  up  for 
yourselves  treasures  upon  earth,  but  lay  up  for  yourselves  treasures 
in  heaven."     I  have  been  much  enlarged  in  preaching,  and  favoured 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  151 

with  peculiar  nearness  to  God  at  certain  times,  for  this  week  past  j 
but  have  been  also  sorely  tempted  by  the  enemy,  and  found  it  re- 
quired great  exertions  of  faith  and  prayer,  to  conquer  every  motion. 
Glory  to  God  for  his  grace  bestowed  on  me  through  Jesus  Christ! 
We  have  now  several  exhorters  raised  up  in  different  parts  of  the 
country.     This  evening  Mr.  R — a  came  to  town. 

Lord's  day  22.  My  labour  was  great.  I  preached  twice,  and  met 
the  white  people  and  the  black  people  separately  at  the  Point  ;  and 
after  preaching  in  town,  met  a  class.  All  this  I  could  submit  to  with 
cheerfulness  ;  but  my  spirit  was  grieved  for  the  want  of  more  holi- 
ness, and  more  of  God. 

"  O  grant  that  nothing  in  my  soul 

May  dwell,  but  thy  pure  love  alone  .' 
O  may  thy  love  possess  me  whole  ! 

My  joy,  my  treasure,  and  my  crown  ; 
Strange  flames  far  from  my  sou!  remove  ; 
My  every  act,  word,  thought,  be  love." 

Monday  23.  My  soul  has  been  much  harassed  by  Satan  ;  though 
I  found  great  freedom  in  preaching  to  a  number  of  souls  at  the  Point, 
On  Tuesday  also  my  spiritual  exercises  were  great  and  painfull 
Lord,  I  am  oppressed,  undertake  for  met  Rode  to  Mr.  E.'s,  and 
found  the  accuser  of  the  brethren  had  taken  advantage  of  the  society* 
by  tempting  them  one  against  another.  But  most  of  them  and  the 
congregation  seemed  to  feel  the  power  of  the  word  preached. 

Wednesday  25.  Though  unwell,  I  returned  to  town,  preached  to 
a  large  and  serious  congregation,  and  endeavoured  to  secure,  in  a 
proper  manner,  our  little  building  at  the  point.  Having  preached  at 
N.  P  's  on  Thursday,  I  found  W  L.  very  sick  on  Friday  ;  but  the 
small  company  which  was  collected  for  worship,  were  deeply  affected 
under  the  word.  And,  blessed  be  my  all-sufficient  Deliverer  I  my 
soul  was  in  a  great  measure  disburdened  of  its  temptations,  and 
restored  to  delightful  access  to  God,  especially  in  the  exercise  of 
prayer.  O  my  God  !  keep  me  always  near  to  thee  ;  always  humble 
and  watchful  ! 

Saturday  28.  At  Mr.  G.'s,  I  met  the  preachers,  I.  M.   and  T,   F 
and  we  had  a  great  melting  in  public  worship  :    my  own   soul  also 
partook  of  the  blessing. 

Lord's  day  29.  There  were  five  or  six  hundred  people  at  the 
Forks,  to  whom  I  discoursed  on  the  judgments  of  God  ;  and  showed 
who  are  the  provoking  cause  ;  not  religious  people,  as  the  ignorant 
say,  but  those  who  transgress  the  laws  of  God  in  defiance  of  his 


152  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL. 

justice.  Thus  it  was  with  the  antediluvians,  with  the  Egyptians, 
with  the  apostate  Israelites  in  the  wilderness,  with  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem  after  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  thus  it  is  with  us.  After 
preaching  we  held  a  love-feast,  and  the  power  of  God  was  present 
with  us.  Then  went  to  Mr.  G— y's  and  preached  to  a  large  company 
there.  After  which  I  went  home  with  Mr.  C.  but  found  that  my  la- 
bour was  too  much  for  my  strength,  and  had  brought  on  a  fever. 

Monday  30.  Rode  nine  miles  and  preached  at  Mr.  M.'s,  then  six 
miles  farther,  and  preached  and  met  the  society  at  Mr.  G — r's  ;  and 
the  Lord  was  with  us.  1  now  find  myself  better  both  in  body  and 
mind,  and  know  the  truth  of  our  Lord's  words,  "  My  grace  is  suffi- 
cient for  thee." 

Friday,  October  4.  Having  travelled  through  the  Barrens,  and 
preached  at  several  places,  I  came  to  brother  C.'s,  and  met  with 
W.  L.  And  after  preaching  in  a  cold,  open  house,  I  rode  to  Mr. 
R.'s,  and  was  happy  in  the  company  of  my  good  friends.  On  Satur- 
day I  lodged  at  the  house  of  N.  J.  a  happy,  simple  soul,  the  glory  ol 
this  family. 

Lord's  day  6.  We  had  a  great  meeting  at  the  widow  M.s.  I 
preached  at  eleven  o'clock  to  six  or  seven  hundred  souls  ;  and  then 
we  held  a  love-feast,  in  which  many  spoke  of  the  goodness  of  God. 
We  had  five  or  six  preachers  and  exhorters  ;  so  we  also  held  a  watch- 
night  from  six  o'clock  till  ten.  And  I  felt  as  if  it  would  have  been 
no  burden  to  have  tarried  in  religious  exercises  all  the  night.  The 
next  evening  likewise  we  had  a  very  solemn  watch-night  at  W   R.'s. 

Wednesday  9.  Having  received  a  letter  from  Mrs.  M.  of  Middle- 
River  Neck,  requesting  me  to  go  and  preach  a  funeral  sermon  at  the 
burial  of  her  sister,  I  set  out  this  morning  in  compliance  with  her 
request.  We  found  it  a  serious,  awful  season  :  and  after  all  wa» 
over,  she  offered  me  some  money  ;  but  being  in  a  place  where  1 
could  receive  my  six  pounds  per  quarter,  which  was  sufficient  for 
keeping  me  in  clothes  and  a  horse,  I  thankfully  refused  to  take  it.  She 
was  capable  of  making  an  excellent,  useful  Christian,  and  appeared 
to  be  under  religious  impressions. 

Thursday  10.  At  the  head  of  the  river,  I  found  a  few  poor,  cold- 
hearted,  contentious  people  :  but  in  the  time  of  my  preaching  from 
Galatians  v.  24,  25.  most  of  them  seemed  much  affected. 

Saturday  12.  At  Mr.  G.'s  I  met  brother  R — n,  who  was  just  reco- 
vering from  a  late  illness  ;  and  the  next  day  we  rode  in  company  to 
the  Point,  where  he  preached  a  very  profitable  sermon  :  and  the 
Lord  applied  the  word  to  the  hearts  of  the  people,  while  I  preached 
at  night  in  town. 


HKV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY^S  JOURNAL,  153 

Monday  14.  My  soul  enjoyed  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all 
understanding.  Mr.  R.  went  with  me  to  T  W  's,  and  as  he  was  un- 
well it  fell  on  me  to  preach  I  was  greatly  drawn  out  in  my  affec- 
tions and  ideas  ;  and  it  was  a  tender,  melting  time.  On  Tuesday  I 
preached  with  holy  warmth  at  Mr.  S.'s,  though  1  had  caught  cold,  and 
found  myself  much  indisposed. 

Wednesday  16.  Met  with  brother  W — e,  and  as  I  found  myself 
unwell,  I  requested  him  to  take  my  place  for  a  day,  but  could  not 
prevail ;  so  I  patiently  submitted  to  go  on,  and  think  hard  of  nothing 
that  may  occur.  If  Jesus  Christ  suffered  so  much  in  purchasing  sal- 
vation for  men,  we  may  be  willing  to  suffer  a  little  in  carrying  the 
glad  tidings  amongst  them. 

Friday  18,  My  body  continued  unwell,  and  my  labour  has  been 
tiresome  to  the  flesh,  but  my  soul  has  been  much  blessed  with  an  un- 
interrupted peace,  and  sweet  communion  with  God.  This  is  the 
time  for  suffering  and  toil,  but  a  rest  remaineth  for  the  people  of 
God. 

"  And  what  are  all  my  suff'rings here, 
If,  Lord,  thou  count'st  me  meet 
With  thy  enraptur'd  host  to  appear, 
And  worship  at  thy  feet." 

I  went  to  the  Point  and  delivered  my  message  to  the  congregation 
with  much  freedom.  But  the  next  day  my  spirit  was  grieved  to  find 
that  the  love  of  some  was  waxing  cold.  When  Christ  cometh,  will  he 
find  faith  on  the  earth  ?  What  an  ungrateful  creature  is  man  !  to  taste 
and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good,  and  then  turn  again  to  folly  ! 

Lord's  day  20.  My  spirit  was  much  refreshed  in  preaching  and 
,^eting  the  little  flock  at  the  Point ;  and  while  I  was  preaching  with 
peculiar  sympathy  in  town,  a  poor  sinner  was  so  affected  that  he 
groaned  as  in  an  agony.  If  sinners  could  know  as  much  of  hell  as 
the  damned  do,  they  would  both  groan  and  roar  aloud.  It  is  the 
blindness  of  their  minds  that  keeps  them  so  easy.  On  Monday 
W  L.,  I.  F  brother  S.  and  myself  held  a  watch-night  at  the  Point  ; 
and  my  soul  was  much  quickened,  though  many  of  the  people  appear- 
ed to  be  dull. 

Thursday  24.  At  the  funeral  of  Mr.  T.'s  son,  I  preached  to  about 
a  thousand  souls,  and  gave  him  such  a  character  as  I  thought  he 
deserved.  Some  were  affected  ;  but  the  funeral  parade  engaged  the 
attention  of  too  many.  I  spent  about  three  hours  in  the  different 
exercises  suitable  to  the  occasion,  found  myself  pure  from  the  blood 
of  the  people,  and  took  nothing  for  my  services. 

Vol.   T  <?o 


Iu4  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

Friday  25.  Being  a  day  of  rest  from  public  exercises,  I  spent  it  in 
prayer,  meditation,  and  reading  ;  partly  in  Whitby's  Notes,  and  partly 
in  the  Life  of  Solon,  the  Athenian  philosopher. 

Saturday  26.  Meeting  with  two  of  the  preachers,  we  took  sweet 
counsel  together.  And  after  I  had  preached  the  next  day  at  Gun- 
powder-Neck, we  held  a  love-feast.  There  was  a  great  melting 
among  the  people,  which  I  hope  will  be  the  first-fruits  of  a  gracious 
harvest. 

Monday  28.  The  people  were  too  destitute  of  spiritual  life  at  Mr. 
D.'s.  But  I  found  some  faithful,  lively  souls,  the  next  day  at  Sus- 
quehannab. 

Saturday,  November  2.  For  a  few  days  past  I  have  been  vari- 
ously exercised  in  preaching  at  different  places.  Some  congregations 
were  warm  and  earnest  in  religion  ;  others  were  dull,  and  seemed 
to  have  but  little  relish  for  divine  things.  To-day  I  came  home  to 
H.  W.'s,  and  except  the  time  employed  in  public  and  private  exer- 
cises, I  was  taken  up  in  reading  Whitby's  Comments.  He  is  steady 
to  his  purpose  in  confuting  Socinianism  and  Calvinism. 

Lord's  day  3.  '•  Truly  my  soul  waiteth  upon  God :  from  him 
cometh  my  salvation."  I  know  they  that  wait  upon  him  shall  renew 
their  strength.  He  hath  drawn  me  by  the  cords  of  his  love,  and 
blessed  me  with  sweet  communion.  In  preaching  and  meeting  class 
at  Deer  Creek,  I  felt  so  much  of  the  worth  of  immortal  souls  more 
than  usual,  that  I  seemed  as  one  awaking  out  of  sleep. 

Tuesday  5.  My  spiritual  trials  have  been  heavy,  but  the  Lord  sup- 
ported and  gave  me  peace.  Lord  sanctify  me  wholly,  and  keep  me 
in  the  dust! 

Thursday  7.  Have  read  Whitby's  first  volume  as  far  as  the  end  of 
the  Acts.  I  preached  and  met  class  to-day  at  T  B.'s.  And  the  neit 
day  at  the  Forks,  I  found  a  people  that  walk  closely  with  God.  Leav- 
ing them  for  the  present,  I  went  to  meet  Mr.  R — n,  who  was  then 
recovered  from  his  illness.  On  the  Lord's  day  we  were  employed  in 
public  exercises  at  the  widow  B.'s.  On  Monday  we  had  a  heart-affect- 
ing time  in  prayer- meeting  at  Deer  Creek  :  and  Tuesday  12,  we  held 
our  quarterly  meeting.  We  had  a  very  solemn  time  at  the  love-feast, 
"in  which  many  spoke  freely  and  feelingly  of  what  God  had  done  for 
their  souls.  After  the  preaching  was  ended  and  the  temporal  business 
all  settled,  we  then  laid  a  plan  for  regulating  the  public  exercises  of 
the  local  preachers  ;  and  concluded  the  whole  in  much  love  and  good 
order.  But  these  public  times  interrupt  my  private  devotions  and 
communion  with  God.  It  would  be  very  disagreeable  to  live  so  always. 
One  of  the  preachers  brought  an  account  of  an  apparition  that  appeared 


REV.  FRANCIS  aSBURy's  J0UKNA)..  1  q& 

to  a  lad,  and  gave  a  particular  account  of  being  murdered  by  his  fel- 
low soldier,  requesting  that  the  lad's  father  might  lodge  an  informa- 
tion against  the  murderer :  which  was  done.  I  was  informed  that 
the  American  and  English  armies  were  cannonading  within  a  mile  of 
each  other,  near  New-Rochelle.  How  much  better  would  it  be  for 
mankind,  to  "  seek  peace  and  pursue  it." 

Wednesday  13.  Was  spent  comfortably  in  company  with  the 
preachers.  We  had  a  public  meeting,  in  which  we  all  prayed  and  ex- 
horted :  and  the  Lord  gave  us  his  blessing.  Brother  K.  and  I  spent 
Thursday  at  Mr.  G.'s  ;  and  on  Friday  I  went  to  Baltimore. 

Saturday  16.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  applied  the  word  [to  the 
hearts  of  the  people,  while  I  preached  in  town  with  much  animation. 

Lord's  day  17.  It  was  difficult  to  reach  the  hearts  of  the  congre- 
gation at  the  Point  :  but  we  had  great  satisfaction  in  the  class-meet- 
ing. Though  my  body  was  weak,  and  there  were  symptoms  of  a 
fever,  yet  I  was  enabled  to  preach  with  spiritual  life  and  power  at 
night  in  town. 

Monday  18.  My  body  was  disordered,  and  my  spirit  sensibly  felt 
the  burden  of  the  flesh ;  but  under  all  my  weakness  and  pains,  my 
soul  was  exceedingly  happy  in  God.  On  Tuesday  I  was  still  unwell 
and  took  a  vomit.  By  Thursday  I  had  got  clear  of  my  fevers,  and 
on  Friday  met  the  preachers  W  W.,  W-  L.  and  C.  P  But  my 
throat  was  now  sore,  and  my  mind  a  little  uneasy  on  account  of  the 
disappointments  in  the  circuit. 

Lord's  day  24.  I  felt  unwell,  but  went  to  the  Point  in  the  morning, 
where  my  mind  was  interrupted  by  the  frequent  coming  of  the  peo- 
ple, almost  to  the  very  end  of  the  sermon.  After  the  preaching  was 
over,  I  told  them  I  had  rather  they  would  stay  at  home,  than  come 
in  such  an  irregular  manner.  The  congregation  were  very  serious 
in  the  evening  at  town.     But  I  felt  much  exhausted. 

Monday  25.  My  soul  was  'calm  and  comfortable.  I  have  applied 
myself  much  to  reading  Whitby  :  but  he  has  so  much  to  say  about 
different  men's  opinions,  that  it  makes  the  labour  of  reading  him  too 
dry  and  tedious.  Now  I  began  to  Fead  the  Christian  Library.  On 
Tuesday  intended  to  go  to  Mr.T's,  but  as  there  was  a  heavy  rain,  I 
thought  it  unsafe  to  venture  so  soon  after  my  recovery.  My  soul  has 
had  complete  victory  over  all  sin,  and  been  blessed  with  peaceable 
and  calm  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  the  Son.  Thanks  be  to 
God  for  his  unspeakable  gifts  ! 

Wednesday  27.  I  went  to  Mr.  R.'s,  where  we  held  a  watch-night. 
My  ideas  were  much  contracted  in  preaching  ;  but  we  had  seve- 
ral exhorters  present,  and  they  all  spoke.     A  great  part  of  what  they 


15b  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURYSS  JOURNAL. 

said  was  very  simple,  though  well  intended,  no  doubt.  The  society 
were  greatly  melted  at  Mr.  P  's  on  Thursday  ;  and  on  Friday  I  went 
to  a  place  of  W  M.'s  cultivation,  and  1  found  a  society  of  about  30 
serious,  steady  people. 

Saturday  30.  Returning  to  Baltimore,  I  preached  from  Rom.  viii. 
38,  39.  The  congregation  was  small,  but  there  was  power  in  the 
word.  It  was  now  reported  that  the  British  troops  were  on  their 
march  to  Philadelphia.  Troubles  may  be  at  hand.  But  my  design 
is,  through  grace,  so  to  improve  my  time  as  to  be  always  prepared 
for  the  worst.  Poor  sinners  have  cause  to  tremble  at  the  approach 
of  death  ;  but  even  in  that  dreaded  hour,  the  righteous  can  rejoice 
in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God. 

Lord's  day,  Dec.  1.  Preached  as  usual  both  at  town  and  Point; 
but  some  of  the  people  seemed  destitute  of  spiritual  feelings.  There 
is  no  small  danger  of  their  being  given  up  to  hardness  of  heart.  If 
the  word  preached  does  not  prove  the  savour  of  life  unto  life,  it  will 
prove  the  savour  of  death  unto  death.  So  that  people  may  hear  the 
word  of  God,  and  resist  the  operations  of  his  Spirit,  till  they  and 
their  seats  have  an  equal  degree  of  spiritual  sensibility  when  the 
word  of  God  is  preached. 

Monday  2.  In  reading  Whitby  on  1  Cor,  iv.  4.  I  observed  these 
words — "Here  also  note  in  St.  Paul  another  sense  of  justification ; 
as  it  relates  to  our  absolution  from  condemnation,  and  our  approba- 
tion as  rightecMis  at  the  last  day,  which  will  be,  saith  he,  according  to 
our  works,  2  Cor.  v.  10.  and  our  fidelity  in  execution  of  the  trusts 
committed  to  us,  verse  2."  We  are  commanded  to  follow  Jesus 
Christ.  And  he,  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him,  endured  the 
cross,  despising  the  shame.  So  it  is  our  duty  to  follow  the  example 
of  Moses,  who  had  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  reward.  Hence 
it  appears,  we  are  justified  by  the  merits  of  Christ,  through  faith  in 
the  day  of  conversion  ;  and  by  the  evidence  of  works  in  the  day  of 
judgment,     Happy  is  the  Christian  who  abounds  with  them  ! 

Tuesday  3.  I  was  informed  that  proposals  were  in  agitation  for 
settling  Mr.  S — e,  and  allowing  him  a  maintenance.  But  none  of 
these  things  shall  give  me  much  distress.  My  soul  quietly  resteth 
in  the  Lord.  I  have  some  desire  to  know  the  issue  of  what  relates 
to  Philadelphia  at  this  critical  juncture.  But  there  is  a  God  who 
overruleth  all  these  matters. 

Thursday  5.  My  soul  was  much  enlarged  to-day  in  preaching  at 
N.  P.'s.  I  afterward  went  in  company  with  Mr.  O.  to  brother  L.'s. 
And  on  Friday  N.  P.,  W  M.  and  myself  held  a  watch-night.  Satur- 
day   I   returned  to  Baltimore,   in  a  spiritual   frame   of  mind,   and 


HEY.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL,  3 


,J« 


preached  from  John  viii.  12.  "  He  that  followeth  me  shall  not  walk 
in  darkness." 

Lord's  day  8.  My  present  practice  is,  to  set  apart  about  three 
hours  out  of  every  twenty-four,  for  private  prayer  ;  but  Satan  la- 
bours much  to  interrupt  me  ;  nevertheless,  my  soul  enjoys  a  sweet 
and  peaceful  nearness  to  God,  for  the  most  part,  in  these  duties.  I 
found  some  at  the  Point  mourning  for  an  interest  in  Jesus  Christ. 
May  the  Lord,  whom  they  seek,  cpme  suddenly  into  the  temple  of 
their  disconsolate  hearts! 

Monday  9.  My  ideas  were  clear  and  my  heart  was  warm,  while  I 
was  treating  on  the  regal  dignity  of  Christ,  the  nature  of  his  govern- 
ment,  and  the  privileges  of  his  subjects. 

Tuesday  10.  With  the  snow  full  in  my  face,  I  set  out  for  Mr.  T  's. 
The  flesh  was  reluctant  for  a  while,  but  was  brought  to  submit.  When 
the  mind  is  reconciled  to  duties  and  difficulties,  then  that  which  was 
hard  becomes  easy. 

Thursday  12.  I  was  greatly  assisted  and  blessed  in  my  own  soul, 
while  preaching  about  two  hours  at  a  watch-night  at  Mr.  P.'s.  We 
have  many  alarming  accounts  of  martial  preparations.  But  I  leave 
the  troubles  of  to-mnrrow  till  to-morrovv  comes.  My  desire  is  to 
live  more  to  God  to  day  than  yesterday,  and  to  be  more  holy  this 
hour  than  the  last. 

Lord's  day  15.  The  troubles  of  the  times  seemed  so  to  engross  the 
attention  of  the  people,  that  the  congregation  were  very  dull  while  I 
preached  at  night  in  Baltimore  from  Micah  vi.  9.  "  The  Lord's  voice 
crieth  unto  the  city,  and  the  man  of  wisdom  shall  see  thy    name  ; 

hear  ye  the  rod,  and  who  hath  appointed  it."     It  seems  Mr.  R  n 

is  going  to  New  York. 

Thursday  19  Received  a  narrative  of  the  work  of  God  in  Virgi- 
nia, written  by  Mr.  J.  to  be  sent  to  Mr.  Wesley.  The  Lord  has  been 
displaying  the  power  of  his  grace  in  a  marvellous  manner,  through 
many  parts  of  Virginia.  An  extract  of  the  narrative  is  here  sub- 
joined. 


i  BRIEF  NARRATIVE  OF  THE  REVIVAL  OF  RELIGION  IN  VIR- 
GINIA.   IN  A  LETTER  TO  A  FRIEND. 

Dear  Sir, 
YOU  was  pleased,  when  in  Virginia,  to  desire  a  narrative  of  the 
work  of  God  in  these  parts.     I  shall  give  you  matter  of  fact,  in  a 


loS  11EV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL. 

plain,  artless  dress  ;  relating  only  what  I  have  myself  seen  and  heard, 
and  what  I  have  received  from  men  on  whose  judgment  and  veracity 
I  can  fully  depend. 

That  you  may  have  a  full  view  of  the  whole,  I  shall  go  back  as 
far  as  my  first  settlement  in  this  parish.  August  29,  1763,  I  was 
chosen  rector  of  B.  in  the  county  of  D.  in  Virginia.  Ignorance  of 
the  things  of  God,  profaneness,  and  irreligion,  then  prevailed  among 
all  ranks  and  degrees.  So  that  I.  doubt  if  even  the  form  of  godliness 
was  to  be  found  in  any  one  family  of  this  large  and  populous  parish. 
I  was  a  stranger  to  the  people  :  my  doctrines  were  quite  new  to 
them  ;  and  were  neither  preached  nor  believed  by  any  other  clergy- 
man, so  far  as  I  could  learn,  throughout  the  province. 

My  first  work  was,  to  explain  the  depravity  of  our  nature  ;  our 
fall  in  Adam,  and  all  the  evils  consequent  thereon  ;  the  impossibility 
of  being  delivered  from  them  by  any  thing  which  we  could  do,  and 
the  necessity  of  a  living  faith,  in  order  to  our  obtaining  help  from 
God.  While  I  continued  to  insist  upon  these  truths,  and  on  the 
absolute  necessity  of  being  born  again,  no  small  outcry  was  raised 
against  this  way,  as  well  as  against  him  that  taught  it.  But  by  the 
help  of  God,  I  continued  to  witness  the  same  both  to  small  and  great. 

The  common  people,  however,  frequented  the  church  more  con- 
stantly, and  in  larger  numbers  than  usual.  Some  were  affected  at 
times,  so  as  to  drop  a  tear.  But  still  for  a  year  or  more,  I  perceived 
no  lasting  effect,  only  a  few  were  not  altogether  so  profane  as  before. 
I  could  discover  no  heart-felt  convictions  of  sin,  no  deep  or  lasting 
impression  of  their  lost  estate.  Indeed  I  have  reason  to  believe  that 
some  have  been  a  good  deal  alarmed  at  times  But  they  were  shy 
of  speaking  to  me  (thinking  it  would  be  presumption)  till  their  con- 
victions wore  off. 

But  in  the  year  1765,  the  power  of  God  was  more  sensibly  felt 
by  a  few.  These  were  constrained  to  apply  to  me,  and  inquire, 
"What  they  must  do  to  be  saved?"  And  now  I  began  to  preach 
abroad,  as  well  as  in  private  houses  :  and  to  meet  little  companies  in 
the  evenings,  and  converse  freely  on  divine  things.  I  believe  some 
were  this  year  converted  to  God,  and  thenceforth  the  work  of  God 
slowly  went  on. 

The  next  year  I  became  acquainted  with  Mr.  M'R.  rector  of  a 
neighbouring  parish  :  and  we  joined  hand  in  hand  in  the  great  work. 
He  laboured  much  therein  ;  and  not  in  vain.  A  remarkable  power 
attended  his  preaching,  and  many  were  truly  converted  to  God,  not 
only  in  his  parish,  but  in  other  parts  where  he  was  called  to 
labour. 


KEV.  FRANCIS    ASBURY  S  JOURNAL.  159 

In  the  years  1770  and  1771,  we  had  a  more  considerable  out-pour- 
ing of  the  Spirit,  at  a  place  in  ray  parish  called  White-Oak.  It  was 
here  first  I  formed  the  people  into  a  society,  that  they  might  assist 
and  strengthen  each  other.  The  good  effects  of  this  were  soon 
apparent.  Convictions  were  deep  and  lasting :  and  not  only  know- 
ledge, but  faith,  and  love,  and  holiness  continually  increased. 

In  the  year  1772,  the  revival  was  more  considerable,  and  extended 
itself  in  some  places,  for  fifty  or  sixty  miles  round.  It  increased  still 
more  in  the  following  year,  and  several  sinners  were  truly  converted 
to  God.  In  Spring,  1774,  it  was  more  remarkable  than  ever.  The 
word  preached  was  attended  with  such  energy,  that  many  were 
pierced  to  the  heart.  Tears  fell  plentifully  from  the  eyes  of  the 
hearers,  and  some  were  constrained  to  cry  out.  A  goodly  number 
were  gathered  in  this  year,  both  in  my  parish  and  in  many  of  ihe 
neighbouring  counties.  I  formed  several  societies  out  of  those 
which  were  convinced  or  converted  ;  and  I  found  it  a  happy  means 
of  building  up  those  that  had  believed,  and  preventing  the  rest  from 
losing  their  convictions. 

In  the  counties  of  Sussex  and  Brunswick,  the  work  from  the  year 
1773,  was  chiefly  carried  on  by  the  labours  of  the  people  called 
Methodists.  The  first  of  them  who  appeared  in  these  parts  was  Mr. 
R.  W  who,  you  know,  was  a  plain,  artless,  indefatigable  preacher  of 
the  Gospel :  he  was  greatly  blessed  in  detecting  the  hypocrite,  razing 
false  foundations,  and  stirring  believers  up  to  press  after  a  present 
salvation  from  the  remains  of  sin.  He  came  to  my  house  in  the 
month  of  March,  in  the  year  1773.  The  next  year  others  of  his 
brethren  came,  who  gathered  many  societies  both  in  this  neighbour- 
hood, and  in  other  places,  as  far  as  North-Carolina.  They  now 
began  to  ride  the  circuit,  and  to  take  care  of  the  societies  already 
formed,  which  was  rendered  a  happy  means,  both  of  deepening  and 
spreading  the  work  of  God. 

I  earnestly  recommended  it  to  my  societies,  to  pray  much  for  the 
prosperity  of  Sion,  and  for  a  larger  out-pouring  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
They  did  so  ;  and  not  in  vain.  We  have  had  a  time  of  refreshing 
indeed  :  a  revival  of  religion,  as  great  as  perhaps  ever  was  known, 
in  country  places,  in  so  short  a  time.  It  began  in  the  latter  end  of 
the  year  1775:  but  was  more  considerable  in  January  1776,  the 
beginning  of  the  present  year.  It  broke  out  nearly  at  the  same  time; 
at  three  places,  not  far  from  each  other.  Two  of  these  places  are  in 
my  parish  ;  the  other  in  Amelia  County  ;  which  had  for  many  years 
been  notorious  for  carelessness,  profaneness,  and  immoralities  of  all 
kinds.     Gaming,  swearing,  drunkenness,  and  the  like,  were  their  de- 


160  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY5S  JOURNAL. 

light,  while  things  sacred  were  their  scorn  and  contempt.  However, 
some  time  last  year  one  of  my  parish  (now  a  local  Preacher)  appoint- 
ed some  meetings  among  them,  and  after  a  while,  induced  a  small  num- 
ber to  join  in  Society.  And  though  few,  if  any  of  them  were  then  be- 
lievers, yet  this  was  a  means  of  preparing  the  way  of  the  Lord. 

As  there  were  few  converts  in  mv  parish  the  last  ypar,  I  was  sen- 
sible a  change  of  preachers  was  wanting.  This  ha9  often  revived  the 
work  of  God  :  and  so  it  did  at  the  present  time.  Last  Decembei 
one  of  the  Methodist  preachers,  Mr.  S.  preached  several  times  at  the 
three  places  above-mentioned.  He  confirmed  the  doctrine  1  had  long 
preached;  and  to  many  of  them  not  in  vain.  And  while  their  ears 
were  opened  by  novelty,  God  set  his  word  home  upon  their  hearts. 
Many  sinners  were  powerfully  convinced,  and  Mercy  !  Mercy  !  was 
their  cry.  In  January,  the  news  of  convictions  and  conversions  were 
common  ;  and  the  people  of  God  were  inspired  with  new  life  and 
vigour  by  the  happiness  of  others.  But  in  a  little  time  they  were 
made  thoroughly  sensible  that  they  themselves  stood  in  need  of  a 
deeper  work  in  their  hearts  than  they  had  yet  experienced.  And 
while  those  were  panting  and  groaning  for  pardon,  these  were  entreat- 
ing God,  with  strong  cries  and  tears,  to  save  them  from  the  remains 
of  inbred  sin,  to  "  sanctify  them  throughout  in  spirit,  soul,  and  body;" 
so  to  "  circumcise  their  hearts,"  that  they  might  "  love  God  with 
all  their  hearts,"  and  serve  him  with  all  their  strength. 

During  this  whole  winter,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  was  poured  out  in 
a  manner  we  had  not  seen  before.  In  almost  every  assembly  might 
be  seen  signal  instances  of  divine  power,  more  especially  in  the  meet- 
ings of  the  classes  Here  many  old  stout-hearted  sinners,  felt  the 
force  of  truth,  and  their  eyes  were  open  to  discover  their  guilt  and 
danger.  The  shaking  among  the  dry  bones  was  increased  from  week 
to  week :  nay,  sometimes  ten  or  twelve  have  been  deeply  convinced 
of  sin  in  one  day.  Some  of  these  were  in  great  distress,  and  when 
they  were  questioned  concerning  the  state  of  their  souls,  were  scarce 
able  to  make  any  reply  but  by  weeping  and  falling  on  their  knees, 
before  all  the  class,  and  earnestly  soliciting  the  prayers  of  God's 
people.  And  from  time  to  time  he  has  answered  these  petitions,  set 
the  captives  at  liberty,  and  enabled  them  to  praise  a  pardoning  God 
in  the  midst  of  his  people.  Numbers  of  old  and  grey-headed,  of 
middle-aged  persons,  of  youth,  yea,  of  little  children,  were  the  sub- 
jects of  this  work.  Several  of  the  latter  we  have  seen  painfully  con- 
cerned for  the  wickedness  of  their  lives,  and  the  corruption  of  their 
nature.  We  have  instances  of  this  sort  from  eight  or  nine  years  old. 
Some  of  these  children  are  exceeding  happy  in  the  love  of  God :  and 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  163 

they  speak  of  the  whole  process  of  the  work  of  God,  of  their  convic- 
tions, the  time  when,  and  the  manner  how  they  obtained  deliverance, 
with  such  clearness  as  might  convince  an  atheist  that  this  is  nothing 
else  but  the  great  power  of  God. 

Many  in  these  parts  who  had  long  neglected  the  means  of  grace, 
now  flocked  to  hear,  not  only  me  and  the  travelling  preachers,  but 
also  the  exhorters  and  leaders.  And  the  Lord  showed  he  is  not  con- 
fined to  man  ;  for  whether  there  was  preaching  or  not,  his  power  was 
still  sensible  among  the  people.  And  at  their  meetings  for  prayer, 
some  have  been  in  such  distress  that  they  have  continued  therein 
for  five  or  six  hours.  And  it  has  been  found  that  these  prayer- 
meetings  were  singularly  useful  in  promoting  the  work  of  God. 

The  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  which  began  here,  soon  extended 
itself,  more  or  less,  through  most  of  the  circuit,  which  is  regularly 
attended  by  the  travelling  preachers,  and  which  takes  in  a  circum- 
ference of  between  four  and  five  hundred  miles.  And  the  work  went 
on,  with  a  pleasing  progress,  till  the  beginning  of  May  ;  when  they 
held  a  quarterly  meeting  at  B.'s  chapel,  in  my  parish.  This  stands 
at  the  lower  line  of  the  parish,  thirty  miles  from  W-'s  chapel,  at  the 
upper  line  of  it,  where  the  work  began.  At  this  meeting,  one  might 
truly  say,  the  windows  of  heaven  were  opened,  and  the  rain  of  Divine 
influence  poured  down  for  more  than  forty  days.  The  work  now 
became  more  deep  than  ever,  extended  wider,  and  was  swifter  in  its 
operations.  Many  were  savingly  converted  to  God,  and  in  a  very 
short  time,  not  only  in  my  parish,  but  through  several  parts  of  Bruns- 
wick, Sussex,  Prince  George,  Lunenburg,  Mecklenburg,  and  Amelia 
counties. 

The  second  day  of  the  quarterly  meeting  a  love-feast  was  held. 
As  soon  as  it  began  the  power  of  the  Lord  came  down  on  the  assem- 
bly like  a  rushing  mighty  wind  ;  and  it  seemed  as  if  the  whole  house 
was  filled  with  the  presence  of  God.  A  flame  kindled  and  ran  from 
heart  to  heart.  Many  were  deeply  convinced  of  sin  ;  many  mourners 
were  filled  with  consolation  :  and  many  believers  were  so  over- 
whelmed with  love,  that  they  could  not  doubt  but  God  had  enabled 
them  to  love  him  with  all  their  heart. 

When  the  love-feast  was  ended,  the  doors  were  opened.  Many 
who  had  staid  without  then  came  in :  and  beholding  the  anguish  of 
some,  and  the  rejoicing  of  others,  were  filled  with  astonishment ;  and 
not  long  after  with  trembling  apprehensions  of  their  own  danger. 
Several  of  them  prostrating  themselves  before  God,  cried  aloud  for 
mercy.  And  the  convictions  which  then  began  in  many,  have  ter- 
minated in  a  happy  and  lasting  change. 

Vol  T.  21 


162  REV     FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

The  multitudes  that  attended  on  this  occasion,  returning  home  all 
alive  to  God,  spread  the  flame  through  their  respective  neighbour- 
hoods, which  ran  from  family  to  family  :  so  that  within  four  weeks, 
several  hundreds  found  the  peace  of  God.  And  scarce  any  conver- 
sation was  to  be  heard  throughout  the  circuit,  but  concerning  the 
things  of  God :  either  the  complainings  of  the  prisoners,  groaning 
under  the  spirit  of  bondage  unto  fear ;  or  the  rejoicing  of  those  whom 
the  Spirit  of  adoption  taught  to  cry,  "  Abba,  Father."  The  unhappy 
disputes  between  England  and  her  colonies,  which  just  before  had 
engrossed  all  our  conversation,  seemed  now  in  most  companies  to 
be  forgot,  while  things  of  far  greater  importance  lay  so,,  near  the 
heart.  I  have  gone  into  many,  and  not  small  companies,  wherein 
there  did  not  appear  to  be  one  careless  soul :  and  the  far  greater 
part  seemed  perfectly  happy  in  a  clear  sense  of  the  love  of  God. 

One  of  the  doctrines,  as  you  know,  which  we  particularly  insist 
upon,  is  that  of  a  present  salvation  ;  a  salvation  not  only  from  the 
guilt  and  power,  but  also  from  the  root  of  sin  ;  a  cleansing  from  all 
filthiness  of  flesh  and  spirit,  that  we  may  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear 
of  God  ;  a  going  on  to  perfection,  which  we  sometimes  define  by  lov- 
ing God  with  all  our  hearts.  Several  who  had  believed  were  deeply 
sensible  of  their  want  of  this.  I  have  seen  both  men  and  women,  who 
had  long  been  happy  in  a  sense  of  God's  pardoning  love,  as  much  con- 
victed on  account  of  the  remains  of  sin  in  their  hearts,  and  as  much 
distressed  for  a  total  deliverance  from  them,  as  ever  I  saw  any  for 
justification.     Their  whole  cry  was, 

"  O  that  I  now  the  re9t  might  know, 
Believe  and  enter  in ; 
Now,  Saviour,  now,  the  power  bestow, 
And  let  me  cease  from  sin !" 

And  1  have  been  present  when  they  believed  that  God  answered  this 
prayer,  and  bestowed  this  blessing  upon  them.  I  have  conversed 
with  them  several  times  since,  and  have  found  them  thoroughly  de- 
voted to  God.  They  all  testify,  that  they  have  received  the  gift 
instantaneously,  and  by  simple  faith.  We  have  sundry  witnesses  of 
this  perfect  love  who  are  above  all  suspicion.  I  have  known  the 
men  and  their  communication  for  many  years,  and  have  ever  found 
them  zealous  for  the  cause  of  God  :  men  of  sense  and  integrity,  pat- 
terns of  piety  and  humility  ;  whose  testimony  therefore  may  be 
depended  on. 

It  has  been  frequently  observed,  that  there  never  was  any  remark- 
able revival  of  religion,  but  some  degree  of  enthusiasm  was  mingled 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  l&O 

with  it — some  wild  fire  mixed  with  the  sacred  flame.  It  may  be 
doubted  whether  this  is  not  unavoidable  in  the  nature  of  things. 
And  notwithstanding  all  the  care  we  have  taken,  this  work  hasi  not 
been  quite  free  from  it ;  but  it  never  rose  to  any  considerable  height, 
neither  was  of  long  continuance.  In  some  meetings  there  has  not 
been  that  decency  and  order  observed  which  1  could  have  wished. 
Some  of  our  assemblies  resembled  the  congregation  of  the  Jews  at 
laying  the  foundation  of  the  second  temple  in  the  days  of  Ezra — some 
wept  for  grief;  others  shouted  for  joy,  so  that  it  was  hard  to  distin- 
guish one  from  the  other.  So  it  was  here  :  the  mourning  and  distress 
was  so  blended  with  the  voice  of  joy  and  gladness,  that  it  was  hard 
to  distinguish  the  one  from  the  other,  till  the  voice  of  joy  prevailed  : 
the  people  shouting  with  a  great  shout,  so  that  it  might  be  heard 
afar  off". 

To  give  you  a  fuller  insight  into  this  great  work  of  God,  I  subjoin 
an  extract  from  two  or  three  of  my  letters. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  M'R, 

May  2,  1776. 
Rev.  and  dear  Brother; 
YESTERDAY  I  preached  at  B.'s  chapel,  to  a  crowded  and  atten- 
tive audience.  Afterward  the  Methodists  held  their  love-feast : 
during  which,  as  many  as  pleased  rose,  one  after  another,  and  spoke, 
in  few  words,  of  the  goodness  of  God  to  their  souls  Before  three 
had  done  speaking  (although  they  spoke  but  few  words)  you  might 
see  a  solemn  sense  of  the  presence  of  God  visible  on  every  coun- 
tenance, while  tears  of  sorrow  or  joy  were  flowing  from  many  eyes. 
Several  testified  the  consolation  they  had  received :  some  believed 
they  were  perfected  in  love.  When  the  passions  of  the  people  were 
rising  too  high,  and  breaking  through  all  restraint,  the  preacher 
gently  checked  them  by  giving  out  a  few  verses  of  a  hymn.  When 
most  of  the  congregation  went  away,  some  were  so  distressed  with  a 
sense  of  their  sins,  that  they  could  not  be  persuaded  to  leave  the 
place.  Some  lively  Christians  staid  with  them,  and  continued  in 
prayer  for  the  space  of  two  hours,  till  fifteen  mourners  tvere  enabled 
to  rejoice  in  God  their  Saviour.  And  some  careless  creatures  of  the 
politer  sort,  who  would  needs  go  in  to  see  what  this  strange  thing 
meant,  felt  an  unusual  power,  so  that  like  Saul  among  the  prophets, 
they  fell  down  on  their  knees,  and  cried  for  mercy  among  the  rest. 
O  may  they  still  continue  to  pray  till  God  has  given  them  another 
heart ! 


^04  ;iEV.  FRANCIS  aSBURY:S  JOURNAi-. 

May  3,  1776. 

Last  night  three  or  four  score  of  my  neighbours  met  together  td 
keep  a  watch-night :  at  which  it  is  the  custom  to  spend  three  or  four 
hours  in  r^liu'ious  exercises,  and  to  break  up  at  twelve.  Such  was 
the  distress  of  those  that  were  convinced  of  sin,  that  they  continued 
in  prayer  all  night,  and  till  two  hours  after  sunrise.  Here  also  four- 
teen or  fifteen  received  a  sense  of  pardon  :  so  that  in  two  days  thirty 
of  my  own  parish  have  been  justified,  besides  others  of  other  parishes. 

Indeed  I  do  not  take  it  for  granted  that  all  are  justified  who  think 
they  are  so.  Some,  I  fear,  are  mistaken.  But  I  shall  judge,  better 
of  this  when  I  see  the  fruits. 

May  7,  1776. 

The  work  of  God  still  increases  among  us  :  I  believe,  within  these 
eight  days,  more  than  forty  here  have  been  filled  with  joy  and  peace 
in  believing.  Of  these  I  have  had  an  account ;  but  there  may  be 
many  more.  And  several,  who  have  been  justified  some  time,  be- 
lieve God  has  blessed  them  with  perfect  love. 

I  have  no  doubt  but  the  work  now  carrying  on  is  genuine :  yet 
there  were  some  circumstances  attending  it  which  I  disliked  :  such 
as  loud  outcries,  tremblings,  fallings,  convulsions.  But  I  am  better 
reconciled,  since  I  read  President  Edwards  on  that  head,  who  ob- 
serves, "  That  wherever  these  most  appear  there  is  always  the  great- 
est and  the  deepest  work." 

There  is  another  thing  which  has  given  me  much  pain  :  the  pray- 
ing of  several  at  one  and  the  same  time.  Sometimes  five  or  six,  or 
more,  have  been  praying  all  at  once,  in  several  parts  of  the  room,  for 
distressed  persons.  Others  were  speaking  by  way  of  exhortation,  so 
that  the  assembly  appeared  to  be  all  in  confusion,  and  must  seem  to 
one  at  a  little  distance,  more  like  a  drunken  rabble  than  the  worship- 
pers of  God.  I  was  afraid,  this  was  not  doing  all  things  in  decency 
and  order.  Indeed  Dr.  Edwards  defends  this  also.  But  yet  I  am 
not  satisfied  concerning  it.  I  had  heard  of  it,  but  never  saw  it  till 
Sunday  evening.  But  this  is  a  delicate  point.  It  requires  much  wis- 
dom, to  allay  the  wild,  and  not  damp  the  sacred  fire. 

The  first  appearance  of  any  thing  of  the  kind  at  my  chapel,  was 
last  Saturday  night.  I  was  not  there,  but  a  young  man  who  studies 
at  my  house  was.  He  is  grave,  prudent,  and  solidly  religious,  with- 
out the  least  tincture  of  enthusiasm.  He  met  the  society  there  in 
the  afternoon,  and  would  have  returned  home  ;  but  that  many  who 
were  in  great  distress,  begged  him  and  some  others  to  stay  and  pray 
with  them.    They  continued  in  prayer  the  whole  night,  during  which, 


lifcJV.  FRANCIS  ASBUftY5S  JOURNAL,  165 

about  twelve  were  set  at  liberty.     But  notwithstanding  all  they  could 
do,  there  were  often  two,  three,  or  more,  speaking  at  one  time. 

I  heard  of  this  the  next  day,  when  I  was  at  church,  and  hastened 
thence  to  the  chapel.  Some  hundreds  were  assembled  there,  and 
were  in  much  confusion  when  1  went  in.  I  went  into  the  pulpit, 
and  began  to  sing,  adding  short  exhortations  and  prayers.  The  con- 
fusion ceased  :  several  spirits  were  revived,  and  some  mourners 
comforted. 

Since  that  evening,  this  kind  of  confusion  has  never  been  known 
in  my  neighbourhood.  It  continued  longer  in  other  places  ;  but  for 
some  time  has  been  totally  gone.  But  as  this  abated,  the  work  of 
conviction  and  conversion  usually  abated  too.  Yet,  blessed  be  God, 
it  still  goes  on,  though  not  with  such  rapidity.  I  have  heard  but  of 
two  or  three  that  found  peace  for  three  weeks  :  whereas  some  tmie 
ago,  seldom  a  week  passed,  but  I  could  hear  of  eight  or  nine  ;  some- 
times between  twenty  and  thirty,  at  one  meeting. 

I  have  chiefly  spoken  of  what  was  done  in  my  parish.  But  that 
you  may  know  a  little  of  what  was  done  elsewhere,  I  subjoin  an  ex- 
tract from  the  letters  of  two  local  Preachers,  in  the  county  of  Sussex 

July  29,  177G. 
Rev.  Sir, 
WITH  unspeakable  pleasure  I  acquaint  you  of  the  glorious  revival 
of  religion  in  our  parts.  It  broke  out  at  our  last  quarterly  meeting;, 
and  has  since  wonderfully  spread  throughout  the  circuit.  The  time 
seems  to  be  coming,  when  we  shall  not  need  to  teach  every  man  his 
neighbour  to  know  the  Lord  :  for  they  daily  know  him  from  the  least 
to  the  greatest,  from  little  children  to  men  of  fourscore.  Above 
seven  years  have  I  been  exhorting  my  neighbours  ;  but  very  few 
would  hear.  Now,  blessed  be  God,  there  are  few  that  will  not  hear, 
It  is  no  strange  thing  for  two- or  three  to  find  the  Lord  at  a  class  meet- 
ing :  and  at  a  Sunday  meeting,  although  there  was  no  preacher,  ten, 
fifteen,  yea,  near  twenty  have  been  converted.  At  a  place  near  me, 
thirty  have  found  the  Lord,  within  eight  days.  It  is  common  with  us 
for  men  and  women  to  fall  down  as  dead  under  an  exhortation  ;  but 
many  more  under  prayer  :  perhaps  twenty  at  a  time.  And  some  that 
have  not  fallen  to  the  earth,  have  shown  the  same  distress,  wringing 
their  hands,  smiting  their  breasts,  and  begging  all  to  pray  for  them, 
With  these  the  work  is  generally  quick  ;  some  getting  through  in 
less  than  a  week,  some  in  two  or  three  days,  some  in  one,  two,  or 
three  hours.  Nay,  we  have  an  instance  of  one  that  was  so  indif- 
ferent, as  to  leave  her  brethren  at  prayers,  and  go  to  bed.     But  all 


2t>t>  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

at  once  she  screamed  out,  under  a  sense  of  her  lost  estate,  and  in 
less  than  fifteen  minutes  rejoiced  in  God  her  Saviour.  And,  blessed 
be  God,  many  of  these  retain  a  sense  of  his  favour.  Many,  who  a 
few  weeks  ago  were  despisers  and  scoffers,  are  now  happy  in  the 
Lord.  Many  old  Christians,  who  were  always  full  of  doubts  and 
fears,  now  walk  in  the  light  of  his  countenance.  Some  have  a  clear 
witness  in  themselves,  that  t-ey  have  given  their  whole  hearts  to 
God.  O  may  God  carry  on  his  work  among  us,  until  we  are  all  swal- 
lowed up  in  love  t 

T.  S. 

Mr.  S.  lives  two-and-twenty  miles  from  me  :  the  writer  of  the  fol- 
lowing letter,  about  thirty. 

July  29,  1776. 
Rev  Sir, 

ON  June  the  9th,  we  had  a  large  congregation.  I  spoke  on,  "  No 
man  can  serve  two  masters."  Several  appeared  to  be  much  dis- 
tressed, two  women  in  particular.  We  spent  above  an  hour  in 
prayer  for  them  and  they  arose  in  peace.  When  we  met  the  class, 
we  suffered  all  that  desired  it,  to  stay.  The  leader  only  put  a  ques- 
tion or  two  to  each  member.  This  was  scarce  ended,  when  the 
fire  of  God's  love  was  kindled.  Praises  hung  on  the  lips  of  many  ; 
and  several  cried  out,  "  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?"  Thus  it 
swiftly  went  on  ;  every  now  and  then  one  rising  with  faith  in  Jesus. 
Surely  this  was  one  of  the  days  of  heaven  !  Such  a  day  I  never  ex- 
pected to  see  in  time.  While  we  were  met,  one  I.  W.  was  observed 
to  be  looking  through  the  crack  of  the  door;  which  being  opened, 
he  came  with  it,  and,  being  unable  to  stand,  fell  on  the  floor  quite 
helpless.  But  in  two  or  three  hours  he  rose  and  praised  a  pardoning 
God  :  while  one  of  the  class  who  had  been  justified  some  time,  re- 
ceived a  blessing  greatly  superior  to  any  thing  he  had  known  before. 
We  have  reason  to  believe,  that  on  this  day  fifteen  were  enabled  to 
believe  in  Jesus. 

Saturday,  June  15.  I  was  speaking  to  the  class,  and  one  found 
peace  to  her  soul.  Sunday  16,  I  spoke  from  "  This  is  the  victory 
that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith,"  to  four  or  five  hundred 
people.  This  was  also  a  day  of  Pentecost.  Convictions  seized  on 
numbers,  who  wrestled  with  God  till  their  souls  were  set  at  liberty. 
A  young  woman  told  me,  "  She  heard  that  many  people  fell  down, 
and  she  would  come  to  help  them  up."  This  she  said  in  scorn.  She 
came  accordingly.     The  power  of  God  soon  seized  her,  and  she 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  Ib7 


wanted  helping  up  herself.  But  it  was  not  long  before  the  Spirit  of 
grace  helped  her,  by  giving  her  faith  in  Christ.  We  believe  twenty 
souls  found  peace  this  day.     O  may  we  see  many  such  days  ! 

July  7.  I  spoke  to  a  large  congregation.  Afterward  I  was  going 
to  give  out  a  hymn,  when  one  was  so  powerfully  struck,  that  he 
could  not  hold  a  joint  still,  and  roared  aloud  for  mercy.  I  imme- 
diately went  to  prayer ;  the  cries  of  the  people  all  the  time  greatly 
increasing.  After  prayer,  B  T  lately  a  great  opposer,  jumped  up 
and  began  to  praise  God,  with  a  countenance  so  altered,  that  those 
who  beheld  him  were  filled  with  astonishment.  Our  meeting  con- 
tinued from  twelve  at  noon,  till  twelve  at  night ;  during  which,  God 
raised  up  about  fifteen  more  witnesses. 

The  Thursday  following;,  six  of  those  who  were  convinced  on  Sun- 
day, found  peace  in  believing.  We  hear  of  many  others  converted 
in  the  neighbourhood,  several  of  whom  were  strong  opposers  :  and 
some  hoary-headed  ones,  who  had  been  strict  pharisees  from  their 
youth  up. 

Sunday  21.  We  had  a  large  and  attentive  auditory,  and  the  power 
of  the  Lord  prevailed.  The  next  day  I  was  much  tempted  to  doubt, 
whether  I  was  sent  of  God  to  preach  or  not?  I  prayed  earnestly  to 
the  Lord  that  he  would  satisfy  me,  and  that  he  would  keep  all  false 
fire  from  among  us.  Afterward  I  preached.  While  1  was  speaking, 
a  mother  and  her  daughter  were  so  struck  with  conviction,  that  they 
trembled  every  joint :  but  before  I  concluded,  both  found  peace. 
Glory  be  to  God  ! 

I  am,  &c. 

J.  D. 

God  has  made  examples  of  several  opposers— examples  not  of 
justice,  but  of  mercy.  Some  of  them  came  to  the  assembly  with 
hearts  full  of  rancour  against  the  people  of  God,  so  that,  had  it  been 
in  their  power,  they  would  have  dragged  them  away  to  prison,  if  not 
to  death.  But  unexpectedly  their  stubborn  hearts  were  bowed  down, 
being  pierced  with  the  arrows  of  the  Almighty.  In  a  moment  they 
were  filled  with  distress  and  anguish,  their  laughter  turned  into 
mourning,  and  their  cursing  into  prayer.  And  frequently  in  less  than 
a  week  their  heaviness  has  been  turned  into  joy.  Of  this  sort  are 
several  of  our  most  zealous  and  circumspect  walkers  at  this  day.  A 
goodly  number  of  these  are  rich  in  this  world ;  yet  they  are  now 
brought  so  low,  that  they  are  willing  to  be  taught  by  all,  and  to  be 
the  servants  of  all. 


itiu  K.EV.  PKANCIS  ASBTJRY's  JOURNAL. 

A  gentleman  of  this  parish,  in  particular,  had  much  opposed  and 
contradicted ;  he  was  full)'  persuaded,  that  all  outward  appearances, 
either  of  distress  or  joy,  were  mere  deceit.  But  as  he  was  walking 
to  his  mill,  ahout  half  a  mile  from  his  house,  deep  conviction  fell 
upon  him.  The  terrors  of  the  Lord  heset  him  round  about,  and  dis- 
tress and  anguish  got  hold  upon  him.  When  he  came  to  the  mill  and 
found  no  one  there,  he  took  that  opportunity  of  prostrating  himself 
before  God,  and  of  pouring  out  his  soul  in  his  presence.  As  his  dis- 
tress was  great,  his  cries  were  loud,  and  his  prayer  importunate. 
The  Lord  heard  him,  and  set  his  soul  at  liberty  before  he  left  the 
place.  And  the  power  which  came  upon  him  was  so  great,  that  it 
seemed  as  if  his  whole  frame  were  dissolving. 

Upon  the  whole,  this  has  been  a  great,  a  deep,  a  swift,  and  an 
extensively  glorious  work.  Both  the  nature  and  manner  of  it  have 
been  nearly  the  same,  wherever  its  benign  influence  reached. 
Where  the  greatest  work  was,  where  the  greatest  number  of  souis 
have  been  convinced  and  converted  to  God,  there  have  been  the 
most  outcries,  tremblings,  convulsions,  and  all  sorts  of  external  signs. 
I  took  all  the  paras  I  could  that  these  might  be  kept  within  bounds, 
that  our  good  might  not  be  evil  spoken  of.  This  I  did,  not  by  openly 
inveighing  against  them  in  the  public  assembly ;  but  by  private 
advices  to  local  preachers  and  others,  as  opportunity  would  permit. 
This  method  had  its  desired  effect,  without  putting  a  sword  into  the 
hands  of  the  wicked.  Wherever  the  contray  method  has  been  taken, 
where  these  things  have  been  publicly  opposed,  when  they  have 
been  spoken  against  in  promiscuous  congregations,  the  effect  has 
always  been  this  :  the  men  of  the  world  have  been  highly  gratified, 
and  the  children  of  God  deeply  wounded.  The  former  have  plumed 
themselves,  as  though  they  were  the  men  who  kept  within  due  bounds, 
and  those  that  had  k<  made  so  much  ado  about  religion,"  were  no  bet- 
ter than  hot-brained  enthusiasts.  I  cannot  but  think  this  has  a  great 
tendency  to  hinder  the  work  of  God.  Indeed  if  we  thought,  that  God 
wrought  every  thing  irresistibly,  we  should  not  fear  this.  But  we 
know  the  contrary  :  we  know,  that  as  some  things  promote,  so  others 
hinder  his  work.  I  grant,  means  should  be  used  to  prevent  all  inde- 
cency ;  but  they  should  be  used  with  great  caution  and  tenderness, 
that  the  cure  may  be  effected,  if  possible,  without  damping  the  work 
of  God. 

With  regard  to  the  inward  work,  there  has  been  a  great  variety  as 
to  the  length,  and  depth,  and  circumstances  of  the  convictions  in  dif- 
ferent persons  ;  but  all  in  general  have  been  at  first  alarmed  with  a 


JIEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  J0URNA&.  169 

sense  of  the  multitude  and  heinousness  of  their  sins  ;  with  an  awful 
view  of  the  wrath  of  God,  and  certain  destruction,  if  they  persisted 
therein.  Hence  they  betook  themselves  to  prayer,  and  as  time  per- 
mitted, to  the  use  of  all  other  means  of  grace  ;  although  deeply  sen- 
sible of  the  vileness  of  their  performances,  and  the  total  insuffi- 
ciency of  all  they  could  do  to  merit  the  pardon  of  one  sin,  or  deserve 
the  favour  of  God.  They  were  next  convinced  of  their  unbelief, 
and  that  faith  in  Christ  is  the  only  condition  of  justification.  They 
continued  thus  waiting  upon  the  Lord,  till  he  spoke  peace  to  their 
souls.  This  he  usually  did  in  one  moment,  in  a  clear  and  satisfactory 
manner,  so  that  all  their  griefs  and  anxieties  vanished  away,  and  they 
were  filled  with  joy  and  peace-  in  believing.  Some  indeed  have  had 
their  burdens  removed,  so  that  they  felt  no  condemnation.  And  yet, 
they  could  not  say  they  were  forgiven.  But  they  could  not  be  satis- 
fied with  this.  They  continued  instant  in  prayer,  till  they  knew  the 
Lamb  of  God  had  taken  away  their  sins. 

Most  of  these  had  been  suddenly  convinced  of  sin  :  but  with  some 
it  was  otherwise.  Without  any  sense  of  their  guilt,  they  were 
brought  to  use  the  means  of  grace,  by  mere  dint  of  persuasion  :  and 
afterward  they  were  brought  by  degrees  to  see  themselves,  and  their 
want  of  a  Saviour.  But  before  they  found  deliverance,  they  have 
had  as  deep  a  sense  of  their  helpless  misery  as  others.  One  in  my 
parish  was  a  remarkable  instance  of  this.  He  was  both  careless  and 
profane  to  a  great  degree  ;  and  remained  quite  unconcerned,  while 
many  of  his  companions  were  sorrowing  after  God,  or  rejoicing  in 
his  love.  One  of  his  acquaintance  advised  him  to  seek  the  Lord. 
He  said,  "  I  see  no  necessity  for  it  as  yet.  When  I  do  I  will  seek 
him  as  well  as  others."  His  friend  persuaded  him  to  try  for  one 
week,  watching  against  sin,  and  going  by  himself  every  day.  He 
did  so  :  and  though  he  was  quite  stupid  when  he  began,  yet  before 
the  end  of  the  week,  he  was  thoroughly  sensible  of  the  load  of  sin, 
and  is  now  happy  in  God. 

If  you  ask,  "  How  stands  the  case  now  with  those  that  have  been 
the  subjects  of  the  late  work  ?"  I  have  the  pleasure  to  inform  you, 
I  have  not  heard  of  any  one  apostate  yet.  It  is  true,  many,  since  their 
first  joy  abated,  have  given  way  to  doubts  and  fears,  have  had  their 
confidence  in  God  much  shaken,  and  have  got  into  much  heaviness. 
Several  have  passed  through  this,  and  are  now  confirmed  in  the  ways 
of  God.  Others  are  in  it  still ;  and  chiefly  those  over  whom  Satan 
had  gained  an  advantage,  by  hurrying  them  into  irregular  warmth,  or 
into  expressions  not  well  guarded.  I  have  seen  some  of  these  in 
great  distress,  and  just  ready  to  cast  away  hope. 

Vol,  J,  00 


+*&■ 


170  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL. 

I  have  a  great  deal  upon  ray  hands  at  present,  and  have  little  time 
either  to  write  or  read.  The  difficulties  and  temptations  of  the  lately, 
converted  are  so  many  and  various,  that  1  am  obliged  to  be  in  as 
many  places  as  I  can  ;  for  now  is  the  critical  hour.  A  man  of  zeal, 
though  with  little  knowledge  or  experience,  may  be  an  instrument  of 
converting  souls.  But  after  they  are  converted,  he  will  have  need 
of  much  knowledge,  much  prudence  and  experience,  to  provide  pro- 
per food  and  physic  for  the  several  members,  according  to  their  state, 
habit,  and  constitution.  This  at  present  seems  in  a  great  measure  to 
devolve  upon  me.  And  though  I  have  been  twenty  years  in  the  Lord's 
service,  yet  1  find  I  am  quite  unequal  to  the  task.  However,  I  will 
do'  what  I  can  ;  and  may  the  Lord  bless  my  endeavours ! 

The  enemy  is  busy  night  and  day,  in  sowing  the  tares  of  division 
among  the  wheat.  And  in  some  places  he  has  prevailed  so  far  as  to 
plunge  some  of  them  in  the  water.  In  other  places  little  feuds  and 
animosities  arise,  to  grieve  the  preachers  and  damp  the  spirits  of  the 
people.  On  these  occasions,  they  commonly  apply  to  me  :  and  all 
is  well,  at  least  for  a  season. — When  I  consider  what  it  is  to  watch 
over  souls,  and  how  much  labour  and  pains  it  implies,  to  discbarge  it 
in  any  degree,  I  cannot  but  cry  out  with  the  apostle,  "  Who  is  suffi- 
cient for  these  things  ?" 

However,  upon  the  whole,  things  are  in  as  flourishing  a  condition 
as  can  reasonably  be  expected,  considering  what  great  numbers,  of  va- 
rious capacities  and  stations,  have  been  lately  added  to  the  societies. 

But  after  all  a  great  part  of  Virginia  is  still  in  a  very  dark  and  de- 
plorable condition.  This  province  contains  sixty-two  counties  ;  and 
the  late  work  has  reached  only  seven  or  eight  of  them.  Nor  has  it 
been  universal  even  in  these,  but  chiefly  in  the  circuit  which  is  regu- 
larly visited  by  the  preachers.  In  this  alone  very  many  hundreds 
have  in  a  few  months  been  added  to  the  Lord.  And  some  are  adding 
still.  May  He  continue  to  pour  out  his  Spirit  upon  us,  and  increase 
the  number  of  the  faithful  every  day  ! 

Our  highest  gratitude  is  due  to  our  gracious  God  ;  for  he  hath 
done  marvellous  things  !  In  a  short  time  he  hath  wrought  a  great 
work :  and  let  who  will  speak  against  it,  it  is  evident  beyond  all  con- 
tradiction, that  many  open  and  profligate  sinners,  of  all  sorts,  have 
been  effectually  and  lastingly  changed  into  pious,  uniform  Christians. 
So  that  every  thinking  man  must  allow  that  God  hath  been  with  us  of 
a  truth,  and  that  his  "  glory  dwells  in  our  land."  I  am  your  sincere 
friend,  and  brother  in  Christ, 

September  10,  1776.  D.  J 

To  Mr.  T   R. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  171 

The  following  letter,  which  relates  to  the  same  work,  was  written  somt 

time  after. 

TO  THE  REV.  MR.  WESLEY. 

June  24,  1778. 

Rev.  and  dear  Sir, 

YOU  have  the  Narrative  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  J.  I  send  this  as  a 
supplement  to  it. 

AT  our  little  conference,  held  in  Philadelphia,  May  1775,  Mr.  S. 
was  appointed  assistant  for  Brunswick  circuit,  in  Virginia.  He  found 
there  about  eight  hundred  joined  together,  but  in  a  very  confused 
manner.  Many  of  them  did  not  understand  the  nature  of  meeting  in 
class  ;  and  many  of  the  classes  had  no  leader.  He  resolved  to  begin 
in  good  earnest,  and  the  preachers  with  him  were  like-minded. 
Their  constant  custom  was,  as  soon  as  preaching  was  over,  to  speak 
to  all  the  members  of  the  society,  one  by  one.  If  the  society  was 
large,  one  preacher  spoke  to  a  part,  and  he  that  came  next,  to  the 
rest.  By  this  means  they  learned  more  of  our  doctrine  and  discipline 
in  a  year,  than  in  double  the  time  before.  The  fruit  soon  appeared  : 
the  congregations  swiftly  increased,  and  many  were  pricked  to  the 
heart.  Many  that  were  a  little  affected,  desired  to  see  the  nature  of 
meeting  in  class  :  and  while  one  was  speaking  either  to  those  that 
were  groaning  for  redemption,  or  those  who  had  found  peace  with 
God,  these  were  frequently  cut  to  the  heart,  and  sometimes  enabled 
on  the  spot  to  praise  a  pardoning  God.  Nay,  sometimes  four,  five,  or 
six  found  peace  with  God,  before  the  meeting  was  over. 

The  work  of  God  thus  increasing  on  every  side,  more  preachers 
were  soon  wanting.  And  God  raised  up  several  young  men,  who 
were  exceeding  useful  as  local  preachers. 

After  Mr.  S.  had  been  about  eight  months  in  the  circuit,  Mr.  J. 
desired  his  parish  might  b'e  included  in  it ;  that  all  who  chose  it  might 
have  the  privilege  of  meeting  in  class,  and  being  members  of  the  so- 
ciety. He  soon  saw  the  salutary  effects.  Many  that  had  but  small 
desires  before,  began  to  be  much  alarmed,  and  laboured  earnestly 
after  eternal  life.  In  a  little  time  numbers  were  deeply  awakened, 
and  many  tasted  of  the  pardoning  love  of  God.  In  a  few  months  Mr, 
J.  saw  more  fruit  of  his  labours  than  he  had  done  for  many  years. 
And  he  went  on  with  the  preachers  hand  in  hand,  both  in  doctrine  and 
discipline. 


172  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

When  Mr.  S.  took  an  account  of  the  societies,  hefore  he  came  to 
the  conference  in  1776,  they  contained  two  thousand,  six  hundred, 
and  sixty-four  persons  :  to  whom  eighteen  hundred  were  added  in 
one  year.  Above  a  thousand  of  these  had  found  peace  with  God : 
many  of  whom  thirsted  for  all  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ.  And 
divers  believed  God  had  "  circumcised  their  heart,  to  love  him  with 
all  their  heart,  and  with  all  their  soul." 

This  revival  of  religion  spread  through  fourteen  counties  in  Vir- 
ginia :  and  through  Bute  and  Halifax  counties  in  North-Carolina.  At 
the  same  time  we  had  a  blessed  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  in  several 
counties  bordering  upon  Maryland. 

Our  conference  was  at  Baltimore  Town,  on  the  22d  of  May.  Here 
I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  J.  part  of  which  I  insert. 

May  11,  1776. 

"  I  praise  God  for  his  goodness,  in  so  plentifully  pouring  out  of  his 
Spirit  on  men,  women,  and  children.  I  believe  threescore,  in  and 
near  my  parish,  have  believed,  through  grace,  since  the  quarterly 
meeting.  Such  a  work  I  never  saw  with  my  eyes.  Sometimes 
twelve,  sometimes  fifteen  find  the  Lord  at  one  class-meeting.  I  am 
just  returned  from  meeting  two  classes.  Much  of  the  power  of  God 
was  in  each. — My  dear  partner  is  now  happy  in  God  her  Saviour. 
I  clap  my  hands  exulting,  and  praise  God.  Blessed  be  the  Lord,  that 
ever  he  sent  you  and  your  brethren  into  this  part  of  his  vineyard  ! 
Many  children,  from  eight  to  twelve  years  old,  are  now  under  strong 
convictions.  And  some  of  them  are  savingly  converted  to  God.  I 
was  much  comforted  this  morning  at  the  W  O.  Chapel.  The  people 
there  are  of  a  truly  teachable  spirit :  those  particularly,  who  pro- 
fess to  have  obtained  the  pure  love  of  God.  They  are  as  little  chil- 
dren. When  you  consider,  how  the  work  is  spreading  on  every  side, 
you  will  readily  excuse  me  from  being  at  your  conference." 

Monday,  June  24.  I  left  Leesburg,  in  company  with  W  B.  (a  truly 
devout  man,  who  now  rests  from  his  labours)  and  came  to  Petersburg 
on  Saturday  the  29th,  where  I  preached,  about  three  in  the  after- 
noon, and  then  rode  on  to  Mr.  B.'s,  about  ten  miles  farther.  A  little 
company  was  waiting  for  me,  and  God  was  with  us  of  a  truth. 

Sunday  30.  I  was  comforted  by  the  sight  of  my  dear  brother  S. 
But  I  was  weak  in  body,  through  riding  so  far  in  extreme  heat,  and 
much  exercised  in  mind  ;  and  did  not  know  how  I  should  be  able  to 
go  through  the  labour  of  the  day.  We  went  to  the  chapel  at  ten, 
where  I  had  liberty  of  mind,  and  strength  of  body  beyond  my  expect 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  173 

ation.  After  preaching  I  met  the  society,  and  was  more  relieved, 
both  in  body  and  mind.  At  four  in  the  afternoon  I  preached  again, 
from  "  I  set  before  thee  an  open  door,  and  none  can  shut  it."  I  had 
gone  through  about  two-thirds  of  my  discourse,  and  was  bringing  the 
words  home  to  the  present  Now,  when  such  power  descended,  that 
hundreds  fell  to  the  ground,  and  the  house  seemed  to  shake  with  the 
presence  of  God.  The  chapel  was  full  of  white  and  black,  and 
many  were  without  that  could  not  get  in.  Look  wherever  we  would, 
we  saw  nothing  but  streaming  eyes,  and  faces  bathed  in  tears :  and 
heard  nothing  but  groans  and  strong  cries  after  God  and  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  My  voice  was  drowned  amidst  the  groans  and  prayers 
of  the  congregation.  1  then  sat  down  in  the  pulpit ;  and  both  Mr.  S. 
and  I  were  so  filled  with  the  divine  presence,  that  we  could  only  say, 
This  is  none  other  than  the  house  of  God !  This  is  the  gate  of 
heaven !  Husbands  were  inviting  their  wives  to  go  to  heaven,  wives 
their  husbands:  parents  their  children,  and  children  their  parents  : 
brothers  their  sisters,  and  sisters  their  brothers.  In  short,  those 
who  were  happy  in  God  themselves,  were  for  bringing  all  their 
friends  to  him  in  their  arms.  This  mighty  effusion  of  the  Spirit  con- 
tinued for  above  an  hour  :  in  whichvtime  many  were  awakened,  some 
found  peace  with  God,  and  others,  his  pure  love.  We  attempted  to 
speak  or  sing  again  and  again  :  but  no  sooner  we  began  than  our 
voices  were  drowned.  It  was  with  much'  difficulty  that  we  at  last 
persuaded  the  people,  as  night  drew  on,  to  retire  to  their  own 
homes. 

Tuesday,  July  2.  I  rode  with  Mr.  S.  to  Mr.  J.'s  ;  who,  with  Mrs. 
J.  received  us  with  open  arms.  I  preached  the  next  day,  not  far 
from  his  ho*use,  to  a  deeply  attentive  congregation.  Many  were 
much  affected  at  the  preaching  ;  but  far  more  at  the  meeting  of  the 
society.  Mr.  J.  himself  was  constrained  to  praise  God  aloud,  for  his 
great  love  to  him  and  to  his  people. 

Sunday  7.  I  preached  at  W.'s  chapel,  about  twenty  miles  from 
Mr.  J.'s.  I  intended  to  preach  near  the  house,  under  the  sliade  of 
some  large  trees.  But  the  rain  made  it  impracticable.  The  house 
was  greatly  crowded,  and  four  or  five  hundred  stood  at  the  doors  and 
windows,  and  listened  with  unabated  attention.  I  preached  from 
Ezekiel's  vision  of  the  dry  bones.  "  And  there  was  a  great  shaking." 
I  was  obliged  to  stop  again  and  again,  and  beg  of  the  people  to  com- 
pose themselves.  But  they  could  not :  some  on  their  knees,  and 
some  on  their  faces,  were  crying  mightily  to  Goiall  the  time  I  was 
preaching.  Hundreds  of  negroes  were  among  them,  with  the  tears 
streaming  down  their  faces.     The  same  power  \ve  found  in  meeting 


174  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL. 

the  society,  and  many  were  enabled  to  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable. 
In  the  cool  of  the  evening  I  preached  out  of  doors,  and  many  found 
an  uncommon  blessing. 

Every  day  the  ensuing  week  I  preached  to  large  and  attentive  con- 
gregations. Indeed  the  weather  was  violently  hot,  and  the  fatigue  of 
riding,  and  preaching  so  often,  was  great.  But  God  made  up  all  this 
to  me,  by  his  comfortable  presence.  Thursday  1 1  I  preached  to  a 
large  congregation  at  the  preaching-house  near  Mr.  J.'s.  After 
preaching  at  several  places  on  Friday  and  Saturday,  on  Sunday  14 
I  came  to  Mr.  B.'s,  where  I  preached  and  met  the  society.  The 
congregation  was,  as  before,  abundantly  larger  than  the  chapel  could 
contain.  And  we  had  almost  such  a  day  as  fourteen  days  ago :  only 
attended  with  a  more  deep  and  solemn  work.  What  a  work  is  God 
working  in  this  corner  of  Mr.  J.'s  parish  !  It  seemed  as  if  all  the 
country,  for  nine  or  ten  miles  round,  were  ready  to  turn  to  God. 

In  the  evening  I  rode  to  Mr.  S.'s,  and  found  a  whole  family  fearing 
and  loving  God.  Mr.  S.  a  sensible  and  judicious  man,  bad  been  for 
many  years  a  justice  of  the  peace.  By  hearing  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus,  he  and  his  wife  first,  and  then  all  his  children,  had  attained  that 
peace  that  passeth  all  understanding.  He  observed,  *'  How  amazing 
the  change  was  which  had  been  lately  wrought  in  the  place  where 
he  lived !  That  before  the  Methodists  came  into  these  parts,  when 
he  was  called  by  his  office  to  attend  the  court,  there  was  nothing  but 
drunkenness,  cursing,  swearing,  and  fighting,  most  of  the  time  the 
court  sat :  whereas  now  nothing  is  heard  but  prayer  and  praise,  and 
conversing  about  God,  and  the  things  of  God." 

Monday  15.  I  rode  towards  North-Carolina.  In  every  place  the 
congregations  were  large,  and  received  the  wbrd  with  all  readiness  of 
mind.  I  know  not  that  I  have  spent  such  a  week  since  I  came  to 
America.  I  saw  every  where  such  a  simplicity  in  the  people,  with 
such  a  vehement  thirst  after  the  word  of  God,  that  I  frequently 
preached  and  continued  in  prayer  till  I  was  hardly  able  to  stand. 
Indeed  there  was  no  getting  away  from  them,  while  I  was  able  to 
speak  one  sentence  for  God. 

Sunday  21.1  preached  at  Roanoake  chapel  to  more  than  double 
of  what  the  house  would  contain.  In  general,  the  white  people  were 
within  the  chapel,  and  the  black  people  without.  The  windows 
being  all  open,  every  one  could  hear,  and  hundreds  felt  the  word  of 
God.  Many  were  bathed  in  tears,  and  others  rejoicing  with  joy  un- 
speakable. When  the  society  met,  many  could  not  refrain  from 
praising  God  aloud.  I  preached  to  a  large  company  in  the  after- 
noon, and  concluded  the  day  with  prayer  and  thanksgiving. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  175 

Tuesday  23.  I  crossed  the  Roanoake  River,  and  preached  at  a 
chapel  in  North  Carolina.  And  I  preached  every  day  to  very  large 
and  deeply  attentive  congregations  :  although  not  without  much 
labour  and  pain,  through  the  extreme  heat  of  the  weather. 

On  Tuesday  30,  was  our  quarterly  meeting.  I  scarce  ever  remem- 
ber such  a  season.  No  chapel  or  preaching-house  in  Virginia  would 
have  contained  one  third  of  the  congregation.  Our  friends  knowing 
this,  had  contrived  to  shade  with  boughs  of  trees  a  space  that  would 
contain  two  or  three  thousand  persons.  Under  this,  wholly  screened 
from  the  rays  of  the  sun,  we  held  our  general  love-feast.  It  began 
between  eight  and  nine  on  Wednesday  morning,  and  continued  till 
noon.  Many  testified  that  they  had  "  redemption  in  the  blood  of 
Jesus,  even  the  forgiveness  of  sins."  And  many  were  enabled  to  de- 
clare, that  it  had  "  cleansed  them  from  all  sin."  So  clear,  so  full,  so 
strong  was  their  testimony,  that  while  some  were  speaking  their  expe- 
rience, hundreds  were  in  tears,  and  others  vehemently  crying  to  God 
for  pardon  or  holiness. 

About  eight  our  watch-night  began.,  Mr.  J.  preached  an  excellent 
sermon  :  the  rest  of  the  preachers  exhorted  and  prayed  with  divine 
energy.  Surely,  for  the  work  wrought  on  these  two  days,  many  will 
praise  God  to  all  eternity. 

T.  R. 


Thursday,  January  2,  1777.  My  soul  has  had  to  wrestle  with 
principalities  and  powers  ;  but  by  the  grace  of  God,  in  obstinately 
resisting  the  tempter,  I  have  come  off  more  than  conqueror,  and  am 
now  in  peace.    I  was  enabled  to  speak  plainly  and  closely  at  Mr.  G.'s. 

Lord's  day  5.  After  preaching  and  meeting  the  society,  I  think  the 
people  were  left  more  in  earnest  for  the  salvation  of  their  souls 
than  they  were  before.  On  Monday  the  Lord  was  the  portion  and 
comfort  of  my  soul ;  and  I  enjoyed  a  very  agreeable  and  happy  sea- 
son with  the  little  flock  at  W-  W.'s. 

Tuesday  7.  The  camp  fever  now  rages  much  ;  of  which  several 
have  died. 

Thursday  9.  I  have  met  with  a  few  faithful,  happy  souls,  both 
yesterday  at  Susquehannah,  and  to-day  at  E.  W  's.  My  own  soul 
lives  constantly  as  in  the  presence  of  God,  and  enjoys  much  of  his 
divine  favour.     His  love  is  better  than  life ! 

"My  Jesus  to  know, 
And  feel  his  blood  flow. 
'Tre  life  everlasting,  'tis  heaven  below." 


176  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

Lord's  day  12.  There  was  but  little  appearance  of  feeling  while  I 
preached  in  the  day  from  John  i.  14.  ;  but  my  soul  was  much  blessed 
in  the  evening  at  W.  E.'s,  and  it  was  a  solemn  time  amongst  the 
people. 

Monday  13.  We  have  constant  rumours  about  the  disagreeable  war 
which  is  now  spreading  through  the  country  ;  but  all  these  things  I 
still  commit  to  God.  Matters  of  greater  perpetuity  call  for  the  exer- 
tion of  my  mental  powers.  My  soul  is  in  a  tranquil  frame,  but  thirst- 
eth  for  more  of  God.  After  preaching  at  S.  L.'s,  I  met  the  society, 
which  seemed  but  slow  in  their  spiritual  progress.  Both  the  audience 
and  myself  were  much  more  engaged  the  next  day  at  I.  P.'s. 

Thursday  16.  A  certain  person  passed  great  encomiums,  and 
sounded  my  praise  as  a  preacher  to  my  face.  But  this  is  a  danger- 
ous practice  ;  for  it  is  easier  for  a  preacher  to  think  too  much  of  his 

gifts,  than  too  little.     St.  Paul  describing  the  true  Israelite  saith 

"  whose  praise  is  not  of  men  but  of  God." 

Saturday  18.  I  have  heard  much  of  many  attending  on  the  Lord's 
days  to  hear  T  C.  but  for  my  part  I  see  but  little  fruit.  My  heart 
was  warmly  engaged  to-day  at  Mr.  F  's  ;  and  as  some  preachers  met 
me  in  the  evening,  we  held  a  watch-night  at  H.  W.'s.  There  was  a 
great  number  of  people,  and  it  was  a  solemn,  profitable  time. 

Lord's  day  19.  In  preaching  at  N.  P.'s,  from  Zeph.  i.  12.  I  wai 
particularly  led,  in  the  close  of  the  sermon,  to  address  the  younger 
part  of  the  congregation,  in  such  a  manner  as  greatly  affected  the 
parents  who  were  present. 

Monday  20.  It  is  now  a  time  of  great  and  spreading  sickness ;  but 
in  this  very  time,  the  Lord  keeps  me  in  health  and  safety  ;  for  which 
my  heart  is  drawn  out  in  grateful  acknowledgments.  There  were 
more  people  than  could  have  been  expected,  to  hear  the  word  at 
Mrs.  P.'s. 

Tuesday  21.  A  messenger  from  Mr.  G.'s  met  me  at  the  widow 
B.'s,  informing  me  that  Mr.  R — a  and  Mr.  G.  S.  were  there  waiting 
to  see  me.  After  preaching  I  set  out,  and  metlny  brethren  the  same 
night,  and  found  them  inclined  to  leave  America,  and  embark  for 
England.  But  I  had  before  resolved  not  to  depart  from  the  work  on 
any  consideration.  After  some  consultation  it  was  thought  best  that 
Mr.  R — a  should  go  to  Mr.  R — n  and  request  his  attendance  here.  On 
Thursday  brother  S.  preached  a  very  argumentative  and  melting 
sermon.  I  intended  to  have  gone  forward  on  my  circuit,  but  was  pre- 
vented by  the  rain. 

Friday  24.  My  heart  has  checked  me  for  not  being  more  watchful 
n  company  and  conversation  :  but  to-day  my  soul  was  greatly  drawn 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL,  11 J 

out  after  God.  How  often  do  we  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
deprive  ourselves  of  divine  consolations,  by  not  steadily  attending  to 
the  duties  of  watching  and  prayer.  Lord,  help  me  to  be  more  atten- 
tive, and  more  faithful ! 

Lord's  day  28.  After  lecturing  in  Mr.  G.'s  family  I  rode  to  the 
Forks,  and  preached  there  ;  then  through  rain,  and  cold,  and  dirt,  to 
meet  the  congregation  at  Mr.  C.'s  ;  and  afterward  returned  to  Mr. 
G.'s,  and  lectured  in  the  evening.  And  the  Lord  was  with  me,  to  sup- 
port and  comfort  me  through  all  the  exercises  of  the  day. 

Monday  29.  My  spirit  was  assaulted  by  Satan,  and  felt  itself  in  a 
heavy  frame  ;  but  in  the  Lord  I  have  help.  As  brother  G.  S.  is  will- 
ing to  take  this  circuit  for  the  present,  my  intention  is  to  move  to- 
wards Annapolis  and  its  adjacent  parts.  May  Divine  Providence  direct 
my  steps.  I  have  had  an  agreeable  conversation  with  my  friend 
Mr.  O— e. 

Friday  31.  I  was  moved  to  speak  in  alarming  terms  at  W-  L.'s; 
Tbut  am  not  yet  so  steadily  and  spiritually  devoted  to  God,  as  my  soul 
earnestly  desires  to  be.  Probably  the  Lord  will  be  pleased  to  make 
me  perfect  through  sufferings.  But,  "  our  light  affliction,  which  is 
but  for  a  moment,  is  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  that  glory  which 
shall  be  revealed  in  us,"  if  faithful  to  the  grace  of  God. 

"  Who  suffer  with  our  Master  here, 
We  shall  before  his  face  appear, 

And  by  his  side  sit  down  : 
To  patient  faith  the  prize  is  sure  ; 
And  all  who  to  the  end  endure 
The  cross,  shall  wear  the  crown." 

Saturday,  February  1.  My  soul  is  determined  to  labour  more  for 
the  spirit  of  devotion.  I  found  myself  at  liberty  in  preaching  at 
the  Point,  on  "  Casting  all  your  care  upon  him,  for  he  careth  for 
you." 

Lord's  day  2.  The  audience  at  the  Point  were  cold  and  unaffected. 
And  at  town,  on  Monday  evening,  they  were  dispersed  by  the  alarm 
of  fire  in  the  time  of  preaching. 

Tuesday  4.  After  a  season  of  temptations  and  spiritual  exercises,  I 
found  my  mind  disburdened  ;  and  a  holy,  awful  nearness  to  God. 
On  Thursday  I  set  out  for  Risterstown,  in  order  to  meet  brother  G. 
S.  and  calling  in  at  Mr.  W-'s,  where  brother  K.  was  then  speaking,  I 
also  spoke  a  few  words,  and  found  my  soul  refreshed.  I  met  with 
brother  G.  S.  the  next  day,  and  saw  an  affecting  letter  from  Mrs.  T. 
of  Philadelphia,  in  which,  after  she  had  given  <?ome  account  of  the 

Vor. .  1.  &?, 


17i>  KEV*.    FRANCIS   A3BURY;S   JOURNAL. 

abounding  wickedness  of  that  city,  she  informed  us  of  the  declensioa 
of  a  few  religious  persons,  of  the  fidelity  of  others,  of  the  camp- 
fever  that  was  then  prevailing  there,  and  that  many  died  thereof; 
sometimes  20,  30,  and  even  40  in  a  day.  An  awful  account  indeed ! 
So  it  seems  as  if  the  Lord  intends  to  briog  us  to  our  proper  reflec- 
tions and  duties,  by  the  sword,  the  pestilence,  and  famine.  Alas  ! 
who  can  stand  before  the  displeasure  of  the  Almighty !  How  much 
better  would  it  be,  for  men  to  please  God,  and  live  in  lore  to  him 
and  one  another,  that  they  might  partake  of  his  blessing,  instead  of  his 
curse  !  Lord,  grant  thy  people  wisdom  and  protection  in  all  times  of 
danger! 

Monday  10.  I  went  to  the  quarterly  meeting  and  met  with  brother 
R — a  and  brother  R— n.  In  our  love-feast  several  people  were 
happy,  but  my  mind  was  under  a  cloud  and  some  severe  exercises. 
However,  I  earnestly  desire  an  increase  of  patience,  and  communion 
with  God.  O  my  Lord,  scatter  every  cloud,  and  cause  thy  face  to 
shine  with  beams  of  divine  love  upon  my  soul ! 

Thursday  13.  Mr.  R — n  went  to  Baltimore  ;  and  on  Friday  1  felt 
a  desire  to  be  labouring  for  the  salvation  of  souls.  I  cannot  be  idle, 
but  must  be  occupied  till  my  Lord  shall  come.  O  happy  day,  when 
the  weary  shall  be  at  rest !  Lord,  hasten  thy  work  in  me,  and  then 
hasten  thy  coming  to  judgment,  or  by  death  ! 

Saturday  15.  I  have  been  reading  some  of  both  Greek  and 
Hebrew  :  but  my  soul  longeth  to  feel  more  deadness  to  every  thing 
but  God,  and  an  increase  of  spiritual  light,  life,  and  love.  I  now 
parted  with  dear  brother  G.  S.  On  the  Lord's  day  I  found  freedom 
and  warmth  in  preaching  to  a  larger  congregation  than  could  have 
been  expected,  at  the  widow  M.'s. 

Monday  17.  Rode  to  Mrs.  R.'s  ;  and  was  grievously  troubled  with 
inward  temptations.  Oh  !  when  shall  I  rest  with  my  Jesus  in  eter- 
nal glory  ?  Lord,  I  am  oppressed,  undertake  for  me  ! 

Tuesday  18.  It  was  a  cold  winter's  day,  but  I  rode  23  miles  to  Mr. 
G.'s,  and  found  one  had  been  brought  to  God  since  my  departure  the 
last  time.  Several  seemed  to  melt  while  1  was  discoursing  on  the 
parable  of  the  dry  bones. 

Thursday  20.  The  weather  was  exceedingly  severe,  and  I  had  25 
miles  to  ride  ;  which  almost  benumbed  both  body  and  soul.  But  my 
mind  was  so  exercised  by  the  way,  with  various  and  heavy  tempta- 
tions, and  such  a  deep  sense  of  my  demerit  and  unprofitableness,  that 
I  thought  my  suffering  was  much  less  than  my  desert.  Satan  fre- 
quently assaults  me  on  every  side,  and  with  every  species  of  tempta- 
tions.   Surely  it  is  through  great  tribulation  we  must  enter  into  the 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  17$ 

kingdom  of  God.     The  righteous  have  great  cause  to  rejoice  that  a 
rest  remaineth  for  them. 

Saturday  22.  The  burden  of  my  ardent  desire  was,  to  be  more 
assimilated  to  my  spiritual  head,  and  to  be  more  abundantly  devoted, 
feoth  day  and  night,  to  the  pure  and  uninterrupted  service  of  my  God 

11 1  would  be  thine,  thou  know'st  I  would, 
And  have  thee  all  my  own  ; 
Thee,  O  my  all-sufficient  good, 
I  want,  and  thee  alone." 

Lord's  day  23.  After  riding  20  miles  to  I.  W.'s,  I  spoke  from 
these  words,  "  How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions  ?"  Many  of 
the  people  displayed,  by  their  looks,  the  carelessness  of  their  hearts  ; 
but  a  few  from  among  them  have  been  brought  to  Christ,  and  some 
more  are  coming.  On  Tuesday  we  had  severe  weather,  with  a  cold 
and  dirty  house  ;  but  my  soul  was  much  blessed  in  my  little  suffer- 
ings. On  Wednesday  I  was  kindly  entertained  by  old  Mr.  M.  and 
his  wife  :  though  a  troublesome  little  Irishman  seemed  much  inclined 
to  altercation.  But  as  Solomon  says,  "  a  soft  answer  turneth  away 
wrath  :"  so  by  coolness  and  meekness,  the  ferocity  of  his  temper  was 
in  a  great  degree  subdued.  I  have  had  some  doubts  of  late,  whether 
I  am  in  my  proper  rout  to  bring  souls  to  God ;  however,  the  event 
must  make  it  manifest. 

Friday  28.  My  heart  was  unfettered  and  quite  happy  in  God,  while 
publishing  glad  tidings  to  poor  sinners  at  Mr.  H.'s,  from  Acts  xiii.  38, 
39.  I  had  appointed  the  next  day  to  enter  Annapolis,  but  a  great 
snow  prevented  me.  Meeting  with  brother  H.  who  was  about  to 
enter  upon  the  circuit,  we  took  some  sweet  counsel  together  relative 
to  the  work  of  God  ;  and  I  gave  him  a  plan  which  comprehended  the 
greater  part  of  the  circuit,  reserving  for  myself  Annapolis  and  a  few 
places  adjacent.     My  soul  is  now  kept  in  peace  and  love. 

Lord's  day,  March  2.  Though  the  weather  was  very  cold,  several 
members  of  the  convention  attended  to  hear  the  word  at  the  widow 
D.'s  ;  and  I  afterward  preached  in  the  play-house,  now  converted 
into  a  church.  In  the  beginning  of  the  ensuing  week,  I  was  re- 
quested to  preach  in  the  assembly-room,  but  some  of  the  members 
opposed  it ;  so  I  returned  to  the  play-house,  and  found  my  ideas  con- 
tracted while  preaching  to  a  deistical  audience  from  Rom.  viii.  7,  8. 
Lord,  if  thou  hast  called  me  to  preach  to  these  souls,  grant  me  divine 
resistance !  But  how  difficult  it  is  to  declare  the  plain  truth  to  ungodly 


180  REV-  FRANCIS  ASBURY:S  JOURNAL 

and  sensual  men  in  such  a  manner  as  not  to  be  dismayed  at  their 
countenance  !  Our  sufficiency  is  of  God. 

Wednesday  5.  I  had  some  hope  for  a  poor,  ignorant  people  at 
Broad-Neck,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Severn.  My  clothes  were  wet 
through,  in  riding  20  miles  the  next  day  to  Mr.  P  's  ;  but  I  received 
no  injury.  Here  I  met  with  Mr.  O.  and  Wm.  M.  and  my  soul  was 
"blessed  with  delightful  communion  with  God. 

Lord  s  day  9.  Preached  at  Mr.  W  's  :  and  on  Monday  my  heart 
was  inflamed  with  divine  love,  and  the  people  were  much  melted, 
while  I  was  discoursing  at  Mr.  R.'s  from  Amos  v.  6.  though  my  soul 
had  been  bowed  down  by  the  weight  of  temptations  ;  and  by  the 
grace  of  God,  I  was  ashamed  before  him,  being  base,  unworthy,  and 
contemptible  in  my  own  eyes.  May  the  grace  which  thus  abases  me, 
in  due  time  exalt  me,  and  bring  me  to  glory  ! 

Tuesday  11.  I  met  with  a  dull  congregation  at  Mr.  G.'s,  and  went 
home  with  Mr.  T.  who  appeared  to  be  the  only  thoughtful  man 
amongst  them.  I  was  much  indisposed  on  Wednesday,  and  on  my 
way  to  Annapolis,  stopped  at  Mr.  M — r's,  where  a  certain  Mr.  Pt.  was 
taken  sick  ;  after  I  had  conversed  with  him  about  his  soul  and  the 
things  of  eternity,  his  conduct  proved  that  God  hath  a  witness  for 
himself  in  every  breast,  for  awaking  in  the  night,  he  uttered  expres- 
sive groans,  and  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord.  But  alas!  when 
men  should  attend  to  the  voice  of  divine  grace  which  speaketh  in 
silence,  though  frequently  with  great  power,  to  every  conscience, 
they  shake  off  the  disagreeable  sensation,  and  plunge  into  business 
and  sensual  pleasures :  and  when  death  comes  they  plunge  into  helL 
Thus  it  was  with  the  rich  man  mentioned  by  our  Lord  in  the  parable  : 
and  thus  it  is  with  many  every  day — Unhappy  creatures  !  How  rich, 
how  honourable,  how  easy,  how  happy  once,  avails  them  nothing 
there !  There  they  must  dwell  in  eternal  poverty  and  nakedness, 
exposed  to  the  beating  storms  of  the  divine  displeasure.  Then  how 
much  better  is  it,  to  choose  affliction  with  the  people  of  God,  than  to 
enjoy  the  pleasure  of  sin  for  a  season  ? 

Thursday  13.  At  W  M'C.'s  many  were  much  wrought  upon  by 
the  Spirit  of  God,  under  the  word :  A.  W  especially  was  so  deeply 
affected,  that  she  had  scarce  power  to  contain  herself— I  saw  a  fresh 
proof  that  the  life  of  man  is  quite  uncertain  :  a  tobacco  house  was 
blown  down  and  killed  a  negro  man. 

My  heart  was  deeply  engaged  in  prayer,  especially  for  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Annapolis.  My  confidence  in  God  was  so  great,  that  1  could 
trust  him  with  my  body  and  soul,  and  all  my  little  concerns.    He 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  181 

makes  me  a  partaker  of  his  spiritual  kingdom,  righteousness,  peace^ 
and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Friday  14.  My  natural  timidity  depressed  my  mind,  at  the  thought 
of  preaching  in  Annapolis,  where  many  people  openly  deny  the  holy 
Scriptures,  as  well  as  the  power  of  inward  religion.  But  the  Lord 
inspired  me  with  a  degree  of  evangelical  courage  ;  and  1  felt  a  deter- 
mination to  adhere  to  the  truth,  and  follow  Jesus  Christ,  if  it  should 
be  even  to  prison  or  to  death. 

Saturday  15.  Preaching  in  a  private  house  in  Annapolis,  I  found 
my  spirit  at  liberty  in  a  good  degree.  May  the  God  of  Daniel  stand 
by  me,  that  I  may  never  be  ashamed  to  preach  the  pure  Gospel,  or 
even  afraid  to  suffer  for  it ! 

Lord's  day  16.  After  preaching  at  the  widow  D.'s,  I  rode  back  to 
Mr.  H.'s,  and  was  not  very  agreeably  entertained  by  a  company  of 
gay,  worldly  people.  And  as  they  must  either  imbibe  something  of 
my  spirit,  or  I  something  of  theirs,  if  we  were  long  together,  I 
thought  it  most  expedient  to  depart  in  peace  as  soon  as  it  was  con- 
venient ;  and  was  much  assisted  and  comforted  in  preaching  from 
Acts  xvii.  30,  31.  but  felt  myself  weary  and  unwell  at  the  oiose 
of  the  day. 

Monday  17.  Preaching  when  the  house  of  assembly  was  adjournedp 
many  of  them  came  to  hear  for  themselves.  The  Lord  was  with 
me,  and  I  found  my  heart  melted  and  expanded  with  love  to  the  souls 
of  the  people.  But  by  imprudently  venturing  out  when  warmed  by 
preaching,  I  have  brought  on  a  sore  throat.  On  Tuesday  I  went  to 
get  a  sight  of  the  poor  prisoners,  but  could  not  obtain  admittance, 
At  Broad-Creek  on  Wednesday,  there  was  a  large  company  of  wild 
and  ignorant  mortals,  who  after  preaching  were  communicating  their 
thoughts  to  each  other  :  some  said  they  did  not  like  the  doctrine  * 
others  said  it  was  the  truth,  the  very  truth. 

Wednesday  19.  I  rode  to  Major  R.'s,  who  treated  me  with  great 
kindness,  and  seemed  desirous  of  knowing  the  truth  :  but  the  spiril: 
of  the  times  has  engrossed  too  much  of  his  attention.  Our  Lord  has 
told  us  that  some,  "when  they  have  heard,  go  forth,  and  are  choked 
with  cares,  and  riches,  and  pleasures  of  this  life,"  Luke  viii.  14.  N© 
doubt  but  this  description  comprehends  a  vast  multitude  of  mankind  : 
they  do  not  consider  religion  as  the  one  thing  needful. 

Thursday  20.  By  the  providence  of  God,  my  throat  was  no  worse, 
but  my  mind  was  under  some  dejection.  However,  we  had  a  power- 
ful and  profitable  watch-night  at  Mr.  P.'s.  And  on  Friday  there  were 
»any  attentive  people  at  Mr,  R.'s, 


182  ilEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY^S  JOURNAL. 

Saturday  21.  As  sure  as  we  draw  nigh  to  God,  in  sincerity,  he  wtfi 
draw  nigh  to  us.  I  have  given  myself  to  private  prayer  seven  times 
a  day,  and  found  my  heart  much  drawn  out  in  behalf  of  the  preachers, 
the  societies,  especially  the  new  places,  aod  my  aged  parents.  And 
while  thus  exercised,  my  soul  has  been  both  quickened  and  purified. 
Let  the  glory  be  given  to  God  !  But  alas  !  after  all  my  heart  is  not 
so  filled  with  generous  gratitude  as  it  should  be  ! 

"  Eternal  are  thy  mercies,  Lord ; 
Eternal  truth  attends  thy  word  ; 
Thy  praise  shall  sound  from  shore  to  shore. 
Till  suns  shall  rise  and  set  no  more." 

Lord's  day  22.  My  mind  was  delightfully  fixed  on  God.  A  few 
people,  who  in  dulness  and  religious  stupidity  exceeded  all  I  had 
ever  seen,  came  to  hear  me  to-day.  But  would  they  sincerely  seek 
^fter  God,  they  should  find  the  way  to  heaven  ;  for  the  prophet  saith, 
((  A  fool  shall  not  err  therein." 

Thursday  26.  I  have  been  variously  exercised  with  the  careless- 
ness of  the  people,  and  the  troubles  of  the  times  ;  though  my  soul 
lias  had  intimate  access  to  God.  I  received  a  letter  from  brother  S. 
intimating  that  according  to  rule,  the  time  was  drawing  near  for  us  to 
return.  But  St.  Paul's  rule  is,  that  our  spiritual  children  should  be 
in  our  hearts,  to  live  and  die  with  them.  2  Cor.  vii.  3.  Then 
doubtless  we  should  be  willing  to  suffer  affliction  with  them.  May 
4he  Lord  give  me  wisdom  sufficient  to  direct  me  in  this  and  every 
intricate  case  ! 

Lord's  day  29.  The  congregation  was  large  at  Mr.  D.'s,  and  some 
of  them  felt  the  power  of  the  word  :  though  in  the  afternoon,  at  a 
school-house  near  Annapolis,  there  was  very  little  appearance  of 
spiritual  feeling.  On  Monday  I  was  under  some  exercise  of  mind  in 
respect  to  the  times :  my  brethren  are  inclined  to  leave  the  continent, 
and  I  do  not  know  but  something  may  be  propounded  to  me  which 
would  touch  my  conscience  ;  but  my  determination  is  to  trust  in  God, 
and  be  satisfied  if  the  souls  of  my  fellow-men  are  saved.  A  genteel 
woman  met  me  to-day  on  the  road  to  I.  H.'s,  and  asked  me  if  I  should 
not  preach  in  town  ;  but  1  had  not  the  presence  of  mind  to  tell  her 
I  had  no  place  there  to  preach  in. 

Wednesday,  April  2.  Having  received  information  that  some  of  my 
brethren  had  determined  on  their  departure,  I  wrote  to  brother  S. 
tf)at  as  long  as  I  could  stay  and  preach  without  injuring  my  conscience, 
it  appeared  as  ray  duty  to  abide  wkh  the  flock.     But  I  must  qooftss 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOWUNAL.  28$ 

Satan  has  harassed  me  with  violent  and  various  temptations.  How- 
ever, my  dependance  is  on  the  Lord,  that  he  will  always  enable  me 
to  do  what  is  right  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man.  I  had  about  twenty- 
two  miles  to  ride  to-day,  and  to  call  by  the  way  to  preach  :  though 
both  hungry  and  weary,  yet  my  soul  was  much  blessed  in  dispensing 
the  word. 

Thursday  3.  My  soul  had  peace,  and  my  body  had  rest :  but  Satan 
was  still  at  hand.  We  had  a  comfortable  watch-night  at  Mr.  P.'s, 
On  Friday  my  heart  was  dissolved  into  tenderness  while  preaching 
at  Mr.  R.'s. 

Saturday  5.  Mr.  M.  gave  me  an  awful  account  of  a  man  struck 
instantly  dead  at  Deer-Creek.  The  very  relation  of  his  crime  is 
enough  to  make  a  man  shudder — he  had  been  cursing  the  Holy  Spirit. 
This  is  a  striking  proof  that  God  is  not  an  inattentive  spectator  of  the 
actions  of  men,  though  most  men  live  as  if  they  thought  he  were. 
No  :  "  for  God  shall  bring  every  work  into  judgment,  with  every 
secret  thing,  whether  it  be  good,  or  whether  it  be  evil."  Ecclesiastes 
xii.  14.  Much  temptation  has  urged  me  to  much  prayer  :  so  that  I 
have  lately  retired  as  often  as  ten  or  twelve  times  a  day  to  call  upon 
my  God.  When  the  tempter  finds  that  his  violent  assaults  only  drive 
us  nearer  to  God,  perhaps  he  will  not  be  so  maliciously  officious. 

Monday  7.  Satan  seemed  determined,  if  possible,  to  distract,  if  he 
could  not  destroy  me — even  blasphemous  thoughts  have  been  darted 
into  my  imagination.  But  I  know  where  my  help  is  to  be  found, 
Let  our  imaginations  be  ever  so  horrid,  and  haunt  us  ever  so  fre- 
quently, provided  we  hate  them,  and  constantly  resist  them,  they  are 
not  imputed  to  us  :  but  we  may  still  rejoice  in  God  in  the  midst  of 
them  all.  "  It  is  enough  for  the  servant,  to  be  as  his  Lord,  who  was 
in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin."  Glory  to 
God,  he  hath  promised  that  "  we  shall  not  be  tempted  above  that  we 
are  able"  (though  sometimes«it  may  be  to  the  extent  of  our  ability) 
**  but  will  with  the  temptation  also  make  a  way  to  escape,  that  we  may 
be  able  to  bear  it."  1  Cor.  x.  13.  I  have  now  read  Newton  on  the 
prophecies  three  times  over. 

Tuesday  G.  There  was  a  large  company  of  wild  looking  people,  at 
Mr.  G.'s,  on  the  fork  of  Patuxent  river.  And  there  was  much  such  a 
congregation  the  next  day  at  Mr.  C.'s. 

Thursday  10.  My  soul  was  much  refreshed  in  speaking  to  the  peo- 
ple at  C.  B.'s  :  and  on  Friday  I  met  with  Mr.  H — n,  and  received  a 
letter  from  Mr.  Ft— -n  ;  in  which,  after  he  had  given  me  an  account 
©f  the  circuits  and  societies,  he  assigned  his  reasons  for  not  trwyeHing 
mach  for  about  the  space  of  two  months  past. 


184  REV.  tRANCIS  ASBUItYS  JOURNAL. 

Lord's  day  13.  After  preaching  at  Mr.  D.'s,  I  found  much  freedom 
in  preaching  to  a  large  company  at  Annapolis  :  and  had  an  invitation 
to  go  into  Worcester  county. 

Monday  14.  This  was  a  day  of  rest  to  my  fatigued  frame,  and  of 
consolation  to  my  immortal  part.  On  Tuesday  there  was  great  de- 
cency in  the  congregation  at  Annapolis  ;  though  Satan,  by  his  emissa- 
ries, had  raised  an  opposition.     But  Israel's  God  is  above  them  all. 

Wednesday  16.  God  was  with  us,  and  the  people  were  happy  at 
Mr.  M.'s.  On  my  way  I  called  and  dined  with  Mr.  R.  who  gave  great 
attention  to  my  explanatory  and  pointed  conversation  on  the  new 
birth.  Riding  after  preaching  to  R.  P.'s,  my  chaise  was  shot  through  ; 
but  the  Lord  preserved  my  person.  The  war  is  now  at  such  a  height, 
that  they  are  pressing  men  for  the  sea  service. 

Thursday  17.  One  of  our  Society  died  of  a  disorder  in  the  throat 
and  lungs,  with  only  one  day's  illness.  Such  is  the  precarious  tenure 
of  life  !  But  "  blessed  are  they  that  die  in  the  Lord."  May  I  always 
have  my  loins  girded  about,  and  my  light  burning,  waiting  for  the  will 
of  my  Lord  !  God  has  displayed  great  wisdom  and  goodness  in  hiding 
future  events  from  man  ;  that  we  may  live  without  that  painful  anxiety 
which  we  should  be  apt  to  feel  if  we  knew  the  hour  of  our  death ;  and 
that  we  may  be  always  ready  to  meet  the  unknown  period. 

Saturday  19.  My  soul  was  much  blessed  at  R.  S.'s,  in  preaching 
from  the  divine  expostulation,  "  Why  will  ye  die  ?"  Mr  I.  D.  invited 
me  to  lodge  at  his  house,  and  treated  me  with  great  kindness. 

Lord's  day  20.  After  preaching  at  Mr.  W  's,  I  rode  about  twenty 
miles  to  lodge  with  a  friend  ;  but  seeing  a  boy  plowing  by  the  road 
side,  my  conscience  smote  me  for  breaking  the  Sabbath,  by  riding 
when  there  was  no  real  necessity  for  it. 

Monday  21.  My  heart  was  comforted  in  the  company  of  an  old 
friend  ;  but  on  Tuesday  Satan  raged  against  my  soul  as  if  he  would 
immediately  destroy  it :  but  my  divine  Protector  is  too  strong  for  him. 
The  Lord  visited  and  blessed  my  soul  in  the  evening,  while  I  was  de- 
scribing the  faithful  and  wise  servant. 

Wednesday  23.  I  found  myself  very  unwell  on  my  going  to  T.  W/s  ; 
but  my  spirit  was  at  liberty  in  preaching.  Though  still  unwell  I  rode 
twenty  miles  to  I.  W  's  on  Thursday,  and  was  blessed  with  a  tranquil 
mind  by  the  way.  Satan  cast  several  infernal  darts  at  my  soul ;  but 
I  was  enabled  to  repel  them  by  the  shield  of  faith,  and  the  power  of 
prayer. 

Saturday  26.  A  very  genteel,  polite  company  assembled  at  An- 
napolis ;  and  though  I  spoke  with  great  plainness,  they  bore  «• 
well. 


EEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL.  185 

Lord's  day  27.  After  meeting  the  congregation  at  the  widow  D.'s, 
I  found  a  large  company  at  Annapolis,  who  gave  good  attention  to  me, 
but  I  fear  (hey  were  not  disposed  to  give  their  h*  arts  to  God.  My 
mind  has  been  grieved  at  some  who  call  themselves  friends  to  reli- 
gion and  to  the  Methodists.  But  alas!  how  blind  and  ignorant  is  the 
unchanged  mind  of  man  !  How  little  does  he  consider  what  will  please 
or  displease  his  M^ker!  I  still  desire  to  have  every  action,  word, 
thought,  and  desire,  entirely  devoted  to  God.  Lord,  hasten  the  much 
wished  for  hour ! 

"  Thou,  my  life,  my  treasure  be, 
My  portion  bere  below  J 
Nothing  would  I  seek  but  thee, 
Thee  only  would  I  know." 

Bionday  28.  About  two  hundred  careless  looking  people  came  to 
hear  the  word  of  God  at  Pig-Point :  they  seemed  entire  strangers  to 
such  a  doctrine  ;  so  some  laughed  and  others  wept.  I  rode  fifty  miles 
in  going  and  coming,  to  preach  that  sermon,  but  hope  it  was  not  alto- 
gether labour  lost. 

Friday,  May  2.  At  Mr.  R.'s  I  spoke  closely  and  pointedly  for  the 
last  time  during  this  visit ;  then  rode  through  the  rain  and  darkness 
to  Mr.  W  's,  and  felt  my  heart  sweetly  melted  with  gratitude  and 
thanksgiving  to  God.  On  Monday  I  went  to  S.  T,  's,  and  met  my 
brethren  at  the  Frederick  quarterly  meeting  ;  where  we  were  fa- 
voured with  the  divine  blessing. 

Wednesday  7.  A  letter  came  to  hand  from  Mr.  J.  which  gave  us 
hopes  that  there  would  be  another  revival  in  Virginia.  He  also  ad- 
vised us  to  take  no  immature  steps,  which  might  have  a  tendency  to 
alter  our  plan.  After  preaching  the  next  day  at  R  S.'s,  T  D.  invi- 
ted me  to  his  house.  I  found  that  he  and  his  wife  were  seeking  to 
be  justified  by  the  deeds  of  the  law  ;  and  I  laboured  with  undissem- 
bled  freedom  to  convince  them  of  their  error  ;  but  it  appeared  to  be 
labour  in  vain. 

Saturday  10.  At  Annapolis  the  congregation  was  small,  and  so  was 
my  power  to  preach.  My  soul  has  been  kept  in  a  calm  and  comfort- 
able frame,  but  panting  for  more  constant  fervour  towards  God. 

Lord's  day  11.  Many  attended  at  the  widow  D.'s,  to  hear  what  I 
would  say  on  my  departure.  I  spoke  from  Acts  xiii.  46.  and  many- 
seemed  much  affected  The  congregation  was  also  large  at  Annapolis  ; 
where  1  spoke  in  plain  terms  to  the  rich  and  the  gay,  on  our  Lord's 
awful  account  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus.  They  behaved  well,  and 
some  were  desirous  to  know  if  I  intended  to  come  again. 

Vol.  J.  24 


J8ti>  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURYS  JOURNAL. 

Monday  12.  Set  out  for  our  yearly  conference,  and  having  preach- 
ed at  Mr.  P.'s  by  the  way,  came  safe  to  Mr.  G  's,  and  was  glad  to  see 
the  preachers  who  were  there.  We  had  some  weighty  conversation 
on  different  points  :  and  among  other  things,  it  was  asked  whether 
we  could  give  our  consent  that  Mr.  R.  should  baptise,  as  there  ap- 
peared to  be  a  present  necessity.  But  it  was  objected  that  this  would 
be  a  breach  of  our  discipline  ;  and  it  was  not  probable  that  things 
would  continue  long  in  such  a  disordered  state.  The  next  day,  with 
great  harmony  and  joint  consent,  we  drew  a  rough  draught  for  sta- 
tioning the  preachers  the  ensuing  year.  And  on  Friday  we  con- 
versed on  the  propriety  of  signing  certificates  avouching  good  con- 
duct for  such  of  the  preachers  as  chose  to  go  to  Europe.  But  I 
could  not  see  the  propriety  of  it  at  this  time.  We  also  conversed 
on  such  rules  as  might  be  proper  for  the  regulation  of  the  preachers 
who  abide  on  the  continent.  And  it  was  judged  necessary  that  a  com- 
mittee should  be  appointed  to  superintend  the  whole.  And  on  Mon- 
day we  rode  together  to  attend  the  conference  at  Deer-Creek. 

So  greatly  has  the  Lord  increased  the  number  of  travelling  preach- 
ers within  these  few  years,  that  we  have  now  twenty-seven  who  at- 
tend the  circuits,  and  twenty  of  them  were  present  at  this  conference. 
Both  our  public  and  private  business  was  conducted  with  great  har- 
mony, peace,  and  love.  Our  brethren  who  intend  to  return  to  Eu- 
rope, have  agreed  to  stay  till  the  is  way  quite  open.  I  preached  on 
the  charge  which  our  Lord  gave  his  apostles,  "  Behold,  I  send  you 
forth  as  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves  :  be  ye  therefore  wise  as  ser- 
pents, and  harmless  as  doves."  Our  conference  ended  with  a  love- 
feast  and  watch-night.  But  when  the  time  of  parting  came,  many 
wept  as  if  they  had  lost  their  first-born  sons.  They  appeared  to  be 
in  the  deepest  distress,  thinking,  as  I  suppose,  they  should  not  see 
the  faces  of  the  English  preachers  any  more.  This  was  such  a  part- 
ing as  I  never  saw  before.  Our  conference  has  been  a  great  time,  a 
season  of  uncommon  affection.  And  we  must  acknowledge  that  God 
has  directed,  owned,  and  blessed  us  in  the  work.  A  certificate,  as 
mentioned  above,  had  been  acceded  to,  and  signed  in  the  conference. 

Lord's  day  25.  My  soul  was  quickened  in  preaching  at  the  Bush 
chapel ;  I  lodged  at  Mr.  D.'s  ;  and  the  next  day  collected  my  writings 
and  letters,  in  order  to  preserve  them.  On  Tuesday  went  to  Mr. 
G.'s;  and  on  Wednesday  began  to  read  regularly  Mr.  Wesley  s 
Notes. 

Thursday  29.  We  had  a  profitable  meeting  at  Gunpowder-Neck. 
And  on  Friday  I  returned  to  preach  at  Mr.  G.'s ;  where  we  had  a 
small,  but  warm  congregation. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBITRY's  JOURNAL,  !87 

Saturday  31.  The  Spirit  of  grace  was  with  me  :  but  I  long  for  a 
more  active  life ;  to  be  constantly  employed  in  bringing  souls  to  God. 

Lord's  day,  June  1.  The  Lord  enlarged  my  heart,  and  opened  a 
door  of  utterance,  while  preaching  to  a  numerous  congregation  at  the 
Forks ;  and  there  were  some  among  them  who  had  for  a  long  time 
been  detained  by  prejudice  from  hearing  us.  But  I  could  not  find 
the  same  liberty  at  Mr.  G.'s  in  the  latter  part  of  the  day. 

Tuesday  3.  "As  the  hart  panteth  after  the  water-brooks,  so  panteth 
my  soul  after  God.  My  soul  thirsteth  for  God,  for  the  living  God  ;" 
though  I  have  been  at  times  sorely  beset  by  temptations.  But  shall 
I  ever  yield  to  the  tempter,  and  sin  against  my  Lord  ?  No  :  in  the 
strength  of  Jesus,  no  ! 

Thursday  5.  Having  been  ten  days  off  and  on  at  Mr.  G.'s,  I  set 
out  to-day  for  I.  C.'s  ;  and  preached  by  the  way  at  P  H.'s.  On  Fri- 
day I  laid  aside  my  wig  and  began  to  use  the  cold  bath  for  ray  health  : 
and  rode  as  far  as  Mrs.  R.'s,  who  was  a  mother  in  Israel,  and  both  a 
friend  and  mother  to  me.  After  many  heavy  trials  my  soul  was 
comforted,  but  earnestly  desirous  of  more  purity  and  fellowship 
with  God. 

Saturday  7.  Some  seemed  to  feel  the  weight  of  divine  truths  at 
Risterstown  ;  and  on  the  Lord's  day  my  heart  was  melted  and  ex- 
panded towards  the  people  at  brother  C.'s. 

4  Monday  9.  I  met  brother  G.  S.  at  Mr.  C.'s,  and  preached  on  Acts 
xvl.  30,  31.  ;  then  called  to  see  a  sick  person,  and  returned  to 
brother  C.'s. 

Wednesday  11.  I  preached  in  town  on  these  affecting  words, 
"  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim  ?"  And  on  Thursday  entering 
my  circuit  at  Mr.  P  's,  we  had  a  heart- affecting  season,  and  a  few 
joined  the  society. 

Friday  13.  We  had  great  harmony  and  love  in  our  increasing  so- 
ciety at  R.'s. 

Lord's  day  15.  There  was  a  large  attentive  audience  in  a  school- 
house  on  Elk-Ridge  ;  where  1  preached  with  usual  energy  and  affec- 
tion on  Amos  iv.  11.  and  hope  the  time  of  favouring  the  souls  of  both 
rich  and  poor  is  now  approaching.  But  after  so  great  a  blessing, 
Satan,  as  if  moved  with  envy,  attempted  to  wound  me  with  his  fiery 
darts.  This  was  probably  permitted  by  my  gracious  Lord,  lest  I 
should  be  exalted  above  measure.  Brother  G  S.  came  to  accom- 
pany me  into  Virginia,  to  fetch  our  clothing  and  books. 

Monday  1G.  We  set  out  and  rode  to  S.  T  's,  where  we  received 
this  strange  relation—"  A  person  in  the  form  of  a  man  came  to  the 
house  of  another  in  the  night ;  the  man  of  the  house  asked  what 


188  RtV.  FRANCIS  AfeBtjft.Y'S  JOURNAL 

he  wanted.  He  replied,  '  This  will  be  the  bloodiest  year  that  ever 
was  known.*  The  other  asked  how  he  knew.  His  answer  waa, 
'  It  is  as  true  as  that  your  wife  is  now  dead  in  her  bed.'  He  went 
back  and  found  hi*  wife  dead.  But  the  stranger  disappeared."  On 
Tuesday  we  went  to  brother  A — m's  ;  and  on  Wednesday  to  B.  F.'s, 
a  kind  man,  but  his  ideas  of  religion  were  confused.  Thursday  we 
rode  to  Leesburg,  and  found  that  brother  B — le  had  just  departed 
from  this  worl  1  of  trouble  and  danger.  My  spirit  w-<$>  much  drawn 
out  tow  sHs  God  and  the  souls  of  the  people,  while  preaching  on 
Matt.  xxiv.  4"-,  &c.  Friday  we  went  on  to  Frederick,  where  1  showed 
the  people  the  danger  of  postponing  their  duties  to  God,  from  Amos 
iv.  11.  The  next  day  we  rode  forty-five  miles  to  Risterstown  and 
came  in  about  seven  o'clock. 

Wednesday  25.  By  invitation,  I  visited  I.  D.  who  was  very  ill,  and 
hope  it  will  be  followed  by  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
prove  a  permanent  blessing  to  his  soul.  Then  rode  on  to  I.  W.'s, 
and  found  myself  unwell,  but  happy  in  God. 

Friday  27.  I  went  to  Mr.  H.'s,  and  intended  to  preach  in  Annapo- 
lis, but  there  was  no  house  open  for  me.  The  next  day  two  of  the 
members  of  the  assembly  promised  to  use  their  influence  in  procuring 
me  a  house  to  preach  in ;  but  expected  they  could  not  succeed. 
Alas  !  What  have  I  done  ?  Whose  ox  or  ass  have  I  taken,  or  whom 
have  1  defrauded  1  But  the  Lord  permits  it  to  be  so ;  therefore  i 
peaceably  submit,  and  will  not  fear  the  face  of  man,  nor  even  a  pri- 
son, while  employed  in  the  cause  of  God  and  of  truth.  However, 
contrary  to  my  expectation,  I  preached  in  the  church,  though  the 
congregation  was  small,  and  the  soldiers  made  a  great  noise  before 
the  door.  I  then  concluded  to  preach  the  next  time  in  the  commons. 
But  the  rain  which  fell  the  next  day  prevented  me  ;  and  there  were 
but  £ew  people  at  Mrs.  D.'s. 

Tuesday,  July  1.  The  Lord  blessed  me  with  joy  and  peace  in 
believing,  and  I  was  enabled  to  cast  all  my  care  upon  him.  On  Tues- 
day I  went  to  Mr.  P 's,  about  twenty  miles;  and  have  been  much 
delighted  in  reading  Dr.  Watts's  Treatise  on  the  Rest  of  Separate 
Spirits,  and  Mr.  Baxter's  Saint's  Rest.  In  these  books  we  find  the  mar- 
row of  Methodism  :  i.  e.  pure  religion,  and  sound  doctrine  which  can- 
not be  condemned. 

Wednesday  2.  Satan  still  manifesteth  a  desire  to  sift  me  as  wheat : 
but  the  Lord  supports  me,  and  fills  me  with  peace.  A  lowering  cloud 
hangs  threatening  over  our  heads,  but  all  my  trust  is  in  the  Lord,  who 
hath  stood  by  and  preserved  me  for  many  years  ;  and  will  stand  by  m° 
still. 


HEV.  FlUNcrS  ASBURY  5  JOURNAL,  189 

Thursday  3.  I  rode  about  twelve  miles,  and  preached  a  funeral 
sermon  on  the  death  of  Mr.  W  It  was  a  very  affecting  time  both  to 
me  and  the  congregation.  But  after  I  had  read  the  rules  in  the 
society,  I  told  them  my  doubts,  and  communicated  my  ideas  of  the 
approaching  troubles,  which  produced  a  great  melting  amongst  them. 

Saturday  5.  I  had  some  conversation  with  Mr.  M— y  ;  but  it  was 
to  no  purpose,  for  he  was  still  inflexible.  Perhaps  I  have  been  too 
forward  in  taking  his  part  before,  and  now  he  requites  me  for  it. 

Lord's  day  6.  There  was  a  very  serious  congregation  in  the  fore- 
noon, where  I  enforced  our  Lord's  affectionate  declaration,  Matt, 
xxiii.  37.  But  in  the  latter  part  ot  the  day,  about  eleven  miles  dis- 
tant from  the  other  place,  the  people  seemed  to  be  stupid  and  inatten- 
tive. As  I  have  thought  bacon  was  prejudicial  to  my  health,  I  have 
lately  abstained  from  it,  and  have  experienced  the  good  effects  of  this 
economy.  My  soul  has  been  kept  in  great  purity,  and  ardent  pantings 
after  more  of  God. 

Monday  7.  In  the  e\fcening  D.  R.  and  brother  H.  came  and  brought 
me  some  account  of  the  preachers,  whom  I  love  in  the  bowels  of 
Christ,  with  much  affection.  We  spent  the  next  day  together  in 
love,  and  to  edification  :  and  on  Wednesday,  they  set  out  for  Virginia, 
and  I  for  Annapolis.  My  spirit  was  somewhat  dejected  by  the  way, 
with  a  fear  that  the  people  would  reject  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ, 
to  their  own  destruction.  But  these  matters  must  be  left  to  the 
Lord,  who  **  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness.'"  I  met  a  very 
insensible  company  at  Mr.  C.'s,  and  laboured  to  fasten  the  truth  on 
their  hearts  from  Malachi  iii.  7 ;  but  it  appeared  to  be  labour  in 
vain. 

Thursday  10.  They  received  me  at  Mr.  H.'s  better  than  I 
expected  ;  and  some  were  touched  by  the  power  of  grace.  There 
was  an  opportunity  on  Friday  of  speaking,  at  least  to  the  judgment  of 
some  rich  and  honourable  men,  on  Psalm  iv,  6,  7.  "  There  be 
many  that  say,  Who  will  show  us  any  good  ?  Lord,  lift  thou  up  the 
light  of  thy  counteuance  upon  us.  Thou  hast  put  gladness  in  my 
heart,  more  than  in  the  time  that  their  corn  and  their  wine  increased." 
My  heaviness  of  spirit  was  almost  removed,  and  my  soul  was  free  and 
happy  in  God. 

Lord's  day  13.  Though  I  spoke  closely  and  plainly  at  Mrs.  D.'s, 
yet  the  audience  did  not  seem  properly  to  understand  me.  I  had 
intended  to  preach  in  the  commons  this  afternoon,  but  the  rain  pre- 
vented it,  so  I  preached  to  a  few  desirous  souls  at  Mr.  H.'s.  But 
my  spirit  is  grieved  within  me,  to  see  such  multitudes  of  people  in 
these  parts  so  forgetful  of  God,  and  filled  with  the  spirit  and  convex 


MO  KfcV.  FIUSCIS  ASBUR.Y  9  JOURNAL. 

sation  of  this  world.  Poor  souls  !  If  they  were  only  convinced  of 
their  sinful  and  lost  estate,  their  disposition  and  conversation  would 
be  immediately  changed.  My  work  at  present  is  very  heavy— it  is 
chiefly  among  unawakened  people.  I  have  devised  what  I  could  to 
bring  them  to  God  :  and  know  not  what  new  method  to  take.  May 
the  Lord  take  the  work  into  his  own  hand  ! 

Monday  14.  There  were  forty  or  fifty,  chiefly  women,  to  hear  the 
word  at  Annapolis :  to  whom  I  showed,  "  If  our  Gospel  be  hid  it  is 
hid  to  them  that  are  lost ;  in  whom  the  god  of  this  world  hath  blinded 
the  minds  of  them  that  believe  not,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  Gos- 
pel of  Christ,  who  is  the  image  of  God,  should  shine  unto  them." 
Though  I  spoke  freely,  yet  but  few  of  them  seem  to  feel  it.  On 
Tuesday  my  soul  was  under  deep  exercises.  I  am  often  purposing 
to  pursue,  with  greater  ardour,  the  summit  of  holiness,  but  still  come 
short ! 

Wednesday  16.  At  a  place  ten  miles  from  Annapolis,  there  was 
some  melting  of  heart  under  the  word.  I  afterward  met  the  class, 
and  then  returned  with  my  mind  fixed  on  God,  and  sweet  nearness  of 
soul  to  him. 

Thursday  17.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  was  with  me  in  preaching  at 
Mr.  P  's  ;  and  there  was  a  great  moving  among  the  society.  JBlessed 
be  God  for  all  things  !  My  body  has  been  in  tolerable  health,  and 
my  soul  frequently  refreshed  with  the  dew  of  heavenly  grace.  My 
meditations  in  the  Hebrew  Bible  have  afforded  me  great  pleasure. 
This  is  the  book  I  study  for  improvement. 

Lord's  day  20.  Both  at  the  school-house,  where  I  called  on  the  peo- 
ple to  consider  their  ways  from  Haggai  i.  5. ;  and  at  Mr.  R.'s,  where  I 
showed  them,  from  Ezek.  xxxiii.  31.  how  many  of  old  time  heard  the 
word,  of  the  Lord,  but  did  it  not ;  there  was  very  little  appearance  of 
any  thing  more  than  attention  ;  though  I  never  laboured  more  ear- 
nestly to  do  good.  It  seems  as  if  a  judicial  stupidity,  in  spiritual 
things,  prevails  among  them. 

Monday  21.  Heard  Mr.  Rankin  preach  his  last  sermon.  My  mind 
was  a  little  dejected  ;  and  I  now  felt  some  desire  to  return  to  England, 
but  was  willing  to  commit  the  matter  to  the  Lord.  There  was  a  large 
congregation  and  some  prospect  of  good  things  at  Mr.  S.'s,  where  I 
told  the  people,  from  the  authority  of  Jesus  Christ,  "  Except  ye  re- 
pent ye  shall  all  likewise  perish."     Luke  xiii.  3. 

Wednesday  23.  God  was  still  my  object  and  my  hope.  But  I  have 
lamented  my  backwardness  in  doing  good  by  private  conversation  ; 
which  is  in  a  great  measure  owing  to  the  natural  bashfulness  of  my 
disposition.     After  visiting  some  poor  people  to  pray  and  talk  with 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUKY'S  JOURNAL.  lyj 

them  on  the  important  subject  of  their  salvation,  I  rode  to  C.'s,  at  the 
head  of  South-River  :  but  it  is  a  miserable,  stupid,  careless  neigh- 
bourhood ;  so  I  bid  it  farewell. 

Thursday  24.  There  were  many  gay  and  giddy  looking  folks  to 
hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  ;  and  a  few  of  them  were  serious  and 
affected.  Poor  souls  !  They  are  real  objects  of  pity.  Both  their 
education  and  the  circle  of  their  acquaintance,  have  a  tendency  to 
make  them  forget  their  latter  end,  and  to  bend  all  the  strength  of 
their  mind3to  present  objects. 

Friday  25.  We  kept  our  general  fast  as  appointed  by  conference  ; 
and  my  soul  was  enabled  to  cast  all  its  little  cares,  both  spiritual  and 
temporal,  on  Him  that  careth  for  me.  May  the  Lord  direct  me  how  to 
act,  so  as  to  keep  njyself  always  in  the  love  of  God !  I  have  lately 
been  reading  an  account  of  Theodosius  and  his  Sons,  with  several  of 
the  ancient  Fathers  ;  which  also  communicates  much  information  rela- 
tive to  the  Eastern  and  Western  Empires  for  about  three  hundred 
years.  So  long  was  idolatry  and  Arianism  kept  out  of  the  church  of 
Christ.  And  while  Chrysostom  was  bishop,  an  Arian  church  was 
burnt  at  Constantinople.  But  since  that  time,  absolute,  uncondi- 
tional predestination  has  made  its  way  into  the  church,  which  nulli- 
fies all  laws,  human  and  divine  :  for  if  men  cannot  do  otherwise  than 
they  do,  why  should  any  law  inflict  punishment  for  their  crimes  ? 
Must  quadrupeds  be  punished  because  they  do  not  fly  ?  How  easily 
might  men,  believing  this  doctrine,  ascribe  their  envy,  malice,  and 
most  cruel  inclinations,  to  the  effect  of  divine  predestination  ;  and 
conclude  that  their  most  malignant  dispositions  were  eternally  de- 
creed ;  and  therefore  not  to  be  conquered  but  complied  with,  though 
they  should  produce  the  most  pernicious  and  destructive  consequences 
in  human  society. 

Saturday  26.  My  soul  was  composed,  and  in  pursuit  of  more  of 
God.  Having  read  the  conquest  of  Rome  by  Alaric,  and  the  rending 
of  the  Western  Empire  by  the  Goths,  I  was  led  to  observe  how 
part  of  the  Revelation  to  St.  John  was  then  fulfilled.  But  much 
more  of  this  is  yet  to  come. 

Lord's  day  27.  After  explaining  the  parable  of  the  sower  at  Mrs. 
D.'s,  I  preached  at  Annapolis  to  a  large  company,  some  serious,  and 
some  gay  and  trifling,  on  these  compassionate  words  of  Christ, 
"  How  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children  together,  and  ye 
would  not." 

Monday  28.  As  the  rain  prevented  my  attending  the  appointment, 
1  visited  the  gaol,  and  found  an  unhappy  mortal  under  sentence  of 


W2  fcEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL. 

death ;  who  was  very  ignorant,  but  so  susceptible  of  religious  advice 
that  he  was  melted  into  tears,  and  shook  like  a  leaf. 

Tuesday  20.  The  Lord  discovered  to  my  view  a  greater  depth  of 
holiness,  and  my  soul  thirsted  for  it.  I  met  with  brother  H.  who  had 
been  to  Virginia,  but  having  some  scruples  of  conscience  about  taking 
the  test  oath,  was  obliged  to  return.  May  the  Lord  direct  U9  all  how 
to  pursue  the  most  wise  and  prudent  measures  !  The  next  day  I 
preached  at  Maggotty,  where  the  work  of  God  goes  on  successfully. 

Thursday  31.  At  Mr.  P  's  there  were  about  a  hundred  souls  who 
seemed  much  alive  to  God.  Here  I  appointed  a  quarterly  meeting 
and  love-feast,  on  my  return  from  Baltimore  arrti  Frederick,  next 
Saturday  fortnight. 

Friday,  August  1.  The  Lord  gave  me  spiritual  peace,  but  my  soul 
was  on  stretch  for  a  greater  degree  of  holiness,  and  deeper  commu- 
nion with  God. 

"I pant  to  (eel  thy  sway. 
And  only  thee  to  obey : 

Thee  ray  spirit  gasps  to  meet ; 
This  my  one  my  ceaseless  prayer, 

Make,  O  make  my  heart  thy  seat ! 
O  set  op  thy  kingdom  there !" 

1  have  now  finished  reading  sixteen  volumes  of  the  Universal  History. 

Lord's  day  3.  In  the  forenoon  the  poor  rich  sinners  were  very 
attentive  in  the  school-house  on  Elk  Ridge  :  and  it  is  possible  the 
Lord  may  raise  a  people  among  them  to  fear  and  love  him.  But  at 
Mr.  R.'s  in  the  afternoon,  the  congregation  was  very  dull,  though  I 
spoke  strong  words  from  the  Almighty's  awful  declaration  concerning 
the  ungodly — "  These  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment." 

Monday  4.  Rode  thirty-seven  miles  to  the  Frederick  quarterly 
meeting,  without  breaking  my  fast,  and  was  under  the  necessity  of 
preaching  when  I  arrived.  The  next  day  our  meeting  began  with 
a  love-feast  ;  and  we  had  a  powerful,  melting  time. 

Friday  8.  H  iving  visited  my  friends  in   Baltimore,  1   rode  to  Mr. 
G.'s,  met  Mr.  R.  and  had  some  agreeable  conversation  on  the  work  of 
God  in  different  parts  of  America.     Went  the  next  day  to  the  Forks, 
where  I  met  with  brother  G   S.  in  great  harmony,  and  found  divine 
assistance  in  dispensing  the  word. 

Monday  11.  We  settled  all  our  little  affairs  in  the  spirit  of  love; 
and  brother  S.  partly  agreed  to  go  with  me  to  the  quarterly  meeting. 
But  alas  !  though  my  confidence  in  Christ  was  not  shaken,  yet  I  felt^ 
myself  less  than  the  least  in  the  company,  and  unworthy  of  the  fa- 


REV.  FRANCIS   ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  193 

Your  of  both  God  and  man.  How  merciful  is  God  in  giving  us  such 
abasing  views  of  ourselves,  which  have  a  powerful  tendency  to  drive 
us  closer  to  him,  and  keep  us  always  in  the  dust ! 

Tuesday  12.  After  I  had  publicly  declared  to  the  righteous,  "  The 
God  whom  we  serve  is  able  to  deliver  us ;"  we  then  had  a  solemn, 
comfortable  love-feast :  and  having  done  our  business,  I  returned  to 
Mr.  G.'s,  where  many  people  attended  to  receive  the  word  of  truth. 
And  we  have  reason  to  believe  the  work  of  God  is  now  reviving. 

Wednesday  13,  was  spent  at  Mr.  G.'s  ;  and  after  some  conversa- 
tion I  found  brother  S.  was  not  to  go  with  me,  because  Mr.  R.  did  not 
choose  to  spend  a  quarter  in  Baltimore  circuit.  Indeed  he  has  not 
taken  a  regular  circuit  since  we  have  been  in  America ;  so  I  was 
obliged  to  go  into  a  new  circuit  with  a  young  exhorter  who  had 
deserted  me  once  before.  But  all  contentions  wound  my  spirit,  so  I 
passively  submitted. 

Thursday  14.  My  mouth  was  opened  and  my  heart  was  enlarged 
at  W-  L.'s  ;  and  1  hope  the  word  was  made  a  blessing  to  many  souls. 

Friday  15.  Rode  to  Curtis's  Creek  to  hold  a  quarterly  meeting 
there  ;  and  the  next  morning  we  began  with  a  love-feast.  It  was  a 
time  of  great  power,  and  exceeded  all  we  had  ever  seen  in  these 
parts.  There  was  something  very  admirable  in  the  Christian  sim- 
plicity of  the  people,  who  spoke  the  language  of  warm  and  artless 
love.  Brother  S.  preached  a  moving  sermon  on  the  barren  fig-tree : 
and  many  sinners  wept. 

Lord's  day  17.  The  rain  prevented  my  going  to  the  Ridge,  and 
brother  S.  from  going  to  Baltimore  ;  so  we  had  a  very  melting  time 
in  discoursing  on  the  subject  of  the  Canaanitish  woman.  And  1 
believe,  Brother  S.  was  persuaded  that  he  ought  to  be  in  this  circuit 
with  me. 

Monday  18.  This  was  a  day  of  much  temptation,  but  my  Deliverer 
was  at  hand.  At  C.  S  's,  I  found  a  few  from  the  Ridge,  who  informed 
me  that  some  attended  yesterday  in  the  rain.  Hence  1  conclude, 
many  of  them  had  a  desire  to  be  saved  ;  and  that  it  is  best  for  a 
preacher  to  attend  his  appointments,  if  the  apparent  risk  is  not  too 
great.  I  preached  to  the  people  with  much  affection  ;  many  felt  the 
weight  of  the  word  ;  and  a  young  woman  wa.«  convinced  of  sin. 

Tuesday  19.  The  pacific  spirit  of  grace  had  possession  of  my  wil- 
ling heart.  After  preaching  at  Mr.  G.'s  to  a  few  souls  as  dull  as 
usual,  I  crossed  the  river  in  the  rain  ;  and  though  I  expected  to  feel 
the  consequence,  yet  suffered  no  injury. 

Wednesday  20.  How  unlike  real  Christians  are  some  that  bear  the 
aame !    The  Lord  hath  enabled  me,  of  late,  to  be  faithful  to  the 

Vol.  I.  26 


194  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

families  which  have  come  in  my  way.  And  we  must  overcome  our 
natural  bashfulness  and  backwardness,  to  assist  the  precious  souls  of 
our  fellow-men,  who  are  on  the  brink  of  endless  ruin,  and  see  it  not. 
On  Thursday  both  the  public  congregation  and  the  class  were  power- 
fully melted  at  Mr.  C.'s. 

Lord's  day  24.  I  was  much  fatigued  by  riding  twenty-five  miles  and 
preaching  twice.  A  report  that  a  British  fleet  was  sailing  up  the 
Chesapeak  Bay,  has  induced  many  people  to  quit  Annapolis.  So  it 
seems  our  troubles  and  sorrows  are  increasing.  Lord,  give  thy  peo- 
ple faith  and  patience  sufficient  for  their  day  of  trial ! 

Monday  25.  My  soul  confided  in  God,  but  was  sweetly  distressed 
with  an  ardent  desire  for  more  complete  holiness.  I  have  lately 
read  Walker's  Sermons  with  much  pleasure.  We  had  an  awful  storm 
this  evening  at  nine  o'clock.  The  thunder,  lightning,  and  sweeping 
winds,  were  all  in  great  commotion.  With  reverence  I  turned  my 
mind  on  the  dread  majesty  and  power  of  God,  who,  by  the  elements 
in  which  we  live,  contends  with  man.  Such  a  scene  as  this  was 
enough  to  strike  the  boldest  sinner  with  terror,  and  make  him  even 
shudder  at  a  wicked  thought.  And  how  dare  wicked  men  sin  at  any 
time  before  a  God  so  terrible  ?  Is  he  less  present  at  one  time  than 
another  ?  "No,  verily !  But  they  desire  not  the  knowledge  of  God. 
Their  surprise  must  be  great  beyond  all  expression,  when  disem- 
bodied they  suddenly  find  themselves,  by  woful  experience,  acquainted 
with  nothing  pertaining  to  their  offended  God,  but  his  inexorable  jus- 
tice and  vengeful  power  ;  of  which  the  awful  scenes  we  now  behold 
in  the  contending  elements,  are  but  a  faint  resemblance.  Then  how 
much  better  is  it  to  suffer  affliction  with  the  people  of  God,  than  to 
enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season  ? 

"  Happy  the  man  whose  hopes  rely 
On  Israel's  God  ;  he  made  the  sky, 

And  earth,  and  seas,  with  all  their  train  ; 
His  truth  for  ever  stands  secure  ! 
He  saves  the  oppress'd,  he  feeds  tfite  poor, 

And  none  shall  find  his  promise  vain." 

Tuesday  26.  T.  W  informed  me  that  they  had  made  choice  of  me 
to  preach  in  the  Garretson  Church.  But  I  shall  do  nothing  that  will 
separate  me  from  my  brethren.     I  hope  to  live  and  die  a  Methodist. 

Wednesday  27.  Though  it  rained  I  rode  twenty-five  miles  to  Mag- 
gotty,  but  was  tempted  and  shut  up  in  my  mind,  while  endeavouring 
to  announce,  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?"  But  the 
next  day  my  soul  was  happy  at  Mr.  P  's,  and  I  admitted  four  persons 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  195 


into  the  society  on  trial.  The  militia  were  now  collecting  from  all 
quarters.  On  the  Lord's  day  my  soul  was  much  drawn  out  and 
blessed  in  preaching  on  1  John  ii.  16,  17.  Perhaps  it  will  not  be  in 
my  power  to  preach  much  longer  with  a  clear  conscience.  But  if  it 
should  be  so,  my  greatest  concern  would  be  for  the  people  of  God. 
For  many  of  the  poor  sinners  seem  deaf  to  all  entreaties  ;  and  I  seem 
to  be  only  a  witness  for  God  against  them,  that  their  damnation  may 
be  just,  if  they  will  not  obey  the  Gospel. 

Monday,  September  1  The  Lord  refreshed  my  own  spirit,  while 
J  encouraged  the  few  faithful  souls  who  were  present,  from  the 
words  of  our  Lord,  "  Fear  not,  little  flock,  for  it  is  your  Father's 
good  pleasure  to  give  you  the  kingdom."  Brother  D.  R.  who  had 
returned  from  Virginia,  met  me  to-day. 

Wednesday  3.  My  soul  was  watered  with  the  peaceful  influence  of 
divine  grace.  But  what  I  enjoyed  was  as  a  stimulus  urging  me  to 
groan  for  more.  I  spent  much  of  my  time  in  reading  Law's  Serious 
Call,  and  Baxter's  Call  to  the  Unconverted  ;  and  think  the  latter  is 
one  of  the  best  pieces  of  human  composition  in  the  world,  to  awaken 
the  lethargic  souls  of  poor  sinners. 

My  mind  was  under  heavy  exercises  ;  so  I  fasted,  and  preached 
with  much  freedom  at  Mr.  T  's  :  but  it  brought  on  a  smart  fever. 
Though  I  was  much  indisposed,  necessity  was  laid  upon  me  to  preach 
twice  on  Thursday,  which  increased  my  fever  ;  and  with  indifferent 
lodging  and  the  noise  of  children,  the  night  was  very  uncomfortable. 

Lord's  day  7.  After  being  blessed  with  a  warm  and  comfortable 
season  while  preaching  to  a  large  company  at  Mr.  H.'s  ;  I  then  rode 
to  the  widow  P.'s,  where  the  word  went  to  the  hearts  of  the  people 
with  divine  energy,  while  I  exposed  to  their  view  the  polluted  state 
of  the  natural  man,  and  pointed  out  the  sovereign  remedy. 

Tuesday  9.  My  mind  was  so  intensely  bent  on  seeking  after  more 
of  God,  that  I  devoted  three  hours  to  the  exercise  of  private  prayer, 
and  found  myself  much  drawn  out  by  the  Spirit  of  grace,  in  holy 
wrestling  and  communion  with  God.  Being  informed  that  sister  S. 
had  slept  in  the  Lord ;  I  congratulated  her  felicity.  Happy  soul ! 
She  is  taken  away  from  the  evil  to  come,  and  gone  to  Abraham's 
bosom,  where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  where  the  weary 
are  at  rest.  I  have  endeavoured  to  banish  all  anxiety  from  my  mind, 
and  devote  much  of  my  time  to  prayer  ;  and  have  reaped  the  gracious 
benefit  thereof  in  my  own  soul.  On  Wednesday  I  went  to  Mag- 
gotty,  and  had  a  large  congregation  :  but  found  that  some  of  our  mem- 
bers had  begun  to  backslide,  and  that  the  society  stood  in  need  of 
purging. 


196  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURYSS  JOURNAL. 

Thursday  11.  By  particular  request  I  preached  a  funeral  sermon 
at  the  burial  of  Mr.  W.  R.  There  were  a  great  many  people  ;  and 
some  of  them  were  cut  to  the  heart  while  I  enforced  Eccles.  ix.  10. 
But  afterward  at  Mr.  P  's  my  mind  was  somewhat  embarrassed. 

Friday  12.  In  performing  the  last  office  for  L.  S.  who  was  a  Chris- 
tian indeed,  I  declared,  for  the  comfort  of  true  believers,  "  The  last 
enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is  death."  Some  attended  on  this 
occasion  who  had  never  heard  a  Methodist  before  ;  and  the  Lord  gave 
me  utterance  and  power. 

Monday  1 5.  We  have  great  commotions  on  every  side.  But  in  the 
midst  of  war,  the  Lord  keeps  my  soul  in  peace.  My  heart  was  warm 
in  preaching  at  C.  S.'s,  though  the  congregation  seemed  dull.  The 
two  following  days  I  had  communion  with  God ;  but  not  in  such  a 
degree  as  I  wish  to  experience.  "  I  long  to  comprehend  the  length, 
and  breadth,  and  depth,  and  height ;  and  to  know  the  love  of  Christ, 
which  passeth  knowledge,  that  I  may  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of 
God  :"  to 

"  Live  the  life  of  heaven  abovs, 
All  the  glorious  life  of  love." 

Thursday  18.  At  Mr.  W  's  I  met  with  brother  S.  S.  who  informed 
me  that  the  preachers  in  Virginia  intended  to  abide  there  awhile  longer. 
Brother  S.  preached  twice,  and  there  was  some  small  moving  amongst 
the  people. 

Lord's  day  21.  There  was  nothing  remarkable  under  the  word  at 
Mr.  T  's  ;  but  there  was  a  large  company  and  some  melting  of  heart 
at  Mr.  P's. 

Monday  22.  I  met  with  brother  G.  S.  who  informed  me  that  my 
brethren,  Mr.  Rankin  and  Mr.  Rhoda,  had  left  the  continent.  So  we 
are  left  alone.  But  I  leave  myself  in  the  hand  of  God  ;  relying  oa 
his  good  providence  to  direct  and  protect  us  :  persuaded  that  nothing 
will  befall  me,  but  what  shall  conduce  to  his  glory  and  my  benefit. 
There  was  both  attention  and  concern  in  the  congregation,  which 
was  pretty  large,  at  Capt.  S.'s. 

Lord's  day  28.  Brother  G.  S.  was  unwell  with  an  ague.  At  Ris- 
terstown  I  urged  the  necessity  of  family  duty,  and  showed  them  how 
they  should  train  up  their  children  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord. 

Monday  29.  My  soul  was  staid  upon  God,  and  resigned  to  his 
unerring  wisdom.  I  wish  to  be  so  subject  to  my  Redeemer,  as  to 
move  in  conformity  to  his  divine  will ;  and  in  all  my  ways  to  acknow- 
ledge him  as  my  God  and  my  guide.     I  spent  part  of  my  time  the 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY7S  JOURNAL.  19,7 

next  day  in  reading  Mr.  Baxter's  Gildas  Salvianus,  and  esteem  it  as  a 
most  excellent  book  for  a  Gospel  preacher. 

Saturday,  October  4.  I  rode  thirty  miles  to  G.  B.'s  to  meet  brother 
P — d.  My  mind  was  spiritually  employed  in  reading,  meditation,  and 
communion  with  God. 

Lord's  day  5.  The  congregation  at  G.  B.'s  were  dull ;  but  at  B, 
G.'s  there  was  a  melting. 

Tuesday  7.  The  word  seemed  to  be  made  a  peculiar  blessing  to  the 
believers  at  I.  H.'s,  and  the  next  day  at  Mr.  E.'s  the  power  of  God 
was  present,  while  I  feelingly  urged  the  people  from  Hebr.  iv.  16. 
"  Let  us  therefore  come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may 
obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need."  My  spirit 
was  also  divinely  animated  in  preaching  afterward  at  R  O.'s,  though  I 
rode  twenty  miles  between  the  two  sermons.  Several  old  professors 
felt  the  reviving  influence  of  the  grace  of  God  :  and  1  was  in  hopes 
they  would  press  on  their  way  with  renewed  vigour.  Such  is  the 
languid  disposition  of  the  human  soul,  that  even  pure  minds  require 
a  constant  stimulation  to  keep  them  in  the  way  of  duty.  This  is  one 
reason  why  God  permits  our  minds  to  be  tempted  by  Satan,  and  our 
bodies  to  be  afflicted  with  diseases. 

Saturday  11.  I  attended  and  spoke  at  the  half  yearly  meeting  of 
the  Germans.  And  on  the  Lord's  day,  after  preaching  at  Mrs.  D.'s, 
I  returned  to  the  meeting  of  the  Germans,  where  brother  G.  S.  and 
myself  bcth  spoke. 

Monday  13.  Commotions  and  troubles  surrounded  me  without,  but 
the  peace  of  God  filled  my  soul  within.  We  seemed  to  be  in  a  strait ; 
but  my  heart  trusted  in  the  Lord.  These  distressing  times  have 
lately  induced  many  people  to  pay  a  more  diligent  attention  to  the 
things  of  God.  So  I  have  hopes  that  these  temporal  troubles  will 
prepare  the  way  for  spiritual  blessings. 

Wednesday  15.  A  heavy  gloominess  hung  on  my  mind.  Brother 
G.  S.  and  I  rode  to  Mr.  H.'s ;  and  after  I  had  enforced  these  words, 
"  Therefore,  my  beloved  brethren,  be  ye  steadfast,  unmoveable,, 
always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  forasmuch  as  ye  know, 
that  your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord  :"  then  brother  S.  ex- 
horted, and  the  hearts  of  the  people  melted  under  the  power  of  the 
word.  We  likewise  saw  the  merciful  hand  of  God  displayed  the 
next  day,  at  Mr.  W  's,  on  the  bank  of  the  Patomac. 

Lord's  day  19.  As  I  was  unwell,  brother  S.  preached  in  the  morn- 
ing on,  "  Thy  kingdom  come  ;"  and  there  was  a  moving  in  the  con 
gregation.    He  also  preached  in  the  afternoon  at  Mr.  B.'s,  but  it  was 
to  a  large  company  of  stupid  seuls 


Il>8  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

Monday  20.  After  I  had  preached  brother  S.  met  the  class  ;  and  it 
was  a  very  powerful  season  ;  he  also  met  a  class  afterward  at  Mr. 
S — r's,  and  we  were  favoured  with  a  similar  blessing.  This  has 
been  a  day  of  spiritual  and  peaceful  exercises  to  my  soul.  At  Mr. 
H.'s  on  Tuesday,  we  were  blessed  with  au  extraordinary  visitation 
of  grace. 

Thursday  30.  We  have  been  detained  by  heavy  rains  at  W  S.'s, 
for  three  days.  The  times  still  wear  a  gloomy  aspect ;  but  our  trust 
is  in  the  providence  of  a  superintending  God.  We  have  been  greatly 
blessed,  and  seen  great  displays  of  the  divine  goodness  since  we  have 
been  together.  And  we  have  been  made  a  blessing  to  each  other. 
We  now  left  Mr.  S.'s  and  rode  to  Rocky-Creek. 

Lord's  day,  November  2.  I  cried  in  the  morning  to  a  large  con- 
gregation at  Mr.  J — n's,  "  We  pray  you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye 
reconciled  to  God  ;"  and  in  the  afternoon  at  the  Sugar-Loaf,  "  Why 
will  ye  die  ?"  And  my  soul  was  enlarged  and  blessed  both  times.  I 
then  rode  to  G.  G.'s,  which  made  about  20  miles  in  the  day. 

Monday  3.  Our  quarterly  meeting  began,  and  brother  S.  preached 
on  the  subject  of  the  barren  fig-tree.  On  Tuesday  we  held  our  love- 
feast  at  9,  and  I  preached  at  12.  Our  brethren  O — g,  C.  S — g,  and 
S — d,  all  spoke.  There  were  many  friends  from  Virginia,  and  the 
congregation  was  very  large.  It  was  a  powerful,  melting  time,  and 
concluded  in  the  spirit  of  love. 

Wednesday  5.  After  riding  thirty-seven  miles  I  came  to  Baltimore, 
but  was  very  weary  ;  though  my  mind  was  calmly  staid  on  God. 

Friday  7.  Went  to  Mr.  G.'s,  and  on  Saturday  preached  on  3  John 
4.  "  I  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that  my  children  walk 
in  truth." 

Lord's  day  9.  After  preaching  with  freedom  of  spirit  and  speech 
at  the  Forks,  I  returned  to  Mr.  G.'s  and  declared,  "  Ye  are  the  salt 
of  the  earth."     My  soul  has  been  kept  by  the  grace  of  God  ;  and 

"  Calm  on  tumult's  wheels  I  sit." 

Monday  10.  We  set  out  for  the  quarterly  meeting  at  Deer-Creek. 
On  Tuesday  our  love-feast  began  at  ten,  and  at  half  past  two  I  began 
the  public  exercises  from  Hebr.  xiii.  17,  18.  "  Obey  them  that  have 
the  rule  over  you,  and  submit  yourselves  :  for  they  watch  for  your 
souls  as  they  that  must  give  account,  that  they  may  do  it  with  joy, 
and  not  with  grief;  for  this  is  unprofitable  for  you.  Pray  for  us  :  for 
we  trust  we  have  a  good  conscience,  in  all  things  willing  to  live 
honestly."  The  preachers  were  stationed  without  any  trouble  ;  and 
all  was  done  in  harmony  and  love. 


REV.  FRANCIS  A&BURY's  JOURNAL.  1 99 

Wednesday  12.  I  rode  back  to  Mr.  G.'s,  in  order  to  attend  a 
quarterly  meeting  on  Curtis's  Creek.  The  Lord  has  lately  kept  my 
soul  in  tranquil  peace,  not  much  disturbed  by  Satan.  I  now  pur- 
posed, by  the  grace  of  God,  as  often  as  time  will  permit,  to  read  six 
chapters  every  day  in  my  Bible. 

Saturday  15.  Great  numbers  of  people  attended  at  the  quarterly 
meeting.  Preaching  on  Acts  xiv.  22.  I  endeavoured  to  imitate  the 
apostles — "  Confirming  the  souls  of  the  disciples,  and  exhorting  them 
to  continue  in  the  faith,  and  that  we  must  through  much  tribulation 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  The  power  of  divine  grace  was 
greatly  felt  in  the  love-feast,  and  all  our  business  was  well  conducted. 

Lord's  day  16.  Having  first  preached  at  the  widow  H.'s,  I  rode  to 
Baltimore  and  preached  there.  On  Tuesday  I  was  blessed  in  a  visit 
to  Mr.  G.'s. 

Wednesday  19.  Rode  to  Risterstown,  and  found  that  God  was  my 
sufficient  portion,  and  my  exceeding  great  reward.  I  wanted  nothing 
pertaining  to  this  world  more  than  I  possessed — neither  clothing,  nor 
money,  nor  food.  Blessed  be  God,  for  his  parental  love  and  tender 
care  towards  me ! 

"  Nothing  oa  earth  I  call  my  own : 
A  stranger,  to  the  world  unknown, 

I  all  their  goods  despise ; 
I  trample  on  their  whole  delight, 
And  seek  a  country  out  of  sight, 

A  country  in  the  skies." 

Friday  21.  I  have  endeavoured  to  improve  my  time  to  the  best 
advantage  in  reading  ;  and  have  seen  so  much  beauty  in  holiness,  that 
I  have  thirsted  and  longed  for  more.  My  desire  is,  like  Abraham, 
the  father  of  the  faithful,  to  maintain  a  constant  walk  with  God. 

Lord's  day  23.  At  Mr.  S/s  I  exposed  the  unjust  plea  which  many 
make  against  serving  God,  from  Matt.  xxv.  24.  "  Then  he  which  had 
received  the  one  talent  came,  and  said,  Lord,  I  knew  thee  that  thou 
art  a  hard  man,  reaping  where  thou  hast  not  sown,  and  gathering 
where  thou  hast  not  strewed."  Thus  do  thousands  charge  God 
foolishly,  •*  We  cannot  repent  and  bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  repent- 
ance— we  cannot  cease  from  evil,  and  learn  to  do  well — we  cannot 
deny  ourselves,  and  take  up  our  cross — we  cannot  come  to  Christ 
that  we  may  have  life.  At  least,  we  cannot  do  these  things  now ;  we 
must  wait  God's  time."  But  God  requireth  these  things  now  ;  there- 
fore, those  who  say  they  cannot  do  them,  practically  say  he  is  a  hard 
master.    At  Risterstown  in  the  afternoon,  my  heart  was  expanded, 


200  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL, 

and  my  mouth  was  opened,  while  I  declared,  "  He  that  being  often 
reproved,  hardeneth  his  neck,  shall  suddenly  be  destroyed,  and  that 
without  remedy."     On  Monday  I  parted  with  W.  G.  and  S.  S. 

Wednesday  26.  I  came  to  Mr.  G.'s  on  my  way  to  the  Eastern 
shore.  On  Saturday  I  intended  to  have  crossed  the  bay,  but  was 
prevented  by  the  weather.  My  soul  has  lately  felt  much  of  the 
power  of  God,  and  I  have  been  enabled  to  trust  him  with  myself, 
and  all  my  concerns. 

Monday,  December  1.  I  left  Mr.  G.'s,  and  after  crossing  the  bay, 
came  in  safety,  at  night,  to  Mr.  H.'s  ;  having  been  absent  more  than 
four  years,  though  I  was  the  first  of  our  preachers  who  carried  the 
Gospel  into  this  neighbourhood.  My  heart  was  thankful  to  God  for 
his  providential  and  gracious  preservation  of  me.  The  next  day  I 
went  to  the  island,  and  preached  with  some  warmth,  and  then 
returned.  The  two  following  days,  we  had  profitable  times  both  in 
preaching  and  class  meetings. 

Thursday  4.  Preaching  and  meeting  the  class  at  Mr.  G.'s,  I  found 
the  Lord  had  carried  on  a  good  work  in  the  souls  of  many.  Blessed 
be  God !  my  soul  was  in  a  comfortable  frame,  and  my  body  was  the 
better  for  exercise. 

Lord's  day  7.  Though  I  spoke  with  feeling  and  warmth,  yet  the 
people  were  dull  both  at  F  T.'s  and  Mr.  H.'s.  But  my  own  soul 
was  kept  in  solemn  nearness  to  God,  and  filled  with  peace  and  love. 
And  I  am  persuaded  that  my  appointment  to  this  circuit  is  hy  Divine 
Providence. 

Thursday  11.  Early  in  the  morning  I  felt  a  strong  desire  for  more 
of  God.  At  Mr.  W's  my  soul  was  much  refreshed  in  preaching  and 
class  meeting.  As  the  congregations  are  generally  large,  and  most 
of  the  people  attentive,  we  have  a  much  greater  prospect  of  doing 
good  in  this  circuit  than  in  some  others. 

Saturday  13.  I  have  been  blessed  with  faith,  and  hope,  and  love. 
Lord,  if  troubles  are  near,  be  thou  nearer  still  to  protect  and  comfort 
me  ;  so  shall  I  not  fear  what  man  can  do  unto  me ! 

Lord's  day  14.  We  had  a  good  time  in  the  forenoon,  and  I  found 
ihe  class  in  better  condition  than  I  expected.  In  the  afternoon  the 
Lord  blessed  me  with  freedom  and  solid  peace,  while  preaching  at 
I.  S.'s  on  Ezek.  xxxiii.  1 1.  There  is  a  great  prospect  of  saving  souls 
in  this  neighbourhood,  if  preaching  can  be  continued. 

Monday  15.  There  was  a  simple,  loving  people  assembled  at  Mr. 
S.'s  ;  and  many  were  powerfully  wrought  on  while  I  enforced  the  di- 
vine command,  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteous- 
ness, and  all  ?bfse  things  shall  be  added  unto  vom,"  Matt.  vii.  "" 


ItSV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL-  201 

For  some  days  past,  my  spirit  has  been  rather  hurried,  and  sometimes 
tempted  by  Satan ;  but  wonderfully  supported  by  the  grace  of  God. 
An  agreeable  prospect  opens  to  my  imagination,  if  Providence  should 
permit  me  to  spend  the  winter  in  this  circuit. 

Tuesday  16.  At  Mr.  W  's  I  met  with  B.  S.  who  once  preached  the 
Gospel,  and  a  blessing  attended  his  labours.  Thursday  was  a  public 
fast-day,  and  my  soul  was  kept  in  a  degree  of  peace,  but  struggled 
much  for  a  more  constant,  fervent  spirit  of  devotion. 

Having  preached  at  Mr.  G.'s,  I  rode  to  T  W  's,  and  lectured  in 
the  evening,  with  satisfaction,  from  the  first  Psalm.  On  Saturday  I 
was  much  embarrassed  in  preaching  at  Mr.  H — d's  ;  and  under  a 
heavy  cloud  rode  to  H — n's.  But  on  the  Lord's  day  my  heart  was 
enlarged  and  inflamed  with  love,  while  preaching  to  a  large  audience 
on  2  Thess.i.  6,7,  8. 

Monday  22.  I  preached  a  funeral  sermon  near  the  Nine  Bridges,  and 
met  with  a  young  minister  who  had  been  under  divine  impressions  : 
my  heart  at  that  time  was  much  united  to  him  j  but  he  afterward  be- 
came a  lawyer. 

Tuesday  23.  Rode  through  Chestertown,  about  thirty  miles,  to 
Mr.  H.'s,  and  enjoyed  some  re9t  from  a  part  of  my  labour.  In  reading 
Josephus  I  have  been  led  to  reflect  on  the  disorder  and  confusion 
which  have  always  overspread  the  ear<h,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree, 
ever  since  the  introduction  of  sin.  Blessed  be  God  !  my  mind  is  kept 
free  from  all  tormenting  fear  :  and  although  my  spiritual  trials  are  va- 
rious and  great,  his  grace  is  always  found  sufficient  for  me.  The 
next  day  I  exhorted  the  people  who  came  together,  and  we  spent 
some  time  in  prayer. 

Thursday  25.  Mr.  W  read  a  good  sermon,  suitable  to  the  day,  at 
church.  Many  people  attended  at  the  preaching  house,  where  I  de- 
clared from  1  Tim.  i.  15.  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of 
all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners." 
The  language  of  my  heart  on  this  Christmas  day  was,  "  Whom  have 
I  in  heaven  but  thee  ?  and  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  desire  be- 
sides thee."  The  next  morning  also  I  was  in  the  spirit  of  devotion, 
and  enjoyed  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding.  Hav- 
ing preached  a  funeral  sermon  in  the  forenoon,  I  addressed  the  con- 
gregation  at  Mr.  H.'s,  from  John  i.  45,  46. 

Thursday,  Jan.  1,  1778.  Though  the  weather  has  been  very  cold 
for  several  days,  I  have  had  to  ride,  sometimes  a  considerable  distance,, 
and  preach  every  day.  This  day  I  preached  a  funeral  sermon  on  the 
death  of  the  daughter  of  her  who  was  buried  last  Friday.  My  text 
was,  "  This  year  thou  shalt  die."     Death,  like  a  cruel  conqueror 

^"ot,.  T.  [>r: 


:202  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

spareth  none  on  whom  he  seizeth  ;  but  sendeth  them  to  the  shades  of 
eternity,  without  respect  to  age  or  condition  ! 

Friday  2.  I  experienced  much  of  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ  shed 
abroad  in  my  heart ;  and  through  his  meritorious  mediation,  found  a 
delightful  nearness  to  God.  Indeed  I  have  found  great  happiness 
during  this  Christmas  season,  and  have  endeavoured  to  redeem  my 
time  by  diligent  industry.  May  the  Lord  keep  me  steadfast  and  faith- 
ful to  the  end,  and  bless  me  with  an  abiding  witness  that  1  love  him 
with  all  my  heart !  The  people  were  lively  to-day  at  Mr.  C.'s,  and 
especially  in  the  class-meeting. 

Lord's  day  4.  The  word  of  the  Lord  went  to  the  hearts  of  the  peo- 
ple with  cutting  power,  both  at  Frederick,  in  the  forenoon,  and  at  Mr. 
H — n's  in  the  afternoon.  But  my  own  mind  has  been  under  exer- 
cises from  Satan.  On  Monday  my  spirit  was  grieved  for  want  of  more 
spirituality,  and  more  of  God.  The  congregation  at  Mr.  S — n's,  was 
large  but  dull.  But  the  people  seemed  quickened  both  at  Mr.  A.'s  on 
Tuesday,  and  at  Mr.  H — d's  on  Wednesday. 

Thursday  8.  I  enjoyed  sweet  communion  with  God  this  morning, 
and  was  enabled  to  rest  my  soul  on  him  as  my  never-failing  support* 
God  was  powerfully  with  us  at  Mr.  S — w's  on  Friday,  and  the  people 
felt  the  weight  of  divine  truths. 

Lord's  day  11.  By  reason  of  the  snow  the  congregations  were 
small,  but  the  Lord  gave  us  his  blessing.  My  soul  has  possessed  a 
holy  calm  ;  and  I  have  found  the  Lord  constantly  with  me,  in  a 
greater  or  less  degree.  1  have  just  finished  the  last  volume  of  Whis- 
ton's  Josephus,  and  am  surprised  that,  at  the  age  of  seventy,  Mr*. 
Whiston  should  spend  so  much  of  his  time  in  such  a  dry,  chronologi- 
cal work.  How  much  better  was  Mr.  Baxter  employed,  when  he 
thought  himself  near  to  eternity — meditating  and  writing  on  the  saints' 
everlasting  rest. 

Tuesday  13.  A  solemn,  comfortable  sense  of  God  rested  on  my 
soul  this  morning;  and  at  Mr.  T  's,  there  was  a  good  congregation  of 
poor,  but  serious  and  desirous  people.  At  the  widow  J.'s  on  Wed- 
nesday, there  was  a  general  melting,  and  six  were  received  into  the 
society  on  trial.  So  there  is  some  ground  to  hope  that  this  place, 
which  has  appeared  to  be  barren,  will  yet  bring  forth  the  fruits  of 
righteousness.  Many  were  also  much  affected  at  Mr.  V-'s :  after  the 
service  was  ended,  two  men  in  arms  came  up ;  but  they  went  away 
without  making  known  their  design. 

Friday  16.   I  found  great  liberty  of  spirit  and  speech  at  Mr.  G.s  : 
and  there  met  with  brother  G.  S. 

Lord's  day  1 8.     After  discoursing  at  Mr.  A— n's  on  the  parable  of 


&EV.  FRANCIS  ASUtfRY'S  JOURNAL.  203 

the  sower,  I  thought  it  proper  to  remove  the  preaching  to  another 
house  :  for  his  religious  sentiments  did  not  agree  with  ours. 

Tuesday  20.  My  soul  was  kept  humble  and  watchful  :  and  I  have 
been  enabled  to  put  my  whole  trust  in  God,  on  all  occasions.  Brother 
L — n  sent  me  some  account  of  the  work  of  God  ;  and  I  am  strongly 
persuaded  that  he  will  defend  his  own  cause,  and  his  own  people. 

Wednesday  21.  The  house  was  not  sufficient  to  contain  the  con- 
gregation at  the  widow  W  's,  and  the  word  went  with  power  to  the 
hearts  of  the  people.  Thursday  was  a  very  cold  day,  yet  many,  both 
rich  and  poor,  attended  at  I.  K.'s.  And  the  Lord  enabled  me  to  show 
them  plainly,  to  what  lengths  a  man  may  go  in  the  externals  of  reli- 
gion, and  be  but  almost  a  Christian. 

Friday  23.  My  heart  was  fixed  on  God.  I  have  lately  found  more 
sweetness  and  delight  than  ever  before,  in  reading  the  Old  Testament. 
And  having  met  with  Luther's  Comment  on  the  Galatians,  I  have  be- 
gun to  read  that.  After  riding  eight  miles  to  Mr.  H.'s,  I  found  that  I 
had  eight  miles  farther  to  ride,  to  preach  a  funeral  sermon  at  Mr.  F  's  : 
aod  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  rested  upon  my  soul.  Then  rode  five 
miles  more,  in  great  peace  and  love,  to  lodge  at  Mr.  M.'s. 

Lord's  day  25.  Many  .attended  at  Mr.  R.'s  in  the  forenoon,  and 
God  gave  me  power  to  speak  to  their  hearts.  I  then  rode  ten  miles 
farther  to  the  meeting-house,  and  preached  to  about  three  hundred 
solemn  and  attentive  people. 

Tuesday  27.  Both  my  body  and  mind  were  under  a  heavy  gloom. 
Attempting  to  preach  in  Quaker-Neck,  my  mind  was  shut  up,  and  I 
had  no  power  to  speak  to  the  people.  This  is  very  painful  and  disa- 
greeable ;  but  it  ought  to  be  borne  with  patience.  Physic  is  neces- 
sary sometimes,  as  well  as  food 

Wednesday  28  My  soul  had  peace,  and  enjoyed  sweet  rest  in  God, 
after  all  my  trials.  May  I  ever  glorify  him,  even  in  the  tires  !  Dark 
prospects,  in  temporal  matters,  present  themselves  to  my  view.  But 
"  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  over  the  righteous  ;"  and  he  hath  pro- 
mised to  be  "  a  wall  of  fire  round  about"  his  church,  "  and  the  glory 
in  the  midst  of  her."  I  preached  a  funeral  sermon  at  the  meeting- 
house on  1  Cor.  xv.  20.  "  But  now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead, 
and  become  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  slept."  There  were  many 
people  on  this  solemn  occasion,  and  my  heart  was  enlarged  towards 
them. 

Lord's  day,  February  2.  We  had  a  good  time  at  Frederick  in  the 
forenoon,  and  I  found  myself  at  liberty  in  the  afternoon  at  Mr.  H.'s. 
My  heart  feels  nothing  contrary  to  love  and  purity ;  and  the  effect 
thereof  is  abundant  peace.     Troubles  stare  me  in  the  face ;  but  I 


■;04  i:Ev*.  FRANCIS  ASBUKY'S  JOURNAL. 

have  confidence  towards  God,  and  without  perplexing  myself  with 
anxious  care,  will  leave  all  events  to  him. 

Monday  3.  There  was  some  appearance  of  a  revival  at  Mr.  S 's ; 
and  the  Lord  blessed  my  soul  with  liberty,  peace,  and  love.  Oq 
Tuesday  we  had  a  love-feast  at  L.  A.'s,  and  many  delivered  their  af- 
fectionate testimony  of  God's  goodness  and  love  in  Christ  Jesus. 

Wednesday  5.  1  received  a  strange  account,  which  had  been  attes- 
ted on  oath  by  the  people  who  lived  in  the  house ;  but  am  at  a  loss  to 
know  what  judgment  to  pass  upon  it.  The  fact  was  this :  a  wick- 
ed young  fellow,  whose  friends  countenanced  the  truths  of  the  Gos- 
pel, was  disposed,  it  seems,  to  curse  the  preacher  ;  but  being  deter- 
red from  doing  it  openly,  he  went  to  the  place  of  worship,  with  a  de- 
sign to  curse  him  in  his  heart.  It  seems  he  was  struck  with  terror, 
and  soon  after  died.  His  own  brother  said,  the  devil  pulled  his 
heart  out. 

Lord's  day  9.  After  preaching  at  Mr.  F  's  in  the  forenoon,  I  met 
the  congregation  at  Mr.  S.'s,  who  is  a  striking  instance  of  the  power 
and  goodness  of  God  :  some  time  ago  he  was,  like  Saul,  an  opposer 
of  the  truth,  but  grace  hath  changed  his  heart 

Thursday  13.  The  Lord  hath  supported  me  in  preaching  at  every 
place  ;  and  this  day  I  came  to  T.  W  's,  and  met  brother  G.  S.  The 
martial,  threatening  aspect  of  the  times,  has  had  a  great  tendency  to 
keep  me  close  to  God  :  and  my  soul  has  experienced  the  benefit. 

Saturday  15.  I  had  much  peace,  but  too  much  company  :  my  time 
was  not  spent  to  the  greatest  advantage.  But  the  next  day  I  felt  the 
power  of  divine  truths  in  my  own  heart,  while  preaching  at  E.  W  *s, 
from  1  Pet.  i.  13,  14,  15. 

Monday  17.  Our  quarterly-meeting  began  in  Mr.  W  's  barn,  and 
numbers  attended  from  different  parts.  On  Tuesday  morning  we  held 
our  love-feast  ;  and  the  Lord  was  with  us.  My  heart  was  powerfully 
drawn  out,  in  preaching  on  the  three  last  verses  of  the  forty-eighth 
Psalm. 

Wednesday  19.  I  set  my  face  unto  the  Lord  God,  to  seek  by  prayer 
and  supplications,  with  fasting.  And  although  brother  S.  had  mani- 
fested a  desire  to  leave  the  continent,  he  now  agreed  to  abide  in  the 
country  with  me  awhile  longer. 

Lord's  day  23.  Though  the  weather  was  disagreeable,  yet  many 
people  attended  at  E.  W  's ;  and  there  appeared  to  be  a  promising 
prospect,  amongst  the  young  people  especially.  I  have  great  hopes 
that  the  Lord  will  show  mercy,  and  make  his  power  known  in  the 
family  of  the  W.'s 


B.EV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  20o 

Monday  24.  Satan  has  made  several  violent  pushes  at  my  soul,  but 
he  has  not  been  able  even  to  break  my  peace.  The  word  was  pow- 
erfully applied  to  the  hearts  of  the  people  at  Mr.  G.'s  to-day. 

Wednesday  2(3.  After  preaching  with  holy  warmth  at  Mr.  L — n's, 
I  met  the  class,  in  which  were  some  faithful  souls  ;  but  others  that 
could  hardly  bear  plain  dealing.  But  we  must  deal  plainly  and  ho- 
nestly, though  affectionately  and  tenderly,  with  all  that  come  in  our 
way,  and  especially  with  such  as  put  themselves  under  our  pastoral 
care.  If  we  seek  to  please  men,  unless  it  is  for  their  good  to  edifica- 
tion, we  are  not  the  servants  of  Christ. 

Thursday  27.  I  spoke  closely  and  pointedly  to  many  poor,  ignorant 
people  at  the  widow  I— p's.  And  on  Friday  met  a  dull  congregation 
at  Mr.  C.'s. 

Monday,  March  2.  Rode  to  1.  K.'s  on  Cedar  Creek,  an  old  Pres- 
byterian, who  keeps  his  coffin  ready  made.  But  both  the  congrega- 
tion and  the  class  seemed  very    blind  and  ignorant  in  spiritual  things, 

Thursday  5.  Returned  to  T.  W's,  with  a  cold  in  my  head  and  an 
inflammation  in  my  throat  which  detained  me  till  the  Lord's  day.  But 
my  time  was  chiefly  spent  in  prayer  and  reading  Flavell's  and  Hart- 
ley's works  ;  though  no  book  is  equal  to  the  Bible.  I  have  also  re- 
ceived much  instruction  and  great  blessings  of  late  in  reading  Mr. 
Wesley's  Works.  There  is  a  certain  spirituality  in  his  works,  which 
I  can  find  in  no  other  human  compositions.  And  a  man  who  has  any 
taste  for  true  piety,  can  scarce  read  a  few  pages  in  the  writings  of 
that  great  divine,  without  imbibing  a  gre  iter  relish  for  the  pure  and 
simple  religion  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  therein  so  scripturally  and 
rationally  explained  and  defended. 

Monday  9.  S  S.  came  in  from  the  upper  circuit  ;  but  on  Tuesday, 
both  he  and  G.  S.  left  me.  However,  I  was  easy,  for  the  Lord  was 
with  me.  And  if  he  will  be  with  me,  and  bring  me  to  my  Father's 
house  in  peace,  he  shall  be  my  God  for  ever.  Yea,  let  him  do  with 
me  as  seemeth  good  in  his  sight,  only  let  him  not  take  his  Holy  Spirit 
from  me,  and  he  shall  be  mine,  and  I  will  be  his,  in  time  and  through 
eternity. 

Friday  13.  1  was  under  some  heaviness  of  mind.  But  it  was  no 
wonder — three  thousand  miles  from  home — my  friends  have  left  me 
— I  am  considered  by  some  as  an  enemy  of  the  country — every  day 
liable  to  be  siezed  by  violence,  and  abused.  However,  all  this  is  but 
a  trifle  to  suffer  for  Christ,  and  the  salvation  of  souls.  Lord,  stand 
by  me  ! 

Lord's  day  15.  My  temptations  were  very  heavy,  and  my  ideas 
vere  greatly  contracted  in  preaching,  neither  was  my  soul  happy  as  nt 


-Oo  UEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  .T61KNAL. 

many  other  times.     It  requires  great  resignation  for  a  man  to  be 
willing  to  be  laid  aside  as  a  broken  instrument.     But 

**  la  all  ray  temptations 
He  keeps  me  to  prove 
His  utmost  salvation, 
His  fulness  of  love." 

Monday  16.  I  applied  myself  to  the  Greek  and  Latin  Testament , 
but  this  is  not  to  me  like  preaching  the  Gospel.  However,  when  a 
man  cannot  do  what  he  would,  he  must  do  what  he  can. 

Wednesday  18.  To  make  the  best  of  my  time  in  this  partial  con- 
finement, I  have  attended  closely  to  my  studies,  spent  some  time  in 
instructing  the  children,  and  intend  to  lecture  frequently  in  the  fa- 
mily. This  day  I  received  information  that  brother  W.  was  cast  into 
prison  at  Annapolis. 

Saturday  21.  My  spiritual  exercises  have  been  various.  I  have 
frequently  been  under  powerful  temptations  ;  but  at  other  times  my 
soul  has  been  serene  and  comfortable.  Much  of  my  time  is  spent 
in  study.  And  my  desire  is,  to  glorify  God  in  all  1  do,  and  spend  all 
I  gain  in  his  service. 

Lord's  day  22  A  large  congregation  attended  at  E.  W  's  while  I 
enforced  the  important  inquiry,  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he 
gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?"  A  warm,  affectionate 
zeal  glowed  in  my  heart,  and  some  of  the  people  were  affected.  On 
Monday  I  met  with  brother  C— x,  and  sent  him  into  the  upper  circuit, 
intending  myself  to  abide  here  for  a  season  till  the  storm  is  abated. 

Wednesday  25.  Blessed  be  God !  his  providence  hath  cast  my  lot 
in  a  quiet,  agreeable  family  ;  where  I  can  make  the  best  improvement 
of  my  time  in  study  and  devotion.  Brother  C — r  came  from  below, 
and  we  had  a  meeting  at  E.  W.'s,  where  some  were  deeply  cut  to 
the  heart  by  the  two-edged  sword  of  the  word. 

Friday  27.  The  grace  of  God  is  a  sufficient  support,  while  I  bear 
the  reproach  of  men,  and  am  rewarded  with  evil  for  all  the  good 
which  I  have  done,  and  desired  to  do  for  mankind.  I  want  for  no 
temporal  convenience,  and  endeavour  to  improve  my  time  by  devo- 
tion and  study ;  but  all  this  cannot  give  full  satisfaction,  while  it  is 
not  in  my  power  to  labour  more  for  God  in  seeking  the  salvation  of 
souls.  But  I  am  strongly  persuaded  that  Divine  Providence  will 
bring  about  a  change  before  long. 

Thursday,  April  2.  This  night  we  had  a  scene  of  trouble  in  the 
family.  My  friend  Mr.  T  W  was  taken  away,  and  his  wife  and 
family  left  in  great  distress  of  mind.  The  next  day  I  sought  the 
interposition  of  God  by  fasting  and  prayer. 


ii£r.  FRANCIS  ASBlfRY"S  JOURNAL.  207 

Saturday  4.  This  was  a  day  of  much  divine  power  and  love  to  my 
soul.  I  was  left  alone,  and  spent  part  of  every  hour  in  prayer  ;  and 
Christ  was  near  and  very  precious.  The  next  day  I  preached  with 
great  solemnity  at  E.  W  's  on  2  Cor.  vi.  20.  and  on  Monday  found 
freedom  to  move.  After  riding  about  fifteen  miles,  I  accidentally 
stopped  at  a  house  where  a  corpse  was  going  to  be  buried,  and  bad 
an  opportunity  of  addressing  a  number  of  immortal  souls.  I  then 
rode  on  through  a  lonesome,  devious  rode,  like  Abraham,  not  know- 
ing whither  I  went :  but  weary  and  unwell,  I  found  a  shelter  late  at 
night.  And  there  I  intended  to  rest  till  Providence  should  direct  my 
way.  This  was  something  like  the  faithful  saints  of  old  times,  men- 
tioned Hebr.  xi.  "  They  wandered  about  in  sheep-skins  and  goat' 
skins,  being  destitute,  afflicted,  tormented  :  (of  whom  the  world  was 
not  worthy  :)  they  wandered  in  deserts,  and  in  mountains,  and  in  dens 
and  caves  of  the  earth."  Though  it  must  be  acknowledged  their 
trials  far  exceeded. 

Tuesday  7.  My  soul  was  kept  in  peace  ;  and  I  spent  much  of  my 
time  in  reading  the  Bible  and  the  Greek  Testament.  Surely  God 
will  stand  by  and  deliver  me  !  I  have  none  other  on  whom  I  can  de- 
pend. And  he  knows  with  what  intention  and  for  what  purposes  I 
came  into  this  distant  and  strange  land,  and  what  little  I  have  suffered 
for  bis  cause.  At  night  a  report  was  spread  which  inclined  me  to 
think  it  would  be  most  pradent  for  me  to  move  the  next  day.  Ac- 
cordingly 1  set  out  after  dinner,  and  lay  in  a  swamp  till  about  sunset ; 
but  was  then  kindly  taken  in  by  a  friend.  My  soul  has  been  greatly 
humbled  and  blessed  under  these  difficulties,  and  I  thought  myself 
like  some  of  the  old  prophets,  who  were  concealed  in  times  of  public 
distress. 

Thursday  9.  1  promised  God,  that  if  he  would  lift  me  up.  I  would 
be  wholly  his,  and  spend  as  much  time  in  returning  thanks  as  I  have 
spent  in  seeking  his  protection,  which  has  been  some  part  of  every 
hour.  My  soul  has  been  much  comforted  in  reading  J.  Alleine's  Let- 
ters, which  he  wrote  in  prison.  I  felt  strong  con6dence  in  God,  that 
he  would  deliver  me  ;  being  conscious  that  I  sought  neither  riches  nor 
honour ;  and  that  what  1  suffered  was  for  the  sake  of  his  spiritual 
church,  and  the  salvatibn  of  my  fellow  men.  I  was  informed  that 
brother  J.  H.  was  apprehended  last  Lord's  day  in  Queen-Ann.  May 
the  Lord  strengthen  and  support  him,  while  he  suffers  for  righteous- 
ness' sake.  He  shall  be  faithfully  remembered  by  me  in  my  addresses 
to  the  throne  of  grace.  This  evening  I  was  called  upon  to  visit  a 
person  in  distress  of  mind  ;  and  the  Lord  gave  him  rest  for  his  soul. 


208  REV.  FllANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

Perhaps  Providence  cast  my  lot  in  this  place  for  the  assistance  of 
this  man. 

Friday  10.  My  heart  was  kept  pure,  and  panting:  after  God,  though 
I  was,  in  some  sense,  a  prisoner,  and  under  the  necessity  of  being 
concealed,  rather  than  sacrifice  the  peace  of  my  conscience,  and 
offend  my  God.  O  my  Lord,  guide  thy  poor  pilgrim  through  the 
rugged  ways  of  this  ungodly  and  dangerous  world  !  And  if  I  suffer 
with  Christ  here,  may  I  finally  reign  with  him  in  glory  !■* 

"  Who  suffer  with  our  Master  here, 
We  shall  before  his  face  appear, 

And  by  his  side  sit  down  ; 
To  patient  faith  the  prize  is  sure ; 
And  all  that  to  the  end  endure 

The  cross,  shall  wear  the  crown." 

My  practice  is,  to  keep  close  to  God  in  prayer,  and  spend  a  part  of 
every  hour,  when  awake,  in  that  exercise.  I  have  lately  begun  to 
read  Mr.  Wesley's  Notes  again  ;  and  have  always  found  both  them 
and  his  Sermons  to  be  made  an  especial  blessing  to  my  soul.  My 
exercises  are  very  deep  and  various.  The  Lord  makes  great  disco- 
veries of  my  defects  and  short  comings  in  many  points.  He  melts  my 
heart  into  humility  and  tenderness  ;  he  graciously  draws  me  nearer 
and  nearer  to  himself;  and  fills  me  with  the  spirit  of  holy  love. 

Saturday  1 1.  God  was  my  portion,  and  my  soul  rested  in  him.  But 
I  was  at  a  loss  to  know  what  to  do :  my  time  was  useless  in  respect 
to  others  ;  though  I  carefully  improved  it  for  my  own  spiritual  advan- 
tage, which,  for  some  years  past,  had  been  ip  a  degree  neglected,  on 
account  of  my  great  attention  to  the  souls  of  others.  And  I  know 
not  what  to  determine,  whether  to  deliver  myself  into  the  hands  of 
men,  to  embrace  the  first  opportunity  to  depart,  or  to  wait  till  Provi- 
dence shall  farther  direct.  The  reason  of  this  retirement  was  as 
follows.  From  March  10,  1778,  on  conscientious  principles  I  was  a 
nonjuror,  and  could  not  preach  in  the  state  of  Maryland;  and  there- 
fore withdrew  to  the  Delaware  state,  where  the  clergy  were  not 
required  to  take  the  state-oath  :  though,  with  a  clear  conscience,  I 
could  have  taken  the  oath  of  the  Delaware  state,  had  it  been  re- 
quired ;  and  would  have  done  it,  had  I  not  been  prevented  by  a 
tender  fear  of  hurting  the  scrupulous  consciences  of  others.  Saint 
Paul  saith,  "  When  ye  sin  so  against  the  brethren,  and  wound  their 
weak  conscience,  ye  sin  against  Christ,"    1  Cor.  viii    12. 

Lord's  day  12.  This  was  one  of  my  dumb  and  silent  Sabbaths,  and 
was  spent  in  fasting  and  prayer,  that  the  Lord  may  turn  again  my 


REV.  FRANCIS   ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  209 

captivity.  My  soul  was  greatly  humbled,  and  not  a  little  comforted 
in  waiting  before  God.  I  lament  that  part  of  the  Lord's  flock  is 
carried  away  captive;  but  hope  that  those  who  remain  in  Zion  will 
be  holiness  to  the  Lord,  and  found  among  the  living  in  Jerusalem. 

Monday  13.  I  formerly  thought  it  would  be  death  to  me  to  keep 
silence  from  declaring  the  word  of  God ;  but  now  I  am  in  a  measure 
contented,  and  hope  to  see  a  day  of  liberty  once  again.  It  appears 
to  be  the  will  of  God  that  I  should  be  silent  for  a  season,  to  prepare 
me  for  farther  usefulness  hereafter.  Therefore  my  time  shall  be 
employed  to  the  best  advantage. 

Tuesday  14.  I  am  not  yet  forsaken  of  all,  but  am  happy  in  the  fa- 
mily where  I  stay,  and  my  soul  is  fixed  on  God.  I  have  a  private 
chamber  for  my  asylum,  where  I  comfort  myself  in  God,  and  spend 
my  time  in  prayer,  meditation,  and  reading.  The  next  day  brother 
J.  F  held  a  public  meeting :  he  appeared  to  be  a  well-meaning,  good 
man  :  and  who  hath  despised  the  day  of  small  things  ? 
k  Thursday  16.  My  soul  was  blessed  with  peace  ;  but  I  earnestly 
desire  to  be  more  spiritual  in  all  my  thoughts,  words,  and  actions. 

Friday  17.  Being  Good-Friday,  I  devoted  myself  to  fasting  and 
prayer.  How  many  such  days  have  I  spent  in  addressing  large  congre- 
gations on  the  mournful  subject  of  our  blessed  Lord's  crucifixion  ;  but 
am  now  deprived  of  the  privilege  of  making  a  public  improvement  of 
the  day.  I  must  sit  down  and  weep,  when  I  remember  Zion,  and  the 
years  of  God's  right-hand.  Oh!  how  I  long  to  see  his  goings  in  the 
sanctuary,  as  in  times  past!  Return,  O  Lord,  to  the  many  thousands 
of  Israel,  and  cause  us  to  rejoice  according  to  the  days  in  which  we 
have  seen  trouble !  I  now  enjoy  a  favourable  opportunity  of  taking 
a  circumstantial  review  of  my  past  life.  But  alas  !  how  am  I  ashamed, 
and  covered  with  blushing  before  God.  My  soul  is  bowed  in  awful 
reverence  and  melting  humility  before  the  mercy-seat.  My  intention 
has  been  pure,  as  far  as  I  can  judge;  but  on  account  of  my  imper- 
fections, if  there  were  no  Mediator,  there  could  be  no  hope  of  mercy. 
But,  blessed  be  God,  I  can  come  with  humble  boldness  to  the  throne 
of  grace,  knowing  "  that  we  have  a  high  priest  that  can  be  touched 
with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities  ;  who  was  in  all  points  tempted 
like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin.  I  hope  to  learn  obedience  by  the 
things  I  suffer ;  and  walk  more  watchfully  and  piously  befere  God 
for  the  time  to  come. 

Saturday  18.  I  labour  to  make  the  best  use  of  my  precious  time  ; 
and  hope  to  be  better  prepared  for  future  service  on  earth,  or  for  eter- 
nal service  in  heaven.     1  bear  our  dear,  suffering  friends,  on  my  heart 

Vol.  I,  27 


21©  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV's  JOURNAL, 

Lord's  day  19.  Another  solitary  Sabbath.  Ezekiel's  portion  is 
mine — to  be. dumb  for  a  season.  But  the  Lord  gives  me  patience, 
and  supports  me  under  it.  The  family  amongst  whom  my  lot  is  cast 
use  me  with  great  kindness  ;  and  may  the  Lord  show  kindness  to 
them  according  to  all  that  they  have  done  unto  me ! 

Monday  20.  Reading  the  Revelation,  with  Mr.  Wesley's  Notes, 
was  made  a  particular  blessing  to  my  soul ;  but  my  conscience 
checked  me  severely  for  not  reading  more  frequently  that  part  of 
the  sacred  canon,  seeing  such  a  blessing  is  pronounced  on  them  that 
read  and  understand  it.  But  I  intend  for  the  future,  if  time  and  health 
will  permit,  to  read  one  chapter  in  it  every  day. 

Tuesday  21.  I  purposed  in  my  own  mind,  to  spend  ten  minutes 
out  of  every  hour,  when  awake,  in  the  duty  of  prayer.  May  the 
Lord  help  me  to  pay  all  the  vows  which  my  heart  hath  uttered,  and 
my  mouth  hath  spoken  in  the  time  of  trouble ! 

Wednesday  22.  I  finished  Mr.  Wesley's  Notes  on  the  New  Testa- 
ment, and  began  to  read  Doddridge's  Rise  and  Progress  ;  but  am  not 
so  decorated  with  holy  love  as  the  temple  of  God  should  be.  I  am 
reconciled  to  my  condition,  and  in  faith  and  prayer  commit  all  events 
to  my  divine  Protector.  This  is  an  excellent  season  for  dressing  my 
own  vineyard. 

Thursday  23.  God  was  near,  and  my  heart  was  exceedingly  hum- 
bled before  him.  1  finished  Doddridge,  and  was  pleased,  instructed, 
and  affected  thereby.  I  think  an  abridgment  of  this  book  would  be 
of  great  service  to  our  societies. 

Friday  24.  I  began  reading  honest  John  Bunyan's  Holy  War  ;  and 
my  soul  was  kept  in  peace,  but  earnestly  desirous  of  every  branch 
and  degree  of  perfect  love.  Holiness  is  far  preferable  to  the  great- 
est wisdom. 

Lord's  day  2b\  I  was  still  confined  and  obliged  to  keep  silence ; 
but  spent  much  of  the  day  in  reading  the  Revelation,  with  Mr.  Wes- 
ley's Notes  upon  it.  As  this  Revelation  was  given  on  the  Lord's  day, 
what  can  be  a  more  proper  subject  for  meditation  on  that  day  ?  De- 
voting much  of  my  time  to  the  exercise  of  prayer,  I  pray  frequently 
for  my  dear  parents  and  friends,  as  well  as  for  myself. 

Wednesday  29.  Ventured  to  leave  my  asylum  ;  and  under  the  spe- 
cial providence  of  God,  came  safe  to  my  old  abode  ;  where  I  purpose 
spending  these  perilous  days  in  retirement,  devotion,  and  study. 
I  want  for  nothing  but  more  holiness,  and  wonder  at  the  love  and 
care  of  almighty  God,  towards  such  a  dead  dog  as  I  am.  My  spirit 
was  greatly  comforted   by  Psalm  cvi.  10.  «  He  saved  them  from  the 


IIEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL,  211 


hand  of  him  that  hated  them :  and  redeemed  them  from  the  hand  of 
the  enemy." 

Friday,  May  1.  The  minds  of  the  people  are  so  confused,  and  filled 
Tijith  the  spirit  and  troubles  of  the  times,  that  it  does  not  appear  to 
me  as  if  God  required  me  to  treat  with  them  on  spiritual  and  eternal 
subjects,  till  they  can,  with  some  considerate  calmness,  pay  attention 
to  those  momentous  matters.  I  have  lately  been  grievously  haunted 
by  the  temptations  of  Satan  ;  but  my  desire  is  to  die  rather  than  live 
to  sin  against  God.  Lord,  stand  by  me  in  the  day  of  trial,  and  every 
moment  support  my  feeble  soul !  On  Saturday  also  my  mind  was 
much  harassed  by  my  spiritual  adversary  :  and  my  study  and  devo- 
tion were  interrupted,  so  that  I  could  do  but  little  either  for  God  or 
myself. 

Lord's  day  3.  My  mind  was  strangely  twisted  and  tortured,  not 
knowing  what  to  do.  It  seems  I  know  not  how  to  fight,  nor  how  to 
fly  :  but  I  am  persuaded  there  will  be  a  speedy  change  in  the  wheel 
of  Providence,  either  prosperous  or  adverse.  Others  are  now  free, 
but  I  am  bound.  Reading  at  present  no  other  books  on  the  Lord's 
days,  I  have  lately  read  the  Revelation,  with  Mr.  Wesley's  Notes, 
three  times  through. 

Monday  4.  Satan  hath  a  desire  to  destroy,  or  at  least,  to  disturb 
my  soul.  But  I  pray  mightily  to  God  against  him.  Oh  that  he  may 
rebuke  the  tempter,  and  make  a  way  for  my  escape  ! 

On  Wednesday  my  temptations  were  so  violent,  that  it  seemed  as 
if  all  the  infernal  powers  were  combined  to  attack  my  soul.  Like 
Elijah,  when  persecuted  by  Jezebel,  I  was  ready  to  request  for  my- 
self that  I  might  die.  However,  about  noon  the  storm  abated,  and 
my  soul  was  calm.  I  had  felt  as  though  I  could  neither  pray  nor  read  ; 
but  the  Lord  blessed  my  troubled  soul  while  endeavouring  to  pray 
with  brother  E.  W  My  temptations  have  been  such  as  I  never 
experienced  before  in  the  course  of  my  life.  But  God  will  help 
me,  and  I  shall  yet  praise  him !  Both  Friday  and  Saturday  my  spiri- 
tual enemies  were  upon  me,  but  my  soul  had  more  strength  from  the 
Lord.  My  practice  is,  to  spend  some  part  of  every  hour  in  prayer. 
Lord,  "  what  is  man,  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him  ?  and  the  son  of 
man,  that  thou  visitest  bim  ?"  On  Saturday  brother  W  came  home, 
as  in  answer  to  prayer.  On  the  Lord's  day  I  read  the  Revelation 
three  times  over,  and  experienced  great  sweetness  in  my  soul,  both 
in  reading  and  family  exercises. 

Monday  11.  My  mind  was  deeply  exercised,  not  knowing  what  to 
do.  If  the  Lord  delivers  me,  I  shall  be  bound  to  praise  him  .  if  I 
had  a  thousand  hearts  and  tongues,  and  a  million  of  years  to  live.,  all 


212  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY}S  JOURNAL. 

would  be  insufficient  for  paying  the  mighty  debt  of  praise.  Time, 
and  language,  and  numbers,  all  fail  in  point  of  praise  and  adoration 
for  the  unmerited  mercies  of  a  gracious  God. 

"  Praise  ye  the  Lord,  ye  immortal  choirs, 
That  fill  the  realms  above  ; 
Praise  him  who  form'd  you  of  his  fires, 
And  feeds  you  with  his  love." 

Tuesday  12.  My  exercises  were  still  grievous  ;  but  I  am  persua- 
ded that  all  these  trials  will  contribute  to  the  spiritual  advantage  of 
my  soul.  Temptations  and  prayer,  as  one  observes,  qualify  a  Gos- 
pel minister  for  his  work.  But  I  am  ready  to  ask,  as  one  of  old, 
"  Lord,  are  there  few  that  be  saved  ?"  May  God  vouchsafe  to  help 
and  deliver  his  few  afflicted  people ! 

Wednesday  13.  I  met  a  small  congregation,  and  my  soul  was  blessed 
in  speaking  to  the  people,  as  it  usually  is  on  such  occasions.  0  my 
God!  when  wilt  thou  turn  again  my  captivity  ?  Surely  Jacob  shall 
rejoice,  and  Israel  shall  be  glad. 

i  hursday  14.  I  still  attend  to  prayer,  study,  and  teaching  the  chil- 
dren ;  but  cannot  be  fully  satisfied  without  preaching  the  Gospel, 
which  appears  to  be  my  peculiar  province.  Though  1  find  more 
relish  for  the  word  of  God,  and  greater  sweetness  in  reading  it,  than 
ever  before. 

Friday  15.  My  soul  was,  for  the  most  part,  in  peace  ;  though  at 
times  my  own  trials  and  the  trials  of  others  produced  strong  agonies 
of  mind.  But  strengthened  with  divine  might,  I  am  able  to  oppose 
the  tempter  in  his  most  violent  assaults,  and  am  brought  off  more 
than  conqueror.  The  study  of  the  holy  Scriptures  affords  me 
great  pleasure.  Lord,  help  me  to  dig  into  the  Gospel-field  as  for 
hidden  treasure  ! 

Saturday  16.  It  may  be  observed  that  two  of  our  preachers  have 
been  apprehended,  rather  than  do  violence  to  conscience  ;  and  the 
men  by  whom  they  were  both  taken,  were  dangerously  wounded 
within  a  few  weeks  ifter  they  had  laid  hands  upon  them.  I  am  now 
resigned  to  my  confinement,  and  am  persuaded  that  God,  by  his  pro- 
vidence, will  show  me  when  and  which  way  to  go. 

Lord's  day  17.  As  a  congregation  was  collected  to  hear  the  word, 
I  ventured  to  preach,  and  found  my  soul  much  drawn  out  both  in 
speaking  to  God  and  the  people.  Perhaps  this  was  a  token  of  future 
enlargement  and  usefulness. 

Monday  18.  My  spirit  was  oppressed  by  heavy  temptations.  The 
preachers  and  people  began  to  convene  for  the  quarterly  meeting; 
which  was  to  begin  the  next  day. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  213 

Tuesday  19.  Brother  C — x  began  our  quarterly  meeting,  and 
then  I  preached  with  tender  sensibility  and  warm  affection,  a  humilia- 
tion sermon  on  Joel  ii.  16,  17,  18.  "Gather  the  people,  sanctify  the 
congregation,  assemble  the  elders,  gather  the  children,  and  those 
that  suck  the  breasts  :  let  the  bridegroom  go  forth  of  his  chamber, 
and  the  bride  out  of  her  closet.  Let  the  priests,  the  ministers  of 
the  Lord,  weep  between  the  porch  and  the  altar,  and  let  them  say, 
Spare  thy  people,  O  Lord,  and  give  not  thine  heritage  to  reproach  ; 
that  the  heathen  should  rule  over  them  :  wherefore  should  they  say 
among  the  people,  Where  is  their  God  ?  Then  will  the  Lord  be  jea- 
lous for  his  land,  and  pity  his  people."  The  hearts  of  the  people 
were  greatly  melted  under  the  word  :  and  the  power  of  the  Lord 
was  with  us  in  the  afternoon  also.  We  were  quiet  and  undisturbed  ; 
and  1  hope  the  word  will  take  root  in  the  hearts  of  some  who  were 
present.  On  Wednesday  there  was  so  much  company  about  me,  that 
I  could  not  keep  in  my  usual  and  desirable  track  of  walking  with  God. 

Thursday  21.  My  mind  was  somewhat  dissipated.  A  young  woman, 
who  had  been  awakened  by  the  instrumentality  of  Captain  W  but 
deprived  of  the  means  of  grace  for  about  four  years,  and  had  thought 
she  could  never  be  happy  unless  amongst  the  Methodists,  was  now 
brought  to  God  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  found  peace  in  her  soul. 
Another  person  was  also  brought  into  deep  distress  for  an  interest 
in  Christ  about  the  same  time.  Our  family  meetings  are  now  at- 
tended with  great  power. 

Friday  22.  Satan  worried  my  mind  with  his  temptations  ;  but  at 
night  we  joined  the  two  families  together  for  worship,  and  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  was  with  us  in  power. 

Saturday  23.  I  set  this  day  apart  for  fasting  and  prayer,  especially 
in  behalf  of  brother  T  W  My  soul  was  comforted  to  hear  that 
Mrs.  P.  near  seventy  years  of  age,  knew  by  experience  that  she 
could  be  born  again,  though  she  was  old.  This  week  the  Lord  has 
given  me  two,  as  the  children  of  my  bonds. 

Monday  25.  T  W  went  back  to  have  his  case  determined.  He 
left  his  family  in  much  distress  of  mind.  I  endeavoured  to  minister 
some  comfort  to  them  ;  but  in  respect  to  myself,  every  thing  ap- 
peared to  be  under  a  cloud  ;  so  that  I  knew  not,  as  yet,  what  the  Lord 
would  be  pleased  to  do  with  me.  I  now  began  to  read  Barclay's 
Apology,  and  to  make  some  strictures. 

Friday  29.  I  spent  much  of  the  forenoon  in  prayer,  and  read 
through  the  book  of  Job  :  but  was  sorely  tempted  by  the  devil.  My 
spiritual  trials  have  been  heavier  and  more  grievous  of  late,  than  I 


214  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

have  ever  experienced  before  in  all  the  course  of  my  pilgrimage. 
They  seem  to  indicate  to  me,  that  I  shall  lose  my  soul,  or  lose  my 
life,  or  live  for  some  peculiar  usefulness  in  the  church  of  Christ. 
On  Saturday  Mr.  H — y  came  to  see  me ;  and  I  ventured  to  set  out 
for  Mr.  W  's  :  but  having  been  so  long  unaccustomed  to  riding,  my 
body  was  exceedingly  fatigued.  However,  my  soul  was  much  re- 
freshed in  meeting  the  people  there. 

Lord's  day  31.  My  body  was  indisposed  ;  but  many  people  came 
together  to  hear  the  word  of  God  ;  and  as  there  had  been  some  little 
disorders  among  them,  I  discoursed  on  2  Tim.  ii.  19.  "  Neverthe- 
less, the  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure,  having  this  seal,  the  Lord 
knoweth  them  that  are  his.  And,  let  every  one  that  nameth  the 
name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity."  We  had  a  profitable  time; 
and  in  the  afternoon  I  went  to  hear  Mr.  C.  who  appeared  to  be  a  well- 
meaning,  though  a  weak  man. 

Monday,  June  1.  I  rode  about  twenty  miles  and  came  home  very 
unwell,  and  continued  for  several  days  afflicted  with  a  fever  and 
boils  ;  but  my  soul  was  peaceably  staid  on  the  Lord,  in  the  midst  of 
various  and  heavy  trials  both  of  body  and  mind. 

Lord's  day  7.  Being  Whitsunday,  I  went  to  the  barn,  weak  as  I 
was,  and  preached  on  Rom.  viii.  7,  8,  9.  My  heart  was  enlarged,  and 
the  people  were  greatly  melted  and  alarmed  ;  and  many  of  them  felt 
the  gracious  drawings  of  the  Father.  But  alas  !  I  am  as  gold  in  the 
furnace  !  though  I  must  not  think  it  strange  concerning  the  fiery  trial, 
which  is  to  try  me,  as  though  some  strange  thing  had  happened  unto 
me.  In  my  patience  may  I  possess  my  soul :  and  the  Lord,  in  his 
own  time,  will  deliver  me.  Surely,  when  this  mortal  shall  put  on 
immortality,  then  shall  there  be  an  eternal  day  without  a  cloud,  ease 
without  pain,  and  joy  without  any  mixture  of  sorrow !  I  preached 
again  in  the  afternoon,  and  found  great  liberty  in  my  spirit.  Perad- 
venture,  the  Lord  will,  in  this  barren  place,  raise  up  a  seed  to  serve 
pirn. 

Wednesday  10.  I  had  both  great  peace  and  heavy  trials  ;  but  have 
cause  to  complain  of  the  want  of  more  seriousness  and  devotion  to 
God.  I  find  the  more  pious  part  of  the  people  called  Quakers,  are 
exerting  themselves  for  the  liberation  of  the  slaves.  This  is  a  very 
laudable  design  ;  and  what  the  Methodists  must  come  to,  or  I  fear, 
the  Lord  will  depart  from  them.  But  there  is  cause  to  presume,  that 
some  are  more  intent  on  promoting  the  freedom  of  their  bodies,  than 
the  freedom  of  their  souls(;  without  which  they  must  be  the  vassals 
of  Satan  in  eternal  fire. 


REV.  FRANCTS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL-  215 

Saturday  13.  For  a  few  days  past  my  mind  has  been  variously 
agitated  at  certain  times,  by  that  restless,  fallen  spirit,  who  so  often 
attempts  to  break  my  peace  ;  but  my  soul  has  been  kept  by  the  same 
omnipotent,  gracious  arm  which  has  been  so  frequently  displayed  in 
my  behalf.  I  went  to  R.  W.'s,  where  all  our  souls  were  under  the 
softening  influence  of  divine  grace  in  the  class-meeting.  With 
animation  of  spirit  I  preached  twice  on  the  Lord's  day,  to  large  con- 
gregations. As  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  meets  with  indulgence  in 
this  free  state,  I  entertain  a  hope  that  it  will  prove  a  general  blessing 
to  the  inhabitants  thereof :  and  that  Delaware  will  become  as  the 
garden  of  the  Lord,  filled  with  plants  of  his  own  planting. 

Monday  15.  The  congregation  was  large  at  Mr.  K.'s,  but  showed 
too  much  appearance  of  spiritual  insensibility.  I  have  lately  been 
surprised,  and  self-reproved,  for  not  feeling  the  same  earnest  desire 
that  the  word  might  profit  the  hearers,  after  it  was  delivered,  as  I 
have  felt  before  the  preaching  began.  My  soul  was  deeply  engaged 
with  the  Lord,  at  this  time,  that  the  word  might  prove  a  permanent 
blessing.  On  Tuesday  1  heard  Mr.  T  preach  a  funeral  sermon, 
which  was  well  put  together,  but  not  calculated  to  reach  the  hearts 
of  the  people. 

Thursday  18.  My  trials,  as  usual,  have  been  great,  but  the  Lord 
has  not  left  me  comfortless.  About  this  time  it  was  currently  re- 
ported, that  a  treaty  of  peace  was  like  to  take  place.  I  thought  this 
would  have  been  a  singular  blessing,  especially  as  it  would  have  given 
the  Gospel  a  free  course  through  the  land.  But  my  hope  is,  through 
grace,  that  I  shall  be  found  prepared  for  all  changes  and  circum- 
stances. 

Lord's  day  21.  I  was  enabled  to  press  upon  the  consciences  of  the 
people,  with  great  pungency,  the  awful  declaration  of  God  in  Amos 
iv.  11.  "I  have  overthrown  some  of  you,  as  God  overthrew  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah,  and  ye  were  as  a  firebrand  plucked  out  of  the  burn- 
ing:  yet  have  ye  not  returned  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord."  Some  felt 
the  word  preached  ;  and  at  the  class-meeting  the  hearts  of  the  society 
were  melted. 

Saturday  27.  We  have  had  some  refreshing  times,  both  in  our 
public  and  society  meetings,  through  the  course  of  this  week  ;  and  my 
own  soul  has  sometimes  been  greatly  drawn  out  in  affectionate  devo- 
tion ;  but  at  other  times  sorely  tempted  by  the  enemy.  We  have 
had  a  very  alarming  drought  in  this  part  of  the  country.  Last  Friday 
we  fasted,  and  prayed  that  the  Lord  might  water  the  earth  :  but 
though  we  had  a  fine  shower,  it  did  not  seem  to  cover  much  more 
than  the  two  adjacent  farms. 


216  Rfiv.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

Lord's  day  28.  In  the  forenoon,  I  preached  under  an  oak,  on 
"  Him  that  cometh  unto  me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out  ;"  but  the  peo- 
ple seemed  unmoved  :  though  in  the  afternoon  they  were  a  little 
roused  by  that  awful  threatening,  Psalm  ix.  17.  "  The  wicked  shall 
be  turned  into  hell,  and  all  the  nations  that  forget  God."  Yet  there 
seems  to  be  a  judicial  hardness  of  heart  amongst  many  of  the  people. 
There  was  a  large  congregation  at  Mr.  S.'s  on  Monday,  but  they  also 
were  under  the  influence  of  a  spiritual  stupor.  My  mind  has  been 
much  agitated  ;  and  at  present  my  prospect  of  success  is  but  gloomy. 
Sometimes  I  have  been  afraid  that  I  have  done  wrong  in  retiring 
from  the  work  ;  though,  as  far  as  I  can  judge,  the  glory  of  God  and  the 
prosperity  of  his  church,  were  my  chief  objects. 

Tuesday  30.  Brother  F.  G.  came  to  see  me  ;  and  on  Friday  the 
Lord  sent  us  a  plentiful  rain  after  the  threatening  drought. 

Saturday,  July  3.  I  lamented  my  want  .of  more  spiritual  life  and 
divine  animation  ;  neither  did  I  find  myself  so  quietly  and  perfectly 
resigned  to  the  present  dispensations  of  Providence,  as  is  necessary 
to  keep  my  soul  in  undisturbed  peace,  and  promote  my  advancement 
in  all  the  beauty  of  holiness. 

Lord's  day  4.  The  Lord  favoured  me  with  great  assistance  in 
preaching  three  times  to-day  ;  and  at  Mr.  C — y's,  in  the  forenoon,  we 
had  a  very  solemn  season. 

Tuesday  6.  It  has  been  matter  of  grief  to  me,  that  I  have  not  been 
more  holy  and  heavenly  in  all  the  powers  of  my  soul.    And  it  will  be 
very  wonderful  if  my  soul  should  be  saved,  after  so  many  external 
trials,  and  such  internal  assaults  from  the  banded  powers  of  darkness 
Death  and  destruction  seem  to  threaten  me  on  every  side ;  but, 

"  Thou  know'st  the  pains  thy  servants  feel ; 
Thou  hear'st  thy  children's  cry  \ 
And  their  best  wishes  to  fulfil, 
Thy  grace  is  ever  nigh." 

Wednesday  7.  My  exercises  were  heavy,  but  I  had  some  liberty  in 
preaching,  and  there  were  some  happy  souls  who  possessed  the  spi- 
rit of  prayer. 

Friday  9.  Satan  so  beset  me  by  different  means,  that  it  seemed  as 
if  I  could  do  little  else  but  endeavour  to  pray. 

Saturday  10.  I  rode  to  W  and  found  that  Mr.  C.  had  taken  away 
about  half  the  society,  and  was  gone  to  set  up  a  church  for  himself. 
But  I  met  those  who  were  willing  to  abide  with  us,  and  preached 
twice  on  the  Lord's  day,  perhaps  to  some  purpose- 


REV.  fiiancis  asbuky's  JOURNAL,  ill! 

Monday  12.  Preaching  in  Slaughter-Neck,  there  appeared  to  be 
some  impediment  in  the  family :  I  therefore  removed  the  preaching, 
and  found  the  children  were  openly  wicked.  We  shall  now  meet 
the  people  at  Mr.  S — y's,  whose  family  appears  serious  ;  and  I  hope 
the  work  of  God  will  go  on  in  this  neighbourhood.  The  people 
were  all  attention  at  R — ds's  on  Wednesday,  but  not  much  affected. 
On  Thursday  I  preached  at  B — y's,  and  then  returned  to  brother 
T.  W  's. 

Saturday  17.  I  laid  a  plan  for  myself  to  travel  and  preach  nine  days 
in  two  weeks.  This  was  one  step  towards  my  former  regularity  in 
what  appears  to  me  as  my  duty,  my  element  and  my  delight.  On 
the  Lord's  day  I  met  a  class  in  the  morning,  and  then  preached  twice, 
with  earnestness  and  affection,  to  large,  attentive,  and  serious  con- 
gregations. My  spirit  was  afterward  refreshed  in  the  company  of 
some  of  my  old  friends. 

Monday  19.  My  company  being  gone,  my  soul  returned  to  its  usual 
exercises  ;  and  1  was  led  to  reflect  on  the  fluctuating  state  of  human 
life — a  continual  circle  in  which  the  soul  can  find  no  permanent  centre 
to  fix  upon  !  We  shall  never  have  perfect  rest  till  we  come  to  the 
holy  mountain  of  the  Lord. 

Tuesday  20.  My  soul  keeps  close  to  God  in  prayer,  meditation, 
and  reading.  My  internal  exercises  are  very  great,  and  I  see  no 
other  way  to  conquer  and  escape,  but  by  resisting  my  malignant  foe. 
On  Thursday  I  went  about  twenty  miles  to  preach  at  one  T— -d's  in 
Sussex  :  there  were  about  two  hundred  people  who  appeared  to  be 
kind;  and  willing  to  receive  instruction  :  and  I  was  enabled  to  fix  their 
attention,  though  they  were  ignorant  and  wild.  I  then  rode  ten  miles 
on  my  way  back  to  visit  I.  B.  who  was  in  deep  distress  of  soul.  On 
Saturday  my  mind  was  sweetly  staid  on  God,  after  riding  about  fifty 
miles  since  Thursday,  seeking  to  bring  poor  wandering  souls  to  the 
fold  of  Christ.     I  hope  to  travel  and  preach  as  long  as  I  live. 

Lord's  day  25.  My  own  soul  was  much  enlarged  while  enforcing 
Rom.  x.  15,  16.  ;  though  the  hearts  of  the  audience  appeared  to  be 
proof  against  the  power  of  the  word.  Thus  it  is  that  the  preaching 
of  the  Gospel  is  too  often  as  seed  sown  in  stony  ground  ;  the  hearers 
do  not  prepare  their  hearts  by  prayer  and  meditation,  and  the  Almigh- 
ty does  not  destroy  their  moral  agency,  to  save  them  by  irresistible 
grace  ;  and  therefore  the  word  which  was  intended  to  be  a  "  savour 
of  life  unto  life,"  proves,  by  their  abuse  of  preventing  grace,  "  a 
savour  of  death  unto  death." 

Monday  26.  I  am  still  in  possession  of  the  inestimable  pearl ; 
Christ  abides  in  me,  the  hope  of  glory. 

Vol.  T  28 


21 1>  rev.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

"  In  the  heavenly  Lamb, 
Thrice  happy  I  am, 
And  my  heart  doth  rejoice  *t  the  sound  of  his  name." 


The  congregation  to-day  at  K.'s  were  dull  and  insensible,  but  in  the 
class-meeting  at  S.'s  we  had  a  melting  time. 

It  was  currently  reported  about  this  time  that  some  of  the  British 
troops  were  so  blocked  up,  that  there  was  very  little  probability  of 
their  escape.  And  thus  it  is  with  the  fallen  spirits  of  mankind  ;  having 
forfeited  the  favour  and  protection  of  their  offended  Creator,  they  are 
environed  by  the  invisible,  malignant  angels,  who  kept  not  their  first 
estate,  desirous  to  involve  the  human  race  in  their  own  condemnation 
and  misery.  But  God,  moved  with  compassion  towards  our  helpless 
race,  has  made  it  possible  that  we  may  escape  through  the  redemption 
that  is  in  Jesus  Christ.  But  O,  melancholy  thought !  men  are  more 
inclined  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  their  enemies,  than  to  the  voice  of 
their  Divine  Friend.  Instead  of  putting  on  the  whole  armour  of  God, 
and  resisting  the  devil  that  he  may  flee  from  them  ;  they  arm  them- 
selves against  all  the  warnings  of  their  gracious  Creator,  and  resist  the 
motions  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  till  they  have  filled  up  the  measure  of  their 
iniquity,  and  have  their  portion  appointed  with  devils  and  damned  spi- 
rits. On  Wednesday  my  soul  was  deeply  exercised  in  seeking  after 
more  of  the  divine  nature.  I  long -to  be  made  perfect  in  love,  to 
have  all  my  heart  wrapped  up  in  Christ  Jesus,  to  have  my  conversa- 
tion in  heaven  ;  and  to  be  completely  prepared  for  every  duty,  and 
every  suffering  that  may  lie  before  me  !  We  had  a  lecture  in  the 
evening  at  T  W-'s,  and  the  hearts  of  some  were  moved  and  melted  by 
the  power  of  God.  I  begin  to  think  it  is  my  duty  to  abide  for  a  sea- 
son in  this  state  ;  and  have  great  hopes  that  the  Lord  will  pour  out  his 
Spirit,  and  favour  us  with  a  revival  of  pure  and  vital  piety. 

Saturday,  August  1.  I  went  into  the  Fork  :  and  on  the  Lord's  day 
preached  at  Mr.  R.'s,  and  at  Mr.  L.'s.  The  congregations  were 
attentive  and  affected  ;  so  that  although  they  are  rude  and  unpolished, 
yet  God  is  able,  even  of  these  unseemly  stones  to  raise  up  chil- 
dren unto  Abraham.  Being  informed  that  Mrs.  P,  was  dangerously 
ill,  I  rode  about  twenty  miles  to  see  her,  arrived  at  the  house  about 
nine  o'clock,  and  found  her  confident  and  happy  in  the  love  of  God  ; 
a  miracle  of  saving  grace.  But  the  power  and  the  glory  of  this  and 
of  every  other  good  work,  belongs  unto  the  Lord. 

Tuesday  4.  We  had  a  large  congregation,  and  the  presence  and 
power  of  God  were  with  us,  while  I  enforced,  on  a  funeral  occasion, 
"  Remember  now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy    youth,  while  the 


AfcV.  FRANCIS  ASiiURV  >  journal.  2iS 

evil  days  come  not,  nor  the  years  draw  nigh  when  thou  shalt  say,  I 
have  no  pleasure  in  them." 

Thursday  6.  After  proclaiming  the  great  salvation  at  J.'s,  I  rode 
back  to  visit  Mrs.  P  again  ;  and  found  her  still  happy  in  God,  and 
patient  under  her  affliction. 

Lord's  day  9.  Having  been  informed  that  some  of  the  people  were 
in  danger  of  being  led  aside  by  impressions  and  dreams  ;  and  a  weak- 
headed-man  having  already  drawn  off  a  few  simple  souls  ;  I  thought 
it  expedient  to  urge  upon  them  Isaiah  viii.  20.  "  To  the  law  and  to 
the  testimony  :  if  they  speak  not  according  to  this  word,  it  is  because 
there  is  no  light  in  them."  While  in  theory,  experience,  and  prac- 
tice, we  keep  close  to  the  written  word  of  God,  we  are  safe.  And  if 
an  angel  from  heaven  preach  any  other  Gospel,  saith  St.  Paul,  "  Let 
him  be  accursed."     Gal.  i.  8. 

Dreams  may  arise  from  various  causes  ;  and  even  diabolical  impres- 
sions may  sometimes  resemble  those  made  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  And 
it  is  evident  that  all  such  impressions  as  have  a  tendency  to  effect 
divisions,  to  interrupt  the  peace  of  the  church,  to  draw  us  off  from 
any  revealed  duty,  or  to  make  us  contented  in  a  lukewarm  and 
careless  state,  cannot  come  from  God,  because  they  are  contrary  to  the 
revealed  dictates  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  the  Spirit  of  truth  cannot 
contradict  itself.  Therefore  all  impressions,  dreams,  visions,  &c. 
should  be  brought  to  the  standard  of  the  holy  Scriptures,  and  if  they 
do  not  perfectly  correspond  therewith,  they  should  be  rejected. 

Monday  10.  At  Mr.  S.'s  there  was  an  ignorant,  hardened  company, 
who  had  heard  much  preaching,  but,  I  fear,  to  bad  purpose.  May 
the  hammer  of  the  word,  in  the  hand  of  Omnipotent  Mercy,  break 
these  rocks  into  pieces !  In  the  evening  I  returned  to  R.  W  's  ;  and 
was  under  painful  exercises  of  soul  the  next  day.  Such  views  of  my 
want  of  more  of  the  divine  nature,  and  such  a  clear  discovery  of  the 
wickedness  and  obstinacy  of  the  people,  were  opened  to  my  mind, 
that  my  spirit  was  brought  down  to  the  dust  before  the  Lord,  and  my 
heart  poured  out  streams  of  humble,  earnest  prayer.  The  words  of 
the  apostle  are  continually  verified — "  We  must  through  much  tribu- 
lation enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God,"  Acts  xiv.  22.  Such  gracious 
discoveries  as  break  up  the  great  deep  of  the  human  heart,  are  pain- 
ful, but  profitable.  Blessed  be  God,  for  illuminating,  quickening, 
sanctifying,  and  strengthening  grace  ! 

Thursday  13.  A  sense  of  the  Divine  presence  penetrated  my  soul, 
and  I  was  deeply  humbled  before  the  Lord  ;  but  was  at  the  same 
time  in  the  furnace  of  temptations  ;  and  by  all  my  prayers  and  efforts, 
could  not  obtain  deliverance  from  them.     No  doubt  but  it  was  then 


220  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBTJRY'S  JOURNAL. 

needful,  that  I  should  be  in  heaviness  through  such  manifold  tempta- 
tions. But  the  Lord  knovveth  bow,  and  when,  to  deliver.  On  Fri- 
day, my  soul  was  in  peace,  and  I  felt  willing  to  die,  rather  than  ever 
yield  to  temptation  and  sin  against  my    *od. 

Lord's  day  16.  After  preaching  at  Mr.  B.'s  in  the  Fork  1  enforced 
Acts  xiii.  40,  41.  at  R.  L.  s,  where  many  people  were  affected,  and 
about  twelve  were  taken  as  probationers  into  the  society.  On  Mon- 
day at  Mr.  F  's  I  spoke  with  spiritual  enlargement  to  a  poor,  igno- 
rant congregation ;  and  there  were  many  persons  much  affected  on 
Tuesday  at  T  's.  It  seemed  as  if  the  Lord  was  working  on  their  wil- 
ling hearts,  to  prepare  them  for  his  church  militant  below,  and  for  his 
church  triumphant  above. 

Though  my  body  is  feeble,  and  the  weather  is  very  warm,  yet 
the  Lord  supports  me,  and  makes  my  labours  successful. 

"  How  do  thy  mercies  close  me  round ! 
For  ever  be  thy  name  ador'd .' 
I  blush  in  all  things  to  abound ; 
The  servant  is  above  his  Lord." 

Thursday  27.  After  preaching  at  the  widow  J.'s.  I  returned  to  Mr. 
W  's  ;  and  was  visited  by  my  old  friends  W   L.  and  W  M. 

Lord's  day  30.  For  several  days  past  1  was  extremely  ill  with  a 
Vomiting,  &c.  and  was  frequently  delirious.  It  was  a  very  heavy 
season  of  affliction  ;  but  the  Lord  looked  upon  me  in  my  trouble,  and 
this  day  he  granted  me  some  relief.  Glory  be  given  to  God  I  my 
fever  was  greatly  abated. 

Lord's  day,  September  6.  I  am  still  unable  to  preach  the  glad 
tidings  of  salvation  to  my  fellow  men.  And  my  mind  has  been 
variously  exercised  through  the  week  past ;  sometimes  grieved  at 
spending  my  time  to  so  little  purpose ;  at  other  times  deeply 
engaged  for  more  inward  religion,  and  for  more  of  God. 

Lord's  day  13.  Another  week  has  passed  without  public  labour, 
except  one  prayer-meeting.  But  my  soul  has  enjoyed  a  great  degree 
of  divine  peace  and  consolation.  Especially  on  last  Thursday,  my 
soul  was  favoured  with  deep  communion  with  God.  How  earnestly 
do  1  long  for  a  more  holy  and  a  closer  walk  with  God  ;  to  have  every 
thought  devoted  to  my  blessed  Jesus.  1  ventured  to  preach  to-day 
on  Hebr.  xiii.  13.  when  my  spirit  was  at  liberty,  and  the  people  were 
affected. 

Tuesday  15.  This  was  a  day  of  peculiar  temptations.  My  trials 
were  such  as  I  do  not  remember  to  have  experienced  before  ;  and 
for  some  time  it  seemed  as  if  I  scarce  knew  whether  to  fight  or  fly. 


11EV.  FRANCIS  ASBURYTS  JOURNAL. 


*****  X. 


My  usefulness  appeared  to  be  cut  off;  I  saw  myself  pent  up  in  a 
corner ;  ray  body  in  a  manner  worn  out ;  my  English  brethren  gone, 
so  that  I  had  no  one  to  consult  ;  and  every  surrounding  object  and 
circumstance  wore  a  gloomy  aspect.  Lord,  must  1  thus  pine  away, 
and  quench  the  light  of  Israel  ?  No  :  though  he  slay  me,  yei  will 
I  trust  him. 

"  Though  in  the  paths  of  death  T  tread, 
With  gloomy  horrors  overspread, 
My  steadfast  heart  shall  fear  no  ill, 
For  thou,  O  Lord,  art  with  me  still ; 
Thy  friendly  crook  shall  give  me  aid, 
And  guide  me  through  the  dreadful  shade." 

Wednesday  16.  My  body  felt  better,  and  my  mind  had  rest.  I 
could  repose  myself  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  and  felt  a  lively  hope  that 
through  all  my  difficulties,  the  Lord  will  finally  conduct  me  to  eter- 
nal rest. 

Thursday    17.    While  riding  on  the  road,  my  soul  was  deeply  af- 
fected with  a  powerful,  solemn  sense  of  a  present  and  gracious  God. 
What  extatic  sensations  must  be  enjoyed  in  heaven,  where   a  much 
deeper   sense   of  the   divine   presence  is  eternally  enjoyed,  without 
interruption  or  cessation  !  Well  might  St.  Paul  say,  "  To  die  is  gain." 
Here  our  communion  with  the  Deity  is  but  partial  and   very   imper- 
fect—we  dwell   in  shells   of  infirmity  ;    exposed   to   the  assaults  of 
wicked  spirits,  and  surrounded  with  countless   numbers   of  amusing, 
empty  objects  ;  by  which  means  we  are  in  continual  danger  of  for- 
getting God,  or  of  being  too  well  satisfied  without  the  fruition  of  him. 
I  called  to  see  Mr.  S.  and  his  wife,  who  was  sick,  and  I  introduced 
a  conversation  on  the  benefit  of  affliction,  as  a  proper  means  to  ex- 
cite our  consideration,  and  humble  us   for  our  past   sins.     But  she 
began  to  say,  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he   chasteneth  ;    and   seemed 
inclined  to  presume  that  she  was  in  a  state  of  acceptance.     This  I 
did  not  believe,  and  therefore  broke   off  the   conversation   abruptly, 
and    went    to  prayer      They    were  both   extremely   affected  ;    and 
especially  Mrs.  S.    The  Lord  had  touched  and  broken  her  heart  ;  so 
that  her  thoughts  of  herself  and   of  the   nature   of  religion   were 
greatly  changed  ;  and  1  left  her  roaring  and  c;yjng  for  mercy. 

Lord's  day  20.  There  was  a  great  melting  in  the  congregation,  and 
a  pleasing  prospect  of  a  gracious  work  of  God,  while  1  attempted  to 
describe  the  solemn  grandeur  of  the  judgment  day,  and  the  woful 
end  of  the  unregenerate,  from  2  Thess.  i.  7,  8,  9,  10. 

Thursday  24.  My  frame  has  been  indisposed  all  this  week,  so  that 
I  am  almost  a  stranger  to  the  enjoyment  of  health  for  any  length  of 


22i:  IU:V.   KRANUS  ASBURY  S  JOUKtvAL. 

time,     i  hare  been  reading  the  life  of  Mr. :  but  think  it  quite  too 

pompous.  The  praise  bestowed  on  him,  is  too  much  to  bestotv  on 
mortal  dust.  What  is  man,  that  such  flowers  should  be  strewed  ou 
his  grave  !  May  I  ever  be  contented  with  the  honour  which  cometh 
from  God  only  !  My  soul  at  present  is  filled  with  his  Holy  Spirit;  I 
have  a  glorious  prospect  of  a  boundless  ocean  of  love,  and  immense 
degrees  of  holiness  opening  to  my  view  ;  and  now  renew  my  cove- 
nant with  the  Lord,  that  I  may  glorify  him  with  my  body  and  spirit, 
which  are  his.  Seven  times  a  day  do  I  bow  my  knees,  to  utter  my 
complaints  before  him,  and  to  implore  an  increase  of  his  grace.  But 
after  all,  and  in  the  midst  of  all,  I  can  feelingly  say,  I  am  an  unprofi- 
table servant.  But  though  unworthy,  utterly  unworthy,  I  am  blessed 
with  the  sweet  gales  of  God's  love.  Blessed  breezes !  how  they 
cheer  and  refresh  my  drooping  soul !  What  the  Lord  has  for  me  to 
do,  I  know  not ;  but  wait  to  know,  and  gladly  to  obey  every  dictate 
of  his  unerring  pleasure. 

Friday  25.  My  soul  was  still  happy  in  my  God,  and  I  am  power- 
fully persuaded  that  I  shall  yet  live  to  be  more  useful  than  ever  in 
the  church  of  Christ. 

Saturday  26.  On  my  way  to  the  Fork,  I  was  in  spiritual  travail  for 
the  souls  of  the  people  ;  and  there  was  some  melting  at  Mr.  R.'s  ; 
but  a  much  more  powerful  moving  at  L  's,  while  I  discoursed  on  2 
Cor.  v.  11.  <k  Knowing  therefore  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade 
men  ;  but  we  are  made  manifest  to  God,  and  I  trust  also,  we  are  made 
manifest  in  your  consciences."  I  returned  to  my  lodging,  blessing 
and  praising  God  that  he  had  enabled  me  to  deliver  my  own  soul ; 
and  given  me  some  cause  to  hope  that  my  labour  was  not  in  vain. 

Wednesday  30.  The  malicious  enemy  of  mankind  still  haunts,  and 
powerfully  tempts  me ;  but  my  never-failing  Friend  makes  me  victo- 
rious. My  soul  is  in  constant  search  after  more  of  God,  and  sweetly 
sinks  deeper  and  deeper  into  the  abyss  of  his  fulness.  I  am  much 
employed  in  the  spirit  and  duty  of  prayer  ;  but  earnestly  desire  to 
be  more  so.  My  desire  is  that  prayer  should  mix  with  every  thought, 
with  every  wish,  with  every  word,  and  with  every  action ;  that  al! 
might  ascend  as  a  holy,  acceptable  sacrifice  to  God. 

Thursday,  October  1.  My  heart  was  much  devoted  to  Him  who 
devoted  himself  to  death  for  me.  Peace  and  purity  were  my  agree- 
able companions  ;  and  I  saw  the  indispensable  need  of  perpetual 
watching,  and  looking  unto  "  Jesus,  the  author  ,and  finisher  of  my 
faith,  who  for  the  joy  which  was  set  before  him,  endured  the  cross, 
despised  the  shame,  and  is  set  down  at  the  right-hand  of  God"— 
endured  the  cross  ! — despised  the  shame  !— And  shall  the  disciple  de- 


«-.>«  ',> 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL.  ZZo 

sire  to  be  above  his  master  ?  Shall  I  ever  shun  the  cross  ?  or  dreacj 
the  shame  ?  God  forbid  !  For  it  is  only  on  condition  that  we  suffer 
with  him,  that  we  shall  also  reign  with  him.  At  T  's  to-day  there 
was  a  gracious  melting  in  the  congregation  ;  and  the  prospect  of  a 
good  work  on  the  hearts  of  many.  I  then  rode  to  Mr.  F-'s  ;  and 
the  untaught  audience  felt  the  weight  of  divine  truth.  Mr.  F-  has 
been  under  religious  impressions  amongst  the  Nicholites,  but  suffers 
spiritual  loss  by  the  want  of  more  fortitude. 

Friday  2.  I  preached  a  funeral  sermon  on  Nanticoke  river  ;  and 
we  had  a  very  solemn  season. 

Lord's  day  4  I  was  greatly  assisted  in  my  public  exercise,  though 
my  body  was  afflicted  with  a  fever.  After  preaching  twice,  I  rode 
to  Mr.  W  's,  and  enjoyed  consolation  in  my  soul ;  though  at  present 
there  is  but  a  small  prospect  of  my  being  permitted  to  preach  long 
in  this  land,  with  a  clear  conscience.  But  to  defile  the  conscience, 
would  be  doing  evil  that  good  may  come  ;  which  I  look  upon  as  a 
dangerous,  yea,  a  diabolical  sentiment ;  and  therefore  can  never 
think  of  indulging  it.  My  conscience  must  be  kept  void  of  offence 
towards  God,  as  well  as  towards  man.  I  am  desirous  to  do  what  I  can 
for  the  salvation  of  the  immortal  souls  which  inhabit  America  ;  but 
if  Providence  should  permit  men  to  prevent  me,  then  I  am  clear,  and 
must  labour  where  the  door  is  open. 

Thursday  8.  I  found  some  religious  feelings  in  the  congregation  at 
G.'s  ;  but  dead,  dead  times  at  L.'s.  And  I  was  so  unwell,  as  to  be 
under  the  necessity  of  sitting  down  to  teach  the  people.  I  returned 
very  ill,  and  was  unable  to  preach  on  the  Lord's  day. 

Lord's  day  18.  My  body  has  laboured  under  affliction  all  the  week ; 
and  Satan  has  buffeted  me  with  heavy  temptations.  I  have  been  much 
tempted  to  impatience,  and  to  say,  Show  wherefore  thou  contend- 
est  with  me  ?  But  shall  the  clay  complain  in  the  hand  of  the  potter  ? 
Lord,  support  me,  and  enable  me  to  resist  the  devil,  that  he  may  flee 
from  me !  This  was  a  very  solemn  day  in  the  great  congregation,  and 
I  felt  unusual  power  in  preaching  on  Acts  xx.  27.  I  left  the  people 
under  the  effects  of  what  they  had  heard  and  felt ;  and  then  returned 
to  Mr.  W  's.  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul ;  and  all  that  is  within  me, 
praise  his  holy  name  ! 

Friday  23.  My  indisposition  still  cleaveth  to  my  shattered  frame. 
But  my  spirit  is  for  the  most  part  pacific  and  calm,  though  much 
tempted.  Lord,  grant  me  patience  and  resignation  on  all  occasions  ; 
that  while  1  am  a  living  man,  I  may  never  complain ! 

Tuesday  27.  My  soul  was  impressed  with  a  deeper  sense  of  the 
presence  and  purity  of  God.    And  1  felt  determined  to  be  more  cir- 


224  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy'S  JOUHNaL. 

camspect  and  watchful  in  every  part  of  my  conduct.  But  what  are 
all  the  resolutions  of  man  without  the  grace  of  God  !  And  will  God 
withhold  his  grace,  without  any  fault  in  us  ?  By  no  means — He  hath 
encouraged  us  to  ask,  hy  promising  that  we  shall  receive,  if  we  do 
not  ask  amiss. — Lord,  help  me  to  fulfil  all  my  covenant  engagements, 
that  I  may  have  respect  to  every  precept  of  thy  righteous  law,  and 
in  all  things  do  according  to  thy  holy  will.  1  spent  part  of  this  day 
in  reading,  but  a  fever  and  pains  produced  a  restless  night. 

Thursday  29.    1  spoke  with  some  animation  at  G.'s,  and  most  of 
the  congregation  felt  the  weight  of  divine  truths. 

Friday  30.  I  put  the  society  in  some  order  at  L.'s,  turning  out  the 
disorderly  members ;  which  always  are  a  weight  and  a  curse  to  any 
religious  community.  Saint  Paul  said  to  the  Corinthians,  (though 
alluding  to  only  one  disorderly  person  among  them)  "  Know  ye  not 
that  a  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump  ?"  1  Cor.  v.  6.  And 
the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  Israel,  for  the  covetousness 
of  Achan,  who  then  dwelt  among  them.  Josh.  vii.  1.  And  who  can 
tell  how  often  the  Lord  is  displeased  with  his  church  for  the  wicked- 
ness of  some  of  its  members  ?  No  doubt  but  this  frequently  checks 
the  spiritual  progress  of  the  righteous  ;  especially  if  ungodly  mem- 
bers are  known  and  not  dealt  with  according  to  the  Gospel.  I  spoke 
plainly  and  closely  to  the  people,  and  there  was  some  moving  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  amongst  them.  But  alas  !  I  am  not  yet  so  devout, 
spiritual,  and  heavenly,  as  I  ought  to  be.  Neither  do  I  feel  that 
burning  love  to  God  which  I  want  to  feel.  What  small  returns  do  I 
make,  after  my  late  visitations  of  judgment  and  mercy  !  I  may  well 
say  of  myself,  ah !  ungrateful  wretch  !  May  the  Lord  help  me  to 
be  always  mending  ! 

Lord's  day,  Nov  1.  After  I  had  preached  a  funeral  sermon,  at 
which  the  hearts  of  many  were  powerfully  wrought  upon,  I  returned 
to  T  W  's,  making  twenty  miles  in  the  whole,  and  lectured  in  the 
evening  ;  and  then  lay  me  down  and  slept  in  peace. 

Wednesday  4.  There  was  some  melting  among  the  people  at  T.'s, 
and  a  prospect  of  a  work  of  grace.  On  Thursday  I  felt  deep  work- 
ings of  heart,  but  was  much  taken  up  with  God  in  prayer.  I  rode  to 
Quantico,  and  found  no  want  of  any  thing  there,  but  religion.  I  then 
returned  to  Sussex,  and  found  my  spirit  at  liberty  in  preaching  to  those 
untaught  people,  who  behaved  with  seriousness  and  attention. 

Monday  9.  I  rode  to  T  W  's ;  and  cannot  help  esteeming  his 
house  as  my  temporary  home  ;  though  I  meet  with  more  spiritual 
trials  than  in  constant  travelling.  Lord,  point  out  my  way,  and  show 
me  what  thou  wouldst  have  me  to  do ! 


&EV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY5S  JOURNAL.  225 

Saturday  14.  I  have  spent  this  week  in  reading  and  private  exer- 
cises ;  and  have  been  much  indisposed  in  my  body.  But,  glory  to 
■God  !  I  have  been  favoured  with  some  access  to  his  gracious  pre- 
sence, and  felt  strong  desires  to  be  abased  as  in  the  dust  before  him. 

Lord's  day  15.  This  morning  I  felt  very  unwell,  but  ventured  to 
set  out  for  my  appointment  twenty  miles  off;  and  found  both  my  body 
and  mind  strengthened  far  beyond  my  expectation. 

Monday  16.  I  preached  to  a  few  poor  people  at  W  R.'s,  and  then 
returned  to  my  temporary  home,  in  a  much  better  state  of  health 
than  when  1  went  out.  Thus  is  my  life  at  present  chequered  ;  I 
eome  home,  and  grow  sick,  then  go  out  and  grow  better  ;  and  return 
to  meet  affliction  again.  So  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  deal  with  me,  to 
keep  my  spirit  down. — Father  of  mercies,  let  thy  will  be  done  !  I  am 
thine,  and  submit  to  be  dealt  with  according  to  thy  pleasure. 

Wednesday  18.  My  soul  was  much  devoted  to  God.  I  spent  part 
of  the  day  in  visiting  the  sick,  and  then  returning,  I  preached  in  the 
evening,  with  much  liberty,  at  E.  W  's. 

Thursday  19.  Having  had  much  time  on  my  hands,  I  have  endea- 
voured to  improve  it  by  enriching  my  understanding  with  religious 
knowledge^  and  by  frequent,  earnest  prayer  to  Almighty  God3 
that  he  may  enrich  my  heart  with  all  the  graces  of  his  Holy  Spirit. 
I  have  lately  read  through  the  first  volume  of  D.'s  paraphrase,  and 
am  now  waiting  for  sufficient  health,  and  a  proper  opportunity,  to 
turn  out  and  labour  in  the  field,  which  is  white  for  harvest.  But  alas  ! 
I  cannot  think  that  I  grow  in  grace  as  1  increase  in  knowledge.  Come, 
dear  Lord,  come  quickly  into  my  panting  soul,  and  by  thy  gracious 
beams  transform  my  whole  soul  into  thy  divine  likeness,  that  I  may 
shine  in  all  the  image  of  Christ  Jesus  ! 

Dr.  D.'s  critical  notes  and  improvements  are  excellent,  instructive,, 
and  beautiful ;  well  calculated  for  forming  the  minds  of  young  preach- 
ers ;  to  prevent  wild  and  unwarrantable  expositions,  such  as  some 
are  apt  to  give.  He  must  have  been  a  man  of  extensive  reading  and 
learning. 

Lord's  day  22.  Some  souls  were  affected  while  I  was  preaching  on 
1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20;  and  in  class- meeting  the  members  of  society  were 
greatly  quickened.  But  it  is  matter  of  lamentation  to  me,  that  I  do  not 
glorify  God  more  perfectly.  On  Monday  I  read  D.'s  paraphrase,  and 
admire  his  spirit,  sense,  and  ingenuity  ;  though  I  disagree  with  him, 
in  respect  to  the  unconditional  perseverance  of  saints.  That  this 
doctrine  has  a  pernicious  influence  on  the  conduct  of  many,  is  beyond 
all  doubt.     And  a  man  must  live  much  above  his  \     iciples,  to  be 

Vol.  I  29' 


226  rev.  francis  asbury's  journal. 

diligent  and  faithful,  under  the  persuasion  of  such  a  stupifying  and 
dangerous  sentiment. 

Thursday  26.  My  mind  has  lately  been  much  taken  up  with  God, 
and  I  have  frequently  struggled,  and  wrestled,  and  pleaded  for  more 
of  the  divine  nature. 

"  Bid  me  in  thy  image  rise, 

A  saintj  a  creature  new  ; 
True,  and  merciful,  and  wise, 

And  pure,  and  happy  too. 
This  thy  primitive  design, 

That  I  should  in  thee  be  blest ', 
Should  within  the  arms  divine, 

For  ever,  ever  rest." 

Friday  27.  I  am  much  delighted  in  reading  the  second  volume  of 
D.s  paraphrase,  and  am  occupied  with  various  / exercises ;  and  my 
soni  enjoys  sweet  pea^e.  But  all  this  is  not  travelling  and  preaching 
at  hirge,  for  the  salvation  of  souls.  Lord,  when  shall  I  return  to  my 
beloved  employment  ;  and  be  every  day  casting  the  Gospel  net,  to 
bring  souls  to  the  expanded  arms  of  the  willing  Saviour  ? 

Lord's  day  29.  We  had  a  large  audience,  and  a  very  solemn  time, 
at  J.  s.      I  then  returned  and  lectured  at  E.  W  's. 

Thursday,  December  3.  Under  some  groundless  apprehensions,  I 
set  out  for  Somerset.  My  soul  poured  out  abundant  prayer  by  the 
way  ;  and  the  Lord,  by  his  providence,  conducted  me  in  safety. 

Tuesday  8.  After  my  little  excursion  to  Broad-Creek,  and  its  adja- 
cent parts,  I  returned  ;  and  notwithstanding  all  the  foreboding  appre- 
hensions of  my  mind,  no  person  offered  me  the  smallest  insult. 

Wednesday  9.  *My  mind  was  kept  in  a  calm  serenity  ;  but  as  I  did 
not  enjoy  such  deep  communion  with  God  as  my  soul  was  favoured 
with  in  the  course  of  the  last  week,  I  was  much  abased  in  my  own 
eyes.  Though,  upon  the  whole,  my  obligations  to  praise  and  magnify 
the  Lord  are  very  great  ;  and  may  his  grace  preserve  me  from  every 
decree  of  ingratitude  ! 

Friday  11.  As  brother  H.  is  incapable  of  travelling,  there  seems 
to  be  a  necessity  for  my  going  to  M.'s.  I  have  endeavoured,  and  do 
still  endeavour  to  improve  my  time  by  prayer,  meditation  and  read- 
ing ;  but  I  cannot  omit  any  opportunity  of  preaching,  not  knowing  how 
soon  my  liberty  or  life  may  come  to  a  final  period.  On  Saturday  I 
met  the  children  and  the  black  people,  and  found  some  gracious 
movings  among  them. 

Lord's  u^y  13.  With  much  freedom  of  spirit,  I  preached  at  E. 
W.'s,  on  these  words,  so  applicable  to  thousands,  "  But  they  made 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  227 

light  of  it,  and  went  their  ways,  one  to  his  farm,  and  another  to  his 
merchandize  ;  and  the  remnant  took  his  servants,  and  entreated  them 
spitefully,  and  slew  them."  The  word,  attended  hy  the  grace  of 
God,  wrought  on  the  understandings  of  some,  and  on  the  affections  of 
others. 

Tuesday  15.  The  Lord  blessed  me  with  sweet  peace  ;  though  too 
much  company  interrupted  my  private  meditations  and  study.  It 
seems  as  if  1  must  commit  myself  to  divine  Providence,  and  go  forth 
to  declare  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  the  children  of  men  :  lest 
others  should  follow  my  example  of  a  partial  silence  without  suffi- 
cient cause. 

Thursday  17.  I  have  ended  the  fourth  volume  of  Mr.  Doddridge's 
paraphrase.  He  sets  the  apostle  off  to  the  greatest  advantage,  on 
the  two  epistles  to  the  Corinthians.  My  soul  has  been  grievously 
exercised  by  temptations  to  impatience  and  discontent.  With  the 
greatest  propriety  St.  Paul  exhorted  Timothy,  to  "  war  a  good  war- 
fare." A  "  warfare"  indeed  !  How  powerful  and  subtle  our  ene- 
mies !  And  it  is  very  remarkable,  that  all  the  addresses  to  the  seven 
churches  of  Asia,  conclude  with  a  promise  to  them  that  overcome. 
Lord,  help  me  to  stand  in  the  evil  day,  fortified  with  faith,  meekness, 
patience  and  love  ;  that  conquering  every  foe,  by  thy  Almighty  aid, 
I  mav  at  last  eat  of  the  tree  of  life  which  is  in^he  midst  of  the  Para- 
dise  of  God  ! 

Friday  18.  I  am  not  altogether  what  I  wish  to  be,  and  am  much 
tempted  by  Satan  ;  nevertheless  the  Lord  is  my  pArtion  and  my  sup- 
port. My  labours  are  still  in  some  measure  circumscribed  so  that  I 
generally  preach  or  exhort  but  about  three  times  a  week.  Lord,  let 
not  my  weakness,  timidity,  or  unfaithfulness,  provoke  thee  to  lay  me 
aside  as  a  broken  instrument,  as  fit  for  little  or  no  service  !  But  for 
twenty  months  before  these  troublesome  times  fully  came,  I  foresaw 
the  probability  of  them,  and  was  much  stirred  up  to  rely  upon  God, 
and  prepare  for  the  worst.  There  is  now  an  appointment  for  me  to 
go  to  Kent,  in  Delaware,  and  my  hope  is,  that  the  Lord  will  fortify 
and  bless  me  in  my  labours. 

Lord's  day  20.  After  preaching  at  L.'s,  I  returned  and  lectured  at 
T.  W  's  :   and  on   Monday   saw  brother  W — n    who  informed  me  of 
the  prosperity  of  the  work,  which  far  exceeds  my  expectation.     Al- 
though the  labourers  are   driven   from  place  to  place,  yet  it  seems 
the  Lord  will  help  us  in  his  own  way  and  time. 

Wednesday  23.  My  temptations  yesterday  were  very  heavy  and 
troublesome  ;  but  to  day  my  soul  overflowed  with  gratitude  to  God. 
1  have  lately  observed  the  strong  propensity  in  children  to  lie,  and 


~2o  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

seen  how  the  Lord  kept  me  from  that  and  many  other  abominations* 
from  my  early  days. 

"  In  all  my  ways  thy  hand  I  own, 
Thy  ruling  Providence  I  see  ; 
O  help  me  still  my  course  to  run, 
And  still  direct  my  paths  to  thee." 

My  soul  has  been  much  quickened  by  reading  the  Memoirs  of  Mr 
D.  who  was  a  man  of  great  piety,  and  strict  devotion  to  God.  There 
is  something  peculiarly  animating  in  the  lives  of  holy  men  ;  for  in 
their  experience  we  see  the  veracity  of  God  in  fulfilling  his  gracious 
promises  ;  and  in  their  holy  tempers  and  godly  conduct,  we  see  the 
possibility  of  complying  with  the  precepts  of  the  Gospel :  therefore, 
in  the  perusal  of  such  tracts,  we  feel  an  increasing  appetite  for  more 
pure  and  undefiled  religion. 

Friday  25.  This  being  the  day  for  commemorating  the  Saviour's 
birth,  I  preached  at  E.  W  's  with  much  inward  freedom  ;  though  the 
audience  were  not  greatly  moved. 

I  have  lately  begun  to  read,  for  the  first  lime,  Mr.  Hervey's  cele- 
brated Dialogues  ;  and  cannot  but  observe  his  laboured  endeavours 
to  establish  the  doctrine  of  "  the  imputed  righteousness  of  Christ." 
He  seems  to  make  it  equal  at  least  to  the  two  grand  commands  of  our 
Lord.  And  why  not  supersede  them?  But  Providence  has  brought 
forth  that  eminent  man,  Mr.  John  Fletcher,  to  manage  this  subject ; 
whose  language  appears  to  be  more  natural,  and  less  studied  than  Mr. 
Hervey's,  and  yet  in  no  respect  inferior :  and  his  arguments  are  in- 
contestable, carrying  their  own  conviction  with  them.  But  of  this  let 
the  public  judge. 

Saturday  26.  I  intended  to  set  out  for  my  appointment  in  Kentf 
but  a  great  snow  prevented  me. 

Tuesday  29.  I  have  generally  read  of  late  about  a  hundred  pages 
a  day,  in  Hervey's  Dialogues,  the  Lives  of  Gilbert,  Harper,  Lang- 
ston,  Brainerd,  &c.  But  alas  !  how  is  my  soul  abased.  It  is  my  deli- 
berate opinion,  that  I  do  the  least  good  in  the  church  of  Christ,  of 
any  that  1  know,  and  believe  to  be  divinely  moved  to  preach  the 
Gospel.  How  am  I  displeased  with  myself!  Lord,  in  mercy  help, 
or  I  am  undone  indeed  ! 

January  I,  J 779.  A  living  miracle  of  Divine  mercy,  I  am  brought 
to  the  beginning  of  another  year.  How  many  of  my  friends  are 
gone  to  eternity  the  past  year,  while  I  am  spared  amidst  temptations 
and  afflictions  of  various  kinds  !  I  humbly  hope,  upon  the  whole.  I 
am  more  spiritual ;  but  Oh  I  how  unfruitful  and  unprofitable.— This- 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBTJRY'S   JOURNAL.  229 

year  seems  to  open  with  forebodings  of  uncommon  distress.     Lord, 
prepare  me  for  every  event  of  thy  providence.     My  own  soul  was 
much  affected,  and  there  appeared  to  be  a  concern  among  the  peoples 
while  preaching  to-day  at  L.'s.     Blessed  be  God!  my  soul  has  inti 
mate  access  toJesus,  and  is  much  quickened. 

"  My  residue  of  days  or  hours, 
Thine,  wholly  thine  shall  be, 
And  all  my  consecrated  powers, 
A  sacrifice  to  thee." 

Saturday  2.  I  reached  my  circuit  in  Kent,  and  preached  on  my 
favourite  subject,  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  ac- 
ceptation, that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners  ;" 
and  there  appeared  to  be  some  meltings  of  heart  among  the  people. 
Upon  mature  reflection,  I  do  no  repent  my  late  voluntary  retire- 
ment in  the  state  of  Deleware.  Notwithstanding  all  my  afflictions 
and  fears,  I  entertain  a  hope,  that  after  the  people  have  been  tried 
and  humbled  by  their  present  calamities,  the  Lord  will  yet  visit  and 
bless  them  with  spiritual  light,  purity,  and  consolation.  Already  I  am 
informed  that  there  is  a  gracious  work  going  on  in  Sussex,  in  Dela- 
ware, and  in  Accomack  and  Northampton  counties  in  Virginia. 

Monday  4.    Being  prevented  from  travelling,  by  a  heavy  fall    of 
snow,  I  finished  the  reading  of  the  2d  vol.  of  Mr.  Wesley's  Sermons^ 
which  1  began  on  Saturday;  and  they  were,  as  usual,  made  a  pecu- 
liar blessing  to  my  soul.     I  trust  the  Lord  favours  me  with  an  increase 
of  love  and  gratitude. 

Wednesday  6.  I  ended  the  first  volume  of  Prideaux's  Connexion^ 
and  had  a  clear  view  of  the  state  of  the  nations  at  the  different  pe- 
riods of  the  church  of  God  :  a  just  view  of  which  is  highly  neces- 
sary for  the  understanding  of  the  prophecies.  The  revolutions  of 
kingdoms  have  been  wonderful  in  all  ages  ;  and  it  ought  not  to  be 
thought  strange,  if  they  should  be  so  now.  But  in  all  the  various 
turns  of  Divine  providence,  God  had,  and  still  has  spiritual  ends,  and 
the  welfare  of  his  church,  in  view. 

Thursday  7.  In  reading  the  second  volume  of  Prideaux,  I  was 
struck  with  the  exact  fulfilment  of  Daniel's  prophecy.  "  The  seventy 
weeks  being  divided  into  three  periods,  that  is,  into  seven,  sixty-two,, 
and  one  week  :  the  first  reaeheth  from  the  time  of  the  going  forth  of 
the  commandment  to  Ezra,  for  the  restoring  of  the  church  and  state 
of  the  Jews,  in  the  seventh  year  of  Artaxerxes  Longimanus,  to  the 
finishing  of  that  work  by  Nehemiah,  forty-nine  years  after ;  the 
second,  from  the  end  of  that  period  to  434  years  aft«r.  ot  which  tim* 


!-3G  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL . 

the  Messiah  appeared  in  the  ministry  of  John  ;  and  the  last,  from  that 
of  his  thus  appearing,  to  his  heing  cut  off  by  his  death  on  the  cross, 
which  was  one  week,  or  seven  years,  and  all  these  put  together,  fully 
make  up  seventy  weeks,  or  four  hundred  and  ninety  years  of  this 
prophecy  :  and,  according  to  this  computation,  every  particular  of  it 
hath  been  fully  verified  in  a  completion  exactly  agreeable  thereto, 
and  the  whole  number  of  years  pointed  out  thereby  exactly  answered 
to  a  month  :  for  as  the  going  out  of  the  commandment  to  Ezra,  from 
whence  they  began,  was  in  the  month  of  Nisan,  so  the  crucifixion  of 
Christ  was  also  in  the  same  month,  just  four  hundred  and  ninety  years 
after."  This  day  my  heart  was  kept  in  peace.  My  soul  shall  make 
her  boast  in  the  Lord. 

Friday  8.  1  rode  to  Mr.  Bayers  and  conversed  freely  with  him  on 
the  things  of  God.  He  appeared  very  kind,  and  inclined  to  hear 
instruction. 

Lord's  day  10.  Though  it  rained,  many  attended  to  hear  the  word 
both  at  B.'s  and  at  Dover  ;  and  on  Monday  my  heart  was  greatly 
enlarged  in  preaching  to  a  large  congregation  at  H.'s  on  Rom.  i.  16. 
There  were  present  many  persons  of  respectability ;  but  every 
mouth  was  stopt,  and  gainsayers  nad  nothing  to  say  or  do. 

Tuesday  12.  I  preached  at  S.'s  on  the  education  of  children  and 
relative  duties  :  I  then  rode  to  R.  Shaw's,  where  I  found  a  tender 
congregation  ;  and  left  one  soul  in  deep  distress.  It  seems  that  God, 
in  compassion  to  the  souls  of  the  people,  has  kept  the  way  open  for 
the  preachers  to  travel,  notwithstanding  the  imprudence  of  some, 
and  the  wickedness  of  others. — If  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  work,  who, 
or  what,  can  hinder  ? 

Wednesday  13.  My  soul  has  enjoyed  a  deep  sense  of  God.  The 
congregation  was  large  at  S.  s,  and  I  trust  their  coming  together  was 
profitable,  at  least  to  some  of  them.  In  many  circuits  the  preachers 
have  hardly  an  opportunity  of  reading  their  Bibles,  much  less  any 
thing  else.  A  great  part  of  the  day  is  taken  up  in  riding,  preaching, 
and  meeting  the  classes  :  and  very  often  at  night,  there  is  a  large 
family,  but  one  room  for  nil,  and  sometimes  no  candle  ;  so  that  I  think 
it  would  be  well,  under  such  circumstances,  if  the  preachers  could  have 
one  spare  day  in  every  week  for  the  purpose  of  improving  themselves. 

Thursday  14.  I  had  many  people  at  T.'s,  to  whom  1  preached 
with  great  freedom  :  and  took  occasion  to  explain  and  enforce  family 
duties.  It  affords  me  no  small  joy  to  find  that  my  labours  are  not 
altogether  in  vain. 

Saturday  16.  I  am  grievously  tempted  by  the  enemy;  but  the 
Lord  is  still  my  defender  and  friend.     I  am  now  reading  the  third 


BEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY*S  JOURNAL.  231 

Volume  of  Prideaux,  and  find  it  both  entertaining  and  instructive.     I 
still  go  on  to  enforce  the  education  of  children,  and  family  duties. 

Lord's  day  24.  At  the  widow  Jackson's  I  enforced  Genesis  xviii. 
19.  "  I  know  him  that  he  will  command  his  children,  and  his  house- 
hold after  him,  and  they  shall  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord,  to  do  justice 
and  judgment  ;  that  the  Lord  may  bring  upon  Abraham  that  which 
he  hath  spoken  of  him."  In  the  evening  1  opened  and  applied  Ezek. 
xxxvi.  25.  &lc.  With  light  and  liberty,  and  the  congregation  felt  the 
weight  of  the  word. 

Tuesday  26.  I  spent  much  of  my  time  in  reading  the  third  volume  of 
Mr.  Hervey's  Dialogues.     I  like  his  philosophy  better  than  his  divi- 
nity.    However,  if  he  is  in  an  error  by  leaning  too  much  to  imputed 
righteousness,  and  in  danger  of  superseding  our  evangelical  works  of 
righteousness ;  some  are  also  in  danger  of  setting  up  self-righteousnesss 
and,  at  least,  of  a  partial  neglect  of  an  entire  dependance  on  Jesus 
Christ.     Our  duty  and  salvation  lie  between  these  extremes.     We 
should  so  work  as  if  we  were  to  be  saved  by  the  proper  merit  of  our 
works  ;  and  so  rely  on  Jesus  Christ,  to  be  saved  by  his  merits  and  the 
divine  assistance  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  as  if  we  did  no  works,  nor  attempt- 
ed any  thing  which  God  hath  commanded.     This  is  evidently  the  Gos- 
pel plan  of  man's  salvation  :  St.  Paul  says  in  one  place,  "  By  grace 
are  ye  saved,  through  faith  ;  and  that  not  of  yourselves,  it  is  the  gift 
of  God."     In  another  place  the  same  apostle  saith,  u  Work  out  your 
own  salvation  with   fear  and  trembling."     But  some    who  see  the 
danger  of  seeking  to  be  justified  by  the  deeds  of  the  law,  turn  all 
their  attention  to  those  passages  of  Scripture  which  ascribe  our  sal- 
vation to  the  grace  of  God  : — and  to  avoid  the  rock  which  they  dis- 
cover on  the  right  hand,  they  strike  against  that  which  is   equally 
dangerous  on  the  left,  by  exclaiming  against  all  conditions  and  doingSj, 
on  the  part  of  man  ;  and  so  make  void  the  law  through  faith — as  if  a 
beggar  could  not  cross  the  street,  and  open  his  hand  (at  the  request 
of  his  benefactor)  to  receive  his  bounty,  without  a  meritorious  claim 
to  what  he  is  about  to  receive. — What  God  hath  joined  together,  let 
no  man  put  asunder.     And  he  having  joined  salvation  by  grace,  with 
repentance,  prayer,  faith,  self-denial,  love,  and  obedience  ; — whoever 
putteth  them  asunder  will  do  it  at  his  peril.     But  it  is  likewise  true 
that  others  who  see  the  danger  of  this,  in  order,  as  they  imagine,  to 
steer  clear  of  it,  go  about  to  establish  their  own  righteousness  ;  and 
although  they  profess  to  ascribe  the  merit  of  their  salvation  to  Jesus 
Christ,  yet  think  they  cannot  fail  of  eternal  life,  because  they  have 
wrought  many  good  deeds  of  piety  towards  God,  and  of  justice  and 
mercy   towards  man ;    and  they   would  think  it   incompatible   with 


232  &EV.  FRANCIS  anbury's  journal. 

divine  justice,  to  sentence  them  to  eternal  punishment,  for  what  they 
call  the  foibles  of  human  nature,  after  having  lived  so  moral  and 
upright  a  life.  Happy  the  man  who  so  studies  the  Holy  Scriptures, 
his  own  heart,  and  the  plan  of  salvation  ;  and  daily  prays  with  such 
earnest  sincerity  to  Almighty  God,  as  to  see  that  neither  faith  with- 
out works,  nor  works  without  that  faith  which  justifies  the  ungodly, 
will  suffice  in  the  awful  day  of  universal  retribution. 

Wednesday  27.  My  soul  is  sensible  that  there  is  a  declension 
among  professors.  This  cannot  but  grieve  the  hearts  of  those  who 
labour,  and  are  engaged  to  promote  the  spiritual  and  eternal  happi- 
ness of  their  fellow  creatures. — Lord,  revive  thy  work  of  grace,  in 
all  our  societies  throughout  this  extensive  continent,  and  in  every 
nation  of  the  earth — and  especially  in  my  poor  heart. 

Thursday  28.  We  had  tidings  of  great  troubles  in  the  south  as  well 
as  the  north.  The  gathering  cloud  seemed  to  lower  and  threaten 
with  great  severity.  O  my  God  !  I  am  thine  :  and  all  the  faithful  are 
thine.  Mercifully  interpose  for  the  deliverance  of  our  land,  and  for  the 
sternal  salvation  of  all  that  put  their  trust  in  thee.  At  present  my 
way  is  measurably  hedged  in  by  Providence ;  but  the  time  may  come 
when  1  shall  be  useful  in  the  church  of  Christ.  This  would  afford 
me  more  satisfaction  than  all  the  riches  of  the  east,  with  all  the 
pomp  and  grandeur  of  empires,  and  all  the  pleasures  that  can  gratify 
both  the  imagination  and  the  flesh. 

Monday,  February  1,  1779.  My  conscience  smote  me  severely 
For  speaking  an  idle  word  in  company.  Oh  !  how  frail  is  man.  It  is 
very  difficult  for  me  to  check  my  rapid  flow  of  spirits  when  in  com- 
pany with  my  friends. — The  tongue  is  an  unruly  member :  and  St. 
James  spoke  a  sacred  truth  when  he  said,  "If  any  man  offend  not  in 
word,  the  same  is  a  perfect  man,  and  able  to  bridle  the  whole  body." 
He  that  can,  on  all  occasions  govern  his  tongue,  will  have  power 
sufficient  to  keep  his  whole  body  in  religious  subjection. 

This  day  our  quarterly  meeting  began,  and  my  heart  was  expanded 
in  preaching  to  about  seven  hundred  people,  on  Hebr.  ii.  2.  I  enter- 
tain great  hopes  that  we  shall  see  a  gracious  revival  of  religion. 
The  Lord  knoweth  that,  next  to  my  own  salvation,  thi?  is  my  chief 
concern,  and  all  my  interest  in  America,  or  in  the  whole  world :  I 
desire  to  live  only  for  this. 

Tuesday  2.  Our  love-feast  began  at  nine,  and  public  worship  at 
twelve  o'clock.  The  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  were  very  power- 
ful in  the  congregation  ;  so  that  there  was  a  general  melting;  and 
amongst  the  young  people,  there  were  outcries  and  deep  distress. 
Here  was  a  blessed  prospect !  God  is  gracious  beyond  the  power  *'- 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  233 

language  to  describe.  Both  preachers  and  people  were  exceedingly 
quickened.  The  public  labours  of  the  day  were  too  much  for  my 
feeble  frame. 

Friday  5.  I  am  still  far  short  of  what  I  wish  to  be  in  point  of  uni- 
versal holiness  and  fervent  devotion  ;  but  my  soul  is  kept  in  peace, 
and  I  am  determined,  by  grace,  to  be  more  resolute,  faithful,  and 
diligent 

Lord's  day  7.  There  was  a  large  company,  and  some  melting  of 
heart,  at  Boyer's,  while  I  preached  on  Luke  xix.  10.  In  the  after- 
noon I  was  invited  to  preach  in  Dover  court  house,  but  my  ideas 
were  not  very  clear,  neither  was  my  spirit  at  liberty. 

Tuesday  9.  My  affections  were  warm,  and  my  words  flowed  with 
ease  last  night  in  town  :  and  the  attention  of  the  people  appeared  to 
be  fixed.  The  people  also  were  very  lively  to-day  at  Shaw's.  My 
body  is  in  a  feeble  state  ;  but  glory  to  God,  when  I  am  weak,  then 
am  I  strong.  Though  this  mortal  frame  is  shaken  by  repeated 
afflictions,  my  soul  is  supported  by  that  peace  which  passeth  all  under- 
standing. Lord,  keep  me  always  in  the  dust  at  thy  feet,  leaning  con- 
tinually on  Jesus  my  beloved,  that  as  my  body  approacheth  the  grave, 
my  soul  may  advance  towards  the  realms  of  light  and  glory,  and  there 
securely  rest  in  Abraham's  bosom  till  the  general  resurrection. 

"  There  I  shall  see  his  face, 
And  never,  never  sin : 
There  from  the  rivers  of  his  grace, 
Drink  endless  pleasures  in. 

Yea,  and  before  I  rise 

To  that  immortal  state, 
The  thoughts  of  such  amazing  bliss 

Should  constant  joys  create." 

"  There  shall  I  bathe  my  weary  soul 
In  seas  of  heavenly  rest, 
And  not  a  wave  of  trouble  roll 
Across  my  peaceful  breast." 

Saturday  13.  Having  seen  some  good  appearances  at  two  or  three 
places,  I  returned  to  my  lodging,  but  found,  as  usual,  that  heavy 
crosses  are  to  be  borne  here.  Upon  the  whole,  it  appears  sufficiently 
clear  that  God  has  other  work  for  me  to  do,  and  that  I  must  not 
abide  here.  If  he  graciously  intends  me  for  more  extensive  service 
in  his  church,  may  he  be  pleased  to  open  my  way,  and  make  it  plain 
before  me ! 

Monday  15.  Various  trials  beset  me,  from  Satan,  the  world,  and 
from  friends  ;    but  hitherto  the  Lord  hath  helped.     I  am  convinced 

Vol.  I.  30 


234  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY5S  JOURNAL. 

there  must  be  no  resting  here,  in  any  person,  place,  or  other  object , 
for  it  would  be  bitter  and  painful  in  the  end. 

Thursday  18.  My  soul  was  in  sweet  peace;  and  I  humbly  hope 
the  Lord  will  sooner  take  me  out  of  the  world,  than  let  me  live  to 
sin  against  him.  'Tis  grace,  almighty  grace,  must  keep  me,  other- 
wise all  my  reading,  praying,  and  labours  of  every  kind,  would  be 
ineffectual.  The  means  must  be  diligently  used  ;  but  unless  God's 
blessing  accompany  them,  they  will  be  used  in  vain. 

Friday  19.  My  soul  was  so  terribly  beset  by  Satan,  that  I  was  ready 
to  say,  I  had  rather  die  than  live  thus.  But  grace,  by  reflection, 
brought  me  to  submit,  and  say,  the  Lord's  will  be  done ;  though  my 
sufferings  were  even  worse  than  death,  yet  let  me  go  to  heaven,  to 
enjoy  thy  presence,  if  it  be  through  fire  and  water.  In  reading 
Clark's  Martyrology,  I  have  observed,  that  notwithstanding  the 
errors  and  superstitions  of  Popery,  there  has  been  a  church  of  faith- 
ful witnesses  preserved,  who  have  borne  witness  to  the  truth,  not  in 
word  only,  but  by  a  holy  life,  and  triumphant  death. 

Monday,  March  1,  1779.  I  have  of  late,  for  the  most  part,  had 
liberty  in  preaching,  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  has  been  with  me  : 
and  from  my  various  and  peculiar  exercises,  I  am  strongly  impressed 
with  a  persuasion  that  the  Lord  is  preparing  me  for  future  services. 
But  alas  !  what  cause  for  shame,  on  account  of  my  great  unfaithful- 
ness. This  present  life  may  be  well  compared  to  a  tempestuous 
ocean  :  sometimes  the  fair  wind  of  prosperity  blows  a  fresh  gale  ;  at 
other  times  the  cross  wind  of  adversity  rages  and  threatens  a  hurri- 
cane. How  difficult  it  is,  in  the  midst  of  such  opposing  diversity,  to 
pay  proper  attention  to  the  Divine  compass,  and  still  pursue  the  right 
course. 

Wednesday  3.  Nothing  grieves  me  so  much  as  the  want  of  holi- 
ness. But  it  affords  me  some  satisfaction  to  find  that  the  people  in 
these  parts  appear  to  advance  in  religion. 

Friday  5.  Satan  shot  his  fiery  darts  at  me  ;  but  my  soul  was  shield- 
ed, and  his  darts  repelled.  My  heart  is  humbled  within  me,  and  I 
must  be  more  faithful  to  God,  or  1  fear  I  shall  not  endure  to  the  end. 

Monday  8.  I  had  a  large  congregation  yesterday  at  J.'s,  and  my 
spirit  was  at  liberty.  To-day  my  hopes  were  revived  at  Dover, 
while  expatiating  on  the  experience  of  Hezekiah. 

Lord's  day  14.  For  some  days  past  my  soul  has  been  dejected  :  but 
upon  examination,  I  am  conscious  that  I  have,  in  some  good  measure, 
walked  closely  with  God,  and  in  the  time  of  my  greatest  heaviness*.  I 
have  found  peace  :  therefore  conclude,  that  it  must  be  owing  to  some 
natural  cause,  though  intended  to  humble  me.     The  most  genteel 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  235 

people  in  Dover  treat  me  with  great  kindness  and  courtesy.  I  hope 
it  will  turn  to  their  own  spiritual  advantage.  I  have  a  witness  within, 
that  I  seek  not  theirs  (neither  money  nor  esteem)  but  them  ;  as  the 
purchase  of  my  Lord's  death,  that  they  may  be  his  willing  servants 
for  ever.  I  have  lately  been  reading  Watson's  Body  of  Divinity. 
The  general  drift  of  it  does  not  comport  with  my  sentiments,  yet  it 
contains  many  good  things.  I  had  a  mind  to  abridge  his  two  sermons 
on,  "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  us  from  evil." 

On  Friday  I  was  inclined  to  believe,  that  the  night  before  the 
Lord  had  re-sanctified  my  soul.  It  afforded  me  much  comfort ;  and 
I  was  ready  to  conclude  it  had  been  so  for  many  years  past,  if  I  had 
maintained  and  believed  it.  But  I  fear  I  have  been  too  slack  in 
urging  both  myself  and  others  diligently  to  seek  the  experience  of 
this  great  and  blessed  gift.  May  the  Lord  help  me  from  this  time,  to 
live  free  from  outward  and  inward  sin,  always  maintaining  the  spirit 
of  the  Gospel  in  meekness,  purity,  and  love. 

At  this  time  my  body  labours  under  much  affliction,  and  I  seem  fit 
for  little  or  no  service.  This,  with  the  heavy  temptations  which  fre- 
quently attack  my  soul,  makes  me  feel  as  in  the  furnace  :  but  grace 
surrounds  me  as  a  wall  of  fire,  and  I  trust  my  soul  suffers  no  damage. 

Tuesday  23.  My  eyes  being  sore,  the  children  read  for  me  the  Life 
of  John  Bruen.  He  was  an  eminent  man,  truly  pious,  and  much 
mortified  in  his  affections,  by  deep  meditation  on  the  word  of  God} 
and  other  religious  exercises.  I  see  myself  the  least  of  all  God's 
servants,  whether  ancient  or  modern  ;  and  although  he  has  done 
more  for  me  than  for  many,  yet  I  have  done  less  for  him.  From  an 
observation  of  Mr.  Bruen's,  that  great  blessings  more  frequently 
attended  the  labours  of  plain  simple  preachers,  than  of  the  more 
sublime  and  eloquent,  I  was  led  to  fear  that  I  had  not  been  simple 
enough. 

Thursday  25.  It  appears  to-  me  very  difficult  to  keep  professors 
from  placing  too  much  confidence  in  past  experience  :  and  to  keep 
them  pressing  after  grace  with  as  much  assiduity  as  at  first.  How 
prone  is  man  to  start  from  God,  and  to  embrace  every  excuse  for  the 
neglect  of  that  best  of  all  duties,  living  in  close  communion  with  the 
Father  of  Spirits  Though  I  now  pray  not  less  than  ten  times  a  day, 
yet  I  find  I  have  need  to  pray  without  ceasing. 

Saturday  27.  A  remarkable  instance  occurred  of  the  watchful 
care  of  God  over  his  people.  Mr.  Peddicord  went  to  bed,  but  could 
not  sleep,  though  he  tried  again  and  again.  At  last  he  was  obliged  to 
rise ;  and  going  down  stairs  with  the  man  of  the  house,  he  found,  the 
house  on  fire. 


236  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

Lord's  day  28.  My  mind  was  much  drawn  out  in  prayer,  and  I  be- 
lieve I  have  not  spent  more  time  in  this  exercise  for  many  years  past, 
if  ever,  than  I  do  now.  But  my  mind  has  been  much  perplexed  about 
wandering  thoughts  in  prayer,  though  Mr.  Wesley's  deep  and  judi- 
cious discourse  on  that  subject  has  afforded  me  no  small  satisfaction. 
He  hath  both  shown  the  causes  of  those  thoughts,  which  are  not 
sinful,  and  incontestably  proves  that  they  contract  no  guilt.  Yet  a 
devout  and  tender  mind  must  be  grieved,  to  find  any  kind  of  tempta- 
tion in  that  sublime  exercise  wherein  the  whole  soul  desires  to  be 
employed.  This  portion  of  Scripture — "  Shall  not  God  avenge  his 
own  elect  who  cry  unto  him  day  and  night?"  hath  followed  me  for 
some  time,  almost  continually,  and  hath  brought  me  much  comfort. 
This  day  I  preached  at  E.  White's.  I  am  strongly  persuaded  in  my 
own  mind,  that  I  have  stayed  in  these  parts  too  long,  A  black  man, 
who  had  been  liberated  by  Mr.  Blades,  gave  such  an  extraordinary 
account  of  the  work  of  God  in  his  soul,  and  withal  displayed  such 
gifts  in  public  exercises,  that  it  appears  as  if  the  Lord  was  preparing 
him  for  peculiar  usefulness  to  the  people  of  his  own  colour.  Let 
the  Lord  choose  his  own  instruments,  and  send  by  whom  he  will. 

Tuesday  30.  Several  of  my  friends  came  to  take  their  leave,  and 
see  the  last  of  me  for  the  present.  They  manifested  great  affection  ; 
and  well  they  might,  if  they  knew  how  much  I  had  suffered  among 
them.  The  next  day  I  set  off,  and  on  my  journey  I  gradually  reco- 
vered my  spirits.  Meeting  with  a  man  on  the  road,  I  began  to  speak 
to  him  about  the  things  of  God,  and  saw  how  Providence  had  brought 
it  about,  for  the  Lord  had  reached  his  heart  the  night  before.  I  ad- 
vised him  to  be  diligent  and  faithful,  and  so  left  him.  I  then  rode  on 
to  brother  Shaw's,  where  I  heard  agreeable  news.  Peradventure 
there  is  something  in  the  womb  of  Providence,  for  which  the  Lord 
hath  been  preparing  me,  by  bringing  me  through  the  fire  and  water. 

Thursday,  April  1,  1779.  My  soul  was  much  blessed,  and  there 
was  a  great  melting  among  the  people,  while  I  spoke  strong  words  on 
the  subject  of  sanctification.  The  believers  were  greatly  quickened, 
and  in  class-meeting  we  had  much  of  the  power  of  God.  I  live  in 
great  hopes  of  doing  good  in  this  journey.  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my 
soul ! 

Friday  2.  I  had  an  interview  with  the  Rev.  Mr.  M'Gaw,  a  kind, 
sensible,  friendly  minister  of  the  Episcopal  Church.  I  then  returned 
to  the  house  of  Mr.  Shaw,  my  quiet  retreat  for  the  present ;  and 
here  I  hope  to  spend  my  little  leisure,  in  peaceable  converse  with 
God  and  divine  subjects.  My  soul  longs  to  be  quite  complete  in  the 
image  of  God. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  237 

Lord's  day  4.  I  breakfasted  with  a  Presbyterian  minister,  and  en- 
deavoured to  answer  some  objections  which  he  started  ;  but  could  not 
attempt  a  vindication  of  those  amongst  us  who  had  dipped  deep  in 
politics. 

On  Wednesday  7,  there  was  a  great  moving  among  the  people, 
some  seeking  justification,  and  others  perfect  love. 

Wednesday  14.  My  soul  was  in  peace  ;  but  I  have  not  sufficiently 
enforced  the  doctrine  of  Christian  perfection.  This  will  press  be- 
lievers forward,  when  every  thing  else  is  found  insufficient ;  and  the 
people  in  these  parts  appear  ripe  for  it,  for  there  is  little  or  no 
opposition.  But  I  have  attended  too  much  to  my  own  small  and  low 
experience.  Brother  D.  and  brother  G.  two  young  preachers,  both 
spoke  to-day,  and  I  gave  each  of  them  a  written  licence.  On  Thurs- 
day my  mind  was  deeply  exercised  on  the  subject  of  sanctification  ; 
and  the  result  was,  a  determination  to  preach  it  more  frequently,  and 
pursue1  it  more  diligently. 

Friday  16.  My  greatest  trouble  is,  that  I  am  not  more  holy.  My 
soul  is  constantly  humble  within  me  on  this  account.  I  visited  the 
Rev.  Mr.  M.  and  presented  him  Mr.  Fletcher's  Checks  ;  at  the  same 
time  opening  to  his  view  the  whole  plan  of  Methodism.  He  treated 
me  with  exceeding  great  kindness  ;  and  1  spent  some  time  very  agree- 
ably in  his  company.  The  people  of  these  parts  (the  most  wealthy 
not  excepted)  are,  for  the  most  part,  very  courteous  and  friendly. 
Surely  the  Lord  will  raise  up  for  himself  a  body  of  faithful  wit- 
nesses among  them.  Sundry  persons  of  respectability  attend  my 
feeble  exercises  in  public,  and  express  satisfaction.  But  shall  this 
satisfy,  or  lift  me  up  ?  God  forbid  !  If  this  should  be  the  case,  God 
would  punish  me  for  my  folly. — And  what  is  the  esteem  of  man,  whose 
breath  is  in  his  nostrils,  when  compared  with  the  approbation  of  the 
Most  High  ? 

Tuesday  20.  We  have  judgment  weather,  a  hard  frost,  which  has 
killed  a  great  part  of  the  fruit.  I  am  now  reading  Newton  on  the 
Prophecies. 

Tuesday  27.  Yesterday  and  to-day,  we  held  a  quarterly  meeting 
near  Dover.  A  great  concourse  of  people  attended  the  ministry  of 
the  word  :  and  many  serious  persons  were  present  at  our  love-feast. 

Wednesday  28.  Our  conference  for  the  northern  stations  began  at 
Thomas  White's.  All  our  preachers  on  these  stations  were  present, 
and  united.  We  had  much  prayer,  love,  and  harmony  ;  and  we  all 
agreed  to  walk  by  the  same  rule,  and  to  mind  the  same  thing.  As  we 
had  great  reason  to  fear  that  our  brethren  to  the  southward  were  in 
danger  of  separating  from  us,  we  wrote  them  a  soft,  healing  epistle 


238  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY*S  JOURNAL. 

On  these  northern  stations  we  have  now  about  seventeen  travelling 
preachers.  We  appointed  our  next  conference  to  be  held  in  Balti- 
more town,  the  last  Tuesday  in  April  next. 

Monday,  May  3,  1779.  Yesterday  we  had  some  melting  under  the 
word,  at  the  house  of  E.  White,  and  to-day  I  wrote  to  John  Dickins, 
to  Philip  Gatch,  Edward  Dramgoole,  and  William  Glendenniog, 
urging  them,  if  possible,  to  prevent  a  separation  among  the  preach- 
ers in  the  south,  that  is,  Virginia  and  North-Carolina.  AncH  enter- 
tain great  hopes  that  the  breach  will  be  healed;  if  not,  the  conse- 
quences may  be  bad.  I  am  now  reading  Edwards  on  the  Affections. 
Excepting  the  small  vein  of  Calvinism  which  runs  through  this  book, 
it  is  a  very  good  treatise,  and  worthy  the  serious  attention  of  young 
professors.  I  have  now  been  about  thirteen  years  employed  in  the 
work  of  God  as  a  travelling  minister  ;  and  upon  a  review,  I  have 
cause  to  be  ashamed  ;  but  at  the  same  time,  great  reason  to  be  thank- 
ful that  I  have  not  yet  grown  weary,  and  humbly  hope  I  never  shall. 

while  able  to  travel  at  all. 

Tuesday  4.  I  still  find  it   pleasant  and  profitable  to  be  employed 

in  my  Master's  service  both  in  public  and  private.     My  conscience 

smote  me  severely  for  lying  in  bed  till  G  o'clock  this  morning,  no 

indisposition  of  body  being  the  cause.    Oh  !  why  should  we  lose  one 

liour,  when  time  is  so  short  and  precious,  and  so  many  things  to  be 

learned,  and  taught. 

Saturday  8.  Yesterday  being  a  public  fast  day,  we  had  a  large  con- 
gregation, and  a  solemn  time  while  I  preached  on  the  fast  of  the 
Ninevites.  I  found  about  forty  in  society  at  the  Draw-Bridge.  Thus 
it  pleaseth  the  Lord  to  work,  and  who  shall  hinder  him  ?  In  the 
most  troublesome  times,  he  can  build  up  the  walls  of  Jerusalem. 
I  thought  for  some  time  that  it  would  have  been  much  better  for  the 
work  of  God  in  America,  if  brother  Shadford  had  staid  ;  but  the 
Lord  ruleth  over  all,  and  he  ruleth  for  the  best.  Many  faithful, 
zealous  men  are  raised  up  for  the  work  in  the  states,  who  only  want 
a  little  instruction,  and  they  are  ready  to  spend  and  be  spent  for  souls. 

Wednesday  12.  Every  day  I  have  had  more  or  less  liberty  in 
preaching  the  blessed  Gospel.  The  people  daily  show  great  marks 
of  affection  and  esteem  for  me.  May  the  Lord  keep  me  humble. 
Yea,  he  is  pleased  to  humble  me  by  afflictions,  temptations,  and 
frequent  discoveries  of  my  defects  and  imperfections. 

Friday  14.  J.  Hagerty  preached  on,  "  May  we  know  what  this  new 
doctrine,  whereof  thou  speakest,  is?"  He  spake  long,  and  much  to 
+  he  purpose.  I  feel  some  fears  le3t  the  people  should  be  offendetl 
against  the  truth,  by  any  improprieties,  or  undue  rashness  of  expres 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S    JOURNAL.  239 

sion.  But  how  can  we  please  such  as  delight  in  their  sins  ?  It  is  our 
dutv,  whether  they  will  hear,  or  whether  they  will  forbear,  to  declare 
that  if  they  die  in  their  sins,  they  can  expect  nothing  but  hell  and 
damnation. 

Saturday  15.  I  received  a  letter  informing  me  of  the  death  of  John 
Laws,  a  young  man  whom  I  visited  about  a  week  ago.  He  had  been 
in  a  declining  state  about  fifteen  months,  and  the  Lord  was  pleased  to 
use  oie  as  an  instrument  to  open  his  eyes,  and  show  him  the  neces- 
sity and  nature  of  religion.  On  my  last  visit  I  found  him  ripening 
fast  for  heaven,  and  have  no  doubt  but  that  his  spirit  now  rests  in  the 
bosom  of  Jesus. 

Lord's  day  17.  I  preached  twice,  and  in  the  interim  went  to 
hear  Mr.  ,  who  preached  so  excellent  a  sermon  on  the  suf- 
ferings of  Christ,  that  I  was  amazed  to  think  how  such  a  contra- 
riety of  preaching  and  practice  could  be  found  in  the  same  man. 
But  what  have  I  to  do  to  judge  another  man's  servant  ?  To  his 
own  master  he  standeth  or  falleth.  The  whole  of  the  public  service, 
preaching,  and  the  Lord's  supper,  lasted  about  six  hours.  The  Fri- 
day following  was  a  day  of  fasting  among  our  people,  that  God  might 
revive  his  work,  avert  calamities,  and  send  us  rain,  that  our  hearts 
may  be  filled  with  food  and  gladness.  My  own  soul  has  not  been  so 
steadily  devoted  to  God  as  I  wish  it  to  be.  How  I  long  to  be  made  as 
a  pure  seraphic  flame  !  In  the  afternoon  of  our  fast  day,  we  had  a 
great  rain  with  heavy  thunder  and  lightning ;  mercy  and  judgment 
united,  a  strong  indication  of  our  deserts,  and  God's  goodness.  On 
the  Lord's  day  at  Johnstown,  about  a  thousand  people  attended  to 
hear  the  funeral  sermon  of  John  Laws,  the  young  man  before  men- 
tioned. His  experience  and  death  have  wrought  powerfully  on  the 
hearts  of  many,  both  in  the  family  and  neighbourhood,  so  that  even  in 
this  unpromising  place  there  is  a  prospect  of  religion.  Thus  we  see 
the  Lord  can  work,  when,  and  where,  and  how  he  pleaseth.  I  am 
ashamed  of  the  littleness  of  my  faith.  Pardon  me,  Lord,  in  this 
my  weakness.  I  long  to  be  altogether  the  Lord's,  to  preach  and 
pray,  believe  and  love,  as  when  I  first  entered  on  the  work  of  the 
ministry. 

Tuesday,  June  1,  1779.  Both  yesterday  and  to-day  my  soul  was 
enlarged  in  unfolding  the  truths  of  the  Gospel.  In  several  parts  of 
this  peninsula  the  work  of  the  Lord  increases,  and  people  are  flocking 
in  apace.  The  work  is  his,  and  worthy  of  him.  May  the  instru- 
ments he  is  pleased  to  work  by,  be  always  humble,  and  give  the  glory 
to  whom  it  is  due.  We  have  a  sound  of  war  from  the  southward  ; 
Lord,  think  upon  us,  that  we  perish  not !    What  reason  have  I  to  be 


240  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

thankful,  that  in  the  midst  of  war  and  confusion  I  am  kept  in  peace 
and  safety. 

Thursday  10.  I  feel  an  increasing  desire  to  be  the  Lord's  every  mo- 
ment, in  every  thought  and  desire,  and  in  all  1  speak  and  do. 

Lord's  day,  June  3.  Many  attended  the  word,  and  the  Lord  was 
with  me  in  speaking  on  Acts  xvi.  30.  In  the  evening  I  treated  on 
the  great  salvation. 

Monday  14.  Notwithstanding  I  was  very  unwell  I  rode  to  S.  L.'s, 
and  preached,  had  a  very  unfeeling  company  to  hear  me,  yet  felt 
assisted  and  blessed  in  speaking  to  them.  1  have  lately  read  Sher- 
lock's Sermons  :  he  was  doubtless  a  man  of  great  abilities,  and  it  is  a 
pity  but  he  had  been  a  more  evangelical  writer.  I  find  some  good 
things  in  his  writings,  and  others,  in  general,  harmless,  but  not  very 
interesting. 

Wednesday  16.  Preached  at  B.'s  ;  found  myself  shut  up,  but  the 
people  appeared  tender  and  attentive  ;  next  day  I  had  more  hearers 
than  I  expected,  at  brother  Shaw's.  I  have  not  spent  so  much  time 
in  private  prayer  of  late  as  I  could  wish,  for  want  of  time.  My 
mind  enjoys  great  peace  and  sweetness  in  God,  and  find  myself  much 
given  up  to  him  ;  'tis  very  seldom  I  feel  a  thought,  much  less  a  de- 
sire, contrary  to  his  holiness.  Last  Monday  night  it  appeared  to  me 
that  I  had  as  deep  a  sense  of  God,  as  though  I  could  see,  touch, 
handle,  and  feel  Him.  This  day  I  received  a  wonderful  Arian  and 
Socinian  letter  from  H.  C.  a  weak,  wild  mortal,  swelled  with  pride 
and  self-will.  I  rode  seven  miles  to  see  a  sick  man  who  was  more 
than  seventy  years  of  age,  deeply  convinced  of  sin.  I  laboured  and 
prayed  with  him,  he  expressed  some  comfort,  but  had  not  a  confi- 
dence of  his  acceptance  with  God. 

Saturday  19.  My  heart  is  kept  in  peace. 

Sunday  20.  I  preached  at  Shaw's,  at  8  o'clock,  to  about  two  hun- 
dred hearers,  with  great  enlargement,  a  melting  tenderness  went 
through  the  congregation  ;  I  then  rode  to  church  at  Dover,  and 
heard  a  most  excellent  sermon  on  hypocrisy,  by  Mr.  M'Gaw.  In  the 
evening,  I  preached  on  the  Gospel  supper.  The  great  (so  called) 
attended,  but,  I  fear,  to  little  purpose. 

Wednesday  23.  Preached  at  a  new  place,  in  a  meadow,  to  about 
one  hundred  people,  who  were  wild  enough  ;  after  preaching,  had  to 
ride  twelve  miles  for  my  dinner.  In  this  our  labour,  we  have  to 
encounter  hunger,  heat,  and  many  restless  nights  with  moscheto, 
unwholesome  provisions,  and  bad  water ;  but  all  this  is  for  souls ; 
were  it  for  silver,  1  should  require  a  great  sum ;  but  the  Lord  is  not  un- 
righteous to  forget  our  labour  of  love,  and  our  reward  is  with  Him. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  241 

Thursday  24.  I  find  the  heat  of  the  weather  too  great  for  close 
study  ;  it  flags  the  spirits,  and  strangely  debilitates  all  the  powers  of 
body  and  mind  in  a  manner  that  is  seldom  felt  in  Europe,  unless  for 
one  month  in  the  year. 

Friday  25.  I  am  not  as  I  long  to  be :  I  want  to  be  more  spiritual 
in  all  my  thoughts,  words,  and  works ;  to  live  wholly  to  God  from 
moment  to  moment. 

Saturday  26.  I  preached  in  New-Castle,  and  twice  the  nest  day  ; 
I  find  these  people  pay  no  great  attention  to,  and  do  not  manifest 
much  affection  for,  our  Gospel  and  ministry  ;  I  had  but  little  liberty  to 
preach  to  them,  and  not  much  satisfaction  while  th«re. 

Tuesday  29.  Employed  in  reading  ;  I  see  what  I  ought  to  be,  as  a 
Christian  and  a  minister,  and  mourn  because  I  am  not  more  holy. 
Oh  !  how  great  a  thing,  to  be  a  man  of  God,  to  be  in  every  thing 
exemplarily  good  ;  in  every  thing,  to  do  one  thing,  the  will  of  God. 

Wednesday  30.  I  received  the  minutes  of  the  Virginia  conference, 
by  which  I  learn  the  preachers  there  have  been  effecting  a  lame 
separation  from  the  Episcopal  Church,  that  will  last  about  one  year. 
I  pity  them ;  Satan  has  a  desire  to  have  us  that  he  may  sift  us  like 
wheat. 

Friday,  July  2,  1779.  Heard  Mr.  M'Gaw,  at  the  Forest  chapel, 
on,  "  Thy  kingdom  come." 

Sunday  4.  At  half  past  8  o'clock,  I  preached  at  the  chapel,  and 
then  went  to  church,  and  heard  Mr.  M.  preach  an  excellent  sermon 
on  wavering  in  religion.  The  inflammatory  disorder  that  had  seized 
my  throat  is  growing  worse. 

Tuesday  6.  I  applied  to  Dr.  Ridgely,  who  prescribed  two  blisters, 
of  great  strength  :  the  two  following  days  I  was  very  ill. 

Friday  9.  I  began  to  mend,  and  am  persuaded  that  the  doctor's 
means  have  been  very  successful,  and  feel  myself  under  great  obliga- 
tions to  him. 

Sunday  11.  Felt  myself  so  much  better  in  health,  that  1  ventured 
to  speak  to  a  small  serious  congregation  ;  I  hope  not  in  vain. 

July  14.  Set  out  for  the  sea-side,  in  a  double  carriage,  brother  All- 
free  with  me.  We  rode  thirty  miles,  and  came  to  Shockley's  a  little 
after  twelve  o'clock.  Preached  to  about  one  hundred  people,  all 
serious :  a  great  alteration  since  I  was  here,  twelve  months  back. 
So  does  God  work.  I  am  in  growing  health,  my  voice  much  restored  ; 
feel  a  springing  hope  that  this  journey  will  be  attended  with  a  bless- 
ing to  myself  and  others.  I  am  overcome  with  a  sense  of  the  good- 
ness of  God,  in  so  suddenly  raising  me  up.  O !  What  I  laboured 
under  this  day  week.  How  great  the  change !  I  find  all  my  affiic- 
Vou  I.  31 


242  H£V.  FRANdS  asbcry's  journal. 

lions  divinely  sanctified  to  me  ;  I  am  kept  in  great  peace,  and  a  divine 
serenity  all  day.  A  sweet  peace  sits  upon  my  soul.  I  read  some 
psalms,  and  a  little  of  Haliburton's  Life,  as  I  rode  in  the  chair.  0 
how  good  it  is  to  strive  to  do  a  little  for  God !  My  friends  were 
frightened  at  my  going  out  so  soon,  but  the  Lord  will  help  me  on  my 
way.     I  spoke  at  Shockley's  on  Eph.  ii.  8,  9,  10. 

Thursday  15.  We  rode  to  the  sea-side,  about  forty  miles  from 
Shockley's.  I  read  part  of  the  life  of  Mr.  De  Renty.  We  came  in 
about  2  o'clock,  and  found  a  kind  reception.  We  prayed  after  din- 
ner in  the  family  and  private  ;  afternoon  went  down  to  the  sea  to 
bathe,  for  my  health  ;  at  night  read  a  chapter,  and  gave  an  exhorta- 
tion.    Brother  Allfree  and  myself  prayed  ;  we  rested  well. 

Friday  16.  Am  kept  in  peace  of  soul,  yesterday  and  this  day;  feel 
myself  as  in  the  presence  of  God,  growing  in  health  of  body  and  soul. 

Saturday  17.  I  preached  on  1  John  i.  8,  9.  to  about  fifty  peo- 
ple, simple,  but  teachable.  Some  poor  men  in  a  boat  came  on 
shore,  who  had  been  taken  prisoners  :  were  English  and  Scotch, 
going  to  York.  I  called  at  their  tent,  read  the  third  of  Romans, 
lectured  to  them  ;  they  seemed  kind  and  humble :  1  pitied  an  old 
man,  near  seventy,  from  Devonshire.  I  went  to  bathe,  called  on 
the  distressed  people,  prayed  with  them.  This  morning  I  finished 
reading  the  book  of  Psalms,  which  has  been  my  regular  reading  this 
week  past  past :  likewise  the  11th  vol,  of  Wesley's  Works,  and  part 
of  the  lives  of  those  men  of  God,  Haliburton,  De  Rent)',  and  Walsh  ; 
one  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  the  other  from  the  Church  of  Rome, 
the  latter  a  Methodist  preacher ;  but  the  work  of  God  is  one  in  all. 
To  set  aside  a  few  particulars,  how  harmonious  does  the  work  of  God 
appear,  in  men  of  different  nations  and  churches.  I  have  been  in 
peace,  but  not  so  much  given  up  to  God.  I  was  humbled  and  stirred 
up  to  be  more  heartily  employed  :  when  shall  every  thought,  word, 
and  action  in  me  be  holiness  to  the  Lord  ? 

Sunday  18.  Rode  to  Wood's,  near  Peleg  Water's  tavern;  had 
about  three  hundred  people,  and  apparentty  very  ignorant  in  reli- 
gion, yet  willing  to  be  taught.  I  spoke  on  1  John  i.  3.  I  found  I 
could  not  speak  plain  enough  to  them  ;  afternoon  on  Isai.  lv.  6,  7. 
they  understood  me  better.  I  went  to  Law's  to  lodge.  I  found  the 
Baptists  were  fishing  in  troubled  water  (they  always  are  preaching 
water  to  people)  and  are  striving  to  get  into  all  the  houses  where  we 
preach ;  they  had  taken  one  simple  man  who  was  joined  to  us,  into 
the  water.  They  plead  they  did  not  want  to  join,  being  church  peo- 
ple, but  the  ministers  were  good  men,  and  they  could  not  deny  them 
their  houses. 


11EV.   FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL,  243 

Monday  19.  I  preached  at  J.  Gray's  to  many  feeling  people:  a 
good  work  is  begun ;  and  I  fear  that  division  is  begun  also.  But  what 
is  to  be  done  ?  must  we  instrumentally  get  people  convinced,  and  let 
Baptists  take  them  from  us  ?  No— we  will,  we  must  oppose  :  if  the 
people  lose  their  souls  how  shall  we  answer  it  before  God  ?  I  met 
with  a  woman  who  warmly  contended  for  dipping,  as  though  it  had 
been  for  life.  Another  began  with  me  about  going  to  their  houses  ; 
and  said,  we  must  all  live  in  heaven.  I  said,  there  will  be  no  rebap- 
tismg  there.  She  said,  we  must  imitate  our  Lord.  I  said,  our  Lord 
rebuked  the  wind,  and  walked  upon  the  sea.  The  point  is  this,  the 
Baptists  and  Methodists  came  and  preached  together  ;  our  simple 
young  men  not  knowing  how  they  would  act ;  the  people  being  unac- 
quainted with  them,  are  for  receiving  both. 

Tuesday  20  1  went  to  the  water,  and  believe  bathing  has  been  of 
singular  use  to  me.  Preached  at  E — s,  on  Acts  xxvi.  18.  Had  great 
freedom.  About  a  hundred  people  were  present,  and  I  hope  there 
will  be  a  work  here,  if  controversy  does  not  prevent  it.  Afternoon, 
I  called  to  see  a  person  in  the  dropsy,  for  whom  1  sent  to  Dr.  White. 
At  three  o'clock,  preached  at  West's  on  Matt.  vii.  7.  "■  Seek,  and  ye 
shall  find."  I  had  much  liberty,  but  the  people  in  general  were  insen- 
sible. After  preaching,  some  poor  people  came  with  tears  in  their 
eyes,  fearing  from  what  I  had  said,  I  was  about  leaving  the  houses  where 
the  Baptists  would  preach,  and  thought  we  were  going  to  leave  them 
altogether,  as  the  others  had  set  it  forth.  I  answered  them,  while 
we  could  get  a  house  to  ourselves,  and  society,  we  would  consider 
them  as  objects  of  our  attention.  Some  rain,  and  my  preaching 
twice,  brought  on  a  small  inflammation  in  my  throat.  We  rode  to 
J.  Gibbons's  fifteen  miles,  heavy  road,  very  hot. 

Wednesday  21.  I  preached  at  twelve  o'clock  to  about  fifty  people, 
unfeeling  enough.  I  spoke  on  Gal.  iii.  22.  I  spoke  all  the  truth. 
After  preaching,  we  rode  to  Jo's.  M — e's,  twenty  miles,  great  part 
heavy  travelling.  An  ulcer  broke  in  my  mouth  while  I  was  preaching, 
but  I  continued  speaking. 

Thursday  22.  I  arose  with  a  gracious  sense  of  God  upon  my 
heart ;  cool  weather  after  the  rain.  I  hear  good  news  from  the  peo- 
ple, of  the  work  of  God  ;  though  they  are  not  competent  judges,  yet 
I  hope  the  prospect  is  favourable.  Many  brought  home  to  God,  and 
hope  more  will  be.  I  have,  in  the  course  of  my  reading,  attained  te 
the  end  of  Solomon  s  Song.  Preached  at  Joseph  Moore's,  a  hundred 
serious  people  attended  ;  a  great  change  since  I  preached  here  nine 
or  ten  months  ago.  Then  many  in  blindness, — now  forty  in  society, 
some  seeking,  others  have  found  the  Lord.     One  of  the  friends  told 


£44  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL. 

me  he  thought  he  could  number  fifty  praying  families.  Some  who 
have  not  joined  us  yet,  are  stirred  up  by  preaching,  to  pray  ;  before, 
the  people  were  swearers,  drunkards,  fighters,  horse-racers,  and  such 
like  ;  but  the  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  them.  1  spoke  on  Eph. 
v.  8.  had  great  liberty. 

Friday  23.  Arose,  as  I  commonly  do,  before  five  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  to  study  the  Bible.  I  find  none  like  it ;  and  find  it  of  more 
consequence  to  a  preacher  to  know  his  Bible  well,  than  all  the  lan- 
guages or  books  in  the  world  ;  for  he  is  not  to  preach  these,  but  the 
word  of  God.  I  preached  at  G.  Bradley's,  in  the  woods,  to  about 
two  hundred  people,  on  Acts  xiii.  26.  Had  considerable  freedom. 
In  the  evening,  at  G.  Moore's  on  Rev.  xxi.  6, 1,  8.  Great  liberty ; 
the  serious  people  much  affected. 

Saturday  24.  1  rode  to  Joseph  Turpin's,  about  13  miles  ;  many 
people,  I  judge  about  two  hundred,  attended.  The  Lord  hath  done 
great  things  since  I  was  here  about  nine  months  ago,  numbers  are 
inquiring  after  God  ;  the  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  us.  Not 
unto  us,  but  unto  him  be  all  the  glory  given. 

Sunday  25.  1  spoke  on  Matt,  xxiii.  37.  with  uncommon  freedom, 
to  about  three  hundred  people,  at  Joseph  Turpin's:  we  h  d  a  melting 
time  here.  The  Lord  is  striving  mightily  to  save  them.  Rode  through 
the  rain  to  Twyford's,  had  a  hundred  people  or  more,  to  hear : 
spoke  on  John  xv.  19,  20.  Strove  to  comfort  and  encourage  the  seek- 
ing souls.     Rode  to  brother  White's  that  night. 

Monday  26.  Spent  in  writing  to  our  dissenting  brethren  in  Virginia, 
hoping  to  reclaim  them.  1  am  kept  in  peace,  though  not  without  in- 
ward and  outward  war. 

Tuesday  27  I  have  peace  :  arose  before  three  :  I  am  much  em- 
ployed, but  it  is  good  to  make  the  best  of  every  moment,  and  care- 
fully to  fill  up  the  space  of  time  that  may  be  lost.  O !  how  precious 
is  time  ;  our  moments,  though  little,  are  golden  sands.  I  preached  a 
funeral  sermon  for  our  late  friend  and  brother,  Hardisty,  to  about 
one  hundred  people.  I  spoke  on  Isaiah  lvii.  1,  2.  Had  liberty  iii 
speaking  to  a  solemn  people  :  some  were  affected,  and  at  the  close 
brother  Peddicord  gave  an  exhortation.  The  flux  prevails,  and  hath 
carried  some  off.  Returning,  I  called  at  Mr.  D — r's,  afterward 
called  at  Mrs.  Peterkin's,  who  is  sick. 

Wednesday  23.  Prepared  my  letters  ;  am  most  severely  tried  at 
times,  but  if  for  good,  the  Lord's  will  be  done.  Had  a  conversation 
with  Mr.  O'Neal  this  week,  a  man  of  learning  and  understanding,  who 
knows  doctrines  and  men ;  is  a  minister  of  the  Episcopal  Church,  in 
Maryland,  a  non-juror.     I  ended  the  reading  of  Isaiah,  in  course 


11EV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  «4o 

going  through  the  Bible ;  have  trials  very  heavy,  but  my  soul  is 
humbled  before  the  Lord.  I  preached  at  Edward  White's,  on  Zeph, 
i.  12.  had  a  great  time  in  preaching. 

Thursday  29.  Set  out  for  Kent  ;  visited  Mrs.  P — n,  going  swiftly 
to  her  home  ;  and  also  William  Riche  ;  about  two  months  ago  he  was 
an  opposer,  proud  and  self  righteous,  but  now  brought  low,  penitent, 
and  submits  to  prayer,  and  Methodist  conversation  ;  thus  does  God 
bring  down.  He  held,  yea,  pressed  my  hand,  unwilling  to  part.  I 
came  to  brother  Shaw's,  before  B.  D.  had  done  preaching.  I  spoke 
a  few  words,  and  after  dinner  went  to  see  my  very  dear  friend., 
M.  M — w  again. 

Friday  30.  Went  to  the  widow  Howard's  ;  spoke  freely  to  about 
two  hundred  people  on  John  iii.  16.  1.  The  condition  that  all  men 
must  have  been  in  if  God  had  not  given  his  Son.  2.  His  great  love. 
3.  The  nature  of  faith.  4.  The  consequences  of  not  believing. 
The  people  were  serious  ;  I  went  to  B.  All — r's.  A  man  followed 
me  that  night,  ten  miles,  distressed  in  soul ;  I  talked  to  and  prayed 
with  him.  He  went  away,  with  clearer  views  and  some  hope,  plead- 
ing for  the  blessing. 

Saturday  31.  Rode  to  Shaw's,  the  weather  was  hot.  Called  on 
Mr.  W — d,  sick  and  distressed  in  his  soul.  There  is  an  inquiry  excited 
in  many  people,  and  an  awakening  power  is  going  forth.  1  saw  to- 
day a  political  libel ;  the  Methodists  are  struck  at,  but  every  charge 
is  false. 

Sunday,  August  1,  1779.  Rainy.  I  rode  to  church,  and  heard 
an  excellent  sermon  on  Luke  xiv.  22.  At  three  o'clock  I  preached  in 
the  square  at  Dover  ;  many  came  to  hear.  I  spoke  on  Ezek.  xxxiii.  30. 
very  plain  and  pointed  :  how  it  was  taken  I  know  not.  I  am  easy 
and  clear  in  my  own  mind. 

Monday  2.  Our  quarterly  meeting  began  :  I  was  detained  by  rain, 
but  came  in  about  one  o'clock.  Brother  Cox  preached  on  Psal.  xlviii 
12,  13,  14. 

Tuesday  3.  In  the  morning  the  rain  continues  ;  all  things  look 
gloomy.  We  appointed  to  meet  at  nine,  if  clear ;  if  not,  at  twelve 
o'clock.  About  twelve  it  cleared  away,  without  such  visible  tokens  as 
sometimes  appear.  We  went  to  the  arbour  ;  it  covers  three  or  four 
hundred  people.  It  is  possible  we  had  six  or  seven  hundred  people 
each  day  ;  from  Sussex,  Somerset,  Queen-Ann's,  Caroline,  Kent,  New- 
Castle,  and  Philadelphia.  I  preached  on  Psal.  cxxvi.  3,  4,  5,  6  ;  and 
was  greatly  led  out ;  God  was  with  us.  Mr.  M.  G.  a  clergyman,  was 
with  us,  very  friendly.    The  rain  prevented  Mr,  M'Gaw's  attendance 


"Aft  HEV.  i  RANC1S  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL, 


Wednesday  4.  We  held  our  love-feast.  Many  spectators,  and  a 
melting  time  ;  some  power  and  life  appeared  to  be  among?t  the  peo- 
ple. Upon  the  whole  we  had  a  blessed  time.  About  12  o'clock  I 
preached  on  Col.  i.  27,  28.  with  some  freedom,  and  hope  the  peo- 
ple were  profited.  Brother  G— n  exhorted  long,  his  speaking  is 
mostly  proposing  cases  of  conscience,  and  answering  them,  and  speak- 
ing about  Christ,  heaven  and  hell  ;  yet  this  carries  all  before  it.  It 
is  incredible  the  good  he  has  been  instrumental  in  doing ;  the  people 
are  generally  moved  under  his  preaching.  It  is  however  thought 
expedient  to  send  him  to  the  north.  1  go  to  Choptank.  We  have 
had  much  of  God  in  this  meeting.  Though  I  have  had  but  little 
sleep,  and  unwholesome  weather,  yet  1  feel  no  injury,  thank  the 
Lord.     We  rode  to  Thomas  White's  after  four  o'clock. 

Thursday  5.    Employed  in  writing. 

Friday  6.  Part  of  the  day  taken  up  in  writing  ;  am  not  collected, 
as  I  ought  to  be,  nor  as  I  long  to  be.  The  same  day  heard  a  sermon 
from  brother  Cox  at  Edw.  W's. 

Saturday  7.  Rode  to  Williams's  ;  I  was  dejected  in  my  own  soul,  on 
account  of  some  things  I  felt  in  body  and  mind  :  met  a  few  in  class  ; 
all  seemed  tender 

Sunday  8.  Preached  on  Rev.  xx.  11,  12,  13,  14,  15.  to  about  three 
hundred  people.  I  had  uncommon  light ;  I  never,  spoke  there  with 
such  liberty  in  my  life.  Rode  to  the  Draw-Bridge,  preached  to  about 
three  hundred  there,  but  not  with  so  much  enlargement  as  in  the 
morning.     The  Lord  is  at  work  here  of  a  truth. 

Monday  9.  This  morning  went  to  the  Bay  ;  afterward  went  to 
Furby's,  spoke  on  1  Pet.  iv.  18.  Met  the  class,  and  found  them 
much  engaged,  and  many  joined.  I  am  weak  and  feeble,  the  weather 
is  trying :  Lord  !  give  me  strength  according  to  my  day.  1  have 
been  tried  with  wandering  thoughts  ;  I  could  only  read  a  few  chapters 
in  Jeremiah  ;  we  have  little  time  for  our  own  improvement.  1  read 
the  first  epistle  to  Timothy. 

Tuesday  10.  Rode  to  Andrew  Perdin's.  It  was  reported  about 
that  there  would  be  a  horse-race,  and  some  opposition,  but  there 
was  none.  Many  came  to  hear  ;  1  spoke  long,  and  with  liberty,  on 
Hebr.  xii.  25.  I  hope  not  in  vain.  Rode  to  William  Verdin's  uhere 
I  preached  some  months  ago  ;  the  man  was  then  quite  an  unfeeling 
person,  but  is  now  in  earnest  for  his  soul's  salvation. 

Wednesday  11.  Rode  to  Richard  Shaw's.  I  spoke  to  a  simple  and 
steady  people  on  the  righteousness  of  the  law,  and  righteousness  ot 
faith  :<  a  subject  with  which  they  appeared  to  have  but  little  ac- 


REV.  PRANdS  ASBVRY59  JOURNAL.  247 

quaintance,  therefore  it  was  necessary  to  inform  their  judgments ; 
some  were  affected.  I  met  the  class  ;  the  people  are  faithful,  in  ge- 
neral, thank  the  Lord. 

Thursday  12.  1  renewed  my  covenant  with  God.     O,  that  every 
thought,  word,  and  act  were  love  ! 

Friday  13.  I  rode  to  Wells's  :  there  were  many  to  hear  for  the 
time  and  place.  1  spoke  on  Rev.  xxii.  11,  12,  13,  14,  15.  with  a 
degree  of  liberty.  Met  the  class,  the  people  were  affectionate.  I 
am  kept  from  a  wandering  mind,  in  a  holy  exercise.  1  am  afraid  of 
the  foot  of  pride.  I  hope  the  Lord  will  keep  me  faithful  in  all  his 
ways,  for  I  want  only  to  please  God.  I  preached  at  Sturgis's,  to  a 
small  congregation. 
Saturday  14.  1  rested;  have  but  little  time  for  private  exercises. 
Sunday  morning  15.  Read  the  law  delivered  by  Moses,  and  our 
Lord's  sermon  on  the  mount  ;  preached  at  9  o'clock  at  Boyer's ; 
then  went  to  the  church  at  Dover  ;  and  preached  in  the  woods  at 
three  o'clock  on  Acts  xvii.  30.  I  was  plain  and  faithful ;  but  the  people 
will,  and  will  not.  Our  own  people  do  not  keep  so  close  to  God  as 
they  ought ;  this  injures  the  work. 

Monday  16.  I  went  to  Hilliard's,  and  the  people  attended  very 
well.  One  is  brought  under  deep  distress,  who  some  months  back 
persecuted  and  kept  back  his  wife.  I  said  at  that  time,  perhaps  he 
will  be  glad  to  come  himself;  and  so  it  is  ;  thank  the  Lord  for  this. 
I  preached  from  Psalm  cxlv.  18,  19,  20.  I  had  liberty  and  clear 
views  in  speaking  ;  and  believe  the  word  went  to  the  hearts  of  the 
hearers.  I  rode  twenty  miles  to-day,  and  if  brother  Cromwell  does  not 
come  1  must  take  the  circuit.  I  bless  God  for  health  while  many 
are  sick  around  me.  May  I  do  the  will  of  God,  and  live  and  love ! 
then  come  life  or  death,  all  will  be  well. 

Tuesday  17.  I  spent  part  of  the  day  with  Mr.  M— w  very  com- 
fortably, and  find  him  a  teachable  man  in  his  stations  I  met  brother 
Allfree,  and  heard  of  the  violent  proceedings  of  some  men  at  Lewis's, 
who  were  encouraged  by  persons  who  ought  to  know  better;  but 
what  are  W — gs,  T — ys,  Presbyterians,  Churchmen,  or  Methodists, 
if  they  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ?  All  of  one  spirit.  1  rest 
contented,  believing  this  will  work  for  good.  God  can  and  will  vindi- 
cate his  own  cause. 

Wednesday  18.    My  spirits  were   flagged  with   a  tedious  ride  to 

widow  Howard's  ;  but  found  it  was  no  time  to  give  way  to  dejection. 

I  preached  with  difficulty,  to  a  large  congregation,  on  Isai.  Iv.  6,  7. 

Thursday  19.    Rode  to  Scotten's  through  heavy  rain,  preached  to 

i  crowded  audience. 


24&  ftEV.  FRANCIS  ASBimY*S  JOURNAL. 

Friday  20.  Went  to  Forest-Chapel,  and  spoke  to  a  large  congre* 
gation.  I  returned  to  brother  Shaw's,  and  wrote  to  brothers  Cot 
and  Ruff.  I  am  grieved  at  the  imprudence  of  some  people  ;  bat 
why  should  I  be  grieved  ?  the  work  is  the  Lord's.  May  I  be  faithful 
in  all  my  ways,  and  attend  to  my  own  calling. 

Sunday  22.  I  went  to  a  Presbyterian  meeting,  and  heard  a  good 
sermon,  on  the  epistle  to  the  church  at  Laodicea,  truly  applicable 
to  the  unfeeling  people,  who  are  so  full  of  politics  they  seem  to  have 
turned  all  religion  out  of  doors.  It  is  time  for  the  watchmen  to 
cry  aloud  !  I  went  to  the  Draw- Bridge,  and  preached  to  about  three 
hundred  people.  The  work  of  the  Lord  goes  on,  and  every  denomi- 
nation of  Christians  appear  to  be  stirred  up.  Well,  it  Christ  is 
preached  we  will  rejoice. 

Monday  23  I  arose  with  a  sense  of  God  upon  my  heart.  Preached 
on  Col.  i.  9,  10,  11,  12.  but  not  with  much  enlargement ;  in  class,  I 
found  the  people  lively  ;  thus  hath  the  Lord  wrought  for  us  according 
to  his  power. 

Tuesday  24.  My  soul  is  humbled.  O  !  that  I  may  feel  divine  love 
every  moment,  that  my  spirit  may  be  holiness  to  the  Lord  !  I 
preached  from  Psalm  vii.  11,  12,  13.  at  A.  Perdin's,  near  Satan's  syna- 
gogue, had  many  to  hear ;  I  did  not  spare  them.  Afterward  I  visited 
a  distressed  soul  under  deep  depression. 

Wednesday  25.  I  went  to  Shaw's,  and  preached  from  Luke  xiii.  24, 
25,  26.  Had  some  opening,  and  the  people  appeared  to  hear,  and 
understand  what  was  said. 

Thursday  2&  Rode  to  Wells's  and  spoke  close,  but  with  little 
liberty,  to  a  serious,  but  not  very  lively  people,  on  Matt.  xi.  4,  5,  6. 
brothers  Wyatt  and  Allfree  both  spoke  after  me.  This  morning,  I 
ended  the  reading  of  my  Bible  through,  in  about  4  months.  It  is 
hard  work  for  me  to  find  time  for  this  ;  but  all  I  read  and  write,  I 
owe  to  early  rising.  If  I  were  not  to  rise  always  by  5,  and  sometimes 
at  4  o'clock,  I  should  have  no  time  only  to  eat  my  breakfast,  pray  in 
the  family,  and  get  ready  for  my  journey  :  as  I  must  travel  every  day. 

Friday  27.  I  rode  to  Stokely's,  and  spoke  pointedly  on  Hosea  x.  12. 
I  met  brother  Wren,  in  Dover,  and  we  travelled  together  three  days. 

Sunday  29.  Preached  at  Boyers,  on  Luke  vii.  22,  23.  Some 
awakenings ;  but  my  spirits  were  dejected  by  false  reports.  O  ! 
what  a  shame  to  grieve  at  those  things?  What  is  our  honour? 
Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  of  you  falsely 
for  my  sake,  saith  the  Lord.  O  !  how  ought  I  to  be  bumbled,  that 
such  trifles  ;»ffect  me  !  But  I  speculate  too  much,  and  reason  upon  the 
<!ark  sidr      I  preached  at  Dover,  at  three  o'clock  from  Psalm  is.  V- 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURYS  JOURNAL,  249 

1  spoke  very  plain,  and  brother  Wren  spoke  better  than  ever  I  heard 

him  before. 

.  Monday  30.  I  rode  to  Hilliard's  ;  there  were  about  forty  people^ 
and  a  little  melting  among  them  ;  the  members  of  society  are  9lack. 
I  rode  to  L.  Allfree's  the  same  afternoon.  Brother  Wren  says,  I 
should  not  ride  the  circuit,  and  go  where  I  am  mo9t  wanted.  I  think 
it  would  be  better  for  me,  and  for  the  work  of  God. 

Tuesday  31.   I  preached  at  brother  Allfree's,  on  Luke  xiii.  24, 

25,  26,  27.  and  had  but  little  liberty  ;  but  the  people  were  melted, 
and  stirred  up.  There  is  an  evil  here  ;  I  believe  some  were  im- 
properly taken  into  society  who  never  had  any  deep  conviction  :  I 
am  afraid  of  them.  Some  are  fallen  into  sin,  others  have  been  on 
the  verge.     In  the  afternoon  T  preached  at  Mr.  Wild's,  on  Acts  xiii. 

26.  "  To  you  is  the  word  of  this  salvation  sent."  The  poor  old 
man  is  mourning  after  God,  and  was  comforted  a  little.  I  had  great 
sweetness  in  speaking,  and  liberty  of  soul ;  but  at  times  I  am  under 
some  gloomy  fears  for  the  cause  of  God. 

Wednesday,  September  1,  1779.  I  went  to  the  widow  Howard's, 
and  was  enlarged  on  Psalm  vii.  11,  12,  13.  I  thought  some  felt  the 
word  ;  but  O  !  how  great  the  work  to  bring  sinners  to  God.  It  is  the 
work  of  Omnipotence  !  Alas,  how  his  poor  dust  labours  and  toils  in 
vain,  without  him.  I  returned  to  Allfree's,  and  employed  my  spare 
moments  in  taking  notes  from  Newton's  3d  vol. 

Thursday  2.  I  was  closely  taken  up  in  writing ;  but  met  the  so- 
ciety :  they  appeared  to  be  humbled,  and  resolved  to  set  out  anew.  I 
pressed  them  to  have  prayer-meetings,  and  they  appointed  one  before 
they  parted. 

Friday  3.  I  went  to  Poplar  Neck,  and  preached  on  Isai.  Iv.  6,  7. 
then  rode  that  night  twenty  miles  to  Dover,  and  was  comforted  in 
society  meeting. 

Saturday  4.  I  changed  my  purpose,  and  instead  of  going  to  Wil- 
liams's, went  to  Thomas  White's.     Preached  at  night. 

Sunday  5.  I  rode  to  Williams's  and  preached  at  1 1  o'clock,  on 
Matt.  xxi.  44  ;  th&  rode  to  the  Draw-Bridge,  where  about  three  hun- 
dred people  were  waiting.  I  preached  on  Mai.  iv.  1,  2.  and  hope  it 
reached  some  hearts. 

Monday  6.  Preached  at  Caleb  Furby's,  on  Rom.  vi.  17,  18.  1 
spoke  strong  words,  and  argumentative,  on  the  subject  of  salvation 
from  all  sin,  and  answered  some  objections  against  the  doctrine.  I 
then  met  the  society,  and  gave  a  pointed  exhortation,  to  stir  them  up. 
I  have  been  straitened  in  speaking,  and  sorely  tempted  ;  but  the 
Lord  will  help  me,  and  has  blest  me  to  the  people.     I  have  had  liUu" 


250  R£V.  IRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

time  for  any  thing  but  travelling ;  preaching  is  but  half  my  work,  and 
ought  not  to  take  up  all  my  time. 

Wednesday  8.  I  preached  at  Shaw's,  to  about  two  hundred  attentive 
people,  from  Rom.  vi.  20—23.     I  hope  the  Lord's  work  goes  on. 

Thursday  0.  I  was  unwell,  and  was  relieved  by  Joshua  Dudley, 
who  took  the  circuit.  I  have  more  time  now  for  writing,  and  am 
kept  humble,  to  think  of  the  respect  the  people  pay  to  such  a  poor 
creature.  Lord,  what  am  I,  that  thou  hast  brought  me  so  far  on  my 
wajr  ?  Though  unwell,  I  completed  my  notes  from  Newton's  3d  vol. 
on  the  prophecies  :  I  cannot  be  idle. 

Friday  10.  I  have  been  employed  in  writing  letters  to  the  preach- 
ers. Lord,  help  me  to  speak  and  write  to  thy  glory,  and  the  good  of 
the  people  1  have  the  charge  of.  I  began  reading  Comber  on  Ordina- 
tion. Much  pomp  was  annexed  to  the  clerical  order,  though  plausi- 
ble in  its  way.  1  believe  the  Episcopal  mode  of  Ordination  to  be 
more  proper  than  that  of  Presbyters  ;  but  I  wish  there  were  pri- 
mitive qualifications  in  all  who  handle  sacred  things. 

Sunday  12.  1  preached  to  the  people,  who  came  to  church,  at  Mr. 
Bassett's  door,  on  Gal.  ii.  19.  In  the  afternoon,  in  the  woods,  to 
the  most  people  I  ever  saw  here,  and  had  liberty ;  some  living 
emotions  appeared  amongst  the  people  :  we  revive  again !  I  had  a 
very  different  feeling  to  what  I  had  the  last  time  I  was  here.  I  hope 
■we  shall  yet  grow  in  Dover. 

Monday  13.  I  rode  to  Choptank,  through  heavy  rain.  I  purpose 
for  Talbot  to-morrow.  I  had  pleasing  views  of  a  life  devoted  to  God, 
and  felt  determined  to  set  out  anew  to  do  the  will  of  the  Lord.  I 
spent  the  afternoon  in  reading  Mark's  Gospel,  making  some  notes, 
and  planning  my  future  business. 

Tuesday  14.  I  went  to  see  brother  Hartley,  under  his  confine- 
ment, who  was  in  jail  for  preaching,  and  found  him  determined  to 
marry.  He  thought  it  was  his  duty  before  God.  I  could  only  advise 
a  delay  till  he  was  released  from  imprisonment.  Persuaded  him  to 
give  bail  at  court,  if  not  released,  as  I  thought  he  would  have  no 
trial.  All  that  the  opposers  wanted,  was  to  prevAt  his  preaching  in 
the  county.  We  thought  his  imprisonment  was  illegal,  as  he  had 
taken  the  oath  in  the  Delaware  state. 

Thursday  16.  We  rode  thirty  miles  yesterday.  I  am  unwell  and 
much  dejected,  and  lament  the  want  of  more  grace.  I  rode  to 
R.  Williams's  and  met  brother  Peddicord,  who  copied  some  letters 
for  me  ;  we  settled  a  plan  for  our  next  quarterly  meeting.  I  preached 
on  Friday  at  the  widow  B ready's,  and  met  a  person  with  whom  I 
laboured  ten  months  ago  to  convince  her  of  sin.      Preaching  is  now 


ftSV.  FRAfTCl3  ASBtTRV'S  JOURNAL,  251 

at  her  mother's  house,  and  a  class  of  twenty  members,     I  preached 
on  Rom.  iii.  19,  20,  21.  and  brother  Peddicord  exhorted. 

Saturday  18.  I  returned  to  Choptank.  Glory  be  to  God  !  this 
mortal  shall  put  on  immortality.     Brother  Peddicord  informs  me,  that 

the  B -ts,  oppose  stoutly,  and  also  the  devil,  and  a  certain  W — f, 

his  agent,  near  Lewistown.     Brother  Dudley  being  detained  by  his 
father  being  sick,  brother  Cooper  is  come  in  his  place. 

Sunday  19.  I  went  to  a  people  whom  I  tried  near  two  years  age- 
in  vain.  Now  God  is  at  work  among  them :  several  are  urtder 
awakenings  :  our  people  going  to  church,  and  Mr.  M — w's  coming 
down,  has  removed  their  prejudices.  I  had  great  liberty  there  oa 
Acts  ii.  27,  28,  29.  At  White's  on  Gal.  ii.  17,  18,  19.  I  had  great 
breathings,  and  not  a  desire  or  thought  that  tended  to  evil. 

Monday  20.  I  read  thirteen  chapters  in  Revelations,  which  was 
part  of  what  should  have  been  read  yesterday,  but  I  had  not  time. 
I  read  also  about  one  hundred  pages  in  Comber  on  the  Consecrating 
Bishops  ;  it  is  very  well  if  properly  attended  to.  Read  fifty  pages  in 
Salmon's  Grammar.  It  is  plain  to  me  the  devil  will  let  us  read 
always,  if  we  will  not  pray  ;  but  prayer  is  the  sword  of  the  preacher, 
the  life  of  the  Christian,  the  terror  of  hell,  and  the  devil's  plague. 

Tuesday  21.  I  read  a  few  chapters  in  the  New  Testament,  and 
about  seventy  pages  in  Salmon's  Grammar  ;  wrote  a  letter  to  my  dear 
friend  Mr.  G — h  :  spent  the  afternoon  in  visiting  our  friends. 

Wednesday  22„  I  am  going  up  into  Kent,  and  then  to  Lewistown  j 
have  hard  trials,  inward  and  outward.  I  spent  this  day  in  riding,  and 
I  met  brother  Peddicord  sick  of  a  fever. 

Thursday  23.  I  called  at  the  widow  Beauchamp's,  who  was  sick, 
but  happy  in  the  Lord.  She  said,  "  I  was  with  my  Saviour  all  night.'* 
She  has  been  a  constant  church-woman  ;  lately  brought  to  seek  justi- 
fication by  faith,  and  is  happy  in  God.  I  rode  to  MispilJion,  to  be 
near  Williams's  on  my  way  to  Lewistown  ;  was  happy  this  day. 

Friday  24.  Rode  to  Lewistown.  Am  ashamed  before  God,  under 
a  sense  of  what  he  has  done  for  me  ;  and  how  unfaithful  and  un- 
fruitful 1  am  in  every  thing.  I  rode  thirty  miles,  and  on  my  way 
called  to  hear  Mr.  T — ,  an  Episcopal  minister.  He  took  care  to  tell 
the  people,  they  were  not  to  be  converted  by  thunder  and  lightning, 
like  enthusiasts,  to  know  the  time  and  place.  In  short,  I  could  not 
tell  what  he  would  be  at ;  but  he  was  legal  to  all  intents  and  purposes. 
I  went  to  Abraham  Harris's  ;  the  people  were  met,  and  brother 
Allfree  preached,  afterward  I  delivered  a  discourse  on  Acts  xiii.  26, 
to  an  attentive  congregation,  and  found  my  mind  at  liberty.. 


-U>i  SiEV.  FRANCIS  asbury's  journal. 

Saturday  25.  Rode  to  Mr.  Shankland's  near  Lewistown,  the  sou 
of  a  New-light. 

Sunday  26.  Went  to  town,  preached  in  the  court  house  twice, 
first  on  2  Cor.  iv.  2,3.  Afternoon,  on  Psalm  vii.  11—13.  I  was 
alarming,  as  the  people  appeared  to  me  to  be  careless.  By  the  inter- 
cession of  the  friends,  1  preached  at  nine  o'clock  from  Mark  viii.  34, 
and  following  verses,  to  about  forty  or  fifty  people. 

Tuesday  28.  I  preached  to  about  fifty  or  sixty  people,  on  Acts 
Xxvl.  18.  I  know  not  when  I  was  more  searching,  though  but  little 
moving  among  the  people.  I  was  told  that  Mr.  W-  proclaimed  a  fast, 
to  let  the  people  know  what  the  Methodists  were,  and  told  them  we 
could  not  be  sent  and  ordained  of  God  ;  that  we  must  be  sent  of  the 
devil.  I  doubt  not  but  souls  will  be  brought  to  God  here.  I  rode 
to  Shockley's  on  Wednesday,  and  preached  on  Luke  xiii.  24,  25,  26. 
to  about  fifty  people  ;  had  great  life.  The  work  of  God  deepens 
here,  though  it  is  but  low  with  some.  I  have  rode  about  a  hundred 
miles  since  this  day  week,  and  preached  six  times  to  not  more  than 
six  hundred  people. 

Thursday  30.  Lord,  keep  me  this  day.  I  rose  early,  and  preached 
at  Gibson's  to  about  sixty  people,  on  Luke  xii.  32.  Some  melting 
appeared  amongst  them.  I  spent  the  evening  with  Mr.  Thorn,  an 
Episcopal  minister. 

Friday,  October  1 ,  1 779.  I  preached  at  the  widow  Bready's,  to 
about  fifty  people,  on  1  Pet.  ii.  25.  A  great  melting  among  the  hear- 
ers. There  is  a  good  work:  here  three  or  four  were  weeping  for 
pardoning  love  ;  they  were  greatly  affected.  The  work  declines  at 
Williams's,  but  revives  here.  The  Lord  doth  provoke  them  to  jealou- 
sy for  their  slothfulness  and  divisions ;  but  1  hope  they  will  revive 
again. 

Sunday  3.  I  preached  on  2  Cor.  ii.   11.  with  some  vigour;  about 

two  hundred  to  hear.     After  this,  I  went  to  church.    Mr.  N 1 

preached  a  good  sermon  on  these  words,  "I  am  determined  not  to 
know  any  thing  among  you,  save  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified." 
I  rode  with  haste  to  the  Draw-Bridge,  and  spoke  on  2  Pet.  i.  20,  21. 
to  about  two  hundred  people.     The  Lord  was  with  us  of  a  truth. 

Monday  4  I  preached  at  Furby's  on  Hebr.  iv  15,  16.  afterward 
gave  an  exhortation  to  the  society  ;  and  found  great  fervour  among 
the  people. 

Tuesday  5.  I  preached  at  Perdin's  on  Acts  xvii.  11.  met  the  so- 
ciety ;  told  the  people  the  whole  of  our  intention,  and  answered  all 
the  objections  to  the  preachers  and  rules  to  the  satisfaction  of  the 


REV*.  FRANCIS  ASBVftYS  JOURNAL.  253 

serious ;  joined  three  in  society,  one  a  young  lad,  about  thirteen, 
broken  hearted. 

Wednesday  6.  I  rode  to  T  White's.  I  met  the  people  at  E. 
White's  ;  they  appeared  to  be  stirred  up,  when  I  told  them  that  they 
were  some  of  the  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit,  in  these  parts,  and  that 
God  was  reviving  his  work  a  little  distance  off. 

Thursday  7.  I  prayed  fi>  quently  ;  read  the  first  epistle  to  the 
Corinthians.  I  am  kept  watchful,  and  have  some  holy  breathings 
after  God.  I  received  a  letter  from  brother  Ruff:  he  says  the  work 
deepens  in  the  Jerseys  ;  it  spreads  in  this  (Delaware)  state,  also  in 
Talbot  in  Maryland. 

Friday  8.  Brother  M'Clnre  came  over.  We  settled  a  plan  for  the 
next  half  year,  in  Maryland,  Delaware,  Pennsylvania,  and  Jersey. 
Our  difficulties  are  great ;  we  have  not  a  sufficient  rumber  of  proper 
preachers ;  some  who  are  gifted  cannot  go  into  all  the  states,  on 
account  of  the  oaths  ;  others  are  under  bail,  and  cannot  move  far. 
I  have  not  spent  this  day  as  I  ought;  perhaps  not  one  in  my  whole 
life.  1  read  eleven  chapters  in  the  second  of  Corinthians,  in  course. 
Brother  Hartley  being  bailed  from  Talbot  goal,  after  near  three 
months  imprisonment,  came  to  take  Kent  in  my  absence  :  he  preach- 
ed on,  "  Persecuted,  but  not  forsaken  ;  cast  down,  but  not  destroyed." 

Saturday  9.  I  went  to  the  Forks,  and  lodged  at  White  Brown's. 

Sunday  10.  The  people  had  not  proper  notice  at  Twyford's.  I 
preached  on  1  Pet  i.  8.  In  the  afternoon  I  preached  at  Senior  Tur- 
pen's,  on  Rom.  vi.  17,  18.  About  two  hundred  were  at  both  places ; 
some  moving  at  the  latter. 

Monday  11.  I  rose  at  five  o'clock,  and  returned  to  my  study.  I 
want  nothing  but  devotion  to  God,  and  to  employ  each  moment  for 
Him.  This  day  I  preached  at  John  Cannon's,  near  the  chapel,  to 
about  three  hundred  people,  on  Acts  svii.  11.  They  did  not  under- 
stand much,  and  felt  less.  I  had  a  smart  contest  with  a  man  upwards 
of  seventy  years  of  age,  deaf  to  Scripture,  sense,  or  reason,  yet  one 
that  has  been  sorely  afflicted  ;  but  age,  like  the  word,  if  it  does  not 
soften,  hardens.  I  returned  to  White  Brown's  ;  a  few  met  me :  I 
prayed  and  gave  an  exhortation.  God  was  with  us.  These  I  call 
my  children.  I  find  my  soul  feels  the  good  effects  of  prayer.  Oh ! 
what  can  stand  before  faith  and  prayer  ? 

Tuesday  12.  We  are  about  to  lay  a  plan  to  build  a  chapel  at 
Brown's.  I  preached  the  funeral  sermon  of  one  Smith  ;  it  was 
thought  he  had  a  work  of  grace  on  his  heart  before  he  died.  There 
were  about  one  hundred  people.  I  spoke  loud  and  long,  on  Matt. 
xxiv.  44.     i  hope  some  felt,  and  will  remember  it. 


£54  KliV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL. 

Wednesday  13.  I  preached  at  Joseph  Turpens,  to  about  one  hun- 
dred people,  on  Luke  xiii.  23  to  27.  There  was  a  move  amongst 
the  people.  I  met  the  class,  and  they  were  serious.  I  had  a  fever; 
went  over  to  H.  K.'s  ;  returned  at  night,  and  made  a  plan  for  the 
house  in  the  Fork.  Next  morning  I  set  off  at  nine  o'clock,  called  on 
the  way  to  appoint  preaching  at  a  new  place.  I  met  with  an  old 
man  who  bad  strange  notions  about  the  Methodists'  rejecting  the  ordi- 
nances, and  pulling  down  the  church ;  whom  I  endeavoured  to  set 
right.  I  came  to  Joseph  Moore's  about  one  o'clock,  and  found  my- 
self better  after  my  ride.  I  am  kept,  through  grace,  and  find  daily 
growth  therein,  and  am  resolved  to  spend  an  hour  in  devotion  before 
I  leave  the  room  each  morning.  I  am  more  than  ever  prest  with  the 
weight  of  my  work,  and  the  worth  of  souls.  Ah  !  what  is  preaching, 
without  living  to  God  ?  It  is  a  daily  unction  we  want,  that  the  word 
may  be  like  a  hammer  and  fire  from  our  mouths,  to  break  hearts,  and 
kindle  life  and  fire. 

Friday  15.  I  spoke  on  1  Pet.  i.  7 — 4.  to  about  thirty  people.  It 
was  a  blessing  to  the  people.  I  was  a  little  unwell ;  did  not,  could  not 
employ  my  time  as  I  wished.  I  live  in  hopes  God  will  make  me  a 
blessing  in  this  journey,  after  trials  and  disappointments.  I  read  the 
epistles  to  the  Philippians  and  Colossians,  in  the  order  of  reading  the 
Bible  through. 

Saturday  16.  I  went  to  Joshua  Moore's,  and  met  the  society. 
There  were  about  thirty  people.  I  exhorted  for  near  an  hour,  and 
spoke  closely  to  the  people,  who  are  apt  to  jar  about  professions ; 
they  are  too  stiff  on  both  sides. 

Sunday  17.  I  preached  at  George  Moore's,  to  about  two  hundred 
people,  on  2  Thess.  i.  7 — 10.  I  was  assisted  to  be  very  alarm- 
ing, and  hope  not  all  in  vain  ;  in  the  afternoon  I  preached  at  Joshua 
Moore's  on  Rom.  vi.  20 — 23.  some  felt  who  were  not  at  the  morn- 
ing sermon. 

Monday  18.  I  rose  at  five  o'clock  :  Lord,  help  me  under  all  my 
trials.  I  addressed  the  throne  of  grace  fervently,  but  cannot  be  what 
I  want  to  be,  at  all  times,  and  in  every  thing.  Lord,  think  upon  me 
for  good !  I  was  guided  by  my  own  experience,  being  much  tempted, 
to  speak  on  Hebr.  iv.  14—16.  and  found  it  was  blest  to  the  serious 
part  of  my  congregation.  Here  were  about  four  hundred  people. 
I  found  several  had  been  greatly  tempted,  and  ready  to  despair,  as  if 
there  was  no  sacrifice  for  sin  ;  but  blessed  be  God,  we  have  a  High 
Priest.  My  reading  was  only  the  first  epistle  to  the  Thessalonians. 
Days  are  short,  and  travelling  every  day,  I  do  very  little. 

Tuesday  19.  I  prayed  often,  read  the  second  epistle  to  the  The?sa* 


liEV.  FKANCIS  ASBUftY'S  JOURNAL.  Zd& 

lonians.  First  and  second  epistles  to  Timothy,  by  half  after  nine 
o'clock  in  the  morning.  I  am  kept  in  peace  and  uprightness  of 
heart,  desire,  and  action.  O !  that  every  moment  were  devoted  to 
God  !  that  1  could  do  more  to  his  glory  !  I  rode  to  Bradley's,  and 
preached  to  about  eighty  people  ;  was  led  out,  in  speaking  on  1  John 
i.  7,  8.  to  a  quiet  unfeeling  people.  I  then  drew  a  subscription  for 
building  a  chapel  here      My  mind  is  in  peace  :   praise  God  ! 

Wednesday  20.  I  set  out  for  Nanticoke,  and  found  the  family  un- 
willing to  part  with  me.     Mr.   T y  preached  at  the  church  at 

Broad-Creek.  I  had  to  meet  the  people  at  a  new  place  ;  found  about 
eighty  or  a  hundred,  rather  wild,  who  looked  with  amazing  wonder. 
I  was  exceedingly  severe,  from  Isa.  Iv.  6,  7.     Was  invited  to  dine 

with  Mrs.  A d,  who  seemed  serious  ;  I  came  to  Joseph  Turpen's, 

just  at  night,  and  spoke  with  a  man  under  deep  concern  for  his  soul, 
and  hope  it  will  turn  to  good  account  in  the  end.  I  had  a  subscrip- 
tion bill,  and  plan,  drawn  for  a  preaching  house  in  the  Fork. 

Thursday  21.  I  preached  at  Turpen's,  on  1  Cor.  i.  20 — 25;  but 
few  people,  and  they  too  unfeeling.     I  lodged  at  H.  K — n's. 

Friday  22.  Preached  at  White  Brown's,  on  Eph.  ii.  19—22.  I 
had  some  liberty,  but  it  is  a  day  of  small  things.  We  obtained  some 
subscribers,  and  laid  out  an  acre  of  ground  for  the  purpose  of  erect- 
ing our  preaching-house.  I  am  kept  by  much  prayer  and  grace.  I 
had  the  curiosity  to  read  Graham's  Journey  through  England.  He 
gives  a  large  account  of  the  churches,  and  noblemen's  seats  ;  but 
not  so  accurate  on  the  face  of  the  country,  and  distance  of  places. 

Saturday  23.  I  preached  with  some  enlargement  at  Thomas  Lay- 
ton's,  on  Hebr.  xii.  4.  to  about  a  hundred  people :  the  work  of  God 
increases  here. 

Sunday  24.  Cloudy  and  rain.  This  day  was  appointed  for  Mrs, 
Jessop's  funeral.  There  were  about  three  hundred  people  ;  we 
had  the  use  of  the  barn.  I  spoke  with  great  opening,  on  Hebr.  is. 
27.  was  much  assisted  in  showing  to  my  hearers,  first,  What  it  is  to 
die  ;  second,  The  judgment,  with  the  certain  consequences  of  both  ; 
third,  The  appointment  for  all  men  once  to  die ;  and  controverted 
the  argument  against  being  saved  from  sin,  drawn  from  death,  that  it 
is  not  a  punishment  to  the  righteous,  that  their  constitutions  being 
subject  to  decay,  makes  it  necessary,  and  in  imitation  of  Christ,  to 
suffer  as  he  did  in  death,  without  sin.     I  went  home  with  D.  Polk.? 

Monday  25.  I  preached  at  Wm.  Laws's,  on  Luke  vi.  three  last 
verses.  There  were  about  a  hundred  persons  :  the  work  goes  on, 
I  went  to  see  J.  L.  junr,  sick,  and  perhaps  near  his  end. 


25o  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

Tuesday  26.  Rode  to  the  widow  Maslin's,  and  preached  to  about 
seventy  people,  on  Rom.  xi.  12.  Brother  Peddicord,  and  brother 
Debrular,  met  with  me  ;  after  more  than  a  fortnight's  trip.  I  am  pre- 
paring for  quarter  meeting,  expecting  it  will  be  a  great  time  of  the 
Lord's  power  :  souls  are  brought  in  every  day.  The  death  of  Mr. 
Dickenson,  was  something  remarkable  ;  full  of  the  world,  and  judge 
of  Caroline  court ;  he  went  to  bed  well,  was  taken  in  an  hour  after, 
and  soon  took  his  departure  out  of  this  to  the  unseen  world.  He 
was  often  heard  to  speak  against  the  Methodists  ;  he  knows  now  the 
truth  of  these  things  we  controvert. 

Wednesday  27  I  was  in  close  employment,  bringing  up  my  journal, 
and  reading  the  Bible  and  Testament. 

Thursday  28.  I  was  helping  to  make  the  arbour,  to  preach  under, 
and  prayed  frequently  that  God  might  be  with  us  ;  was  not  so  spi- 
ritual as  I  wished.  I  read  2  Peter,  and  so  to  the  end  of  my  Bible. 
I  rose  at  three  o'clock,  and  spent  an  hour  in  prayer  and  retirement, 
and  gave  myself  to  reading.  I  do  not  find  the  same  life  when  at  study, 
as  when  riding  and  preaching  ev.ery  day  ;  though  I  become  tired  of 
both  too  much. 

Friday  29.  I  visited  the  sick,  and  spent  some  time  in  retirement. 

Saturday  30.  I  preached  a  sacramental  sermon  from  1  Cor.  xi. 
28—30  ;  was  directed  to  the  atvful  consequence  of  an  unworthy,  and 
the  blessings  of  a  proper  receiving  it. 

Sunday  31.  We  all  went  to  church,  preachers  and  people,  and 
received  the  Sacrament.  Messrs.  Thorn,  O'Neal,  and  M'Gaw,  were 
presant.  Mr.  O'Neal  preached  an  affecting  passion  sermon  ;  after 
the  Lord's  supper,  Mr.  M'Gaw  preached  an  excellent  sermon.  At 
night  I  preached  in  the  barn,  on  "  He  that  saith  he  abideth  in  him, 
ought  himself  also  so  to  walk,  even  as  he  walked." 

Monday,  November  1,  1779.  Our  quarter-meeting  began  in  Ed- 
ward White's  barn.  The  three  clergymen  attended  with  great  friend- 
ship. I  preached  on  Isaiah  lxvi.  6,  7.  and  had  much  liberty  ;  there 
were  about  a  thousand  or  twelve  hundred  people,  and  the  greater 
part  were  serious  .  brother  Garretson  and  Brother  Ruff  exhorted. 

Tuesday  2.  I  preached  agnin  on  1  Thessalonians  ii  13,  with  more 
power  and  application  to  the  people  :  we  held  our  love-feast  in  the 
morning  ;  preaching  at  twelve  o'clock  :  brothers  Hartly  and  M'Clure 
exhorted.  There  were  as  many  people,  or  rather  more  than  yester- 
day ;  the  barn  and  treading-floor  filled.  We  had  a  close  conversation 
with  the  clergy,  who  informed  themselves  of  our  rules,  and  were 
willing  to  give  us  all  the  assistance  they  could  by  word  and  deed. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy'S  JOURNAL.  25? 

Wednesday  3.  We  parted  in  much  affection  and  great  love  :  we 
appointed  to  meet  at  Mr.  Thorn's,  Monday  three  weeks.  The  Lord 
hath  done  great  things  for  us  among  the  people  :  may  he  make  and 
keep  us  humble  :  I  am  unwell  with  so  much  exercise.  The  weather 
favoured  us  much  ;  after  a  little  rain,  it  cleared  away  a  fine,  pure, 
healthy  day,  only  cool :  all  went  well  ;  there  was  great  harmony 
among  us,  though  men  of  different  political  principles  ;  we  suppressed 
these,  and  all  was  love.  There  was  an  extraordinary  deliverance  this 
morning  ;  brother  Edward  White's  boy.  about  six  years  old,  fell  into 
the  well  ;  was  prevented  by  his  sister  from  falling  head  foremost,  but 
no  more  :  young  as  he  was  he  held  the  bucket  ;  went  down  as  far 
as  the  bucket  would  go,  came  up,  let  go  the  bucket,  took  hold  of  the 
sides  of  the  well,  and  saved  himself;  his  father  went  down  and 
brought  him  up  :  all  these  things  demand  notice  and  thanksgiving. 

Thursday  4.  I  rose  early  :  prayed  several  times  before  I  left  the 
room,  and  wrote  to  the  stewards  in  Philadelphia.  Most  of  my  time 
to-day  was  taken  up  in  writing  :  I  am  kept  in  peace  with  God  :  1  am 
watchful. 

I  here  give  a  short,  and  extraordinary  account  of  the  case  of 
Achsah  Borden  : — From  her  childhood  she  was  attentive  to  reading 
her  Bible,  and  ofttimes  had  serious  thoughts  of  eternity  :  one  day, 
reading  and  meditating,  an  uncommon  light  and  comfort  flowed  into 
her  heart.  Her  soul  cried  out,  '•  Sweet  Jesus!"  and  was  convinced 
Christ  was  her  Saviour  ;  her  friends  observing  for  a  season  that  she 
was  very  serious,  feared  a  melancholy  ;  which  to  prevent,  they 
gathered  their  friends  and  neighbours,  with  music  and  dancing,  think- 
ing to  rouse  her  (as  they  said)  from  her  stupidity,  or  charm  off  her 
religious  frenzy.  Through  various  temptations  she  was  prevailed 
upon  to  go  into  company,  of  course,  into  sin  ;  she  lost  her  comfort, 
and  afterward  fell  into  deep  distress  :  she  had  heard  of  the  Metho- 
dists, and  was  anxious  to  go  to  them  that  they  might  pray  for  her. 
Those  with  whom  slie  was,  paid  no  regard  to  her  importunity,  but 
locked  her  up  in  a  room,  and  ordered  all  the  knives  to  be  taken 
away.  She  knew  their  meaning,  but  says,  she  was  under  no  tempta- 
tion to  destroy,  or  lay  violent  hands  upon  herself.  Soon  after  this 
her  speech  failed  her,  so  that  she  only  spoke  half-sentences,  and 
would  be  stopt  by  inability  ;  but  by  grasping  any  thing  hard  in  her 
hand,  she  could  speak  with  difficulty  and  deliberation  ;  but  soon  lost 
this  power,  and  a  dumb  spirit  took  perfect  possession  of  her  :  she 
said,  then  it  was  imprest  on  her  mind,  "  The  effectual  and  fervent 
prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much."  She  heard  the  Metho- 
dists were  a  people  that  prayed  much,  and  still  retained  her  desire  '<: 

Vol.  I.  33 


258  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBUftY's  JOUR.NAL- 

go  amongst  them,  and  by  signs  made  it  known  to  her  friend*.  And 
after  about  one  year's  silence,  her  mother  was  prevailed  upon  to  go 
with  her  to  New-Mills,  New-Jersey,  (about  thirteen  miles  distant) 
where  there  was  a  society  and  meeting-house  :  they  knew  no  Metho- 
dists, nor  could  get  any  one  to  tell  them  where  to  find  any,  notwith- 
standing they  were  now  in  the  midst  of  them.  Satan  hindered;  in- 
quiry was  made  among  the  B ts,  who  knew  the  Methodists,  ef 

whom  we  might  have  expected  better  things.  They  returned  home, 
and  after  another  year's  waiting  in  silence,  by  signs  her  mother  was 

persuaded  to  come  to  New-Mills  again  :  they  fell  in  with  the  B ts 

again  ;  but  turning  from  them,  with  much  difficulty,  and  some  hour? 
wandering,  they  found  one  to  direct  them.  They  went  where  a 
number  were  met  for  prayer  ;  the  brethren  saw  into  her  case,  be- 
lieving it  was  a  dumb  spirit,  and  that  God  would  cast  him  out. 
Prayer  was  made  part  of  three  days  :  the  third  day  at  evening  she 
cried  for  mercy,  soon  speke  and  praised  God,  from  a  sense  of  com- 
forting, pardoning  love.  During  the  two  years  of  her  silence,  she 
would  not  work  at  all,  nor  do  the  smallest  thing. 

Friday  5.  Set  apart  for  fasting  and  prayer  :  though  tempted  at  times, 
I  shall  not  be  overcome  :  I  had  rather  die  than  sin  against  God.  I 
read  about  one  hundred  octavo  pages,  then  applied  to  the  Bible  for  the 
exercises  of  the  remaining  part  of  the  day  :  I  began  the  reading  of 
my  Bible  through  again  :  read  a  few  chapters  in  Genesis,  visited  the 
sick  in  the  neighbourhood,  but  ate  nothing  till  six  o'clock  at  night ; 
had  various  struggles,  but  the  grace  of  God  is  sufficient  for  me  at  all 
times  :  glory  be  to  Jesus  ! 

Saturday  6.  I  set  out  for  Boyer's,  called  at  Joseph  Perdin's,  who 
was  convinced  about  two  years  ago  by  my  preaching ;  but  through  fear 
and  want  of  resolution  was  kept  back  :  he  said  my  preaching  always 
came  home  to  him  ;  now  he  has  found  peace. 

Sunday  7.  I  preached  at  Boyer's,  on  Luke  vi.  and  last  verse  ;  then 
rode  to  town,  and  heard  a  most  excellent  sermon,  on  "  Follow  peace 
with  all  men,  and  holiness  ?"  The  sermon  was  close,  and  much  to  the 
purpose.  1  preached  on  1  Corinthians  i.  19—23.  very  close,  and 
endeavoured  to  tear  away  their  props  and  false  dependencies.  I 
lodged  at  Mr.  M'Gaw's. 

Monday  8.  I  rode  to  Hilliard's,  where,  with  much  comfort,  I 
preached  to  about  forty  people,  and  had  the  most  liberty  I  ever  felt 
here  before.  I  read  a  part  of  the  Confession  of  Faith  ;  some  good, 
and  other  very  strong  things  in  it.  I  thought  the  case  of  Robert 
Turner  worth  notice  :  he  came  from  the  Jerseys  into  this  Peninsula 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY?S  JOURNAL.  259 

and  was  useful  in  preaching.  Lewis  Allfree  was  convinced  by  him, 
who  had  been  an  extravagant  sinner,  and  afterward  became  a  useful 
preacher.  The  said  Turner  went  home  to  his  family,  to  settle  his 
affairs,  and  intended  to  travel  after  a  few  weeks  ;  brother  Ruff,  from 
a  great  call,  pressed  him  to  go  iuto  the  circuit  before  the  time  he  in- 
tended;  Ruff  said  "Suppose  you  had  but  a  fortnight  to  live,  would 
you  not  go  ?"  Turner  answered  he  would.  By  the  time  Ruff  came 
round,  about  a  fortnight,  Turner  died  with  the  small-pox ! 

Tuesday  9.  I  spent  my  time  in  reading  a  part  of  the  Confession  of 
Faith  and  Catechism,  and  transcribing  a  few  sections  ;  I  read  two  chap- 
ters, and  preached  on  the  epistle  to  the  Laodiceans  :  I  was  assisted  in 
speaking  and  inwardly  mourned  over  the  people.  Though  very 
severely  tried  at  times,  I  have  great  feelings  in  prayer,  and  sweet 
consolation.  I  find  the  Lord  revives  my  soul,  and  I  am  greatly 
assisted :  I  preached  at  Allfree's  to  about  thirty  people.  1  have 
been  greatly  led  out  every  time  I  have  spoken  on  this  visit. 

Wednesday  10.  I  rose  with  a  sense  of  the  divine  presence,  in 
wrestling  prayer  ;  I  find  peace,  though  not  without  some  darts  from 
Satan  :  I  read  three  chapters  in  the  Bible  ;  rode  to  the  widow  How- 
ard's, and  preached  on  Isaiah  liii.  1.  I  spoke  as  plain  as  I  could,  but  I 
fear  to  little  purpose  ;  rode  to  friend  Heathers's,  and  found  more  love 
to  these  people  than  formerly. 

Thursday  11.  I  preached  to  about  forty  people,  at  Hilliard's,  thir- 
ty at  Allfree's,  and  forty  at  Howard's  ;  I  had  liberty  in  speaking  on 
the  faithful  and  wise  servant,  at  the  Forest  chapel. 

Friday  12.  I  spoke  on  Galatians  vi.  16 — 18.  and  was  pointed,  but 
there  was  no  great  moving  among  the  people  :  I  dwelt  upon  the  life 
and  power  of  religion  :  if  they  understood  me,  I  fear  they  did  not 
feel  the  word.  I  kept  this  day  in  fasting,  till  near  4  o'clock,  then 
took  a  cup  of  milk  and  bread  :  I  have  read  the  Confession  of  Faith 
and  the  Assembly's  Catechism  :  they  are  calculated  to  convert  the 
judgment,  and  make  the  people  systematical  Christians. 

Saturday  13.  I  went  to  Wells's,  and  had  about  forty  hearers.  I 
spoke  on  Zechariah,  eighth  chapter  and  last  verse  :  "  We  will  go 
with  you  :  for  we  have  heard  that  God  is  with  you."  Brother  Gar- 
rettson  preached  at  Shaw's  at  night.  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr. 
Jarratt,  who  is  greatly  alarmed,  but  it  is  too  late  ;  he  should  have 
begun  his  opposition  before.  Our  zealous  dissenting  brethren  are  for 
turning  all  out  of  the  society  who  will  not  submit  to  their  administra- 
tion. I  find  the  spirit  of  separation  grows  among  them,  and  fear  that 
it  will  generate  malevolence,  and  evil  speaking :  after  all  my  labour, 


260  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's    JOURNAL. 

to  unite  the  Protestant  Episcopal  ministry  to  us,  they  say, w'  We  don  t 
want  your  unconverted  ministers;  the  people  will  not  receive  them." 
I  expect  to  turn  out  shortly  among  them,  and  fear  a  separation  will 
be  unavoidable  :  I  am  determined,  if  we  cannot  save  all,  to  save  a 
part ;  but  for  the  divisions  of  Reuben  there  will  be  great  heart 
searchings  ! 

Sunday  14.  I  preached  at  the  chapel,  to  about  four  hundred  seri- 
ous people,  from  John  iv.  48  :  I  spoke  for  near  two  hours  ;  perhaps 
it  is  the  last  time.  I  preached  at  Shaw's  in  the  afternoon,  on  Num- 
bers x.  29.  and  following  verses,  to  about  three  hundred  people,  and 
had  much  sweetness  :  surely  there  will  be  a  work  here.  I  have  been 
pressed  to  go  to  Virginia  :  time  and  circumstances  must  shortly  de- 
termine, whether  I  go  to  the  north  or  south. 

Monday  15.  1  rode  twelve  miles,  to  Stephen  Black's,  and  preached 
on  John  xii.  48.  to  about  sixty  people  :  1  had  some  opening,  and  met 
the  class  I  am  kept  in  peace,  though  under  reasoning  about  what 
is  right  and  wrong  ;  but  I  am  determined  to  be  on  the  sure  side. 

Tuesday  16.  Rode  to  Calehan's,  and  had  about  fifty  people  :  spoke 
on  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  word  but  in  power."  I  then  re- 
turned to  Thomas  White's. 

Wednesday  17.  I  rode  to  Stradley's  :  had  about  sixty  people  to 
hear  :  met  the  society  of  about  twenty-two  members,  all  serious,  and 
under  good  impressions.  I  was  surprised  to  find  them  so  clear  in 
their  ideas  of  religion,  and  was  blest  among  them  :  returned  to 
Thomas  White's,  met  the  people,  gave  a  warm,  searching  exhorta- 
tion. 1  am  troubled  about  our  separating  brethren,  in  Virginia  :  I 
have  read  through  the  book  of  Genesis  ;  and  again  have  read  the 
Confession  of  Faith,  the  Assembly's  Catechism,  Directory  of  Church 
government,  and  Form  for  the  Public  Worship  .  now  I  understand  it 
better  than  I  like  it.  I  purposed  to  rise  at  four  o'clock,  as  often  as 
I  can,  and  spend  two  hours  in  prayer  and  meditation  ;  two  hours  in 
reading,  and  one  in  recreating  and  conversation  ;  and  in  the  evening, 
to  take  my  room  at  eight,  pray  and  meditate  an  hour,  and  go  to  bed 
at  nine  o'clock  :  all  this  I  purpose  to  do,  when  not  travelling ;  but  to 
rise  at  four  o:clock  every  morning. 

Thursday  18.  Spent  the  day  in  reading  and  prayer,  but  was 
sorely  tempted  ;  wrote  letters  to  W  Lynch,  Waters,  and  the  venera- 
ble Otterbine. 

Friday  19.   I  kept  a  day  of  fasting  and  humiliation. 

Saturday  20.  Ended  the  reading  of  Salmon's  Grammar,  more  than 
six  hundred  pages. 


KEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  261 

Sunday  21.  Preached  on  John  v.  44.  to  the  end  of  the  chapter, 
and  was  clear  and  pointed  :  the  people  are  stirred«up,  but  there  are 
disorders  among  them,  occasioned  by  their  unfaithfulness.  Met  the 
society,  and  afterward  the  Africans. 

Monday  22.  Rose  between  four  and  five,  spent  an  hour  in  prayer 
and  meditation,  read  a  few  chapters  in  the  Bible  before  it  was  day- 
light :  I  want  to  be  all  devoted  to  God  ;  every  moment  given  up  to 
Christ.  Rode  to  Maxfield's,  and  preached  to  about  three  hundred 
people ;  spoke  on  "  Lord,  are  there  few  that  be  saved  ?"  First5 
showed,  What  we  are  to  be  saved  from.  2.  How  we  are  saved  ;  3. 
Why  there  are  few.  No  open  sinner  can  be  in  a  state  of  salvation  ; 
no  formalist,  violent  sectarian,  having  only  opinions  and  modes  of 
religion  ;  no  hypocrites  or  backsliders ;  no,  nor  those  who  are  only 
seekers.  I  came  back,  was  much  tried,  prayed  to  the  Lord  for  peace., 
and  opened  my  Bible  on  these  words  ;  '*  So  the  service  was  pre- 
pared, and  the  priests  stood  in  their  places,  and  the  Levites  in  their 
courses,  according  to  the  king's  commandment." 

Tuesday  23.  Rode  to  Layton's,  and  preached  to  about  thirty  peo- 
ple, from  "  Through  much  tribulation  we  must  enter  into  the  king- 
dom of  God  ;"  Spoke  as  my  own  experience  led  me  ;  then  returned 
to  Edward  White's,  and  lectured  on  Moses  meeting  his  father-in-law, 
Exodus  xviii.     There  were  not  many  people,  but  they  were  happy 

Wednesday  24.  Rode  to  the  widow  Jump's,  and  preached  to  about 
thirty  souls,  on  "  Why  sayest  thou,  O  Jacob,  and  speakest  thou,  O 
Israel,"  &c. — There  is  a  declension  here  ;  but  I  follow  my  own  feel- 
ings. A  great  sweetness  has  attended  me  this  day,  although  I  drank 
of  the  wormwood  and  the  gall  in  the  morning.  When  I  get  out  into 
the  work,  1  am  always  happy. 

Thursday  25.  Rose  at  four  o'clock,  and  had  a  sweet  time  in  medi- 
tation and  prayer,  from  four  to  six  ;  purpose  to  spend  two  hours  in 
the  morning,  and  one  at  night,  in  these  blessed  exercises. — Began 
this  morniug  to  read  books  on  the  practice  of  physic  :  I  want  to  help 
the  bodies  and  souls  of  men. 

Friday  26.  Preached  at  William  Laws's  to  about  a  hundred  peo- 
ple ;  spoke  on  Numbers  x.  29.  While  meeting  the  class,  some  ap- 
peared greatly  affected :  this  evening  I  read  in  the  Bible,  and  some 
books  on  physic  :  also  exhorted  ;  for  the  people  press  upon  us  to  hear 
the  word. 

Saturday  27.  Was  kept  in  a  calm  after  the  devil  had  been  tearing 
my  soul  like  a  lion  ;  but  he  hath  left  me  for  a  season  :— I  looked  into 
Rutherford's  Letters,  and  they  were  blest  to  me :  also  looked  into 


>Gt  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV's  JOURNAL. 

Doddridge's  Rise  and  Progress  of  Religion,  and  that  was  also  blessed 
to  me.  My  soul  is  waiting  on  the  Lord  for  full  Christian  perfection. 
I  poured  out  my  soul  to  the  Lord  for  this,  and  for  my  brethren  in  all 
parts  of  the  world,  that  the  power  of  religion  may  continue  with  us, 
as  a  people.  I  tremble  to  think  of  the  cloud  of  the  Divine  presence 
departing  from  us  ;  if  this  should  be,  I  hope  not  to  live  to  see  it ; 
and  with  Mr.  Wesley,  desire  that  God  may  rather  scatter  the  people 
■»o  the  ends  of  the  earth  ;  I  had  rather  they  should  not  be,  than  to  be  a 
dead  society  : — Amen,  says  poor  William  Spencer. 

Sunday  28.  Preached  at  the  widow  Bready's  before  church,  on 
Hebrews  x.  12,  and  following  verses  ;  had  some  liberty  in  speaking  : 
afterward  went  to  church,  received  the  sacrament,  and  returned  to 
Bready's,  and  heard  J.  Cromwell,  an  original  indeed  ;  no  man's  copy. 
Spent  a  day  with  Mr.  Thorn. 

Tuesday  30.  I  intended  to  go  to  Choptank,  but  Mr.  M ,  was 

coming  down  to  preach  a  funeral  sermon,  and  desired  me  to  stay. 
We  spent  an  evening  at  the  widow  Bready's  together,  and  had  some 
talk  about  erecting  a  Kingswood  school  in  America. 

Wednesday,  December  1,  1779.  Rode  twelve  miles  to  Carden's, 
.and  preached  to  about  one  hundred  serious  people,  and  1  hope  there 
will  be  good  done  :  met  Mr.  Airey,  from  Dorchester  county,  who  was 
convinced  by  reading  the  writings  of  old  Mr.  Perkins.  Mr.  Airey 
solicits  preaching  in  that  county.  I  have  taken  cold  by  some  means. 
it  has  brought  on  an  inflammation  in  my  throat. 

Thursday  2.  There  fell  a  very  heavy  rain,  that  prevented  my 
going  to  Johnny-cake  Landing. 

Sunday  26.  Preached  at  Andrew  Perdin's  to  a  large  congregation  : 
spoke  with  great  power  from  "  His  name  shall  be  called  Jesus." 
Afterward  preached  at  Jonathan  Sipple's,  on  John  ii.  8.  there  was 
some  moving  among  the  people. 

Monday  27.  Visited  the  sick,  Cranmer,  a  faithful  soul,  and  Ruth 
Smith,  wearing  away  fast  with  a  consumption,  but  praising  God,  and 
continually  preaching  Christ. 

Tuesday  28.  A  stormy,  rainy  day  :  went  to  Lewis's,  but  none  came. 
I  must  spend  the  whole  night  in  prayer,  after  the  example  of  my 
Lord ;  for  temptation  is  to  try  me  ;  perhaps  for  my  good,  as  I  have 
many  things  to  lift  me  up.  Brother  Hartley  is  now  married,  and  be- 
gins to  care  for  his  wife.  I  have  spent  but  little  time  to-day  in  read- 
ing or  writing.  There  is  a  prospect  of  a  work  of  religion  in  this 
state,  if  the  preachers  are  faithful  ;  but  I  fear  none  more  than  my- 
self ;  yet,  sure  I  am  that  I  want  to  be  the  Lord's.    The  hard,  cold 


31EV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  263 

weather  is  broke  at  last.  People  suffer  much  more  in  winter  by 
cold,  and  in  summer  by  heat,  here  than  in  England.  I  find  the  care 
of  a  wife  begins  to  humble  my  young  friend,  and  makes  him  very 
teachable  :  I  have  thought  he  always  carried  great  sail ;  but  he  will 
have  ballast  now. 

Wednesday  29.  Preached  at  D.  Dehadway's,  to  about  two  hundred 
people,  and  spoke  livingly  from  2  Cor.  vi.  17,  18.  I  was  led  out 
greatly.  Preached  at  night  at  Joseph  Perdin's,  from  1  Cor.  xv.  58. 
and  had  much  liberty.  One  of  the  devil's  camps,  a  tavern,  is  broken 
up  here  ;  for  most  of  their  neighbours  have  forsaken  them. 

Thursday  30.  Rode  to  Stradley's,  and  preached  on  Luke  iv.  17,  18. 
I  had  life,  and  there  were  more  people  than  I  expected.  I  came  to 
Thomas  White's,  and  went  to  see  James  Patterson,  very  ill ;  he 
appears  to  decline  swiftly. 

Friday  31.  I  went  to  Carden's  ;  a  dreadful  road,  eight  miles  through 
the  woods,  and  very  cold.  I  spoke  with  great  warmth  on  1  John  iii. 
4,  5.     Always  when  most  tried  I  have  the  greatest  liberty. 

Saturday,  January  1,  1780.  I  preached  at  Edward  White's  on  Luke 
iii.  6 — 9.  with  great  liberty;  not  in  much  order,  but  useful  to  the 
people.  Went  to  see  I.  Peterkins  ;  he  is  continually  praying  now 
death  is  before  him.  Lord,  hear  and  answer  his  prayer !  Now  com- 
mences the  new  year  ;  these  two  years  past  have  been  trying  years 
to  me,  and  I  doubt  not  but  this  will  be  so  likewise  ;  only,  my  God,  keep 
me  through  the  water  and  fire,  and  let  me  rather  die  than  live  to  sin 
against  thee ! 

Sunday  2.  Rode  to  Carden's,  eight  miles  through  the  swamp,  by- 
ten  o'clock,  and  preached  at  eleven  to  about  two  hundred  peoples 
from,  "  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts.'* 
I  had  the  presence  of  God,  and  spoke  more  than  an  hour.  I  believe 
good  was  done.  We  came  back  safe  through  the  snow  and  ice  : 
preached  at  brother  White's  a4ittle  after  two  o'clock,  on  Deut.  xxix. 
10 — 13.  upon  renewing  their  covenant  :  addressed  the  family  at  night 
It  was  a  dreary  night  of  rain,  wind,  snow  and  frost.  I  have  been 
much  tried  and  much  blest.  "  It  is  through  much  tribulation  we 
must  enter  the  kingdom-" 

Monday  3.  Exceeding  cold  weather  :  thank  the  Lord  for  a  house 
and  home,  and  all  necessary  things. 

Tuesday  4.  Read  a  chapter  iu  the  Bible,  read  the  Good  Steward,  a 
Sermon  upon  the  Reformation  of  Manners,  and  Mr.  Wesley's  Sermon 
on  Mr.  Whitefield's  death  :  was  closely  employed  :  prayed  three  times 
in  the  family,  and  attended  private  prayer  my  usual  times.  I  long 
to  be  holy  and  to  make  the  best  use  of  a  short  life.    How  much  skiH 


264  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

is  required  to  be  a  doctor !  What  diseases  the  human  body  is  subject 
to !  What  regimen  and  care  are  necessary  !  How  many  diseases  hath 
the  soul !  What  skill  ought  a  preacher  to  have  to  know  the  causes 
and  cures !  it  will  require  all  his  time  and  study  :  the  consequences 
of  miscarriages  are  greater  in  the  soul  than  the  body. 

Wednesday  5.  Prayed  and  read  closely  till  three  o'clock  in  Mr. 
Wesley's  4th  volume  of  Methodized  Works.  I  have  my  trials,  and 
believe  it  is  because  I  am  not  so  extensively  in  the  work  as  I  hope  to 
be  shortly. 

Thursday  6.  I  did  not  travel ;  but  read  my  Testament,  and  some 
of  Young's  Poetry,  which  is  very  sublime  :  was  much  taken  up  in 
prayer.  I  want  to  be  employed  in  travelling  and  preaching,  if  the 
weather  would  permit.  Europeans  cannot  judge  of  the  inclemency 
of  our  climate  but  by  experience.  I  have  hard  struggles ;  but,  glory 
be  to  God,  his  grace  is  sufficient. 

Friday  7.  The  ice  on  the  ground,  and  the  coldness  of  the  weather, 
prevents  my  travelling.  This  was  a  day  of  fasting:  I  ate  nothing 
till  after  three  o'clock,  and  then  only  a  bowl  of  milk  :  amidst  all 
my  exercises,  I  feel  as  though  I  advanced  in  the  divine  life  ;  am 
thankful  that  I  am  so  well  provided  for,  when,  no  doubt,  thousands 
are  suffering  the  want  of  food,  firing,  house-room,  and  clothing.  Oh! 
may  I  act  worthy  of  these  favours.  At  4  o'clock  began  reading  Mr. 
Fletcher's  Checks. 

Saturday  8.  I  spent  in  reading  and  prayer. 

Sunday  9.  Preached  on  2  Cor.  xiii.  5.  "  Examine  yourselves 
whether  ye  be  in  the  faith,"  and  was  as  pointed  as  I  could  be.  Lord, 
make  it  a  blessing  to  souls  ! 

Monday  10.  Spent  part  of  the  day  in  examining  the  list  of  Mr. 
Wesley's  books  ;  employed  some  time  in  prayer,  but  not  so  much  as 
I  had  appointed. 

Tuesday  11.  I  read  the  Checks,  went  to  view  a  spot  of  land  for 
building  a  preaching-house  upon,  formed  a  subscription  paper,  and 
obtained  subscribers  for  about  £80. 

Wednesday  12.  Was  principally  employed  in  assorting  the  books 
for  sale. 

Thursday  13.  Finished  reading  the  First  Check  ;  the  style  and 
spirit  in  which  Mr.  Fletcher  writes,  at  once  bespeaks  the  scholar,  the 
logician,  and  divine. 

Friday  14.  A  day  of  fasting,  prayer,  writing,  and  visiting  the  soci- 
ety :  was  kept  in  peace,  but  did  not  spend  so  much  time  in  prayei 
»s  I  wished  to  do 


iittV-  FRANCIS  ASBU11Y;S  JOURNAL.  265 

Saturday  15.  I  am  going  into  Sussex  :  my  mind  is  serene,  raised 
to  God  and  heaven,  and  longing  after  the  salvation  of  souls  as  much 
as  ever.  I  rode  to  Johnstown  :  the  roads  are  spread  with  sheets  of 
ice  ;  but  my  horse,  rough  shod,  went  safe. 

Sunday  16.  Read  my  selections,  and  part  of  the  Revelations,  and 
preached  at  Alexander  Law's,  to  about  a  hundred  and  fifty  people,  an 
argumentative  sermon,  from  John  iv.  48.  There  were  some  oppo- 
sers  to-day.     I  met  the  family,  and  spoke  to  the  Africans. 

Monday  17.  Spoke  from  1  Timothy  i.  15.  with  great  enlargement, 
to  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  people ;  and  Tuesday  at  Sharp's,  on 
1  John  i.  8,  9.  I  had  much  light  and  liberty  while  speaking.  I 
lodged  at  Mr.  Rawlston's,  a  candid,  conversable  Presbyterian  elder. 

Wednesday  19.  Preached  on  Mark  viii.  34 — 36.  at  William  Law's 
to  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  people  ;  met  the  society.  I  was  led 
out  upon  the  subject,  and  believe  many  felt  it.  The  Presbyterians 
appeared  to  be  very  attentive  :  truth  will  bear  a  strict  scrutiny. 

Thursday  20.  Preached  at  Spencer  Hitche's  to  about  thirty  peo- 
ple, on  Titus  i.  15,  16.  I  was  searching,  and  the  weather  very 
piercing  :  afterward  went  to  Mr.  Daniel  Polk's. 

Friday  21  Rode  to  White  Brown's.  This  week  past  I  have  been 
in  much  haste,  but  have  read  a  little  every  day,  and  finished  the  book 
of  Joshua.  O,  for  more  holiness  of  heart !  I  cannot  rise  so  early 
as  I  would,  it  is  so  extremely  cold  these  days  and  nights.  I  long  to 
be  more  spiritual.  I  am  glad  at  hearing  that  brother  Cromwell's 
labours  are  blest  in  the  Fork,  to  the  stirring  up  and  awakening  of 
several.  Glory  be  to  God  !  May  I  rejoice  more  heartily  in  the  suc- 
cess of  others,  and  yet  be  moved  to  emulation,  to  live  holier,  to  la- 
bour more,  and  preach  with  greater  fervour. 

Sunday  23.  About  three  hundred  people  flocked  together  upon 
short  notice,  to  whom  I  preached  on  Matt.  i.  21.  "  Thou  shalt  call 
his  name  Jesus  :"  was  very  plain,  but  not  methodical :  met  the  soci- 
ety ;  the  strangers  who  stayed,  fled  when  1  had  nearly  done,  for 
fear  I  should  speak  to  them.  In  the  afternoon  I  had  a  long  confe- 
rence with  a  Nicholite,  who  wanted  to  find  out  who  were  right,  they 
or  us ;  a  man  of  no  great  argument,  and  I  fear  but  little  religion  :  this 
makes  these  people  so  troublesome  to  us. 

Monday  24.  Preached  a  funeral  sermon  for  Solomon  Turpen,  to 
near  three  hundred  people,  from  Gen.  1.  24.  Was  much  assisted, 
and  spoke,  including  the  funeral  service  and  exhortations  in  all,  three 
hours  :  the  people  stayed  with  great  patience  and  seriousness,  ex- 
cept a  few  wild  young  men.  The  work  revives,  and  truth  will 
spread. 

Vor,.  I.  34 


:-'t>0  KEV.  IKAISCIS  ASBUKy's  JOUUNAL. 

Tuesday  25.  Preached  to  about  thirty  people  at  J.  T  s,  on  Psal. 
xxvii.  10.  The  "Orphan's  hope."  I  had  not  great  enlargement, 
but  the  few  present,  old  and  young,  were  in  some  degree  affected. 
Satan  has  tried  me,  but  cannot  prevail.  I  read  but  little  :  the  wea- 
ther is  so  severe  I  cannot  keep  from  the  fire  ;  the  rooms  are  cold 
and  unfinished,  and  families  are  in  the  way.  I  kept  my  times  for 
prayer  ;  but  not  so  long  or  so  feeling  as  I  desire. 

Wednesday  26.  Preached  a  funeral  for  one  Sizer;  though  it  was 
a  cold  day,  1  had  about  one  hundred  people  :  spoke  from  Psal.  xc.  12. 
The  house  being  uncomfortable,  and  the  people  cold  I  had  not  the 
satisfaction  I  wished  for,  but  hope  there  was  some  good  done;  cold  as 
it  was,  I  read  the  burial  service,  and  made  some  observations  upon  it 
that  ought  to  impress  our  minds.  I  returned  to  John  Flowers's,  spent 
some  time  in  conversation  and  prayer,  and  then  came  to  R.  Turpen's. 
There  are  three  serious  girls,  left  by  their  father  in  possession  of  a 
good  plantation  :  they  are  young,  but  if  they  are  faithful,  God  will 
stand  by  them  :  Rebecca  is  a  pattern  of  piety,  and  a  stay  to  all  the 
rest.  I  could  not  but  advise  them  to  keep  house.  Lord  help  me  to 
improve  !  What  is  man  !  I  am  much  troubled  at  times.  I  must 
travel ;  I  always  find  a  blessing  in  it :  God  has  given  me  health,  the 
best  convenience,  and  some  gifts  ;  and  I  have  some  particular  business 
that  others  cannot  so  well  do.     Lord,  pardon  my  past  slothfulness. 

Thursday  27.  The  weather  was  very  cold,  and  the  wind  so  eX' 
ceedingly  high,  it  was  hardly  safe  to  travel :  as  I  had  no  appointment 
I  stopt  for  one  day,  and  read  my  Bible  in  course,  through  Judges ; 
read  a  part  of  Fothergill's  Journal ;  instructed  Thomas  Garrettson  a 
little  in  English. 

Friday  28.  A  fine  day  for  travelling  :  yesterday  was  so  cold,  it  was 
hardly  possible  to  travel  without  getting  ones  limbs  frozen.  I  rose 
soon  after  five  o'clock,  prayed  four  times  before  I  left  my  room,  and 
twice  in  the  family.  I  then  set  out  for  Isaac  Moore's  below  Broad- 
Creek,  met  with  some  difficulty  in  the  way  from  the  ice,  but  came 
there  safe.  Was  variously  exercised  with  thoughts,  and  had  bard 
fightings.  After  riding  twenty- five  miles  I  took  a  little  food,  this 
being  a  day  of  abstinence  and  prayer  with  me. 

Saturday  29.  Rose  at  five  o'clock,  prayed  five  times  in  private, 
once  in  the  family,  and  transcribed  into  my  collection  a  piece  for  the 
preachers,  from  Baxter's  Works.  Read  a  few  chapters  in  the  Old 
and  one  in  the  New  Testament.  My  soul  is  more  at  rest  from  the 
tempter  when  I  am  busily  employed.  Very  cold  weather  yet ;  we 
are  under  great  disadvantages  in  large  families,  people  want  much  to 
talk  ;  no  glass  in  the  windows ;  some  places  not  a  room  to  sit  in  with 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBtJRY's  JOURNAL^  267 

any  solitude.  Went  to  visit  a  young  woman,  near  her  end,  in  a 
dropsy  :  she  was  in  some  doubt  about  her  acceptance  with  God, 
though  a  professor.  I  came  in  to  her  comfort — surely  it  is  a  serious 
thing  to  die  ! 

Sunday  30.  Preached  on  John's  second  epistle,  8th  verse  :  had 
many  to  hear,  and  I  spoke  with  zeal. 

Monday  31.  Rose  at  five  o'clock,  and  prayed  six  times,  and  hope 
God  will  be  with  and  bless  us,  and  make  it  a  time  of  power — but 
Oh  !  I  pass  through  the  fire  day  after  day.  Lord,  let  me  rather  die 
than  live  to  dishonour  thee!  I  preached  on  Psalm  cxiii.  1.  had 
many  to  hear,  but  not  great  liberty  in  speaking.  Joseph  Cromwell 
came  in  and  gave  an  exhortation  :  the  people  were  very  serious.  In 
the  evening  we  divided  the  circuit,  and  settled  the  preachers'  stations. 
John  Cooper  for  Sussex  and  Somerset ;  Hartley  and  Black  for  Kent 
and  part  of  Sussex. 

Tuesday,  February  1,  1780.    At  nine  o'clock  we  had  a  love-feast  j 
a  time  of  great  tenderness  :  after  some  time  brother  Cromwell  spoke, 
his  words  went  through  me,  as  they  have  every  time  I   have  heard 
him — he  is  the  only  man  I  have  heard  in  America  with  whose  speak- 
ing I  am  never  tired  ;  I  always  admire  his  unaffected  simplicity ;   he  is 
a  prodigy,  a  man  that  cannot  write  or  read  well,  yet  according  to 
what  I  have  heard,  he  is  much  like  the  English  John  Brown,  or  the 
Irish  John  Smith,  or  Beveridge's  Shepherd's  Boy  :  I  fear  he  will  not 
stand  or  live  long.     The  power  of  God  attends  him  more  or  less  in 
every  place,  he  hardly  ever  opens  his  mouth  in  vain  ;  some  are 
generally  cut  to  the  heart,  yet  he  himself  is  in  the  fire  of  temptation 
daily.     Lord,  keep  him  every  moment.     I  preached  on  1  Thess.  i.  5. 
and  was  much  led  out ;  there  were  about  five  hundred  people.     This 
meeting  will  be  attended  with  a  great  blessing — rich  and  poor  approved 
the  doctrine.    I  heard  of  the  sudden  death  of  my  dear  friend  Jonathan 
Scipple.     About  eighteen  months  ago  he  was  brought  home  to  God, 
from  an  open  sinner,  to  be  a  happy,  faithful  man.     He  is  soon  taken 
away  from  the  evil  to  come  ;  he  was  loved,  and  is  much  lamented  :  in 
extreme  pain,  but  full  of  patience,  and.  rejoicing  in  God,  he  made  a 
blessed  end.     All  hail,  happy  soul !    Soon  taken  thy  flight  to  rest ! 
This  is  clear  gains  indeed,  late  brought  in,  soon  taken  away — my 
mind  moves   with  mixed  passions  of  joy  and  grief. — Freeborn  Gar- 
rettson  spoke  in  his  usual  plainness,  as  to  matter  and  manner,  but  it 
moved  the  people  greatly. 

Wednesday  2.  I  preached  a  funeral  sermon  over  a  young  woman 
by  the  name  of  Amelia  Dodwell,  I  had  hope  in  her  death.  I  spoke 
on  Eccles.  ix.  10.  with  great  fervour  and  clear  views  ;  brother  Crom- 


26w  rev.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL. 

well  exhorted  :  I  spoke  at  the  grave  ;  the  people  were  serious. 
Strangers  attended,  that  did  not,  would  not,  before  quarter-meeting* 
These  people  were  drawn,  and  friends  refreshed  ;  life  begets  life. 
I  have  been  humbled  in  spirit,  but,  blessed  be  God,  all  things  go  well 
in  my  own  heart.  Freeborn  Garrettson  had  a  desire  to  go  to  Dorset ; 
I  consented  to  his  going,  and  the  Lord  go  with  him. 

Thursday  3.  Rode  to  Mr.  Freeny's,  about  ten  miles,  and  preached 
to  about  one  hundred  people.  I  spoke  upon  "  To-day,  if  ye  will 
hear  his  voice,"  &c.  Brother  Cromwell  exhorted,  and  some  were 
moved. 

Friday  4.  Rode  to  Jonathan  Boyer's,  and  preached  to  about  eighty 
people  :  the  Baptists  followed  us  about.  Here  we  met  with  a  woman 
in  deep  distress  ;  we  both  spoke  to  her,  and,  I  hope,  sent  her  away 
comforted.  I  had  to-day  a  providential  escape  :  my  horse  started, 
turned  round  in  the  woods,  hardly  escaped  running  me  on  the  trees  ; 
which,  if  he  had,  would  have  overset  me,  and  might  have  broken  the 
carriage  and  my  limbs,  the  ground  being  so  hard  ;  but  thanks  be  to 
God,  I  received  no  hurt.  I  spoke  at  Boyer's  from  these  words, 
"  Will  ye  be  also  his  disciples  ?" 

Saturday  5.  Came  to  Morgan  Williams's,  and  was  received  kindly 
for  the  first  time.  I  found  one  of  my  countrymen  under  deep  distress, 
a  backslider,  and  a  man  of  sense  ;  if  restored  it  may  be  he  will  be  a 
preacher.  He  is  afraid  it  is  impossible  he  should  be  restored.  I 
showed  him  the  meaning  of  Hebr.  6th  chap,  that  it  must  be  one  who 
denied  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  opposed  as  the  Jews  did,  and 
in  enmity  to  crucify  Christ,  which  he  never  did. 

Sunday  6.  Spoke  on  Hosea  xiii.  9.  There  were  more  people 
than  the  house  could  hold,  and  they  were  very  attentive.  The  peo- 
ple seem  quite  ripe  in  the  Fork  for  the  Gospel.  I  rode  to  Choptank, 
near  thirty  miles. 

Monday  7.  I  went  to.  see  the  old  people,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Peterkin, 
rejoicing  in  God,  and  willing  to  die.  Made  an  addition  to  my  book 
to  the  preachers.  I  have  done  but  little  of  account,  but  visiting  the 
sick,  and  praying  with  them. 

Tuesday  8.  I  added  to  my  book,  and  kept  my  times  of  prayer — 
I  abridged  from  Mr.  Law.     My  mind  was  well  takenf  up  with  God. 

Wednesday  9.  Have  peace,  but  long  to  be  more  employed  in  the 
public  work.  I  hear  the  work  spreads  in  Bolingbroke  and  Talbot. 
So  the  Lord  leads  us  on  through  many  hinderances.  Perhaps  there 
never  was  such  a  work  carried  on  by  such  simple  men,  of  such  small 
abilities,  and  no  learning.  The  Lord  shows  his  own  power,  and 
makes  bare  his  own  right  arm  !  Brother  Garrettson  set  off  for  Dorset 


It£V.  FRANCIS  ANBURY'S  JOURNa£.  269 

to  preach  the  Gospel.  We  committed  the  remains  of  Mrs.  Peterkin 
to  the  dust  at  Thomas  White's  ;  she  died  in  full  triumph  of  faith  ; 
many  people  were  present,  and  we  gave  exhortations  suited  to  the 
occasion. 

Thursday  10.  I  read  a  little  in  the  morning,  and  visited  the  sick. 
Was  blessed  in  talking  with  J.  White's  family.  I  must  spend  whole 
nights  in  prayer ;  I  have  been  in  peace,  but  want  more  love.  Brother 
Hartley  has  obtained  a  discharge  from  Talbot  gaol,  after  much 
labour  and  pains  ;  the  grand  jury  returned  the  bill  of  indictment, 
Ignoramus.  Thus  God  makes  way  for  us  in  all  trials.  Prayed  for 
an  hour  after  I  took  my  room ;  I  took  my  bed  about  ten  o'clock. 
Had  not  prayed  in  the  day  so  much  as  I  should — Oh !  my  God,  keep 
me  in  the  spirit  of  prayer. 

Saturday  12.  Visited  my  friends  and  prayed  from  house  to  house  ; 
met  the  class,  and  was  much  blest.  Spent  some  time  in  prayer  ;  but 
Satan  hath  many  devices. 

Sunday  13.  I  rode  eight  miles,  and  preached  to  about  two  hundred 
people,  who  seemed  dead  and  unfeeling.  Spoke  on  Romans  v.  19, 
20.  and  laboured  hard  to  make  them  understand,  but  fear  they  did 
not.  At  three  o'clock  preached  on  1  Tim>  iii.  5.  with  some  life  ;  we 
had  but  few  people,  and  most  of  them  strangers. 

Monday  14.  The  work  of  God  revives,  but  the  people  are  not  so 
faithful  as  they  ought  to  be. 

Tuesday  15.  A  rainy  morning  :  I  had  to  go  to  Slaughter's  ;  and  on 
my  way  called  at  John  Case's,  prayed,  and  went  on  to  the  place  of 
preaching.  There  were  about  one  hundred  very  attentive,  poor, 
ignorant  people.  Spoke  on  Acts  xiii.  26.  with  great  liberty.  It  was 
through  great  tribulation  I  went ;  I  am  tried  as  by  fire.  I  called  at 
Diall's,  and  spoke  to  him  about  his  soul  ;  went  to  see  old  Mrs.  Cox, 
a  great  professor  of  religion,  but  now  going  out  of  her  senses  on 
account  of  the  loose  behaviour  6f  one  of  her  children  ;  which  makes 
me  fear  she  was  upon  a  self-righteous  foundation.  She  is  now  in  a 
delirium,  insensible  of  any  thing.  Spoke  rousingly  to  her,  but  could 
not  wake  her  at  all.  Went  from  thence  to  Mr.  Peterkin's :  he  is 
sick,  but  has  no  deep  sense  of  religion. 

Wednesday  16.  A  bright,  blessed  morning,  but  I  am  in  heaviness 
through  manifold  temptations  ;  but  trust  the  Lord  will  keep  me. 
Have  read  in  the  intervals  of  those  two  days  twelve  of  Mr.  Wesley's 
Sermons  ;  and  cannot  read  them  without  conviction  and  great  instruc- 
tion. God  is  with  me:  he  is  preparing  me  for  great  labours,  and  I 
hope  yet  to  endure  to  the  end  ;  but  must  be  more  sanctified  : 


2?0  1REV.  FRANCIS  ASBVRY'S  JOURNAL 

"  Lord  hasten  the  hour,  thy  kingdom  bring  in, 
And  give  me  the  power  to  live  without  sin." 

Keep  me  holy  and  constant  in  thy  work,  always  industrious  that  Satan 
may  have  no  fair  occasion  to  tempt.  I  lectured  at  Edward  White's 
on  John  xiv.  19 — 21.  and  had  great  liberty,  love,  and  life;  and  the 
people  likewise.  After  all  my  trials,  God  blesses  me.  Satan  is  a  liar, 
and  Christ  is  true,  and  will  never  leave  nor  forsake  me. 

Thursday  17.  I  am  going  to  preach  a  funeral  sermon  for  Zach. 
Nichols,  a  schoolmaster,  a  reading  Churchman,  an  Englishman,  and 
wish  I  could  say  assuredly,  a  Christian. —  I  found  great  liberty  in 
preaching  from  Matt.  xxiv.  44— read  and  explained  the  funeral  service 
— there  was  a  great  melting  among  the  people,  and  1  hope  not  in  vain. 

Saturday  19.  I  rode  through  bad  roads  to  Williams's  ;  and  was  in 
peace  and  prayer.  Stept  into  Johnson's,  took  dinner,  and  had  some 
close  conversation  with  him  ;  he  is  a  mild  conversable  man.  I  came 
in  late  ;  the  people  were  met — exhorted  and  felt  some  life  among  the 
people. 

Sunday  20.  Was  solemn  in  prayer.  Spoke  on  James  i.  22—24. 
I  was  assisted  to  be  close,  moving,  and  argumentative  ;  but  have  in 
general  hard  labour.  Here  they  are  an  unsettled  people,  and  weak 
of  understanding — preached  in  the  afternoon  at  the  widow  Bready's, 
from  James  i.  8.  "  A  double  minded  man  is  unstable  in  all  his  ways." 
This  text  was  pressed  upon  me  to  speak  from,  while  at  Williams's, 
and  I  could  not  get  over  it.  In  the  afternoon  I  found  there  was  a 
cause  ;  the  Nicolites  had  been  working  upon  several  of  our  friends, 
and  had  shook  them  with  their  craft.  These  are  a  people  who 
sprung  from  one  Nicole,  a  visionary,  but  I  hope  a  good  man:  he 
held  Quaker  principles,  but  the  Friends  would  not  recpive  him.  A 
certain  James  Harris  is  at  present  their  leader  :  they  clothe  in  white, 
take  every  thing  from  nature,  and  condemn  all  other  societies  that 
do  not  conform  to  the  outward — If  a  man  were  to  speak  like  an 
archangel,  if  he  sung,  prayed,  and  wore  a  black  or  a  coloured  coat, 
he  would  not  be  received  by  these  people.  They  were  almost 
asleep  when  the  Methodists  came,  but  now  are  awake  and  working 
with  simple,  awakened  people.  They  love,  like  some  other  denomi- 
nations, to  fish  in  troubled  water.  They  oppose  family  prayer  as 
much  as  any  sinners  in  the  country  ;  and  have  much  to  say  against 
our  speakers  ;  profess  what  they  will,  there  is  nothing  in  names. 

Monday  21.  I  am  kept  in  peace.  Preached  twice  yesterday,  and 
met  the  society.    J.  Hartley  is  sick.     I  see  there  is  no  way  like 


EEV.  FRANCIS  ASBUKY'S  JOURNAL.  '2,11 

prayer  for  the  life  of  my  own  soul.  Some  lazy,  backsliding  people 
among  us,  are  gone  after  the  Nicolites  :  let  them  go,  for  they  were 
become  as  salt  that  had  lost  its  savour  ;  we  want  no  such  people.  I 
preached  at  the  Draw-Bridge  to  about  two  hundred  people — spoke 
on  "  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon"— was  clear  and  searching. 

Mr  .  who  has  been  a  man  much  in  pursuit  of  the  world,  and 

who  was  condemned  by  our  friends  in  his  conduct ;  rose  up  after  I 
had  done,  and  said,  he  was  the  man  pointed  at,  and  desired  another 
hearing. 

Tuesday  22.  Rode  to  Andrew  Perdin's,  had  about  sixty  people, 
and  spoke  on  Luke  xi.  28,  "  Blessed  are  they  that^iear  the  word  of 
God,  and  keep  it" — met  the  class.  John  Beauchamp  and  Dr.  Bow- 
ness,  both  professed  sanctification  :  I  hope  it  is  so.  The  society  is 
much  increased  ;  but  all  is  not  gold  that  shines. 

Wednesday  23.  I  rode  to  Shaw's,  it  came  up  cold  and  snowed — 
had  about  6fty  people  ;  a  solid  society,  tender,  and  in  a  measure 
faithful.  1  have  been  much  in  haste  these  two  davs,  had  but  little 
time  for  prayer  and  private  duties  ;  but  I  take  mornings  and  nights, 
and  am  resolved,  that  if  not  in  the  day,  I  will  have  it  at  night  and 
morning.  I  was  tried  in  getting  off;  called  at  two  of  the  friends' 
houses,  and  had  prayer :  and  had  my  trials  also — spoke  at  Shaw's  on 
I  John  iii.  10. — felt  warm  in  spirit,  although  I  suffered  on  the  road 
with  cold — have  read  but  little,  but  am  labouring  for  souls. 

Thursday  24.  Rode  ten  miles  out  and  ten  miles  in,  to  Joseph 
Wyatt's — about  two  hundred  people  :  a  very  cold  day — spoke  on 
Titus  ii,  11.  to  the  end — was  much  led  out,  and  kept  in  peace 
all  day. 

Friday  25.  A  day  of  fasting  and  rest ;  sorely  tempted  :  this  made 
me  think,  that  had  I  gone  to  preach  or  to  town  and  met  class,  it 
would  not  have  been  the  case  :  so  I  must  for  the  future  be  more 
employed, 'for  this  is  the  will  of.  God  concerning  me.  This  morning 
I  read  the  Testament — and  had  a  good  time  in  general  this  week,  but 
Oh!  the  workings  of  heart  I  labour  under;  have  spent  much  time  in 
prayer  night  and  morning  : — I  am  much  led  out  at  such  times. 

Saturday  26.  Rode  to  Boyer's,  and  met  society  ;  most  of  the 
hearers  present  met  in  class.  Spoke  as  searching  as  possible  :  and 
gave  an  exhortation  :  the  people  were  much  stirred  up.  At  night  I 
was  greatly  engaged  in  prayer. 

Sundav  27.  Spoke  from  Luke  xi.  24 — 27.  There  were  many 
people,  and  a  good  time.  I  showed  how  the  devil  is  cast  out  and 
how  he  returns  :  then  rode  to  Dover  and  came  in  just  as  church 
was  ended.     I  preached  with  great  labour  on  Acts  xxiv.  25.     Some 


27iS  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNALi 

had  eaten  and  drank  more  than  enough,  and  were  fit  to  go  to  sleep; 
but  the  greater  part  were  attentive.  But  Oh !  what  a  continual 
burden  have  I  to  come  and  preach  here.  Went  home  with  lawyer 
Basset,  a  very  conversant  and  affectionate  man,  who,  from  his  own 
acknowledgments,  appears  to  be  sick  of  sin.  His  wife  is  under 
great  distress  ;  a  gloom  of  dejection  sits  upon  her  soul ;  she  prayeth 
much,  and  the  enemy  takes  an  advantage  of  her  low  state. 

Monday  28.  I  rode  to  Shaw's,  spoke  at  three  o'clock  on  Acts  xxviii. 
28.  I  was  blest  with  a  calm,  sweet  frame,  and  had  great  ease  and 
freedom  in  my  soul  and  subject ;  an  attentive  congregation.  I  feel 
a  peculiar  love  tot  these  people  ;  and  expect  if  Mr.  Basset  ever 
comes  to  God,  he  is  to  preach.  I  have  been  kept  in  peace,  and  am 
ready  to  think  sometimes  God  has  saved  me  from  all  sin,  proper- 
ly so  called.  Satan  made  one  sudden  stroke  at  me,  but  I  looked  to 
God.  Last  Sunday  morning  I  was  drawn  out  in  prayer,  and  felt  the 
effect  in  a  particular  manner  in  preaching  at  Boyer's :  the  word 
went  like  fire  ;  a  little  of  it  in  the  evening,  but  there  is  so  much 
pride,  and  so  much  of  unbelief  in  the  Dover  people,  that  a  man  needs 
the  faith  and  power  of  Stephen  to  bear  up  and  speak  to  them. 

Tuesday  29.  Rode  to  Scotten's,  had  about  fifty  people ;  they 
were  disappointed  in  expecting  me  the  day  before,  and  I  was  misin- 
formed. I  spoke  with  liberty  on  1  Tim.  i.  5.  The  roads  were  bad 
beyond  my  expectation.  I  rode  on  horseback,  returned  to  Shaw's, 
took  dinner,  heard  of  Freeborn  Garrettson's  being  put  in  jail  in 
Dorset.  So  Satan  has  stretched  his  chain,;  but  this  shall  work  for 
good.  Spent  a  night  with  Mr.  M'Gaw,  had  great  satisfaction  in  con- 
versing with  him  relative  to  his  having  a  closer  connexion  with  us. 

Wednesday,  March  1,  1780.  Rode  twelve  miles  to  the  chapel ;  four 
or  five  miles  the  roads  were  so  bad  that  I  was  obliged  to  get  out  of 
the  carriage  and  walk,  I  came  late,  and  much  fatigued.  Spoke  or. 
Matt.  v.  16.  "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men"— spoke  freely, 
and  was  blest;  the  work  revives  here,  and  over  in  Queen  Ann's 
county,  a  few  miles  distant  from  this.  Through  bad  roads  with  diffi- 
culty I  rode  to  Fatadd's  mill— stayed  that  night— could  not  get  to 
Choptank. 

Thursday  2.  Heard  of  Mr.  Peterkin's  death,  he  died  last  night— 
I  came  to  his  house,  and  went  to  Thomas  White's— find  it  is  a  fact 
that  brother  Garrettson  was  put  into  jail  last  Sunday. 

Friday  3.  Rose  between  four  and  five  o'clock,  and  prayed  some 
time — have  begun  reading  Robertson's  History  of  Scotland,  in  2  vols. 
—Went  to  Stradley's,  spoke  on  Rev.  iii.  20.  with  liberty  ;  met  class, 
came  back,  and  spoke  a  few  words  to  the  people,  who  were  met  to  put 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  273 

the  remains  of  James  Peterkin  in  the  ground  :  at  the  repeated  solici- 
tations of  Mrs.  M.  White,  I  attended  those  old  people  in  life  and 
death. 

Saturday  4.  I  wrote  to  Peddicord  and  Cromwell ;  and  have  ap- 
pointed Joshua  Dudley  for  Dorset :  he  is  qualified  by  law.  Rested 
md  read  Robertson's  first  volume.  Oh  !  what  treachery  and  policy 
ittendeth  courts  ;  and  bow  does  court-policy,  without  design,  give 
way  to  a  reformation  ;  this  has  been  the  case  in  England  and  Scotland. 
Sunday  5.  I  went  to  church  and  heard  Mr.  Neal  preach  a  good 
sermon  on,  "Oh!  that  they  were  wise."  I  preached  at  Edward 
White's,  on  Micah  vi.  6—8.  The  subject  was  too  laboured  for  the 
:ongregation,  yet  searching,  and  the  people  were  solemn. 

Monday  6.  I  was  kept  close  in  reading  the  first  volume  of  the  His- 
ory  of  Scotland,  and  was  kept  in  quiet.  In  the  morning  I  wrote  to 
jrother  Garrettson  to  comfort  him  under  his  imprisonment. 

Tuesday  7.  A  rainy  day,  but  went  to  my  appointment  :  there  were 
ifew  people  ;  1  spoke  on  Eph.  i.  8,  9.  and  had  great  liberty.  I  think 
i  certain  person  here  that  has  been  a  high  church  woman,  will  yet 
be  a  Methodist.  Called  at  Vincent  Dorothy's,  took  dinner,  talked 
and  prayed  with  the  family.     I  am  to  preach  at  his  house. 

Wednesday  8.  I  rose  at  five,  and  begun  reading  in  Mr.  Wesley's 
Notes  on  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  This  day  I  visited  the  widow 
Cox,  who  has  nearly  lost  her  reason.  She  was  pleased  to  see  me, 
and  showed  some  tenderness  and  intervals  of  reason,  though  I  had 
but  little  satisfaction  with  her.  Lectured  on  Jer.  iii.  15 — 19.  and 
was  blest.     Came  back  to  Thomas  White's. 

Thursday  9.  I  am  under  a  gloomy  heaviness  through  manifold 
temptations.  Read  Mr  Wesley's  Notes  on  the  epistle  to  the  Ro- 
mans. Some  of  his  sentiments  I  have  adopted,  and  thought  them  my 
own ;  perhaps  they  are  not,  for  I  may  have  taken  them  first  from 
him.  Prayed  often,  and  shut  myself  up.  I  find  meditating  on  past 
unfaithfulness  humiliating  ;  but  I  must  go  on  :  pondering  my  ways  so 
much  dejects  and  weakens  my  faith.  Lord,  keep  me  ;  keep  me,  gracious 
Lord,  and  never  let  me  go  !  I  met  class  at  night,  though  none  but 
the  White's  families.  It  was  made  a  blessing,  and  made  me  examine 
my  own  heart. 

Friday  10.  I  rose  between  four  and.  five  o'clock,  spent  some  time 
in  private  prayer  and  with  the  families  ; — read  Mr.  Wesley's  Notes 
on  1  Corinthians,  and  ended  the  reading  of  the  second  book  of  Kings, 
in  my  reading  in  course  the  Bible  through.  To-morrow  I  am  to  go 
down  into  the  North- West  Fork,  where,  I  am  told,  the  Lord  revives 
his  work.  In  the  evening  was  unwell,  and  went  to-bed  early. 
Vol.  I.  35 


274  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL, 

Saturday  11.  Rose  under  some  exercise  of  soul,  set  off  fop  the 
Fork  about  eleven  o'clock,  stopped  at  brother  Gozeley's,  fed  my 
horse,  and  heard  of  the  severity  used  to  brother  Garrettson  in  Cam- 
bridge jail,  and  that  they  would  not  let  the  people  come  to  speak 
with  him.  All  this  shall  work  for  good,  and  we  will  rejoice  that  we 
are  counted  worthy  to  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake.  Found  it  bad 
travelling  I  when  I  came  ioto  by-roads,  my  horse  nearly  overset; 
but  with  difficulty  came  to  White  Brown's,  and  was  blest  in  praying 
with,  and  speaking  to  the  family. 

Sunday  12.  Rode  to  Turpen's  ;  and  fear  something  is  the  matter 
here.  1  cannot  preach  with  freedom,  and  am  not  happy.  Spoke  on 
Ezek.  xviii.  19.  in  light  and  liberty,  and  as  searching  as  I  well  could. 

Monday  13.  Received  a  letter  from  brother  Garrettson  :  his  ene- 
mies are  softened  towards  him.  I  think  the  Lord  will  deliver 
me  yet  from  all  eviL  I  heard  Cromwell  was  put  in  jail,  but  did  not 
credit  it.  I  labour  to  be  more  spiritual,  and  to  be  holy  in  heart  and 
life.  I  rode  to  John  Cannon's,  and  spoke  on  John  i.  8,  9.  bad  liberty^ 
There  were  about  a  hundred  people,  and  some  little  stir.  One  of 
the  sons  has  a  religious  frenzy  ;  he  was  panic  struck,  and  prayed  some 
hours  :  he  kneeled  down  in  time  of  preaching;  he  may  be  sincere,, 
and  come  to  something.  Rode  to  Morgan  Williams's;  met  brother 
Lowrey,  now  rejoicing  in  God,  his  backslidings  healed,  and  his  soul 
restored.  Received  another  letter  from  brother  Garrettson,  where- 
in he  informs  me  the  people  want  to  get  rid  of  him,  and  that  they 
are  not  so  cruel  to  him  as  formerly,  nor  to  the  people  who  visit  him. 

Tuesday  14.  Rose  in  peace,  spent  near  an  hour  in  retirement,  and 
was  blessed.  Read  some  chapters  in  the  Bible.  My  soul  is  kept  in 
peace  ;  Glory  be  to  God  !  I  wrote  to  Philip  Rogers,  and  spent  my 
time  till  noon  in  reading,  writing,  and  prayer. 

Wednesday  15.  Brother  Garrettson  expects  to  come  out  of  jail  by 
the  favour  of  the  governor  and  council  of  Maryland,  in  spite  of  his 
foes  :  so  the  Lord  works  for  us.  In  Somerset  they  are  using  some  of 
Bishop  Warburton's  Works  against  Mr.  Wesley  and  Mr.  Wbitefield. 
I  was  much  blest  in  speaking  at  Spencer  Hitche's  on  Titus  iii.  2—8.  to 
nearly  two  hundred  serious  people  ;  their  prejudices  wear  off":  it  is 
to  be  observed,  bad  as  these  people  were,  they  never  persecuted  us, 
as  they  have  done  at  some  other  places  ;  it  cannot  be  for  our  being 
falsely  reported  to  be  Tories,  for  in  Somerset  some  of  our  greatest 
enemies  are  of  that  s*tamp. 

Thursday  16.  I  have  peace  ;  rose  at  five  o'clock,  read  the  Scrip- 
tures, ended  the  first  book  of  Chronicles.  Lust  night  1  gave  an  ex- 
hortation ;  a  young  girl  wept  enough  to  break  her  heart.    I  hope  shs 


REV.  FRANCIS   ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  27S 

"vv ill  seek  the  Lord.  I  am  kept  in  faith,  and  feel  my  heart  much 
melted  and  moved  to  poor  opposers,  and  can  pray  for  them  as  I  do 
for  myself. 

Friday  17.  Rose  at  five  o'clock,  prayed,  and  read  awhile  in  an  old 
author,  who  warmly  attacks  Popery  in  its  capital  errors,  and  in  a 
strong,  argumentative  manner;  but  is  full  of  Greek  and  Latin  quo- 
tations. I  rode  to  Johnstown,  and  from  thence  to  William  Law's; 
met  Freeborn  Garrettson,  who  came  out  of  jail  by  order  of  the 
governor  and  council  of  Maryland,  who  had  sent  to  the  governor  of 
Delaware  to  know  if  F.  Garrettson  were  not  a  fugitive,  and  had  re- 
ceived satisfactory  information.  Brother  Garrettson  preached  on 
Matthew  xxv.  10.  "  And  they  that  were  ready  went  in  with  him  to  the 
marriage,  and  the  door  was  shut."     I  spoke  a  few  words  after  him— 

1.  That  the  way  some  kept  off  conviction  was,  by  neglect  of  prayer. 

2.  Some  not  uniform  in  prayer  :  3.  Others  never  intended  to  give  up 
all  sin  :  4.  Others  rest  in  present  attainments,  and  take  pride  in  what 
God  hath  done  for  them,  and  fall  away  :  and  closed  with  an  application 
suited  to  the  cases  and  consciences  of  the  people. 

Saturday  18.  Rose  at  four  o'clock,  and  spent  some  time  in  prayer. 
Brother  Garrettson  took  my  place  aod  appointments  :  we  drew  some 
outlines  for  our  conference  while  together.  I  preached  at  John 
Lewis's  on  John  viii.  31 — 37.  and  had  great  liberty,  and  more  people 
than  I  expected,  as  it  rained. 

Sunday  19.  Preached  at  Alexander  Law's,  and  spoke  searchingly  ; 
the  people  were  attentive  ;  some  Presbyterians  brought  to  think 
very  seriously.  1  rode  to  William  Law's,  and  spoke  on  2  Thess.  i. 
7 — 13.   had  living  liberty,  and  1  hope  not  in  vain. 

Monday  20.  Rose  early,  wrote  an  hour,  and  then  rode  twenty-four 
miles  to  Caleb  Furby's  to  preach  ;  was  late,  but  came  before  Caleb 
Boyer  had  done  meeting  the  class.  Spoke  on  John  iii.  24  and  felt 
quick onings.  Went  home  with  Waitnaan  Scipple  ;  he  and  Philip 
Barratt  determined  to  go  about  the  chapel,  and  to  set  it  near  the 
Draw-Bridge. 

Tuesday  21.  R,ode  to  Perdin's,  and  had  many  people  ;  spoke  on 
;'vli!achi  iii.  16 — 18.  Had  much  power  in  speaking:  then  rode  to 
Choptank,  to  the  funeral  of  James  Peterkin  and  Elizabeth  his  wife, 
at  Thomas  White's. 

Wednesday  22.  Mr.  M'Gaw  preached  the  funeral  sermon  of  J. 
and  Elizabeth  Peterkin.  in  Mr  White's  barn  ;  there  were  about  four 
hundred  people  ;  I  only  stood  as  clerk — Joseph  Cromwell  gave  an 
exhortation,  pretty  long  and  rough  :  Mr.  Neal  gave  an  exhortation. 
Bir.  M'Gaw  and  myself  returned  to  the  baptising  the  children.     I 


276  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

have  been  collecting  all  the  minutes  of  our  conferences  in  America, 
to  assist  me  in  a  brief  history  of  the  Methodists  ;  and  an  account  of 
our  principles. 

Thursday  23.  Rose  early  :  have  some  trials  among  my  friends  ;  but 
it  is  all  well,  God  is  with  me.  Company  is  not  agreeable  at  all  times  ; 
but  the  will  of  the  Lord  be  done,  if  he  calls  me  to  it. 

Good-Friday  24.  A  cloudy  day  ;  it  began  raining  when  I  was 
a  few  miles  on  my  way  ;  1  could  not  turn  back :  about  eleven 
o'clock  it  cleared  away — -I  came  to  the  chapel,  there  were  about 
forty  people — Spoke  on  Isaiah  liii.  10.  then  rode  to  brother  Shaw's, 
and  was  much  blest,  as  1  always  am  in  this  family.  I  have  deep  and 
sore  trials  :  the  remembrance  of  them  depresses  my  soul. 

Saturday  25.  Have  peace  of  soul,  but  am  not  enough  given  up  to 
God.  I  purpose  to  be  more  devoted  to  God  in  prayer  and  meditation  : 
rode  to  Boyer's,  and  met  the  society  :  the  people  appear  to  be  more 
alive  to  God  than  vhen  I  was  here  last — preached  on  2  Tim.  ii.  18, 19. 
and  had  much  light  and  liberty. 

Sunday  26.  Rode  to  church,  where  we  had  a  smooth,  sensible  dis- 
course on  1  Peter  i.  3.  I  attended  the  communion — communicants 
increase  daily,  for  people  get  awakened  by  us  ;  when  this  is  the  case, 
they  go  to  the  Lord's  supper.  In  the  afternoon  I  preached  ;  many 
flocked  to  hear,  it  being  Easter-Sunday.  Spoke  plainer  than  ever 
on  Acts  xvii.  18.  had  enlargement  of  heart ;  the  church  minister  was 
present. 

Monday  27.  Called  at  the  Rev.  Mr.  M'Gaw's  ;  spent  an  hour, 
changed  books  and  sentiments,  and  came  off  to  Mrs.  Beauchamp's, 
then  to  Perdin's,  there  were  near  two  hundred  people  ;  spoke  on 
1  Peter  i.  7 — 12.  was  blest  and  felt  some  things  I  spoke  ;  nothing 
but  hard  trials  could  make  me  speak  so. 

Tuesday  28.  I  rode  to  Stradley's,  and  spoke  on  1  Peter  iii.  18. 
with  great  opening — entered  deep  into  the  nature  of  Christ's  suffer- 
ings, and  some  sublime  truths  of  the  Gospel. 

Wednesday  29.  Spent  what  time  I  had  to  spare  in  transcribing 
from  Robert  Walker  a  part  of  one  of  his  sermons  to  the  preachers, 
and  put  it  in  my  selections.  I  went  to  preach  at  Vincent  Dorothy's, 
and  spoke  on  Luke  xxiv.  25,  26.  Made  a  faithful  discharge  of  truth 
to  the  people ;  they  were  attentive.  I  have  been  very  much  exer- 
cised in  mind  ;  the  time  for  leaving  this  place  draws  nigh.  Never 
was  confinement  in  one  state,  Delaware,  so  trying  to  me,  Lord  help 
me,  I  am  weak !  At  night  1  went  to  Edward  White's,  and  gave  an 
exhortation  ;  was  greatly  troubled  in  mind. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy'S  JOURNAL.  277 

Thursday  30.  I  am  going  to  Sussex,  on  my  way  to  the  quarter 
meeting  at  the  Fork.  I  fear  there  will  be  great  commotions  this 
summer ;  God  only  knows  what  the  end  of  these  things  will  be  ;  but 
"  Blessed  are  those  people  that  are  found  watching."  I  lost  my  way 
and  wandered  into  the  swamp,  and  feared  I  must  lie  in  the  woods, 
but  came  to  a  friend's  house,  and  then  pushed  on  and  reached  Mr. 
Polk's  about  seven  o'clock — read  a  wonderful  book  against  Metho- 
dists, but  it  will  do  no  great  harm. 

Friday  21.  Waked  before  three  o'clock,  though  I  did  not  go  to 
bed  till  after  ten  o'clock — was  weather-bound,  and  read  the  second 
volume  of  Robertson's  History  of  Scotland.  The  fate  of  unfortunate 
Mary,  Queen  of  Scots,  was  affecting  ;  and  the  admired  Queen  Elizabeth 
does  not  appear  to  advantage  in  the  Scotch  history.  Prayed  an  hour 
this  morning,  and  retired  twice  ;  used  abstinence,  though  not  so 
severe  as  I  commonly  use  on  Fridays. 

Saturday,  April  1,  1730.  Rose  about  half  past  three  o'clock,  and 
set  out  for  Broad-Creek — was  kept  in  peace  all  the  way  ;  when  in 
temptation,  I  pray,  and  it  flies.  Came  in  about  three  o'clock  ;  and 
found  that  the  spirit  of  lying  and  fury  reigned !  I  received  a  satisfac- 
tory letter  from  William  Moore  ;  he  hopes  a  reconciliation  will  take 
place  in  Virginia,  if  healing  measures  are  adopted. 

Sunday  2.  Rose  about  six  o'clock  :  I  lay  in  a  dark  room,  and  was 
a  little  unwell :  I  am  kept  near  to  God,  but  under  some  dejection,  I 
believe  it  was  because  the  people  of  this  house  are  not  right  toward 
God.  Spoke  to-day  on  Acts  xxviii.  22.  "  As  for  this  sect,  we  know 
that  every  where  it  is  spoken  against."  Spoke  long  and  freely,  but 
the  people  were  not  greatly  moved— preached  in  the  afternoon  at 
George  Moore's  on  1  Peter  iv.  18.  "  If  the  righteous  are  scarcely 
saved,"  &c.  and  a  blessing  followed. 

Monday  3.  Rose  at  five  o'clock,  spent  some  time  in  prayer,  and 
my  reading  in  course  to  the  twenty-third  Psalm— preached  at  Thomas 
Jones's  to  about  sixty  careless  ignorant  people  ;  had  very  little  com- 
fort ;  spoke  from  2  Tim.  ii.  19.  Read  in  the  afternoon  the  Appendix 
to  the  History  of  Scotland.  I  am  in  heaviness  through  the  deaduess 
of  the  people,  and  the  lies  of  the  wicked  about  us  ;  of  which  there 
appear  to  be  enough  ;  and  it  does  seem  now  as  if  they  could  freely 
shed  our  blood  :  Lord,  give  me  faith  and  patience!  The  present  state 
of  things  is,  Report,  say  they,  and  we  will  report  it ;  nothing  c-m  come 
amiss  ;  all  is  fish  that  comes  to  the  net ;  the  wicked  will  say  any  thing  ; 
yes,  all  manner  of  evil  against  us. 

Tuesday  4.  There  came  on  rain,  but  I  went  to  Gitting  Bradley's  ; 
there  were  about  forty  people,  though  it  rained  rapidly.      Spoke 


27S  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL. 

on  Rev.  iii.  20.   and   was   much   blest— then  returned  to  George 
Moore's. 

Wednesday  5.  A  snowy  morning.  Rode  to  Leven  Bacon's  :  there 
were  about  thirty  people  ;  I  was  led  out  to  speak  close  to  them,  and 
some  felt  it  to  the  heart. 

Thursday  6.  Rode  to  Mr  Freeny's.  I  preached  from  2  Chron. 
vii.  14.  and  was  led,  though  with  labour,  to  deliver  my  soul  to  them. 
Set  off  to  go  seven  miles,  through  a  dreary  road  and  deep  swamps, 
to  Callaway's — came  in  about  seven  o'clock,  and  found  liberty  as  soon 
as  I  came.  God  has  a  people  in  these  rude  wastes  :  I  expect  to  gos 
after  preaching,  to  the  sea-side. 

Friday  7.  About  three  days  ago  I  was  moved  to  pray  for  good 
weather,  when  I  saw  what  a  condition  we  should  be  in :  there  is  a 
change  in  the  weather.  I  have  peace  this  morning,  and  my  heart  is 
lifted  up  to  God  in  thankfulness.  An  appearance  of  good  weather  : 
blessed  be  God  !  though,  when  the  weather  was  so  uncomfortable,  I 
was  tempted  to  murmur  :  Lord,  pardon  me  in  this  also.  Surely, 
what  the  Lord  does  i^-  right,  whether  he  does  it  against  a  single  per- 
son or  to  a  whole  nation.  Preached  at  Callaway's  on  2  Peter  iii.  18. 
and  was  blest.  There  were  about  fifty  souls  :  an  attentive,  feeling 
people.  After  preaching,  I  rode  thirty  miles  to  the  sea-side  :  there 
met  brother  Garrettson,  confident  that  God  had,  in  a  vision  of  the 
night,  sanctified  him. 

Saturday  8.  Went  to  the  sea  and  bathed,  though  cold  :  and  then 
rode  about  nine  miles  from  Evans's  to  Gray's.  Our  quarterly  meet- 
ing began  :  I  preached  on  Rom.  v.  6,  7.  and  had  liberty.  The 
Baptists  show  their  enmity,  and  go  from  house  to  house  persuading 
weak  people  to  be  dipt,  and  not  to  hear  the  Methodists  ;  and  they 
bring  their  preachers  in  our  absence. 

Sunday  9.  I  have  peace  :  it  has  been  very  rainy  ;  but  clear  this 
morning.  We  had  a  great  day:  preached  on  1  John  v.  19.  "We 
know  that  we  are  of  God,  and  the  whole  world  lieth  in  wickedness." 
Brother  Garrettson  exhorted,  there  was  some  melting — John  Cooper 
spoke  to  purpose  ;  Joseph  Cromwell  brought  up  the  rear  with  great 
-success.     The  people  were  serious. 

Monday  10.  I  have  peace  of  soul ;  but  too  much  talk  like  trifling ; 
the  devil  throws  his  firebrands,  but  grace  is  sufficient.  I  appointed 
brother  Wyatt  to  keep  the  ground  against  the  Baptists,  and  to  supply 
our  places  here  instead  of  the  travelling  preachers  that  are  going  to 
conference  :  for  John's  people  intend  to  come  a  fishing  about,  when 
we  are  gone.  We  had  a  love-feast  at  eight  o'clock— many  spoke  in 
a  very  feeling  manner.     God  was    with   us  at   eleven  o'clock— I 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASEURV's  JOURNAL.  279" 

preached  on  2  Cor.  iv.  12.     Brother  Cromwell  and  brother  Garrett- 
son   exhorted  :    the  people  were  moved  at  what  was  said,  though 
simple,  and  the  same   things  he  frequently  says  ;  but  he  is  a  man  of 
God,  and  their  spiritual  father. 

Tuesday  11.  We  rode  fifty  miles  to  Choptank. 
Wednesday  12.    I  was  employed  in  writing  a  short  history  of  the 
Methodists  ;  also  I  in  preparing  my  papers  for  conference.     I  am 
going  from  my  home,  Thomas  White's. 

Thursday  13.  I  set  off  for  Richard  Shaw's,  in  Kent ;  and  came  in 
about  five  o'clock,  and  kept  a  watch-evening.  I  spoke  on  1  Cor.  xvL 
13,  14.    Caleb  Peddicord  exhorted. 

Friday  14.  A  day  ot  fasting— I  was  employed  in  preparing  my 
papers  for  conference  ;  Caleb  Peddicord  is  my  scribe.  1  am  under 
some  apprehensions  that  trouble  is  near.  Thomas  M'Clure  is  con- 
fined sick  in  Philadelphia.  Henry  Kennedy  and  William  Adams  are 
dead  :  so  the  Lord  cuts  off  the  watchmen  of  Israel.  But  sure  I  am 
that  it  is  better  to  die  early,  than  to  live,  though  late9  to  disho- 
nour God. 

Saturday  15.  I  spent  the  afternoon  with  Mr.  M'Gaw. 
Sunday  16.  Rode  twelve  miles,  and  preached  at  the  chapel,  or 
Psalms  cxxii.  6 — 8.  Had  some  life  among  the  people,  but  I  fear  they 
did  not  properly  understand  me.  Preached  at  Richard  Shaw's,  my 
farewell  sermon,  on  Acts  xxi.  32.  The  people  were  solemn,  but  not 
deeply  affected  with  a  sense  of  the  worth  of  their  souls. 

Monday  17.  Our  quarter  meeting  began — Our  little  chapel  with 
galleries,  held  about  seven  hundred  ;  but  there  were  I  judge  near 
one  thousand  people.  I  preached  on  Phil.  i.  27.  "  Only  let  your 
conversation  be  as  it  becometh  the  Gospel  of  Christ." 

Tuesday  18.  After  love-feast,  Mr.  M'Gaw  read  prayers,  and  Mr, 
Neal  preached  a  good  sermon  on  "  Feed  my  sheep  ;"  brother  Gar- 
rettson  and  myself  exhorted.  The  power  of  God  was  present  in 
the  love-feast :  many  spoke  in  our  meeting  with  light,  life,  and 
liberty. 

Wednesday  19.  I  left  Mr.  Emery's,  where  we  were  very  kindly 
entertained  in  the  dreary  forest ;  they  live  well  ;  these  people  were 
brought  off  their  prejudices  by  Mr.  M'Gaw's  preaching  in  the  chapel ; 
they  and  their  family-connexions  promise  fair.  Brother  Garrettson 
spoke  on,  "  Ye  now  have  sorrow" — But  he  could  not  move  the  peo- 
ple here  as  at  the  sea-side  :  they  are  cooler,  and  he  is  not  their  spiri- 
tual father. 

Thursday  20.  Set  off  for  Baltimore,  and  called  at  Mr.  M'Gaw's; 
we  parted  in  much  affection.     Called  at  Mr.  Basset's,  and  had  a 


280  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL. 

warm  conversation  with  Warner  Mifflin.  We  prayed,  and  Mrs. 
Ba?sfit,made  a  confession  of  finding  peace.  We  rode  to  Solomon 
bymons  s. 

Friday  21.  We  rode  to  Robert  Thomson's,  Maryland,  Cecil- 
County  ;  dined,  prayed,  and  spoke  close  to  him,  who  had  fainted  in 
his  mind,  being  now  left  alone.  We  came  to  Susquehannah  River  a 
little  before  sun-set,  and  passed  over  in  ttfe  night;  rode  six  miles  in 
the  dark,  and  a  bad  road  ;  but  Providence  has  preserved  me  hitherto. 
I  had  a  very  tender  feeling  for  the  people  I  left  behind ;  this  makes 
me  think  I  must  return. 

Saturday  22.  !  could  not  pray  for  our  friends  we  left  behind  with- 
out weeping.  We  rode  to  Mr.  Gough's,  Baltimore  county  ;  my 
friends  appeared  very  joyful  to  see  me  ;  brother  Glendenning  had  his 
objections  to  make,  and  pleaded  some  in  favour  of  the  Virginia  bre- 
thren, who  had  made  a  division.*  We  prayed  after  dinner,  and  God 
was  with  us — I  had  cause  to  talk  more  than  I  desired. 

Sunday  23.  Lord  give  me  wisdom  that  is  profitable  to  direct.  This 
is  a  dumb  Sabbath  :  I  have  no  freedom  to  preach  here ;  there  are 
strange  changes  ;  what  has  taken  place  with  our  brethren  seems 
parallel  with  the  commotions  of  the  southward  ;  and  the  same  spirit. 
I  am  kept  in  peace,  through  grace,  and  am  casting  my  care  upon  the 
Lord.  If  I  cannot  keep  up  old  Methodism  in  any  other  place,  I  can 
in  the  peninsula  :  that  must  be  my  last  retreat.  Spent  some  time  in 
private,  and  prepared  some  conditions  for  a  partial  reconciliation,  in 
hopes  to  bring  on  a  real  one  in  Virginia.  Brother  Garrettson  preach- 
ed in  the  afternoon,  on  these  words,  "  Disallowed  indeed  of  men, 
but  chosen  of  God,  and  precious  ;"  he  was  short  and  profitable  ;  I 
prayed  with  my  heart  full.  Met  brother  Selby,  whom  I  have  not 
seen  for  near  six  years,  one  of  my  old  friends  from  New- York, 
driven  about  by  the  commotions  of  the  present  times  :  he  with  great 
joy  fell  upon  my  neck  and  wept.  I  am  more  moved  than  ever  before, 
with  leaving  and  meeting  my  friends  ;  these  are  humbling  times,  and 
make  the  Christians  love  one  another :  I  found  the  spirits  of  the 
preachers  much  melted  and  softened.  1  hope  things  will  be  made  easy. 

Monday  24.  We  made  a  plan  for  the  appointment  of  the  preach- 
ers. Received  three  epistles  from  the  Jerseys,  soliciting  three  or 
four  preachers,  with  good  tidings  of  the  work  of  God  reviving  in  those 

*  See  what  a  poor  unsettled  creature  this  Glendenning  ever  was.  This  was  long  before 
he  went  into  his  mighty  trances,  visions,  &c.  that  he  talks  so  much  about.  No  wonder 
that  a  person  of  his  selfish  temper  should  behave  as  he  has  done  lo  his  brethren  the 
Methodists 

"VV.  P 


3fcV.  FRANCIS  ASBimY's  JOURNAL,  ^81 


parts.  The  petitioners  I  shall  hear  with  respect.  I  am  kept  in 
peace;  praise  the  Lord,  O  raj  soul!  Rode  to  Baltimore,  and  my 
friends  were  much  rejoiced  to  see  me  ;  hut  silence  broke  my  heart. 
The  act  against  nonjurors  reduced  me  to  silence,  because  the  oath 
of  fidelity  required  by  the  act  of  the  state  of  Maryland,  was  prepos- 
terously rigid.  I  became  a  citizen  of  Delaware,  and  was  regularly 
returned.  I  was  at  this  time  under  recommendation  of  the  governor 
of  Delaware  as  taxable. 

Tuesday  25.  Our  conference  met  in  peace  and  love.  We  settled 
all  our  northern  stations  ;  then  we  began  in  much  debate  about  the 
letter  sent  from  Virginia.  We  first  concluded  to  renounce  them  ; 
then  I  offered  conditions  of  union. 

I.  That  they  should  ordain  no  more. 

II.  That  they  should  come  no  farther  than  Hanover  circuit. 

III.  We  would  have  our  delegates  in  their  conference. 

IV  That  they  should  not  presume  to  administer  the  ordinances 
where  there  is  a  decent  Episcopal  minister. 

V.  To  have  a  union  conference. 

These  would  not  do,  as  we  found  upon  long  debate,  and  we  came 
back  to  our  determinations  ;  although  it  was  like  death  to  think  of 
parting.  At  last  a  thought  struck  my  mind,  to  propose  a  suspension 
of  the  ordinances  for  one  year,  and  so  cancel  all  our  grievances,  and 
be  one.  It  was  agreed  on  both  sides,  and  Philip  Gatch,  and  Reuben 
Ellis,  that  had  been  very  stiff,  came  into  it,  and  thought  it  would  do. 

Wednesday  26.  Preached  on  Acts  vi.  4.  with  liberty. 

Thursday  27.  Read  the  advice  to  preachers.  At  twelve  o'clock 
we  had  a  melting  love-feast ;  preachers  and  people  wept  like  chil- 
dren. At  night  I  preached  on  Acts  ii.  48.  with  great  liberty,  to  about 
six  hundred  people.  Joseph  Cromwell  and  Freeborn  Garrettson, 
spoke.  At  the  recommendation  of  the  conference  William  Watters 
too — these  three  volunteered,  and  were  to  be  my  spokesmen.  Myself 
and  brother  Garrettson  are  going  to  the  Virginia  conference,  to  bring 
about  peace  and  union.  I  am  kept  in  peace,  through  much  business  ; 
little  sleep,  cold  weather  and  damp.     Lord,  return,  and  visit  us. 

Friday  28.  I  have  peace,  and  am  going  to  brother  Lynch's  this 
day.  I  had  a  melting  sense  of  divine  love  upon  my  heart  after  dinner  ; 
this  family  professeth  sanctification  ;  whether  this  be  so  in  the  fullest 
sense  I  know  not ;  but  this  I  know,  that  they  are  much  more  spiritual 
than  ever  I  knew  them  :  so  far  it  is  well,  and  we  go  upon  safe 
ground. 

Saturday  29.  Rode  to  Mr.  Gough's  ;  this  is  a  good  house  to  do  bu- 
siness at. 

Vol.   I.  36 


282  REV.  PRANtilS  ASBURY*S  JOURNAL. 

Sunday  30.  T  went  to  the  Fork  preaching-house  ;  an  Episcopalian 
minister  preaching  just  by.  Spoke  on  Psalms  Ixxviii.  4 — 8.  It  was 
not  made  a  great  blessing  to  the  people  :  I  was  much  tried  to  know  if 
the  subject  was  proper,  and  I  think  it  was  ;   I  could  not  make  choice 

of  any  other.     Spoke  at  Mr.  G 's,  on  1  Peter  i.  5 — 10.  had  only 

the  family  to  preach  to.  This  is  not  like  Kent  (in  Delawnre)  for  life 
and  congregations.  There  were  many  of  us,  and  much  talking  pre- 
vented my  reading,  writing,  and  praying. 

Monday,  May  1,  1780.  I  am  going  to  Virginia;  am  kept,  but  not 
so  much  employed  for  God  a9  I  ought  to  be.  Preached  at  Baltimore 
on  John  v.  19.     A  rainy  night,  but  many  came  to  hear. 

Tuesday  2.  I  rode  to  John  Worthington's,  and  spoke  at  night ;  God 
was  present.  I  once  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  Charles  Scott, 
apparently  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  but  what  is  he  now !  He  died  in 
a  drunken  revery. 

Wednesday  3.  I  rode  to  Georgetown,  from  thence  to  William 
Adams's  in  Virginia  ;  came  in  late  and  fatigued. 

Thursday  4.  Prepared  some  papers  for  Virginia  conference. — I 
go  with  a  heavy  heart ;  and  fear  the  violence  of  a  party  of  positive 
men  :  Lord,  give  me  wisdom.  I  preached  at  the  chapel  in  Fairfax — 
and  met  Mr.  Griffith,  an  Episcopal  minister,  who  was  friendly  ;  and 
we  spent  the  afternoon  together. 

Friday  5.  Set  out  in  company  with  brother  Garrettson,  rode  near 
forty  miles,  lodged  at  Garratt's  tavern,  where  we  were  well  enter- 
tained. Brother  Garrettson  talked  to  the  landlord  on  the  subject  of 
religion,  and  prayed  with  him  at  night  and  in  the  morning,  though  he 
would  not  consent  to  call  his  family  together.  We  rode  on  to  Mr. 
Arnold's,  about  thirty  miles,  the  roads  good  Brother  Garrettson  will 
let  no  person  escape  a  religious  lecture  that  comes  in  his  way. — Sure 
he  is  faithful,  but  what  am  I  ?  We  found  the  plague  was  begun  ;  the 
good  man  Arnold  was  warm  for  the  ordinances  I  spoke  on  "  Strive 
to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate."  There  were  about  forty  people,  but 
dead  enough. 

Sunday  7.  We  rode  eighteen  miles  to  Brown's  tavern.  I  preach- 
ed on  Isai.  lv.  6,  7.  On  entering  into  Virginia,  I  have  prepared  some 
papers  for  the  conference,  and  expect  trouble,  but  grace  is  almighty  ; 
hitherto  hath  the  Lord  helped  me. 

Monday  8.  We  rode  to  Granger's,  fifteen  miles,  stopped  and  fed 
our  horses.  These  people  are  full  of  the  ordinances  ;  we  talked  and 
prayed  with  them,  then  rode  on  to  the  Manakin-town  ferry,  much 
fatigued  with  the  ride  ;  went  to  friend  Smith's,  where  all  the  preach- 
ers were  met  :  I  conducted  myself  with  cheerful  freedom,  but  found 


IlEV,  FRANCIS  ASBtfRy5S  JOURNAL  *28^ 

there  was  a  separation  in  heart  and  practice.  I  spoke  with  my  coun- 
tryman, John  Dickins,  and  found  him  opposed  to  our  continuance  in 
union  with  the  Episcopal  Church — Brother  Walters  and  Garrettson 
tried  their  men,  and  found  them  inflexihle. 

Tuesday  9.  The  conference  was  called  :  brother  Watters,  Garrett- 
son, and  myself  stood  back,  and  being  afterward  joined  by  brother 
Dromgoole,  we  were  desired  to  come  in,  and  I  was  permitted  to 
speak — I  read  Mr.  Wesley's  thoughts  against  a  separation  ;  showed 
my  private  letters  of  instructions  from  Mr.  Wesley  ;  set  before  them 
the  sentiments  of  the   Delaware  and  Baltimore  conferences — read 
our  epistles,  and  read  my  letter  to  brother  Gatch,  and  Dickins's  let- 
ter in  answer.     After  some  time  spent  this  way,  it  was  proposed  to 
me,  if  1  would  get  the  circuits  supplied,  they  would  desist ;  but  that 
I  could  not  do.     We  went  to  preaching  ;   I  spoke  on  Ruth  ii.  4.  and 
spoke  as  though  nothing  had  been  the  matter  among  the  preachers  or 
people  ;  and  we  were  greatly  pleased  and  comforted — there  was  some 
moving  among  the  people.     In  the  afternoon  we  met ;  the  preachers 
appeared  to  me  to  be  farther  off;  there  had  been,  I  thought,  some 
talking  out  of  doors. — When  we,  Asbury,  Garrettson,  Watters,  and 
Dromgoole,  could  not  come  to  a  conclusion  with  them,  we  withdrew, 
and  left  them  to  deliberate  on  the  conditions  I  offered,  which  was  to 
suspend  the  measures  they  had  taken  for  one  year.     After  an  hour's 
conference,  we  were  called  to  receive  their  answer,  which  was,  they 
could  not  submit  to  the  terms  of  union. — I  then  prepared  to  leave  the 
house,  to  go  to  a  near  neighbour's  to  lodge,  under  the  heaviest  cloud  I 
ever  felt  in  America — Oh  !  what  I  felt ! — nor  I  alone  ! — but  the  agents 
on  both  sides  ! — they  wept  like  children,  but  kept  their  opinions. 

Wednesday  10.  I  returned  to  take  leave  of  conference,  and  to  go  off 
immediately  to  the  North  ;  but  found  the)7  were  brought  to  an  agree- 
ment while  1  had  been  praying,  as  with  a  broken  heart,  in  the  house 
we  went  to  lodge  at — and  brothers  Watters  and  Garrettson  had  been 
praying  up  stairs  where  the  conference  sat.  We  heard  what  they  had 
to  say — surely  the  hand  of  God  has  been  greatly  seen  in  all  this  : 
there  might  have  been  twenty  promising  preachers,  and  three  thou- 
sand people,  seriously  affected  by  this  separation;  but  the  Lord 
would  not  suffer  this — we  then  had  preaching  by  brother  Watters 
on,  "  Come  thou  with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good" — afterward  we 
had  a  love-feast  ;  preachers  and  people  wept,  prayed,  and  talked,  so 
that  the  spirit  of  dissention  was  powerfully  weakened,  and  I  hoped  it 
would  never  take  place  again. 

Thursday  11.  I  rode  to  Petersburg,  thirty-five  miles,  through  much 
fatigue  and  want  of  rest ;  found  myself  indisposed  with  the  headach 


'-'-■i  lltV.  FRA;\XIS  ASBtlftVS  JOURNAL 

With  difficulty  I  spoke  at  brother  Harding's  on,  "  We  know  that  we 
are  of  God" — but  was  so  unwell  I  could  scarcely  speak  at  all. — 
Though  having  prevailed  with  God  and  man,  I  yet  halt  on  my  thigh. 

Friday  12.  I  am  a  little  better  :  rest  this  day  to  write  to  Mr.  Wes- 
ley. In  Petersburg,  our  friends  who  had  a  little  religion  before  these 
times,  have  declined  ;  I  fear  their  hearts  are  worldly.  Some  who  had 
religion  before  these  times  have  lost  it ;  and  many  who  had  none, 
have  gained  much  ;  like  some  who  had  no  fortunes,  have  gained 
great  ones  ;  and  many  of  those  who  had  great  fortunes,  are  in  a  fair 
way  to  lose  them,  if  these  times  hold  long. 

Saturday  13.  Went  to  Nathaniel  Lee's,  and  preached  to  about  fifty 
people  on  Eph.  v.  8  and  had  freedom  ;  the  congregation  small,  owing 
to  a  muster  and  cock  fighting  not  far  off.  I  then  rode  to  Wood  Tuck- 
er's, a  great  friend  to  the  old  plan  of  Methodism  ;  and  was  kept  in 
peace. 

Sunday  14.  Rode  to  George  Booth's  ;  he  is  a  curious  genius  for  a 
mechanic.  We  had  a  great  house,  and  about  three  hundred  people  ; 
I  spoke  on  1  Cor.  ii.  14.  plain,  warm  and  searching  ;  but  they  seemed 
sn  general  careless  :  I  fear  there  is  but  little  solid,  pure  religion  here. 

Monday  15.  Was  much  exercised  ;  Lord!  keep  me  every  moment. 
As  this  is  rest-day,  I  intend  to  employ  my  time  in  reading  and  writing 
principally ;  but  my  spirit  is  restless  various  ways  ;  and  I  think^I 
ought  always  to  be  employed.  I  am  for  attending  my  twelve  times 
of  prayer,  and  resisting  the  devil  steadfastly  in  the  faith.  I  am  much 
humbled  before  the  Lord  ;  a  blessing  I  want,  and  will  not  cease  cry- 
ing to  the  Lord  for  it.  I  read  Dr.  Chandler's  Appeal  to  the  Public ; 
I  think  upon  the  whole  he  's  right — Why  might  not  the  Protestant 
Episcopal  Church  have  as  much  indulgence  in  America  as  any  other 
society  of  people  ? 

Tuesday  16.  Spent  near  an  hour  in  private  prayer,  and  twice  in 
the  family  ;  then  went  to  Notaway  church,  where  Mr.  Jarratt  gave 
an  excellent  sermon  on,  "  A  man  shall  be  an  hiding  place."  He  was 
rather  shackled  with  his  notes. — We  then  had  sacrament ;  afterward  I 
returned  to  George  Booth's,  spent  the  evening  with  Mr.  Jarrett,  and 
found  him  as  friendly  as  ever.  He  labours,  but  the  people  give  him 
little  or  nothing. 

Wednesday  17.  Rode  to  the  Widow  Heath's — about  seventy  peo- 
ple were  waiting  for  me ;  it  was  twenty  miles,  my  horse  lame,  and 
the  road  rough  ;  the  enemy  tried  me  just  before  I  came  to  the  house, 
as  he  generally  does,  if  the  distance  is  more  than  I  expect;  I  spoke 
on  Luke  xiii.  23.  and  was  pointed,  and  had  liberty  :  God  moved  upon 
the  hearts  of  the  people — met  the  societ}--,  about  fifteen  pious  pen- 


•KLV.  FRANCIS  asbury's  JOURNAL  2&5 

pie ;  most  were  blest,  and  they  seem  all  on  stretch  for  holiness- 
spent  my  afternoon  in  reading  and  study.  There  seems  to  be  some 
call  for  me  in  every  part  of  the  work  :  I  have  travelled  at  this  time 
from  north  to  south  to  keep  peace  and  union  :  and  Oh !  if  a  rent  and 
separation  had  taken  place,  what  work,  what  hurt  to  thousands  of 
souls  !  It  is  now  stopped,  and  if  it  had  not  it  might  have  been  my  fault ; 
it  may  have  been  my  fault  that  it  took  place  ;  bat  !  felt  a  timidity  that 
I  could  not  get  over  ;  preachers  and  people  ranking  the  trial.,  they 
see  the  consequences,  and  I  hope  will  do  so  no  more.  They  have 
suffered  for  their  forwardness.     May  we  all  be  more  prudent. 

Thursday  18.  When  I  came  to  Andrews's  the  people  had  no  notice  ; 
I  was  much  tried  on  the  way,  my  horse  lame  and  the  road  rough  ; 
but  I  lifted  up  my  heart  to  God.  The  family  sent  out  and  called  in 
about  sixty  people,  black  and  white.  Spoke  on  Rev.  xxii.  13 — 18. 
I  had  liberty,  and  felt  a  moving  in  my  own  soul — two  women  were 
cut  to  the  heart,  and  ivere  in  an  agony  of  soul  for  holiness  :  I  prayed 
with  them  twice,  while  the  people  stayed — and  afterward  spoke  to 
them  ;  they  both,  notwithstanding  their  agony,  had  a  clear  sense  of  the 
blessing  they  stood  in  need  of,  and  believed  God  had  purified  their 
hearts — I  saw  them  both  happily  breathing  a  divine  calm  and  heaven- 
ly sweetness — I  see  clearly  that  to  press  the  people  to  holiness,  is 
tfce  proper  method  to  take  them  from  contending  for  ordinances,  or 
any  less  consequential  things.  I  read  and  transcribed  some  of  Pot- 
ter's Church  Government ;  and  must  prefer  the  Episcopal  mode  of 
Church  Government  to  the  Presbyterian.  If  the  modern  bishops 
were  as  the  ancient  ones,  all  would  be  right ;  and  there  wants  nothing 
but  the  spirit  of  the  thing. 

Friday  19.  A  very  warm  day.  I  rode  over  Black-Water  to  Bed- 
ingfields,  and  spoke  with  liberty  to  about  one  hundred  people,  on 
Acts  xxvi.  19.  when  I  came  to  treat  on  sanctification,  I  melted  into 
tenderness,  and  the  people  also — met  class,  and  had  a  blessed  tender- 
ness  among  the  people  :  kept  a  fast-day  till  four  o'clock,  then  ate  no 
meat :  it  is  a  day  of  peace  and  purity,  but  I  might  have  been  more  in 
prayer.  I  called  to  see  Capt.  Nicholas  ;  his  wife  is  confined  to  her 
bed ;  but  she  was  blessed  :  thank  the  Lord. 

Saturday  20.  I  rode  to  Bartlett's,  ten  miles,  and  preached  to  about 
thirty  insensible  people  :  afterward  rode  to  Warren's,  who  was  in  dis- 
tress, being  of  a  melancholy  cast,  which  is  a  family  disorder.  He  is  a 
man  of  understanding ;  and  in  time  past  followed  the  Quakers.  He  was 
in  bed  in  perfect  health  :  I  raised  him  up,  and,  after  prayer  he  ap- 
peared better.  The  people  are  young,  and  have  no  deep  sense  of 
religion  here ;  but  they  must  have  a  trial. 


l:tib  rev.  francis  asbury's  journal. 

Sunday  21.  I  have  peace  of  mind,  but  fear  we  shall  have  few 
hearers  to-day  :  it  is  not  far  from  the  rich  and  great  upon  James 
River.  I  read  and  transcribed  some  of  Potter's  Church  Government, 
till  ten  o'clock  ;  was  assisted  in  speaking  to  about  two  hundred  peo- 
ple, who  appeared  very  ignorant  and  unfeeling.  After  a  while,  I 
gave  them  another  sermon,  not  very  acceptable  to  me  ;  and  perhaps 
less  so  to  them  :  however,  I  am  clear — they  are  warned.  We  then 
set  out  at  four  o'clock,  rode  sixteen  miles  over  high  hills,  and  deep 
vallies,  in  the  dirk  :  but  came  safe  ;  went  to  bed  at  eleven  o'clock, 
and  was  up  at  five  o'clock.  It  is  well  if  this  will  do  long:  I  am 
always  on  the  wing,  but  it  is  for  God. 

Monday  22.  I  laboured  with  Brother  Hill ;  I  showed  him  the  evil 
of  a  separation,  which  he  seems  to  be  afraid  of.  Our  people's 
leaving  the  Episcopal  Church  has  occasioned  the  people  of  that 
Church  to  withdraw  from  our  preaching.  I  preached  on  Rom.  viii. 
7 — 9  and  had  an  opening  ;  the  people  appeared  pleased,  and  some 
wept,  and  I  hope  were  profited.  I  advised  our  friends  to  attend  the 
Episcopal  Church,  that  prejudice  might  be  removed  ;  then  their  peo- 
ple will  attend  us  :  if  I  could  stay,  some  would  attend.  We  suffer 
much  by  young  preachers  and  young  people  ;  yet  they  would  do  their 
duty  if  they  knew  it  ;  but  those  that  knew  a  little  of  our  discipline, 
and  have  been  first  in  the  work,  came  into  the  notion  of  ordinance!, 
and  neglected  the  direction  in  the  minutes. 

Tuesday  23.  I  went  to  the  great  preaching-house,  in  Nansemond : 
it  has  been  a  store-house,  now  turned  into  a  preaching-house  :  there 
were  about  three  hundred  people — 1  saw  but  one  trifler  among 
them  ;  and  he  rose  and  went  out,  when  I  came  about  the  consciences 
of  the  sinners.  I  spoke  on  1  Pet.  iv.  18.  had  uncommon  freedom; 
they  appear  to  be  an  affectionate,  good  people  ;  they  collected  me 
money,  but  I  took  none  ;  a  man  offered  me  a  silver  dollar,  but  I 
could  not  take  it,  lest  they  should  say  1  came  for  money.  There  is  a 
general  prospect  of  a  work  ;  the  minister,  Mr.  Burgess,  is  a  very 
respectable  man,  and  preaches,  the  people  say,  plain  good  sermons. 
No  doubt  the  introduction  of  the  ordinances  by  us  would  be  offen- 
sive where  there  is  a  clergyman  so  worthy.  1  had  a  meeting  at  night 
at  Pinner's  ;  the  society  came.  I  exhorted  them  to  holiness,  and 
relative  duties,  and  spoke  of  Satan's  temptations  ;  there  was  a  great 
melting.  I  read  between  preaching  and  the  evening  meeting,  Bishop 
Burnett's  plain  and  honest  Account  of  the  Earl  of  Rochester:  it  was 
a  great  thing  to  see  such  a  man  brought  to  God  !  A  check  to  infidels, 
a  confirmation  of  truth.  I  was  melted  and  filled  with  God  :  Oh  I 
.how  the  Lord  blesses  me  among  these  people  !    I  have  laboured  to. 


StEV.  FKAKCIS  ASBURY?S  JOURNAL.  287 

get  our  friends  well  affected  to  the  Episcopal  Church  ;  what  could  I 
do  better,  when  we  had  not  the  ordinances  among  us. 

Wednesday  24.  I  have  peace  and  power,  and  love  to  God.  This 
was  appointed  for  a  rest-day,  but  one  of  my  old  friends  gave  out  for 
preaching — While  I  have  my  health,  and  God  is  with  me,  I  shall 
never  say  it  is  enough.  There  is  a  prospect  of  a  good  work  in  Nan- 
semond,  Virginia  ;  near  one  hundred  people  joined,  in  the  neighbour- 
hood. Rode  to  Philips's,  six  miles,  and  preached  to-  about  one  hun- 
dred people — After  preaching,  rode  on  to  the  widow  Lane's,  twenty- 
five  miles  ;  rode  over  Black  Water,  through  Southampton,  and  with 
hard  riding  (and  some  part  bad  roads)  reached  there  about  nine 
o'clock  ;  where  I  slept  in  peace,  and  rose  early.  Oh  !  for  faith  to  be 
saved  from  all  sin. — At  twelve  o'clock  went  to  preach,  and  God  was 
with  us  of  a  truth,  while  I  spoke  upon  1  Pet.  i.  7 — 12.  afterward 
met  the  Society,  and  gave  the  ppople  liberty  to  speak  ;  many  of  them 
spoke,  and  there  were  great  meltings  among  them  :  one  woman  tes- 
tified sanctification.  I  was  blest,  and  felt  more  spiritual  ;  1  can  speak 
with  a  full  heart  till  tears  flow  :  the  people  are  more  moved  by  my 
easy  speaking  than  ever  before.      Blessed  be  the  Lord  ! 

Sunday  28.  Yesterday  I  rode  to  William  Graves's,  spoke  on  Hebr, 
sv.  13 — 15.  and  had  some  life.  There  were  about  thirty  people  to 
he^ar :  met  the  class,  then  rode  to  Robert  Jones's,  twenty  five  miles. 
Have  peace  this  morning,  but  not  so  tender  as  1  would  always  wish  to 
be.  I  read  a  pamphlet  wrote  by  Mr.  Jarratt,  in  answer  to  the  Bap- 
tists, in  a  dialogue — and  I  think  it  is  well  wrote,  and  ought  to  be  pub- 
lished. I  have  had  my  mind  tried  about  approaching  troubles  ;  but  I 
ought  rather  to  mind  my  own  business,  and  trust  all  to  God — Spoke  at 
Robert  Jones's,  on  Rev.  xxi.  5 — 8.  some  feared  the  soldiers  would 
come  to  press  our  horses  ;  but  I  had  faith  to  believe  they  would  not  ,; 
and  was  led  out  much  in  speaking  ;  some  wild  young  men  kept  talk- 
ing, till  I  came  to  that  part  fitted  for  them,  then  they  listened.  I  met 
the  class  ;  they  were  stirred  up,  thirsting  for  full  sanctification.  I 
felt  a  tenderness  for  brother  Hartley's  sister,  who  wept  for  his  ab- 
sence. Bless  the  Lord,  who  gives  me  to  weep  with  them  that  weep. 
But  Oh !  what  must  my  dear  parents  fee!  for  my  absence  !  Ah ! 
surely  nothing  in  this  world  should  keep  me  from  them,  but  the  care 
of  souls  ;  and  nothing  else  could  excuse  me  before  God.  I  read  my 
select  Scriptures,  the  Law,  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  and  the  Reve- 
lation ;  and  prayed  often  :  God  was  with  me.  Preached  at  Mabry's  ; 
they  have  built  a  new  house  :  there  was  a  woman  sat  by  the  desk; 
and  cried,  "  Glory  and  praise  !  I  drink  of  the  water  of  life  freely  ;  I 
am  at  the  fountain  ;  my  flesh  praises  God,  I  never  heard  such  singing 


'28S  HEV.  FRANCIS  ASIiURY'S  JOURNAL. 

in  my  life."  I  spoke  with  great  power  from  Thess.  i.  6 — 9.  and  then 
met  society.  This  day  has  been  a  high  day.  Was  led  out  to  speak 
to  saints  and  sinners  ;  the  people  spoke  in  society  ;  God  was  with  us; 
some  expressed  their  joy  in  the  union.  I  rode  to  Booth's  ;  and  am 
kept  in  peace  and  love,  and  have  great  consolation  in  public  and  private. 

Monday  29.  Read  Mr  Wesley's  second  volume  of  Sermons  ;  rode 
to  Wood  Tucker's  :  spoke  on  Hebr.  xii.  1—4.  Then  met  society, 
or  rather  gave  them  an  exhortation  ;  the  people  of  the  world  were 
by,  and  God  was  with  us — I  hope  what  was  spoken,  was  blest  to  saint 
and  sinner.     I  am  kept  by  grace,  though  I  have  been  in  temptation. 

Tuesday  30.  I  rose  at  five  o'clock,  with  peace  of  mind,  and  was 
employed  in  writing  letters  to  my  friends  in  the  Peninsula.  Then 
rode  to  George  Smith's,  preached  on  1  Peter  iv.  17.  to  about  sixty 
people  :  spent  some  time  in  speaking  ;  but  had  not  as  much  liberty  as 
at  some  other  times.  Spoke  to  the  class  ;  the  people  spoke  after- 
ward of  the  goodness  of  God  ;  afterward  I  rode  to  Busbell's ;  some 
were  gone  home  for  fear  of  the  horse- press  :  Captain  Bushell  is 
dead,  and  the  work  dies  with  him  :  before  I  had  done  prayer,  there 
came  up  soldiers  and  horses  ;  the  people  were  affrighted,  but  there 
was  no  need  :  the  officers  came  in,  and  sat  down  ;  one  soon  tired  :  the 
other  could  not  stay  it  out.  I  spoke  from  1  Peter  v.  10.  and  addressed 
myself  according  to  my  audience  ;  the  people  were  greatly  alarmed  J 
I  was  tempted  to  go  back  to  the  north,  there  is  such  a  commotion  in 
the  country  ;  the  troops  are  going  to  Camden,  South  Carolina.  But 
I  must  go  on,  and  not  faint  in  the  way.  I  have  been  very  well  off; 
but  am  following  trouble.  What  matters  it,  where  I  go,  what  comes 
upon  me,  if  God  is  with  me  ;  or  where  I  live  or  where  I  die,  if  holy, 
and  ready  ! 

Wednesday  31.  I  find  some  left  the  society  here,  at  the  time  of  the 
division  ;  and  between  one  thing  and  another,  it  is  bad  times  here, 
and  a  sorrowful  day  with  me. 

Thursday,  June  1,  1780.  Rode  to  Mr.  Jarratt's,  and  was  kindly 
entertained.  Preached  in  the  barn  to  about  seventy  people  ;  but  not 
so  lively,  as  when  I  was  here  four  years  ago  ;  spoke  on  1  John  iii.  23. 
had  much  free  conversation  among  the  people  ;  Mr.  Jarratt  is  as  kind 
as  formerly. 

Friday  2.  Went  to  White-Oak  ;  and  spoke  on  Titus  iii.  2—5.  and 
was  blest  :  then  met  the  society  and  spoke  to  the  people — Mr.  Jarratt 
wept,  and  all  the  people,  at  the  joy  of  union. 

Saturday  3.  Rode  to  Gillum  Booth's,  had  about  sixty  people,  and  I 
spoke  on  Malt.  vii.  21 — 23.  Here  Captain  Benson  came  twelve 
miles  to  see  me  ;  poor  man,  I  wept  over  him,  and  exhorted  him  to 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  28$ 

seek  the  Lord ;  which,  if  he  does  not,  I  fear  he  will  never  come 
back  ;  but  his  family  are  praying  for  him  :  1  felt  an  uncommon  love 
for  him,  and  a  hope  God  will  bless  and  keep  him  alive  in  the 
day  of  battle.  1810.  Now  General  Benson  is  living  in  Talbot, 
Maryland. 

Sunday  4.  I  rode  twelve  miles  to  Mrs.  Merritt's  meeting-house  : 
there  were  about  three  hundred  people,  white  and  black.  Spoke  on 
Rom  ii.  7 — 9.  after  sermon  I  spoke  to  the  society,  some  of  them  are 
happy  souls  ;  but  there  is  a  slackness  in  meeting  :  the  rules  of  the 
society  have  not  been  kept  up  here — I  spoke  to  some  select  friends 
about  slave-keeping,  but  they  could  not  bear  it  :  this  I  know,  God 
will  plead  the  cause  of  the  oppressed,  though  it  gives  offence  to  say 
so  here — O  Lord,  banish  the  infernal  spirit  of  slavery  from  thy  dear 
Zion. 

Monday  5.  I  have  peace  ;  though  I  am  grieved  at  some  things :  it 
will  be  long,  I  fear,  before  the  good  Virginia  brethren  will  be  brought 
into  close  discipline  ;  though  there  are  many  gracious  people. 

Tuesday  6.    Have  peace  of  mind — preached  at  Walker's  barn  on 
Hebr   iik  2.     Met  some  faithful  people  in  society — have  been  read- 
ing Knox's  first  volume  of  Sermons  ;  they  are  sublime,  though  not 
deep  :   I  approve  the  spirit  and  principles  of  the  man  ;  he  appears 
to  be  of  the  spirit  of  Mr.  M'Gaw  :  he  gives  some  favourable  hints 
of  restoration ;  that  natural  evil  should  purge  out  moral  evil ;  but 
gave  it  not  as  his  own  opinion,  but  as   that  of  others  :  in  another 
place  he  says,  "  perhaps   the  heathen  world    shall    have  an  after- 
trial  ;"  if  in  time  it  is  true  :  so  it  sometimes  is,  that  if  a  man  is  a 
rigid  Calvinist,  and    turns,  he   must  go  quite   round  ;    but  general 
redemption  and  conditional  salvation  is  the  plan.     I  keep  up  prayer 
in  public  or  private  twelve  times  a  day  ;  and   am  exercised  not  a 
little  ;  Lord,  keep  me  through  the  approaching  troubles  of  the  conti- 
nent.    I   preached  at   Benjamin  Johnson's  ;  had   many  to  hear,  and 
some  of  the   rich.     Went   as   near  the  conscience  as  I   could  get  . 
spoke   on  Luke  xiii.  23 — 25.  then  met   society,   and   had   a  melting 
time  :  the  people   spoke  their   experiences,  and  joyed  in  the  union, 
and  to  see  my  face. 

Wednesday  7.  Rode  to  Rose-Creek  ;  here  my  old  friend  William 
White  would  not  come  to  hear  me.  Spoke  on  Rom.  xiii.  11 — IS 
was  much  assisted  ;  all  the  friends  were  moved  ;  but  sinners  are  cal- 
lous !  God  was  with  us  :  thus  the  Lord  made  us  to  rejoice,  and 
although  there  has  been  a  falling  off,  I  hope  God  will  revive  the  peo- 
ple, and  his  work  in  this  place. — Rode  home  with  friend  Rivers  ;  and 
think  1  am  more  given  up  than  ever  I  was  in  my  life  :  1  see  the  need 

Vor      I  37 


290  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy"s  JOURNAL. 

of  living  near  to  God,  to  be  able  to  preach  the  travails  of  God's  peo- 
ple, to  get  freedom  and  love  to  bear  with  sinners,  and  to  deal  faith- 
fully:  I  am  labouring  for  God,  and  my  soul  is  pressing  after  full 
salvation. 

Thursday  8.  In  my  way  I  called  to  see  friend  Marks  and  family ; 
he  is  worn  down  with  family  troubles  :  also  called  to  see  Mrs. 
Clayburn  at  B.  court-house  ;  she  is  under  some  despondency  from 
weakness  of  body.  Spoke  at  Mark  Crowder's  on  1  Peter  i.  5 — 10. 
The  word  was  blest  to  believers.  In  society  some  spoke  of  the 
goodness  of  God.  In  the  afternoon,  I  rode  through  a  steep,  danger- 
ous place,  into  the  river  ;  but  though  it  was  frightful,  I  came  safe 
over  to  Wharton's  Edward  Dromgoole  is  a  good  preacher,  but  entan- 
gled with  a  family.  We  spoke  of  a  plan  for  building  houses  in  every 
circuit  for  preachers'  wives,  and  the  society  to  supply  their  families 
with  bread  and  meat ;  so  the  preachers  should  travel  from  place  to 
place,  as  when  single  :  for  unless  something  of  the  kind  be  done,  we 
shall  have  no  preachers  but  young  ones,  in  a  few  years  :  they  will 
marry  and  stop. 

Friday  9.  Preached  at  Woolsey's  barn,  on  Jude  20 — 22.  James 
Morris  exhorted,  and  the  people  were  moved  very  much.  I  rode  to 
friend  Owen's,  had  the  comfort  to  see  my  Portsmouth  friends,  and  was 
pleased  to  find  their  faces  Zion-ward. 

Saturday  10.  Preached  to  about  sixty  people,  was  blest  in  speak- 
ing ;  rode  on  to  my  old  friend  Samuel  Yeorgan's  ;  as  kind  as  ever, 
but  a  Dissenter  in  heart.  I  spoke  at  the  chapel  with  great  power  on 
Isaiah  iii.  10,  11.  Here  I  was  taken  sick,  a  smart  fever,  I  could  get  no 
farther  ;  was  very  bad  on  Monday,  Tuesday,  and  Wednesday — Provi- 
dence dark  ;  my  spirits  much  dejected. 

Wednesday  14.  Cannot  read,  write,  think,  pray,  or  speak  much,  I 
have  such  pain  ;  but  I  trust  in  the  Lord.  It  is  no  matter  where  I  die, 
if  in  the  Lord  ;  I  commend  all  to  him  :  the  more  I  suffer,  the  better 
it  will  be  in  the  end,  if  it  is  for  souls  I  labour  and  suffer. 

Thursday  15.  I  am  better  in  health  ;  but  have  the  toothach  vio- 
lently, and  am  forced  to  use  tobacco,  that  I  had  laid  aside ;  but  put- 
ting this  in  my  tooth,  I  found  some  relief.  Lord,  give  me  patience  ! 
I  am  never  so  holy  as  when  travelling  and  preaching — I  hope  to  set 
out  again  to-morrow.  Lord,  give  me  patience  under  all  my  suffer- 
ing, and  a  happy  issue  out  of  all,  in  thine  own  time  !  Have  read  as 
far  as  Isaiah,  in  going  through  my  Bible  ;  have  but  little  time.  I 
see  the  need  of  returning  to  my  twelve  times  of  prayer  ;  I  have 
been  hindered  and  interrupted  by  pain  and  fevers  ;  pain  is  trying ; 
but    I    am    kept   from   murmuring    hitherto.     Satan    has    tried   me. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL.  291 

and   I   have  had  some    dejection   of  spirit.     Lord,  keep  me  every 
moment ! 

Friday  16.  I  Crossed  Roanoak,  (North-Carolina)  felt  a  little  better, 
though  weak.  We  rode  near  thirty  miles,  was  like  to  faint  in  the  car- 
riage ;  but  at  brother  Edward's  felt  refreshed,  and  ease  from  pain  ; 
slept  well ;  blessed  be  God. 

Saturday  17.  I  am  in  peace,  and  much  blest  always  when  travel- 
ling. Preached  at  Jories's  barn  to  about  one  hundred  people  ;  spoke 
on  Hebr.  iv.  11 — 15.  was  weak,  but  spoke  long.  A  few  felt  and  un- 
derstood. The  unawakened  appeared  unmoved  ;  my  discourse  was 
not  for  them.  I  think  ray  immediate  call  is  to  the  people  of  God  : 
others  seem  in  a  hardened  state ;  they  have  heard  much,  obeyed 
little.  Went  to  Mrs.  Yaney's,  an  afflicted,  distressed  woman,  sunk 
into  rigid  mortification,  thinking  she  ought  to  fast  excessively. 

Sunday  18.  I  rode  fifteen  miles  to  brother  Bustion-s,  and  preached 
to  about  five  hundred  people — was  much  led  out  on  Isaiah  lv.  6,  7. 
The  people  were  solemnly  attentive  :  I  was  tempted  to  think  I  had 
done  well,  but  I  opposed  the  devil  and  overcame  him.  Brother 
Dickins  spoke  on  charity  very  sensibly,  but  his  voice  is  gone  ;  he 
reasons  too  much  ;  is  a  man  of  great  piety,  great  skill  in  learning, 
drinks  in  Greek  and  Latin  swiftly  ;  yet  prays  much,  and  walks  close 
with  God.  He  is  a  gloomy  countryman  of  mine,  and  very  diffident  of 
himself. — My  health  is  recovered  ;  thank  the  Lord,  thus  he  makes 
my  strength  sufficient  for  my  day  :  glory  to  God  ! 

Monday  19.  Rose  about  five  o'clock,  was  a  little  disturbed  in  my 
rest  with  company.  Brother  Dickins  drew  the  subscription  for  a 
Kingswood  school  in  America ;  this  was  what  came  out  a  college 
in  the  subscription  printed  by  Dr.  Coke.  Gabriel  Long  and  brother 
Bustion  were  the  first  subscribers,  which  I  hope  will  be  for  the 
glory  of  God  and  good  of  thousands.  We  set  off  in  the  rain,  rode 
over  Fishing-Creek  to  Davis's,  ten  miles  ;  I  spoke  on  1  Thess.  i. 
8,  9.  had  some  light,  but  the  people  were  very  little  moved  ;  rode 
twelve  miles  to  Gabriel  Long's,  through  the  woods.  I  hope  John 
Dickins  will  ever  after  this  be  a  friend  to  me  and  Methodism.  My 
health  is  greatly  restored  ;  am  blest  among  my  friends. 

Tuesday  20.  After  an  hour  spent  in  prayer,  private  and  in  the 
family,  I  read  a  few  chapters  in  the  Bible  ;  began  reading  Watts's  first 
volume  of  Sermons  ;  was  pleased  and  profited — preached  at  noon  to 
fifty  people,  on  Titus  ii.  11 — 14.  had  some  liberty  among  the  people  ; 
they  were  very  little  affected  ;  but  the  faithful,  for  whom  I  princi- 
pally spoke,  were  tender  ;  then  rode  over  to  Joseph  John  Williams's, 


892  REV.  FRANCIS  asbury's  journal 

a  rich  man  of  this  world,  and  I  hope  sincere.     I  am  kept  through 
mercy 

Wednesday  21.  I  had  to  ride  alone  hetter  than  twelve  mile*  to 
'VTr.  Duke's;  when  I  came  there,  found  about  thirty  people,  and 
ihey  quite  ignorant.  After  preaching  I  took  dinner,  and  in  talking 
found  three  or  four  of  them  tenderly  serious  ;  gave  them  advice  :  the 
man  and  his  wife  have  had  conviction,  and  have  sinned  it  away.  They 
say  it  was  the  disputes  of  the  Baptists  that  turned  them  aside.  I  then 
rode  home  with  a  Mr.  Green,  a  Presbyterian  :  and  was  much  blest  in 
reading  Watts 's  first  volume  of  Sermons. 

Thursday  22.  1  rode  to  Jenkins's,  and  spoke  plainly  to  about 
eighty  people,  and  found  the  word  was  fitted  to  their  cases ;  met 
class  ;  it  was  a  day  of  peace  to  me  ;  the  Lord  was  with  me  at  this  poor, 
but  good  man's  house.  I  was  kept  by  the  power  of  God  ;  my  soul  is 
breathing  after  the  Lord  at  all  times.  There  is  a  hardness  over  the 
people  here  ;  they  have  had  the  Gospel  preached  by  Presbyterians, 
Baptists,  and  Methodists,  the  two  former  appear  to  be  too  much  in  the 
spirit  of  the  world  ;  there  is  life  amongst  some  of  the  Methodists,  and 
they  will  grow  because  they  preach  growing  doctrines.  I  heard  of 
Mr.  Hart  from  Charleston  passing  north,  and  one  of  the  countess  of 
Huntingdon's  men  turning  Baptist.  They  have  soon  turned  about  j 
but  they  may  follow  Mr.  Whitefield  in  Calvinism. 

Friday  23.  1  have  peace,  the  Lord  is  my  portion  ;  this  was  a  day  of 
fasting ;  I  rode  fifteen  miles,  preached,  prayed,  and  sung  near  two 
hours  ;  ate  a  little  about  four  o'clock,  and  preached  at  Nutbush- 
Creek  chapel,  (a  little  log  house,  about  twenty-five  feet  long  and 
twenty  wide)  to  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  people  ;  here  I  found  a 
broken  society.  Rode  home  with  Dr.  King  ;  his  wife  was  in  society. 
I  slept  in  peace,  and  rose  about  five  o'clock  :  my  heart  is  with  God! 
Glory  be  to  thee,  O  Lord  ! — I  had  too  mean  an  opinion  of  Carolina ; 
it  is  a  much  better  country,  and  the  people  live  much  better  than  I 
expected  from  the  information  given  me. 

Saturday  24.  Though  the  weather  was  extremely  hot,  I,  yet  weak 
in  body,  rode  to  Col.  Edmund  Taylor's  :  and  at  the  schoolhouse  spoke 
to  about  seventy  people,  on  1  Peter  iv.  18.  Afterward  was  kindly 
entertained  at  Col.  Taylor's  ;  they  were  for  ordinances  here,  though 
not  heated. 

Sunday  25.  Rode  six  miles  to  the  Tabernacle  ;  about  four  hundred 
people,  rich  and  poor,  attended  ;  had  very  little  liberty  in  speaking; 
the,  people  very  insensible.  I  think  these  people  must  be  awakened 
by  judgments,  for  it  appears  the  Gospel  will  not  do  it.     I  spoke  neaj 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY*S  JOURNAL.  293 

two  hours  to  little  purpose,  held  a  love-feast ;  all  the  friends  were 
stirred  up;  then  rode  eight  miles,  lodged  over  Nutbush-Creek  at 
brother  Reeves's ;  I  am  kept  in  peace,  but  felt  much  ashamed  for  my 
unfaithfulness. 

Monday  26.  Rose  early ;  my  legs  are  so  inflamed  1  cannot  tell 
what  to  do  ;  but  we  must  bear  all  things  :  I  read  Watts's  first  volume 
of  Sermons  last  week,  and  transcribed  a  little  of  it — I  preached  at 
Turner's  ;  he  has  lost  the  use  of  his  limbs.  I  advised  him  to  use  the 
cold  bath,  or  electricity  ;  either  might  help  him.  I  had  liberty  in 
the  word ;  the  hearers  were  stirred  up ;  many  came  to  hear  who  do 
Dot,  will  not,  attend  the  other  preachers.  Now  the  end  of  this  may 
be  good  ;  for  if  they  get  their  hearts  affected,  they  will  come  to  h^ar 
others,  and  by  constant  travelling  1  may  do  good.  1  had  in  both 
meetings  eighty  or  ninety  people  ;  the  circuit  preachers  have  but 
about  twenty.  The  Baptists  appear  to  be  very  dead  ;  their  own  peo- 
ple will  not  attend  only  on  Sabbath  days.  The  people  are  taken 
away,  and  times  are  so  difficult  that  they  appear  to  be  under  a  judi- 
cial hardness,  having  heard  so  much  and  felt  so  little. 

Tuesday  27.  Preached  at  William  Price's,  many  came  to  hear  ; 
Lord,  set  home  thy  word  to  their  hearts.  Rode  to  Haw-Tree,  many 
came  to  hear  ;  my  text  was,  1  Peter  i.  5 — 13.  I  had  great  freedom, 
and  held  a  love  feast,  the  people  were  affected. — There  is  the  most 
religion  hereof  any  place  in  the  circuit,  and  yet  nothing  great:  I  was 
much  refreshed,  rode  through  the  woods,  a  blind  path,  to  a  friend's  ; 
I  am  always  upon  the  run,  though  kept  in  peace  ;  was  grieved  to  see 
the  distress  of  the  people  ;  some  taken  out  to  war,  others  expecting 
it  every  day  Lord,  help  thy  people  ;  there  are  many  things  that 
are  painful  to  me,  but  cannot  yet  be  removed,  especially  slave- keep- 
ing and  its  attendant  circumstances.  The  Lord  will  certainly  hear  the 
cries  of  the  oppressed,  naked,  starving  creatures.  O,  my  God  !  think 
on  this  land  Amen.  I  am  inpeace,  but  have  hard  labour  ;  I  hope 
it  will  be  for  good  :  I  expect  to  meet  trouble,  but  the  Lord  can  keep 
me  in  the  greatest  danger  as  in  apparent  safety. 

Wednesday  28.  Rode  to  Todd's,  six  miles  :  I  am  dejected  to  see  so 
little  religion.  I  am  comforted  when  I  pray  much,  and  find  deliver- 
ances. I  am  badly  situated  :  and  cannot  go  out  into  the  woods  ;  have 
no  place  for  retirement  at  some  houses  :  I  preached  at  Todd's,  to 
about  seventy  people,  but  very  insensible  ;  met  class,  talked  a  little, 
and  then  gave  the  people  liberty  to  speak  of  the  goodness  of  God. 
1  laboured  in  public  ;  and  hope  some  will  take  it  home  :  spoke  from 
Luke  vi.  46.  many  came  to  hear  I  have  read  John  Clagget  against 
Chubb  ;  he  writes  well  for  a  layman,  but  I  suspect  he  would  write  as 


S94  REV.  FRANCrS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL. 

much  against  us,  whom  he  deems  Arminians.  Chubb  is  quite  wrong ; 
Clagget  is  no  ways  smooth  and  entertaining,  though  he  has  truth  and 
argument  on  his  side.  I  found  here  two  old  English  folks,  an  old  man 
near  sixty,  in  society  ;  an  old  woman  eighty- nine  years  old,  Nodder 
by  name,  and  can  walk,  read,  sing,  and  pray,  who  was  converted  to 
God  about  a  year  ago.  O,  my  God  !  when  shall  I  be  established  in 
purity  ! 

Thursday  29.  Read  several  chapters  in  Isaiah.  I  have  thought  if 
I  had  two  horses,  and  Harry  fa  coloured  man)  to  go  with,  and  drive 
one,  and  meet  the  black  people  ;  and  to  spend  about  six  months  in 
Virginia  and  the  Carolinas,  it  would  be  attended  with  a  blessing.  I 
rode  to  widow  Pegram's,  had  about  sixty  people,  it  being  a  muster- 
day  ;  but  these  were  happy  souls.  As  soon  as  we  begun  to  sing,  the 
power  of  God  came  over  us  ;  I  spoke  from  1  Peter  v.  6 — 8.  then 
rode  to  Capt.  Burrows's  ;  the  people  in  many  places,  are  but  chil- 
dren in  understanding  ;  we  have  many  things  to  say,  but  they  cannot 
bear  them  now — I  am  much  blessed  in  my  own  soul.  I  began  to  form 
a  plan  for  myself  and  all  the  preachers  for  next  year,  if  we  live.  I 
am  still  seeking  full  and  final  salvation.  I  preached  at  Burrows's  ; 
but  fear  there  is  very  little  religion  in  this  place  :  I  was  uncomfor- 
table. The  congregation  about  sixty  people,  but  they  were  very  dead  ; 
their  minds  and  mouths  full  of  the  world.  I  came  off  to  the  widow 
Ellis's,  and  found  the  Lord  was  here  :  there  has  been  a  heavy  rain 
these  two  nights  past ;  if  it  continues  it  will  destroy  the  full  ripe 
crops  of  wheat. 

Friday  30.  Slept  in  peace  last  night :  rose  with  a  deep  sense 
of  God  ;  met  with  Henry  Jones,  a  serious  young  man  ;  and  believe 
he  is  called  to  the  work  of  the  ministry  :  I  advised  him  to  go 
with  me.' 

Saturday,  July  1,  1780.  My  soul  pants  after  God  more  and  more. 
O,  that  I  was  filled  with  strong,  constant,  humble,  suffering  love !  I 
preached  at  the  widow  Ellis's,  on  Hebr.  x.  21 — 24.  I  was  fervent, 
had  liberty,  and  spoke  as  searchingly  as  I  could  to  saints  and  sinners. 
Here  Edward  Dromgoole  met  me  ;  and  I  appointed  James  Mallory 
for  Norfolk  circuit,  as  there  has  been  a  few  people  kept  together, 
notwithstanding  the  absence  of  the  preachers. 

Sunday  2.  I  rode  to  Lindsey's,  a  rough  road  ;  had  about  seventy 
people  ;  and  spoke  on  2  Cor.  iv.  4 — 6.  now  I  have  done  in  this  cir- 
cuit ;  the  Lord  has  blessed  me  in  body  and  soul.  To-morrow  1  am 
going  to  Tar-River.  Edward  Dromgoole  is  hearty  in  good  old  Me- 
thodism ;  we  have  had  great  union  ;  I  hope  he  will  check  the  spirit 
of  some  of  the  divisive  men.     I  wrote  to  R.  Ellis  ;  read  my  select 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  295 

scriptures.     God  is  with  us  ;  it  may  be  trials  are  coming,  but  no  mat- 
ter ;  why  should  I  fear?  the  Lord  liveth,  and  he  is  my  rock. 

Monday  3.  Very  rainy  night,  with  thunder  and  lightning.  I  am 
grieved  to  see  slavery,  and  the  manner  of  keeping  these  poor  peo- 
ple. I  set  out  for  Tar-River — after  riding  about  five  miles  I  was 
told  I  could  not  cross  Bear  Swamp  ;  but  by  the  guidance  of  a  Baptist 
friend,  came  through  that  and  two  very  deep  creeks.  Afterward  I 
left  my  guide,  we  had  travelled  a  few  miles  together,  and  talked  in  a 
friendly  manner — rode  three  miles  farther  and  was  stopped  by  what 
was  called  Bens-Creek  :  the  bridge  was  gone,  and  a  man  said  it  was 
ten  feet  deep  ;  I  then  made  for  Falcom's  bridge,  on  little  Fishing- 
Creek  ;  but  the  low  grounds  were  covered  and  no  bridge  to  be  seen  : 
lodged  at  Mr.  Falcom's,  was  known,  and  kindly  entertained.  I  la- 
boured to  make  Mrs.  Falcom  sensible  of  her  danger,  and  hope  not  in 
vain  ;  prayed  evening  and  morning  in  the  family. 

Tuesday  4.  I  rode  by  Miller's  cross  roads  to  Great  Fishing-Creek* 
a  rough  way — but  got  safe  along,  and  was  comforted  in  mind — crossed 
Great  Fishing  Creek, — stopped  at  Sandy  Creek,  where  1  found  a  kind 
old  man,  brother  Howell ;  lodged  with  him  and  spent  my  time  peace- 
ably. 

Wednesda}'  5.  Set  out  to  Green  Hills  ;  but  with  difficulty  I  got 
along ;  bat  this  was  not  all ;  for  in  going  the  distance  of  four  miles  I 
rode  eight,  and  was  tried  to  purpose  ;  on  account  of  the  waters,  I 
have  rode  about  thirty  miles  out  of  my  way  ;  and  am  now  twenty  six 
miles  from  the  place  of  preaching  to  morrow — Have  been  happy  till 
to-day  ;  but  when  lost,  I  began  to  feel  like  fretting  against  persons 
and  things.  O,  my  God  !  pardon  me  in  this.  I  was  very  kindly  en- 
tertained, and  blessed  with  fellowship  at  Green  Hills  ;  but  never  met 
with  so  many  difficulties  as  I  have  met  with  in  this  circuit :  I  hope 
for  the  greater  blessings  ;  am  kept  by  grace,  and  enjoy  health  in  this 
hot  weather  ;  though  so  far  to  the  south  ;  have  peace  of  soul,  bless 
the  Lord. 

Thursday  6.  Rode  twenty-six  miles  ;  exceeding  hot,  and  my  horse 
suffered  greatly.  When  I  came  to  the  place  about  seventy  people 
were  met,  singing  and  praying.  I  spoke  on  Hebr.  iv.  13 — 16.  had 
not  much  strength  of  soul  or  body.  The  people  appeared  inattentive 
and  their  minds  full  of  the  present  troubles. 

Friday  7.  A  day  of  fasting,  till  near  three  o'clock  ;  I  was  weak, 
and  lodging  on  the  floor  was  uncomfortable. 

Saturday  8.  Rode  to  Cypress  chapel  ;  had  liberty  in  speaking  on 
1  John  i.  8,  9.  to  about  one  hundred  people.  Here  James  OKelly 
met  me  ;  he  spoke,  and  appeared  to  be  a  warm-hearted,  good  man  ; 


296  RfcV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY5S  JOURNAL 

but  he  was  troubled  with  the  people  about  these  times.  At  Ross's 
I  spoke  on  Rev.  xxii.  10 — 19.  1  had  an  opening  ;  and  one  Lindsay,  aa 
exhorter,  spoke  ;  an  honest  zealous  man  :  he  has  lost  his  little  pro- 
perty  by  these  times.  I  have  rode  near  one  hundred  miles  this 
week  ;  and  as  severe,  constant  hot  weather  as  I  ever  knew. 

Sunday  9.  Preached  at  Green  Hills  to  about  four  hundred  souls, 
on  1  Thess.  ii.  4.  The  subject  was  new,  the  people  dead.  I  had 
not  much  liberty.  James  O'Kelly  spoke  on,  "  Have  ye  understood  all 
these  things  ?"  He  raised  high,  and  was  very  affecting,  but  to  little 
purpose.  There  are  evils  here;  the  meeting  not  solemn;  the 
women  appeared  to  be  full  of  dress,  the  men  full  of  news— These 
people  are  Gospel  slighters.  I  fear  some  heavy  stroke  will  come  on 
them.  James  O'Kelly  and  myself  enjoyed  and  comforted  each 
other  :  this  dear  man  rose  at  midnight,  and  prayed  very  devoutly  for 
me  and  himself.  He  cries,  give  me  children  or  I  die  ;  but  I  believe 
no  preaching  or  preacher  will  do  much  good  at  present.  I  was  con- 
demned for  telling  humorous  anecdotes,  and  knew  not  whether  it  was 
guilt  or  fear,  lest  my  friends  should  think  I  go  beyond  the  bounds  of 
prudent  liberty.  It  is  dreadful,  when  a  preacher  is  put  to  it  to  vin- 
dicate himself. 

Monday  10.  Through  heat  and  for  want  of  retirement,  I  suffer 
loss  ;  but  bless  God  for  health  and  faith.  I  made  my  journey  to 
Roger  Jones's.  About  sixty  people  ;  God  was  with  us  ;  the  people 
spoke  of  the  goodness  of  the  Lord. 

Tuesday  11.  Had  a  heavy  night ;  rose  up,  and  laid  myself  down 
on  the  floor  upon  my  nightgown  ;  slept  in  pain  ;  rose  at  four 
o'clock  ;  prayed  in  private  and  in  the  family ;  then  set  off  at  six 
o'clock  ;  had  hilly  roads  ;  and  after  riding  five  or  six  hours,  came  to 
my  appointment;  had  very  little  freedom  in  speaking  to  about  one 
hundred  people  :  here  I  met  with  W  Partridge.  The  Lord  keeps 
me  in  health  :   I  cast  all  my  care  upon  him. 

Wednesday  12.  I  rode  to  Cooper's  upon  TarrRiver,  had  about  one 
hundred  and  twenty  people ;  I  was  under  discouragement  before  I 
began,  but  the  Lord  helped  rne — These  people  have  heard  Baptists 
and  Presbyterians,  but  I  fear  to  little  purpose.  God  assisted  me  to 
deliver  my  own  soul.  I  rode  to  a  friend's,  and  had  great  difficulty  on 
the  way  ;  but  I  am  kept  from  murmuring  :  while  labouring  for  other 
souls,  my  own  is  blessed — have  felt  nothing  contrary  to  love  for 
some  days  past. 

Thursday  13.  Rode  to  the  chapel  :  had  an  insensible  people, 
full  of  the  spirit  of  the  world,  ^laboured  hard  to  preach  on  Luke 
xiii.  23 — 25,     Then  rode  to  Captain  Pope's  ;    I   am  distressed  with 


H.KV.  Mulcts  ASUURY5S  JOURNAL,  &9J 

the  troubles  of  the  times  ;  and  hear  there  are  great  commotions.  I 
went  to  the  preaching-house,  and  poured  out  my  soul  to  God  for 
some  time  in  the  evening — my  heart  found  rest,  and  felt  power  to 
trust  God  with  my  life  and  my  all — Oh  !  why  doth  my  cowardly  flesh 
complain  ? 

Friday  14.  God  was  with  me  ;  I  was  comforted  with  brother 
Pope,  a  lame,  wise,  and  pious  man  ;  he  has  built  a  preaching- 
house  almost  himself.  Who  can  tell  what  a  man  may  do  under  divine 
assistance  ?  He  makes  a  few  cards,  teaches  a  few  children,  and  says 
he  lives  as  well  as  ever  he  did  in  his  life.  I  was  much  comforted  at 
the  preaching-house  this  moiuiag.  I  suffered  much  for  want  of  a 
place  of  retirement ;  !  cannot  go  into  the  woods,  there  are  so  many 
ticks,  chiegoes,  and  such  insects  at  this  season  upon  the  ground- 
retired  at  six  o'clock  to  the  chapel  ;  it  has  been  a  Bethel  to  me ;  my 
day  of  fasting  and  humiliation  has  been  blest  to  my  soul. 

Saturday  15.  After  spending  some  time  in  the  chapel  alone,  I  set 
out  to  Paschal's,  about  six  o'clock ;  1  came  in  before  twelve,  I  spoke 
very  close  and  plain  on  Acts  xxvi.  18.  to  about  thirty  people,  and 
had  but  little  faith  for  them.  Rode  on  to  B.  Hartfield's,  about  twenty 
miles,  much  fatigued  with  the  badness  of  the  road. 

Sunday  16.  I  rose  unwell,  and  somewhat  dejected.  Lord,  keep  me 
from  the  power  of  wicked  men,  devils,  and  sin.  Sometimes  I  think, 
will  that  Infinite  Being  we  call  God,  who  commands  kingdoms,  con- 
tinents, and  worlds,  take  care  of  such,  a  worm  as  me  ?  Then  I  con- 
sider, he  is  Infinite,  and  cannot  be  hurried  so  as  to  forget  any  per- 
son. He  can  keep  me  as  securely  as  if  there  were  none  but  myself 
in  the  world.  Lord,  give  me  faith  to  trust  in  thee  every  moment, 
even  in  my  greatest  dangers  !  I  spoke  on  2  Thess.  i.  6 — 9.  I  had 
great  light ;  but  the  people  seemed  hardened.  I  fear  judgment  will 
overtake  them  before  they  will  be  awakened  ;  I  never  felt  more 
engaged,  and  hardly  a  person  moved !  I  read  my  select  scriptures, 
and  had  my  soul  much  taken  up  with  God — The  few  people  ia 
society  seemed  tender  at  brother  Hartfield's. 

Monday  17.  I  set  out  about  five  o'clock,  and  rode  to  Crawford's 
upon  Neuse-River,  about  twenty  miles,  alone  ;  was  tried  at  times,  but 
had  some  sense  of  God  ;  was  not  so  free  from  my  temptations,  but 
kept  from  sinning  or  yielding  in  heart :  there  were  many  people.  I 
spoke  with  liberty  on  1  Peter  iv.  18.  There  was  a  melting  among 
the  people  ;  but  they  are  rich,  and  are  not  cured  of  the  love  of 
money. 

Tuesday  18.  Rode  to  Kimborough's,  sixteen  miles,  crossed  Neds© 
River.    Many  Baptists  to  hear  ;  they  were  serious,  and  I  spoke  feel- 

Vol,.  I.  38 


29S  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAl- 

ingly,  and  aimed  at  their  hearts,  from  Romans  viii.  24—26.  I  met 
brother  Poythress,  much  cast  down  ;  the  people  are  lifeless  in  re- 
ligion ;  but,  bless  the  Lord,  I  have  had  a  good  entrance  ;  and  a  com- 
fortable sense  of  the  divine  presence — after  dinner,  I  was  alone  in 
the  woods  an  hour,  had  sweet  meltings,  came  back  and  wrote  these 
lines  for  future  consolation. 

Wednesday  19.  I  rode  to  Abraham  Hill's,  and  had  great  liberty  in 
speaking  from  Hebr.  iv.  10.  &c.  then  brother  Poythress  spoke  ;  and 
we  had  a  refreshing  shower  according  to  prayer~we  afterward 
spent  some  time  in  reading,  out  of  what  I  had  written  and  abridged, 
upon  the  art  of  speaking  and  preaching.  I  find  the  spirit  of  separa- 
tion on  account  of  the  ordinances,  is  very  high  among  preachers  and 
people  ;  but  I  hope  it  will  be  checked. 

Thursday  20.  Rode  twelve  miles  to  Tignal  Jones's  ;  hilly,  rocky 
roads  ;  about  eighty  people  to  hear.  While  I  was  speaking  General 
Hugine  came  in,  and  heard  part  of  my  sermon  ;  he  is  a  polite,  well- 
behaved,  conversable  gentleman  ;  we  dined  together — after  dinner,  I 
set  out  on  my  journey  ;  we  came  to  a  desperate  creek  called  North- 
East,  in  Chatham  county,  where  the  bridge  was  carried  away  by  the 
freshet ;  we  had  to  go  through  among  rocks,  holes,  and  logs— -I  was 
affrighted  ;  yea,  it  was  wonderful  that  the  carriage  did  not  overset : 
brother  Poythress  said  the  horse  was  down  twice,  and  covered  all  but 
his  head  ;  however,  the  water  kept  up  the  carriage,  and  we  came 
safe  through  all  our  difficulties,  to  brother  Merritt's.  Hitherto  the 
Lord  hath  helped,  body,  soul,  horse,  and  carriage  ;  there  is  a  provi- 
dence attending  animate  and  inanimate  creation.  Here  I  met  brother 
Allen,  a  promising  young  man,  but  a  little  of  a  Dissenter. 

Saturday  22.  We  set  out  for  Crump's,  over  rocks,  hills,  creeks,  and 
pathless  woods  and  low  land  ;  and  myself  in  the  carriage.  The 
young  man  with  me  was  heartless  before  we  had  travelled  a  mile ; 
but  when  he  saw  how  I  could  bush  it,  and  sometimes  force  my  way 
through  a  thicket,  and  make  the  young  saplins,  bend  before  me ;  and 
twist  and  turn  out  of  the  way,  or  path,  for  there  was  no  proper  road  j 
he  took  courage — with  great  difficulty  we  came  in  about  two  o'clock, 
after  travelling  eight  or  nine  hours  ;  the  people  looking  almost  as 
wild  as  the  deer  in  the  woods  ;  I  preached  on  Titus  ii.  10 — 12. 

Sunday  23.  We  passed  Haw-River,  wide,  but  shallow,  bad  going 
down  and  coming  up  ;  they  took  the  carriage  over  by  hand  ;  then  we 
had  to  travel  the  pathless  woods  and  rocks  again  :  after  much  trouble, 
and  fear,  and  dejection,  we  carnA'-to  Taylor's  preaching-house,  where 
they  were  pressing  horses,  as  we  expected ;  but  I  came  off  safe — 
and  spoke  on  2  Peter  i.  0—12.    I  had  some  liberty,  but  the  people's 


AEV.  PRANCf?  ASSURES   JOURNAL,  290 

jainds  were  in  confusion  ;  poor  souls,  well  they  might,  when  there 
were  such  works  carried  on.  The  time  to  favour  this  people,  I  fear,  is 
past;  and  they  seem  hardened,  and  no  preaching  affects  them,  at  least 
not  mine  ;  they  are  exceedingly  ignorant  withal.  There  are  a  few 
serious  people,  but  much  distressed  one  way  or  another.  I  have  tra- 
velled thirty  miles,  and  could  not  avoid  travelling  on  Sunday,  for  I 
had  not  where  to  stay ;  rode  to  brother  Beck's,  and  was  much  fatigued  : 
found  brother  Beck  sick — he  has  a  gracious  wife. 

Monday  25.  Cool,  like  the  fall;  I  am  kept  in  peace  ;  rose  with  &. 
sense  of  God's  presence  ;  have  only  time  to  pray  and  write  my  jour- 
nal ;  always  upon  the  wing,  as  the  rides  are  so  long,  and  bad  roads- 
it  takes  me  many  hours,  as  in  general  I  walk  my  horse.  I  crossed 
Rocky-River  about  ten  miles  from  Haw-River :  it  was  rocky,  sure 
enough ;  it  is  in  Chatham  county,  North-Carolina.  I  can  see  little 
else  but  cabbins  in  these  parts,  built  with  poles  :  and  such  a  country 
as  no  man  ever  saw  for  a  carriage.  I  narrowly  escaped  being  over= 
set;  was  much  affrighted,  but  Providence  keeps  me,  and  I  trust  will. 
I  crossed  Deep-River  in  a  flat  boat,  and  the  poor  ferryman  sinner 
swore  because  I  had  not  a  silver  shilling  to  give  him.  I  rode  to  friend 
Hinton's,  borrowed  a  saddle,  and  rode  near  six  miles  to  get  three,  as 
we  were  lost ;  when  we  came  to  the  place  there  were  about  sixty 
people.  I  was  at  some  loss  who  to  preach  to,  saints  or  sinners  ;  but 
found  sinners  as  unfeeling  as  those  who  are  out  of  the  reach  of  mercy, 
I  spoke  on  1  Peter  v.  9 — 12.  I  was  glad  to  get  away,  for  some  were 
drunk  and  had  their  guns  in  meeting.  I  expect  to  see  some  of  these 
people  again,  and  believe  they  will  be  humbled  in  time,  but  I  fear 
not  by  the  Gospel,  which  they  have  slighted  ;  but  by  judgments.  We 
came  back  and  found  a  serious  family  :  was  blest  in  a  family  meeting  ;■ 
the  Lord  filled  our  hearts  with  his  love.  1  had  a  fever  in  the  night- 
rose  refreshed  in  the  morning. 

Tuesday  25.  Was  engaged  in  private  and  family  prayer  for  divine 
protection  :  for  1  dwell  as  among  briars,  thorns,  and  scorpions  :  the 
people  are  poor,  and  cruel  one  to  another :  some  families  are  ready 
to  starve  for  want  of  bread,  while  others  have  corn  and  rye  distilled 
into  poisonous  whiskey  ;  and  a  Baptist  preacher  has  been  guilty  of  the 
same — but  it  is  no  wonder  that  those  who  have  no  compassion  for  the 
non-elect  souls  of  people,  should  have  none  for  their  bodies.  These 
people  have  had  some  religion — but  if  any  seeth  his  brother  need, 
and  shutteth  up  his  bowels  of  compassion,  so  as  neither  to  give  nor 
sell ;  "  How  dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  that  man  ?"  These  are  poor 
Christians.  We  left  our  worthy  friend  Hinton's,  a  kind  family,  who 
parted  with  us  in  tears  :  I  hope  to  see  this  place  again  (I  have  s^en  it 


SCO  REV,    FRANCIS  ASBUttY:S  JOURNAL. 

many  times)  with  a  change  for  the  better.  We  forded  Deep*Rivei, 
rode  to  White's,  within  ten  miles  of  the  camp,  into  a  settlement  of 
people  from  Pennsylvania,  some  were  Quakers.  I  preached  at 
White's  to  about  twenty  people  ;  was  very  unwell  by  a  disorder  in 
my  bowels  ;  then  rode  sixteen  miles  to  R.  Kennon's  ;  it  was  rainy,  and 
we  rode  two  miles  in  the  dark  through  the  woods,  but  came  safe  about 
ten  o'clock,  fatigued,  and  under  a  temptation  to  stop ;  but  reading 
Paul  to  Timothy,  where  he  says,  "  I  charge  thee  before  God,"  &c. 
I  resolved  to  go  on  ;  and  though  but  little  time  and  opportunity  for 
retirement,  not  any  for  reading  or  gaining  knowledge,  yet  saving  souls 
is  better  ;  but  people  are  so  distracted  with  the  times,  they  are  afraid 
to  leave  their  houses,  or  ride  their  horses.  I  acknowledge  the  pro- 
vidence and  immediate  hahd  of  God  in  my  journey  ;  though  it  be  not 
of  general  benefit,  I  shall  gain  a  general  knowledge  of  the  preachers 
and  people,  and  strengthen  our  union. 

Wednesday  26.  I  preached  at  Harris's  to  about  one  hundred  peo- 
ple with  some  opening  ;  it  was  well  I  did  not  give  way  and  rest  to«day. 

Thursday  27.  Rose  in  some  consolation,  and  read  a  few  chapters 
in  the  Testament.  I  acknowledge  the  goodness  of  God  in  preserving 
my  health,  life,  and  horse,  from  these  people  ;  they  are  verv  vile,  and 
if  there  is  any  mischief  done  it  is  laid  to  the  soldiers  :  people  rob, 
steal,  and  murder  one  another  with  impunity.  Rode  twelve  miles  to 
West's,  about  one  hundred  people  ;  some  fahhful  Baptists.  I  spoke 
with  Thomas  Brown,  a  preacher,  who,  with  twelve  more,  is  separated 
from  the  separate  Baptists  on  account  of  their  slackness  in  discipline  : 
I  had  fellowship  with  the  man  ;  we  spent  some  time  together.  I  told 
him  the  danger  of  being  alone  ;  and  advised  them  to  meet  in  a  class, 
one  with  another.  My  trials  are  great — riding  twenty  miles  a  day,  or 
more  ;  rocky  roads,  poor  entertainment,  uncomfortable  lodging — little 
rest  night  or  day  ;  but  thanks  be  to  God,  he  keeps  me  :  #ie  more  I 
do  and  suffer,  the  greater  the  crown. 

Friday  28.  Rode  twelve  miles  to  the  chapel,  and  preached  to  one 
hundred  people,  on  1  Peter  iv.  18.  with  some  life  ;  but  the  people 
were  unfeeling.  I  had  an  exceeding  rough  road,  through  woods,  over 
rocks,  through  creeks,  &c.  I  expect  fewer  trials  everyday,  and  fre- 
quently find  more — I  will  therefore  expect  greater.  I  rode  seven 
miles  to  Mr.  Trice's,  was  kindly  entertained,  had  the  pleasure  of 
seeing  and  conversing  with  brother  Bailey,  from  Ireland,  a  good  and 
sensible  man  :  I  slept  well,  and  am  better— I  praise  God  for  health. 

Saturday  29.  Rode  to  Roades's,  and  preached  to  about  200  people 
on  Titus  iii.  2 — 8.  I  had  some  light :  brother  Bailey  and  Allen  spoke, 
I  hope  it  will  revive  the  work.     I  then  went  on  to  Alston's . 


&E?V.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL..  JO*i 

Sunday  30.  Preached  at  Neuse  preaching-house  to  about  four  hun- 
dred people — had  not  much  liberty.  These  people  have  had  an 
abundance  of  preaching  from  the  Baptists  and  Methodists,  till  they  are 
hardened.  I  am  kept  in  peace,  power,  and  love  to  God,  and  from 
every  moral  evil.  In  the  evening  a  heavy  rain  came  on.  I  lodged 
at  Mr.  Allen's  ;  there  are  many  trials  in  my  way,  but  the  Lord  hath 
brought  me  on — to  him  be  all  glory  now  and  ever !  I  have  lately 
passed  through  Cumberland,  Chatham,  Orange,  and  Wake  counties,  in 
North-Carolina :  brother  Bailey  has  agreed  to  give  up  all  business 
and  travel  with  me,  and  go  to  labour  in  the  north.  B.  Allen,  and  E. 
Bailey  spoke  at  Neuse  after  me.  I  hope  some  good  was  done,  and 
the  work  will  revive.  The  people  in  these  parts  have  been  hurt 
with  Calvinism  ;  our  first  preachers  moved  their  passions,  and  they 
hastily  and  improperly  joined  ;  and  afterward  they  dropped  off  from 
society,  and  there  was  a  great  falling  away.  The  ordinance-places 
seem  very  barren. 

Monday  31.  A  very  rainy  day.  I  rested  at  Mr.  Allen's,  read  in 
the  New  Testament,  and  prayed  in  the  family  four  times. 

Tuesday,  August  1,  1780.  We  were  discouraged  by  the  rivers,  but 
setiout  late  to  Clenny's,  crossed  Eno  with  difficulty — the  water  ran 
over  the  foot-board  of  my  carriage.  After  that,  I  rode  a  stony,  hilly 
way  about  twelve  miles,  came  in  by  the  time  Edward  Bailey  had 
preached  an  alarming  sermon  on  "  Seek  the  Lord  while  he  may  be 
found."  Then  I  preached  from  Hebr.  ii.  1 — 3.  Afterward  Beverley 
Allen  spoke,  and  prayed  mightily.  This  is  a  settlement  of  Irish 
Pennsylvanians.  Through  all  my  troubles  I  am  kept  in  peace,  faith, 
and  love  ;  we  were  blest  in  family  prayer,  speaking  to  them,  and 
praying  for  them.  I  am  this  day  to  go  towards  Hillsborough  with  re- 
luctance— but  at  God's  command  I  go,  and  from  no  other  motive — t 
feel  no  temper  or  desire  but  to  do  the  will  of  God. 

Wednesday  2.  Rode  seven-miles  to  Hillsborough,  and  preached  in 
the  house  of  Mr.  Cortney,  a  tavern,  to  about  two  hundred  people, 
on  Hosea  x.  12.  "  It  is  time  to  seek  the  Lord."  They  were  decent, 
and  behaved  well ;  I  was  much  animated,  and  spoke  loud  and  long. 
Before  I  set  off  this  morning,  I  felt  dejected,  but  on  the  way  it  va- 
nished. I  felt  faith  to  believe  we  should  have  a  peaceable,  profitable 
meeting,  and  trust  it  was  so  :  they  have  had  a  warning.  Edward 
Bailey  and  brother  Allen  gave  exhortations.  I  came  back  to  hold  a 
watch-night,  without  eating  or  drinking — though  importuned  to  take 
refreshment :  hitherto  the  Lord  has  helped  me  through  continual 
fatigue  and  rough  roads  :  little  rest  for  man  or  horse,  but  souls  are 
perishing — time  is  flying — and  eternity  comes  nearer  every  hour 


30£  ftfcTV.  FRANCIS  ASBCRY'S  JOURNA-L. 

Thursday  3.  We  set  off  for  Pittsylvania,  and  travelled  twenty-five 
miles  to  John  Lee's  ;  came  in  about  eight  o'clock.  God  is  at  work, 
and  I  hope  I  shall  be  blessed  here  more  than  in  the  three  circuits 
past.  I  felt  a  solemn,  melting  sense  of  God  upon  my  heart  in  family 
prayer.  I  had  a  sensible  feeling  for  my  northern  friends,  when  I 
heard  of  the  fighting  in  the  Jerseys  ;  I  fear  they  will  be  distressed. 
I  am  kept  in  peace. 

Friday  4.  I  was  never  more  devoted  to  God — it  makes  me  think  I 
am  in  my  duty.  I  was  tempted  and  tried  in  Delaware  to  prepare 
me  for,  and  drive  me  to  this  work  ;  and  believe  if  I  had  not  started 
I  should  have  suffered  great  loss  in  my  soul.  I  admire  the  hand  of 
God  in  disposing  of  me,  and  wonder  and  own  his  providence. 

Saturday  5.  Our  quarterly  meeting  began  at  Henley's  preaching- 
house.  I  preached  on  Coloss.  i.  27 — 29.  then  brother  Bailey,  Ivey, 
and  Morris  spoke,  there  was  some  reviving  among  the  people.  We 
lodged  at  John  Lee's— my  mind  was  much  drawn  out;  we  retired  to 
an  old  log  shop,  and  prayed  frequently,  and  found  our  hearts  sweetly 
united  together. 

Sunday  6.  We  had  a  great  meeting,  love-feast  at  ten — very  warm 
weather ;  a  log-house,  covered  with  long  shingles  ;  the  sun  beating 
through.  At  one  o'clock  preaching  began,  I  spoke  on  Eph.  iii.  16 — 
18.  to  about  five  hundred  people;  was  blest,  and  the  word  went 
with  power.  Some  were  moved,  some  hardened,  yet  I  hope  good 
was  done  and  the  work  will  revive. 

Monday  7.  Exceeding  hot  weather;  1  rose  with  a  comfortable 
sense  of  the  divine  presence  on  my  heart ;  we  prayed  alone  in  the 
woods  ;  I  pleaded  in  private  ;  great  labours  are  before  me  :  the  Lord 
keeps  me.  At  ten  I  preached  in  Lee's  chapel,  in  Caswell  county,  to 
about  sixty  people,  on  Matt.  vii.  2  J .  "  Not  every  one  that  saith,  Lord, 
Lord,  &c."  I  possessed  clearness  of  ideas,  liberty  of  speech,  and 
the  people  serious  :  the  preachers  are  under  great  difficulties  here 
for  want  of  places  of  study  ;  most  places  but  one  room,  or  if  a  cham- 
ber, they  cannot  live  there,  it  is  so  hot.  I  found  the  people  much 
united  to  me,  and  appeared  to  think  too  highly  of  me.  Lord,  keep 
me  from  pride,  and  all  high  thoughts  of  myself;  but  daily  travelling 
and  other  labours  will  humble  me.  There  is  a  good  work  of  God 
here  ;  but  some  of  the  Baptists  rage  because  we  have  what  they  lost ; 
but  while  we  keep  close  to  God,  and  preach  the  power  of  religion, 
they  can  do  us  no  harm.     (True  !)  ' 

Tuesday  8.  I  rode  to  Baxter's,  sixteen  miles;  about  eighty  people, 
many  came  that  never  attend  at  other  times.  My  text  was  1  John  i. 
8.  9.     I  had  great  liberty,  but  was  tried  in  getting  there  :  we  cross 


REV.  FfUNCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  3QS 

ed  the  Line  Creek.  After  preaching,  rode  six  miles,  but  was  an 
hour  too  late.  About  eight  o'clock,  came  to  a  cabin,  an  earthen 
floor,  and  damp  bed.  I  was  very  weary  and  had  a  pain  in  my  head ; 
but  the  people  were  kind  :  I  knew  not  how  to  lie  down.  Edward 
Bailey  laid  down,  and  slept  well. 

Wednesday  9.  I  rode  sixteen  miles  to  White's,  came  in  about  three 
o'clock  ;  no  preaching  appointed.  I  had  time  to  write,  and  plan  for 
another  trip  through  Carolina.  I  have  had  little  time  or  place  for 
prayer  till  J  came  here  :  the  roads  are  so  bad,  I  have  my  carriage  to 
refit  almost  every  week.  This  is  Caswell  county  ;  the  poor  people 
have  been  much  put  to  it,  the  year  past,  for  bread  ;  the  present  year 
they  have  exceeding  fine  growing  corn  :  Lord,  remember  the  poor! 

Thursday  10.  I  rode  for  the  state  of  Virginia ;  we  were  lost,  stopt 
at  Dickinson's,  and  took  dinner  ;  then  rode  on  to  Sylvester  Adams's, 
several  creeks  to  cross,  and  bad  roads,  to  travel.  Edward  Bailey  led 
my  horse  down  a  steep  hill,  and  the  carriage  overset,  the  horse  strug- 
gled, but  kept  his  feet :  one  shaft  broke,  which  we  strapped  up  ;  and 
rode  on  near  thirty  miles  :  we  found  the  Rawlinses  there.  Abraham 
is  incurable  :  I  have  a  mind  to  try  Isaac  again,  having  a  hope  that  he 
is  humbled  ;  Lord,  direct  me  what  to  do  in  this  matter.  I  made  pro- 
posals to  him,  but  he  rejected  them :  1  fear  he  is  also  incurable,  being 
too  lazy  to  ride  a  circuit. 

Saturday  12.  I  went  down  Dan-River  two  miles,  and  preached  to 
about  eighty  people  on  James  iv.  8 — 11.  Edward  Bailey  spoke  very 
zealously  after  me  ;  it  is  very  hot,  myself  weak  and  distressed  ;  have 
no  place  for  retirement  but  the  woods,  and  the  heat  dispirits  me  : 
there  is  a  great  difference  between  this  and  the  northern  part  of  the 
continent.     I  am  kept  in  faith,  and  seek  the  glory  of  God. 

Sunday  13.  I  rode  to  Watson's  preaching- house,  a  round  log 
building  after  the  plan  of  this  part  of  the  country.  There  were 
about  five  hundred  people  ;  I  6poke  on  the  parable  of  the  sower,  a 
lengthy  discourse.  Edward  Bailey  preached  much  to  the  purpose 
about  Christian  discipline  and  fellowship,  from  those  words,  "  Where 
two  or  three  are  gathered  together,  in  my  name,"  &c.  There  was 
a  moving. 

Monday  14.  I  brought  Isaac  Rawlins  to  some  acknowledgment, 
and  appointed  him  to  ride  Pittsylvania,  New-Hope,  and  Tar-River, 
till  conference.  His  greatest  admirers  saw  his  obstinacy,  and  would 
have  disowned  him  if  he  had  not  submitted  ;  for  they  began  to  tire 
with  his  lounging  about.  I  hope  this  will  be  a  warning  to  him,  and 
will  make  him  take  more  care,  and  submit  to  order.     I  preached  at 


304  hev.  PftANdTS  asbu-ry's  jrOtPRNAL, 

Colonel  Wilson's  to  about  two  hundred  people,  I  spoke  on  Hebr, 
xii.  1 — 4. 

Tuesday  15.  I  rode  thirty  miles  to  Mr.  Martin's,  the  roads  and 
cpeeks  are  rendered  bad  for  travelling  by  the  late  freshets. 

Wednesday  16.  I  preached  at  Dowby's  store  to  about  three  hun- 
dred people,  some  gay  ones.  I  spoke  on  1  John  ii.  13 — 17.  the  peo- 
ple were  attentive  :  Edward  Bailey  thundered  away  on  "  Is  there  not 
a  cau3e  ?"  I  have  been  very  unwell,  and  travelling  down  Dan-River 
and  among  the  creeks,  am  in  danger  of  the  fever  and  ague.  We 
were  obliged  to  swim  the  horses  over  Birche's  creek,  and  bring  the 
carriage  over  the  shattered  bridge. 

Thursday  17.  I  stopped  at  friends  Baker's,  being  very  unwell. 
Brother  Bailey  went  to  a  chapel  ten  miles  from  this.  I  want  to  write, 
and  to  recover  strength,  or  I  shall  run  myself  down.  I  am  kept 
in  peace,  humility,  and  watchfulness.  I  have  been  unwell  for 
this  week  past ;  this  has  made  it  an  additional  burden  to  travel, 
and  the  sun  is  so  violent,  that  it  appears  to  me  I  could  not  stand  it, 
were  it  not  for  the  top-carriage.  I  thought  it  would  be  well  for  me 
to  have  a  person  with  me  always,  and  I  think  Cromwell  is  the  man. 
If  I  should  preach  a  systematical,  dry  sermon,  he  would  pay  the 
sinners  off.  I  was  kept  in  peace,  my  body  some  little  recruited.  I 
rested  comfortable,  retired  often  to  prayer,  that  God  would  go  with 
me  to  the  next  circuit.  I  suppose,  upon  a  calculation,  I  have  rode 
better  than  a  thousand  miles  since  February  last,  when  I  was  at 
quarterly  meeting  at  the  seaside  in  Delaware. 

F  tf,ay  18.  Felt  unwell,  something  like  an  ague;  this  being  an 
unhealthy  spot  amongst  the  rivers.  I  rode  twelve  miles  to  Boyd's 
church  ;  about  sixty  people  ;  they  had  but  little  notice.  I  asked  the 
people  if  they  chose  to  have  the  service  read  ;  they  did,  and  I  read 
as  far  as  the  first  lesson,  not  having  time  to  read  all :  then  spoke  on 
2  Chron.  vii.  14.  in  great  plainness  ;  the  people  did  not  feel.  I  pre- 
vailed on  our  preachers  to  use  that  church  once  a  fortnight. 

Saturday  19.  I  am  unwell  in  body,  but  my  mind  is  happy  :  this  is 
a  comfortable  house  to  be  at,  (Mr.  Griffin's,)  I  shall  have  half  a  day's 
rest.  I  preached  on  Acts  xiii.  16.  about  eighty  people,  very  wild 
and  unfeeling.  I  rode  to  brother  Parish's,  ten  miles,  crossed  Shoko- 
Creek  at  the  Fish-trap,  a  very  bad  ford,  occasioned  by  the  late  freshet 
that  rose  near  forty  feet. 

Sunday  20.  I  could  not  read,  write,  think,  or  converse  much.  At 
twelve  o'clock  I  preached  to  about  five  hundred  souls  ;  an  un- 
awakened  people,  but  the  Lord  assisted  me  greatly,  from  Luke  i& 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY5S  JOURNAL.  305 

<j>3 — 25.  Some  solemnity  and  quickening  :  brother  Bailey  exhorted. 
I  cannot  get  clear  of  a  cold,  and  a  s-low  fever.  I  praise  God  for 
cooler  weather,  it  is  what  I  have  prayed  for,  and  God  has  sent  it : 
for  the  heat  is  one  cause  of  my  being  unwell. 

Monday  21.  We  rode  to  Carter's,  five  miles  :  I  was  unwell,  and 
Edward  Bailey  preached  on  "  We  preach  not  ourselves."  We  rode 
on,  and  crossed  Dan  and  Stanton  rivers  at  Sir  Peyton's  ferry  ;  there 
is  a  short  canal  cut  from  one  river  to  the  other.  I  rode  through  the 
woods  to  our  friend  Crowden's,  about  ten  miles  from  Carter's — came 
in  about  sunset. 

Tuesday  22.  I  am  some  little  better  in  health  ;  my  spirit  is  re* 
freshed  at  kind  entertainment  and  a  loving  family,  old  Methodists  of  a 
right  spirit.  I  hear  the  work  revives  in  this  circuit ;  bless  the  Lord, 
I  shall  have  better  entertainment,  and  better  roads,  but  above  all, 
better  people  :  I  thankfully  acknowledge  the  goodness  of  God  in  all 
my  travels.  May  He,  who  alone  is  able  to  keep  my  soul  and  body,  be 
ever  with  me  !  1  preached  at  Dr.  Crowden's  to  about  three  hundred 
people  on  Titus  iii.  2.  Had  liberty  and  life,  though  unwell.  After 
preaching  set  out  on  the  way,  about  thirteen  miles,  came  in  about 
eight  o'clock :  the  people  seemed  not  greatly  pleased  to  see  us.  I 
slept  some  little,  rose  early  for  the  quarterly  meeting  at  C©1.  Bed- 
ford's ;  rode  about  ten  miles  to  breakfast ;  met  Henry  Willis  and 
Moses  Parks,  rather  stiff  for  ordinances.  I  spoke  on  Habakkuk 
iii.  2.  spoke  freely  to  them.  I  was  a  little  grieved.  Brother  Parks 
preached  a  sermon  on  the  "  Grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  &c. 
He  was  much  out  of  his  harness  ;  I  thought  they  were  but  children, 
and  that  I  ought  to  bear  with,  and  take  care  of  them.  I  retired  into 
the  barn,  prayed,  and  felt  the  Lord  near.  Next  day  at  nine  o'clock, 
love-feast — we  had  much  prayer,  some  singing  and  speaking  ;  at  last 
brother  Parks  prayed,  and  some  of  the  honest  hearted  people  broke 
out  into  a  shout.  At  twelve  o'clock  I  preached  under  an  arbour  near 
the  church,  to  about  three  hundred  people,  on  John  iii.  17,  18.  was 
assisted  at  first,  but  was  not  close  or  clear  in  the  application.  Thomas 
Morris  gave  a  good  exhortation  ;  Edward  Bailey  spoke  very  fervent. 
God  blessed  him  ;  his  greatest  gift  is  exhortation.  So  all  ended  in 
peace.  This  day  there  came  an  account  that  the  southern  army  was 
defeated,  and  all  taken  to  a  man,  except  Gen.  Gates,  which  cannot  be 
all  true.  I  am  kept  in  resignation  and  faith,  and  praying  that  God 
may  bless  my  labours,  and  bring  peace  and  union  among  the  Metho- 
dists in  Virginia.  I  received  comforting  letters  from  Mr.  White  and 
Mr.  Gough — all  these  comfort  me  in  the  house  of  my  pilgrimage. 

Vol.  I.  39 


306  REV.   FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL, 

Mr.  White  informs  me  of  Thomas  Haskins,  a  young  man  that  was 
convinced,  who  has  a  good  education,  has  been  reading  the  law  three 
years  ;  now  he  must  read  and  preach  the  Gospel. 

Friday  25.  I  rode  to  Page  Mann's,  sixteen  miles,  was  much  assisted 
in  speaking  on  Hebr.  iv.  11 — 13.  to  about  three  hundred  people, 
who  appeared  serious  and  somewhat  moved. 

Saturday  26.  Rode  to  Robinson's,  a  smith,  who  braced  up  my 
carriage  ;  we  rode  on  to  Little-Falling  River,  and  then  to  the  New- 
Store,  where  was  a  company  stationed.  The  captain  wanted  our 
certificates  ;  Bailey  disputed  with  him — I  showed  him  mine.  We 
rode  on  to  Great-Falling  River  :  I  stopped  at  one  Vincent  Glass's  : 
the  man  was  kind,  onr  entertainment  plain  ;  I  did  not  sleep  well. 
We  talked  with  our  host,  he  had  catched  some  notions  from  the 
Baptists  and  Presbyterians  ;  though  he  was  going  another  way,  he 
changed  his  purpose  and  came  with  us  ;  we  rode  twelve  miles,  over 
hills  and  creeks,  and  through  woods — about  eleven  o'clock  I  spoke 
on  Isaiah  xxxv.  6,  7.  to  about  five  hundred  people,  wild  enough  :  this 
is  a  running  life.  The  devil  roars,  and  men  threaten,  but  God  is 
with  us.  I  laboured  to  come  at  the  consciences  of  the  people,  but 
eould  not.  I  keep  my  health  to  a  wonder  ;  but  I  want  time  for  re- 
tirement ;  we  had  near  thirty  miles  from  Page  Mann's  to  Staples's 
I  can  hardly  get  time  and  place  to  note  down  any  thing  I  spent  some 
time  at  the  quarter  meeting  in  the  barn,  alone.  Oh  !  how  good  did 
that  feel. 

Monday  28.  Rode  sixteen  miles  to  Fore's,  about  one  hundred  peo- 
ple ;  some  serious  souls.  Spoke  to  the  society — about  thirty 
members. 

Tuesday  29.  Rode  to  friend  Martin's  ;  came  in  about  ten  o'clock, 
preached  from  2  Corinthians  iv.  1 — 4.  to  about  five  hundred  hearers, 
some  Baptists,  some  Methodists,  some  old  Churchmen,  some  Inde- 
pendent people,  who  have  joined  with  one  Mr.  R ts  to  be  Inde- 
pendent Presbyterians.  I  see  very  little  religion  among  the  people 
in  these  parts  ;  some  professors  came  to  see  what  was  going  on. 

Wednesday  30.  Rode  thirty  miles  to  Billups's  barn  ;  about  one 
hundred  and  thirty  people,  rich  and  unfeeling :  I  could  not  get  in  till 
two  o'clock,  spoke  freely  from  Hebr.  x.  12 — 16.  I  lodged  at  Col. 
Billups's. 

Thursday  31.  Rode  to  Tucker's,  spoke  on  Peter  iv.  18.  had  great 
light — met  brother  Parks,  found  him  more  teachable — we  have  hot 
weather. 

Friday,  September  1,  1780.  A  day  of  fasting.  I  was  kindly  enter- 
tained by  the  people,  who  refitted  our  clothing.     Rode  to  Brown1? 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  307 

eighteen  miles,  came  in  about  ten  o'clock,  spoke  on  1  Peter  v.  6 — 10. 
with  some  freedom,  though  very  unwell  by  fasting  and  riding. 

Saturday  2.  Rode  fourteen  miles  to  my  old  friend  Johnson's,  spoke 
from  1  Peter  iii.  17,  18.  to  about  one  hundred  people  ;  felt  life  ; 
some  of  the  people  were  moved  ;  then  met  society  ;  some  of  them 
felt  and  spoke  of  the  goodness  of  God,  and  were  put  in  mind  of  old 
times,  and  old  preaching.  Brother  Johnson  is  a  solid  true  Methodist ; 
he  laments  the  falling  away  that  I  told  him  of.  1  am  a  true  prophet 
of  evil  tidings,  as  it  suits  my  cast  of  mind. 

Sunday  3.  This  day  nine  years  past  I  sailed  from  Bristol,  Old 
England.  Ah !  what  troubles  have  I  past  through  !  What  sickuess  ! 
What  temptations  !  But  I  think,  though  I  am  grown  more  aged,  I  have 
a  better  constitution,  and  more  gifts  ;  and  I  think  much  more  grace. 
I  can  bear  disappointments  and  contradiction  with  greater  ease. 
Trials  are  before  me,  very  great  ones,  but  God  hath  helped  me 
hitherto.  I  can  with  greater  confidence  trust  Him  !  and  indeed  what 
have  any  of  us  to  trust  in  for  futurity,  except  the  living  God  ? 

Virginia. — Monday,  September  4,  1780.  This  being  a  day  of 
rest,  affords  me  an  opportunity  of  reading  and  writing.  I  enjoy  a 
serene  mind. 

Tuesday  5.  I  rode  to  Easlin's  preaching-house  ;  where  I  spoke  to 
about  one  hundred  people.  Some  few  warm  hearts,  1  thought,  among 
many  more  cold.  I  spoke  on  Hebr.  xiii.  6.  ;  and  had  much  liberty. 
At  night  met  the  people  at  B.  Clark's,  and  exhorted  them  closely  to 
relative  duties.  A  poor  sinner  who  was  drunk,  had  prepared  a  bot- 
tle of  spirits  for  the  disturbance  of  the  congregation  ;  his  horse  threw 
him,  and  the  fall  had  nearly  killed  him. — 1  had  had  a  foreboding  of 
mischief. 

Wednesday  6.  At  Morgan's,  to  about  one  hundred  people,  I  spoke 
in  great  plainness  of  speech  on  2  Cor.  iv.  2,  3.  preaching  has  not  been 
accompanied  with  success  here  \  the  audience  were,  however,  gene- 
rally attentive.  I  met  with  F.  H.  he  is  gone  from  the  Methodists. 
I  dealt  very  plainly  with  him  ;  he  was,  in  his  way,  very  affectionate 
to  me  ;  but  what  is  that  to  me  ? 

Thursday  7.  At  Malone's  spoke  to  about  one  hundred  souls,  on 
Matt.  xxiv.  12,  13.  We  had  a  love-feast,  some  speaking.  After 
meeting  we  had  some  friendly  contention  with  A.  Y  and  W  about 
the  ordinances  :  so  far  as  this  was  a  loss  of  precious  time,  so  far 
Satan  prevailed,  and  I  am  sorry. 

Friday  8.  My  mind  is  calm  ;  1  have  had  close  communion  with 
God.     My  hours  of  retirement  have  been  kept.     When  I  can  get  a 


308  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy'S  JOURNAL. 

barn  or  a  preaching-house  I  am  happy.  Though  I  have  talked 
much  I  have  kept  my  temper.  I  feel  nothing  but  love  ;  and  no  con- 
tradiction I  meet  with  makes  me  angry.  I  have  a  natural  affection 
for  my  own  countrymen  ;  yet  I  can  hear  them  called  cruel  people,  and 
calmly  listen  to  threatenings  of  slaughter  against  them.  Were  a  peo- 
ple spreading  desolation  with  fire  and  sword  in  England,  I,  as  an  in- 
habitant, whether  the  invaders  were  right  or  wrong,  would  probably 
feel  as  the  Americans  now  do,  and  use  the  same  harsh  expressions  : 
thus  I  reason,  and  cannot  therefore  condemn — but  the  grace  of  God  is 
sufficient  to  set  us  all  above  the  world,  and  all  things  here. 

Saturday  9.  Rode  to  Edward  Pegram's — about  seventy  people 
there.  I  was  under  great  dejection  ;  and  spoke  with  very  little  life 
on  Hebr.  xiii.  6. 

Sunday  10.  At  BushelPs  chapel  I  spoke  to  about  four  hundred 
people  on  the  parable  of  the  sower  ;  and  although  my  fever  came  on 
before  I  began,  I  was  greatly  assisted.  I  spoke  long,  and  was  ready 
to  weep  over  them.  After  the  meeting  I  rode  seventeen  miles  and 
came  to  Capt.  Smith's.  I  have  travelled  since  Friday  morning  about 
sixty  miles.  I  went  to  bed  and  had  a  strong  fever  on  me  all  night,  it 
was  an  intermittent.  Monday — very  weak,  but  happy! — Received 
letters  from  Jesse  Hollingsworth,  from  White,  and  from  Peddicord. 

There  is  a  great  work  of  God  in  Delaware  ;  but  a  drought,  and  very 
awful  distresses  in  the  land;  I  mourn  with  them,  and  I  rejoice  with  them. 

Monday  11.  Though  unwell,  1  spoke  on  Hebr.  iii.  12,  13,  14.  I 
first  stood  up  and  prayed,  but  was  obliged,  through  illness,  to  commit 
my  labours  to  Edward  Baily,  who  spoke  afterward  :  resuming  my  sta- 
tion, I  preached  with  liberty. 

Tuesday  12.  I  visittd  my  friends.  These  kind  people  have  made 
me  a  dress  of  Virginia  cloth,  which  I  much  needed,  as  my  dress  ap- 
proached to  raggedness.  I  saw  L.  Cole,  a  serious,  good  man,  under 
a  strong  bias  to  ordinances,  because  he  opened  his  book  on,  "  They 
shall  not  profit  my  people  :"  with  this  he  was  affected.  I  saw  bro- 
ther  D e,   brother  M s,   all  loving,  and  showed  me  more 

respect  than  is  due  to  me. 

Wednesday  13.  A  little  better  in  health.  Have  read  the  first 
volume  of  Keysler's  Travels  through  Switzerland.  I  am  much  un- 
fitted for  business  by  this  tertian.  Prayer,  both  in  public  and  in  pri- 
vate, has  not  been  neglected. 

Thursday  14.  Rode  to  Mr.  Jarratt's,  and  was  kindly  received.  I 
am  very  unwell. 

Friday  15.  Preached  with  freedom  at  the  barn  on  Rom.  xiii.  11. 


RET.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  309 

Saturday  16.  Wrote  to  Mr.  Wesley,  at  the  desire  of  the  Virginia 
conference ;  who  had  consented  to  suspend  the  administration  of  the 
ordinances  for  one  year.*  I  want  to  be  more  devoted.  I  had 
liberty  in  speaking.  God  was  with  us.  I  am  but  feeble  in  body,  and 
not  so  fervent  in  spirit  as  I  desire  to  be. 

Sunday  17.  I  had  some  close  talk  with  Mr.  Jarratt :  he  seems 
willing  to  help  what  be  can,  and  to  come  to  the  conference.  My 
health  is  much  restored.  Rode  to  White's  chapel— a  miserable 
place  it  is  ;  unfinished,  and  one  part  lying  open  to  the  sun.  A  com- 
pany of  young  men  diverted  themselves  under  the  trees,  laughing 
and  mocking  while  I  discoursed  with  great  plainness  to  about  five 
hundred  people  on  Hebr.  iv.  2,  3.  I  was  determined,  if  possible, 
they  should  hear.  Rode  on  about  twelve  miles  to  Lewis  Feather- 
stone's,  a  good  man. 

Monday  18.  Peace  !  I  preached  on  Psalm  i.  with  some  liberty,  to 
a  few  faithful  souls. 

Tuesday  19.  Rode  to  Green's,  sixteen  miles.  What  with  oppo- 
sers,  the  bad  times,  and  a  worse  devil,  there  has  been  a  great  falling 
away  here.  I  spoke  on  Gal.  v.  16,  17.  and  was  close  and  home; 
enforcing  the  power  of  religion  to  my  hearers,  among  whom  were 
some  people  warm  for  the  new  way. 

Wednesday  20.  I  came  to  Richard  Walters  s— sixteen  miles. 
Spoke  on  Coloss.  i.  26,  27,  28.  Had  light,  and  spoke  long.  Brother 
Baily  also  spoke.  Brother  James  Foster,  a  feeling,  good  soul,  worn 
out  in  the  Lord's  work,  met  me  here  ;  I  felt  much  love  and  tender- 
ness for  him  :  he  concluded  by  prayer.  My  manner  is,  to  pray  in 
the  morning  for  the  prosperity  of  the  work  in  every  circuit ;  in  the 
afternoon  for  all  the  travelling  preachers,  for  our  union,  and  the  spiri- 
tuality of  each.    I  am  greatly  blessed  in  my  soul  by  day  and  by  night. 

Thursday  21.  Travelled  over  rough  roads  sixteen  miles,  to  Fos- 
ter's. I  spoke  on  2  Peter  iii.  16,  17.  I  preached  with  some  life. 
The  people  are  kind,  and  appear  loving  ;  but  there  is  a  great  falling 

*  The  answer  to  this  letter  was  made  through  Dr.  Coke,  Richard  Whatcoat,  and 
Thomas  Vasey,  in  1784,  who  all  came  to  America  properly  ordained.  And  here  I  will 
take  occasion  to  correct  a  mistake  into  which  Dr.  Whitehead  has  fallen  in  his  Life  of  Mr. 
Wesley.  It  is  in  that  work  stated,  that  had  Mr.  Wesley  obtained  the  consent  of  the  Ameri- 
can preachers  and  people,  he  might  have  sent  ministers  regularly  ordained,  to  the  society 
in  that  part  of  the  world  the  truth  is,  that  the  American  Methodists,  both  ministers  and 
people,  wished  to  have  such  ministers  among  them,  that  they  might  partake,  like  other 
Christian  societies,  of  the  ordinances  of  the  church  of  God  ;  and  when  ministers  did  thus 
come  they  received  them  generally  and  joyfully.  I  will  farther  presume,  that  Mr.  Wesley 
received  few  letters  from  America  in  which  that  subject  was  not  pressed  upon  him. 


310  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

away ;  the  devil  has  not  been  idle,  and  opposers  have  preached  to 
them  water,  more  than  holiness  ;  and  have  thus  brought  confusion 
among  the  Methodists. 

Friday  22. 1  am  weak,  and  not  able  to  fast  altogether,  I  eat  sparingly. 
Rode  twenty-seven  miles,  and  came  to  a  good  house,  yesterday  it  was 
very  warm  for  the  season.  I  feel  the  weight  of  the  work,  the  great- 
ness of  my  charge,  and  resolve  to  be  more  given  up  to  God  than 
ever.  From  brother  Foster's  conversation,  I  am  led  to  hope  our 
breaches  will  be  healed. 

Saturday  23.  I  preached  at  Hayes's,  to  about  five  hundred  people. 
They  were  gay  and  careless  ;  I  spoke  with  fervency,  but  they  were 
unmoved.  We  rode  on  to  John  Finney's,  a  serious  man,  and  a 
preacher. 

Sunday  24.  I  spoke  long  and  in  much  plainness  on  the  latter  part 
of  the  eighth  chapter  of  Mark,  to  about  seven  hundred  people  ; 
some  of  the  gay  sort  among  them,  and  hope  there  was  good  done. 
I  have  enjoyed  great  fellowship  with  brother  Foster,  he  was  once 
for  the  new ;  he  is  now  for  the  good  old  way. 

Monday  25.  Rode  to  Stoney  Hill  preaching-house;  spoke  to  about 
fifty  serious,  feeling  people.  Trials  and  blessings  accompany  me. 
After  dinner  retired  to  Benjamin  Tucker's.  I  was  much  blessed  in 
private,  while  pleading  for  wisdom  to  go  before  the  people,  and  for  a 
spirit  of  supplication  in  my  accustomed  morning  and  evening  prayers 
for  all  the  preachers  and  circuits  in  America.  I  begin  at  the  north 
and  go  to  the  south  in  order.  He  that  faithfully  cares  for  others, 
others  will  care  for  him  :  above  all,  the  Lord,  who  is  not  unrighteous 
to  forget  the  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love  we  show  towards  the 
saints,  He  will  care  for  him. 

Wednesday  27.  Rode  to  George  Pegram's  ;  preached  to  about 
eighteen,  great  and  small,  on  2  Peter  iii.  17,  18.  I  rode  on  to  Mr. 
Yearbury's  ;  he  lives  well ;  is  kind  and  decent  in  behaviour  :  de- 
livered a  family  lecture.  Rode  ten  miles  to  Petersburg.  A  heavy 
rain  induced  us  to  put  off  preaching  until  two  o'clock :  spoke  on 
Rev.  iii.  10.  was  led  out ;  upon  the  whole  blessed  ;  there  were  some 
old  friends  from  the  country  present. 

Thursday  28.  Rode  twelve  miles  to  Mr.  Patrick's.  Some  soldiers 
and  otfiers  came  to  hear  the  word.  Rode  on  twelve  miles  to  Baker'?, 
and  was  kindly  received.  Brother  Davis  went  with  me.  I  spoke  on 
1  John  i.  8,  9. — had  some  liberty.  I  sometimes  feel  gloomy :  trying 
circumstances  prevent  me  from  making  an  exertion  ;  yet  if  1  would 
try  to  force  myself  on  such  occasions  it  might  be  well. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  311 

Friday  29.  1  have  a  sense  of  God  upon  my  heart ;  although  little 
rest,  and  much  tempted.  I  was  greatly  led  out  in  preaching  at  Ba- 
ker's ;  both  parents  and  children  wept  in  silent  tears,  while  I  spoke  on 
Gen.  xviii.  19.  Rode  that  evening  to  the  Manakintown,  where  a  watch- 
night  was  held  by  brothers  Finney,  Bailey,  and  Foster.  I  spoke  to 
our  brethren  upon  a  firm  and  lasting  union  ;  it  was  opposed,  and 
with  tears  :  tears  and  feelings  will  not  induce  me  to  give  up  my 
charge.  It  began  to  be  a  doubt  with  me  whether  I  should  leave  Vir- 
ginia until  conference.  I  sent  certain  proposals  by  brother  Finney 
to  the  preachers  at  their  quarterly  meetings. 

Sunday,  October  1.  I  preached  at  the  Manakintown  to  about  five 
hundred  people  ;   I  was  led  out  and  spoke  plainly. 

Monday  2.  Rode  to  Maxey's,  twelve  miles.  Preached  from  Luke 
xiii.  23,  24,  25.  and  had  some  liberty. 

Tuesday  3.  Rode  twenty  miles,  crossed  James-River,  and  lodged  at 
Tucker  Woodson's.  I  spoke  and  prayed  with  an  old  Presbyterian, 
who  was  once  pleased  with  our  preachers. 

Wednesday  4.  We  had  not  rode  far  before  it  began  to  rain  again- 
Edward  Baily  was  so  unwell  1  feared  for  him,  and  stopt  at  a  tavern  ; 
it  was  Duke's,  in  Goochland,  about  twelve  miles  from  our  last  stage. 
Here  my  companion  was  confined  to  his  bed.  I  dried  our  clothes, 
and  talked  with  the  woman  of  the  house,  who  had  been  under  con« 
viction  by  hearing  our  preachers  in  Carolina,  but  now  unhappily  in 
a  way  of  life  unfriendly  to  religion  :  we  brought  them  to  prayer,— 
forced  prayer. 

Thursday  5.  Set  off  without  any  breakfast.  Passed  onward  to 
Lindsey's  tavern,  inquiring  the  way  to  the  Broken-Backed  church  ; 
we  could  not  get  any  positive  directions  until  we  came  within  eight 
miles  of  it,  and  found  it  to  be  on  this  side  of  the  fork  of  James-River, 
about  twenty  miles  distant  from  Duke's.  We  met  about  sixty  peo- 
ple, after  riding  nearly  as  many  miles.  I  spoke  on  Gen.  xviii.  19. — 
very  little  moving.  Oh,  how  different  was  it  from  the  effect  pro- 
duced on  Tuesday  last,  when  discoursing  on  the  same  text !  We 
crossed  the  North-River  in  a  canoe,  and  the  carriage  was  brought  over 
in  the  same  way  :  were  kindly  received  at  Roger  Thomson's  ;  and 
here  it  was  the  Broken- Backed  conference  was  held,  in  which  the 
subject  of  the  ordinances  was  brought  into  consideration.  I  have 
been  much  tried  in  this  journey  by  the  lodging,  people,  and  weather. 
Oh  that  I  could  bear  all  things  !  My  companion  is  sick  and  much 
dispirited,  and  I  myself  am  very  unwell.  I  expect  some  of  this  cir- 
cuit is  very  inaccessible.     O  why  should  I  take  all  this  labour  in 


SlJi  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

vain,  if  it  be  yet  in  vain  ?  my  work  and  my  reward  is  with  the  Lord, 
Every  morning  and  evening  I  pray  for  all  the  preachers  and  circuits  ; 
and  as  1  am  so  led  out  to  pray  for  them,  I  hope  they  will  all  be  united 
once  more  as  they  have  been. 

Friday  6.  We  went  forwards  ;  the  Fork  church  seven  miles  distant. 
Brother  Bailey  was  taken  sick  upon  the  road  :  I  left  him  about  two 
miles  below  the  church,  went  on  and  preached  on  Rom.  viii.  Return- 
ing to  brother  B.  I  found  him  very  ill  with  a  violent  fever:  he  rode 
twelve  miles  in  the  carriage  to  brother  Hopkins's  in  Amherst.  Riding 
on  horseback  fatigued  me. 

Saturday  8.  Rode  to  Martin's  ;  I  spoke  on  Joshua's  resolution, 
with  some  pleasure,  to  about  eighty  people.  Continued  on  seven  miles 
up  into  the  mountains,  to  Mr.  Haines's — the  ways  bad  enough.  Brother 
Bailey  travelling  so  far  without  eating  any  thing,  came  in  very  sick. 

Sunday  9.  Rode  thirteen  miles  to  the  Sugar-Loaf  Mountains. 
Edward  Bailey,  after  riding  a  few  miles,  was  taken  with  a  second  fit, 
and  very  ill ;  1  left  him  in  the  carriage  and  proceeded  on.  About 
five  hundred  people  had  assembled,  to  whom  I  spoke  on  2  Cor.  iv. 
2,  3,  4.  Returning  after  preaching  to  brother  Bailey,  I  found  him 
with  all  the  symptoms  of  a  severe  bilious  attack,  and  like  a  dead 
man  in  appearance  ;  he  passed  the  night  in  great  distress — prayer 
was  made  for  him  ;  through  mercy  his  fit  went  off — I  took  brother 
Bailey  to  help  me  ; — his  affliction  has  given  me  much  trouble.  Great- 
ly distressed  for  him  as  I  have  been,  I  am  much  consoled  in  being 
able  to  leave  him  with  Doctor  Hopkins,  who  is  a  kind,  skilful,  sensible 
man. 

Monday  10.  Set  out  alone  for  Mumpin's.  After  riding  about 
twenty  five  miles  night  overtook  me  at  Wallace's  mill ;  it  was  some 
time  before  I  could  find  my  way,  which  I  discovered  to  be  un^Jer  the 
trunk  head  race  of  the  mill ;  here  the  top  of  the  carriage  being  too 
high,  set  fast :  I  took  the  horse  out,  and  with  much  trouble  came 
clear  without  breakage  of  any  kind.  The  people  of  the  house  were 
Presbyterians  ;  they  gave  me  lodging. — I  prayed  night  and  morning 
with  them. 

Tuesday  11.  Rode  over  the  mountains  ten  miles,  came  to  the  new 
preaching-house  ;  spoke  on  2  Cor  v.  17,  18,  19.  was  much  blessed. 
Here  I  saw  Robert  Wagden,  a  soldier,  and  James  Signal,  Englishmen, 
captured  with  Burgoyne. — The  first  I  saw  in  York  seven  years  ago  ; 
since  then  he  fell,  and  was  restored  at  the  barracks  in  Albemarle 
when  a  prisoner.  I  spent  the  night  with  them  comfortably.  Two 
soldiers  in  the  neighbourhood  have  occasioned  scandal  among  the 


REV.  FRANCIS   ASBURY'S  JOURtfAIg,  31§ 

Baptists.     Soldiers,  I  think,  should  be  in  society  with  one  another,, 
and  exhort  and  preach  among  themselves. 

Wednesday  12.  I  rode  to  Fretwell's,  twenty  miles  :  was  troubled 
in  getting  the  carriage  into  the  flat  at  the  river  side.  I  spoke  to 
about  forty  people  on  Acts  xiii.  26.  I  rode  to  Mr.  Grymes's,  a  com- 
fortable house  :  arriving  abtfut  eight  o'clock,  I  was  blessed  and  conso* 
led  for  all  my  toils. 

Thursday  13.  I  have  peace  and  love,  although  unwell:  I  intend  to 
spend  this  day  in  retirement.  I  preached  at  Mr.  Grymes's  at  twelve 
o'clock  to  about  thirty  people,  white  and  black,  on  2  Peter  iii.  17,  18. 
I  had  great  liberty  and  clear  ideas.  Though  employed  thus,  I  have 
had  a  little  time  for  retirement  and  writing.  I  am  happy  ;  but  I  see 
the  great  need  of  doing,  being,  and  suffering,  what  I  preach  to  others.  I 
have  travelled  so  much  that  it  seems  like  confinement  to  rest  one 
day ;  I  hope  I  shall  travel  as  long  as  I  live  ;  travelling  is  my  health, 
life,  and  all,  for  soul  and  body.  I  am  not  well,  but  I  am  kept  upright 
in  heart ;  and  am  much  concerned  for  a  union  with  the  preachers.  I 
am  alternately  in  hope  and  despair  aoout  it. 

Friday  14.  Rode  to  Bohannon's,  passing  the  Rapid  Dan-River. 
About  two  o'clock  I  arrived,  after  some  difficulties,  and  found  Henry 
Fry  preaching  to  about  eighty  people.  I  spoke  after  him  on  Luke 
xiii.  23,  24,  25. — was  fervent ;  but  the  people  thought  I  must  speak 
like  thunder  to  be  a  great  preacher.  I  shall  not  throw  myself  into 
an  unnatural  heat  or  overstrained  exertions.  I  rode  home  about  ten 
miles  with  brother  Fry ;  he  is  a  serious  man.  My  carriage  broke, 
and  his  overseer  mended  it  very  well  ;  meantime  1  rested,  and  read 
at  times  the  Valley  of  Lilies  of  a  Kempis — it  is  much  in  the  style  of 
his  Pattern  or  Imitation.  I  wonder  Mr.  Wesley  has  never  abridged 
this  work. 

Sunday  16.  I  rode  to  Roberts's,  under  the  mountains,  about  ten 
miles.  Spoke  to  about  five  hundred  people  ;  1  was  zealous,  but  the 
people  languid.  A  certain  kind  of  preaching,  of  which  these  people 
have  lately  heard  much,  leaves  the  most  stupid  souls,  to  my  mind, 
thnt  I  find  any  where.  I  have  been  much  tempted  ;  but  I  am  stirred 
up  to  pray  much  ;  so  I  make  a  necessity  of  a  calamity  :  I  remem- 
ber all  the  preachers  and  societies  twice  a  day.  We  had  to  ride  back 
to  Henry  Fry's  in  the  rain. 

Monday  17.  I  have  peace.  Rose  at  five  o'clock,  spent  nearly  an 
hour  in  retirement — had  all  the  circuits  and  preachers  on  my  mind  ; 
1  was  led  to  plead  with  God  for  a  union  :  I  have  peace  with,  and  love 
to  all  mankind.     I  rode  twenty  miles  yesterday.     Brother  M'Clure 

Vol.  I.  40 


314  IiEV.    FItANCIS    ASBURY'S    JOURNAL. 

came  in  from  the  north,  on  his  way  to  see  his  parents  in  the  west. 
I  preached  at  Henry  Fry's  on  Gal.  v.  16, 17,  18.  had  life  in  speaking. 
Spent  some  time  with  the  family. 

Tuesday  18.  Rode  ten  miles,  preached  at  Stockdale's  to  about 
thirty  people.  Rode  on  fifteen  miles — put  in  at  Ragland's  ;  a  Baptist 
spoke  to  the  family.  Next  morning  rode  eighteen  miles  to  the  Bro- 
ken-Backed church  ;  got  in  a  little  after  twelve  o'clock.  Preached 
on  Zeph.  i.  12.  Here  I  received  the  melancholy  tidings  of  the 
death  of  my  companion  and  friend,  Edward  Bailey  :  it  was  very  dis- 
tressing to  me  :  riding  together  so  long  had  created  a  great  sympathy 
between  us.  He  died  on  Tuesday  last,  about  five  o'clock,  in  full  con- 
fidence— he  spoke  to  the  last,  and  bore  a  testimony  to  the  goodness 
of  God.  He  would  sometimes  get  upon  his  knees  in  the  bed,  weak 
as  he  was,  and  pray.  It  troubles  me  to  reflect  that  he  was  neglected 
so  long  ;  yet  it  was  unavoidable.  The  Doctor  supposed  a  mortifica- 
tion took  place  in  his  bowels,  inflamed  by  the  corrosive  nature  of  the 
bile.  It  was  a  sorrowful  quarterly  meeting  to  me  ;  few  people  ;  they 
lifeless,  and  my  dear  friend  dead !  1  spoke  to  the  preachers  about  a 
union. 

Thursday  20.  I  preached  on  John  iii  16,  17.  to  a  very  unfeeling 
people — friends  parted  in  much  love.  On  Friday  I  rode  sixteen  miles 
to  John  Lasley's  ;  lectured  on  2  Pet  i.  4—9.  to  some  inanimate  souls. 

Saturday  22.  I  set  out  as  soon  as  it  was  light,  and  came  about  three 
o'clock  to  the  widow  Granger's,  and  Ground-Squirrel  Bridge  ;  a  dis- 
tance of  forty  miles.  I  travel  very  heavily  now.  I  have  lost  my 
poor  Bailey — so  suddenly  called  away  !  Lord  humble  me,  and  make  me 
more  watchful !  He  desired  me  to  see  into  his  temporal  matters,  for  his 
poor  sister,  and  wife,  and  children.  1  have  reason  to  praise  God  that 
I  have  health  under  such  fatigue.  I  said  I  should  have  trouble,  be- 
fore I  went  into  Fluvanna  ;  yet  I  little  thought  my  friend  would  die 
there.  If  my  affections  were  naturally  tender,  I  should  be  bathed  in 
tears,  for  I  have  great  cause  to  weep  ;  but  the  Lord  hath  ordered 
it :  it  may  be  that  I  suffer  more  than  those  who  weep  away  distress. 
I  was  ready  to  say,  "  none  shall  ride  with  me  hereafter."  Satan 
works  upon  my  gloomy  mind  greatly.  I  was  comforted  in  meeting  B. 
and  B— ,  R.  B— ,  T  C—  ;  a  solemn  meeting.  We  have  lost  three 
useful  preachers  within  one  year.     The  Lord  cuts  Israel  short. 

Sunday  23.  I  spoke  long  and  freely  on  the  parable  of  the  sower  to 
four  hundred  people  ;  but  it  appears  as  if  sinners  were  Gospel-proof. 

Monday  24.  I  rode  twelve  miles  to  friend  Ellis's — spoke  to  about 
sixty  people,  on  2  Cor.  iv.  lo,  17,  18.  John  Tunnell  spoke  after  me. 
I  wrote  to  the  preachers  jointly  and  severally  about  a  union. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  315 


Tuesday  25.  Rode  to  Mr.  Meredy's,  thirty-five  miles.  We  were 
entangled  in  the  way  ;  came  in  late,  leaving  the  carriage  in  the  woods. 
I  was  unwell  by  long  fasting,  although  among  very  kind  people.  We 
heard  a  rumour  of  the  British  landing  up  James-River  :  I  was  afraid 
they  would  interrupt  me  in  the  circuit  appointments. 

Wednesday  26.  I  am  unwell,  but  happy  in  God  ; — that  is,  I  feel  a 
solemn  determination  to  labour  more  for  God,  because  others  desert 
the  work.  I  preached  with  great  liberty  at  Tally's  ;  there  were  some 
young  preachers  present  ;  they  shook  whilst  I  showed  the  call  to  the 
ministry — how  they  ought  to  evidence  it,  by  having  the  same  end  in 
view  our  Lord  had — "  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  the  poor  ;  to  bind  up 
the  broken-hearted,  and  to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are  bound  :"  to 
imitate  the  prophetic  and  priestly  office  of  Christ.  Thus  to  set  up 
Christ  among  the  people,  or  to  conclude  they  had  not  the  call.  I  met 
the  society ;  some  spoke,  and  the  Lord  blessed  us.  At  night  the 
alarm  was  made  for  the  seventh  division  of  the  militia.  The  rumour 
was,  that  there  were  five  thousand  of  the  British  troops  ;  that  they 
had  torn  two  counties  to  pieces,  and  had  been  within  six  miles  of 
Williamsburg.  As  my  appointments  lay  down  that  way,  I  put  off  to 
the  north  across  the  river. 

Thursday  27.  I  set  off;  rode  across  Hanover  to  the  court-house, 
crossed  Pamunkey  a  little  below,  and  proceeded  on  to  Collins's, 
thirty-seven  miles. 

Friday  28.  Rode  on  to  Fredericksburg  :  my  horse  failed  through 
fatigue,  bad  feed,  and  not  enough  of  it.  I  stopped  and  fed  by  the 
way  ;  mistaking  my  road,  I  met  a  serious  man,  and  spoke  to  him  about 
his  soul  ;  it  may  be,  the  losing  my  way  was  ordered  by  Providence. 
Came  to  Garratt's,  at  Stafford  court-house  :  fell  in  with  a  Presby- 
terian, an  acquaintance  of  Mr.  Pillmore  ;  I  spoke  freely  to  him,  and 
had  prayer — two  young  men  from  Winchester  joined  us.  Saturday 
morning,  after  paying  eight  continental  dollars  for  my  horse,  and  my 
supper  and  bed,  I  rode  on  to  Dumfries,  about  twelve  miles.  Rode 
on  four  miles  farther,  fed  my  horse,  and  got  a  cup  of  boiled  milk  for 
myself:  here  my  paper-money  failed,  and  I  was  obliged  to  pay  in  sil- 
ver. Rode  on,  carrying  my  corn,  and  fed  upon  the  road.  Missing  my 
way  to  William  Adams's,  when  on  the  south  side  of  Colchester,  I  went 
down  the  state  road  within  two  miles  of  Alexandria,  making  my  jour- 
ney near  fifty  miles  :  my  horse  was  much  fatigued,  and  myself  in  a 
fever  with  hard  riding  :  I  was  blessed  in  the  family  1  put  up  with. 
0,  how  sweet  is  rest !  But  O,  for  eternal  rest ! 

Sunday  30.  I  am  happy  in  the  review  of  my  labours  ;  in  the  re- 
flection that  my  heart  is  in  the  work  of  God  ;  and  that  it  is  not  in  vain. 
I  rejoice  in  the  prospect  of  returning  home  to  Delaware. 


316  REV-  FRANdS  A81TJRY5S  JOttRNAL. 

Maryland. — Monday  31.  Crossed  Georgetown  ferry  ;  stopped 
at  Baggailey's.  Rode  on  in  great  peace,  and  came  to  John  Wor- 
thington's  about  5  o'clock,  after  a  ride  of  thirty  miles.  I  was  kindly 
entertained.  I  called  at  Mr.  Thomas  Dorsey's — kind  people.  1 
"breakfasted  with  them.  I  put  forward  to  Baltimore  :  when  with- 
in about  two  miles  there  came  up  an  autumnal  storm ;  there  was 
fear  of  the  trees  falling,  and  that  the  wind  would  overset  the  carriage. 
I  came  in  safe,  stopped  an  hour,  and  proceeded  on  to  Mr.  Gough's 
and  arrived  between  eight  and  nine  o'clock.  There  has  been  some 
snow  to-day,  and  the  night  is  cold.  1  have  spent  my  stock  of  money, 
three  guineas  and  two  half  johannas,  given  me  by  Mr.  Gough  and  Mrs. 
Chamier  ; — two  guineas  and  a  half,  and  a  half-crown  went  in  Virginia. 
Rode  on  about  twelve  miles  to  dinner,  eight  miles  afterward  to  Swan- 
Creek,  being  kept  in  peace.  Here  1  met  that  man  of  God  and  pri- 
soner of  Christ,  Charles  Scott ;  he  is  like  a  flame  of  fire ;  he  has 
good  sense,  good  utterance,  and  professes  the  sanctifying  grace  of 
God  : — a  useful  man  ;  dealing  faithfully  with  the  societies.  I  gave 
him  some  Virginia  cloth  to  make  him  a  suit  of  clothes.  O,  how  sweetly 
were  we  united  to  each  other!* 

Thursday,  November  2.  I  set  out  for  Susquehannah  ferry.— I 
passed  over  in  a  calm,  and  gained  Robert  Thompson's  about  three 
o'clock.     The  old  man  is  stirred  up. 

Delaware — Friday  3.  Set  off'  for  my  favourite  Dover.  (I  believe 
Little  Pipe-Creek  now,  1813)  Mr.  T  and  B.  are  the  offspring  of  very 
pious  parents.  I  hope  God  has  touched  their  hearts.  1  stopped  awhile 
at  Dr  Ridgely's  to  deliver  a  message  to  him  from  Colonel  Dorsey  of 
Elk  Ridge,  in  Maryland.  While  tarrying  after  dinner,  Dr.  M'Gaw 
came  in.  I  went  home  with  the  Doctor,  and  was  kindly  received. 
The  Doctor's  intentions  were  not  to  go  to  the  quarterly  meeting  ;  but 
having  this  opportunity.  I  went  and  took  him  along.  It  was  one  o'clock 
before  we  arrived — about  three  hundred  people  had  been  waiting  for 
us.  Mr.  M'Gaw  preached  an  excellent  sermon  on  "  Who  shall  ascend 
the  hill  of  the  Lord  ?"  Brothers  Hartley  and  Glendenning  exhorted. 
We  all  stayed  at  Mr.  Barratt's  ;  Mr.  M'Gaw  prayed  with  much  affec- 
tion :  we  parted  in  great  love. 

Sunday  5.  We  had  between  one  and  two  thousand  people — our 
house  42  by  48,  was  crowded  above  and  below,  and  numbers  still 
remained  outside  :  our  love-feast  lasted  about  two  hours— some 
spoke  of  the  sanctifying  grace  of  God.  I  preached  on  John  iii.  16, 
17,  18, — a  heavy  house  to  preach  in  :  brothers  Peddicord  and  Crom- 
well exhorted. 

*  Up  died  an  apostate — wa^in  the  habit  of  speaking  maliciously  of  his  former  frif  n<H 
he  became  horribly  wicked. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  317 

Monday  6.  I  preached  to  about  four  hundred  people  on  2  Chron. 
viii.  18.  and  had  liberty  :  I  spoke  of  the  necessity  of  getting  and  keep- 
ing the  power  of  religion — William  Glendenning  exhorted  afterward 
— then  we  parted.  1  see  the  footsteps  of  Providence  in  my  coming 
back.  The  people  regretted  my  absence,  and  the  preachers  would 
have  been  at  variance  one  with  another.  William  Glendenning  plead 
hard  to  come  to  Dover ;  but  I  did  not  think  him  so  fit  as  Thomas 
Chew.  Brother  G.  is  a  good  little  man,  and  though  his  utterance 
is  less  strongly  marked  with  the  Scotch  than  formerly,  it  is  not  yet 
good.  The  British  had  almost  thrown  themselves  in  my  way  on  my 
return  through  Virginia  ;  I  wished  not  to  fall  into  their  hands  :  they 
left  it  soon  after  I  came  away.  Here  there  has  been  good  done  in 
my  absence  ;  among  believers  we  have  been  very  solemn  ;  and  the 
work  of  God  has  been  deep  among  the  brethren  ;  not  so  in  Vir- 
ginia ;  the  preachers  there  do  not  know  how  to  preach  sanctification 
for  want  of  experience.  I  stationed  the  preachers  thus  : — Thomas 
Chew,  and  the  two  Cromwells,  for  Kent ;  for  Dover,  Peddicnrd  and 
Law  ;  Roe  and  J.  White,  for  Sussex  ;    William  Glendenning,  Stephen 

Black,  Joseph   Wyatt,  for  Kent   in   M y  ;    and   Hartley  and 

Everett  for  Dorset. 

Tuesday  7.  I  was  closely  engaged  in  reading  a  volume  of  Mr* 
Wesley's  Journal  of  above  three  hundred  pages  ;  ended  it  on  Wed- 
nesday morning.  I  felt  dejection  of  spirits  for  want  of  public  exer- 
cise :  I  have  had  so  much  of  this,  that  within  this  six  months,  1  have 
travelled  according  to  my  computation,  two  thousand  six  hundred 
and  seventy-one  miles  ;  yet  am  uneasy  when  still.  I  proposed  meet- 
ing the  children  when  I  came  again  :  I  appointed  a  place  for  them 
to  sit,  and  desired  the  parents  to  send  a  note  with  each,  letting  me 
know  the  temper,  and  those  vices  to  which  the  child  might  be  most 
subject.  I  long  to  spend  a  few  minutes  every  hour  in  prayer.  I 
see  great  need  of  living  near  to  God — the  people  are  so  affectionate. 
Lord,  humble  me  ! 

Wednesday  8.  Rode  to  Perdin's,  calling  at  Caleb  Furby's  and 
Daniel  James's — at  Perdin's  lectured  on  1  Thess.  iii.  6.  Engaged 
the  friends  to  subscribe  7  Cwt.  pork  towards  the  meeting-house  at 
Barratt's.  I  called  at  Combs's,  and  had  preaching  there,  although 
the  master  of  the  house  differs  from  us  in  some  points.  Wrhile  we 
are  busy,  others  are  not  entirely  quiet ;  others,  less  in  the  habit  of 
teaching  by  stated  speaking,  can  yet  disseminate  their  books. 

Thursday  9.  I  came  to  my  old  lodgings  at  Thomas  White's — met 
the  preachers.     We  spoke  farther  about  the  work  of  God. 


318  KKV.   FRANCIS  ASBURYS  JOURNAL. 

Friday  10.  This  day  I  arranged  my  papers  containing  a  brief  ac- 
count of  the  beginning  and  progress  of  our  divisions  :  it  was  tran- 
scribed into  a  book  by  Caleb  Peddicord. 

Saturday  11.  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Gough,  Mr.  Lynch,  and  Mr.  Skinner. 
To-day  the  quarterly  meeting  begins  at  Caroline.  I  am  kept  in  faith 
and  love  to  God  and  all  mankind.  William  Glendenning  has  handed 
me  a  book  written  by  Jeremiah  Burroughs,  in  the  time  of  the  com- 
monwealth, upon  heart-divisions,  and  the  evil  of  the  times  :  in  this 
work  I  promise  myself  good  arguments  against  our  separating  bre- 
thren. The  Lord  does  greatly  carry  on  his  work  ; — some  little 
wild- fire;  a  few  disorderly  walkers.  Read  a  volume  of  Mr.  Wes- 
ley's Journal.  « 

Sunday  12.  I  preached  at  E.  White's  on  1  John  iv.  14,  15,  16, 
17,  18.  I  spoke  on  perfection  strongly  and  clearly:  some  strangers 
attended.  The  work  goes  on  here  ;  but  although  I  want  rest  it  is 
no  place  for  me  to  stay  ;  there  is  too  much  company.  The  quarterly 
meeting  for  Kent  in  Maryland  was  large  and  powerful :  there  were 
twelve  preachers  present.  I  am  kept  in  peace  of  soul,  expecting 
my  ministering  brethren  that  we  may  consult  about  the  work  of  God. 
Samuel  Roe  is  going  to  Sussex — one  that  has  happily  escaped  the  sepa- 
rating spirit  and  party  in  Virginia,  and  the  snares  laid  for  his  feet ; — and 
so  also  did  poor  William  Spencer  of  late  years  ;  eternal  thanks  to  God  ! 

Monday  13.  I  read  Mr.  Wesley's  Journal.  In  the  afternoon  the 
preachers  came  to  consult  farther  about  the  stationing.  They  all 
agreed  to  my  first  appointment,  except  one  brother  ;  he  was  unwil- 
ling to  go  back  to  Baltimore,  although  we  had  no  one  so  well  quali- 
fied :  on  Monday  evening  and  Tuesday  we  met  and  conferred,  when 
the  judgment  of  the  preachers  prevailed  against  F.  Garrettson. 
We  were  blest  in  prayer  with  each  other.  Our  appointments  were 
as  follows; — Kent  in  Maryland,  Glendenning,  S.  Black,  Joseph 
Wyatt ;  Kent  in  Delaware,  Thomas  Chew,  Joseph  and  James  Crom- 
well ;  Sussex,  S.  Roe,  J.  Martin,  J.  White  ;   Dorset,  Peddicord.    * 

Tuesday  14.  We  parted  in  peace,  united  in  heart,  and  in  judgment, 
and  abounding  in  love. — Glory  be  to  God  ! 

Wednesday  15.  I  ended  the  reading  of  a  volume  of  Mr.  Wesley's 
Journal,  giving  an  account  of  the  rent  made  by  Mr.  Maxwell  and  Mr. 
Bell.  I  read  a  part  of  what  I  had  transcribed  upon  the  art  of  preach- 
ing. At  night  1  met  the  society,  and  found  them  more  and  more 
spiritual — questioned  closely — permitted  some  to  speak  :  it  was  a 
?olemn  time.     Thursday  morning  we  made  our  plans. 

Thursday  16.  I  examined  Joseph  Everett,  as  to  his  call  and  qualifi- 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASJBURY's  JOURNAL.  319 

cations,  his  circumstances,  and  his  knowing  and  loving  the  Metho- 
dist doctrine  ;  he  gave  full  satisfaction  ;  we  however  left  the  matter 
in  suspense  until  Caleb  Peddicord  goes  down,  and  we  shall  know 
from  him  what  £all  there  is  in  Dorset. 

Friday  17.    A  day  of  fasting. — We  all  parted  after  much  business, 

5.  Roe  went  to  Sussex  :  the  two  Cromwells  for  the  circuit,  ^Kent, 
in  Delaware  ;)  Peddicord  to  Dorset ;  myself  to  go  through  Kent 
and  Sussex, — then  to  the  Jerseys,  Philadelphia,  and  Chester.  I 
wrote  to  Watters,  Dudley,  and  Debrular.  Friday  set  out  for  Mur- 
der-Kill, stopping  at  Combs's  that  night.  I  spoke  freely  to  the  man 
upon  his  mysticism,  and  to  the  family  about  their  souls. 

Saturday  18.  Rode  on  to  the  chapel;  Joseph  Cromwell  met  the 
people  in  class  ;  I  gave  an  exhortation,  took  down  the  names  of  the 
children,  and  spoke  to  some  of  them  :  I  desired  the  preachers  to 
meet  the  children  when  they  came  along  ; — an  important  but  much 
neglected  duty — to  the  shame  of  ministers  be  it  spoken. 

Sunday  19.    We  met  at  the  chapel  ;  my  text,   Psalm  Ixxviii.  4,  5, 

6,  7.  the  people  came  in  late  ;  I  was  incommoded,  but  at  last  felt 
liberty  ;  the  serious  parents  were  much  affected  : — Joseph  Cromwell 
exhorted.  I  met  the  society,  and  gave  a  close  exhortation.  Settled 
the  rules  of  the  house,  and  appointed  stewards. 

Monday  20.  I  went  to  Perdin's  ;  spoke  from  1  Sam.  xii.  23, 
24,  25.  I  had  a  cloud  over  me  all  the  time  I  was  speaking ; — was 
severely  tried.     I  was  humbled  and  solemn. 

Tuesday  21.  Rode  to  young  Logwood's — spoke  to  about  one  hun- 
dred people,  from  1  Chron.  xiv.  11.  Was  much  blest.  Joseph 
Cromwell  spoke  much  to  purpose. — I  trust  there  will  be  a  good  work 
in  this  place.  Rode  to  Richard  Shaw's.  I  was  kept  in  much  confi- 
dence in  prayer — my  soul  was  much  drawn  out  after  these  people. 
My  text  here  from  Phil.  iv.  8.  I  had  not  much  liberty.  I  met  the 
society,  exhorting  them,  and  pressing  them  to  close  communion  with 
each  other,  and  reminding  them  of  their  obligations  to  us  ;  they  ap- 
peared deeply  sensible  of  it  with  cries  and  tears  ;  brother  Joseph 
Cromwell  exhorted.     My  mind  is  kept  very  serene. 

Thursday  23.  I  am  much  given  up  to  God.  Joseph  Cromwell 
parted  from  me  to  go  into  his  circuit.  Mr.  Coleman  came  up  with 
me  from  Virginia,  either  to  take  charge  of  Dover  school,  or  to 
preach  ;  he  expressed  great  satisfaction  in  the  people  of  these  parts. 
I  went  to  see  Mr.  Logwood  :  1  have  been  waiting  some  time  for  his 
coming  to  the  Lord  ;  he  hath  long  stood  it  out,  but  I  believe  he  is 
now  deeply  engaged,  and  so  are  almost  all  the  adults  of  his  family* 
I  met  a  man  who  took  occasion  to  abuse  me  as  ringleader  of  sedition 


320  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S    JOURNAL. 

with  many  hard  sayings  : — he  was  in  his  cups  :  1  pitied,  forgave,  and 
prayed  for  him. 

Friday  24.  I  rode  ten  miles  to  Mr.  Boyer's,  and  preached  on  Phil, 
iii.  4.  Had  liberty,  and  the  people  were  affected :  Mr.  Coleman 
exhorted.  I  spoke  to  the  society,  addressing  them  with  respect  to  the 
rules  and  their  loose  walk.  Answered  a  very  affectionate  letter  from 
John  Finnev,  relative  to  the  union  in  Virginia. 

Saturday  25.  We  rode  to  Mr.  M'Gaw's,  and  had  some  talk  with  him 
about  his  undertaking  a  plan  for  the  education  of  youth,  John  Cole- 
man being  proposed  as  his  assistant. 

Sunday  2t5.  I  rode  to  Shaw's,  preached  with  liberty  to  about  one 
hundred  people,  from  1  Chron.  xxviii.  9.  In  the  afternoon  again,  at 
Dover,  preached  on  Eph.  iii.  1 1 .  Had  some  liberty,  and  spoke  search- 
ingly  ;  but  this  people  will,  and  they  will  not ;  they  will,  in  appearance 
be  religious,  but  not  in  heart. 

Monday  27.  I  rode  down  to  Jones's,  and  preached  from  Prov.  i. 
24 — 26.  I  had  life,  and  some  appearance  of  effect  produced.  In 
the  afternoon  Mr.  M'Gaw  preached  an  excellent  sermon  on  "  when 
Christ  who  is  our  life  shall  appear,  then  shall  we  also  appear  with 
him  in  glory." 

Tuesday  28.  I  preached  at  Jos.  Wyatt's  on  these  words,  u  If  any 
man  be  in  Christ  he  is  a  new  creature  ;"  had  not  much  liberty.  I 
met  the  society  :  many  spake  of  the  goodness  of  God.  1  went  to 
lodge  with  Mr.  Smith,  a  strong  Churchman.     I  am  kept  in  faith. 

December  1.  I  have  peace  of  mind  and  the  love  of  God.  I 
preached  at  Liverson's  on  Prov.  xxviii.  13,  14.  had  divine  help. 
I  found  some  simple-hearted  people  here,  but  very  ignorant  of 
true  religion.  I  met  class,  and  reproved  two  disorderly  walkers : 
I  hope  they  will  reform.  I  rode  to  Mr.  Cook's,  who  desired  my 
company  :  I  talked  and  prayed  with  him,  and  proceeded  on  to  the 
Cross  Roads.  I  here  met  many  of  my  friends,  among  about  three 
hundred  attentive  people,  to  whom  I  spoke  upon  Matt.  iii.  7,  8,  9, 
10.  I  hope  good  will  be  done  here.  I  rode  to  Blackstown,  where  I 
met  about  one  hundred  and  thirty  people,  and  spoke  on  "  Take  heed 
to  yourselves  :"  some  of  them  were  greatly  engaged.  Lewis  Allfree 
has  been  made  a  blessing  to  these  people  ;  their  number  is  increased, 
and  they  purpose  building  a  chapel. 

Friday  3.  I  rode  to  Scotten's.  Here  they  have  been  disappointed 
in  preaching,  having  had  but  two  sermons  this  last  quarter ;  the  con- 
sequence was  that  they  did  not  attend  :  they  are  not  as  steady  as  they 
should  be.  The  day  I  rode  to  Shaw's  being  damp?  I  caught  cold.  I 
have  suffered  loss  in  my  mind. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBKRY'S  JOURNAL.  #2! 

Saturday  4.  Rode  to  Fatad's,  and  although  it  snowed,  there  came 
together  about  thirty  people  :  preaching  was  a  blessing  to  them. 

Sunday  5.  Rode  to  the  chapel :  the  weather  was  so  bad  that  not 
more  than  thirty  people  attended  ;  having  a  sore  throat  I  spoke  with 
difficulty.  After  meeting  1  went  to  Mr.  Emery's.  Monday  I  was  bled. 
I  rode  to  Black's,  but  found  myself  unfit  to  speak.  Leaving  Mr, 
Coleman  I  went  on  to  Black's,  fearing  my  throat  would  be  worse  :  I 
was  afflicted.  A  useful  letter  from  my  trusty  friend,  Robert  Furnessy 
came  to  me ;  I  have  also  received  one  from  Peddicord,  giving  ass 
account  of  the  work  in  Dorset. 

Wednesday  8.  Rode  twelve  miles  to  Jarratt's,  to  preach  the  funeral 
of  Edward  Collins  :  for  about  eighteen  months  past  he  has  attended 
our  preaching  ;  was  convinced  of  sin,  but  had  never  joined  us  ;  in 
death  was  blest  with  the  peace  of  God,  departing  in  the  faith.  I 
spoke  on  these  words,  of  Eccles.  ix.  10.  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand 
findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might."  I  was  ill  able  to  speak  on  ac- 
count of  my  throat ;  but  was  blessed  :  the  people,  among  whom  were 
some  strangers,  hearkened  diligently.  I  have  been  in  greater  heavi- 
ness lately,  than  for  some  months  past.     My  soul  is  much  humbled. 

Thursday  9.  This  is  a  day  appointed  for  prayer  and  thanksgiving 
by  the  government :  I  intend  to  improve  it  for  the  church  and  states. 
0  what  cause  of  thankfulness  have  we  that  there  has  not  been  a 
famine  of  bread  and  water,  and  the  word  of  God  ;  that  every  place 
has  not  been  deluged  in  blood  ;  and  what  cause  to  praise  God,  that 
hundreds  have  been  brought  to  the  Lord,  year  after  year,  in  these 
times  of  trouble  ! 

Friday  10.  Was  under  dejection.  Read  thirty  chapters  of  Isaiah* 
Rode  to  Dill's — had  about  forty  people  :  was  much  led  out  to  speak 
to  the  poor.  Fasted,  and  intended  to  spend  great  part  of  the  night 
in  prayer,  but  I  felt  weak  through  want  of  rest,  I  spent  better  than 
an  hour  in  fervent  prayer  and  was  much  blest,  having  my  soul 
divinely  filled  with  love  when  I  lay  down.  Rose  about  five  o'clock 
in  better  health  :  passed  some  time  in  fervent  prayer  for  the  whole 
work,  the  preachers,  and  people.  Thomas  Haskins  is  a  young  man 
of  learning,  and  has  been  studying  the  law  :  like  William  Spencer,  he 
has  given  it  up  for  grace  and  divinity.  Glory  be  to  God  !  I  believe, 
the  Lord  has  called  Thomas  Haskins  for  a  preacher  :  he  was  con- 
vinced in  Dover  some  months  ago. 

Saturday  11.    I  praise  my  God  ;  I  have  great  peace  of  soul. 

Sunday  12.  I  went  to  Mr.  Thome's  church  and  heard  Mr.  Thorne  r 
he  preached  a  good  sermon  on  the  passion  of  our  Lord,  on  "  whom 
having  not  seen,  ye  love  ;"    the  people   seemed  very  solemn.    I 

Vor..  I.  41 


322  REV.  PRAXIS  ASBCRy's  JOURNAL. 

preached  at  Edward  White's — was  much  assisted  in  speaking  on 
«'  Happy  art  thou  O  Israel  !'*  These  people  do  grow  in  grace  :  four 
or  five  of  them  profess  sanctification — this  I  know,  that  they  are  very 
spiritual. 

Monday  13.  I  have  faith,  and  am  kept  in  life  and  the  spirit  of 
prayer. 

Tuesday  14.  I  rode  to  K— —  and  performed  the  funeral  rite  over 
a  child — in  exhortation  I  endeavoured  to  enforce  the  necessity  of  a 
strict  and  pious  education  ;  the  people  were  much  moved,  and  I  felt 
some  hope,  that  notwithstanding  we  have  been  greatly  discouraged 
here  in  times  past,  this  swamp  will  bring  forth  some  fruit  of  three 
years  labour. 

Wednesday  15.  I  visited  S.  White,  she  is  near  her  end  ;  possess- 
ing calm  and  solid  peace,  and  sweetly  resigned  to  the  will  of  God. 
Preached  at  I.  Lay  ton's  :  called  to  warn*  my  brethren  against  the 
poisonous  and  false  principles  of  opposing  sectarists.  I  was  doing 
only  what  it  was  my  bounden  duty  to  do,  and  indeed  acting  on  the 
defensive. 

Saturday.    My  soul  is  kept  in  constant  peace  and  love  to  God. 

Sunday.  Preached  at  J.  T  's  on  **  O  that  there  were  such  an -heart 
in  them,"  &c.  Deut.  v.  29.  the  congregation  was  larger,  and  there 
was  more  of  the  power  of  God  among  them,  than  I  have  ever  known 
at  this  place. 

Tuesday  19.  Rose  at  five— my  soul  stayed  upon  God.  Preached  at 
M.  W  's  on  the  prayer  of  Jabez,  to  a  small,  inattentive  congregation. 

Wednesday.  I  preached  to  a  faithful  people  at  T.  Layton's,  on 
Matt.  iii.  9,  10.  The  Methodists,  blessed  be  God !  do  grow  as  well 
as  the  wicked  ;  their  little  stock  increases  ;  I  am  pleased  with  their 
temporal,  and  rejoice  in  their  spiritual  prosperity. 

Saturday  23.  I  attended  the  funeral  of  E.  T.— a  man  that  had  been 
convinced  of  sin  many  years  ago,  but  had  lost  his  convictions  :  about 
a  twelvemonth  past  God  made  use  of  the  Methodists  to  reach  his 
heart  again  ;  he  sought  the  Lord  ;  joined  our  society,  and  at  the  last 
quarterly-meeting  appeared  to  be  a  very  happy  man.  He  was  poor 
—persecuted  by  his  wife,  children,  and  family :  he  was  so  hardly 
treated  that  scarcely  could  he  live  with  them  :  he  was  sensible  of  his 
death,  and  died  in  peace. 

Sunday  24.  I  received  a  letter  from  F-  Garreltson,  and  another 
from  T.  S.  C.  who  promise  me  their  filial  obedience  in  the  Gospel : 
on  the  same  day  a  letter  from  W  G — g,  who  is  well  satisfied  with  his 
station,  and  mentions  a  letter  from  R.  L.  Cole,  who  says,  the  jarring 
string  is  broken,  and  those  who  were  friends  at  first  are  friends  at 


REV.  FitANCIS  ASIU'RV  S  JOWKKAi,.  o2j 

last,  in  Virginia  :  I  rejoiced  for  the  consolation,  and  many  more  will 
rejoice  with  me. 

Tuesday  26.  I  preached  to  an  unaffected  people -at  J.  E.'s,  on 
Matt.  iii.  17.  My  soul  is  stayed  upon  God,  and  kept  in  peace.  1  rise 
early  and  spend  my  usual  time  in  prayer,  and  remember  my  dear 
friends  before  God. 

Thursday  28.  Wrote  to  C.  T  to  take  S.  Roe's  place  while  he 
goes  down  to  the  eastern  shore  of  Virginia  ;  I  believe  God  has  a  work 
for  us  to  do  there. 

Friday  29.  I  rode  to  I.  B.'s,  where  there  had  been  a  work  break- 
ing out,  but  so  harassed  are  the  people  by  opposers  and  their  con- 
trary principles,  that  I  fear  no  lasting  good  will  be  done.  "  A  double 
minded  man  is  unstable  in  all  his  ways."  From  B.'s  I  went  to  Moore's, 
and  met  with  a  people  I  had  not  seen  for  more  than  nine  months  :  we 
mutually  rejoiced  to  see  each  other.  Blessed  be  God,  my  soul  is 
kept  in  peace. 

Broad-Creek,  Saturday  30.  While  I  was  preaching,  I  was  seized 
with  the  putrid  sore  throat ;  the  attack  was  violent.  Sabbath  day  1 
took  physic,  and  applied  two  blisters  that  drew  kindly ;  afterward 
put  one  on  the  back  of  my  neck,  and  another  behind  the  ear  ;  had 
some  blood  taken  from  the  arm,  and  some  from  the  tongue;  and  it 
pleased  kind  Providence  to  relieve  me  sooner  than  I  expected.  I 
desire  to  give  thanks  to  God  for  patience  and  resignation. 

January  1,  2,3,4,  1781.  Pain!  Pain!  Pain!  5th,  found  myself 
considerably  amended,  so  that  I  sat  up  and  did  a  little  business. 

Sunday  7.  The  weather  was  rainy,  so  I  stayed  in  the  house  :  this 
is  the  second  dumb  Sabbath  I  have  had  ;  to  this  I  could  not  submit 
were  I  not  infirm. 

Wednesday  10.  I  rose  with  a  sense  of  God  upon  my  heart.  I 
preached  to  many  people  at  G.  Moore's,  on  the  great  salvation  :  my 
hearers  appeared  to  be  very  stupid.  The  family  where  I  lodged  was 
a  prayerless  family  ;  and  if  ministers  (so  called)  can  themselves  visit 
without  calling  the  household  together  for  that  purpose,  it  is  not  to 
be  wondered  at  that  there  are  so  many  without  family  prayer  :  lying 
in  bed  till  sunrise,  and  drinking  a  dram  after  they  are  up,  are,  perhaps, 
the  circumstances  most  prominently  remembered  of  their  clerical 
guests. 

Thursday  11.  Preached  in  Quaker-Town  ;  from  thence,  being  in- 
vited and  pressed  by  Mr.  T.  Rodney,  I  went  to  Lewistown  :  found 
the  Court-house  crowded,  to  whom  I  preached  on  2  Cor.  v.  13,  14,  15. 

Lord's  day  14.  Being  rainy,  we  had  only  about  one  hundred  and 
twenty  serious  people  at  the  place  appointed.     The  people  here 


314  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBLRV's  JOURNAL. 


are  much  more  genlie  than  they  were  a  twelvemonth  past.  We  have 
a  society  of  more  than  twenty  members,  some  of  whom  have  found 
the  Lord  ;  but  I  think,  for  ignorance  of  God  and  religion,  the  wilds 
and  swamps  of  Delaware  exceed  most  parts  of  America  with  which 
I  have  had  any  acquaintance  :  however,  God  is  able  of  these  stones 
to  raise  up  children  unto  Abraham. 

Monday  15.  Rose  early  ;  spent  my  usual  time  in  retirement. 
Preached  to  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  people  at  S.'s — I  find  their 
prejudices  abated,  although  the  work  on  their  hearts  is  not  deep.  My 
soul  enjoys  peace  ;  I  was  led  out  in  prayer  for  the  whole  work  of 
God,  the  circuits  and  the  preachers;  this  I  do  every  morning  as  my 
first  work.  I  have  a  sense  of  God  on  my  heart,  and  am  sensible  of 
the  danger  of  falling ;  and  what  good  or  harm  may  I  do  as  I  am,  faith- 
ful or  unfaithful ! 

I  have  been  in  heaviness,  but  I  trust  I  am  kept  from  sin.  Indeed, 
I  believe  Satan  is  doing  all  he  can  to  discredit  the  work  of  God  that 
is  carried  on  through  our  instrumentality,  because  he  envies  our  suc- 
cess. It  appears  to  be  high  market  day  among  every  denomination 
of  people  ;  availing  themselves  of  the  work,  they  are  labouring  to  de- 
tach those  who  would  be  members  from  our  society. 

Thursday  18.  I  called  on  the  widow  F-  who  had  lately  lost  her 
husband.  He  was  a  constant  hearer  of  us,  and  as  constantly  resisted 
the  doctrine  he  heard,  and  could  not  bear  the  chapel  so  near  him : 
lie  sickened  and  died  in  a  short  space  ;  was  delirious  most  of  the  time 
he  was  ill.  What  was  remarkable,  and  awfully  so,  was,  that  his  little 
son,  of  whom  he  was  passionately  fond,  and  on  whom  he  frequently 
called  in  his  delirium,  to  go  with  him  ;  went  and  hanged  himself  about 
the  time  his  father  died  :  they  went  into  eternity  nearly  together, 
and  were  laid  out  and  buried  at  the  same  time.  This  awful  circum- 
stance was  the  means  of  awakening  a  stubborn  son  who  is  now  seek- 
ing the  Lord.  How  wonderful  are  the  ways  of  God  !  He  takes  away 
a  child  to  awaken  a  father,  or  removes  a  father  to  convince  a  child. 

Friday  19.  I  conversed  with  T.  C.  whom  I  visited  under  affliction 
about  a  year  ago  :  he  then  had  a  humble  confidence  of  his  accept- 
ance with  God,  and  a  firm  persuasion  that  God  would  save  him  from 
all  sin.  In  the  course  of  his  sickness  he  became  somewhat  delirious, 
and  yielded  to  a  suggestion  that  it  was  all  delusion  :  he  began  to  set 
in  order  his  temporal  affairs  ;  but  in  about  eight  days  there  was  a 
change  in  his  disorder  of  body  and  mind  ;  his  confidence  in  God 
returned  ;  he  professed  that  God  had  saved  him  from  all  sin,  and  he 
appears  to  be  always  alive  to  God, 


REV.' FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL.  3^ 

Sunday  21.  Mr.  M'Gaw  preached  at  Banit's  chapel,  and  was 
assisted  by  Mr.  Thorne  in  the  administration  of  the  Lord's  supper  : 
It  was  a  gracious  time,  and  I  hope  it  was  not  received  in  vain. 

Monday  22.  On  my  way  to  P — 's  I  came  on  a  race  ground,  where 
the  sons  of  Belial  had  been  practising  my  horse  ;  he  ran  away  with  me 
when  he  came  to  the  end  of  the  paths,  but  stopt,  and  I  received  no 
harm.  I  lifted  my  heart  to  God  ;  and  by  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  he 
stopt  near  a  point  of  woods,  which,  had  he  entered,  I  might  probably 
have  lost  my  life  :  my  heart  was  deeply  humbled  before  the  Lord, 
who  preserved  me  from  such  imminent  danger. 

Monday  28.  I  learn  that  about  six  or  seven  years  ago  B.  S.  was 
deeply  awakened,  and  became  a  member  of  the  Methodist  society  : 
some  time  after  this  he  lost  his  convictions,  and  ran  into  sin.  Last 
Christmas  he  was  sitting  up  with  a  sick  person,  where  were  present 
two  women  who  had  lately  been  awakened  through  the  instrumen- 
tality of  L.  A.  :  they  asked  him  what  he  thought  of  the  Methodists  ; 
He,  contrary  to  his  better  knowledge,  answered,  "  they  are  all  hypo- 
crites :"  they  asked  him  what  he  thought  of  L.  A.  and  I.  D.,  he 
spake  against  them  as  well  as  the  rest — "  how  then,  (rejoined  they,) 
can  they  pray  and  exhort  as  they  do,  if  they  are  such  men  as  you 
say;"  he  told  them  he  could  pray  like  a  minister  himself,  when  he 
was  in  society.  Next  day  he  set  off  to  go  home,  which  he  never 
reached  :  he  was  taken  ill  ;  was  bereft  of  his  senses,  and  so  he  died. 

Dover.  Sunday,  February  4.  I  preached,  and  had  some  of  the 
Council  and  members  of  Assembly  to  hear  me.  I  spoke  plainly  ; 
intending  my  discourse  as  a  vindication  of  the  doctrine  of  the 
Methodists. 

Monday  5.  On  my  way  to  quarterly  meeting,  held  at  the  Valley 
preaching-house,  I  called  on  his  Excellency  Governor  Rodney,  to 
sign  my  certificate,  which  he  did  with  great  readiness  and  politeness. 
At  the  meeting  we  found  some*  faithful  souls,  and  the  work  revives 
among  them  :  they  were  greatly  led  out  to  speak  in  the  love-feast, 
six  or  seven  standing  up  as  witnesses  of  a  present  salvation  from  all 
sin. 

Pennsylvania.  Saturday  11.  My  soul  enjoys  peace,  and  I  rejoice 
to  hear  that  the  work  of  God  is  deepening  and  widening  in  the  Jer- 
seys. My  old  friends  here  in  Philadelphia,  appear  loving  to  me  ; 
but  they  are  net  united  as  they  ought  to  be. 

Tuesday  13.  After  casting  in  my  mite,  by  saying  and  doing  what  I 
could  in  Philadelphia,  I  left  my  kind  friends,  and  set  off  for  New 
Jersey. 

New-Jersey.  Wednesday  14.  I  met  with  and  heard  B.  Abbitt — hi*- 


3^6  ?LV-   FRANCIS  AS^URY'S  .IOURNvL 

word9  came  with  great  power.    Over  in  Chester,  he  informs  me,  twen- 
ty were  renewed  in  love,  and  eight  on  this  side  ;  the  people  fall  to  the 
ground  under  him,  and  sink  into  a  passive  state,  helpless,  stiff,  motion- 
less.   He  tried  to  attach  himself  to  two  other  sects,  but  had  such  strug- 
gles within  that  he  was  forced  back — the  Lord  would  not  let  him  be 
any  thing  but  a  Methodist:  such  is  his  account. — He  is  a  man  of  uncom- 
mon zeal,  and  (although  his  language  has  somewhat  of  incorrectness) 
of  good  utterance.     Here,  I  find,  remains  the  fruit  of  the.labours  of 
that  (now)  miserable  man,  A.  Whitworth.     How  awful  the  thought, 
that  God  should  own  a  man  and  make  him  a  blessing  to  many  souls, 
and  then  lay  him  aside  like  a  broken  instrument ! — yet  so  it  was,  be- 
cause of  his  sin  :  may  others  take  warning  by  his  fall ! 

Thursday  15.  I  have  found  the  Lord  with  me  in  an  extraordi- 
nary manner,  ever  since  I  left  Delaware.    Brother  I s  tells  me 

there  is  daily  a  great  turning  to  God  in  new  places,  and  that  the  work 
of  sanctification  goes  on  in  our  old  societies. 

Tuesday  20.  Rode  to  Penny  Hill :  was  much  pleased  with  the  sim- 
plicity of  our  old  German  mother  K.  She  says  she  lived  in  blindness 
fifty  years,  and  was  at  length  brought  to  God  by  the  means  of  Metho- 
dism :  she  is  now  rejoicing  in  the  perfect  love  of  God ;  her  children 
are  coming  home  to  the  Lord  ;  while  she  is  preaching  in  her  way  to 
all  she  comes  up  with. 

Friday,  March  2.  My  soul  enjoys  peace ; — and  I  have  a  little 
respite  from  the  haste  I  have  been  in  for  some  time  past;  neverthe- 
less I  have  read  the  first  and  second  volumes  of  Rollin's  Ancient  His- 
tory (containing  about  three  hundred  pages  each)  in  about  two  weeks. 
We  may  justly  admire  the  policy  and  the  temperance  of  the  Persians ; 
and  it  is  very  satisfactory  to  find  a  more  particular  account  corrobo- 
rating the  Scripture  history  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies  con- 
cerning that  great  man  Cyrus,  called  of  God. 

Pennsylvania. — Saturday  3.  Rode  to  Philadelphia,  where  I  preach- 
ed but  twice  :  I  met  the  society,  which  was  made  a  blessing  to  some  ; 
and  I  am  persuaded  that  my  stay  would  be  a  mean  of  the  prosperity 
of  the  society  here  ;  but  it  is  possible  I  may  be  more  useful  where  I 
am  going. 

Tuesday  6.  Read  the  fourth  volume  of  Rollin's  Ancient  History  ;  it 
contains  the  memorable  life  of  Socrates,  who  was  certainly  a  wise 
man ;  but,  as  the  worthy  historian  remarks,  there  were  many  ble- 
mishes in  his  character. 

Saturday  10.  Rode  to  French  Creek,  and  wa3  kindly  entertained  by 
my  much  respected  friends  Mrs.  R.  Grace,  and  her  daughter  Mrs. 
Potts,  and  her  grandau$hter  Martha  Potts,  afterward  Mrs.  Haskin* 


KEV.  FBANCIS  ASBt/RY's  JOURNAL.  327 

who  lived,  and  have  since  died  in  the  Lord.  O  may  the  unfeigned  faith 
which  was  in  them  be  also  in  their  children  and  their  grand-children. 

Sunday  11.  Preached  to  a  small  congregation.  One  of  my  hearers 
seemed  desirous  I  should  form  an  independent  church. 

Wednesday  14.  Rode  twelve  miles  into  the  forest  to  preach  to 
the  remnant  of  poor  Demours's  flock.  I.  Demours,  as  well  as  S. 
Howe,  died  a  martyr  to  labour  and  loud  speaking ;  they  were  both 
disciples  of  good  Mr.  Evans.  He  preached  the  last  day  of  his 
life ;  after  his  death  his  people  melted  away  for  want  of  preaching 
and  discipline  ;  we  have  been  sent  for,  and  owned  and  blessed  among 
them.  I  have  heard  of  a  great  work  among  the  Germans  towards 
Lancaster.  Certain  opposing  sectarians  hunt  our  preachers  like 
partridges  upon  the  mountains  ;  they  are  trying  to  stop,  but  are  go- 
ing, I  apprehend,  the  readiest  way  to  establish  us.  God  will  stand 
by  his  people — blessed  be  his  name !     My  soul  is  kept  in  peace. 

Friday  16.  I  preached  at  the  valley  preaching-house :  and  here  I 
set  my  seal  to  what  J.  C.  had  done  in  expelling  a  member  who  had 
long  been  troublesome  to  the  society. 

Monday,  March  19.  A  letter  from  C.  B.  P.  informs  me  that  the 
work  of  the  Lord  prospers  in  Dorset :  glorious  news  this,  at  which 
my  heart  is  greatly  cheered. 

Dover.  Saturday  24.  I  was  much  led  out  in  speaking  of  Peter's 
fall  at  my  favourite  place.  1  am  greatly  comforted  with  the  good 
news  of  Zion's  prosperity-  Upon  a  review  of  my  travels  I  find  that 
from  the  first  of  last  May,  to  this  present  date,  I  have  travelled  nearly 
or  quite  four  thousand  miles. 

Tuesday  27.  I  resolve  to  spend  an  hour  in  enlarged  prayer  as  soon 
as  I  rise  in  the  morning  ;  to  retire  again  at  eleven,  at  five,  and  at 
eight  o'clock,  when  in  my  power. 

Wednesday  28.  My  soul  is  comfortable.  I  daily  find  myself 
greatly  humbled. 

Delaware. — Tuesday  9.  I  preached  the  funeral  sermon  of  J.  B.  a 
Free-mason — a  great  sinner,  and  an  enemy  to  the  Methodists, — per- 
secuting his  wife  and  children  for  coming  to  hear  them.  When  sick 
he  sent  for  the  Methodists  to  pray  for  him,  and  promised  to  come  and 
hear  them  if  spared. 

Wednesday  10.  Since  I  have  been  here  I  am  greatly  kept  from  the 
fear  of  men,  and  unholy  desires  to  please  them ;  I  feel  as  free  in 
speaking  to  masters  as  to  their  servants.  I  trust  the  Lord  will  hum- 
ble and  save  those  people. 

Saturday  13.  Our  quarterly  meeting  began  at  the  Forest  chapel — 
the  congregation  was  large  :  I  spoke  first,  and  was  followed  by  bro- 


o28  IJ.EV.  FRANCIS'  ANBURY  a  JOURNAL. 

thers  C — ,  R — ,  C.  and  L.  the  people  were  quickened  and  appeared 
much  alive  to  God.  The  next  day,  being  Easter-Sunday,  our  love-feaat 
began  at  nine,  and  public  preaching  at  eleven  o'clock.  After  meeting 
we  rode  about  twenty  miles  to  brother  White's,  where  about  twenty 
preachers  met  together  to  hold  a  conference.  From  thence  I  at- 
tended Kent  quarterly  meeting,  on  the  East  shore  of  Maryland. 

Maryland.— Friday  19.  Crossed  the  Chesapeake,  and  came  to 
Mr.  Gough's.  Saturday  I  rode  to  Baltimore,  and  preached  on  the 
Sabbath  day. 

Tuesday  24.  Our  conference  began  in  Baltimore,  where  several  of 
the  preachers  attended  from  Virginia  and  North-Carolina. — All  but 
one  agreed  to  return  to  the  old  plan,  and  give  up  the  administration  of 
the  ordinances  :  our  troubles  now  seem  over  from  that  quarter ;  and 
there  appears  to  be  a  considerable  change  in  the  preachers  from 
North  to  South  :  all  was  conducted  in  peace  and  love. 

Monday  30.  I  am  relieved  in  mind  relative  to  my  visiting  Virginia, 
and  my  soul  is  kept  in  peace,  whilst  1  feel  power  to  trust  the  Lord 
with  my  all. 

Tuesday,  May  1.  Wrote  to  my  father  and  Mr.  Wesley. 

Monday  6.  I  employed  this  day  in  visiting  my  friends. 

Tuesday  7.  I  was  preparing  to  set  off  to  Virginia,  but  my  horse 
failed.  I  hardly  know  how  to  proceed  :  Providence  seems  dark  ;  I 
doubt  if  I  can  ride  on  horseback,  and  yet  I  am  unwilling  to  give  up 
my  visit  to  the  South. 

Thursday  10.  I  set  off  in  the  hope  that  the  Lord  will  bless  and 
keep  me  for  his  own  cause  and  glory. 

Saturday  12.  Reached  Mr.  Adams's  about  eight  o'clock  at  night:— 
I  always  come  to  this  house  weary,  but  generally  get  my  body  and 
soul  refreshed.  I  missed  my  watch,  but  found  it  again  at  the  door 
where  I  had  alighted  ;  my  horse  had  trodden  it  and  bruised  the  case, 
and  not  broken  the  chrystal,  without  otherwise  injuring  it. 

Sunday  13.  Preached  at  the  chapel ;  afterward  Harry,  a  black  man, 
spoke  on  the  barren  fig  tree.  This  circumstance  was  new,  and  the 
white  people  looked  on  with  attention. 

Thursday  17.  I  had  uncommon  liberty  in  preaching  in  the  court- 
house in  Leesburg.  I  see  the  need  of  a  preacher's  being  well  ac- 
quainted with  his  Bible,  and  yet  not  to  think  so  ;  the  word  of  God  is 
one  grand  dispensatory  of  soul-diseases  in  every  case  of  spiritual 
malady.  I  bless  the  Lord  for  health  and  peace  : — my  soul  was  much 
drawn  after  God,  and  melted  in  family  and  private  prayer. 

Virginia. — May  21,  1781.  I  preached  in  the  afternoon  at  P  H.'?; 
and  bad  liberty  in  urging  purity  of  heart.      Harry  spoke  to  the 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  329 

**egroes,  some  of  whom  came  a  great  distance  to  hear  him  :  certain 
sectarians  are  greatly  displeased  with  him,  because  he  tells  them 
•they  may  fall  from  grace,  and  that  they  must  be  holy. 

Tuesday  22.  We  set  off  for  Rectortown,  being  informed  it  was 
about  twenty-two  miles  ;  we  found  it  nearer  thirty.  I  reached  there, 
weary  and  dispirited,  about  half  past  two  o'clock ;  I  spoke  for  an 
hour  with  great  assistance,  both  loud  and  clear,  to  an  apparently 
unconcerned  people.  I  have  been  kept  back  by  the  rain,  the 
waters,  &c.  so  as  not  to  reach  John  Hite's  until  Saturday  evening. 

Sunday  27.  Had  about  two  hundred  people  to  hear.  The  society 
here  are  not  united  in  love  ;  there  is  a  consequent  falling  away 
among  them. 

Monday  28.  I  found  my  heart  deeply  engaged  with  God  on  my 
way  to  J.  Hite's  ;  O  what  fellowship  have  I  with  God  as  I  ridf  along! 
my  soul  is  filled  with  love,  and  I  witness  that  the  Lord  can  keep  me 
alive  in  the  day  of  famine. 

Tuesday  29.  Felt  solemn  and  much  tempted.  The  Lord  help  his 
poor  servant  from  day  to  day,  from  hour  to  hour,  and  from  moment 
to  moment !  Alas,  what  a  dearth  of  religion  is  here  !  my  God,  help 
us  to  go  on  under  these  difficulties  !  Here  brother  C.  was  once 
taken  up  by  T  H.  a  man  of  property  :  he  lived  about  one  year 
afterward  and  languished  out  his  life  :  it  may  be  he  sinned  the  sin 
unto  death  ;  but  there  was  hope  in  his  end.  He  spoke  to  all  around 
him  exhorting  them  to  repent.  Whether  he  was  judicially  visited  I 
know  not ;  but  I  do  not  recollect  an  instance  of  one  preacher  that 
has  been  thus  treated,  that  something  distressing  has  not  followed  his 
persecutors  ;  it  may  not  be  for  the  preacher's  holiness,  but  rafcfaer 
the  cause  of  God,  which  the  Eternal  vindicates. 

I  have  had  great  conOicts  of  mind  for  some  time  past.  I  believe 
Satan  has  been  hard  at  work,  and  has  painted  every  possible  danger 
he  can  to  my  imagination. 

Thursday  31.  My  soul  enjoyed  peace  :  I  was  blessed  in  reading 
the  thirty-seventh  Psalm  ;  and  was  also  comforted  in  reading  a  few 
pages  of  Bishop  Hopkins,  on  the  words  "  Count  it  all  joy  when  ye 
fall  into  divers  temptations." 

June,  Saturday  2.  Preached  at  Martinsburg— afterward  returned 
to  Brother  Bruce's  :  he  is  a  lily  among  the  thorns. 

Sunday  3.  Preached  to  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  serious  people, 
and  was  blest  in  meeting  class. 

Monday  4.  1  preached  to  a  few  lifeless  people  at  Stroud's.  I  find 
myself  given  to  God  in  prayer,  and  am  not  peculiarly  exercised  ;  yet 
my  spirits  feel  depression. 

Vol.  I.  i? 


330  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  3  JOURNAL. 

Tuesday  5.  Had  a  rough  ride  over  hills  and  dales  to  Guest's, 
Here  brother  Pigman  met  me,  and  gave  an  agreeable  account  of  the 
work  on  the  south  branch  of  Patomac.  I  am  kept  in  peace  ;  and 
greatly  pleased  I  am  to  get  into  the  woods,  where,  although  alone,  I 
have  blessed  company,  and  sometimes  think,  Who  so  happy  as  myself? 

Wednesday  6.  We  had  twelve  miles  to  R.'s,  along  a  bushy,  hilly 
road.  A  poor  woman  with  a  little  horse,  without  a  saddle,  outwent 
us  up  and  down  the  hills,  and  when  she  came  to  the  place  appointed, 
the  Lord  met  with  and  blessed  her  soul. 

Thursday  7.  I  set  out  for  the  south  branch  of  Patomac,  a  country 
of  mountains  and  natural  curiosities.  Blessed  be  God  for  health  and 
peace  !  The  enemy  strives  against  me  ;  but  I  look  to  God  from  hour 
to  hour.  We  found  some  difficulty  in  crossing  Great-Capon  River; 
three  men  very  kindly  carried  us  over  in  a  canoe,  and  afterward  rode 
our  horses  over  the  stream,  without  fee  or  reward  :  about  five 
o'clock  we  reached  W  R.'s  ;  I  laid  me  down  to  rest  on  a  chest,  and 
using  my  clothes  for  covering,  slept  pretty  well — here  I  found  need 
of  patience. 

Friday  8.  Not  being  able  to  cross  the  South  Branch,  we  had  to 
bear  away  through  the  mountains,  and  to  go  up  one  of  about  two 
hundred  yards  elevation  ;  in  some  places  the  breaks  in  the  slate 
served  for  steps,  in  other  parts  of  the  ascent  there  were  none :  we 
at  length  reached  the  place  appointed,  and  preached  to  about  twenty, 
as  I  think,  prayerless  people,  on  Isaiah  lv.  6,  7.  I  hope  some  felt 
the  word. 

Sunday  10.  I  preached  at  eleven  o'clock  to  about  two  hundred 
people  with  a  degree  of  freedom.  I  then  rode  to  R.  Williams's. 
On  my  way  I  had  a  view  of  a  hanging  rock  that  appears  like  a  castle 
wall,  about  three  hundred  feet  high,  and  looks  as  if  it  had  been  built 
with  square  slate  stones  ;  at  first  glance  a  traveller  would  be  ready 
to  fear  it  would  fall  on  him.  1  had  about  three  hundred  people  ; 
but  there  were  so  many  wicked  whiskey  drinkers,  who  brought  with 
them  so  much  of  the  power  of  the  devil,  that  I  had  but  little  satisfac- 
tion in  preaching. 

Monday  11.  I  rose  at  five  o'clock,  with  a  determination  to  live 
nearer  to  God.  Here  are  a  few  believers  groaning  for  full  redemp- 
tion, but  many  more  are  dying  through  controversy  and  for  the  want 
of  urgent  exhortation  to  purity  of  heart  :  it  is  hard  for  those  to 
preach  this  doctrine  who  have  not  experimentally  attained  it,  or  who 
are  not  striving  with  all  their  hearts  to  possess  it.  From  Williams's 
I  crossed  the  South  Branch  and  went  to  Patterson-Creek. — I  came 
to  a  Dutch  settlement :  the  people  love  preaching,  but  do  not  under- 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL.  331 

stand  class-meeting,  because  they  are  not  enough  conversant  with  the 
English  tongue :  and  we  cannot  all  do  as  J.  Hagertv  and  H.  Wydner, 
who  speak  both  languages  :  could  we  get  a  Dutch  preacher  or  two 
to  travel  with  us,  I  am  persuaded  we  should  have  a  good  work 
among  the  Dutch.  I  love  these  people — they  are  kind  in  their  way. 
We  have  many  trials  and  threatenings  ;  but  God  is  with  us.  I 
have  lately  been  reading  Fletcher's  Checks,  and  they  have  been 
greatly  blest  to  me  :  however  he  may  be  now  treated,  and  his  works 
held  in  light  estimation,  ages  to  come  will  bless  God  for  his  writings, 
as  I  have  done  for  those  of  Baxter  and  other  ancient  divines. 

I  am  now  in  a  land  of  vallies  and  mountains,  about  ten  or  fifteen 
miles  from  the  foot  of  the  Alleghany  ;  a  mountain,  that  at  this  part 
of  it,  is  two  days'  journey  across  ;  thither  some  of  our  preachers  are 
going  to  seek  the  outcasts  of  the  people.  Blessed  be  God,  I  am 
kept  in  constant  peace  and  love,  and  am  not  so  subject  to  dejection 
as  in  times  past. 

Sunday  18.  My  soul  enjoyed  great  peace  in  family  and  private 
prayer.  There  is  much  talk  about  some  of  our  preachers  being 
taken  up— -I  have  no  fears  from  that  quarter. 

Monday  19.  I  was  led  to  wonder  at  myself  when  I  considered  the 
fatigue  I  went  through- — travelling  in  the  rain ;  sleeping  without 
beds,  &c. — and  in  the  midst  of  all  I  am  kept  in  health  :  this  confirms 
me  in  the  persuasion  that  1  am  about  the  work  I  am  called  to,  and 
the  Lord. gives  me  strength  according  to  my  day  : — so  let  thy  work 
spread,  blessed  Jesus,  and  let  not  thy  servants  labour  in  vain  ! 

Wednesday  21.  We  had  hard  work  crossing  the  Fork-Mountain, 
being  sometimes  obliged  to  walk  where  it  was  too  steep  to  ride.  I 
tvas  much  blessed  in  speaking  to  about  ninety  Dutch  folks,  who  ap- 
peared to  feel  the  word.  Here  is  a  spring  remarkable  for  its  depth, 
and  the  quantity  of  water  it  discharges  sufficient  for  a  mill  within 
two  hundred  yards  from  the  source,  which  sometimes  in  freshets 
throws  its  mass  of  waters  considerably  above  the  ordinary  level  of 
the  surface. 

It  does  not  appear  that  I  do  any  great  good  ;  yet  I  am  constantly 
happy  and  measurably  holy  :  I  bless  the  Lord  for  this. 
;*  Thursday  23.  Last  evening  I  rode  a  mile  and  a  half  to  see  some 
of  the  greatest  natural  curiosities  my  eyes  ever  beheld — they  were 
tigl  caves,  about  two  hundred  yards  from  each  other  :  their  entrances 
Hre,  as  in  similar  cases,  narrow  and  descending,  gradually  widening 
towards  the  interior,  and  opening  into  lofty  chambers,  supported,  to 
appearance,  by  besaltic  pillars  :  in  one  of  these  I  supg, 

"  Still  out  of  the  deepest  abyss," 


d^Si  1XV.  FKANC1S  ASBUR.VS  JOURNAL. 

The  sound  was  wonderful.  There  were  stalactites  resembling  tta 
pipes  of  an  organ,  which  when  our  old  guide,  father  Ellsworth,  struck 
with  a  stick,  emitted  a  melodious  sound,  with  variations  according  to 
their  size  :  walls,  like  our  old  churches  ;  resemblances  to  the  towers 
adjoining  their  belfries  ;  and  the  natural  gallery,  which  we  ascended 
with  difficulty — all  to  me  was  new,  solemn,  and  awfully  grand.— 
There  were  parts  which  we  did  not  explore — so  deep,  so  damp, 
and  near  night. — I  came  away  filled  with  wonder,  with  humble  praise, 
and  adoration. 

In  journeying  through  this  mountainous  district  I  have  been  greatly 
blessed,  my  soul  enjoying  constant  peace.  I  find  a  few  humble, 
happy  souls  in  my  cotirse  ;  and  although  present  appearances  are 
gloomy,  I  have  no  doubt  but  that  there  will  be  a  glorious,  Gospel-day 
in  this  and  every  other  part  of  America. 

There  are  but  two  men  in  the  society  at  Lost-River  able  to  bear 
arms;  they  were  both  drafted  to  go  into  the  army;  I  gave  them 
what  comfort  I  could,  and  prayed  for  them. 

Saturday  30.  1  got  alone  into  a  barn  to  read  and  pray.  The  peo- 
ple here  appear  unengaged  :  the  preaching  of  unconditional  election, 
and  its  usual  attendant,  Antinomianism,  seems  to  have  hardened 
their  hearts. 

Sunday,  July  1.  More  people  attended  preaching  than  I  expected  : 
1  had  some  liberty  in  speaking,  but  no  great  fervour,  neither  seemed 
there  much  effect  produced.  I  retired  to  read  and  pray  in  the  woods, 
the  houses  being  small,  and  the  families  large. 

Friday  13.  For  some  days  past  my  congregations  have  not  been 
very  large,  which  is  in  part  owing  to  the  harvest-home.  I  fasted 
from  yesterday  noon  until  four  o'clock  to-day  ;  though  much  tempted, 
I  have  been  blest.  I  have  kept  close  to-day,  and  have  read  two  hun- 
dred pages  of  Baxter's  Saints'  Rest ;  surely  this  is  a  most  valuable 
book — a  book  I  should  like  to  read  once  a  quarter. 

Monday  1G.  We  set  out  through  the  mountains  for  quarterly  meet- 
ing. It  was  a  very  warm  day.  and  part  of  our  company  stopped  after 
thirty  miles  travelling ;  brother  William  Partridge  and  myself  kept 
on  until  night  overtook  us  in  the  mountain  among  rocks  and  woods, 
and  dangers  on  all  sides  surrounding  us  :  we  concluded  it  most  sa^t 
to  secure  our  horses  and  quietly  await  the  return  of  day;  so  we  laid 
Jown  and  slept  among  the  rocks,  although  much  annoyed  by  t|| 
gnats.  Next  day  I  met  with  several  preachers,  with  whom  I  fP^BI 
some  time  in  conversation  about  the  work  of  God.  At  twelve  o^ock 
the  people  at  Pencil's  met,  and  we  all  exhorted. 

20.  I  had  some  liberty  on  2  Cor.   vi.  2.     I  have  been 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  333 

obliged  to  sleep  on  the  floor  every  night  since  I  slept  in  the  moun- 
tains.    Yesterday  I  rode  twenty- seven  miles,  and  to-day  thirty. 

Saturday  21.  I  adore  the  goodness  of  God  that  I  am  kept  in  health  ; 
and  I  may  wonder  at  myself  that  it  is  thus,  when  I  consider  how 
rough  the  fare  is  in  this  roughest  of  circuits.  1  feel  thankful  to  God 
for  sending  such  plenty  for  man  and  beast,  and  for  the  fine  season  to 
gather  it,  which,  considering  how  many  men  are  called  away  to  the 
armies,  is  a  great  mercy. 

Tuesday  24.  I  had  some  leisure  for  reading  my  Bible,  which  I 
have  had  little  time  for  of  late.  I  thank  the  Lord  for  peace,  power, 
love,  and  a  fervent  spirit. 

Monday  31.  Attended  a  quarterly  meeting  at  Leesburg.  I  gave  a 
brief  account  of  the  Methodists,  who  and  what  they  were,  and  repel- 
led some  charges  brought  against  them  here.  At  twelve  o'clock 
brother  Ellis  preached  a  solid,  good  sermon  on,  "  He  that  hath  this 
hope  in  him  purifieth  himself  as  he  is  pure." 

Maryland. — August,  Tuesday  7.  Our  quarterly  meeting  began  at 
Charles  Penn's,  near  Seneca.  On  Wednesday  many  gave  testimony 
to  the  goodness  of  God  in  the  love-feast.  I  preached  a  long  sermon 
to  many  people  assembled  in  a  barn  :  the  weather  was  very  warm 
and  trying  to  me  ;  but  if  good  is  done,  all  is  well.  I  hear  the  work  of 
the  Lord  greatly  revives  and  spreads  in  Dorset :  there  is  some  oppo- 
sition, but  God  is  with  the  young  preachers,  who  speak  like  old  men. 
It  appears  as  if  the  whole  peninsula  would  be  Christianized  :  go  on, 
gracious  Lord, 


n 


And  let  thy  word  o'er  all  prevail:' 


1  am  kept  by  the  power  of  God,  and  filled  with  comfort  under  all 
my  trials. 

Sunday  12.  Was  a  damp,  unwholesome  day.  At  Micah  Dorseys, 
Elkridge,  I  was  seized  with  all  the  symptoms  of  an  inflammatory  sore 
throat :  I  bled,  took  medicine,  and  applied  blisters  ;  but  the  disease 
was  too  violent  to  yield  at  once  ;  very  high  fever  followed,  and  1 
suffered  more  than  1  can  well  express  :  I  made  use  of  poultice  with 
better  success  ;  the  gathering  broke,  and  1  found  some  relief.  I 
praise  God  that  his  providence  cast  my  lot  among  so  kind  a  people  ; 

)d,  lodging,  a  physician,  Dr.  Pew,  and  whatever  else  was  neces- 

fry,  was  not  withheld.     I  am  sensible  I  am  not  so  humble  as  1  should 

%e  ;  and  it  may  be  I  am  in  danger  of  forming  improper  estimates  of 

my  importance,  among  preachers  and  people  :  were  this  disposition 

Indulged,  God  might  justly  cut  me  off. 


334  KtLV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

Monday  20.  I  set  out  on  my  way  in  great  weakness  of  body ;  but 
I  could  not  be  satisfied  to  be  at  rest  while  able  to  travel :  I  stopped 
awhile  at  Dr.  Pew's,  and  came  in  the  evening  to  my  old  friend  Tho- 
mas Cromwell's. 

Sunday  26.  I  had  a  warm  ride  of  fifteen  miles  to  G.'s,  where  I 
spoke  with  liberty  to  the  poor,  simple-hearted  people.  My  body  is 
weak,  but  my  mind  is  kept  in  peace  :  I  desire  to  trust  to  God  with 
body  and  soul.  It  is  now  near  four  years  since  I  was  in  these  parts  ; 
in  times  past  I  laboured  much  here. 

Preached  at  Fell's  Point  on  Deut.  xxxiii.  29.  with  a  good  de- 
gree of  freedom ;  and  in  town  at  half  past*  five  o'clock  :  I  trust 
the  people  felt,  and  I  hope  they  will  remember  it.  Spent  Wednesday 
and  Thursday  in  writing.  I  still  find  my  soul  kept  in  peace,  and  I 
daily  feel  a  deeper  sense  of  God  and  a  greater  concern  for  the  pros- 
perity of  his  work  ;  yet  I  have  no  distressing  thought  about  it,  being 

able  to  trust  God  with  his  own  cause. 

Friday  31.  I  received  a  packet  of  letters  from  the  Peninsula,  by 

which  I  learn  that  the  work  of  God  still  prospers  there  ;  that  perse- 
cution, as  a  necessary  consequence,  rages  with  great  violence  ;  and 
that  two  or  three  of  the  preachers  are  unable  to  preach  through  weak- 
ness of  body. 

Monday,  September  3.  I  visited  the  Bush  chapel.  The  people 
here  once  left  us  to  follow  another  :  time  was  when  the  labours  of 
their  leader  were  made  a  blessing  to  them  ;  but  pride  is  a  busy  sin. 
He  is  now  no  more  :  upon  the  whole,  I  am  inclined  to  think  the  Lord 
took  him  away  in  judgment,  because  he  was  in  a  way  to  do  hurt  to 
his  cause  ;  and  that  he  saved  him  in  mercy,  because  from  his  death- 
bed conversation  he  appears  to  have  had  hope  in  his  end. 

Wednesday  5.  I  preached  to  about  three  hundred  people  at,  Deer- 
Creek  with  a  good  degree  of  freedom;  and  rejoiced  to  find  that  my 
old  friends  continued  faithful. 

Sunday  9.  After  riding  twenty  miles,  I  preached  at  Jones's  on  the 
Manor,  to  about  six  hundred  people,  with  great  liberty  ;  the  audience 
were  still  and  attentive.     Mr.  Gough  spoke  after  me. 

Monday  10.  1  learn  that  the  Lord  is  reviving  his  work  on  the  east- 
ern shore,  more  or  less,  in  every  circuit.  The  wicked  persecute, 
and  Satan  rages  in  Dorset  ;  but  God  will  carry  on  his  own  work  and 
maintain  his  own  cause.  " 

Tuesday  1 1.  My  soul  enjoys  great  nearness  to  God  in  private,  an# 
more  fervour  of  spirit  than  I  have  known  for  some  years  ;  I  also  feel 
a  greater  care  for  the  circuit  preachers,  and  for  the  work  of  God  in 
general.    I  spent  part  of  my  time  in  marking  Baxter's  Cure  for  Church 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  336 

Divisions  through.  I  have  little  leisure  for  any  thing  but  prayer  ; 
seldom  more  than  two  hours  in  the  day,  and  that  space  I  wish  to  spend 
in  retired  meditation  and  prayer  :  riding,  preaching,  class- meeting, 
leaves  but  little  for  reading  or  writing,  and  not  always  enough  for 
prayer:  something  might  be  gained  could  I  pore  over  a  book  on 
horseback,  as  Mr.  Wesley  does  in  England  ;  but  this  our  roads  forbid. 
Saturday  22.  Spoke  in  a  barn — a  cold  place,  and  cold  people. 
Here  I  met  with  T  Stephens,  who  heard  me,  and  Mr.  M.  of  Stroud, 
in  England :  his  wife  was  then  a  member  with  us  :  he  has  rambled 
until  the  Lord  has  also  found  him  out. 

Pennsylvania. — Tuesday  25.  Rode  to  York.  I  was  met  by  Mr. 
Ranckle,  who  was  once  a  Methodist,  but  now  a  German  Presbyterian 
minister.  Mr.  R.  and  Mr.  Wagner  appear  as  if  they  wished  to  be 
friendly,  but  they  fear  us,  lest  we  should  get  the  good  will  of  the 
people,  and  we  should  join  them  to  our  societies. 
Sunday  30.  Under  great  weakness  of  body. 

Wednesday,  October  3.  I  began  to  amend.  I  am  kindly  and  com- 
fortably entertained  by  Mrs.  Grace,  an  old  disciple ;  first  awakened 
by  Mr.  Whitefield,  afterward  convinced  by  reading  Mr.  Wesley  s  ser- 
mon on  Falling  from  Grace  ;  and  now  a  fast  friend,  and  member  of  our 
society. 

Sunday  7.  Preached  at  the  Valley  preaching-house,  on  the  "  grea 
salvation,"  to  an  attentive  people,  with  some  animation.  From  thence 
we  rode  to  Benson's  preaching-house,  where  there  was  a  great 
gathering  of  people,  like  a  quarterly  meeting. 

It  is  with  difficulty  I  observe  my  morning  and  evening  hour  of  re- 
tirement ;  I  am,  however,  kept  in  constant  peace. 

Tuesday  9.  I  preached  at  E.  Jones's  to  about  a  hundred  people. 
Here  1  met  with  J.  R — s,  mischievous  and  disappointed  :  having 
separated  himself,  he  charges  us  with  casting  him  off,  and  spares  not 
his  secret  abuse  on  conference  and  preachers  :  fallen,  deceitful,  self 
deceiving  man,  I  leave  thee  to  God  and  thy  own  conscience. 

Friday  12.  Came  to  Philadelphia — found  the  people  serious,  loving, 
and  lively.  The  society  here  appears  to  be  in  a  better  state  than 
they  have  been  in  since  the  British  army  was  here. 

Sunday  14.  I  had  some  comfortable  sensations  in  speaking  on  John 
iii.  14.  Our  congregations  are  large,  and  I  hope  for  a  revival  of  the 
work  amongst  us.  I  heard  two  good  sermons  at  St.  George's.  I  gave 
them  a  plain  discourse  at  night  at  St.  George's,  on  1  John  i.  8,  9. 

Tuesday  16.  I  enjoy  peace  ;  but  I  soon  grow  tired  of  (he  city. — 
There  is  a  deepening  of  the  work  in  some  souls  ;  but  1  fear  the  reli- 
gion of  others  evaporates  in  talk. 


t 


336  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

Thursday  18.  I  left  the  city  of  Philadelphia.  In  the  evening  I 
visited  a  German  woman  in  distress  for  her  soul.  We  spent  an  hour 
in  prayer,  and  God  set  her  at  liberty.  Next  day  I  returned  to  the 
city  ;  and  on  Sabbath  day,  the  21st,  we  had  a  love-feast.  I  attended 
the  Episcopal  church  twice.  Our  own  house  was  crowded.  The 
work  of  God  appears  still  to  revive  amongst  us  ;  and  I  trust  the 
society  increases  in  grace  as  well  as  in  numbers.  Among  too 
many  of  the  citizens  the  spirit  of  politics  has,  in  whole  or  in  part, 
eaten  out  the  spirit  of  religion.  We  have  come  to  a  conclusion  to 
print  the  four  volunles  of  Mr.  Wesley's  Sermons. 

Thursday  25.  Attended  the  quarterly  meeting  at  Cloud's  chapel.  I 
found  myself  sweetly  united  to  preachers  and  people.  James  Bar- 
ton, a  public  speaker  among  Friends,  bore  his  testimony  that  God 
was  amongst  us. 

Saturday  27.  My  intervals  of  time  are  employed  in  marking  Bax- 
ter's "  Cure  for  Church  Divisions,"  for  abridgment,  which  may  some 
day  see  the  light.  My  soul  is  drawn  out  to  God  to  know  whether  1 
ought  to  go  to  Virginia  this  winter,  in  order,  if  possible,  to  prevent 
the  spreading  of  the  fire  of  division  :  I  do  not  look  for  impulses  or 
revelations — the  voice  of  my  brethren  and  concurrent  circumstances 
will  determine  me  in  this  matter.  Harry  seems  to  be  unwilling  to 
go  with  me  ;  I  fear  his  speaking  so  much  to  white  people  in  the  city, 
has  been,  or  will  be,  injurious  ;  he  has  been  flattered,  and  may  be 
ruined. 

Delaware. — Wilmington,  Sunday  28.  I  made  an  application  to  a 
discourse  delivered  by  another.  At  New-Castle  many  attended  the 
word,  while  I  enlarged  on  Matt.  vii.  7. 

Saturday,  November  3.  We  had  twelve  preachers,  and  about  one 
thousand  people  at  quarterly  meeting.  This  evening  our  quarterly 
meeting  conference  began.  We  scrutinized  and  dealt  with  fidelity 
one  with  the  other.  Nothing  would  satisfy  the  preachers  but  my 
consenting  to  go  to  Virginia.  There  appears,  at  times,  to  be  great 
movings  among  the  people  ;  but  there  seems  to  be  a  slackness  of  dis- 
cipline among  the  preachers  and  them  ;  this  evil  must  be  cured,  or 
the  work  will  be  injured. 

Monday  12.  For  some  days  past  I  have  been  engaged  in  trouble- 
some business. 

Saturday  17.  I  am  agitated  in  my  mind  :  I  want  to  be  gone,  for  1  am 
persuaded  my  call  fo^  the  present  is  to  the  south.  I  have  often  ob- 
served, as  others  doubtless  have,  who  have  been  similarly  circum- 
stanced, that  the  peace  of  mind  which  the  preparations  for  a  journey 
necessarily  disturbs,  returns  to  the  traveller  on  his  way. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  337 

Thursday  22.  I  set  out  for  Virginia  :  my  horse  gave  me  the  slip, 
so  that  I  got  no  farther  than  Dover  by  Sunday. 

Saturday,  December  1.  I  have  attended  my  appointments  on  the 
way,  and  am  now  as  far  as  my  old  friend  Mr.  Robert  Thompson's,  in 
Bohemia.  My  mind  has  been  kept  in  peace  ever  since  I  left  bro- 
ther White's  ;  I  felt  the  pain  of  parting  with  him  at  Dover :  he 
has  the  most  real  affection  for  me  of  any  man  I  ever  met  with.  The 
Lord  show  kindness  to  him  and  his,  for  all  their  kindness  shown  to 
me! 

Maryland.  Sunday  2.  I  preached  at  R.  Thompson's  ;  and  in  the 
evening  visited  his  brother,  E.  Thompson,  who  was  very  sick. 

Monday  3.  Crossed  the  Susquehannah,  and  came  to  I.  D.'s. 

Thursday  6.  Came  to  Baltimore.  Here  I  received  letters  from 
Virginia,  by  which  I  learn  that  affairs  are  not  so  bad  in  Virginia  as  I 
feared :  a  few  of  the  local  preachers  have  made  some  stir,  and  the 
travelling  preachers  have  withdrawn  from  them  and  their  adherents. 
I  have  spent  some  time  in  Baltimore  with  satisfaction,  and  could 
freely  stay  longer,  but  there  may  be  danger  in  these  trading  towns, 
and  my  way  south  seems  to  be  open. 

Monday  17    Set  out  for  Virginia. 

Virginia.  Wednesday  19.  Preached  in  Leesburg.  From  thence 
I  travelled  and  preached  through  Hanover  and  Gloucester  circuits. 
I  find  the  spirit  of  party  among  some  of  the  people  :  the  local 
preachers  tell  them  of  the  ordinances,  and  they  catch  at  them  like 
fish  at  a  bait ;  but  when  they  are  informed  that  they  will  have  to  give 
up  the  travelling  preachers,  I  apprehend  they  will  not  be  so  fond  of 
their  new  plan  ;  and  if  I  judge  right,  the  last  struggle  of  a  yielding 
party  will  be  made  at  the  approaching  conference  to  be  held  at  the 
Manakintown. 

Saturday  29.  Rode  to  Stedham's,  in  Gloucester  circuit.  This  man 
was  once  famous  for  racing  :  he  is  now  a  servant  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  The  old  man  wept  when  I  described  the  tenderness  of  a 
soul  when  first  united  to  Christ :  he  was  awakened  by  the  instru- 
mentality of  Mr.  Jarratt  ;  and  I  am  persuaded  there  have  been  more 
*ouls  convinced  by  his  ministry,  than  by  that  of  any  other  man  in 
Virginia. 

Tuesday,  January  1,  1782.  Having  preached  several  times  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  Old  Church,  to  very  unfeeling  congregations, 
I  rode  to  Dudley's  ferry,  in  order  to  cross  York-River,  but  was  disap- 
pointed, the  boat  being  on  the  opposite  side.  We  returned  to  the 
widow  C.'s,  being  unwilling  to  stay  at  the  tavern,  and  had  a  con- 
gregation of  sixty  or  seventy  people  :  we  then  rode  about  five  miles 

Vol.  I.  43 


33S  nhv.  francis  asbury's  journal. 

to  a  ferry,  and  passed  over  immediately.  Arrived  at  the  other  side, 
we  found  the  small-pox,  and  camp-fever  raging,  and  heard  of  several 
poor  creatures,  white  and  black,  that  had  died  on  the  road.  Ah ! 
we  little  know  what  belongs  to  war,  with  all  its  train  of  evils ; 
churches  converted  into  hospitals  and  barracks,  houses  pillaged  or 
burnt,  which  last  has  been  the  sad  fate  of  the  palace  at  Williamsburg. 

I  met  with  five  or  six  faithful  souls  on  our  fast-day,  and  the  Lord 
wa9  present  with  us.  There  is  considerable  distress  amongst  our 
societies,  caused  by  some  of  the  local  preachers,  who  are  not 
satisfied  unless  they  administer  the  ordinances  without  order  or  ordi- 
nation, and  the  whole  circuit  appears  to  be  more  or  less  tinctured 
with  their  spirit. 

Tuesday  8.  I  rode  to  Mr.  Jarratt's,  and  found  him,  as  usual,  quite 
friendly. 

Wednesday  9.  I  rested  with  Mr.  Jarratt. 

Thursday  10.  Brothers  M.  and  F  met  me  at  White-Oak  chapel, 
where  A.  C — ,  one  of  our  young  preachers,  was  baptised  by  Mr. 
Jarratt.  We  spent  the  evening  comfortably.  I  find  the  party-men 
among  our  societies  grow  weak,  and  I  am  persuaded  this  division  will 
cause  the  sincere,  among  preachers  and  people,  to  cleave  closer  to 
doctrine  and  discipline,  and  may  be  the  means  of  purging  our  societies 
of  those  who  are  corrupt  in  their  principles. 

Saturday  12.  I  preached  at  Captain  Smith's — the  matter  was  good, 
but  I  had  not  much  liberty  in  speaking.  I  feel  that  talking  about  any 
thiag  but  the  things  of  God  is  improper  for  me,  and  out  of  my  line. 
1  am  not  so  full  and  flaming  with  the  love  of  God  as  I  was  some  time 
ago  :  I  feel  resolved,  through  grace,  to  keep  near  to  God  at  all  times. 
O  how  many  things  are  lawful  in  themselves  that  yet  are  not  expe- 
dient, and  damp  the  pure  life  of  God  in  the  soul !  I  have  these  words 
often  in  my  mind,  "  The  children  which  thou  shalt  have  after  thou 
hast  lost  the  other,  shall  say  again  in  thine  ears,  The  place  is  too 
strait  for  me  ;  give  place  to  me  that  I  may  dwell." 

Tuesday  15.    Preached  at  Ellis's  chapel  to  a  simple,  loving  people. 

Wednesday  16.  I  preached  at  the  widow  King's.  About  eighteen 
months  ago  I  preached  in  this  neighbourhood,  and  then  thought  the 
people  dead  with  a  witness,  all  except  one  poor  old  Englishman  :  now 
there  are  a  few  faithful  souls. 

Sunday  20.  1  preached  at  the  great  preaching-house  in  Nansemond 
with  uncommon  openings  in  my  mind.  About  twenty  months  past  I 
preached  here,  and  was  then  in  hopes  of  a  revival ;  but  evil-speakiDg 
and  other  things  have  prevented.  How  do  unskilful  surgeons  often 
put  their  patients  to  pain  without  profit ! 


REV.   FRANCIS    ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  330 

Tuesday  22.  I  preached  at  brother  Moss's ;  a  place  the  circuit- 
preachers  had  quitted,  because  there  were  no  hearers  :  this  good  pur- 
pose nay  travelling  answers — to  get  a  few  to  hear  me  who  will  not 
come  to  hear  others. 

Wednesday  23.  At  Lane's  chapel  I  enlarged  on  2  Cor.  vii.  1.  and 
found  it  was  what  the  brethren  wanted  :  they  are  a  loving  people,  and 
may  rank  with  any  of  our  north-country  Methodists.  My  soul  is 
refreshed  ;  and  I  bless  the  Lord  for  what  he  has  done  for  this 
society.  My  friend  W — ,  who  was  fond  of  our  preaching,  and  rode 
thirty  miles  with  me  in  my  last  visit  here,  is  gone  into  Quieliem,  and 
would  not  come  to  hear :  how  changeable  a  creature  is  man  !  This 
was  a  day  of  fasting  and  humiliation  with  me.  In  describing  the 
filthiness  of  the  flesh,  I  treated  on  those  sins  that  are  in  the  flesh,  and 
committed  by  the  members  of  the  body  :  the  filthiness  of  the  spirit, 
those  sins  to  which  devils  are  subject — such  as  pride,  envy,  self-will, 
bitterness,  &c.  :  to  cleanse  ourselves  from  these,  every  mean  of  self- 
denial  and  spiritual  mortification  is  necessary  :  it  must  be  sought  by 
faith,  and  expected  as  a  present  salvation. 

Thursday  24.  God  is  with  me,  and  has  all  my  heart :  I  am  not 
sensible  of  any  thing  contrary  to  humble,  thankful,  constant  love  to 
God — pitying  love  to  poor  sinners  ;  and  melting,  sympathetic  love  for 
the  dear  ministers  and  people  of  God,  wherever  I  meet  them.  I 
found  great  fellowship  with  the  pious  family  of  the  Davis's,  especially 
with  Henry  Davis,  who,  I  trust,  is  an  Israelite  indeed  in  whom  there 
is  no  guile. 

I  had  about  fifty  hearers  at  ,  among  whom  were  some  high 

Galvinists  :  Mr.  M.  took  my  text  to  preach  from,   "  The  grace  of 
God  that  bringeth  salvation,  hath  appeared  unto  all  men." 

Friday  25.  I  had  a  comfortable  meeting  with  my  old  friends  at 
R.  Jones's,  and  trust  the  word  was  felt  among  the  people. 

Saturday  26.  I  had  a  large  congregation  at  Richardson's,  where 
the  Lord  has  lately  been  at  work.  I  met  a  class,  and  found  many 
earnest  seekers  of  salvation  :  the  poor  mourners  came  again  at  night, 
to  whom  I  applied  Hezekiah's  experience,  at  which  all  appeared 
deeply  affected  ;  they  wept,  talked  together,  and  seemed  loath  to 
leave  the  place. 

Sunday  27.  I  had  a  large,  solemn  congregation  at  Mabry's  chapel. 
I  trust  the  work  revives  in  the  souls  of  these  people.  I  lodged  with 
my  old  friend,  I.  Mabry,  who  gave  me  the  following  account  of  the 
death  of  his  daughter,  F  Mabry,  who  for  some  years  past  appeared 
to  live  the  life  of  faith.  In  August  last  she  was  taken  ill  :  when  at 
the  point  of  death,  the  Lord  cut  short  his  work  in  her  soul,  cleansing 


340  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

her  heart ;  she  testified  what  God  had  done  for  her  with  great  power, 
her  language  surprising  all  who  were  present ;  she  appeared  to  be 
kept  alive  one  whole  day  almost  miraculously :  her  father  said,  he 
thought  the  power  of  God  was  so  strongly  upon  her  that  she  could 
not  die. 

Tuesday  29.  I  rode  to  Roses-Creek ;  this  is  the  coldest  day  I  have 

yet  felt  in  Virginia.     Mr   ,  who  had  lately  lost  his  wife,  desired 

me  to  preach  in  his  house,  which  1  did  to  about  fifty  people.  I  spent 
the  evening  with  F  G — n,  and  E.  M — n,  at  T    Rivers's. 

Wednesday  30.  I  saw  brother  E.  Dromgoole  ;  he  is  very  weak  in 
body,  but  steady  to  old  Methodism  ;  I  feel  a  great  desire  that  he  ma)' 
travel  again. 

Thursday  31.  I  preached  at  Wolsey's  barn,  on  "  Where  is  the 
blessedness  ye  spake  of:"  from  thence  rode  to  O.  Myrick's. 

North-Carolina. — Friday,  February  1.  Brother  S.  Yeargan  gave 
me  an  account  of  a  light  his  former  wife  saw,  whilst  at  prayer  one 
day  in  a  little  thicket  below  the  house  ;  she  said  the  light  shone  all 
around  her,  "  above  the  brightness  of  the  sun."  This  remarkable 
circumstance  she  had  resolved  not  to  communicate  even  to  her  hus- 
band :  on  more  mature  reflection,  however,  she  thought  it  most  pro- 
per to  tell  him  ;  he  observed  to  her,  "  Perhaps  you  will  die  soon, 
—are  you  willing  ?"  "  Yes,"  was  her  reply  ;  but  at  the  same  time 
expressed  her  fears  of  a  long  illness,  which,  said  she,  will  burthen 
the  family  :  within  two  weeks  from  this  she  died.  She  was  my  kind 
nurse  the  last  time  I  was  in  Virginia  ;  and  she  is  the  third  woman  of 
my  former  kind  friends,  that  I  have  heard  of,  who  has  died  in  the 
Lord  during  my  absence.  Blessed  be  the  Lord  for  the  great  things 
he  has  done  !     After  preaching  to  a  few  small  congregations,  on 

Thursday  7.  I  rode  sixteen  miles,  and  preached  to  a  large  assem- 
blage of  people  at  I.  T  'son  the  "  great  salvation."  Though  I  am  often 
in  haste  and  straitened  for  want  of  time,  I  have  gone  through  Mr.  Wes- 
ley's third  volume  once,  and  am  going  through  it  again.  I  make  it  a 
rule  to  spend  an  hour,  morning  and  evening,  in  meditation,  and  in  prayer 
for  all  the  circuits,  societies,  and  preachers.  I  expect  to  see  the  work 
of  God  revive  in  these  parts,  so  soon  as  the  spirit  of  disputation  is 
cast  out.  Blessed  be  God,  I  enjoy  good  health  of  body  and  peace  of 
mind.  I  find  no  preaching  does  good,  but  that  which  properly  presses 
the  use  of  the  means,  and  urges  holiness  of  heart  ;  these  points  I  am 
determined  to  keep  close  to  in  all  my  sermons. 

Virginia. — Saturday  9.  We  rode  twenty-five  miles  up  Maherrin, 
and  missing  our  way,  did  not  reach  the  place  until  three  o'clock:  the 
people,  meantime,  had  waited  for  us,  and  I  spoke  to  them  on  Luke 


REV    FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURJNAL.  341 

xix.  10.  I  trust  not  in  vain.  In  this  country  I  have  to  lodge  half  my 
nights  in  lofts,  were  light  may  be  seen  through  a  hundred  places  ;  and 
it  may  be,  the  cold  wind  at  the  same  time  blowing  through  as  many  ; 
but,  through  mercy,  I  am  kept  from  murmuring,  and  bear  it  with 
thankfulness,  expecting  ere  long  to  have  better  entertainment — a 
heavenly  and  eternal  rest. 

Monday  11.  I  rode  to  J.  Martin's,  Briery-Creek,  and  preached  to 
nearly  one  hundred  people  from  Acts  xxvi.  18.  After  preaching  I 
had  some  conversation  with  Mr.  M- Roberts,  who  was  formerly  a 
clergyman  of  the  Episcopal  Church,  but  he  is  now  set  out  on  an  Inde- 
pendent plan  :  although  he  has  his  peculiarities,  I  admire  his  candour 
as  a  Christian  :  his  plan  may  fail,  and  his  zeal  may  cool — if  indeed 
that  is  not  already  observable.  Mr.  M.  charged  Mr.  Wesley  with 
inconsistency  in  some  things,  and  disapproved  of  his  sending  what 
preachers  he  thought  fit  to  any  place  or  people.  I  observed,  in  re- 
ply, that  Mr.  Wesley  did  nothing  without  consulting  the  preachers  ; 
that  he  was  no  spiritual  tyrant.  Mr.  M.  took  care  to  let  me  know 
that  he  did  not  believe  that  any  one  could  finally  fall  from  grace  :  I 
felt  great  love  to  the  man,  and  was  pained  that  we  had  to  agree  to 
disagree. 

February  12.  We  rode  (o  solid  Robert  Martin's,  on  Appomattox- 
River.  Brother  Martin  appears  to  be  a  man  of  piety— a  professor  of 
sanctification.  He  informed  me  of  the  remarkable  conversion  of 
Captain  Wood,  an  officer  of  the  continental  line  :  he  was  taken  at  the 
capture  of  Charleston  by  the  British  ;  obtaining  a  parole,  he  return- 
ed home  to  Prince-Edward, — here  it  was  that  he  was  convinced  of 
sin.  While  labouring  under  deep  distress  of  soul  he  made  frequent 
attempts  to  destroy  himself,  and  would  suffer  no  one  to  come  near  him 
but  brother  M.  at  length  the  Lord  set  him  at  liberty  ;  and  he  is  now  a 
serious  man,  and  appears  to  be  much  devoted  to  God. 

Wednesday  13.  I  preached  at  S.  Jones's,  and  was  much  led  out  on 
Rom.  xiii.  11.  I  enjoy  peace  from  morning  to  night :  was  it  only  for 
what  I  feel  that  I  travelled  and  preached,  my  labours  to  myself  would 
not  be  lost,  but  I  shall  do  good  ;  God  will  not  suffer  the  word  he  gives 
me  to  fall  to  the  ground  ;  it  will  be  blessed  to  preachers  and  people. — 
Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul,  and  all  that  is  within  me,  for  ever  and  ever ! 

Saturday  &  Sunday  16,  17.  Preached  at  Col.  Bedford's,  in  Char- 
lotte county  :  many  appeared  to  be  quickened  and  restored  to  the 
grace  of  God. 

Monday  18.  Preached  with  pleasure  and  delight  at  Mr.  Almond's 
on  the  "  Almost  Christian."  While  brother  Ellis  was  exhorting,  the 
congregation  was  alarmed  with  the  cry  of  fire,  which  had  kindled  in  a 


342  iu.v.  fkaNcis  askury's  journal. 

house  adjoining :  willing  hearts  and  ready  hands  sufficed  to  save  the 
furniture  and  almost  every  article  of  value  from  the  destructive 
flames,  but  the  house  that  first  took  fire,  and  the  dwelling  house,  with 
a  connecting  piazza,  were  consumed.  We  left  this  scene  of  awful 
solemnity  and  alarm,  and  rode  to  brother  Crowder*s  for  our  dinners, 
which  we  needed,  having  rode  twenty-five  miles  since  we  took  any 
refreshment. 

Tuesday  19.  I  preached  to  a  mixed  multitude,  with  great  comfort, 
on  Colos.  i.  27,  28.  and  hope  the  people  will  remember  it.  I  praise 
the  Lord  for  uninterrupted  communion  with  him. 

North  Carolina. — Wednesday  20.  I  crossed  the  Dan  and  Stanton 
rivers,  and  came  to  C s,  poor  and  worthy  people :  the  woman  pro- 
fesses sanctification,  and  the  man  appears  to  be  much  given  up  to  God. 
I  had  uncommon  enlargement  of  spirit  in  speaking  on  Mark  xi.  24. 

Thursday  21.  I  am  filled  with  love  from  day  to  day.  O  bless  the 
Lord  for  the  constant  communion  I  enjoy  with  him !  Sanctification 
is  the  doctrine  which  is  most  wanted  to  be  preached  among  the  peo- 
ple here,  whom,  the  more  I  know  the  more  I  love :  Antinotniani  are 
labouring  to  spread  their  tenets  among  them  ;  but  they  will  give  way, 
as  holiness  of  heart  and  life  is  pointedly  enforced  and  pressed  home 
upon  their  consciences.     This  is  the  best  antidote  to  the  poison. 

Sunday  24.  I  always  find  the  Lord  present  when  I  go  to  the  throne 
of  grace.  O  that  the  Lord  may  keep  me  from  moment  to  moment ! 
I  received  a  letter  from  J.  W.  a  faithful  youth  that  bids  fair  to  make 
a  great  man  of  God,  aud  ^useful  preacher  of  the  Gospel.  I  began  to 
fear  1  should  have  no  one  to  travel  with  me,  and  pilot  me  in  this 
strange  hnd,  when  providentially,  brother  J.  C.  met  me.  1  find  my 
greatest  trials  to  arise  from  "  taking  thought :"  it  is  by  this  Satan 
trys  to  come  in :  it  is  my  constitutional  weakness  to  be  gloomy  and 
dejected  ;  the  work  of  God  puts  life  into  me — and  why  despond  ? 
the  land  is  before  us,  and  nothing  can  hurt  us  but  divisions  among 
ourselves. 

Virginia. — I  preached  the  funeral  sermon  of  Philip  Adams,  one  of 
our  preachers.  He  died  last  March.  This  duty  I  performed  the  more 
cheerfully  believing  that  such  would  have  been  his  choice  had  I  been 
within  reach  at  the  time  of  his  death.  My  subject  was  1  Kings  xiii. 
30.  P,  A.  was  a  man  of  grace,  and  his  gifts  increased  ;  he  was  steady, 
and  closely  attached  to  the  doctrine  and  discipline  of  the  Methodists  : 
he  died  happy  in  the  Lord,  and  I  doubt  not  but  that  he  has  gone 
where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at  rest. 

North  Carolina. — Sunday,  March  3.  I  preached  the  funeral  ser- 
mon of  Mrs.  Harrison,  the  wife  of  T.  Harrison,  on  Dan-River.  Although 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  343 

there  was  snow  on  the  ground,  many  people  attended  ;  to  whom  I 
spoke  on  1  Cor.  xv.  57,  58.  Mr.  H.  appears  to  be  deeply  distressed 
at  the  loss  of  his  wife  ;  I  hope  it  will  terminate  in  a  concern  for  his 
own  soul.  He  offered  me  a  large  reward  for  my  services — money  is 
not  my  object.  I  have  great  affection  for  C.  Kennon,  one  of  the  most 
sensible  Calvinists  in  these  parte  :  he  acknowledges  he  found  his  reli- 
gion among  the  Methodists  ;  his  system  he  borrowed  from  Witsius„ 
Fletcher  has  cured  him  of  the  disease  of  disputation  ;  he  reads  him 
with  delight  even  while  he  is  prostrating  the  pillars  against  which  he 
leans. 

Tuesday  6.  I  enjoy  great  peace  :  my  soul  resteth  in  God  from  day 
to  day,  and  from  moment  to  moment. 

Saturday  10.  I  have  hard  work,  but  the  Lord  supports  me,  and 
daily  keeps  me  in  his  love ;  this  bears  up  my  spirit  under  all  the 
usage  and  fatigues  I  undergo.  Notice  is  taken  here  of  a  preacher's 
words  and  actions  ;  we  must  therefore  be  cautious,  and  not  lay  a 
stumbling-block  before  the  weak :  it  is  my  duty  to  labour  for  God  and 
souls  without  a  complaining  word. 

Tuesday  13.  I  have  been  much  tried  this  day  two  various  ways : 
I  feel  myself  greatly  humbled.  This  morning  I  poured  out  my  soul 
to  God  in  the  granary,  and  was  refreshed  in  my  spirit.  When  we 
came  to  New-Hope  Creek  we  could  not  ford  it ;  so  I  crossed  on  a  log. 
Hitherto  the  Lord  hath  helped  me.  I  would  not  live  always  ;  nei- 
ther would,  of  choice,  know  what  is  before  me. 

Sunday  18.  1  preached  with  great  liberty  to  a  solemn,  attentive 
people.  I  met  society,  and  the  people  spoke  freely.  1  am  willing 
to  travel  and  preach  as  long  as  I  live  ;  and  I  hope  I  shall  not  live  long 
after  I  am  unable  to  travel. 

I  obtained  the  promise  of  brothers  P.  Bruce  and  O'Kelly  to  join 
heartily  in  our  connexion.  1  feel  much  led  out  in  spirit  for  the 
preachers  who  are  to  meet  in  conference,  that  we  may  all  be  united 
together  in  love  and  peace,  and  firm  resolves  to  carry  on  the  work 
which  God  hath  called  us  to. 

Sunday  25.  At  Kimbrough  I  preached  to  a  large  congregation,  but 
I  am  afraid  the  word  preached  will  not  profit  them.  I  spoke  warmly 
for  about  an  hour  ;  t^iere  came  on  a  rain,  and  the  people  appeared  to 
be  more  afraid  of  their  saddles  being  wet  than  their  souls  being  lost. 

Wednesday  28.  I  preached  to  about  one  hundred  people  at  the 
Tabernacle,  on  Deut.  xxxiii.  29.  I  trust  there  is  more  of  the  life 
of  God  here  now  than  when  I  was  here  last. 

Thursday  29.  I  have  felt  much  this  day  from  the  coldness  of  the 
weather — but  no  matter.     Brother  Ogburn  met  me  again  :  I  am  ge- 


344  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY*S  JOURNAL. 

nerally  blest  with  the  preachers  ;  when  one  leaves  me  another  meets 
me,  and  my  soul  enjoys  God  as  a  satisfying  portion. 

Sunday,  April  7.  I  preached  at  Roanoak  chapel  on,  "  I  have 
somewhat  against  thee  because  thou  hast  left  thy  first  love,"  &c.  it 
may  be  for  the  last  time.  I  hasted  on  to  preach  a  funeral  sermon  at 
brother  John  Seward's,  at  the  interment  of  a  young  woman  who  had 
been  a  member  of  our  society  about  five  years  ;  she  died  suddenly, 
and,  I  trust,  rests  from  her  labours. 

Friday  12.  I  preached  at  the  widow  F — s,  on  "  work  out  your  own 
salvation  with  fear  and  trembling."  We  rode  to  J.  Keese's  to  be 
ready  for  quarterly  meeting,  to  bejheld  next  day  at  White-Oak  chapel. 

Saturday  13.  We  met  Mr.  Jarratt,  but  he  had  such  a  cold  he  refu- 
sed to  preach.  I  spoke  on  "  the  children  thou  shalt  have  after  thou 
hast  lost  thy  others,"  &c.  We  had  a  love-feast  at  4  o'clock  in  the 
evening :  it  was  truly  a  gracious  season,  many  spoke  freely  and  feel- 
ingly of  the  goodness  of  God. 

Sunday  14.  I  preached  at  the  chapel ;  and  we  then  went  to  church. 
I  read  the  lessons  for  Mr.  Jarratt,  who  preached  a  great  sewnon  on 
union  and  love  from  the  123d  Psalm:  we  received  the  sacrament, 
and  afterward  went  home  with  Mr.  Jarratt,  that  we  might  accompany 
him  to  our  conference.  I  have  been  much  tried,  jnwardly  and  out- 
wardly. I  have  been  deeply  and  solemnly  engaged  in  public,  in 
families,  and  more  especially  in  private,  for  a  blessing  on  the  people, 
and  for  union  and  strength  among  the  preachers  at  our  approaching 
conference. 

Tuesday  16.  We  set  out;  and  on  the  next  day,  (17th)  reached 
Ellis's,  at  whose  house  we  held  the  conference.  The  people  flocked 
together  for  preaching  :  Mr.  Jarratt  gave  us  a  profitable  discourse  on 
the  14th  chapter  of  Hosea.  In  the  evening  the  preachers  met  in  con- 
ference :  as  there  had  been  much  distress  felt  by  those  of  them  of 
Virginia,  relative  to  the  administration  of  the  ordinances,  I  proposed 
to  such  as  were  so  disposed,  to  enter  into  a  written  agreement  to 
cleave  to  the  old  plan  in  which  we  had  been  so  greatly  blessed,  that 
we  might  have  the  greater  confidence  in  each  other,  and  know  on 
whom  to  depend  :  this  instrument  was  signed  by  the  greater  part  of 
the  preachers  without  hesitation.  Next  morning  I  preached  on  Phil 
ii.  1,  2,  3,  4,  5.  I  had  liberty,  and  it  pleased  God  to  set  it  home  : 
one  of  the  preachers,  James  Haw,  who  had  his  difficulties,  was  de- 
livered from  them  all ;  and  with  the  exception  of  one,  all  the  signa- 
tures of  the  preachers  present  were  obtained.  We  received  seven 
into  connexion,  and  four  remained  on  trial.  At  noon,  Mr.  Jarratt 
*T)oke  on  the  union  of  the  attributes. 


REV.  bKASCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL,  iiu 

Friday  19.  We  amicably  settled  our  business  and  closed  our  con- 
ference.  Mr.  Jarratt  preached  on  "  A  man  shall  be  as  a  hiding-place 
from  the  wind,  and  a  covert  from  the  tempest,"  &c.  We  had  a  love- 
feast — the  power  of  God  was  manifested  in  a  most  extraordinary 
manner — preachers  and  people  wept,  believed,  loved,  and  obeyed. 

Saturday  20.  We  rode  upwards  of  thirty  miles  to  Captain  Smith's? 
without  eating  or  drinking. 

Sunday  21.  Held  quarterly  meeting  at  Boisseau's  chapel — the 
glory  is  strangely  departed  here.  I  preached  with  liberty  on  "  They 
that  sow  in  tears,  shall  reap  in  joy  :"— from  thence  I  basted  to  Mr. 
Jarratt's  barn,  where  the  people  were  waiting,  to  whom  I  enlarged 
on  James  iv.  7,  8,  9,  10. — Mr.  Jarratt  seemed  all  life,  and  deter- 
mined to  spend  himself  in  the  work  of  God,  and  visit  what  circuits 
he  could. 

I  am  persuaded  the  separation  of  some  from  our  original  plant 
about  the  ordinances  will,  upon  the  whole,  have  a  tendency  to  unite 
the  body  together,  and  to  make  preachers  and  people  abide  whereia 
they  are  called  :  I  feel  abundant  cause  to  praise  God  for  Ts-hat  he 
has  done. 

Monday  22.  I  rode  thirty  miles  to  brother  Finney's,  in  Amelia,, 
without  any  refreshment.  I  have  constant  peace,  and  my  soul  en- 
joys more  calm  than  heretofore  ;  some  pain  indeed  was  felt  in  part- 
ing with  my  Virginia  brethren,  as  though  I  had  left  something  valuable 
behind  me. 

Thursday  25.  I  rode  forty-three  miles  in  order  to  reach  Fluvannah 
circuit ;  and  next  day  preached  at  the  Broken-Backed  Church. 

Tuesday  30.  Rode  to  Doctor  Hopkins's  and  preached  with  liberty 
from  Psalms  cxlv.  17,  18,  19.  I  hope  our  meeting  was  not  in  vain. 
Lord,  preach  thy  word,  by  thy  holy  Spirit — let  me  not  travel  and 
spend  my  strength  for  nought — and  thine  shall  be  the  glory  ! 

Lord's  day,  May  6.  I  preached  with  freedom  on  the  parable  of  the 
sower,  at  brother  H.  Fry's,  in  Culpepper  county — he  professeth  sane- 
tification.  1  find  many  of  the  people  and  some  of  the  local  preach- 
ers quite  warm  about  the  ordinances,  on  which  subject  there  is  much 
disputation  :  blessed  be  God  !  in  the  midst  of  it  all  I  have  quiet  and 
patience,  and  hope  shortly  to  get  into  a  more  peaceable  clime — my 
face  is  to  the  north. 

Friday  11.  I  preached  at  Culpepper  court-house — the  people- 
were  serious  and  attentive.  Here  I  heard  the  good  news  that  Britain 
had  acknowledged  the  Independence  for  which  America  has  beeri 
contending — may  it  be  so ! — The  Lord  does  what  to  him  seemetb 
good. 

Vol.  I,  44 


o. 


16  liEV.  FRANCIS  ASBUHYS  JOURNAL, 


Wednesday  16.  Our  quarterly  meeting  began  in  Fairfax  circuit. 
I  preached  with  but  little  consolation  to  my  own  soul :  next  day  there 
was  some  move  in  the  love-feast — one  sinner  brought  under  convic- 
tion, and  one  backslider  reclaimed. 

Friday  18.  I  set  out  with  brother  G — ,  who  has  given  up  his  sepa- 
rating plan  ;  the  Lord  has  conquered  him,  and  I  hope  that  all  who  are 
worthy  will  return. 

Maryland. — Monday  21.  A  few  of  us  began  conference  in  Balti- 
more :  next  day  we  had  a  full  meeting  ;  the  preachers  all  signed  the 
agreement  proposed  at  the  Virginia  conference,  and  there  was  a  unani- 
mous resolve  to  adhere  to  the  old  Methodist  plan. — We  spent  most  of 
the  day  in  examining  the  preachers.  We  had  regular  daily  preaching ; 
Monday  brother  Ellis  preached  :  on  Tuesday  I  spoke  on  1  Tiro.  iv.  12t 

Wednesday  23.  We  had  many  things  before  us. — Our  printing 
plan  was  suspended  for  the  present  for  want  of  funds. 

Friday  25.  Was  set  apart  for  fasting  and  prayer  :  we  had  a  love- 
feast,  the  Lord  was  present ;  and  all  was  well.  The  preachers  in  gene- 
ral were  satisfied. — I  found  myself  burthened  with  labours  and  cares. 
We  have  now  fifty-nine  travelling  preachers  ;  and  eleven  thousand 
seven  hundred  and  eighty-five  in  society. — Our  young  men  are  seri- 
ous, and  their  gifts  are  enlarged. 

Saturday  26.  Rode  to  brother  Lynch's,  to  get  quiet  and  rest 
after  so  much  haste,  and  bustle,  and  business.  I  want  to  be 
retired  to  answer  my  letters.  I  feel  a  great  necessity  of  being  more 
than  ever  given  up  to  God  :  I  hope  he  will  yet  do  great  things  for  us 
this  year. 

June,  Saturday  2.  I  spent  a  considerable  part  of  this  week  at 
Mr.  Gough's,  in  answering  letters,  in  reading  and  retirement :  I  now 
return  to  Baltimore  under  a  deep  sense  of  the  goodness  of  God. 

Monday  4.  Set  out  for  Calvert— preached  on  the  way  at  West 
River.  I  spake  to  about  one  hundred  poor  people,  whom  I  exhorted 
to  seek  that  they  might  find.  After  dinner  I  retired  and  sat  down  on 
a  log  beside  the  water  for  nearly  two  hours,  and  had  sweet  com- 
munion with  God.  H  is  not  the  place,  nor  the  posture  of  the  body, 
that  constitutes  the  real  worshipper ;  yet  at  proper  times  and  con- 
venient places,  it  is  good  to  kneel  before  the  Lord  our  Maker.  We 
came  to  Herring  Bay,  and  thence  went  to  a  place  formerly  called  Hell- 
Corner,  and  thus  named  because  of  the  desperate  wickedness  of  the 
people  ;  yet  even  here  hath  God  brought  many  poor  souls  to  the 
knowledge  of  himself. 

Thursday  7.  Rose  at  four  o'clock,  and  spent  an  hour  in  private- 
Rode  through  the  heat  sixteen  miles  to  Childs's  barn  ;  where  I  spoke 


R&Y.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL.  347 

on  2  Cor.  iv.  16. ;  and  where  God  has  already  wrought  on  the  hearts 
of  many,  bringing  them  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth. 

Friday  8.  We  have  a  pleasant  rain  after  great  heat  and  drought  j 
for  which  we  have  cause  to  praise  God.  „, 

Saturday  9.  There  was  an  extraordinary  hail  near  this  place  a  few 
days  ago. 

Sunday  10.  Rose  in  peace.  My  soul  is  solidly  given  up  to  God, 
although  I  am  sorely  tempted. 

Friday  15.  1  had  many  of  the  rich  to  hear,  to  whom  I  spoke  on 
John  vii.  17.     In  the  course  of  my  preaching  I  was  led  to  strike  at 

Deism  :  I  learned  afterward  that  Doctor ,  a  professed  Deist,  was 

present.     1  love  these  poor  people,  and  I  believe  some  of  them  love 
me  :  I  hope  the  time  to  favour  them  will  yet  come. 

Virginia. — Saturday  23.  I  preached  at  Leesburg ;  and  again  on 
Sunday  afternoon  ;  I  fear  to  little  purpose.  God  be  merciful  to  these 
people  !  I  must  now  retire — my  morning  and  evening  hour  is  as 
my  daily  bread. 

Wednesday  26.  Rode  to  S — 's  under  the  Blue-Ridge — neither  the 
place  comfortable  nor  the  people  lively — I  believe  but  few  of  the 
hearers  understood  me. 

I  have  read  the  lives  of  Mr.  Gilpin  and  Mr.  Latimer,  and  took  good 
heed  of  the  life  of  Mr.  B — .  I  admire  their  spirit,  writing,  and 
speaking  ;  there  is  something  in  them  all  so  methodistical. 

I  find  it  difficult  to  get  time,  strength,  and  place  for  retirement ; 
nevertheless,  I  do  not  neglect  it.  From  S — 's  we  crossed  the  ridge 
to  Hite's,  where  we  rested  and  were  comforted. 

We  crossed  the  mountain  at  the  Gap,  near  my  bed  where  I  slept 
last  summer,  and  riding  up  the  North-River  made  our  journey  near 
twenty  miles  :  when  we  came  there  we  found  that  the  people  had 
gone  to  bury  our  old  friend  S — ,  so  that  we  had  seven  miles  farther 
to  go  :  arriving,  we  found  them  handing  about  their  stink-pots  of 
mulled  whisky.  We  have,  not  unfrequently,  to  lodge  in  the  same 
room  with  the  family,  the  houses  having  but  the  one  room,  so  that 
necessity  compels  us  to  seek  retirement  in  the  woods — this,  with  the 
nightly  disagreeables  of  bugs  to  annoy  us,  shows  the  necessity  of  crying 
to  the  Lord  for  patience  :  in  the  midst  of  all,  I  thank  God,  I  enjoy 
peace  of  mind.  O  how  many  thousands  of  poor  souls  have  we  to  seek 
out  in  the  wilds  of  America,  who  are  but  one  remove  from  the  Indians 
in  the  comforts  of  civilized  society,  and  considering  that  they  have 
the  Bible  in  their  hands,  comparatively  worse  in  their  morals  than 
the  savages  themselves  :  the  want  of  religion  among  them,  arises, 


'it  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL. 

I  apprehend,  from  the  badness  of  their  own   hearts,  and  from  their 
hearing  corrupt  doctrines. 

Saturday,  July  6.  We  crossed  the  great  mountain,  and  being 
obliged  to^walk  down  its  opposite  side,  I  was  much  fatigued  :  arriving 
at  the  widow  George's,  I  preached  on  "  My  Spirit  shall  not  always 
strive  with  man  :"  I  had  been  sorely  tried  in  body  and  mind — I  now 
spoke  with  delight. 

Sunday  7.  In  recrossing  the  mountain,  on  my  way  to  Mill-Creek  ; 
I  was  obliged  to  walk  up  and  down  its  sides,  and  was  greatly  tired. 
I  delivered  a  short  discourse,  with  pleasure,  to  about  three  hundred 
people  ;  afterward  brother  Hagerty  spoke  to  them  :  it  rained  before 
and  after  preaching,  but  held  up  while  we  worshipped  by  the  side  of 
the  stream,  for  want  of  a  house.  After  preaching,  we  rode  to  the 
Branch  ;  making  a  Sabbath  day's  journey  of  nearly  forty  miles. 

Monday  8.  I  am  sick  and  weary — ah  !  how  few  are  there  who 
would  not  choose  strangling  rather  than  life  and  the  labours  we  un- 
dergo, and  the  hardships  and  privations  we  are  compelled  to  sub- 
mit to  !     Blessed  be  God  !  we  have  hope  beyond  the  grave. 

Thursday  11.  At  Patterson-Creek  I  struck  at  the  root  of  Antino- 
mianism,  while  speaking  at  Jones's,  certain  sectarians  were  not  „well 
pleased  at  this  :  once  in  Christ  and  always  safe—this  is  a  favourite 
morsel  to  some. 

Friday  12.  Rode  to  the  north  Branch,  crossed  the  Nobbly  Moun- 
tain ;  at  its  foot  we  stopped,  ate  a  little  bread,  drank  fine  water, 
prayed,  and  then  went  forward  to  Cressaps.  I  was  pretty  plain  on 
Isaiah  lv.  6,  7.  Here  Colonel  Barrett  met  me,  and  conducted  me  two 
miles  up  the  Alleghany  :  we  were  riding  until  near  ten  o'clock,  the 
road  was  dreary,  and  the  night  was  dark :  I  wanted  rest  and  found  it. 
We  had  nearly  two  hundred  people  to  hear  in  this  newly  settled 
country — they  were  attentive  ;  and  I  hope  God  will  do  something  for 
them.  After  preaching  on  John  vii.  17.  we  set  out  on  our  return  : 
I  was  much  fatigued,  and  it  rained  hard  ;  my  poor  horse  too,  was  so 
weak  from  the  want  of  proper  food,  that  he  fell  down  with  me  twice  ; 
this  hurt  my  feelings  exceedingly — more  than  any  circumstance  I 
met  with  in  all  my  journey  beside. 

Sunday  14.  Was  rainy — however,  it  cleared  away  time  enough  to 
get  to  Williams's,  on  the  south  Branch.  Brother  Hagerty  preached 
an  excellent  discourse  on  "  He  would  have  all  men  to  be  saved,  and 
come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth" — after  which,  I  spoke  about 
forty  minutes  on  Prov.  i.  23 — 25.  I  am  not  so  pious  as  I  want  to  be, 
I  pray  much,  but  I  do  not  watch  and  pray  enough  :  in  the  course  of 


KEY.  FRANCIS  ASBTRY  S  JOURNAL.  543 

the  labours  of  the  day  I  purpose  to  do  it  more.  Since  Thursday  we 
have  rode  sixty  miles  along  incredibly  bad  roads,  and  our  fare  was 
not  excellent.  O  what  pay  would  induce  a  man  to  go  through  wet 
and  dry,  and  fatigue  and  suffering,  as  we  do  ? — souls  are  our  hire. 

Tuesday  16.  We  proceeded  along  to  great  and  little  Capon,  over 
rough  and  stoney  roads. 

Wednesday  17.  We  went  on  through  devious  roads  and  arrived  at 
Guess's — here  I  set  on  a  scheme  to  prevent  my  horse  from  falling 
lame,  that  had  yesterday  lost  a  shoe  ;  it  was  to  bind  round  his  foot  a 
piece  of  the  neck  of  a  bull's  hide — my  contrivance  answered  the 
purpose  well. 

Thursday  18.  I  preached  at  Stephen  Harland's  under  the  spreading 
trees,  on  David's  charge  to  Solomon.  Thence  rode  on  to  Boydstone's, 
where  we  staid  one  day,  which  afforded  us  the  first  leisure  time  since 
Monday  morning,  we  have  had  to  sit  down  and  write.  I  am  at  times 
greatly  concerned  that  there  are  no  visible  movings,  and  instantaneous 
conversions  among  the  people. 

Saturday  20.  Preached  at  Sheppard-Town,  to  about  two  hundred 
people  :  from  thence,  crossing  the  Patomac,  came  to  Wood's. 

Maryland. — Sunday  21.  I  preached  to  a  large  congregation  of 
poor  sinners,  who  appeared  hard  and  ignorant.  We  went  for- 
ward to  Frederick-Town,  where  I  arrived  much  fatigued  and 
unwell,  yet  I  preached  in  the  court-house  at  six  o'clock,  on  Luke 
xix.  41,  42. 

Saturday  27.  Being  unwell,  I  declined  going  to  Baltimore,  and  went 
to  Perry  Hall,  where  I  found  my  dear  friend  Thomas  White.  On 
the  Sabbath  day  we  read  prayers  in  the  family,  and  I  preached  in  the 
afternoon  on  2  Chron.  xxxii.  24,  25. 

Monday  29.  Closely  employed  in  answering  letters  from  various 
parts.  I  find  it  hard  to  keep  the  power  of  religion  ;  yet  I  feel  that 
my  soul  is  stayed  upon  God.  I  want  to  be  moving  on  ;  if  I  rest  a  few- 
days  I  am  tried  :  blessed  be  God,  who  thus  embitters  inactive  quies- 
cence to  me  ;  I  am  impelled  forward  by  my  desires  of  comfort  for 
myself,  and  sincere  wishes  to  be  useful  to  the  church,  and  to  the 
world  of  sinners. 

Thursday,  August  2.  Preached  at  the  Fork  preaching- house  to- 
about  one  hundred  people. 

Pennsylvania. — Monday  13.  Rode  to  Little  York,  and  dined  with 
Mr.  Otterbine  and  Mr.  Magner.  I  had  many  hearers  in  the  German 
school-house.  This  is  a  day  which  I  ought  to  remember  with  gra- 
titude :  I  borrowed  a  young  mare  :    and  as   I  rode  along  with  my 


oot)  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBIRY'S  JOURNAL. 

hands  in  ray  pockets,  she  blundered  and  fell ;  in  the  scuffle  I  had 
thoughts  of  throwing  myself  off,  but  did  not :  after  some  time  she 
recovered,  and  I  praised  the  Lord  who  had  preserved  me  in  such 
imminent  danger. 

Monday  20.  I  see  God  will  work  among  Menonists,  Dunkers, 
Presbyterians,  Lutherans,  Episcopalians,  Dutch,  English,  no  matter— 
the  cause  belongs  to  God. 

Sunday  26.  Rode  ten  miles  to  Benson's  preaching-house,  where 
there  were,  I  suppose,  nearly  four  hundred  hearers  collected ;  after 
preaching  here,  at  ten  o'clock,  I  rode  six  miles  farther,  and  preach- 
ed to  about  five  hundred  people  at  the  Valley  preaching-house.    • 

Tuesday  28.  After  preaching  to  a  small  congregation  of  unengaged 
hearers,  we  rode  to  Philadelphia.  What  a  noisy  disagreeable  place ! 
O  for  something  of  that  simplicity  which  dwelt  among  the  dwellers  in 
tents  !     But  the  souls  of  the  people  are  precious. 

Sunday,  September  1.  We  had  a  solemn  melting  season  at  the  love 
feast  in  the  morning,  most  of  the  society  present ;  we  afterward  went 
to  St.  Paul's,  heard  a  sermon  preached  by  Mr.  M'Gaw,  and  received 
the  sacrament. 

Monday  2.  Met  the  leaders  and  stewards  to  look  into  the  temporal 
affairs  of  the  society.  After  dinner  we  rode  to  Burlington,  nineteen 
miles,  and  preached  on  "  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with 
mau." 

Jersey. — Tuesday  3.  Rode  to  Trenton — the  town  in  a  great  bustle 
with  the  court,  and  the  French  troops.  My  subject  was  the  Syrophe- 
necian  woman  :  the  congregation  was  large  and  serious.  Ah  poor 
Gospel-hardened  Trenton  !     But  a  few  have  been  converted  of  late. 

Thursday  5.  I  spoke  with  plainness  to  a  multitude  of  people  at 
Egbert's,  some  probably,  came  to  see  us  taken  up  by  the  magistracy. 
At  night  a  drunken  man  applied  to  have  his  wife's  name  blotted  from 
the  class  paper ;  anon  came  two  more  to  demand  our  passes  :  we 
were  threatened  with  desperate  work  in  the  morning,  an  attack  on 
the  road  :  we  saw  neither  harm  nor  them. 

In  Germantown  there  came  a  gentleman  of  the  committee  and 
examined  our  passes  ;  he  treated  us  with  great  politeness,  and  told  us 
what  the  law  required  :  brother  Tunnill's  pass  was  pronounced  valid  ; 
but  mine  was  not  because  I  had  not  the  signatures  of  the  proper 
authorities  in  the  counties  through  which  I  had  travelled  :  I  pleaded 
ignorance  of  the  necessity  of  this.  Here  appeared  to  be  the  secret, 
the  mob  had  been  after  brother  Everett  with  clubs,  and,  it  was  sup- 
posed, under  the  connivance  of  their  superiors  ;  they  found,  however, 


11EV.  FRANCIS  asbury's  JOURNAL,  ool 

that  he  was  qualified  according  to  law  :  the  work  of  God  prospers, 
and,  it  is  possible,  this  is  the  real  cause  of  offence  to  unfriendly 
ministers. 

Saturday  7.  Rested  from  public  labours,  and  spent  some  time  in 
reading  and  writing. 

Sunday  8.  Preached  to  a  very  gay  congregation,  consisting  of  four 
or  five  hundred  people  :  there  appears  to  be  a  prospect  of  good 
among  them.  The  priests  of  all  denominations,  Dutch  and  English, 
appear  to  be  much  alarmed  at  our  success  ;  some  oppose  openly, 
others  more  secretly ;  the  Episcopal  ministers  are  the  most  quiet  ; 
and  some  of  these  are  friendly. 

Saturday  14.  I  came  to  New-Mills  after  preaching  at  H — *s  and 
Penny-Hill.  I  passed  through  Monmouth  and  upper  and  lower  Free- 
hold :— here  lived  that  old  saint  of  God,  William  Tennant,  who  went 
to  his  reward  a  few  years  ago. 

Pennsylvania. — Monday  16.  After  preaching  at  Mount-Holly  to  a 
crowded  congregation,  I  rode  very  unwell  and  under  deep  exercises 
of  mind  to  Philadelphia — twenty  miles.  I  have  preached  seventeen 
times,  and  rode  above  two  hundred  miles  in  the  last  two  weeks.  I 
think  God  will  do  great  things  in  the  Jerseys  :  the  prospect  is  pleas- 
ing, East  and  West. 

Saturday  21.  I  received  two  letters  from  Virginia  which  gave  me 
great  consolation  ;  the  divisions  there  are  much  abated — the  work 
revives — the  preachers  are  in  health  and  well  received. 

Sunday  22.  After  preaching  on  the  Christian  graces,  I  visited  Mr. 
M.  W — ,  who  opened  himself  to  me  on  matters  of  religion  with  free- 
dom. I  went  to  St.  Paul's  ;  and  to  ray  great  surprise,  in  comes  my 
old  friend  Barton. — He  was  brought  up  a  churchman,  and  was  awaken- 
ed without  human  means  :  observing  that  ministers  and  members  in  that 
church  were  dead  and  careless,  and  finding  some  living  testimonies 
among  Friends,  he  was  induced  to  join  them,  and  thus  adhered,  for 
twenty  years,  becoming  a  public  speaker  among  them.  He  is  now 
jealous  for  the  Lord's  ordinances — he  says  he  could  never  fully  give 
them  up,  and  must  now  come  to  the  Methodists. 

Monday  23.  I  began  begging  for  the  society,  that  we  might,  if 
possible,  relieve  our  preaching-house  from  the  encumbrance  of 
ground-rent.     I  soon  got  about  £270  subscribed. 

Tuesday  24.  I  think  the  Pennsylvanians  are,  in  general,  as  igno- 
rant of  real  religion  as  any  people  I  have  been  amongst :  when  the 
power  is  lost  where  the  forms  were  never  cherished,  the  downright 
ignorance  of  the  heathen,  who  have  only  heard  of  Christ,  is  the 
necessary  consequence, 


oat  KLV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL. 

Delaware.— Saturday  28.  Preached  in  Thoroughfare-Neck  (twen- 
ty miles)  and  then  returned  to  Wyatt's,  and  preached  with  liberty; 
thence  I  hastened  on  to  Dover,  and  at  six  o'clock  delivered  my  third 
discourse,  making  a  journey  of  forty  miles  : — we  know  not  what  we 
can  do  until  we  try. 

Sunday,  October  6.  I  preached  in  White's  new  chapel  for  the  first 
time  :  it  is  one  of  the  neatest  country  chapels  the  Methodists  have 
on  the  whole  continent. — My  subject  was  Haggai  ii.  9.  "  In  this  place 
will  I  give  peace." 

Tuesday  22.  I  have  had  large  congregations  in  several  counties  of 
the  states  of  Delaware  and  Maryland,  and  have  been  humbled  before 
the  Lord  that  so  many  people  should  come  to  hear  such  a  poor  worm 
as  I  am  ;  if  any  good  has  been  done  by  my  poor  labours,  to  God  the 
Lord  be  all  the  glory.  I  am  this  day  in  Dorset  circuit,  and  have 
preached  for  the  first  time  to  about  three  hundred  hearers. 

Saturday  26.  Quarterly  meeting  at  Thomas  Avry's — the  first  day 
had  about  five  hundred  people,  (though  rainy,)  gad  I  had  life,  and 
light,  and  liberty  in  speaking  to  them. 

Lord's  day  27.  We  met  at  seven  o'clock — the  people  spoke  with 
great  life  and  simplicity  :  at  noon  it  was  supposed  there  were  not 
less  than  twelve  hundred  people,  to  whom  I  spoke  with  divine  aid 
from  the  latter  part  of  the  eighth  chapter  of  Mark's  Gospel.  At- 
tended quarterly  meeting  at  Barratt's  chapel.  I  was  greatly  afflicted 
in  mind ;  I  could  not  accomplish  my  plan,  to  send  preachers  to  the 
backwoods,  where  they  are  greatly  wanting.  I  have  been  counselled 
not  to  leave  the  peninsula — this  advice  I  shall  not  follow. 

Saturday,  November  16.  I  have  been  employed  in  making  large  ex- 
tracts from  Baxter  and  Borroughs  on  Church  Divisions  :  I  think  every 
minister  and  Christian  ought  to  read  these  works. 

Monday,  December  2.  My  soul  is  kept  in  constant  peace,  and 
shall  make  her  boast  in  the  Lord  under  all  her  trials. 

Virginia.— -Sunday  8.  Preached  to  a  wild,  hardened  people  at  the 
Old  Church,  in  King  and  Queen  county.— In  the  evening  spoke  at 
Stedman's.  My  spirit  has  been  clothed  in  sackcloth  since  my  comiDg 
into  this  state — my  hopes  begin  to  revive. 

Wednesday  1 1.  I  rode  to  Williamsburg — formerly  the  seat  of  go- 
vernment, but  new  removed  to  Richmond  ;  thus  the  worldly  glory  is 
departed  from  it — as  to  divine  glory  it  never  had  any.  I  preached  m 
James-city  court  house.  The  place  has  suffered  and  is  suffering  : 
the  palace,  the  barracks,  and  some  good  dwelling-houses  burnt. — The 
capitol  is  no  great  building,  and  is  going  to  ruin  ;  the  exterior  of  the 
college  Dot  splenJid,  and  but  few  students  ;  the  Bedlam-house  is  deso- 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  353 

late,  but  whether  because  none  are  insane,  or  all  are  equally  mad,  it 
might,  perhaps,  be  difficult  to  tell. 

Sunday  22.  We  had  a  solemn  time  at  the  great  preaching-house  in 
Nansemond  county. 

Tuesday  24.  I  rode  through  Suffolk — Alas  !  for  these  Oliverian 
times — most  of  the  houses  here,  except  the  church,  are  destroyed,  or 
more  or  less  injured. 

New-Year's  day,  1783.  I  have  passed  through  Gates,  Hartford, 
Bertie,  and  Northampton  counties,  in  North  Carolina  :  I  am  now  in 
Southampton  county  in  Virginia,  and  have  this  day  preached  in  St. 
Paul's. 

Monday  7.  After  preaching  at  H.  C.'s  we  rode  twenty  miles  to 
Greaves's,  where  I  met  with  Mr.  Jarratt ;  on  Tuesday  he  preached 
for  me  at  R.  Jones's — I  exhorted — the  meeting  was  lively. 

Tuesday  14.  Wolsey's  barn — cold  day — cold  house — cold  peo- 
ple :  there  has  been  preaching  here  for  seven  years  past,  yet  the 
society  declines. 

Friday  23.  At  brother  Holmes's,  in  Mecklenburg  county.  My  s/ui 
mourns  for  the  deadness  of  the  people  in  our  old  circuits.  We  have 
great  calls  to  South  Carolina  and  Georgia. 

Monday  28.  I  preached,  and  the  people  seemed  attentive  ;  at  pre- 
sent there  is  a  good  prospect  of  success. 

Saturday,  February  2.  Our  quarterly  meeting  began  in  Mecklen- 
burg circuit.     I  hope  God  will  favour  us,  and  revive  his  work  here. 

Sunday  3.  I  was  very  unwell.     Brother held  a  love-feast : — 

at  noon  I  was  much  led  out  on  Mark  viii.  4.  I  am  quite  dissipated 
with  company,  and  greatly  desire  retirement. 

Tuesday  4.  I  offended  some  at  Col.  Bedford's— they  could  not 
bear  the  thoughts  of  a  possibility  of  falling  from  grace. 

Friday  7.  Being  unable  to  reach  the  quarterly  meeting  at  Henley's, 
I  consented  to  preach  at  brother  Crowder's — God  is  my  hope  and 
my  help  at  all  times. — My  soul  is  kept  in  peace — and  O,  that  I  could 
yet  sink  deeper  into  God  from  day  to  day  ! 

Sunday  9.  Rose  with  a  sense  of  the  Divine  presence.  I  am  greatly 
blessed  in  reading  the  latter  part  of  Jeremiah's  Lamentations,  and 
Ezekiel's  prophecy.  I  discover  how  the  prophets,  who  spoke  in  dif- 
ferent ages  and  places  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  accord  in  sentiment 
and  language  :  so  it  is  now  with  the  preachers  of  the  GospeL  I  had 
great  comfort  in  preaching  at  noon  ;  and  so  I  always  have  after  se- 
vere trials. 

Monday  10.  Being  disappointed  in  crossing  Roanoak  on  Saturday, 
we  tried  again  this  morning,  and  getting  into  Pittsylvania  circuit,  after 

Vol.  I.  45 


354  R11V.  fraxcis  asbury's  journal. 

riding  about  forty  miles,  reached  brother  Martin's  ;  I  felt  weary, 
more  than  I  have  done  for  months  past. 

Thursday  13.  Rode  twenty-five  miles,  but  my  horse  failing,  (bad 
fare,  and  no  fodder  for  him)  we  did  not  get  in  until  2  o'clock ;  the 
people,  however,  had  waited  :  I  was  much  led  out  in  speaking, 
although  very  unwell  from  fasting,  walking,  and  the  exercise  of  my 
mind. 

North  Carolina. — Monday  17.  We  proceeded  to  the  Yadkin  cir- 
cuit. It  is  well  we  are  on  this  side  the  Dan  River,  the  late  rains 
might  else  have  prevented  our  going  on  for  a  season.  On  our 
route  we  passed  through  Salem,  a  Moravian  town,  well  built  after  the 
German  manner  :  every  one  appeared  to  be  in  business.  We  lodged 
at  Mr.  Thomson's,  a  settler  on  the  Moravian  lands,  which  is  a 
tract  of  sixteen  miles  square :  neither  was  the  cabin  comfortable, 
or  our  host  pleasing. 

Sunday,  March  2.  Came  to  Short's  ;  and  preached  to  a  number  of 
people,  who  appeared  solemn,  while  I  enforced  "  My  Spirit  shall  not 
always  strive  with  man."  We  rode  on  to  L — 's,  lodged  in  a  cabin  : 
but  the  bed  was  clean. 

Monday  3.  Cold  as  it  was,  we  rode  from  Guilford  to  Caswell 
county,  a  distance  of  twenty  miles,  and  met  with  a  considerable  con- 
gregation, among  whom  were  a  few  warm-hearted  people :  I  hope 
the  Lord  will  work  here.  Here  was  a  cabin  with  one  room,  a  barn, 
and  stables.  I  have  little  time  to  write  or  place  to  read  :  the  barn  is 
my  closet  for  prayer. 

Friday  7.  I  had  a  large  congregation  at  Hillsborough ;  and  there 
was  more  attention  and  solemnity  observable  than  formerly.  I  visited 
three  young  men  who  are  to  die  shortly  ;  they  wept  while  I  talked 
and  prayed  with  them.  I  walked  to  the  church  :  it  was  once  an  ele- 
gant building,  and  still  makes  a  good  appearance  at  a  distance,  but 
within  it  is  in  ruins.  The  calamities  and  destructive  waste  of  war 
have  been  severely  felt  in  these  parts. 

Tuesday  11.  Preached  at  Wim's  to  about  thirty  people — one  or 
two  faithful  souls  among  them.  The  son  of  Mr.  Wims  has  been  cured 
of  a  confirmed  dropsy,  by  the  recipe  of  Mr.  P  of  Brunswick,  Vir- 
ginia, who  has  thought  proper  to  keep  his  remedy  secret :  would  it 
be  a  wonder  if  God  should  render  it  unsuccessful,  or  that  some  judi- 
cial dispensation  should  light  on  those  who  will  not  make  generally 
known  a  discovery  so  useful  ?  O  what  a  distressed  people  have  they 
been  in  these  parts  during  the  late  contest :  to  the  fightings  without, 
were  added  all  the  horrors  of  a  civil  war  within.  Poor  brother  B — t 
was  twice  robbed,  and  escaped  with  his  life. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  355 

Saturday  15.  Preached  to  some  Calvinistic  professors,  and  sinners. 
The  people  are  very  careless,  and  professors  are  unfaithful :  what 
have  I  suffered  on  account  of  these  things  ! 

Rode  twenty-eight  miles  to  H — 's  ;  O  how  this  family  is  changed 
for  the  worse !  Black  and  white  now  wicked.  We  got  our  horses 
and  took  our  leave  about  an  hour  by  sun,  and  came  to  sister  Kem- 
brough's,  where  we  found  the  family  at  prayer.  We  were  wonder- 
fully directed  along  a  road  I  had  never  but  once  before  trod  :  here 
my  soul  is  blessed,  my  burden  is  gone. 

Saturday  22.  I  preached  to  a  poor,  unfeeling  people,  at  a  place  the 
circuit  preachers  had  left.  We  were  fortunate  enough  to  eat  about 
eleven  o'clock  ;  we  got  nothing  more  until  about  that  hour  next  day  ; 
we  pushed  on  to  get  to  M — 's,  arrived  there  at  eight  o'clock  at  night, 
there  was  no  fodder,  no  supper,  no  prayer.  Next  morning  we  started 
at  sunrise,  and  with  difficulty  getting  over  the  river,  came  to  Win- 
stead's  about  ten  o'clock  :  here  we  breakfasted. 

Sunday  23.  I  have  peace.  I  was  close  and  fervent  in  speaking  at 
the  widow  T — 's.  Hard  times — we  can  scarcely  get  food  for  man  or 
beast. 

Wednesday  26.  I  spoke  at  G.  Hill's,  to  a  proud  and  prayerless 
people,  many  of  whom  were  backsliders. 

Friday  28.  By  getting  my  feet  damp,  I  have  taken  cold,  and  have 
had  a  return  of  my  old  complaint ;  an  inflammation  in  my  mouth  and 
throat :  I  could  not  eat  flesh,  and  have  little  else  to  eat. 

Saturday  29.  My  throat  growing  worse,  I  was  bled  in  the  arm  and 
tongue,  which  gave  me  some  relief. 

Monday  31.  Preached  at  T  's  and  P  's,  with  some  fervency  :  the 
work  revives.  While  I  am  enabled  to  praise  God  for  health  and 
peace.  I  lament  that  I  am  too  apt  to  catch  the  spirit  of  the  people  I 
am  among  :   I  want  to  be  more  habitually  serious. 

Saturday,  April  5.  I  heard  the  news  that  peace  was  confirmed 
between  England  and  America.  I  had  various  exercises  of  mind  on 
the  occasion  :  it  may  cause  great  changes  to  take  place  amongst  us  ; 
some  for  the  better,  and  some  for  the  worse.  It  may  make  against 
the  work  of  God  :  our  preachers  will  be  far  more  likely  to  settle  in 
the  world  ;  and  our  people,  by  getting  into  trade,  and  acquiring 
wealth,  may  drink  into  its  spirit.  Believing  the  report  to  be  true, 
I  took  some  notice  of  it  while  I  treated  on  Acts  x.  36.  at  brother 
Clayton's,  near  Halifax,  where  they  were  firing  their  cannons,  and 
rejoicing  in  their  way,  on  the  occasion.  This  day  I  prevailed  with 
brother  Dickens  to  go  to  New-York,  where  I  expect  him  to  be  far 
more  useful  than  in  his  present  station. 


356  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

Virginia.  Tuesday  17.  Quarterly  meeting  at  White-Oak  chapel; 
next  day,  (Good  Friday)  Mr.  Jarratt  preached  and  administered  the 
sacrament.  After  I  had  preached  on  Peter  iii.  18.  I.  Cromwell  spake 
very  pointedly  at  C.'s,  an  apostate  :  he  came  with  great  assurance,  to 
the  door,  as  if  he  had  a  mind  to  say  or  do  something,  but  I.  C.  called  him 
Factor  Tor  the  devil,  full  of  all  subtilty — and  maintained  his  ground. 

Monday  21.  Set  out  for  Buckingham,  to  visit  some  who  have  been 
separated  from  us  on  account  of  ordinances,  and  my  spirit  was  re- 
freshed among  them.  Preached  at  brother  B.'s,  to  a  kind  and  tender 
people.  Brother  A.  of  this  neighbourhood,  had  a  child  of  ten  years 
of  age,  that  found  the  Lord  in  a  gust  of  thunder  and  lightning,  and 
straightway  preached  to  all  the  family  :  at  the  same  time,  a  poor 
backslider  was  cut  to  the  heart ;  he  thought  himself  to  be  dying,  and 
cried  out  against  the  doctrine  of  not  falling  from  grace  as  the  means 
of  his  fall,  and  warned  those  about  him  of  those  destructive  principles. 

After  long  rides  through  Fluvanna  and  Orange  circuits,  I  came  to 
Petersburg  on  Monday  the  fifth  of  May;  and  the  next  day  to  Ellis's 
chapel. 

Wednesday  7.  Our  conference  began  at  this  place.  Some  young 
labourers  were  taken  in  to  assist  in  spreading  the  Gospel,  which 
greatly  prospers  in  the  north.  We  all  agreed  in  the  spirit  of  African 
liberty,  and  strong  testimonies  were  borne  in  its  favour  in  our  love- 
feast  :  our  affairs  were  conducted  in  love.  From  Petersburg  I  pro- 
ceeded northward. 

Thursday  22.  I  enlarged  on  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  Hosea,  at 
Adams's  church  ;  and  fear  the  subject  was  nearly  descriptive  of  the 
state  of  the  people. 

Maryland. — On  my  way  to  Baltimore,  I  dined  at  Colonel  Dorsey's. 
Here  I  gave  an  exhortation :  after  reading  the  burial  service  over  a 
child,  I  proceeded  on  to  Baltimore. 

Sunday  24.  Preached  at  town,  and  Point ;  and  was  assisted  to  be 
searching. 

Tuesday  26.  We  began  our  conference  with  what  preachers  were 
present.  On  Wednesday  we  had  a  full  assembly,  which  lasted  until 
Friday.     We  had  a  love-feast,  and  parted  in  peace. 

Monday,  June  2.  Preached  at  Cromwells,  on  my  way  to  Calvert ; 
thence  rode  on  through  dust  and  heat  to  W's  ;  I  found  my  old  friends 
tender;  here  was  a  young  woman  in  deep  distress  of  mind,  occa- 
sioned by  the  flight  of  a  whippoor-will  close  to  her,  which  strangely 
led  her  to  fear  her  end  was  nigh. 

Rode  to  Mrs.  Heneliss's — a  few  poor  people  and  negroes,  and  the 
minister,  Mr.  Gates,  from  Annapolis,  attended  :  1   was  as  close  as  I 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  357 

could  well  be.     Mr.  G.  and  myself  had  some  talk  on  religion  ;  he  is 
a  polite  man. 

I  went  alone  to  the  silent  woods,  and  my  soul  was  much  melted  in 
prayer  ;  entreating  the  Lord  to  go  with  me  and  preserve  me  through 
all  my  weary  journeys. 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving  a  letter,  (with  a  sermon,)  from  Mr. 
Ogden,  a  man  of  piety,  who,  I  trust,  will  be  of  great  service  to  the 
Methodist  societies,  and  the  cause  of  God  in  general. 

Friday  6.  I  rode  to  Childs's — was  close  and  pointed.  Poor  C — 
was  very  kind.  I  admire  the  piety,  prudence,  and  good  sense  of  the 
Misses  Childs  :  since  they  have  experienced  religion,  none  of  the 
great  will  employ  them  :  their  patrons,  alarmed  at  the  deep  and 
gracious  impressions  apparent  on  the  young  minds  of  some  of  the 
scholars,  withdraw  their  children  at  once. 

Sunday  8.  I  have  been  well  exercised,  although  I  am  not  so  weary 
as  I  expected  :  I  have  preached  three  times,  and  the  weather  is  very 
warm.  I  believe  the  more  we  do,  the  more  we  shall  be  enabled  to 
do  for  God  and  for  our  souls. 

I  visited  sister  R — y,  sick  of  the  putrid  fever  :  I  prayed  with  her, 
and  trusted  God  with  my  safety  from  infection.  I  went  to  I.  Wor- 
thington's  ;  but  I  beheld  such  cruelty  to  a  negro,  that  I  could  not 
feel  free  to  stay  ;  I  called  for  my  horse,  delivered  my  own  soul,  and 
departed. 

Sunday  15.  Rode  to  Bennett's  chapel — a  pretty  octagon  house, 
built  of  logs  :  there  was  an  insensible,  but  attentive  people  :  I  hope 
the  time  to  favour  them  will  come. 

I  had  a  comfortable  time  at  I.  Wilson's — they  were  kind  beyond 
measure.  I  visited  the  old  gentleman,  hoping  he  had  done  with  dis- 
putation :  the  subject  of  slavery  being  introduced,  he  acknowledged 
the  wrong  done  the  blacks  by  taking  them  from  their  own  country, 
but  defended  the  right  of  holding  them :  our  talk  had  well  nigh 
occasioned  too  much  warmth. 

Virginia. — Wednesday  18.  After  preaching  at  Shepherds-Town, 
I  rode  to  Boyds-Town,  and  rested  one  day. 

Saturday  21.  Preached  to  a  few  people  in  Winchester.  For 
several  days  past  I  have  had  to  ride  the  whole  day,  and  to  preach 
without  eating,  until  five  or  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  except  a  little 
biscuit :  this  is  hard  work  for  man  and  horse  ;  this,  however,  is  not 
the  worst — religion  is  greatly  wanting  in  these  parts.  The  inhabi- 
tants are  much  divided,  made  up,  as  they  are,  of  different  nations,  and 
speaking  different  languages,  they  agree  in  scarcely  any  thing,  except 
it  be  to  sin  against  God. 


obU  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

Sunday  15.  Preached  at  I.  Hite's  at  ten,  at  W  H — 's  at  twelve 
and  at  W — 's  at  four  o'clock  :  all  these  were  funeral  discourses. 
Rachel  S — y  was  a  professor  of  religion  :  she  dreamed  that  within 
three  weeks  she  should  die  of  the  smallpox  :  9he  thought  she  heard 
something  strike  on  the  top  of  the  house  like  the  nailing  up  of  a 
coffin  ;  she  took  it  as  a  warning,  went  to  prayer,  was  exceedingly 
happy,  sickened,  and  died  triumphantly. 

Friday  25.  The  weather  has  been  uncommonly  warm ;  I  felt 
weak,  yet  spoke  closely  to  a  few  people  ;  thence  I  rode  to  Paup's, 
where  1  fell  sick,  and  became  unfit  for  service.  I  went  alone  into 
the  fields  and  poured  out  my  soul  to  God. 

Pennsylvania. — Saturday  and  Sunday  26,  27.  Our  quarterly 
meeting  was  held  at  Worley's,  near  Little  York  :  many  spoke  in  our 
love-feast  with  great  simplicity,  and  my  spirit  was  refreshed  among 
them. 

Thursday  31.    Preached  at  Martin  Boehm's  to  many  people. 

Saturday,  August  2.  Indisposed  and  dejected.  This  is  a  barren 
land  for  religion,  yet  fruitful  for  every  thing  else. 

Monday  4.  Rose  early  to  pour  out  my  soul  to  God.  I  want  to  live 
to  him,  and  for  him  ;  to  be  holy  in  heart,  in  life,  and  in  conversation: 
this  is  my  mark,  my  prize,  my  all — to  be,  in  my  measure,  like  God. 

Tuesday  5.  I  preached  on  "  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  living  God." 

Having  lately  heard  of  the  death  of  Isaac  Rawlings,  and  having  had 
an  intimate  acquaintance  with  him  for  some  years,  I  will  here  notice 
some  of  the  circumstances  of  his  life.  He  was  born  and  brought  up 
in  Patapsco  Neck  ;  and  when  grown  up  was  uncommonly  wicked. 
The  Methodists  about  this  time,  coming  into  those  parts,  he  pro- 
fessed conviction  and  conversion  through  their  instrumentality : 
some  time  after  this  he  began  to  speak  in  public  ;  roughly,  but  I 
believed  in  sincerity.  I  took  notice  of  him  and  appointed  him  to 
travel  on  the  eastern  shore  ;  there  he  did  some  good  and  some 
harm  :  I  then  sent  him  to  Pennsylvania ;  it  was  the  same  thing  there. 
Eight  years  ago  he  was  sent  to  Virginia ;  the  first  year  he  did  much 
good  :  refusing,  however,  to  take  his  appointment  from  conference, 
he  stayed  about  Brunswick,  causing  disaffection  among  the  people, 
whence  sprung  disorder  :  thence  we  removed  him  to  Pittsylvania, 
where  he  was  also  useful ;  here  he  would  not  long  remain,  but  went 
off  to  James-City.  After  a  considerable  time  we  received  him  again, 
although  contrary  to  the  advice  of  some  who  knew  him  better. 
About  two  years  past  he  was  appointed  to  Pennsylvania ;  this  appears 
to  have  placed  him  where  he  wished  to  be,  and  he  presently  set 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL.  359 

about  making  a  party,  enjoining  secresy  upon  his  followers  ;  after  one 
quarter  he  left  us,  and  set  up  for  himself;  and  he  and  his  few  ad- 
herents took  from  us  the  Forest  chapel.  He  began  now  to  be  for- 
saken ;  and  being  too  lazy  to  ride  a  circuit,  took  to  baptising  and 
begging,  by  way  of  subscription.  There  were  many  reports  about  him 
which  decency  forbids  to  mention,  which,  nevertheless,  were  probably 
true.  From  these  scandalous  imputations  on  his  character,  he  felt,  it 
seems,  the  necessity  of  defending  himself;  and  being  at  the  Yellow 
Springs,  he  was  for  some  hours  employed  in  having  his  defence  writ- 
ten :  he  did  at  times  drink  freely,  but  whether  he  was  in  liquor 
while  there,  I  know  not ;  so  it  was,  that  setting  off  on  a  mettlesome 
horse,  he  had  not  rode  many  yards  before  he  was  thrown  to  the 
ground,  and  died  on  the  spot.  I  had  said,  "  I  think  he  cannot  stay 
long,"  because  he  did  pervert  the  right  ways  of  the  Lord.  To  the 
Lord  I  leave  him,  desiring  that  his  sad  example  may  be  a  warning  to 
me  and  all  preachers  of  the  Gospel. 

Saturday  9.  Our  quarterly  meeting  began  in  Philadelphia  circuit, 
and  was  well  attended  ;  our  love-feast  was  spiritual,  and  many  spoke 
feelingly  of  the  goodness  of  God.  From  the  quarterly  meeting  I  went 
to  Hoffman's,  in  the  Valley,  where  they  are  building  us  a  new 
stone  chapel :  I  spoke  to  them  on  2  Chron.  xv.  17. 

Wednesday  13.  Preached  at  F  's  on  my  way,  and  in  the  evening 
reached  the  city  of  Philadelphia  in  lowness  of  spirits. 

Saturday  16.  Visited  the  sick  and  was  a  little  refreshed.  I  have 
constant  peace  with  God,  and  my  heart  is  dead  to  every  unlawful 
pursuit.  This  city  is  all  in  motion — stores  full  of  goods,  great  trade 
going  on,  all  things  prosper  but  religion. 

Sunday  17.  Was  a  melting  time  to  me  and  many  others  at  our  love- 
feast.  Brother  J.  B.  felt  the  power  of  God  as  soon  as  he  came  :  he 
had  been  engaged  some  days  before  ;  and  so  had  I.  O  that  all  in  the 
house  had  been  so  predisposed,  surely  it  would  have  been  a  great 
time  of  the  Lord's  power!  I  preached  on  2  Thess.  i.  6,  7,  8.  strik- 
ing a  side  blow  at  the  Universalist  system,  I  made  one  of  our  sisters 
sick  for  a  day. 

Friday  22.  I  have  rode  about  one  hundred  miles  since  I  left  Phila- 
delphia, and  preached  nine  times  :  the  weather  is  very  warm,  and 
the  poor  flesh  complains  ;  yet  I  bless  God  for  health  to  drag  along 
while  so  many  are  seriously  afflicted.  My  dear  old  friend,  Mrs.  Mad- 
dox,  aged  one  hundred  and  two  last  May,  went  into  eternity  about  a 
month  ago. 

Monday  25.  Set  out  for  New- York  :  arrived  there,  I  found  brother 
Dickens  preaching. 


360  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL. 

New-York — Wednesday  27.  I  was  close  and  searching ;  a  few 
felt  it — a  little  of  the  good  old  spirit  yet  prevails  among  these  people. 
We  had  preaching  generally  morning  and  evening,  and  I  trust  the 
seed  sown  will  not  all  be  lost. 

Sunday  30.  In  the  evening  I  thought  it  necessary  to  put  them  on 
an  examination  whether  they  were  Christians  or  not.  I  spoke  on  2 
Cor.  xiii.  15.  I  was  very  much  led  out ;  a  power  went  forth,  and  I 
hope  some  real  good  was  done. 

Monday,  September  1.  Left  the  city,  and  spent  some  time  at  Mr. 
W  's  in  reading  the  additional  works  of  Mr.  Fletcher. 

Wednesday  3.  My  soul  is  serene.  I  find  it  expedient  to  spend  an 
hour  in  prayer  for  myself  alone  ;  and  an  hour  each  morning  and 
evening  for  all  the  preachers  and  people. 

New-Jersey. — Thursday  10.  At  Mount  Holly  I  had  more  people 
than  I  expected.  On  Friday,  I  rode  a  long,  barren  way,  to  the 
Forks  of  Egg-Harbour. 

Sunday  13.  I  injured  myself  by  speaking  too  long  and  too  loud.  I 
rode  seveu  miles,  got  wet,  had  poor  lodgings,  with  plenty  of  mosche- 
toes  ;  next  day,  poorly  as  I  was,  I  had  to  ride  seventeen  miles,  and 
spoke  while  I  had  a  high  fever  on  me.  I  laid  me  down  on  a  plaak — 
hard  lodging  this  for  a  sick  man. 

Tuesday  15.  Rode  fifteen  miles;  could  hardly  preach  :  my  sub- 
jects yesterday  and  to-day,  were  Paul  to  Titus  ii.  2. — 12.  and  Pet. 
iv.  18. 

Sunday  20.  I  had  a  wild  chase— first,  to  New-England-Town  ;  but 
their  minister  had  warned  the  people  against  hearing  us  ;  thence  to 
Cohansey — here  Mr.  Vantull  had  appointed  to  preach  at  the  same 
hour,  although  my  appointment  had  been  given  out  some  time  before  ; 
arriving,  however,  before  him,  I  preached  in  the  court-house— and 
cleared  out  :  those  who  remained,  met  with  hard  blows. 

Monday  21.  In  the  evening  at  Salem ;  a  number  of  Friends  attend- 
ed, and  were  serious.  Here  a  few  of  our  scattered  people  have  attempt- 
ed to  build  a  house  of  worship,  but  found  themselves  too  weak  to  ac- 
complish it :  they  applied  to  some  of  the  people,  called  Quakers,  for 
assistance,  who  subscribed  liberally  ;  the  matter  was  talked  over,  as  I 
am  informed,  at  their  quarterly  meeting  ;  when  it  was  objected,  "  that 
we  spoke  for  hire,"  it  was  answered,  "  no — it  was  only  for  a  passing 
support," — so  there  was  consent  given  that  Friends  who  were  free  to 
do  it,  might  give. 

Delaware. — Passed  through  Philadelphia,  and  came  on  Saturday, 
the  twenty-seventh,  to  Dover,  where  I  preached  at  nine  o'clock  on 
the  Sabbath-day,  and  at  Barratt's  chapel  at  three  o'clock. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  361 

Thursday,  October  3.  I  preached  at  Queen  Anne's,  where  a  consi- 
derable number  attended,  and  where  many  profess  religion. 

Friday  4.  Preached  at  A.'s,  in  Kent  county,  to  a  large  company,  and 
was  much  assisted.  Of  late  I  have  been  greatly  subject  to  dejection 
and  gloominess  of  mind,  which  I  have  been  ready  to  attribute  to  ex- 
cessive exercise,  and  the  drinking  of  tea  and  coffee  :  I  mean  to  quit 
the  use  of  these  for  a  season,  and  see  what  effect  this  will  produce. 

Maryland. — Saturday  11.  I  found  some  faithful  people  at  brother 
Hartley's,  in  Talbot.  Here  I  met  with  brother  G.  and  heard  him 
speak  with  pleasure  :  we  spent  the  evening  together  at  Mr.  Benson's 
in  reading,  conversation,  and  prayer. 

Sunday  12.  We  had  about  five  hundred  people  at  the  Bay  side.  I 
find  the  prejudices  of  the  people  in  Talbot  grow  weaker  ;  and  there 
is  some  revival  of  religion  among  them.  I  preached  on  Hebr.  iii.  12, 
13,  14.  One  that  was  formerly  full  of  pride  and  contempt  for  reli- 
gion, ran  to  the  bed  while  I  was  speaking  and  lay  there  till  after  ser- 
mon. She  went  home  sick  ;  I  trust,  of  a  wounded  conscience.  I 
crossed  the  ferry  to  Cambridge. 

Wednesday  15.  Met  brothers  Wyatt  and  Cole,  at  I.  M'K.'s,  and  our 
spirits  were  refreshed  together.  I  am  happy,  though  often  something 
unwell. — I  have  great  liberty  in  preaching  and  in  prayer.  I  feel  no- 
thing contrary  to  love  to  God  and  all  mankind.  Bless  the  Lord,  O 
my  soul ! 

Thursday  23.  I  enjoy  much  peace  with  God,  although  I  am  left 
to  serve  alone. — But  God  is  with  me. — O  healthful  sickness,  blessed 
pain,  if  the  Lord  supports  !  I  am  now  beside  the  Chesapeake  Bay  ; 
here  Calvert  and  Dorset  lie  opposite  to  each  other  ;  eight  years  ago, 
when  going  down  the  bay,  little  thought  I  of  the  great  things  God  was 
about  to  do  for  both  shores. 

Saturday  25.  Our  quarterly  meeting  began  at  Kane's  barn.  Our 
love-feast  was  large,  powerful,  and  lively  :  we  had  very  sensible 
tokens  of  the  goodness  of  God. — Here  is  a  blessed  work  of  God  among 
a  people  who  were  once  brutish  and  wicked. 

Tuesday  28.  I  had  to  hasten  away  to  Pboebus's,  sixteen  miles,  to 
perform  the  funeral  rites  of  W  Wright,  a  native  of  Ireland.  He 
began  to  preach  about  three  years  ago  :  last  conference  he  was  re- 
ceived as  a  travelling  preacher,  and  appointed  to  Annamessex  circuit, 
where  he  laboured  very  faithfully, — From  the  best  accounts  we  are 
warranted  in  believing  that  he  died  happy  in  God.  We  had  a  solemn 
time  at  our  meeting,  and  I  hope  the  impressions  made  will  be  lasting. 
I  want  to  feel  and  live  the  holiness  I  preach  to  others  :  and  this  I 

Vol.  I.  46 


3<5£  hev.  FRANCIS  ASBURY^S  JOURNAL. 

might  do,  were  I  more  diligent  in  watchfulness  and  prayer  :  God  will 
always  help  those  who  do  all  they  can  to  help  themselves. 

Sunday,  November  2.  There  were  few  at  Captain  Downing's  when 
I  began  to  speak,  but  before  I  had  done  preaching  we  had  a  conside- 
rable, company  ;  thence  we  returned  to  Melvin's,  where  I  enforced 
Luke  xi.  13.  to  a  few  people.  The  word  was  made  a  blessing  to  the 
woman  of  the  house,  who  went  with  us  weeping  to  quarterly-meet- 
ing. Our  love-feast  was  in  life  and  power,  although  there  were  not 
so  many  and  clear  testimonies  as  in  Dorset. 

Riding  leisurely  to  brother  Farley's,  I  missed  my  road,  and  stopped 
at  a  poor  man's  house — so  poor  that  the  furniture  within  was  not, 
perhaps,  worth  twenty  shillings  ;  the  woman  listened  to  me  with  great 
attention  while  I  spoke  to  her  about  her  soul  :  after  praying  with  her 
and  her  children,  I  pursued  my  journey.  I  bless  God  I  have  seen  so 
much  of  rough  and  smooth,  that  neither  makes  any  impression  on  me  ; 
— I  know  how  to  be  abased  and  how  to  abound. 

Delaware. —  \  spbke  at  Mr.  Bassett's,  in  Dover,  to  many  people  ; 
thence  rode  on  to  the  Cross-Roads.  Here  a  design  had  been  formed  to 
prevent  my  preaching  ;  and  Mr.  Bishop  came,  as  I  was  told,  to  advise 
me  to  forbid  resistance — had  he  and  another  honestly  discouraged 
those  who  had  got  together  to  interrupt  preaching  on  a  former  occa- 
sion, resistance  and  forbearance  would  have  been  equally  unneces- 
sary.    I  rode  on  through  the  rain  and  darkness  to  Mr.  Thompson's. 

Sunday  23.  Preached  on  Romans  ii.  8,  9,  10.  with  some  openings. 

Tuesday  25.  I  visited  some  families,  and  my  soul  was  grieved  at 
the  backslidings  of  some  of  my  old  friends.  O  may  the, Lord  reach 
their  hearts. 

Made  a  short  stay  in  Baltimore,  and  preached  at  Elk-Ridge  on  my 
way  to  Virginia.  When  we  reached  the  Patomac,  brother  P — s  was 
unwilling  to  cross  ;  so  we  stayed  at  the  public  house  without  fire, 
candle,  or  supper ;  and  the  host  drunk.  Next  morning  we  crossed 
the  river,  and  were  kindly  received  at  brother  Bushby's. 

Virginia. — Friday  28.  Preached  to  a  large  congregation  in  the 
court-house  at  Alexandria.  On  my  way  to  Fredericksburg  I  fell  in 
with  some  gentlemen,  and  conversed  with  them  on  the  subject  of  re- 
ligion ;  they  sought  refuge  in  God's  foreknowledge,  and  thence  drew 
their  proofs  that  their  Creator  would  not  eternally  damn  them. 

Sunday  30.  Came  to  Collins's,  in  Caroline  county,  in  time  to  escape 
the  rain  ;  but  the  people  had  no  notice  of  my  coming.  I  enjoy  peace 
of  soul.  I  seek  nothing  but  God  ;  and  I  feel  uncommon  tenderness 
for  the  people. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURV'S  JOURNAL  363 

Thursday,  December  4.  I  preached  to  about  thirty  people  at  old 
father  Stedman's,  in  Kings  and  Queens  county,  Gloucester  circuit : 
myself  and  the  people  were  blessed  in  waiting  on  God. 

Sunda}'  7.  I  went  to  Williamsburg,  and  found  the  people  waiting  : 
the  key  of  the  court-house  being  lost,  or  mislaid,  1  stood  without,  and 
was  assisted  on  Acts  xvii.  30,  31.  I  feel  some  faith  that  God  will  call 
out  a  people  in  this  place. 

Thursday  11.  Went  down  to  James-River  in  hopes  of  getting  an 
early  passage  across,  but  was  detained  till  twelve  o'clock.  I  spoke 
and  prayed  at  Mrs.  E.'s  :  since  I  last  prayed  in  her  house,  one  of  her 
children,  a  son,  has  died  of  a  consumption  :  he  would  not  allow  him- 
self to  speak  of  worldly  affairs  on  the  Sabbath  day  :  we  have  good 
cause  to  believe  he  died  in  the  Lord  ;  and  doubtless  there  are  hun- 
dreds whom  we  know  not  of,  that  thus  go  to  God  and  rest  from  their 
labours. 

After  being  detained  by  a  storm  on  Craney  Island,  en 

Thursday,  December  18.  Set  out,  through  a -dripping  rain  for 
Portsmouth  ;   and  reached  there  about  one  o'clock. 

Saturday  20.  I  spent  the  evening  at  Colonel  Williams's,  in  Curri- 
tuck county,  North  Carolina,  in  company  with  brothers  Ivy,  Bald- 
win, and  Morris.  The  work  revives— many  are  brought  to  God  ; 
and  I  am  comforted. 

Sunday  21.  I  suppose  we  had  five  hundred  people  at  Coenjock 
chapel.  Monday  at  White's,  and  Tuesday  at  Winfield  court-house,  I 
presume  we  had  six  or  seven  hundred  people,  inattentive  and  wild 
enough  :  I  had  little  faith,  and  less  liberty.  From  this  neighbourhood 
I  went  to  Nixonton,  where  numbers  also  attended  ;  but  I  spoke  with 
little  comfort  to  myself.  Spirituous  liquor  is,  and  will  be,  a  curse  to 
this  people. 

Wednesday  24.  Set  out  in  the  rain  to  Hartford  town — I  spoke  in  a 
tavern ;  the  people  seemed  .wild  and  wicked  altogether.  I  jour- 
neyed on  through  the  damp  weather,  and  reached  Pettigrew's  about 
six  o'clock. 

Here  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Wesley,  in  which  he  directs  me 
to  act  as  general  assistant,  and  to  receive  no  preachers  from  Europe 
that  are  not  recommended  by  him  ;  nor  any  in  America,  who  will 
not  submit  to  me,  and  to  the  minutes  of  the  conference. 

I  preached  in  Edenton,  to  a  gay,  inattentive  people  ;  I  was  much 
pleased  with  Mr.  Pettigrew  :  I  heard  him  preach,  and  received  the 
Lord's  supper  at  his  hands.  Thence  I  crossed  the  Chowan  river, 
and  preached,  journeying  through  Bertie,  Hertford,  and  Northamp- 
ton counties,  to  considerable  congregations, 


364  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

Friday,  January  2,  1784.  Rode  to  Doctor  P — 's.  After  preaching 
here,  I  saw  Henry  Metcalf,  who  travels  through  this  circuit,  a  man  of 
a  sorrowful  spirit,  and  under  constant  heaviness. 

Monday  4.  A  few  met  me  at  Northampton  court-house  ;  after 
preaching  we  rode  on  through  the  rain,  to  brother  Anthony  Moore's, 
where  I  was  warm,  dry,  and  comfortable. 

North  Carolina. — 1  have  read  two  volumes  of  Sermons  written 
by  Mr.  Knox,  of  the  West-Indies.  I  am  much  pleased  with  his 
defence  of  revealed  religion  ;  and,  indeed,  through  the  whole  work 
there  is  something  sublime  and  spiritual — so  catholic  too,  and  free 
from  peculiar  doctrines  :  I  esteem  him  as  one  of  the  best  writers 
amongst  the  Presbyterians  I  have  yet  met  with. 

Sunday  4.  I  had  five  hearers,  beside  the  family  ;  we  then  rode 
through  rain  and  snow  to  brother  Seward's. 

Monday  12.  On  my  way  to  I.  Malone's  my  horse  fell  on  the  ice, 
and  caught  my  leg  under  him  :  I  had  some  bread  in  my  great-coat 
side-pocket  that  was  under  me  in  my  fall,  which  made  it  worse,  and 
I  hurt  my  knee  too  :  I  had  presence  of  mind,  and  prayed  as  I  fell. 
The  snow  being  deep  saved  me  much  from  damage.  I  lament  the 
love  of  the  world,  covetousness,  and  other  evils  that  lie  heavy  on 
the  church  of  God. 

Tuesday  13.   I  preached. 

Thursday  15.  After  preaching  at  Easter's,  I  rode  to  Tignall 
Jones's  :  his  wife  has  waded  through  deep  waters.  I  have  spent 
some  time  in  Mecklenburg  circuit ;  but  such  has  been  the  weather 
that  I  have  had  but  few  hearers.  We  tried  to  cross  Stanton-River 
at  Owen's  ferry,  but  could  not  for  the  ice  ;  we  then  had  a  long  cold 
ride  to  Coles's  ferry,  and  here  we  got  over.  We  lodged  where  we 
had  nothing  to  eat  or  drink  but  a  little  toast  and  water  :  I  went  sha- 
king to  bed  as  if  I  had  an  ague  on  me. — After  riding  some  miles  to 
Halifax  court-house,  about  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning  I  had  seme 
coffee  for  my  breakfast. 

Saturday  30.  Preached  at  a  church,  and  held  a  love-feast.  My 
toe,  which  has  been  inflamed  for  some  time  past,  is  now  very  trouble- 
some.    Sister  Martin's  kindness  has  been  a  plaister  for  all  my  sores. 

Thursday,  February  5.  Rode  to  Guilford  quarterly  meeting — 
thence,  twenty-five  miles,  to  Short's — and  thence  to  Madeira's  :  here 
my  toe  became  so  bad,  I  was  obliged  to  halt. — I  applied  different 
poultices  to  takeout  the  inflammation. 

Wednesday  fl.  I  feel  much  better,  and  hope  shortly  to  be  able  to 
go  on  the  Lord's  work  again  : — this  is  my  life,  my  all.  During  my 
confinement  I  have  been  reading  the  sacred  text. 


REV     FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  365 

Lord's  day  15.  Lord,  my  soul  thirsteth  for  holiness  in  myself  and 
others.  I  found  my  heart  led  out  in  prayer  for  those  I  cannot  preach 
to.  The  Lord  is  my  witness,  that  if  my  whole  body,  yea,  every  hair 
of  my  head,  could  labour  and  suffer,  they  should  freely  be  given  up 
for  God  and  souls.  During  my  heavy  affliction  I  could  scarcely  have 
met  with  a  greater  disappointment  than  my  being  unable  to  go  to 
the  Yadkin  : — but  it  might  not  be  to  any  great  purpose  ;  and  Provi- 
dence has  hindered.  By  the  help  of  a  stick,  I  can  now  visit  the  barn 
and  stable.  The  more  I  pray,  Satan  tempts  the  more — but  this  is 
according  to  custom :  I  hope  to  live  the  life  of  love  and  holiness 
below,  triumphing  over  all  my  foes. 

Wednesday  17.  Being  sent  for,  I  went  to  Mr.  B — 's,  on  Dan-River. 
I  have  been  engaged  in  reading  Baxter's  Saints'  Rest ;  and  my  soul 
was  often  drawn  to  God  in  secret  prayer. 

Sunday  21.  Preached  at  the  funeral  of  Absolem  Bostwick's 
daughter. 

Monday  22.  Preached  twice — began  to  fear  I  should  stop  again — 
my  foot  swelled,  and  my  toe  inflamed. 

Tuesday  23.  Rode  forty  miles — next  day  preached  to  fifteen 
people. 

Thursday  25.  Rode  to  Hillsborough  :  the  snow  was  deep — the 
street  dirty— my  horse  sick — the  people  drinking  and  swearing  : 
I  endeavoured  to  preach  on  "  A  man's  gaining  the  whole  world,"  &c. 

Friday  26.  Brothers  Allen  and  J.  Cromwell  were  with  me  :  we 
took  sweet  counsel  together,  and  refreshed  each  others  bowels  in 
the  Lord. 

Thursday,  March  4.  Preached  at  Browder's,  and  then  hasted  to 
the  widow  Kembrough's.  Here  I  was  wonderfully  entertained  with 
a  late  publication  by  Silas  Mercer,  a  Baptist  preacher,  in  which  he 
has  anathematized  the  whole  race  of  kings  from  Saul  to  George  III. 
his  is  republicanism  run  mad.  Why  afraid  of  religious  establishments 
in  these  days  of  enlightened  liberty?  Silas  has  beaten  the  Pope,  who 
only  on  certain  occasions,  and  for  certain  reasons,  absolves  subjects 
from  allegiance  to  their  sovereigns  ;  and  if  the  nations  of  Europe 
believed  the  sweeping  doctrines  of  Silas,  they  would  be  right  to  de- 
capitate every  crowned  head,  and  destroy  every  existing  form  of 
church  government.  If  plunging-baptism  is  the  only  true  ordinance, 
and  there  can  be  no  true  church  without  it,  it  is  not  quite  clear  that 
ever  Christ  had  a  church  until  the  Baptists  plunged  for  it. 

Sunday  7.  Although  the  day  was  unfavourable,  many  attended  at 
Pope's  chapel,  where  I  was  wonderfully  assisted,  and  enablecMto  be 


.;"'<:>'>  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURv's  JOURNAL. 

close  on  2  Cor.  xiii.  5.  a  favourite  subject.     We  had  a  short,  simple, 
livir^  i^ve-feast. 

Monday  8.  I  enlarged  on  Isaiah  lv.  6,  7.  at  P — 's  chapel.  This 
neighbourhood  has  been  poisoned  by  preaching  Antinomianism  ;  but 
I  hope  it  will  yet  come  to  something. 

Thursday  1 1.  After  preaching  at  S — 's,  we  rode  to  Long's.  I  have 
had  great  times  in  Tar-River  circuit ;  the  congregations  have  been 
large  and  living,  more  so  than  in  any  circuit  I  have  passed  through 
since  1  crossed  the  Patomac. 

Wednesday  17.  I  preached  at  Jones's  chapel — a  better  house 
than  I  expected  to  have  seen  built  by  the  ;Vlethodist3  in  North  Caro- 
lina :  we  then  rode  fifteen  miles  to  W — 's,  where  we  were  kindly 
received,  and  comfortably  entertained. 

Wednesday,  April  1.  After  passing  through  Brunswick  circuit,  I 
preached  at  Mr.  Jarratt's  barn.  Mr  J.  was  very  kind,  and  the  peo- 
ple very  attentive. 

Virginia. — Sunday  S.  Preached  at  Finney's  old  place,  where  I 
suppose  there  might  be  some  that  had  hardly  heard  preaching  since  I 
was  here  last  year  :  thence  I  rode  through  Powhatan,  Cuttberland, 
and  Buckingham  counties,  where  there  is  poor  encouragement  for  re- 
ligion. O  my  Lord,  arise  for  thine  own  glory,  visit  the  people  in 
mercy,  and  make  known  thy  power  in  the  salvation  of  poor  sinners  ! 

We  crossed  James-River  in  a  canoe  ;  our  horses  by  wading  and 
swimming  got  over.  I  found  some  people  of  feeling  at  T  Key's,  to 
whom  1  preached  on  John  iii.  19.  thence  we  rode  the  river  seven- 
teen miles  along  a  very  rude,  uneasy  path,  to  preach  to  fifteen  peo- 
ple ;  after  getting  a  little  cold  bacon,  we  rode  on  to  C — 's,  where  we 
fared  better. 

Sunday  11.  Preached  at  G — 's  church  to  perhaps  five  hundred 
people  :  from  the  church  we  rode  on  to  Doctor  Hopkins's  :  I  could 
not  see  ;  feeling  the  hills  and  dales,  we  pushed  on  about  thirty  miles  : 
we  got  in,  cold  and  fatigued,  about  eleven  o'clock.  A  drunken  man 
we  fell  in  with  conducted  us  four  or  five  miles.  The  labour  of  the 
day  has  been  performed  with  little  refreshment  for  either  man  or 
horse.  Since  yesterday  week  at  noon,  I  have  rode  one  hundred  and 
fifty-four  miles  in  this  rough  country.  Arriving,  through  the  woods, 
at  Martin  Key's,  I  found  a  happy  change  since  I  was  here  last  year — 
bless  the  Lord  !  I  will  take  it  as  an  answer  to  prayer :  n-w,  the 
whole  family  are  called  together  for  worship — the  man  is  seeking,  the 
woman  has  found  the  Lord,  and  the  children  are  serious. 

Saturday  17.  Quarterly  meeting  at  brother  Fry's  :  a  living  power 
went  through  the  people  in  our  love-feast.     It  was  supposed  the 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY5S  JOURNAL.  ^67 

congregation  consisted  of  nearly,  or  quite,  seven  hundred  people  :  I 
hope  the  word  was  sealed  to  some  hearts.  I  do  not  love,  live,  or 
labour  as  I  desire  :  O  my  soul !  stir  up  thyself  to  take  hold  of  the 
Lord  by  diligence  and  faith  every  moment. 

Sunday  25.  I  preached  at  the  Manakintown  on  the  Epistle  to  the 
church  at  Smyrna. 

Monday  26.  Rode  on  to  Walthel's,  and  thence  to  Petersburg,  where 
we  found  a  house  full  at  six  o'clock.  On  Tuesday  we  reached  Ma- 
bry's  chapel  at  quarterly  meeting,  just  as  preaching  was  over. 

Thursday  29.  Rode  to  Ellis's  chapel,  iu  Sussex  county,  where  we 
held  our  conference  the  two  ensuing  days.     Brother  O'Kelley  gave 
us  a  good  sermon,  "  I  keep  under  my  body,  and  bring  it  into  subjec- 
tion," &c-     Mr.  Jarratt  gave  us  a  good  discourse  on  1  Tim.  i.  4. 
Our  business  was  conducted  with  uncommon  love  and  unity. 

From  this  conference  I  proceeded  on  and  crossed  James-River  oa 
tny  way  to  the  north,  and  was  led  io  cry  to  God  to  go  with  us  and 
meet  us  there. 

Thursday,  May  20.  Reached  Baltimore  about  seven  o'clock.  I 
have  rode  about  fifty  miles  to  day.  In  crossing  the  Patomac,  when 
about  midway,  we  turned  back  to  meet  the  stage,  and  I  found  Dr. 
Lusby  :  I  learned  by  letter  that  my  father  and  mother  are  yet  alive. 

Tuesday  25.  Our  conference  began,  all  in  peace.  William  Glen~ 
denning  had  been  devising  a  plan  to  lay  me  aside,  or  at  least  to  abridge 
my  powers  :  Mr.  Wesley's  letter  settled  the  point,  and  all  was  happy. 
The  conference  rose  on  Friday  morning. 

I  find  the  spirit  and  conversation  of  those  I  am  among  steal  upon 
me  :  my  soul  is  in  travail  to  be  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation  and 
godliness. 

It  is  amazing  to  behold  how  the  ice,  coming  down  the  Patomac,  has 
swept  the  banks,  cutting  through  large  trees,  removing  rocks  of  in- 
credible size,  and  smoothing  the  river  banks  as  though  many  hundreds 
of  men  had  been  employed  for  that  purpose. 

I  was  solemn  and  blessed  at  Sharpsburg.  A  poor  Irish  women,  who 
had  treated  the  Methodists  ill,  was  convicted,  and  sent  for  me  to  pray 
with  her  ;  God  grant  that  the  impressions  made  may  be  lasting  !  From 
Sharpsburg  I  hastened  on  to  Shepherdstown,  where  the  Lord  set 
home  his  word.  Came  to  sister  Boydstone's,  one  of  the  kindest  wo- 
men in  Virginia;  here  all  things  were  comfortable:  I  was  sleepy, 
weary,  and  feeble,  but  my  body  and  soul  was  refreshed  :  thanks  be  to 
God  for  every  friend  !  I  covenanted  with  God  to  be  more  in  prayer ; 
fflv  soul  is  humbled  before  the  Lord. 


O0&  THE  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

Thursday,  June  17.  Lord,  strengthen  my  resolution  to  be  thine  in 
heart  more  and  more  :  make,  and  keep  me  always  watching  unto 
prayer ! 

I  preached  at  Martinsburg  to  a  hundred  people  or  more,  and  was 
led  out  while  I  enlarged  on  "  What  is  the  Almighty  that  we  should 
serve  him,"  &c.  Thence  to  Stroud's  at  seven  o'clock,  and  spoke 
with  great  plainness  ;  the  people  stared  upon  us  ;  next  morning  we 
had  all  the  workmen  to  prayer.  The  mother  and  two  daughters  ap- 
peared tender,  and  wept  when  we  took  our  leave  of  them  ;  who  knows 
what  God  may  do  for  them  ? 

Sunday  20.  I  attempted  to  preach  at  Newtown  ;  I  raged  and  threat- 
ened the  people,  and  was  afraid  it  was  spleen  ;  1  found,  however,  that 
Mr.  Otterbine,  a  worthy  German  minister,  had  done  the  same  a  little 
time  before. 

Friday  25.  We  had  hard  work  in  crossing  a  mountain  six  miles 
over,  and  it  was  still  worse  the  next  day  in  crossing  the  greater  moun- 
tain ;  I  found  it  very  warm  work  though  stript.  We  struggled  along 
nevertheless,  and  met  with  about  four  hundred  people  at  Strayder's, 
to  whom  I  spoke  on  2  Cor.  xiii.  5.  I  hope  not  in  vain.  While  I  was 
at  prayer,  a  large  limb  fell  from  a  sycamore  tree  in  the  midst  of  the 
people,  yet  not  one  received  the  least  injury  ;  some  thought  it  was  a 
trick  of  the  devil ;  and  so  indeed  it  might  have  been  ;  perhaps  he 
wanted  to  kill  another,  who  spoke  after  me  with  great  power. 

Sunday  27.  At— I  was  much  tried  in  spirit,  yet  I  was  enabled  to 

speak  pure,  living  truth  on  Tit.  iii.  2 — 6.  at  three  o'clock,  I  was  as- 
sisted to  speak  feeling  words  to  some  souls  at  Vanmetu's,  though  in 
pain  and  weariness.  Thence  I  hasted  to  preach  at  six  o'clock  at 
Hoffman's,  a  third  time  this  day,  where  I  enlarged  on  Job  xxi.  15. 
about  ten  o'clock  at  night  I  came  to  brother  Dew's,  very  weary,  and 
lodged  there  :  I  hope  this  days's  labour  will  be  useful  to  my  own 
soul  and  the  souls  of  others. 

Virginia — Monday  28.  Preached  twice — speaker  and  hearers  too 
dull — alas ! 

Tuesday  29.  Although  my  body  is  weak,  my  soul  is  filled  with  love 
to  God.     He  is  my  portion. 

Wednesday  30.  I  had  freedom  of  spirit  and  utterance,  at  J.  Cres- 
sap's,  to  a  large  congregation  :  and  although  still  weak  in  body,  I 
preached  again  at  Barratt's  in  the  evening. 

Thursday,  July  1.  We  began  to  ascend  the  Allegany,  directing 
our  course  towards  Redstone.  We  passed  the  Little  Meadows, 
keeping  the  route  of  Braddock's  Road  for  about  twenty-two  miles. 


REV.  FRAN-CIS  ASBURY's    JOURNAL,  360' 

along  a  rough  pathway  :  arriving  at  a  small  house  and  halting  for  fhe 
night,  we  had,  literally,  to  lie  as  thick  as  three  in  a  bed.  My  sou! 
has  peace.  For  three  days  I  had  a  fever  ;  the  excessive  labour  I 
have  undergone  may  have  nourished  it :  when  I  rose  yesterday 
morning  I  was  very  unwell  ;  after  riding  about  seven  miles,  I  was 
taken  with  a  trembling  and  profuse  perspiration  :  I  ate  something 
and  felt  better,  and  my  fever  is  now  abated.  My  soul  has  been 
blessed  in  an  uncommon  degree — and  thou,  my  soul,  bless  the  Lord— 
and  O,  that  he  may  be  pleased  to  make  me  a  blessing  to  the  people- 
in  this  part  of  the  world ! 

Friday  2.  I  was  amongst  a  dull,  kind  people  :  I  spoke  closely,  and 
perhaps  laboured  much  in  vain  ;  here  are  some  of  Looster's  disci- 
ples :  this  man  set  up  prayer-meetings,  and  preached  for  £25' 
per  annum  ;  he  left  his  people  because  they  would  not  increase  his' 
salary. 

Sunday  4.  At  Cheat-River  we  had  a  mixed  congregation  of  sinners, 
Presbyterians,  Baptists,  and  it  may  be,  of  saints  :  I  had  liberty,  and 
gave  it  to  them  as  the  Lord  gave  it  to  me— plain  enough.  After  me 
brother  Bouham  spoke  with  life  and  power.  I  think  God  will  bring 
a  people  to  himself  in  this  place. — Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord 
for  a  plentiful  rain  after  a  long  drought ! 

Three  thick — on  the  floor — such  is  our  lodging — but  no  matter  ; 
God  is  with  us— 

"'Labour  is  rest,  and  pain  is  sweet, 
Whilst  thou,  my  God  !  art  here." 

Pennsylvania — Wednesday  8.  We  had  nearly  seven  hundred  peo- 
ple atBeeson-Town  :  they  were,  in  general,  serious  and  attentive. 

Thursday  9.  I  preached  at  D — 's,  to  a  wild  people,  on  Acts  xiii. 
26.  Since  last  Friday  we  have  rode  one  hundred  and  sixty  or  more 
miles,  on  rough  roads,  through  a  rough  country,  and  with  rough  fare  : 
I  trust  our  labour  will  not  all  be  lost. 

Tuesday  14.  I  preached  to  many  people  at  Old-Town,  where  they 
abound  in  intemperance. 

Wednesday  15.  I  preached  at  Bath--I  was  shut  up. 

Maryland. — Sunday  18.  I  preached  in  the  new  market-house  at 
Fredericktown — many  attended  both  from  town  and  country. 

Wednesday  21.  We  had  many  to  hear  at  Winchester;  they  ap- 
peared to  be  orderly  and  solemn,  and  I  hope  it  will  appear  that  some 
were  convicted. 

Sunday  25.  I  preached  at  Reislers-Town  on,  "  Take  heed  that 
the  light  which  is  in  you  be  not  darkness." 

Vol.  I  47 


370  REV.  FRANCIS  A&BUKY'S  JOURNAL. 

•  Tuesday  27.  We  had  about  thirty  people,  and  a  poor  time  at  Rock- 
chapel.     We  came  to  Squire  M 's — a  kind,  inquiring  man,  who 

received  and  entertained  us  hospitably. 

Saturday  31.1  praise  God  for  health  of  body,  peace  of  mind,  and 
a  desire  to  be  holiness  to  the  Lord  :  I  am  led  into  a  deep  and  sweet 
union  with  God. 

My  mind  was  solemn  at  the  love-feast,  and  the  people  appeared 
to  be  stirred  up  :  I  was  very  searching  on  Luke  xviii.  11.  and  there 
was  some  move.  Thence  I  hasted  to  Worley's,  where  I  found  about 
one  hundred  and  fifty  people  waiting  for  me.  I  want  to  be  very 
spiritual  ;  seeing  that  it  is  by  continual  prayer  alone  this  state  is  to  be 
attained  ;   I  will  endeavour  to  watch  thereunto  with  all  perseverance. 

Richard  Williams,  on  the  north  branch  of  the  Patomac,  was 
taken  prisoner  by  the  Indians:  it  may  be  satisfactory  to  many  to 
record  in  this  journal  his  own  account  of  the  wonderful  deliverances 
he  experienced,  and  the  extraordinary  combinations  of  providences 
by  which  he  was  restored  to  his  family. 

A  few  days  before  Braddock's  defeat,  nineteen  Indians  beset  the 
house,  killed  his  father,  his  mother,  and  one  of  his  brother's  sons  : 
Williams  and  his  child  they  secured  as  prisoners,  and  took  them  away 
to  Fort-Pitt  (now  Pittsburg)  tying  his  hands  to  a  tree  every  night  to 
prevent  his  escape  ;  the  child  he  fed  with  wild  cherries  or  sawice 
berries  ;  but  it  was  taken  from  him  at  the  fort.  On  the  day  of  Brad- 
dock's  defeat,  he  was  taken  across  the  Ohio  River,  and  guarded  to 
Detroit,  where  he  found  the  garrison  reduced  to  the  extremity  of 
eating  horseflesh.  After  staying  some  time  at  Detroit,  he  made  his 
escape,  taking  with  him  a  Frenchman's  gun  and  ammunition  ;  and 
pushed  homeward,  first  by  curve  lines,  and  then  in  a  more  straight 
direction. 

The  Indians  pursued  and  headed  him,  which  obliged  him  to  alter 
his  course  :  wading  through  a  deep  stream,  the  water  went  over  his 
bead,  and  wet  his  powder.  For  three  days  he  travelled  on,  until 
being  pres  l  by  hunger,  he  stopped  to  dry  his  wet  powder,  but  on 
examination  he  found  it  all  dissolved  away  :  his  next  shift  was  to  dig 
sarsaparilla  for  sustenance.  He  went  on,  and  by  good  fortune  found 
a  fish  which  a  bird  had  dropped,  and  eat  that.  Continuing  on,  he 
came  to  a  large  river,  where  he  saw  two  canoe  loads  of  Indians  pass  ; 
from  these  he  hid  himself:  the  Indians  being  out  of  sight,  he  made  a 
raft  of  two  logs,  and  by  this  contrivance  gained  the  opposite  shore. 
After  this,  he  was  three  days  without  eating  or  drinking,  and  reduced 
to  extreme  suffering  :  he  saw  an  Indian,  and  escaped  him,  and  came 
to  a  stream  of  water  of  which  he  drank,  and  soon  after  a  plumb-tree 


REV.   FRANCIS  AS  BURY  \s  JOURNAL.  J(l 

■some  of  the  fruit  of  which  he  took  along  with  him.  The  day  follow- 
ing he  fared  something  better,  having  found  part  of  a  fawn,  which  he 
roasted,  picking  the  bones  and  the  marrow,  and  carefully  preserving 
the  meat  for  future  need.  After  the  venison  was  all  eaten,  on  each 
succeeding  day,  for  three  days,  he  found  a  squirrel.  He  afterward 
caught  and  eat  a  pole-cat :  at  another  time  he  saw  a  hawk  fly  up,  and 
going  to  the  spot  he  found  a  wild  turkey.  Travelling  on,  he  came  to 
the  Ohio  and  waded  it :  near  this  place  an  Indian  threw  his  tomahawk 
at  him  ;  he  tried  to  escape,  by  climbing  up  a  wild  cherry-tree,  but 
found  himself  too  weak,  and  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  two  Frenchmen 
and  five  Indians,  and  thus  found  himself  once  more  in  the  power  of 
his  enemies.  With  these  he  feigned  derangement ;  they,  however, 
took  him  along  with  them  to  Fort-Pitt.  Orvthe  way  he  tired,  and 
they  threatened  to  kill  him  -r  he  told  them  he  was  willing  to  die. 
Arriving  at  the  fort,  an  Indian  charged  him  with  being  a  prisoner 
from  Detroit :  he  was  forthwith  put  under  a  guard,  and  a  council  held 
in  the  French  language,  to  determine  on  what  was  to  be  done  with  him. 
The  sentence  of  the  general  was,  that  he  should  be  shot :  to  this  some 
objected,  saying  that  his  spirit  would  haunt  them  if  he  was  killed  there, 
and  advised  his  being  taken  to  the  island  and  buried  in  the  sand.  He 
was  told  that  he  should  eat  no  more  meat  there,  that  the  crickets 
should  eat  him.  He  behaved  himself  as  though  he  understood  nothing 
they  said,  yet  he  knew  the  general  purport  of  their  conversation, 
although  they  spoke  in  French.  He  relates,  that  one  morning  before 
day,  while  in  the  fort,  he  fell  into  a  trance  :  he  beheld  spirits  for  his 
conductors,  and  lightning  also  :  the  guards  being  both  asleep,  he 
climbed  up  the  high  wall,  and  clambering  over  the  spike  palisades, 
got  out  s  «fe.  Having  still  to  pass  the  sentinels,  and  not  knowing 
where  they  were  placed,  he  was  discovered  just  as  the  cock  crew 
for  day  ;  the  sentinels  mistook  him  for  a  comrade  and  let  him  pass. 
At  this  time  he  felt  a  conviction  that  his  wife  prayed  for  him,  and  this 
was  communicated  in  an  unusual  manner  :  and  she,  during  his  absence, 
had  great  comfort,  and  an  assurance  that  she  should  see  her  husband 
again.  Escaping  thus,  he  made  the  best  of  his  way  without  inter- 
ruption until  the  evening,  when  he  heard  a  gun  fired  at  some  distance 
behind  him  ;  presently  another — these  were  his  pursuers,  who  had 
found  his  track  in  the  woods  :  he  strove  to  run,  but  he  was  too  weak. 
Another  gun  yet  nigher  to  him  went  off:  he  made  what  way  his 
strength  would  allow,  and  when  he  came  to  places  where  he  left  no 
track,  he  made  zigzag  courses  to  deceive  them,  and  give  him  time  to 
get  ahead  ;  but  there  were  so  many  of  them,  they  would  still  discover 
his  track  again.     Thus  he  struggled  on  until  seven  guns  were  fired, 


72 


KEY.  FRANCIS  ASBtJRY  S  JOURNAL, 


the  last  of  which  he  supposes  to  have  been  within  two  or  three  huu 
©red  yards  from  him  ;  now  his  heart  began  to  fail,  and  he  thought  h« 
was  gone,  yet  he  resolved  to  labour  onward  as  long  as  he  had  life. 
At  the  firing  of  the  last  gun,  his  pursuers  crossed  his  track  and  got  a 
head  of  him  ;  taking  advantage  of  this  circumstance,  he  turned  out  of 
the  path,  letting  the  Indians  who  were  behind  tread  in  the  footsteps 
of  those  before.  Following  the  direction  now  taken,  he  had  not  gone 
far  until  he  came  to  a  path  which  led  to  a  settlement  of  the  whites ; 
this  he  did  not  long  keep,  but  going  round  the  head  of  a  ravine,  laid 
himself  down,  concluding  that  if  his  track  was  again  discovered,  he 
would  be  favoured  by  the  darkness.  The  Indians  did  get  his  track 
twice,  but  never  overtook  him.  He  went  on  in  the  dark  as  well  as 
he  could,  sometimes  feeling  the  bushes  with  his  hands  :  among  the 
rocks  he  often  fell  down  from  weakness  ;  having  gained  smoother 
ground,  he  stopped  and  lay  down  until  day. 

His  enemies,  it  seems,  had  not  given  up  the  pursuit.  He  had  not 
long  left  his  hard  lodgings  when  he  heard  the  report  of  two  guns  ; 
but  coming  to  a  hill  where  no  mark  of  a  footstep  could  be  traced,  he 
steered  his  course  for  Bedford,  and  came  on  a  trading  path  in  which 
he  kept.  Five  days  he  lived  on  acorns  ;  afterward  he  found  some 
wild  cherries  ;  but  Io  !  while  he  was  eating  up  comes  an  Indian. 
The  Indian  asked  him  where  he  was  going  ;  he  said,  To  the  Dela- 
ware ;  the  Indian  then  took  him  by  the  hand  and  gave  a  whoop,  when 
presently  others  joined  him.  By  these  he  was  kept  a  prisoner  for 
some  time  :  he  appeared  bold  ;  was  active  in  cooking,  and  by  his 
cleverness  got  the  favour  of  the  captain,  who  praised  him,  and  said, 
he  could  do  every  thing  like  an  Indian.  He  had  more  than  he  needed 
to  eat ;  the  captain,  however,  was  very  careful  to  secure  him  every 
night,  by  making  him  lie  down  in  one  corner  ;  here  he  drew  a  cord 
over  some  hoop-poles  and  tied  deer's  hoofs  to  the  end,  so  that  if 
Williams  pulled  open  the  poles  they  would  rattle  and  the  deer's  hoofs 
would  strike  the  captain's  face.  With  these  Indians  Williams  staid  a 
long  time  :  they  #&nt  to  war  and  left  him  to  provide  deer  for  the 
squaws.  At  last  he  found  an  opportunity  of  escaping,  which  he  im- 
proved, and  arrived  safe  at  his  own  home.  He  is  now  a  faithful  man — 
his  wife  a  pious  woman  ;  and  they  have  preaching  at  the  house. 

Our  quarterly  meeting  in  Philadelphia  circuit  began  the  21st  of 
July.     I  addressed  the  congregation  on  the  Epistle  to  the  church  of 
Sardis.     We  had  a  gracious  time  on  Sunday  the  1st  of  Aqgust.     At 
four  o'clock  I  preached  again,  in  the  Valley  church,  on  Isaiah  Ixv!. 
/,'  Heaven  is  my  throne,  and  the  earth  my  footstool." 


IlEV.  MiANCIS  asbuhy's  JOUKKAL,  373 

Monday,  August  2.  After  preaching  at  brother  H.'s  on  Luke  xi.  13. 
i  went  to  the  city  and  preached  to  many  people  on  1  Peter  iii.  15. 

Friday  6.  I  was  blessed  in  preaching  on  "  Blessed  are  they  that 
mourn,  for  they  shall  be  comforted."  I  was  weak  and  faint  from  the 
extreme  warmth  of  the  weather. 

Sunday  15.    I  was  very  weak,  and  had  to  lie  down  on  the  floor  ; 
however,  although  faint,  I  was  enabled  to  speak  to  nearly  a  thousand 
people  in  Philadelphia. 
;    New- Jersey. — Monday  16.    Went  to  Burlington. 

Tuesday  17.  Went  to  Trenton  :  although  unwell  and  greatly 
oppressed  by  heat,  I  preached  at  both  these  places. 

Tuesday  24.    I  rode  to  Mr.  Ogden's.     Next  day  I  spoke,  but  with 
little  freedom,  to  an  attentive  yet  unfeeling  audience,  in  Sussex  court- 
house.    My  host,   who  appears  to  be  a  man  of  liberal  sentiments 
entertained  me  kindly. 

I  preached  at  New-Market  Plains  to  about  one  hundred  hearers 
I  spoke  freely  in  vindication  of  Methodism  :   it  was  strange  ;   for  I 
knew  not,  until  afterward,  that  there  were  present  those  who  come 
at  no  other  time. 

New-York Friday  27.    We  had  a  trying  journey  to  New-York  ; 

the  weather  being  excessively  warm.  I  found  my  old  friends  C.  &. 
W  L — ,  at  Newark,  who  appeared  pleased  to  see  me.  We  took  the 
stage,  and  reached  York  about  eight  o'clock.  At  York  we  found  the 
people  alive  to  God  :  there  are  about  one  hundred  in  society^  and, 
with  those  in  Philadelphia,  to  my  mind,  appear  more  like  Methodists 
than  I  have  ever  yet  seen  them.  My  first  discourse  was  for  the 
benefit  of  poor  stragglers,  who  have  not  yet  returned  to  the  fold  ;  tbc 
subject  chosen  was  Rev.  iii.  1 — 4. 

Sunday  29.  In  the  evening  I  preached  for  the  benefit  of  poor 
sinners,  on  Job  xxi.  15. 

Monday  30.  My  soul  is  alive  to  God  :  I  visited,  prayed,  read,  wrote, 
met  the  classes,  and  in  the  evening,  preached.  I  have  found  great 
consolation  and  fellowship  in  the  classes. 

Monday,  September  7.  I  took  leave  of  my  dear  friends  in  New- 
York  :  they  showed  their  love  in  deed  and  in  truth,  liberally  supply- 
ing me  with  what  was  necessary.  On  Tuesday  brother  Hagerty  met 
me,  and  we  rejoiced  together. 

New- Jersey. — Sunday  13.  Preached  at  Penny  Hill,  and  afterward 
at  New  Mills.  I  have  been  kept  in  peace,  hut  find  my  adversary  is 
not  dead  ;  neither  am  I  out  of  the  body,  or  what  I  may  be,  or  must 
be  before  1  see  the  kingdom  of  God.  O  my  soul,  keep  near  to  God, 
and  always  watch  and  pray  ! 


,h4  KEV.  FRANCIS  ASDVRY  S  .lOl'ftNAi, 

Monday  14.  I  was  weak  and  feverish — sorely  tempted,  and  much 
comforted.  I  walked  over  to  John  Budds's,  a  son  of  affliction  :  we 
spoke  of  the  dealings  of  God  with  our  own  souls — not  in  vain  :  we 
prayed,  and  parted  in  love.  Two  things  seem  to  dim  my  prospect! 
of  heaven,  in  point  of  qualification, — First,  I  do  not  speak  enough  fop 
God  ;  and  Secondly,  I  am  not  totally  devoted  to  him.  Lord,  help 
me  to  come  up  to  my  duty  ! 

Sunday  21.  I  spoke  at  P.  C.'s  ;  and  at  Godfrey's  in  the  evening. 
I  cannot  sufficiently  praise  God  for  health,  while  others  are  sick  in 
almost  every  house.  I  have  felt  great  nearness  to  God  for  a  few  days 
past. 

Tuesday  23.  1  was  tried  when  I  missed  my  way,  but  I  was  blessed 
in  speaking  to  the  people.  It  is  a  great  time  of  sickness  with  the 
ague  and  fever. 

Thursday  24.  I  found  a  dearth  at  Haddonfield.  A  poor  sot  came 
in  and  muttered  awhile  :  after  meeting  he  acknowledged  he  was  a 
sinner,  and  seemed  sorry  for  his  conduct,  drunk  as  he  was. 

Saturday  26.  I  was  weary  and  faint  as  I  journeyed  towards  Phila- 
delphia. After  preaching  twice  in  the  day,  I  was  refreshed  by  a 
glass  of  wine  and  a  piece  of  bread. 

Delaware. — Saturday,  October  2.  I  preached  in  our  new  chapel 
at  Dover,  in  the  slate  of  Delaware,  on  faith,  hope,  charity.  At  Bar- 
ratt's  I  believe  I  was  alarming  on  Isai.  iii.  10,  11.     I  was  moved  in 

the  evening  towards  the  boys  to  school  at  C :    I  spoke  till  they 

wept  aloud.     O  my  God  !  their  parents  fear  thee— bring  them  home, 
with  them,  to  thvself. 

Maryland. — Thursday  7.  I  rode  in  the  afternoon  to  Queen  Annes, 
visited  and  prayed  with  B.  Ellis  in  affliction,  and  was  persuaded  God 
would  spare  him.  Poor  F.  is  overtaken  by  the  adversary  ;  and  R.  is 
gone  astray.     Alas,  how  are  the  mighty  fallen  ! 

Friday  8.  Came  to  "Angiers.  Here  they  had  the  flux  ;  but  I  did 
not  feel  free  to  leave  the  house  until  I  had  delivered  my  message  ; 
my  testimony  was  low,  but  serious  and  weighty. 

Wednesday  13.  At  Hopper's,  the  congregation  was  large  indeed. 
I  was  greatly  at  liberty  ;  and  1  hope  the  seed  was  not  all  lost.  Here 
I  met  with  brother  Garrettson — all  love  and  peace. 

Thursday  14.  I  rode  twenty  miles  to  visit  Kent  Island  for  the  first 
time.  Here  we  had  an  unusual  collection  of  people,  and  surely  all 
was  not  in  vain.  We  had  a  good  time  at  Newcomb's  :  the  word  of 
God  has  greatly  triumphed  over  the  prejudices  of  rich  and  poor. 
We  went  on  to  Cambridge.  Here,  George,  a  poor  negro  in  our  so- 
ciety, we  found  under  sentence  of  death  for  theft  committed  before 


HEV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  375 

he  became  a  Methodist ;  he  appeared  to  be  much  given  up  to  God ;  he 
was  reprieved  under  the  gallows  :  a  merchant,  who  cursed  the  negro 
for  praying,  died  in  horror.  I  pity  the  poor  slaves.  O  that  God, 
would  look  down  in  mercy,  and  take  their  cause  in  hand  ! 

Wednesday  20.  I  was  distressed  by  the  levity  of  some  spirits.  We 
had  a  long  ride  to  Taylor's  Island  :  we  had  a  profitable  season  there  ; 
and  next  day  going  twenty-four  miles  to  Todd's,  I  found  a  warm  peo- 
ple indeed.     I  injured  myself  by  speaking  too  loud. 

Saturday  23.  Rode  thirty  miles  to  Mr.  Airy's,  preaching  by  the 
way.  We  had  a  great  time,  multitudes  attended.  Dorset  is  now  in 
peace,  and  the  furies  are  still. 

Sunday  24.  This  day  has  been  so  much  taken  up,  that  I  had  no 
time  to  spare.  My  mind  is  with  the  Lord,  and  every  day  is  a  Sabbath 
with  me.  Here  B.  T.  who  was  a  great  churchman,  after  hearing  F. 
G.  a  second  time,  was  seized  with  conviction  on  his  way  home,  and 
fell  down  in  the  road,  and  spent  great  part  of  the  night  crying  to  God 
for  mercy.  It  was  suggested  to  him  that  his  house  was  on  fire ;  his 
answer  was,  t(  It  is  better  for  me  to  lose  my  house  than  my  soul." 

Virginia. — Sunday,  November  1.  We  rose  early  and  rode  twenty 
miles  to  Downing's.     I  lectured  at  Burton's  in  the  evening. 

Monday  2.  After  riding  twenty  miles  to  Col.  Paramore's,  I  preach- 
ed with  liberty.  The  family  is  kind ;  the  father,  mother,  son,  and 
neice  have  tender  impressions.  The  people  hereabout  are  gay,  blind 
in  spiritual  matters,  well  featured,  and  hospitable,  and  good  livers. 

Tuesday  3.  After  preaching  at  Garrettson  chapel,  I  rode  to  Col. 
Burton's,  and  was  kindly  received. 

Friday  6.  I  came  back  to  Col.  Burton's.  Since  I  went  from  this 
house,  I  have  rode  about  one  hundred  miles,  spent  five  hours  in 
delivering  five  public  discourses,  and  ten  hours  in  family  and  public 
prayer  ;  and  read  two  hundred  pages  in  Young's  Works.  I  have  en- 
joyed great  peace,  and  hope  to  see  a  great  and  glorious  work. 

The  Presbyterians  came  down  here  about  thirty  yeargs  ago  ;  many 
were  moved,  and  some  advances  were  made  towards  a  reformation. 
A  house  was  built  for  public  worship.  About  six  years  past  the  Bap- 
tist's visited  these  parts,  and  there  was  some  stir  among  the  people. 
I  think  the  Methodists  are  most  likely  to  have  permanent  success, 
because  the  inhabitants  are  generally  Episcopalians.  We  preached 
some  time  before  any  regular  circuit  was  formed,  or  any  people  had 
joined  us  ;  now  brother  Willis  is  stationed  here,  and  there  are  one 
hundred  in  society. 

The  land  here  is  low  and  level,  and  is  refreshed  with  fine  breezes 
from  the   sea ;    there  is  an   abundance  in   the  productions  of  the 


0<b  REV.  FRANCIS  APURY'S   JOURNAL. 

earth  and  of  the  waters  ;  the  people  are  generous,  social,  and  polished 
in  their  manners. 

Saturday  7.  Came  to  Downing's,  and  had  a  large  congregation  for 
the  time  and  place.  I  see  a  difficulty  in  saying  any  thing  of  any  deno- 
mination of  people  :  it  is  so  much  like  evil  speaking  to  mention  their 
faults  behind  their  backs  ;  I  will  avoid  it,  and  endeavour  to  prevent 
others  doing  it  in  my  presence.  « 

Maryland. — Sunday  8.  I  rode  twelve  miles  to  Snow-Hill.  Here 
the  judge  himself  opened  the  court  house,  and  a  large  congregation 
of  people  of  different  denominations  attended  ;  the  subject  was  the 
certainty,  universality,  and  justice  of  God's  proceeding  at  the  day  of 
judgment. 

Sunday  15.  I  came  to  Barratt's  chapel ;  here,  to  my  great  joy,  I 
met  these  dear  men  of  God,  Dr.  Coke,  and  Richard  Whatcoat :  we 
were  greatly  comforted  together.  The  Dr.  preached  on  "  Christ  our 
wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption."  Having  had 
no  opportunity  of  conversing  with  them  before  public  worship,  I- was* 
greatly  surprised  to  see  brother  Whatcoat  assist  by  taking  the  cup  in 
the  administration  of  the  sacrament.  1  was  shocked  when  first  inform- 
ed of  the  intention  of  these  my  brethren  in  coining  to  this  country: 
it  may  be  of  God.  My  answer  then  was,  if  the  preachers  unani- 
mously chuse  me,  I  shall  not  act  in  the  capacity  I  have  hitherto  done 
by  Mr.  Wesley's  appointment.  The  design  of  organizing  the  Metho- 
dists into  an  Independent  Episcopal  Church  was  opened  to  the 
preachers  present,  and  it  was  agreed  to  call  a  general  conference,  to 
meet  at  Baltimore  the  ensuing  Christmas  ;  as  also  that  brother  Gar- 
rettson  go  off  to  Virginia  to  give  notice  thereof  to  our  brethren  in  the 
South. 

Delaware. — 1  was  very  desirous  the  Dr.  should  go  upon  the  track 
I  had  just  been  over,  which  he  accordingly  did.  I  came  to  Dover, 
and  preached  on  Eph.  v.  6.  was  close,  and,  I  hope,  profitable. 

Maryland. — Tuesday  16.  Rode  to  Bohemia,  where  I  met  with 
Thomas  Vasey,  who  came  over  with  the  Doctor  and  R.  Whatcoat 
My  soul  is  deeply  engaged  with  God  to  know  his  will  in  this  new 
business. 

Wednesday  17.  Rode  to  quarterly  meeting  at  Deer-Creek;  thence, 
by  Mr.  Gough's  to  Baltimore.  I  preached  in  the  evening  to  a 
solemn  people  on,  "  O  wicked  man,  thou  shalt  surely  die  :"  about 
the  ending  of  the  sermon  the  floor  of  the  house  gave  way,  but  no 
injury  followed. 

Tuesday  23.  We  rode  twenty  miles  to  Frederick  quarterly  meeting, 
where  brother  Vasey  preached  on.  "  The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd;  I 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASygURJPs  JOURNAL,  31 ? 

Shall  not  want."  Our  love-feastf  was*:  attended  with  the  power  and 
presence  of  God.  Leaving  Frederick,  I  went  to  Calvert  quarterly 
meeting.  Brother  Poythress  and  myself  had  much  talk  about  the 
new  plan.  At  our  quarterly  meeting  we  had  a  good  time  ;  the  love- 
feast  was  in  great  life  and  power.  I  admire  the  work  of  God  among 
the  coloured  people  in  these  parts. 

Friday  26.  I  observed  this  day  as  a  day  of  fasting  and  prayer, 
that  I  might  know  the  will  of  God  in  the  matter  that  is  shortly  to 
come  before  our  conference  ;  the  preachers  and  people  seem  to  be 
much  pleased  with  the  projected  plan  ;  1  myself  am  led  to  think  it 
is  of  the  Lord.  I  am  not  tickled  with  the  honour  to  be  gained — I  see 
danger  in  the  way. — My  soul  waits  upon  God.  O  that  he  may  lead 
us  in  the  way  we  should  go  !  Part  of  my  time  is,  and  must  necessa- 
rily be,  taken  up  with  preparing  for  the  conference. 

Tuesday  30.  I  preached  with  enlargement  to  rich  and  poor,  on 
"  That  we  may  have  boldness  in  the  day  of  judgment."     The  Lord 

has  done  great  things  for  these  people.     The  Rev.  M.  W s  and 

myself,  had  an  interesting  conversation  on  the  subject  of  the  Episco- 
pal mode  of  church-government.  I  spent  the  evening  with  D, 
Weems,  and  spoke  to  the  black  people. 

Saturday,  December  4.  Rode  to  Baltimore,  and  preached  on  Mark 
xiv.  29,  30.  with  freedom.  I  spent  some  time  in  town,  and  was 
greatly  grieved  at  the  barrenness  of  the  people  ;  they  appear  to  be 
swallowed  up  with  the  cares  of  the  world. 

Sunday  12.  At  the  Point  my  heart  was  made  to  feel  for  the  people, 
while  I  enlarged  on,  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,"  &c,  I  was 
close  and  fervent  in  town  at  four  o'clock.  A  young  man  pushed  the 
door  open  while  we  were  meeting  the  society  ;  he  was  carried  before 
a  justice  of  peace,  and  committed  to  jail,  but  he  was  bailed  out. 

Tuesday  14.  I  met  Dr.  Coke  at  Abingdon,  Mr.  Richard  Dallam 
kindly  taking  him  there  in.  bis  coach  ;  he  preached  on,  "  He  that 
hath  the  Son  hath  life." — We  talked  of  our  concerns  in  great  love. 

Wednesday  15.  My  soul  was  much  blest  at  the  communion,  where 
I  believe  all  were  more  or  less  engaged  with  God.  I  feel  it  necessary 
daily  to  give  up  my  own  will.  The  Dr.  preached  a  great  sermon  on 
"  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more  than  me,"  &c. 

Saturday  18.  Spent  the  day  at  Perry-Hall,  partly  in  preparing 
for  conference.  My  intervals  of  time  1  passed  in  reading  the  third 
volume  of  the  British  Arminian  Magazine.  Continued  at  Perry- 
Hall  until  Friday  the  twenty-fourth.  We  then  rode  to  Balti- 
more, where  we  met^a  few  preachers :  it  was  agreed  to  form  our- 
selves into  an  Episcopal  Church,  and  to  have  superintendents,  elders 

Vol.  I.  48 


378  KEV.  FftANCI95&Sqtf»Y  S    JOURNAL. 

arid  deacons.  When  the  conference  was  seated,  Dr.  Coke  and  my- 
self were  unanimously  elected  tome  superintendency  of  the  church, 
and  my  ordination  followed,  after  being  previously  ordained  deacon 
and  elder,  as  by  the  following  certificate  may  be  seen. 

Know  all  men  by  these  presents,  That  I,  Thomas  Coke,  Doctor  of 
Civil  Law  ;  late  of  Jesus  College,  in  the  university  of  Oxford,  Pres- 
byter of  the  Church  of  England,  and  Superintendent  of  the  Metho- 
dist Episcopal  Church  in  America ;  under  the  protection  of  Almighty 
God,  and  with  a  single  eye  to  his  glory  ;  by  the  imposition  of  my 
hands,  and  prayer,  (being  assisted  by  two  ordained  elders,)  did  on  the 
twenty-fifth  day  of  this  month,  December,  set  apart  Francis  Asbury 
for  the  office  of  a  deacon  in  the  aforesaid  Methodist  Episcopal  Church. 
And  also  on  the  twenty-sixth  day  of  the  said  month,  did  by  the  impo- 
sition of  my  hands,  and  prayer,  (being  assisted  by  the  said  elders,)  set 
apart  the  said  Francis  Asbury  for  the  office  of  elder  in  the  said  Me- 
thodist Episcopal  Church.  And  on  this  twenty-Seventh  day  of  the 
said  month,  being  the  day  of  the  date  hereof,  have,  by  the  imposition 
of  my  hands  and  prayer,  (being  assisted  by  the  said  elders,)  set  apart 
the  said  Francis  Asbury  for  the  office  of  a  superintendent  in  the  said 
Methodist  Episcopal  Church,  a  man  whom  I  judge  to  be  well  qualified 
for  that  great  work.  And  I  do  hereby  recommend  him  to  all  whom 
it  may  concern,  as  a  fit  person  to  preside  over  the  flock  of  Christ. 
In  testimony  whereof  I  have  hereunto  set  my  hand  and  seal  this  27th 
day  of  December,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1784. 

Thomas  Coke. 

Twelve  elders  were  elected,  and  solemnly  set  apart  to  serve  our 
societies  in  the  United  States,  one  for  Antigua,  and  two  for  Nova- 
Scotia.  We  spent  the  whole  week  in  conference,  debating  freely, 
and  determining  all  things  by  a  majority  of  votes.  The  Doctor 
preached  every  day  at  noon,  and  some  one  of  the  other  preachers 
morning  and  evening.  We  were  in  great  haste,  and  did  much  busi- 
ness in  a  little  time. 

Monday,  January  3, 1785.  The  conference  is  risen,  and  I  have  now 
a  little  time  for  rest.  In  the  evening  I  preached  on  Ephes.  iii.  8. 
being  the  first  sermon  after  my  ordination  :  my  mind  was  unsettled, 
and  I  was  but  low  in  my  own  testimony. 

Tuesday  4.  I  was  engaged  preparing  for  my  journey  southward. 
Rode  fifty  miles  through  frost  and  snow  to  Fairfax,  Virginia,  and  got 
in  about  seven  o'clock. 

Virginia. — Thursday  6.  We  had  an  exceeding  cold  ride  to 
Prince-William — little  less  than  forty  miles,  and  were  nearly  two 
hours  after  night  in  getting  to  brother  Hale's. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOCRKAL,  373 

Friday  7.  A  calm  day.  I  half  briber  Hickson  for  my  companion 
We  passed  Fauquier  court-house ;  came  to  the  north  branch  of  Rap- 
pahannock, which  we  found  about  waist  high,  and  frozen  from  side 
to  side ;  we  pushed  the  ice  out  of  the  track  which  a  wagon,  well  for 
us,  had  made,  and  got  over  safe.  Pursuing  our  journey,  we  came  to 
a  little  ordinary  kept  by  one  Whitehead  ;  here  were  some  wagoners 
at  cards  in  the  front  room  : — this  did  not  prevent  our  having  prayers 
in  the  one  adjoining :  we  slept  in  peace,  and  had  only  nine  shillings 
and  six-pence  to  pay  in  the  morning. 

Saturday  8.  Rode  to  brother  Fry's  to  dinner,  where  I  met  with 
brother  Willis,  who  had  stopped  there  on  his  way  to  the  conference. 

Sunday  9.  We  read  prayers,  preached,  ordained  brother  Willis 
deacon,  and  baptised  some  children.  I  feel  nothing  but  love.  I 
am  sometimes  afraid  of  being  led  to^hink  something  more  of  mj^self 
in  my  new  station  than  formerly 

Tuesday  11.  In  the  morning  I  discovered  that  my  horse  was  very 
lame  ;  after  some  time  he  grew  better.  The  adversary  tries  to  get 
me  into  a  fretful  spirit — our  journey  was  attended  with  some  difficul- 
ties ;  but  I  do  not  murmur.  I  had  dreaded  the  ice  in  James-River, 
but  we  crossed  with  the  greatest  ease.  We  directed  our  course  to 
Sianton-River  ;  and  here  we  waited  some  time  at  Hunt's  landing.  Mr. 
Hunt  was  so  kind  as  to  insist  on  our  staying  with  him  ;  and  we  were 
tired  enough  to  want  rest.    I  lectured  in  his  family  night  and  morning. 

Saturday  15.  Preached  and  administered  the  sacrament  at  Royster's 
church  ;  then  rode  to  brother  Phelps's,  where  I  was  pointed  on  Rev. 
svii.  14. 

Sunday  16.  Although  there  was  only  a  probability  of  my  coming, 
a  few  people  met  at  Doby's  store,  where  I  preached  with  some  life 
on  St.  John  iii.  19,  20,  21. 

Tuesday  18.  Brother  Willis  was  ordained  elder  at  Carter's  church  . 
the  Lord  was  with  us  in  this,  the  sacrament,  and  the  love-feast ;  and 
all  was  in  life. 

North  Carolina. — Thursday  20.  My  horse  was  lame.  I,  rode 
with  patience  to  A.  Arnet's,  and  was  blest :  we  rejoiced  in  the  Lord 
together. 

Friday  21.  After  preaching  at  Thompson's,  and  baptising  some 
children,  we  set  out  for  Short's.  Travelling  onward  we  came  to  a 
creek  :  it  was  so  dark  by  this  time  that  we  could  not  find  the  ford  ; 
we  rode  back  a  mile,  and  engaged  a  young  man  who  undertook  to  be 
our  guide,  but  he  himself  was  scarcely  a%le  to  keep  the  way.  We 
rode  with  great  pain  to  Waggoner's  chapel,  and  after  pushing  on  through 
deep  streams,  I  had  only  nine  hearers  ;  this  was  owing  to  the  care 


330  REV.  FRANCISJHfelB.Y's  JOURNAL. 

Iessness  of  the  person  who  sh<S|jlc|$fave  published  the  notice  of  oiu 
coming.  ■**" 

Sunday  23.  I  had  about  one  hundred  hearers  ;  to  whom  I  spoke 
on  Josh.  xxiv.  15.  We  lodged  with  F  C.  who  was  very  kind, 
although  he  could  afford  but  one  bed  for  three.  The  horses  fared 
well.  Next  morning  we  set  off,  and  came  to  Old  Town  instead  of 
Salem  :  by  the  evening,  we  reached  brother  Hill's,  on  the  Yadkin 
circuit.  Thus  far  the  Lord  has  led  me  on  ;  and  I  still  hope  to  get 
along  according  to  appointment. 

Friday  28.  My  horse  being  unfit  to  travel,  I  borrowed  another,  and 
went  on  seventeen  miles  to  Fisher's  River,  where  I  met  with  a  few 
poor  people.  Thence  we  rode  through  the  barren  mountains,  and 
crossed  the  frequent  rivers  in  our  course,  and  came  to  W — 's :  next 
day  I  preached  at  Heady's,  and  rode  on  to  Hindorn's  in  Wilkes 
county :  here  we  were  kindly  entertained,  although  there  were  few 
people  to  preach  to.  Nothing  could  have  better  pleased  our  oW 
church  folks  than  the  late  step  we  have  taken  in  administering  the 
ordinances  ;  to  the  Catholic  Presbyterians  it  also  gives  satisfaction  ; 
but  the  Baptists  are  discontented. 

Thursday,  February  3.  Rode  twenty  miles  to  Witherspoon's  :  here 
was  a  large  assemblage  of  people  ;  some  to  pay  and  receive  taxes ; 
some  to  drink  ;  and  some  to  hear  me  preach  :  I  gave  them  a  rough 
talk  on  Rev.  ii.  5,  6,  7,  8.  From  this  place  we  rode  to  Allen's.  The 
people  here  are  famous  for  talking  about  religion  :  and  here  and  there 
is  a  horse  thief. 

Sunday  6.  Yesterday  some  were  prevented  from  offering  their 
children  to  God  in  baptism,  by  a  zealous  Baptist :  to-day  brother 
Willis  spoke  on  the  right  of  infants  to  baptism  ;  our  opposer  soon  took 
his  leave. 

Monday  7.  I  preached  at  Elsberry's,  and  rode  thirty-one  miles 
to  Morgan  Bryan's.  The  weather  has  been  cold  and  uncomforta- 
ble. I  have  rode  on  the  horse  I  borrowed,  nearly  three  hundred 
miles  in  about  nine  days. 

Tuesday  8.  I  observed  this  as  a  day  of  abstinence.  I  preached 
and  administered  the  sacrament ;  held  a  love-feast — our  friends  were 
greatly  comforted.  Here  I  plunged  four  adults,  at  their  own  request, 
they  being  persuaded  that  this  was  the  most  proper  mode  of  bap- 
tising. 

Thursday  10.  Rode  to  Salisbury,  where,  as  it  was  court-time,  1 
had  but  few  hearers  ;  and  some  of  these  made  their  escape  when  1 
began  to  insist  on  the  necessity  of  holiness  ;  a  subject  this  which  the 
/-ntinomians  do  not  like  to  hear  pressed  too  closely. 


K£V.  FRANCIS  ASUVRV'S  JOURNAL, 


f 

Tuesday  15.  I  gave  up  my  horse,  and  borrowed  one  of  Mr.  Ran- 
dal.    I  fear  my  horse  will  lose  his  eyes.     I  visited  B :  one  who 

has  departed  from  God  ;  he  appeared  to  be  sensible  of,  and  lamented 
it ;  yet,  he  said,  he  had  not  power  to  pray  and  seek. 

South  Carolina. — Thursday  17.  We  set  offfoF  Charleston,  South 

Carolina.     When  at  the  Charaw  Hills,  we  thought  of  going  to 's, 

but  he  was  not  at  home.  A  family  which  had  moved  from  Virginia 
sent  after  me  with  an  invitation  to  come  and  dine  ;  1  accepted  their 
kindness,  and  arriving,  found  that  they  had  been  Methodists  :  after 
spending  some  time  in  the  church  in  prayer,  we  prepared  to  pursue 
our  journey,  but  being  pressed  to  stay  until  the  morrow,  we  remained 
with  them.  Came  to  the  Long-Bluffcourt-house — found  few  people  : 
thence  journeying  on,  we  arrived  at  I.  Kimbro's,  and  were  kindly 
entertained. 

Tuesday  22.  I  heard  of  that  imposter,  T — y — t,  who  was  fleecing 
the  people  of  one  hundred  guineas  per  annum  :  was  he  a  good  man, 
I  doubt  if  they  would  supply  him  thus.  The  greatest  consolation  I 
had  was  whilst  alone  in  the  woods.  I  was  comfortable  in  brother, 
Lee^s  company.  C* 

Wednesday  23.  We  crossed  Lynch's  Creek,  Blackmingo,  and 
Black-River,  and  arrived  at  Georgetown,  where  we  met  with  a  kind 
reception.  I  felt  my  mind  solemn,  and  devoted  to  God,  but  was  in 
great  doubt  of  success.  If  God  has  not  called  us  by  his  providence 
into  these  parts,  I  desire  and  pray  that  we  may  have  no  countenance 
from  the  people  ;  although  we  have  rode  four  or  five  hundred  miles, 
and  spent  our  money. 

Thursday  24.  I  preached  in  Georgetown  on  1  Cor.  ii.  14.  to  a 
serious  people.  A  Mr.  Wayne,  a  nephew  of  the  celebrated  General 
Wayne,  introduced  himself  to  us,  with  whom  we  took  breakfast  ;  on 
parting,  he  showed  us  the  way  to  the  ferry,  and  paid  our  ferriage. 
I  found  the  Lord  had  brought  him  through  deep  exercises  of  soul. 
We  travelled  on  through  a  barren  country,  in  all  respects,  towards 
Charleston.  We  came  that  evening  to  Scott's,  where  the  people 
seemed  to  be  merry  :  they  soon  became  mute  :  we  talked  and  prayed 
with  them  :  in  the  morning  when  we  took  our  leave  of  them,  they 
would  receive  nothing.  We  met  brother  Willis  ;  he  had  gone  along 
before  us,  and  had  made  an  acquaintance  with  Mr.  Wells,  a  respect- 
able merchant  of  the  city,  to  whom  he  had  carried  letters  of  intro- 
duction, from  Mr,  Wayne,  of  Georgetown  :  1  jogged  on,  dejected  in 
spirit,  and  came  to  Mr.  Wells's.  We  obtained  the  use  of  an  old 
meeting-house  belonging  to  the  General  Baptists,  in  which  they  had 
ceased  to  preach  :  brother  Willis  preached  at  noon — brother  Lee 


ilEV.  FRANCIS  IfiJBURY'S  JOURNAL. 


morning  and  evening.  I  first  weirtto  the  Episcopal  church,  and  then 
to  the  Independent  meeting-house  :  at  this  la6t  I  heard  a  good 
discourse. 

Monday  28.  The  CaWinists,  who  are  the  only  people  in  Charles- 
ton who  appear  to  have  any  sense  of  religion,  seem  to  be  alarmed. 
Yesterday  morning,  and  again  at  noon,  the  congregations  were  small ; 
at  night  we  were  crowded.  There  is  a  great  dearth  of  religion  here  ; 
some  say,  never  more  so  than  at  this  time. 

The  people  were  a  little  moved  while  brother  Lee  preached  to 
them  on  Sabbath  evening.  My  first  sermon  was  on  Wednesday  the 
second  of  March,  on  2  Cor.  v.  20.  I  had  but  little  enlargement.  I 
preached  again  the  next  day  on  Eccles.  xi.  9.  the  people  were  so- 
lemn and  attentive.  I  find  there  are  here  who  oppose  us — I  leave 
the  Lord  to  look  to  his  own  cause.  I  told  my  hearers  that  I  expected 
to  stay  in  the  city  but  seven  days  ;  that  I  should  preach  every  night, 
if  they  would  favour  me  with  their  company,  and  that  I  should  speak 
on  subjects  of  primary  importance  to  their  souls,  and  explain  the 
essential  doctrines  taught  and  held  by  the  Methodists. 

Friday,  March  4.  I  gave  them  a  discourse  on  the  nature  of  convic- 
tion for  sin,  from  John  xvi.  8.  many  serious  people  attended,  and 
some  appeared  to  feel. 

Saturday  5.    I  spoke  on  the  nature  and  necessity  of  repentance. 

The ministers,  who  had  before  this  held  meeting  at  the  same 

hour  with  us,  and  had  represented  our  principles  in  an  unfavourable 
light,  and  strove  to  prepossess  the  people's  minds  against  our  doc- 
trines— even  these  ministers  came  to  hear.  This  afternoon  Mr. 
Wells  began  to  feel  conviction  ;  my  soul  praised  the  Lord  for  this 
fruit  of  our  labours,  this  answer  to  our  prayers. 

Sunday  6.  I  had  but  few  hearers  this  morning  ;  these  few  appeared 
to  have  feeling  hearts  :  in  the  evening  I  preached  to  a  large,  wild 
company,  on  Acts  xvii.  30,  31.  My  soul  is  in  deep  travail  for  Mr. 
Wells — I  hope  God  will  set  him  at  liberty.  The  sore  throat  and 
scarlet  fever  prevail  in  this  city,  yet  are  the  inhabitants  vain  and 
wicked  to  a  proverb.     I  bless  God  for  health. 

Wednesday  8.  I  had  a  good  time  on  Matt.  vii.  7.  In  the  evening 
the  clouds  about  Mr.  Wells  began  to  disperse  ;  in  the  morning  he 
could  rejoice  in  the  Lord.  How  great  is  the  work  of  God — once  a 
sinner,  yesterday  a  seeker,  and  now  His  adopted  child  !  Now  we 
know  that  God  hath  brought  us  here,  and  have  a  hope  that  there  will 
be  a  glorious  work  among  the  people — at  least  among  the  Africans. 

Thursday  9.  This  day  I  delivered  my  last  discourse  on  1  Pet.  iii. 
J  5.     T  loved  and  pitied  the  people,  and  left  some  under  gracious  im; 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JotJRNAL,  383 

pressions.     We  took  our  leave  ;  and  had  the  satisfaction  of  observ- 
ing that  Mrs.  Wells  appeared  to  be  very  sensibly  affected. 

We  had  rough  crossing,  in  going  over  the  Bay  to  Hadrell's  Point. 
I  baptised  two  children  at  Mr.  S — 's,  for  which  1  was  offered  a  great 
reward — but  it  was  by  persons  who  did  not  know  that  neither  my 
own  feelings  nor  the  constitution  of  our  church  permitted  me  to  re- 
ceive any  compensation  for  such  services. 

We  reached  Georgetown  time  enough  to  give  notice  for  preaching 
in  the  evening. 

Sunday  13.  The  people  generally  attended  and  were  serious.  We 
found  Mrs.  Wayne  under  deep  distress  of  soul. 

From  Georgetown  we  came  by  Kingstree  and  got  to  Mr.  Durant's, 
who,  I  had  heard,  was  a  Methodist :  we  found  him,  in  sentiment,  one  of 
Mr.  Hervy's  disciples,  but  not  in  the  enjoyment  of  religion  :  I  deli- 
vered my  own  soul  before  I  took  my  leave  of  him. 

Hearing  of  brother  Daniel  at  Town-Creek,  I  resolved  to  make  a 
push  for  his  house  ;  it  was  forty  miles  distant,  and  I  did  not  start  un- 
til nine  o'clock.  I  dined  at  Lockwood's  Folly,  and  got  in  about  se- 
ven o'clock.  O,  how  happy  was  I  to  be  received,  and  my  dear 
friends  to  receive  me !  I  have  been  out  for  six  weeks,  and  rode  near 
five  hundred  miles  among  strangers  to  me,  to  God,  and  to  the  power 
of  religion.  How  could  I  live  in  the  world  if  there  were  no  Chris- 
tians in  it ! 

North  Carolina. — Saturday  19.  After  preaching  at  Town-Creek, 
I  rode  in  the  evening  to  Wilmington  ;  night  came  on  before  we  reach- 
ed there,  and  from  the  badness  of  the  causeway,  I  ran  some  risk : 
we  went  to ,  but  he  was  not  prepared  to  receive  us  ;  after- 
ward to ,  where  we  had  merry,  singing,  drunken  raftsmen  ; 

to  their  merriment  I  soon  put  a  stop.     1  felt  the  power  of  the  devil 
here. 

Sunday  20.  The  bell  werft  round  to  give  notice,  and  I  preached  to 
a  large  congregation.  When  I  had  done,  behold  F-  Hill  came  into 
the  room  powdered  off,  with  a  number  of  fine  ladies  and  gentlemen. 
As  I  could  not  get  my  horse  and  bags,  1  heard  him  out :  I  verily  be- 
heve  his  sermon  was  his  own,  it  was  so  much  like  his  conversation. 
I  came  away  well  satisfied  that  I  had  delivered  my  own  sou!. 

Monday  21.  On  my  way  I  stopped  at  A— 's  and  baptised  some 
children  :  the  poor  mother  held  out  a  piece  of  gold  to  me.  This  is 
the  pay  of  the  priests  here  for  such  service  :  Lord,  keep  me  from 
the  love  of  honour,  money,  and  ease. 

Wednesday  23.  I  had  a  few  hearers  at  the  Lake  chapel.  There 
lias  been  much  injury  done  here  to  the  cause  of  religion   by  some 


334  JEUuV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL. 

who  promised  much  in  this  way,  and  performed  little.  I  lodged  near 
the  Wacamaw  Lake,  which  is  seven  miles  in  circumferance,  fed  by 
several  streams  running  through  the  adjacent  marshes,  and  surround- 
ed nearly  on  all  sides  by  a  sandy  beach  :  this  is  a  desert  country  ; 
has  few  inhabitants,  and  fewer  still  who  have  any  deep  sense  of 
religion. 

Tuesday  29.  Rode  to  Elizabethtown,  crossing  the  north-east 
branch  of  Cape  Fear  River.  I  called  at  S — 's  and  offered  baptism 
to  his  sick  wife,  which  she  declined  accepting  ;  after  I  came  away 
she  was  distressed  at  her  refusal,  and  sent  her  son  four  miles  after  me  • 
myself  and  my  horse  were  both  weary,  but  I  returned  and  had  a 
solemn  time. 

Wednesday,  April  6.  I  preached  at  Swansbury  in  sight  of  the  sea. 
Here  are  a  wicked  people  indeed  ;  nevertheless,  a  few  have  joined 
society. 

Monday  1 1 .  Preached  in  the  court-house  at  Kingston.  I  was  en- 
tertained very  kindly  by  Governor  Caswel. 

Tuesday  19.  Preached  at  the  Cypress  chapel,  and  had  many  people 
to  hear.  I  met  Doctor  Coke  at  G.  Hill's  that  evening :  here  we 
held  our  conference  in  great  peace. 

Monday  25.  I  rode  to  Doctor  Peets  :  this  man  has  given  up  family 
and  private  prayer,  and  yet  is  in  distress  about  his  soul. 

Tuesday  26.  1  preached  at  Bridge  Creek  chapel.  I  was  very  ill, 
and  was  tempted  to  think  the  Lord  was  about  to  lay  me  aside,  or  take 
me  away,  and  detain  Doctor  Coke  in  America. 

Virginia. — Saturday  30.  I  am  much  better  in  health — my  sickness 
was  made  a  blessing  to  me.  Rode  to  W.  Mason's,  where  we  are  to 
meet  in  conference.  I  found  the  minds  of  the  people  greatly 
agitated  with  our  rules  against  slavery,  and  a  proposed  petition  to»the 

general  assembly  for  the  emancipation  of  the  blacks.     Colonel , 

and  Doctor  Coke  disputed  on  the  subject,  and  the  Colonel  used  some 
threats  :  next  day,  brother  O'Kelly  let  fly  at  them,  and  they  were 
made  angry  enough ;  we,  however,  came  off  with  whole  bones,  and 
our  business  in  conference  was  finished  in  peace. 

Thursday,  May  5.  At  R.  Jones's,  I  found  a  blessing  in  my  labours. 
Spent  the  evening  with  W  Graves  ;  I  am  weak  in  body,  but  I  have 
a  constant  sense  of  the  presence  of  God.  Rode  to  Lane's  chapel, 
where  I  found  a  serious,  loving  people. 

Sunday  8.  Rode  to  Ellis's  chapel — read  prayers  and  preached.  It 
appears  to  be  low  times  here.  I  was  happy  with  brothers  Nichols 
and  Spratley  in  the  evening. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  385 

Monday  9.  Set  off  for  James-City,  came  to  James-River,  and  miss- 
ing the  house  where  the  ferrymen  stay,  I  was  detained  some  time 
before  I  found  them. 

Tuesday  10.  Had  a  large  congregation  at  Chickahominy  church  : 
I  administered  the  sacrament  to  a  number  of  communicants,  and  we 
had  a  very  gracious  season. 

Thursday  12.  Rode  to  York,  lately  the  seat  of  war.  Here  Lord 
Cornwallis  surrendered  to  the  combined  armies  of  America  and 
France.  The  inhabitants  are  dissolute  and  careless.  I  preached 
to  a  few  serious  women  at  one  o'clock  ;  and  at  the  desire  of  the 
ladies,  again  at  four  o'clock.  I  came  to  Mrs.  Rowe's  ;  the  son  was 
once  on  our  side  ;  he  has  left  us,  and  now  we  have  the  mother.  I 
lodged  in  the  poor-house. 

Saturday  14.  I  directed  my  course  for  Urbanna.  I  was  apprehen- 
sive of  a  gust,  while  crossing  the  Rappahannock  ;  but  I  reached  the 
other  side  in  safety  :  lodging  with  Colonel  Gordon,  and  Captain 
Owings.  I  waited  on  Colonel  Carter,  a  Baptist — a  man  of  a  most 
excellent  spirit  :  we  had  much  free  conversation  on  the  subjects  of 
religion,  churches,  and  slavery. 

We  crossed  the  Patomac  at  Hooe's  ferry,  and  found  the  people  vul- 
garly wicked,  drinking  and  swearing  :  we  paid  a  dollar  for  our  fer- 
riage, and  left  them.  Perhaps  the  providence  of  God  led  me  this 
way,  that  I  might  see  and  learn  to  pity  the  state  of  the  people  in  the 
northern  Neck  of  Virginia ;  and  those  also  of  Charles  and  St. 
Mary's  counties  in  Maryland  ;  I  have  been  sensibly  affected  with 
their  situation. 

Maryland. — Thursday  20.  Preached  at  Childs's,  and  at  Weems's  ; 
at  which  last  place  they  are  building  a  chapel.  I  hasted  on  to  An- 
napolis, but  through  neglect,  the  people  had  no  notice  of  my  coming. 
Brother  Gill  was  here  a  few  weeks  past,  when  one  S — ,  a  barber, 
came  to  mock  ;  and,  it  is  said,  stood  up  to  preach  ;  and  said  his  sins 
were  forgiven  :  he  was  soon  seized  with  sickness,  and  made  a  sud- 
den exit — here  we  will  leave  him. 

Sunday  23.  Notwithstanding  it  rained,  many  attended,  of  both 
rich  and  poor  :  but  in  the  afternoon,  the  wind,  or  the  rain,  kept  the 
gentry  away  ;  many  of  the  common  people  heard  gladly.  From 
Annapolis,  we  rode  to  Alexandria,  to  meet  Dr.  Coke  ;  he  did  not 
come,  however,  until  the  next  day. 

Thursday  26.  We  waited  on  General  Washington,  who  received 
us  very  politely,  and  gave  us  his  opinion  against  slavery. 

Vol.  I.  49 


386"  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURYyS  JOURNAL. 

Friday  27.  We  returned  to  Annapolis.  The  Doctor  preached  at 
six  o'clock,  to  a  crowded  congregation  :  thence,  passing  through  Bal- 
timore, we  came  to  Mr.  Gough's. 

Monday  30.  We  went  to  Abingdon,  to  settle  our  college  business  • 
and  took  a  bond  for  the  conveyance  of  the  ground  :  we  then  returned, 
and  fixed  our  plan  for  the  approaching  conference. 

Wednesday,  June  1.  Our  conference  began.     I  was  unwell  during 
the  session,  a  blister  running,  applied  for  a  pain  in  my  breast.     On 
Thursday  the  Doctor  took  his  leave  of  America  for  this  visit.    We 
parted  with  heavy  hearts.     On  Friday  we  rested  from  our  labours 
and  had  a  love-feast. 

Saturday  4.  I  spent  three  hours  profitably,  in  reading  the  printed 
minutes  of  the  conference. 

I  left  Baltimore  at  three  o'clock  to  take  a  little  breath  after  such  a 
press  of  business. 

Sunday  5.  I  rode  to  Abingdon,  to  preach  the  foundation  sermon  of 
Cokesbury  College  :  I  stood  on  the  ground  where  the  building  is  to 
be  erected,  warm  as  it  was,  and  spoke  from  Psalm  lxxviii.  4—8. 
I  had  liberty  in  speaking,  and  faith  to  believe  the  work  would 
go  on. 

Monday  6.  From  Abingdon  I  returned  to  Perry-Hall,  and  there 
continued  until  Friday. 

Saturday  11.  Preached  in  Baltimore,  on  "Ye  know  not  what 
manner  of  spirit  ye  are  of." — In  the  town  I  spoke  three  times,  and  at 
the  Point  once. 

Friday  17.  Preached  at  the  Garrettson  church  to  a  dull,  backsli- 
ding people. 

Friday  24.,  I  crossed  the  mountains  to  Sharpsburg,  and  preached  t» 
some  honest  Germans.     Came  on  to  Shepherds-Town. 

Tuesday  28.  Rode  to  the  Springs  called  Bath — now  under  great 
improvement.  I  preached  in  the  playhouse,  and  lodged  under  the 
same  roof  with  the  actors. — Some  folks,  who  would  not  hear  me  in 
their  own  neighbourhood,  made  now  a  part  of  my  audience,  both 
night  and  morning.  Leaving  Bath  I  came  to  brother  Dew's,  (on  the 
South  branch  of  the  Patomac)  very  unwell. 

Sunday,  July  3.  The  day  was  raiuy,  nevertheless  I  preached,  ad- 
ministered the  sacrament,  and  baptised  some  children. 

Saturday  9.  Rode  to  Dewit's,  where  I  had  many  to  hear,  and  some 
to  have  their  children  baptised. 

Sunday  10.  My  congregation  was  large.  Hard  labour  has  almost 
overdone  me.     I  rode  to  S — s's,  where  I  found  some  life  among  the 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  387 

people.     A  long,  dreary  ride,  brought  us  to  Morgantown  :  I  preached 
and  baptised,  and  was  much  spent. 

Thursday  14.  I  was  taken  with  an  inflammation  in  my  throat :  I 
preached  at  Col.  Martin's  :  afterward  I  went  on,  in  the  night,  and 
very  unwell,  to  Seaton's. 

Friday  15.  I  had  a  high  fever ;  I  however  bore  up  to  ride  eight 
miles,  and  preached  and  baptised. 

Saturday  16.  Rode  to  Litton's,  but  could  not  preach. 

Tuesday  19.  Came  to  Beason-Town  ;  gave  an  exhortation,  and 
rode  on  to  . 

Thursday  21.  Went  to  Mr.  Jacob's,  Old  Town  ;  he  and  his  wife 
appear  to  be  much  engaged. 

Sunday  24.  As  an  appointment  was  made  for  me  to-day,  I  read 
prayers  and  preached  with  some  pain,  and  to  little  purpose. 

Monday,  Tuesday,  Wednesday.  Very  unwell,  with  a  relapse  of  an 
inflammatory  complaint  in  the  throat ;  for  sometime  I  could  get  no  re- 
lief; honey,  a  remedy  so  excellent  in  such  cases,  was  not  to  be  had  : 
meantime,  I  ate  with  pain,  and  was  called  to  the  exercise  of  patience. 

Virginia. — Thursday  27.  Being  in  a  good  degree  recovered,  I 
felt  thankful.  My  spirit  is  grieved  at  so  much  vanity  as  is  seen  here 
at  Bath,  by  the  many  poor  careless  sinners  around  me.     The  living 

is  expensive,   four  dollars   per  week.     Capt.  is  here,  raised 

almost  from  the  grave  :  I  feel  tenderly  for  him ;  I  hope  God  will 
convert  his  soul. 

Sunday  30.  Mr.  Keith  gave  us  a  sermon— very  legal  and  to  lit- 
tle purpose.  In  the  afternoon  I  gave  them  my  last  discourse  on 
Rom.  i.  16. 

Maryland. — Monday  31.  Rode  thirty  miles  :  I  was  almost  spent; 
I  ate  a  little,  and  was  glad  to  get  to  bed. 

Tuesday,  August  1.  I  felt  better:  the  weather  is  very  warm. 

Wednesday  2.  I  rode  fifty  miles  :  I  felt  weary,  but  better  in  health. 

Thursday  3.  Reached  Baltimore.  Our  friends  here  have  bought 
a  lot,  and  are  building  a  new  chapel  thereon,  seventy  by  forty-six 
feet :   it  is  well  fixed  for  entrances  and  light. 

Sunday  6.  From  preaching  so  frequently  in  the  evenings,  and  con- 
sequent exposure  to  night  air,  I  have  suffered  a  relapse,  and  the  in- 
flammation of  my  throat  has  returned  :  to  this  was  added  a  bilious  lax  ; 
so  that  I  was  laid  up  at  Mr.  Gough's  until  Saturday  the  20th  Inst. 
During  my  stay,  Mrs.  Chamier  has  departed  this  life,  and  is  gone,  I 
trust,  to  Abraham's  bosom.  It  has  been  a  school  of  affliction  to  me  ; 
but  I  am  thankful  that  in  my  sufferings,  I  had  a  skilful  physician,  and 
constant  attendance  from  my  kind  nurses,  and  I  was  in  a  house  where 


388  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURv's  JOURNAL. 

prayer  was  wont  to  be  made.  I  have  been  taught  the  necessity  of 
jvalking  more  holily  and  humbly  with  God  ;  to  pray  more  fervently, 
and  to  preach  more  faithfully. 

Sunday  21.  I  was  just  able  to  perform  the  funeral  rites  of  Mrs. 
Chamier.  I  preached  to  about  one  thousand  people,  and  had  a  very 
serious  time. 

Tuesday  23.  I  set  off,  very  weak,  for  Philadelphia,  and  reached 
there  on  Thursday  the  25th. 

Pennsylvania. — Sunday  28.  Preached  a  sacramental  sermon  on 
Rom.  v'ui.  32.  Our  congregation  was  large  in  the  evening,  to  whom 
I  enlarged  on  Joshua  xxiv,  19. 

New- York. — Wednesday  31.  Reached  New-York  ;  and  preached 
the  three  following  days,  although  weak  in  body,  and  languid  in 
Spirit. 

Sunday,  September  4.  Notwithstanding  I  was  very  unwell,  I 
preached  thrice,  read  prayers  twice,  and  held  a  love-feast  :  my 
flesh  went  heavily  along.  Our  society  here  has  increased  in  number 
and  grace ;  our  congregations  also  grow  larger.  I  feel  deeper 
desires  to  be  given  up  to  God.  My  friends  here  have  been  libe- 
ral indeed  in  supplying  my  temporal  needs  ;  may  they  be  abundantly 
rewarded  in  spirituals. 

Wednesday  6.  After  preaching,  this  morning,  I  left  the  city:  over- 
staying the  hour,  the  stage  left  us,  and  we  found  ourselves  under  the 
necessity  of  walking  six  miles  ;  I  dined  with  Mr.  Ogden,  and  preach- 
ed in  Elizabethtown,  in  the  unfinished  church  belonging  to  the  Pres- 
byterians. 

New-Jersey. — Friday  9.  Heard  Mr.  Woodall  preach  a  funeral  dis- 
course on, "  Lord,  thou  hast  made  my  days  as  a  handbreadth."— In  my 
judgment  he  spoke  well. 

Saturday  10.  I  had  liberty  in  preaching  to  the  people  at  Monmouth, 
on  Josh.  xxiv.  17.  and  felt  much  for  the  souls  present. 

Saturday  17.  Quarterly  meeting  at  Morris's  River:  our  house  was 
not  quite  covered,  and  it  was  falling  weather  ;  the  people,  neverthe- 
less, stayed  to  hear  me  preach ;  afterward  brother  A.  and  brother 
L.  spoke  to  them. 

Sunday  18.  We  had  a  great  time  ;  the  people  spoke  freely  of  the 
dealings  of  God  with  their  souls. 

Wednesday  21.  Rode  to  brother  F-'s.  I  received  my  wagon  for 
forty-four  pounds — Will  it  not  bring  me  into  trouble  in  travelling, 
and  in  getting  horses  ? 

Saturday  23.  Preached  at  Salem  and  at  Stow-Creek,  with  some 
consolation  :  many  attended,  although  it  rained,  and  we  had  a  com- 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL-  380 

iortable  time  at  sacrament.  I  plunged  H.  T  and  S.  M.  in  Salem- 
Creek  :  this  unusual  baptismal  ceremony,  might,  perhaps,  have  made 
our  congregation  larger  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been.  Lord, 
help  me  to  keep  on,  under  all  my  troubles  of  body  and  mind.  From 
Salem  we  proceeded  on  thirty  miles  through  a  great  storm  ;  we  were 
glad  to  stop  at  Gloucester,  where  we  had  a  room  to  ourselves,  enjoy- 
ing our  Christian  privileges,  and  were  comfortable.  Next  morning 
we  came  on  to  Cooper's  ferry,  and  although  the  wind  blew  vio- 
lently in  the  morning,  when  we  came  to  the  ferry  all  was  calm.  We 
breakfasted   in   Philadelphia  early  enough  for  church. 

Pennsylvania. — Monday  26.  Set  out  for  the  south  ;  and  arrived 
at  Chester.  Next  day  preached  at  Mattson's  ;  arriving  at  Wilmington, 
I  preached  there  on  James  i.  27. 

Delaware. — Friday  30.  At  Blackstone's  chapel.  I  felt  the  ne- 
cessity of  watching  against  the  spirit  of  politics,  and  of  being  more 
in  the  spirit  of  prayer  :  the  people's  minds  are  agitated  with  the  ap- 
proaching election  of  delegates  to  the  assembly. 

October  1.  Came  to  Dover. — 1  had  the  court-house  full  of  people, 
but  I  was  not  in  possession  of  liberty  of  mind  or  strength  of  body  to 
preach.     The  election  is  not  yet  over. 

Monday  3.  We  had  a  gracious  season  at  the  sacrament  at  Purdon's. 
That  evening  I  rode  to  brother  White's,  and  was  closely  occupied 
with  temporals. 

Maryland. — Saturday  8.  We  had  an  open  time,  and  the  souls  of 
the  people  were  stirred  up  at  Angiers  j  the  Lord  was  also  with  us  at 
Worton  chapel  in  the  afternoon. 

Sunday  9.  I  preached  at  Kent  Old  chapel  on,  "  Ye  have  said  it  is 
vain  to  serve  God  :" — in  the  afternoon  and  at  night  in  Chestertown. 
I  always  have  an  enlargement  in  preaching  in  this  very  wicked  place  : 
the  people  to-day  were  very  serious  and  attentive. 

Monday  11.  Came  to  B.'s  ;  there  was  a  spirit  of  life  among  the 
people,  and  my  own  soul  felt  comfortably.  Some  of  our  principal 
members  here  are  men  who  have  not  been  successful  ;  had  they  pros- 
pered in  their  pursuits,  perhaps  they  never  would  have  sought  the 
Lord  :  being  now  in  possession  of  religion,  there  is  the  less  of  dan- 
ger in  prosperity ;  I  therefore  counselled  them  to  go  to  the  western 
country,  where  the  means  of  rearing  a  family,  and  advancing  in  the 
world  was  more  within  the  reach  of  the  inhabitants. 

October  24.  Set  off  from  brother  White's,  for  Dorset  circuit.  I 
preached  at  brother  Frazier's  in  the  evening.  After  visiting  the  so- 
cieties in  this  quarter,  I  came  on  Saturday  to  Caroline  quarterly 
meeting,  at  the  widow  Haskins's  ;  here  we  had  a  gracious  season. 


390  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL. 

Rode  to  Dover  quarterly  meeting.  Our  brethren  preached  ami 
exhorted,  and  I  administered  the  sacrament. 

Wednesday  31.  I  preached  on  Caleb's  following  the  Lord  fully. 
I  left  Dover  and  felt  some  pain  in  parting  with  my  friends. 

Maryland. — Saturday,  November  3.  I  crossed  the  Chesapeake, 
and  found  some  difficulty  in  getting  my  wagon  over :  I  missed  my 
appointment  at  the  college,  and  came  late  to  Mr.  Gough's. 

Sunday  4.  Came  away  early,  and  arriving  in  Baltimore,  preached 
at  noon  on  Hebr.  xi.  2—8.  ;  and  at  night,  on  Caleb's  fully  following 
the  Lord.  I  found  the  means  of  conveyance  by  my  carriage,  or 
Jersey  wagon,  would  not  do. 

Tuesday  G.  I  preached  at  Annapolis  to  a  multitude  of  people,  part 
of  whom  were  serious. 

Wednesday  7.  I  was  under  considerable  exercise  of  mind  about 
my  carriage;  I  at  length  resolved  to  decline  travelling  in  it,  and 
buying  a  secondhand  sulky,  left  it  to  be  sold.  I  now  travelled  light 
and  easy,  and  came  to  Childs's  church. 

Being  disappointed  in  crossing  at  Holland's  Point,  I  shaped  my 
course  for  Alexandria.  I  preached  on  the  Sabbath  evening  on  my 
way,  to  an  attentive  congregation,  and  reached  town  on  Monday  13. 

Virginia. — Tuesday  14.    I  dined  with  Doctor  Samuel  Smith  and 

Mr.  M'K at  General  Roberdeau's.  Our  conversation  turned  upon 

slavery  ;  the  difficulties  attending  emancipation,  and  the  resentment 
some  of  the  members  of  the  Virginia  legislature  expressed  against 
those  who  favoured  a  general  abolition.  I  preached  in  the  court- 
house. I  took  cold  by  coming  out  into  the  open  air  whilst  in  a  pro- 
fuse perspiration  ;  and  this  I  seldom  fail  to  do,  if  I  preach  to  a  large 
congregation  in  a  close,  warm  place.    In  the  afternoon  I  set  out,  and 

spent  the  evening  with  brother  Foster  at  Mr.  V 's  :  it  rained,  and 

the  house  was  like  a  sieve — they  could  not  even  keep  the  beds  from 
the  wet. 

Thursday  17!  The  morning  was  very  damp,  and  I  imprudently  set 
out  an  hour  before  day ;  I  thus  increased  the  cold  I  had  caught  in 
Alexandria,  and  brought  on  a  regular  attack  of  my  old  complaint — an 
inflammation  in  the  throat.  The  day  was  very  cold,  and  we  suffered 
much  :  we  stopped  at  a  very  indifferent  house  where  there  were  no 
beds  fit  for  use,  and  no  candles  :  we  had  to  wait  about  two  hours  for 
some  boiled  milk.  My  fever  and  inflammation  increasing,  I  rode  on 
thirty-three  miles,  to  Collins's,  in  Caroline  county,  where  I  became 
indisposed  indeed. 

Saturday  19.  I  could  not  think  it  safe  to  stop  here;  I  went  on, 
passing  by  Hanover  court-house,  Hanover  and  New-Castle  towns, 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  391 

anxious  to  get  into  a  good  lodging  and  amongst  kind  people.  I  called 
at  one  tolerable  house  ;  plain  people  they  were,  but  ill  as  I  was  I 
could  not  stay  here.  Journeying  on,  I  came  to  a  petty  ordinary, 
where  the  host  recommended  me  to  a  widow  Chamberlayne,  who, 
he  thought,  would  receive  me  and  use  me  well  :  it  was  growing  late, 
and  it  was  cold;  and  it  was  still  five  miles  to  her  house  ;  on,  how- 
ever, I  went :  the  Lord  opened  the  heart  of  this  widow,  and  she  kindly 
received  me  under  her  roof:  I  found  her  to  be  a  motherly  woman, 
and  to  have  some  skill  in  my  complaint.  I  was  doubtful  whether  it 
were  best  to  bleed  or  blister  :  my  throat  inflamed  and  ulcerated.  In 
this  situation  I  continued  with  little  amendment,  until  on  Wednesday 
morning  the  23d,  one  ulcer  broke  ;  and  on  Thursday  the  other.  I 
was  now  in  a  fair  way  for  recovery ;  but  having  taken  cold  by  frequent 
bathing  my  feet,  a  violent  pain  and  swelling  settled  in  the  joint  of  my 
great  toe,  to  which  I  applied  a  bath  and  poultice  of  bitter  herbs. 
My  spirits  have  not  failed.  I  find  myself  humbled  before  the  Lord  ; 
and  hope  that  this  affliction  will  be  for  his  glory,  and  my  good. 

Friday  25.    This  day  I  rode  to  James-City. 

Sunday  27.  I  went  to  Chickahominy  church,  where  conditional 
notice  had  been  given  for  brother  Reed  :  I  preached  on  Acts  v.  31. 
and  spent  the  evening  at  Mr.  Welden's.  My  foot  continuing  in  such 
a  state  as  to  prevent  my  going  to  my  appointments,  I  was  led  to  reflect 
on  this  dark  providence.  Unwilling  to  be  idle,  I  wrote  to  the 
preachers  to  do  what  they  could  in  collecting  money  to  carry  on  the 
building  of , our  college.  For  some  time  past,  I  had  not  been  quite 
satisfied  with  the  order  and  arrangement  of  our  form  of  discipline  ; 
and  persuaded  that  it  might  be  improved  without  difficulty,  we, 
accordingly  set  about  it,  and  during  my  confinement  in  James-City,, 
completed  the  work,  arranging  the  subject-matter  thereof  under 
their  proper  heads,  divisions,  and  sections. 

December  4,  5.  I  felt  somewhat  better,  and  had  a  great  desire 
to  go  on  my  way.  We  set  out  and  came  to  the  river ;  after  long 
waiting  we  got  over,  but  with  difficulty  ;  the  high  wind  meeting  the 
tide,  made  so  rough  a  sea  that  the  water  came  with  great  violence  into 
the  boat,  as  we  beat  out  of  the  creek's  mouth  to  get  into  the  river  : 
thus  exposed,  I  took  cold,  which  brought  on  a  slight  inflammation, 
and  next  day  increased  and  produced  a  fever. 

Saturday  17.  Having  proceeded  on,  I  arrived  at  brother  Red- 
drick's,  in  Gates's  county,  North  Carolina,  where  I  spoke  a  little. 

Sunday  18.  I  had  more  hearers  at  Winton  than  I  expected  ;  they 
were  attentive  to  what  I  said  on  Jos.  xxiv.  19, 


392  REV.  FRANCIS  ASBTJRY's  JOURNAL. 

At  Wicocon  the  glory  is  departed.  A  few  Baptist  women  stood  at 
a  distance  and  wept,  whilst  I  administered  the  sacrament :  they  dared 
not  come  to  the  table,  lest  they  should  be  discovered  by  their  own 
people. 

On  Thursday  last  we  made  an  attempt  to  cross  the  Roanoak  at 
Cushi,  but  could  not  get  a  flat;  we  then  made  for  Oliver's  ferry, 
and  having  no  knowledge  of  the  way,  I  waded  through  Rock-West 
twice,  and  wet  my  books.  The  river  was  rising  rapidly,  and  we  had 
still  six  miles  to  Long-Ferry  :  I  was  very  unwell,  and  my  spirits 
greatly  sunk.  After  getting  over,  our  difficulties  did  not  cease  ;  we 
had  to  wade  several  deep  and  dangerous  swamps  :  we,  at  length,  by 
kind  Providence,  were  brought  safely  to  brother  CurrelPs,  where  we 
met  brother  Morris.  The  two  following  days  we  went  on  in  the  same 
manner,  both  horses  and  riders  sometimes  in  danger  as  they  worried 
through  the  swampy  wilds. 

A  solitary  day  this  !— plenty  of  water,  if  nothing  else.  We  em- 
ployed a  black  man  to  ride  our  horses,  and  we  took  to  a  canoe  ;  being 
remounted,  and  journeying  on,  we  came  to  a  stream  that  was  im- 
passable, we  found  ourselves  under  the  necessity  of  going  round  by 
Martinsburg,  and  thus  got  into  the  road,  and  now  pushed  forward 
with  spirit,  until  we  came  to  Swift's  Creek :  here  the  causeway  was 
overflown,  and  the  logs  most  of  them  afloat :  my  horse  fell,  but  I 
was  preserved  by  his  securing  a  fore-foot  hold  on  the  timber  after 
falling  :  thus  we  toiled  over  our  swampy  routes  and  crazy  bridges, 
till  seven  o'clock  ;  and  about  that  time  arrived  at  Neuse-Ferry  :  having 
rode  about  forty  tedious  miles. 

North  Carolina.— Came  to  Newbern.  Found  brothers  A.  and 
B.  in  the  church  ;  I  preached  at  three  o'clock  on  "  the  world  by 
wisdom  knew  not  God."  The  assembly  was  in  session,  and  some  of 
the  members  were  friendly. 

Wednesday  21.  Sailed  down  to  Beaufort,  and  preached  in  the 
church  :  the  people  are  kind,  but  have  very  little  religion.  On  the 
same  evening  I  pushed  down  to  the  Straits,  and  next  day  preached  at 
the  Straits  chapel;  thence  I  returned  to  town,  and  preached  again  ; 
after  which  we  sailed  back  to  Colonel  Bell's,  whence  we  first  started. 

Saturday  24,  and  Sunday  25.  We  held  quarterly  meeting  at  Swans- 
bury,  many  people — little  religion. 

We  came  to  Ford's  ferry  on  Drowning  creek.  The  waters  had 
risen,  and  extended  far  outwards  from  the  banks  of  the  stream  ;  here 
we  were  brought  to  a  full  slop  ;  providentially,  we  found  a  man  there 
who  was  waiting  for  his  brother  to  fetch  him  over,  the  brother  came. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURy's  JOURNAL,  333: 

'and  we  all  crossed  over  together  ;  not,  however,  without  danger-- 
bushes  would  strike  the  horses,  and  their  capering  about  had  well 
nigh  overset  the  boat;?. 

South  Carolina. — January  4,  1786.  I  rode  my  sore-backed  horse 
about  thirty  miles  to  Dunham's,  in  Britaiu-Neck.  Dunham  is  in  de- 
spair :  this,  perhaps,  is  constitutional — or  it  may  be  owing  to  his  cir- 
cumstances ;  the  awakening  of  God's  Spirit,  or  the  combination  of  all 

these  may  have  produced  this  effect.     I  borrowed  brother  A 'a 

horse,  and  we  went  on.  We  crossed  great  Pee  Dee,  and  Lynch's 
creek,  and  wet  my  books  :  coming  to  Blackmingo,  we  lodged  at  a 
tavern  and  were  well  used.  Sleeping  up  stairs,  I  was  afraid  the  shin- 
gles, if  not  the  roof  of  the  house,  would  be  taken  away  with  the  wind, 

Saturday  7.  I  preached  at  Georgetown  twice  to  about  eighty  peo- 
ple each  time  ;  this  is  a  poor  place  for  religion.  Here  I  was  met  by 
brother  H.  Willis. 

Tuesday  9.  Rode  to  Wappataw.  ft  was  no  small  comfort  to  me 
to  see  a  very  good  frame  prepared  for  the  erection  of  a  meeting-house 
for  us,  on  that  very  road  along  which,  last  year,  we  had  gone  pensive 
and  distressed,  without  a  friend  to  entertain  us. 

Wednesday  10.  Preached  at  S.  Capers's — we  had  a  good  time,  and 
many  hearers,  considering  that  neither  place  or  weather  was  favour- 
able :  my  soul  enjoyed  great  peace,  and  I  was  much  engaged  with 
God  that  my  labours  might  not  be  in  vain.  From  Capers's  I  came  to 
Cain-Hoy  by  water.  I  was  grieved  at  B.  A.'s  conduct ;  hurt  to  the 
cause  of  God  may  follow. 

Friday  13.  I  came  to  Charleston  :■  being  unwell,  brother  WiMia- 
supplied  my  place. 

Sunday  15.  We  had  a  solemn  time  in  the  day,  and  a  full  house  and 
good  time  in  the  evening.  My  heart  was  much  taken  up  with  Gody 
Our  congregations  are  large,  and  our  people  are  encouraged  to  under- 
take the  building  of  a  meeting-house  this  year.  Charleston  has  suf- 
fered much— a  fire  about  1700 — again  in  November,  1740 — and 
lastly,  the  damage  sustained  by  the  late  war :  the  city  is  now  in  a 
flourishing  condition. 

Friday  20.  I  left  the  city,  and  found  the  road  so  bad  that  I  was 
thankful  I  had  left  my  carriage,  and  had  a  saddle  and  a  good  pair  of 
boots.  We  were  water-bound  at  Wasmesaw,  where  1  found  a  few  who 
had  been  awakened  by  the  instrumentality  of  our  preachers.  I  was 
comforted  in  reading  Mr.  Zublee's  account  of  the  death  of  some  pious 
Germans  ;  and  also  Mrs.  Fletcher's  account  of  her  husband's  death. 

Monday  24.  The  Wasmesaw  being  still  impassable,  we  directed 
our  course  up  the  low  lands  through  the  wild  woods,  until  we  came 

Vol.  T.  50 


394  REV,  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL* 

to  Mr.  Winter's,  an  able  planter,  who  would  have  us  to  dine  with  hin* 
and  stay  the  night.  His  wife's  mother  being  ill,  and  desiring  the  sa- 
crament, we  went  to  her  apartment,  and  there  had  a  melting,  solemn 
time  :  in  this  worthy  family  we  had  prayer  night  and  morning. 

Tuesday  25.  We  made  an  early  start.  We  stopped  at  a  tavern  for 
breakfast ;  the  landlord  had  seen  and  heard  me  preach  three  years 
before  in  Virginia,  and  would  receive  no  pay.  That  evening  we 
came  to  Mrs.  B.'s.  We  rode  fifty  miles  to  the  Congaree  :  we  lodged 
where  there  were  a  set  of  gamblers  :  I  neither  ate  bread  nor  drank 
water  with  them.  We  left  these  black  legs  early  next  morning,  and 
after  riding  nine  miles,  came  to  a  fire,  where,  stopping  and  broiling 
our  bacon,  we  had  a  high  breakfast.  At  Weaver's  ferry  we  crossed 
the  Seleuda.  Here  once  lived  that  strange,  deranged  mortal,  who 
proclaimed  himself  to  be  God  :  report  says,  that  he  killed  three  men 
for  refusing  their  assent  to  his  godship  :  he  gave  out  his  wife  to  be 
the  Virgin  Mary,  and  his  son  Jesus  Christ ;  and  when  hanged  at 
Charleston,  promised  to  rise  the  third  day. 

Friday  28.  I  had  near  four  hundred  hearers  at  Parrott's  log  church, 
near  Broad-River.  We  have  rode  about  two  hundred  miles  in  the 
last  eight  days. 

Sunday  30.  Having,  by  appointment,  to  preach  on  Sandy-River,  we 
set  off  in  the  rain  which  had  been  falling  all  the  night  before:  the 
first  little  stream  we  attempted  to  cross  had  well  nigh  swept  brother 
M' Daniel  away.  We  rode  on  to  Little-Sandy,  but  found  it  too 
much  swoln  for  us  to  ford  ;  going  up  the  stream,  we  crossed  over  on 
a  log,  our  horses  swimming  over  ;  having  gained  the  opposite  bank, 
we  continued  on  about  twenty  miles,  and  had  a  trying  time  :  I  was 
happy,  although  brother  Willis  was  afraid  we  should  be  obliged  to 
sleep  in  the  woods. 

Monday  31.  We  rode  to  friend  Terry's;  but  here  we  met  with 
our  old  difficulties,  and  were  compelled  to  go  up  higher.  Coming  to 
Great-Sandy,  we  crossed  the  river  at  Walker's  mill ;  and  here  we 
were  in  danger  of  losing  both  our  horses ;  the  Water  came  with 
such  rapidity  from  the  dam  that  it  swept  them  down  the  stream 
under  a  log  :  we  at  length  came  to  father  Seally's  :  here  we  staid  to 
refit,  and  had  every  thing  comfortable.  I  preached  on  Wednesday, 
after  which  I  had  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  to  ride  to  White's, 
Mulberry-Fields,  near  the  mouth  of  John's-River. 

North  Carolina. — Thursday,  February  3.  We  made  a  push  for 
the  Highlands,  and  got  as  far  as  brother  Smith's.  On  Friday  we 
aimed  to  get  to  the  Horse-Ford,  but  missing  our  way,  we  made  but 
twenty-five  miles,  reaching  Herman's,  who  treated  us  kindly,  and 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'S  JOURNAL.  395 

would  receive  nothing — this  was  well  for  us,  for  we  had  but  little 
to  give. 

Saturday  5.  Was  a  very  rainy  day  ;  however,  we  pushed  on, 
and  rode  this  day  about  fifty  miles.  We  crossed  the  north  branch 
of  the  Catabaw-River,  and  arriving  late  at  the  south  branch,  we  pro- 
videntially met  with  a  man  who  was  acquainted  with  the  ford  and 
piloted  us  safe  over ;  it  was  dark,  and  the  river  mild  :  through  a 
heavy  day's  journey  we  came,  wet  and  weary,  to  Mr.  Moore's. 

Sunday  6.  I  preached  at  brother  Connelly's,  where  there  is  a  large 
society,  and  a  revival  of  religion. 

Monday  7.  We  rode  to  W  White's,  and  appointed  preaching  for 
the  next  day ;  here  I  had  about  one  hundred  hearers. 

Wednesday  9.  We  rode  forty  computed,  and  perhaps  in  truth  fifty 
miles,  to  quarterly  meeting  at  Gordon's,  at  the  Mulberry-Fields,  on 
the  Yadkin-River  :  here  we  met  with  brothers  Ivey,  Bingham,  and 
Williamson.     Thursday,  the  sacrament  was  a  time  of  refreshing. 

Saturday  18.  I  rode  through  rain  and  hail  to  B — 's,  and  preached 
to  a  few  serious  people  on  Psalm  cxxviii.  and  we  were  blessed  toge- 
ther. O,  what  happiness  do  they  lose  who  never  visit  the  poor  in 
their  cottages  ! 

Sunday  12.  At  Joseph  Herndon's  it  was  a  chilly  day,  but  there  was 
some  life  among  the  people. 

Monday  13.  There  were  many  to  hear  at  K — 's. 
My  rides  are  little  short  of  twenty  miles  a  day  in  this  mountainous 
country,  besides  my  public   labours  :  my  soul  has  peace,  but  this 
body  is  heavy  and  afflicted  with  pain. 

Tuesday  14.  We  rode  through  the  snow  to  Heady  s,  where,  to  my 
surprise,  I  found  that  the  poor  people  had  built  a  good  house  of  logs  ; 
and  not  satisfied  with  this,  they  must  needs  collect  a  little  money  for 
me,  if  I  would  receive  it. 

Sunday  19.  Preached  at  Morgan  Bryan's.  Next  day  I  set  off  in 
the  rain,  and  travelled  with  it :  we  swam  Grant's  creek,  and  reached 
Salisbury  in  the  evening,  wet  and  weary.  I  thought  we  should 
scarcely  have  preachers  at  the  time  appointed,  but  the  bad  weather 
did  not  stop  their  coming.  We  spent  three  days  in  conference,  and 
went  through  our  business  with  satisfaction.  Having  sent  our  horses 
into  the  country,  we  could  not  get  them  when  they  were  wanted  ; 
I  therefore  borrowed  brother  TunnelPs  horse,  and  went  on  to  my 
appointments. 

Wednesday,  March  1.  I  found  many  waiting  at  Newman's  church, 
Rockingham  county,  to  whom  I  enlarged  on  "  Christ  our  wisdom, 
righteousness,    sanctification,   and    redemption."      Provisions   here 


^*G  UEV.   FRANCIS  ASRUR\ 's  JOURNAL. 

are  scarce  :  some  of  our  friends  from  the  Delaware  are  suffer- 
ing. I  arrived  in  the  night  at  A.  Arnett's  :  my  being  in  a  poor 
cottage  did  not  prevent  my  being  happy,  for  God  was  with  me. 

Thursday,  March  2.  I  preached  on,  "  This  do  in  remembrance  of 
me  ;"  and  it  was  a  solemn,  good  time. 

Saturday  4.  At  (he  widow  Dicks  the  preachers  fell  in  with  each 
other  :  there  were  F — ,  E — ,  L.  and  H. ;  the  latter  is  a  smooth-tongued 
pretty  speaker,  a  youth  that  promises  fair  for  future  usefulness. 

Tuesday  7.  At  Stanfield's  I  had  many  hearers,  and  more  liberty  in 
speaking  than  I  have  had  for  some  time  past.  It  is  hard  to  get  and 
preserve  the  spirit  of  preaching :  it  seems  as  if  God,  at  times  and 
places,  withholds  his  Spirit  from  his  servants  ;  or  else  the  power  of 
Satan  is  so  strong  as  to  depress  the  life  and  liberty  of  the  speaker. 

Friday  M.I  rode  once  more  to  Hillsborough,  where  I  met  with  a 
coal  reception  :  I  am  now  satisfied  never  to  visit  that  place  again  until 
they  have  a  society  formed,  constant  preaching,  and  a  desire  to  see 
me.  O,  what  a  county  is  this !  We  can  but  just  get  food  for  our 
horses.  I  am  grieved,  indeed,  for  the  sufferings,  the  sins,  and  the 
follies  of  the  people. 

Tuesday  21.  Came  to  Whitaker's  chapel,  near  Fishing-Creek, 
where  I  spoke,  with  but  little  consolation  to  myself,  to  about  seventy 
souls.  I  feel  my  body  unwell  ;  but  my  soul  is  stayed  in  cheerful 
dependance  upon  God. 

Wednesday  22.  Rode  to  D.'s  chapel,  where  I  was  met  by  about 
fifty  hearers  :  spirituous  liquors  have  greatly  injured  the  people 
here. 

Friday  24.  At  Conniconnara  chapel,  I  had  nearly  gone  through 
my  subject,  when  a  man  began  to  talk  ;  his  brother  carried  him  away, 
after  fruitless  endeavours  to  silence  him.  Brother  Dickens  spoke, 
and  I  came  away  in  great  pain  to  brother  Clayton's. 

Saturday  25.  I  took  some  Hiera  Eicra,  and  felt  better.  Read  our 
Form  of  Discipline,  in  manuscript,  which  brother  Dickens  has  been 
preparing  for  the  press. 

Sunday  26.  We  had  a  large  congregation,  and  a  solemn  time  at 
brother  Clayton's.  After  meeting  returned  to  brother  Dickens's.  He 
and  his  wife  cleave  to  God  ;  but  there  is  a  great  declension  else- 
where. 

Tuesday  28.    I  called  on  sister  B ,  at  whose  house  I  preached 

when  she  lived  near  Portsmouth,  Virginia.  1  found  her  at  the  point 
of  death,  her  soul  filled  with  the  peace  and  love  of  God.  I  came 
on  to  Roanoak  chapel,  where  I  was  led  to  be  sharp  while  I  treated 
on  the  form  of  godliness  without  the  power. 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY's  JOURNAL.  397 

Virginia. — I  found  the  Lord  was  working  among  the  people  at 
Young's,  in  Mecklenburg,  and  fell  myself  to  be  in  a  warmer  clime. 
We  had  a  gracious  time  at  quarterly  meeting,  especially  at  the  sacra- 
ment :  the  words  of  our  excellent  sister  Jones,  both  in  speaking  and 
in  prayer,  were  sweetly  and  powerfully  felt.  The  second  day  was 
great,  both  in  preaching  and  love-feast :  my  soul  was  melted  ;  I  have 
not  witnessed  such  a  meeting  in  the  south. 

Saturday,  April  1.  Rode  through  the  rain  twenty-four  miles  to  the 
widow  Bedford's,  where  but  a  few,  besides  the  society,  came.  I  met 
the  married  men  and  women  apart,  and  fftere  were  tenderness  and 
tears,  greatly  felt,  and  copiously  shed,  among  them. 

Friday  7.  I  preached  at  Merritt's  chapel,  with  but  little  life.  I 
rode  down  to  Mason's  that  night,  much  weakened  through  abstinence. 
A  deep  dejection  seized  my  spirits,  so  that  I  could  hardly  bear  up. 
On  the  Sabbath  day  I  preached  at  Moss's,  to  a  large  congregation. 
We  went  forwards  towards  Lane's  church  :  here  our  conference  was 
held — some  spirits  were  tried  before  it  ended.  Here  ten  young  men 
offered  themselves  on  probation. 

Thursday  13.  Rode  through  the  rairi  to  N.  Lee's. 
Friday  14,  Arrived  in  Petersburg,  and  had  but  a  dull  time. 
Sunday  16.  Being  Easter-day,  I  preached  at  the  Manakintown  on 
Coloss.  iii.  1,  2,  3,  4.  with  some  freedom. 

Monday  17.  I  directed  my  course  northward,  and  on  Thursday  the 
twentieth  reached  Alexandria. 

Sunday  23.  Hail,  glorious  Lord  ! — After  deep  exercise  of  body  and 
mind,  I  feel  a  solemn  sense  of  God  on  my  heart.  I  preached  by  day 
in  the  court-house,  on  1  Pet.  iii.  10  ;  and  in  the  evening  at  the  Pres- 
byterian church  on  Luke  xix.  41,  42.  Alexandria  must  grow  :  and 
if  religion  prospers  among  them,  it  will  be  blessed.  I  drew  a  plan, 
and  set  on  foot  a  subscription  for  a  meeting-house. 

Maryland. — Wednesday  26.  Arrived  in  Baltimore,  and  was  occu- 
pied until  the  following  Saturday  in  collecting  money  for  the  books, 
and  inspecting  the  accounts  of  the  book-concern. 

Sunday  30.  I  preached  three  times,  and  made  a  collection  to  defray 
the  expenses  of  sending  missionaries  to  the  western  settlements  ; 
I  spoke  twice  on  the  same  subject  through  the  course  of  the  week. 

Monday,  May  8.  Our  conference  began  at  Abingdon,  where  love, 
candour,  and  precision,  marked  our  deliberations. 

Saturday  13.  We  find  that  the  college  is  now  only  fit  for  covering, 
and  we  are  already  in  debt  nearly  £900,  and  money  is  scarce, 
Came  to  Baltimore  to  spend  another  tedious  week. 


398  »EV.   FRANCIS  ASBURY  S  JOURNAL. 

Friday  19.  My  soul  is  stayed  upon  the  Lord  ;  and  all  within  me 
longs  for  God ;  even  the  living  God. 

Sunday  21.  I  preached  in  the  new  meeting-house  in  Light-street, 
on  "  I  had  rather  be  a  door-keeper  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  than 
to  dwell  in  the  tents  of  wickedness."  And  in  the  evening  I  spoke 
on  1  Kings  ix.  6,  7,  8,  9.  it  was  a  very  solmen  time,  a  Warning  to  our 
young  people. 

Tuesday  23.  We  had  a  watch-night,  brother  Whatcoat  preached  ; 
it  was  a  moving  season. 

Wednesday,  June  1.  CaHie  to  Antietum  settlement,  and  spoke  in  a 
Dutch  church  :  a  travelling  ministry  would  be  more  productive  of 
good  among  these  people  ;  their  preachers  and  people  are  too  fond  of 
settling,  and  having  things  established  on  the  regular  plan. 

Virginia. — Thursday  2.  I  reached  Shepherd's  Town  with  diffi- 
culty, and  in  pain.  1  was  blest,  and  delivered  my  own  soul.  The 
people  here  are  displeased  with  me  because  I  do  not  send  them  bro- 
ther Vasey.  Riding  through  so  much  wet  and  damp  weather  has 
caused  the  inflammation  of  my  foot,  and  I  am  afraid  of  being  stopped  : 
this  is  a  great  trial  to  me  ;  Lord,  give  me  a  perfect  resignation !  We 
have  had  rain  for  eighteen  days  successively,  and  I  have  rode  about 
two  hundred  miles  in  eight  or  nine  days  ;  a  most  trying  time  indeed. 

Saturday  4.  We  rode  twenty-eight  miles  along  very  bad  roads  to 
Melbourn's.     Brother  Watters  preached. 

Sunday  5.  The  Lutheran  minister  began  a  few  minutes  before  I 
got  into  Winchester :  I  rode  leisurely  through  the  town,  and  preach- 
ed under  some  spreading  trees  on  a  hill,  on  Joshua  xxiv.  19.  to  many 
white  and  black  people.  It  was  a  solemn,  weighty  time ;  all  was  serious- 
ness and  attention.  1  then  went  once  more  to  Newtown ;  here  I 
preached  on  2  Tiro.  iii.  16,  17.  I  had  but  little  freedom  in  speaking. 
I  called  on  Mr.  Otterbine  :  we  had  some  free  conversation  on  the 
necessity  of  forming  a  church  among  the  Dutch,  holding  conferences, 
the  order  of  its  government,  &c. 

Rode  to  Col. s,  as  welcome  as  snow  in  harvest.     My  soul  is 

kept  in  peace  ;  but  my  poor  body  is  much  fatigued,  and  I  am  lame 
withal.  I  came  over  a  rough  road  to  Johnson's,  and  preached  to  a 
most  insensible  people. 

Monday  12.  Rode  thirty-one  miles  ;  spoke  at  Dewitt's  to  about  fifty 
people  ;  rather  hard  this,  after  riding  so  far :  I  shall  go  elsewhere, 
and  do  more  good,  I  hope. 

Tuesday  13.  I  had  an  open  time  at  Col.  Barratt's.  My  lameness 
discourages  me.     Praise  the  Lord!  there  is  a  little  religion  on  the 


REV.  FRANCIS  ASBURY'3  JOURNAL.  399 

Maryland  side  of  the  Patomac,  and  this  is  some  comfort,  without 
which  this  Alleghany  would  make  me  gloomy  indeed.  Sick  or  lame, 
I  must  try  for  Redstone  to-morrow.  "Viy  mind  has  been  deeply  im- 
pressed with  the  necessity  of  getting  our  people  to  set  apart  the  five 
o'clock  hour  wholly  for  prayer  ;  to  establish  prayer  meetings,  and  to 
speak  evil  of  no  man. 

Thursday  15.  We  rode  about  twenty-two  miles,  and  were  kindly 
entertained  for  five  shillings  and  sixpence. 

Saturday  17.  We  had  a  heavy  ride  to  Morgan-Town  :  I  was  to 
have  been  there  at  four  o'clock,  but  missing  my  way,  1  made  it  six. 

Sunday  18.  We  had  a  great  day.  When  I  had  done  preaching 
brother  M.  exhorted  with  life  and  power,  and  the  power  of  God  was 
felt  among  the  people.  1  suppose  there  were  nearly  six  hundred 
hearers  present. 

Tuesday  20.  Being  court  time  at  Besontown,  our  congregation  was 
large ;  perhaps  not  less  than  six  hundred  people.  My  foot  continues 
swelled  and  uneasy  ;  but  I  desire  to  praise  the  Lord  under  every 
affliction. 

Thursday  22.  Crossed  the  Monongahela  at  Redstone  at  Old  Fort, 
where  they  are  building  a  town.  I  am  now  among  some  of  my  old 
friends  that  moved  from  Maryland  to  this  country. 

Pennsylvania.— Friday  23.  I  was  much  blessed,  and  had  many  to 
hear  at  S.  Litton's.  We  are  now  going  to  the  frontiers,  and  may  take 
a  peep  into  the  Indian  land.  This  is  a  fruitful  district,  and  I  hope  it 
will  prosper  in  religion.  I  have  lately  been  sorely  assaulted  by 
Satan,  and  much  blessed  of  the  Lord. 

Saturday  24.  The  people  were  very  still,  and  very  lifeless  at 
Lackey's.  I  felt  the  power  of  death,  and  my  spirits  were  low.  This 
is  death — when  religion  and  every  comfortable  accommodation  are 
wanting — Lord,  sanctify  all  these  for  my  humiliation. 

Sunday  25.  We  had  a  wild  company  at  D — 's,  to  whom  1  was  led 
to  be  pointed  on  Isaiah  lv.  6,  7.  after  preaching  we  ate  a  little  bread 
and  butter,  and  rode  fifteen  miles  to  Doddridge's  Fort ;  we  arrived 
just  at  sunset,  and  I  was  comforted  in  the  company  of  brother  Smith, 
and  others  of  my  old  friends  from  Maryland. 

Virginia. — Monday  26.  Preached  in  Coxe's  Fort  on  the  Ohio- 
River,  on  "  Trust  in  the  Lord  and  do  good,  so  shalt  thou  dwell  in 
the  land,"  Psalm  xxxvii.  2,  3.  We  found  it  necessary  to  return, 
they  said  twelve,  but  I  thought  fifteen  miles  :  we  were  lost  in 
the  woods  ;  and  it  rained  all  the  way  ;  we,  however,  came  in  about 
eight  o'clock,  and  about  ten  laid  ourselves  down  to  rest  in  peace, 


40U  >';.EV.   FKASCIS   ASEUKY'S   JOVRN AL. 

Tuesday  27.  1  had  a  large  congregation,  and  divine  aid.  We  hasted 
away  to  a  little  town  called  Washington — wicked  enough  at  all  times, 
but  especially  now  at  court  time.  We  had  uncomfortable  lodgings. 
Riding  hard  all  day,  and  loss  of  sleep  at  night,  never  fails  laying  me 
under  affliction. 

Thursday  29.  I  had  enlargement  in  speaking  to  three  or  four 
hundred  people  at  Roberts's  chapel,  on  Luke  iv.  18. 

Friday  30.  Occasion  was  given  to-day  for  expressions  of  wonder 
by  a  clerical  character,  that  any  one  should  be  able  to  preach  who 
had  not  acquired  learning — what  Jesuitical  stupidity  was  here  mani- 
fested !  We  came  to  the  widow  Murphy's  ;  the  family  are  kind,  and 
the  mother  professes  religion. 

July  1  and  2.  I  spoke  in  the  new  church  at  Besontown  ;  we  had 
a  feeling,  gracious  season  :  the  sacrament  was,  I  trust,  attended  with 
a  blessing. 

Maryland. — Monday  3.  We  came  in  haste  to  Simkins's,  and  thence 
to  Barrett's.  We  rode  through  gloomy  mountains,  and  over  rough 
roads  for  two  hours  in  the  dark,  where  both  man  and  horse  were  in 
danger  ;  but  the  Lord  was  our  preserver,  and  no  accident  happened 
to  us. 

Tuesday  4.  I  came  to  Barratt's,  where  God  spoke  to  the  hearts  of 
a  few  souls,  who  were  not  a  little  moved.  Here  I  was  almost  ready 
to  drop  for  want  of  sleep. 

I  found  an  appointment  had  been  made  for  me  at  Friend's  Cove  : 
I  hesitated  to  go,  but  being  unwilling  to  disappoint  the  people,  I  set 
out,  and  must  needs  stray  two  miles  out  of  my  way  to  see  a  curious 
spring,  which  ebbs  and  flows,  but  not  regularly  :  what  with  rocks  and 
logs  in  our  route,  the  tvay  was  so  rough  it  was  a  mercy  that  ourselves 
and  our  horses  escaped  unhurt :  I  came  to  the  Cove,  and  preached 
on  Luke  xi.  13.  I  have  been  greatly  tempted  to  impatience  and  dis- 
content. The  roads  are  bad ;  my  horse's  hind  feet  without  shoes  ; 
and  but  little  to  eat — to  this  1  may  add,  that  the  lodgings  are  uuclean 
and  uncomfortable.  I  rode  across  the  mountain  to  Spurgin's,  where 
I  met  with  a  number  of  serious  souls — I  do  not  repent  coming  fifteen 
miles — I  preached  on  "  That  we  may  have  boldness  in  the  day  of 
judgment."  I  rode  twenty-two  miles  to  Foster's,  along  a  blind  path, 
and  came  in  about  nine  o'clock,  and  was  thankful.  I  have,  in  six 
days,  rode  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  on  as  bad  roads  as  any 
I  have  seen  on  the  continent. 

K.XD  OF  VOL.  1. 


