     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Jews and Christians in Egypt: The Jewish Troubles in
                  Alexandria and the Athanasian Controversy, Illustrated
                  by Texts from Greek Papyri in the British Museum
      Creator(s): H. Idris Bell, O.B.E., M.A. (editor); with three Coptic
                  texts edited by W. E. Crum, M.A.
     Print Basis: London: British Museum / Bernard Quaritch Ltd. /
                  Humphrey Milford, Oxford University Press, 1924.
                  Fetched directly from archive.org (identifier
                  jewschristiansin0000bell), full OCR text, 2026-09-13 -
                  a fleet cross-world research thread identified the item
                  and this build thread fetched and verified it directly.
          Rights: Public Domain (in the United States, by publication
                  date)
    Rights basis: 1924 publication clears this project's own "to ~1929"
                  US-publication-date rule outright, the same basis
                  already used for chronicle-of-edessa_cowper.txt. NOT
                  yet public domain in a life+70 jurisdiction: Bell died
                  1967, so life+70 reaches only 2038 - the same caveat
                  already carried for the Budge Paradise volumes (Budge
                  d. 1934, life+70 already elapsed by contrast). The
                  archive.org item's own metadata carries no rights or
                  license field of its own (checked directly,
                  2026-09-13); this basis rests on the publication date
                  alone, read from the title page reproduced below.
        Contents: Part I, the Claudius-to-the-Alexandrines papyrus
                  (unrelated to this world). Part II, "The Meletian
                  Schism" (pp. 38-99) - papyri and commentary on the
                  Meletian monastic community at Hathor, including
                  Aurelius Pageus (priest, later monastic Prior) and the
                  community he headed, in the same milieu
                  desert.source.nepheros-archive already anchors. Part
                  III, "The Correspondence of Paphnutius" (pp. 100+) - a
                  separate Melitian correspondence, unrelated to Pageus's
                  own archive by name though within the same broader
                  schism.
    OCR quality: the interlinear Greek/Coptic apparatus is heavily
                  garbled in places (typical for a 1924 scan of papyrus
                  facsimile transcriptions); Bell's own English prose
                  commentary and translations, spot-checked directly
                  against the raw text this session, are clean and
                  reliable. Any verbatim citation from this file should
                  cite the English translation/commentary, not the
                  interlinear Greek transcription, unless independently
                  re-checked.
     __________________________________________________________________











y3 


eee 


3 








BR- 
1Fd 


BY , 
JEWS AND CHRISTIANS 


IN EGYPT 


The fewish Troubles in -Alexandria and the 


cAthanasian Controversy 


ILLUSTRATED BY TEXTS FROM GREEK PAPYRI IN THE 
BRITISH MUSEUM 


EDITED BY 


H. IDRIS BELL, O.B.E., M.A. 


ASSISTANT KEEPER IN THE 
DEPARTMENT OF MANUSCRIPTS 


WITH THREE COPTIC TEXTS 
EDITED BY W. E. CRUM, M.A. 


PRINTED BY ORDER OF THE TRUSTEES 
SOLD AT THE BRITISH MUSEUM 


Anp By BERNARD QuaritcH, Ltp., 11 GRAFTON Street, New Bonp Street, W.! 


Anp Humpurey Mitrorp, Oxrorp University Press, Amen House, ECye 
1924 " 


[All rights reserved | 


Theology [thre | 


SCHOOL GF THEOLOGY 
AV CIlAREMONE 
California 


PRINTED IN ENGLAND 
AT THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
BY FREDERICK HALL 


University of Southern California Library. 


mre fh OO aw F v hk : &, “Le 5 
= 


PREPACE 


HE importance of the small groups of documents published in this 
volume made it advisable to edit and issue them more speedily 
than would have been possible if they took their turn among the 
general series of papyrus documents acquired by the Museum. They 
were acquired as a part of a joint purchase by the Museum and certain 
American and other universities, in which Prof. F. W. Kelsey of 
Michigan was the moving spirit ; and fortunately it was found possible 
to arrange with the partners in the purchase that these groups should 
be kept together. Students of Roman administration, as well as 
scholars interested in Jewish antiquities, will welcome the new light 
thrown upon their subjects by the letter of the Emperor Claudius to 
Alexandria. No writer on the ecclesiastical history of the fourth 
century can dispense with a study of the new letter relating to the 
Meletian quarrels with St. Athanasius, or those from Paphnutius’s 
archive, even if it should turn out that the interesting suggestion 
that among them is an autograph of St. Athanasius himself is less 
well founded than it seems at present. Accordingly Mr. H. I. Bell 
has prepared the texts, translations, and introductions here given 
of the Greek documents, and Mr. W. E. Crum has kindly edited 
_the three Coptic letters, so as to place the material at once at the 
«disposal of scholars. Should any further documents from the same 
“source have been acquired in any quarter, this publication will call 
i J attention to their importance, and aid in their elucidation, and it is to be 
_» hoped that any such discoveries may be promptly made known. Five 
1) collotype facsimiles have been added as almost indispensable for the 
study of these, often difficult, texts. 


J 


Methodist World Service Fund ( 


J. P. Grtson. 


March 13, 1924. 


















oe halal atop statelte ‘a arte i : ~ Be 
iS rae inte ay, oy oe é a fey Per, toner : a if 
B,%, eee : Jct ‘oi 
ren is i <i ad = 4 a8 is EE, tee haar et i A) 
OR ee enema e tee at Pike ae 
Pee times. i a ee ah A | at 


e fA ath ae j cia r 7 R : . 
ee A ath. pete oP ieee. ‘be : . es wei ae a ry ine ip 


Bt etry ie ed = Mylo aoe rye one: lg ots oat 
te. : 


Sk ae otis ic a oe SS: EAA aaa tte F aan ary teint 
rs ig tS a. 6 iswt ihe ae rien AS ‘ooule oe 
ME yee snd) 5 arte Sve sae inceihs as a)? Dev 
Be ee haart escheat I aie ee asi 
7 a lar ata A wes Sef alae et Gabeir ns - 
3 a shor a . pies: wi Oo Sa? ee wal BAe flere mie ea te 
peta 3/2 ea an 
ie sig ais) re piney tat be Eke Besa ha eee Pra oe 
e ae! ee by) ea a DS eitarwed sil elec aie) ne eae 


. MES = ees ee pking ay figiag ns mar) as 


n's dl? ay ss Pn fa 


a) e~ ae. 
we 
‘< 


a oe 
pr gece 


7 


Dae} 
4 


; ad ‘hod 7) oy inn eee 

by ot, Per pat gt ale si aie, nee a ood oat A 
ahs Pew. RAGS ALN Sie oe ced a era pee 
as =) =e ; “ 


F ew, BAA giro Cg ANE aR 9 5 * HS Nae es opted Pon ai. 


vo 
° 
e 


\ eae 
, 
eo 

' 5, 

; Wigs 
— 
iz 
~ 

l 
r ee a a! 
_— 

- 

+ 

= 

"ls 

oI 

, 

> 


= 
7 el 


e 
a Sie sry seine le oe ae : ft ijlaece er Gaeaee 
~ mee ie ah: as Set D hy wees Lee ie % a3 ice Ca it : 


‘ef. rae P A : - ® , = . 
hd ; ree i pert eT ee ee be i: pale Ping ee: i Nie , nme 


- OO ee ale nih eS ths fa See aa Meet re) 
a N . 7 12) 
ae i 

_ _ \ 

an - - 





CONTENTS 


PREFACE . 

NOTE 

ADDENDA ET CORRIGENDA 

ABBREVIATIONS AND METHOD OF PUBLICATION 


I. CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES :— 


. Palacographical and diplomatic questions 
The Impertal cult : 

. The rights of the Alexandrines 

. The Jewish question . : : ; 
5. The character and policy of Claudius . 


- WwW WH 


TEXT 
TRANSLATION 
COMMENTARY. 


Il. THE MELETIAN SCHISM :— 
INTRODUCTION : 
TExTS AND COMMENTARY 


WI. THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS :— 
INTRODUCTION : 
TEXTS AND COMMENTARY 


TABLE OF PAPYRI IN ORDER OF INVENTORY NUMBERS 


INDICES :— 
. Supyect InprEx to INTRODUCTIONS AND COMMENTARIES 
. PrrsonaL InpEx 
. GEOGRAPHICAL INDEX 
. GENERAL INDEX :— 
(az) Greek Worps. 
(4) Coptic Worps. 
. InpDEx oF REFERENCES :— 
(2) AuTHors . 
(2) Inscriptions ; 
(c) Papyrt anp OstTRAca 


bw h 


On 


PAGE 
ill 


Vil 


Vili 


Io 
21 


es 
27 
29 


38 
45 


100 
103 


121 


122 
125 
128 


128 
136 


137 
139 
139 


vi CONTENTS 


FACSIMILES 


Letter of Claudius. 1912, col. 5 . 
Letter from Alexandria. 1914, recto 
Letter of Hatre. 1920, ll. 1-7 
Letter of Paiéous. 1921, ll. 22-8 j 

Letter of Bés and Aphinge. 1922, ll. 3-12 

Letter of Ausonius. 1924 < 

Letter of Athanasius. 1929 3 , 
Coin of Claudius representing Messalina as Demeter 


—— 8 


NOTE 


OR the reason stated by Mr. Gilson in the Preface this volume is 

a special publication, forming no part of the series Greek Papyri 
an the British Museum; and since its contents are likely to have a wider 
interest than those volumes, the method of publication has been altered. 
Not only are the texts printed in modern form, but the commentary is 
unusually full. Much doubtless remains to be done before these texts 
have yielded their full value, but it is hoped that the present volume 
will at least provide a sufficient basis for further study. 

I should like to express my sincere thanks to all who have assisted 
me—first and foremost to Mr. W. E. Crum, whose services are by no 
means confined to his edition of the three Coptic letters, and to Prof. 
Hunt, to whose learning and insight texts and commentary owe far 
more than appears from the occurrences of his name in the notes. My 
colleague Mr. H. J. M. Milne has given frequent help in the decipher- 
ment or interpretation of difficult passages. The proofs of the volume 
have been.read by Sir Frederic Kenyon and Mr. Gilson. To the vast 
bibliographical knowledge of Mr. Norman H. Baynes I am indebted for 
references to useful literature; to Prof. M. Rostovtzeff for notes on 
the Claudius letter; and to Mr. J. G. Milne for a valuable suggestion 
on the same. Mr. G. F. Hill kindly furnished for reproduction a cast 
of the coin of Claudius shown on p. 37. Mr. C. T. Lamacraft of 
this Department has, as always, done invaluable work in the prepara- 
tion and piecing together of the papyri; and as before my thanks are 
due to the staff of the Clarendon Press. 


ADDENDAY ED ©C@ RiviGEay br 


Page gf. Mr. J. G. Milne takes the passage about the senate as ‘pretty conclusive 
evidence that the city had had one under the Ptolemies’. Had Claudius (who, for himself 
or through his advisers, must have known the facts) been aware that Alexandria had never 
had a senate he would have used that as an argument. ‘I can quite easily ’, writes 
Mr. Milne, ‘envisage the Permanent Secretary at Rome minuting: “ Say that we can’t 
discuss the arrangements which were definitely abolished by Augustus, but offer them an 
enquiry to keep them quiet”’.’ 

There is a good deal of weight in this argument, particularly as it comes with the force 
of official experience, but it still seems to the editor improbable that had Augustus abolished 
a senate Claudius, who more than once refers to his policy as a precedent, should not have 
mentioned the fact. That Alexandria had at one time had a senate seems however very 
likely. 

Page 16. To the authorities cited on the question of the citizenship of the Jews may 
now be added Gelzer, in Pauly-Wissowa-Kroll, x, 401, who takes a view practically 
identical with that here propounded (Baynes). 

Page 19f. Since Part I was printed there has appeared an important work on the 
so-called ‘ Heidnische Martyrerakten’, viz. A. von Premerstein, Za den sogenannien alexan- 
drinischen Martyrerakien (Philologus, Supplementband xvi, Heft II, 1923). He deals 
(pp. 15-27) with the ‘Isidorus Acéa’, of parts of which he gives a revised text, and dates 
the embassy to which they refer as 30 Apr., 1 May, a.p. 53. 

Page 25, ll. 77-8. Prof. Hunt has suggested, since the first part of the volume was 
printed off, that the sense may be rather ‘I will not go into the question of past responsi- 
bility, dut shall have no mercy on the aggressor Uf the conflict is renewed. This (which does 
not necessarily involve the correction of dpfapévery to dp&opévov) removes, the difficulty 
noticed on p. 18 and explains the severity of the Emperor’s measures indicated by BGU. 
511+Cairo 10448, and it may well be the correct interpretation. 

Page 30, note on 1. 17. Prof. Rostovtzeff refers to P. Oxy. xii, 1434, where we hear of 
an estate in the Oxyrhynchite nome formerly belonging to C. Julius Theon, father and son, 
in the reign of Augustus; cf. P. Ryl. ii, 145 (Euhemeria): rod mpoeoraros tas Gewvos tot 
©€avos mpooddov, where the same persons may be concerned. It seems by no means 
unlikely that the younger C. Julius Theon, whose father is described as [ye|vopévou dpxtepews 
Kat imopvnpa|rolypa( pov), was the father of our C. Julius Dionysius. 


a 


METHOD OR (PUBLICATION AND LIST) OF 
ABBREVIATIONS 


Tue method followed in this volume is in the main that which has now become all 
but universal in editions of non-literary papyri. The texts are given in modern form, with 
accents, breathings, and punctuation, symbols and abbreviations being extended. In the 
critical notes contractions, lectional signs, and corrections in the original are recorded, and 
mistakes and mis-spellings (not, however, established vulgarisms of grammar and spelling) 
are corrected. In the texts the signs ‘’ represent words or letters added later in the original, 
angular brackets ( ) those omitted in the original but supplied by the editor, square brackets 
[ ] those lost in the original and restored by the editor, round brackets ( ) the resolution of 
a symbol or abbreviation, braces { } a superfluous letter or letters in the original, double 
square brackets [ ] a deletion in the original. Dots are placed under letters which in the 
MSS. are doubtful or very imperfect ; dots between square brackets indicate the estimated 
number of letters lost in a lacuna, dots outside brackets letters visible but unread. Heavy 
Arabic numerals refer to the catalogue numbers of papyri in this volume and in volumes IV 
and V of Greek Papyri in the British Museum, 

The following are the less easily recognized abbreviated references to the authorities 
cited :— 


Apophth. Patrum = Apophthegmata Patrum, cited from the text in Migne, P.G., Ixv. 

Archiv = Archiv fir Papyrusforschung. 

Athan, or Athanasius = the works of St. Athanasius, cited from the text in Migne, ?.G., 
XXV, XXVI. 

BGU. = Aegyptische Urkunden aus den Koenighchen Museen 2u Berlin: Griechische Ur- 
kunden, vols. i-iv. 

Bludau = A. Bludau, Juden und Judenverfolgungen im alten Alexandria, Minster i. W., 
1906. 

C.I. G. = A. Boeckh, etc., Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum, Berolini, 1828-1877. 

C.1I. L. = T. Mommsen, etc., Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum, Berolini, 1863, etc. 

Cantarelli = L. Cantarelli, Za serve det prefetti di Egttto, 1, Reale Accademia dei Lincei, 
Roma, 1906. 

Crum, Ca/al. or Catalogue = W.E. Crum, Catalogue of the Coptic Manuscripts in the British 
Museum, London, 1905. 

Crum, Coptic MSS, = W. E. Crum, Coptic Manuscripts brought from the Fayyum, London, 
1893. 

Crum, Osfr. = W. E. Crum, Coptic Ostraca, London, 1902. 

Crum, Short Tex/s = W. E. Crum, Short Texts from Coptic Ostraca and Papyrt, London, 
1921. 


Ds LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 


Daremberg-Saglio = Ch. Daremberg et E. Saglio, Decionnaire des Antiquités grecques et 
romaines, Paris, 1873-1919. 

Dessau = H. Dessau, Juscripiiones Latinae Selectae, Berolini, 1892-1916. 

Dio Cassius, cited from the Teubner text (ed. Dindorf, vol. iii, Lipsiae, 1864). 

Dittenberger, Or. Gr. Inscr. = W. Dittenberger, Orientis Graect Inscriptiones Selectae, 
Lipsiae, 1903, 1905. 

Dittenberger, SyJ/. Znscr. Gr.2 = W. Dittenberger, Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum, ed. 3, 
Lipsiae, 1915, etc. 

Epiphanius, Adv(ersus) Haer(eses), cited from the text in Migne, P. G., xlii. 

Eusebius (of Caesarea), cited from the text in De griechischen christlichen Schriftsteller der 
ersten dret Jahrhunderte (ed. I. A. Heikel, Band I, Leipzig, 1902). 

G. G.N. = Nachrichten von der Konighchen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Goltingen. 

Ghedini = G. Ghedini, Leééere cristeane dat papirt grect del II] e IV secolo (Supplementd ad 
‘Aegyptus’, Serie divulgazione, sez. greco-romana, n. 3), Milano, 1923. 

Gnomon = W. Schubart, Der Gnomon des Idios Logos (= BGU. v. Heft 1), Berlin, 1919. 

Hall, Copt. and Greek Texts = H. R. Hall, Coptic and Greek Texts of the Christian Period 

. mn the British Museum, London, 1905. 

Hilary of Poictiers, cited from the text in Corpus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Latinorum, 
vol. Ixv (ed. A. Feder, Vindobonae, Lipsiae, 1916). 

Hirschfeld, Verwaltungsbeamten = H. O. Hirschfeld, Dze Kazserlichen Verwaltungsbeamien 
bis auf Diocletian, 2te Auflage, Berlin, 1905. 

Hist. Laus. = Palladius, Historia Lauszaca, cited from the text in J. A. Robinson, Zexis 
and Studies: vol. vi, C. Butler, Zhe Lausiac History of Palladius, Cambridge, 1898, 
1904. 

I, G. Rom. = R. Cagnat, etc., Inscriptiones Graecae ad Res Romanas pertinentes, Paris, 

TQOT, etc. 

Jannaris = A. N. Jannaris, An Historical Greek Grammar, London, 1897. 

Josephus, cited from the Teubner text (ed. S. A. Naber, Lipsiae, 1888-1896). 

Jouguet, Vie municepale =P. Jouguet, La wie municipale dans lEgyple romaine, Paris, 
Igtl. 

Juster = J. Juster, Les Juzfs dans Pemptre romain, Paris, 1914. 

Krall = J. Krall, Corpus Papyrorum Ratnert: Koptische Texte, Wien, 1895. 

L. and 8. = H. G. Liddell and R. Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, 8th ed., Oxford, 1897. 

Lafoscade, De Epistulis = L. Lafoscade, De epistulis (alitsque trtulis) imperalorum magistra- 
tuumque Romanorum quas ab aetate Augustt usque ad Constantinum Graece scriptas 
lapides papyrique servaverunt, Insulis, 1902. 

Lauchert = Fr. Lauchert, Leben des hetligen Athanasius des Grossen, Koln, 1911. 

Lausiac Hist. See Hist, Laus. 

Migne, P.G. = J. P. Migne, Patrologiae Cursus Completus: Series Gracca. (The texts are 
quoted with some changes of punctuation.) 

Mitteis, Grundziige. “See Wilcken, Grundsziige. 

Moulton and Milligan = J. H. Moulton and G. Milligan, Zhe Vocabulary of the Greek 
Testament, London, 1915, ete. 

O. Strassb. = P. Viereck, Griechische und Griechisch-Demotische Ostraka der Universttéts- 
und Landesbibliothek zu Strassburg im Elsass, Berlin, 1923. 

P. Amh. = B. P. Grenfell and A. S. Hurt The Amherst Papyri, Part II, London, rgor. 

P, Cairo Masp. = Calalogue général des Antiquités Egyptiennes du Musée du Caire: 
J. Maspéro, Papyrus grecs @époque byzantine, Le Caire, 1911-1916. 


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS x1 


P. Cairo Preis. = Fr. Preisigke, Gréechische Urkunden des Agyplischen Museums zu Katro 
(Schriflen der Wiss. Ges. in Strassburg, 8. Heft), Strassburg, 1911. 

P. Fay. = B. P. Grenfell, A. S. Hunt, and D. G. Hogarth, Fayiim Towns and their Papyri, 
London, 1900. 

P. Flor. = G. Vitelli and D. Comparetti, Papzrz Fvorentinz, Milano, 1906-1915. 

P. Gen, = J. Nicole, Les Papyrus de Genéve, Geneve, 1896. 

P. Hib. = B. P. Grenfell and A. S. Hunt, Zhe Hibeh Papyrt, Part I, London, 1906. 

P. Iand. = C. Kalbfleisch, etc., Papyrz Landanae, Fasc. I-IV, Lipsiae, 1912-1914. 

P, Lips. = L. Mitteis, Greechische Urkunden der Papyrussammlung 2u Leipzig, Leipzig, 
1906. 

P. Lond. = Greek Papyri in the British Museum, vols. i-iii, 1893-1907. 

P. O. = R. Graffin and F. Nau, Pasrologia Orientalis, Paris, 1907, etc. 

P, Oxy. = B. P. Grenfell and A. S. Hunt, Zhe Oxyrhynchus Papyrt, 1898, etc. 

P. Ryl. = Catalogue of the Greek Papyri in the John Rylands Library, Manchester : vol. ii, 
ed. by J. de M. Johnson, V. Martin, and A. S. Hunt, Manchester, 1915. 

P. Ryl. Copt. = W. E. Crum, Casalogue of the Coptic Manuscripts in the Collection of the 
John Rylands Library, Manchester, Manchester, 1909. 

P.S.1. = Puddlicaziont della Socteta Italiana per la ricerca det Papiri grect e latini in Egitto : 
Papirt grect e latint, vol. i-vi, Firenze, 1912-1920. 

P. Tebt. = B. P. Grenfell, A. S. Hunt, E. J. Goodspeed, Zhe Zedtunis Papyri, Part II, 
London, 1907. 

P, Thead. = P. Jouguet, Papyrus de Théadelphie, Paris, 1911. 

Pauly-Wissowa-Kroll = Paulys Real-Encyclopdédie der classtschen Altertumswissenchaft, neue 
Bearbeitung, edited by G. Wissowa and W. Kroll, Stuttgart, 1894, etc. 

Philo, cited from the text of L. Cohn and P. Wendland, Berolini, 1896-1915, with references 
to the pages of (T.) M(angey’s) edition. 

Preisigke, Wamenbuch = Fr. Preisigke, Mamenbuch, Heidelberg, 1922. 

Prosop. Imp. Rom. = E. Klebs, H. Dessau, P. de Rohden, Prosopographia Imperit Romani 
saec. I, IT, ITT, Berolini, 1897, 1898. 

Rogala = S. Rogala, Die Anfdnge des arianischen Strectes (Forschungen zur christlichen 
Literatur und Dogmengeschichte, vii. 1), Paderborn, 1907. 

Rufinus, A(cstoria) L(cclesiastica), cited from the text in Migne, P(atrologia) L(atina), xxi. 

SB. = Fr. Preisigke, Sammelbuch griechischer Urkunden aus Agypien, Bd. I, II, Strassburg, 
IQ15—1922. 

Schubart, Agypten = W. Schubart, Agypéen von Alexander dem Grossen bis auf Mohammed, 
Berlin, 1922. 

Schiirer = E. Schiirer, Geschichte des jiidischen Volkes im Zeitalter Jesu Christi, 3rd—4th ed., 
1898-1909. 

Seneca, Afoc(olocyntosis = Ludus de morte Claudi’), cited from the Teubner text (ed. 
Fr. Haase, Lipsiae, 1902). 

Socr(ates, Historia Ecclestastica), cited from the text in Migne, P. G., Ixvii. 

Sophocles = E. A. Sophocles, Greek Lexicon of the Roman and Byzantine Periods, 
Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1914. 

Sozomen (Historta Ecclestastica), cited from the text in Migne, P. G,, xvii. 

Spiegelberg, Eigennamen = W. Spiegelberg, Aegyptische und griechische Eigennamen aus 
Mumienetiketten der rimischen Raiserzett ( Demotische Studien, Heft 1), Leipzig, rgor. 

Stephanus, Thesaurus = H. Stephanus, Thesaurus Graecae Linguae, Parisiis, 1831, etc. 

Stud. Pal. = C. Wessely, Studien zur Palaeographie und Papyruskunde. 


xii LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 


Sizgsber. Pr. Akad. = Sitzungsberichte der Kinighichen Preusstschen Akademie. 

Suetonius, cited from the text of M. Ihm (Lipsiae, 1907). 

Theodoret, H(zstorza) E(cclestastica), cited from the text in Die griechischen christlichen 
Schriftsteller der ersten dret Jahrhunderte (ed. L. Parmentier, Leipzig, 1911); 
Haereticarum Fabularum Compendium from that in Migne, P. G., 1xxxiii. 

Wilcken, Antesemitismus = U. Wilcken, Zum alexandrinischen Antisemitismus (Abh. Kon. 
stichs. Ges. d. Wiss., lvii, 1909, 783-839). 

Wilcken, Chrest. and Grundziige = L. Mitteis und U. Wilcken, Grundziige und Chresto- 
mathie der Papyruskunde, Leipzig—Berlin, 1912. 

Z. a. Sav.-St. = Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung. 


JEWS AND CHRISTIANS IN EGYPT 





I> CLEAUDIVUS: TOM HE: ALE XANDRINES 


PAPYRUS 1912.—A.D. 41. 
Inv. No. 2248 verso. 29 X 116-5 cm. 


Acquired in 1921. Ina small cursive hand, larger at the beginnings of lines, usually 
legible but occasionally becoming very rapid and less easy to read ; papyrus of light colour. 
The left side of the roll (verso) is imperfect and a good deal damaged ; the portion containing 
the Claudius letter is mostly well preserved but is slightly damaged in places, especially at 
the foot of col. 2. Facsimile of Col. 5: Plate I. 


1. Palaeographical and diplomatic questions. 


Till about ten years ago Philadelphia in the Heraclides Division of the 
Arsinoite nome, though represented by a fair number of papyri in various 
collections, played a far less important part in the records of papyrology than 
such Fayum sites as Arsinoe, Socnopaei Nesus, Tebtunis, or Theadelphia. In 
1900-1 Messrs. Grenfell and Hunt excavated the necropolis with indifferent 
success, but succeeded in identifying the site of Philadelphia, near the village of 
Rubayyat. The actual site is Darb el-Gerza ; and here, in 1914 or early in 1915, 
was discovered the very important ‘archive of Zeno’, that collection of early 
Ptolemaic texts which has made the name of Philadelphia famous.’ Portions of 
this archive had been unearthed a few years previously; sporadic digging by 
natives had evidently gone on for sometime. The discovery of the main archive 
attracted more attention to the site, and it is clear that searches still continue to 
be made, since papyri from Philadelphia are at the present time not infrequently 
to be found on the market. Only one discovery of great importance has, how- 
ever, been made since that of the Zeno papyri, and this appears to have occurred 
late in 1920 or early in 1921. Internal evidence suggests that the discovery was 
made in the ruins of a building, for the papyri found form parts of a single 
archive, apparently that of the comogrammateis (or of a single comogrammateus) 
in the reigns of Gaius, Claudius, and the early years of Nero; one or two of the 
documents go back to Tiberius. The papyri, or many of them, were offered to 


1 For this archive and the history of Philadelphia see M. Rostovtzeff, A Large Estate 
in Leypt in the third century B.c., Madison, 1922. 
B 


2 CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES [1912] 


Cairo dealers but for the most part refused on the ground that, being chiefly 
registers, they were of no value. Rather more than forty, however, including 
several long and unusually well-preserved rolls, were bought, and in 1921 were 
sold, with many other papyri, to a syndicate of buyers, consisting of the British 
Museum, the Universities of Cornell, Princeton, and Michigan, and the Library 
of Geneva. The Gerza papyri were divided among all the purchasers except 
Michigan ; and the last-named University in the summer of 1922 succeeded in _ 
securing at least a large portion of the residue of the archive, which had remained — 
in the hands of the finders. It is hoped that arrangements will ultimately be 
made for a joint publication of the whole archive, which is of considerable 
importance for the history of Philadelphia, and village administration generally ; 
but the present text is of sufficient interest to justify separate publication, 
particularly as it has nothing to do with Philadelphia, its presence in the Gerza 
archive being purely fortuitous. 

The Claudius letter, with the prefect’s edict ordering its publication, was 
copied on the verso of a long but imperfect roll, the recto of which contains 
a tax-register. The letter and edict, which are complete, occupied only part of 
the verso; before the column containing the edict are the ends of lines of 
a column forming part of a register, the nature of which it is hardly possible to 
determine, and between Columns 2 and 3 is inserted, the reverse way up, a list of 
names. These registers on the verso are apparently in the same hand as the 
Claudius letter, as may also be the text on the recto. The roll, imperfect on 
the left, may well be complete on the right. 

The presence of the Claudius letter in a collection of village records whose 
reference is purely local is at first sight not easy to account for, and may be due 
to the private interest of the writer ; but though the letter deals in the main with 
matters affecting only the city of Alexandria itself, Claudius does also announce 
his decisions concerning the Alexandrian citizenship and the rights attaching to 
it, so that if Philadelphia contained any Alexandrian citizens or any property | 
belonging to Alexandrines there was a reason for the village officials to be 
interested in its contents. One person at least who occurs in the register on the 
recto (it is true, to judge from the name, an Egyptian) is referred to as év 
* AdeEavd(peia). 

_ The copyist, though he wrote a good and practised hand, was careless, and 
his orthography is such as we can hardly suppose to have characterized the letter 
shown at Alexandria, even if that was, as is probable (see below), merely a transla- 
tion of a Latin original. Apart from the common confusion of « and «, € and 
at, which would not be surprising even in the productions of the Imperial or pre- 
fectal chancery, but which is more constant here than would be expected from 
an educated writer, we find confusion of v and ou (v for oi, ll. 20, 61, 64, voy for 
olov, 1. 81, dev for d€ou (1. 72, vs for ofs, 1. 87, Aowwevwvrar for Avpalvwvras, 1. 86), of v 
and 1 nets, quérepos frequently interchanged with tyels, ipérepos), -vos shortened 
to -ts (AmoAAwrs, 1. 16, KAavdis AtoAAwuis, 1. 19), 0 and constantly interchanged 
(€. g. mpotwr for mpdrov, 1. 69, kAnporovs for KAnpwrods, 1. 61, Pour for PsBur, 1. 64), 
KO for x9 (mpoceverOjoovra, 1. 65, émpdxOn, 1. 92), iota adscript often incorrectly 
inserted (€.g. yewdoxor, 1. 53, waptvpdt, 1. 105), and AiiAdros (-.) twice written 


[1912] CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES 3 


for Aiwiduos (Il. 1, 70). Such mistakes, which represent the actual pronunciation 
but not the orthography, suggest a scribe writing from dictation, but there are 
others which seem to be due to copying from a written source. The omission of ét1, 
indeed, in 1. 33 and even yapxovres for ydp dpxovres (1. 64) are mistakes which 
a scribe writing from dictation might make, but the blunder in 1. 45, where we 
have to restore something like dvaordcets (ds wepl rds ela) BoAds, must be due to 
the copyist’s eye having skipped from the first to the second eo. The mis- 
writing oyova, corrected to evvoia, in ]. 10 points in the same direction. It is quite 
possible that the text passed through two stages: it may have been read from 
the exhibited roll (which was perhaps not conveniently placed for direct copying) 
to an amanuensis, from whose hasty manuscript it was subsequently copied out 
at Philadelphia. 

The prefect’s edict is given in full, but this is clearly not the case with the 
letter of Claudius, which, though it concludes with the final greeting (€ppwode), 
has no date; for it seems out of the question that the date should be omitted 
from a letter of this importance. Doubtless the scribe thought it unnecessary 
to copy the date, which certainly stood, as usual, at the end of the letter (see 
examples in Lafoscade, De Epistulis); so too several of the letters collected by 
Lafoscade lack the dating clause. 

The question must now be raised whether the Greek text here published 
was the original form of the letter. This is certainly the natural assumption in 
the case of a letter written to such a city as Alexandria. We know that Greek 
was employed as well as Latin in the Imperial chancery,! and A. Stein, after 
a careful discussion of the question, lays down the rule (Unters. 2. Gesch. u. 
Verw. Aegyptens, p. 158 f.) that Imperial rescripts addressed to private persons 
(including Roman citizens) and edicts intended for publication in Egypt were 
written in Greek, rescripts and mandates to Roman Imperial officials and 
announcements to the troops in Latin. The present letter certainly falls under 
the first category rather than the second, and there seems little point in addressing 
the citizens of Alexandria in a language which very few of them can have under- 
stood. The actual text, however, raises a doubt. Inthe first place, Stein (of. cit., 
pp. 83, foot-note, 155") points out that ‘the exact Imperial title, especially the 
mention of the ¢rzbunicia potestas’, implies translation from the Latin; and though 
it may perhaps be objected that this is only an inference and possibly an 
erroneous one, yet it is certainly supported by the known papyrus evidence. 
Now the present letter has the full Imperial title, including the ¢ridunicia 
potestas,® and it ought therefore, on Stein’s principles, to be a translation from 
the Latin. That it is a translation is strongly suggested by the style, which 
frequently recalls Latin idioms or turns of phrase; and though, as Lafoscade 
maintains, even letters in which Latinisms occur were often written in Greek (by 


1 See, e.g., H. Peter, Dre gesch. Litt. ub. die rim. Kaiserzett bis Theodostus I (1897), 
ip. 6'f.,'339. 

e Stein points out (p. 162) that the letter of Claudius in Josephus, Avz/., xix, 280-5, also 
has the full title, whereas, on his principles, it should have been written in Greek; but he 
expresses doubts as to its genuineness. As is pointed out below (p. 15 f.), there seems no 
adequate reason for rejecting it, and so far as the Imperial title is concerned it finds 
a complete analogy in the present letter. 


B2 


4 CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRIVES [1912] 


Romans or Greeks influenced by the use of Latin),’ there are features in the 
present letter which perhaps point rather to translation from a Latin original 
than to Greek composition by a writer whose ordinary language was Latin. It 
is a point not easy to settle, in view of the undoubted influence which Latin 
idiom exercised on the Greek of the Empire, and one’s conclusion must depend 
rather on the general effect than on any particular passage; but the total 
impression does seem to be that of Latin style rather than Greek. It is note- 
worthy how naturally many passages would go into Latin, and here and there 
are phrases which suggest a Latin original, such as 1. 29, kaimep ovx avy mpds Ta 
Trowadra pdidios (guamvis ad talia non facilis?). In the note on 1. 103 f. it is 
suggested that the omission of tis, expected in Greek, may be due to translation 
from the Latin.? None of these arguments nor even the sum of them can be 
regarded as conclusive, but they give additional force to that drawn from the 
use of the full Imperial title. 

Of course, even if a Latin original be conceded, it does not follow that the 
letter was sent to Alexandria in that language; it may have been translated in 
the Imperial chancery, as we know was a regular practice. But the use of the 
full title points to its having been sent in Latin; and it is not impossible that it 
was. Claudius, though an assiduous student of Greek,® was a stickler for the use of 
Latin by Roman citizens, and may have deliberately used Latin as a reminder 

o the unruly Alexandrines of the majesty of Rome.® 

Whatever be the truth as to this question, it stands to reason that the 
letter was published in Greek. In his recent article on the Imperial rescripts ° 
Wilcken points out that publication (proposztio) was applied only to subscriptiones, 
not to epzstulae,’ The present document is of course an epistula, but its publica- 
tion does not constitute an exception to Wilcken’s rule, for, as Wilcken points 
out, it was always open to the recipient to publish a letter if he thought good, 
and in this case there was ample reason. The letter was addressed not to an 
individual magistrate, not even to the xowdv of magistrates, but to ‘the city of the 
Alexandrines’ in general; and it appears from the prefect’s edict that it was, 
publicly read at a meeting of citizens. But since only a portion of the citizens 
were able to be present, the prefect deemed it good to exhibit (€xetvai, proponere) 
the letter so that all might read it. It may perhaps be inferred from this that 
the letter was not given to the ambassadors, but sent to the city through the 
prefect ; in any case that the publication could be ordered only by the latter. 


' So too, even more definitely, P. Viereck, Berl. Phil. Woch., 1903, 145-6. 

* On the criteria of Latin style see, e. g., Schubart, Gnomon, p. +. 

* Suetonius, 42; Josephus, Azz/., xix, 213. 

4 Suetonius, 16; Dio Cassius, lx, 17, 4. 

* If we could be certain that the edzc¢ (not letter) of the Philhellenic Emperor Hadrian 
published by Jouguet (/tev. é. gr., Xxxiil, 1920, 375 ff.) is a translation from a Latin original 
this would strengthen the case for a Latin original of our /effer; but though the hypothesis 
is suggested by the existence of two copies not quite identical in wording the differences 
cannot certainly be regarded as due to anything more than faulty copying from a Greek 
text. 

6° Zu den Karserreskripien, in Hermes, lv, 1-42. 

" pp. 15, 21. 


[1912] CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES 5 


2. The Imperial cult. 


The embassy which was the occasion for the writing of the present letter 
had three objects: firstly, to congratulate Claudius on his accession and, in con- 
nexion therewith, to request his acceptance of various honours ; secondly, to ask 
for certain favours; thirdly, to present the official apologia of the city for the 
recent anti-Jewish disturbances. Claudius deals with these subjects in the 
above order. 

The honours voted are largely concerned with the Imperial cult, for which 
therefore our letter is a very valuable document, though on some points its 
evidence is not as explicit as we could wish.! The attitude of Claudius, though 
it perhaps shows some inconsistencies, is what we should expect, in view of his 
temperament and general outlook as described by Suetonius and Dio Cassius. 
He declines the offer of temples and of the appointment of an dpxiepeds, and in so 
doing states his position with regard to the question: ‘for I do not wish to be 
offensive (poptixds) to my contemporaries, and I hold that sacred fanes and the 
like have by all ages been attributed only to the gods as peculiar honours’. He 
is a man, not a god, and desires only the honours which a man can accept, for to 
accept more is to be vulgar, ostentatious, offensive: such is Claudius’s principle, 
and it is this principle which on the whole determines his attitude to the single 
honours. He permits the city to keep his birthday as a dies Augusta and to 
erect statues to himself and other members of his family ; characteristically he 
explains the latter concession by a reference to precedent: ‘for I see that you 
have been zealous to establish on every side memorials of your loyalty towards 
my house’. His predecessors had accepted such honours; it cannot therefore be 
goptixds for him to do the same. He further sanctions the introduction of 
a Claudian tribe—a valuable addition to our knowledge of tribe-nomenclature at 
Alexandria. The wording of this clause (@vAjy KAavivavay xatadet£ar) might 
seem to imply that a new tribe was to be created, but the renaming of an existing 
tribe seems likelier,? and the word xaradeifa. must not be pressed too far. As 
pointed-out in the note ad /oc., no Claudian tribe is recorded elsewhere, and the 
known Philoclaudian tribe is perhaps, though not necessarily, to be taken as the 
form which the proposed gvA7 KAavéiava took or as the same tribe renamed 
under Nero. Permission is also given for the erection of equestrian statues of 
the ‘ procurator’ Vitrasius Pollio (see l. 43, n.). 

So far the honours accepted are all such as can easily be reconciled with the 
principle stated above ; and the same principle inspired the refusal of a golden 
statue of the Pax Augusta Claudiana, which had actually been made, but which, 
despite the urgent entreaties of Barbillus, Claudius declines and orders to be 
dedicated to Roma. This is perhaps even an exaggeration of the principle, and 


1 For this subject see E. Beurlier, Ze culte impérzal, Paris, 1891 ; E. Kornemann, 
Zur Geschichte der antiken Herrscherkulte (Kito, i, 51-146); and particularly F. Blumen- 
thal, Der dgyptische Kaiserkult (Archiv, v, 317-45). 

2 For the renaming of tribes see Jouguet, Vie muntcipale, p. 147. 


6 CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES [1912] 


it is a little surprising to find Claudius speaking of it as oprixérepos, for it was 
hardly equivalent to the attribution of divine honours. Was his refusal inspired 
by a feeling that the cult of the Pax Augusta was inseparably associated with 
the memory of Augustus, and that it would be arrogance in a successor to add 
his name to the title? Kornemann in his valuable study of the Imperial cult 
speaks (A Zio, i, 104) of Claudius as ‘den von Augustus und Tiberius in so vielen 
Dingen abweichenden, dagegen auf die hellenistische Monarchie des Caesar 
zuruckgehenden’. He adds in a foot-note: ‘Den Beweis hierftir hoffe ich bei 
anderer Gelegenheit spater zu erbringen’, and it is of course possible that in the 
course of his reign Claudius’s policy changed—there are facts of later date which 
might be adduced in support of Kornemann’s theory ;1 but it certainly finds no 
confirmation in the present letter. Quite the contrary: it is to Augustus, not 
to Julius, who is never mentioned, that Claudius looks repeatedly, and though 
he never refers to Gaius, who did in truth abandon the policy of Augustus, 
his whole attitude seems to be a deliberate repudiation of his predecessor's . 
point of view. Hence the suggestion made above acquires at least a certain 
plausibility. 

The Pax Augusta Claudiana was, however, only one of two golden statues 
offered to Claudius. The other he accepts, but does not state what it repre- 
sented; there is good reason for believing (1. 38, n.) that it may have been 
a statue of Messalina. He gives instructions that this statue is to be carried 
in procession as part of the celebrations on name-days, i. e. Imperial birthdays and 
the like. 

So far the replies of Claudius are perfectly consistent with the principle laid 
down in the concluding words of this section of his letter; but there are two 
points on which, at first sight, his decision is less easy to understand. He 
permits the dedication of sacred groves for each nome of Egypt (aden ré xara 
LouoVv Tapeivar THS Aiyba(r)ov) and the erection of four-horse chariots at the three 
entrances to Egypt, Taposiris, Pharos, and Pelusium. It is not, indeed, stated to 
whom the groves were to be dedicated, but the natural assumption, were this 
passage taken in isolation, would be that it was to Claudius himself, and in the 
case of the chariots the words dqudpdcai por suggest a similar conclusion. 
It is conceivable that Claudius, offered a number of semi-divine honours 
and anxious not to appear ungracious by refusing too much, was not wholly 
logical in his choice; a certain inconsequence and incapacity for connected 
thinking were notoriously characteristic of him. But the letter as a whole is well 
constructed, and it is not perhaps necessary to resort to this hypothesis, espe- 
cially as we have not the terms of the Alexandrian Wjgiopa. The groves may, as 
suggested in the note on 1. 42, have been attached to the local S<Baoreta, being 
dedicated to Divus Augustus zz honour of Claudius, like the Amastris dedication 
quoted in the note on 1. 35, imep ris LeBaoris Eipyyns eis rv rewmhy TrBeptov 
KAavdiov Tepparixot S<Bacto0b; and it does not seem impossible that a¢idpical 
po. may have a similar sense. 

Whatever be thought of this point—and it must be admitted that any sort 


* See below, p. 7. 


[1912] CLAUDIUS TO. THE ALEXANDRINES 7 


of dedication zo rather than for Claudius would be difficult to reconcile with his 
principle—at least his general-attitude is a conservative one, averse from anything 
like divine. honours. In P. Ryl. ii, 133 (A.D. 33) we have a priest of Tiberius ; 
yet Claudius definitely refuses an dpxcepeds and a temple. . The present letter was 
indeed written early in his reign, and he may, in face of an importunity which 
even this papyrus illustrates, have. made further concessions later. We know 
definitely that a temple was dedicated to him during his lifetime at the colony 
of Camalodunum in Britain.! It must be remembered however that, as Tacitus 
hints, political motives were here operative. Claudius may well have yielded to 
real or supposed expediency, in a newly-conquered and remote portion of the 
Empire, what he would not yield in Alexandria, and still have retained, in essen- 
tials, the principle laid down in the present letter. A papyrus referred to in the 
note on |. 48 may indeed mention an dpytepe’s of his cult, but the reading is 
doubtful, and as there pointed out the passage is more probably, even on other 
grounds, to be referred to Gaius. Blumenthal (Archiv, v, 322) inserts in his list of 
Kaisertempel one at Alexandria to Claudius; but the foundation mentioned by 
Suetonius to which he refers was primarily a literary institution, and it is very 
doubtful whether we can take it as in the proper sense a temple; still less are we 
justified on the evidence in regarding it as dedicated (in the full religious sense) to 
Claudius.? There is finally an inscription from Cys in Caria (Bull. Corr. Hell, 
xi, 1887, 307), datable in A.D. 52, to TiBépiov KAavdiov Kaicapa Tepuavixov Ad’roxpa- 
tropa Vedv SeBaordv, and another from Seleucia in Pisidia (I. G. Rom. iii, 328), to 
TiPépiov Kravd.0[v] Katcapa S<S8aord[y] Tepyavixdy Oedv exipayy, and we may add the 
vewkdpou of Claudius (apparently) mentioned in the inscription from Aezani quoted 
in the note on]. 60; but these were of merely local significance, and we cannot 
even be certain, in the second and perhaps the first cases, that Imperial sanction 
was obtained. On the whole, likely as a certain relaxation of Claudius’s principle 
in course of time may be, there is no sufficient evidence for regarding his reign as 
an epoch of marked development in the Imperial cult, with the possible exception 
of the temple in Britain. . 

The present papyrus does, however, show very clearly what steady pressure 
was maintained from the side of the provinces upon the Emperors to sanction exten- 
sions of the cult. The most striking example of this is seen in the prefect’s edict. 
Ordering the publication of a letter in which Claudius definitely refuses divine 
honours, the Emperor’s own representative calls on the people of Alexandria to 


1 Tacitus, Auz., xiv, 31: ‘templum divo Claudio constitutum quasi arx aeternae domina- 
tionis aspiciebatur ’. This is mentioned under the year 61, but Seneca, Agoc. 8, shows that 
the temple was dedicated while Claudius was yet alive. a 

2 Suetonius, 42 (Ihm, 1907): ‘Denique et Graecas scripsit historias, Tyrrhenicon 
viginti, Carchedoniacon octo. Quarum causa veteri Alexandriae Musio additum ex ipsius 
nomine (novum) ; institutumque ut quotannis in altero Tyrrhenicon libri, in altero Carche- 
doniacon diebus statutis velut in auditorio recitarentur toti a singulis per vices’. The Latin 
is not very clear, but it hardly warrants Blumenthal’s conclusion, and his statement that 
Claudius was himself responsible for the establishment is equally hazardous ; all probability 
and analogy suggest that the impulse came from the Alexandrian side. It is apparently to 
this foundation that Athenaeus, vi, p. 240), refers: -rois vy r@ KAavdio (? Knavdtei) vi 
sopisrevovow ; cf. too H. Smilda, Veta Drvt Claudi, p. 168. But even the word Kdavéueiov 
should not be pressed as evidence for a cult of the living Claudius. 


8 CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES [1912] 


admire tHv peyadedrnta Tod Oeod nudv Kaicapos. Blumenthal (Archiv, v, 328 ; 
cf. Wilcken, Grundziige, p. 120) states that the living Emperor was not officially 
known as eds, in Egypt any more than in other provinces, and that was true so 
far as the then known evidence went ; but the present instance is a glaring excep- 
tion. If the intentions of the Emperor were thus defeated by his own officials, 
we can see how inevitable, sooner or later, was the development of the cult into 
a real worship of the living ruler. 


3. The rights of the Alexandrines. 


After dealing with the honours voted him by the Alexandrines, Claudius 
turns to their requests, which, though placed second in the letter and doubtless 
in the agenda of the embassy, are not likely to have held that position in the 
minds of the citizens. It must be confessed that Claudius’s answers to these 
points do not promise any very substantial addition to the rights and privileges 
of Alexandria. 

He begins by confirming the Alexandrian citizenship, with all its riua xal 
tAdvOpwra,' to all those who had been ephebi up to his principate, exception being 
made in the case of children of slaves (we may suppose sons of citizens by servile 
mothers) who had wrongfully intruded themselves among the ephebi. These 
were of course not entitled to the citizenship; it is uncertain whether, among 
those confirmed, there were any not strictly entitled to it, and consequently how 
far the confirmation was a favour to the citizens. He also confirms all the privi- 
leges conceded to Alexandria by previous Emperors, kings, and prefects, ‘as 

ivus Augustus also confirmed them’; but this, while it may have been of some 
value, did not amount to any improvement in the city’s position. 

The next clause, that relating to the zeocorz of Divus Augustus, falls properly 
under the previous section. It appears to be a mere matter of administrative 
detail, and it is not clear that any concession of much value is involved. The 
reduction (see ll. 62-6, n.) of the term of office for municipal magistracies to three 
years was granted in response to a definite request from the citizens and must 
therefore be taken as a favour conferred, but it is difficult to estimate the degree 
of benefit which the citizens would derive from it. 

The really important point was, however, the last, the request of the 
Alexandrines for a senate; and on this point Claudius adopts a non-committal 
attitude. He announces that he has instructed the prefect to examine into the 
question and to report to him on the advisability of the change and, if the senate 
is conceded, on the best method of constituting it. Since we know that Alexandria 
did not obtain a senate till the reign of Septimius Severus,? we must conclude 
that the prefect’s report was adverse. It is possible that this disappointment of 


i See l, 55, 2. 

* Spartianus, Vita Severt, 17: ‘Deinde Alexandrinis ius buleutarum dedit, qui sine 
publico consilio, ita ut sub regibus, ante vivebant, uno iudice contenti, quem Caesar dedis- 
set. (Cf, Dio, li, 17,74. 


[1912] CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES. 9 


their hopes may have helped to provoke the renewed outbreak of anti-Semitism 
which is to be inferred from the ‘Isidorus Acta’ (see below, p. 1g f.). 

That Alexandria possessed no senate under the earlier Roman Emperors 
was already well-known; what is subject of dispute is the question whether 
a senate existed under the Ptolemies, and on this point unfortunately Claudius 
was aS ignorant as ourselves (ll. 66-7). The latest pronouncement on the 
problem is that of W. Schubart (Agypten von Alexander dem Grossen bis auf 
Mohammed, pp. 32-3), who holds strongly that Alexandria had a senate in the 
Ptolemaic period, though previously} he preferred to leave it an open question, 
as also does Wilcken,? but with an inclination to decide against the BovdA7j. The 
ancient evidence is not conclusive, for though Spartianus clearly implies that 
there was no senate under the Ptolemies,> Dio* has usually been taken as 
implying that Augustus abolished a senate at Alexandria, The inference is, 
however, by no means justified; the words of Dio may merely mean that 
Augustus refused a senate,° and we may even conjecture that the Alexandrines 
took the opportunity of his amnesty and confirmation of privileges to ask for 
a senate, as they did later on Claudius’s accession.* On this question at least the 
testimony of the present letter is, negatively, decisive. If Augustus had really 
abolished an existing senate, it is inconceivable that Claudius, who refers to his 
predecessor’s confirmation of Alexandrian rights and of the privileges of the 
Jews (Josephus, Avzz., xix, 282 f.; 1. 87), should have been or have professed to 
be ignorant of it. 

It is nevertheless possible that, as Jouguet is inclined to think,’ a senate had 
existed at an earlier period and had been abolished by one or other of the 
Ptolemies. In favour of this supposition may be adduced an inscription, very 
likely of the third century B.C., which implies a BovAy and which Plaumann ® 
wished to refer to Alexandria; but the attribution, though Plaumann’s argu- 
ments have considerable force, is by no means.certain. On the other side may 
perhaps be set the evidence of the present letter. Claudius, a keen student of 
history (though there is no evidence that he had specially studied Egyptian 
affairs in the Ptolemaic period), knew (if we take his words literally) of no Bova 
at Alexandria, and, what is more to the point, the Alexandrian envoys themselves © 
do not seem to have submitted any conclusive evidence of its previous existence. 
Would they not have done so in the circumstances, had they possessed such 
evidence, as we know the Jews did for their privileges? Prof. Rostovtzeff indeed 


1 Kho, x, 60 ff. 

2 Grundziige, p. 15. 

® The idea that the passage can be explained away is rightly rejected by Jouguet, 
Vie municipale, p. 28. 

4 li, 17, 2: od pévroe odd éxeivors Bovdevew €v 7h “Payn epaxev. GAG Tois pev Grows 
as éxdorots, Tois & ’AdeEavdpevow dvev Bovrevtav modcreveoOar €xédevoe* ToTavtny mov vewrepomotiay 
avr av Katéyvo. 


> Cf.too Jouguet, Z.¢.; Schubart, Avvo, x, 60; now particularly Jouguet, Rev. ee yfi., 


N.S. 1,55 
Cf. however 1912, 68 f.: kacvod dy mpadyparos viv mp (@) t (0) vy karaBadAopevov. 
7 Vie municipale, p. 32 f. 8 Kho, xiii, 485-90. 


* Josephus, Av/., xix, 281. 


10 CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES [1912] 


(with whom Prof. Hunt is inclined to agreé) would take Claudius’s od« éy Aéyeww 
as merely an evasion of the question (‘I have nothing to say as to that point!’) 
rather than a literal statement of :fact, and he holds that the Alexandrines 
would hardly have asked for a senate except on the ground that they had once 
possessed one (perhaps till the reign of Philadelphus?). This may be true as 
regards the earlier period, but whatever may be thought of: that. point, it is: very 
unlikely that Claudius would, even as an evasion, say odk éxw Aéyerv had Augustus 
actually abolished a senate. As to the earlier period we cannot argue from the 
negative result of the prefect’s investigation ; for if he discovered that the city had 
once possessed a Bovd7 and had later lost it, that very fact might decide him or 
Claudius against the concession. 


4. The Fewish question. 


The last section in the body of the letter, which deals with the question of 
anti-Semitism, is of special. interest, and throws valuable light not only on the 
particular events referred to but incidentally on several disputed points. 

The subject of the relations between the Jews of the Diaspora and the 
Graeco-Roman world in which they lived has been frequently discussed in recent 
years, but on more than one of the fundamental problems a generally accepted 
agreement has still to be reached. Unfortunately the discussion, in modern as in 
ancient times, has not always been free from racial or theological bias.! 

The Jews formed an important element in the population of Alexandria 
from early times, perhaps even from the city’s first foundation.2, They occupied 
there the quarter known as ‘ Delta’,? but in the time of Philo two quarters were 
predominantly Jewish, and not a few individual Jews or Jewish families were 


‘ For the general history and condition of the Jews in the Roman Empire see 
E. Schiirer, Gesch. des jiidischen Volkes tm Zettalter Jesu Christ? (3 vols., 3rd ed. 1898, 4th 
ed. 1901, 1909); J. Juster, Les Juifs dans [Empire romain (2 vols., Paris, 1914); Th. 
Reinach, /wdaed (Daremberg-Saglio, vol. iii, pt. 1); for the question of anti-Semitism and 
the Jews of Alexandria in particular, F. Stahelin, Der Antisemitismus des Altertums. in 
secner Entstehung u. Entwicklung (Basel, 1905); A. Bludau, /uden u. Judenverfolgungen im 
alten Alexandria (Miinster i, W., 1906); Wilcken, Zum alexandrinischen Antisemttismus 
(Abn. Kon. siichs. Ges. d. Wiss., vii, 1909, 783-839) with the literature there referred to, 
.and Grundziige, 24-6, 62-5; P. Jouguet, La vie municipale dans l Egypte romaine, pp. 18- 
22; W. Schubart, Archiv, v, 118-20, and Linfihrung (see Index there); H. Willrich, in 
Kho, iii, 397-419; W. Weber, Hine Gerichisverhandlung vor Kaiser Traian (Hermes, |, 47- 
92); A. v. Premerstein, Alexandrinische und jiidische Gesandte vor Kaiser Hadrian (Hermes, 
lvii, 266-316); A. N. Modona, La vita pubblica e privata degli Ebret in Egitto nell eta 
ellenistica e romana (Aegyptus, ii, 253-75, iii, 19-43); B. Motzo, La condizione gturtdica det 
Giudet dt Alessandria sotto? Lagidt e ¢ Romani (Atti d. R. Accad. d. Sc. di Torino, xlviii, 
1912-13, 577-98); see also H. Willrich, Zudazca (Gottingen, 1900). It was impossible to 
consult the recent article of M. Engers, Dze staatsrechtliche Stellung der alexandrinischen 
Juden (Kho, xviii, 79-90) until this introduction had been completed, and: it is therefore 
satisfactory to find that he comes to substantially the same conclusions regarding the evidence 
of Philo and Josephus as the present editor, Some references to his article have been added 
in foot-notes. 

? Josephus, ¢. Ap., ii, 35; Bell. Lud., ii, 487. The doubts thrown by some modern 
scholars on Josephus’s statements as to the early settlement of the Jews in Egypt are 
not supported by the papyrological evidence. 

* Josephus, Bell. Jud, ii, 495. 


[1912] CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES I 


living in other parts of the city.1 As elsewhere in the ancient world, so also in 
Alexandria, the Jews were exposed to the hostility of their neighbours. This 
hostility was due to various causes. Economic factors were not without influence ; 
for the Jews, besides being dangerous rivals in commerce, were not infrequently 
tax-farmers or farmers of the royal domains,? and many of them were persons 
of great wealth.?- Even more powerful, however, were political and religious 
prejudice. Precluded by their religion from sharing in many of the activities of 
their fellow-townsmen, to whom the wéAis was above all things a religious com- 
munity united by the common service of the ancestral gods, and yet enjoying 
special privileges of their own and favoured, not by the Ptolemies only but by 
many of the Hellenistic monarchs, as later by the Romans, the Jews were 
naturally objects of suspicion and dislike. During the Ptolemaic period, indeed, 
we have no evidence of strictly anti-Semitic outbreaks, for the persecution 
attributed by the third book of Maccabees to Philopator, whatever kernel of fact 
it may contain, is too legendary in its details to serve as evidence, and the better- 
attested troubles under Euergetes II arose from reasons of Egyptian politics ; 
but it seems clear that anti-Semitic feeling existed even then, and in the Roman 
period it led to open hostilities. Doubtless it was now accentuated by political 
causes. The Jews had deserted the national dynasty on the arrival of the 
Romans, and they received their reward in the confirmation of their privileges 
and in the special favour of the Emperors. But the Alexandrines, who saw their 
city degraded from a royal capital to a subordinate position under Imperial 
Rome, were constantly hostile to the Emperors,® and consequently hated their 
Jewish protégés the more bitterly. Moreover, the Jews, encouraged no doubt by 
the favours they had received, seem to have been aiming at yet further privileges, 
in particular at the full Alexandrian citizenship. 

This raises one of the problems alluded to above, the question whether the 
Jews, as a community (as to individuals there is no dispute), possessed the 
citizenship. This is expressly asserted by Josephus and according to some 
scholars implied by Philo, but it is denied by many modern writers, such as 
Willrich, Bludau, Wilcken, Schubart, and Reinach. Schirer strongly maintains 
the affirmative point of view, and even Juster in his more recent work, rejecting 
the arguments of Wilcken and Schubart, takes the same standpoint.° Since the 


1 Philo, Zz F2, 8, 55 (M. 525); cf. id, Leg., 20, 132 (M. 565): tas mpocevyds— 
modrai d¢ elou Ka Exacroy tyjpa tis médews. Philo, Zn #/., 6, 43 (M. 523), estimates the 
total number of Jews in Alexandria and Egypt as not less than a million. 

2 Not however, apparently, to any great extent bankers or money-lenders, as we might 
expect ; see Reinach, Daremlerg-Saglio, p. 628, and cf. Wilcken, Avézsemitismus, p. 788 f. 
There is only one instance in papyri of an imputation of usury against the Jews (Wilcken, 
Chrest. 60, A. D. 41), and this dates from a time when the anti-Semitic feeling was peculiarly 
intense. 

8 Cf. the case of the Alabarch Alexander (‘dem alexandrinischen “ Rothschild” ’, 
Bludau, p. 68). So too in the present letter (1. 94 f.) Claudius speaks of the Jews drodavov- 
ras... mepoveias dxdvrwy ayaboy, words in which we perhaps catch an echo of the envy felt 
by the Greeks for their wealthy enemies. 

« According to Josephus, Bell. Lud., ii, 487, this hostility existed from the very first. 

5 Cf. Mommsen, Rém. Gesch.‘, v, 582 f. 

6 So too (apparently) Modona, Aegyptus, ii, p. 265 f. 


12 CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES [1912] 


present letter contains new evidence on the point, it is necessary to examine 
the problem again. 

The ancient authorities cited to support the view of Schiirer and Juster are 
Philo and Josephus. The testimony of Jace. iii is on the other side; for the 
writer states in cap. 2, 28-30 that Philopator degraded the Jews eis Aaoypagiav kal 
oixerixny diddeow, but ordered édv dé ries ef adTGv mpoarpovrat ev Tois KaTa TedeTas 
pepunuevois dvacrpéper bar, rovrovs icomoAtras ’AAe~avdpedow eivar. The implication 
is clearly that they did not already possess the citizenship.’ The historical 
authority of Macc. iii is not high, but it is very unlikely that if, as Josephus 
asserts, the Jews had always enjoyed the citizenship an Alexandrian writer of the 
late Ptolemaic or early Roman period should make such a mistake.? 

Before dealing with the evidence of Philo and Josephus, it will be well to 
notice the arguments adduced against the citizenship. Wilcken, following Schu- 
bart, cites a papyrus (BGU. 1140 = Wilcken, Chrest. 58) in which a Jewish 
petitioner is described as ’AAe£avdpém(s), but the word has been altered to ‘lovéaiov 
tay and ’Adre~avope(ias). Clearly, then, argues Wilcken, there was a difference 
between the "AdcEavdpeds or citizen and the "lovdatos rév amd AA. Schiirer (iii*, 
718) and Juster (ii, 9 f.) dispute this inference; the alteration, says the latter, is 
merely ‘une meilleure détermination de la qualité du solliciteur’. This is how- 
ever, if not impossible, at least a highly disputable assertion ; for if the petitioner 
was an Alexandrian, what need was there to specify further? A citizen was 
a citizen, whatever his race.® 

Again, the mention in BGU. 1151, 7 f., of rod Tév lovdalwy dpxetov as compared 
with the woAurixdy apyetov of BGU. 1131, 14, 22 shows that the Jews had a special 
notarial office distinct from that of the wéAvs, and therefore points, as Wilcken 
remarks (Grundziige, 63), to their forming a woAirevua, not a part of the body of 
citizens. It is, indeed, undisputed that they had their own organization, a genarch 
or ethnarch, a yepovoia (whereas Alexandria did not possess a senate), and their 
own judicial organization.* The practical inconvenience of such separate privi- 


1 Schiirer’s interpretation of the passage, that ‘ er beraubte die alexandrinischen Juden 
des Biirgerrechtes ’ (ili*, 489), is quite unjustifiable ; the degradation eis Aaoypadiav xr. does 
not imply loss of citizenship but merely of the privileges which no one denies that they 
possessed. 

* For the date of JZacc. iii see, e. g., Bludau, pp. 62-6. It may be noted incidentally 
that the passage quoted may throw some light on the question. The book is unlikely to 
have been written at a time when the citizenship was a burning question, i. e. later than the 
middle of the first century, for the Jews were then asserting the fact of the citizenship. 

° The petitioner’s assertion that he was over the statutory age for poll-tax, which might 
seem conclusive, is not really so, owing to the mutilation of the document; for the argument 
may have run: ‘I am an Alexandrine, the son of an Alexandrine, and zm any case 
I am over-age’. 

* Philo, Zn F7., 10, 74 (M. 527-8): tis yap mperépas yepovoias, fv 6 c@rnp Kai evepyérns 
ZeBaoros emipeAnooperny rev “lovdaikdv eidero peta tiv Tod yevdpxov tedevtHy; Strabo ap. Jos., 
Ant, XiV, 117: Kadicrarat dé Kai eOvdpyxns adirdy, Os Svoiket re Td COves Kai Starr Kpioers Kai TvpBo- 
Aaioy empedetrat kai mpooraypdray, os dy rodiTelas dpxwv avtoredods, It is not certain that,as 
Philo seems to imply, the yepovaia took the place of the ethnarch, for Claudius, in the letter 
quoted by Josephus (Avzé., xix, 280-5), says reAevrjoavros Tod tov "Iovdaiwy ebvdpyov roy S«Ba- 
oroy pr) kexwdukevae €Ovdpyas yiyverOa. For the organization of the Jewish community at 
Alexandria see Schiirer, iii*, 76-9; cf. Juster, i, 413-14. 


[1912 | CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES 13 


leges, if the Jews possessed the full citizenship, is obvious ; and though it is 
arguable that they were of necessity granted these privileges owing to their 
religious principles, the improbability is so great that without overwhelming 
evidence the theory can hardly be accepted. 

Wilcken (Antisemitismus, p. 788), following Willrich, regards the existence 
of a Ghetto as an argument against citizenship (cf. too Jouguet, Vie municipale, 
p. 19); but this, though of some weight, is not conclusive, since the Jews, at least 
in Philo’s time, were not confined to the Jewish quarter, nor was that quarter 
itself exclusively peopled by Jews.! 

Lastly, Schubart (Archiv, v, 111-12) gives reasons (not perhaps conclusive) 
for supposing that the ‘Macedonians’ formed a special class, not possessing the 
Alexandrian citizenship. Now, Josephus states (c. Ap., ii, 35; Bell. Lud., ii, 488) 
that Alexander gave, and the Diadochi confirmed, to the Jews the right to be 
classed with the Macedonians, and there is papyrus evidence (Wilcken, Grundziige, 
63) which tends to confirm this, at least for certain Jews; hence, if Schubart’s 
theory is sound, the Jews did not as such possess the citizenship. 

We may now turn to the evidence of Philo. In his 7x FZ, 8, 53 (M. 525) he 
says that Flaccus rdAw é@’ €repov érpéreto, THY THs METEpas ToALTELas dvalpecy, 
iv’ droxorévray ols pdvors epodpuer 6 Huerepos Bios eOdv Te waTplwv Kal petove tas 
ToAuTLKOY dikalwv Tas éoxdras tmopevoper suppopds, ovdévos emELANupevor TELoWaTOS 
cls dogdAevay. dAlyats yap Borepov huepars rlOnor mpdypappa, ov’ ob Eévous Kal émnavoas 
jas amexdder ktA. This has been taken as evidence for the Alexandrian citizen- 
ship of the Jews, but it does not necessarily imply that. moduretas may mean 
‘citizenship’ (M. ‘ius civitatis’), but the passage of Strabo quoted above, p. 12, 
note 4, shows that it need not have that meaning.” Still less can the wodutixa 
dfckara be taken as proof. The Jews possessed very substantial rights, some of 
which (e. g, that in respect of scourging, Philo, / 4/., Io, 78—g) they shared with 
the Alexandrines, and when Flaccus called them &évo. he was not necessarily 
denying their right to be woAira. As Juster points out (ii, p. 1), the Jews who 
had not the right of domicile in a Greek méA1s were £évo. but those who had it 
were 7dpovkol.® 

It is quite likely that in Leg., 44, 349 (M. 597): perameupdevtes aywvicacbar 
tov wept ths ToAuTelas ayéva, Philo is using woAvreta in a sense similar to that 
suggested above, viz. the rights of the Jews as a woA(revya, but it is not impossible 
that one of the objects of the embassy was to ask for the citizenship, for Philo 
seems to imply that favours were being asked.* 


1 This may be inferred from Philo, Jz 77, 8, 55 (M. 525): tovray (i.e, the potpar rijs 
modews) S00 “Lovdaixai A€yovrar ba TO WEL aToOVS ‘Iovdaiovs €v TAaUTals KATOLKELY. 

2 See the remarks of Engers (Adio, xviii, 84) on this point. 

° Cf. Josephus, Ant., Xiv, 213: évérvxdv por of lovdator ev And@ kai Twes Tav Tapoikav 
*Tovdaiwv, It may be added that it is at least possible that modurixds might be used of 
a modirevpa as well as of a wédis; see, e.g., Schubart, Einfiihrung, p. 280f. For the 
rodrevpara see now Engers, Alo, xviii, 79 f. (cf. too p. 841). On p. 83 Engers adduces a 
further argument from Philo, /m /7., 20, 172 (M. 542) which seems conclusive ; see too his 
discussion of the word kdrouxos, p. 83%. 

4 Leg., 28,178 (M. 572): ypappareioy ... kepadawdn TUmov mEepiexov av Te emdbopev Kal 
dy ruxeiv névodpev; 183: To de dn Kal mpovopias oleaOa ruyxaver. 


14 CLAUDIUS. TO THE. .ALEXANDRINES [1912] 


In favour of the citizenship might be urged Philo’s use of the word ’AAe&av- 
dpevs: In Fil., 10, 80 (M. 528): rév idwwrdy ’AreLavdpéwy lovdaiwy ; Leg., 28, 183 
(M. 572-3): GdAX. Zouxe (Gaius) rH Tov dAdwv ’AdeLavdpewv pepid. mpockeioOa ; but 
the word was ambiguous, and though technically it meant an Alexandrian 
citizen it might also be used in a literary work to mean an inhabitant. of 
Alexandria. . 

It will be.seen that while these passages are quite consistent with the theory 
that the Jews possessed the citizenship, none of them compels us to accept it. On 
the other side may be set two passages which make in the opposite direction. In the 
In Fl., 6, 43 (M. 523) Philo says 7 m6Aus oixyropas éxet Surrovs, 7uas Te Kal Tovrovs, thus 
implying a contrast between the Alexandrines and the Jews; and later (10, 78-9, 
M. 528), after speaking of the Alexandrines’ privilege as regards scourging, he 
adds 16 0s rotro kal éml rGv juetéepwv Svernpyoay of mpd PAdkkov. It would be 
absurd to press either passage, but their evidence must be set against that of the 
others. 

That Josephus maintained the Jews to be citizens there is of course no dis- 
pute;’ and he cites two authorities for his contention. One is a stele set up by 
Julius Caesar at Alexandria: Kaicap *lovAuos trois év Adeavidpeta “loviatous moujoas 
XaAKHy oTHAny edjrwoev Sri AdeLavdpéwy ToAiral elo (Axtz., xiv, 188) ; so too c. Ap., 
ii, 37, where, however, he speaks more vaguely: tiv ot7jAnv ... Td dikarduara 
mepiexovoay & Kaioap 6 wéyas tots Iovdatois édwxey. It is perhaps significant that 
he does not quote this stele verbally, whereas many of his documents are given 
in full. It is not necessary to accuse him, as Willrich seems inclined to do (Kio, 
iii, 405), of dishonesty ; he may not have had a copy of the stele before him 
and have been speaking from memory; but in the circumstances it is impossible 
to treat this stele as very strong evidence, particularly as it is difficult to see what 
right Caesar had to give a decision concerning the Alexandrian citizenship (Will- 
niehiidies).* 

Weare reduced then to the letter of Claudius quoted by Josephus in full in 
Ant., xix, 280-5. But before considering that it is best to examine the evidence of 
the present letter, whose authenticity cannot be called in question. After deploring 
the ordovs, Claudius calls upon both parties to amend their ways, "AAe£avdpeis pe... 
kai lovdators dé (Il. 82, 88). Could there be a clearer indication that in the eyes of 
Claudius the Jews were not ’Adefavdpeis, i.e. Alexandrian citizens? Lower down 
(1. 95) he speaks of the Jews as living év dAdorpia meet. This should be decisive. 
It is perhaps possible that their enemies, in a time of strained relations, should 
speak of Jewish citizens as aliens and as living éy éAdorpia adAe, but is it con- 
ceivable that the Emperor himself, in a letter carefully calculated to hold the 
balance even, should do the same? 

Hardly less decisive is 1, 92 f., where Claudius bids the Jews pndt émormatpew 
yupvacvapxixois 7) Koountixots dyGor. This apparently means (see note ad loc.) that 
they were not to take part in the athletic contests presided over by the gym- 
nasiarch or cosmetes; but surely the Jews, if citizens, had as much right to 

1 See, e. g., Bell. Lud., ii, 487-8 ; Ant. xii, 121; c. Ap., ii, 38. 


* See now the ingenious (and perhaps correct) interpretation of this passage suggested 
by Engers, Avo, xviii, go. 


[1912] CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES 15 


compete as any other citizens.. Moreover, the gymnasiarch and cosmetes were 
the magistrates specially associated with the ephebi, and the ephebia was the 
necessary preliminary to citizenship (1. 53, n.) ; their mention here, therefore, seems 
clear proof that the Jews were not citizens. . . . 

At all events the total effect of the present letter is decisively to disprove the 
idea that the Jews possessed the citizenship ; and the question arises how it is to 
be reconciled with that quoted by Josephus, which has been almost universally 
interpreted as implying the opposite.! The important words are: émuyvovs dvéxa- 
dev tovs ev "Are€avdpela “lovdaiovs, ’AAcEavdpets Aeyouevous,. cvyKatorkiaevtas Tots 
mpeTo.s evOvs Katpots ’Are€avdpedor kal tons modurelas Tapa Tov Baciréwy rerevxéras, 
Kaas havepov éyévero x TOY ypaypdrwy TOV Tap’ adrots Kat TOV dvaTaypdTwr, Kat peTa 
OTH HeTepa Hyepovla "AdeLdvdperav bx6 Tod} VeBaortod trorayxOijvar, mepvddy Gar abrois 
74 dixata tnd Tov TeudOevtwv emdpywov... Adeavdpets 5€ enapOjvar Kata Tov Tap’ avtois 
Tovdalwy ... BovdAouar pndey did rHv Tatov mapadpootvny Tdv dixaiwyv To “lovdalwy 
€Over mapanentwxevat, prrdocecdar Se adrois kal Ta Tpdrepoy Sikardpata. 

If we accept both the authenticity and the current interpretation of this 
letter, we cannot escape the difficulty by supposing that Claudius at first thought 
the Jews to be citizens and later discovered his error or vice versa. It is clear 
that both letters were written early in Claudius’s reign ;? and the words in 1. 87 f. 
of the present document, dmep kai éy® dtaxovoas auporépwy éBeBaiwoa, make it 
certain that Claudius had already issued a decree confirming the privileges of the 
Jews. The letter in Josephus, if genuine, must be the one referred to, and we 
cannot suppose a change of opinion on a fundamental point to be ignored in the 
present letter. 

Thus we are driven to one of two explanations: either the Josephus letter 
is a forgery ® (or a genuine letter worked up for propagandist purposes) or it does 
not mean what it is generally supposed to mean. Against the former supposition 
must be set the conclusion, with its exhortation to both parties, which not only 
recalls the attitude adopted by Claudius in the present document but seems very 
unlikely to proceed from a Jewish forger. The last remark applies even more 
strongly to Claudius’s letter eis riv olxoupévny (Ant., xix, 286-91); and it will be 
admitted that the two must stand or fall together. At most therefore we must 
assume interpolation, an excessively hazardous proceeding in the case of a com- 
paratively recent and well-known edict. . 

But is the letter in Josephus really inconsistent with the present one? In 
other words, is the current interpretation necessary? It is to be noticed that 
Claudius twice (§§ 281 and 284) distinguishes between the Jews and the ’Ade€ap- 


1 Not, however, by Reinach, Daremberg-Saglio, iil, 627; cf. too the remarks of 
Jouguet, Vee municipale, p. 20, on ton tmy, &c. 

2 Josephus’s narrative makes this certain for the letter which he quotes. 

8 E. von Dobschiitz (Am. Journ. of Theol., viii, 73'7°°) speaks of this and its companion 
letter as being ‘under strong suspicion of being fabrications’ (cf. too A. Stein, Unser- 
suchungen, p. 162; Jouguet, Vie munzcipale, p. 19"); but of the two references cited, 
Mommsen, R(dmische) Geschichte), v, p. 523 f., implicitly accepts the genuineness of the two 
letters, and that to Ranke, if it is to his W(edr-) G(eschichie), iii, p. 97, is an error. Even 
Willrich, who is strongly against the Jewish claims, accepts the genuineness ; he pronounces 
Claudius credulous and uncritical (A/a, iii, p. 404). 


16 CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES [1912] 


dpets, and that he refers to the former as ‘called ’Ade£avipeis’. Why ‘called’, 
if they were ’AdeEavdpeis in the technical sense?! Moreover, he does not say 
they were given the Alexandrian citizenship, merely that they had tons rodureéas. 
We are reminded of Strabo’s remark, quoted above (p. 12, note 4), that the 
ethnarch had the powers of a woAuretas dpxwv adroredods, The Jewish community 
was in fact a city, a moAvrea, within a city, with powers practically equal (and in 
the possession of a yepovota superior) to those of the Alexandrines. Thus there 
is no real necessity to interpret the Josephus letter as implying citizenship; its 
true interpretation, uncertain while it stood alone, is determined by the present 
papyrus. 

That the Jews were agitating for the full citizenship may be inferred not 
only from the claims made by Josephus and perhaps from Philo (see above, 
p. 13) but from Claudius’s words in the present letter (Il. 88-95); and it may 
be that resentment at their claims played its part in producing the great ‘ pogrom’ 
under Gaius. Of that outbreak we have a very brief account in Josephus (Azz., 
xviii, 257-9) and a detailed one in Philo’s two treatises, J Flaccum and Legatio 
ad Gaium, which are apparently parts of a longer but now imperfect work [lepi 
dpetév.2. More exactly, Philo gives two accounts, not quite consistent, but it is 
easy by combining the two to reconstruct the sequence of events. The narrative 
of Willrich (Azo, iii, 397-419) is prejudiced and one-sided, but on the other hand 
that of Philo is quite obviously an ex parte statement, and highly rhetorical in 
style. Philo’s remark, in reply to a hypothetical objection that he has given too 
favourable an account of Flaccus as prefect, émaiwvG tov PAdKkov, ovK emELd1) TPOTHKEV 
€xOpov eyxapidcerv, GAN’ ty’ adrod ri pox Onplav apidnror€pav tapacrnow (ln Fil., 2, 7, 
M. 518), shows a temper remote indeed from that of the historian. 

The accepted reconstruction of the events, which is likely to be in the main 
correct, is as follows. In the summer of A. D. 38 Agrippa I, travelling to his new 
kingdom via Egypt, arrived at Alexandria. According to Philo he was careful 
to enter the city as unobtrusively as possible, but the statement is difficult to 
reconcile either with what we know of his character or with subsequent events; 
and in any case we may assume that his compatriots, delighted at the arrival of 
a Jewish king, high in the Emperor’s favour, did not allow the event to pass 
without a public manifestation of their enthusiasm. The Greek populace, 
annoyed, we may assume, by the jubilations of their rivals, dressed up in mock- 
royal state a well-known idiot of the town, surrounded him with a guard of 
make-belief soldiers, and paraded him through the streets with cries of Marin, 
Marin, a Syrian word for ‘king’. 

The insult, to a personal friend of Gaius, was daring; and it was doubtless — 
a desire to escape the consequences which led the Alec uceae to raise a demand 
for the placing of the Emperor’s images in the synagogues. Flaccus, whose 


1 Motzo, Atti R. Acc. Tor., xlvili, 583 ff., advances a theory that ’Adegavdpeis has 
a technical sense ; there were "Ade§avdpeis Iovdaior, enjoying the inferior grade of citizenship, 
i.e. not members of demes, and “Iovdaio, who lacked the citizenship altogether. This 
is ingenious but not very likely. 
? Juster (i, p. 6), following L. Hitaesebionts Le classement des euvres de Pitter (Bib7. de 
Ecole des Hautes Etudes, i), pp. 65-78, denies this, but Massebieau’s arguments do not seem 
conclusive. 


[1912] CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES 17 


position, as an enemy of Agrippina and a partisan of Tiberius Gemellus, was very 
precarious, could not safely oppose this, whatever his own sentiments may have 
_ been; and when he published an edict declaring the Jews aliens and intruders 
the mob saw that they were secure. The result was a regular campaign of 
terrorism. The Jews were driven from the other parts of the city into the 
‘Delta’ quarter, over 400 houses being sacked; many of them were murdered or 
beaten, and innumerable insults and outrages were heaped upon the survivors. 
There may well be some exaggeration in Philo’s narrative, but Willrich goes too 
far in minimizing the sufferings of the Jews,! the extent of which may be inferred 
from Claudius’s remarks in the present letter. 

If the Jews hoped for redress from Flaccus, they were soon undeceived. He 
took up an attitude of strong hostility, and even had a number of their elders 
scourged ; with what, if any, justification, it is impossible to say in the absence of 
any check on Philo’s prejudiced narrative. However, he was not long ina position 
to control the situation ; at the following Feast of Tabernacles, in the autumn of 
38, he was arrested and banished to Andros. The Jews, having obtained per- 
mission to lay their case before the Emperor, sent an embassy to Rome, probably 
in the late autumn or early winter of the same year.?, This was the embassy 
whose fortunes are so graphically described by Philo in his Legatio ad Gaium. 
Josephus® states that both sides sent an embassy, each consisting of three 
persons, Philo being at the head of the Jews and Apion being one, probably the 
leader, of the Alexandrines ; but Philo gives the number of the Jewish delegates 
as five ;* and on such a point his authority is conclusive. 

Philo unfortunately, in the present state of his work, gives no information as 
to the ultimate issue, but the account in Josephus shows that the Jews got no 
satisfaction, Of events in Alexandria between the date of the embassy and the 
accession of Claudius we know nothing, but at that point we have a brief but 
valuable reference in Josephus (Avz., xix, 278): ocraovd¢erar 5€ Kara rov abrov ypdvov 
lovdaiwy Tra mpds” EdAnvas én ris “AdAeEavdpéwy TéAEws. TedAevTHoavTOS yap Tod Tatov 
70 lovdaiwy €Ovos ... dveOdppyoe Kal év GrAots evOEws Hv. It is clear from this that 
the Jews were on this occasion the aggressors. Our letter adds a further detail. 
In 1. 96 f. Claudius warns them pndé érdyeodar 7) mpoolerOat ard Supias i) Alybnrov 
katamAgortas ‘lovdatovs. The injunction could have point only if this had already 
occurred ; and since there can be no question of such a step being taken during 
the ordovs under Gaius, which was sudden and unpremeditated, we are probably 
justified in concluding that the reference is to the events at the beginning of 


1 Kho, iii, p. 407‘. Josephus’s reference is too brief to be set against Philo’s. 
Willrich’s prejudice is shown in his remarks about the arms. Had the Jews no opportunity 
to procure arms between the summer of 38 and the accession of Claudius in January, 41 ? 
That they had prepared for revenge may perhaps be inferred from the present letter ; 
see below. 

2 See Willrich, AZ, iii, p. 410'; Bludau, p. 81 f., against Schiirer, who dates the em- 
bassy in the winter of a. p. 39-40. In favour of the earlier date is perhaps the present letter, 
which shows that on this occasion the two parties lost no time in laying their case before 
Claudius ; but this is not conclusive, since the primary objects of these embassies was to 
congratulate the new Emperor on his accession. 

> Ant, xvili, 257-9. 

* Leg., 46, 370 (M. 600). 


18 CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES [1912] 


Claudius’s reign. It may be assumed that the Jews, not merely from a desire 
for revenge but because they must have felt their position very insecure, had 
been making secret preparations for armed resistance, and they may conceivably _ 
have planned a rising even before the news of Gaius’s death reached them ; but 
this is not a necessary supposition. If we suppose the news to have arrived at 
Alexandria by about the middle of February,! this allows time for the Jews to 
send to their compatriots in Egypt and Syria, to be joined by them, to attack 
the Alexandrines, and for both parties to send embassies to Rome by the 
early summer. But they may equally well have risen on the first receipt of the 
news and have received assistance later, in the course of the perhaps protracted 
disturbances. 

The question arises whether Claudius is referring to this affair only or to the 
whole sequence of events, beginning with the massacre under Gaius. In favour 
of the first supposition is the word wddw in 1. 78, which indicates a resumption 
of hostilities; but two other considerations make rather in favour of the latter 
supposition. Claudius says that he does not know which side was responsible 
for the ordois. As, on Josephus’s own showing, the Jews were the aggressors 
in the affair under Claudius, this suggests that the reference is not merely 
to this, but to the state of hostility which had no doubt continued ever since 
A.D. 38. Again, reprimanding the Jews for sending a separate embassy, ‘as 
if they lived in two cities’, he adds, ‘a thing such as never occurred before 
now’. He must have known of Philo’s embassy, not three years earlier; but the 
clause has a justification if he was thinking of the whole series of events. It 
might perhaps be suggested, indeed, that the delegation sent in 38-9 had 
remained in Rome ever since; but against this must be set the fact that the 
Alexandrian embassy which inspired the present letter was certainly distinct 
from that sent to Gaius. The delegates numbered eleven (I. 19, n.), whereas 
Josephus gives the number on the previous occasion as three, and the name of 
Apion does not appear among them; moreover, they were clearly sent primarily 
to congratulate Claudius on his accession. It is not possible to suppose that the 
Jews omitted to send a counter-embassy, especially if a ordouws, in which they 
had been the aggressors, had just occurred. 

If m¢\w does make it necessary to prefer the first supposition (and of course 
we do not know that the outbreak under Gaius was the first) we can only suppose 
that the guilt of the Jews in the new disturbance was not so clear to Claudius as 
to Josephus’s authority; and the statement as to the embassy must be taken 
loosely, as referring to the whole period, whereas ry mad dp£apéver refers only 
to the recent outbreak. 

Claudius, in reply to the representations of both parties, assumes an attitude 


* For the speed of communication in the Roman Empire see, e. g., Wilcken, Z. d. Sav.- 
Sz, xii, pp. 146-7. He allows for the journey from Rome to Alexandria 9-10 days 
‘unter den allergiinstigsten Umstinden’, by the sea-route. Every effort would doubtless 
be made to send speedy news of Claudius’s accession to so important a province as Egypt, 
but it occurred in January, and though the sea-route was used even in winter (W. Riepl, 
Das Nachrichtenwesen des Altertums, 1913, p. 225; to his references may be added Philo, 
Leg., 29, 190, M. 573) we should allow at least a fortnight and probably more for the 
journey at that season. 


[1912] CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES 19 


of strict impartiality. He reprimands, in measured terms, the intolerance of the 
Alexandrines towards their Jewish neighbours, and confirms all the privileges of 
the latter ; but on the other hand he refuses to enlarge these privileges and, if the 
Jews continue to cause disturbances, threatens them with punishment in language 
of unexpected sharpness. It is clear that the Alexandrines had no right to 
accuse him of unfair preference for the Jews; and if, in the well-known ‘ Isidorus 
Acta’, he appears, like other Emperors, in a réle distinctly hostile to the 
Alexandrian envoys, we are probably justified in concluding that he regarded 
the Greeks as more to blame than the Jews.! 

This brings us, in conclusion, to the problem of the date of the Acta referred 
to. They are contained on a papyrus preserved partly at Berlin (BGU. 511) and 
partly at Cairo (P. Cairo 10448). The whole text, which is one of the most 
interesting examples of the Alexandrian propagandist literature known as 
‘Heathen Acts of the Martyrs’, was re-edited in an improved form by Wilcken 
in his Antisemitismus, pp. 800-6, and again as Chrest.14. The papyrus contains 
a record of a trial by the Emperor Claudius of a suit, arising out of an anti- 
Semitic ordots, brought by Isidorus, the gymnasiarch of Alexandria, against 
King Agrippa. It was earlier inferred from one passage that a rival Jewish 
deputation was present, but Wilcken’s revised text removes the necessity for the 
assumption, though on other grounds it is likely enough that a Jewish embassy 
would figure in the case. 

Wilcken originally concluded, from the presence of the Empress and from 
the fact that the sitting took place, according to his restoration, in the Lucullian 
Gardens (which did not pass into the Imperial possession before about 47-8), 
that the date was 53;7 hence the Jewish king was Agrippa II. Reinach, how- 
ever, pointing out that SepourjAvavots could be read as easily as AovkovA]\vavols, 
and that close relations with Alexandria are attested for Agrippa I but not for 
Agrippa II, preferred a date in Claudius’s first year, i.e. in 41.2 Wilcken, how- 
ever, still adheres to his former view, and the question can now be reconsidered 
in the light of the present letter. 

At first sight our letter would seem to strengthen Reinach’s case. We now 
have evidence, additional to that of Josephus, for anti-Semitic disturbances at the 
beginning of Claudius’s reign, and, what is more important, evidence that Jews of 
Syria were concerned in them. What more natural than that Agrippa should 
have intervened to assist the community he had helped in the past ; or that, if he 
did not, the Alexandrines should suspect his agency in the arrival of Syrian Jews 
at Alexandria? A chronological argument may also be invoked. The first day 
of the session recorded in Chrest. 14 was Pachon 5 (= April 30). The proclama- 
tion of Rectus ordering the exhibition of the present letter was dated Neos 
Sebastos 14 (= Nov. 10). This suits very well with the supposition that the 
case on which Claudius here writes to the Alexandrines was decided in May. 

A moment’s reflection will, however, show the improbability of this sugges- 


1 That he was not in general unfairly partial to the Jews is shown by his expulsion of 
them from Rome (Suetonius, 25 ; Acés, xviii, 2; cf. Dio, Ix, 6, 6). 
* Flermes, XXX, p. 489. 
8 Rev, d. et. juives, XXXiV, pp. 296-8. 
(Ce, 


20 CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES [1912 | 


tion. In Col. i of the ‘Isidorus Acta’ the ‘ambassadors (apéoBes) of the 
Alexandrines’ are referred to; and it is to be presumed that the Isidorus and 
Lampon who occur in Cols. ii and iii were among them; yet neither name 
appears among the ambassadors mentioned in the present letter. It might 
indeed be suggested that the delegates sent to Gaius had remained in Rome con- 
tinuously since then, that Isidorus and Lampon were two of their number, and 
that the embassy mentioned in the present letter was quite distinct; or that 
(since Isidorus is described as gymnasiarch, not ex-gymnasiarch, and could there- 
fore hardly have been in Rome continuously since 38-9) two embassies, one to 
congratulate Claudius on his accession and one to conduct the case against 
Agrippa, were sent in 41; or, lastly, that the mpécBes of Col. i are those of 
the present letter and that Isidorus and Lampon are not to be regarded as 
mpécBes.1 Any one of these explanations is possible, though none is likely ; but 
there is a further consideration, which seems decisive. In the Berlin-Cairo 
papyrus Isidorus (gymnasiarch of Alexandria!) and Lampon are condemned to 
death ; and P. Oxy. 33 (= Wilcken, Chrest. 20), iv, 5 f., shows that the sentence 
was actually carried out. Is it conceivable that within a few weeks of the 
execution of one of the highest municipal magistrates,? in consequence of an 
adverse decision in a case between the city and Agrippa concerning anti-Jewish 
disorders, Claudius should be writing to Alexandria in friendly terms, should 
make no allusion to an event so calculated to excite the citizens to bitter resent- 
ment, and should even say that he did not know on which side rested the guilt 
of the disturbances? The improbability is so overwhelming as to outweigh all 
the arguments on the other side. Moreover, the considerations adduced by 
Wilcken still hold good. We know that the Lucullian Gardens were not in 
Imperial possession in 41; we at least do not know that the Servilian were. We 
know that the rédle played in the Berlin-Cairo papyrus by the Empress suits. 
Agrippina® but not Messalina ;* and, finally, though we have no such record of 
relations between Agrippa II and Alexandria as we have concerning Agrippa I, 
yet we know from Josephus that he had influence with Agrippina, which he used 
in favour of the Jews.» When we remember, finally, that in the present letter 
Claudius threatens, in case of further disturbances, to show ‘what a benevolent 
prince can be when turned to just indignation’, and that, on the other hand, he 
confirmed the Jews in all their privileges and restored that liberty of worship 


1 Against this, however, is the occurrence, in a mutilated passage of Col. iii, of the word. 
mpeo Bea. 

2 Against the older view that the gymnasiarch stood at the head of the municipal 
magistrates see Grenfell and Hunt’s note on P. Oxy. xii, 1412, 1-3. They incline to place 
the gymnasiarch fourth, the hypomnematographus, archidicastes, and presbeutes being the- 
first three. 

® Tacitus, An, xii, 37: ‘ Atque illi. . . Agrippinam quoque, haud procul alio suggestu 
conspicuam, isdem, quibus principem, laudibus gratibusque venerati sunt. /Vovum sane et 
mortbus velerum tnsolitum, feminam signis Romanis praesidere : ipsa semet parti a maioribus 
suis imperii sociam ferebat’; Dio, Ix, 33, 7: 7 8€ ’Aypurmiva kal Sypooia moAddKis adt@ Kai 
xpnuarifovre kat mpecBeias dkpowpévm maphy, emi Byyaros idiov kaOnuévn. Kathy kal TodT o ovdevos. 
éXarrov Oéapa. 

* Note that both Tacitus and Dio emphasize the novelty of the practice. 

5 Josephus, Av/., xx, 135. 


[1912] CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES 21 


disturbed under Gaius, we can well understand that the Alexandrines may later 
have renewed their anti-Jewish atrocities and that on that occasion Claudius 
showed less hesitation in apportioning the blame. 


5. Lhe character and policy of Claudius. 


Apart from its evidence on the matters already discussed, the letter is of 
considerable interest for the light which it throws on the personality of Claudius 
and the character of his government. Before, however, we can consider it from 
this point of view, it is necessary to inquire how far it can be regarded as his 
work. The general efficiency of his administration, which, despite certain abuses, 
due to the greed and corruption of Messalina and the freedmen,! cannot be dis- 
puted, is frequently attributed, at least in part, to the influence of the latter 
rather than to Claudius himself; but on the other hand it is certain that he took 
an active part in the details of government, particularly in the administration of 
justice? and in the duties of the censor’s office,® and the general lines of policy 
are so much in agreement with all we know of his personality and point of view 
as to make it difficult to suppose that he was not largely responsible. The pre- 
sent letter can therefore hardly fail to be the result of his personal intervention. 
It was addressed to the second city of the Empire; it concerned, among other 
matters, a vote of divine honours to himself and the feuds of the Greeks and 
Jews, two questions in which he was specially concerned, and the request of the 
Alexandrines for a senate, an important point of state policy ; and the second of 
these questions involved something in the matter of a judicial decision, always 
very attractive to Claudius. 

It may, therefore, be regarded as certain that Claudius was himself directly 
responsible for the decisions here announced, though he may doubtless have taken 
advice ; but it does not therefore follow that the actual wording of the letter can 
be attributed to him. <A priori, it seems improbable that he himself wrote out 
the rough draft and not likely that he dictated it, nor does it show any of that in- 
consequence and irrelevant pedantry which distinguished him, and which are so 
apparent in his famous speech on the grant of the zs honorum to the Gauls.* 
On the other hand there are some very characteristic touches. The wording of 
his reference to the testimony of Germanicus,° the personal note in his acceptance 
of honours,® the appeal to antiquity to support his refusal of an dpx.epevs and 
temples,’ the tone of his exhortations to the Alexandrines and Jews,° and lastly 
the sudden and unexpected outburst against the latter °—all these passages seem 
clearly to betray the hand of Claudius himself rather than of an amanuensis ; and 


WCE e722, Dio, 1x, 8, 4. 

2 Suetonius, 14; Dio, lx, 4, 3 f., 5, 73 Seneca, Apoc., 7, 4f., 12, 2, WV. 43-5. 
3 Suetonius, 16. Cf. Tacitus, Avm., xi, 13. 

4 Dessau, 212. 

5]. 25f., dy elva 70 reAevraiov cima mapels Ta GAAa KT), 

® ], 29, kaimep ovk dv mpos Ta Tovavra pasd.os. 


7 Wi. go-r. $ ll. 79-82. ® ll. g8-100. 


22 CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES [1912] 


we are probably justified in concluding that the letter represents in all points the 
personal decisions of the Emperor, that it was drafted in accordance with definite 
instructions from him, and that. he may very likely have introduced, either into 
the original draft or at a later stage, certain interpolations of his own. 

The character of Claudius was a curious mixture, and included traits which 
made him, alike to contemporaries and to posterity, somewhat of a ‘ figure of 
fun’; but it is clear that his natural endowment, till illness and neglect had 
adversely affected him, was good, and to the end one must recognize in him 
a solid base of character and commonsense. His intentions as Emperor were 
unquestionably good, and his reign showed none of those aberrations or that pro- 
gress towards megalomania which have made the names of Caligula and Nero 
infamous. That he was pedantic, timid, wanting in consistency and concentra- 
tion, with little self-control, must be admitted ; but W. Weber goes too far in 
calling him merely ‘schwachsinnig’.1 The present letter brings evidence of 
some value on this point. For the actual arrangement of the matter, which is 
clear and logical enough, Claudius himself may not have been responsible, but 
the decisions themselves, which, as we have seen, there is every reason for 
attributing to him, betray no trace whatever of any weakness of intellect. On 
the question of the honours voted him he shows on the whole ? a consistent and, 
what is more, a reasonable point of view, obviously disliking such honours, yet 
careful not to offend the Alexandrines{by adopting a too unaccommodating 
attitude. His decisions on the requests made to him are reasonable and well- 
grounded ; in regard to the senate in particular he shows a statesmanlike caution, 
neither acceding to the request nor rebuffing the petitioners by a definite refusal. 
Finally, on the question of the Jews he holds the scales even between the two 
parties and preserves throughout a perfectly judicial attitude. From this letter 
one would never suspect that Claudius was ‘ weak-minded ’. 

The letter is of importance, however, not only from the point of view of 
Claudius’s character but also from that of his public policy. As already said 
(above, p. 6), Kornemann regards Claudius as returning in many respects to the 
Hellenistic monarchy of Julius Caesar, in reaction against the policy of Augustus 
and Tiberius, but there is nothing in our letter to confirm this. Julius himself 
~and Gaius, who did, in his unbalanced way, return to the Hellenistic monarchy, 
are never referred to, and it is to Augustus that Claudius appeals when he finds 
it necessary to rely on precedent. Moreover, his whole attitude is rather that of 
Augustus and Tiberius than that of the Hellenistic sovereigns. At the beginning 
of his reign certainly he was a Roman grinceps,® not a Hellenistic BacwWevs ; and 
it seems very doubtful whether in essentials he abandoned that standpoint at 
a later time. That his reign did mark an epoch in the history of the principate, 
that, for example, the development of the secretariat, under the Imperial freed- 
men, into great offices of state* was a notable step forwards in the direction of 
autocracy—these and similar facts cannot be disputed ; but developments of this 


1 Hermes, \, 59'. 

‘ For a possible exception see above, p. 6. 

* Note that he twice (Il. 58, 81) uses the word jyepav (= princeps); cf. too |. 54. 
* See, e.g., Hirschfeld, Verwaltungsbeamten, 442 ff. 


[1912] CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES 23 


kind were inevitable if the principate was to function satisfactorily at all, and such 
administrative evolution cannot fairly be taken as marking any break, in principle, 
with the policy of Augustus. 


Io 


15 


20 


25 


3° 


Gol. x.] 
Aovkios Aipiddros ‘PHxros  déyet: 


ered TT avayvdoes Tihs lepordrns 

kal evepyeTikwrarns is tiv modeLv 

émiaToAns maoca % wodEls TWapaTuyeEly 

ovk nouvvnOn{v} dia Td mAnOos avTas, 

dvavKatoy hynoduny éxdetvae 

tiv émicroAny iva kat dvdpa Exacrov 

dvayewvbckov adtiv Thy Te peyadldrnTa 

Tod Oeod Aydv Kaicapos Oavpdonre 

kal TH mpos THY more [[opota]] edvotg 

xdpw exnte. ("Erovs) B TiBepiov Kdavdiov 
Kaicapos S«Bacrod Teppavixod Avroxpdropos, 

pynvos Néov S¢Bacro(d) 16. 


Col. 2.] 

TiBépios KAatdios Kaicap S<Bacros Teppavixis Adtokpérwp apx {t}repeds 

péyetctos Onpapyixns éEoveias Umaros dmodeduypevos Are€avdpéov 

Th mode xaipev. TiBépios Kraddios BapBiddos, ‘Amrodrduis 'Apreputddpou, 

Xaupihpov Acovidov, Mapxos ’Iobdu0s Aoxanmddns, Pdwos ‘IovAcos Atoviaro(s), 

TiBépios Kdatdios Pavias, Tlaciwy Tordépwvos, Atovicros SaBBiwvos, 

TiBépios Karavdus ArorrAgdvis 'Apiorovos, Tdsos ’LovXos ‘ArrodAGvt0s, 
‘“Eppaiokos 

Amodrwviov, & mpéaBes tuaev, dvaddvTes por TO Wigiopa TOAAa meEpl 

ris morews SueEHAOoy, Umaydpevot por OHdrAov mpos THY Els Hpas 

eivoiay tv ék moANGv Xpovov, & elaTE, Tap’ Euol TeTapevpEryY EC . 

cixeTat, pioer piv edoeBeis mepl Tods XeBaotovs vmrdpxovres, os 

éx moAAG@y por yéyove yvopipov, é€epérws Jé mepl Tov epov 

oikov Kat omovddcavtes Kal omovdacbévTos, @y Elva TO TENEV- 

raiov elmo. mapels Ta Gra péyetoTos eat pdprus ovpos addedAgos 

Teppavixss Kaicap yvnowrépas tyds pwvais mpocayopetoas- 

dudmep Hdéws mpocedegdunv Tas dobeioas th pov por Tyas 

kalmep odk dv mpos Ta Toadra {p} pdtdvos. Kat mpora pev YeBaoriy 

ipeiv dyew emirpémor Thy éuty yeveOdctay ov Tpotrov avTol mpo- 

elpnoba, Tas Te exaTao a Taxov Tay dvdpidyTov dvaotaoeas 

éuod Te Kal Tod yévous pov Troijoacde ovvKwpar éy® Opa. yap 


e 2 a lon € Z > M4 7 x PEN bak 
(Ort) mavTn pynpEela TNS NMETEPAS evoeBetas els TOV Epov olKov 


24 


35 


40 


45 


50 


55 


60 


65 


CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES [1912] 


Wpbcacba (é)orovddoarat. Téav 6& dvoiv xprladly avdpudvtev 
6 pev Kdavdiavijis Eipjyns SeBacrhs yevd[peyvos domep brébero 
kal mpocedermdprioley 6 euol typ[i}éraTos BdépBirdos apvovpévov 


4 > 


pov dia 7d Hoprikére[pols dlox]ei[y,] éwei ‘Pduns dvareOjcerat, 


Gols, 
£ hie 4 a 4 ¢ ~ 9 ~ vA a“ 2 2 
6 O€ Erepos Ov Tpdmov byeis aEvodTE TopmedoeL Tals Errovipals 
¢ ee ’ ¢ aN 2 XN pees M 7 
pépais map’ dpiv: ovvmopumevéror dé [kar av]] adra Kal Si¢pos 
2 2 v4 > 2 I> ae OF, ) 4 
@ BovrAecOar Kicpot noknpévos. Evndes 6 ic {o}ws rocatvras 
mpoo|tléuevov Teas adpvicacba dvdiy Kdavdiavav xaradig~at 
dron Te Kara vopov mapeivar ths Aiytm(r)ov- didmep Kai rabré [| np] 
& cpety emirpémat, ef b€ BovrAeoOat kai Overtpaciov II wAciwvos 
a > a by , \ > Pg 2 4 3 (a ~ MS 
Tod é€uov emitpbrov Tods édimmous avdpidvtas dvactioate. Tov dé 
TeTpaTdévwv dvacrdadis (as mepl tas eic)Bortds THs yxdpas adidpicée 
por Botrec Oar 
ovvyxwpe. 7d pev mept THY Taméoipiy Kadrovpévnv ths ArBdns 
To O€ mepi Ddpov ths Ade~avdpeias tpirov dé wept IIndAovorov 
a on oP: ~ > be > Te. ‘ ~ AN 
THs Alydr(r)ov ornoat, apx{t}repéa 0 epov Kal vadv KaTacKevas 
an al > 
TapeTooue, ovTe HopTiKds Tois KaT eé“avTov avOporols 
, > X € x \ os My lot v4 ~ ~ 
BovAdpevos eivar Ta fepd d& Kai T& ToLladTa pdvois Tois Oeots 
eEépera vd Tod mavTos ai@vos admodeddcbat Kpirfo|y. 
TIepi d¢ rév airnbévtay & map’ éuod daBeiv éomovddKa- 
e 7 ee “ 2 4 BA Tod 
TE oUTws yelvdaokol maot Tols EpnBevKkdoer Axper THS 
éuns tyepoveias Bail] Bov||Baov dtagvdadcoat thv Are~avdpéwv 
vp ’ \ = ~ te (a ‘ id 
modeiTelay emi Tois THS mwoAEws TeLpeElols Kal gidavOpdros 
mace wAnY ef ph tives UTHrAOoY Kuas os ey dovrdov 
ylelyovéres édnBetoa, kal Ta adda de ovK Hocov civar BovrAope 
la , ya iP td € ~ 2 4 ¢ 2 ~ Noe ~ ¢ ta 
BéBaia maévO boa tbpeiv éxapicOn b7é Te TaY mpd E“od HyEepdver 


kai Tov Baciiéwv Kal T@v emdpxwv, ws Kai [6] Beds BeBacros eBeBaiace. 


Col. 4.] 


Tovds d& veoxépouvs rob év ‘Ade~avdpeia vaod bs éativ Tod Bed 
SeBacroh KAnporovs civat BovrAoue Kaba cal J ev Kavérer 

Tov avtod Ocod SeBacrod KAnpobvra. ‘Trép dé tod Tas mroAc- 
Teikas apxas rpleTis evar Kai mév(v) époi [[v]] Kadds BeBovrcicbat 
Ooxetral, & yap (dp)xovTes PdRar Tod ddcew edObvas oY KaKas 
Hpgav peTpidrepor rely mpooevexOnoovra Tov ev Tais 

apxais xpévov. IIepi dé ris BovAts 6 Tt pév more otyndes 

dueiv emi Tov dpxaiwv Bacthéwy ovdK Exar A€yewv, dre O& emt Tov 
mpo éuod SeBacrav ov« eiyetat cagpas oldate. Katvod dy 
mpdypatos viv mporwy KataBaddopuévou Omep adndrov ei auvoi- 


[1912] CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES 25 


7° 


75 


80 


85 


go 


I0o 


105 


cel TH TWOAEL Kal Tois éuols mpdypace: éypaa Alprdrio ‘PHxTor 
Siacképacbar Kal Snrdoé por ef rar Kal cuvelotacbar Ty apxiy oEl, 
tov Te Tpomov, eimep dpa auvdyew Sév, Kal’ dv yevyjoeTat TovTO. 

Tis b& mpos “Iovdatovs rapayfs Kal ordoews paddov & ef xpi) 76 adnbes 
elmeiv Tob mod€uou mérepor péev aizion Katéotnoay Kalmep 

e€ dvtTikataocTdcews TOAAG TaY TueTépwy mpécBewy 

pirorepnbevtoy Kai uddrtota Avovuctov tod Oéwriols duos 

ov e€BovrnOny axpiBds e€edévEat, Tapievdpevos epavTat 

kaT& Tov méAev dpgapéevov dpynv aperapédntov* 

amdGs 8& mpocayopetor dre dv ph KaTamatonrat Thy ddE- 

Oprov dpyiv tatrnv Kat addAnAwv avOddiov eyBiacOjcopat 

Oigar dv eat Hyeuav pirdvOpomos eis dpyyv dixatay peraBeBrr- 
pévos, Atéwep ere kal viv dtapaptipome elva Ade~avdpeis pev 
mpacws kal piiavOpimas mporpépovte “Lovdaio(t)s rois 


THY avThv mode €K ToddA@Y xXpbvey olKodcEL 


Col. 5.] 


A A ~ 
kal pndev taév mpos Opnokeiav adrois vevomopévov 
ToO Oeod AopévwvTar GAA EGow avTovs Tois Ebeoty 
xpnoba bs Kai émi rod beod YeBaorod, dmep Kai yar 
dvaxotoas audorépwv eReBalwoa Kai “Iovdéous dé 
dvtTikpus Kedevor pndty Aa: Ov mporEpov 
54 
éxxov mepiepydferOar pdt domep ev dvoei modecely Ka- 
a 4 - > 4 lo ~ 
tolkoovras Ovo mpecBeias exméumev Tov dood, 
a AY v4 Va 2 lA XN 2 fA 
® ph mpotepov mote empdxOn, pnde émiomatpery 
YUMVATLAPXLKOLS 7) KOTUNTLKOIS aYOCEL, 
Ua \ ‘ 2 A 3 iA XN 
Kaptroupévous pev Ta oikia amoAdovtas dé 
2 _ , + 7 £ 7 > ~ 
év dddorpia mide mepiovoias amdvtav ayabor, 
pnde éerdyecOat 7) mpocelecOar amd Supias i Alyda(r)ov 
Katamdéovtas “Iovdaiovs é£ ob peifovas vrovoias 
dvavkacOjooue AapBdvew ef O€ pH, TWavTA 
Tpomov avtovs éme€ehetoopat Kabdmep Kowviy 
> > fe ra Le f > ‘ 
Tea THS oikoupéevns voooy é~eyeipovtas. ’Eav 
TovT@Y amooTayTES auPorEpor meTa MpAOTNTOS 
kal piravOporeias THs mpos aAAHAOUS CHY eOeAnonre 
lod XN a 
kai éyat mpovotay Ths modEews ‘Tonoopat Thy avaTdrot 
kaddmep éx mpoydvay oixias bpiv trapxovons. 
BapBirrdAur rai eas Erépwor paptupai det mpdvora[y] 


26 CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES [1912] 


© ~ > 2 \ v2 a \ ~ 4 
NUOV Tap €Emol Trovovpéval, Os Kal viv Taon Pido- 
- A iv > a Q ¢ My € ~ 4 
Telmeia Tept Tov ayova Tov Urep buav KExplnTEl, 
va ~ n~ 4 
kat TiBepiot Kravdior "ApyxiBiot Tau Euai €TE[pwr]. 


“Eppocbat. 

2. 1. lepwrarns. 3. 1. es, nédw 3 so in Il, 4 (ads) and ro. 6. 1. avaykaiov. 
8. 1. dvayweokovtes, peyadebryra (MS. peyadvornr®). 15. 1. peéytoros, drodedevypévos. 
17. 1. Aewvidov. 18. SaBBievos: first 8 corr. from p. 1g. eppaoxos corr. from 
Eppatkos, 20. |. of. 2t. 1. pe(?), dpas. - 22. ed etote: Hunt; |. tore. First € 
of rerapuevperny corr., perhaps from o. 23. |. elyere, € Of vmapxovres corr. from a. 
24. 1. yuopipov, eEarpéras. 25. 1. omovdacevres (first o corr. from 1), iva. 26. 1. cima, 
peyotos. 24. Kaioap: Hunt. 28. Second e of mpocedeEapny corr. from a. 1. ipav. 


29. The deleted p is smeared and blotted; probably the scribe, after writing it, dropped 
a blot of ink on the papyrus, and for that reason deleted the p and began the word afresh. 
l. apéra, 30. |. tpiv, emirpéma, yeveOdiav, mpocipynabe. 31. |. d€ Exaorayod ; the scribe, 
having written cxaracrayov, intended to insert a a before the first r and delete aor, but 
he inadvertently inserted it before the second r and overlooked the preceding rao. 
32. 1. mouncacba ovyxopd, 6po. 33. mynueia: or perhaps premea (szc). 1. tperépas. 
34. 1. fptcacba éomovddcare. Second av of avdpiavrwy corr. 36. mpooedetmapr|o|ev: Milne ; 
l. mpooedum, The o following is inserted above the line, and beneath it (probably not part of 
«v) is a character which has perhaps, but not certainly, been deleted. 37. 1. poprixarepos, 
eri. “Papns dvarebnoera: Milne. 38. 1. erovipors. 39. |. cupmoprevéera. The x of the 
deleted xa av is not itself deleted, the deleting strokes beginning at a, and possibly xatréu is 
to be read; but the following «ai seems to make a kai before atr@ unnecessary. 40. 1. Bov- 
deobe. 41. mpoo[c|épevov: Milne. 1. ras (a perhaps corr.), karadeiéar. 42. adon- Te; 
1. dé. 43. 1. tpiv emirpémw, BovrAcobe, Oturpaciov MoAN@vos. The a of BovdeoOu re-written. 
44. Se corr. from re. 45. 1. dpidpdoa (first « corr. from v), BovdeoOe. 46. |. ovy- 
Xapo. 49. Ll. maparrotpar, dvOparors. 50. First o of yovos perhaps corr. Br. 1. 
e€aipera, 53. 1. ywooko, ednBevkdor apr. 54. |. nyepovias BeBaov dSiapvrdoco. 
oa 

55. I. wodureiav, ripiows, piravOporous. 56. 1. maou. Sovdwv: Milne. 57. epnGerf. ....]]. 
The deleted letters do not seem to begin with x, hence cores was not the original ending, 
and optes is not very likely. 1. BovAopar. 58. |. byiv. 60. |. vewxdpous, 61. 1. kAnpwrovs, 
BovAopat, of, Kaverar. 62. 1. modurikas. 63. |. rprereis. MS. ravenoillv ]eados. 
64. 1. Soxeire, of, PdBar. 6 yap (ip)xovres : Hunt. 65. 1. dpiv mpocevexOjoovra. roy ev: 
Hunt. 67. 1. bpiv, exo. 68. 1. etyere. . 69. |. mparov. -v Of cuvowver corr. from « 
70. |. mpdypaot. Third of amAdrw corr. from «; the « adscript perhaps a later insertion. 
71. 1. dn\éoa, re, cuvictacbar. 42. 1. Seo. o Of ovvayew corr. from «. 75. |. tuerepor. 
76. 1. proruunevrar. 77. 1. e&eheyEa. 78. 1. mad. 79. |. mpocayopeva, karamavonre. 
t Of 6d€6proy corr. from o(?). 81. 1. detéau oor, PirdvOpwmos. 82. 1. dvapapripopa: iva. 
83. 1. prravOparws mpoopéepevrat. 84. 1. modu, oikovor. 85. o Of Opnoxetay corr. from «. 
86. 1. Avpaivovrat. 87. 1. ois, eyo. 88. 1. “Iovdators. 89. 1. Kedevo, TAN. 
go. |. duct méAcow. 92. |. 6, émpay6n. 93. 1. dydau. 94. |. olkeia droXavovras. 
95. Second a and roy of amavrwv corr. ; perhaps azavov was first written. 96. |. mpocier Oa, 
98. 1. dvayxacOnoopa.. 8 of de corr. from p. 100. |. twa. 102. |. @itavOpwmas. 
103. lL. éy@, dvwrdrw ; the scribe wrote avarwra:, corrected the but overlooked the a (Hunt). 
tiv : 1, perhaps ris, but see the commentary. 104. |. oikelas jyiv (« corr. from @). 7 of 
vrapxovans corr. from a. 105. 1. éraipax (So in]. 108) paprupa. 106. 1. dpav, pidroripia. 
107. l. rév dyva, xéxpyrat ([nre] is read for reasons of space). 109. 1. "Eppwode. 


[1912] CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES 27 


TRANSLATION 
A. THE PREFECT’S PROCLAMATION. 


Proclamation by L. Aemilius Rectus: Since the whole populace was unable, 
owing to its numbers, to be present at the reading of the most sacred and most 
gracious letter to the city, I have deemed it necessary to display it publicly, in 
order that reading it individually you may admire the majesty of our god Caesar 
and show your gratitude for his goodwill towards the city. Year 2 of Tiberius 
Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus Imperator, 14th Neos Sebastos. 


B. THE EMPEROR’S LETTER. 


Il. The Address. 


(1) Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus Imperator, Pontifex 
Maximus, holder of the Tribunician Power, consul designate, to the city of the 
Alexandrines, greeting. 


Il. The Preamble. 


(2) Ti. Claudius Barbillus, Apollonius son of Artemidorus, Chaeremon son 
of Leonides, M. Julius Asclepiades, C. Julius Dionysius, Ti. Claudius Phanias, 
Pasion son of Potamon, Dionysius son of Sabbion, Ti. Claudius Apollonius son 
of Ariston, C. Julius Apollonius, and Hermaiscus son of Apollonius, your 
ambassadors, having delivered to me the decree, discoursed at length concerning 
‘the city, directing my attention to the goodwill towards you which for many 
years past, you know, you have found stored up in me; for you are by disposi- 
tion loyal to the Augusti, as is manifest to me by many tokens, and in particular 
have shown and received many good offices in relation to my house, of which (to 
mention but the last instance, disregarding the others) my brother Germanicus 
Caesar is the supreme exemplar, addressing you more frankly, by word of mouth. 
Hence I gladly received the honours given me by you, though I am not partial 
to such things. 


= Ill. The Honours Voted. 


(3) In the first place I permit you to keep my birthday as a Dies Augusta 
in the manner stated in your own proclamation. 

(4) I agree to the erection by you in the places specified of the statues of 
myself and the members of my family ; for I see that you have been zealous to 
establish on every side memorials of your loyalty towards my house. 

(5) Of the two golden statues, that of the Pax Augusta Claudiana made at 
the suggestion and earnest entreaties of my vety good friend Barbillus was 
refused by me as it appears too offensive, and is to be dedicated to Roma; the 
other shall have a place in your processions in the manner you think best on 
name-days ; and with it let there be also a throne adorned with whatever decora- 
tion you wish. 

-(6) It would perhaps be foolish, while accepting so great honours to refuse to 
introduce a Claudian tribe and sanction sacred precincts for each nome of Egypt ; 


28 CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES [1912] 


wherefore I permit you both to take these measures, and, if you wish, to set up 
also the equestrian statues of Vitrasius Pollio my procurator. 

(7) To the erection of four-horse chariots which you desire to establish in 
my honour at the entrances into the country I give my consent; one to be at 
the place called Taposiris in Libya, one at Pharos in Alexandria, the third at 
Pelusium in Egypt. 

(8) I deprecate, however, the appointment of a high-priest to me and the 
erection of temples, for I do not wish to be offensive to my contemporaries, and 
I hold that sacred fanes and the like have yes all ages been attributed only to the 
gods as peculiar honours, 


IV. The Favours Asked. 


(9) Concerning the requests which you are anxious that I should grant 
I decide as follows: To all who have become ephebi down to my principate 
I secure and confirm the Alexandrian citizenship with all the privileges and 
amenities enjoyed by the city except only to such as may have intruded them- 
selves among you and contrived, though born of servile mothers, to become 
ephebi; and no less is it my will that all those favours shall be confirmed which 
were granted you by my predecessors in the principate and by kings and prefects, 
as Divus Augustus also confirmed them. 

(10) It is my will that the zeocorz of the temple of Divus Augustus at Alex- 
andria shall be chosen by lot in the same way as those of the same Divus 
Augustus at Canopus are chosen by lot. 

(11) In your plan for making the municipal magistracies triennial you 
seem to me to have shown great wisdom ; for the magistrates, through fear of the 
account which they will have to render for any delinquencies, will behave with 
greater circumspection during their term of office. 

(12) As to the question of the senate, what was your custom under your 
former kings I cannot say, but that you had not a senate under the Augusti who 
have preceded me you know well. Since therefore this is a new proposal now 
first mooted and it is uncertain whether it will be to the advantage of the city 
and of my own interests, I have written to Aemilius Rectus to hold an inquiry 
and to inform me both whether the order should be constituted and, if this 
should be decided on, in what way it is to be formed. 


V. The Fewish Question. 


(13) As to the question which of you were responsible for the riot and feud 
(or rather, if the truth must be told, the war) against the Jews, I was unwilling to 
commit myself to a decided judgement, though your ambassadors, and particu- 
larly Dionysius son of Theon, pleaded your cause with much zeal in confrontation 
(with their opponents), and I must reserve for myself an unyielding indigna- 
tion against whoever caused this renewed outbreak; but I tell you plainly that 
if you do not desist from this baneful and obstinate mutual hostility I shall per- 
force be compelled to show what a benevolent prince can be when turned to just 
indignation. (14) Wherefore I conjure you yet once again that, on the one side, 
the Alexandrines show themselves forbearing and kindly towards the Jews who 
for many years have dwelt in the same city, and offer no outrage to them in the 


[1912] CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES 29 


exercise of their traditional worship but permit them to observe their customs as 
in the time of Divus Augustus, which customs I also, after hearing both sides, 
have confirmed; and, on the other side, I bid the Jews not to busy themselves 
about anything beyond what they have held hitherto, and not henceforth, as 
if you and they lived in two cities, to send two embassies—a thing such as never 
occurred before now—nor to strive in gymnasiarchic or cosmetic games, but 
to profit by what they possess, and enjoy ina city not their own an abundance 
of all good things ; and not to introduce or invite Jews who sail down to Alex- 
andria from Syria or Egypt, thus compelling me to conceive the greater 
suspicion ; otherwise I will by all means take vengeance on them as fomenting 
a general plague for the whole world. (15) If, desisting on both sides from 
these proceedings, you are willing to live with mutual forbearance and kindliness, 
I on my side will continue to display the time-honoured solicitude for the 
interests of the city, with which my family has a traditional friendship. 


VI. Conclusion. 

(16) I testify to the constant zeal for your interests with which on this 
occasion also my friend Barbillus has exerted himself to further your cause before 
me, as also to that of my friend Ti. Claudius Archibius. Farewell. 

1. For L. Aemilius Rectus see Dittenberger, Or. Gr. Jnser., ii, p. 372 f., Cantarelli, 
Peer 

6. exbeiva: i.e., the Latin proponere ; this is a case of proposzto, but not in the technical 
sense as applied to subscriptiones ; see above, p. 4. 

8. peyadiérnra: the original looks more like -Acoryra. 

13. «8: the « is written over the beginning of the 6 or vice versa. Perhaps therefore 
one figure is corrected to the other. 

14 f. Claudius at first declined the title Pater Patriae, which he assumed only between 
the 6th and the 12th of January, a.D. 42 (Pauly-Wissowa-Kroll, iii, 2787). 

16. TiBépios KAavdios BdpBiddos : the name, granting a confusion of 7 and /, which 
is likely enough in an Egyptian scribe, is that of Ti. Claudius Balbillus, the prefect under 
Nero (Tacitus, Azz., xiii, 22; Pliny, V. #,, xix, 1, 3; Seneca, Quaest. Nat., iv, 2, 13), who 
was very likely of eastern origin (Cantarelli, p. 30 f.); but it is not probable that the prefect 
had any connexion with Alexandria, and more likely the name is the known BdpAXos, for 
which see Preisigke, Mamenbuch. The ambassador may conceivably be the astrologer 
spoken of by Dio (Ixvi, 9, 2) as one of rois dpioras avrév (dorpodsyor) and employed by 
Vespasian, who is also mentioned by Suetonius, Vero, 36. He was clearly a man of some 
standing (note that Claudius speaks of our Barbillus (1. 108) as rae éuéx Er(ai)pax ; cf. too |. 36) ; 
but there is no evidence that he was a Roman citizen, and the only locality with which we 
have authority for connectfng him is Ephesus (Dio, 2. ¢.). 

’ArrodAaus *Aprewidopov; the name is too common to justify us in identifying this man 
with the ’AroAAdvids tts Alywmrios mentioned by Dio (lix, 29, 4), though the date suits. The 
‘ Apollonius Graecus’ mentioned as a rhetorician by Seneca, Controv., 7, 4, 3, 18 of course 


too early. 

17. Xaipjpov Acovidov: here at least we certainly meet with a known person, viz. the 
Xapnpor 6 pirddaogos (Suidas, s. v. Avovicwos *AeEavdpevs, ed. Bernhardy, 1394), for whom see 
Pauly-Wissowa-Kroll, s. v. Chairemon 7 (iii, 2025-7). We do not, indeed, know the name 
of that Chaeremon’s father, but he was an Alexandrine, a man of great distinction and with 
Imperial connexions (he was a teacher of Nero, Suidas, s.v. ’Adééavdpos Alyaios, Bernhardy, 
204), and the date suits perfectly. Moreover he was hostile to the Jews, and Josephus, 
c. Ap., i, 288-303, replies at some length to his Atyumrcaky ioropia. 

Mapxos “Iovduos.’AcKAnmddns: probably, as Prof. Rostovtzeff points out, the Julius 
Asclepiades, padoogos, of P. Fay. 82 and 87. 

Téwos *IovAvos Atovdawo(s): no doubt the person alluded to by Philo, Jn #7., 4, 20 
(M. 520), Avoviaror Sqpoxdroe kth. ; he is apparently mentioned below (1. 76; see |. 20, n.) 


30 CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES [1912] 


as the chief exponent of the Alexandrian case against the Jews. Among the ambassadors 
of P. Oxy. x, 1242 (a mission apparently sent about a. D. 112, certainly not later than 114 and 
probably not before 111; see W. Weber, Hermes, 1, 1915, 80) are a Dionysius and a Theon ; 
the latter, but not the former, recurs in the ‘ Paulus and Antoninus Ac/a’ (early Hadrian), 
and in C.I.G. 4734 (= Dittenberger, Or. Gr. Inscr., ii, 682; I.G Rom. i, 1196), an 
inscription probably written in a. p. 130 (Letronne, La Statue vocale de Memnon, p. 181 ; 
so too Otto, Priester und Tempel, i, p. 197; see however C.1.G, iii, p. 1203, col. 2), we 
have [duos “IovAros Avovpiowos dpyxidikaorns, O¢wvos dpxidixacrod tos kat marnp. In P. Oxy. 1, 33 
verso, iv, 6 a Theon is named among the Alexandrian ‘ martyrs’; and finally in P. Oxy. ii, 
268, 1 (A.D. 58) we have a Odom dpxtdixalor|q. The father of our Dionysius, assuming his 
identity with the man named in |. 76, was Theon. The names Theon and Dionysius were 
of course common, but in view of the practice, so frequent in Egypt, by which a son was 
given his grandfather’s name, it is very tempting to connect these various people, all proba- 
bly belonging to the high Alexandrian aristocracy and several of them known to have 
occupied important official positions. Weber (Hermes, 1, 49f.) identifies the Dionysius 
of Oxy. 1242 with the Acovdovs AdeEavdpeds of Suidas, described as pupil and successor of 
Chaeremon, whom we here find associated with our C. Julius Dionysius. Otto (/.¢.) raises 
the question whether the archidicastes of a. p. 58 was the father of the Dionysius of C, I. G. 
4734, who describes himself as son of a Theon, dpxidcaorns. This seems improbable, even 
assuming, with Otto, that Theon became archidicastes when very young and the younger 
Dionysius when very old. It does, however, seem not unlikely, if our C. Julius Dionysius 
was the son of a Theon, that the Theon of a. pD. 58 was his son and the Dionysius of Oxy. 
1242 his grandson. Weber is no doubt right in regarding the last-named as an old man 
(‘ er muss ein Siebziger gewesen sein’) ; and if we assume him to have been, say, 78, he may 
have had a son already in middle life, himself with an adult son. Hence the Theon 
of Oxy. 1242 and of the ‘ Paulus and Antoninus Ac/a’ may be the son of this Dionysius, 
who, since he took part in the embassy under Trajan but not in that under Hadrian, very 
likely died in the interval. A Julius Theon, ex-archidicastes and actual hypomnemato- 
graphus, occurs in P. Tebt. ii, 286 = Mitteis, Chrest. 83 (after a. p. 121) and is no doubt to 
be identified with the father of the Dionysius of C. I. G. 4734, perhaps with the Theon of Oxy. 
1242 and of the ‘ Paulus and Antoninus Acéa’. There is a chronological difficulty in this, if 
we take C.1.G. 4734 literally as meaning that Dionysius’s son was archidicastes ; but as 
Otto points out (i, p. 197), this is not absolutely necessary ; the wording of the inscription 
may be loose and inexact. Perhaps, however, the last Theon may have become archi- 
dicastes very young; we do not know that this was impossible. Hence the following 
(of course quite conjectural) genealogy may be constructed :—Theon—C, Julius Dionysius, 
envoy in a.p. 41—Theon, archidicastes in a.p. 58—Dionysius, pupil and successor of 
Chaeremon, envoy, as an old man, crc. a. D. 112—Julius Theon, envoy with his father 
circ. 112 and without him at the beginning of Hadrian’s reign, archidicastes at an unknown 
date—C. Julius Dionysius, archidicastes in a. p. 130—Theon, possibly archidicastes before 
that date. An objection to these identifications is the absence of the Roman gentile name 
in several cases, e. g. in Oxy. 1242 and Oxy. 268; but a comparison of ll. 17 and 76 of the 
present letter suggests that the usage was negligent, even in an official document ; and see 
too the remarks of Otto, Priester und Tempel, i, 34, 1984, 199; Koschaker, Z. d. Sav.-Sz,, 
xxvili, 258 f. Oxy. 1242 was not itself official, though probably based on the official Acéa, 
while Oxy. 268 is a copy only. ; 

18. SaBBiwvos: hardly anything of the o remains, but the reading is very probable. 
SapyBiov and SaBBiwr are doubtless variant forms of the same name; for the second see 
Josephus, Azz, xv, 47; C.I. G. add. 2113 c (Tauric Chersonese) ; for the first C. I. G. 
2130, 57 (Anapa in Circassia) ; I. G. Rom, i, 920 (Tanais). It should be Semitic, and though 
not found in Preisigke, amenduch, isno doubt connected with the common Sap8as, which 
again may be related to the names SauPadaios, &c. (Vamenduch, col. 524). There is, however, 
no reason to suppose that it was specially Jewish or that Dionysius was of Jewish ancestry. 

1g. TiBepios ... ’Apiorovos: it is a little difficult to decide whether we have here one 
person or two. To place a comma after KAavéis, involves leaving Ti. Claudius without a 
cognomen, which is‘improbable in an official document at this period; on the other hand 
it is contrary to precedent to give the patronymic of a Roman citizen at the end of the name 
like this. Possibly a cognomen has been omitted by the careless scribe; but it may 
be merely that, the name Apollonius being common, there was another Ti. Claudius Apol- 


[1912] CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES at 


lonius at Alexandria, and the father’s name is inserted to prevent confusion. The position 
of ’Apicrovos may be due to the translator. 

19 f. ‘Eppaickos ’AmodAoviov: in Oxy. 1242, col, ili, occurs a man of this name, who, 
as he was evidently of distinguished birth (1. 44 f.: “Eppaioke, avdddws droxpelvn temobas To 
ceavrod yéver), may well be the son or, better, the grandson of the present envoy. 

20. & mpécBers tudv: on the use of this form as against mpeoBevrai see Lafoscade, 
De epistulis, p. 90. The context naturally suggests that all the ambassadors have been 
named, and it is curious, therefore, that in 1. ro8 Claudius refers to Ti. Claudius Archibius 
as having rendered services to the Alexandrines in connexion with the embassy. We can 
only suppose that Archibius happened to be in Rome at the time and, being a persona grata 
with the Emperor (rau éuau ér(at\[pox], 1. 108), used his influence on behalf of the envoys. 
In 1. 76, indeed, Atovyyciov rod O¢er|o|s is mentioned ; but strange as it is that he should thus 
be referred to, it can hardly be doubted that this is the C. Julius Dionysius of 1. 17. 

Wipirpa: a Whpiopa might be carried by any corporate body (see especially Wilcken, 
Chrest. 332, 23, n., and Partsch, Archiv, v, 454 £.; cf. the yypopa of the Jews in honour of 
Gaius, Philo, Zn F/., 12, 97, M. 531), so that nothing can be gathered from this as to the 
machinery by which the Alexandrian wé\s expressed its mind. 

21. dmaydpevol por dprov: Hunt prefers correcting por to we and taking djAov as = dndady 
to placing a comma after émayopevor and taking por (for enol) dpAov as a parenthesis. Probably 
he is right, though the mistake po: for pe is unexpected ; Hunt suggests that the scribe was 
influenced by the ox of tmayduevor. Even so the sentence is a little awkward, and perhaps 
suggests translation from a somewhat intractable original. 

22. ¢.: difficult. ¢% could perhaps be read but is not, good here, and ér[t| is also 
inappropriate, besides that there is no trace of any letter lost after that which follows the 
supposed «. There seems to be insufficient room for a letter of any size between y and ¢,so 
that de¢ and xar-, which would give a sense, are not suitable. Very likely it is nothing 
more than «, inadvertently repeated at the beginning of |. 23. 

23-24. Since the Alexandrines were notoriously hostile to the Roman Empire and 
continually at loggerheads with the authorities (cf, e.g., Mommsen, Am. Gesch., V, 582, 
Wilcken, Antisemztismus, p. 7873; but note, on the other side, Philo, Jn F7., 4, 23, M. 520: 
i) mods ’AXeEavdpéwv eoriv, hy Teriunke pev e& dpxis Gras 6 ZeBaords oixos), the first clause can be 
regarded only as a diplomatic misrepresentation of the facts, except in so far as evoeBeis 
mepi rovs S<Baorovs may be taken to refer to the Imperial cult (cf. the vaod ds éotw Tov Oeod 
SeBaorod of |. 60 f.), in which the Alexandrines had never been backward ; but the second is 
probably true enough. Germanicus, who appeared at Alexandria in Greek dress and, 
during a famine, opened the state granaries and distributed wheat to the citizens (Tacitus, 
Ann., ii, 593; cf. Josephus, c. Ap., ii, 63; see too Pauly-Wissowa-Kroll, x, 454), was very 
popular there, and Gaius also seems to have had an affection for Alexandria, which he was 
intending to visit at the time of his assassination ; cf. Philo, Leg., 43, 338 (M. 595): 
ddexros yap tis adrov Epws Kareixe THs ’AXeEavdpeias, cis jv éndbe omovdy maon mapayeverOat Kai adi- 
képevos mAciaTrov xpdvoy évdcartnOyvat KTA. 5 Josephus, Ant., xix, 81 : émi yap ’ANeEavdpeias mape- 
oxevaoro mein kara Gewpiay ris Alyonrov. For Germanicus in Egypt cf. Wilamowitz-Moellen- 
dorff, Sitegsber. Pr. Ahad., 1911, 816-21. It isto be remembered further that Claudius 
represented not only the Julio-Claudian house but that of Antony; on this subject see the 
remarks of H. Willrich, KWo, iii, 99, 400. For Claudius’s piety towards his family see 
Suetonius, 11; Dio, lx, 5, 1-2. 

2%. mpooayopevoas: the allusion seems to be to some definite speech or speeches 
delivered by Germanicus and apparently still on record. The word after Teppavexds was at 
first read xairep, which made the clause a little strange. Hunt's Kaigap (palaeographically 
equally possible) lessens but does not wholly remove the difficulty of ynowwrépas. It can 
hardly mean ‘ more szvcere’, but perhaps, as Hunt remarks, the idea may be that words 
spoken face to face had more force than those merely written. The paraphrase adopted in 
the text (suggested by Mr. Gilson) perhaps best represents the sense. 

29. This is quite true; cf. Suetonius, 12; Dio, Ix, 5, 3-4, 12, 5. For his attitude 
towards the erection of statues see especially the first passage of Dio: kat eixdéva piav, kat 
rabrny dpyupav, avdpidvras te Sto XaAKod Te kal AGov Whi bévras adr@ ra mpdra €AaBe. padraca yap 
ndvra Ta To:adTa dvahopara eivar, Kal mpooére TmoAATY pev Cyuiav modvpy S€ kai ByAov TH ye TOdeL Trapée- 
yew @reye. It has been suggested in the introduction (p. 4) that pdidios perhaps represents 
the Latin faczlis. 


32 CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES [1912] 


29 f. SeBuoriy xkrd.: for the jyepar SeBaorai see Fr. Blumenthal, Archiv, v, 336-44. 
The birthday of Claudius was Aug. 1 (Suetonius, 2; Dio, lx, 5, 3), and Blumenthal (p. 338) 
has pointed out, in Dittenberger, Or. Gr. Juscr., ii, 663, 5 (A.D. 42, from Denderah), an 
instance of Pharmuthi 8 described as S«Bacrqj. The Imperial birthdays were celebrated 
monthly, not, as with us, annually ; hence Pharmuthi 8 points to Mesore 8, which = Aug. 1; 
i.e. the 8th day of the month was celebrated as the birthday of Claudius. Blumenthal 
(p. 343) holds that ‘die Eponymitatserklarungen’ were issued ‘von den staatlichen 
Behérden, vom praefectus oder vom Kultusminister’, but here the initiative clearly 
proceeded from the municipality, not only as to the celebration of the birthday but even 
as to the method of it (dv rpdémov adroit mpoeipno&e); note the perfect), and we may make 
a similar assumption for Naucratis and Ptolemais. For Egypt as a whole it is difficult 
to see what single authority other than the Roman officials could take action, though 
' the various wod:redpara may probably enough have voted certain honours (cf. the wygicpa 
of the Jews, Philo, Zz #7., 12, 97), and we may suppose that the prefect or dpytepeds 
*AdeEavdpeias kal Aiyimrov méons issued the necessary order; but the present evidence 
makes it likely that, in that case, the authorization of the observance for the whole country 
merely followed and completed, and did not precede, the spontaneous local decrees. 

31. dvdpidvrwy: on the use of this word (implying human honours) rather than é@yaApa 
(implying divinity) for the Imperial statues see Blumenthal, Archiv, v, 328. 

35. 6 pév KAavdcavns Eipnyns SeBaorijs yevd|ue|vos: the last word, though largely restored, 
seems all but certain. For the Pax Augusta see Daremberg-Saglio, s.v. Pax, p. 363; 
J. Toutain. Les cultes patens dans Empire romain, i, 422; G. Wissowa, Religion und 
Kultus der Romer, p. 277 f.; V.Gardthausen, Augustus und seine Zett, i, 479-81, ii, 263-6; 
A. W. Van Buren, Journ. Rom, Stud., iii (1913), 138 f. Since the chief recommendation 
of the Roman Empire to the provincials was the peace and security which it brought 
one might expect that the cult of Pax Augusta would be very popular, but the extant dedica- 
tions are not specially numerous, either in the East or in the West. C.I. L. iii, Suppl. 
6983 (= Dessau, 5883), from Amastris in Pontus, is a bilingual dedication to Pax 
Augusta during the reign and in honour of Claudius: ‘Pro pace A[ug.i]n honorem Ti. 
Claudi Germanic[i Aulg. divi Aug.’ ; imép rijs SeBal ors eipnyys eis] rHv rexpny TyBepedy Kdavdiou 
Teppar|txod S<Bacrod]. 

37+ ¢met ‘Poyns dvareOqoera: the o is not altogether satisfactory but seems possible, 
especially as the papyrus is broken here, and émei is quite likely. If it is correct we have to 
suppose a blank space after Soxeiv, but such spaces are not infrequent, particularly where 
there is a break in the sense, and dpvoupévov . . . doxeiv may be regarded as a parenthesis. 
The cult of Roma or Dea Roma, whether alone or in combination with the Imperial cult, 
was widespread; see Daremberg-Saglio, s.v. Roma. Many dedications will be found in 
the indices to C. J. L., Dittenberger, Dessau, &c. For the association of geographical 
personifications with the cult of the Pax Augusta see A. W. Van Buren, Journ. Rom. Stud., 
iii, 134-41 (see, however, Rostovtzeff, Archaeologia, |xix, 1917-18, 207). 

38. 6 de erepos: it is regrettable that Claudius does not state what this other statue was. 
Since he has declined the Pax Augusta Claudiana 8: rd goprix()repos Soxeiv we cannot sup- 
pose it was a statue of his Genius or anything having a purely personal reference. An 
ingenious and very plausible suggestion has been put forward by Mr. J. G. Milne: that this 
statue was of Messalina, who on the reverse of the Alexandrian tetradrachms of Claudius in 
the years 2 to 6 figures, with two children, as Demeter (see figure, p. 37). As Mr. Milne 
observes, ‘if the Alexandrians had judiciously made a statue of her, Claudius would not 
have ventured to do anything except allow it to be honoured’. This seems on the whole 
the likeliest explanation. 

moumevoe xTA.: we may infer from this that a procession formed a regular part of the 
celebrations on the jépat S<Baorai. Processions were of course a constant feature of Greek 
religious festivals ; the most famous Alexandrian rom was that of Philadelphus (Athen, v, 
196a ff.). 

39. Sippos: it is not certain whether this word here means a chariot or a seat. In the 
procession the former might be expected; but if that were intended the statue would pre- 
sumably be borne in the car (cf. Philo, Zeg., 20, 134, M. 565), which can hardly be the 
meaning of cuvmopmevéror «rh. Probably, therefore, we are to understand an elaborately 
worked chair or throne, perhaps a sed/a curulis ; possibly, however, a litter. 


[1912] CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES 33 


40. jnoxnpévos: the same word in Philo, Zeg., 22, 151 (M. 568): répevos.. . dmace Tois eis 
MOAVUTEAETTATOV KOTMOY NOKNLEVOY, 

41. Pvdijv Kdavdiavdy : no such tribe is known elsewhere, for in P. Lond. iii, 840, 2 (p. 169) 
the reading is not KAavovayés 6 kai... udos, as suggested in the note ad Joc., but KAavdials 
"AOnvaidos (Preisigke, B.-L.) ; but a roKdaddios 6 Kai ’ANaeds, probably (from the deme- 
name) Alexandrian, is known from P. Amh. 85,1; 86, 1 of a.p. 78, and it may be that the 
Alexandrines adopted the name ?Ao«Aavdus rather than KAavdcavés, as here suggested (but 
see Wilcken, Archiv, v, 183, who very plausibly refers this name to Nero). Our evidence 
for Alexandria is, however, so imperfect, that there may well have been a dvd} KAavéiard not 
recorded in papyri. It is indeed possible that the tribe was named KAavé.avd at this time, 
but that its name was changed to Gdok\avdios by or under Nero. For the Alexandrian 
tribe-names of the Roman period see Schubart, Archiv, v, 94f. The present passage, in 
which xaradifa should go with dpyncacda (hardly with mapeiva:), seems to imply that the 
Emperor alone had power to modify the tribe organization, and therefore probably disproves 
Schubart’s conjecture (Avo, x, 56) that ‘die Demen- und Phylenordnung in Alexandrien 
selbstandiger Regelung durch die Stadt offen gestanden hitte ’. 

42. Gon xrd,: this is a somewhat unexpected concession, and it is not clear to whom 
these groves were to be sacred. Hardly to Claudius, in view of ll. 35-7 above and 48-51 
below ? Possibly they were to be established, in his honour, as part of the cult of Divus 
Augustus and in connexion with the existing 2<Sacreta or with temples in which the Caesars 
were ovvvact, In support of this reference may be made to Philo, Zeg., 22, 151 (M. 568), 
which mentions, in connexion with the «Baoreiov at Alexandria, réyevos evputatov .. , dAcect 
. noxnpévov. The Greek of our letter might mean either that an ddgos was to be planted 
for each nome (i. e. at Alexandria) or 7 each nome. The former seems unlikely; against 
the latter is the difficulty of supposing that the Alexandrines had either the wish or the 
authority to take such steps in the x@pa. But in ll. 46-7 we find permission given for 
dedications at Taposiris and Pelusium, neither of which had any special connexion with 
Alexandria, and the former was not even in Egypt proper at all, and Alexandrian citizens 
were widely scattered throughout Egypt; moreover, the clause may be merely a loose way 
of authorizing the extension to the whole country of a concession made to Alexandria. 
3«8aoreia are known in only a few nomes (a list by Blumenthal in Archzv, v, 322), but it 
may be assumed that every nome had its official centre of the Caesar cult, either in a special 
SeBaorcioy or in some existing temple. For the importance and diffusion of sacred groves 
in antiquity see the article Zuwcus in Daremberg-Saglio. An ddgos is known in the Fayum 
from the KdoreAdov “Adcous of P. Lond. iii, 1177, and the éppos "Adcovs of Lond. 948 = 
Mitteis, Chrest. 341. 

43. Overrpaciov Toheiwvos: cf. Pliny, VV. #., xxxvi, 57: ‘ Rubet porphyrites in eadem 
Aegypto ... Statuas ex eo Claudio Caesari procurator eius in urbem ex Aegypto advexit 
Vitrasius Pollio, non admodum probata novitate ;.nemo certe postea imitatus est’. There 
has been some controversy as to whether this ‘ procurator’ is to be identified with the 
C. Vitrasius Pollio who was prefect of Egypt from a.p. 39 to 41 (Cantarelli, p. 27). The 
editors of the Prosop. Imp. Rom. (iii, p. 456) accept the identity, but Cantarelli (p. 27), 
following P. M. Meyer (Hermes, xxxii, 211), doubts it, and K. Fitzler (Stecndriiche, p. 96°) 
definitely rejects it, suggesting (cf. too p. 126) that Pliny’s Pollio was procurator metallorum. 
The present passage, in Prof. Rostovtzeff’s opinion, despite the use of the word émirpomos 
(procurator), makes against this, for the procurator metallorum was hardly a person of 
sufficient importance for the Alexandrines to erect statues (and equesfrian statues) to him. 
It is true that Claudius elsewhere (I. 59) uses the correct érapxos for the prefect, not 
the attested but technically inexact émirpomos (cf. A. Stein, Archiv, iv, 1514), nor does 
he refer to Pollio, as one would expect if he were referring to a prefect, as yevouevov ; but 
Rostovtzeff remarks that we do not know that Pollio, after leaving Egypt, was not given a 
procuratorship ; or again, Claudius may be using the word (of an ex-prefect) in a loose, 
general sense, to indicate the grade in the Imperial service which he had reached. 
Equestrian statues certainly suggest military command, and there is no reason to suppose 
that the procurator metallorum had troops under his immediate authority. Perhaps, there- 
fore, the Vitrasius Pollio of Pliny is the prefect, whose term of office is thus seen to have 
extended into the reign of Claudius, Rectus being doubtless his immediate successor ; but it 
may be suggested on the other hand that the reference may conceivably, if less probably, 
be to statues of Claudius made by (i.e. at the cost of) Vitrasius Pollio. The Greek is not 

D 


34 CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES [1912] 


inconsistent with this, and the clause follows directly on the acceptance by Claudius 
of personal honours. 

44. dvdpiavras : possibly, however, avdpudvres (szc). 

44f. ray 8€ rerparddov dvaorda¢{t|s: tas dé trav kr. would be better Greek, and the text 
may, here again, indicate translation ; see, however, Lafoscade, De Lpzstulzs, pp. 92 ff. For 
the dedication of four-horse chariots cf. Philo, Leg., 20, 135 (M. 565): réOpurmoy ék rod yupvaciou 
madadrarov... as d€ paci twes Kal imép yuvaixds dvarebev tis dpxaias KAeordrpas; a Classical 
instance is Herodotus, v, 77. Perhaps these chariots were dedicated not to Claudius but on 
behalf of him (Srép as in Philo), though d¢idpio(ai) por more naturally suggests the former. 
They were to be placed at the entrances into Egypt from the North (sea), West, and 
East, and possibly the ancient association of the chariot with war may have inspired the 
choice. 

45. dvaordo¢|t|s... xopas: the text as it stands is obviously corrupt, and the correction 
adopted not only gives the required sense but explains the error; the scribe’s eye skipped 
from the first to the second ew. 

46. ris AiBins: this is the Libyae nomos, a part of the Marmarica; see W. Smith, 
Dict. of Greek and Roman Geogr., s.v. Marmarica. The western boundary of Egypt was a 
little uncertain, and the Libyan nome was sometimes reckoned as Egyptian, but here it is 
clearly excluded from the country. : 

48. dpx{ibvepéa: a Rainer papyrus (R 172, rst cent.) quoted by Wessely, Karanis und 
Soknopaiu Nesos, p. 66, mentions (as read by W.) K[Aavdiov Kai]oapos S<Bacrod Tep[ pare |xod 
dpxvepet Tatar “Tova fot] "AokAn(middnt) Kal eénynrhe [—]ou. P. Ryl. ii, 149, 1-4, shows, as the 
editors point out, that the latter part is to be read ’Aokhé e€nynrit |orparny|a, and the present 
passage gives support to their suggestion that K[Aavdiou is to be amended to I'afov—unless, 
indeed, we refer the name to Nero (cf. Blumenthal, Archiv, v, p. 323), which is not 
particularly likely in view of the Rylands papyrus. For the dpycepeds in the Imperial cult see 
Blumenthal, Avchzv, v, 332; Kornemann, A, i, 99, 107, &c. 

49. oprixés: cf. 1]. 37. 

52. airnOevrwy: the dotted letters are very doubtful ; the characters suggest rather po. 

, 53- ebyBevedoce: for the ephebia in Egypt see Jouguet, Remarques sur léphébie dans 
LE gypte gréco-romaine, in Rev. de Phil., xxxiv (1910), 43-56, Vie municipale, pp. 150-60 ; 
Wilcken, Grundsziige, pp. 139-43; Schubart, Agypien, p. 143. The age of ephebia was 
normally 14, though there were perhaps exceptions (Jouguet, Vre munzcipale, pp. 150-3, 
Wilcken, p. 141 f.); the duration, normally in the Greek world one year, though with local 
exceptions, is uncertain in Egypt, but may have been a single year. Jouguet holds 
{p. 158) that the ephebia ‘est le signe du droit de cité et que la seule preuve qu’on peut 
donner de son droit de cité est inscription sur le registre des éphébes ’, and the present 
passage confirms this, for it is the ephebia which Claudius takes as proof of citizenship. 
Cf. Gnomon, § 44 (1. 121 f.): Atyuntiou droypayapevo|u| vidy ds epnBevkd[rla rev dbo téraprov 
dyadapBavera, The motive for such wrongful enrolment was doubtless to secure a claim to 
the citizenship. 

54. The Emperors, usually through the prefect, exercised a control over the Alexan- 
drian citizenship; see Gnomon, § 40 (1. 113 f.): ta mept tav cicaydvrwy ods py Set eis THY 
*AdcEarOpéewv mone|t |r| ¢ Ja viv nyepovuxhs yéyovev Stayvacewas. See too Schubart, Linfithrung, 
p. 269 f. and references there; Th. Reinach, Mouv. Rev. Hist. de Droit, xliv (1920), 16-17. 

55. For these rights see, e.g., Jouguet, Vee municrpale, pp. 25 ff.; Schubart, Alo, 
x, 59f. One very important advantage of Alexandrian citizenship to a native of Egypt was 
that it was the essential condition of admission to the Roman citizenship. 

56. tes: or possibly rwas (szc), but e and a are often difficult to distinguish in 
this hand. 

os... epnBetoa: os is evidently used in the sense of dore, and xaimep must be under- 
stood before ey SovAwy. SdovdAwv is doubtless to be taken as feminine; the reference is to 
the sons of citizens by servile mothers. Such persons were not, of course, entitled to the 
citizenship, for 1 dv d€ vépyuos vids tov matpos dvtos *ANe~avdpéws ’AdeEavdpets od Svvarar civat 
(P. Cattaoui r+BGU. 114, v, 6-8, Archiv, iii, 60); but that persons without the proper 
qualification were sometimes introduced into the roll of citizenship is shown by the 
passages quoted above from the Gmomon, and a citizen could no doubt, on occasion, 
find means of getting his slave-born son accepted among the ephebi. On this subject 
see Reinach, cited above, 1]. 53, n. 


[1912] CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES 35 


58. nyeudver: note this use of jyepov as = princeps ; cf. 1. 81. 

59. as Kal [6] Oeds SeBaords &BeBaiwoe: the reference is clearly to a definite act of 
Augustus. After the surrender of Alexandria he addressed the Alexandrines in Greek, 
promising them an amnesty (Dio, li, 16, 3-4; Plutarch, Az/fon., 80, Reg. e¢ Lmp. Apophth., 
Aug., 3), and from the way in which this is reported the speech may have been preserved, 
though the reports of Dio and Plutarch do not wholly agree, but it does not seem likely that 
Augustus’s confirmation of privileges formed part of his speech ; it was doubtless embodied 
in a decree or proclamation. It can, in any case, hardly be doubted that Claudius had the 
text of the confirmation before him. This is important for the question of the senate (see 
above, p. 9). Of course, as it stands, the sentence is illogical, for Augustus cannot have 
confirmed any grants of privileges by jjyeudves or erapyor. 

60. veoxdpovs: apparently the first mention in Egypt of zeocorz in connexion with the 
Imperial cult. For instances outside see, e.g. C.I.G. 3190 (Smyrna ; vewxdpov rév 
SeBaorav); 3484 (Thyatira ; vewxdpos rod S<B8(acrov)); add. 3831. ar7 (Aezani; of veaxopor 
avrod [Claudius ?] 6a Biov). It may be inferred from the present passage that meocorz were 
a regular feature of the cult in Egypt also, for ]. 61 shows that there were zeocord at Cano- 
pus. It appears that in the latter place they were appointed by lot, and the injunction 
to adopt the same method at Alexandria implies that this had not been done hitherto ; 
probably they had there been elected. From the choice by lot we may perhaps, though not 
necessarily, infer that the appointment was for a year only ; that the office was normally held 
for a limited pericd is shown by such a title as vewxopos dia Biov (see above). The known 
instances prove it to have been a very honourable post, for which, at Alexandria, there may 
well have been keen competition, and this, rather than any shortage of qualified candidates, 
was probably the reason for the change. For the title vewxdpos applied to cities, chiefly in 
connexion with the Imperial cult, see E. Beurlier, Ze culte impérial, chap. iv, and ap. 
Daremberg-Saglio, s.v. Neocorus. The present passage, in a letter addressed to the mods 
of Alexandria, confirms what had already been established by Blumenthal in his article in 
the Archiv (cf. too Wilcken, Grundziige, p. 119), that the S«Bacreia were municipal temples 
and the cult therefore a municipal one. 

60f. vaod ... 3eBaorov: this settles an old controversy. Suidas (s. v. ‘Hyiepyov, Bern- 
hardy, 853) states of the Augusteum or Caesareum at Alexandria: ’Avravio d€ gxoddpe 
ees Cleopatra] vedv péyar, domep otv npylepyos dmedeipén 76 ZeBaor@ dé éredéoOn. Pliny 
(NV. H., xxxvi, 69) mentions two obelisks, ‘ Alexandreae ad portum in Caesaris templo ’, 
and hence Mommsen (C.1I.L., iii, Suppl. 1, p. 1203, on 6588) held that the statement in 
Suidas was an error and that the temple was really dedicated to Julius, the name S«Bacretov 
being due merely to the association of Augustus with the cult of his father. Blumenthal, 
however (Archiv, v, 318 f.), preferred to accept the explicit statement of Suidas, and the 
present passage shows that he was right. The passage of Pliny cannot be set against the 
evidence of Claudius, and in any case is not really inconsistent with it, for Philo, Zeg., 22, 
150, 151 shows that S<«Bacreioy and Ka:apeiov were synonymous, so that Pliny’s ‘ Caesaris 
templum’ is merely a loose equivalent of the latter word. Néroutsos-Bey, L’anccenne 
Alexandrie, p. 16, remarks ‘le temple, avec ses deux obélisques, n’était pas dédié a Jules 
César, mais 4 Auguste et a ses successeurs, qui étaient tous adorés collectivement sous 
Yinvocation de deux Césars, 6edv Katodpwv’, and this no doubt explains the double name ; 
cf. the Hamburg fragment published by P. M, Meyer, 2. f vergl. Rechisw., xxxv (1918), 
93 ff., Kat]oapeiov Oedv SeBalorav. For the position of the temple see Strabo, xvii, 9 (794) ; 
Pliny, Z.c.; Philo,2.c. The last-named gives the fullest account of it: oddev yap rovbrov eore 
réyevos, olov Td eydpevov SeBacreiov, émiBarnpiov Kaioapos veds, (os) dvtikpd) tOv edoppordrav 
Aywévov peréwpos Wpurar peyotos Kal emipavéeotaros Kal oios odx érépwb. KkaTdmrews dvabnudror, [ev] 
ypapais kai dvOpidor Kal dpyip@ Kal xpvo@ mepiBeBrnpevos ev KvKAM, Té“EVvOS EUpUTaTOY GToais, 
BiBrv0OnjKkas, dvdpaow, cidceor, mpoTvAaios, etpuxwpias, UmalOpors, damage Tois cis moAvTEAEoTaTOY 
kdapoy noKnpevoy, emis Kai dvayouevors kal Karan A€éover owrnpios. Athanasius, Hist, Ar. 56, men- 
tions rovs knmevopevous év TS Kaucapei@ trérovs, evidently ornamental gardens. 

61. Kavéro.: this evidence for a S¢Bacretov at Canopus seems to be new; Canopus 
does not appear in Blumenthal’s list in Archiv, v, 322 (cf. too P. Ryl. ti, 133, 2, n., and 
the list of P. M. Meyer, Z. f. vergl. Rechisw., xxxv, 1918, 95”). 

62-6. The interpretation and readings adopted in the text and translation are due to 
Prof. Hunt. To suppose (as the editor had at first done) that the v in 1. 63 was deleted 
with the intention (inadvertently not carried out) of correcting it to ov, thus making Claudius 

18) 2, 


36 CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES [1912] 


reject the proposal of the Alexandrines, is much less likely, for mdvv, placed where it is, 
would not go well with od cadés. The passage is a new and valuable piece of evidence with 
regard to the dpxai, about which, in the Greek cities, we know singularly little, but it must 
be confessed that its testimony is not unambiguous. ‘To begin with, Claudius does not 
definitely say whether the proposal he approves of is that the magistracies should or should 
not be triennial. On this point, however, there can be little doubt ; the obvious interpretation 
is that the rpveria is now being introduced. Apart from other considerations Prof. Hunt 
points out that if a proposal for a zperia had been rejected by the Alexandrines we should 
expect 7. But it is not so clear whether the term was being lengthened or shortened. 
The clause (oi) yap (dp)xovres «rAd, naturally implies the latter ; for it seems reasonable to 
suppose that the nearer the expected «v@dmm the greater would be the #é@os and therefore 
the motive for being pérpios. There is, indeed, evidence which makes against this, viz. an 
inscription of the Ptolemaic period in Archiv, v, 162, where a Hephaestion son of 
Herodes, called ’Apowoeds, is described as yupvacvapynoas ro KO (eros), The provenance is 
unknown, nor is the deme securely localized, but there is ground for supposing (see Ruben- 
sohn, ad Joc.) that it was one of the Alexandrian demes, and though it is not impossible that 
an Alexandrian citizen resident in the yopa might be gymnasiarch in some nome-capital, it 
is more natural to refer his office to Alexandria. But the expression yupvaciapxnoas rd KO 
(éros) should imply an annual office, so that if the inscription is to be referred to Alexandria 
it may be argued that in the Ptolemaic period annua! tenure was the rule in that city, as it 
was in most places (see Pauly-Wissowa-Kroll, vii, 1992 f.). On the other hand P. Oxy. xii, 
1418, 15 furnishes evidence that the gymnasiarchy was then (a. D. 247) held for more than 
one year (see too Oertel, Lzfurgze, pp. 320, 363), and Grenfell and Hunt suggest in the 
note ad Joc. that the term may be ‘three ormore’. This isat Oxyrhynchus, not Alexandria, 
but it is not unlikely that the nome-capitals would model their practice on that of the latter. 

The clause referred to, however, is very difficult to explain if the term of office was 
being extended. The inscription in Archzv, v is a very uncertain basis, since it may not 
refer to Alexandria at all, and in any case it is not a necessary inference from 16 «6 (éros) 
that the office was annual (see now E. Breccia, Bull. Soc. Arch. d’Alex., N.S., v, 123 f.); 
it may perhaps merely mean that this was the man’s 2gth year of office, and the case was 
probably an exceptional one; he may even have been gymnasiarch for life. Hence it is 
best to conclude that the term till the reign of Claudius was more than three years (or was 
it perhaps unlimited ?) and was then reduced to three. 

71. dpxnv: note that the Bovdn is here referred to as an dpyn. 

73. ddnOes: or possibly ddcbes (sz). 

74. modeuouv: cf. Philo, Leg., 17, 119 (M. 562), weysoros ody kal axnpuktos médepos em TO 
éOver cuvexporeiro. This use of the word shows that Wilcken’s reliance on its occurrence in 
the ‘ Paulus and Antoninus Ac/a’ to connect the events there referred to with the Jewish 
revolt under Trajan (Antisemitismus, p. 814) is unjustified ; cf. v. Premerstein, Hermes, 
lvii, 287 f. 

75. €€ dvtiuKatraordoews: We must understand something like mpds rods dvturddovs ; cf. 
Polyb., iv, 47, 4: €« Ths dvriKatactdcews THs yevouévns . . . mpds Tovs Tov “Podiwy mpeaBeurds ; 
Dittenberger, Sy//. /nscr. Gr? 785, 7-9: vorepov Sé éxarépov pépous ef dvrixalralordcews ee 
duy[kou]oa. 

76. Atovvaiov tod Céwr|o|s: this name does not occur in the list given in ll. 16-20, but 
the person meant is no doubt C. Julius Dionysius (1. 17), though it is strange that his father’s 
name is here inserted. For the omission of the nomen and praenomen cf. |. 105, and for 
the insertion of a patronymic even in the case of a Roman citizen, |. 19 (see, however, 
note there). 

47. tamevopevos: Cf, 1,22. On this passage see the Addenda. 

80, avOddov: an unrecorded and not very likely adjective. Prof. Stuart Jones there- 
fore suggests (cai) avéadiay, as translating ef confumaciam, and this may be the correct text, 
but if so we must suppose a double error, for -wy is certain. For a’éadia see Moulton and 
Milligan, s. v. avéddns. 

85 f. Attacks on the synagogues played a prominent part in the disturbance under 
Gaius. 

86. Aoévovrar: this is the word used by Philo, Leg.. 20, 134 (M. 565): mpocevyds dcas 
py eduynOnoay éumpynoect Kai karackahats apavica .. . erepov Tpdmov eAvmnvarTo peTa THS TOV rdmwv 
kal eOav avarpomis. 


[1912] CLAUDIUS TO THE ALEXANDRINES | 37 


éGecw: the word has almost a technical sense in relation to the Jews; cf. the passage 
just quoted ; Joseph., Anz, xix, 283: é€upévovras rois iio e€ect (So too z2d., 285); Philo, 
Leg., 16, 115 (M. 562): ray tepav vépov kai re rev aypdpev ebay; &c. 

92. emozmaipew: the reading is not quite certain; the lower part of the downstroke of 
p has almost wholly disappeared, and the following e is inferred only from a horizontal 
stroke; but (given the certain om) no other word seems likely and w is a perfectly possible 
reading. The word is translated by Stephanus, Zhesaurus, ‘subsulto, velut ab animi 
deliquio, palpitabundus’, by L. and S. ‘to be in alarm’, and this is the meaning required in 
the passage ihey refer to, Plut., Aor., 327 c, éu (so Reiske for MS, emi) rois Didummois 
modewors énéomaipev  “EAAds, but it is not very appropriate here. The sense adopted 
depends on the meaning given to dyaoe. If, as first taken, it refers to contests in the 
elections to these offices, we want a sense like ‘to aspire to’; but Prof. Hunt points out 
that it is strange in that case to single out only the gymnasiarchy and cosmeteia. He pre- 
fers therefore to take the dyoves in the ordinary sense of athletic contests. This is certainly 
better, but even so émomaipew is unexpected. Perhaps ‘to strive in’ is not too far removed 
from the attested sense. 

94. dmohdovras : for the dropping of v in the diphthong av see Mayser, Gramm. gr. 
Pap., p.114. But the phenomenon is probably commoner in the Roman than in the 
Ptolemaic period. 

IOI, mpadrnros: or perhaps mpedrnros (szc). 

103 f. rnv avardrar . . . imapxovons: the interpretation adopted in the translation and 
critical notes is due to Prof. Hunt. It is possible that rjv should be corrected to ris, taking 
Tis dy(w)rdrw with oix(e)‘as rather than (as in the text) with mpévoar, but this, though it 
improves the style, is not absolutely necessary ; indeed, the omission of rjs before xaOdrep to 
connect oix(«)/as with wédeos may be a sign of translation from a Latin original; see 
introduction. For similar instances see Lafoscade, De Lpistuli’s, pp. 92 ff. 





ll; “THE MELE TIAN SCHISM 


The Meletian schism of Egypt,' though at first sight of only local and minor 
importance as compared with the Arian controversy, is of great interest for 
the historian of Christian Egypt, and the eventual alliance of the Meletians with 
the Arians, exercising as it did a decisive influence on the fortunes of St. Athana- 
sius, gives the schism considerable significance even for the student of general 
ecclesiastical history. Our evidence concerning its origin is fragmentary and, at 
first sight, conflicting. The primary authorities are (1).the writings of St. Athana- 
sius; (2) Latin translations of two letters (i) from four Egyptian Bishops to 
Meletius, (ii) from Peter, Bishop of Alexandria, to his flock, together with (iii) an 
account of the circumstances, the whole forming a fragment of an anonymous 
ecclesiastical chronicle or collection of documents, all first edited by Maffei and 
re-edited, e. g.,in M. J. Routh’s Religuiae Sacrae, ed. altera, iv, 91-4; Migne, P.G., 
x, 1565-8, xviii, 509-10 (cf. P. Batiffol, Byz. Z., x, 131-2); (3) the Canons of 
Peter, ge of Alexandria (Routh, Rel. sacrae, iv, 23 ff.; Migne, P.G., xviii, 
468 ff.); (4) Epiphanius, Adv. Haer., |\xviii (Migne, P.G., xlii, 184-201). 
conescne as an uncompromising opponent of the Meletians, is of value chiefly 
for his chronological evidence ; his statement (Afol. c. Ar., 59) that Meletius was 
deposed by Peter for many irregularities ‘and for sacrificing ’ [to idols] need not 
be taken very seriously, for the accusation was one that came readily to contro- 
versialists on the morrow of a great persecution.2, The documents referred to 
under (2)? are, on the contrary, of fundamental importance, and Epiphanius, 
though he wrote later than Athanasius, had excellent authority, probably in part 
that of Egyptian Bishops banished to Palestine.* The situation described by 
Epiphanius is entirely different from that presupposed by the documents of (2), 
but it is easy to reconcile them if we suppose them to present different stages in 
the growth of the schism. The combination made by Schwartz and Duchesne 
probably gives the correct sequence; Achelis, less convincingly, adopts the 
reverse order. 

The schism had no doctrinal origin, but arose out of a dispute which broke 
out during the Great Persecution, probably in A.D. 305, among the Christian 


1 To be distinguished from the later Meletian schism at Antioch, which had no 
connexion with it. Among recent authorities may be cited: H. Achelis, in Herzog-Hauck, 
Realencyklopidie fiir prot. Theol. u. Kirche, xii, 558-62, xxiv, 83; E. Schwartz, G. G. ¥., 
1905, 164-87; L. Duchesne, Avst. anc. de Péghse, ii, 3rd ed., 97-100; F. J. Foakes- 
Jackson, in J. Hastings, Luc. of Rel. and Ethics, viii, 538. 

> Cf. the similar Donatist accusation against i Marcellinus (Dackeene: ii, 93 f). 

8 ©. Seeck, Z. f. Kirchengesch., xvii “(1896- 7), 66-7, pronounces these documents 
forgeries, but his Te are quite unconvincing and their authenticity is now almost 
universally accepted, e.g. by Schwartz, G. G. WV, 1904, 389; Duchesne, ii, 99; Achelis, of. 
cit., xii, 561; &c. See = Rogala, Die Anfinge “des artanischen Streites. 

4 See Schwartz, G.G. V., 1905, 165. 


THE MELLTIIAN SCHISM 39 


prisoners, no doubt at Alexandria, concerning a question of church discipline, the 
treatment of the /afsz. Peter, the Bishop of Alexandria, represented the milder, 
Meletius,! Bishop of Lycopolis, the more rigid school. Neither party proposed 
to exclude the /afsz permanently from communion, neither thought of re-admitting 
them unconditionally ; it was merely a question of the interval to be allowed 
before re-admission and the status to be accorded after it.2 But as neither party 
would give way the dispute ended in a schism, though we may infer from the letter 
of the four Bishops, who address Meletius as ‘dilecto et comministro in Domino’, 
that it did not at first amount to a complete severance of relations. Shortly after 
the outbreak of the quarrel Meletius and Peter appear to have been set at liberty, 
probably on the temporary cessation of the persecution; but when it broke out 
again Meletius, anxious, it would seem, to extend his own following, took it on him 
self to enter the dioceses of four Bishops who were then in prison and undertake 
ordinations. The Bishops protested in the letter referred to (2, i above), but 
Meletius disregarded their remonstrances, and later on, the Bishops having been 
martyred, probably in 306,° he went down to Alexandria, where, finding that 
Peter was in hiding, he proceeded to excommunicate various priests and visitors, 
Peter thereupon wrote to his flock bidding them to hold Meletius excommunicate. 
At a later date Meletius was arrested and banished, with several of his followers, 
to the mines of Palestine, where he remained till the edict of toleration promul- 
gated by Galerius in 311. The persecution was renewed by Maximinus very 
soon after Galerius’s death, and one of the first victims was Bishop Peter, who 
was martyred on 25 Nov.,311. The schism continued even among the exiles in 
Palestine; the two parties held no communication with each other, and Meletius 
ordained Bishops and priests of his own sect, which assumed the title ‘ Church 
of the Martyrs’.* So too, after Peter’s death, the Meletians maintained their own 
organization, though under the episcopate of Alexander relations between the two 
parties were apparently not entirely hostile. So at least we may infer from the 
fact that it was Meletius who called Alexander’s attention to the heretical nature 
of the doctrines expounded by Arius; ° though it may well be that his chief motive 
in so doing was, on the one hand, to take vengeance on Arius, a former adherent, 
now reconciled to the Catholic party, and, on the other, to embarrass Alexander,® 
who showed little eagerness to take action against his heretical presbyter. 

The Council of Nicaea, called together primarily to deal with the Arian 
question, considered also the Meletian schism, deciding that Meletius should 
continue to bear the title of Bishop, though without exercising the duties of the 
office, and that those ordained by him should be re-ordained and retain their 


1 The correct form is undoubtedly MeAirwos (see, e.g., Schwartz, G. G. WV., 1905, 164"). 
1914, 20, though Callistus is not a conclusive authority on orthography, offers further 
confirmation of this. But the form Meletius, since it has everywhere established itself, is 
retained for convenience. 

2 This fact, somewhat obscured in Epiphanius’s account, is rendered certain by the 
Canons of Peter; see Schwartz, G. G. lV., 1905, 172-3. 

3 Schwartz, G. G. WV., 1905, 177, as against Seeck, Z. (1 Kirchengesch., xvii, 67. 

* Epiphanius, Adv. Haer., Ixviii, 3. 

» Epiphanius, xviii, 4. 

6 Cf. Athan., Atol. c. Ar., 59: SuéBadre .. . AdeEavdpor, 


40 THE MELETIAN SCHISM 


rank and functions. What was the attitude of Athanasius to this decision at the 
time we do not know, but he keenly regretted it later,1 and with reason, for the 
compromise was a failure. The details of the ensuing events are, however, 
somewhat uncertain. It has been inferred from Athan., Aol. c. Ar., 59, that 
Alexander died five months after the Council of Nicaea (325), which is indeed 
the natural interpretation of Athanasius’s words ; yet Epiphanius states? that he 
persecuted the Meletians after Meletius’s death, which must have occurred after 
the Council, for Meletius, in accordance with the decision there arrived at, handed 
Alexander a ‘ brief’ containing the names of the Bishops and certain priests of his 
schism and personally introduced them to him.’ Further, the Index to the 
Festal Letters of Athanasius definitely dates the death of Alexander 17 April, 
328, and the accession of Athanasius 8 June of the same year. How are we to 
reconcile these apparent discrepancies? S. Rogala® would apparently reject the 
testimony of the Index; but though that work contains undoubted errors, due 
usually to misunderstanding of the Egyptian calendar, there is no other ground for 
questioning its accuracy here. Seeck® and Schwartz™ suppose that Constantine 
called a second meeting of the Council to settle the Egyptian troubles, i.e., 
probably, the Meletian schism, a theory suggested by a passage in Eusebius,° 
while on the other hand Gwatkin® prefers to suppose that Athanasius was 
counting not from the Council itself but from the final reception of the Meletians. 
In either case there seems little time between the reception and Alexander’s 
death for, first, the death of Meletius, before which he appointed a certain 
John Archaph as his successor,!° and, second, such a persecution as Epiphanius 
speaks of. At all events we may take it that the reception of the Meletians 
was delayed till 327; very possibly neither Alexander nor Meletius was 
particularly anxious to carry out the Nicene decision. On the news that 
Meletius, notwithstanding his recent submission, had before his death appointed 
a successor, thus perpetuating the schism, Alexander may have resolved on more 
drastic measures against the Meletians, measures which it perhaps fell to his 


' Apol.c. Ar., 71: re Medirwos bred€xOn, ds pymor’ Sedov, xtr.; cf. § 59: of dé Meduriavol 
énwadnrote ed€xénoav’ ov yap avayKaioy viv tHv airiav ovopdgew, Schwartz goes too far in 
concluding (G. G. V., 1911, 370) on the strength of the last sentence that the decision was 
taken ‘ sicherlich unter dem Druck des Kaiserlichen Willens ’. 

° Adv. Haer., \xvili, 5: “Adeéavdpos . . «pera thy TeAevTHY MeXnyriov .. . mdvrn Todvs idia 
ouvdyortas, Ud dé MeAnriov karadepOevrus, eddker tapdooew TE Kal cuvéxew Bid¢ecOai Te. 

$ Athan.. Afol. c. Ar., 71-2. 

* Migne, P. G., xxvi, 1351; cf. Lauchert, note 63, p. 149. 

; p. 80%. 

Z.f. Kirchengesch., xvii, 69 f. 

AG) Gave, kO1E, 9c0 M1. 

® Vita Const., iti, 23: adda yap amdyrov cipnvevopevor, pdvors Aiyuntious dpukros Hv % mpos 
GdAnrovs idoverkia, ds Kai adéis evoydetv Bacidea, od py Kal mpds dpyny eyeipev. Oia yoodr 
marépas if Kat paddAov mpopyras Oeod mdon mepremav tivp kai SevTepov exddet kal maduy 
é€peciteve Tots avrois dvekikdkws, Kai Swpous eriva maduv, edndov Te Thy Slarav Se emorodas. 
Rogala rejects this theory (p. 801) on the ground ‘ dass dort nur von agyptischen Bischéfen 
die Rede ist’, which is a rather questionable assertion. 

® Studies of Arianism, p. 66°. 

'© Sozomen, ii, 21: per’ od wodd de [after the handing over of the Meletian churches | 
péhAwy rév Biov Katadiwmdvey, “lodveny twa TOV aitd cvvnOwy, mapa To Sdypa Tis €v Nekaia cvyodou, 
Karéornoev avr’ avoid. 


THE MELETIAN SCHISM 41 


successor to carry out; but it is also conceivable that Epiphanius, a notoriously 
muddle-headed writer, confused the -disputes between Alexander and the 
Meletians revealed by Eusebius with a later persecution of the Meletians by 
Athanasius. 

However this may be, it is clear that the truce was of very brief duration, 
and on the death of Alexander the Meletians appear to have opposed the election 
of Athanasius!, the validity of which they certainly impugned at a later date. 
The persecution of the sect, whether by Alexander or by Athanasius, led to their 
sending a deputation to the Emperor to lay before him their grievances. 
Epiphanius names as the leaders John [Archaph], Callinicus, Bishop of 
Pelusium, and a confessor named Paphnutius.?, The deputation was, however, 
refused access to Constantine, and after hanging about Constantinople and 
Nicomedia for some time struck up an alliance with the party of Eusebius of 
Nicomedia, which, Arian in sympathy though outwardly accepting the Nicene 
creed, was bitterly hostile to Athanasius.? Cynical as this alliance of the ultra- 
orthodox Meletians with the heretical Eusebians may have been, it proved very 
dangerous and led ultimately to Athanasius’s first exile. At first no doubt the 
alliance was purely political *, but close and constant association could hardly fail 
to produce a tendency to Arianism among the Meletians, and this is expressly 
asserted by Sozomen, who says that in course of time the Arians were popularly 

called Meletians in Egypt.® 

During the later stages of the Arian controversy the Meletians played 
a quite secondary part. A number of them made their peace with the Catholics 
and appeared thenceforth among the partisans of Athanasius,° their leader John 
Archaph was banished by Constantine after the Synod of Tyre in 335,” and it is 
clear that after his return from his second, and indeed probably his first, exile, 
Athanasius had the great body of the Egyptian Christians behind him. Yet the 
Meletians continued to maintain their existence as a distinct sect. For the fourth 
century this is abundantly clear from the writings of Athanasius and the 
historians.2 In the fifth century they were known to Theodoret, who speaks of 


' On this question see Lauchert, pp. 30-2; Gwatkin, Studies of Arzanism, p. 66°. 

® Adv, Haer,., \xviii, 5. 

§ Epiphanius, Ixviii, 6; Socr., i, 27 ; Sozomen, ii, 21. 

* Cf. Schwartz, G.G.M. 1911, 371 f. Athanasius more than once clearly 
distinguishes between the standpoints of the two parties, e.g. Lp. ad Lpisc. Aeg. et Lid., 
22: MeNercavol pév dua THY mpooraciay Kai THY paviay THs pidapyvpias, ’Apetopavirar bé Sid rH idiay 
doéBevav ; 1bid.: of pev .. . oxtoparekol yeydvacwy, of O€ .. . dmedeixOnaav aiperikot. 

> ij, 21. Athanasius’s authority on such a point is not of the best, but reference may 
be made to his Ast, Ar., 78: mpoOipas yoy kai rax€ws ek Medutiavev "Apevavol yeydvaow. Cf. 
too the statements of Theodoret quoted below, and Epiphanius, Adv. Haer., Ixviii, 6. 

® See Gwatkin, Studzes of Arianism, p. 71’. 

7 Sozomen, ii, 31. 

8 Besides these Mr. Crum calls attention to a passage in Apophth. Patrum (Migne, 
P. G., \Xv, 405, wn): Aoav de ket MeAuriavoi, oikovytes ev T@ Kadap@ue Tod ’Apowoirov. It is to 
be noted that they are here called aipersoi. A further reference, also pointed out by 
Mr. Crum, occurs in the Coptic life of Pamin (ed. Amélineau, M/ém. de la miss. arch. 
francaise, iv, 740): ‘L’autre était un schismatique (oxtoparexds) abominable (kukAeurns, 
vagabond) de Vhérésie (aipeous) des Mélétiens. The Meletian church is said to have been 
‘prés du tétrapyle de la ville’; there was also a convent to the east of the town, and there 


42 THE MELETIAN SCAISM 


communities of Meletian monks as still existing in Egypt; he states that ‘they 
do not accept sound doctrine, and in their way of life they follow vain practices 
concordant with the infatuations of the Samaritans and Jews’.! This is interest- 
ing, as tending to confirm what was said above regarding the heretical tendency 
of the later Meletians. Further evidence on this point is furnished by a Coptic 
text in Crum., Cazal., no. 358, which is from an Encomium on the martyr Claude 
by Constantine, Bishop of Asiut,a younger contemporary of the Patriarch Damian 
(died A.D. 605); according to Crum ‘the feature of the Melitian heresy here cited 
is their division of the persons of the Trinity.’ ? 

Several modern authorities * state or imply that the sect did not last beyond 
the fifth century, but this is an error, and it can be traced for at least three 
centuries later. In the year 512 we find* a certain Eulogius, described as 
povdtwv more pev Medutiaves, viv 5€ dprodogos (sic), selling to a Meletian priest (Ilotov 
mpeoButép» Mediriav@) a ‘monastery ’ (probably only a complex of cells) at Labla 
near Arsinoe ; and the same person negotiated a similar sale in the following 
year to two Meletian monks from the monastery of Labla.° Mr. Crum further 
calls attention to three Coptic references. In P. Morgan MS. no. xxxvii, 
f. 139 b, in the Life of Apollo, who was driven by Justinian from the Pachomian 
monastery of Pboou, it is stated that Meletians existed (xpnyari¢ev) in the 
district of Heracleopolis at that time. In the (Arabic) Patriarchal History the 
writer of the life of Damian (A. D. 569-605) mentions (P.O., i, 473) in connexion 
with the four monasteries of Wadi Habib, that ‘there were among them the > 
Meletians, I mean the followers of Meletius, who used to receive the Chalice 
many times in the night, before they came to the church’. These Meletians 
Damian, when he ‘was counted worthy to sit upon the evangelical throne’, 
ordered to be banished. Thirdly, a reference to Meletians as still existing occurs 
in a sermon of the Patriarch Benjamin (d. 659), published by H. de Vis. But 
there is an even later reference in the Patriarchal History. It is stated of the 
Patriarch Michael I (A.D. 744-68) that he tried to convert ‘the followers of 


were one hundred and fifty of the sect. In the Coptic text Pamin is the successor of 
Matthew the Poor, whom the Patriarchal History places early in the eighth century (P. O., 
v, 79), but the synaxarium (9 Kihak, P. O., iii, 412 f.) makes him a confessor, who lived 
into the reign of Constantine. Mr. Crum suggests that two men of the name have been 
confused, the confessor of Ashmunén being the opponent of the Meletians, the later being 
located much further south (at Esne). 

' H. £.,i, 9,14: ore trois bytaivovor meOdpeva Odypact Kal Kara THY ToNtTELaY Kevois TUT émt- 
rndetpace Kexpnpéva, Th Sapapertay xat “lovdaiwy ppevoBdraBela cvpBaivorra, Cf. Socr., i, 9 (Migne, 
P. G., \xvii, 84): dype viv xexopicba ris exkdnoias Tos ev Aly’mt@ Meduriavovs. Theodoret, 
Haer. Fab. Comp., iv, 7, gives further interesting details as to the practices of the Meletians, 
stating also that they had adopted Arianism when it was patronized by the Emperor, but 
now claimed to have abandoned it. 

* Constantine here mentions that the Meletians flourished at that time in Asiut. The 
Encomium is contained in P. Morgan MS. no, xlvii (Crum). 

° J. M. Fuller, in W. Smith and H. Wace, Dict. of Christ. Brogr., iii, 891; F. J. 
Foakes-Jackson, in J. Hastings, Lcycl. of Rel. and Ethics, viii, 538; H. Leclercq., Cath. 
Encycl., X, 165. 

+ SB. 5174. 

® SB. 5175: duporépos Mederiavois povd{ovow povagrypiov Kadoupevov AdBAa mpoactiov ris 
atitns “Apowoevray rodeos. 


° Coptica, i, Homéhes coptes de la Vaticane, p. 65. 


THE MELETIAN «SCHISM 43 


Meletius’, but failed, ‘for they denied that they were heretics, and they remained 
dissidents, some of them in the monasteries and some in the deserts’; upon 
which, in consequence of the Patriarch’s prayers, ‘the Lord destroyed them .. 
and at the monastery wherein there were three thousand persons, there no longer 
remained any save ten souls, who were believers and did not walk in their path’.* 
We may probably conclude that the sect died out finally during the eighth century. 

On a schism which lasted so long and, in its earlier stages, played so 
important a part in the history of the Church any fresh light is welcome; and 
the papyri which follow are the more valuable because they come from the 
Meletian side. They were acquired on two occasions, in 1922 and 1923, each 
time as part of a quite miscellaneous collection, but their mutual connexion is 
undoubted. With one certain and one doubtful exception all are letters addressed 
to (or written by ; see 1921, intr.) a certain Apa Paiéous, whether individually or in 
common with others. Of the two exceptions, one (1918) is a contract, the other 
(1922) a Coptic letter in which the name of Paiéous, if it ever occurred, is lost. 
The letters are all undated, but 1918 bears a date corresponding to the year 334, 
and 1914 can, on interna! grounds, be dated with practical certainty in either 334 
or 335, more probably the latter. There are no grounds, palaeographical or 
otherwise, which make it necessary to separate the other papyri very widely from 
these two, and probably the whole collection dates from the decennium 330-40. 

Paiéous (Hainots, gen. Tavjotros; also Taumod, indeclinable) was, as the 
prefix ‘Apa’ shows, a priest, and he is so addressed more than once. In the 
address of 1920 he is given the further title of duodroyntys (‘ Confessor ’), which 
implies that he had suffered in the Great Persecution ; for it is very improbable 
that the title Confessor, hallowed by long association with the pagan persecutians, 
would at this period be used with reference to any sufferings that Pai¢ous may 
have endured at the hands of the Catholic party. We may infer, therefore, that 
he was already a man of at least middle age, and this supposition is borne out by 
the great respect with which his correspondents treat him. From 1921, 32, it 
appears likely that his father’s name was Dicaeus. He was clearly the head, or 
one of the heads, of a large Meletian community. On the question where this 
community was to be looked for the letters first acquired threw no light except 
such as could be obtained from the uncertain evidence of personal names, one or 
two place-names referred to in the letters, and the dialect of the only Coptic 
letter (1920) included in the purchase of 1922. On these grounds it had been 
concluded that the locality was either in Middle Egypt, perhaps in the district 
between Ashmunén and Asiut, or, less probably, in the neighbourhood of the 
Heracleopolite nome. Fortunately the papyri acquired in 1923 contain evidence 
which decides the question. In the Coptic letter 1920 just referred to Paiéous is 
addressed as ‘ Paeiéw of P-hathér’. So far as this passage goes in itself, it is not 
clear whether P-hathér is a place-name or a personal name (‘ [son of] 
P-hathor’),’ but 1918, which indeed does not contain the name of Paiéous but 
clearly belongs to the Meletian archive, is a contract between a priest of Hipponon 


bP. 0.9, 198=9. 
2 Taréd or Hardp, the name of a yydioy in 1419, may be, like many such names, that of 


a former owner. 


44 THE MELETIAN SCHISM 


in the Heracleopolite nome and the zpoecréres of the povn of “Adop ‘in the 
eastern desert of the Upper Cynopolite nome’. There can be no doubt that 
AOop in 1918 is the same name as ngatewp in 1920, and it is thus established that 
Paiéous’s settlement was situated in the Upper Cynopolite nome. The many 
names which occur in the correspondence and particularly the long list of 
greetings in 1914 suggest that the settlement was a populous one. The 
correspondence also contains evidence of other Meletian communities. In 1917 
reference is made to one in the ‘Island of Memphis’, and the writer of that 
letter asks that letters may be written on his behalf to all the cells in the ‘ Upper 
Country’, by which is presumably meant.the Thebaid. Among other places 
referred to are Terét (1914, 57), probably one of the places so named in Middle 
Egypt, perhaps the modern Derit esh-Sherif ; Tamouro (1914, 58) in the Hera- 
cleopolite nome; Tdhe (1920, 6), probably the place so called near Hermopolis ; 
and Antaeopolis (1918, 9). The second at all events was apparently the site of 
a Meletian settlement. 

The letters further give us some insight into the life of the Meletian monks. 
It may be noted in the first place that the community was largely Coptic in race. 
Many of the persons mentioned have Egyptian names, three of the letters are in 
Coptic, while 1915 has a Coptic endorsement, and the Greek is mostly of a vulgar 
kind. 1917 is interesting for its references to the system of intercessory prayers, 
apparently well organized ; 1915 and 1916 show us how the community looked 
after any brother who might fall into distress ; 1920 and 1922 give us some hints 
as to the industrial life of a Meletian settlement ; and 1918 illustrates at least 
one of the methods by which the monks were provisioned. It is, however, in 
two documents which open up wider historical vistas that the exceptional value 
of this collection lies. The questions which they raise are dealt with in the 
introductions to the documents themselves ; here it is sufficient to say that one of 
them, 1918, contains precious evidence concerning the Synod of Caesarea in 
A.D. 334, and that the other, 1914, is even more important for the information it 
gives on the events at Alexandria immediately before the Synod of Tyre. The 
latter document is the more valuable because, coming from the Meletian side, 
it supplements the biased and partial evidence of the Catholic tradition, on which, 
in the main, historians have hitherto had perforce to depend. It may well be 
that other letters from the archive have been found and will yet come on to 
the market, and they may contain further historical material. If so, it is much 
to be hoped that they will be published as soon as possible. 

This suggests the question whether any documents from the Meletian archive 
can be recognized among papyri already published. A possible instance is 
P. Amh. 145 (= Ghedini 41), to which attention was drawn by Mr. Crum in 
connexion with the correspondence of Paphnutius, published below. In general 
appearance, so far as can be gathered from the photograph, this is not unlike one 
or two of the letters addressed to Paphnutius, and a [lazvovéns is mentioned in 
it (1. 26); but there seems no sufficient reason for connecting it with the Paph- 
nutius of the present volume. It is, however, not impossible that it has some 


' In Meletius’s brief (Athan., Apo/. c. Ar., 71) is named Koddodéos ev rh divw Kurd. 


THE MELETIAN SCHISM 45 


connexion with our Meletian community. The writer is Apa Johannes and the 
recipient Paul. An Apa Johannes is mentioned in 1914, 34, but he is probably 
to be identified with John Archaph, who is not very likely to have signed a letter 
in Coptic, as does the writer of Amh. 145. Paul, an dvayvéorns, is, however, 
mentioned in 1914, 59; a Paul, rpeoBvrepos amd Tyévews, occurs in1917, 11; and in 
1919, 25 6 axdpios HataAos sends greetings. There are in the present correspond- 
ence at least two persons, and possibly more, called Tlamvodrios, and in one letter 
the name has the form Hazvov6ns (1918, 7, 8) seen in Amh. 145, 26. A Hierax, 
with or without the honorific dma indicating that he was a priest, occurs several 
times in our correspondence, and recalls the Hierax who was the bearer of 
Amh. 145. Lastly, the Coptic signature to that letter is of some significance, as - 
compared with the three Coptic letters of our collection and the Coptic endorse- 
ment of 1915. No doubt, however, these evidences are very slight, and certainty 
is hardly attainable. 

Even more doubt exists with regard to another possible connexion, also 
suggested by Mr. Crum. This is the group of Coptic letters in the Rylands 
collection referred to in the introduction to 1920. There are one or two names 
common to the two collections, but these are not sufficiently infrequent to have 
much weight, and the rarer names of the present collection, in particular that of 
Paiéous, the centre of our correspondence, are not found in the Rylands group. 
The dialect too of the latter would point to a locality south of Ashmunén. It 
is possible enough that some or all of the Rylands letters are Meletian and even 
that one or two of the names referred to in both groups may be those of identical 
persons, but on this point there are really no grounds for decision. 


PAPYRUS 1913.—19 March, A.D. 334. 
Inv. No. 2543. 22-5 X 338 cm. 


Acquired in 1923. Light brown papyrus (except on the left, in the upper part, where 
the tint is darker) of rather coarse quality. Worm-eaten in places, a good deal damaged at 
top and bottom and badly rubbed, particularly in the lower part, where the ink has often 
entirely disappeared. Written in a medium-sized, regular, sloping, somewhat laterally 
compressed cursive hand, along the fibres, in black ink. 

This and the following papyrus are distinguished among the others because 
they deal with affairs of wider historical importance than the local affairs of the 
Meletian community at Hathor. 1918 is a contract made between a priest 
named Pageus and the monastery of Hathor. It is described at the conclusion 
as TO Tis KaTacTdcews ypappdriov; more briefly we might perhaps call it, on the 
analogy of the earlier cvorarixdy (e.g. P. Lond. ined. Inv. No. 1966) a karacraruxéy. 
That is to say, it is a contract for the appointment of a deputy. Pageus had 
been summoned by Constantine to attend the Synod of Caesarea, and he here 
agrees with the Priors (spoeorGres) of the monastery that his brother Gerontius 
shall take his place and discharge his functions during his absence. 

The contract is thus, even from the juristic point of view, of some interest, 
but its main importance comes from its connexion with the Synod of Caesarea, 
an event concerning which our information is scanty. A brief account of its 


antecedents will perhaps be useful. 


46 THE-MELETIAN SCHISM. [1913] 


After the failure of the first Eusebian attack on Athanasius, which took the 
form of a demand for the admission of Arius and his followers to communion, 
supported, on Athanasius’s first refusal, by a threatening letter from the Emperor, 
whom however Athanasius persuaded to waive the order, the Meletians brought 
forward an accusation that he had imposed an unauthorized tax in kind (orixdpia 
Awa). Certain presbyters of Athanasius, who were opportunely at court, were 
able to dispose of this charge, and Constantine administered a reproof to the 
Meletians but summoned Athanasius to court—Athanasius does not say why, 
and the letter which he quoted has disappeared from the text of the Afol. ¢. Ar. 
($ 60). On his arrival Athanasius found: himself confronted with two fresh 
charges, one concerning the breaking of a chalice by his presbyter Macarius (see 
below), and one of conspiracy against Constantine. The Emperor acquitted him 
on both counts and wrote to the Alexandrines a letter on his behalf. He arrived 
home some time after Easter, 332.1 He was not long left in peace. The 
Meletians and their allies the Eusebians soon brought two charges against him, 
one new, the other already examined by Constantine. This second was to the 
effect that a priest named Macarius sent by Athanasius to summon Ischyras, 
a schismatic priest (one of those ordained by Colluthus), had, in an altercation 
with him, broken a sacred chalice. (The story grew in course of time; in the 
letter of the Oriental Council of Sardica Athanasius is accused of having personally 
broken the chalice, smashed the altar, overturned the priest’s chair, and demo- 
lished the church!*) The other charge was one of having murdered a certain 
Arsenius, Bishop of Hypsele. The Ischyras case, as already settled, Constantine 
declined to reopen, but he ordered the censitor Dalmatius to try the other.? 
Lauchert * appears to take the Synod of Caesarea as the direct result of this 
command, but Athanasius’s words,’ especially when combined with Sozomen’s 
narrative,’ make this supposition unlikely, and it is better to separate the Synod 
from the first exposure of Arsenius.” 

Athanasius, summoned to appear before the court, set his clergy to work 
and succeeded in tracing Arsenius first to the monastery of Ptemencyrcis in the 
Thebaid and finally to Tyre. Arsenius at first denied his identity but on being 
brought before the Bishop of Tyre he confessed the deceit and made his peace 
with Athanasius. John Archaph also apologized to Constantine, who com- 
mended him for so doing and summoned him to court.8 The truce was, how- 
ever, of very brief duration, and the charges were soon set afoot once more. It 
is rather hard to believe that after their signal defeat the Eusebian-Meletian 
coalition merely reiterated the two accusations already exposed. Athanasius 


' See the fourth Paschal letter, Migne, P. G., xxvi, 1379. 

* Hilary of Poictiers, iv, p. 53. 

§ Athan., Aol. c. Ar., 65. boas oer 

> Apol. c. Ar., 65: ypager Se eis rHv Avtidyetav Aadpartio TS Knvowpt dkodvoa Ths mepl Tov 
ovov Oikns. 

° ii, 23, 25; cf. Socrates, i, 27, who, however, does not mention the Synod of 
Caesarea. 

* So too Schwartz, GG. JV., 1911, 376, though he is wrong as to the date of the 
Synod of Caesarea; see below. 

8 Athan., Apol, c. Ar., 70. 


[1913] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 47 


says nothing of any others, but it appears from Sozomen! that Athanasius had 
already at an earlier period been accused of violence and oppression towards the 
Meletian party, and similar but more detailed charges were found by the historian ? 
in the minutes of the Synod of Tyre. Further evidence of the same kind is con- 
tained in the letter of the Oriental Council of Sardica.3 The last source definitely 
states that it was on account of such proceedings (‘ propter haec’ ; this includes 
both the chalice incident and the violence towards opponents) that the Synod of 
Caesarea was summoned. The evidence of 1914 makes it certain that these 
charges were not baseless, and we are probably justified in assuming that after 
each frustrated offensive of his enemies Athanasius allowed himself the luxury of 
reprisals. Hence, while the chalice incident and the case of Arsenius probably 
figured in the agenda of the Synod of Caesarea, we may take it as beyond 
question that the charges of persecution and oppression were among the reasons, 
and were perhaps the principal reason, for the convening of that body. 
Athanasius himself nowhere mentions the Synod of Caesarea. The few 
-allusions to it elsewhere are as follows :—Sozomen, ii, 25: ’A@avaciw 5& mdAw at 
TOV evaytiov emiBovdal dvexivovy Tpdyparta, Kal pioos mapa TO Bactr€l Kareckevace, kat 
, 5) / Lod om ») te e XN - f t 
KaTnyopwv ennyeipe TAHOos. lap av dxAovmevos 6 Bactreds otvodov yeverOar Tpoce- 
tagev ev Karoapeta ris Wadaorivns. Eis jv xdndels odx tajxovoev, EtoeBiov Tod tHd€ 
> , \ a ’ \ a 2 a > \ , Ss s > x / 
€mLoKOTIOV Kal TOU Nikowndetas kal Trav aud avtovs detoas THY oKawpiay. “AAAG TdTE 
1 ?) ° 5) L 5) \ \ , 2 5) ! _ \ gy 
pev, kairo. ovvedOeiy dvayxaCopevos, Gul rods TpiaKxovra pnvas aveBddreTo' peta Se 
tabra apodpotepoy Biacbels tev eis Tupov. Lbid., ad fin.: ejdovy dé [i.e. the Synod 
of Tyre ina letter to Constantine]... xa@drt, to} Baoikéws tpoordgéavros (Migne 
-ovTos) €v T@ TapEAOovTe eviavT@ cuvedOely adrod xapw eis Katodperay Tods ava tHv “Ew 
ETLTKOTOUS, OVK ATHVTNTEDY, ETL paKp~ XpOV@ TaAaiTMpovmervnY THY ctvodoy idov Kal TOV 
Tod Kputobvros Tpoctaypatev Katapporjoas. Theodoret, H.£., i, 28, 2-4: weidover 
\ a : . % / i . , a , 
67) ody [i. e. the Eusebian party | Tov Baotrea ovvodsov ev Katoapeta ris Madavorivns 
b} n =f XX p io € tal 3 na pu) ny XQ “} te 
abpotoat, vba 7 TAELovs Hoay ot dSvopevets, KaKeloe KpLOnvat KeAcdoat Tov “APavacvov. 
Tlevobels 52 ws iepedou 6 Bacireds, TavTamact yap nyvde Ta TUpEvdpeEva, TOdTO yevéabaL 
mpooétagev. "AAN 6 Oetos ’APavac.os, Thy TOy dikaCdvTwmy Svopéverav emia TapEVvos, OdY 
nKev eis TO ovvedplov. “Evred0ev 52) tAelova mpddacw eis ovkopavtiay aPBdvTes, Kat 
Tov KaTa THs GAnOeias avade€apevor TOAELOV, Tpds Tals GAAaLs Tapavoulats Tupavvidos 
Cee Vee , es fa) , > / é \ > / ~ > / 3 / 
avtov Kal OpacuTntos emt TOU Bacirdews EypayavTo’ Kal ov Taytay THs eAnidos éwev- 
cOnoav. “Ex yap on Trav cipnyevor Ovpmdels 6 mpadtatos Bactrevs eméorerEv ad’T@ THY 
2 —=N ¢ , \ n S Ze a ’ a N I 3 
épyny bnopaivwy kat katadaBety tv Tupov mapeyyvav. “Exeioe yap mpooérakev aOpot- 
na \ U4 c /- is CN X ] / € C 6 x K / \ 
cOnvat THY cvvOdoY, ITOTTEVTAS, OS oiat, TOY ABavac.oy vpopacbat THY Katcapéwy dia 
rov éxeivns nyovpevov. Festal Index, year 334 (Migne, ?.G., xxvi, 1352-3): Hoc 
anno visitavit [Athanasius] partes inferiores: quo tempore vocatus fuit Caesaream 
Palaestinae ad synodum, ubi eius inimici fraudulentas machinas struebant ; 
verum ipse insidias praesentiens excusatione usus est, quominus illuc profici- 
sceretur. Letter of Oriental Council of Sardica (Hilary of Poictiers, iv, p. 54): 
Nam propter haec necessario concilium apud Caesaream Palaestinam primo 
videtur esse condictum et, cum minime ab ipso vel ab eius satellitibus ad supra- 
dictum concilium occurreretur, post alterum annum in Tyro propter eius facinora 
necessario iterum celebratur. 


Trad. zSiteo es ° Hilary of Poichers, iv, p. 53 f. 


48 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1913] 


It will be seen from the foregoing that the Synod was summoned to 
Caesarea, under the presidency of Eusebius, and that Athanasius declined to 
attend on the ground that a body so constituted would not be impartial. It aiso 
appears clearly that the date was 334. Sozomen indeed, though in the second 
passage he speaks of the Synod of Caesarea as summoned in the year before that 
of Tyre, seems to make the interval one of thirty months, and the Festal Index, 
though it correctly places Caesarea in 334, assigns Tyre to 336, thus giving the 
same interval of two years. Schwartz concludes that the Synod of Caesarea 
must have been summoned in February or March of 333,) but 1913 proves him 
wrong. Sozomen’s rpidxovra wjvas must be due either to corruption in the text 
(\’ for « ?) or, perhaps more likely, to the fact that he was counting not from the 
summons to Caesarea but from that to Antioch, when Constantine instructed 
Dalmatius to try the case. If the latter suggestion is correct we have an 
approximate date for the first production of the Arsenius charge. 

Constantine, on the receipt of Athanasius’s refusal, appears to have recog- 
nized the cogency of his plea, but without abandoning the decision to have the 
charges investigated ; and he therefore convened the Synod to Tyre the following 
year, taking advantage of the opportunity afforded by the celebration of his 
Tricennalia at Jerusalem. 

We may now turn to the evidence of 1918. In the first place it definitely 
fixes the date of the Synod of Caesarea, It bears a date corresponding to 
19 March, 334. As the Imperial letters had already been received, while, on the 
other hand, it is not likely that the persons summoned, particularly since they 
belonged to the party which had procured the summoning of the Synod, would 
lose any time in obeying the Emperor's commands, we may place the actual 
summons about the middle of February or but little earlier. In a phrase which 
may embody a quotation from Constantine’s letter we are told that the object of 
the Synod was mpos bidxpioww wept Kabapropo0d (Tod) dylov Xpuotiavixod AHOovs (? — 
for the reading see 1.6 f,, n.). An indication is further given as to the scale of 
the Synod: Constantine had summoned tuvds ris Aiydrrov étuckdmovs te Kal mpeo- | 
Burépovs kal Erépovs TodAovs Kal eué ody adrois. Pageus was a simple village priest, 
and could not take his seat in the Synod, but he was probably summoned as 
a witness, one of those pdptupas moAdods kar’ abtod Tmapeckevacpévovs ek Tov Ta 
‘Apetov kai MeAuriov gpovotytwy of whom Sozomen (ii, 25) speaks. 

Besides its historical and juristic interest the document has a value for its 
evidence on Egyptian monasticism, since Pageus specifies the duties which his 
deputy was to take over. Unfortunately it is precisely this portion of the 
papyrus which has suffered worst from rubbing, and the text here presented is 
very imperfect. More can be made out by happy conjecture, but in places the 
ink has entirely disappeared, and a quite complete text must inevitably be in 
part merely conjectural. Pageus describes himself merely as dm0 kébyns ‘Inaévev 

. mpeoBvrepos, but it is clear from what follows that he was attached to the 


' G.G.N., 1911, 376%. Schwartz’s argument is vitiated by two curious blunders. 
Post alterum annum surely means ‘next year’, not ‘two years after’, as Schwartz 
appears to take it; and what justification has he for rendering dmd meptou ‘im vorvorigen 
Jahr ’? 


[1913 | THE MELETIAN SCHISM 49 


monastery in some capacity.! His successor was to mpovofjoar xal diockely Kal 
oixovopety all the affairs of the monastery (a[dlyra ra TH(s) wovh|s] tpdypara); but 
Pageus was hardly an olkovéuos, for he apparently states that Gerontius was to 
appoint the oixovdjor, [kal6” duoudrntd pov. The uncertainty of reading makes this 
last point not wholly certain, but whatever be read in 1. 14, it is probable that 
Pageus had the right of appointing the ofxovduou, and in that case he can hardly 
have been an olxovduos himself. Possibly he was a dvocxyntys, for which title see 
P. Cairo Masp. i, 67021 verso, 16; A. Steinwenter, Stud. Pal., xix, 35. 


t ‘Tararias Pdavilow ’On[rdrov mar]pi«jov Kal ‘Avixiov Ilavdivov trav 


Aapmplolrdroy Papevod Ky. 


nN 


[Avpir}tos ITayeds “Qpov amd xébuns ‘Inmévev rod ‘HpaxdeoroXérov 
~ ~ lan Va ~ ~ 
vouod mpeaBurepos ‘Tots mpoect@olt]’ povis povoydy 
3 [kaA]oupévns “Abop ovens ev 76 drnrwrKG bor Tod dvw Kuvororetrov. 
Ociwy Baciikov ypaupdroy dvamep- 
4 $[Oév|rav bmd Tob edocBecrdrov Baciiéos Keovorayrivov kedev[ OlvT@y 
: \ a aw ? , 
Tivas THS AlyvmrTov EemicKé- 
. ia \ ears ~ \ 22 X\ \ > “A 
5 Tous Te Kal mpecBurépous Kai érépovs modrdods Kai éue ody adrots 
lacs to DOLLY pai ore a1 eee Dell ites yostee 
6 [a}ravtnoa «is Kawcdpiay ris Tadaorivns Supias mpds dudxpiow Trepli| 
k[alOapicpod (rot) ayiov Xpnoriavixod 


{T]AnOovs emi[ylouévov pov roratrny exBacw moujoacbar eis tv mpolye)- 


~~ 


yeleleueraly] Kaodpray mpos domdj- 

8 [ploow tev KeKeAevopévov avdyKn pot yeyévntat diddox‘o'v avt é[pold 
k[arajo[T\joar axpt THs EuHs mapov- 

9 [oilas, (6° 3) atvnga rods povoxods TAS imeTepas porns émi TrapovT|@|y 
TaraBaeitiols mpecBurépov ‘Immdvev 

10 [kal? ITamvovriov didkovos amd Ilapwréoda kai IIpwodros dpxé ‘ov 
povoxod Kat <[répwv modAlov, kal kat... u.. On. 

tr [Poa Kat nvddknoav e€ dpovotas Exovoiws Kal avdaipéro(s] Kal ae Ta- 
vlojr® yrdpun Avpidrvov Tepdvtiov dpo- 

12 [y]vjotdy pou adehpov ws duvdpevov thy xdpay jou [a|romAnp@loas EX pt 
THs éuns mapovoias ts xpovoy 

13 [kal ?| alajyra 7a rH(s) povals] Tpdy para Mmpovonoa: Kal d.oikely Kat 
OUKOVONELY. \ThEIOU™ ReUT (ols aie KOGU wi /aea.n').! aleeie i es 

14 [..J--yue-[--]----[-] Kal... adz[. . oljkovgpous rhs povi[s exlrééau 
[Ka]0 dpordtntad pov, pydeutas ‘dé’ Kawvoro- 

15 [uMlals yeyvolmer|ns dr[ev (ray) mpoec|ré[ray rhs] porns mleplt 7[dr] 

| .. ou7[@ Kal Bovdropévoy e€edOeiv povoyxav 


1 This is perhaps supported by the scribal blunder in], 2. The scribe at first wrote 
mpeoBvrepos porns krA. and only inserted rois mpoecrdou by an afterthought. Possibly a better 
correction would have been to add trois mpocoraox ris adtis povas in |. 3. 

E 


50 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1913 | 


on 30-35 letters JoOae [. -JAL- -]eAl- - - 
j.... 0s. Kdpiov 7d tis Kataordcews [y]pappla- 
17 Toy [waray[h emepepdpevjov klalt émepwrnbels apodroynoa. 


18 [(2nd h.) Adphrcos Ilayeds 6 mplox([(efuevos)] éo[nueolodunv. (3rd h.) 


of mplox(efpevor).}..[. .] kal... .. mw. 8 Kat KoddobOos Kai Ato- 
oxop{ in] 
19 [ 
Jo. @.. 5 KoddodOos eyp(awpa) (imep) Tov dN wr) yp(e pare) 17) 
20 [e(ddrwy. (4th h.) Jal IIpods [...]. xu. - cov mapnpe 
at | (5th h.) |. Hamv[ov6cos about 14 letters] 
wo +. nu0dK|(noa). taal ea 
2. inmavev; so |. g. l, povayay; sol. 15. . 3. 1. oper, KuvorroXirov. 5. us 
of moddovs corr. or rewritten. 6. 1. Kadpear (so 1. 7), Xprorcavecod. he []AnGous 
émt{ylouevov (1. emevyonévov): Hunt. 8. xlaralo[r}jou: Hunt. g. 1. povaxois, 
10. |. dpyatov povaxod. 11. youn: Hunt. 12. is xpdvov: Milne; see note. is 
(1. eis). 13. a[dpra ra ri(s) poral s| mpaypara: Hunt; see note. 14. ex|Acéae : 
Hunt; see note. 16 f. [y|equpla]r[eo: Hunt. 1g. After (inép) a long down- 
stroke has been washed out. 21. judo|«] / (2). 


‘In the consulship of Flavius Optatus, Patrician, and Anicius Paulinus the 
most illustrious, Phamenoth 23. Aurelius Pageus son of Horus, of the village of 
Hipponon in the Heracleopolite nome, priest, to the Priors of the monastery of 
monks called Hathor situated in the eastern desert of the Upper Cynopolite 
nome. Whereas sacred Imperial letters have been sent up by the most pious 
Emperor Constantine ordering certain persons from Egypt, both Bishops and 
priests and many others and myself among them, ... to proceed to Caesarea in 
Palestinian Syria to come to a decision concerning the purgation of the holy 
Christian body and I am desirous to make a journey of this kind to the aforewritten 
Caesarea to fulfil the orders given, it is necessary for me to appoint a deputy in 
my place until my return, (wherefore) I gathered together the monks of our 
monastery in the presence of Patabaeis, priest of Hipponon, and Papnutius the 
deacon of Paminpesla and Préous, former monk, and many others; and they... 
and approved with unanimity, voluntarily and spontaneously and with irrevocable 
decision, Aurelius Gerontius my full brother as a person fitted to occupy my 
place until my return temporarily (?) [and] to supervise and administer and control 
all the affairs of the monastery, both as regards... and to choose the stewards 
of the monastery in the same way as myself, and that no innovations shall be 
made without the consent of (?) the priors of the monastery in the matter of the 
... monks and of those who desire to depart... The deed of appointment is 
valid wheresoever it is produced, and in reply to the formal question I have given 
my consent. I Aurelius Pageus the aforesaid have signed the deed. We the 
aforesaid ...and...and Colluthus and Dioscorides... I Colluthus have written 
on behalf of the others, as they are illiterate. We...and Préous... are 
present (?) [and approve?]. I Papnuthius ... have given my approval.’ 


[1913] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 51 


I. ‘Yrarias Pdavi{ oly ’On[tdrov mar |pi{k]iov : all the dotted letters, though quite possible, 
are in themselves very uncertain and could hardly be read but for the analogy of (e.g.) 
P. Thead. 24 and 25. The v of vmarias is inferred from a slanting stroke in the top left 
corner of the papyrus, on the assumption that, as not infrequently, the first letter was made 
specially large, extending much above the others. 

ky: y is very probable, « on the other hand very dubious, but there are certainly two 
strokes before y, so that « seems out of the question and « is the only alternative. 

2. Hayeds: the name does not occur in Preisigke’s Namenbuch, but may very likely be 
identical with the well-known Maeds. For the insertion of intervocalic y see 1.. Mayser, 
Gramm. der gr. Papyrt, p. 168 ; cf, e.g., P. Oxy. xvi, 1928 verso, 12, yovra = Aéovra. It 
is improbable, however, that the name.is to be equated with Haods, which occurs so 
regularly in the letters that we cannot suppose Paiéous to have called himself Iayeds, 

3. [kad joupéons: there is not really room for «ad, but the reading can hardly be doubted. 
«a does not seem to have been written in |. 2, for though the papyrus is much rubbed at the 
end of that line some traces at least of any letters there should be visible. It may be 
suspected that the scribe, who was given to omissions, actually wrote Aovpevys, forgetting 
that he had not written xa in |. 2. 

“A@op: it had been suggested by Mr. Crum, even before [kad ouuévns was read, that the 
letters afop were to be connected with the Tgatowp of 1920, 2. There can be no doubt 
that this is the same place as that, and thus 1913 gives us the provenance of the whole 
collection. “Aéop seems not to occur in any hitherto published text. 

4. keder[slyrav: or -ros, agreeing with Kevoravtivov, but the plural, agreeing with 
ypauuarov, is more natural and seems a possible reading. 

5. The end of this line is practically hopeless, but the scanty traces might suffice to test 
a conjectural restoration. The e at the beginning of the undeciphered portion is very 
probable. Since [d'ravr#om in |. 6 is all but certain, a verb is not required here, but the 
line may end in ovly (cuvaravricac). 

6 f. mpds Sidkpiow xrA.: it is unfortunate that there is any uncertainty in the reading of 
so crucial a passage, but the reading adopted, though it may at first seem objectionable, is 
difficult to escape from.  did«prow may be taken as certain. After it ze is extremely 
probable, and a small trace above |. 7 to the right of the o of mpotyeyypla|zzevn|v] cannot, if 
that reading be adopted rather than mpoxipéonv (see note there), be part of |. 7 and suggests 
the bottom of a p. Hence epi is a natural reading. apiryou is certain except for the o, 
which is much preferable to 6 (dp.y08), and the character before it must be either 8 or 6 (ep 
is sometimes made in a similar way in late Byzantine texts but never in 1913). Of the two 
6 is slightly the better reading, and 8 would necessitate Bap |Bapiopod, which suits neither the 
space nor the context. If 6 be read we can hardly escape xaOapupod. After the v, mov is 
suggested, but this is hopeless, and dyiov is perfectly possible (for the form of a cf, e. g., 
the a of [d]ravrjom or either a of Tadaorivs). After this Xpynorcavxod seems certain (for the 
mer sO1o..22,0.), In ly ei[ylouevov, though several of the individual letters are doubtful, 
is almost_certain, and gives the required sense ; [m]\n@ove on the contrary is excessively 
dubious and is read merely exemplr gratia. It suits the space (better, e.g., than [y]éous, 
which could also be read) and can be reconciled with the confused traces, though they do 
not suggest it; .»..os is the most obvious reading. mAnGovs too, though an understandable, 
is not the most natural word in the context. Apart from this the reading adopted seems 
highly probable, though it must be confessed that the wording is peculiar. The objections 
to it are that (1) Sd«pow, which here must mean a decision or judgement, goes curiously 
with what follows, (2) «u@apwpod is an unexpected word, (3) the omission of rod is 
objectionable. As regards the last point it may be noted that the scribe was much given 
to omissions. In ]. 7 rqy is expected, but was not written, before rovavrny (cf. too duoyrijorov 
without rév in ]. rr), and there are certain examples of omission in Il. 2 (‘rois tpoeoraa[«]’), 
8 (duddox‘ ov), 10 (dpyé'ov’), 13 (end; see note), 14 (‘de’), and probable ones in li. z 
([Kad oupevys ; see note), 7 (mp0 ye)ypla unery[r]), 9 (oe é)), 13 (ra(s)).  Sudkpeow is appropriate 
in itself, for the Synod of Caesarea was of the nature of a judicial assembly, and as to 
xaSapiopod, the word seems to suit Constantine’s conception of its functions very well. We 
have not indeed his letter convening the Synod, but the following passage from that 
convening the Synod of Tyre in the following year (Eusebius, Vita Const, iv, 42) is 
significant: émedy d€ ody bytovs didoverkias otarpw twes edavvdpevor . .. Ta TévTa ovyxeew 
émixetpovow, Omep maons cuuhopas emékewa Kex@pykevar po Soxei, rovtou xdpiy Oéovras vas, TO TOD 


EQ 


52 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1913] 


Adyou, mporpéropas yopis rivos tnepbécews eis ravTd ovvdpapeiv, mAnp@oa THY ovvodov, €TapivaL 
Tots xpnCovaowy éemckoupias, Tovs added hors idaag Oat Kivduvevorras, eis 6udvorav éemava- 
yayeiv ra Steot ata Tay peddy, SropOdcac Gar Ta TANppEAOVMEVA Ews KaLpOS emMLTPETEL, 
«th, Such a phrase as «is xabapiopdy rod dyiov XprotvamKod mAnOovs seems quite consonant 
with Constantine’s style ; the combination of it with mpds dudkpeow may be due to the scribe. 

7. mpoyeyyp|ajupeva|» |: between zpo and the downstroke taken as p there is certainly 
not room for yey, and it is therefore an obvious suggestion that mpox{Jé|v] should be read. 
A trace of ink above the line might be part of «, and the downstroke would suit « as well as 
p, but the traces after the lacuna ( (where the upper layer of papyrus has disappeared) do not 
at all suit the reading ey, but suggest rather pyevy (though this too is very indistinct). 
Hence it is better to suppose that the scribe, more suo, has omitted two letters. The ink 
above the line must therefore be assigned to the p of zep[¢] in 1. 6. 

8. dvr’ [yo]: pov twa or twd pov is impossible, but the reading in the text is far from 
certain. avra{pxn| (Milne) is almost equally epaet kjara|g|r|joa, which the traces alone 
are insufficient to establish, is confirmed by 1. 

g. (&’ 6): something like this seems reid The exact word or phrase is of course 
uncertain. 

jmetépas: it is not necessary to emend to beet eps, since Pageus was clearly attached 
in some way to the porn. 

TMaraPaeir|o\s: the reading is very probable, and is perhaps supported by 1914, 1, where 
the same person may be addressed. 

10, Haywréoda: the reading is probable and better than Tatwrécha or Haewréoha, 
though these are not quite excluded. The place is apparently unknown, though a village 
Pesla (or rather two villages, év@ and «arw) is known in the Hermopolite nome (P. Lips. 
54, 4; Flor. 50, 65; Amh. ror, 7). 

Hpaotros: identical with IIpavoty of 1914, 52? But Hpeoty cannot be read there, and 
since eee was a ‘former monk’ the identification is not specially likely. 

KOT « . on . . [2 caly: difficult, and no likely reading has suggested itself. «ar and 
vy are probable ; vy are very uncertain, and the combination 6yy is rather intractable, but it 
is inserted in the text because it is the most obvious reading of the characters. The last 
letter of 1. ro issn, or v. If répwv modd]av, a probable reading i in itself, be rejected, this 
may be a name or names. 

II, avOapéro|s|: the s of éxovetws is certain, and though s is entirely lost here, the w has 
a ligature at the end, so that at6aipére[s] is preferable to addapéro. 

12. is ypgvov: doubtful and not really required but the easiest reading of the characters. 

13. [kai 2] 1 ald ipra Ta this) povals ] Tpaypara : Prof. Hunt, to whom the reading is due, 
suggested rév povayar, but there is certainly not room for rév nor very much for xov (a could 
be read after v). Hence, as the traces suit r7 it is best to suppose, since pov is fairly certain, 
that the scribe again omitted a letter. 

[me|pt wer [.|... kage ..: the letter following « may well be a, but the next one comes 
rather low for s; ov could be read. [melpt pév is a likely reading. In the undeciphered 
passage following something was omitted, and at least three letters, ending with 1, have been 
added above the line. 

14. The traces rather strongly suggest cat ro[d|s adr[ods oi|kordyous, but no oikovduor have 
been mentioned previously, and Prof. Hunt conjectures some such reading as kali emi ro 
[ov KrA. él r@ itself is however impossible. 

éx|\éEac: the space would better suit kara|\é£ar, but éx|A¢éa is a likelier word, and seems 
possible if we suppose the oex to have been spread out. 

15. yeyvolwév|ns: the context makes this almost necessary, but the reading is excessively 
uncertain, ‘The first letter is a good y, but what follows is not at all easy to reconcile with 
vyvo (or ewo) and the characters after the defaced patch are very unlike ys, though they can 
perhaps be read so at need. After this a. [ can easily be read, and since the small trace is 
consistent with », dev is a not unlikely reading. spoec|ra[rav is suggested by the context, 
but involves the supposition that the scribe has again omitted a word. 

16. [. .|A[. .JeAl : some case of dAdkAnpos is suggested, and there may be only one letter 
between the first A and «, but the word seems inappropriate here. ‘The three dotted letters 
are all of them easy to read. 

17. The second half of this line was left blank, the subscriptions beginning in I. 18. 

18. of mp[ox(eiuevor): neither Colluthus nor Dioscorides has been named in the body of 


5) 
QuT 


{1913 | THE MELETIAN SCHISM 53 


the contract. Probably therefore these are the mpocorares of |. 2 or some of them. Pageus 
signed first, then the mpoeoréres jointly, then the witnesses. If the hand in 1. 19 is the same 
as here (see note) Colluthus signed for all. As regards the readings here, the first kai is 
very probable, the third certain, but the second is dubious. The characters are indeed 
very like those of the third kai, but 8 is a curious ending fora name. It is hardly possible 
to read kal Haujods Ackai(ov) (cf. 1921, 32, and intr.). 

, Avockop|i|dz[s|: this seems clearly the reading rather than Acécxopov (cf. 1916, 3; 1918, 

4; 1921, 23). 

19. In view of the context it is preferable to take this as the same hand as in l. 18, 
but it must be admitted that though the ovdos is fairly similar, some letters and the general 
appearance of the script differ somewhat from the hand of 1. 19. The symbol for imép is 
of unusual shape, rather like that for rdAavrov at this period. Though a lacuna is marked 
in the text before ¢ . o..¢ there are isolated traces here and there, too small for any 
reading. 

20, A large uncial hand, evidently that of a writer not expert with his pen. There is 
room for o between x and », which, as a may follow p, suggests [tmo|Séx[o|uat, but the word 
is not suitable here. Prof. Hunt suggests that mapnue may be for mdpeuu, followed in 1. 21 
by [kat evdoxd (for the latter word see the second subscription in that line). 


PAPYRUS 1914.—-May-June, A.D. 335(?). 
Inv, No. 2487. 23°6x 28-2 cm. 


Acquired in 1922. Dark brown papyrus but with bands of lighter colour. Worm- 
eaten on the left side, with smaller holes in many places; verso rubbed in several lines. 
Written in a good upright cursive hand, fairly large and not much compressed at the 
beginning but growing smaller and more cramped as the writer proceeded, particularly on 
the verso; on both sides along the fibres, the writing on the verso being at right angles to 
that on the recto. Black ink of a greyish tint. The address is at the bottom edge of the 
verso, the reverse way up. Facsimile of recto: Plate II. 


This letter is historically the most important of the whole archive and 
indeed may well claim to rank among the primary authorities for the ecclesias- 
tical history of Egypt in the fourth century. The writer, Callistus, was doubtless 
a Meletian monk or cleric, and he gives a circumstantial account of the sufferings 
of his fellow Meletians at the hands of Athanasius’s adherents and of Athanasius 
himself. 

The style of the letter is unfortunately awkward and at times obscure; and 
moreover a private letter, the writer of which, referring to matters familiar to his 
correspondent, does not need to be as definite as an historian, is always apt to be 
a little difficult of comprehension to those unacquainted with the circumstances. 
Hence it is not surprising that parts of our letter are by no means clear and 
admit of more than one interpretation. The Greek is indeed not exactly illiterate ; 
the spelling, though often inaccurate, shows few of the wilder vagaries character- 
istic of uneducated writers, and the syntax is as a rule intelligible. Nevertheless 
there are features in the style which suggest that Callistus was a Copt and not 
wholly at home in Greek. Such are: the repetition of a word or phrase without 
a connecting particle or conjunction, Il. g-10, 7jA@acw épovtes . . ., olvdpuevor 
7AOaow ; the omission of any connecting word in 1. 38, rodr’ oby jxovoev "APavac.os 

.. tdvv aOvuet "AGavdo.os ; and the writer’s habit of inserting an explanatory or 


54 THE MELETIAN SCHISM (1914] 


supplementary clause without a conjunction, as in Il. 24 (émolnoav, xrd.), 48 
("Equs, xrA.). 

Many features of grammar and style are, however, familiar enough in later 
Greek. Such are: the use of the definite article for the relative pronoun (Ta 
emd0apev, 1. 3); the confusion of the prepositions of motion and rest (am7Adaow 
...& 7H porn, |. 15 f.3 mpoepbiv ev rots olyvors, 1. 17 f.; eis adrovs éorw, |. 48); the 
tendency to normalize verbal forms, introducing a into the second aorist (émaayev, 
l. 3; etpav, 1. 13; e€€Baday, 1. 14; &c.), and o into the conjugation of dvvayar 
(d0vovrat, 1. 5); the confusion of perfect and aorist (jpxay, -ev, ll. 12, 36, for jpar, -ev ; 
cf. the ending in 7A@acw) ; the accusative ending -av for -a (warépay, |. 52) ; the fond- 
ness for rod with the infinitive in place of a subordinate clause (7 jjyépar ydp «iow Tod 
haBiv abrods adrds, 1. 59); the use of the genitive absolute for the subject of the 
sentence (éyBdvtwy adtay etpay, 1.13, but see note ad loc. ; éveBad(e)ro .. . as abrob 
anwdnwodvtos, |. 39 f.); the use of participles without a principal verb (I. 17 f.) or 
the insertion of a xai between participle and principal verb (1. 8 f.); &c. Among 
orthographical peculiarities, apart from the common confusions of « and e, « and 
at, o and w, may be mentioned: confusion of 8 and ¢ (eixa@, 1. 6); € for « 
(‘Hpaxdéov, 1. 3 f.); » for at (7, 1. 59), e« (notv, 1. 16) and v (dvoavres, 1. 19; TUpH, 
1. 50); oc for v (povdakn, 1. 44); v for B (edddun, 1. 47); p for A (mpoepbiv, 1.17) ; the 
omission of y from the combination yy or yk (dvayida, 1. 5; mapnytdar, |. 22 ; 
nvekev, Il. 40, 42); &c. 

It remains to determine the date of the letter and the circumstances in which 
it was written. Athanasius was clearly at the time in actual possession of the 
see of Alexandria, and the letter therefore cannot have been written during one 
of his periods of exile. On every ground, as will be seen from what follows, we 
may further exclude his later tenures of the see, after his return from his third 
exile. The period, however, between his second and third exiles.may also be 
ruled out; for though during the earlier part of that period he enjoyed compara- 
tive tranquillity, it is not very likely that, with bitter enemies intriguing against 
him and under an Emperor unfriendly to him personally and of notoriously 
Arian sympathies, he would give a handle against himself by instituting or 
permitting such proceedings as 1914 reveals. The date of the letter must fall 
therefore before March 19 of A.D. 339 or 340,” when the second exile began. 
But it is possible with practical certainty to narrow the period yet further. It 
seems clear from several passages of the letter that though Athanasius still 
possessed power enough not only to instigate but even (if the wording of Il. 42-8 
can be taken literally) himself to carry out measures against the Meletians, yet 
his position was far from secure, and he felt himself seriously threatened. There 


+ Sozomen (iii, 21) states that after his return from his second exile Athanasius ots peév 
éyva Ta Apetov ppovoivras, kueidev, ois dé abros edokivace, ras exkhyolas emerpee, kal THY TicTw 
ris év Nixaia ovvddov; and it was said (Aéyerac) that even ex route for Egypt he took similar 
steps in other provinces, which was made a ground of accusation against him. But the 
letter of the Oriental Council of Sardica (Hilary of Poictiers, iv, p. 54 f.) shows that the 
reference in the second sentence and probably that in the first should really be to the return 
from the first exile. Even if anything of the kind occurred after the return from the second 
exile, such measures were very different from those referred to in 1914. 

2 For the question of date see Lauchert (who chooses 340), p. 152, note 124. 


[1914] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 55 


is no trace in our tradition of such insecurity during the early years of his 
episcopate, and indeed it is very unlikely that till their alliance with the Eusebian 
party the Meletians were strong enough to constitute a real menace. This 
alliance was probably not formed till late in 330.1. Hence we may regard the 
latter part of 330 and Easter of 340 as the extreme limits of time for our letter. 
Parts of this period are, however, ruled out. In consequence of the accusations 
of the Meletians Athanasius was summoned to court, probably towards the end 
of 331, and did not return till after Easter of 332. Again, he left Alexandria on 
July 11, 335, to attend the Synod of Tyre; and since he was banished after it, 
he did not return till Nov. 23, 337. Now, though our letter_is itself_undated, it 
does date certain of the events it records. Isaac’s visit to Heraiscus occurred on 
Pachon 24 (May 19); Athanasius banished the bishops on Pachon 27 (May 22); 
Heraiscus was imprisoned till Pachon 28 (May 23). It is quite clear that the 
letter was written shortly after the events recorded, i.e. late in May or early in 
June. Hence the possible years, befor nasius’s first exile, are 331, 332 

Bee a4, . The fact that 1918 is dated in makes it ‘preferable to_ place 
1914 also before the first exile rather than after it, but this consideration is not 
in itself decisive, and we must consider whether any evidence can be discovered 
in the letter itself to justify a nearer dating. 

The situation revealed is roughly as follows: Athanasius was anxious and 
despondent, partly in consequence of reports which reached him from abroad. 
Among these was one concerning a Macarius, whom apparently the Emperor 
had ordered to be taken into custody. A certain Archelaus, a second person 
whose name is lost, and Athanasius son of Capito, a priest already known to us 
from Athan., Aol. c. Ar., set out from Egypt with the intention of carrying off 
(anoondca, 1. 34) Macarius, i.e., apparently, of delivering him from justice, and 
also bearing defamatory letters against an Alexandrine named Heraiscus ; but 
‘Apa Johannes’, hearing a report of this at Antioch (see, however, 1. 34, n.), 
came and seized them and placed them in custody. The news of Archelaus’s 
imprisonment caused Athanasius great despondency. He was contemplating 
(apparently, from 1. 38, as a result of repeated summonses) going abroad, and had 
actually embarked his baggage, but could not make up his mind to the step, and 
had removed his baggage from the ship. Nevertheless, though evidently in 





1 Epiphanius, Adv. Haer., xviii, 5-6, makes the Meletians, persecuted by Alexander 
(see above, p. 40 f.), attempt an appeal to the Emperor and after their failure conclude an 
alliance with Eusebius, but he gives no date, though the word xpovorpi8ijca seems to imply 
some interval between the two events. Socrates (i, 27) seems to place the alliance after the 
letter of Constantine ordering Athanasius to receive Arius into communion (Athan., Aol. c. 
Ar., 59), whereas Sozomen (ii, 21-2) implies the reverse order. That there was no 
serious threat to Athanasius till the latter half of 330 may be inferred from a comparison 
of his second and third Festal Letters; see Schwartz, G.G.V., t911, 371, and cf. 
Lauchert, p. 41. 

2 A. Robertson, Wie. and Post-Nic. Fathers, iv, p. xxxviil, dates his departure late in 
330, but this seems improbable ; there is nothing in the third Festal Letter to imply that 
he was outside Egypt. The Kephalaion for 331 (Migne, P. G., xxvi, 1352) is wrong in 
saying that the letter for that year was written during Athanasius’s return from the court 
(this is due to confusion with Letter iv) but may be correct in the statement that ‘hoc anno 
perrexit in comitatum’. . tM 


56 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1914] 


a precarious position, he was carrying on an active campaign against the 
Meletians. The attack on Isaac, Bishop of Letopolis, and others on the evening 
of Pachon 24 is attributed not to him but to his partizans, to soldiers, and to the 
pracpositus castrorum; but 1. 29 testifies to the ‘distress’ he was causing to the 
Meletians, and in ll. 42-8 a catalogue of his high-handed measures is given. 
He had imprisoned one of the Bishops of Lower Egypt in the meat market, 
a priest of the same district in the applicitum, and a deacon in the principal 
prison, and had banished or procured the banishment of (éroljcev . .. dmodnuijoat, 
1. 47) seven Bishops ; moreover, as the imprisonment and scourging of Heraiscus 
are mentioned in the middle of this recital,.it is natural to suppose that Athanasius 
was responsible, directly or indirectly, for those measures. 

The situation strongly suggests the time immediately preceding the Synod 
of Tyre in 335. The year 331, when, as we have seen, Athanasius was summoned 
to court to answer the charges of the Meletians, would suit the references to his 
impending but delayed departure ; but we have no reason to suppose that his 
journey began till towards the end of the year, whereas the present letter was 
clearly written in May or June. On the other hand his departure for the Synod 
of Tyre occurred on July 11, which suits our letter excellently. Moreover, in 
connexion with the Synod of Tyre we hear, not indeed from Athanasius himself, 
who doubtless thought it inexpedient to mention charges which he could not 
wholly deny, but from Sozomen, of violence towards the Meletians.1_ We do not 
know indeed to what exact date these charges refer, but it is natural to suppose, 
with Schwartz,? that after his return from Nicomedia in 332, fresh from his 
triumph over his accusers and fortified by a letter from the Emperor, he thought 
it a favourable opportunity to settle his account with his Meletian adversaries in 
Egypt; a settlement all the more desirable as the recent attack on him had 
shown him what a danger they might become. He seems to have followed up 
his return from his first exile with a vigorous offensive against his enemies,® and 
analogy suggests that he acted similarly after his return from court in 332. But 
if the events recorded in 1914 occurred after 332 (and 332 itself is ruled out, for 
he cannot have contemplated going abroad again in May or June of that year), 
the reference to his intended departure points clearly to either 334 or 335. 
Athanasius was summoned to the Synod of Caesarea, as 1918 shows, in February 
or early March, 334, but refused to attend on the ground that the assembly was 
biased. He may have hesitated before coming to this decision, but our authorities 
do not state this, and the end of May is rather a long time after the summons. 
Even on this ground then it seems better to place 1914 in 335, before the Synod 


' See above, p. 47, note 2. The letter of the Oriental Council of Sardica, there referred 
to (note 3), may be quoted: ‘ Accusatus praeterea est de iniuriis, violentia, caede, atque zpsa 
episcoporum internicione [ Arsenius]. Quique etiam diebus sacratissimis paschae tyrannico 
more saeviens duczdus |cf. 1914, g | atque comitibus iunctus, quique propter ipsum adzguos in 
custodiam recludebant, aliquos vero verberibus flagellisque vexabant, ceteros diversis tormentis 
ad communionem eius sacrilegam adigebant’, &c.; so too §7: ‘in episcoporum exitiis 
innocentiumque fratrum persecutione horrendus’. On these charges see Fr. Loofs, Theol. 
Studien und Kritiken, 1909, 287 f. 

2 G.-Gs LV, 1911, 874. 

* Sozomen, iii, 2, 5; Hilary of Poictiers, iv, p. 55. 


[1914] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 57 


of Tyre, especially as we know that Athanasius decided to appear at the latter 
only after long hesitation and under strong pressure.1_ But there is an additional 
argument. In ll. 30-2 (see note) there is apparently a reference to the arrest of 
Macarius, whom we know to have been seized and placed in chains on the 
Emperor’s order as a preliminary to the Synod of Tyre. Several other pieces of 
evidence make a date before that Synod extremely probable, though they do not 
definitely favour 335 as against 334. The two persons (other than Athanasius 
himself) who can be identified with certainty are Isaac, Bishop of Letopolis, and 
Athanasius son of Capito. The former (l.6,n.) clearly played a prominent part at 
Tyre and in the events leading up to the Synod, and the latter (1. 33, n.) was exiled 
at or after it. Moreover, the ‘Apa Johannes’ of I. 34 (see note) is probably to be 
identified with the Meletian leader John Archaph, and it is natural enough to find 
him at Antioch in either 334 or 335. He was:exiled after the Synod of Tyre. 
Finally, the Archelaus who attempted with two confederates to rescue Macarius 
may be a person of that name mentioned by several of our authorities in con- 
nexion with the Synod of Tyre. There are considerable difficulties in this, but, as 
suggested in the note on |. 32 f., there may have been a confusion between an agent 
of Athanasius called Archelaus and an Imperial official of the same name. 

The last argument is, no doubt, extremely dubious, but the others are 
weighty, and the general result of the discussion is to make it highly probable 
that 1914 is to be dated May-June, 335. The letter thus, and indeed in any 
case, acquires great historic interest as giving us new light on the events which 
preceded the Synod of Tyre; and its value is the greater because it comes from 

‘the Meletian side, whereas, the Catholic party having eventually triumphed, the 

literary tradition chiefly ? represents their standpoint. We are now enabled to 
see the other side of the picture. It was always suspicious that Athanasius, 
while dwelling on the charges concerning the chalice and Arsenius, which he 
could refute, says nothing of those which accused him of violence and oppression 
towards the Meletians. The reason is now clear: these charges were in part 
true. That he was himself responsible for the violence of the soldiery on the 
evening of Pachon 24 Callistus does not state, and it is not probable; but we 
may doubt whether he took much trouble to prevent such outrages, and he is 
definitely charged with imprisoning the schismatics and with other high-handed 
measures. Very important too is what Callistus tells us of the attempt to carry 
off Macarius. He does not indeed allege that the three would-be kidnappers 
were commissioned by Athanasius, but he does state that Athanasius was very 
despondent when he heard of Archelaus’s arrest, and it is hardly conceivable that 
the confederates can have acted without at least his tacit consent. We must 
conclude that there was a germ of truth in the picture given of Athanasius by 
his enemies as a self-willed, unruly man, apt to treat even the Imperial authority 
with contempt. 

1 Sozomen, ii, 25: pera d€ raira opodpdtepoy BracGeis jeev eis Tipov; Athan., Apol. 
c. Ar., 71, uo dé ypder [i.e. Constantine] cai dvdykny émitiOnow date Kal dkovras Has 
amooreAdeo bat, 

? Not entirely ; e.g. Epiphanius obviously used, among others, a source favourable to 
Meletius ; and Hilary of Poictiers has preserved the letter of the Oriental Council of Sardica. 
We have, too, fragments of the Arian Philostorgius. 


58 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1914] 


Yet it must not be forgotten that the letter of Callistus also is an ex parte 
statement. The facts he relates can hardly be doubted, but they may have had 
a justification which he does not allow to appear. And in any case it would be 
unfair to found on these and similar facts a general condemnation of Athanasius, 
though we admit faults in his character and errors in his conduct. Both sides 
were tarred with the same brush: the leaders of both were for the most part 
conspicuously lacking in the virtue of Christian charity towards their opponents ; 
both were apt to be disingenuous in their controversial methods and, while very 
quick to complain of persecution when it was directed against themselves, quite 
willing to practise it against others ; and both were prepared to accept the help 
of the secular authority, though they denounced any reliance upon it by the 
opposite side. A fair and critical judgement between Athanasius and _ his 
Opponents must rest on a consideration, not of such details, but of total 
personality and of the main issues at stake. 


1 T@ ayamn7@ adehdO ama Ilainod kai IaraBeir mpeoButépois Kéad- 


Atoros €v 
2 K(upl)@ 6(€) xaipev. Tivooxw tpads Oéd\ope Tra mpaxdévta 
evTadba 


4 a 2 4 ~ > - io , 4 “2 lon ‘\ 3 a Bb] lod 
3 mpdypata eEddiva yap nkovoate Ta emdOapey ev TH vuKTi exivn Ev TH 
oikia ‘Hpa- 
& 
4 KA€ov Tod KOo(u)uevTapynoiov. Hiciv yap kai Ties adeApol ex TeV €d- 
[Olévrwy mpos bas 
? € ~ 2 ~ A ‘\ 4 \ > Mt \ a < ca 
5 MeO Hudy ev TH oixia Kal Sbvovrar Kal adroi Ta mpayOévta [d]uiy 
avaylyyika. Mera 
6 yap tiv npuépav éxivn(v) ev 7H T{p}erpdde Kai eixdge tod ITay[oly 
pyvos “Ioak 
2 , lot SY rT 
7.6 emtoxoros amo Anrods ndOev mpos “Hpaeioxov ev ‘Adeg~alvdplia, Kal 
nOéANGEV . 
8 yevoarOat pera Tot émickdmov ev TH TapeuBorAn. “Akotvcav[re]s ody of 
Stagépov- 
> nan na 
g tes APavaciov Kai 7rOacw dhépovtes pel’ éEavTdv orpatidras Tod dovKds 
Kal THs 
lan 3 
10 mapepPorrs, olvépuevor HAOacw dpa evdtn ouvKrAicavTes Tiv [wlapeuBorArnv 
Va 
Povddpe(vor) 
11 Kal avTov Kai Tods addedpods midcat. ‘AkotcavTes ody TIVés oTpaTLoTaL 
[olé ev 7TH mapeuBorR Kai 
, ~ a 2 a ¥ bx ‘\ la cal 
12 poBov Oeod exovres ev TH Kapdia npkay adrods Kal expupav ev Tais 
7 2 lal a. 
KédAAaLS EV TH Tapeu“BorA 
NY d ms e 
13 Kal éxivay pn evpeOévtov éyBdvrwv adbtav ebpav técoapes adedpods 
épxopuévous €v TH Ta- 
an \ 
14 peuBorn, Kai Katakowarvres avdtovds Kai éwapdes Toinoduevor doTE avTovs 


kivduvetoat Kai eféBarav 


[1914 | THE MELETIAN SCHISM 59 


15 avrovs em ths Nixorddews. Kail pera (rd) rovrous éyBadiv admhdOaow 
mad emi thy mwbAnY Tob 

16 “Hdiov év ti pov ev A holy émigevotdpevor of adeApol Kai midcavtes 
ddXous mévtn ek ei(p)Eav 

17 avrods év TH mapeuBorAH dias, Kal cuvKdLcartes adtods péypis Tod 
T[0\y mpatmrécirov mpoepbiv 

18 €y Tots ciyvors 7d mpds mpoel Kal AaBov adTodvs 6 mpaimécitos Kal 6 
akpiBas Kai adrovs éxédev- 

19 gev eyBrnOivat exros THs Nuixomddrcws: Kal tov povdpiy ‘Hpaxdjédnv 
dvjcalvres kai bBpioavres 

20 evétiAay TO adTO émamidovpevot, Ste “Kata motav ériay rods plolvaxods 
tov Medttiavey 

21 jacas ev TH povp;” Kal drdov adeddoy “Appova dvta ev TH Tapep- 
BlolAn [Klat adrov dmodeydpevor 

22 Tovs adedAgods ouvéxricay ev TH mapeuBorn, Tmaphy(y)iAav 6€ aitod dare 
Hy vmo0déxec Oar av- 

23 Tov povaxods év tH oikia ad’tod. “Addos yap addedpos ovK Eorw f ph 
ob[Tot of] Sto vrodéyopmevor Tods 

24 addeAgovs: emoincay avrods SiravOAvar. OABopucda ody wavy diecplypé|vor 
UT avTeaY KaTa& T6- 

25 mov. “EnidoirovpeOa ovy f{ovy} dre ovK émitpérovow iiv mpos [dv] 
wdnav ‘Hpaeioxoy amedOiv 

26 Kal émioképacba abrov. "Ev ty vukti yap év 9 bBpicOnoay of adeddol 
6 mpaimlooitos Tav oTpaTLoT@y emrep- 

27 ce pdow 7TH émtoxim@ éyor bri “ Hpdptyca Kai érapuvHOnvy ev tH 
vukTi Ott Tovs adergovs 

28 bBpica”. 'Eroinoey dt kal aydrny év éxivyn TH hpépa Edgy oy Sua] 


Sy ¢ 6, ad 2 a4 
TO GpapTHM“a O ETroincer. 


In the left margin, from top to bottom of the papyrus: 


29 Adavdows dé peyddws aOvpt Kai adtos mapéxe tulv Kdpatoy did Ta 
ypagddpeva Kal Tas 

30 pdows Tas Epxomévas avz7[@| a[mwo] ewer, emidy 6 Plalotheds Maxdproy 

(in Bo y 2 a 
evpav ew ev TO 
4 ef 

Bi KOplOd|T@......+-++.++5+-lupo ypdrbas [.....|. avvous dre dijoas 
avtov Kal. em 

Ba OUT OS ne oo hae ee os ce PUVA TOL A.) (a oa ee OEOle . ArreA bor T@P 
ouv “Apxedd- 


33 ov To [...-..-kal......J. werd Adar[aciov roj6 viod Karirwvos, 


60 


34 


35 


36 


37 


38 
39 


42 
43 
44 


45 
46 


47 
48 


49 


5o° 


51 


52 


53 


54 


55 


THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1914] 


Verso: 


Sy 4 > 4 
Bovr6uevor arroomdce Maxdpiov, } pdots odv amedOny mpos dma Iwdvyny 
2 > 4 
ev Avtioxia: 
c 
> - \ 
nrOev Kal mdocas avrovs Katécyey avrovs, émdr) éml ouKopavi7ia kal 
Owe joav ypdipav- 
’ “ a la 
tes kata ‘Hpacicxov, kai adros Apxédaos Ta y(p)dupata npKev fo. 
‘O eds obv émoinoey 
Kai Tovs tpis é€m Kal éxe eo. Toor obv ikovoev Abavdotos drt 
2 . , 
Apxéraos 
ouvecxéOn, mévu dOvpet ABavdowos. TloAAax@s odv 7HAOav emt 
avrov Kal péxpis viv ov amedhunoer eveBddoro dé] Ta oKetdNn avdToU 
évy TH Oa- 
Adoon as adtod dma@dnpobvTos, Kal mdédwv eis SedTEpov ively)Kev TA oKEDH 
adm6 Tob mrolov, pip BovAduevos alrlodnuylc|als] ......-. War.. 
eyplalwe iva 3 
yvotrar év mola Odie éeopév: ively)kev yap émioxomoy THS KéTw ydpas 
kal ovvéxrAiwev adtov év TO pakéAdAw, Kal mpeaBiTEpoy TaY avTaY pEpav 
t B oc) Pps . se Epo! li P 
7 \ > X\ > lal 2 vg ‘\ , > n~ ve 
guvéxricey Kai avToy évy 7@ amdtkit@ Kal didkova ev TH peyloTy 
mn lad \ 7 
Porrakh, Kal pmexpls 
THs oyddns Kal eikddos Tot Ilayav pyvos kal ‘Hpaciocxos ovvKek\opé- 
vos é€ativ évy Tn BorAn—evyapicT® ue 6 eam 6e@ dtt 
n tapeuBorn—evdxapicT® ev 7O Oeomdrn d | 
3 - £ 
erravOnoav € mAn- 
Noa a NITES ane , Niage pins 2 b) 7 ) 2 4 s) 
yal as eixev—xai emi TH évddun Kal eiKddr erroinoey éEmioKdmrous EmTa arodn- 
pica “Ews kat Ilérpos «is advrots éoriv, vids TouvBéoris, Mi dpe- 
Anonrat ovv 
mept huav, ddedXpor, ér1dH Ta Wopia adjkav dnicw, iva dia Tov éni- 
oKoTOY [Ln- 
oy oy ~ e kext > ‘ By > ~ > aN X a 4 Ba 
mos wo apOn iva tupn atta per’ attod. “Eyo yap ayopd¢wv a&prous 
els Ola- 
Tpopivy nydpaca aptdéBnv cirov (raddvrwv) id, ‘Endy ody etpnra 
) ee > 
elOnpova ato- 
atihaTé pot orAlya wWopula. Aomdgoye tiv marépay pov IIpavotiy kal 
mavTas TOUS 
> ~ 
adehgovs Tovs dvtas pet adTod Kai O€ova roy dudkova Kai Yamplova 
kat ‘“Qpiova 
kal IIamvotrw kal dra Sapydrny kai Wadpw cat Ilibp cai Evdaiwova 
kal dma Tpidova 
kal Tepévriv kai dma ‘lépaxav cai dma “Edevdv kat dra Apnoty kai 
dma Iau kat Kopyyidw 
kat IIicdriv cat Koddobd0ov kai "Iwonm cai ra madia avtod Kai ives. 


Mi apedjons ovv, 


[1914] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 61 


57 warTnp, amootikat mpos Vaciv amd Tepot evexev ths aptaéBns rod airou, 
Kal moinoov 

58 Tovav amd Tapotpw iva kai avrtos amédOn cis Tapotpm Evexev ris 
apTtaBns tod airou: 

59 1) 1mepac yap «iow Tod AaBiv adrodvs avtds. Aomdfoue IIabdov tov 
avayvéornvy Kal ara 

60 °"Hdiayy Kal ‘AvovBav péyav kai ‘AvovBav juxpov Kai Iapotri kal 
Tirotny kai ta matdia advrod Kal “Op 

61 amd Tovpvaxay kai mdvtas rovs ddedgods adrod tods per adTod Kal 
Ilamvotri Kai Aeo- 

62 vidny tov adeApoy alvjr[od] Kai Tov adeApdy Tov GAAov Tov per’ adbTor. 

At the foot, the opposite way up : 
63 “Alma ITanod Kai ILaraBeir] [7(apa)] Ka(A)Aiorov. 


I. maimod (the stroke of a is extended through the « to 0, making it appear like y or r), 
maraeir, Kal AvoTos. 2. 1. ywaookew, — 3. Probably exivn; 1. exeivy (so |. 28). 
]. “Hpaknetov. 4. Upas. 5. 1. dvayyeiha. 6. 1. exelynv, cixads. toak. 
7. 1. “Hpaicxov (and so in every case), ’AdeZavdpeia. 8. yevoarba; the stroke is 
perhaps accidental. g. 1. orpatiras. 10. 1. oivdpevor, cvykdeivavtes (so 1. 17). 
TI. 1. orpari@ra. 12. KeN Aas. 13. 1. ékeivar, téooapas. 14. |. aiwappdes; see 
note. 15. 1. Nexomddews, éxBareiv. 16. I. eiciv, wévre, éxet. aN’ Aovs. rep: 
mpoedOety. 18. Tow oryvas. o Of mpoer corr. ; 1. mpai. 19. 1. ‘Hpakdeidny djoavtes. 
20. |. everev\ay, emamretNOUpeEvot, airtay, v of pLovaxovs corr. from « (?). ores elacas, 
pov7. aN Aov, ap pova. 22. |. ouvexhevcav, mapnyyeiday, adr. Py meri) has oi] 
svo: Hunt. 24. |. dethavOjvar (Hunt). —exp[-ype|or: Milne. 25. 1. emdumovpeba, 
amen Getv. 26. |. orpariwray ereprpev. 27. émapownOnv. 28. tn’nuepa, —XAn»y. 
29. |. ddupet, mapéxer, ypapdopeva, kdparov: Hunt. 30. 1. paces, emevdy (so Il. 35, 
49). eT. 31. KopuirdTo. 32. wa: so Il. 49, 50, 88. 33. weov. SAbele 
droondgat, amndGev, ’Avrioxeia. iway’yny. 35. I. dewa, 36. yap para. aeeelt 
rpeis. éxe: Hunt; |. exe. 39. 1. éveBadero or -Aaro, Gadao’on. 40. |. dmody- 
poovros. ive(y)xev Ta oxevn : Hunt. 41. 1. iva. 42. 1. yvoire, Odiwper. 43. 1. ouv- 
ékNevoev (so i 44). paked Ao. 44. 1. Sudkova (so 1. 53), pudak). 45. a of mayor 
corr. from o, The second « of ouvkexdiopevos corr. from Ak; 1. cuyKexdevopevos. 
A610. 47. 1. €Bddun. t of drodynpioa re-made. 48. 1.”Eyns (but see note), 
TovBecriou (-ias ?), duehnaonre. 50. |. rnp7. 51. l. nydpaca, evpyre eidnuova amooreiAate. 
52. 1. domd¢oua; sol. 59. 0 Of mpavow (see note) corr. from « or «. The writer perhaps 
began to write «ai too soon. 53. 1. O€ava. 54. 1. Evdatpova. 55. tepaxay. 
56. First A of codAovOor corr. from 7. iwonr. 57- 1. marep, amooreihat. 59. 1. ai 
(see note), AaPeiv. 61. |. Acwvidny. 62. aN dor. 


‘To my beloved brother Apa Paiéou and Patabeit, priests, Callistus greet- 
ing in the Lord God. We wish you to know the events which have occurred 
here ; for you heard at the time what we suffered that night at the house of 
Heraclius the recorder. For there were also certain brethren of them that came 
to you with us in the house and they can themselves inform you of what 
occurred. Well, after that day, on the twenty-fourth of Pachon, Isaac the 
Bishop of Letopolis came to Heraiscus at Alexandria, and he desired to dine 
with the Bishop in the Camp. So the adherents of Athanasius, hearing of it, 
came bringing with them soldiers of the Dux and of the Camp; they came in 
a drunken state at the ninth hour, having shut the Camp, wishing to seize both him 
and the brethren. So certain soldiers who were in the Camp and had the fear of 


62 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1914] 


God in their hearts, hearing of it, took them and hid them in the store-chambers 
in the Camp; and when they could not be found they went out and found four 
brethren coming into the Camp; and they beat them and made them all bloody, 
so that they were in danger of death, and cast them forth outside Nicopolis. 
After they had cast them forth they departed again to the Gate of the Sun, to 
the hostel in which the brethren are entertained, and they seized five others 
there and confined them in the Camp in the evening; and they shut them up 
till the pracpositus came out to the guard-room towards morning; and the 
pracpositus and the scribe took them and he ordered them to be cast forth out 
of Nicopolis; and Heraclides the keeper of the hostel they bound and mal- 
treated, threatening and enjoining him: ‘For what reason did you admit the 
monks of the Meletian party into the hostel?’ Another brother Ammon, who 
was in the Camp and himself receives the brethren, they shut up in the Camp, 
forbidding him to receive monks in his house. For there is no other brother 
but these two who receives the brethren; they made them play the coward. 
So we are greatly afflicted, being separated by them each in his own place ; and 
so we are troubled that they will not suffer us to depart to the papas Heraiscus 
and visit him; for on the night in which the brethren were maltreated the 
pracpositus of the soldiers sent a report to the Bishop saying: ‘I sinned and was 
drunken in the night, in that I maltreated the brethren’. And that day he had 
a service said, though he is a Gentile, on account of the sin which he committed. 
Athanasius is very despondent, and on his side he causes us distress by reason of 
the writings and the reports that come to him from abroad, since the Emperor, 
having found Macarius abroad at court, ... to —yrus writing ... that having 
bound him and...he should ...,in order that ...So Archelaus the... and 
. . . having departed with Athanasius son of Capito, wishing to carry off 
Macarius, the report came to Apa John at Antioch; he came and seized them 
and put them under arrest, because they had written vile slanders against Heraiscus, 
and Archelaus himself took the letters abroad. It was God who sent the three 
of them abroad and keeps them abroad! So Athanasius heard this news, that 
Archelaus was arrested, and Athanasius is very despondent. Often (?) did they 
come for him, and till now he has not left the country; but he had his baggage 
embarked at sea as though he would leave the country, and then again he took his 
baggage off the ship, not wishing to leave the country.... I have written to you 
in order that you might know in what affliction we are; for he carried off a Bishop 
of the Lower Country and shut him in the Meat Market, and a priest of the 
same region he shut in the lock-up, and a deacon in the principal prison, and till 
the twenty-eighth of Pachon Heraiscus too has been confined in the Camp— 
I thank God our Master that the scourgings which he endured have ceased—, 
and on the twenty-seventh he caused seven Bishops to leave the country; Emés 
and Peter are of their number, the son of Toubestis. Do not neglect us then, 
brethren, since they left behind the bread, in order that it might not be taken 
outside, on account of the Bishop, to the intent that he might keep it by him. 
For when buying loaves for our sustenance I bought at 14 talents the artaba of 
wheat. As soon therefore as you find a competent person send me a few loaves. 
I greet my father Prauous(?) and all the brethren who are with him, and Theon 


[1914] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 63 


the deacon and Saprion and Horion and Papnutius and Apa Sarmates and Paomius 
and Pior and Eudaemon and Apa Tryphon and Gerontius and Apa Hierax and 
Apa Helenas and Apa Haréous and Apa Piam and Cornelius and Pisatius and 
Colluthus and Joseph and his children and Phines. So do not neglect, my 
father, to send to Psais of Terot for the artaba of wheat, and cause Touan of 
Tamouré as well to depart to Tamouré for the artaba of wheat; for the days are 
come when they should receive them. I greet Paul the lector and Apa Elias and 
Anubas the elder and Anubas the younger and Pamutius and Titoués and his 
children and Hor of Toumnakon and all his brethren who are with him and 
Papnutius and Leonides his brother and the other brother who is with them’. 
(Addressed) ‘To Apa Paiéou and Patabeit, from Callistus.’ 


1. araBeir: greeted also in 1920, and perhaps to be identified with the HWara@aeiz[o]s 
mpesButépov ‘Inmavev of 1918, 9. For the name Mr. Crum compares W. Spiegelberg, 
Eigennamen, p. 47*, TaBeir, gen. TaBeiros. For Muijod and the various forms of the name 
see Preisigke, Mamenbuch, s.v. Waieds, and cf. too Humots, P. Oxy. xvi, 1890, 2. 

3. eapwa: eadpva or a€adpva is the modern Greek form of ¢e€aipyys, and in I, G. Rom. 
ili, 1145, 4 occurs the form e&eavys, illustrating the insertion, in the present case, of a vowel 
between ¢ and »v. 

ra: for this common use of the definite article in place of the relative see P. Oxy. xvi, 
1862, 27, 0. 

3 f. ‘Hpakdéov rod Ko(u)uervtapnoiov: Athan., Hist. Ar., 48, mentions ‘Hpdkdeds tis TO 
a€impare Kdpns as the dudkovos of the letter written by Constantius to incite the Alexandrines 
against Athanasius. This was before his third exile, a.p. 356. Since the Heraclius here 
mentioned was a Meletian and also an official (for the commentarienses see, e.g., P. Oxy. 
xvi, 1877, 2, n.), it seems by no means unlikely that he is the same person as the comes 
of 356. 

4. cio krA.: the exact sense, given the common confusion of tes and jpets, is not 
certain. _We may interpret either as ‘for there are certain brethren of them that came 
to you with you (]. tudv for nuev) in (your) house’, or as ‘ for there were (Azsforical present) 

. . with ws in (4zs) house’ (i.e. that of Heraclius). The latter seems preferable; Callistus 
may even, as Prof. Hunt suggests, have originally intended to write something like rap 
yevouevav peO nuaey ; or possibly there may be a confusion of eiow and fear (cf. the form joi, 
probably for «ioiy but conceivably for joay, in |." 16). But neither supposition is really 
necessary, in view of the awkwardness of the writer’s style. 

5. avayyyika: for the omission of the y cf. mapny:Aay, 1. 223 nvexev, ll. 40, 42. 

6. «ixatu: for the confusion of 6 and ¢ see 1786, 17, n. A specially good instance 
occurs in P, Oxy. xvi, I901, 61: Balndoy for Badigov. 

*Iodx : mentioned in the ‘brief’ given by Meletius to Alexander, Athan., Apol. c. Ar., 
71: “Ioaax ev Anrois; see M. Le Quien, Orzens Chrishanus, ii, 522, 610. He evidently 
played a prominent part in the attack on Athanasius at the Synod of Tyre, for Ischyras (the 
hero of the chalice incident), in his letter to Athanasius, excuses himself for his false 
accusations on the ground of Bias pos yevoperys, kal mAnyav émitebevo@y amd (1. vo ?| *Ioaak Kal 
‘Hpakdcidov, kal Ioadk tod THs Anrods, kal ind ray ody avrois (Athan., Afol. c. Ar., 64). He 
was also present at Tyre, where he (unless this was the other Isaac) accused Athanasius of 
violence towards him, probably with reference to the events here recorded: Sozomen, ii, 25, cai 
Evmdovs O€ kat Tayapuos, kat *Ioadak kat Axuddas kat “Eppatoy Tov aud leavyny [ Archaph ] emi oKoTrot 
mr\nyav adtod karnydpovv. He signed the letter of the Oriental Council of Sardica 
(Hilary of Poictiers, iv, p. 77). 

7. ‘Hpaeioxov: Heraiscus was apparently a person of some importance, since the 
Athanasian party thought it worth while to disseminate accusations against him, even outside 
Egypt (see ll. 35-6 ; cf.too 1. 25 f., where Callistus complains that he is not allowed to visit 
him, and 1. 45 f., where he is kept imprisoned in the camp), and it is curious that he appears 
to be unknown to all our authorities for this period. In 1. 25 he is called mamas, a word (see 
], 25, n.) which may denote either a bishop or a priest. Since in the present passage 


64 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1914] 


nOednoev is naturally referred to Isaac, in which case rod emuxérov might, in view of |. 25 f., 
45 f., be Heraiscus, one is tempted to wonder whether the latter was a sort of antipope, set 
up by the Meletians in opposition to Athanasius. It is a serious objection to this view that 
neither Athanasius nor any of the ecclesiastical historians should refer to him; and it may 
therefore be better to take mamas as ‘ priest’, to make Heraiscus the subject of 79éAncev, and to 
refer tod émuxdrov to Isaac. Even as a mere presbyter Heraiscus may have been a person 
of considerable importance (for the position of the Alexandrian presbyters see, e.g., 
E. Schwartz, G. G. WV., 1908, 366 f.), perhaps the leader of the Meletian opposition in 
Alexandria. ‘There is, however, support for the other view in Il. 48-50 (see note there), 
and we cannot exclude it. The omission of Athanasius to mention him (which is in any 
case curious) may have been deliberate, and the historians in the main depend for their 
Egyptian history on Athanasius. It is not likely that he lived in the camp, which may well 
have been a favourite place of rendezvous. There were Meletian soldiers there (I. 11 f.). 

8. yevoarOa: for the use of this word as ‘dine’, ‘take a meal’, see, e.g., Apophth. 
Patrum, Arsen. 24: adv amocxions ta OadXia cov, éOé yedoa per euov; Ammon. 10: 7Ade 
mote... €is Tomov yevoarOar; Sozomen, i, IL: «l@Oer pera Trav olkelwv emiovvanrew TH vyoTelar, 
kal es pytny nuepay yever Oat. 

mopeuBor; : the sequel shows that this was the great camp near the suburb of Nicopolis, 
for which see E. Breccia, Alexandrea ad Aegyptum (Engl. ed.), p.87, and the map at the 
end. See, however, |. 15, n., below. 

Q. kai (first): superfluous. 

otpariéras ... mapeuBodjs: i.e. troops under the immediate command of ote Dux and 
soldiers quar tered in the camp itself. 

10. pa evdty: in the second and third, and evidently still in the fourth, century the 
fashionable hour for dinner; cf. P. Oxy. 110, 111, 523,927, 1755. In Oxy. 1485 (second 
or early third cent.) and 1214 (fifth cent.), however, we find the seventh hour, in Oxy. 1486 
and 1487 (third to fourth cent.) the eighth ; but as Grenfell and Hunt remark (Oxy. 1484-7, 
intr.), the difference may be due only to the change in the time of sunrise. 

11. [o|é: though o is lost and little of « remains (the foot only), the reading is practically 
certain; [7#|v is impossible. 

12. jpxav: cf. 1. 36. The word must be from aipe, a confusion of perfect with aorist ; 
cf, Jannaris, §§ 1861, 1870-5. 

keddats : for the meaning ‘ store-chambers’ see F. Luckhard, Przvathaus, 65 f., and the 
instances there collected. 

13. éeyBdvrwr aitav: probably this refers to the Athanasians, who were apparently leaving 
the camp when they met the other Meletians entering. Thus ¢ySdvrav airéy is used for 
éyBavres. ‘This is preferable to referring the words to the concealed Meletians: ‘when they 
could not be found (for they had gone out).’ 

epxovenous ev «td.: for the confusion of the prepositions of motion and rest ao e.g. 
1334, 7, n.; Ghedini, p. 314. 

14. Renae res: cf. e.g., Athan., Hest, Ar., 55: ra O€ tov mapOdver ayia c@para KatéKomTov 
mhyyats. 

évapmes: perhaps merely an ignorant blunder for aipdéppous, but a form ending in -péns, 
though apparently not recorded, seems possible. 

15. Nukorddews: everything shows that the camp and Nicopolis were in close connexion 
(see ], 8, n.); indeed they might be synonymous, but it is natural to identify the camp with 
that of which remains existed till recently (see Breccia, doc. cz#.), which was outside Nicopolis 
proper, and nearer to Alexandria, on the coast. Possibly the camp or Nicopolis had by the 
fourth century been so extended that they joined, At all events it seems clear that 
‘ Nicopolis’ was also used as the name of the whole area within which the camp was situated. 

15 f. emt ryv mvAny rod “HNiov:; this was the great east gate of Alexandria, corresponding 
to the Gate of the Moon on the west. 

16, porn: regularly used at this period (e. g., Athan., Afol. c. Ar., 67 : Hivvns mpeoBurepos 
povns Treweyxtpkews) aS ‘monastery’; but it also frequently had the sense of mamnszo, i.e. 
a hostel or lodging for the night, for the use of travellers, and hence came to mean ‘stages’ 
of a journey; e.g., Athan., Apol. c. Ar., 29: of dmd rpidkovra kai €& povdv év *Avtioyeia 
vopdoarrés twa ws énioxonov févov. The mention of the povdpuos (1. 19, n.) perhaps favours 
the second sense. It seems not improbable that in SB. 5748, 6 povis is to be taken in the 
same sense rather than, as Preisigke understands it (SB. ii, p. 367), ‘ monastery’. 


[1914] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 65 


noiv: probably, as stated in the critical note, for eoiv, « and 7 being pronounced alike, 
but a past sense would be equally appropriate, and it is conceivable that joav was in the 
writer’s mind ; cf. 1. 4, n. 

adepoi: i.e., as throughout, the Meletian monks. 

17. mpamdourov: i.€., no doubt, the pracpositus castrorum, for whom see Wilcken, 
Grundaiige, p. 407; Cod. Just., i, 46, 43 xii, 59, 8. 

18. éy rvis atyvos: cf. P. Lond. 413, 12, 16 (ii, p. 301 f.), passages which show that the 
signa, no doubt the centre or other part of the camp where the szgwa or standards (see 
W. Smith, Dict. of Gr. and Rom. Ant., s.v.; R. Grosse, Rim. Militirgesch., p. 232 £.) were 
kept, included store-rooms. We know that at an earlier time the eagles and apparently even 
the segna (Tacitus, Ann., i, 39) were sacred’and were used on occasion as sanctuary. It is 
not unnatural that the place where they were kept should come to be used for purposes of 
storage, and perhaps became a sort of camp head-quarters. The present passage proves 
further the presence at the signa of a guard-room or military prison (or at least of an apart- 
ment which could, on occasion, be used as such), and is thus important as clearing up 
a hitherto unexplained use of crestom in Coptic as prison’. For this use see Crum, Ca/al., 
no, 1224, where in an imprecation the writer hopes that his enemy may ‘be friendless in the 
civstom’; Short Texts, 389, where, in a letter full of complaints, the writer declares: ‘they 
confined me in the crenon’ ; F. Rossi, Wuovo codice copto, p. 88 f., where a (military) martyr 
is confined in the cieston; 1709, 88, maranosoc Mtrticsemtuit, ‘the deacon of the prison’ 
(this, rather than ‘ prisons’, as Thompson translates, is perhaps the true rendering in view 
of the Greek ciyva). Mr. Crum quotes an instance of ovyvopvAa€ in an ostracon (Monastery 
of Epiphanius, Part II, p. 201, no. 177) which he is editing for the Metropolitan Museum 
of Art, New York. From estitom no doubt comes the Arabic stjn, ‘ prison’ (A. A. Bevan, 
Vol. of Or. Stud. pres. to E. G. Browne, p. 71, accepts this derivation, suggested by Crum). 
The succession of meanings is then: standard (ségnum), place where the standards are kept, 
including guard-room (szgna, cia), prison (ciyva, cremon, stn). 

gxpiBas: no doubt a military scribe, on the staff of the praepositus. éxédevoev doubtless 
refers only to the latter. 

19. povdpw: the word appears to be new. As to its meaning there is hardly room for 
doubt ; the povdpios was clearly the keeper or porter of the pov. Though povdptos does not 
seem to occur elsewhere, reference may be made to G. Loewe, Corp. Gloss. Lat., v, 423, 
‘ Mansionarius hostiarius qui custodit edem’, and cf. the common word mapapovdpios (Crum). 
Mansionartus and rapapovdpws refer to the custodian of a church or the porter of a monastery, 
and such may be the sense of povdpios here, in which case porn means ‘monastery’; but 
Heraclides seems to have had complete authority to receive or reject visitors, and there is no 
reference to any superior (cf. ll. 20-1, 23-4) ; hence ‘ hostel’ and ‘ keeper of the hostel’ are 
perhaps likelier. 

24. énoinoay xrh,: i.e., all the others had been intimidated into refusing hospitality to 
the Meletians. ; 

25. As appears from Il. 44 ff, Heraiscus was imprisoned in the camp, at least till 
Pachon 28. Perhaps this was why Callistus was unable to visit him ; or, if we suppose that 
he was released on the 28th and that this letter was written later, it may be that the con- 
dition of his release was that he should hold no communication with the other Meletians. 
As pointed out above (I. 7, n.), the use of the word mdzas is interesting. According to the 
established usage (which goes back at least to the thirteenth century), the word, when 
perispomenon, denotes a priest, when paroxytone, the bishop of one of the patriarchal sees 
(Alexandria, Rome, &c.), but as A. Deissmann, Licht vom Osten‘, p- 1867, points out, this 
is ‘wohl gelehrte Spielerei’. For the early use of the word in both senses see Deissmann, 2. ¢.; 
Harnack, Stagsber. d. Kon. Pr. Ak. d. Wiss., 1900, 990-1; P. M. Meyer, on P. Giss. 55, 
p.92f. It was still in the fourth century (and far later in the petitions in the liturgy, though 
one may call this an archaism ; Crum) specially used of the Bishop of Alexandria (e. g., 
in the letter of Ischyras, Athan., Afol. c. Ar., 64: paxapio mdna “A@avacio; YI: 6 mamas 
"AdéEavdpos), but it also occurs of a village priest, as in P. Lond. ii, 417 (= Wilcken, Chrest. 
129), 3: Kadp mdmas ‘Epyourédews. There is therefore no objection to translating it ‘ priest ’, 
except that mpeoBvrepos is elsewhere used in that sense, which suggests that mémas here 
means the Bishop of Alexandria, and, as pointed out in the note on 1. 7, this finds some 
support in Il. 48-50. 

28. éroincev kth.: the division (’EAAyy dv) and interpretation are due to Prof. Hunt. 

F 


66 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1914] 


For ‘E\Ajves as = ‘pagans’ see, e.g., Athan. Azst. Ar., 55-8, and many other 
instances. 

29-32. dia Ta ypapopeva might well, in the Greek of this writer, mean ‘by his writings’, 
which gives excellent sense, and would furnish a parallel to Athan., H/zst. Ar., 30, where the 
enemies of Athanasius complain airés pév odv dn memAnpoxe TA TavTayod ypapov Kab’ nudv; 
but this does not accord with ras dda... %éwbev. We must therefore take did in the 
correct sense as ‘owing to’, and suppose the writer to mean that Athanasius’s proceedings 
against the Meletians were measures of revenge or self-defence, due to reports of the 
campaign against him which was being carried on abroad; eo, ¢€@6ev seem usually in this 
letter to mean outside Lgyp/, i.e. ‘abroad’, Hence the clause emd) «rd. should be an 
explanation of what precedes, stating what it was that had roused Athanasius’s resentment 
or suspicion. The mutilation of ll. 31-2 is particularly unfortunate, because the passage 
is crucial for the understanding of the situation implied in the letter. The general sense is 
clear: the Emperor, making some discovery concerning Macarius, wrote to somebody to 
arrest him (or another), in order that further action might be taken; whereupon three 
agents or partisans of Athanasius set out in order to dmoomdca. Macarius. The natural 
rendering of 1. 30 is ‘finding Macarius at court’, but if adréy in 1. 31 refers to Macarius the 
ypawas is strange in that case. Moreover, if Macarius was, as is extremely probable (see 
introd.), the priest accused of breaking a chalice, he should have been in Egypt, though 
that is not absolutely necessary, since he may have gone to court on business of Athanasius 
and have been taken from there to Tyre for the Synod; but see Socrates, i, 28: kai #yeto 
pev Maxdpios 6 mpeaBurepos ex ths “AdeEavdpeias aidnpodéopios bia orpati@rixns xeipds. 
Athanasius (Agol. c. Ar., 71: kai 6 pév Makdpios Séopios dia orpatiwray méurera «is Tépov" 
enol b€ ypdder Kal dvdykny éniribnow Sore Kai dkovtas jpas dmooréAdeoOar) does not mention 
whence Macarius was taken, and his méumera.. . euot S€ ypdper is not unfavourable to the 
supposition that he was not in Alexandria at the time; Socrates's ek ris "A. may be nothing 
more than a (natural) inference. Now Athanasius (Agol. c. Ar., 60) mentions Apis and 
Macarius (Socrates, i, 27, gives the first name as Alypius) as the priests who were at court 
when the Eusebians brought forward their accusation about the linen garments and by 
whose efforts the accusation was quashed. He gives no locality; Socrates, Z. c., says it was 
Nicomedia. A Macarius, then at Constantinople, was his authority for his account of the 
death of Arius (Zp. ad Serap., 2). The name was a common one, but the priest associated 
with Apis may not improbably be identical with the Macarius of the chalice incident, and 
if so the translation ‘finding Macarius at court’ is perhaps correct, though the ypdwas is 
unexpected. An alternative interpretation is to suppose an infinitive in 1. 31 after kopsda[ro 
and to render ‘having found that Macarius had [done something] at court’, but the 
artificial order seems too literary for this writer. Is then airév to be referred to some one 
else? Perhaps to Athanasius? There is no hint in what follows that Athanasius was 
threatened with arrest, indeed the implication throughout is that he was a free agent, and 
the second supposition must be ruled out ; moreover dzoordo(at) in 1. 34 clearly means ‘to 
carry off’, in the sense of rescuing, and therefore implies that Macarius was a prisoner. 
Hence avrév is best referred to him; the Emperor’s letter may have been written later, after 
Macarius had left the court; or a written order to an official there present is not impossible. 
At all events it is clear that the Macarius here referred to was not in Egypt when this letter 
was written and improbable that he was brought from Egypt; cf. too 1]. 34, n. 

]ép@ should be an official’s name; Tapoldpo (1. 38; see note) is inappropriate. ]. avvous 
{the reading is practically certain, though avrovs is possible, and even perhaps avupous) is 
rather intractable, and the reading at the end of |. 31 and beginning of ]. 32 very puzzling. 
kataeri|ra OF karaeori|Aa can be read, but it is not very satisfactory to credit the writer with 
kara &mra (= érera), and gorda Seems quite inappropriate to the context. The letter before 
« looks like 7, but xai mém6a (= méro.6a) cannot be read. For do in 1. 32 avro is equally 
possible. ; 

32 f. ’Apxeddov: an Archelaus is mentioned by several of the later authorities (not by 
Athanasius himself) in connexion with the Synod of Tyre and the affair of Arsenius. The 
passages are: Socr., i, 29: éruxe d€ mos rod tmarikod ’Apxeddou oikéras ev kamndcl@  dkovoat 
Aeydvtav Tidy os "Apoévios 6 eySuevos avypjobar mdpertw ev Tivos oikia Kpumrdpevos (he then 
inquires and informs Ath.; shortly before the Synod; cf. Athan., Apol. c. Ar., 65: ¢yvaodn 
kpumtépevos 6 “Apoémos, THY pev apxnv ev Aiydmt@, Aourdy S€ Kal ev TUp@ madw KpumTdpevov adrov 
eSpov of npérepor); Rufinus, A. £., i, 16: ‘idque [concilium] apud Tyrum (misso e latere 


(1914] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 67 


suo uno ex comitibus, adnitente quoque Archelao tunc comite Orientis, nec non et eo qui 
Phoenicem provinciam gubernabat) congregari iubet’; 17: ‘ Archelaus, qui cum caeteris 
ex praecepto Imperatoris concilio praesidebat’ (rescues Ath. from his enemies); Vita Anon. 
Ath. (Migne, P. G., XXV), § 12: "ApxéAaov rovyapoiy dvdpa trav air@ (the Emperor) cuveotiov 
kai Gpopdpar [1]. dpoppdver 2}, dua kal Noévy@ tore Bowikns dpxovrt, kara CyTnow Tov ToLovT@Y exméureL } 
§ 14: Arch. saves Ath., fv Sé’ApyéAaos odros rod Kpurnpiou pev mpoeoras* Tada € Kal coppovérraros 
kal emtouéoraros, Kal eimeiv ikavdraros, ei d¢ mov Kat Oavdrov Séor katappoveiy érorusratros ; Photius, 
Ath. Vita (Migne, tom. ctt.), § 6: mpoyewpi¢erar rd BaowdtKdy BovAnua dvdpa ovvérrioy Kai oud pova 
*ApxéAaov bvoua, Kal abv aire rév Pouvixns dpxovra ouvedpidoa te Tots wept EboéBiov, kal. cvvd.ia- 
oxepacOa & kata tod *AOavaclov ouveckevacto ; § 7 (rescues Ath.); Metaphrastes, Ach. Vita 
(Migne, ‘om. czt.), § 7 (same account as Photius); § 8 (rescues Ath. ; fv yap kal rod Kpernpiou 
eapxos, kal ra dda emuetkévraros, Kal Suvards T@® kpatovvtt amoAoynoacOat, etrov dé Kal Oavarov 
mepippovngatr éromos), All these authorities, except perhaps Socrates, are suspect, for the 
accounts they give of the Synod of Tyre are demonstrably inaccurate in various points. In 
what they say of Archelaus it is certainly false that he was president of the Synod; that 
position was occupied by the Count Dionysius, as appears, e.g., from Athan., Afol. c. Ar., 
28, 71, 72, 78 ff, and there is nothing in Athanasius’s account to indicate that he had 
colleagues. Common to all the accounts, however, is the fact that Archelaus was a man of 
high rank, and that he was of service to Athanasius; all the authors are very favourable to 
him, except perhaps Photius (see § 7 of his Life). The Archelaus of 1914 was a partisan 
of Athanasius, and was involved in the dispute with the Meletians and Eusebians; and it is 
very tempting to identify him with the Archelaus of the literary tradition and in 1. 33 to 
read rod [émarixod. Of course if Rufinus is correct in making Archelaus Comes Orientis the 
identification is impossible, but Rufinus’s authority is small. As regards tmartxod it is an 
objection that Archelaus and his companions were arrested by ‘ Apa John’; for even if this 
is John Archaph (1. 34, n.) it is not likely that he would venture to arrest a consularts. It 
may be that our Archelaus, a partisan of Athanasius, has been confused by the writers 
quoted with another Archelaus, a consular’s and perhaps Comes Orientis. There was 
a well-known Archelaus, Bishop of Caschara in Mesopotamia, who was active in the con- 
troversy with the Manichaeans (see Hegemonius, Acta Archelat, ed. C. H. Beesen, Griech. 
Christl. Schrifist., Leipzig, 1906); but there is no reason whatever to connect him with 
Athanasius. The Archelaus 6 «duns of Athan., Vita Antonit, 61, may be identical with the 
Archelaus of the Tyre tradition, since he had connexions with Laodicea. 

33- “A@ar[aciov rod viod Kamlrwvos: the letter which the Council of Sardica (A.D. 342 
according to E. Schwartz, G. G. WV., 1904, p. 341, 1911, pp. 51 ff; on the other hand 
Lauchert, p. 55 and note 138, adheres to the date 343) addressed to the Church of 
Alexandria refers to this person in the following terms (Athan., Afo/. c. Ar., 40): &yvoper 
ru kal "A@druos Kat ’A@avdowos 6 Kamirwvos Kai Taddos xat IIhovrioy, of cupmpecBirepor judy, 
oveKeuny kal avroi mendvOacw id rdv wept EvaéBuov, Sore rods pev eEopicod metpabjvai, Tovs O€ Kat 
Gavdrov dmedas diavepevyéva; cf. § 17, ad fin., where the Synod of Alexandria (a. D. 339 
according to Lauchert, p. 50; 338 in A. Robertson, Wicene and P.-N. Fathers, iv, p. lxxxvi) 
States: kai yap kai mpeoBirepor ths ’AdeEarSpeias Tégaapes Kat’ ekeivoy Tov KaLpdy [the Synod of 
Tyre], kairou pndé eis Tépov &ehOdvres, tmepdpror map avt@v yeydvaow, Probably it was this 
Athanasius who, as a fellow-deacon with the saint, signed the circular letter of Alexander, 
Migne, P. G., xviii, 572-82. It appears from the passages quoted above that he was 
exiled at the Synod of Tyre, and it may be inferred that the reason for this was his pro- 
ceedings recorded in the text. It is by no means impossible that the third person, whose 
name is lost in the lacuna in 1. 33, was one of the three mentioned along with Athanasius 
son of Capito by the Council of Sardica. As room must be found for a name or epithet 
after rod and for kai, Havdvuv suits the space best. 

34. anoonace: see ll, 29-32, n. 

dra “lwdvyqy: it seems highly probable that this is the Bishop John Archaph, the leader 
of the Meletians after Meletius’s death; see above, p. 40, He was probably abroad at 
this time, for he was prominent in the proceedings connected with the Synod of Tyre, after 
which he was banished by Constantine. Epiphanius states that after the failure of the 
mission to the Emperor (see above, p. 41) Archaph and his companions spent some time 
(xpovorpBjca) at Constantinople and Nicomedia, where they concluded their alliance with 
the Eusebian party. As pointed out above (p. §5), this alliance cannot well be earlier 
than 330. After the first break-down of the Arsenius and Ischyras charges the Emperor 

F 2 


63 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1914] 


summoned Archaph to court (Athan., Aol. c. Ar., 70); and since he was acting in concert 
with the Eusebians before and during the Synod of Tyre it seems likely that he remained 
in Asia till it met. If therefore 1914 was written in 335 it is natural to find Archaph at 
Antioch (see however next note). That he is not called Bishop is no difficulty. In |. 6f. 
Isaac is given his title in order to identify him, but Callistus’s correspondents doubtless 
knew all about Archaph. For da applied to a Bishop see PSI. iii, 216, 4; Oxy. xvi, 1900, 
53 1967, 3 (48a in the first two cases is equivalent to da). Mr. Crum adds that dma is 
the regular and invariable use in Coptic, where it practically = 4884. It is clear from the 
context, if the punctuation adopted is correct, (1) that the three Athanasians were not at 
Antioch, (2) that they were in Asia, not Egypt, and probably not very far from Antioch. 
Macarius may already have been taken to Tyre; or possibly he was en roufe thither, i.e. 
presumably from Nicomedia or some other place in Asia Minor, and so may at the moment 
have been near Antioch; but Tyre itself is not too far from Antioch to suit the context. 
Athan., Aol. c. Ar., 17, quoted above (1. 33, n.), is however against the supposition that 
they went to Tyre. 

év *Avrioxia: it is of course conceivable that the colon should be placed after “Ioavyny, 
thus making John go ¢o Antioch; but the order this would involve is not so likely in the 
writer of our letter as that adopted in the text. 

36. kal... é&: the meaning is apparently that it was Archelaus who was conveying 
the ypdppara out of Egypt. Strictly, since jaav ypawavres refers to the three, these ypdppara 
should be their own, but it may be suspected, especially in view of |. 37 f., that they were, 
or included, letters (perhaps a circular letter) of Athanasius himself. 

36 f. 6 Oeés... a: awkwardly put, but the readings, with the exception of the two 
dotted letters, seem certain, and a reasonable sense is given if we suppose the writer to 
mean, in effect, ‘a good riddance!’ The three went abroad with a nefarious design, but 
the result was that they were arrested and unable to return, much to the inconvenience of 
Athanasius (1. 37 f.); the whole affair was really providential. 

38. Perhaps (xai) should be inserted after ouveryé6y, but the abrupt, disconnected 
clauses are not surprising in the style of this writer. 

Todays: ‘in many ways’ seems inappropriate; probably the writer had in his mind 
moANakts, 

41. BovdAdpevos: the last letter looks more like v than s, and very possibly Sovdopevov 
was written. But d{lodnui[ola{:] is likelier after it than adrod. The sentence probably 
ended with dmodnyjoa. e¢ypaya could be read at either the first or the second y, but the 
traces after the first might be » rather than a. iva seems very probable, and the general 
sense (which was suggested by Prof. Hunt) can be regarded as almost certain. 

42. jve(y)kev: evidently Athanasius is the subject. 

érigxorov: very probable, though no single letter is quite certain. ‘A Bishop’, though 
runt is not added; cf. |. 43, mpeoBurepor. 

43- pakéddo: cf., e.g., Socr., i, 38: rod évr7 orod paxéAdov; Stud. Pal., xx, 68 v., ii, 5-6: 
‘Adptaveiov kal tis ék AuBds oTOds Kal pakéAXov Kal oToas ekrds paxéhAov ; I Cor., X, 25: wav ro ev 
paxehi@ tadovpevoy éoblere. 

44. dmdixire: the word (cf, e.g. 1416, 23; 1485, 125, where the form a@myxrov is 
used) means ‘ camp’, and hence should be synonymous with zapeyBodn, but here the two 
words are evidently used with a different application. There is, however, a word dmAcccrdpios, 
which denotes a subordinate official of the commentartensts (see Joh. Lydus, De Mag., iii, 8, 
16), who was himself a member of the Ducal oficium. G. Rouillard, L’adm. ctv. de LP Egypte 
byzantine, p. 42 (cf. P. Cairo Masp. iii, 67287, iv, 1, n.) translates ‘gardien de prison’, but 
his functions, as defined by Lydus, were rather those of a tipstaff or constable ; Lydus calls 
him faSdodxes. Since however, when an interval elapsed between arrest and the opening 
of the court, some place of detention must be found for the custody of prisoners, and since 
the title dmAccerdpios in the above sense is difficult to account for if dw\ikerov meant nothing 
but ‘camp’, it is a likely inference that the latter word was also used to denote a lock-up 
or place of temporary detention. Hence the rendering in the translation. (Prof. H. Stuart 
Jones accepts the above interpretation of the word.) 

govdaky: probably a civil prison. 

46 f, ebyapioré ... etyev: apparently an interjected clause, the main sentence continuing 
at kai; hence the punctuation in the text. 


[1914] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 69 


47. emoinoev .. . awodnunoa: i.e., banished them or caused them to be banished. This 
illustrates the powers exercised by the Bishops of Alexandria. 

48. "Es ... Tov8eoris: the text is not satisfactory, but all the single letters except en 
are certain or practically so, and no alternative division of words suggests itself. The 
objections to the text are: (1) the use of a singular verb ; (2) the awkward position of vids 
TovBeors ; (3) the unusual name “Ews. As regards the last, a name "Eyny (accus.), not 
marked as doubtful, occurs in P. Fay. 37, 1 (3rd cent.), but no other instance is recorded in 
Preisigke’s Vamenbuch. The first letter might be a, as the cross-stroke has almost wholly 
disappeared, and ad could be read for »; év ois, suggested by Prof. Hunt, is impossible. In 
the ‘brief’ of Meletius occurs a Bishop KdAns év ‘Epyéby, and if we take the apparent 
rewriting of the long « in unoa as the upstroke of x, Kddvs could be read here; but the form 
of the letter would be quite unlike that of any other « in this hand. The use of éoriv for 
<iaiy is not an insuperable objection to the reading adopted, as Callistus was shaky in his 
grammar ; and the following words (referring to Peter) may be an afterthought, eds adrovs 
eoTw Can easily mean ‘is (sc. are) among them’. The name TovBéors (suggested by Mr. 
Crum in preference to rod Béorus, first read) does not seem to occur elsewhere, but is pro- 
bably confirmed by 1918 (acquired since this commentary was first written), where the 
name Iler@uBéorws (1. 7) is simply a masculine formation from the ‘feminine TovBéoris 
(I. -ria?); cf. Preisigke, Mamenbuch, s.v. Wero8dors. The name probably contains that of | 
the goddess Ubastis; cf. F. Ll. Griffith, Caz. of Dem. Pap. in the John Rylands Library, iii, 
20647 (Crum). There is a court title @éorns (= Vest’s) which occurs in later writers, 
e.g. Cedrenus, p. 760D, 7624, 771 A dzs, but the gap in time between the fourth and the 
eleventh century is so great that it is much better to read TovBéors as a name. 

Ilérpos is probably to be identified with the [érpos év ‘Hpaxdeods of Meletius’s ‘brief’. 
It is true that H. M. Gwatkin (Studzes of Arcanism, p. 711) apparently identifies the latter with 
the Hérpos who signed the letter of the Egyptian Bishops on behalf of Athanasius to 
Dionysius at the Synod of Tyre (Athan., Aol. c. Ar., 78-9), and if this is correct he must 
by then have made his peace with Athanasius, But he may have done so after, and in 
consequence of, the banishment here mentioned; and in any case the name was a common 
one. There is certainly more reason, if a choice has to be made, for identifying the Peter 
of the ‘brief’ with the Meletian Bishop of 1914 than with the partisan of Athanasius who 
signed at Tyre. 

48-50. An obscure and difficult passage, since it is by no means clear at first sight 
(1) who ra Yopia dpijxay drive, (2) who the Bishop referred to is, (3) who is the subject of 
7(n)pn, or (4) why the leaving behind of the bread made Callistus’s supply insufficient. The 
interpretation adopted in the translation and critical notes is due to Prof. Hunt. It involves 
the supposition that the order in the text is illogical and confused: what the writer meant to 
say was: ajay dmicw da tov enickoroy, iva pn ew apby dda tnpNbn per aitod. But who is 
the Bishop and how was Callistus affected by this? Prof. Hunt agrees in decisively rejecting 
the idea that toy émicxorov was Athanasius, whose election was opposed and its validity 
later impugned by the Meletians, and who is not elsewhere given the episcopal title in this 
letter. Some such explanation as the following may meet the case: The clergy, &c., of 
Alexandria seem to have been entitled to a regular (free?) distribution of bread, and 
Athanasius repeatedly complains that during the Arian domination the Catholics were 
deprived of their bread supply, e.g., Hust. Ar., 10: GArdovs edjpevor, GrAwy dprous adypodivro 
(at the time of Athanasius’s third exile); 31: [Constantius writes to the prefect] iva réws 6 
giros adbatpebf mapa ’AOavaciov, kai S067 Tots ta ’Apeiov dpovodor; cf. 2., 54, 63, Apol. de 
Juga, 6, Epist. encycl. ap. Migne, xxvi, 1338 a. This bread supply in each city was no 
doubt under the ultimate control of the Bishop ; but Athanasius may well have ignored the 
Meletian clergy. They had perhaps a special supply, managed by one of themselves ; and 
when the seven Bishops were banished, they left the bread in the hands of ‘ the Bishop’. 
If this was Isaac he may have returned by this time to Letopolis and been unable to supply 
the Alexandrian Meletians; but we have seen (ll. 7, 25 nn.) that there is some evidence for 
supposing Heraiscus to have been a Meletian anti-pope. This passage gives the idea 
further support. To take him as roy énickomoy suits the context excellently and removes all 
difficulty as to Callistus’s request for bread. The sequence of thought is then: Heraiscus 
has been imprisoned till the 28th (Callistus was still unable to get at him; 1. 25), and seven 
Bishops have been banished. Therefore help us with our bread supply; for they (the 
Bishops) left their supply in Heraiscus’s hands (and it is therefore inaccessible to us) 


cd 


70 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1914] 


Schwartz, G.G.WV., 1911, 482, foot-note, infers from the words of the Egyptian Synod 
(Athan., Agol. ad Ar., 18: that the Arians were seeking rijs éxxnolas dpedeoOa rov airov TH 
mpopdce ths duaBodjs Kai ’Apecavois mapacxeiv) that the enemies of Athanasius ‘ haben sich 
wahrscheinlich tiber Versuche des Athanasius beschwert ihnen als Arianern . . . die aznonae 
zu entziehen.’ The inference is perhaps more than the words can bear, but the present 
passage may give it some support. We know (Afol. ad Ar., 18) that Athanasius 
was accused of selling for his own advantage (mumpdoxov kai els rd tcov dmopepsuevos) COM 
given, under a bequest of Constantine, to the widows of Libya and Egypt; and it is also 
noteworthy that the accusation which, after the attack at the Synod of Tyre had broken 
down owing to his appeal to Constantine, led to his first banishment, was precisely that of 
threatening to hold up the Imperial corn fleet (Aol. c. Ar., 87). It is a little surprising 
that Constantine, who had received ample proofs of the sharp practices of the Eusebian 
party, should have instantly credited this new accusation and banished Athanasius unheard 
(Joc. cet.), if there had been no foundation for the charge. 

51. For the prices of wheat at this period see A. Segré, Crrcolazione monetaria, 
pp. 104-5. The certainly dated rates there given advance from 1 tal. 4,000 dr. in 314 to 
24 tal. in 338 (the reference should be to P. Oxy. i, 85, col. iii = Lond. 760), with rates of 
40 (misprinted ‘ 20’) and 26 tal. from two undated Rainer papyri. The present rate was 
clearly regarded as high; but the value of the coinage was dropping very rapidly at this 
time, and a rise from 14 talents (and that a high price) to 24 between 335 and 338 is quite 

ossible. 

‘ 52. Upavotv: probably the same name as the Ipaois (which Preisigke, Mamenbuch, s.v., 
equates with Ipoois) of P. Oxy. vi, 996 (a.p. 584); cf. Oxy. xvi, 1896, 9 (A.D. 577); 1941, 
2 (fifth cent.), and see too Crum, Ca/al., no. 557, mpay, and note there. The third letter 
could equally well be read «, but the a of y#pas in 1. 42 is very similar. Apparently Prauous 
was the head of a community of Meletian monks. He is Zerhaps identical with the Ipeots 
of 1918, 10, 20, but see note there. Several of the names which follow occur in the records 
of this period (e. g., Epiph., Adv. Haer., Ixviii, 5, mentions Madvovrids tis péyas avip dvaxwpytis, 
Kat avTos vids duooyntpias tuyxdvev, mapayyduevos Kal aitds moods Ths épodoyias, among the 
Meletians ; see too |. 56, n., below), but identification on the score of such common names 
is hazardous, and there is no reason to suppose that any of these people were of any 
eminence. Those whose names are preceded by dma may all be regarded as priests. 

53- Qpiwva: perhaps the writer of 1917 (see 1. 18 there). Also mentioned in 
1922, 14. 

54. Uarvotrw: another person of the name occurs below in]. 61. So too there are 
two people so called in 1918, 7, 8. The second in 1918 was from Antaeopolis ; the first, 
there and here, may be the deacon of Paminpesla who occurs in 1918, ro. 

dra Tptpova: also in 1918, 4; 1921, 21. : 

55. Tepdvriov: also in 1918, 4; very likely identical with the person deputed by Pageus 
in 1913. 

dia ‘Iépaxay: also in 1916, 3; 1918, 5; 1921, 22. 

dra ‘Edevay ; the reading is probable, though the form does not seem to occur elsewhere. 
The erNe[sun of 1922, 13 appears to be identical with the 9eXemH, mother of Hor, who 
occurs in 1920, 6. 

dra ‘Apnovy: see Preisigke, Vamenbuch, s.v. ‘Apnots. The papyri quoted are both from 
the Fayum. Cf. too 1925, 19, and note there. 

56. KodAodfov: perhaps the person who occurs among the subscribers (mpoecréres) of 
19138 (Il. 18, 19). 

Dives: see 1919, intr. A Sweés was one of the Egyptian Bishops at Tyre who supported 
Athanasius (Afol. c. Ar., 79), but he is not in the least likely to be the person here 
mentioned. 

7) dueAnons «th,: though this refers to the bread supply, and in spite of the odv, it does 
not seem to be a recurrence to the subject of Il. 48-52; 1. 59 suggests that it was the 
provisioning of a community at Tamouro that Callistus was anxious about. Whether ris 
dprdBys is to be taken literally, the allowance being a single artaba, or in a more general 
sense, referring (somewhat strangely) to an allowance of any amount, is not clear. airds in 
1. 59 should refer to an amount of more than one artaba; but perhaps rijs dprdrs, if it is to 
be taken literally, indicates an allowance of one artaba per head. 

57. Yaeiv: perhaps identical with the fisherman of 1919, 30. 


we 


[1914] THE MELETIAN SCHISM at 


Tepér: no doubt to be identified wijh the Coptic tepwt, for which see Crum, Ca/al., 
mo. 1146, 5+ Krall, 177, 2; 208, 2; Hall, Copt. and Greek Texts, p. 143, no. 16, 6 
(vepwt muyoomnc); Ameélineau, Géogr. del Egypte, pp. 494-6. Hall’s tepwr is the modern 
Derfit esh-Sherif (see Baedeker, Leypt, 7th ed., p. 218), near the district-capital Derfit, close 
_ to the junction of the Bahr Yfsuf and the Ibrahimiyah Canal. It is the latter Derfit which 
is perhaps to be identified with tepwt alone. Our Tepér may be either; there were other 
places of the name (Amélineau, Z. c.), but one of the two mentioned seems the likeliest. 

58. Today: also in 1917, 11; 1918, 8. In the latter he is called dra, which shows that 
he was a priest; in the second he appears as son of Ouenaphrius. For the name see PSL. v, 
478, 2 (Oxyrhynchus) ; Oxy. xvi, 1911, 66 ; and cf, Tovans, SB. 5124, 39 (Tebtunis). The 
name was borne by an obscure martyr, whose very fragmentary Acts are to be found in 
Paris copte 129", f. 80. He is probably distinct from arasu, for whom see Journ. Lg. 
Arch., iv, 68, no. 9239 (Crum). Tovdvors (SB. 5366; Cairo Masp. ili, 67288, ii, 2, 4) is no 
doubt a different name, but may be connected. 

Tapovpo: cf. Stud. Pal., xx, 103, 4 (Tayapw) and v. ([Talupep) ; 52, 5 (Taapépov) ; 
P. Hib., p. 8 (Taapépov). This village was in the Heracleopolite nome, and, as appears 
from Hib., p. 8, probably in the Coite toparchy. 

59. 7: this does not seem likely to be a numeral (though a sense ‘ for it is 8 days since 
they received them’ is conceivable), and is better taken as = ai. 

Iaddov: a priest of the name (dmé Tyér(e)ws) occurs in 1917, 11, and 6 paxdpios Tavdos 
sends greetings to Paiéous in 1919, 25. 

60. Hapotrw: probably also in 1916, 5. 

Terovnv: the reading is very probable. The nameis to be equated with the forms Ti6o7s 
(and its variants), Terojs, Teréi, Tirdis, Terode, for which see Preisigke, Wamenduch. 

“Op: a owp of Tohe in 1920, 6 is presumably different. “This may conceivably be the 
*Qpos father of Pageus and Gerontius in 1913. 

61. Tovpvaxoy: this seems likelier than tod Mvaxov. The first syllable may be the not 
uncommon Tooy (Toyw), but then praxev is difficult, and more probably we should correct 
to Tywovvaxay, a not unlikely dapsus calamz. For this name Mr. Crum refers to Eg. Expl. 
Fund, Arch. Survey, xii, Deir el-Gebrdwi, ii, pl. xxix, 4 (Phoebammon of Tmou-nakén) ; 
B. M. Coptic Room, stele 1481 (tTaxoymanwan); B.M. Add. MS. 14732, f. 118, Syriac life 
of Bishoi (Thamonikon ; no indication of locality except that it was in Egypt; kindly verified 
by Mr. E. W. Brooks). An identification with the taxoy smagwae of 1920, 1 is unlikely. 
Deir el-Gebrawi is near Manfalfit, not, therefore, very far from the probable site of our 
Terét; but as Phoebammon occurs in a list of saints it does not follow that Tmou-nakén 
was in the same neighbourhood, though Mr. Crum writes that the list seems to him ‘to 
point to Middle Egypt decidedly’. Stele 1481, a grave-inscription, cannot be localized ; 
only one of the three men of Tmou-nakém commemorated bears an uncommon name, 
viz. kKNoyas, and this name is found in the nome of Heracleopolis (Krall, 47, 2), the Fayum 
(Crum, Copt. IZSS., 45, 14, KNOTS aga asrwenc), and the nome of Memphis (Stud. Pal, x, 
297, 11, KAour¢). Mr. Crum writes that it is the ancient form of KoAdAovéos (its derivative) 
and is characteristic of Middle Egypt and the Fayum, whereas roNoyx, neNNoysa, &c., are 
the Sa‘idic forms (see his note on no. 532 in Monastery of Epiphanius). ; 

61. Tamnvovrw: see 1. 54, n. 

Aeovidny: also in 1918, 6. 

63. Perhaps (as the lacuna is not very large) only one of the recipients was named. 
Between the two lacunae are traces of ink, probably only the usual filling (crosses or the 
like) of the blank space left for the string between the two parts of the address. 


72 THE MELETIAN SCHISM 


PAPYRUS 1915.—Czrca A.D. 330-340 


Inv. No. 2544. 20:5 18-1 cm. 


Acquired in 1923. Brown papyrus, light and dark by patches. Worm-eaten along 
the top edge and in some other places, and broken and worn about the middle and at the 
foot. Written in a medium-sized, clear, sloping cursive hand, along the fibres, in brown 
ink. In places, especially in the first few lines, the ink has run, apparently owing to the 
damp which has discoloured the papyrus. Probably folded from left to right and perhaps 
then from top to bottom. 


The two following letters, though they have no historical reference, are 
specially interesting for the light they throw on social conditions. They illustrate, 
on the one hand, the life of the Christian (and particularly the Meletian) com- 
munity, in which, whatever its faults, the sense of brotherhood was strong and 
the duty of mutual charity fully realized, and, on the other, the cruel economic 
position of the Egyptian middle-class. The letters are in the same hand, having 
both been written by a certain Heriéous, and both refer to the same matter. 
1915, which, owing to its fuller details, may have been written and is here placed 
first (see intr. to 1916), was written by him individually to Paiéous alone (this is 
doubtful in 1. 1 but is confirmed by 1. 40). In 1916, on the other hand, the only 
name preserved is Mavoti[s, but since the hand is that of 1915, and Moses is 
nowhere mentioned in the latter, we must suppose Heriéous to have written 
both ; and the plural trodeéorepor in 1916, 7 points to the occurrence of his name 
in the lacuna in 1.6. Thus 1916 is a joint letter by Moses and Heriéous, and it 
is addressed not to Paiéous only but to the community generally, or at least to its 
leading members. ; 

The subject of the two letters is the sufferings of a certain Pamonthius (the 
name, lost or perhaps not mentioned in 1916, is given by 1915, 6), a member of the 
Meletian sect, as is shown by the words 6 ddeAd@ods }udv, who had been a wine-dealer 
but owing to the exactions of the dpyovres (no doubt primarily the financial officials) 
had fallen into such money difficulties that he had been compelled to borrow 
a large sum of money. Unable to pay off the debt, even though he sold all his 
property, even to his wardrobe, he had seen his children seized by his creditors 
and had apparently (see 1916, 42 f.) himself suffered arrest but had later been 
set free on bail. Heriéous and his friends, having subscribed all the money 
which they could themselves afford, now appeal to Paiéous and his companions 
to assist in raising a fund to pay off the debt and so ransom the children. 

The letters thus illustrate vividly the terrible burden under which the mass 
of the people laboured. The wide-spread, though illegal, practice of pledging 
children as security for debt (see P. M. Meyer, Furist. Papyri, p. 29; A. Stein- 
wenter, Z. d. Sav.-St., xlii, Kan. Abt, 189, and the literature there referred to) 
was the obvious means by which, in a slave-owning society, the oppressed classes 


[1915 | THE MELETIAN SCHISM 73 


sought to relieve their position. P. Cairo Masp. i, 67023 (= Fur. Pap. 12) 
furnishes a good illustration of the practice; and cf. too P. Iand. 62; Oxy. x, 
1295, 11-13; and, for an early instance (3rd cent. B.C.), PSI. iv, 424, 11-14. On 
the economic misery of the time and the burdensome nature of the taxes and 
liturgies see Wilcken, Grundziige, p. 354 f. (cf. however 1708, 29, n.) ; G. Rouil- 
lard, L’adm. civ. de PEgypte byzantine, p. 169, &c.; Bell, Fourn. Eg. Arch., 
iv, 103. In the present case there is no evidence that the debtor had pledged 
his children as security for his debt, but this is a likely, though not necessary, 
inference. 

If 1915 and 1916 be compared it will be seen that they show great similarity 
in style, the same phrases occurring in both. Heriéous was apparently given to 
repeating himself; a noticeable feature of both letters is his penchant for post- 
scripts. 


ader}pla 
II{ainobre “Epinots év] k(upi)o alpen, 
Toils €v... .|\ypOover cuppopé mapamecotou 
Bon|Oet)p mlalpla}yyértayeran npiv 6 Oetos Nbyos Tao, pddioTa 
Tois ddedgois Hudv. ’Ereidy otv 6 adeAdos Aya 


OL 


TlapavOes mepiotdécect tes {o}Tvyovoals mapa- 
x + - € Q Pt v2 > 
Tecav eaxloTa mémovbey bd avOpdmay ave- 
Aenpdvey Kal dOéwy dol[tle ws Erws eimeivy avay- 
KaoOnvat THs pakapias éAmidos u@y amrooTepn- 
10 Onvat, d0ev edénoev Huds emOcive Ov? adTa 
~ \ fe ON x 3 te 
TabTa Ta ypdppara mpos Thy ddehporyTa 
¢ ae wee A 4 a cad 
vpav, SndOoas tiv To’rov waow mpaéuv, 
4 \ € we 4 4 ’ n~ 
ivia) kai byis yvovtes oupBddrAdgcobe at7@ peuvy- 
4 ~ - > I Z AY 
pévot [To|0 waxapiov amoarojA\ov AéyovtTes Tovs 
- ~ = / 
GANA Kali] [é]v tats Ko(o)uikais m[plégeor. Odros ‘yap 6° adderdgos 
oo A 4 2B > , Apa ST ON, ty ¢ 
NE@V ETUXEV TOTE OlvoTpaTns Kal Emt TOA{A}UV 
2 ‘ ¢ X\ mn 2 ~ > ~ 4 3 La 
evoxAnbeis b1d Tay ev TH avTod marpidr dpxovTa(r) 
[[wapal| mapa riv ddvapi adjrol6 elompdr(r)eoPar Kai eK 
20 TovTov dykov apyupiov davielloduevos Kai tatra 
3 ‘\ Xx 7 x ~ X\ X 
ameTnOeis Kai pry Ovvduevos amavtav mpos Ta 
2 > 2 ¢ \ lan a 
xpewototvpeva qvaykdabn b1d Tov davicTa(r) 
madvTa T& €avToD aypl Kal Tov iwatiov TaV 
Thy aoxnpoctyny avTod TEepiokeTTacpévar 
25 moAHoal’ Kai TovT@y mpabévToy poyis Tiyv hpiovay 
Tov apyupioy TedvvnTat TEpivonoal Tos davioTais, 
a e b 2 2, oa \ BY re ie 
olrives of avedenpmoves Exeivol Kal ad0eot améotra- 


gay Ta mévra Te éEavTow Téxva vimia Kopldy. 


74 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1915] 


"Obey émitivwpev mpds dpas TavTnvi Tv Eemocro- 
a a“ a be 
30 Ajv, déodvres vplas clupBarécOar adT@ «is d edly] 
Stvacbe [Sodvle ixfa] wap’ adra[y ad]ra [arodd By] 


From top to bottom of the left margin : 
JerOar viol rob odpaviov marpds Hpuov. 


Verso : 
| GE Ors Vie. oon Tot ie oaks POUXS a per. GoU 
]. ev mdvu abtd BonOnoov émidy pddrora 
35 ]- vBn 6 adedrgos bre Apwacayv Ta réxy|a] 
[atrod lly So{Afar. Mi oby aulédnofol 72 


]. Kal mavti TpoTe. 


Lower down : 
epo. XXX Moyag MenTwWoy 
Toya’ NenTwoy 


Addressed (the reverse way up): 
40 ‘Amdd(os) ITatnodr: mpecB(utépx) XXX mapa) ‘Epinods adeddis. 


2. KO. 5, end. nuar (the line for », which however seems to be written, but perhaps 
the writer merely made a minim too many). 6. 1. HapavOrs (= -Atos), (ov) rais ruxovoas. 
7. 1. atoxuora. 8. 1. &ros.  avay'kacOnvat. 9. + Of paxapias corr. froma. 10. 1. émOetvat. 
11. Second 7 of ravra corr. from 6 (7 written above and @ not deleted). 1. adedpéryra. 
12. v Of vuor corr. from 7. |. dn\eoavras, macay. 13. iv. 1. tpeis yvdvres. 14. aroord- 
[A]ov: Gilson. 1. Xéyovros. 15. |. wiores. 16. First o of ovros corr., and a letter («?) 
was written, and has presumably been deleted, after the secondo. 18. apxovrd ; 1. dpydvrav. 
20. oy'kov. 21. 1. dmarndeis. 22. nvaykdo6n: apparently the scribe first wrote v 
(for »’x) and then wrote the « over the last stroke of vy and the apostrophe, thus correcting 
toy.  danord; |, Saveordv. 23. iuatioy. 24. avt Of avrov corr. from mo(?). 25. 1. todq- 


cat, pice. 26. 1. deduvnrat mepiroujoa, Saveotais. 28. 7 of first ra corr. from a. 
There has probably been a correction in mavra(see note). —_29.. |. emutetvoper.T ¥ 31. 1. dodvar, 
32. vio. 34. |. emesdy. 36. 1. dovdciar. 40, tainoutt. 1. ‘Epinotros adeh pov. 


‘(To the . . .] brother (?) Paiéous, Heriéous greeting in the Lord. To those 
who have fallen into ... misfortune the word of God exhorts us to give succour ; 
to all, and most to our brethren. Since therefore our brother Pamonthius, 
having fallen into no common vicissitudes, has suffered most shamefully at the 
hands of pitiless and godless men so that he is compelled, one might almost say, 
to lose our blessed hope, for which reason he besought us to make application by 
these present letters to your brotherliness, setting forth all his affairs, to the end 
that you too, knowing thereof, may help him, remembering the command of the 
blessed Apostle not to neglect those who are weak, not only in the Faith but even 
in the affairs of this world. For this brother of ours was formerly a wine- 


[1915] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 95 


dealer, and being long importuned by the magistrates of his native place with 
exactions beyond his means, and having for this reason borrowed a great sum 
of money, and being asked for this and not being able to meet his liabilities, he 
was compelled by his creditors to sell all that he had, even to the garments 
that cover his shame; and when these were sold, scarcely could he get together 
the half of the money for his creditors, who, those pitiless and godless men, 
carried off all his children, being yet quite in their infancy. Wherefore we 
direct to you this letter, requesting you to help him to the extent of your 
power, that he may recover them from them. P.S. [So will you be ?| sons of 
our Heavenly Father. P.P.S.... by all means help him, since ... our brother, 
because they carried off his children into slavery. Therefore do not neglect the 
[matter ?, speedily ?] by all means.’ (Addressed) ‘Deliver to Paiéous, priest, 
from brother Heriéous.’ 


1, Something like 16 dyamnr@ kai (e. g.) tyswordre is to be read before dded]9[4], which 
is inferred only from a downstroke, probably the tail of the . 

3. The reading 76 after the lacuna might almost be taken as certain but for the 
impossibility of finding a word ending in yOorms or npbov. The word is clearly an 
adjective going with cuzpopg. The remains suggest ex|npOover, i.e. emupOdvy for émpOdve, 
and this suits the space, for we could read roi[s pév ev em|npOdver, but this involves supposing 
that the writer used émipOovos in an unusual sense. Probably the reference is not to any 
single text of Scripture but a general recollection of New Testament teaching. Passages 
like Gal. vi, 10; I Tim. v, 8 were probably in the writer’s mind when he added paduora rots 
adergois Hav. 

9. THs paxapias édmidos: cf. Tit. ii, 13. 

10. éGev: the word is superfluous and leaves the sentence beginning with émedn, lL. 5, 
without a principal verb. 

14-16. Not a verbal quotation of any single text but a reminiscence of such passages 
as Rom. xiv, 1 (roy 5€ doOevotvra TH riorer mpoodapBaverbe) ; Acts XX, 353 Ja.v.143 1 Thess. 
Vv, 14. 
ae ofrwes: the two ends of the s are brought so close together that the letter looks 
like o. 

28. ndvra: if this is right the preceding rd is superfluous. The vr are not very clear 
but probable ; a:dia is less likely. There has perhaps been a correction. 

32. The letter preceding «ofa: was probably ¢ or 4, as the ligature comes downwards 
from the top. Hence we cannot read yiveo@a or vopiterda. Probably otras éo|er$a: (1. -e), 
or yea jer Oar or KAnOnc|ecda. As the space cannot be great the first seems best. 

35. |. ¥8n: difficult, The » is all but certain, though a (= e) is just possible. ov}yai8y 
however does not suit the traces at the beginning. The sense required is ‘ since our brother 
is in great distress’. 

36. For [atrod «ils see 1916, 17. Line 35 may require a longer supplement, but to judge 
by the recto, where 1. 1, in which a trace of ¢ remains, must have been the first line of the 
letter, there cannot be room for a great deal ; and cf. 1.37, n. The reading after yy is 
exceedingly uncertain and is got rather from a priort probability than from the actual 
characters, none of which except the v of duéAnooy can be regarded with great confidence, 
though ody suits the traces well. 

34. Perhaps [mpaypa rax|o? In that case, if the reading in 1], 36 is correct, tayd kat 
ndvr. tpdm@ is loosely used, as if the sentence had a positive form (807@jc0v or some 
similar verb). ; 

38-9. This is very puzzling. The word before the crosses (which mark, as usual, the 
point where the string passed round the folded letter) is obscure but is presumably Coptic. 
noyag wentwoy (the division of the words is doubtful) has, according to Mr. Crum, the 
appearance of a place-name, and nentwoy may be a curious genitive form (‘of the mount’; 
cf. P. Cairo Masp. i, 67022 r., 9, V., 4, Movrrroov). But the purpose of the entry is not 


76 : | THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1915] 


clear. The address is given below, the reverse way up; moreover it is strange that l. 38 
occupies only part of the available space (the papyrus is rubbed before epg., but there is no 
clear evidence of any writing having preceded; some apparent traces are more probably 
stains than ink), and that the words are repeated in 1. 39. Mr. Crum therefore suggests 
that Il. 38-9 are mere scribbles or pen-trials; but against this are the facts (1) that the 
crosses are inserted as if for an address, and just above the crosses in ]. 40, (2) that the 
hand is probably identical with that of ]. 40. Both Coptic and Greek are in a larger, more 
formal hand than the letter itself, as is usual in addresses, but in their formation the 
characters resemble those of Heriéous, and there seems no reason to doubt that he wrote 
the whole. Perhaps the Coptic was an after-thought; Heriéous addressed the letter in the 
usual way and then added the (temporary?) address of Apa Paiéous for the messenger’s 
guidance. It should be added that in neither 1. 38 nor in 1. 40 are the crosses made as 
here printed. In 1. 40 three parallel lines aré drawn from left to right downwards and 
three others at right angles across them. In 1. 38 a similar scheme was probably adopted, 
and the whole was apparently enclosed in a rough circle. In 1]. 39 the over-written 9 1s 
misplaced, between y and a, but was no doubt intended to go between a and m. 


PAPYRUS 1916.—Czrca A.D. 330-340. 
Inv. No. 2545. 23X19-5 cm. 


Acquired in 1923. Light brown papyrus, discoloured in places by damp. Con- 
siderably damaged, especially at the foot and in the middle, and imperfect in the right top 
corner. Written in the same hand as 1915, and in ink of the same colour, across the fibres. 
On the verso the discolouring of the papyrus and running of the ink make portions very 
difficult to read. 


As explained in the introduction to 1915 this letter refers to the same 
subject as that. It is apparently a joint letter from Moses and Heriéous, written 
by the latter, and addressed to the Meletian community generally ; but Heriéous 
sometimes forgets that he is not writing in his own name only and drops into the 
first person singular, just as, in his final greeting, he apparently addresses 
Paiéous alone. On the verso he has added a postscript in his own name 
addressed to the latter individually. 

As 1915 gives fuller details than 1916 it is natural to suppose that it was 
written first and that 1916 was intended partly to reinforce it and partly as 
a circular letter to be passed round the community. Hence the order here 
adopted. It is, however, to be noted that 1916 has no address on the verso, and 
l. To suggests (see note there) that Pamonthius was the bearer of it. If so, he 
would doubtless supply the details himself, and the inference from the greater 
fullness of 1915 is unnecessary. It is likely enough that both letters were 
written and delivered together. 


Tois mar[? ayiols ayamnrois [kal yAv-], 
kutaros [ITat|notre mpeoBlvrépw Kai] 
Atooxopos kai] ‘Tépag kai [ 


Kal dma S[ovlpod Kat mao[e tots aded-| 


(1916] -THE MELETIAN SCHISM a7 


2 - \ A re \ eas 
5 pois Kal wax Tloils wept [buas) 
Yd = le a 
kar’ dviolua Movon{s cai ‘Epinods ?] 
[ol] bmodeéotepor budy ev [K(vpi)o xaipev.| 
Shy ah NSS ab i as le ale 
A X \ 7 ¢ om 
IIpa@rov pev tiv mpoolkivnow vpov| 
Tolovpevol, ayamntol marploves, ayyéAdeLy ?] 

10 OéAwpev mepi rovTov Tov dylamnrod IapwvOiov ?| 
ed 2. 7 3 4 d ‘\ “st ot ua 
ére év peyddn avdyKkn éo[ti Kal aicxiota mérov-] 
bev bm6 Tivev avOpemiwv dvedenpdov-| 
wv kal abéwv, iva Kai dpils smovddonte ?| 

Fares \ ES 
OUTO i... VK. [sl > XP[- ss] 0. KOE THS 
15 [vjrepBorfs buav alyd|mnyv thy év TO ovpare 
= 2 ¢ fa) 4 4 
Katokely. ‘Avaykiailws ovv mdévu omovdacate 
» ~ 2S ed \ ee > ~ y 74) 
avT@ a&bKvos, dre Ta Téxva adTod «is Jovadiay 
fptacav of Saviotai: ef dt ExeTEe peor OS AdEX- 
x ~ 2 bp) 7 
pov todrov auvBonOjoate, ayamnrol, 
} 5 
20 Ore mavu ododpas ‘é’OABe Huds odTws mepl 
4 ~ iz iA A € ~ “) > 4 
Tavtns (Ths) dvdykns, Kal nuls ovK oKYnTw- 
yw » ¢ , a I) eS 
pev. Ei re kal edphxayev wapedokapev avTo, 
GAA Kai brép THY Sbvapw huov Eemroijoa- 
pev, Ei 7 éav dvvicate ovvdéEate apyvpia 
25 pérpnoov adrd, kal ypdaTé por mepl oy de- 
~ ee 
ddkate, va Td dohares peOdpev, va Kal 
micbdpmev, emid) Ta WOAAA TAEioTA apytpLa 
la 2 
xpewot?. “Opa pi) dpedroare, aylalmnrol, em- 
6) mapamecobaw 6 adedgpos Torat[ryly avdyKn(y). 


30 "ElppaclOal oar eyfomar...J.-.... 


From top to bottom of the left margin: 
’Evoigacbe obv thy eudutoy buoy dydany Kai evon(Ajayxvialy| 


Kal THY aTopyiy THS Luav TarTploTnTos. 


Verso: 
Tpddo ce ovv, adedgpe Iacnod|s 
ravtny Thy avadyKny, iva | Tav-| 


35 Tl Tpomm Kal KatdoTyooy | 
aitG® mapa rois ddedgois, iva | 
Soda: oda yap Ore wodf{A}v ww. [ 
kai dmoaTedde Tols adedgois | 
doparly typaa tiv. Ei 7 éav duvycare ouvde§at ?| 


40 mapa Tois yirdvois addeAgois [.]- p++ a: [1.2 aodla- 


78 THE MELETIAN SCHISM , 1916] 


Anv Kat odpdyigov adriy [.|. vooT.A....[.]. avTob 
éyytny avtov e\aBa Tapa TY oTpaTiwToV TEvTAKoTlwy 


TaddvTwv Keddreov Kal Toxov, FY ow. 


3. 1. Atookdpe, ‘Iépaxt. 5» mace toils wept [buas|]: Hunt. 8. of mperoy corr. from o. 
To. |. OéNopev. II. avaykn. 13. iva; so ll. 26 (dz), 34, 36. 1. duets. 16. avay’- 
klarlos. 17. |. dovAeiav. 18. |. davevorai. 19. v Of cvvBonOyoare corr. from B. 
at. avay kys. ], quets, dxvnoopev. 25. |. petpyoare. 26. 1. padopev (Hunt). 
27. 1. nevrOapev, emerdn (So |. 28 f.) 28. J. xpeworet, épare. 29. |. mapatecetrar, rovavrn 
davayky (MS. avay'«i). 30. l.oe. 31. 1. evdeigarde. evorray xual v]. 33; |. oor, mainov|s. 
34. avay'kny. may|ri: Hunt. 37. 1. déouw(?). a of yap corr. or rewritten. 39. 1. doda- 
Aju (?). 42. ey yunv, TevTaKoOL@. 43. 1. kepddauov. 


‘To the all-holy, beloved, and most sweet Paiéous, priest,and Dioscorus and 
Hierax and ... and Apa Sourous and all the brethren and all them that are with 
you by name, Moses [and Heriéous ?] the most humble among you, greeting in the 
Lord. First making obeisance to you, beloved patrons, we desire to [inform] you 
concerning this be[loved Pamonthius], that he is in great straits and has suffered 
most shamefully at the hands of certain pitiless and godless men, that you too 
[may succour] him... from your superfluity to dwell in (?) the love which is in 
heaven. By all means then succour him without hesitation, because his creditors 
have carried off his children into slavery ; and if you hold me this man as brother, 
join in giving help, beloved, because these straits have afflicted us exceedingly, 
and we ourselves will not shrink (from helping him), Whatever we could find we 
have given him; yea, we have done even beyond our means. Whatsoever you 
can collect in money pay it over, and write to me of what you have given, that 
we may know for certain, that we may have assurance, since he owes much, 
very much money. See that you do not neglect, beloved, since our brother will 
fall into so great straits. I pray for your health ... P.S. Show then the love 
and compassion that are native to you and the affection of your fatherli- 
ness. P.P.S. I write to you then, brother Paiéous, [to inform you of?] these 
straits, to the end that [you may] by all means [help him ?] and appoint .. . 
for him among the brethren, to the end that they may give .. .; for I know 
that they ... much... And dispatch to the brethren...I have written to 
you. Whatsoever [you can collect ?] among the neighbouring brethren secure and 
place it under seal. Ihave taken him on bail from the soldiers for five hundred 
talents capital and interest 800 talents.’ 


Ty mav[? ayio|s : there is hardly room for raveupnpors. Tavdytos or the superlative of it, 
when not applied to the divine Persons or attributes or to the Virgin, was a title of bishops 
(see Sophocles, s.v.), but it is quite possible that in a complimentary letter like this it might 
be used of mere priests, ar[apiorol|is (cf., e. g., 1677, 41) could perhaps be got in but is 
not very likely. 

4. The reading mao[s is not certain, as there may be a character between a and the 
supposed o, but probably the appearance of a letter is due merely to the running of the ink 
from the a. 

7. [oi] bxodeéorepor: if the supplements adopted are right this must be used in a depre- 
catory sense, practically as a superlative. ‘There is no reason to correct tyay to jar if we 


[1916] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 79 


suppose that the writers regard themselves as belonging to the community presided over 
by Paiéous. 

g. marplaves: cf. P. Lond. iii, 982 (p. 242) = Ghedini, 27, 1, 105 Ghedini, 25, 10. 

10. HaperOlov: the supplement is rather long (but cf. the practically certain supplement 
of 1, 11), and possibly one should read rather ddehpod. The rovrov seems to imply that 
Pamonthius himself carried the letter (note that it bears no address), and if so it was not 
necessary to name him, particularly as Heriéous had previously (if, as is natural, we place 
1915 first) written on his behalf. 

12. There is a considerable blank space between the 6 and « of dev, due apparently to 
a prominent displaced fibre. 

13. omovdaonre: cf. 1]. 16. 

14. The supposed « might be v, perhaps followed by p, and xp suggests xpnydrav, but 
it does not seem possible to read atré ek rev tuav xpnuarov Kal «Tr, (with, e.g., OéAnre, Sdvres] 
in ], 13; Hunt). 

18. por: probably an ethical dative, rodrov being the object of éxere, not (= rovre) 
of cvvBonOnoare. 

2if. dxvijcopev, Ei re xrd.: it seems better to punctuate like this, understanding 
Bonbeiv or orovddéew adr after éxvjo(o)uer, than to omit the stop and take the construction 
as confused, the writer beginning to write ‘we shall not hesitate to give him whatever we 
can afford’ and then changing to the past tense. 

24. duvqoare: for the tendency in late Greek to confuse deponent and active forms 
(which makes itself felt in both directions) see Jannaris, § 1000, dvvapat however, a common 
verb in Byzantine papyri, seems immune from the tendency in extant texts, and the present 
form may be a mere slip of the pen. 

ovrdééare : not corrected in the critical notes to ovddééae because such paratactical uses 
are characteristic of the style of the Byzantine age, and there is therefore no need to regard 
ovrdgéare asa slip of the pen; cf. P. Oxy. vii, 1071, 4: 76 ti didovow roucovow; 8: Katagioov 
obv ypdyov; xvi, 1871, 5: Kxarakidon pabe; 6: pn[dlév ody dpednots roto ppdrricoy. 

25. perpyoov: strictly inappropriate, as the word is properly used of payments in 
kind. 

26-7. The interpretation adopted is due to Prof. Hunt. To leave péAoper (it is 
hardly possible to read pd@opev) uncorrected and render ‘ that we may surrender the bond’ 
raises great difficulties, as the creditors only can have held a bond. The sense no doubt is 
that a written statement in Paiéous’s own hand would be more trustworthy than an oral 
message. 

24. Ta Toa mAeiora: curiously worded. Perhaps rd is superfluous and mciora inserted 
merely to strengthen and reinforce wodAd, ‘much, yes, very mutch’, 

29. mapamecodow: though future in form, it may be suspected that this verb should 
really have been perfect. But a future sense is not impossible, as the writer may have been 
thinking of the further consequences of failure to pay ; oy 

30. In rather fainter ink than the preceding lines (except Il. 1-5), but this is probably 
due to damp or the ink having run before it was dry; the hand seems to be the same. 
The reading of the dotted letters is extremely doubtful, but ce is more likely than wpas. 
After the lacuna it is hardly possible to recognize with any confidence _part of ddeApe or 
ddeAdot. But one or other is expected and may have been written. The traces do not 


support rodXods xpdvovs. 
~-\ _ 33. About half of Il. 33-9 is lost, so that dyyéANov oor is insufficient; but the sense is 


no doubt similar. 

35. There is a small blank space after kardornoov; so too after va in 1, 36. Prof. 
Hunt suggests (e.g.) [BonOnons abr mav|ri. 

36. Something like [kai avrol ex THs tmepBodns avrév| or [Kat adroi et ru €av Stvevra ait@| 
probably expresses the sense. @ Tékva adrou dro-|, referring Sodcw to the creditors, is less 
likely. 

te dnéoredde: very doubtful, owing to the fading and running of the ink, which 
confuses the characters, but it gives the required sense and suits the traces better than any 
of the other words (dmédore, drooreiAare, dmoméeuware, &c.) which have suggested themselves. 
For the mixture of single and plural cf. 1. 25. 


39. dumoare: cf. 1. 24, n. 


80 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1916] 


40. yirdvois: for the confusion of 2nd (or 1st) with 3rd declension forms see Jannaris, 
§ 346. The traces in the second half of the line are too small and indistinct for reading, 
though they might perhaps serve to test a conjecture. The sense would seem to be that 
Paiéous is to pack securely and send under seal the amounts collected. 

41. oppayifov: for the retention of the ¢ in the aorist see, e.g., 1676, 57, n., and the 
instances collected in the index to vol. v (p. 289). After this it is hardly possible 
to read kai dndariAov bnép adrod, though gr can be reconciled with the smeared and indistinct 
traces. 
43. { : the symbol (which is made not quite as in the text, the side stroke being 
joined to the other) is that for talents, and we must therefore suppose (since ¢ = 500 is 
impossible) that the sum of 800 talents is either the total of capital and interest or the latter 
alone. The second is the more natural interpretation of the wording but would indicate 
a most usurious rate of interest. Pamonthius, however, had clearly borrowed under great 
difficulties and therefore possibly enough at a high rate, and we do not know how long the 
interest had been accumulating. Moreover it would appear from 1915, 25 f. that he had 
paid off about half the original capital, so that 800 talents may be the interest on 1,000. 
(This assumes that the amount in the text is that of Pamonthius’s debt, which is a not 
unreasonable assumption ; the guarantors obtained his release on undertaking liability for 
his debt.) , though not absolutely certain, is very nearly so. 


PAPYRUS 1917.—Circa A.D. 330-340. 
Inv. No. 2489. 25+5 X 46-7 cm. 


Acquired in 1922 (left half) and 1923 (right half). Light brown papyrus, darkened in 
one or two places. Considerably damaged, especially at the foot and towards the right side, 
where a strip of papyrus is lost from |. 5 downwards. Written in a fairly large, sloping, 
irregular cursive hand, rather uncial in character, along the fibres, in black ink. 


This letter, like 1915 and 1916, is of rather unusual interest, but not so much 
for its subject-matter as for its spelling and extraordinary style. The confusion of 
€ and a is of course common enough in papyri, but few writers at present known 
are so addicted to it as the writer of 1917, and spellings like patpwardnuatvos (uepedn- 
pévos), dat (dé), atve (€id€var) show to what a length his predilection for au can go. 
Another striking feature of his letter is the wild confusion of cases and genders, 
which makes it difficult in places to determine the exact sense—if indeed the 
writer can be allowed to have had any exact sense in his mind at all, which his 
style renders a little doubtful. That style is of a verbosity and emptiness not 
common even in texts of the Byzantine period, complimentary epithets being 
accumulated one upon another and words and ideas repeated until it becomes 
hard to obtain any distinct impression from the medley. The writer characteris- 
tically omits even to give his own name in the greeting and has to slip it in by an 
afterthought towards the end of the letter. 

A further point of interest is the treatment of the xomina sacra. The 
standard contractions of these, surmounted by a straight stroke, are already 
common in fourth-century texts, and several examples will be found in the 
present volume ; but the writer of 1917 writes the xomina sacra in full and yet 
uses (not indeed always but frequently) the stroke—or rather, in most cases, two 
short strokes—above them. There are examples elsewhere (see, on this subject, 


[1917] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 81 


L. Traube, Nomina Sacra, p. 49 f.), but the practice of the present writer is 
exceptionally regular and consistent. As hinted by Traube, it is no doubt due 
to the fact that the contracted forms of the zomina sacra, though well established, 
were not yet completely understood by the less literate writers. 

When we come to the actual subject, it is a little difficult to discover what 
the writer is informing his correspondent about. The greater part of the letter is 
occupied with requests for Paiéous’s prayers, the prayers of the other brethren, 
and their intercession with yet others. The writer speaks of a tapdnrwpa dia8o- 
Atk? (stc) which had occurred to him ; but what the mapdmrwpua was, is uncertain. 
It was perhaps that he stayed too long in the xnroAdyavov (1. 13), which is sup- 
ported by 7reup Ja¢du(e)vos if that reading be accepted ; but in any case the mention 
of the d.a@4«n in 1. 9 ff. suggests that he was already in some disgrace, and that 
the agreement as to his being handed over (mapadéonra, 1. 12) to Sourous was 
in the nature of a punitive measure. It may indeed be that Paiéous already 
knew the circumstances of the writer’s sin, and that the object of this letter was 
merely to ask for prayers. 

In any case the letter gives a very interesting illustration of the practice of 
intercessory prayers. The writer asks that requests for prayers shall be circulated 
kata povyy, i, €. among the various cells of the Meletian anchorites, not only in the 
immediate neighbourhood but also in the ‘upper regions’, i.e. probably in the 
Thebaid. One is reminded of the mortuary and similar rolls of the Middle Ages. 

There is no trace of an address on the verso, though there are a number ot 
crosses, such as frequently mark the space left for the string. The address may 
have occurred on the strip which has disappeared from towards the right (recto) 
side of the papyrus, but there is nothing to support this. 


1 TO yvnowrdéte Kal dalTwordro Bla|kaplordrm a[yarnt|® Kal bed 
t c ee t t t t 
A 7 
Hatpednpaive Kal [wJadmlAnpopaivos mvedparos a&yiov 
2 kal TipidTatos Tap Kupio Oud dra ITainod, ev Sdeond[rov ’In|ood 
Xpisrob xaipar Ips péev mdly|rov @&youal cor rhv 
oAoKAnpiavy Tapa 7O Kupio bad. Tatra r& yipélupara i[uev éypalpa 
=- 3 lan a / tee) {eS § d A SN =~ 
ey TP XapTip TovTw iv avTa avdyvos paitda yapas 
4 Kal peta ipjvns BeBewrdrns éxE dylov [wvedpartlos Kal pwlatra (Aaporntos 
OG patpernualvo kai [7] ward pidroge- 
, 7 7 YA beg) AN “Or 2 
[[y]Jvfas paxpobupuias memdAnpopatyy mvevplaros ayiov. ol ovv ypddo, 
7 x V4 BA los 
yynot@rarar Kal BeBled|rarar dma Tatnod 
6 mapa xupiov Oeod, Smas épdpns tas yipds ofov mpds tov deo |rérny 
x ¢ 7 aA ; a 
Oatdv ds toimws oravpO.f.|.[... (ca O6@ papatrn- 
7 paivn Oud eyo} 76 tarwd kal tarerdpo, Kal [ov Klaragij@] 7d gas rob 
iiov idaive, dros 6 Beds [dxupdcn ?| 7d Xpoypaghov tay 
8 dpapriay pov did 7 d\y BeBewrdrov stpalv Tplovevyav ay.wwrdrov. 
Tvévait cat oby Oatrw, [yynotdrjarar cal pakapl- 
9 @Tatat, dre dre Hoya év TH vijow ris Mépdlews] paitla] trav dytwrdror 
adehgav Kai éroi[yoav melpl éuod thy Ova OHxny 
G 


ies) 


cn 


82 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1917] 


> 


10 Thy Oe@ pepedn[péer|nvy Kal arovdata(v) et[rAoy|nuaily|nv) mvedplarols 
aylov.«.e¢ kal dra Kj.......]s kal dra “Npoevod- 
11 gos kal d&ma oupods xal dra eB xai Iladdo |rplecBu[zjaipo 7O azo 


a A oN ta 
Tnévaiws Kat ‘Avrivous [P Kal... .ljog Tovav vid Ovevadpli lov 


e By a 9 x 
12 kal ama Mixadrdgdvnv, iva mapaddéontal par tob [dja Xovpots ts THv 
povay avrod. Kal euilva ? weplagdpawos ev 76 
a ~ \ 967 
13 Knmodaxdvo, Kal epliva éxi ws toh Papailv|d0, cai dlo]jrar dai efeBnv 
drnrba eis TO [... 2... |S, Kal viv BéBnxai pe 
4 , a eS fe 3 \ , si 
14 mapdmTopa dtaBodrrxyn. lav obv moinoov, ayamntat yvynowwTatat Kat 
3 - XN es Oo \ a 
agidratar mapa Kupio [Oe@, pera aomlovdys piroge- 
15 vias mvedparos dyiov 06 patpadnuatyw vuKTos Kal jyaipas mapakadeons 
> 6 \ \ 2 ? i a 2 cues 
Tov Oeov Tov Kivpiov ? wdv|rwy—rTov ev viw 
Bb) nN \ £ 2 sy od (220 ee 3 7 PA A Co) ¢ Fe, 
16 év maTpi Kal 6 €v matpl vy vie—iva dmoddat pe els Tas Xtpas vuav: 
dobevas Oal..[........|alws ddoKka’Topa 
17 mvedpatos dyio. Od povoy dai tatra eypawa typara dai Kal TO adrra 
wy s na BA AN see 2} \ 
Appovi kai 7O dnla......klal 7@ dra IleBe 
18 kal els Ta dvw paipn mpos Mixadrdvnv did mod, éey@ ‘Qpiwv, wa 
epdpwow atitav Tas adylalrdtas avTdv| xipay mpds roy [[Geor]] 
SN 2 iG fa eS € - oN Ni ‘ by ie 7 
19 Oedv ev bdrns Kapdias abtdy os Tolmas oTavp@ Kal uh amroorepyol|solloci 
pat Kal pi €[..... wot] pat, aAAA w 6 Beds 
Se Ne? , y Naas ’ 2 Ney , 2 
20 olktippwv Kal édXejpov otTws Kal bis [ol|kTippwyv Kal édXEhpoves yiyverbe 
did [éuod o7rolvdagopavor 
SX XN - lal oy ? 3 a er - A ‘N 
21 mpos Tov Oadby. Ilav ovv motnoov, ayamnrai, elva ypawns Kata poviy 
kal 7® dra Doulpods Kal 7@| dra IeBai, iva 
NN > \ > 4 - AY 2 lot ie, XQ Xx \ 
22 Klaji avrot €Aejpmoves yevécovTe repli] E“ot Kadécwo.v mpos Tov Oatoy 
paita onlovdns mveltuatos aytou 
23 Oe@ pepedrAnpaivw iv’ obrws Kat adtot [ypdyaor pelt[& omov\dyqs 6An{s] 
Kapoias did [éuod els Ta avlw pailpn 
24 KaT{aaT}a poviy évTreAA@paivor mrepi [éuot dyecOar..... ] thy kal. .Jovvav 
Tol... Pmepl €luod 
25 OTe 6 Oeds paxpdOvpos Kai édefploy yevioceTar?.......Juy Kar... 
? plata almovdns ? cerca 10 letters.] 
’ ~ ey 
26 ‘Aomd(opalt] oat, pakd[pre] dra ITainod,........-.- ? dra IT\eBe . . [— 
27 Kal Tods avy [alol mdvz[as aldeApovs [— 
I. 1, horewordr@, pepeAnper@, memAnpopero. ew (8 rewritten); so |. 4. 2. 1. tiypiw- 


tat, be (so 1. 3, &c.), deondrn “Inootd Xpiot@ xaipe. mainov (so ll. 5, 26), tn |oov. o. luast 
stroke of v in odokAnpray rewritten. @aw/, iv. x of xapriw corr. from x, and @ rewritten. 
of rovrw smeared, and a letter deleted between it and iv. ]. werd; so ll. 4 (2s), 9, 22, 25. 


4. ipnyys (I, eipnyns), ikapornros. 1, BeBaordrns €&, peweAnpevos,  aywod. 6. (ast a of 
paxpoOupuas corr. from o. 1. memAnpopevos, yunowwrare, BeBaidrare. mVEUp| aTos. 6. 1. Kupio 
de®, endpys, xeipas (SO 1. 16), rémos oravpod (?: o corr.; see note), pewednuevos. Oarov. a. lo wob 


Tametvov, Tadam @pov, HAiou (A rewritten) eiSeva, dxupmon, xeipdypapor. Geos (so Il. 19, 25). s of 
os corr. from o. [od xlaragi[o]: Hunt; see note. 8. 1. BeBaordrov, oe, Gédro, 


[1917] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 83 


ynowwrate, pakapiorare, pwr. g. |. jer. s of rns corr. or rewritten. » of tyv 
rewritten. 10. Oe@, mvevplaro]s, 1. eddoynuevny, II. ], HavAos mpecBurepos 6, Thévews, 
"Avrivoos (?), viod (?). 12. A Of pukadovny (1. Meyaddvupos) corr, from m(?), iva (so 


M.er6," 18,21, 2:3), te. ]. mapadaonré pe TO Gra Sovpoire cis, Ewewa (so |. 13) orovdatspevos. 
13. eki (I. ekei), amm’Oa, _s of ews corr. from a straight stroke, perhaps part of an intended r, 


], apevod, dre dé, BeBnké por. 14. |, duaBodrkdv, ayant yrnowwrate, dkrare. KUpt@. 
15. 1. pepednpuevos (?—Xn rewritten), juépas, Tov. Bear (so K 19), Vio, 16. |. to, tpor. 
], amodaoe (?: see note), d¢ (sol. 17, dzs). 17. |. dyiov. Between the first and second 


+ Of aupov a character (which looks like e) has been written. It may be merely a confused 
apostrophe or perhaps a miswriting of the second », which was then rewritten separately. 


18. 1. peépy (sol. 23), Meyardvupov, émdpwury, xeipas, 1g. 1, 6Ay xapdia (p added later), 
Tinos atavpod (v rewritten), pe, dzs. s of ws smudged but probably not corr. 20. p of 
eAenpov rewritten, 1. dpeis (MS. tps), oixrippoves, cmovdatsuevor, Second e of yeyvecOe corr. 
from au. 21. |, dedv (So |. 22), dyamnré, iva, Sovpodrs, MeBé. v Of wovny corr. from s. i of 
iva rewritten, 22. |. yernoovra.. s of mpos rewritten. 23. |, pepeAnpevor (?). 
24. |. evreANpevor. 25. s Of paxpobvpos rewritten. 26. 1. oe. paxalpre|: Milne. 


‘To the most genuine and most enlightened, most blessed, beloved and in 
God’s keeping and filled with the Holy Ghost and most valued in the sight of 
the Lord God, Apa Paiéou, greeting in our Master Jesus Christ. Before all 
things I pray for prosperity for you with the Lord God. This our letter I wrote 
on this papyrus that you might read it with joy and with most secure peace 
from the Holy Ghost and with cheerfulness in God’s keeping and with enter- 
tainment of long-suffering filled with the Holy Ghost. To you then I write, 
most genuine and most secure in the sight of the Lord God Apa Paiéou, that 
you may lift up your hands to our Master God, in the semblance of a cross,.. 
in God’s keeping for me the humble and wretched and unworthy to behold the 
light of the sun, that God may [annul] the bond of my sins by your most 
secure, most holy prayers. I desire you then to know, most. genuine and most 
blessed one, that when we were in the Island of Memphis with the most holy 
brethren, they, ... and Apa C ...s and Apa Orsenuphius and Apa Sourous and 
Apa Pebe and Paul the priest of Téenis and Antinous [and ?’.. .]Jus son of Touan 
the son of Ouenaphrius and Apa Megalonymus, made concerning me the covenant 
in God’s keeping, excellent and blessed of the Holy Ghost, that you (?) shall 
hand me over to Apa Sourous, to his cell. And I abode, being tempted, in 
the vegetable garden, and I abode there till Phamenoth, and so soon as I went 
out I departed to the ..., and now there has befallen me a diabolical transgres- 
sion. By all means therefore, beloved, most genuine, and most worthy in the 
sight of the Lord God, with zealous entertainment of the Holy Ghost in God’s 
keeping, by night and day entreat God the Lord of all—they that are in the Son 
being in the Father, and he that is in the Father is in the Son—that he may 
restore me into your hands; ... burnt offering of the Holy Ghost. And not 
only did I write this, but I wrote also to Apa Ammon and Apa...and Apa 
Pebe and to the Upper Country to Megalonymus for myself, I Horion, that they 
may lift up their most holy hands to God with all their hearts, in the semblance 
of a cross, and may not cut me off and may not [cast me out ?], but to him to whom 
God is compassionate and merciful so do you too be compassionate and merciful, 
being zealous on my behalf to God. By all means then, beloved, write from cell to 
cell and to Apa Sourous and to Apa Pebe, that they also may be merciful for me 

G2 


84 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1917] 


and may call upon God with zeal of the Holy Ghost in God’s keeping, that so 
they too may write with zeal of their whole heart for me to the Upper Country 
from cell to cell, enjoining (all) to pray for me... for me, that God will be long- 
suffering and merciful ... with zeal...I greet you, blessed Apa Paiéou... 
Apa Pebe... and all the brethren with you.’ 


1. Ga[t|wordre: the reading is not certain, and the word does not seem to be used 
elsewhere in a similar context, but it is strongly suggested by the certain letters, and w are 
quite possible readings. 

Oc@ patpednpaive: a very favourite phrase of the writer’s and often used in contexts 
where it is difficult to assign to it any very satisfactory meaning. The difficulty is increased 
in several cases by the shakiness of the writer's concords, which makes it uncertain to what 
word the phrase is to be attached. Here at least the meaning is not in doubt; it signifies 
that Paiéous is under the special care of God. ‘In God’s keeping’ seems a reasonable 
rendering, and in order to represent in English the style of the original it is retained 
throughout the translation. For the phrase itself cf., e.g., Eusebius, Vet. Const., iv, 41, 6 ye 
TH Ged pepwednpévos. - ‘ 

2. xaipac: for the use of this form instead of yaipew see P. Oxy. xii, 1492 (= Ghedini 
12), 1; PSI. ili, 208 (= Ghedini 13), 15 Oxy. ix, 1185, 13 ;. Lond. ili, 899.(1, p. 208); 
&c.; and cf. Oxy. iii, 526, 1; Flor. ii, 140 verso, 1, where xaipos is used. Now too see 
F, X. J. Exler, Zhe Yorm of the Ancient Greek Letter (Washington, D.C., 1923), pp. 33 f., 
67 f. Usually, as in the instances quoted, the word, when used in the imperative, comes first ; 

‘but cf. the Coptic letters 1920 and 1921 below. 

e¥xopai oor kth. : cf, P. Oxy. xii, 1495 (= Ghedini 21), 3-5. 

4. 6 payeAnpaive: the grammatical relation of this is uncertain; it may be in- 
tended to go with idapérnros (‘ godly cheerfulness’), as mend. mv. dyiov in |. 5 may be meant 
to go with paxpoOvpias, but on the whole it seems best to refer both to Paiéous. This 
is supported by the deleted +; the writer perhaps began to write memAnpopévos xr. here and 
decided to add pera xr. first. 

5. BeBled|rara: if the trace above the lacuna is rightly identified as 8 there is room for 
nothing more than eo, In ll. 4, 8 the form BeBewraros is used. 

6. &s roimws gravp@: the mysterious combination wcramecoravpe recurs in |. 19, also in 
a passage asking for the raising of hands in prayer. The difficulty of interpretation is 
increased by uncertainties of reading, for in both cases the writer has muddled the phrase. 
Here the second o is a correction. In ]. 19, on the contrary, where the two sigmas are 
original and certain, the writer has become confused over oravpw; he seems first to have 
written this and then to have rewritten the v with a very long tail, so that it looks like p, 
which he may even have intended. The division and interpretation adopted (as rvzos 
atavpod, the lifting up of the hands suggesting to the writer the figure of the cross), which 
was suggested by Mr. Milne, is a little far-fetched, but it seems possible, and no other 
tolerable explanation offers itself. It perhaps receives some support from the passage 
in Athan., De Incarn. Verbi, 25: mera, ei 6 Odvatos Tov Kupiov AUTpov eotl TmavTwy, Kal TO 
Gavat@ tovrov Td pecdrotxov Tod paypod Averat, Kal yiverar Tay eOvOv H KARO’ Tes av Has 
mpooekad€aato, ei py) €oTavpwTo; €v dye yap T@ oTavpw exTeTapevars Xepol Tis amoOvnoKEL. Atd Kat 
TOUTO empeTev Umopewar TOV KUpLov Kal TAS XElpas eKTElVaL, va TH Mev TOY Tadatdy Nady, TH dé TOds amd 
rav Over Exton, Kat auorépous €v éavt@ ovvdyn. What follows is quite obscure. Probably 
Ge@ patpatdnpairn is to be referred to Paiéous. Prof. Hunt suggests that the feminine forms, 
here and in ]. 5, may be due to the use of polite periphrases for ov, but the writer is so very 
erratic in his concords that the explanation is perhaps hardly required. 

7. da: used in the sense of imép; cf. ll. 18, 20, 23. An uncertainty in the use of the 
prepositions was characteristic of later Greek, and led, in the modern language, to the 
disappearance of several (including imép) and their replacement by others. Instances in 
papyri are: wepi for tmép, below, |. 24; 1781, 14; P. Oxy. x, 1298, 4 f.; xii, 1494, 6; 
dud for mepi, Oxy. xvi, 1871, 5 f.; 1875, 11. In Oxy. 1871, 4 (wépyouat twa...) dia rods 
dvOpérovs Kai Tovs kaundous, da has the sense of ‘for’, i.e. ‘to fetch’. For the use of dd 
(with the accusative) as = imép see Jannaris, §§ 1521, 1534 (c). The present instance (with 
the genitive) is a half-way house to the later use. 


[1917] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 85 


[od xJaragéi[@|: this (taking «iSéva as a confusion with ideiv) seems on the whole likelier 
than the editor’s reading [«]arag(|, ‘and I ask the light of the sun to know it’, 

[ixupdon|: Or, e. g., dpavion; but dkvpdcp (the o is written for reasons of space) suils the 
metaphor of yipsypapov better. 

9. TH moo tis Mépdlews|: it is not clear what island at or near Memphis is 
intended. 

me|pt ewod tiv Suabijkny: mepi here seems to be used in its proper sense, not as = drép. 
The daOy«n is apparently a mutual agreement made among the brethren concerning the 
writer. 

to. .¢.e: the first letter may well be «; so perhaps Seve (O. Strassb. 645, 6). In any 
case the word seems likely to be a name. ‘These names are apparently to be taken as 
subjects to éoi[ncav, added by an afterthought: ‘they made a covenant, (that is to say) 
Seve (7), &c. 

dna K[. S Meee mies either K[odAvd60]s (1914, 56; 1918, 18) or KopynAcos (1914, 55) 
would suit the space, but neither is called dra. KodoSds (1918, 9) is rather too short, and 
this person also is not called ama. The word was not always inserted, but is generally 
(though not always; cf. 1. 58, n.) used in 1914; hence the person referred to here may be 
different from any of those who occur elsewhere in the correspondence. ‘This is the more 
likely, since he was presumably a member of the Memphite community, not of that at 
THathor. 

II, Tnévaws : just conceivably for Tyveos in the Hermopolite nome (another Tjus in the 
Thinite nome, PSI. iii, 168, 26), but much more probably a hitherto unrecorded place- 
name. 

’Avrivous: it is natural to suppose that this is another personal name (the last letter may 
be either s or o), but if so we should expect before Tovav the word «ai, that following 
’Avrivovs being a patronymic or epithet (mpecBurep|os?). Unless «ai has been accidentally 
omitted, we must suppose «ai to follow in the lacuna and og to be the end of a name. In 
that case Tovay is the father’s name and Ovevadpiov the grandfather’s (amending vi@ to viod). 
This is unexpected in a letter but not impossible. 

Tovay: cf. 1914. 58, n. 

12. Mixadtéyny: perhaps used in this letter as an indeclinable word. The person 
referred to is almost certainly identical with the sxyRaNwiyasroc, samaNwityasoc of 1921, 
24, 25. For the name Meyadovupos see BGU. 91, 1; P. Fay. 108, 1. A connexion with 
such names as Mikados, MuxkdAn, Mixkadiov, Mixkados, Mexkddov (see Preisigke, Wamenbuch) is 
much less likely. 

mapadéonrai: since there is no further mention of anything that Paiéous is to do except 
to pray for the writer and intercede with various brethren on his behalf, it is possible 
that this really refers to the parties to the d:a6qj«n, and the verb may even be a quotation from 
the (written or oral) agreement, one party addressing the other. If so, what follows has 
reference to the performance of the dca6j«n, the knroddyavoy being in connexion with the povy 
of Sourous. But the writer does not definitely say so, and if the probable meup|agépawos is 
accepted it may well be that the writer's wapdéwropa was that instead of going to the wovy he 
remained in the «nroAdyavov. For the aorist form see |. 16, n. 

metp}(opawos ; suggested by Prof. Hunt and on the whole likelier than the editor’s 
reading omovd|a¢éuawos which is used in a different sense in ]. 20. 

13. knmohaxdvm: apparently a new word. 

viv BéBnxa: certainly not curBéBy«a, though that may be intended. But this writer 
seems quite capable of using Baive in the sense of cvpBaiva. 

14. ojovdjs: almost certain, though the v (made in the same way as the v of oraupa, 
1. 19) is a little doubtful; cf.1. 22. Whether the writer attached any definite meaning to 
this jumble of words may be gravely doubted. 

15. G6 papadnpaive: the same doubt arises regarding the reference of this phrase as 
on some previous occasions. 

rov x{vpiov xrh.; the probable Jrev suggests this reconstruction, which involves the 
supposition that roy... wo is a parenthesis, that rov stands for rév (sc. dvroy after vig), and 
that the writer changes the construction in the.second part of his antithesis. This is the 
less objectionable because it seems clear that the construction is confused. 

16. dmodeor: for the use of the future in place of the subjunctive see |. 22, yevécovre, 
and, e.g., P. Oxy. vii, 1071, 5, 6. But an aorist form ¢dwca occurs (see P. Oxy. vii, 1066, 


86 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1917] 


12; xvi, 1874, 14; 1. 12 above, rapadéonrar; and the instances collected by Jannaris, § 996 
(51)), and it may be that we should read amodoon. 

Calico [sce . Jaws: the writer’s extraordinary style makes conjecture hazardous. 
dai is a very doubtful reading. After it 97{ is possible. 

18. ¢y® ‘Opiwy: this seems to be a (strictly ungrammatical) interjection of the w riter’s 
name, which he perhaps remembered he had omitted in 1. 2. 

aitay|: the repetition is quite possible for th:s writer. 

1g. ws Toinws oruvp@: cf. |. 6, n. 

dmoortepnolt@ oot pa: evidently used in the sense of ‘deprive me of fellowship’, ‘ cut 
me off’, After this kai pa) €[xpimreot] pa is possible. 

22. yeveoovte: cf. ]. 16, n. 

katéowow : Cf. 1916, 24,n. It is quite likely that the present is a parallel case to those 
quoted there, the sense being in effect ‘may show their mercy by calling on God’. 

para xtd.: cf 1]. 14 f. and note. 

24. mepi: cf. 1.7, n.; Jannaris, § 1488. 

26. ga: the traces so read are on a piece of papyrus which had been detached and 
has conjecturally been inserted here. But the identification is very uncertain, and the traces 
are by no means clear. 

27. d|Sehpous : this was not the last word, for‘under the second e of Hee in l. 26 is the 
top of a single letter; but]. 27 was the last line, unless there was a short one under the lost 
second half of 1. 26. 


PAPYRUS 1918.—Circa A.D. 330-340. 
Inv. No. 2546. 22-8 13-7 cm. 


Acquired in 1922. Light brown papyrus. Damaged in several places, particularly at 
the point where the papyrus was folded from top to bottom. Written in a medium-sized, 
rather irregular, sloping cursive hand, along the fibres, in black ink. Folded from right to 
left and then once from top to bottom. 


There is little of special moment in this letter, which, apart from the 
lengthy greetings, is merely to announce the dispatch of provisions and to 
express the writer’s intention of visiting Paiéous. But the letter illustrates. how 
anchorites and monks obtained their supplies, and it has grammatical and ortho- 
graphical points of interest. The evidence as to folding (Il. 21-2, n.) is also of 
value, since it confirms inferences drawn from creases in other papyri as to the 
frequent practice of folding letters in two directions before sealing them. 


TO TipiwTdt@ Kal dyannpévm matpi dra [Ila-| 
inods [[o]] Xapiowos mrctora xaipev. II pd pé[r] 
mdvrev aon d\fopat cot woAAd Ev K(upt)w, domd[oluae 
dra Atooxopoly] kat dra Aptgova kai dra Kepédy- 
5 dws Kat dma ‘Tépag kai of ody tpiv ddeddol 
kar’ dvopa, aomdgouat ITervipios cal Acwvi- 
$ns kai ITerOvBéottos kai ILamvoténs kal dra 
Tovay kai dra Ilavape, dordg(o|uat ILamvovdns 
6 AvratoroXitns Kai KodoBods Kai of dded- 


10 gol Kar’ dvoya. EHidéres ody thy omovdny 


[1918] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 87 


cov, wdtep dra Ilanots, wept mavrav ddedpav 
pad{A}iora eué, Wold Ered] cor powwixia 
adptaBas dvo kal ddrevpa gla|kod apraBas 
pds Kal mpos Kai oragoitia xvidioy piav 
15 Kal KAoKedéas Kvidioy pilav: Kai et TL 
xpelayv Exes méuov por Kai pi) (4)pleAnola 
fa} mept tov elmév corr Kal edv Oédy 6 OHed)s [? Tax]e 
pxopar mpos tuds ev taxe{s}. Aomdi(lere 
{rat} IIcadtobs kai of ody tpiv mavras 
20 Small traces of 1 more line. 


Verso: 


RE Sy eee as FL 
Parnes od Anééos) dre Ila-. BS , 
a LS) (apa) Xapioros. 


1. |. nyamnperg. [malinovs (so 1. x1): 1. Haunodre. 3. l.ce. Ko. 4. l. Tptpava, 
Tepdvtiov. 5. l. ‘Iépaxa, rovs, adeAqgors. 6. 1. Tervipsov, Aewvidny. 7. 1. MerOuBeorwor, 
Tanvov6ny (so 1. 8). 8. Over the at of acrafopa a character shaped like \ has been made. 
g. 1. rov AvravoroAitny, KodoBdy, rods ddeApos. kavor. 10. o of ovoua corr. from o. e of 
evdores corr., perhaps from 7; 1. eidas. II. @ Of ravrwy perhaps corr. from o (or vice 
versa ?). 12, First a of padduora perhaps inserted later. 1. euov. 13 f. 1. dpraBny 
play, 14. 1. orapidua, év (so |. 15). 15. l. yAvkedaias. 16. 1. dpeAnoate = 
Guédnoov (?: see note). 17. 1. etmov (?). Os. 18. 1. domd{ovra (?: see note). 
19. |. qpiv. 21. ma inovs ; 1, Mamovrt. 22. |. Xapiciov. 


‘To the most valued and beloved father Apa Paiéous, Charisius very many 
greetings. Before all things I greet you much in the Lord; I greet Apa Dio- 
scorus and Apa Tryphon and Apa Gerontius and Apa Hierax and the brethren 
with you by name; I greet Petnirius and Leonides and Petthubestius and 
Papnouthes and Apa Touan and Apa Panare ; I greet Papnouthes of Antaeopolis 
and Colobus and the brethren by name. Knowing then your zeal, father Apa 
Paiéous, for all the brethren, and especially myself, behold I have sent you dates, 
two artabae, and lentil meal, one artaba and upwards, and grapes, one cuizdion, 
and sweet olives, one czidion; and if you need anything send to me and do not 
neglect (?) the matters of which I told you; and if God. will I hope to come to 
you speedily. Psalious and those that are with us greet all [who are with you?]’. 
(Addressed) ‘ Deliver to Apa Paiéous, from Charisius.’ 


1, [Ila\jods: there is not very much room for za, especially at the end of the line, 
where we should expect a to terminate in a flourish, and it may be suspected that the dra 
led to the accidental omission of the 7a of rainovs. 

6. Ilervipios: the reading is almost certain, but the name does not occur in Preisigke’s 
Namenbuch. 

7. IerOuBéorv0s : cf. 1914, 48,n. This name also is not found in Preisigke. 

14. puds kat pds: cf. P. Oxy. iii, 488, 17 and n. (Hunt). 

15. kdoxedéas: for the almost certain correction to yAuxedaias cf. 1. 4, where Tepéyrios is 
written Kepdvduos, and see too SB. 1984(/), where yAvkehaiov appears as kAvkedeov. The 
word yAvkedaia does not seem to occur elsewhere, so far as the lexica and papyrus indexes 
go, but SB. 5747, 8, xepapsa B, év xpéos, év yAuxvedeay, seems likely to be an instance, yA. 


88 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1918] 


being for yAvkeAadv (so too, in the original edition, Grenfell, who accents yAvkveAedv), not 
for YAvkedaion, as Preisigke takes it. 

et rv: as not infrequently happens, xpetav yes is treated as practically a single, active 
verb, ‘need’, and so takes an accusative; cf. P. Lond. 239, 21 (ii, p. 298); Oxy. vii, 1068, 
20; “xiV, 1683, 17 f.3 xvi, 1929, 3; and so too in the i a of Aristides, Apol., pub- 
lished by Milne ( Journ. ‘Theol. Stud., XXv, 1923, 73- -7), ]. 26: méumovow airois a xpeiav 
eyouow, 

16 f. kat py... cov: not very satisfactory; the letter before the lacuna is certainly p, 
not a, the letter after it, though it can at need be read as a, is not specially like it, and the 
reading and interpretation adopted involve the supposition that the writer not only wrote 
peAdnoa (u[eAnon|s is too much for the space) for dueAncoy but inserted a superfluous a at the 
beginning of I. 17 and wrote evmey for eizov. Nevertheless pr dueAjons is so frequent in 
similar contexts that duéAnoov seems an obvious. correction here. The omission of a is easy 
enough to account for after 7, and the insertion of a in ]. 17 may be due to the fact that the 
writer originally intended to write (e. g.) a etrdy oot. 

17. 7év: the use of the article for the relative pronoun is very frequent in vulgar Greek 
of the Byzantine period; cf., e. g., the instances collected in the indexes to P. Lond. iv 
(p. 533) and v (p. 289). \ 

[ray |a: the a is likely, and though the word is hardly required after av 6éAy 6 6eds it 
suits the space and may well have been added as an additional toning down of the 
assertion: ‘I hope to come D. V.’ 

18 f, domd|Clere {ra} ... mdvras: this sentence is interpreted above as a greeting from 
the companions of Charisius to the community at Hathor. This seems likelier than to take 
domd¢ere aS = dondferde and amend oi to rots. Perhaps mavras is for mdvres, as the traces in 
]. 20 do not favour (e. g.) tovs obv tpiv. 

21-2. The diagram on the right (taking the place of the usual crosses) marks the 
place where the string passed round the folded letter. To the left of dn(d8os) is a crease, 
which suggests that the papyrus was folded here; and the diagram on the left is so placed 
that when the roll was thus folded it would come just opposite to that on the right. Thus 
the two diagrams prove conclusively that the letter was folded not only parallel to, but also 
at right angles with, the fibres of the verso, and that the string was passed round the letter 
and the seal attached after this second folding. 


PAPYRUS 1919.—Czvca A.D. 330-340. 
Inv. No. 2547. 25-2 X 41-2 cm. 


Acquired in 1923. Light brown papyrus. Imperfect on the left, except in the lower 
part of the papyrus, and rubbed along two narrow strips, one about the middle of col. 1, 
the other towards the left middle of col. 2. Written in a good, flowing, rather large cursive 
hand of notarial or official type, along the fibres, in black ink, Folded from right to left. 


The mutilation of col. 1 of this letter makes its particular purpose uncertain, 
but indeed it is somewhat doubtful whether it had any special purpose at all. 
The earlier lines were occupied with the opening greeting, the complete or 
restorable lines (from 1. 12 onwards) with compliments, religious reflections, and 
the concluding greetings, so that only two or three lines remain for any definite 
message or request, and it may well be that none such occurred. The style is of 
the usual wordy and empty kind, and is further obscured by the writer’s inability 
(rather striking in the case of a man whose hand is so practised) to control his 
cases, which are in extreme confusion. 

The writer's name is Tévyns, which at once recalls the IIfvvns apecBvrepos 
povis Treyeyxtpxews rod (Migne ris) ’Avreomodtrov vouod whose letter. to John 


[1919] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 89 


Archaph is quoted by Athanasius, Apol. c. Ar., 67. He calls Paiéous ddeA¢ds, 
not tar#p, so that we may take him to have been a man of some standing. He 
mentions (1. 30) a Yais, who may be the Waciv azo Tepdr of 1914, 57, and Terét 
(see 1914, 57, n.) was near enough to the Antaeopolite nome to make a con- 
nexion possible. A further argument in favour of the identification is ll. 18-20, 
which, though at present very doubtfully read, show that Pinnes was living at 
a considerable distance from Paiéous. uvés of 1914, 56 is likely to be a different 
person, since that passage implies that Phines was in the neighbourhood of 
Paiéous’s cell, and he is not called dma, as a priest probably would be. 


Colt 
[TS Kupip K]al ddeAPO jpar 
bate yeas dra| ITanodrt Ilévyns 
[€v K(upt)m mAcioTla yalpev. . 
[pd piv mévrav) eilxoular 78 xvpip O08 
Ralis' 9 er eieterecwe ars |. 7. dylalydvrav ody 
Bnet Remon meet lot tethaa 76 Zxovrt m7 dv- 
Rival ages 2? ader|POv cvvTavodyToy — 
[aspect k ] did beow THY adEAPO 
(OE Ss eae oe pdrA{Aliora bre ory O(€)O 
ein Won, SP ASIA et Juacpe .. [.] GAAHA@Y THY 
ete teahaten se: ata T)hy €v Helv mpoodevovcay 
Cer RC tlavrnv. Evyoua ov 7@ det- 


7 ~ ied 4 ‘ ~ X \ 
[yvjoT@ O(€)@ m\doais @pars wepi ood Kal mepl 
[Tav adedpaly ev X(pioT)@: Kal yap mpoonKdv 
15 oT GdApAov peluvigKegOa ev K(upi)e X(puoT)O did 
Thy éxatépwy vyeieav TodTO O€ moLodyTES 
\ 5 U4 2 foal A X 
Xpyoriavol KrAnOylcoluey ev X(ptoT)@. Todro oé 
év atépvois x bru Kay pecOa paxpav 
_ G@ddAjrov év TH miaTE TOK deuvyAoTov O(€0)b 


a ~ ) 
20 Kal GwMTHPOS huav.c... apev k[al] em adrov 


Col. 2] 
éoTiy 4 carnpla nuay X(picr)@ dvvdpea dvta avy Tots 
mpatrovet Thy alv\rod peydAny Ovvapw Kal ouv- 

14 aN 7 2 
exxnkores TH[v] mplolonyopeiav. IIpocayopetw ce 
TOAAG Kai Todis ddelAdlo}s mdvras Kar svopa rods adv 

va Ay Fie te ~ 4 ‘ nt 
25 gol, kal 6 paxdpios IlabAos mpocayopetet oe Kal Tovds 
adv col adergovs, Kali] of avy fpiv mdvtes adedpods 
mpocayopevoulat] oe pera Kai mévtov Tov 
adv gol ddedgovs: 'Edavn dé 4 adydmrn tpov 


€ 


év mot 1) mpoxupiocopuévn, PaA{A}ltoTa % pap- 


go THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1919] 


30 Tupneioa piv wrd Vairos kai Apmoxpa adder, 
as kal ovvnpiOunte tais dddAats dydzrats. 
Todro dé mowotvres ovvxpnorol KrAnOHoo- 
pev. 


Verso: 
dma ILas\nodr: 


35. 75 Jos. 
Perhaps traces of 1 more line. » 


4. 00; so too |. 9. 5. 1. dyaydvrwv. 7. 1. cupmovowvrer. 11. 1. npiv. 14. Xo; 
Soul pet7ee it. 15. K® XO. 16. 1. tylear. 17. 1. Xprotcavoi, 18. 1. reba 
(?: see note). 19. Ov. 21. |, Xpiorod . . . dvrwr(?). 22. mparrovot. |. cuve- 
oxnkéter(?). 23. 1. mpoonyopiay. 26. |. ddeAgoi. 28. 1. ddeApav. 29. |. mpoxn- 
pvocomenn. 31. 1. curnpidunra. + of ayaras corr. 32. |. ovyxprorot. 


‘To our lord and brother Apa Paiéous, Pennes, very many greetings in the 
Lord. Before all things I pray to the Lord God... I pray therefore to the ever- 
to-be-remembered God at all hours on your behalf and on behalf of the brethren 
in Christ; for indeed it is fitting that we make mention of each other in the 
Lord Christ for the health of both; and so doing we shall be called Christians 
in Christ. This I have in my heart, that even though we were far from 
each other, (yet) in the faith of our ever-to-be-remembered God and Saviour [we 
are united ?] and in him is our salvation, if we are by power of Christ with those 
who do his mighty power [sc. will?] and have jointly obtained the appellation 
[i.e. of Christians]. I greet you much and all the brethren by name that are with 
you. The blessed Paul greets you and the brethren with you, and all the 
brethren with us greet you with all the brethren with you. Your love which is 
trumpeted abroad was shown in all things, particularly that which was testified to 
us by Psais and Harpocras the fishermen, even as it is numbered among. your 
other works of love. And doing this we shall be called fellows with Christ.’ 


2. It is quite possible that nothing is lost before ama Tamotrs and that |. 2 was 
indented, but an adjective may well have been inserted here, and as |. 3 was apparently not 
indented that is perhaps more probable. 

4. The line over 6 extends also over the tw of xupwo, and as tw is separated by a space 
from kup and was so written (the being linked to +) as to look like xe it is possible that 
the writer, on reaching the end of the line, took the last two words for ko 6o. 

B. dylalyovrey: dyarovrov (e. g. pera Tay oe dy.) is naturally suggested, but seems hardly 
_ possible, as the room is insufficient for a and the first stroke of s. But neither y is certain. 

8. ddeAPO: wv Of cvvT@vodtyrev (I. 7) is made cursively, without raising the pen, but here 
the concluding stroke is not extended upwards as in |. 7, and it is improbable that more 
than » was intended. The phrase may have been (e. g.) thy ddeAPo mpérovear, 

g. wad{A} ora: for the misspelling see 1]. 29 and 1918, 12, and cf. too méAAv, 1915, 17; 
1916, 37. 

Io. jvacye .. (ts perhaps kar(ovv-, &c. Jeoxe judo peda. 

13. mepi: cf. 1917, 7, n. and 24, n 

15. ptlurnoxerOa: not a very easy reading, but possible, and it suits Me traces better 
than anything else which has suggested itself. 


[1919] THE MELETIAN SCHISM gl 


18. weeGa: very puzzling. A verb is wanted, and the available space is scanty. The 
original characters are certainly very like pena. » has been crossed out and e written above 
it. Prof. Hunt’s suggestion of #ueba, though it cannot be read, is a probable correction. 
Apparently the writer, by a curious slip of the pen, wrote pena for nueéa, and then, attempting 
to correct it, altered n to « instead of simply striking out y and inserting it before 7. For 
jjpe6a and other deponent forms see Moulton and Milligan, s. v. etui. 

21 f. As it stands the passage means nothing, and emendation is necessary. That 
adopted in the translation and critical notes seems the likeliest. Sv-auy in |. 22 is perhaps 
a slip of the pen (due to the duvdye: of 1. 21, which is directly above it) for BovAnou. 

25. IatAcs: a Hatdov tov dvayymorny is mentioned in 1914, 59, but was then with or 
near Paigéous. The MavdA@ [xp|eoBv[rlaipo 1@ aad Tyévaws of 1917, 11 is more likely to be 
the person here referred to, but quite as likely this Paul was different from either. 

32. Tovto S€ mowdvres: doing what? ‘This seems to be mere unthinking verbiage, 
perhaps a recollection of ll. 16-17. 

guvxpnotoi: ovyxpnords is an unlikely adjective, and the Xpyoriavoi of |. 17 (cf. 1918, 6, 
Xpyotiauxod ; xpnotopdpw, 1926, 1; &c.) makes it almost certain that avyxptatol is to be 
read. But the sense is not altogether clear. ovv-Xpioroi, ‘fellow-Christs’, is rather bold, 
but is perhaps possible if we take the meaning to be ‘ fellow-workers with Christ’. Or has 
xptorés its original sense, ‘ anoinied jointly’? The word may be miswritten for cvyypnoriavoi. 

35. Possibly dzdd]os. 


PAPYRUS 1920.—Circa A.D. 330-340. 
Inv. No, 2488. 26x15 cm. 


Acquired in 1922. Light brown papyrus, darker in patches but nowhere dark; lacunae 
in several places, especially on the left. Written in a fair-sized, upright cursive hand, 
rounded and fairly regular, with few ligatures, across the fibres, in black ink of a grey tinge. 
Folded from top and bottom, chiefly the latter. Facsimile (ll. 1-7): Plate III (¢). 


The following three papyri have considerable palaeographical value because 
of their early date, as also from the fact that their connexion with 1918 and 1914 
makes them datable within comparatively narrow limits. This last point is 
of special importance because most early Coptic papyri so far known can be dated 
only on grounds of handwriting. In Mr. Crum’s Catalogue of the Coptic MSS. in 
the Rylands Library is a group of letters (269, pl. 3 ; 270, pl. 4; 271, pl.43; 273, 
DINO Wiig 27s 207, pla 8015 S11, pl. sco9ra pl. 65 614 + 952. pl ks 
396, pl. 4), all written in a more or less pure Achmimic dialect and all dated by 
Crum, on grounds of script, comparatively early (fourth and fourth-fifth cen- 
turies). A comparison with the present letters shows that he was right. The 
Rylands letters do not indeed, from the hands, seem to be all of the same date, 
but a majority of them probably differ from one another by not many years, and 
in view of the evidence of 1920-1922 there is little danger in dating these in the 
fourth century, perhaps in the second rather than the first half. None of the 
hands very closely resembles that of 1920 ; perhaps the nearest (rather in single 
letters than in general appearance) is 292. A far closer parallel is however 
no. 1102 (pl. 12) in Crum’s Catalogue (from Ashmunén, i. e. Hermopolis), which 
may now definitely be dated in the fourth century and probably not late in it. 

As pointed out in the introduction to this Part (p. 45) the evidence does not 
greatly support the assumption that 1920-1922 come from the same settlement 
as the Rylands letters. 


92 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1920] 


The contents of 1920 are in no way remarkable. The subject is the making 
for the writer by Paiéous himself or his community of a cloak and some shoes, 
and the letter has therefore a certain interest, as illustrating the occupations of the 
monks; cf. 1922. It is a reasonable inference from what is said that the writer, 
Hatre of Tmou mpahém, was living at no great distance from the settlement 
of Hathor. 


QATPE TWpariiTeeoy eeMlaowee MeTcoarer mecy 
E1WT TACINY NitgaToOwWP equine epor 
TONOY Oaelixoere Naipe Yussie emaciwr 
mamatTaheerr Yuwie emRoyer maAciHoy 
5 aYW MeEcNHoy THPoY ETHERAR HATA NHEypa 
YUE ECOWP MWpaehTwoe eeliTecpeeaay oe 
ACHH aeltecugHpe Yuwie EpwTh To 
[MJoy gaettascerc efoyuwuy enay enmeTit 
90 itee aailgo NoenacceAoc emerre 
TO AEIRMOOCTE NAR aelloooy ENTARET Wa 
pon ethenpnte HoyAehitwm fitoy 
eEWxe OYN WF0aee Tacetoc [RjATA MeROYy 
[ww .. .|MeiTHitooye RAEI ATW 
Pere ] NeTRitacsoyy ehoA epoc met 
[Man TlefenrcTOAH Nan Nrogime eT 
[Maai]TC Nak eWwme ON EROYOW N : 
[....Jam adAa enpHte NitTooyerte 
(eeeaenee: JAaTaANooy aemese Cap Wore 
[NT]aTamooy ehoA aeaonRnoyer Huw 
[MJe Wulle ERWANTAMOC NEGH oycoit 
[e]yMHoy Tiltooye H TAac astaghey 
ere oyoemte NeAoode eqywoywoy aer 
[Ta]ac semaghey fire]... .] fcooym seeit 
[seJNTR oYpwsee enfanoyly adtAa apr ma 
25 [seeleye oww NETWIhID exswes 


20 


OYBrel oaeiaxoetc NTETH 
THP Maseeeye QwwT 


Verso an’ mainy gossoAoe’ (ornament) mapa’ a[TpHtoc] 


2. First 9 altered from &. 4. Watta : sz. 5. pa: no line visible over a. 12, Or 
nmeyoy-, equally possible. 13. Right ends of first e are broken off, but there is little 
doubt as to the reading. 17. Read ?ethempute; cf. 1. 11. 25. QWW: sic; cf. 


2%, 279 S2C, 


[1920] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 93 


‘ Hatre of Tmou mpahoém lit is that writes (to) his father Paeiéw of P-hathor,? 
greeting him much. In the Lord hail (yaipe).? I greet my father Patabeit ; 4 
I greet the little Paeiéw (5) and all the brethren that are with you, according to 
(xara) their names; I greet Hér of Tdohe® and his mother Helené and her 
children. I greet you (g/ur.) much in the Lord, desiring to see your face as it 
were the face of angels (dyyedos).° Seeing that (éevdx) (10) I spoke, then, to you, 
on the day when you came to us, respecting the fashion? of a cloak (AeBirwy) ; ® so 
now, if it be possible, make it according to (card) your® wish (?) [.....]... I send 
it when you shall come. And... whatever you shall spend thereon. He that 
(15) [shall bring] this letter (émo.) to you, the same [shall take] it (sc. the cloak) 1° 
to you. Again if you wish, [..... ]...1! But (4AAd) as to the fashion of the 
SHOGSif 5.52.5 | make them ;* there1* has not been means [that I] should make 
them, for there has been a little (20) sickness. If you make it (sc. the cloak) and 
you find a brother about to come, send it, or (4) give it to Pahbew. See, an 
owpe of dried grapes have] given to Pahbew...[..... ]. I know indeed (yév) that 
you are a good (?) man!*, but (4AAd) have (25) mind of me also and pray for me. 
Farewell in the Lord and do you (g/ur.) have mind of me also." 

Verso. ‘Give (ambos) it to Paiéw the confessor (suoAoynr}s), from (mapd) 
Ha|trés].’ 

The ornament between the two parts of the address apparently consists of 
a parallelogram placed at right angles to the writing and enclosing, on the left, 
a number of lines crossing one another diagonally, on the right, a number of 
upright lines from top to bottom of the parallelogram. 


* An unknown place. ‘Eagle Island.’ ? Cf. 1918, 3, n. 

* Despite the phrase in |. 8, this division of the words is made probable by the many 
Coptic letters using gaamxoerc Q¢arpe. 

+ The first ma may, as so often, represent ama, if it is not a mere error. 

* The best known Téhe (Tukh) was near Hermopolis; v. P. Ryl. Copt. 42, n. 342, n.; 
Wadi Sarga, no. 133, . Presumably Téhe, being thus named, was not in the immediate 
neighbourhood. 

® Reminiscent perhaps of Acts vi, 15. 

* pute in Saiidic, an archaic and very rare word (Zoega, 269, 564); not uncommon in 
Achmimic, where it sometimes corresponds to Sa. casot (Mich. vii, 20; Zach. iv, t). slecan 
hardly have any but a concrete, material meaning here. Note that ge too is used (Il. 9, 18). 

* On the gender of this cf. Wadi Sarga, no. 161,n. Men who wear such a garment 
are no doubt monks, : 

2 Or their”. 

** The genders of the various accusatives prevent doubt as to what objects are in question. 

" st at end of |. 16 may be plur. art., or pronom. form of ese ‘bring’. 

* If € (as in MS.) and not ethe be read, it may, with following -me, indicate a participial 
construction. 

‘’ vasto and tassro (1. 12) differ presumably in meaning, but it is difficult to distinguish 
them. The former is very rarely used of the making of a material object (Zoega, 423). 

" It seems best to leave tap untranslated. 

*° This name as here in Rossi, Wuovo Cod., p. 3, and the same person (a martyr) as 
nagheoy, JZSS. coples de Leyde, 185; and the name as natoheoy in a graffito at Achmim, 
feec., xi, 147. In Afiss., iv, 422, ‘ Baba’ is the Arabic transcript of the above martyr’s name 
(cf. P. Lond. iv, p. 410, n.), which thus appears to be connected with Achmim. 

* A similar phrase in Mon. of Epiphanius, no. 327. 

*" These words recall the postscript often added by the scribe, who however usually 
gives his name. ; 


94 THE MELETIAN SCHISM 


PAPYRUS 1921.—Czrca A.D. 330-340. 
Inv. No. 2549. 24:5 X19°8 cm. 


Acquired in 1923. Lightish brown papyrus; a good deal rubbed in places and with 
several small lacunae, besides the loss of a strip down the whole sheet near the left side of 
the letter; the two fragments are nowhere continuous but the gap is smallest in ll. 22-7. 
Written in a fair-sized, upright, rather square cursive hand with very few ligatures, along the 
fibres, in black ink. Folded from left to right. Facsimile (Il. 22-8): Plate III (4). 


This letter, though, apart from an announcement of the dispatch of some 
articles (provisions ?), it consists entirely of greetings and pious compliments, 
is not without interest, firstly for the reflections and scriptural quotations in the 
earlier part, and secondly because it is apparently a letter from, not to, Paiéous. 
There are indeed difficulties as to this last assertion. The first line is very imper- 
fect, so that though ma[s|Hoy comes at the end, where we naturally look for the 
name of the writer, it is not impossible that the usual order might be reversed. 
But the address on the verso is clear: nm’ maesnoyce ammaroy. a is the regular 
abbreviation for tapd, which in addresses precedes the sender’s name, and it is not 
plausible to explain it here as = wapddos ; where a verb was used at all it was 
either amddos or émidos. The translation must therefore be ‘From Paiéous’, and 
since he is not likely to have called himself ‘the just’, we must conclude that 
Dikaios. was his father’s name; for the word as a personal name see Preisigke, 
Namenbuch. But there are difficulties even here. It is strange that the recipient’s 
name was not given in the address, whereas the sender’s name was, and it is 
hardly less so that in an archive which was clearly that of Paiéous himself we 
should find (not a draft but) an actual letter written by him. Internal evidence 
too would naturally suggest that he was the recipient. The writer addresses his 
correspondent with great deference and respect, as we should expect Paiéous to 
be addressed. Hierax, Tryphon, and Dioscorus, to whom greetings are sent, are 
known as members of the community at Hathor ; Isidorus, who sezds greetings, 
isnot. The articles sent by the writer were delivered by Megalonymus, who is 
almost certainly identical with the M:xaAéyny of 1917, a man there also clearly not 
belonging to the Hathor community. In every way it would be more satisfactory, 
but for the address, to regard Paiéous as the recipient, and the suspicion arises 
that the writer may have blundered in the address and inserted nm’ before narnoye 
instead of before asnatoy ; but this can hardly be assumed on a@ friorz grounds 
Paiéous may have been temporarily absent from his monastery and this letter 
have been directed by him during this absence to his deputy or temporary 
successor. ; 

The dialect here shows decided characteristics of the younger type of 
Achmimic (Acta Pauli): abadN, apay, veer demonstrative, verbal forms SRALE, 
sappeit, ve- causative prefix, p- before Greek verbs (? |. 18) ; but the majority of its 
forms are common to Achmimic and Middle-Egyptian. The only word already 
purely Satidic is the verb o (ll. 10,12). The script may be compared with those 
of Rylands Catalogue, pl. 3, nos. 276, 311, pl. 5, no. 313. 


[1921] 


| fe) 


15 


20 


25 


30 


Verso. 


THE MELETIAN SCHISM : 95 


TleTe| jMa(l|Hoy 
gselisacic Dealper NWApeln seeit 


Howh [it}ree [fupaceearT TaannoyTe 


eberte[n ....] QWc ENRoYyasanapioc 
azeeaiTe ....) AYW ERPay[T] giiteR 
ghhr[oyernalitoy fire mroyte gwe 


(T] 
Te ail... <. IMAM Noypar eherer 


TieT[ic ayo) Ten[aleann tieler ervey 

q bs if cv. 

HTen [eeeetac .]. AOYAM Nias ENMpPAT IREUHee: 
T on, ' 2 Coonan 
eherten[ceealT owe ERO seeeaTaer fire MXC 
RATA O[€ NTaAMxacie wooe gaeMeMaAN we 
seapedalay eltjo aeeeaTacr Tagp seine 


brtoy Nrje mhloc ayw asermoyaere eTQace 
Tewalepar oleemeyRapitoc Nwyapel ent 
MieTleye apaly wzeceitaxwr abhadr iirveer 

r , Y 
QE* AOO|'YH COVA Mee ETQACE AYW ENPaT 
ethene’. .| TERPacpH Tap wAW seeeac weoyatt 
Mtee epniicirey apa cenac: write en roy 
GE NMAEIWT AYH Tlaseppes[T] ecemmerpe carta 


arcey gii[iten|Mpocey yn eToyaah ierawpoc 
wre [Apan] yoyite ama Tply}epom usnte 
THNHpe [Te]|pag eewmRecan erTiieeeeecy Puyy(szc) 
joy wus [Allockopoc YnNoyse acitTitnay «sit 
Teese WJM WER aetihecay Nre seyRadoiryacoc 
eqjuyiite [e]Teneeeee aeatla eernadoiryeroc 
Mec .. [elNeqyTeel Tape emeqarimtayle 
aaniteT).Japan adAa quite apan seit 


epiwsee TIHPOY] eTamenery yuwiite apan 
[seNeTiaeleeen THPOY RATA Neypeit 
[eppwcear ce] eyNoeear CN RO OW eeanapiw 
[TATE HAY ATIW)|TATE MaTep 


W MWaesHoye ainaioy/ 


96 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1921] 


“POTS eid erate 1 Paiéu. 

In the Lord hail (yaipere)! Before (+pév) [all] things [I] give thanks unto 
God because of your (?)[..... ], since £(as) you are a man (5) most (?) blessed 
(uakdpios) ....- and zealous in your good(?) works (inspired) of God, so that 
(Gare) smite cas with joy because of your faith (aéoris) [and] your love (ayamn) 
that you have toward ? every one. We are glad a little* (10) because of your 
[manner (? of life)] °, since (@s) you are a soldier of Christ ; even (xard) as the Lord 
Salelaifi fae. +1 6 “No one that is a soldier mixeth’ (himself) in the affairs 
of [this *] life (Sios) °” and “the husbandman that laboureth, [he] it is 1° [taketh] 
of his (séc) fruit (kapaés) the first.”11_ We (15) believe (moredvew) Him (?), that thus 
it shall be fulfilled toward (?) every one that labours. And we are glad because 
CE rar nekye For (ydp) the scripture (ypagy) saith, “ Whosoever believeth (mor.) 1 on 
Him shall not be put to shame.”!* So now,!* my father and my beloved, do 
you (?) ® remember (20) me in [your] holy prayers. Isidore 1° greets [you]. 
Inorect’ Apa Tryphon, Loreet.< 3). 5. Hierax and the other brother that is 
with him. I greet (and) I do obeisance to!* Dioscorus.”” And now I have sent 
you filteen.\.. = and other six by (?) Megalonymus,” (25) who desires (?) that 
you should know that Apa Megalonymus ..... ; for (yap) if he had sold (?) 
(them), he would have sent them,” with those that you (already) have.” But 
(add) he greets you and (so do) all [those] that are with him. I greet you [and] 
all [those with] you, according to (ard) their names. [Fare you well], I pray, in 


1 The recipient’s name begins either with Pets...,or with Peus... That this should 
be no name, but an epithet (formed with the relative, or the article) applied]to Paiéous, 
seems improbable here. 
enmn- for emtR-. . Cf. ehe- for erhe- in ll. 4, 7, 10. No trace here of t above. 

§ Neither ga- nor mJca- is legible here. 

* mneusHasr often means merely ‘a little’; e.g. Prov. v, 14; Mk. viii, 7. 
° If caxat, the meaning may be ‘ your example’. 

° Can fan be miswritten for ita, ‘in the Spirit’? 


is) 


’ Taop sec, presumably a mere slip for Tagg. 

* Space hardly allows ms- and Sa‘id. has m- (rod). 

Dooy Ab Vane ible ke 

© meugag-, as the Sa‘id. (sec cod.; cf. Horner, p. 572). 

wh a AUN, ab OE 

Here again t seems to be omitted ; 1. erp-. 

iS OMe whl. 

‘4 $stoy oymee is presumably intended. 

'° For ? eneerpe. 

6 Does not occur elsewhere. 

Cf. 1914, 54; 1918, 4. 

'® There seems no room for gre in the gap and tHmHpe I cannot explain. Presumably 
the object of the preceding usime. The 2nd plur. -tHme, to be expected in this dialect, 
would not be grammatical after this verb. pe might recall the enclitic, ‘ further, besides ’, in 
Papyruscodex, pp. 26, 34. For Hierax cf. 1914, 55; 1916, 3; 1918, 5. 

” Reading fusime foywuy(T) mwa. 

*°C{ 1916, 3% LOIS; 4: 

A COR UOLT 125 ny 
~ Assuming this to represent emeyy ... meqmtatnmooyne, though teer for 4 may 
seem improbable. Clearly it cannot here be the demonstrative, as in ll. 8, 15 ; consequently 
the preceding meg cannot be dative. 

* Assuming gapak ; but all is uncertain. 


[1921] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 97 


the Lord God, most blessed [and] most [saintly] father.’ ([éppdc0ai ce] edxouac 
ev Kupl OO paxapis[ tare kal dy.d |rare TATE Dp.) 
Verso. ‘From (zapd) Paiéous (son) of Dikaios.’ 


PAPYRUS 1922.—Circa A.D. 330-340. 
Inv. No. 2548. 2317-7 cm. 


Acquired in 1923. Brown papyrus with some lighter patches ; imperfect on the 
right except in ll. 2~7 and with some lacunae elsewhere. Written in a rather large, irregular 
cursive hand with not many ligatures, along the fibres, in greyish black ink. Facsimile 
(ll. 3-12): Plate III (c). 


It is by no means certain that this letter was addressed to Paiéous. The end 
of 1. 1 is mutilated; the visible letters cannot be reconciled with the reading 
maermoye and rather suggest m[ex|No[c], nor is there room for maemmoye after the a. 
(But if s[.]No could be satisfactorily accounted for it would be possible to read 
(e. g.) [w]a[snoy].) Hence it must be considered doubtful whether the letter really 
belongs to the Meletian archive at all, especially since the names Bes, Aphyngius, 
Chariton, and Pshen ... do not elsewhere occur in the collection. On the other 
hand the names Helen (here doubtful) and Horion are found in other letters, and 
T...of 1. 16 may be Tryphon, who also occurs elsewhere. The mention of 
a eBirwy connects the letter with 1920, and its general appearance makes it likely 
that it belongs to the same period. Hence it is on the whole probable that it is 
one of the Meletian letters; whether it was addressed to Paiéous or some other 
member of the community must be left in doubt. Unfortunately it appears 
to have borne no address on the verso. 

The idiom of the writer differs notably from that of the other two papyri. 
Conspicuous in it is the very rare verbal prefix ga- as Perf. I (Il. 4, 6 ?, 112, 14), 
and its relative etga- (1. 7). See Wadi Sarga, no. 1, and references; also the 
Acta Paul. On the other hand a- seems here to represent Pres. II (ll. 4, 5, 21). 
To be noted further is the suffix -roy (I. 18), beside the usual -coy; also the 
frequent doubling of consonants: «, A, m,p, 7. The vowel system is in the main 
Middle-Egyptian: the forms ead, epak, ssauye, ertat- (1. 3, but gatoot- |. 17) 
distinguish it from the ‘ Achmimic’ group, though others: mex, cam, cper, cnmeoy, 
Tunmay, xsaeit, &c., are common to both these dialects. 

The script too is remarkable: with one exception so far (Crum, Short Texts, 
no, 184, where the dialect shows some of the above features), this scribe is alone 
in forming his g backwards §. His us approximates to that of early Fayytimic 
MSS. : cf. especially Crum, Cazal., pl. 11, no. 711. 


Bure eestacinge mereger [JA Jal 
SNIMECNHOY THpoy eyuitepan meer 
WT KATA E€ ETEdAReAIE ehaA oFTATH 
BEAINHOY ECOHT CANDICE ENGWUJT 

H 


98 THE MELETIAN SCHISM [1922] 


5 SEARNHOY NIKKI orTAchiToy sextitA 
AentTe gfaluTIMaycoy WN AapiToy wxees/ ar] 
: ° 
coy NER ADOYW KATA E€ ETOATBOC 


erhenepTah citteoy Mapuynt mt. . | 
Wanoy api mppacyw mmeprah cimleoy 
10 NSAEIT KKaTIIMNACYCOY Mel, 
mee ggc| 
giTAAehitoy imimaito’ gant 
SANTOR THUJITE ATA wit 
SUMETTIIITELLEy AYU oFAe[ IH Aen] 
TE QANTENNAYCOY EOPPpsioimn atl 
15 NAPITON weeeaicoy NER THU[HITE a 
SPMITETHMERLEC] THUJTITE ET[ 
SEMITECAN EWWITE OATOOTH | 
WNHIINE eeaATHMAyTOY aocyw | 
fitoy seabcnnecoy GIs of 
20 ANNEOY eTeTIAeH [I]MROYer MN] 
coy Hen ewuwle anwempe oal 
WER NWecitHoy (TINpoy ustite €/par 
AoYouh exma eeaqy coet 
ere aeuse . w (lank) 


Verso, at right angles to the preceding text. Of 1. 25 scarcely a letter is 
distinguishable. 


26 efage ewwime ae €. meeyencho MW. 1a 
TIpawMe EWWMe AART... OARROC EARR... 
PeMoyw Tagai 


‘Bés and Aphinge! it is that write to... and all the brethren. They 
greet you, our father. Seeing (card) how you went forth from us (saying), 
“T am coming north,’ we are grown weary expecting (5) that you should come. 
You have not come with (?) the cloak (AeBirov) ? and the napkin (Aévriov). [We] 
sent them to Charitén (saying that he should) give them to you. And seeing 
(kara) how I said regarding the two arzabas of lentils that [were to be ?]* bought, 


1 The first name is rare. Bns @ ‘ Big Bés ’, Bns kovis, Byns ojp ‘ Little Bés’, are found. 
In Cemeteries of Abydos, iii, 39 it is a woman’s name (cf. Bjjos). To the second ’Adiyxtos, 
’Angvyxeos correspond. On the analogy of ’Apovayxuos, &c. = gepoyou (cf. Crum, Cazal., 
no. 1028) one might here assume eyoyox as the original form. But H. Thompson points 
out that "Adiyxcos has been accepted as an equivalent of the later ehwmg. 

? Cf. 1920, n. 8. 

* Lit. ‘saying, Give them to thee’, Similarly in 1. 15. 

‘ Or ‘that [you(?) have] bought’, though in |. 7 the relative has a different form. 
‘[Saying, ] buy them’ is also possible. 


[1922] THE MELETIAN SCHISM 99 


have a care for the two artabas (10) of olives; send them to me CP) eis witha?) 
the cloak (AeBirwy) of ...10n account of (?)...of his?... and yours.? We 
greet Apa Pshen ... and those with him, and Hele[ne.* The (?) napki]ns 
(A€vriov) > we have sent to Horién® the... (of) (15) Chariton, (saying that he 
should) give them you. We greet... and those with him. We greet. T*.....and 
his brother. If you have in hand . . . of dates, send them.? And... fetch 
them (?).° Thirty-two lengths (?)® of .. . (20) make them (?)?° at the price (ruu7) 
[of] the small... [send?] them to us, if we can do according... you. All the 
brethren greet [you?]... something to get (?)." Write... 

Verso, ... .-But if... If he’. . . what you said ~. ., let (?) the answer 
reach us.’ 


' This abbreviated word—assuming masmo the right reading—may be a name, a place 
(Iavés ?), or may designate the material whereof the /edc#ém was made. Further, n may be 
the article, m-asto, or ma the possessive, ‘my ’, ma-mo (? ‘my nomzsma *). It would, however, 
be possible to read teamo, though it would be difficult to accommodate this verb (‘to make ’) 
to the context. 

* Or gas- may be verbal, as in ll. 4, 14, and so too itTteg-. 

* This can hardly be right, for how can meq- and twr agree? 

* Cf. 1920, 6. 

,’ Supposing the words in ll. 5, 6 to be repeated. But it is doubtful whether enough 
letters could be got into the lost part of the line. 

° Cf. 1914. 53: 1917, 18. 

” Note the suffix here, compared with that in Il. 6, 14. 

* Perhaps better Ne|Arroy, another reference to the Jebitén. 

* Assuming o16@ to stand for ox. 

’ Supposing this to be the verb tamo (cf. 1920), with doubled sm. 
"' Not satisfactory, since »xma should not here represent otto. 


Ill. THE -CORRESPONDENCE -OF PAPTEINOGTIUS 


THE seven letters which follow were all, according to the statement of the 
dealer from whom they were purchased, discovered together. That the statement 
is correct is sufficiently shown by the contents of the letters themselves, which are 
all, with one exception (1927), addressed to a certain Paphnutius ; in 1927 the 
name of the recipient does not occur, but there is no reason to doubt that it 
belongs to the same archive as the others and was, like them, sent to Paphnutius. 
Unfortunately no information was given as to provenance, and the one place 
which occurs in the correspondence (®iAovikxov, 1924, 5), though it may probably 
be identified with a place so-called in the Heracleopolite nome, can give no help 
as to the locality in which Paphnutius lived and in which the papyri were found. 
There is one piece of evidence which suggests (see 1927, intr.) that this is to be 
sought farther south than Oxyrhynchus, but the inference is not certain. Nodates 
occur, but here the evidence of script is decisive. A comparison with, forexample, 
the Abinnaeus correspondence, which can be dated exactly, makes it clear that 
these letters also belong to the fourth century, probably to about the middle 
of it. A further argument, more hazardous but of some weight, may be drawn 
from a personal name. The letter numbered 1924 was from a certain Ausonius, 
who subscribes at the foot, the letter being written by an amanuensis. The name 
Ausonius was not very common in Egypt ; and though several persons so-called 
do occur in papyri (Atodvios 6 kal KAedvOns BovdcuTis tmép Tov apiOudv tepovikns, 
P. Lips. 18, 3rd—4th cent. ; Atoovio Newerrave and Aicovio to xéperr, Stud. Pal., 
XX, III, 4th—5th cent.; Adcoviov yevayevov mperBurépov, PSI. iii, 183, A.D. 484; 
Avooviov amd Bevedixiadiov, Oxy. xvi, 1917, 63, sixth century ; rod xvptov pov 
diaonpotdrov jyeudvos Adyovaotapvetkns Pdaoviov lovAiov Adcoviov, Oxy. i, 87, A. D. 
342; cf. Oxy. 1559, A. D. 341, where the same name is to be read in ]. 8), yet there 
is, if Preisigke’s Namenbuch can be trusted, only one whose date is very suitable 
to that suggested by the hand of our letters. This is the last of those referred to 
in the foregoing list, who was prefect of Augustamnica in 341 and 342. Now 
the hand of 1924 is one of distinctly official type, and the subscription, though of 
a quite different character and much less ornamental, is that of a practised and, 
apparently, educated writer. The tone of the letter too suggests a man in 
authority and well suits the prefect.1 There is therefore some ground for the 
identification and, consequently, for placing the letters about the middle of 
the fourth century. 

The name Paphnutius (Papnuthius, &c.?) was common, and it is difficult 


* It does not follow of course that he was prefect when the letter was written. The 
omission of the title, in a purely private and personal letter, is indeed no proof that he 
was not. 

* The following forms occur in the present correspondence: Marvovdis 1923, 1924, 
Ghedini 25, Hadpvovés (1926), Hadpvotrios (1926), Mamvovris (1925, 1928, 1929). 


THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS 10L 


to identify the owner of our archive. It is abundantly clear that he was a man 
of standing and high reputation for sanctity. The letters are for the most part 
from persons of education, exhibiting a greater mastery of Greek and better 
orthography than the average. 1924 may probably, as we have seen, be from an 
official of high rank ; the writers of 1925 and 1928 were both of them in a position 
to employ an amanuensis, and not of necessity, for they both wrote with ease and 
fluency ; 1927 is written in a definitely literary uncial and is couched in a style 
which, if wordy and turgid, reveals literary ambitions ; the writer of 1926, though 
her orthography is poor, was probably.a woman of some wealth and position ; and 
lastly 1929 may actually be from the pen of St. Athanasius himself. Yet all the 
writers address Paphnutius with obvious respect and even deference. That he 
was an anchorite is evident from 1925 and 1926 ; and the address of 1925, if rightly 
read, implies that he was connected with a monastic settlement. It is therefore 
not unnatural to suppose that he may be a person known to history. Unfortu- 
nately there were several men of the name who played a prominent part in the 
religious history of the fourth century, and they are moreover not always easy to 
distinguish. The following may however be mentioned: 

On the Catholic side we have (1) a bishop of the Upper Thebaid, a con- 
fessor, who lost his eye in the Great Persecution, and was present at Nicaea and 
afterwards at the Synod of Tyre. He was a friend and partisan of Athanasius. 
See, e. g., Socrates, i, 8, 11; Rufinus, #. £., i, 4; Sozomen, ii, 25. (2) Different 
from the former was Paphnutius, Bishop of Sais (Athan., Zom. ad Antioch., 
Migne, P. G., xxvi, 808). He was appointed about 945 (Athan:, Pestal Letter x1x, 
Migne, xxvi, 1430), and therefore cannot be identified with any one of the three 
Egyptian bishops of the same name present at the Occidental Council of Sardica 
in 342 or 343% (Athan., -Afol. c. Ar., 50). He may however be the bishop 
banished by the Arians at the time of Athanasius’s third exile (Athan., Hist. Ar., 
72. (3) Paphnutius ‘Cephalas’, the well-known anchorite, for whom see 
Butler’s note, Lawstac Hist., ii, p. 224,note 89. (4) At least one other anchorite 
of the name, for whom see Butler, doc. cit. Onthe Meletian side, we have (5) the 
Hadvovrids tis, péyas avip dvaxwpytijs, kat adros vids éuodoyntpias Tuyydvev, whom 
Epiphanius, ddv. Haer., \xviii, 5, mentions as one of the Meletian deputation to 
Constantine ; and we also find (6) a Paphnutius, a monk of the monastery 
of Ptemencyrcis, who wrote the letter of Pinnes in Athan., Afol. c. Ar., 67. 

Our Paphnutius is not in the least likely to be no. 1 above, and no. 6 can also 
be ruled out. The Bishop of Sais (2) is possible, since he may have been 
an anchorite before his appointment or have become one after his exile, but there 
is no evidence for this, and on the whole the Paphnutius of these letters, if 
a known person at all, is likeliest to be one of the Catholic anchorites (3 and 4) 
or the Meletian anchorite (5) mentioned by Epiphanius. Among these it is quite 
impossible to make a definite choice, especially since we do not know that 
Paphnutius was not a person wholly unknown to history. There is however 
some reason to identify him with the recipient of a letter previously published. 
This is no. 6 in A. Deissmann’s Septwaginta-Papyri (= Ghedini 25), a letter 


' For the date see 1914, 33, n. 


Untversity of Southern California Library 


102 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPANCTIOS 


addressed by a certain Justinus to [r@ xupi@] pov kai dyamntd ddedbo Tlatvovbio 
xpnotopdp|o| (this, not Xpnotoddplov]is to be read on the analogy of 1926, 1). The 
date of this letter is clearly the same as that of our collection, the format and 
arrangement are similar, and the subject of the letter (a request for prayers) also 
connects it with ours. The fact that it was acquired separately and long before 
the present archive (in 1897) is not a fatal objection.’ 

Unfortunately Ghedini 25 does not in any way help to identify Paphnutius. 
The choice (if choice of a known person must be made) between the Catholic and 
the Meletian anchorites of the name is of some importance for the question of the 
authorship of 1929. Obviously, if Paphnutius was a Meletian, that letter cannot 
be from St. Athanasius. There is however no reason for connecting these letters 
with the Meletian archive, though they were acquired at the same time as 1914, 
1917 (left half), 1920. The Paphnutius letters were definitely stated to have been 
found together ; the Meletian ones belonged to a miscellaneous collection from 
various places. It is conceivable that single pieces might become separated from 
the collection, but in this case there is no reason forthe assumption. The present 
letters are all addressed to Paphnutius, the Meletian letters (with the possible 
exception of 1921 and 1922) to Apa Paiéous. Among the persons mentioned in 
the correspondence of the latter are one or two who bear names occurring in the 
Paphnutius letters (they include two called THamvovrios, 1914, 54, 61, &c.), but 
these names are too common to have any significance.2— The two sets of letters 
differ completely in their atmosphere: the Meletian circle is semi-Coptic, the 
Greek of the letters being poor and the orthography illiterate ; the Paphnutius 
letters reveal a cultivated circle, with no trace of Coptic affinities. Finally, there 
is nothing in the external appearance of the letters to suggest a common 
provenance.® 

We may then dismiss any Meletian connexion as improbable. Paphnutius, 
so far as we can tell, was an orthodox Catholic, and the question of the authorship 
of 1929 can be discussed without reference to such considerations. 

As a matter of fact, the interest of the letters does not depend upon the 
identity of the recipient but upon their character. Christian letters are by this time 
fairly numerous,* but the present collection has a special value because it 
proceeds from a single archive and because, addressed to the same person and he 
an anchorite of high reputation for sanctity, these letters illustrate vividly and at 
first hand the role which the ascetics played in fourth-century Egypt. As 


* For P. Amh. 145 see above, p. 44., As there pointed out, there are no adequate 
grounds for connecting that letter with the present series. 

* The only exception is ‘Apnodv (1925, 19), which might have some importance, but it 
stands alone, and the reading is very doubtful. 

* No argument can be founded on the contents of the letters. Only one even of the 
Meletian letters and one contract refer to historical events, and the Paphnutius letters are 
not of a character to contain any allusions to such matters. Doctrinally there is nothing to 
indicate Meletian or Catholic sympathies in either set. Indeed the Meletians, though allied 
with the Arians and popularly often confused with them (see above, p. 41), were originally 
ultra-orthodox and probably never fully held the specifically Arian dogmas. Hence no help 
can be expected in this particular. 


* See G. Ghedini, Letfere cristiane, where the Christian letters on papyrus of the third 
and fourth centuries are collected. 


THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIVUS 103 


Valeria puts it (1926, 9-11) ‘ by ascetics and devotees revelations are manifested ’ ; 
and so to ascetics, to Paphnutius among others, those in trouble, afflicted by sick- 
ness, by misfortune or the attacks of enemies, or by the consciousness of their own 
sinfulness, turned for help and intercession. Many of course resorted to the holy 
man in person ; those who could not do that appealed to him by letters, like the 
writers of the present series. And so these letters, long-winded as they are, often 
clothing a small modicum of meaning in a cloud of words, have a very consider- 
able worth for the student of Christian history and of social life in the fourth 
century. 

The letters were folded up when received, but it is certain that they had 
previously been unfolded by the finders ; hence, though the actual state at the 
moment of acquisition is some guide to the methods of folding adopted, it does 
not always afford secure evidence. 


PAPYRUS 1923.—Middle of the Fourth Century. 
Inv. No. 2491. 28:2x 10cm. 


Acquired in 1922. Pale papyrus, but with patches of darker brown. Worm-eaten in 
places. Written in a fair-sized, very clear, and fairly regular cursive hand, along the fibres, 
in rather pale ink. Folded from right to left, once from left to right, and then once from 
top to bottom. 


As pointed out below (1929, intr.), an Ammonius, who was a bishop and a 
friend of St. Athanasius, is mentioned in the works of the latter, but the name 
was far too common for any identification to be even probable. There was, for 
example, an Alexandrian presbyter of the name (Athan., Afol. c. Ar., 73), also a 
Meletian bishop of Diospolis (0. cz¢., 71), and finally a well-known anchorite, for 
whom see Hzs¢. Laus., xi (Butler, ii, pp. 32,191). But the writer of 1923. is quite 
as likely to have been a man unknown to fame as any of the persons called 
Ammonius who occur in the records of the fourth century. 

The object of the letter was partly to request the prayers of Paphnutius, the 
writer being perhaps in some difficulty, though this is not a necessary inference 
from ll.-13-15, and partly to report a meeting with a common friend. Grammar 
and orthography are comparatively good and indicate a man of some education. 


a > a ‘ 
T@ ayamnt® Kai OeoceBeo- 
TadT@ Kal Oeogtdn Kai evAo- 
ynpéve marpi Iamvov6[t\o 
Appa ey Kupio 

pudvios ev Kupic 

5 O6@ xaipeuy. 
Oida pev dei bre did Toy ayi- 
wv gov evyav cwOjoope 
amd tmavTos mipatnpiov Tob 
diaBdrov Kai amd mdons émi- 


10 Bovrias avOpérrev, Kat 


104 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS [1923] 


viv Tapakad® ores 
Lvnpovedans pov ev TES 
dylas ebxés cov pera yap 
tov Oedy 4 carnpia pov 
13 €& ot. Ala|jvrnoev mids pe 
6 adergpos Hyaoy [? Aidlvpuo(s], 
kal KaOds pot elmas trepl 
ToU Tpadyparos amnvTnoa 
mpos avt[dy. “Eppacbai ole] &yxope 
20 To\Aois xpovas, 
7 4 
YAUKUTATE TATEP* 
ig \ l= Na 
6 Oeds THs Elphyns 
Siagurddés oe emt ph- 


KiaTOV xpovov. 


Address on the verso: 


25 £ T[S] x{vlplo dyanntd arp) Mamvopy|io 


2. 1. Ocopurei. 7, 1. cwOjoopa. 8. 1. wetparnpiov. 12. |. rats. 13. 1. edxais. 
17. 1. xaos. 19g. |. evyoua. 23. |, duavdAdén. 


‘ To the beloved and most pious and dear to God and blessed father Papnu- 
thius, Ammonius greeting in the Lord God. I always know that by your holy 
prayers I shall be saved from every temptation of the Devil and from every con- 
trivance of men, and now I beg you to remember me in your holy prayers ; for 
after God you are my salvation. Our brother Didymus came to see me, and 
I met him according to your instructions in the matter. I pray for your health 
for many years, most sweet father ; may the God of peace preserve you for a great 
length of time.’ (Addressed) ‘To my lord the beloved facies Papnuthius.’ 


G3. JEXO}E Beopid( ch) cf. 1927, 2; for evAoynuév P. Amh. ii, 145 (= Ghedini 41), 1 

6. oiSa pév: certainly to be divided so rather than aueee the pév is answered by «ai 
vov in 1, 10 f. 

8. mparnpiov: the sense ‘temptation’ is perhaps new. 

16. [Aid]vpo[s]: the o looks rather like ¢, so that [S|vuélov| was at first read, but the 
space is large for o and small for wv, and o is quite possible. Several people of the name 
Didymus are known at this period. ‘The most eminent was the head of the catechetical 
school of Alexandria, for whom see, e.g., W. Smith and H. Wace, Dict. of Chrisi. 
Biogr., $.0. 

18. drqyryoa : the word regularly means ‘go to meet’, and so comes to smean little 
more than ‘go’ (cf., e. g., 1918, 6); it has also frequently the sense of ‘appear ’, especially 
in a court of law. Since, however, the writer has just said that Symeon came to meet (or met) 
him there is no point in saying that he zent to meet (or met) Symeon ; moreover mepl TOU 
mpaypatos, though it no doubt actually goes with etwas, must have reference to the dmdvryots. 
Hence ‘answer’ seems the correct sense; or possibly nothing more than ‘ negotiate with’. 
“ Met’ reproduces the ambiguity of the Greek. 

19 ff. This subscription is almost certainly in the same hand as the letter, which is 
therefore holograph. 

25. It is not usual at this period to begin an address with a cross or chrism (the 
earliest instance in Ghedini*is no. 43, 4th-5th cent.); but the first visible stroke can 


[1923] THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS 105 


hardly be r. After Mamvovim are traces of ink, which extend above this line and probably 
formed an ornamental figure marking the place where the string or fibres passed round the 
folded letter. The top portion on the right looks like the chrism (2k). On the extreme right 
are further traces of ink, and (apa) could be read, but there is not room for "Appoviov, and 
probably these traces are part of another diagram corresponding to the first; cf. 1918, 
21-2, n. 

Hamvolv|iio: perhaps mamve6io was actually written. 


PAPYRUS 1924.—-Middle of the Fourth Century. 
Inv. No. 2492. 28:5X12 cm. 


Acquired in 1922. Reddish brown papyrus. Somewhat worm-eaten in the folds. At 
the foot of the letter 10-5 cm. of blank papyrus, Written in a medium-sized well-formed 
upright cursive hand of official type, along the fibres, in black ink; the subscription in 
a rapid sloping cursive, paler ink. Folded from right to left and then once from top to bottom. 
Facsimile: Plate IV. 

For the possible identity of the writer of this letter see above, p. 100. The 
letter, written by a secretary, is brief and businesslike, and freer than usual from 
otiose verbiage. The structure of the sentences shows some sense of style. It is 
therefore likely that the writer was a man of education and standing, and the pro- 
posed identification with the known praeses of Augustamnica is fairly probable. 


~~ » ao a y A 
T@ dyann7@ warpi dra Iamvovbio 
Avoduos. 
Meprynpévos tev evtohdv Ths offs 
DeooeBias perereuwaunv “Qpov rov 
5 a0 Pirovixov kal bréuvnoa adrov, 
Déddov 6& ngiwoa ev dract btopvical pe 
oy 9 a a \ Cae} a x 
iy ev tots [duarois thy map’ é“od omovdhy 
evdeigw [fa 6& al él rodr[o Kal éml mévroy 
los la 
KeAevons Tapakad® Ta peyddra. Mépvnoo 6é 
To pov ev zlatls dylas cov edyais. (2nd hand) ’Eppopévov ce 
kal evydpuevoyv brép huov 


6 Beds StadvAdén, ayamn- 


Te TATEP. 
Address on verso : 
(ist hand) T$ dyamnré rarpi ama Ilamvov6(io) 
Ee Adcévwos, 
4. 1. OcooeBeias. 5. umeuvnoa. 6. vmouynoat. Wnt 


‘To the beloved father Apa Papnuthius, Ausonius. Remembering the 
injunctions of your piety I sent for Horus of Philonicou and instructed him, and 
Gallus I requested to give me his instructions in all things, that so far as possible 
I may show my zeal. I beg you earnestly to give me your orders in this and in 
all things. Remember me in your holy prayers.’ (Signed) ‘ May God preserve 
you in health and praying on our behalf, beloved father.’ (Addressed) ‘To the 
beloved father Apa Papnuthius, Ausonius.’ 


106 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS [1924] 


5. idovikov: the name occurs in the Hermopolite nome, but only once (P. Ryl. ii, 
206, 37), whereas a village of the name in the Heracleopolite nome (Coite toparchy) is 
mentioned not infrequently, e.g. SB. 2246; P. Hib., p. 8; Stud. Pal., xx, 32, 8; 52, 155 
117, 53 Oxy. vi, 965; &c. In P. Petrie iii, 99, 10, 17, 28, where no nome is mentioned, 
the reference may probably be to this Heracleopolite village rather than to one, otherwise 
unknown, in the Arsinoite nome, as Grenfell and Hunt point out (P. Tebt. ii, p. 407). 
[Gd Joverkiov in Stud. Pal., xx, 7, 12 (Arsinoite nome) is not very strong evidence on the 
other side, as the ending is different and the first three letters are supplied by the editor. 
Our ®Aovixov is perhaps most likely to be that in the Heracleopolite nome, but the fact does 
not greatly help to determine the provenance of the Papnuthius correspondence. 

tréuynoa: the context shows that tmoprycai we in |. 6 is used in the sense ‘tell me of 
any service I can.do him’, and a somewhat similar sense is probable here. ‘Instruct’ is 
perhaps as good a rendering as any. 


PAPYRUS 1925.—Middle of the Fourth Century. 
Inv. No. 2493. 29-2 x 18-5 cm. 


Acquired in1g22. Papyrus mostly lightish brown, but stained to a reddish colour in the 
middle of the recto and on the right of the verso. The left half (recto) is very fragmentary ; 
both halves worm-eaten in places. Written in a fairly large, upright, regular, rather square 
uncial hand, along the fibres, in black ink of a greyish tinge ; the subscription in a smaller, 
cramped, sloping, and very cursive hand. Folded from right to left and then once from top 
to bottom. 

The reading of the name (apparently hitherto unrecorded) in |. 2 is not 
certain but the characters look most like Pianius. The letter was written by an 
amanuensis, who wrote a good, if rather stiff and formal, hand, but he was careless, 
and given to omissions or unnecessary insertions of letters. Mutilation makes 
portions of the letter obscure, but it contained little but greetings and a request 
for Paphnutius’s prayers; the writer was evidently in some trouble. 

T@ wobtvo7[at@ élriotipns vrepBddrdovte 

ama Ilamvolutio) Tidvios év xK(upio) O€)@ yaipew. 

Evxaipnbeis rob [ovreiiov\ros mpds tiv Oeocé- 

Reidy cov dvalykatloy ily|nodunv mpocayo- 
5 petoar THyv evrAd[Bedy colv] did ypappdtov, - 

Xopevos 76 X[(ptor)@ Kali avrais dweoler}iv oe me- 

pimtvgacbai {oe; klalrag{wOjval pe ere yap 7h 

mvedpati oe eori.jen[.|, Kal’ éxdorny Se mpoo- 
ay. .J.-.[.- J. [-- Jono mapaxare dé rip 

10 ayltornTd gov iva xjatlal~idons evEacbar 


Q a an ev 
[Umep Tov apaptiav pov iva 6] O(€)ds pUonTral pe éx 


OW Nima tnt ore kal €k Tv] GvayK@v TOY én 
Kiueveov po. I pdc]enfe] tovs ddedpods 
Hep Baye at os ens lov mpdceme map’ éu(oyd 
RS Ure Owe) cic setacs a cs ] Told] Operrod Abavaci- 
ov. Ev... . see. .jooor Kal adbtos yap Ta) 


ayamavtav [Hv] OeolaléBerdy oov tvyxdvi. 


"Ey® Adavdowly mpoloaylolpetw tov Ktprdv 


[1925] THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS 107 


pov kai EvoeB[iJolv xlai ‘Apnoty cal mdvras 
20 Tods addleApods rods dvras?| mapa TH aytdrynTl 
Gov pl poop fsb usin oo ]. bpas Kat [6] adedgos 
avrod Awpdbeos. (2nd hand) ’Eppwcdai [ale év x(upi)m moddois evxopar 
Xpovois, Kvplé fou moOivorare. 
Address on the verso : 


(ist hand) T6 ayamn7@ adeXgO [pjov [blank ? Ilalmvoutio dvaxwpnth 


ec 


25 Hovis povalxa@ly. 
I. 1. wo€ewordre. é|mornyns: Milne. 2. KO Oo. 3. A letter has been 
inserted above the o of ovvrewros ; see note. 6. x\o. Tien Coc. 13 f. 1. emexerpevor. 
16. Ta. 17. |. rvyxdves. 23. |. modeivorare. 25. 1. povjs (?); see note. 


‘To the most desired, excellent in knowledge Apa Papnutius, Pianius (?) 
greeting in the Lord God. Finding opportunity by the man who is setting out 
to your piety, I deemed it necessary to salute your discretion in a letter, praying 
to Christ that I may be found worthy to embrace you also with my very eyes; 
for even now in spirit [I can salute you], but every day I... and entreat your 
holiness to vouchsafe to pray for my sins, that God may deliver me from . . . and 
from the difficulties which beset me. Greet the brethren from us... greet from 
me ...on behalf of .. . the slave of Athanasius Eu ...; for he too is of them that 
love your piety. I salute Athanasius my lord and Eusebius and Haréous (?) and 
all the brethren who are with your holiness. . . . and his brother Dorotheus 
[salute] you.’ (Signed) ‘I pray for your health in the Lord many years, my most 
desired lord.’ (Addressed) ‘To my beloved brother Papnutius, anchorite . 
monastery (?) of monks.’ 


I. é|reorjpns: the reading seems likely, though evorjyns is hardly the word we should 
expect. Each letter is perfectly possible, and the space suits, except that it is somewhat 
ample for rn. The use of the genitive with bmepBd\Xaq is curious, but can hardly be escaped, 
as ns is quite certain. 

2. Tudmos: this is what the traces suggest, but the name does not seem to occur else- 
where, and though z is probable the two following letters are too imperfect for any 
confident reading. 

3+ [cv]»re[é|-(ov)ros : above the o is a letter (or letters), apparently in a different hand. 
It does not seem to be the missing ov, wrongly inserted after r. That ovvretvovros was 
intended can hardly be doubted. 

7 ff. éri xrd.: the sense required is, as Prof. Hunt points out, something like ‘I can see. 
you in the spirit, but I want to greet you (or talk with you) in person’ (cf. 1926, 17-19), 
but it is difficult to get this. éorc] ei8[iv] (Hunt) cannot be read; but an apparent trace of 
ink after 7, which might be the top of 1, suggests that ¢oz[c] eim[iv] (though there is scanty 
room for w) may have been written. In that case oe must be a mere slip of the pen for 
cot, perhaps due to the following «. «a6 éxdorny is probably ‘daily’ (understanding jyépavr), 
as Hunt suggests, but mpocayopedoa cannot be reconciled with the traces after the first 
lacuna; an apparent line over the last two letters there suggests a nomen sacrum, preferably 
Ge). re is not very satisfactory ; ¢si would be an easier reading. 

11. O(e)ds: doubtful, as Os not dos would be expected, and there is no trace of the 
usual line marking contraction, but this word seems to be required by the context. The 
supplement in |. 12 and dvayxév are due to Prof. Hunt. 

13. mpdolem[e|: the traces suit this, but it is doubtful in view of the occurrence of the 
word in 1]. 14. 

14. There isa line through ewv, perhaps accidental but possibly to delete it. In the 


108 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS [1925] 


latter case we might read (e. g.) map’ ‘Ymeplexiou tov vidr| rol] «rd. Ei[oéBuoy (cf. 1. 19). This 
is rather supported by the emphatic éy# in 1, 18, but Jecor is then difficult to fit in. 

315. Operrod: presumably a slave, and his name may be the Ev- of 1. 16; but it may 
also have occurred in this line (or vmep may be the beginning of a name; cf. previous note) 
and ev- be either a second name or a verb. The Athanasius meant may be the writer 
of 1929. 

19. klai “Apyody: aa very doubtful, and the space is perhaps rather large for » only ; 
but the ois on a piece of papyrus depending from a twisted fibre, so that the space is 
smaller than it looks, and aa are perfectly possible readings. For the possible significance 
of this name see p. 1022. 

21. What seems required is mpooayopever (followed by a name) ips, but mpooayopever is 
quite impossible. poco could perhaps be read but cep is likelier. For vpas it is possible 
to read vos, but A}Suuos is apparently out of the question ; the traces before v suggest € 
(€?), less probably «is. If d¢ be read a name can hardly have preceded, and the reference 
of a’rod is obscure. Has a name been accidentally omitted ? 

24. The traces read as ov of [uJov may really be part of the conventional flourishes 
filling the space between the two halves of the address. There may have been no space 
(though that is usual), since in ]. 2 dra occurs. 

25. plovis: cf. 1918, 2. The reading is easily reconcilable with the traces, and the 
chief objection to it is the misspelling it involves, for though the scribe was careless his 
orthography was fairly good. IU:Jams could also be read, but povaxds is impossible after it. 
x|epis poral xdly is palaeographically unlikely. 


PAPYRUS 1926.—Middle of the Fourth Century. 
Inv. No. 2494. 27X13 cm. 


Acquired in 1922. Dark papyrus of reddish colour, but with patches of light brown 
in the lower half. Worm-eaten in many places. In a clear but rather awkward and 
inelegant cursive hand, with very few ligatures, along the fibres, in black ink. Folded ~ 
inwards from each side, but chiefly from the left and once each from top and bottom. 

The orthography and grammar of this letter are the poorest of the whole 
collection, but it is from a woman, and since there is no change of hand in the final 
greeting was probably written by the sender herself. Among women in general 
the standard of education in Egypt was much lower than among men; hence we 
cannot argue from the comparative illiteracy of this letter that Valeria belonged 
to a class of society inferior to that of the other writers, and indeed it seems likely 
that she was a woman of some position in the world; cf.].25f. Intrinsically the 
letter is perhaps the most interesting in the collection, for though its object also 
is merely to ask for Paphnutius’s prayers Valeria goes more into detail than the 
others, and her very inexpertness as a letter-writer gives her letter a personal 
touch which is wanting in theirs. 

TG tipotdt@ Kal xpnotopipw 
kal mdons aperns Kexoopnpévo "Anna IIa- 
provOrs. 

Ovarepia ev XpioT@ xépev. 

5 Ag@ Kal mapaxad® ce, Tipi@rate Tra- 
THP, Elva. .L. opnKiy eTHONS pol 
Tapa TO XpicT@ kai claow dd Bor 
oitws milorevm Oia TOY aav Evy oy 


x 4 ~ DY 2 
clacly AapBadvw, Tav yap daoKour- 


[1926] THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS 109 


‘ la ? 4 
10 Tov Kal Opnokevévtwy amoKandvv- 
pata ducvéovre. Meydéro yap 
voow tepikipe dvomvjas Suis 
t p BK U] 1) : 
Otrws yap wemiorevKa Kal mictedo 
er rN BA > ? BA 
ore €dv evén emdvw pov ciacw 
BP. 2 “ a va 
15 AapBdve. Aéope TO Oc Séope 
, , , > x. a Pp: 
K€ cot pvjoOnti pov év TH ayia cov 
mpocevyy. Hi xé é€v odpate ovk ika 
ni \ va ; 2 uA 
Tapa tovs mddas aloly ev mvevpari 
eika mpos Tods mé[dlas cov. IIpoca- 
20 ylopel¥o Tals Ovyarlépals] wou, Kai 
pvjoOnre aitav év TH ayia cov 
mpocevyfp, Bacoiavns Kai Oeoxdias. 
‘Aoral(jeré oe TodAAa Kal 6 atvBr- 
ng \ af by 7 > oN 
os polv], Kat evy[ov] erdvm avTo. 
25 Aom[d¢jeté oe d€ kal bAos 6 oikés 
pov. [ ] "Ep(p\@c6é ce wyone, 
[T|pudrare marHp. 
Address on the verso : 


T@ timtordrm watpi "“Anma IIa J | gvovt{ie] mapa ths Ovyatpos 


Ovarepias. 
I. 1. rysewrdre (so 1. 28), xpeoropdpa. 2 f. 1, Mapvovbio. 4. @ |. xaipew. 
5f. lL. mdrep; sotooinl. 27. 6. 1. iva, airjons (see note). 7. 1. taow; so too in ll. 9, 14. 
8. m.written above the mw of morevw; see note. g. uv Of ackovytwy corr. or rewritten. 
10 f.-]. droxahvppara Serxyvovta ; amo COIT. - It. |, peyddy. 12. |. mepixerpae Svomvoias 
deus. 15. 1, déopuar, drs. 46, J «al; so too in 1 27, 17. l. jKa; So too in 1. 19. 
23. 1. domaferar; so too in |. 25. 24. |. adrod, 26. 1. éppacba, evyouar. 


‘To the most valued and Christ-bearing and adorned with every virtue Appa 
Paphnutius, Valeria greeting in Christ. I beg and entreat you, most valued 
father, to ask for me [help ?| from Christ and that I may obtain healing ; thus I 
trust by your prayers to obtain healing, for by ascetics and devotees revelations 
are manifested. For I am afflicted with a great disease in the shape of a grievous 
shortness of breath. For thus I have trusted and yet trust that if you pray on 
my behalf I shall obtain healing. I pray to God, I pray also to you, remember 
me in your holy supplication. Even though in body I have not come to your 
feet, yet in spirit I have come to your feet. I salute my daughters, and do you 
remember them in your holy supplication, I mean Bassiana and Theoclia. My 
husband too greets you many times, and do you pray on his behalf. My whole 
household too greet you. I pray for your health, most valued father.’ (Addressed) 
‘To the most valued father Appa Paphnutius from his daughter Valeria.’ 


I. xpnotopépm: cf. Deissmann, Sepi.-Pap. 6 (= Ghedini 25), 30, where xpnoropép| | is 
to be read, 

6. eva. . 4. gdnxw: the o is all but certain, the @ inferred from the top and bottom of 
a long upstroke above and below a hole in the papyrus. Prof. Hunt suggests eiva émi cai 


110 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS [1926] 


jew, ‘pray that I may come to you and be healed’, which is possible in this writer, but can 
hardly be reconciled with the traces, though ofa\t could easily be read. The letter following 
a has a loop, whereas ¢ in this hand almost always ends in a straight stroke projecting 
upwards to the right, and never has so pronounced a loop as this; 8 could be read. 
Moreover, the following letter does not look in the least like 7. 

8. n[elorebo: above the m and immediately before the lacuna is anerier m, probably in 
the same hand. Perhaps the intention was to alter to wemiorevea as in |. 13, but this has 
not been done. 

20. Very doubtful. The reading is suggested by the traces, but the p has a short 
downstroke (not, however, shorter than in mpogevy7, |. 22) and might be v; and a more 
serious objection is that the daughters ought to be with Valeria, not with Paphnutius 
(@vydrnp is hardly likely to be used in a spiritual or conventional sense). But rpooayopetovci oe 
does not seem a possible reading. @vyar|épa[s] is the most dubious part of the line. Of the 
dotted letters only the bottoms remain. 

28. Iavovr|i@]|: such seems to be the spelling, though on the recto the name is given 
as Tlapvovbts. 


PAPYRUS 1927.—Middle of the Fourth Century. 
Inv. No. 2495. 24X32 cm. 


Acquired in 1922. Papyrus of medium brown colour. Worm-eaten in places; the 
whole of the lower half of col. r has disappeared except two small fragments. Written in 
a fair-sized sloping uncial hand of ‘ ecclesiastical’ type, along the fibres, in brown ink; the 
hand grows smaller and more cramped towards the end. Folded inwards from both sides, 
mainly from the left. 

Both in script and in style this letter is the most ambitious of the collection, 
but as a stylist the writer shows more ambition than success, and though the letter 
was longer than any of the others and a good deal of it is preserved, it is singularly 
empty of content. It is mostly occupied with windy compliments, and it is not at 
once apparent what its particular purpose was; apparently nothing further than 
to ask the recipient whether the writer is to ‘come up’ (i.e. he lived lower down 
the Nile? or does he refer to going up into the desert, i. e. dpos ?) to see- him. 
He even forgets to insert his correspondent’s name, but there is no reason to doubt 
that this letter also was addressed to Paphnutius. The writer calls himself 
‘Dorotheus the Oxyrhynchite’, which suggests, but does not necessarily imply, 
that he lived at Oxyrhynchus. Hence, if avéA@wwev in 1. 58 does refer to going up 
the Nile Paphnutius lived to the south of that city. The name of the writer is 
less common than some of those which occur in this series, but it would be very 
hazardous to identify him with any known person so called, e.g. with the 
Awpobém tii doxntn OnBalw EEnkoordy ayovti Eros ev TS onnAalw of Hist. Laus., ii 
(Butler, ii, p. 16) or the Awpddeos év dAAw orNAalw oikGv TpEc BUTEpos Of Hist. Laus., 
lviii (0p. cz¢., p. 151). 

On the verso are remains of at least one column of writing in an apparently 
similar hand to that of the recto. The one certain column is headed by the 
number A. There are four figures (oblong parallelograms with a single stroke 
through each), probably serving to mark the place of the string, but there are 
no recognizable traces of any address. 


Cole] 
~ ¢ 2 “~ x 
TO TipiwTdto adedg@ kal 


Oefolpurle|t, Awpddeos 6 'Og{ulpvyyxel- 
Tns 6 a&xptos dodA0s mpocayopev- 


[1927] THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS IIE 


Ot 


10 


et oe ev mr(edpar)t Kal ev aydan X(pioTo)b. 
IIpd pev wévtav trapaxad® 79(v) 
O(ed)v Kat m(aré)pa tod} owrhpos 'In(co)i X(picto)i 
émas Karagidon pe Tod evpei(v) 

a ’ 4 ’ ~ - 
Xap évomuoy atrod dé€a- 
aOé cat Ta Tap é“od ypdppara: 
lol] €v rotr@ yap Kayo pé\dAw eddv- 
picOar Srav 6 ayabds SodAos di- 
& ypappdroly] pe mpoodéénrale] 

as Ni ¢ XN 2 ~ > X > ta 
kat Tas umep e[ulov evxas avadepe: 

4 XQ \ - 

mpoOtpuws mpos Tov Seomérny 
ev idtxpivet Siavoia, TIioredo 


Wel (NTE x [toe hata, Roa GaP onte Merge a0 ] 


Two fragments, certainly from this column: 


(1) (2) 


Slight traces of 2 lines \vo[. Jae. . [ 
] eddpaolia |. ogpeddy 
20 €ykw|uagoul Be) pam. | 
| ebppalava jomra . .[ 
\rpol ] yap on .[ 
| Aal 


Gol. 2:1 


30 


35 


40 


GAA Oia Tv edKAlEleaTaTHY 
[c]ov mlolAcriav Kai o¢plvordrny, 
uéte THY Tob K(do)u(oy adrafovia(v) 
amexnpulgjas kal ‘tiv’ ra[v] Kevoddéw(v) 
peyaravyiav éBdédvgas. Kai 
pels ovv erevodpev paddo(v) 
2S a ] ru Ue: 7 wy 
emt 7h akon Ott dpovipws ed1- 
x 4 Lm 
gas 76 yevvedrarov aOdov, 
> ~ bt ~ 
emrtOvpobpev O€ pepetobat 
€v Th avTH modelTeia TH cov 
piroxayabeia, b7t ws ika- 
~ YA ¢ \ - 
vos Taxa cor 6 O(ed)s éxdpicer 
\ Q x ‘ c ay 
TOV KaT& TOV Kalpov evpel(y) 
> 7 ‘ 
avrTimadov Kat Oeparevti- 


kov dmopa{a}riKoy’ “roy Kat- 


112 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS [1927] 


45 ploy” yap “ ceyopd¢lolyres”, Kn- 
puTTer 6 Tplopakadpios amdaTodlols, 
(a4 er € € ie 4 2 »”» 

dre al Hpépar movnpai eioty. 
*"Eriotiewov d& Kal Tov xapa- 

eS 2 le dA 2) 
KTnpd cov Oedoacbar édv émi- 

50 [lol|rpéme 6 K(Wpto)s, emi epddioi eope(v), 
aidotyulal. d& €dOcivy pH more 
[...-].[--].. quads Kal evrpdtopey). 
[?Idvv] obv éemioredoapey sre ef O€- 
[Anpa Oleo)v eotiv Tob Huas cor amavTa(v) 


55 [@yyeAleis mp@rov dia Tod gépor- 


4 


és got] TO EmioTodov. Ads ovy 


d 


bY ens } v4 e 4 la iN 
avT@ Ti dyyeriav St BovrAe{s} 7 ov 


Gens es Jev . [.].. ag tror mAnpalule(v) 


[ 

[ 

[BovrAet] dvérdOaper, wy doTe mloli- 
[ 
60 [ 


mieloaies Jov tiv mepi cod aydn{n(v)| 
[tee eeko ts “Pamelpl o€, Tyudtare ev mv{(edpar)d], 
[kal Tovs od]y aol] ddeAgovs . [ 


2. 6. 1. Ogvpvyxirns. 3. 6. 1. &xpetos. 4. TVL, XV. io He, 6. Ov, mpa, TD Xv. 


7. evpet. o Of omws added later, in the margin. 8 f. 1. d€€acOai ce. tof. 1. evOvpetrOac. 
13. Umep. 15. tdexpuer; |. eid, 91. mo |Aeriay : Hunt ; 1. -ecay. 32. Kev adacona ; 
l. ddagoveiav. 33. Kevodoéo. 35. 1. émawotpev. paddo. 36 f. 1. @ekas, 37. 1. yev- 
vatoratov. 38. 1. pipetoba. 39. 1. modurefa. Over the y of avrn is a stroke, perhaps acci- 
dental or possibly intended to separate the word from modecreca. 40. |. didtokdyabia, ixavas 
(MS. icavos; see note). 41. 6s. 42. 0 Of first tov corr. from .  evpel. 44 f. xarp[o|y, 
cEayopd¢[ores: Hunt. 48. 1. emiorevoy. 50. Ks, cope. |, emei. 52. nas: 
Hunt. evrparropé. 54. Ov, amavra. Bovkec: Hunt. 59. idwe mAnpope. 
60. Probably ayaz[7]. 61. nel. 


‘To the most valued brother and beloved of God. Dorotheus of Oxyrhyn- 
chus the unprofitable servant salutes you in the Spirit and in the love of Christ. 
Before all things I entreat God, the Father of our Saviour Jesus Christ, to vouch- 
safe that I may find favour in his sight, that you may receive my letter; for 
therein I too shall have cause to rejoice, when the good servant welcomes me in 
a letter and zealously offers up his prayers on my behalf to our Master in sincerity 
of heart. For I trust that... but by reason of your most glorious and most 
revered way Of life, since you renounced the boasting of the world and abhorred the 
arrogance of the vainglorious. We too then commend you the more because we 
hear that you prudently showed forth your most noble contest, and we desire to 
imitate in the same way of life your kindliness(?), because God in abundant 
measure, it seems, granted you favour to find a fitting and salutary renunciation 
accordant with the times. For “redeeming the time ”, proclaims the thrice-blessed 
apostle, ‘‘ because the days are evil”. I trusted to behold your features also if the 
Lord permits it, since we are on the way, but I fear to come lest haply [you chide ?] 
us and we be put toshame. We were very confident therefore that if it be God’s 
will that we should meet you you will first inform us by him that brings you the 


[1927] THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS 113 


letter. Give him therefore the message whether you desire or not that we 
should come up, not so that . . . we fulfil... our love for you... concerning you, 
most valued in the Spirit, and the brethren who are with you.’ 


2. The omission of the recipient’s name is perhaps accidental. 

17 ff. That these two fragments belong to col. 1 is clear from the fact that the hand 
is fairly large and spread out, whereas in the lower part of col. 2, where alone the papyrus 
is imperfect, the writing is smaller and cramped. Moreover neither fragment could be 
fitted into the available space in col. 2. 

34. €8deAvéas: in the sense of ‘abhor’ the word should be middle, but the causal sense 
is inappropriate here, and the writer was rather ambitious than accomplished in his use of 
the Greek language. 

36 f. The words émi 79 dkom seem to show that Dorotheus was referring to some 
particular example of his correspondent’s zeal rather than to his way of life in general. 

40. didoxdyabcia: apparently a new word, but cf. P. Oxy. i, 33 (= Wilcken, Chrest. 20), 
li, 13, dpAoxayadia (Hunt), which has been variously emended, but which, in view of the 
present passage, may be right. The word should mean something like ‘kindliness 5 
as rendered in the translation; but this is not very appropriate to the context, which rather 
requires a reference to Paphnutius’s ascetic virtue, and it may be doubted whether 
Dorotheus was not rather thinking of ‘love of the good’. 

40 f. ixavos: o and are not elsewhere confused in this letter, with the doubtful 
exception of |. 48 (see note), and it is conceivable that ixavés, agreeing with @eés, should be 
read, but this seems improbable. 6s ixavés in the sense simply of ‘in ample measure’ is 
preferable. ‘Perhaps’, the usual sense of rdya, is hardly appropriate here ; probably the 
word is used merely to modify the force of és ikavas. ‘It seems ’, adopted in the translation, 
perhaps expresses the right shade of meaning. The rest of the sentence is very obscure 
and difficult. dé, first written rj» and then apparently corrected, has no noun if we read 
dnopa{a}rixdy ; and if that adjective is used as a noun the article should be ré. amopaortikéy is 
itself an unexpected word, apart from the fact that no such form is known 3 admodarids is the 
attested adjective. Several letters are dotted as doubtful but all are probable readings, and 
ayopaorixdy (Hunt), which is more suitable, can hardly be read, for the ¢, though the ink 
has faded and in parts disappeared, seems certain ; besides the impression of the letter on 
the papyrus there are clear traces of ink from the bottom and top of the upstroke and from 
both sides of the loop. dmogpa{o }-r1xédv, however, seems possible, if we suppose that the writer 
(who originally wrote ryv) intended dxépaow, but, changing his mind, added recov to amogac, 
forgetting to delete the o, and similarly, when he altered the 7 Of rnv to 0, omitted to delete 
the ». rév kaiploly erh. is then a loose quotation; some MSS. do in fact place xaipév before 
efayopa{opevor in the passage quoted. To begin the quotation at ér and the new sentence 
at xnpurret, as the editor had done before the first part of 1. 45 was read, makes hopeless 
difficulties, and is indeed impossible if ydp (a likely reading) is accepted. It should be 
added that the ¢ of dyrimadov has a thickening in the middle, which makes it look like @; 
_ but ¢ has elsewhere a rather large loop, and even if we read avr(c\ it is difficult to make 
a possible word out of the following characters. 

44-7. Eph. v, 16. 

48. érioz[elvov: the spelling is in general correct, and the space between r and v 
is very large fore. It is possible to read éntoz| ev Jouper (sic), but on the whole the reading in 
the text is perhaps preferable. 

49 f. emi[o]rpémee: it is not certain that the o has really been deleted, and the reading 
must therefore be regarded as doubtful; but the certain pew and probable r make it difficult 
to avoid it. 

50. ePddor: the word is apparently unknown (except in the substantival form epddior, 
viaticum), but it is a likely enough formation and suits the context excellently ; Dorotheus 
was on the way but hesitated to come actually to Paphnutius’s cell without authorization. 
Palaeographically the reading is very probable, though the upper part of the ¢ has completely 
disappeared, 

53- mavv is perhaps hardly enough, but the writing seems to be less compressed at the 
beginnings of lines. It no doubt gives the sense. 

55. [ayyerleis: cf. 1. 57. 


114 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS 


PAPYRUS 1928.—Middle of the Fourth Century. 
Inv. No. 2496. 27-7 x 26-5 cm. 


Acquired in 1922. Papyrus stained dark brown on the left, a paler brown on the 
right. Much worm-eaten, and fragmentary. Written in a large bold cursive hand by 
a practised scribe, letters laterally compressed, along the fibres, in black ink ; the subscription 
and postscript in a large sloping, more rapid cursive. Folded inwards, mainly from the 
right, and then once from top to bottom. 


The main portion of this letter, which is a request for Paphnutius’s prayers 
in sickness, was written by an amanuensis. It isa good deal mutilated but clearly 
contained nothing beyond the request for prayers. The most interesting portion 
is the postscript, added by the sender himself in hisown hand. There is no reason 
to identify him with any Heraclides known to us, e. g. with the bishop banished by 
the Arians (Athan., Wzst. Ar., 72), the anchorite mentioned by Sozomen, iii, 14, or 
the Meletian bishop of Nikiou (Athan., Apol. c. Ar., 71; cf. 64). 


1 T@ mapa 666 [Hylamnpé[ylm marpi dna Ilanvovrio 
2 “Hpakdeions. 
3 Act pev ods 6 katpds rolb] eWkacblal trép tudy, Kal THs mapa Tod 
kKpeit Tol vos 
4 01a 7av ebxGv cov Boln|Oelas d[ed|ucOa- viv dé mréov Tapakads ofe TodTO] 
5 Kal els dvoud pov Kai mpos THY Ka[TlaAaBoilal|dy we vdcloy [e|réyolvald[y pe] 
GOUT AL “KGL TO. ENGLOP KG a) |cioyeois.avs Whe PRet ar ths les <.oellty og eaaeee ] 
dofiva: (?). Ovd yap] 
adrAws Bonleicbat moa[r|lvw 
yal. -lpoes xpnoroglélp[élals] ws byetay exes. (2nd hand) "EppdcOaé ofe] 
év K(upl)e Xpynot@ ewyouar emi wordy 


Oe 60" =a 


‘ 10 Xpovov evxdpevov vrép Euod avve- 
II xas, wétep OeoceBéota{ta}-Te. 
12 Kat 6 mpopirns Bod “év Odi emexarecduny Kal eiojKovcer 
13 pov”. Néy adnOas Odrgris év 7 eiul, Sov obte addeAGod ov're 
14 Twos ddrAov PonOjoa Svvarar BojOea ef py (i) dua Too Kuptov Lav) 
15 Xpnarod dia trav buov evyav TpocdoKkopévn éArris. 


Address on the verso: 


(ist hand) T6 mapa 066 jyarnpéva razpi ama Ilanvourio 
‘Hpakdeions. 
3. Kpeir Tovos. 5. pe vdciov: Hunt; see note. 1. enetyoucay. 8. 1. xpearogo- 
tas, Uylevay, g. ko. I Xpord , 12, 1. Orirpern 14. nea. 15. 1. Xpiorod, 
poo Ookwpevn. 


‘To the beloved father in the sight of God Apa Papnutius, Heraclides. 
Always you find time to pray on our behalf, and we ask the help which the Most 


[1928] THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS 115 


High gives through your prayers; but now yet the more do I entreat you to do 
this both in my name and with reference to the sickness which has fallen upon me 
and is oppressing me, and to give (?) the oil. . . for in [no] other way do I trust to 
be helped...’ (Signed) ‘I pray for your health in the Lord Christ for a long time, 
praying continually on my behalf, most pious father. The prophet also cries: “In 
affliction I called upon him and he heard me.” Now of a truth it is affliction in 
which I am, where neither from a brother nor from any other can effectual help 
come save the hope which I expect by our Lord Christ through your prayers.’ 
(Addressed) ‘To the beloved father in the sight of God Apa Papnutius, 
Heraclides.’ 

4. todro: it is not certain that anything followed aje, but, there would be room for 


tovro, for which (or an equivalent word) a place must be found somewhere, and if éniyovedy 
pe is right in J. 5 it cannot be fitted in there. 

5+ He vdgloly: pe can well be read, though the trace taken as the first stroke of » might 
be the last of the preceding ». In that case a word beginning «vo would have to be read, 
and nothing likely suggests itself. récov is just what is wanted and is supported by @daov in 
]. 6, but it can be accepted only with some misgiving. The letter after o looks like p (though 
the downstroke of p is not elsewhere looped round at the foot as this is) and the supposed 
v is not much like any other v in the letter. The following ériyovedy pe is not very 
satisfactory, as karahaBovody pe seems sufficient, but the characters visible strongly suggest myo 
or muro or mrya and émra is not likely. The ais on a detached piece of papyrus, the position 
of which is quite conjectural. 

8. All the readings of the first hand in this line are very doubtful except xpyaru, ews, 
and exes. is a possible and indeed likely reading, but the upper part is lost, and v could 
be read (for the spelling Xpyorod cf. 1.15). If @ be read xpnotog|é|p[e] is expected (cf. 1926, 
1); but in that case it is difficult to account for the traces between p and ews, and xpurropopia 
seems a likely enough formation from xpueroddpos. 

12. A combination of Ps. cxvii, 5, ev Gripe. (AT ék Oditpews) émexadeoduny tov KUptov, Kat 
ennxousey por (uov R-* ART), and Jon. ii, 3, éBdnoa ev OrjiWrer pou mpds Kuptov rov Oedv pov, Kat 
ciojkovoey pou. Or possibly Heraclides knew Ps. cxvii in a text into which elonxovoey had 
been introduced (perhaps from Jon. ii, 3 ?) in place of émjxovcer. 

13. vv krh,: é€ori is to be understood. 


PAPYRUS 1929.—Middle of the Fourth Century. 


Inv. No. 2497. 28x 31-8 cm. 


Acquired in 1922. Reddish brown papyrus, but with lighter patches. Broken and 
worm-eaten, and in places much defaced by rubbing. Written in a rather large bold sloping 
cursive hand by a practised writer, along the fibres, in black ink. Folded inwards, mainly 
from the right, and then once from the top downwards. Facsimile (reduced): Plate V. 


This letter, the most imperfect of the whole series, is also from one point of 
view the most interesting. It is from an Athanasius, and the question at once 
suggests itself whether this may perhaps be St. Athanasius himself. The idea 
may at first sight seem quite gratuitous, for the name Athanasius was common, 
but 1929 has features which give it some support. The hand is an easy, bold and 
rather handsome one, betraying a practised writer, but on the other hand it 
is hardly of an official type. It suggests rather a private person of education 
‘than a professional scribe. Mutilation makes the text in a considerable part 

12 


116 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS [1929] 


of the letter very conjectural, but so far as can be judged the style is very 
noticeably superior to the average of papyrus letters and even to that of the 

present series, itself obviously proceeding from a cultivated circle. Particular 

stress may be laid on the separation of noun and adjective in the concluding 

clause : éppwpévov ce 7 Oeia duapvda€er(e) tpdvoia. This is an essentially literary 

device, so far removed from the usual style of papyrus letters that it at 

once arrests attention. Again the list of names in 1. 17, placed side by side 

without a connecting kai, shows an effort after elegance of form. The unusual 

phrase 6 wavtoxpatwp eds Kat 6 Xpiords avrod in |. 3 points in the same direction, 

and the sentence beginning Tapaxadé (1. 6) has an unmistakably literary flavour. . 
It is true that this is largely restored and the readings are far from certain, but the 

visible remains seem to impose something similar in style. Yet, though the 

writer is consciously aiming at style he is entirely free from the nebulous bombast 

which characterizes half-educated writers of the Byzantine Age when they aim at 

literary form, and which can be seen, for example, in 1927. It seems clear that 

the writer is a man of education and with some literary sense. He writes too 

with respect indeed but in a tone of perfect equality ; one would imagine him to 

be a person of authority, and he speaks of his household as if it were of some 

size. 

The foregoing considerations cannot be strongly reinforced by the evidence 
of names, but there is one name which has some evidential value. Among the 
members of his household Athanasius mentions an ’Avrioxos. Now among the 
extant letters of St. Athanasius is one (Migne, P.G., xxvi, 1165) addressed 
"Iwdvvn Kat “Avtidxw tots dyatyrots viots Kal ovpnpecButépos. John and Antiochus 
were then at Jerusalem, though that apparently was not their ordinary residence,! 
and it would of course be absurd to found much on a mere coincidence of name. 
Nevertheless Antiochus, common enough earlier, seems to have been infrequent in 
Christian times,? and in Egypt one is prepared in the fourth century to find it at 
Alexandria rather than in the yépa. The persons addressed in St. Athanasius’s 
letter were clearly younger than himself, were apparently in regular correspon- 
dence with him, and seem to have been travelling about, so that Antiochus may 
quite well have been at some time a member of his household. 

The other names do not help. Mention is made of the writer’s mother, who, 
if the reading Avddluns in 1. 11 be rejected, may, from |. 17, have been called 
Didyma, though on the whole it is preferable, in view of |. 11, to make Avddpun 
and 7 pytnp two different persons; but unfortunately we do not know the name 
of either of St. Athanasius’s parents. In his second letter to Lucifer (Migne, 
P.G., xxvi, 1183 ff.), written about 359, which is extant only in a Latin version, 

1 "Exdpny SeEduevos tpav kat viv emorodny, ore padiora amd ‘lepocodvpov éypawWare. 

? The only. fourth-century papyrus instances given in Preisigke’s Mamenbuch are: 
P. Oxy. i, 102, 3 (a.p. 306); PSL. ili, 205, 1 (a.p. 317); Séud. Pal., xx, 106, 13 (4th 
cent.). The first two are earlier than our letter, and in Oxy. 102 the name is no doubt that 
of a pagan, the man having been a magistrate of Alexandria. In Afol. ad Const. 10, 
Athanasius cites as witnesses that he had prayed for Constantius, along with the Dux 
Felicissimus and others, the agen/es in rebus Antiochus and Evagrius. Antiochus, Bishop of 
Ptolemais (died before a.p. 408), for whom see, e.g., W. Smith and H. Wace, Dict. of 


Christian Biography, s.v., may also be reckoned to the fourth ngentDry. But the name was 
not common then, especially i in ecclesiastical circles. 


[1929] THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS 117 


Athanasius complains that owing to his persecution by the Arians ‘testis est 
autem Dominus, quia nec parentes quos habeo potui videre, ex quo persequuntur 
nos’, and A. Robertson concludes from this that his parents were then alive 
(Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, iv, p. xiv' ; see, however, p. 562°) ; but the word 
parentes may of course mean merely ‘relatives’, and so proves nothing. 
Lauchert (p. 3) infers from the fact that his parents are not mentioned in con- 
nexion with his persecution by the Arians, whereas an aunt of his does occur 
(fist. Ar., 13), that they were then dead; but there is really no evidence on 
either side, and in any case we do not know the date of the present letter. 

The other letters give no further: decisive indication. The writer of 1925 
mentions a slave of Athanasius and sends greetings to ’A@avactoy rév Kipidv pov, 
who was therefore at that time with Paphnutius. The Athanasius referred 
to may well be the writer of 1929, but we cannot be certain of this, and the 
reference tells us little about him (except that he was in a position to keep 
slaves), since he was presumably, in view of 1929, merely on a temporary visit to 
Paphnutius. Among the writers of the letters we meet some names familiar in 
the records of Athanasius’s life ; e. g., Heraclides and Ammonius occur among 
Athanasian bishops banished by the Arians, Hzs¢z. Ar., 72, and cf. Ep. ad 
Dracontium, 7: pynpoveves ’Appovior, Tod peta Vapatiwvos anxodnuncayvtos ; but these 
names were too common for the coincidence to have any value. 

The letter is too fragmentary for stylistic tests to be applied, but one or two 
points are deserving of mention. In the first place, the omission of the title 
éxioxomos is of no significance. If the MS. tradition of fourth-century letters can 
be trusted there was no uniformity of practice in this particular, and titles were 
inserted or omitted at the whim of the writer; thus Ursacius and Valens omit 
their titles in writing to Pope Julius (Afol. c. Ar., 58; Hzst. Ar., 26), but insert 
them in their letter to Athanasius (zdzd.)._ Even the title of the person addressed 
was often not inserted (e.g. “Adavacio "IwBiavds, Migne, xxvi, 813 ; ’Emxtyte 
"A@avacros, op. cit., 1049; &c.); and Athanasius in his letters usually omitted his 
title. The salutations are often omitted in the MSS., but some examples of them 
and of the final greetings may be quoted: Kupiw vio cal mrodewordtw cvddErtoupy@ 
“Povpwtave "Adavdovos év Kupiw yxaipew (Migne, xxvi, 1180); ’A@avdow.os a8Ba 
‘Qpovotw Kxrd., ayamnrots Kat ToOewordtois adeAdols ev Kupim xalpew .. . Upoca- 
yopevovow tas of cbv éuol. "Eppoadar tpas ev xupiw edxopat, dyanntol kal mobevd- 
rarou adeAgot (tom. cit., 977-80) ; “Eppacbai oe kal pynuovedvey nuav TO Kpiw €dxo- 
peda, dyamnte kal ws GANOGs TOOEWdraTeE (tom. cit., 1084); TO ay. Kai GAnOds 700. vid 
Magivo prrocddo AO. ev K. x. ... TIpocayopetovat oe advtes of ody iyuiv (op. cit, 
1085-9). The resemblances here to our letter are too slight and trivial to be of 
any value, and there is one noteworthy difference. In no extant letter does 
St. Athanasius use the phrase é» xupf@ 0€6 in the salutation, as does the writer of 
1929. But we have too few of the saint’s letters to build very much on this. 
One further difference may be noted. Inthe writings of St. Athanasius, to judge 
by the printed text, we find the form Hagvodrios, here Tanvouria. This however 
cannot be used as a serious argument; MSS. are not to be trusted on points of 
orthography, and an editor has to normalize spellings. Finally, the fact that the 
letter is holograph is no argument against the Athanasian authorship. Athana- 


118 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS [1929] 


sius certainly employed amanuenses, but it does not therefore follow—indeed it is 
excessively improbable—that he never wrote a letter with his own hand, and the 
present letter, purely private and personal in character, is not ofa kind for which 
he would be specially likely to use an amanuensis. 

It will be seen that a definite decision is impossible. The most we can say 
is that there is at least a reasonable probability that we have in the present docu- 
ment a specimen of the hand of the great champion of orthodoxy, and the mere 
possibility gives to.our letter an interest which, in its sadly mutilated state, 
it would not otherwise possess. The editor’s debt to Prof. Hunt is particularly 
great in this letter. 

1 [TO [rijuiolrdétl@ Kai alyalrnr® [rart]pi Il anvovriw 
[Adlavdovos [élv K(vpi)o [O(6)]o xatpev. 
Xpiorss| avrod doin tiv onv OeocéBerar 


tN 


‘O nlalvrox[pdétwp] Beds Kal 6 

T[alpapeviy Aluiv] wordy [x]pd[vor] Kal peuvia|Olar juev ev tails 
gals mpooelvyais|: rhs yap] ons [ayi]jérntos Told|ro dtatedovons 

éorlale jpily a&mlavralx AD vlye ae . Ilapaxad@ obv ruxvo- 

[7Elpos quay pyyjoOn[re af 

[AaluBdvovra dia z[7)]v [a]y[éa iv ayldmny cov, kal ws édy alijrnonoba 


yap [map] tudy diddpevar evxal adva- 


anNTr Anon fF WwW 


UMELS 

9 ev (rleils dlyiais [cov] mpoeeuyiais > od ee] 7d HulElrlelpolv}. Xaprooua 
TO Otxaio 

10 [miaOeis] Gs atravralxf moreis Hulov prjplnr]: Kal yap oida ore 


ur [girei]s [i]uas. Mddorzia & eorl ppolyris pole Ardvjuns Kal rhs 


12 [Punrlposs a. yap Ardbpyo[s silence ges Jov kai 4 prltnp| pov dvepart 
Toi etna sais Ayav obv [péyrotos mrelpl euod [éori] m[polomdécyxovros 
© Ge eg ean @ kal atover[ata €xovTos| TuaTelvw@ Ole eis TOV amdvTwv 


15 getnpla|. Ardywov dé-[év ravrais tlais vdolous HO]6ueOa dre Kal dvd 

16 pepiuyns coe yéyou[er Tov] Kadov vidv ‘Qpiova dmroarirat 

17 [mplos nuas. Ocoddctos, [....]oO .[.]., Avrioyos, AfdWun, 7 pArnp, 
TAVTES 

18 off tlo¥ mmerépov oikov mloAdAd] ce Kal mpockuvotpev Kal mpooayopevouer, 

19 [Teutlorate adyamnré md[rep. “Eplpwpévfoly ce 4 Oela Staguddger(e) 


4 5 \ ee 
Mpovora Emi py- 


20 [kta]rov x[pdlvoy del peuvnoKopevoy Huar, 
21 [ayalrnré, Tiwialrlare. 


Address on the verso: 


22 Te ryuolrdlr@ Kal dylanntd marl! Man\yjovrio 


23 AGlavdloros ev K(upi)p Oe)6. 
2. Ko [Ao ; so too in 1. 23. 4. l mapapevecy, 6. Cor dit cis: s djyaimy: Hunt; 


1]. bysaivery, 7f. map’: Hunt. dva|ha]uBavorvrac: Hunt. - 1. airhonode. g. «0 ee: 


[1929 | THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS 119 


Hunt, exempli gratia; seenote. 10-11. Seenoteonl.9, 12. |. dvopadet. 14. drover|ara 
€xovros|: Hunt. 15. 1. dudyovres. rats vdo[ors : Hunt. 16. 1. drooreiiat, 18. m[odda]: 
Hunt. 20. |. pipynokdpevor, 


‘To the most valued and beloved father Papnutius, Athanasius greeting 
in the Lord God. May Almighty God and his Christ grant that your piety may 
long be spared to us and remember us in your prayers; for if your holiness con- 
tinues so to do it will be our lot everywhere to be in good health. I therefore 
entreat you repeatedly, remember us ; for the prayers which you offer are taken 
on high owing to your holy love, and according as you ask in your holy prayers 
so will our state prosper. I shall do you justice by believing that you every- 
where make mention of us; for indeed I know that you love us. My care is 
_ chiefly for Didyma and my mother (?) ; for Didyma [is in sickness], and my mother 
is in bad health ; so that there is very great anxiety concerning me, suffering [this ?| 
in addition and being in very weak health; yet I trust in the Saviour of all. 
Living’ in the midst of these sicknesses, we rejoice that it came also into your 
mind to send to us our good son Horion. Theodosius, ..., Antiochus, Didyma, 
our mother, all they of our household, we both salute and address you many times, 
most valued, beloved father. May the divine Providence preserve you for a great 
length of time, ever remembering us, beloved, most valued.’ (Addressed) ‘ To the 
most valued, beloved father Papnutius, Athanasius in the Lord God.’ 


1. Lamvovrim: the r is made rather peculiarly, the cross-stroke beginning low and almost 
touching the bottom of the downstroke, so that the whole looks like the lower half of 6. As 
the papyrus is slightly rubbed it might be thought from the facsimile that 6 is the true 
reading, but a close examination makes it certain that + is correct; cf. too the verso. 

5. gais: this suits the space better than éyias, but the traces are so very slight that it is 
impossible to decide with certainty between the two words, 

7. prnoOn| rt]: pvnoG;|va] would be too much for the space. The use of the imperative 
is quite intelligible and not uncommon, e.g. Ghedini 25, 19 f.; 1926, 15 f. 

[rap’|: this suits the space better than 6’, which the editor had originally read. 

8. a [éh[ialy ay|dmnv olov: this gives a good sense and suits the visible letters, but 
the space available for nva is rather small; the supposed » is a mere spot of ink, which 
looks like the top of the first upstroke. [6] dy[:ol» would suit the space better, but ay is 
then rather intractable. : 

9. mpolalevx|ais: there are difficulties in this reading, particularly in the case of e, but 
the context and the visible letters almost impose it, and it can hardly be doubted that it is 
correct. Prof. Hunt’s ed é£e. probably gives the sense, but the space is somewhat scanty. 

Xapwodpae xrd.: the reconstruction and in part the reading of this passage (to [? unr|pés) 
is due to Prof. Hunt. That it is doubtful need hardly be emphasized; but at least it can 
be said that readings and restorations are all reconcilable with the remains. 

11. Adv|uns: this reading (at first rejected by the editor on the evidence of |. 17, where 
Didyma seemed to be the mother’s name, becomes very plausible if, with Prof. Hunt, we 
insert a comma after Avdvpn there. Didyma and 4 pyrnp are then different persons. 

12. [ SMe ea ols! site Jov: Prof. Hunt suggests fe: g.) [eee muper |ov OF kdpatov Or some 
similar phrase, and this seems likely enough. 

dvopart: OF avwpanila (-av). Some marks which might suggest a defaced a in |. 12 can 
hardly so be interpreted. Asay (Hunt) could be read without much difficulty at the 
beginning of |. 13, but this leaves some characters unaccounted for, and the ovy probably 
rules out kali] ¢yay as the beginning of the new sentence. dvwpanila xpqrac is not possible. 

14. tovro Or radra is hardly sufficient at the beginning, nor are the traces specially 
favourable to it. 

15. diayav krd.: the reading didyey is extremely probable, indeed almost certain (da 
ray less likely); hence some such restoration as here adopted seems required. The com- 


120 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAPHNUTIUS [1929] 


bination of a singular participle and a plural verb is an objection but not a fatal one, in an 
informal and perhaps hasty letter, even in the case of so correct a writer as this. The 
singular didywv was probably due to the singular morevw ; then the writer (his thought per- 
haps passing from himself to his household generally) dropped into the plural. 

16, xaddv: for the Christian use of the word see Moulton and Milligan, s.v.; Wilcken, 
- Chrest, 127, intr. ; and the remarks of Ghedini (p. 121) on the same letter. 

17. |o@.[.].: the letter after @ might be a, but the last letter can hardly be part of s, so 
that [Mu]o6ag cannot be read. 

A sjiun, 7) wyrnp: see l. 11, n. 

22-3. This address is very faint, but by the help of ll. 1-2 can be read with practical 
certainty. In the earlier part the characters are confused by the presence of some super- 
fluous strokes, perhaps relics of an earlier text. 


TABLE OF PAPYRI 


IN ORDER OF INVENTORY NUMBERS 


Inv. Cat. Inv. Cat. 

2248 verso 1912 2496 1928 
2487 1914 2497 1929 
2488 1920 2543 1913 
2489 1917 2544 1915 
2491 1923 2545 1916 
2492 1924 2546 1918 
2493 1925 2547 1919 
2494 1926 2548 1922 
2495 1927 | 2549 1921 


SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA SCHOOL 
OF THEOLOGY LIBRARY 


INDICES 


i. SUBJECT INDEX TOAUN PRODUCTIONS 
AND COMMENTARIES 


Abinnaeus papyri, 100. 

Achmimic dialect, 94. 

— group of Coptic papyri, I. 

Agrippa I at Alexandria, 16. 

Agrippa II, influence of, 20. 

Agrippina, character of, 20. 

Alexander, Alabarch, 11°. 

Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria: relations 
with Meletius, 39-41. 

— — with the Meletians, 55'. 

— death of, 40. 

’Ade€avdpevs, meaning of, 14, 16. 

Alexandria, Augustus at, 35. 

— Bishops of, powers of, 69. 

— Camp at, 64. 

— Christian dissensions at, 39. 

— citizenship, 8, 34. 

— gates of, 64. 

— hostility of, to Roman Emperors, 11, 31. 

— Imperial cult at, 35. 

— Jews at, viii, 10-20. 

— letter of Constantine to, 46. 

— Meletian antipope at (?), 64, 65, 69. 

— municipal magistracies at, 35-6. 

— — term of, 8. 

— neocor? of Augustus at, 8. 

— power of Alexandrian presbyters, 64. 

— senate at, vill, 8—1o. 

— Synod of, date of, 67. 

— supposed temple of Claudius at, 7. 

— tribes at, 5, 33. 

Ammonius, 103, 117. 

dvOpids, use of, to imply Auman honours, 32. 

Antiochus, agens in rebus, 116°. 

Antiochus, Bishop of Ptolemais, 116°. 

Antiochus, correspondent of St. Athanasius, 
116. 

Anti-Semitism, vili, 10-11, 16-19, 20-21. 

ara, aB8a applied to Bishops, 68. 

dmavraw, sense of, 104. 

"Adiyios, "Anpiyxeos, 98. 

Apis, agent of St. Athanasius at court, 66. 

dmXixtrov, amdtktrapios, 68. 

Apollonius, known persons of the name, 29. 

dpxat, term of, 35-6. 


Archaph, John. Sze John Archaph. 

Archelaus, 55, 57- 

— and the Synod of Tyre, 66-7. 

Archelaus, Bishop of Caschara, 67. 

dpxtepevs, in Imperial cult, 34. 

— ‘of Claudius, 7. 

Arian party. See Eusebian party. 

Arius denounced by Meletius, 39. 

Arsenius, Bishop of Hypsele, 46, 48, 57, 
66-7. 

Ascetics, importance of, 102-3. 

Asclepiades, M. Julius, philosopher, 29. 

Asiut, Meletians at, 422. 

Athanasius, St.: accession of, 40. 

— accused of violence and oppression, 47- 

— arbitrary proceedings against Arians and 
Meletians, 54, 55- 

— as authority for Meletian schism, 40. 

— character of, 57-8. 

— election opposed by Meletians, 41. 

— Eusebian-Meletian coalition against, 41. 

— — attacks on, 46-8, 55-7. 

— first exile of, 55, 70. 

— date of his second exile, 54”. 

— interference with bread supply, 69-70. 

— letter from (?), 115-20. 

— letter of Constantius against, 63. 

— parents of, 116-17. 

— popularity of, in Egypt, 41. 

— refuses to attend Synod of Caesarea, 47-8. 

-— regrets truce with Meletians, 40. 

— rescued by Archelaus, 67. 

— summoned to court, 55, 56. 

— writings against the Arians, 66. 

Athanasius, son of Capito, 55, 57, 67- 

Athletic contests, Jews excluded from, rq f. 

Augusteum at Alexandria, 35. 

Augustus and Alexandria, 35. 

— and the Alexandrian senate, viii, g—10. 

— Claudius’s attitude towards, 6, 22. 

Ausonius, identity of, 100, 105. 


Balbillus, Ti. Claudius, prefect, 29. 
Barbillus, Ti. Claudius, identity of, 29. 


INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


Benjamin, Patriarch of Alexandria, refers to 
Meletians, 42. 

Bys, 98. 

Bread supply to Alexandrian clergy, 69. 


Caesarea, Synod of, 45-8, 51-2, 56. 

Caesareum at Alexandria, 35. 

Callinicus, Bishop of Pelusium, 41. 

xahdés, Christian use of, 120. 

Camalodunum, temple of Claudius at, 7. 

Camp at Alexandria, 64. 

Canopus, Imperial cult at, 35. 

KaTaoTdoews ypaupatioy, 45. 

keAAa as ‘store-chamber ’, 64. 

Chaeremon, philosopher, 29. 

Xatpe, xaipus, use of, 84. 

Chariots, dedication of, 6, 34. 

Children, pledging of, 72-3. 

‘Church of the Martyrs’, 39. 

Citizenship, ephebia as step to, 34. 

Claudian tribe at Alexandria, 5, 33. 

KAavoteioy at Alexandria, 72. 

Claudius: attitude to Anti-Semitic riots at 
Alexandria, 18 f., 21. 

— — to honours and Imperial cult, 5-7, 31. 

— — topolicy of Augustus and Tiberius, 6, 22. 

— celebration of his birthday, 32. 

— character and policy of, 21-3. 

— date of acceptanceof title Pater Patriae, 29. 

— insistence on use of Latin by Roman 
citizens, 4. 

— letter of, concerning Jews at Alexandria, 
oe aie 

— piety towards his family, 31. 

Commentarienses, 63. 

Communication, speed of, in Roman Empire, 
187. 

‘ Confessor ’, use of the title, 43. 

Constantine and attacks on Athanasius, 46. 

— and Egyptian troubles, 40. 

— banishes Athanasius, 70. 

— banishes John Archaph, 41. 

— bequest to widowsof Libyaand Egypt, 70. 

— commends John Archaph, 46. 

— Meletian deputation to, 41. 

— orders arrest of Macarius, 66. 

— summons John Archaph to court, 67-8. 

— summons Synod of Caesarea, 47, 48. 

— summons Synod of Tyre, 47, 48, 51-2. 

Constantine, Bishop of Asiut, 42. 

Constantius, 63. 

Coptic dialects, 93, 94, 97- 

— influence on Greek style, 53-4. 

— script: unusual form of 9, 97. 

Cross (chrism), use of, 104. 

Cynopolite (Upper) nome, 44. 


Dalmatius, censitor, 46, 48. 
Damian, Patriarch of Alexandria, 42. 


129 


Darb el-Gerza, finds of papyri at, 1. 

‘ Delta’ quarter at Alexandria, 10. 
Dicaeus, father of Paiéous, 43. 

Didymus, 104. 

Dinner, fashionable hour of, 64. 

Stovxntys, 49. 

Dionysius, C. Julius, and family of, 29-30. 
Dionysius, president of Synod of Tyre, 67. 
Dorotheus, 110. 


Economic misery of Egyptian middle-class, 
72. 

exriOévar aS = proponere, 29. 

iyepeov, use Of, as prenceps, 22%, 35. 

"EAXny as ‘pagan’, 66. 

Nmépar SeBaotat, 32. 

Ephebia, 34. 

Epiphanius, authority of, 38, 572. 

Lpistulae, publication of, 4. 

€nitporos as = prefect, 33. 

€6os, technical use of, 37. 

Euergetes II, Jewish troubles under, 11. 

Eusebian (Arian) party : alliance with Mele- 
lians, 41, 55, 67-8. 

— attacks on Athanasius, 46-8. 

Eusebius of Caesarea, 48. 

Eusebius of Nicomedia, 41. 

Evagrius, agens in rebus, 1167. 

eaidyns, late forms of, 63. 


Felicissimus, Dux, 1167. 

Flaccus and the Jews at Alexandria, 16 f. 

Folding of papyri: evidence for double 
folding, 86, 88. 


Galerius, edict of toleration by, 39. 

Gentile names, omission of, 30. 

Germanicus, popularity of, at Alexandria, 31. 

yepovoia of Jews, at Alexandria, 124. 

yevoua as = ‘dine’, 64. 

Grammar: Accidence: Nouns and adjec- 
tives : accusative in -ay in third declension, 
546 

— — — confusion of rst and 2nd with 3rd 
decl. forms in adjectives, 80. 

— — Verbs: confusion of deponent and 
active forms, 79. 

— — — deponent forms of eiyi, gt. 

— — —o in divapa (dvvorrat), 54. 

— — —a in second aorist, 54. 

— — — ébwoa as aor. of didam, 85-6. 

-— — — retention of ¢in aorist of verbs in 
-i¢a, 80. 

— —  — confusion of perfect and aorist, 54, 
64. 

— Prepositions: use of prepositions, 84. .. 

— — éd used for trép and mepi, 84. 

— — nepi used for imép, 84, 86. 


124 


Grammar: Syntax, &c.: paratactical con- 
structions, 79, 86. 

— — participles used absolutely, 54. 

— — gen. absolute for subject of sentence, 
54- 

— — rod with infin, instead of subordinate 
clause, 54. 

— — ethical dative, 79. 

— — future used for subjunctive, 85, 86. 

— — xpeiav €xyw governing acc., 88. 

— — definite article for rel. pronoun, 54, 63, 
88, 

— — omission of article, 37. 

— — confusion of prepositions of motion 
and rest, 54, 64. 

Greek, use of, in Imperial letters, 3-4. 

Groves, sacred, 6, 33. 

Gymnasiarch, position of, in cursus honorum, 
20°, 

— term of office, 36. 


ga- (verbal prefix), 97. 

Hathor, Meletian settlement at, 43-4. 
Heracleopolis, Meletians at, 42. 

Heraclides, 114, 117. 

Heraclius, commentardensis, 63. 

Heraiscus, of Alexandria, 55, 56, 63-4, 69. 


Imperial cult, 5-8, 33, 34. 

Index to Athanasius’s Paschal Letters, 40. 
Intercessory prayers, 81. 

Interest, high rate of, 80. 

Isaac, Bishop of Letopolis, 55-7, 63. 
Ischyras, schismatic priest, 46, 63. 
‘Isidorus Ac/a’, viii, 19 f. 


Jews at Alexandria, viii, ro—20. 

— in Egypt, number of, 11}. 

— wealth of, 11. 

BINH, 71. 

John, correspondent of St. Athanasius, 116. 

John Archaph, 45, 55, 67-8, 88-9. 

— apologizes to Constantine, 46. 

— appointment of, 40. 

— at Antioch, 57. 

— banishment of, 41. 

— leads deputation to Constantine, 41. 

Josephus’s evidence as to Jews and Alexan- 
drian citizenship, 14, 

Julius Caesar and Jews of Alexandria, 14. 


KNOYS, 71. 


Labla, near Arsinoe, Meletians at, 42. 
Latinisms in Greek, 3-4. 

AeBirov, 93. 

Libyae nomos, 34. 





INDEX OL SUBJECTS 


Macarius, agent of St. Athanasius at court, 66. 

Macarius, presbyter of St. Athanasius, 46, 
55, 57, 66, 68. 

Maccabees, iii, date of, 122. 

‘ Macedonians’ at Alexandria, 13. 

Marcellinus, Pope, accused of pagan sacri- 
fice, 387. 

‘ Martyrs’, Church of the, 39. 

Matthew the Poor, Patriarch, 42. 

Maximinus, persecution by, 39. 

Meletians: history of the schism, 38-43. 


_— alliance with Eusebian party, 55, 67-8. 


— attack Athanasius, 46-8. 

— persecuted by Athanasius, 55-7. 

— set up a rival bishop to Athanasius (?), 
64, 65, 69. ; 

— settlement at Hathor, 43-5. 

— mutual charity, 72. 

— orthodoxy of, 102. 

Meletius, 39-40. 

— ‘brief’ of, 63. 

— deposition of, 38. 

Memphis, Meletians near, 44. 

Messalina, as Demeter, 32, 37. 

— golden statue of (?), 6. 

Michael I, Patriarch of Alexandria, 42-3. 

povdptos, 65. 

Monasticism, evidence on, 48. 

porn, meanings of, 64, 65. 

Monks, life of, 44. 

Moon, Gate of the, 64. 

Mortuary rolls, ancient analogy of, 81. 

Municipal magistracies, term of, 35-6. 


Neocort in Imperial cult, 35. 

Nicaea, Council of, 39, 40. 

Nicopolis, 64. 

NKEUSHAL, QO. 

Nomina sacra, contraction and overlining of, 
80-1. 


oikovdmos, 49. 

Orthography: Confusion of 6 and ¢, 54, 63. 
— — and a unusually frequent, 80. 
— —eand €l, 54-6 

— — e and 7, 65. 

— — nanda, 54. 

— —nand e, 54. 

— —n and ein Xpiotés, Xprotvavekds, 51. 
— — nand v, 54. 

— —oand v, 54. 

—— panda, 54. 

— — vand 8, 54. 

— —vand Ny 2. 

——vanda, 2. 

— —woando, 2. 

— dropping of v from diphthong av, 37. 
— y omitted from yy, yx, 54, 63. 

— incorrect insertion of iota adscript, 2. 


INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


Orthography : intervocalic y, 51. 
— -ws shortened to -ts, 2 ; 


Pahbew, 93. 

Paiéous, Apa, 43-4. 

— letter from, 94. 

— name Iampoi, Marois, 63. 

Pamin, 41%. 

mamas, meaning of, 63, 65. 

Paphnutius, identity of, 100-2. 

— papyn, 44- 

— — provenance of, 110. 

Paphnutius, Meletian confessor, 41. 

mapotkor applied to Jews, 13. 

TlaraBeir, 63. 

Pater Patriae: date of acceptance of title by 
Claudius, 29. 

Pax Augusta, 32. 

Pax Augusta Claudiana, golden statue of, 
5-6. 

Pesla, village of, 52. 

Peter, Bishop of Alexandria, 39. 

Peter, Bishop of Heracleopolis, 69. 

Philadelphia, site of, 1. 

— papyri, 1-2. 

Philo’s evidence as to Jews and Alexan- 
drian citizenship, 13 f. 

—ILn Flaccum and Legatio ad Gatum, 
mutual relation of, 16. 

Se Egyptian Bishop at Synod of Tyre, 


Pines of Ptemencyrcis, 88-9, ror. 
moXtteia, sense Of, 13, 16. 

Pollio, Vitrasius, ae. 

Praepositus castrorum, 65. 
IIpavovs, 70. 

mpeaBus, use Of, for mpecBeurns, 31. 
Presbyters, power of, at Alexandria, 64, 
Processions in Greek festivals, 32. 
Procurator metallorum, 33. 
Proposttio, 4, 29. 

Wypiopa, 31. 

Ptemencyrcis, monastery of, 46. 
Publication of rescripts, 4. 


Rectus, L. Aemilius, 29. 


125 


prre, 93. 
Roma (Dea Roma), cult of, 32. 


Sabbion, Sambion, 30. 

Sardica, Council of, 46, 47, 54, 56', 63, 
1Ol. 

— — date of, 67. 

2<Baureia, groves connected with, 33. 

— municipal temples, 35. 

Secretariat, development of, under Claudius, 
oD 

Signa, ciyva, cxesmon, $777, 65. 

Sun, Gate of the, 64. 

Synagogues, attacks on, 36. 

Syria, Jews from, called in by Alexandrian 
Jews, 17-19. 


TaBeir, 63. 

TARLIO, 93. 

Tamouré, Meletian settlement at, 44. 

Taio, 93. 

Taxes, burden of, 72-3 

Terdét, 71. 

Thebaid, Meletians in, 44. 

Theon, archidicastes, 30. 

Theon, C. Julius, viii. 

6eds, application of title to living Emperor, 8. 

Titles, use of, in letters, 117. 

Turovns, 71. 

Tmounakén, 71. 

Tovay, 71. 

TovBéortts, 69. 

Tribes at Alexandria, 5, 33. 

Tribunicia potestas, mention of, in Imperial 
litle, a sign of translation from Latin, 3. 

Tyre, Arsenius found at, 46. 

— Synod of, 41, 47, 48, 51-2, 55-7, 63, 
66-8, 70, 101. 


Vestis, court title, 69. 
Wadi Habib, Meletians at, 42. 
Wheat, price of, 70. 


Women, standard of education of, 108. 


Zeno, archive of, 1. 





2 FERSONAL INDEX 


*Adavdows, Bishop of Alexandria, 1914, 9, 
29, 37, 383 1925, 15, 18; 1929, 2, 23. 
’Aavdavos, son of Capito, agent of St. Athana- 

sius, 1914, 33. 
Aipidtos ‘Pyxtos, Aoveios, prefect, 1912, 1, 70. 
*Appov, Meletian at Alexandria, 1914, 21. 


"Appov, ara, 1917, 17. 


*Appovios, 1923, 4. 

’Avixtos IavAivos, consul, 1913, 1. 
*AvouBas peyas, 1914, 60. 
*AvouBas pixpds, 1914. 60. 
*Avrivoos (?), 1917, 11 (-vovs). 


126 INDEX OF 


*Avtioxos, 1929, 17. 

"AToAAwrtos, Tasos "IovAvos, envoy to Claudius, 
1912, 19. 

*ArrokAa@mos, TiBepvos KAavdios, envoy to Clau- 
dius, 1912, 19 (-oms). 

"Amo\A@nos, father of Hermaiscus, 1912, 20. 

‘AmoAA@vos, son of Artemidorus, envoy to 
Claudius, 1912, 16 (-ous). 

“Apnovs, aa, Meletian, 1914, 55. 

“Apnovs (?), 1925, 19. 

*Apiatwv, father of Ti. Claudius Apollonius, 
1912, 19. 

“Aprrokpas, adevs, 1919, 30. 

Aptepidwpos, father of Apollonius, 1912, 16. 

"ApxéAaos, agent of St. Athanasius, 1914, 32, 
36, 37. 

*ApxiBtos, TiBepros KAavdios, 1912, 108. 

*AgkAnmuadns, Mapkos “IovAvos, envoy to Clau- 
dius, 1912, 17. 

atpHe., See gatpe. 

Adpndws Tepdvrvos, son of Horus, 1918, 11. 

AvpyAvos Tayeds, son of Horus, priest, 1918, 
2, [18]. 

Avoonos, 1924, 2, 15. 

Avrokxpdrap, 1912, 12, 14. 

acdinge, 1922, 1. 


BapBidos, TiBépios KAavdios, envoy to Clau- 
dius, 1912, 16, 36, 105. 

Bacotavn, 1926, 22. 

Buc, 1922, 1. 


Tdios “IovAvos ’AmroAA@yos, envoy to Claudius, 
1912, 19. 

Tdtos “IovAvos Atoviatos, envoy to Claudius, 
1912, 17. 

Taddos, 1924, 6. 

Teppavkds, 1912, 12, 14. 
24. 

Tepdvruos, ama, 1914, 55; 1918, 4 (Kepovd.). 

Tepdvtios, Avpndtos, son of Horus, 1918, 11. 


I. Kaioap, 1912, 


Acddun, 1929, 11, 12, 17. 

Aidupos (?), 1923, 16. 

ainaroc (?), 1921, 32. 

Avovvowos, Tdeos “lovAws, envoy to Claudius, 
1912, 17, 76. 

Atovvotos, son of Sabbion, envoy to Claudius, 
1912, 18. 

Avockopidns, Prior of Hathor, 1918, 18. 

Atéokopos, ara, 1916, 3; 1918, 4; 1921, 
23 (?). 

Awpdéeos, 1925, 22. 

Awpdbeos, 6 ’O€vpuyxitns, 1927, 2. 


“Edevas, dma, 1914, 55. 
"Epis (? ‘; Meletian Bishop, 1914, 48. 
“Eptnovs, 1915, ea 40; {1916, 62}. 


PERSONS 


“Eppaickos, son of Apollonius, envoy to Clau- 
dius, 1912, 19. 
Ev[, 1925, 16. 

Evéaivor, 1914, 54. 

EvoeBios, 1925, 19. 


"HXlas, da, 1914, 60. 
‘Hpaioxos, Meletian leader at 
1914, 7, 25, 36, 45- 
“Hpakdeidns, povdpios, 1914, 19. 
“Hpakdeidns, 1928, 2, 17. 


Alexandria, 


“Hpdkdevos, commentartensts, 1914, 3 (-kXe.). 


Ocddocr0s, 1929, 17. 

Ocdkrera, 1926, 22. 

Oar, Sidkwv, 1914, 53. 

Oé¢ev, father of C. Julius Dionysius, 1912, 76. 


‘lépa€, dra, 
1921, 22. 
*Inaovs Xptotés, 1917, 


1914, 55; 1916, 3; 1918, 5; 


2; 1927, 6. 


*JovAtos ’AmoAN@MOs, Tavos, envoy to Claudius, 


1912, 19. 
"Tovhuos "AoKAnmddys, Mapxos, envoy to Clau- 
dius, 1912, 17. 


*IovAvos Atovyowos, Taos, envoy to Claudius, 


1912, 17. 
Iodx, Meletian Bishop of Letopolis, 1914, 6. 
Icrawpoc, 1921, 20. 
"Iwavyns (Archaph), aa, Meletian leader, 
1914, 34. 
‘loon, 1914, 56. 


Kaioap, Tepparxds, 1912, 27. 

Kaioap, TiBépios KAavduos, 1912, 12, 14. 

Kaicap, 6 eds, 1912, 9. 

Kdddtoros, 1914, 1, 63 (Kaduor.). 

Karirev, father of Athanasius, 1914. 33. 

KAavdiavds: KXavdcavy Eipnyn Ze8aorn, 1912, 35- 

— van Kravdtard, 1912, 41. 

Kdavdwos ’AroAA@mos, Ty8epros, envoy to Clau- 
dius, 1912, 19 (-&s). 

Kdavdcos ’ApxiBios, ‘TiBépios, 1912, 108. 

KAavdwos BapBiddos, TuBépios, envoy to Clau- 
dius, 1912, 16. 

Kiavdios Kaioap, TyBépios, 1912, 11, 14. 

KAavdwos avias, TiBépios, envoy to Claudius, 
1912, 18. 

Koddovéos, Prior of Hathor, 1918, 18, ro. 

KodAov€os, 1914, 56. 

KodoBés, 1918, 9. 

KopynAtos, 1914, 55. 

K[ Racer har ls, ama, 1917, Io. 

Kwvoravrivos, 6 evaeBeotaros Bacidevs, 1918, 4. 

Aewvidns, father 
(Acov.). 

Aewvidns, 1914, 61; 1918, 6. 

Avtxios Aluidtos ‘Phxros, prefect, 1912, 1. 


of Chaeremon, 1912, 17 


INDEX OF PERSONS 


Maxdpuos, Athanasian priest, 1914, 30, 34. 

Mapxos ‘Iov\os ’AokAnmdédns, envoy to Clau- 
dius, 1912, 17. 

Meyadovupos, axa, 1917, 12 (Mixadwrny), 18 
(do.); 1921, 24 (ssyKaNwmyaroc), 25 
(Mu.). 

Medcrtavoi, of, 1914, 20. 

Mikadomy, seyKaNwityaroc. 
yupos, 


Mavons, 1916, 6. 


See Meyado- 


*Omratos, PAduvos, consul, 1918, 1. 

"Op, 1914, 60. See also *Qpos, gwp. 
Otvadepia, 1926, 4, 28. 

Overdppios, father of Touan, 1917, 11. 
Ovirpaovos TloANiwy, énizporos, 1912, 43. 


Tayevs, Avpndwos, son of Horus, 1913, 2, [18]. 

NaceiHoy, WrRoyer, 1920, 4. 

Hamovs, dma, 1915, 2, 40; 1916, 2, 33; 
1918, 1, 11, 21; 1919, 2, 34. Tamoi, 
1914, 1, [63]; 1917, 2,5, 26. maemnoy, 
1921, 1. maemny, 1920, 2, 28. nmaernoyce, 
1921, 32. 

Tapovrios, 1914, 60. 

Tapeorévos, 1915, 6 ; (1916, 107]. 

Havape, ava, 1918, 8. 

IlazvovOns 6 *ArravoroXirns, 1918, 8. 

Tlarrvov6ns, 1918, 7. 

anvov6tos, dna, anchorite, 1928, 3, 25; 
1924, 1, 14. Wanvovrws, 1925, 2, 24; 
1928, 1, 16; 1929, 1, 22. Tadvovdrs, 
1926, 2. Hadvoirios, 1926, 28. 

Tlaxvovdis, Meletian, 1913, 21. 
Tlamvovrtos. 

Tamvovrws, deacon, 1913, 10. 

Harvovrios, dra (two persons), 1914, 54, 61. 

Taciwr, son of Potamon, envoy to Claudius, 
1912, 18. 

HaraBueis, priest, 1918, 9. 

NaraBeir, priest, 1914, 1, [63]; 1920, 4 
(mataheert). 

IlavAivos, ’Avixwos, consul, 1913, 1. 

Tlathos, 6 dvayveorns, 1914, 59. 

TlavAos, mpecBitepos, 1917, 11. 

Haidos, 1919, 25. 

fadvovdtos, Tagvovrios. 

Tla@pios, 1914, 54. 

naghey, 1920, 21, 23. 

eRe, da, 1917, 11, 17, 21, 26 (?). 

Tlevyns, 1919, 2. 

Iler6uBéor10s, 1918, 7. 

Ilervipios, 1918, 6. 

Merpos, Meletian Bishop [of Heracleopolis ?}, 
1914, 48. 

mete (?), 1921, 1, 

neugn{, 1922, 12. 


See also 


See [amvov6tos. 








127 


Tap, dra, 1914, 55. 
Tludvios, 1925, 2. 
Tp, 1914, 54. 
Tliodrvos, 1914, 56. 
TIoAXNiwv, Overpacros, 
(Hoderwvos). 
(Mordpev, father of Pasion, 1912, 18. 
IIpavovs, 1914, 52. 
IIpwovs, former monk, 1918, 10, 20. 
IIcahiovs, 1918, 19. 


exitporos, 1912, 43 


‘Pros, Aovkios Aividos, prefect, 1912, 1, 70. 
‘Pon (personified), 1912, 37. 


2a8Biev, father of Dionysius, 1912, 18. 

Zampiov, 1914, 53. 

Zapuatns, dra, 1914, 54. 

2<Baords, 1912, 12, 14. 6 
1912, 59, 61, 62,87. of mpd éuod SeBacroi, 
1912, 68. oi SeBaoroi, 1912, 23. 

Zeve (?), 1917, to (see note). 

Zoupovs, dwa, 1916, 4 (-pov); 1917, 11, 12, 
21. 


4A v) 
Ocds SeBacrds, 


TiBepios KAavdios ’AmoAN@mos, envoy to Clau- 
dius, 1912, 19. 

TiBeptos KNavdios ’ApyxiBios, 1912, 108. 

TiZéptos KAavdios BapBiddXos, envoy to Claudius, 
1912, 16. 

TiBepios Kdavdwos Katcap SeBacrds Teppavixos 
Avroxpdrop, 1912, 11, 14. 

TiBepwos Kdavdws Pavias, envoy to Claudius, 
1912, 18. 

Tirovns, 1914, 60. 

Tovay, ara, 1918, (op 1914, 58. 

Tovav, son of Quenaphrius, 1917, 11. 

TovBeoris, father of Peter, 1914, 48. 

Tpvpev, dra, 1917, 54; 1918, 4 (Tp.); 1921, 
21. 


Pavias, Ty8épios KAavdvos, envoy to Claudius, 
1912, 18. 

bives, 1914, 56. 

Aduvos ‘Onraros, consul, 1918, 1. 


Xatpnuwv, son of Leonides, envoy to Clau- 
dius, 1912, 17. 

Xapiows, 1918, 1, 22. 

Napitwn, 1922, 6 (-toy), 15. 

Xpiorés, 1919, 14, 15, 17, 21; 1921, 10; 
1925, 6; 1926, 4.7; 1927, 4; 1928, 9 
(Xpnor.), 15 (do.); 1929, 3. Inaois xe 
1917, 2; 1927, 6. 


WVaeis, 1914, 57. 
WVais, dAvevs, 1919, 30. 


128 


‘Opiov, 1914, 53; 1922, 14 (wppsum) ; 
1929, 16. 

*Qpos, father of Aur. Pageus, 1913, 1. 

*Opos, 1924, 4. See also owp. 

’Apaevovguos, dma, 1917, 10. 


INDEX OF PERSONS 


eatpe, 1920, 1, 28 (atp.). 
eeNent, mother of Hér, 1920, 6; 1922, 
r3.(r): 


ewp, 1920, 6. See also ‘Qpos, “Op. 





3. GEOGRAPHICAL INDEX 


“Aéop, monastery in the Upper Cynopolite 
nome, 1913, 3; 1920, 2 (ngatowp). 

Alyumros, 1912, 42, 48, 76; 1913, 4.° 

’Ade€dvdpera, 1912, 47, 60; 1914, 7. 

‘Are~avdpevs, 1912, 54, 82. 

’AdeLavdpewy 7) modus, 1912, 15. 

*AvratoroAiTns, 1918, 9. 

*Avridxera, 1914, 34. 

"Avo pépn, Ta, 1917, 18, 23. 

Teppavexds. See Index 2. 

“ENAnv (= ‘ pagan’), 1914, 28. 

“HpakAcoroXirys vouds, 19138, 2. 

*Tovdaios, 1912, 73, 83, 88, 97. 

‘Inmover, village in the Heracleopolite nome, 
1913, 2, 9. 

Karodpeta THs Tladatctivns Supias, 1913, 6, 7. 

Kdvoros, 1912, 61. 

Kdro xwpa, 7, 1914, 42. 

Kuvorronitns (vopds), 6 avo, 1913, 3. 

Anrods (w6Xts), 1914, 7. 

AiBin, 1912, 46. 

Mépdews, vnoos THs, 1917, 9. 

Nexdrodts, 1914, 15, 19. 


*O£upvyxitns, 1927, 2. 


Tla\aorivy Svpia, 7, 19138, 6. 
‘Haptyrécda, 1913, ro. 


TapepBodn, 7, at Alexandria, 1914, 8, 10 zs, 
TI-13, 17, 21, 22, 46. 

Magwar, Taoy M-, 1920, 1. 

Meatowp. See “Aéop. 

IIndovcvov, 1912, 47. 

TlvAy rod “HXiov, at Alexandria, 1914, 15-6. 

“‘Poun, 1912, 37. 

Supia, 1912, 96. 7 Madaorivyn 5., 1918, 6. 

Tapovpa, village in the Heracleopolite nome, 
1914, 58 dzs. 

Tandoupis, 1912, 46. 

TALOY saTaowar, 1920, 1. 

Tepor, 1914, 57. 

Tnems, 1917, 11. 

Tovpvaxoy (= Tpovvaxey ?), 1914, 61. 

Twoe, 1920, 6. 

ipos, 1912, 47. 

fidovikov, village in the Heracleopolite nome, 
1924, s. 





4. GENERAL INDEX 


(a) GREEK WORDS. 


(Ax asterisk indicates a doubtful form.) 


aya6s, 1927, 11. 
1912, 95. 

ayardw, 1918, 1 ; 1925, 17; 
1928, 1, 16. 

ayann, 1914, 28; 1916, 15, 
31; 1919, 28, 31; 1921, 31 


A > , 
TO ayaboy, 


dytos, 1913, 6; 1917, 1, 4,5, 
LOU ht 22 alo Sonos 
13; 1924, 10; 1926, 16, 
21; 1929, 8,9. dyoraros, 
LOU 2 Ss On) Lore 


33, 38, 40; 1917, 9, 27; 
1918, 5, 9, 11; 1919, 1, 
7 (?), 8, 14, 24, 26 dzs, 28; 
1923, 16; 1925, 13, 20, 
1921, 21, 245 1O2T risoo 
1928, 13. 


8; 1927, 4, 60; 1929, 
8 (?). 

dyanntés, 1914, 1; 1916, 1, 
9, 10,19, 28; 1917, 1, 14, 
21; 1923, 1, 25; 1924, 
The 4 LOLby waa 
1929, I, 19, 21, 22. 

dyyedia, 1927, 57. 

ayy, [1916, 9?]; 1927, 
55: 


ayiérns, 1925, 10, 20; 1929, 5. 

ayopage, 1914, 59; 51. 

dyo, 1912, 30. 

dywv, 1912, 93, 107; 1929, 

Bae 

ddeAgos, 1912, 26 ; 1918, 12 ; 
1914, 1, 4, 11, 13, 16, 
204, 20,27, 40,53, Ot, 
62 ds; 1915, 1, 5 ds, 16, 
35, 40; 1916, 4, 18, 29, 


ddeAporns, 1915, 11. 
adnros, 1912, 69. 


dei, 1912, 105; 1923, 6; 


1928, 3; 1929, 20. 
deiuynotos, 1919, 12, 19. 
acos, 1915, 8, 27 ; 1916, 13. 


- d0dov, 1927, 37. 


dOvpéew, 1914, 29, 38. 
aidgéoua, 1927, 51. 
*aiuappéns, 1914, 1 4 (euapwes). 


aipo, 1914, 12, 36, 50. 

aloxtoros, 1915, 7; (1916, 
rr |. 

airéo, 1912, 52; 1926, 6 
(er.). airéopar, 1929, 8. 

airta, 1914, 20 (ercav). 

airtos, 1912, 74. 

aioy, 1912, 51. 

axon, 1927, 36. 

dxovw, 1914, 3, 8, 37. 

axpiBds, 1912, 77. 

dxvpdo, (1917, 7 ?]. 

ddacoveia, 1927, 32. 

devpa, 1918, 13. 

adnOns : Td ddnOés, 1912, 73. 

a\nbas, 1928, ES. 

dduevs, 1919, 30. 

dda, 1912, 86; 1915, 16; 
1916, 23; 1917, 19; 1927, 
30. 

@AnAor, 1912, 80, 102; 1919, 
LO, Dg, 19. 

@Xos, 1912, 26, 57; 1918, 
19; 1914, 16, 21, 23, 62; 
1919, 31; 1928, rq. 

addérptos, 1912, 95. 

a@\Nos, 1928, 7. 

adoos, 1912, 42. 

apaptave, 1914, 27. 

duaprnua, 1914, 28. 

duapria, 1917, 8 ; {1925, 11]. 

dpedéw, 1914, 48, 56; 1915, 
36; 1916, 28; 1918, 16. 

dwerapéAntos, 1912, 78. 

dpetavénros, 1918, 11. 

appérepo, 1912, 88, ror. 

a (conj.), 1912, 79. 

dvayyéh\\w, 1914, 5. 

dvaywookw, 1912, 8; 1917, 


2, 
avayxa{@, 1912, 98; 1915, 8, 
22. 
avayxaios, 1912, 6 ; 1925, 4. 
avayxaiws, 1916, 16. 
dvaykn, 1918, 8; 1916, 11, 
21, 29, 343 1925, 12. 
avayveots, 1912, 2. 
dvayveorns, 1914, 59. 
avadid@pt, 1912, 20. 
ava\apBave, 1929, 7. 
avaréptra, 1918, 3. 
avdutaots, 1912, 31, 45. 
dvatiOnut, 1912, 37. 
dvapepo, 1927, 13. 
dvaxwpnrns, 1925, 24. 
avdpids, 1912, 31, 34, 44. 
avedenpov, 1915, 8, 
[1916, 12]. 
avepxopat, 1927, 58. 


273 





INDEX OF WORDS 


avev, 1913, 15 (?). 

dvnp: kar’ dvdpa, 1912, 7. 

dOporos, 1912, 49 ; 1915, 7; 
1916, 12; 1928, Io. 

dviornut, 1912, 44. 

avri, 1918, 8. 

avrikardoraors, 1912, 75. 

dvrexpus, 1912, 89. 

dvrimados, 1927, 43. 

avo, 1918, 3; 1917, 18, 23. 
dvorito, 1912, 103. 

dveparéw;, 1929, 12. 

afdw, 1912, 38; 1915, 30; 
1924, 6; 1926, 5. 

a&t@raros, 1917, 14. 

déx«vos, 1916, 17. 

dra, 1914, 1, 34, 54 zs, 55 
quater, 59, 63 3 1917, 2, 5, 
10-12 sacpe, 147 ler, 21 bis, 
26 dis; 1918, 1, 4 “er, 5, 
7, 8, 115 (1019).1,..3415 
1924, 1, 14; 1925, 2; 
1926, 2 (amma), 28 (do.); 
1928, 1, 16. 

dmatréw, 1915, 21. 

aravraxj, 1929, 6, 10. 

dravrde, 1918, 6; 1915, 21; 
19238, 15, 18; 1927, 54. 

dras, 1912, 53, 953; 1924, 6; 
1929, 14. 

anépxopat, 1914, 15, 25, 32, 
34, 58; 1917, 13 (amdéa). 

amn\twrexds, 1918, 3. 

amNixtrov, 1914, 44. 

amas, 1912, 79. 

aré, 1918, 2, 10; 1914, 7, 
AT hijo ho, Oly LOL ry & 
1923, 8,9; 1924, 5. dno 
eEwber, 1914, 30. 

arodecikvupe : Umatos dmodedety- 
peévos, 1912, 15. 

avrodnuéw, 1914, 39, 40, 41, 
47- 

arodiéopt, 1912, 51; 1915, 
40; 1917, 16; 1918, 21; 
1920, 28. 

aroxddvppa, 1926, 10 (-xa- 
Avvp.). 

aroknpitra, 1927, 33. 

drohaupBavw, (1915, 31 ]. 

amohave, 1912, 94 (-Aaovras). 

amomAnpow, 1918, 12. 

arromAnpwaois, 1918, 7. 

droonmdw, 1914, 34; 1915, 
27. 

dmooreh\\w, 1914, 51, 573 
1916, 38; 1929, 16. 

anoorepew, 1915, 9; 1917, 
19. 

K 


129 


dnéatoAos, 1915, 14; 1927, 
46. 

drogatikds, 1927, 44. 

apa, 1912, 72. 

apyvptov, 1915, 20, 26; 1916, 
O45 277 

apern, 1926, 2. 

dpvéouat, 1912, 36, 41. 

dprdfw, 1915, 35; 1916, 18. 

dprdBn, 1914, 51, 57, 58; 
1918, 13 des. 

dpros, 1914, 50. 

apxatos, 1912, 67 ; 1918, 10. 

apxn, 1912, 63, 66, 71. 

apxvepevs, 1912, 48 (apyuep.). 
dpxvepeds péyioros, 1912, 14. 

dpxo, 1912, 65. dpxopat, 
1912, 78. 

apxov, 1912, 64; 1915, 18. 

dobevéew, 1915, I5- 

aaOevas, 1917, 16. 

doxéw, 1926, 9. 

domdoua,1914, 52,59; 1917, 
26; 1918, 3 dzs, 6, 8,18; 
1926, 23, 25. 

aopadns, 1916, 39, 40) ro 
doparés, 1916, 26. 

doxnuoouvn, 1915, 24. 

drovwrata, 1929, 14. 

*addddws, 1912, 80 (see note). 

avdapéros, 1918, 11. 

avtoxpdrop, 1912, 12, 14. 

avtés, 1912, 5, 8, 30, 39, 62, 
84, 85, 86, 99; 1918, 5, 
14(?);1914, passim; 1915, 
IO, 13, 18, 19, 24, 30,31, 
34, [36]; 1916, 14, 17 
O18, 22,.25, 36,41 615,425 
1917, 3; 12, 18 dzs, 19, 22, 
23; 1919, 20, 22; 1923, 
19 ; 1924, 5 ; 1925, 6, 16, 
22; 1926, 21, 24; 1927, 
8, 39, [57]; 19289, 3. 

apidpio, 1912, 45. 

apinut, 1914, 49. 

apiorapa, 1912, ror. 

dypevos, 1927, 3. 

axpt, 1912, 53 ; 19138, 8, 12; 
1915, 23. 


Baivo, 1917, 13. 

Baowhevs, 1912, 59, 67; 19138, 
4; 1914, 30. 

Baorkikds, 1913, 3. 

Bdehitro, 1927, 34. 

BeBaos, 1912, 54 (BarB.), 58. 
BeBadraros, 1917, 4, 5, 8. 

BeBatdw, 1912, 59, 88. 

Bios, 1921, 13. 


130 


Bodo, 1928, 12. 

BorGera, 1928, 4,14. 

Bonééw, 1915, 4, 34; 1928, 
”, 14. 

Bovdevopa, 1912, 63. 

Bovdn, 1912, 66. 

BovAoua, 1912, 40, 43, 45, 
5°, 57> 61, 77 ; 1918, 15; 
1914, 10, 34, 41 ; 1927, 
57, [58]. 


yap, 1912, 32, 645 1914, 3, 4, 
6, 23, 26,50, 59; 1915, 16; 
1916, 37; 1919, 14; 1923, 
13; 1925, 7, 16 ; 1926, 9, 
Tig 03 <elO27 cos V6, 
27,45; (1928, 6]; 1929, 
GLO kes 

yeirav, 1916, 40 (y:rovors). 

yeveOXla, 7, 1912, 30. 

yevvadraros, 1927, 37. 

yevos, 1912, 32. 

yevopa, 1914, 8. 

yivopat, 1912, 24, 35,57, 72; 
1918, 8, 15, (yeyv.?); 1917, 
20(do.), 22,[25?]; 1929, 
16. 


ywooko, 1912, 53; 1914, 2, 
42; 1915, 13; 1917, 8. 
yAvkehala, 1918, 15 (KAoke- 
eas). 

yduxvratos, 1916, 1; 1923, 
2I. 

yunowos: yynot@tepos, 1912, 27. 
yunowwraros, 1917, 1, 5, 8, 
14. 

yvopn, 1913, 11. 

yvopios, 1912, 24 (yvop.). 

ypaupara, 1913, 3,19; 1914, 
36; 1915, 11; 1917, 3; 
1925, 5 ; 1927, 9, 12. 

ypappariov, 1913, 16. 

ypag}, 1921, 17. 

ypapw, 1912, 70; 1918, 19 ; 
1914, 29, 31, 35, 41; 
1916, 25, 33, 39; 1917, 
9. 5,07 07s, 2, weg 

yupvactapxikds, 1912, 93. 


SavetConat, 1915, 20. 

daveictns, 1915, 22, 
1916, 18. 

Setxvupt, 1912, 81; 1926, 11; 
1927, 36. 

Sethaivopa, 1914, 24. 

dewds, 1914, 35; 1926, 12. 

Seondrns, 1914, 46; 1917, 
2,63; 1927, 14. 

devrepor, eis, 1914, 40. 


26; 





INDEX OF WORDS 


déxopar, 1927, 8. 

déw (1), 1914, 19 (dvoarres), 
31. 

d/o (2), 1915, 10. dei, 1912, 
71,72. Seopa, 1926, 15 
bis ; 1928, 4. 

6n, 1912, 68. 

djAos : SpAov = Sndady, 1912, 
21. 

onAdw, 1912, 71 ; 1915, 12. 

Snpapxexés: Onpapyixns e&ov- 
cias, 1912, 15. 

dua: with acc., 1912, 5, 37 
1913. 9; 1914, 28, 20, 
49; 1915, 10; 1919, 15; 
1927, 30; 1929, 8. with 
Sens aL Lia] onl One Os 
23; 1923, 6; 1925, 5; 
19265 (Si: L927. ries) 
1928, 4, 14, 15; 1929, 
15. 

SuaBorrkds, 1917, 14. 

dudBodos, 1923, 9. 

Stdyo, 1929, 15. 

diddoyos, 1918, 8. 

didOeors, 1919, 8. 

dvabjxn, 1917. 9. 

dtaxovw, 1912, 88. 

Sudkprors, 19138, 6. 

didkwv, 1913, 10; 1914, 44, 
53: 

Stapaprvpopa, 1912, 82. 

Oudvoa, 1927, 15. 

Scaokerroua, 1912, 71. 

duatehew, 1929, 5. 

dtarpopn, 1914, 50. 

Stahepw: of duabéportes, 
partizans ’, 1914, 8. 

ScadvAdooew, 1912, 54; 1928, 
23; 1924, 12; 1929, 19. 

didmpe, 1912, 28, 64; 1915, 
31; 1916, 25, 37; 1927, 
56; 1928, 6(?); 1929, 
3, 7 

SueE€pxopa, 1912, 21. 

duepyw, 1914, 24. 

dixatos, 1912, 81. 
1929, 9. 


‘the 


\ Qe 
TO OLK.ALOV, 


Ovorxéw, 1913, 13. 


OwWrep, 1912, 28, 42, 82. 

did7t, 1927, 32. 

dippos, 1912, 39. 

doxéw, 1912, 37, 64. 

dovdeia, 1915, 36; 1916, 17. 

dovdAos, 1912, 56; 1927, 3, 
II, 

dové, 1914, 9. 

dvvapa, 1912, 5; 19138, 12; 
1914, 5; 1915, 21, 31; 





1916, 24 (Svncare), [39 ?]; 
1928, 14. 

dvvupis, 1915, 19, 26; 1916, 
233 1919, 21, 22. 


duvards : ev Trois Ovvarois, 1924, 


7. 

dvo, 1912, 34, 90, 91; 1914, 
23; 1918, 13. 

dvomvora, 1926, 12. 


édv, 1912, 100; 1918, 17; 
1926, 14; 1927, 49. for 
dv, 1915, 30; 1916, 24, 
39; 1929, 8. 

éavrov, 1914, 9; 1915, 23, 

28. 

edo, 1912, 86; 1914, 21. 

eBdopos Kat ecixkds, 1914, 47 
(evd.). 

eyyin, 1916, 42. 

eykopiatw, 1927, 20. 

eyo, 1912, 32, 87, 103; 1914, 
50; 1917, 18; 1925, 18; 
1927, 10. éve, 1913, 5; 
1918, 12. pol, 1912, 22, 
36, 63, 106. epov, 1912, 
32, 52, 58, 68; 1918, 8; 
1917, 7, 9, 18, [20], 22—- 
24; 1924, 7; 1925, 14; 
1927, 9, 13; 1928, 10; 
1929, 13. pe, 1917, 12, 
13: (1. pou), 16, To. Ges: 
1923, 15 ; 1924, 6;1925, 
7, 11; 1927, 7,12;1928, 
5 dis. pot, 1912, 20, 21, 
24, 28, 45, 71; 1918, 8; 
1914, 52; 1916, 18 (i. 
pe), 25; 1918, 16; 1923, 
17; (1926, 13]; 1926, 
O. Hou LOL2 oer 
1913, 7, 12 des, 14; 1914, 
52; 1917, 8; 19238, 12, 
14; 1924, 10; 1925, 
[ro], 19, 23, 24 (?); 1926, 
14, 16, 20, 24, 26; 1928, 
5, 13; 1929, 12. Sec 
Heets. 

é6ehw, 1912, 102; 1914, 7. 

€60s, 1912, 86. 

et, 1912, 43, 56, 69, 71, 73, 
98; 1916, 18, 22, 24, 39; 
1918, 15; 1926, 17; 
1927, 53. «vn, 1914, 23; 
1928, 14. 

elOnpor, 1914, 51. 

eikds : €Bdopuos Kal eik., 1914, 
47.  dydoos kai eix., 1914, 
45. Terpas kai elkds, 1914, 
6 (erxage), 


eiduxpuns, 1927, 15. 

ciut, 1912, 26, 29, 50, 57, 
60, 61, 63, 81; 1918, 3; 
1914; 4, 16, 27, 23,28, 
35, 42, 46, 48, 53, 59; 
1916, 11; 1917,9 (nopaw); 
1919, 15, 18 («ea for 
ijucOa?), 21 bis; 19238, 15; 
[1925, 20?]; 1927, 47, 
50, 54; 1928, 13; 1929, 
6; ta, | 13) 

eirep, 1912, 72. 

eivov. See under Neyo. 

elpnyn, 1917, 4; 1928, 22. 
KAavdiavy Elpnvy S<Baorn, 
1912, 35. 

eis, 1918, 14 ds, 15. 

eis, LOLA :§ 35. 21, 33, Sn; 
1918, 7, 12 (?); 1914, 50, 
58; 1915, 30, 36; 1916, 
Lyf; LOLs, 52,73 916.10. 
23; 1928, 5; 1929, r4. 
eis Sevreporv, 1914, 40. els 
for év, 1914, 48. 

civaxovw, 1928, 12. 

etoBohyn, 1912, 45. 

eiomparro, 1915, 19. 

ex, 1912, 22, 24, 75, 84, 94, 
99 ; 1913, 11; 1914, 4; 
1915, 19; 1917, 4 (exé); 
1925, 11,[12]. ey, 1912, 
56 


éxaoTaxov, 1912, 31. 
exaoros, 1912, 7; 1925, 8. 
éxdrepor, 1919, 16. 


exBaive, 1914, 13 (ey8.) : 
1917, 13. 

exBaddo, 1914, 14, 15 (eyf.), 
19 (do.). 


exBaors, 1918, 7. 

exBialo, 1912, 80 (eyB.), 

exei, 1914, 16; 1917, 1 

exeivos, 1914, 3, 6, 13, 28; 
1915, 27. 

exdéyo, 1918, 14. 

éxovoias, 1913, II. 

exréurr@, 1912, gt. 

expinra(?), 1917, 
note). 

exriOnut, 1912, 6. 

exrés, 1914, 19. 

edatov, 1928, 6. 

eheqpor, 1917, 20 dis, 22, 
25, 

emis, 1915, 9; 1928, 15. 

evavtov, 1912, 77. 

euBddAopar, 1914, 39. 

€uds, 1812, 24, 30, 33, 44, 
48, 54, 72, 105, 108; 


Tg (see 





INDEX OF WORDS 


1913, 8, 12; 1915, 33. 
obpos, 1912, 26. 

eudutos, 1916, 31. 

ev, 1912, 90, 95; 1913, 3; 
1914, passim; 1915, 2, 
15, 16, 18; 1916, 7, 11, 
15; 1917, 2, 3, 9,12, 15, 
16-ter, 19; 1918, 3, 18; 
1919, [3], 14, 15, 17, 18, 
19, 29; 1923, 4, 12; 
1924, 6, 7, 10; 1925, 2, 
22; 1926, 4, 16, 17, 18, 
21; 1927, 4 dzs, 10, 39, 
6150 1928.70,) F2,..19° 
1929, 2, 4, 9, 23. for eis, 
1914, 16, 18, 21; 1915, 


évatos, 1914, ro. 

evdeixvups, 1924, 8. 
pa, 1916, 31. 

evekev, 1914, 57, 58. 

évoyhéew, 1915, 18. 

evradéa, 1914, 2. 

evrédNo, 1914, 20. evréhAopat, 
1917, 24. 

evrohn, 1924, 3. 

evtpéma, 192'7, 52. 

evariov, 1927, 8. 

e€ayopd(w, 1927, 45. 

e€aiperos, 1912, 51 (eep.). 

eapéros, 1912, 24 (c£ep. y 

edguva (= e€aipyns), 1914, 3. 

eeyeipw, 1912, 100. ‘ 

e€ehéyxo, 1912, 77. 

e£épxouar, 1918, 15. 

e€ovoia: Snuapxixns €€ovoias, 
1912, 15. 

eo, 1914, 15, 30, 36, 37 
bis, 50. 

eEwbev : dd aber, 1914, 30. 

emdyouat, 1912, 96. 

emawew, 1927, 35 (emev.). 

éraipoa, 1917, 6 (ep.), 18 
do.). 


évdeikvu- 


erdv, 1914, 51, 

erdvo, 1926, 14, 24. 
emamrethéopn.a, 1914, 20. 
erapxos, 1912, 59. 
ere, 1927, 50. 


emeiyo, 1928, 5. éetyopat, 
1913, 7. 

exevon, 1912, 2; 1914, 30, 
35> 49; 1915, 5, 34; 
1916, 27, 28; 1920, 9 
(emerte). 


ereEepxopat, 1912, gg. 
emrepordw, 1918, 17. 
éni: with acc., 1914, 15, 38; 
1919, 20; 1923, 23; 
K 2 





i91 


1928, 9; 1929, 19. emi 
médv, 1915, 17. with gen., 
1912, 37, 67 de,. 847; 
1918, 9; 1924, 8 dzs. 
with dat., 1912, 55 ;1914, 
35) 47; 1927, 36. 

ertBovdia, 1928, 9. 

entOupéw, 192:'7, 38. 

emtxadéouat, 1928, 12, 

emtkeyua, 1925, 12. 

erugevdw, 1914, 16, 

enuokenroua, 1914, 26. 

énioxoros, 1918, 4; 1914, 7, 
8, 27, 42, 47, 49. 

emonaipo, 1912, 92. 

emotnun, 1925, 1. 

emtotrodn, 1912, 4, 73 1915, 
29; 1920, 15. 

entotéduov, 1927, 56. 

emiretvo, 1915, 29. 

emttiOnut, 1915, 10. 

emirpero, 1912, 30, 43 ; 1914, 
25; 1927, 40. 

emitporos, 1912, 44. 

émupépo, [1913, 17]. 

mos: ws eros cimeiv, 1915, 8. 

enta, 1914, 47. 

eravupos, 1912, 38 (erovupats). 

épyo, 1914, 16. 

épxouat, 1914, 4, 7, 9, Io, 
13, 30, 35, 38; 1918, 18 ; 
1927, 51. 

€ratpos, 1912, 105 (erep.), 
108 (do.). 

érepos, 1912, 38; 1918, 5, 
10 (?). 

ért, 1912, 82; 1925, 7 (?). 

eros, 1912, 11. 

<0, 1912, 22 ; [1929, 97]. 

evdoxéw, 1918, 11, 21 (?). 

evepyerixoraros, 1912, 3. 

ednOns, 1912, 40. 

edOvpéoua, 1927, 10, 

ev0ivn, 1912, 64. 

evkatpéw, 1925, 3. 

edk\e€oratos, 1927, 30. 

evAdBera, 1925, 5. 

evAoynuévos, 1917, 10; 1928, 
2. 

etvowa, 1912, 10, 22. 

etpioxo, 1914, 13 d7s, 30, 51; 
1916, 22; 1917, 7, 42. 

evoeBeta, 1912, 207 

evoeBns, 1912, 23. 
tatos, 1918, 4. 

evondayyvia, 1916, 31. 

evppacia, 1927, 19, 21. 

evxapioréw, 1914, 46. 

evxn, 1923, 7,13 ; 1924, 10 ; 


evaeBeo= 


132 


1926, 8 ; 1927, 13 ; 1928, 
4,15; 1929, 7. 

evxonar, 1916, 30; 1917, 2, 
[24]; 1919, 4, 12; 1921, 
30; 1923, 19 ; 1924, 11; 
1925, 5, 10, 22; 1926, 
14, 24, 26; 1928, 3, 9, 
10. 

epnBevo, 1912, 53, 57. 

edurmos, 1912, 44. 

épddios, 1927, 50. 

exo, 1912, 11, 23, 67, 68, 


90; 1914, 12, 37, 47; 
1916, 18; 1918, 16; 
1919, 6, 18; 1928, 8. 


drovorara exo, (1929, 14 |. 
ed €xa, [1929, 9 ri 
éws, 1917, 13; 1928, 8. 


(dw, 1912, 102. 


7, 1912, 93, 96 ; 1927, 57. 

nyewovia, 1912, 54. 

NYEMOY, 1912, 58, 81. 

nyeopa, 1912, 6 ; 1925, 4. 

noeas, 1912, 28. 

noopat, 1929, 15. 

iko, 1926, 17 (xa), 19 (etka). 

dvs, 1914, 16; 1917, 7 
(A.). 

jpets, 1912, 9, 21 ; 1914,5(?), 
25, 29, 49; 1915, 4, 5, 
Q, 10, 17, 32; 1916, 20, 
21, 23; 1917, 3; 1919, 
Deel. 620s 2, 204090: 
1923, 16; 1924, 11; 
1925, 14(?); 1927, 35, 
52, 54; 1928, 3, 14; 
1929, 4 d7s, 6, 7, 10, IT, 
17, 20. 

nuepa, 1912, 39; 1914, 6, 
28, 59; 1927, 47. vuxros 
kal npepas, 1917, 15. 

jmerepos, 1912, 75; 1913, 9; 
1929, 18. 16 mpérepor, 
1929, 9. 

juloeva, 7, 1915, 25. 

joooy, 1912, 57. 


Gddaooa, 1914, 39. 

Gavpdgo, 1912, 9g. 

Gedowa, 1927, 49. 

Ocios, 1918, 3; 1915, 4 ; 1929, 


19g. 

OeAnua, 1927, 53. 

Gého, 1914, 2; 1916, 10; 
1917, 8; 1918, 17. 

eds, 1912, 9, 50, 59, 60, 62, 
86, 87; 1914, 2, 12, 36, 











INDEX OF WORDS 


46; 1917, 1, 3, 4, 6 er, 
7, 10, 14, 1h 62s, 19 O25, 
21-23, 25; 1918, 17; 
1919, 4, 13, 19; 1921, 
30; 1923, 5, 14, 22; 
1924, 12; 1925, 2, 11; 
1926, 15; 1927, 6, 41, 
54; 1928, 1, 16; 1929, 
2, 3, 23. ovv bed, 1919, 9. 

JeoveBera, 1924, 4; 1925, 3, 
17; 1929, 3. 

GcooeBeararos, 1923, 1; 1928, 
II. . 

deopirns, 1923, 2 ; 1927, 2. 

Ocparedo, 1927, 43. 

AriBo, 1914, 24 ; 1916, 20. 

Arjiis, 1914, 42 ; 1928, 12, 
13. 

Openrds, 1925, 15. 

Opnoxeia, 1912, 85. 

Opnoxevo, 1926, Io. 

dvydrnp, 1926, 20 (?), 28. 


taows, 1926, 7, 9, 14. 

idtos, 1927, 59. 

idov, 1918, 12. 

iSpvo, 1912, 34 (vdpocacba). 

iepds: ra iepd, 1912, 50. 
ieporaros, 1912, 2. 

ixavas, 192:'7, 40. 

itapdérns, 1917, 4. 

inarvov, 1915, 23. 

iva, 1912, 7, 25, 82; 1914, 
32, 41, 49, 50, 58; 1915, 
13, 315° 1916, 113, 26-02, 
34, 36; 1917, 3, 12, 16, 
18, 21 d2s, 23; 1924, 7, 
8; 1925, 10, [11]; 1926, 
6 


torn, 1912, 48. 
io@s, 1912, 40 (wows). + 


kayo, 1927, 10. 

kaOa, 1912, 61. 

kabamep, 1912, 99, 104. 

kalapiopds, 1918, 6. 

xabiorn, 1918, 8; 1916, 35. 
cabicrapat, 1912, 74. 

kaos, 1923, 17. 

katvds, 1912, 68. 

kawvorouia, 1918, 14. 

kairrep, 1912, 29, 74. 

kapds, 1927, 42, 44; 1928, 


aye 

kak@s, 1912, 64. 

kadéw, 1912, 46; 1918, 3 ; 
1917, 22; 1919, 17, 32. 

cards, 1929, 16. 

Kahos, 1912, 63. 





kdparos, 1914, 209. 

xav, 1919, 18. 

capdia, 1914, 12; 1917, 19, 
23. 

kaprréopat, 1912, 94. 

kapros, 1921, 14. 


| kard: with acc., 1912, 7, 42, 


49, 72; 1918, 14; 1914, 
20, 24; 1916, 6; 1917, 
Ty wa LOS, 6, aoe; 
1919, 24 ; 1925, 8; 1927, 


42. with gen., 1912, 78, 
80; 1914, 36. kata, 
1922, 3. 


karaBdddo, 1912, 69. 
karadeixkvyju, 1912, 41. 
karakémro, 1914, 14. 
katahauBavo, 1928, 5. 
kata&ws, 1917, 7 (?). 
kara&idw, 1925, 7, 10; 1927, 


7. 

catarava, 1912, 79. 

karatAew, 1912, 97. 

karackeun, 1912, 48. 

kardoraots, 19138, 16. 

karéxo, 1914, 35. 

katotkeo, 1912, 91; 1916, 16. 

kata, 1914, 42. 

xé for cai, 1926, 16, 17. 

kedevo, 1912, 89; 1918, 4, 
8; 1914,18; 1924, 9. 

KehAn, 1914, 12. 

xevddo£os, 192'7, 33. 

keadawoy, 76, 1916, 43. 

kntodaxavoy, 1917, 13. 

knpvtr@, 1927, 45. 

xwovvevo, 1914, 14, 

KAnpdo, 1912, 62. 

kAnporés, 1912, 61. 

xvidtoy, 1918, 14, 15. 

kowds, 1912, 99. 

coud, 1915, 28. 

koputaros, 1914, 31 (Kopud.). 

koupevrapnotos, 1914, 4. 

koopéw, 1926, 2. 

koopytiKds, 1912, 93. 

koopuxds, 1915, 16. 

kdapos, 1912, 40; 1927, 32. 

kpeirrov, 1928, 3. 

kpive, 1912, 51. 

kpurro@, 1914, 12. 

kuptos : adj., 1918, 16. title, 
[1919, 1]; 1923, 25; 
1925, 18,23. God,1915, 
2; 1917, 15; 1927, 50; 
1928, 14. x. eds, 1917, 2, 
8, ©, 99a (LOLS a. ex, 
cupio, 1916, 7; 1918, 3; 
[1919, 3]; 1925, 22. ep 


k. 06, 1921, 30 ; 19238, 4; 
1925, 2; 1929, 2, 23. 
ev x. Xpwr@, 1919, 15; 
1928, 9. 

Kon, 1918, 2. 


AapBdvw, 1912, 52, 98; 1914, 
18; 1916, 42 (ehaBa) ; 
1926, 7, 8, 14. 

Aapmpés: Aapmpédraros, 1918, 
Tr. 


AeBirov, 1920, 11 ; 1922, 5 
(Nebrroy), rr (do.). 

Aéyo, 1912, 1, 67 ; 1914, 27; 
1915, 14. «iwov, 1912, 
26, °74; 1915, 8; 1918, 
17; 1923, 17. 

Aevtioy (Neste), 1922, 5, 
14(?). 

Aédyos, 1915, 4. 

Aourds : Tod Aouad, 1912, 91. 

Avpaivo, 1912, 86 (Aowev.). 


pakdptos, 1915, 9, 14; 1917, 
26; 1919, 25; 1921, 4. 
paxaptoraros, 1917, 1, 8; 
1921, 30. 

pakedAop, 1914, 43- 

pakpoOupia, 1917, 5. 

paxpdOvpos, 1917, 25. 

pakpés : paxpay eva, 1919, 
18. 

pdduora, 1912, 76; 1915, 4, 
34; 1918, 12 (padd.); 
1919, 9 (do.), 29 (do.); 
1929, 11. 

paddAov, 1912, 73; 1927, 35. 

pavOdvo, 1916, 26 (see note). 

paptupew, 1912, 105; 1919, 


29. 
paprus, 1912, 26. 
peyadavyxia, 1927, 34. 
peyadevdrns, 1912, 8. 
peyados, 1914, 29. 
peyas, 1914, 60; 1916, 11; 


1919, 22; 1926, 11. ra 
peydda, adv. 1924, 9. | 
peytoros, 1912, 15, 26; 


1914, 44; [1929, 13]. 

peiCov, 1912, 97, 

perhéw: Oe@ pepeAnuevos, 1917, 
410) 10,005, 25: 

MeNueriavoi, of, 1914, 20. 

pedro, 1927, ro. 

pev, 1912, 23, 29, 35, 46, 66, 
74, 82, 94; 1918, 13; 
1914, 46; 1916,8 ; 1917, 
2; 1918, 2; [1919, 4]; 
1923, 6 ;1927,5; 1928, 3. 





INDEX OF WORDS 


péevo, 1917, 12, 13. 

péptva, 1929, 16. 

péepos, 1914, 43; 1917, 18, 
23: 

werd: with acc., 1914, 5; 
1923, 13. pera 7rd with 
inf., 1914, 15. with gen., 
1912, 101; 1914, 5, 8, 9, 
225-5 3n Ol O25 LOLS 3, 
4° Mer, 9, [14 ly: 225.23, 
25 (?); 1919, 27. 

peraBdddrAw, 1912, 81. 

petameumopa, 1924, 4. 

perpéew, 1916, 25. 

pérpios: retpi@tepos, 1912, 
65. 

pexpts, 1914, 39, 44. 
with inf,, 1914, 17. 

BN, 1912, 56, 795 92; 98 ; 
1918, 19; 1914, 13, 22, 
23, 41, 48, 56; 1915, 15, 
21,230; LOL7; 10 brs 
1918, 16; 1927, 58; 
1928, 14. pn more, 1927, 
Bt, 

pndé, 1912, go, 92, 96. 

pndeis, 1912, 85, 89; 1918, 
T4, 

pyktotos, 1928, 23; 1929, 
19. 

phy, 1912, 13; 1914, 6, 45. 

pnmes, 1914, 49. 

pntnp, 1929, 12 bes, 17. 

puxpos, 1914, 60. 

pepéouar, 1927, 38. 

pipvnokopat, 1919, 15 31926, 
£6; 25.3 1929, 4, 20. 
pépynpar, 1915, 13; 1924, 
3,9; 1929, 4. 

punpetov, 1912, 33. 

prnun, 1929, Io. 

punpovevo, 1928, 12. 

poyts, 1915, 25. 

povaptos, 1914, 19. 


fa. TOU 


povaxds, 1913, 2 (povox.), 9 | 


(do.), 10 (do.), 15 (do.); 
1914, 20, 23 ; 1925, 25. 
porn, 1918, 2, 9, 13-15; 
1914, 16, 21; 1917, 12, 
21, 24; 1925, 25(?). 
pdvos, 1912, 50. ov pdvor, 
1915, 15; 1917, 17. 


vabs, 1912, 48, 60. 

véos: Néos SeBacrds, month, 
1912, 13. 

vewokopos, 1912, 60. 

vamos, 1915, 28. 

vjocos, 1917, 9. 





#33 


vopifo, 1912, 85. 

vowds, 1912, 42 ; 1918, 2. 

véoos, 1912, 100 ; 1926, 12; 
1928, 5; 1929, 15. 

viv, 1912, 69, 82, 106; 1914, 
39; 1917, 13; 1928, 11; 
1928, 4, 13. 

w§, 1914, 3, 26, 27. 
kal uépas, 1917, 15. 


VUKTOS 


6: € for ai, 1914, 46. 7 for 
ai, 1914, 59. & for oi, 
1912, 20, 61, 64. 6 for és, 


1914, 3; 1918, 17. rod 
with inf. for subordinate 
clause, 1914, 59; 1927, 
54- 

dySoos kai eixds, 1914, 45. 

dykos, 1915, 20. 

ddev, 1915, 10, 29. 

oda, 1912, 22, 68; [1913, 
20]; 1916, 37 ;1918, ro; 


1923, 6; 1929, to. 
iSaive = cid€vae for ideiv, 
1917, 7. 

oikeios, 1912, 104. 1d oi- 


ketov, 1912, 94. 
oikéw, 1912, 84. 
1912, roo. 
oikta, 1914, 3, 5, 23. 
oikovouew, 1918, 13. 
oikovduns, 1918, 14. 
oikos, 1912, 25, 33; 1926, 
25; 1929, 18. 
olktippov, 1917, 20 dzs. 
oivdopat, 1914, ro. 
oivorparns, 1915, 17. 
otos, 1912, 81x (vov). 
oxvéew, 1916, 21. 


c > ia 
7) olKoupevn, 


| dd€Optos, 1912, 79. 


ddiyo, 1914, 52. 

dAokavT@pa, 1917, 16. 

ddoKAnpia, 1917, 3. 

dros, 1917, 19, 23; 1926, 
25. 

opoyynovos, 1918, 11. 

6po.orns, 19138, 14. 

opodoyew, 1913, 17. 

oporoyntys, 1920, 28. 

dpovota, 1918, 11. 

épos, 1912, 76. 

dvopa: eis dvoya, 1928, 5. 
kar dvoua, 1916, 6; 1918, 
6, 10; 1919, 24. 

énicw, 1914, 49. 

érov, 1928, 13. 

dros, 1917, 6, 7 ; 1928, 11 ; 
1927, 7. 


épdo, 1912, 32; 1916, 28. 


134 


épyn, 1912, 78, 80, 81. 

pos, 1918, 3. 

és, 1912, 22, 25, 30, 38, 40, 
45, 52, 60, 64, 72; 87 
(us), 89, 92, 97, 106; 
1913, 9; 1914, 26, 28, 
47; 1915, 30; 1916, 25; 
1917, 19; 1928, 13. 

doos, 1912, 58. 

domep, 1912, 69, 87. 

dors, 1912, 66; 1915, 27. 

drav, 1927, 11. 

dre, 1917, 9, 13. 

ért, 1912, 33, 67, 79; 1914, 
20, 25; 27-068, 91537540 5 
1915, 35; 1916, 11, 17, 
20, 37; 1917, 9, 253 
1919, 9, 18; 1923, 6; 
1926, 14; 1927, 16, 36, 
49, 47, 53, 57 5 1929, Io, 


15. 

ovv, 1914, 8, 11, 24, 25, 32, 
34, 36-38, 48, 51, 56; 
1915, 5, 36; 1916, 16, 
31; 1917, 5, 8, 14, 21; 


1918, 10; 1919, 12; 
1927, 35, 53, 56; 1929, 
6; 13° 


ovpdmos, 1915, 32. 

ovpavds, 1916, 15. 

ovre, 1912, 49 31928, 13 dis. 

ovros, 1912, 42, 72, 80, 101; 
1914, 15, 23, 37; 1915, 
II, 12, 16, 20, 25; 1916, 
TO, Tg, 21, 345 1017, 3 
dis; 19 941919, * 12, 16; 
17, 32; 1924, 8; 1927, 
10; [1928, 4]; 1929, 5, 
[15]. ék rovrov, 1915, 20. 

ovrooi, 1915, 29. 

ovras, 1912, 53 ; 1916, 20; 
1917, 20, 23; 1926, 8, 
PS. 

éwia, 1914, 17. 

ovis, 1925, 6. 


matoiov, 1914, 56, 60. 
maw, 1912, 78; 1914, 15, 


40. 

fan (?), 1921, rr. 

mavdy.os, 1916, 1 (?). 

mano’ (?), 1922, 11, 

mavraxj, 1913, 17. 

mavrn, 1912, 33. 

mavroxparwp, 1929, 3. 

nmavv, 1912, 63; 1914, 24, 
38; 1915, 34; 1916, 16, 
20; (1927, 53]. 

mamas, 1914, 25. 





INDEX OF WORDS 


mapd: with acc., 1915, 19; 
1926, 18. with gen.,1912, 
52; 1914, 63; 1915, 31, 
40; 1916, 42; 1918, 22; 
1920, 28: 1921, 32; 
1924, 7; 1925, 14 ds; 
1926, 28 ; 1927, 9 ;1928, 
3; [1929, 7]. with dat., 
1912, 22, 39, 106; 1916, 
36, 40; 1917, 2, 3, 6,14; 
1925, 20; 1926, 7 ;1928, 
I, £6. . 

mapayyé\ko, 1914, 22. mapay- 
yeAAopat, 1915, 4. 

Tmapadidau, 1916, 22; 1917, 
12. 

maparéopat, 1912, 49 (mape- 
Toupe). 

mapakahéw, 1917, 15; 1928, 
11; 1924, 9; 1925, 9; 
1926, 5; 1927,5; 1928, 
4; 1929, 6. 

napapevo, 1929, 4. 

mapaninto, 1915, 3, 6; 1916, 
29. 

mapantapa, 1917, 14. 

maparvyxavo, 1912, 4. 

mapeyut, 1918, 9, 20 (? — ma- 
pnye). 

mapeuBorn, 1914, 8, 10 dzs, 
Dish 2.0035 Liye t 22.010. 

mapéxw, 1914, 29. 

mapinut, 1912, 26, 42. 

mapoweopat, 1914, 27. 

mapovoia, 1918, 8, 12. 

mas, 1912, 4, 51, 56, 58, 98, 
106; 1918, 13 (?); 1914, 
R2Otrw LOLS. Ammons 
28, 37; 1916, 4, 5, 34; 
1OV7, 204,55), 21, 275 
LOLS, 3) 1r, tom 1919: 
[4], 6, 13, 24, 25, 27, 293 
1923, 8, 9; 1924, 8; 
1925, 19 ; 1926, 2; 1927, 
5; 1929, 17. 

macxo, 1914, 3; 1915, 7; 
1916, 11. 

namnp, 1914, 52, 57; 1915, 
So LOLS tite load: 
31; 1928, 3, 21, 25; 


1924, 1,13, 14; 1926, 5, | 


27, 28; 1927, 6; 1928, 
T, 10, LOn LOA9) Cro, 
22. God, 1917, 16 dzs, 

marpiktos, 1918, 1. 

marpidtns, 1916, 32. 

marpis, 1915, 18. 

matpov, 1916, 9. 

mavo, 1914, 46. 





Tlayov, 1914, 6, 45. 

me(Ow, 1916, 275 [1929, 10]. 

metpat@, 1917, 12. 

metparnpiov, 1928, 8. 

mréumo, 1914, 26; 1918, 12, 
16. 

mevrakdotol, 1916, 42. 

mévre, 1914, 16 (mevrn). 

mept: with acc., 1912, 23, 
24, 45, 46, 47 2s, 107; 
1914, 49; 1915, 5; 1927, 
61. with gen.,1912, 20, 
52, 663 1918, 6, 13(?), 
15(?); 1916, 10, 20, 25; 
1917, 9, 22, 24 des 31918, 
II, 17; 1919, 13; 1928, 
17; 1927, 60; 1929, 13. 

meptepyagopat, 1912, 90. 

Trepikerpat, 1926, 12. 

meptovoia, 1912, 95. 

meprovea, 1915, 26 (mepuy.). 

nepirtvcoopa, 1925, 6. 

mepioxerracw, 1915, 24. 

mepiataots, 1915, 6. 

mud(o, 1914, 11, 16, 35. 

mimpacko, 1915, 25. 

norevo, 1921, 15, 18; 1926, 
8,13 des; 1927, 15, 48, 
53; 1928,7; 1929, 14. 

miotis, 1915, 15; 1919, 19; 
1921, 8. 

mActotos, 1916, 27. mAciora 
xaipev, 1918, 2; 1919, 3. 

meio, 1912, 89 (Aart). 

méov, 1928, 4. 

mAnyn, 1914, 46. 

mos, 1912, 5 ; 1918, 7 (?). 

mAnv, 1912, 56. ; 

mAnpow, 1917, 1, 5; 1927, 59. 

mAotoy, 1914, 41. 

mvevua, 1925, 8; 1926, 18. 
ev mvevpatt, 1927, 4, O61. 
mvevpa dytov, 1917, 1, 4,5, 
10, 15, 17, 22. 

mobewdraros, 1925, I, 23. 

mote, 1912, 32; 1914, 24, 
28 b7s, 36, 47, 573; 1916, 

LOLT, 99, ede neta 
LOW SS 2i LOA. 
53(?); 1928, 6; [1929, 
10].  motgonar, 1912, 103 
(mono.), 106; 1913, 7; 
1914, 14; 1916, 9. 

motos, 1914, 20, 42. 

morepnos, 1912, 74. 

modes, 1912, 3, 4, 10, 16, 21, 
55, 84, 90, 95, 103. 

modrela, 1912, 55; 1927, 31, 
39: 


sisi) 


1919, 


modurikds, 1912, 62. 

Tod\Aaxes, 1914, 38. 

modvs, 1912, 20, 22, 24, 75, 
84; 1918, 5, [10]; 1916, 
27, 37; 1928, 20; 1925, 
22; 1928, 9; 1929, 4. 
emt édv, 1915, 17. odd, 
adv., 1918, 3; 1919, 24; 
1926, 23; 1929, 18. 

Toumevo, 1912, 38. 

movnpds, 1927, 47. 

more, 1912, 66,92;1915, 17; 
1927, 51. 

mérepos, 1912, 74. 

novs, 1926, 18, 19. 

mpaypa, 1912, 69, 70; 1913, 
13; 1914, 3; 1923, 18. 

mpaews, 1912, 83. 

mpamdotros, 1914, 17, 18, 26. 

mpagis, 1915, 12, 16. 

mpadtns, 1912, tor. 

mparta, 1912, g2; 1914, 2, 
5 L922; 

mpeoBeia, 1912, gt. 

mpecBus, 1912, 20,75. 

mpeoBvrepos, 1918, 2, 5, 9; 
1914, 1, 43; 1915, 40; 
1916, 2; 1917, 11. 

mp0, 1912, 58, 68; 1917, 2; 
1918, 2; [1919, 4]; 
1927, 5. 

mpoyovos, 1912, 104. 

mpoypapo, 1918, 7. 

mpoeipnpar, 1912, 30. 

mpoepxoua, 1914, 17 (ampoep- 
6). 

mpocotas, 6, 1918, 2, 15 (?). 

mpobipos, 1927, 14. 

mpoxeyat, 1918, 18 drs. 

mpoxnptoow, 1919, 29. 

mpovoew, 1913, 13. 

mpdvora, 1912, 103, 
1929, 19. 

mpoodevm, 1919, 11. 

mpés: with acc., 1912, 10, 
21,20, 73,85, 102; 1913, 
6577; 1914, 4, 75:25, 34; 
Sin LOLS, 0, 72t20 5 
1917,. 6, 18 d7s, 21522; 
1918, 18; 1923, 15, 19; 
1925, 3 ; 1926, 19; 1927, 
14; 1928,5; 1929, 17. 
7O mpos wpoi, 1914, 18, 
abs., pias kat mpds, 1918, 
14. 

mpocayopevo, 1912, 27, 79; 
L919, 23, 25, 27-5 1925, 
4, 8(?), 18; 1926, 19; 
1927, 3; 1929, 18. 


105 ; 





INDEX OF WORDS 


mpoodexouat, 1912, 28 ; 1927, 
I2. 
mpoolokdw, 1928, 15. 
mpoceimov, 1925, 13, 14. 
mpooevxn, 1917, 8; 1921, 20; 
1926, 17, 21; 1929, 5,9. 
mpoonyopia, 1919, 23. 
mpoonkoyv, 1919, 14. 
mpootena, 1912, 41, 96. 
mpookuvéew, 1929, 18. 
mpookvrynots, 1916, 8. 
mpoodirapéw, 1912, 36. 
npoondcxo, 1929, 13. 
mpoohépopa, 1912, 65, 83. 
mpdrepov, 1912, 89, Q2. 
mpopytns, 1928, 12. 
mpwl: To mpos mpat, 1914, 18. 
mpetos: mprov, 1912, 69; 
1916, 8; 1927, 55. mpara 
as adv., 1912, 29. 
mukvorépas, 1929, 6. 
mvAn, 1914, 15. 
modem, 1915, 25. 


padios, 1912, 29. 

pvoua, 1925, 11. 

povvups: éppwobe, 1912, 109. 
epp@oba, 1916, 30 ; 1921, 
30; 1923, 19; 1925, 22; 
1926, 26; 1928, 8. éppw- 
peévos, 1924, 10 ; 1929, 19. 


capes, 1912, 68. 

oceBaords, 1912, 29. KAavdua- 
vm Eipyyn S<Baorn, 1912, 
35. Neos SeBacrés, month, 
1912, 13. See also In- 
dex 2. 

gepvdratos, 1927, 31. 

onpedo, 1913, 18. 

aiyva, 1914, 18. 

giros, 1914, 51, 57, 58. 

oxevos, 1914, 39, 40. 

oxpiBas, 1914, 18. 

ods, 1924, 3; 1926, 8; 1928, 
3; 1929, 3, 5 dzs. 

onovdafo, 1912, 25 drs, 34, 
52) A916, [137 ),0 516: 
omovddfoua, 1917, 20. 

orovoatos, 1917, 10. 

onovdn, 1917, 14, 22, 23, 
25(?); 1918, 10; 1924, 


- 
ordows, 1912, 73. 
oravpos, 1917, 6, 19. 
arapvdwov, 1918, 14 (ora- 
pour.). 
orepvov, 1919, 18. 
aropyn, 1916, 32. 





135 


otpatiatns, 1914, g, 11, 20; 
1916, 42. 

ov, 1923, 15. o€, 1916, 30(?), 
33 (I. coi); 1917, 8, 26; 
1919, 23, 25, 27; 1928, 
19, 23; 1924, 10; 1925, 
6-8, 22; 1926, 5,23, 25, 
26 ; 1927, 4, 9, 61; 1928, 
4,8; 1929, 18,19. oi, 
1915, 33 ; 1917, 6 ; 1918, 
11; 1919, 13; 1928, 7, 
13; 1924, 10; 1925, 4, 
5) 10, 17,.21; 1926, 16, 
18, 19, 21 ; 1927, 30, 30, 
49, 60; 1928, 4; 1929, 
8; [oh wa, 1017, .25- 5, 
27; 1918; 3 (1. ce); 12, 
E73 LOUD 2 2048 2S) 
1926, 16; 1927, 41, 54, 
[56], 62; 1929,16. See 
Upeis. 

ovykdetm, 1914, 10, 17, 22, 
43-45- 

avyxpio7ds, 1919, 32 (ov- 
xpnor.). 

ovyxopéw, 1912, 32, 46. 

svxoparria, 1914, 35. 

avAdeyo, 1916, 24, [39 ra 

oupBaddAopa, 1915, 13, 30. 

TupBwos, 1926, 23. 

oupBonbéo, 1916, 19. 

ovupropmedvo, 1912, 39. 

ouproveo, 1919, 7. 

ovppéepo, 1912, 69. 

ovppopad, 1915, 3. 

ctv, 1913, 5; 1917, 27; 1918, 
5, 19; 1919, 5» 9, 21, 24, 
26 dzs, 28; 1927, 62. 

owdayo, 1912, 72 ; 1918, 9. 

ovvaptOnew, 1919, 31. 

auvexw, 1914, 38; 1919, 22. 

ovvexas, 1928, 10. 

avvnOns, 1912, 66. 

ouvicrapa, 1912, 71. 

ouvreiva, 1925, 3. 

ahodpas, 1916, 20. 

oppayifo, 1916, 41. 

cofo, 1923, 7. 

cepa, 1926, 17 

cernp, 1919, 20; 1927, 6; 
1929, 15. 

aetnpia, 1919, 21 ; 19238, 14. 


radatrwpos, 1917, 7. 

tddavrov, 1914, 51; 1916, 43. 

Tapevo, 1912, 22. raprevomac, 
1912, 77. 

tanewwds, 1917, 7. 

tapaxn, 1912, 73. 


136 


taxa, 1918, 17 (?); 1927, 41. 

Taxos: ev taxet, 1918, 18. 

re, 1912, 8, 32, 43, 58, 71 
(rar) ; 1918, 5. 

ré for d¢, 1912, 31, 42, 72. 

texvov, 1915, 28, 35 ; 1916, 
17. 

tehevtatos, 1912, 25. 

téooapes, 1914, 13. 

TeTpam@nos } TeTpaTrwAor, 
1912, 45. 

Terpas kal cixas, 1914, 6. 

tnpew, 1914, 50. 

Tun, 1912, 28, 41; 1922, 20. 

Tiwios: ta tiwwa, 1912, 55. | 
Tyudtaros, 1912, 36; 1917, 
2; 1918, 1; 1926, 1, 5, 
Pie) Phen PW ten (Ones 
1929, 1, I9, 21, 22. 

tis, 1912, 56, 100; 1913, 4; 
1914, 4, 11 ; 1916, 12, 22, 
24, 39; 1918, 15; 1928, 
cn 

tovovtos, 1912, 29, 50; 1918, 
7; 1916, 29. 

toKos, 1916, 43. 

tomos, 1914, 24. 

tocovtos, 1912, 40. 

tpets, 1914, 37. 

tprerns, 1912, 63. 

Tpiopakdptos, 1927, 46. 

tpitos, 1912, 47. 

tpomos, 1912, 30, 38, 72; 
1912, 99; 1915, 37; 
1916, 35. 

tuyxavo, 1915, 6, 17; 1925, 
IY. 

tumos, 1917, 6 (romas), 19 
(do.). 

tov for rév, 1912, 107. 


\ 
TO 


vBpi¢o, 1914, 19, 26, 28. 

vytaive, 1929, 6. 

vyiea, 1919, 16; 1928, 8. 

vids, 1914, 33, 48; 1915, 
32; 1917,11; 1929, 16. 
Christ, 1917, 15, 16. 

ipets, 1912, 20, 27, 28 (np.), 
39; 38, 39, 43, 56, 58, 65 
(np); 67, 104, 106 (np), 
107; 1914, 2, 4,5; 1915, 





atta, 1920, 4 (?) ; 1921, 21; | 
1922, 12. | 
apuynt, 1922, 8. 
aoyw (ayw), 1922, 7, 18 | 
KChama ye 


INDEX OF WORDS 


12, 13, 29, 30; 1916,[5], 
7, [8], 13, 15 3%: 32, 39> 
1917, 8, 16,20; 1918, 5, 
18, 19; 1919, 28; 1925, 
21; 1928, 15; 1929, 
7, 8. 

tpetepos, 1912, 33 (np). 

tmdyopnat, 1912, 21. 

vrapxo, 1912, 23, 104. 

vmatia, 19138, 1. 

Umaros: Umatos dmodedevypevos, 
1912320") 2 

imép: with acc., 1916, 23. 


with gen., 1912, 62, 1073. | 


19138, 19; 1924, 11; 
1925, [11], 15 (?); 1927, 
13; 1928, 3, 10. 
trepBaldrw, 1925, 1. 
imepBory, 1916, 15. 
bmépxopat, 1912, 56. 
ind (with gen.), 1912, 28, 
5I, 58; 1918, 4; 1914, 
GHG SAS )Isy Gf Satta, ih 
1916, 12; 1919, 30. 
unode€atepos, 1916, 7. 


| vmodéxopa, 1914, 21-23. 
| Umopupynokw, 1924, 5, 6. 
| umévora, 1912, 97. 


UmoriGewar, 1912, 35. 


paivoua, 1919, 28. 
dakds, 1918, 13. 
DapevoO, 1913, 1; 1917, 13. 
aos, 1914, 27, 30, 34. 
pepo, 1914, 9, 40,42; 1919, 
5 (?); 1927, 55. 
pravOperia, 1912, 102. 
pravOparos, 1912, 81. 
pAravOpera, 1912, 55. 
pravOpores, 1912, 83. 
piréo, [1929, rr]. 
proxdyabia, 1927, 40. 
dtoevia, 1917, 4, 14. 
purortmeopat, 1912, 76. 
roripia, 1912, 106. 
péBos, 1912, 64; 1914, 12. 
dowikiov, 1918, 12. 
poprikds, 1912, 49. 
tepos, 1912, 37. 
ppovipws, 1927, 36. 
vdaky, 1914, 44 (porrd.). 


\ 
Ta 


optika- 


(2) Coptic WorRDs. 


fine, 1922, 18. 


edoode, 1920, 22. 


| erwt, 1922, 2, 





gvdn, 1912, 41. 
vou, 1912, 23. 
porn, 1912, 27. 

pos, 1917, 7. 
orewdraros, 1917, I. 


xaipw: xaipew, 1912, 16; 
1914, 2; 1915, 2 ; [1916, 
7|; 1928, 5; 1925, 2; 
1926, 4; 1929, 2. whrei- 
ota xaipew, 1918, 2; 1919, 
3. xaipe, 1917, 2; 1920, 
3. xaipere, 1921, 2. 

xapd, 1917, 3. 

Xapaxtnp, 1927, 48. 

xapiCoua, 1912, 58 ; 1929, 9. 
active, xapi{o, 1927, 41. 

xdpis, 1912, 11; 1927, 8. 

xapriov, 1917, 3. 

xeip, 1917, 6, 16, 18. 

xetpdypapov, 1917, 7. 

xXpdopa, 1912, 87, 107. 

xpeia, 1918, 16. 

xpewotew, 1915, 22; 1916, 
28. 

XP; 1912, 73. 

Xptotiavkds, 1918, 6 (Xpyor.). 

Xpworeavds, 1919, 17 (Xpyor.). 

* vpusropopia, 1928, 8 (xpyor.). 

xptoropdpos, 1926, 1 (xpyor.). 

xpévos, 1912, 22, 66, 84; 
1918, 12(?); 19238, 20, 
24; 1925, 23; 1928, 10; 
1929, 4, 20. 

xpvaovs, 1912, 34. 

xwpa, 1912, 45; 1913, 12; 
1914, 42. 


Wndiopa, 1912, 20. 
Wouior, 1914, 49, 52. 


pa, 1914, 10; 1919, 13. 

os, 1912, 23, 56, 59; 1913, 
12; 1914, 40; 1915, 8; 
1916, 18; 1917, 6, 19; 
1919, 31; 1921, 10; 
1927, 40; 1929, 8, 10 (?). 

omep, 1912, 35, 90. 

ore, 1914, 14, 22; 1915,8; 
1921, 6; 1927, 58. 

apéeripwos, 1927, 24. 


asat-, vb., 1922, 6, 15. 


' ssataer, 1921, 10, 12. 


(sxe) axgppert, 1921, 19. 
aseeye, Pp m-, 1920, 25, 27; 
1921, 19. 


srauje, 1922, 3 


oemme, 1920, 22. 
oy, news, 1922, 27. 
oyacte, 1921, 13. 
oypat, 1921, 7. 
oywuy, vb., 1921, 23. 


pasi-, 1920, 1, 6. 
pute, 1920, 11, 17. 
prah, 1922, 8, 9. 
poyot, 1921, 5, 9, 16. 
paocyuy, 1922, 9. 


con, 1920, 20. 
2; 1922, 2, 17, 22. 


5. 


can, 1921, 


INDEX OF WORDS 


cmiteoy (cay), 1922, 8, 9, 
19. 


coaes, 1920, 1. coer, 1922, 
sth 


twho, 1920, 25. 

tas- (1Tae-), 1921, 3. 

| tanto, 1920, 18, 19, 20. 

tito oy, 1920, pass7m. 

munmay, 1921, 23, 26; 1922, 
passim. 

tTooye, 1920, 17. 

Tago, 1922, 27. 

Taop, vb., 1921, 12. 


uHeas, 1921, 9. 
wapen, 1921, 14. 








(2) AUTHORS. 


PAGE | 





| woorye, vb., 1920, 2 


- in Oatt- = ait- 
1922, 4, &c. 
of-, prep., 1922, 5. 


737 
2. 


prefix, 


(gwh) obhroye, 1921, 6 (cf. 
12), 


oaxat, usm-, 1921, 3. 
oice, vb., 1921, 13, 1 
ont, north, 1922, 4. 


xo ehod, 1920, 14. 
xaeit, 1922, ro. 


6. 


aWK abad, 1921, 15. 


Swuyt, 1922, 4. 


Gig (Ss), 1922, 19. 


INDEX OF REFERENCES 


PAGE 
Acta Pauli (Coptic) . ; 97 | Athanasius, Lp. ad Lucif,, ii 116-17 
Apophth. Patrum, Ammon. to . 64  — Ep. ad Maximum 117 
— Arsen. 24 ; On! | — Lp. ad Orsisium . 114 
— Sisoe (Migne, Ixy, 405, Bn) . 41°  — Lh. ad Rufinianum 117 
Aristides, Agol. ( Journ. Theol. Stud., | — £p. ad Serap., 2 466 
XXV, 73-7) . 88 — Lpist. encycl. (Migne, xxvi, 13 938 A) 69 
Athanasius, Afol. ad Const. 1162 — Ep. Pasch., i iv 46! 
— Apol.¢. Ar. t7 . Oi, 08) j= Xe g IOI 
—— 18 70 | — Festal Index 40, 47, 552 
— — 28 OM Ni List ATA 10 » . 66 
SS 0 64 raters 66 
SS SSS OF | 3 69 
5 O 9 HOI | a SS 63 
559 38, 39°, oa 36 ee Tod 69 
e289 . 46, periemn 64 
64 65, ae wo =—-5655 66 
— — 65 46*°, 66 | — — 56 35 
aa OF 64, 89, 101 | — — 63 69 
— — 40 EEN id (73 IOI, I14, 117 
sae 40", 443,57), 63, 66, cacy ie Mere oh fs) aL 
114 — Tom. ad Anhebe IOI 
—— 7I-2 : 40° | — Vita Antonit, 61 . 67 
—-— 72 67 | Athenaeus, v, 196a ff. 32 
—— 73 103 | — vi, 240b ; 72 
= ety: ; 67, 69 
— Apol. de fuga, 6 . 69 | Bible: Ps. cxvii, 5 115 
— De Incarn. Verbt, 25 84 | — Prov. v, 14 (Coptic) 96 
— Ep. ad Adelphium 1i7 | — Mich. vii, 20 (Coptic) . 93 
— Lp. ad Draconhum, » . rr7 |. "Jon. ii; 3 4. : Pie 
— Ep. ad Epictetum Tip) —— Zach, iv, x (Coptic) 93 
— Lp. ad Episc. Aeg. et Lib., 22 Al| | = Wlaceoil ETy02 
— Lp. ad Loann, et Ant. : 116 | — Mk. viii, 7 (Coptic) 96 
— Ep. ad Jovianum 117} — Acts vi, 15°. 3 93 


138 INDEX OF REFERENCES 


PAGE 
Bible: Acts xviii, 2 . tg! 
pein epee) TS 
— Rom. x, 11 96 
— — xiv, I 75 
— 1 Cor. x, 25 68 
-—— Gal. vi, 10 . 15 
— Eph. v,:16 13 
— 1 Thess. v, 14 AG 
—1 Tim. v, 8 75 
— 2 Tim. ii, 4 96 
— — ii, 6 96 
— Tit. ii, 13 Ts 
—Jja.v,I4 . 75 
B. M. Add. MS. 14932, f. ‘118 Ves 
Cedrenus, p. 760 D, 762 a, ee A 69 
Cod. Sust., i 46, 4 65 
— xi, 59, 8 : 65 
Copiica, i, Homélies coptes, D. 65 42 
Dio Cassius, li, 16, 3-4 aus! 
— li, 17, 2 9 
as li, 17,3 8? 
—lix,29,4 . 29 
lx, 4, 3f,, 5» 7 21? 
= Ix, Ii 31 
= Ix, 5,3 , Ae 
— 1K, 5, 3-4, 12, Ee 31 
— Ix, 6, 6 19} 
— Ix, 8,4 or 
Sn ryt 4* 
clk, 39,7 20° 
— lxvi, 9, 2 29 
Epiphanius, Adv. Haer., |xviii, 3 39° 
— Ixvili, 4 : ; 39° 
— Ixviii, 5 40°, 4v , 40, IOI 
— Ixviii, 5-6 ae 
— Ixviii, 6 per iiges 
Eusebius, Vita Const., ili, 23 40° 
— — iv, 41 OA 
— — iv, 42 . 51-2 
Herodotus, v, 77. 34 
Hilary of Poictiers, i iv, p. 53 46° 
— iv, p. 53 f. ay 
— Iv, p. 54 47 
— iv, p. 54 f 54° 
== A¥,.p) 55 50° 
— iv, p. 77 63 
Joh. Lydus, De Mag. squalls 8, 16 68 
Josephus, Avz., xii, 121 14 
— — xiv, 188. 14 
— — xIV, 213 13 
a aks 47 39° 
— — xvili, 257-9 ty 
—- — xix, 81 eu 
— — xix, 213 4° 





Josephus, Awz., xix, 278 
— — xix, 280-5 
— — xix, 281 

— — xix, 282 f, 

— — xix, 283 

— — xix, 286-91 
— — Xx, 135. 

— Bell. Iud., ii, 487 
— — ii, 484- 8 

— — ii, 488 

aa Sally 495 


Le. Ap, i, 288- 303 


= = tiygs 
=i, 37 
se Ges 
— — il, 63 


PAGE 

. 6 1” 
37, 124, 14-16 
9 

9 

By 

15 

20° 

lO”, ir 

T4 

13 

iO: 

29 

107, 13 

14 

14 

31 


Loewe (G.), Corp. Gloss. Lat., v, 423 65 


MSS. copies de Leyde, 185 
Mém. miss. arch. fr., iv, 740 


Metaphrastes, Ath. Vita 
Miene, 7. G., xviii, 


Palladius, W7s/. Laus., xi . 


Por, OF, 473 
— iii, 412 f, 
—vV,198-9 . 
Philo, Zn F7., 2, 7 
— — 4, 20 

me eo 

= 70; 48 
—= 18, 53 
aes 8, 55 
eae Oi: E 

Ss eo, 78-9 
— — 10, 80 
I OY 

= Pe, Ye 
— Leg., 16, 115 
Bare een 
—— 20, 192, 
— — 20, 134 . 
= 7 29) 235 

— — 22, 150, I51 


-—-—- 22,151. 


— — 28,178 . 

— 28, 189). 

— = 43,338 . 

— — 44, 349 . 

= 455870 « : 
Photius, A¢h. Vita, 6 
Pliny; -V.d22., Xik,< 2, 3 
— XXXvi, 57 

— XXXvi, 69 . 
Plutarch, Az/on., 80. 


— Reg. et Imp. ‘Apophth. Augiy 3 35 


Poly b, iv, 47, 4 


572-82 








INDEX OF REFERENCES 139 
PAGE PAGE 
Rossi, Wuove Cod., p. 3 93 | Sozomen, iii, 21 54° 
—=— presi... ; ‘ 65 Spartianus, Vita Severe, 14 82, 9 
Routh, Ze. ran , iv, 91-4 38 | Strabo, xvii, 9 (794). 35 
Rufinus, Vika Bes ; IOI | — ap. Jos., Am/., xiv, 117 E2t 61S 
— — i, 16 66 | Suetonius, Claudius, 2 32 
SS 31 
Seneca (the elder), Controv., 7,4,3 . 29 | ——12 31 
Seneca, Agoc., 7, 4 f., 12, 2, vv. 437 5 217 | —— 14 21? 
—— 71 | —— 16 4°, 21° 
—— Quaest, Nat., iV, 2; 13. 29 | —— 25 19 
Socrates, i, 8, S WOT peas 13 48, 7? 
= 19 . 42’ | — Nero, 36 : 29 
eee mae 41", 46°, 55 | Suidas, ’Adé£avdpos, 204 29 
es 28 . 66 | — Atoviowos, 1394 29 
—1, 29 66 | — ‘Hpiepyor, 853 SS 
= 1G SS F is 
ee zi Ss | Tacitus, Ann., li, 59 3t 
as Oy TB 21 
ie 2 Ds 40, 415, 41° : 1 
— ii, 21-2 55. Be es ais 
—- ii, 22, Py ae ae sod . 
—ii,23. : Fe Enbs Bs Xill, 22 a E. : . 5 
N25 7 40" ) 4, 48, 56, 571, 63, 101 ee a 1, 9, 14 - 
_—- % % 
ety ie P : ; 56° oe Fab. Se, iv, 4 42} 
—_ ita 114 | Vita Anon. Ath., 1 67 
(2) INSCRIPTIONS. 
PAGE PAGE 
Archiv, v, 162 36 | Dessau, 212 21s 
Boo 4 . 6 
B. M. Coptic Room, stele 1481 ae Aerie Dittenberser, Or. 6 Gr. Insers i, 063, 5 oe 
Bull. Corr. Hell., xi, 1887, 307 d my idea Syl. Inscr. Gr.*, 785, 7-9 ret. 
Eg. Expl. Fund, Arch. Survey, xii, 
Cemeteries of Abydos, iii, 39 98 Der el-Gebréwi, ii, pl. xxix, 4 71 
Cal) Gadd: Gi13¢>. ; 30 
ae Sera | 30 | I. G. Rom. 1,920 30 
— 3190 . 36 | == iil, 328 7 
wa cy ee 35 | — ili, 1145, 4 63 
— add. 3831.a 17 35 | Adio, xiii, 485-90 9° 
— 4734. : : 20 4) Woce., xi, 147 93 
C. I. L. iii, Suppl. 6983 a 32 Rev. &, 7., XXXiii, 1920, 375 ff. 4° 
(c) PAPYRI AND OSTRACA. 
PAGE PAGE 
BGU. 91, 1 85 | Crum, Ca/al., no. 1102 gi 
— 114+Cattaoui, 1, v, 6- 8 34 | ——no. 1224 65 
— 1131, 14, 22 : 12 | — Copt. MSS., 45, an : 71 
— 1140 = moe Chrest. 58 12 | — Monastery of ce no. 177. 65 
— 1151, 7f. 12 | ——no., 327. 93 
: — Short Texts, no. 184 97 
Crum, Ca/al., no. 358 42 | ——no. 389. 65 
— — no. 557 . 70 
—— no. 711. 97 | Ghedini, 25 IOI-2, 109 
— — no, 1028 98 | — 25, 10 19 





140 INDEX OF REFERENCES 
PAGE | - 
Ghedini, 25, 19f. 119 | P. Oxy. 1890, 2 
Gnomon, § 40 . 34 | — 1896, 9 . 
os § 44 34 | — T1900, : 
: == 1901; OF 
Krall, 47, 2 . 71 we ae 66 
P. Amh. 85, 1; 86, 1 33.| — 1917, 63 
—— LOT a7 Z ‘ c 52 | — 1928 verso, 12 
— 145 ae a FOZ; TOF 192065 
P. Cairo Masp. 6yo21 verso, 16 - 49 | — 1941, 2 
— 67023 - 73 | — 1967, 3 é 
— 67288, li, 2,4 . : Tis NWP, Se 99, 10) 17, 28 
P. Cattaoui 1+ BGU. 114, v, 6 See oa ek wiLainer R 172 
Pi Fay..37,.1 p00 (eR. ee 
— 108, I 85 | —- 149, 1 
P. Flor. 50, 65 52 | — 206, Bae 
— 140 verso, I » S840  SPoRyl Cope 269-75, 292, 30 311, 
P? Hib., p- 8 71, 106 312, 314, 352, 396 - . 
P. Iand. 62 73 | 236, 311,913" ". 
P. Lips. 18 100 | PSI. 168, 26 
— 54,4 525 -= 183 
P. Lond. 239, 21 88 | — 205, 1 
— 413, 12, 16 65 | — 208, 1 
Alas 65 | — 216, 4 . 
—- 840, 2 33.) = 424, 15-44 
— 899 84 | — 478, 2 
— 948 SON lee balls 286 
— 982 7Oo\e ba headneanneoic) 
Lae 08 
feet toe ce SB. 198 
ett? >: AO Wea ve 
— 1435, 125 . 687s 5124, 39 
lOO ROOl a 65 — 5174 . 
— ined. Inv. No. 1966 45 | prop 
P. Oxy. 33 | 20,113 | __ 5366 . 
— 33 verso, iv, 6 3° | __ 5747, 8 
= ey 100) ) KS oe nore ee 
ee 116° | Sniegelberg, Ezgennamen, p. 44* 
— 268, 1 3° We Stud? Pal., % 307-1 ae : 
— 488, 17 87 | _xx,4, 12 : 
— 526, I SA es 32, 8 
— 965 106 Ses sr 
— 996 10 gee me ls oe 
— 1068, 20 88 SAG Sl v., ii, 5-6 
— 1071, 4,8 . 19) == ron dandy, 
— 1185, 13 34 —— 106,13. 
—- 1242. 30, S0Cpe Ne ee a 
— 1242, col. ill BF eee ae 
— 1295, I1-13 73 oN 
so ie a S Wadi Sarga, no. 1 
— 1495, 3-5 . 84 bass rae 14. 
— 1559 . ; LOO te Ware 
1683, 771. . 88 
— 1871, 5, 6 79 | Z.f. vergl. Rechtsw., xxxv, 93 fi. 





34 
106 


gi 
94 
85 
I0o 
116? 
84 
68 
73 
71 
30 
5t 


87 
106 
71 
424 
42° 


jeg adele Sigs) 


NIB) 


biel thane tial ry 


oti 
Sian 


=f ‘ 
mee 





Prare: | 


Letter of Claudius. 1912, col. 5. 











Letter from 





peed E. 


ndria. 


1914, recto. 





va! te: a Ho REL een | 





Soe ge F res inter eT weeds 








TE-E FAA 7 me z oor ie ey WI ive: 
FADIN, refine 
NECN Wea per xp 





Prare: Lif, 


(a) Letter of Hatre. 1920, ll. 1-7. (6) Letter of Paiéous. 1921, ll. 22-8. 
(c) Letter of Bés and Aphinge. 1922, Il. 3-12. 








Pirate IV 


1924 


lus 


Letter of Auson 

















ae th 
ell, H, ris (Harold Idris), Sj ; 
Jews and Christians in Egyot =the Je 


832] 





BR Bell, Sir Harold Idris, 1879- 
190 Jews and Christians in Egypt; the Jewish troubles in 
Bu Alexandria and the Athanasian controversy, illustrated by: 


Oxford university press, 1924. 
xii, 140 p. illus., v facsim. (2 double) 28 cm. 
Bibliography: p. ;ix)—xii, 

The correspondence of Paphnutius. 
1. Crum, Walter Ewing 1865-1944. 1. Title, 


Library of Congress a”) Boe ee Geet ic 
ey Lae 





texts from Greek papyri in the British museum, edited by H. 
Idris Bell ... with three Coptic texts edited by W. E. Crum, 
M. A. Printed by order of the Trustees. London, Sold at 
the British museum and by B. Quaritch, Itd., and H. Milford, 


ConTENTS.—Claudius to the Alexandrines.—The Meletian schism.— 


25—8088 


hy, 


as 
Pats 





