Title: The Eternal Happiness of the Saints
Creator: Robert Bellarmine (1542-1621) (John Dalton, Translator)
Publisher: London, n.d. (19th c.)
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Archive.org item metadata carries an explicit
  `NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT` possible-copyright-status, checked directly
  against the item's own metadata, 2026-09-25, this session.
Source: Internet Archive item theeternalhappin00belluoft
  (archive.org/details/theeternalhappin00belluoft), fetched
  directly (curl, raw bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt
  full-text file, 2026-09-25, this session.
Provenance note: Body text unaltered including its own OCR errors.
  Bellarmine devotional work in English translation. Vendored
  2026-09-25 as part of a post-Step0-Revision-2 PD
  source-acquisition pass.

ih- 

P 
loo 

-LO 
P 

!CQ 


& 

4 


THE 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS 


OP    THE 


(SAINTS, 


^Translate**  from  tfje  3Latm 


OF    THE 


VEN.  CARDINAL  BELLARMINE, 

BY    THE 

EEV.  JOHN  DALTON. 

COLL  CHRIST!  REGIS 
BIS.  MAJOR 

^5^x 

THOMAS   RICHARDSON   AND    SON, 

172,  FLEET  STREET;  9,  CAPEL  STREET,  DUBLIN; 
AND  DERBY. 


PREFATIO. 

ANNO  superiore,  ad  meam  prsecipue  spiri- 
tualem  utilitatem,  conscripsi  mihi  ipsum, 
libellum, — De  Ascensione  Mentis  in  Deum, 
per  Scalas  Rerum  Creatarum."*  Nunc, 
quoniam  placet  Deo  senilem  setatem 
meam  adhuc  longius  aliquantulum  protra- 
here,  subit  animum  de  coelesti  Patria,  ad 
quam  anhelamus  omnes  filii  Adam,  qui 
hanc  vallem  mortalitatis  gementes  et  flentes 
incolimus,  aliquid  meditari,  et  meditationes 
stilo  alligare,  ne  pereant.  Igitur  in  Scrip- 
turis  Sanctis,  quse  sunt  veluti  Epistolse 
Consolatorise  de  Patria  Coelesti  ad  exilium 
nostrum  a  Patre  transmissse,  quatuor  no- 
mina  reperio,  ex  quibus  utcunque  bona 
illius  Loci  nobis  innotescere  possunt.  No- 
mina  sunt,  Paradisus,  Domus,  Civitas, 
Regnum,  &c. 

*  Already  translated. 


t  PREFACE 

LAST  year,  for  my  own  spiritual  benefit 
especially,  I  composed  a  "Gradual  to  ascend 
unto  God  from  the  Contemplation  of  created 
objects."  Now,  since  it  hath  pleased  God 
to  prolong  my  old  age  a  little  longer,  I  wish 
to  meditate  on  that  heavenly  country  to 
which  all  the  sons  of  Adam  ardently  aspire, 
who  dwell,  lamenting  and  weeping,  in  this 
valley  of  death;  and  these  meditations  I 
desire  to  write,  lest  they  perish.  Where 
fore  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  may  be 
compared  to  "Consoling  Letters"  sent  unto 
us  in  this  our  exile  from  heaven  by  our 
Father,  I  find  four  names  mentioned,  from 
which  we  may  in  a  manner  learn  what  are 
the  good  things  of  that  land.  The  names 
are, — -Paradise,  Mansion,  City,  and  a 
Kingdom.  Of  Paradise  St.  Paul  speaks: 
"  I  know  a  man  in  Christ  above  fourteen 

years  ago such  an  one  rapt  even  to 

the  third  heaven that  he  was  caught  up 

into  paradise,"  &c.     Of  the  "Mansion" 


VI  PREFACE. 

the  Son  of  God  himself  speaks :  "  In  my 
Father's  house  there  are  many  mansions." 
Of  the  "City"  St.  Paul  speaks  in  his  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrew*:  "But  you  are  come  to 
Mount  Sion  and  the  city  of  the  living  God, 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem."  Of  the  "  King 
dom"  there  is  mention  made  in  St.  Mat 
thew:  "Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for 
theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  This 
name  is  continually  occurring  in  the  Holy 
Scripture.  The  abode  of  the  saints  in  heaven 
is  called  a  "Paradise,"  because  it  is  a  most 
beautiful  place,  abounding  in  delights.  But 
because  men  might  suppose  that  paradise 
was  a  garden  placed  near  a  house,  which 
could  contain  but  few  people,  the  Holy  Spirit 
.has  added  the  name,  "  House,"  because 
it  is  a  royal  mansion,  a  great  palace,  where 
in,  besides  a  garden,  there  are  halls,  couches, 
and  many  other  excellent  things.  But 
because  a  house,  however  large,  cannot 
contain  many  people,  and  lest  we  should 
think  that  very  few  will  possess  eternal  life, 
the  Scripture  adds  the  word  "City,"  which 
contains  many  gardens  and  many  palaces. 
But  since  St.  John,  speaking  of  the  number 
of  the  blessed,  saith :  "  After  this  I  saw  a 
great  multitude  which  no  man  could  num- 


PREFACE.  VU 

ber."  And  as,  moreover,  no  city  can  con 
tain  an  innumerable  multitude,  the  word 
"Kingdom"  is  used,  to  which  is  added, 
"the  kingdom  of  heaven/'  than  which  no 
place  in  the  whole  universe  is  more  bound 
less  and  extensive. 

But,  again,  since  in  a  most  extensive 
kingdom  there  are  many  who  never  see 
each  other,  nor  know  their  names,  nor 
whether  they  ever  existed ;  and  since  it  is 
certain  that  all  the  blessed  behold  each 
other,  and  know  each  other,  and  converse 
familiarly  with  one  another  as  friends  and 
relations :  therefore  the  Scriptures,  not  con 
tent  with  the  name  of  "Kingdom,"  added 
that  of  a  "  City,"  that  we  might  know  its 
inhabitants  are  truly  citizens  of  the  saints, 
and  as  familiar,  and  as  closely  united 
together,  as  the  inhabitants  of  the  very 
smallest  city.  But,  in  order  that  we  might 
likewise  remember,  that  these  happy  men 
are  not  only  citizens  of  the  saints,  but 
also  friends  of  God,  therefore  the  Holy 
Spirit  calls  that  a  "  House,"  which  it  also 
named  a  "  City."  In  fine,  because  all  the 
blessed  in  heaven  abound  in  delights,  it  is 
likewise  called  "  Paradise."  Hence  these 
four  words — Kingdom,  House,  City,  Para- 


Vlll  PREFACE. 

dise — mean  one  and  the  same  tiling ;  and 
the  Paradise  is  so  extensive,  that  it  can 
truly  be  called  a  House,  City,  and  King 
dom.  Wherefore,  concerning  this  most 
blessed  place  I  will— first,  under  the  word 
"  Kingdom ;  then  under  that  of  a  "City ;" 
afterwards  under  that  of  a  "House ;"  arid, 
lastly,  under  the  word  "Paradise"— meditate 
in  the  chamber  of  my  heart;  and,  with 
God's  assistance,  commit  to  writing  what 
He  shall  please  to  suggest  unto  me. 

BELLARMINE. 


CONTENTS. 


BOOK  1. 

CHAP.  PAGE 

PREFATIO,      .         ,        .-       .        .        .     iii 
Preface,     .         .  .        -        .  v 

1.  The  Extent  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,     .       1 

2.  The  Inhabitants  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,       5 

3.  The  Monarchial  Form  of  the  Kingdom  of 
God, 10 

4.  All  the  Blessed  are  Kings,      .         .         .13 

5.  The  Happiness  enjoyed  in  the  Kingdom  of 
God, 20 

6.  What  importance  men  attach  to  Earthly 
Kingdoms,  and  what  importance  ought  to 

be  attached  to  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,    .     28 

7.  The  First  Means  of  attaining  the  King 
dom  of  God,  34 

8.  The  Second  Means  of  attaining  the  King 
dom  of  God,      . 37 

9.  The  Third  Means  of  attaining  the  King 
dom  of  God,  ...         .         .         41 

10.  The  Fourth  Means  of  attaining  the  King 
dom  of  God,      ...         .  .45 


CONTENTS. 


BOOK  II. 

CHAP.  PAGE 

1  On  the  Beaut j  of  the  City  of  God,        .         51 

2.  On  the  Concord  and  Peace  of  the  City  of 
God,          .         .        ....     ....     54 

3.  On  the  Liberty  of  the  City  of  God,        .         57 

4.  On  the  Situation  and  Form  of  the  City  of 
God, .62 

5.  On  the  Foundations  and  Gates  of   the 
City  of  God,  ....        .        65 

6.  On  the  Walls  and  Streets  of  the  City  of 
God, 70 

7.  On  the  Temple  of  the  City  of  God,      .         73 

8.  On  the  Meat  and  Drink  in  the  City  of 
God,          .......     77 

9.  On  the  Mystical  Foundation  of  the  City 

of  God,  ...'..".         .         .  82 

10.  On  the   Mystical  Gate   of  the   City  of 
God, 85 

11.  On  the  Mystical  Stones  of  the  City  of 
God,          .         .        .       ;.        ...  89 

12.  On  Flying  from  the  City  of  this  World,  97 

BOOK  III. 

1.  All  the  Blessed  are  the  familiar  Sons  of 
God, 104: 

2.  The  Magnitude  and  Beauty  of  the  House 

of  God,          .        .        ^         /.      107 


CONTENTS.  XI 

CHAP.  PAGE 

3.  The  Chambers  in  the  House  of  God,  111 

4.  On  the  Couches  in  the  House  of  God,  113 

5.  On  the  Courts  of  the  House  of  God,  118 

6.  On  the  First  Gate  of  the  House  of  God, 
which  is  Faith, 121 

7.  On  Hope,  which  is  the  Second  Gate  of  the 
House  of  God,        .••-••.  --';- •  -"-.  ^     .         .126 

8.  On  Charity,  which  is  the  Third  Gate,  130 

9.  On  Humility,  which  is  the  Fourth  Gate,  134 

10.  More  Considerations  on  Faith,     ,         .       139 

11.  More  Considerations  on  Hope,         .         .142 

12.  Other  Considerations  on  Charity,          .       144 

13.  Other  Considerations  on  Humility,          .  147 

14.  The    Necessity   of   entering  this   Gate, 
however  narrow,  if  we  wish  to  be  Saved.       149 

BOOK  IV. 

1.  True  Joy  is  to  be  found  in  Heaven,          .  152 

2.  On  the  Joy  of  the  Understanding,          .     155 

3.  On  the  Joy  of  the  Will,  .         .         .         .161 

4.  On  the  Joy  of  the  Memory,          .         .       164 

5.  On  the  Joy  of  the  Eyes,          .         .         .168 

6.  On  the  Joy  of  the  Ears,       .         .         .       171 

7.  On  the  Joy  of  the  Nostrils,      .         .         .174 

8.  On  the  Joy  the  Senses  of  Touch  and  Taste 
will  have,       ......       175 

9.  The  Joys  of  Heaven  compared  with  those 

of  Earth,        , .  .  ',  .        .  178 


Xll  CONTENTS. 

CHAP.  PAGE 

1,0.  The  Earthly  and  Heavenly  Paradise  com 
pared,  182 

11.  The  Goods  of  this  World,  and  those  of  the 
Earthly  Paradise,  compared  with  the  Joys 

of  the  Heavenly  Paradise,          .         .  .'      .  186 

12.  On  the  Price  that  Paradise  was  purchased 

at,  compared  with  Paradise  itself,  .       188 

BOOK  V. 

1.  On  the  Treasure  hidden  in  a  Field,  .  193 

2.  On  the  precious  Pearl,         .      '  .,!        .  200 

3.  The  Labourers  in  the  Vineyard,      ,  .  206 

4.  On  the  Talents,           ;.  >      .         .         .  214 

5.  The  Parable  of  the  Supper,     .  .  225 

6.  The  Parable  of  the  Wise    and  Foolish 
Virgins,          .         .         .         .         •         >  234 

7.  On  the  Prize,        ...  .244 

8.  On  the  Crown,             ....  253 


THE 

KINGDOM  OF  GOD, 

OR   THE 

ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS. 


BOOK  I. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE  EXTENT  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 

WE  may  learn  How  important  is  a  know 
ledge  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  from  this 
circumstance,  that  Christ^  our  heavenly 
Master,  began  His  preaching  with  these 
words :  "  Do  penance,  for  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  at  hand."  He  also  delivered 
nearly  all  His  parables  concerning  the  king 
dom  of  heaven,  saying,  "  The  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  likened/'  &c.  And  after  His 
resurrection,  during  the  forty  days  before 
His  ascension,  appearing  to  His  disciples, 
He  spoke  to  them  of  the  kingdom  of 
God,  as  St.  Luke  mentions  in  the  Acts 


2  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

of  the  Apostles.  This  kingdom  therefore 
formed  the  beginning,  continuation,  and 
end  of  the  discourses  of  Christ.  But 
I  do  not  intend  to  enter  upon  all  the 
points  connected  with  heaven,  but  only  to 
explain  those  that  relate  to  the  "  place  and 
state"  of  the  Blessed.  In  the  first  place,  1 
will  endeavour  to  show  why  the  "  habita 
tion"  of  the  blessed  is  called  the  "kingdom 
of  heaven"  in  the  Holy  Scriptures. 

The  habitation  of  the  saints  is  called  a 
kingdom  for  many  reasons.  First,  because 
it  is  a  land  the  boundless  extent  of  which 
cannot  be  conceived  by  human  imagination. 
This  earth,  though  but  a  point,  as  it  were, 
in  comparison  with  heaven,  contains  many 
and  great  kingdoms  that  can  scarcely  be 
numbered :  how  great,  therefore,  must  that 
"one  kingdom"  be,  which  extends  through 
out  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  heaven  of 
heavens  !  But  the  kingdom  of  heaven  does 
not  only  include  the  heavenly  region,  but 
also  the  whole  extent  of  it.  This  heavenly 
country,  which  is  properly  called  the  king 
dom  of  heaven,  is  the  first  "province,"  as 
it  were,  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  in  which 
the  highest  princes  reside,  who^  are  all  the 
sons  of  God.  The  second  province  may  be 
called  setherial,  in  which  the  stars  dwell ;  all 
of  which,  though  not  animate,  yet  are  so 
obedient  to  the  voice  of  their  Creator,  that 
they  may  be  said  to  be  living  creatures, 
according  to  Ecclesiasticus,  "  Come,  let  us 
adore  the  King,  for  whom  all  things  live/' 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.        3 

The  third  province  is  aerial,  in  which  winds 
and  clouds  pass,  and  storms,  rain,  snow, 
hail,  thunder,  and  lightning  are  produced, 
and  where  birds  of  various  kinds  sport  and 
fly.  The  fourth  province  is  watery,  and 
contains  seas,  fountains,  and  lakes,  in 
which  fishes  multiply,  "  that  pass  through 
the  paths  of  the  sea."*  The  fifth  is 
earthly,  which,  emulous  as  it  were  of 
heaven,  contains  the  most  noble  inhabi 
tants,  but  not  the  most  blessed — I  mean 
men,  endowed  with  reason,  but  mortal; 
these  have  dominion  over  the  beasts  of  the 
earth  and  the  fishes  of  the  sea.  The  last 
province  is  subterraneous,  which,  like  the 
desert  of  Arabia,  produces  no  good  fruit 
whatever,  but  only  thorns  and  briars ;  there 
wicked  spirits  dwell  on  account  of  their 
pride ;  they  wished  to  be  the  first,  but  they 
became  last — they  strove  to  exalt  their  throne 
above  the  stars  of  heaven,  but  they  were 
cast  down  to  the  lowest  hell.  And  here, 
also,  those  will  be  confined,  who,  having 
imitated  the  wickedness  of  those  bad  spirits, 
die  without  true  repentance.  Now,  all 
these  provinces  God  rules  by  His  power,  of 
whom  the  Psalmist  speaks,  "  All  things 
serve  Thee/'  This  vast  and  mighty  king 
dom  God  will  share  with  those  that  love 
Him. 

Wherefore,  Christian  soul,  rejoice,  and 
be  not  confined  within  the  narrow  limits  of 
things  present.  Why  dost  thou  labour  and 
toil  so  much,  merely  to  gain  a  small  part  of 


4  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

this  world,  whilst,  if  thou  wish,  thou  canst 
possess  the  whole?     Truly,  if  men  would 
seriously  aspire  after  this  kingdom,  if  they 
would  attentively  meditate  upon  it,  they 
would  blush  to  wage  war  for  such  narrow 
portions  of  the  earth.     0  man !  God  offers 
thee  the  possession  of  His  immense  and 
eternal  kingdom,,  whilst  thou  fightest  for 
one  small  city,  wherein  many  crimes  are 
committed,    and   other  innumerable   sins, 
by    which    the    King  of  Kings   is  justly 
provoked   to    anger.     Where  is   thy   pru 
dence?    where  thy  judgment?     But  1  do 
not  speak  in  this  manner  as  if  I  supposed, 
that   it   was   unlawful   for    Christians    to 
enter   into   war   for  the   defence   of  their 
cities.     I  know  that  just  wars  are  allowed, 
not  only  by  the  holy  Fathers,  (especially 
St.  Austin  and  St.  Thomas,  the  prince  of 
scholastic  writers,)  but  also  by  the  precur 
sor  of  pur  Lord — "greater  than  whom  hath 
not  arisen  amongst  those  born  of  woman/' 
Pie  said  to^the  soldiers^  not  that  they  should 
desert  their  service  as  being  unlawful,  but 
that,   being  content  with  their  pay,  they 
should  "  do  violence  to  no  man/5""     In  my 
"Controversies"  I  have  also  defended  just 
wars.     I  dp  not  therefore  speak  against  war 
simply  in  itself;  but  I  exhort  you  to  follow 
that  which  is  more  perfect,  and  often  more 
useful,  according  to  what  St.  Paul  says  to 
the  Corinthians  :  "Already  indeed  there  is 
plainly  a  fault  among  you,  that  you  have 

*  St.  Luke,  iii.  14. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.        5 

lawsuits  one  with  another.  Why  do  you 
not  rather  hate  wrong  ?  Why  do  you  not 
rather  suffer  yourselves  to  be  defrauded?" 
(1  Epist.  to  Corinthians  v.  7.)  And^St. 
James  adds  in  his  Epistle :  "  From  whence 
are  wars  and  contentions  among  you  ?  Are 
they  not  hence  from  your  concupiscence? 
You  covet,  and  have  not:  you  kill,  and 
envy,  and  cannot  obtain.  You  contend 
and  war,  and  have  not,  because  you  ask 
not."  (chap,  iv.)  Whoever  earnestly  aspires 
after  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  would  not 
easily  be  moved  to  war  by  the  loss  of  one 
city ;  but  he  would  seek  after  those  who 
could  settle  the  dispute  without  expense 
and  danger.  But  let  us  proceed  to  other 
points. 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE  INHABITANTS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 

THE  kingdom  of  heaven  is  called  a 
"  Habitation/'  because  it  contains  such  a 
multitude  of  different  inhabitants ;  no  palace 
or  city,  but  only  large  kingdoms  contain 
such  numbers.  There,  as  St.  Paul  tells  us 
in  his  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  are  many 
thousands  of  angels ;  there  also  are  "  the 
spirits  of  the  Just  made  perfect,"  to  whom 
belong  all  who  have  departed  in  the  Lord 
from  Abel,  even  to  the  last  good  man  that 
will  die  at  the  end  of  the  world.  But  not 


6  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

only  will  the  souls  of  the  Just  be  there,  but 
also  their  glorious  bodies,  each  of  which 
shall  shine  like  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of 
their  Father,  as  our  Lord  assures  us  in  St. 
Matthew.  With  regard  to  the  angels,  we 
who  live  on  this  earth  scarcely  know  any 
thing  of  them  but  their  names. *  We  learn 
from  the  vision  of  the  prophet  Isaias, 
(chap,  vi.)  that  some  are  called  Seraphim, 
and  others  Cherubim  :f  some  Thrones, 
others  Dominations :  some  Principalities, 
others  Powers,  as  St.  Paul  mentions  in  his 
Epistle  to  the  Colossians:  (chap.  i.  ver.  16.) 
in  his  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  he  also 
speaks  of  "Virtues,"  and  in  another  place, 
Archangels  are  spoken  of:  Angels  are 
finally  ranked  amongst  them,  of  whom  there 
is  so  frequent  mention  throughout  the 
Holy  Scriptures.  From  these  nine  names, 
it  is  the  unanimous  opinion  of  learned 
doctors,  that  there  are  nine  "  orders"  of 
angels,  each  of  which  contains  many  thou 
sands,  according  to  the  prophet  Daniel: 
"  Thousands  of  thousands  ministered  to 
him,  and  ten  thousand  times  a  hundred 
thousand  stood  before  him."  (chap.  vii.  10.) 
And  Job  asks :  "  Is  there  any  numbering 
of  his  soldiers?" 

But  although  all  the  angels  are  doubtless 
most  happy,  and  wonderfully  resplendent 

*  See  Alban  Butler,  Sept.  29th,  on  St.  Michael, 
f  These  are  two  pure  Hebrew  words;  the  first  means  "  to 
burn,  or  burn  up;"  the  second,  "  to  be  like  the  Most  High;'* 
(Vide  Geseiiius'  Diet,  in  Voce,  translated  by  Leo.) 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.        / 

with  the  glory  of  every  divine  gift,  yet  those 
are  called  "  Seraphim"  who  burn  with  the 
flames  of  love :  the  others  "  Cherubim"  who 
shine  with  the  splendour  of  knowledge  : 
those  are  named  "  Thrones"  who  enjoy  an 
inexpressible  tranquillity  in  the  divine  con 
templation:  those  "Dominations"  who  rule 
this  lower  world,  as  the  ministers  of  a 
mighty  commander:  others  "Powers," 
because  they  do  signs  and  wonders  by  the 
command  of  their  Almighty  Lord  :  others 
"  Principalities,"  because  they  have  power 
over  the  kings  and  princes  of  the  world : 
some  again  are  named  "Archangels,"  be 
cause  they  assist  the  prelates  of  the  Church: 
and  many,  in  fine,  are  called  "  Angels," 
since  they  are  the  guardians  and  protectors 
of  all  that  live  upon  the  earth.  But  these 
are  not  the  only  significations  of  the  names 
of  the  angels:""  they  are  also  images  or 
representations  of  the  greatness  of  God: 
thus  the  seraphim,  by  their  burning  love, 
represent  as  it  were  in  a  glass,  the  infinite 
love  of  God  which  alone  induced  Him  to 
create  the  angels,  man,  and  all  other  crea 
tures,  whom  He  still  preserves.  The  che 
rubim  in  like  manner  represent  the  infinite 
wisdom  of  God,  which  hath  regulated  all 
things  by  number,  weight,  and  measure. 
The  thrones  also,  by  a  perfect  image  as  it 
were,  show  us  that  profound  "  rest"  which 
God  enjoys  on  His  throne  ;  who,  whilst  all 

*  See  the  work  on  the  "  Heavenly  Hierarchy,"  ascribed 
by  some  to  St.  Diouysius  the  Areopagite. 


8  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,,  OR  THE 

tilings  are  in  motion,  remains  unalterable, 
tranquilly  ruling  and  directing  events.  The 
dominations  too  tell  us,  that  it  is  God  who 
alone  truly  rules  all  things,  because   He 
alone  can  either  preserve   them,  or  anni 
hilate  them.     The  virtues  convince  us,  that 
itjs    God   "who   alone    doth    wonderful 
things/'  and  who  hath  reserved  to  himself 
alone  to  renew  signs,  and  to  multiply  won 
ders.     The  powers  signify  by  their  name, 
that   God  alone    is    absolutely  and  truly 
powerful,  to  whom  nothing  is  impossible, 
because  in  Him  alone  true  power  resides. 
The  principalities  signify,  that  God  is  the 
Prince   over  the  kings  of  the  earth,  the 
King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.  The  arch 
angels  signify,  that  God  is  the  true  High 
Priest  of  all  the  churches.     The   angels, 
that  God  is  the  true  Father  of  orphans ; 
and  that  although  He  hath  given  His  angels 
to  be  our  guardians,  He  himself  is  present 
with  each  one,  to  guard  and  protect  him. 
The  prophet  who  has  said, '"  He  hath  given 
his  angels  charge  over  thee,  to  keep  thee  in 
all  thy  ways,"   introduces  the   Almighty 
thus  speaking :  "I  am  with  him  in  tribu 
lation,  I  will  deliver  him,  and  I  will  glorify 
him."  (Psalm  xc.)   And  our  Lord,  who  had 
said,  "  their  angels  in  heaven  always  see 
the  face  of  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven/* 
has  also  added:  "Are  not  two   sparrows 
sold  for  a  farthing ;  and  not  one  of  them 
shall  fall  upon  the  ground  without  your 
Father.     But  the  very  hairs  of  your  head 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.       9 

are  all  numbered.  Fear  not  therefore; 
better  are  you  than  many  sparrows."  (St. 
Matthew,  chap.  x.  29,  &c.)  Such  are  the 
few  points  that  we  know  about  the  angels, 
concerning  whom  you  may  read  St.  Ber 
nard  on  "  Consideration/'"'  from  whom  I 
have  taken  these  details. 

With  these  nine  orders  of  the  angels, 
correspond  on  the  other  hand  that  multi 
tude  of  holy  men,  which  no  one  can  num 
ber,  as  we  learn  from  the  Apocalypse.  This 
multitude  contains  also  nine  "orders ;"  for 
some  are  patriarchs,  some  prophets,  some 
apostles,  some  martyrs  and  confessors; 
whilst  others  are  pastors,  doctors,  priests, 
Levites,  monks,  and  hermits,  holy  women, 
virgins,  widows,  or  married  people.  Where 
fore,  my  soul,  I  beseech  thee  to  consider 
what  great  happiness  it  will  be,  to  be 
united  with  such  great  saints !  St.  Jerome 
mentions,!  that  he  visited  many  provinces, 
and  many  people,  and  crossed  many  seas, 
that  he  might  see  and  hear  those  celebrated 
men,  whom  he  had  known  by  their  works. 
Queen  of  Saba  came  from  the  ends  of  the 
earth  to  hear  the  wisdom  of  Solomon  ;  and 
to  St.  Antony,  the  hermit,  men  hastened 
from  all  parts,  being  moved  by  the  fame  of 
his  sanctity:  even  Emperors  themselves 
courted  his  friendship.  But  what  will  it 
be  to  behold  hereafter  so  many  angels,  so 

*  Lib.  v. 
f  Epistola  ad  Paulinum. 


1.0  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

many  just  men,  to  be  united  with  them  in 
the  closest  friendship,  and  to  be  made  par 
takers  of  their  happiness?  Were  we  to 
behold,  in  this  our  exile,  one  angel  arrayed 
in  all  his  beauty,  who  would  not  eagerly 
wish  to  meet  him  ?  What  therefore  must  it 
be,  to  behold  all  the  angels  in  one  place  ? 
And  if  only  one  of  the  prophets,  apostles, 
or  doctors  of  the  Church  were  to  descend 
from  heaven,  with  what  curiosity  and  atten 
tion  would  he  be  heard !  Now  in  the 
kingdom  of  God,  we  shall  be  allowed  to 
behold — not  one  only,  but  all  the  prophets, 
apostles,  and  doctors,  with  whom  we  shall 
continually  hold  sweet  converse.  How 
greatly  does  the  sun  rejoice  the  whole  earth: 
but  what  will  be  the  glory  from  innumerable 
Suns  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  all  animate, 
intelligent,  and  exulting  in  their  joy  !  This 
union  with  the  angels  and  men,  all  of  whom 
are  most  wise  and  excellent,  appears  to  me 
so  delightful,  that  I  consider  it  alone  will 
be  a  great  happiness,  and  on  this  account, 
would  willingly  be  deprived  of  all  the  plea 
sures  of  this  life. 


CHAPTER  III. 

THE  MONARCHICAL  FORM  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 

THE  third  reason  why  it  is  called  a 
"  Kingdom"  is,  because  there  alone  is  to  be 
found  a  perfect  form  of  government.  There 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     11 

is  this  difference  between  a  kingdom  and  a 
republic  :  in  the  former  the  supreme  power 
is  possessed  by  one  person :  in  the  latter  it 
is  divided  amongst  many.  Bat  in  the 
kingdoms  of  this  world,  supreme  power  in 
the  true  and  proper  sense  of  the  word, 
cannot  exist.  For  although  a  king,  without 
the  advice  or  consent  of  others,  can  com 
mand  something  to  be  done ;  yet  it  cannot 
be  accomplished  without  the  approbation  of 
his  subjects.  It  even  often  happens  that 
he  cannot  give  a  command,  or  at  least  will 
not  dare  to  do  so,  should  all  his  subjects  be 
against  him.  How  many  great  kings  and 
emperors  have  there  been,  who  were  either 
deserted  by  their  army,  or  put  to  death  ! 
History  is  full  of  such  examples.  Supreme 
power  therefore  is  useless  to  the  kings  of 
this  world,  because  they  can  never  execute 
any  thing,  unless  their  subjects  approve  of 
it.  But  the  power  of  God,  who  is  truly 
and  essentially  King  of  kings,  dependeth 
upon  no  one,  but  His  own  will :  and  since 
He  is  omnipotent,  He  can  do  all  things ; 
neither  doth  He  stand  in  need  of  soldiers, 
arms,  or  any  external  aid.  And  when  He 
makes  use  of  the  ministration  of  angels, 
men,  or  even  inanimate  things,  He  does  so 
because  He  wills,  not  because  he  requires 
them.  For  He  who  without  any  assistance 
made  heaven  and  earth,  and  all  things 
therein,  by  His  only  word,  and  who  pre 
serves  them  by  His  will,  can  also  govern 
them  by  His  power  alone.  But  God  reigus 


12          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

in  the  truest  sense  of  the  word,  not  only 
because  He  possesses  supreme  power ;  but 
also  because  He  alone  knows  how  to  govern: 
He  stands  not  in  need  of  any  council,  or 
ministers  of  state.  ''Who  hath  known 
the  mind  of  the  Lord?  or  who  hath  been 
his  counsellor?"  says  St.  Paul:  and  be 
fore  him  the  prophet  ^  Isaias  :  '  Who 
hath  forwarded  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord? 
or  who  hath  been  his  counsellor,  and 
hath  taught  him?  With  ^  whom  hath  he 
consulted,  and  who  hath  instructed  him, 
and  taught  him  the  path  of  justice,  and 
taught  him  knowledge,  and  showed  him 
the  way  of  understanding?"  (chap.  xl.  13, 
14;)  Wherefore  a  monarchy,  which  is  the 
best  form  of  government,  is  to  be  found  in 
God  alone  in  its  true  and  perfect  nature. 
He  is  not  only  "  terrible  over  all  the  king? 
of  the  earth,"  as  it  is  said  in  the  Psalms; 
but  He  is  also  "  King  above  all  gods," 
as  it  is  expressed  in  another  place.  Others 
are  false  gods — or  rather  devils,  according 
the  prophet :  "  All  the  gods  of  the  Gentiles 
are  devils."  (Psalm  xcv.)  Some  are  gods 
by  participation,  as  the  kings  of  the  earth 
and  the  angels  of  heaven,  thus — "  I  have 
said :  You  are  gods  and  all  of  you  the  sons 
of  the  Most  High."  (Psalm  Ixxxi.)  But 
all  these  gods  are  under  the  power  of  that 
God,  who  reigneth  in  heaven :  He  alone 
then  is  truly  a  great  king.  This  Nabu- 
chodonosor,  king  of  Babylon,  acknow 
ledged  in  these  words,  after  he  had  suffered 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     13 

a  most  severe  punishment  for  his  pride: 
"  Now  at  the  end  of  the  days,  I  Nab  itch  o- 
donosor  lifted  up  my  eyes  to  heaven,  and 
my  sense  was  restored  to  me :  and  I 
blessed  the  most  High,  and  I  praised  and 

florified  Him  that  liveth  for  ever :  for  his 
ingdorn  is  an  everlasting  power,  and  his 
kingdom  is  to  all  generations.  And  all  the 
inhabitants  of  the  earth  are  reputed  as 
nothing  before  him :  for  He  doth  according 
to  his  will,  as  well  with  the  powers  of 
heaven,  as  among  the  inhabitants  of  the 
earth :  and  there  is  none  that  can  resist  His 
hand,  and  say  to  him:  Why  hast  thou 
done  it?"  (Daniel,  chap.  iv.  31,  &c.)  Thus 
he  spoke,  giving  us  all  an  example  to 
humble  ourselves  under  the  powerful  hand 
of  God,  as  St.  Peter  admonishes  us :  and 
to  be  more  delighted  with  serving  the  King 
of  kings,  that  we  may  experience  His  good 
ness,  than  proudly  to  resist  His  will,  lest  we 
be  forced  to  feel  the  weight  of  His  avenging 
hand. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

ALL  THE  BLESSED  ARE  KINGS. 

THE  fourth  reason  (and  a  very  powerful 
one)  why  heaven  is  called  a  kingdom  is 
because  all  the  Blessed  in  heaven  are  kings, 
and  all  the  conditions  of  being  such  most 
aptly  apply  to  them.  For  although  the  saints 


14          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

in  heaven  serve  God,  as  it  is  mentioned  in  the 
Apocalypse,  yet  at  the  same  time  they  reign 
also ;  for  in  the  same  book,  and  in  the 
same  chapter,  where  it  is  said,  "  His  ser 
vants  shall  serve  Him/'  a  little  lower  we 
are  told  that  "  They  shall  reign  for  ever 
and  ever."  (chap,  xxii.)  But  all  the  Bless 
ed  will  not  only  serve  and  reign  at  the 
same  time ;  they  will  also  be  called  servants 
and  sons.  Thus  God  speaks  in  the  Apoca 
lypse  :  "  He  that  shall  overcome  shall  pos 
sess  these  things,  and  I  will  be  his  God, 
and  he  shall  be  my  son."  (chap.  xxi.  7.) 
Wherefore,  as  they  can  be  both  servants 
and  sons,  so  also  they  can  be  both  servants 
and  kings ;  they  are  servants  because  they 
were  created  by  God,  to  whom  they  owe 
obedience,  and  from  whom  they  receive 
their  being,  and  all  things  else ;  and 
David  makes  no  exception  when  he  says: 
"All  creatures  serve  him."  They  are  also 
the  sons  of  God,  since  they  were  born  of 
God  by  water  and  the  Holy  Spirit ;  they 
are  kings,  too,  because  they  have  received 
the  dignity  from  the  King  of  kings,  who  is 
called  by  this  name  in  the  Apocalypse, 
"  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords."  (chap. 
xix.  16.) 

t  But  it  may  perhaps  be  said,  that  it  is  not 
difficult  for  one  to  be  both  a  king  of  the  earth, 
and  a  servant  of  God,  for  thus  the  Psalmist 
speaks :  ' '  And  now,  0  ye  kings,  under 
stand,  receive  instruction,  you  that  judge 
the  earth.  Serve  ye  the  Lord  with  fear :  and 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     15 

rejoice  unto  him  with  trembling."  (Ps.  ii.) 
But  to  be  a  king  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
and  a  servant  of  the  King  of  heaven — who 
can  understand  or  comprehend  this  ?  And 
yet  such  is  the  truth,  which  faith  believes 
and  understands.  The  just,  therefore,  will 
also  be  kings  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
because  they  will  be  made  partakers  of  the 
royal  dignity,  and  power,  and  riches,  &c., 
of  that  kingdom.  This  is  what  the  Holy 
Spirit  clearly  teaches  us,  especially  in 
three  passages  from  the  Scripture ;  the 
first  of  which  occurs  ^in  St.  Matthew: 
"  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs 
is  the  kingdom  of  heaven/'  (chap,  v.)  In 
another  part:  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my 
Father,  possess  you  the  kingdom  prepared 
for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world." 
(St.  Matthew,  chap,  xxv.)  The  third  pas 
sage  is  from  the  Apocalypse  :  '  To  him 
that  shall  overcome  I  will  give  to  sit  with 
me  on  my  throne  :  as  I  also  have  overcome, 
and  have  sat  down  with  my  Father  in  His 
throne."  (chap,  iii.)  What  can  be  clearer 
than  these  words  ?  The  kingdom  of  heaven 
is  promised  —  the  possession  of  it  will  be 
given  to  us  at  the  last  day — we  shall  have 
a  seat  on  the  royal  throne  of  the  Son  of 
God,  and  of  His  Father,  our  eternal  King: 
what  is  this  but  a  participation  of  the  same 
kingdom,  which  God  possesses  from  eter 
nity?  St.  Paul  also  adds  his  testimony : 
"If  we  suffer,  we  shall  reign  with  Him;" 
and  St.  John  likewise,  in  the  beginning  of 


16          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OH  THE 

the  Apocalypse:  "I,  John,  your  brother, 
and  your  partner  in  tribulation,  and  in  the 
kingdom/'  &c.  And  St.  James,  in  his 
Epistle :  "  Hath  not  God  chosen  the  poor 
in  this  world,  rich  in  faith,  and  heirs  of  the 
kingdom  which  God  hath  promised  to  them 
that  love  Him?"  (chap.  ii.  5.)  But  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  not  lessened,  because 
it  is  divided  amongst  innumerable  angels 
and  men.  This  kingdom  is  not  like  the 
kingdoms  of  the  world,  which  cannot  well 
be  divided ;  but  should  they  be  distributed 
into  parts,  the  division  weakens  them,  and 
at  length  they  are  destroyed.  But  not  so 
with  the  kingdom  above,  which  is  perfectly 
possessed  by  all,  and  wholly  by  each  one, 
just  as  the  sun  is  seen  by  all  and  each  of 
the  inhabitants  of  earth,  whom  it  equally 
enlightens  and  vivifies.  But  this  point  will 
be  more  easily  understood  when  we  explain 
the  good  things  that  are  to  be  found  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  We  must  now  dwell 
on  the  conditions  or  qualities  which  are  re 
quired  in  kings,  so  that  we  may  be  con 
vinced  the  saints  and  blessed  spirits  can 
justly  be  called  the  Kings  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven. 

There  are  two  qualities  especially  neces 
sary  for  kings — -wisdom  and  justice.  But 
with  wisdom  the  Scripture  joins  prudence 
and  counsel,  and  all  other  things  that  relate 
to  intelligence ;  with  justice  are  united 
mercy,  clemency,  and  other  virtues  that 
adorn  and  perfect  the  will.  Wisdom.,  there- 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     17 

fore,  is  required  that  the  king  may  have 
knowledge ;  justice,  that  he  may  govern  his 
subjects  with  equity.  On  this  account, 
Solomon,  in  the  beginning  of  his  reign, 
being  admonished  by  God  to  ask  for  what 
he  wished,  asked  for  wisdom,  which  is  the 
chief  of  all  the  virtues  required  in  kings. 
His  petition  was  acceptable  before  God,  as 
we  read  in  the  third  Book  of  Kings,  and 
therefore  he  obtained  what  he  prayed  for. 
Would  that  he  had  asked  for  justice  also  : 
perhaps  he  would  not  then  have  fallen  into 
so  many  crimes.  But  more  justly  does 
David  speak  in  that  psalm,  where  he  prays 
for  blessings  on  Solomon  his  son :  "  Give 
to  the  king  thy  judgment,  0  God ;  and  to 
the  king's  son  thy  justice."  (Psalm  Ixxi.) 
From  these  words  it  appears  that  he  fore 
saw  Solomon  would  ask  for  wisdom,  and 
therefore  David  prayed  that  "justice  and 
judgment"  might  be  given  to  him,  which 
without  wisdom  cannot  exist,  although  wis 
dom,  though  but  imperfectly,  may  exist 
without  justice.  The  Book  of  Wisdom, 
which  was  written  for  the  instruction  of 
kings,  thus  speaks :  "  Love  justice,  you 
that  are  judges  of  the  earth."  (chap,  i.)  It 
commences  from  "justice,"  because  it  is 
not  only  in  itself  necessary  for  kings,  but 
also  because  it  disposes  us  to  receive  wis 
dom.  Thus,  a  little  lower,  it  adds :  "  For 
wisdom  will  not  enter  into  a  malicious  soul, 
nor  dwell  in  a  body  subject  to  sin."  In 
fine,  Jeremias,  foretelling  the  virtues  of 

At 


18          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

Christ,  the  eternal  King  says :  "  Behold, 
the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  and  I  will 
raise  up  to  David  a  just  branch:  and  a 
king  shall  reign  and  be  wise,  and  shall 
execute  judgment  and  justice  in  the  earth/' 
(chap,  xxiii.  5.)  Truly,  therefore,  are  "wis 
dom  and  justice  required  in  kings." 

Now  every  one  must  acknowledge,  that 
all  the  blessed  in  heaven,  though  they  may 
have  been  whilst  on  earth  simple  and  igno 
rant,  are  now  possessed  of  the  deepest  wis 
dom,  and  so  eminently  endowed  with  the 
virtue  of  justice,  that  they  might  justly 
become  kings  of  any  kingdom.  For  all 
the  blessed  behold  the  very  essence  of  God 
Himself,  which  is  the  "  first  cause"  of  all 
things ;  and  thereby,  from  this  fountain  of 
uncreated  wisdom,  they  drink  in  such  wis 
dom  as  neither  Solomon  nor  any  other 
mortal  possessed,  except  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who,  even  during  the  time  of  His 
mortal  life,  saw  God,  for  in  Him  "were  hid 
all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  know 
ledge.  "  But,  besides  the  wisdom  which 
the  blessed  possess,  there  is  also  given 
to  them  a  full  measure  of  justice,  so  that 
they  can  never  sin,  nor  even  wish  to  sin ; 
thus  St.  Augustin  speaks:*  'The  first 
liberty  of  the  Will  was,  to  be  able  not  to 
commit  sin,  but  the  last  will  be  much 
greater,  not  to  be  able  to  sin."  But  he 
who  cannot  commit  sin,  cannot  be  unjust ; 
and  since  perfect  charity  is  the  same  as 

*  Liber  de  Correptione  et  Gratia,  cap.  12. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     19 

perfect  justice,  as  St.  Augustine  asserts,* 
he  who  loves  not  God  with  the  greatest  and 
most  perfect  love,  cannot  possess  the  perfect 
justice.  Now,  they  who  behold  God — that 
infinite  and  pure  Being — cannot  certainly 
turn  away  from  Him,  but  they  must  ever 
love  Him  with  the  most  ardent  love ;  whence 
it  follows,  that  all  the  saints  in  heaven  are 
perfectly  wise,  perfectly  just,  and  therefore 
most  proper  to  reign. 

Arise  then,  my  soul,  and  as  far  as  possi 
ble  consider,  what  happiness  it  will  be  to 
reign  with  God !  And  thus — -to  omit  other 
considerations — penetrate  heaven  .itself  on 
the  wings  of  contemplation,  and  behold 
that  glorious  throne  of  which  our  Saviour 
speaks:  "To  him  that  shall  overcome,  I 
will  give  to  sit  with  me  on  my  throne,  as  1 
also  have  overcome,  and  have  sat  down 
with  my  Father  in  His  throne/'  (Apoc. 
ohap.  iii,  21.)  How  great  will  the  glory  be 
for  that  just  soul  to  be  placed  with  such  an 
infinite  multitude  of  angels,  on  the  very 
throne  of  Christ  and  of  God !  And  by  His 
just  judgment  to  be  proclaimed  a  conqueror 
over  the  world,  and  the  rulers  thereof,  and 
all  invisible  powers !  And  how  will  this  soul 
exult  with  gladness,  when,  delivered  from 
every  toil  and  danger,  she  shall  behold  herself 
gloriously  triumphant  over  all  her  enemies  ! 
What  more  will  she  desire,  when  she  shall 
be  made  a  partaker  of  all  the  gifts  of  her 
Lord,  even  of  a  participation  of  His  throne 

*  Lib.  de  Natura  et  Gratia,  (cap.  ult.) 


20          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

and  Kingdom  ?  Oh,  how  zealously  do  they 
fight  on  earth,  and  with  what  patience  do 
they  bear  all  things  for  the  love  of  Christ, 
who,  with  a  lively  faith  and  a  sure  hope, 
contemplate  such  divine  honours  in  hea 
ven  ! 


CHAPTER  V. 

THE  HAPPINESS  ENJOYED  IN  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD. 

THE  fifth  reason,  it  appears  to  me,  why 
heaven  is  called  a  kingdom  is,  because  the 
good  things  enjoyed  by  the  blessed  seem 
something  like  those  possessed  by  the  kings 
of  the  earth ;  but  they  are  so  much  greater 
and  more  excellent  as  heaven  is  superior  to 
earth.  Wherefore,  the  kingdom  that  is 
prepared  for  the  blessed  is  not  simply  call 
ed  a  "'kingdom/'  but  the  "kingdom  of 
heaven,"  that  so  we  may  understand  the 
difference  between  the  pleasures  of  each — 
the  one  being  limited,  base,  mean,  and 
temporal ;  whilst  the  others  are  boundless, 
noble,  spiritual,  and  above  all,  eternal. 
The  goods  of  an  earthly  kingdom  are  con 
sidered  to  be,  power,  honour,  riches,  and 
pleasures.  An  earthly  monarch  can  com 
mand  his  subjects ;  and  if  they  obey  him 
not,  he  can  imprison  them,  banish  them, 
fine  them,  scourge  them,  or  put  them  to 
death.  Hence  kings  are  feared  by  the 
people,  for  they  appear,  as  it  were,  to  be 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     21 

gods.  Again,  kings  wish  to  be  honoured 
with  almost  a  supernatural  veneration,  by 
the  knee  being  bent  before  them,  as  if  in 
adoration ;  and  often  they  will  not  deign  to 
listen  to  us,  unless  we  bow  down  to  the 
earth ;  and  whenever  they  appear  in  public, 
they  wish  every  one  to  make  way  for  them. 
In  addition  to  this,  they  require  a  large 
"exchequer,"  full  of  gold  and  silver; 
neither  do  they  count  their  money  by  hun 
dreds  or  thousands  of  pounds,  but  by  ten 
hundred  thousands ;  and  with  reason,  since 
they  are  obliged  to  support,  not  ten  or 
twenty  servants,  but  to  lead  whole  armies 
forth  against  their  enemies.  Lastly,  they 
do  not  condescend  to  indulge  in  ordinary 
amusements,  but  only  in  those  which  they 
suppose  become  their  royal  majesty — such 
as  banquets,  hunting,  and  the  theatre — on 
which  they  squander  immense  sums  of 
money.  Now  these  are  the  chief  pleasures 
which  earthly  princes  possess ;  and  all  of 
them  are  short  and  fading,  since  they  begin 
with  life,  and  end  in  death ;  unless  it  should 
sometime  happen,  that  their  life  was  of 
longer  continuance  than  their  kingdom. 
But,  moreover,  these  pleasures  are  not  pure, 
because  power  is  joined  with  infirmity, 
honour  with  ignominy,  riches  with  poverty, 
and  joy  with  sorrow  and  affliction.  The 
power  of  a  prince  is  such,  that  the  people 
should  depend  on  the  will  of  their  prince  ; 
but  power  is  infirm,  because  the  prince  de 
pends  on  the  strength  and  resources  of  his 


22          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

people.    What  can  a  king  do  in  capturing1 
or  defending  a  city,  if  the  people  are  either 
unwilling  or  unable  to  assist  him  ?     But  a 
prince  depends  not  only  on  the  resources  of 
his  subjects,  but  also  on  walls,  fortifications, 
arms,  engines  of  war,  and  "money/'  which 
is  called  the  nerves  of  war.     Wherefore  the 
people   depend  on  the  pleasure    of   their 
prince,  and  serve  him  alone ;  the  prince,  on 
the  contrary,  depends  on  many  men  and 
many  things,  all  of  which  he  is  obliged  to 
employ.      In  fine,  a  king  can  imprison, 
banish,  or  put  to  death  his  subjects;  but  a 
king  also  (I  speak  de  facto,  not  de  jure)  can 
be  imprisoned,  banished,  &c.f  Julius  Csesar, 
Caius,  Nero,  Galba,  Yitellius,  Domitian, 
Commodus,  Heliogabalus,  &c.,  afford  ex 
amples  of  this  truth.     And  not  only  these 
who  were  so  wicked,  but  also  those  of  much 
milder    dispositions,    such    as    Alexander 
Mammssas,  Grordianus  the  younger,  Perti- 
nax,  Tacitus,  Numerianus,  Probus,  Gra- 
tian,  Valentinian  the  second,  not  to  mention 
St.  Edward  the  Confessor,  St.  Wenceslaus, 
king  of  Bohemia,  St.  Sigismund,  king  of 
Burgundy,  St.  Canute,  king  of  Denmark, 
&c.     Let  us  now  speak  of  their  honours. 
Whilst  kings  are  present  before  others,  they 
are  certainly  honoured  and  respected  ;  but 
when  absent,  they  are  often  ridiculed  and 
spoken  against :  even  when  present,  many 
praise  them  with  their  lips,  whilst  they  de 
spise  them  with  their  heart,  so  that,  if  the 
number  of  those  that  praise  them  and  those 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     23 

that  revile  them  could  be  counted,  the  lat 
ter  would  be  founi  more  numerous  than  the 
former.  Truly,  therefore,  the  ignominy  of 
kings  is  often  greater  than  their  glory,  since 
few  are  those  who  honour  their  dignity 
when  present,  but  many  accuse  them  when 
absent  of  avarice,  and  others  of  cruelty, 
others  of  luxury,  &c. 

^But  perhaps  the  riches  of  kings  are  pure, 
without  any  admixture  of  poverty.  No,^  for 
none  are  so  poor  as  kings ;  they  have  im 
mense  incomes  and  great  treasures,  but 
their  debts  and  expenses  are  much  greater. 
He  that  possesseth  little  is  not  so  poor  as 
one  who  desireth  many  things,  because  he 
stands  in  need  of  them.  And  is  it  not  a 
great  proof  of  poverty  when  kings  beg  a 
mite,  as  it  were,  from  the  poor  themselves, 
by  exacting  as  taxes  what  is  necessary  for 
their  support?  I  do  not  speak  thus  as  if  I 
wished  to  blame  the  exaction  of  tributes,  for 
I  know  it  is  just  they  should  be  paid  to 
kings,  according  to  what  St.  Paul  says  in  his 
Epistle  to  the  Romans :  "  Wherefore  be 
subject  not  only  for  wrath,  but  also  for 
conscience7  sake.  For  therefore,  also, 
you  pay  tribute.  For  they  are  the  minis 
ters  of  God,  serving  unto  this  purpose. 
Render  therefore  to  all  men  their  dues. 
Tribute  to  whom  tribute  is  due, ^  custom 
to  whom  custom/'  <fcc.  (chap,  xiii.)  But 
I  merely  wished  to  show  the  miserable  con 
dition  of  kings,  who,  although  they  abound 
in  riches,  are  yet  compelled  to  collect  a  part 


24  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

of  them  from  the  poor  and  destitute.  But 
what  shall  we  say  of  their  pleasures  ?  Kings 
have  certainly  gardens,  orchards,  sumptuous 
banquets,  hunting,  &c.,  and  whatever  else 
can  amuse  them;  but  they  also  have  the 
gout,  head-aches,  complaints  in  the  liver ; 
and  what  is  more  distressing,  the  most  pain 
ful  cares  of  the  mind,  which  deprive  them 
whole  nights  of  sleep,  together  with  suspi 
cions,  fears,  and  anguish.  If  the  doors  of 
their  chambers  creak  at  night,  they  suspect 
treachery ;  if  an  armed  multitude  have  been 
seen,  a  desertion  is  apprehended.  Thus, 
joy  is  mixed  with  sorrow,  and  rest  interrupt 
ed  by  care ;  this  is  the  reason  why  many 
have  resigned  their  crown,  that  they  might 
lead  a  private  life.  But  let  us  hear  how 
St.  John  Chrysostom,  in  one  of  his  Homi 
lies"""  to  the  people  of  Antioch,  speaks  of  the 
kings  of  his  time :  "  Look  not  at  the  dia 
dem,  but  at  the  multitude  of  cares — look 
not  at  the  purple,  but  at  the  soul,  blacker 
than  the  purple  itself.  The  crown  does  not 
so  much  circle  the  head,  as  cares  do  the 
soul.  Neither  consider  the  troops  of  atten 
dants,  but  the  multitude  of  troubles.  For 
no  private  house  can  be  found  so  full  of 
cares  as  a  palace :  every  day  deaths  are 
expected,  but  in  the  night  one  cannot  tell 
how  often  the  soul  is  terrified,  and  thinks  it 
is  about  to  depart.  And  all  this  in  time  of 
peace.  But  when  a  war  breaks  out,  what 

*  Horn.  66. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     25 

can  be  more  miserable  than  life  ?  How 
many  dangers  befal  friends  and  subjects!* 
The  royal  pavement  is  always  sprinkled 
with  the  blood  of  relations.  If  yon  wish  me 
to  relate  some  facts,  you  will  perhaps  ac 
knowledge  them.  I  will  tell  you  some  that 
happened  in  our  own  time.  One  king 
having  suspected  his  wife  of  adultery — • 
already  the  mother  of  many  kings,  bound 
her  naked,  and  delivered  her  to  the  beasts 
of  the  mountain.  What  a  life  do  you  sup 
pose  he  must  have  led?  He  would  not 
surely  have  taken  such  a  terrible  revenge, 
unless  he  had  been  consumed  by  some  dis 
ease.  This  same  person  murdered  his  own 
son  also,  but  being  seized,  he  destroyed 
himself.  After  this,  another  was  taken 
away  by  poison ;  and  his  son,  although  he 
had  done  no  injury,  was  deprived  of  his  sight 
for  fear  of  the  future  consequences.  Ano 
ther  (but  I  cannot  mention  his  name)  ended 
his  life  very  miserably ;  he  was  burned  to 
death  with  his  chariots  and  horses,  &c.  No 
one  can  express  the  sorrows  he  was  obliged 
to  endure,  when  he  came  to  the  throne. 
And  the  present  king  who  now  rules,  when 
he  was  crowned  with  the  diadem,  did  he 
not  begin  to  be  surrounded  with  toil,  dan 
ger,  sorrow,  and  treachery  ?  But  such  is 
not  the  state  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven."'* 
How  truly  this  great  saint  hath  said,  "Such 


*  Not  haying  the  passage  in  Greek  by  me,  I  cannot  say 
whether  this  translation  is  correct. 


26          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

is  not  the  state  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven/' 
•  we  shall  now  see. 

The  kings  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
who  all  live  in  happiness  with  God,  possess 
power  without  infirmity,  honour  without 
ignominy,  riches  without  poverty,  pleasure 
without  pain;  for  of  them  the  Psalmist 
speaks :  "  There  shall  no  evil  come  to  thee : 
nor  shall  the  scourge  come  near  thy  dwell 
ing/'  (Psalm  xc.)  And  in  the  Apocalypse: 
"  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their 
eyes;  and  death  shall  be  no  more,  nor 
mourning,  nor  crying,  nor  sorrow  shall  be 
any  more,  for  the  former  things  are  passed 
away."  (ch.  xxi.  4.)  Wherefore  exceeding 
great  is  the  power  of  these  heavenly  kings, 
without  the  least  admixture  of  infirmity. 
One  angel,  without  an  army,  without 
swords  and  spears,  instantly  slew  one  hun 
dred  and  eighty-five  thousand  Assyrians  ; 
neither  was  he  afraid  of  being  wounded  by 
any  of  the  soldiers.  St.  Gregory  relates 
in  his  "  Dialogues/'""  that  a  certain  holy 
man,  when  the  executor  with  uplifted  arm 
was  about  to  behead  him,  exclaimed,  "St. 
John,  save  me !"  and  immediately  the 
executioner  could  neither  move  nor  stir 
his  hand  in  anyway.  St.  John  therefore 
heard  the  prayer  of  his  client ;  and  with 
such  quickness  was  the  executioner  struck, 
that  the  stroke,  though  just  falling,  was 
prevented.  Such  then  is  the  power  of  the 

*  Lib.  iii.  cap.  36. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     27 

kings  of  heaven,  that  neither  the  distance 
of  place,  nor  the  situation  in  which  this  just 
but  defenceless  man  was  placed,  nor  the 
multitude  of  armed  enemies,  could  prevent 
St.  John  from  delivering  him  from  instant 
death.  Numerous  examples  of  the  like 
nature  could  be  mentioned. 

The  honour  these  heavenly  kings  possess 
is  so  great,  that  not  only  good  men,  but  the 
wicked  also,  and  even  devils,  are  forced  to 
respect  them.  Many  there  are  who  despised 
and  spurned  these  holy  men  whilst  they  were 
upon  earth ;  but  afterwards  they  honoured 
and  venerated  them  when  translated  to 
heaven,  especially  if  the  Church  by  a  public 
decree  numbered  them  among  the  saints  : 
and  even  the  demons  themselves,  who  were 
wont  to  harass  the  saints  with  temptations 
when  living  in  the  flesh;  and  even,  by  the 
permission  of  God,  to  beat  them  with  many 
stripes,  now  fear  their  relics  and  images 
since  they  reign  with  God.  What  shall  I 
say  of  the  riches  these  kings  enjoy?  "Their 
great  treasure  is,  to  want  nothing,  because 
God  is  all  in  all/'  He  is  not  rich  who  pos- 
sesseth  many  things  ;  but  he  who  desireth 
nothing,  because  he  standeth  in  need  of 
nothing :  the  soul  ought  to  be  rich,  but  not 
the  coffers ;  heaven  and  earth  and  all  things 
therein,  contribute  to  the  riches  of  the 
saints,  for  what  do  not  they  possess  who  are 
"heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ?" 
and  whom  the  Father  hath  appointed  "  heirs 
of  all  thinffs  ?" 


28 

.There  now  remain  but  the  pleasures 
which  the  blessed  enjoy  in  heaven :  these 
are  pure  and  sweet,  without  any  ingredient 
of  sorrow  or  affliction :  we  have  already 
heard  from  the  Apocalypse,  that  God  will 
wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes,  and 
that  sorrow  and  mourning  will  be  no  more. 
But  on  this  point  we  shall  dwell  more  at 
length,  when  we  speak  of  Paradise.  We 
have  now  seen,  that  the  good  things  which 
the  blessed  and  all  the  saints  will  enjoy  in 
heaven  together,  are  such,  that  they  can  in 
no  way  be  compared  with  the  pleasures  of 
earth ;  especially  since  the  latter  are  tem 
porary,  the  former  eternal. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

WHAT  IMPORTANCE  MEN  ATTACH  TO  EARTHLY  KINGDOMS, 
AND  WHAT  IMPORTANCE  OUGHT  TO  BE  ATTACHED  TO 
THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 

LET  us  now  consider  with  what  eager 
ness  men  seek  after  earthly  kingdoms; 
though  insignificant,  frail,  and  full  of  care 
and  trouble,  that  hereby  we  may  be  con 
vinced  with  what  ardour  our  heavenly 
Kingdom  ought  to  be  desired  and  sought 
after.  The  passion  for  dominion,  without 
doubt  far  exceeds  all  other  passions ;  for  a 
kingdom  is  not  one  individual  "good/'  but 
a  collection  of  all  those  pleasures  which  are 
so  much  prized  by  men.  These  are,  power, 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     29 

honour,  riches,  and  delights,  as  we  have 
already  seen ;  there  is  the  liberty  of  living 
just  as  we  please,  which  is  naturally  pleas 
ing — not  only  to  man,  but  also  to  beasts ; 
there  is  excellence,  and  a  kind  of  divinity 
as  it  were,  on  account  of  which  kings  have 
no  equals  in  their  government,  but  are  supe 
rior  to  all,  above  all,  and  are  reverenced  by 
all.  Hence  it  is,  that  when  kings  wish  to 
make  a  promise,  they  can  find  nothing 
greater  than  half  of  their  kingdom.  Thus 
Assuerus  addressed  Esther:  "What  wilt 
thou,  Esther?  What  is  thy  request?  If 
thou  should  even  ask  one  half  of  the  king 
dom,  it  shall  be  given  thee."  (Esther  v.  3.) 
And  Herod  said  to  Herodias:  "Whatso 
ever  thou  shalt  ask  I  will  give  it  thee, 
though  it  be  the  half  of  my  kingdom. " 
Hence  it  is,  that  to  possess  or  extend  king 
doms,  men  consider  it  lawful  to  throw  aside 
every  right;  nor  is  there  any  thing  so 
sacred  which  they  will  not  violate  for  the 
sake  of  reigning.  The  very  first  individual 
who  unjustly  waged  war  against  his  friends 
and  neighbours,  was  Ninus:  he  broke 
through  every  law,  just  and  unjust,  that  he 
might  enlarge  his  kingdom,  as  St.  Augus 
tine*  testifies.  Julius  Caesar  was  the  first 
to  oppress  his  country,  which  he  did  for  the 
sake  of  being  emperor.  Maximinus  the 
Thracian  slew  Alexander  by  his  soldiers, 
that  he  might  succeed  to  the  empire, 

*  De  Civitate  Dei,  Lib.  iv.  cap.  6. 


30          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

although  he  had  received  from  him  many 
and  great  benefits.  Philip  the  Arabian 
did  the  same  also  to  Gordian  the  emperor. 
But  the  lust  of  reigning  arms  man,  not 
only  against  neighbours  and  benefactors, 
but  also  against  brothers,  nephews,  and 
even  fathers.  Thus  Romulus  killed  his 
brother  Remus,  and  Caracalla  his  brother 
Geta.  Athalia  slew  all  the  children  of 
Ochozias  her  son,  who  was  king,^  that  so 
she  might  obtain  the  crown.  Thus  the 
desires  of  sovereignty  impels  not  only  men, 
but  also  females  to  commit  the  most  shock 
ing  crimes.  Sinochus,  a  Persian,  contrived 
to  murder  his  father  and  brother,  in  order 
that  he  alone  might  reign.  But  why  do  I 
mention  these  instances?  the  mother  of 
Nero,  when  the  astrologer  told  her  that 
her  son  would  be  emperor,  but  that 
she  would  be  destroyed  by  him,  is  re 
ported  to  have  exclaimed,  "  Let  him 
destroy  me,  provided  he  may  reign !" 
Wherefore,  this  ambitious  woman  consi 
dered  the  kingdom  to  be  of  such  impor 
tance  to  her  son,  that  she  preferred  it  to  her 
own  life.  But  this  thirst  for  ruling  not 
only  makes  injustice,  to  be  justice,  and 
arms  man  against  a  Brother,  nephew,  and 
parent,  but  it  also  violates  the  sacred  obli 
gation  of  an  oath,  (which  has  always  been 
considered  most  obligatory  by  every  nation, 
even  by  the  most  cruel  enemies,)  when  a 
throne  is  in  view.  If  we  are  to  give  credit 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     31 

to  Cicero,"x"  we  are  told  that  Julius  Csesar 
was  always  accustomed  to  repeat  these 
words  of  Euripides :  "  If  an  oath  is  to  be 
violated,  it  may  be  violated  for  the  sake  of 
reigning :  in  other  matters,  cultivate  piety." 
I  omit  innumerable  other  examples  which 
demonstrate  to  all  ages,  that  nothing  what 
ever  is  prized  more  by  men  than  a  king 
dom.  ;  and  yet,  not  only  do  kings  reign  but 
for  a  short  period,  but  also  every  kingdom 
will  quickly  be  utterly  destroyed ;  whilst 
the  kingdom  of  the  blessed  shall  alone 
remain  for  ever.  Hear  the  prophet  Daniel : 
"  But  in  the  days  of  those  kingdoms,  the 
God  of  heaven  will  set  up  a  kingdom  that 
shall  never  be  destroyed,  and  his  kingdom 
shall  not  be  delivered  up  to  another  people; 
and  it  shall  break  in  pieces,  and  shall  con 
sume  all  these  kingdoms,  and  itself  shall 
stand  for  ever."  (ch.  ii.  44.)  This  prophecy 
will  be  fulfilled  at  the  end  of  the  world ;  for 
then  not  only  all  great  monarchies,  but  also 
small  states,  cities,  and  all  the  temporal 
power  of  princes  will  vanish  away  ;  but  the 
kingdom  of  Christ  and  his  saints  will  be 
eternal,  according  to  the  words  of  St. 
Luke :  "  And  of  His  kingdom  there  is  no 
end," 

Now  if  an  earthly  kingdom,  which  passeth 
quickly  away,  and  which  is  obtained  but  by 
few,  and  full  of  many  sorrows,  be  so 
ardently  loved,  sought  after,  preferred  be- 

*  De  Officiis,  Lib.  iii. 


32  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

fore  every  thing  else,  and  acquired  only  by 
great  dangers  and  bloodshed :  why  do  so 
few  love  their  heavenly  kingdom,  and  so 
negligently  seek  after  it  ?  And  yet,  if  the 
Holy  Scriptures  are  to  be  believed,  we  are 
certain  that  this  kingdom  is  open  to  all 
men,  can  be  possessed  without  the  effusion 
of  blood,  and  is  without  any  comparison 
superior  to  all  earthly  kingdoms.  If  I 
should  say,  Despise  this  kingdom  that  you 
may  obtain  a  small  farm  or  a  vineyard,  you 
would  justly  be  astonished  and  laugh  at 
me :  but  when  I  say,  or  rather  when  God 
says,  Despise  this  vile  and  contemptible 
kingdom,  and  seek  that  which  is  noble  and 
great,  (which  you  may  obtain,  if  you  wish, 
by  the  grace  of  God  which  is  never  want 
ing,)  why  do  you  not  desire  it,  and  hasten 
to  obtain  it  ?  I  do  not  know  what  answer 
to  make,  except  that  the  glory  of  this 
earthly  kingdom  is  always  before  our  eyes, 
and  is  touched,  as  it  were,  with  our  hands ; 
whilst  our  heavenly  kingdom  can  neither 
be  seen,  nor  touched,  nor  even  conceived  by 
faith.  This,  indeed,  is  true ;  but  if  we 
attentively  consider  what  force  the  authen 
ticity,  truth,  and  inspiration  of  Scripture 
carry  with  them,  <uid  how  forcibly  and 
clearly  this  same  Scripture  speaks  on  this 
point,  which  is  confirmed  by  the  powerful 
testimony  of  many  ages,  not  only  by  mira 
cles  but  also  by  blood,  we  shall  certainly 
exclaim :  ' '  Thy  testimonies,  0  Lord,  are 
become  exceedingly  credible."  (Ps.  xcii.) 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      33 

The  obscurity  of  our  faith,  therefore,  is 
not  the  reason  why  we  are  not  inflamed 
with  a  desire  for  this  heavenly  kingdom. 
But  being  occupied  by  exterior  things,  and 
weighed  down  by  the  force  of  custom,  we 
have  no  time  to  think  and  consider  what  is 
expedient  for  us.  We  do  not  follow  the 
advice  of  our  Lord,  ' '  by  entering  into  our 
chamber/'  and  shutting  the  door  of  our 
heart ;  we  do  not  earnestly  beseech  God  to 
direct  us  in  so  important  an  affair.  But  if, 
throwing  aside  for  a  time  all  minor  cares, 
we  were  seriously  to  think  on  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  ;  how  easily  and  securely  it  can 
be  acquired.  And  what  an  ^immense  dif 
ference  there  is  between  things  temporal 
and  things  eternal — between  that  which  is 
most  insignificant  and  that  which  is  most 
excellent — between  what  is  of  very  little 
importance  and  what  is  of  the  utmost 
importance;  in  fine,  between  an  earthly 
kingdom  and  a  heavenly  kingdom.  Did 
we,  I  repeat,  consider  these  truths,  doubt 
less  we  should  have  such  a  contempt  for  all 
earthly  thrones,  crowns,  and  sceptres ;  and, 
on  the  other  hand,  such  an  ardour  for  the 
heavenly  things  would  rise  in  us,  that,  so 
far  from  being  difficult,  it  would  be  a  most 
easy  task  for  us  to  employ  all  our  strength 
in  seeking  and  acquiring  the  kingdom  of 
God,  for  which,  as  our  true  and  last  end, 
we  were  made  by  our  wise  Creator.* 

*  Father  Caraffa  was  accustomed  to  say,  that  if  men 
thoroughly  knew  the  truths  of  eternity,  and  compared  the 


34  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 


CHAPTER  VII. 

THE   FIRST   MEANS    OF    ATTAINING    TO    THE   KINGDOM 
OF    GOD. 

LET  us  now  consider  what  is  necessary  to 
be  done,  in  order  that  we  may  possess  this 
most  blessed  and  happy  kingdom.  But  we 
need  not  say  much  on  this  point,  since  the 
King  of  heaven  himself  came  upon  earth  to 
teach  us ;  and  thus,  as  our  Master  and 
Leader,  he  has  pointed  out  to  us  four  most 
excellent  and  secure  means.  The  first  is : 
"  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his 
justice,  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added 
unto  you/'  Our  end  is  the  kingdom  of 
God,  which  kingdom  will  be  given  to  us  if 
we  arrive  there  by  the  way  pointed  out  to  us 
by  our  Leader.  Now,  the  "  justice"  of  this 
kingdom  is  the  mark  at  which  we  ought  to 
aim,  if  we  wish  to  gain  the  reward.  For 
Cassian,  in  his  first  "  Colloquy,"  teaches 
the  end  is  one  thing  and  thejmark  another; 
the  mark  is  the  sign  to  which  the  arrows 
are  directed,  the  end  is  the  reward  which 
those  receive  who  reach  that  mark.  Now, 
the  mark  proposed  by  God  for  our  actions 
is  "justice,"  and  the  reward  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  But  the  justice  of  God  is  not 

goods  and  evils  of  this  life  with  those  of  the  next,  the  world 
would  become  a  desert,  because  there  would  be  no  one  that 
would  attend  to  the  affairs  of  this  life.  (See  the  "Spirit"  of 
St.  Liguori.) 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS       35 

the  justice  of  the  Scribes  and  the  Pharisees, 
which  consisted  merely  in  the  external  ob 
servance  of  the  law  ;  nor  is  it  the  justice  of 
the  philosophers,  which,  corrupted  by  sin, 
did  not  extend  beyond  the  light  of  reason. 
But  it  is  the  justice  of  the  Gospel  which 
teaches  us,  "to  love  God  with  our  whole 
heart,  with  our  whole  soul,  with  our  whole 
strength,  and  our  neighbour  (though  our 
enemy)  as  ourselves."  Of  this  end  St. 
Paul  speaks :  "  You  have  your  fruit  ^  unto 
sanctification,  and  the  end  life  everlasting." 
(Romans,  chap.  vi.  22.)  This  is  the  lesson, 
therefore,  which  our  Master  teaches  us, 
"  First  of  all  to  seek  the  kingdom  of  God 
and  His  justice:"  ^ that  is,  our  chief  con 
cern  and  only  desire  should  be  directed, 
not  towards  temporal  goods,  but  to  obtain 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  by  a  perfect  and 
most  diligent  observance  of  this  first  and 
greatest  commandment.  But  because  few 
do  this,  therefore  "  many  are  called,  but 
few  are  chosen ;"  for  many  live  in  such  a 
manner  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  but 
a  secondary  consideration  with  them,  and 
the  justice  of  God  an  indifferent  object,  as 
if  our  Lord  had  said,  "  Seek  first  the  king 
dom  of  this  ivorld  and  its  pleasures,  and 
the  kingdom  of  God  shall  be  added  unto 
you."  But  not  so  insignificant  is  the  king 
dom  of  God,  that  it  should  be  forced  or 
those  who  prefer  everything  else  to  its  pos 
session.  But  if  we  wish  to  learn  an  eas;y 
way  to  obtain  the  justice  of  God,  whict 


36  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OB  THE 

most  truly  and  certainly  leads  to  this  king 
dom,  let  us  hear   Christ,    our    Teacher: 
"  Blessed  are  they  that  hunger  and  thirst 
after  justice,  for  they  shall  have  their  nil. 
Is  it  then,  O  Lord,  so  easy  to  find  justice 
with  thee,  that  it  is  sufficient  only  to    hun 
ger  and  thirst"  after  it?      Truly  blessed 
would  all  the  poor  be,  if,  merely  by  being 
hungry  and  thirsty  after  money,  they  could 
be  so  filled  with  it  as  to  desire  nothing 
more.     But  one  is  quite  different  from  the 
other.     For  they  who  hunger  sad. thirst 
after  justice— that  is,  they  who  seek  justice 
as  anxiously  and  as  eagerly  as  those  who 
suffer  from  thirst  and  desire  water,  or  from 
hunger  and  desire  food— these  always  think 
of  jfistice,  they  aspire  after  it  and  what  is 
far  better,  they  ask  it  of  God  with  many 
and  unceasing  tears.     Such  petitions  Uod 
always  listens  to  with  joy  ;  and  He  so  falls 
them  with  the  riches  of  His  justice,  that, 
being  satiated  thereby,  they  produce   the 
words  and  the  works  of  justice.    But  money 
is  not  such  a  good  that  he  who  desires  it,  or 
asks  it  of  God,  is  immediately  heard ;  for 
many  abuse  their  riches,  but  justice  no  one 
can  abuse.     In  fine,  justice  is  like  wisdom, 
of  which  St.  James  speaks:  "  If  any  of  you 
want  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  who  giveth 
to  all  men  abundantly,  and  upbraideth  not: 
and  it  shall  be  given  him.       0  unspeak 
able  clemency  of  our  Lord,  who  more  easily 
and  willingly  grants  what  is  necessary  tor 
us,  than  we  ask  or  desire  it  from  Him !    It, 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     37 

therefore,  we  stand  in  need  of  ^  the  wisdom 
of  the  saints,  or  of  the  gifts  of  justice,  both 
of  which  are  necessary  for  us  to  obtain  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  let  us  ask  them  of  God 
from  our  heart,  seriously,  with  sighs  and 
tears,  and  we  shall  surely  obtain  them. 
God  giveth  to  all  that  ask  in  this  manner ; 
nor  doth  He  repel  any  one,  or  give^  cove 
tously  or  moderately,  but  bountifully  : 
neither  doth  He  rebuke  us,  as  if  He  were 
angry  that  we  besought  Him  so  often. 
What  can  we  say,  then  ?  Who  can  bring 
excuse  for  his  ignorance  or  infirmity  in  the 
day  of  judgment  ?  Seek  only  after  justice, 
and  ask  it  of  God,  and  thou  shalt  be  so  filled 
that  no  more  wilt  thou  desire  the  delights 
of  the  flesh,  nor  the  allurements  of  honours, 
or  of  any  other  earthly  good ;  but  thou  wilt 
live  in  this  world  so  justly,  soberly,  and 
piously,  as  to  arrive  in  the  next  at  an  eter 
nal  kingdom. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

THE    SECOND   MEANS    OP    ATTAINING    TUB   KINGDOM 
OF    GOD. 

ANOTHER  road,  which  our  Leader  has 
pointed  out  to  us  is  this :  "Blessed  are  the 
poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven."  Here  we  are  not  commanded 
to  keep  our  coffers  entirely  empty,  but  our 


38  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

heart  and  affections  free  from  the  desire  of 
external  things.  Our  Lord  offers  to  us 
immense  treasures,  but  He  will  not  give 
them,  unless  we  offer  Him  our  heart  com 
pletely  disengaged  from  creatures.  "  The 
desire  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evils/' 
(1  Tim.  vi.  10.)  In  Greek  it  is  called 
0*Xa/>cyv/tua — that  is,  the  love  of  money.  But 
the  root  of  all  good  is  charity,  and  these 
two  can  never  remain  together.  Where 
fore,  unless  we  truly  and  perfectly  become 
"  poor  in  spirit,"  so  that  we  are  neither 
affected  by  riches  nor  by  poverty,  and  unless 
we  readily  give  something  to  the  poor,  and 
do  not  convert  it  to  our  own  use,  except 
through  necessity,  we  cannot  obtain  the 
justice  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and,  conse 
quently,  we  cannot  enter  heaven.  This  is 
the  true^  way  that  leadeth  to  life  eternal ; 
upon  this  road  our  Saviour  Himself  was 
the  first  to  enter,  "Who  being  rich,  became 
poor  for  your  sakes,  that  through  His  po 
verty  you  might  be  rich."  (2  Epist.  to  Cor. 
chap.  viii.  9.)  And  although  He  kept  a 
purse,  yet  He  entrusted  it  to  Judas,  who 
He  knew  to  be  a  thief,  that  so  we  might 
comprehend  how  free  His  soul  was  from  the 
love  of  money.  "Upon  this  path  the  Apos 
tles  also  entered,  though  it  would  not^have 
been  difficult  for  them  to  have  enriched 
themselves,  since  they  were  renowned  for 
signs  and  wonders,  and  spoke  the  languages 
of  many  nations,  and  were  admired  by  tlv3 
whole  world  for  their  wisdom.  But  they 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     39 

who  had  once  spoke  the  words,  ' 'Behold  we 
have  left  all  things,  and  have  followed 
thee ;"  who  had  tasted  how  sweet  it  was  to 
be  free  from  the  love  of  money,  having  food 
and  wherewith  to  be  covered,  they  consi 
dered  virtue  and  the  justice  of  God  to  be 
their  great  gain.  On  this  road  also  walked, 
not  only  monks  and  hermits,  but  even  kings 
and  pontiffs  who  have  thus  arrived  at  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  St.  Lewis,  King  of 
France,  was  certainly  rich ;  but  because  he 
was  at  the  same  time  poor  in  spirit,  he 
used  common  garments,  fasted  frequently, 
was  liberal  to  the  poor,  and  severe  to  him 
self  alone :  he  did  not  spend  his  money  in 
banquets  and  pageants.  St.  Gregory  also, 
who  was  a  Pope,  possessed  many  and  large 
estates  belonging  to  the  Church ;  but  Be 
cause  he  likewise  was  "poor  in  spirit/' 
he  was  so  liberal  with  his  alms,  though 
parsimonious  in  his  own  regard,  that  he 
seemed  to  exceed  the  bounds  of  liberality 
towards  others,  and  of  neglect  ^  towards 
himself  and  his  friends.  But  this  is  the 
way  that  leadeth  to  life. 

St.  Paula,  a  Roman  lady,  whose  life  is 
written    by    St.    Jerome,""    was    amongst 

*  See  his  epistle  to  Eustocliium,  the  daughter  of  Paiila. 
It  is  perhaps  one  of  the  most  interesting  and  instructive 
amongst  his  letters.  He  thus  commences:  "  Si  cuncta  cor- 
poris  mei  membra  verterentur  in  linguas,  et  omnes  artus 
Eumand  voce  resonarent,  nihil  dignum  JSanctae  ac  venerabilis 
Paulae  virtutibus  dicerem."  His  account  of  her  leaving 
Toxotius  and  Ruffina  her  children,  and  how  they  endea 
voured  to  stay  her  departure,  is  most  affecting.  The 
description  of  her  death  and  burial  in  Jerusalem,  is  also 


40          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

women  as  poor  in  spirit,  as  she  was  rich 
in  wealth.  Though  of  most  noble  descent, 
she  spent  her  money  in  erecting  monaste 
ries,  and  supporting  the  poor  with  such  libe 
rality,  that  it  seemed  to  be  her  desire  to  be 
reduced  to  such  poverty,  as  to  compel  others 
of  their  charity,  to  defray  her  funeral 
expenses.  And  how  much  she  mortified 
her  own  body,  we  may  be  convinced  by  the 
fact,  that  she  abstained  from  flesh,  eggs, 
and  wine ;  for  a  linen  garment,  she  wore 
sackcloth;  she  slept  on  the  bare  ground, 
and  with  frequent  prayers  and  tears,  endea 
voured  to  wash  away  even  her  trifling  faults. 
St.  Hedwiges*  also,  Queen  of  Poland, 
though  rich  in  worldly  goods,  was  richer  by 
her  poverty  of  spirit,  being  content  with  only 
one  mean  garment,  which  she  wore  even  in 
the  depth  of  winter ;  she  fasted  daily,  Sun 
days  and  great  festivals  being  excepted; 
and  with  stripes,,  watchings,  and  all  kinds 
of  mortifications,  she  thus  subdued  her 
body.  From  these  circumstances  we  may 
learn  to  what  purposes  she  applied  her 
riches,  and  what  little  affection,  if  any  at 
all,  she  had  towards  them.  It  is  not  then 

truly  edifying.  He  ends  in  these  words:  "Vale,  O  Paula, 
et  cultoris  tui  ultimam  senectutem  orationibus  juva.  Fides 
et  opera  tua  Christo  te  sociant:  prteseiis  facilius  quod  pos- 
tulas,  impetrabis.  Exegi  monumentum  tuura  a^re  peren- 
nius,  quod  nulla  destruere  possit  yetustas.  Incidi  elogium 
Sepulchro  tuo,  quod  huic  Volumini  subdidi;  tit  quacunque 
npster  sermo  pervenit;  Te  laudataui,  Te  in  Bethelem  con- 
ditam  Lector  agnoscat." 

*  See  her  life  in  Surius. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     41 

wonderful,  that  this  woman  arrived  ^  so 
quickly  at  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  being 
so  poor  in  spirit,  and  so  free  from  all  other 
cares. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

THE    THIRD   MEANS    OF    ATTAINING    THE    KINGDOM 
OF    GOD. 

THE  third  way  pointed  out  by  our  Leader 
is  this :  "  Blessed  are  they  that  suffer  per 
secution  for  justice'  sake ;  for  theirs  is  the 
kingdom  of  heaven/'  (St.  Matthew,  ch.  v. 
10.)  Truly  admirable  is  the  doctrine  of 
Christ  our  teacher,  which  however  is  hiadon 
from  the  "wise"  of  this  world.  For  who 
would  have  believed,  unless  God  had  said 
it,  that  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  be  poor,  but 
rich  in  afflictions  ?  ^  And  yet  truly  hath  He 
spoken.  Nothing  is  more  calculated  to  ac 
quire  the  true  riches  which  merit  the  king 
dom  of  heaven,  than  a  mind  free  from  all 
affection  to  money,  and  at  the  same  time 
full  of  a  desire  to  suffer  for  Christ.  Hear 
our  Lord  in  St.  Luke :  "  Woe  to  you  that 
are  filled ;  woe  to  you  that  are  rich,  for  you 
have  your  consolation;  woe  to  you  that 
laugh?'  (chap,  vi.)  And  again  in  the  same 
place :  "  Blessed  are  ye  that  hunger  now,  for 
ye  shall  be  filled.  Blessed  are  ye  that  weep 
now,  for  ye  shall  laugh.  Blessed  shall  ye 


42  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

be  when  men  shall  hate  you,  and  when 
they  shall  separate  you,  and  shall  reproach 
you,  and  cast  out  your  name  as  evil,  for  the 
Son  of  man's  sake.  Be  glad  in  that  day 
and  rejoice ;  for  behold,  your  reward  is 
great  in  heaven/'  (verses  21,  22,  &c.)  Hear 
what  St.  James  says  of  riches  and  tribu 
lations:  "My  brethren,  count  it  all  joy 
when  you  shall  fall  into  divers  temptations; 
knowing  that  the  trying  of  your  faith 
worketh  patience ;  and  patience  hath  a  per 
fect  work."  (chap,  i.)  Here  he  does  not 
say:  Bear,  endure,  be  patient;  but,  Rejoice, 
yea,  "count  it  all  your  joy:"  that  is,  receive 
your  tribulation,  not  as  an  affliction,  but  as 
matter  for  great  joy.  On  the  other  hand, 
he  thus  speaks  of  riches  :  "  Go  to,  now,  ye 
rich  men,  weep  and  howl  in  your  miseries 
which  shall  come  upon  you:"  and  in  the 
preceding  chapter  he  adds :  "  Be  afflicted, 
and  mourn,  and  weep  :  let  your  laughter  be 
turned  into  mourning,  and  your  joy  into 
sorrow."  (ch.  iy.  9.) 

But  whence  is  it,  that  persecution  makes 
a  man  happy,  which  ought  rather  (one  would 
suppose)  make  him  miserable?  Much 
could  be  said  on  this  point :  but  I  will  make 
only  one  remark,  that  persecution  is  like  a 
furnace  of  burning  fire.  And  as  fire  pre 
pares  our  food,  clears  silver  of  its  dross,  and 
proves  gold;  so  also  does  persecution,  if 
patiently  endured,  prepare  sinners  for  re 
ceiving  grace  ;  it  purges  the  imperfect,  and 
proves  the  just,  and  thus  all  are  wonderfully 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     43 

benefited.  A  sinner  is  "raw  flesh"  as  it 
were,  which,  unless  it  be  properly  cooked,  is 
cast  away  as  not  fit  to  be  eaten  by  man. 
For  a  sinner  is  full  of  bad  humours — of  the 
concupiscence  of  the  flesh,  which  is  Luxury: 
of  the  concupiscence  of  the  eyes,  which  is 
Avarice :  and  of  pride,  which  is  Ambition. 
But  if  he  pass  through  the  furnace  of  perse 
cution,  he  is  "  cooked"  in  such  a  manner, 
as  to  be  fit  to  be  presented  at  the  table  of 
the  Lord.  When  persecution  or  tribulation 
comes,  then^we  forget  our  passions,  our 
avarice,  ambition,  &c. ;  and  we  begin  to  be 
entirely  different  men.  But  a  just  man, 
though  imperfect,  and  not  subject  to  enor 
mous  crimes,  may  yet  be  indulgent  to  his 
flesh,  a  lover  of  pleasure,  a  lover  of  gain, 
and  of  the  vanities  of  the  world.  He  is 
therefore  like  to  silver  full  of  much  dross. 
But  if  the  furnace  of  persecution  should 
overtake  him,  and  he  bear  it  with  patience, 
then  the  dross  will  gradually  be  separated 
from  the  silver ;  he  will  begin  to  be  recol 
lected,  to  meditate  on  heavenly  things,  to 
abstain  from  carnal  desires ;  in  fine,  to  live 
justly,  soberly,  and  piously  in  this  world, 
and  to  expect  that  blessed  hope,  and  the 
coming  of  the  glory  of  the  great  God. 
I^astly,  a  man  perfect  in  charity  is  gold ; 
but  he  has  to  be  proved  by  the  fire  of  per 
secution,  lest  others  (and  he  himself)  should 
suspect,  that  he  was  debased  gold,  not  pure 
gold ;  for  when  it  is  seen  that  he  patiently 
endures  the  fire  of  persecution,  not  only  is 


44          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

lie  acknowledged  by  others  to  be  what  he 
appears  to  be,  but  he  himself  also  acquires 
a  greater  hope,  and  a  more  secure  expecta 
tion  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  "  Tribula 
tion,"  saith  the  Apostle,  "worketh  patience; 
and  patience  trial;  and  trial  hope;  and 
hope  confoundeth  not."  (Epistle  to  the 
Romans,  chap.  v.  3,  &c.)  Thus  God 
daily  more  and  more^  exalts  his  friend  that 
is  proved  by  tribulation,  till  at  length  He 
brings  him  to  a  share  of  his  kingdom^  and 
happiness.  Behold  what  is  the  fruit  of 
patience  in  affliction  !  But  it  is  strange  to 
see  how  few  make  use  of  these  advantages, 
although  they  are  open  to  all.  Affliction 
is  everywhere  to  be  found,  everywhere  to 
be  met  with — at  home,  on  a  journey,  in  the 
forum,  in  the  temple,  for  in  all  places  the 
wicked  oppress  the  good.  Wherefore,  most 
true  are  the  words  of  the  Apostle:  "All 
that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  shall 
suffer  persecution."  But  we,  delicate  sol 
diers,  either  fly  from  this  proving  furnace, 
or  when  we  have  received  an  injury  we 
throw  it  back  on  our  adversary :  so  that  we 
not  only  refuse  to  suffer  persecution,  but 
we  even  cause  it.  And  those  are  to  be 
found — a  man's  enemies  of  his  own  house 
hold — that  applaud  him  who  retaliates  an 
injury,  (as  it  is  called,)  and  yet  such  people 
who  despise  the  precepts  of  Christ,  wish  to 
be  called  Christians  ! 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     45 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE   FOURTH   MEANS    OF   ATTAINING   THE    KINGDOM! 
OF    GOD. 

BUT  because  this  doctrine  is  very  diffi 
cult,  and  very  few  understand  it,  and  much 
less  wish  to  experience  it,  therefore  our 
Leader  hath  pointed  out  the  fourth  "way," 
and  this  very  narrow.  He  says :  "  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence,  and 
the  violent  alone  bear  it  away/'  (St.  Mat 
thew,  chap.  xi.  12.)  As  if  He  had  said: 
I^arn  aware  that  it  will  appear  a  paradox 
to  men,  that  those  should  be  happy  who 
are  poor,  and  those  miserable  who  are  rich ; 
on  the  contrary,  that  we  should  rejoice  in 
afflictions,  and  weep  in  prosperity  ;  neither 
was  I  ignorant,  that  few  are  they  who 
would  wish  to  lose  present  goods,  in  order 
to  acquire  future  ones ;  and  to  choose  pre 
sent  evils,  that  so  they  might  avoid  those 
to  come.  But  I  who  am  Truth,  must  speak 
the  truth;  therefore  I  now  add,  that  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  can  be  taken  only  by 
the  violent ;  therefore  have  I  said  in 
another  place :  "  How  hardly  shall  they 
that  have  riches  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  For  it  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  pass 
through  the  eye  of  a  needle,  than  for  a  rich 
man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 
And  again :  "  How  narrow  is  the  gate,  and 


46  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

straight  is  the  way  that  leadeth  to  life,  and 
few  there  are  that  find  it !"  And  in  another 
place  I  have  said,  that  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  like  unto  a  treasure  hidden  in  a 
field;  and  to  a  precious  "  pearl' '  which 
cannot  be  purchased  unless  we  sell  every 
thing;  hence  it  is  necessary  for  us  to  be 
deprived  of  every  thing  on  earth,  if  we  wish 
to  possess  in  heaven  this  heavenly  treasure 
and  precious  pearl.  In  St.  Luke  I  have 
likewise  plainly  assured  you :  "  Every  one 
of  you  that  doth  not  renounce  all  that  he  pos- 
sesseth,  cannot  be  my  disciple/'  (chap.  xiv. 
ver.  33.)  And  although  this  "renuncia 
tion"  is  to  be  understood  as  relating  to  the 
affection  of  the  mind  ;  yet  since  a  real  dis 
position  to  part  with  all  temporal  goods, 
should  the  honour  of  God  or  our  own  salva 
tion  require  it,  is  no  easy  matter,  and  which 
few  accomplish,  I  have  therefore  added 
other  similitudes  concerning  him  who 
wished  to  build  a  tower,  and  had  not 
wherewith  to  finish  it ;  and  of  a  king  who 
was  about  to  wage  war  against  another 
king,  and  had  not  sufficient  forces  to  engage 
with  him,  with  any  hope  of  victory.  Now 
if  the  erection  of  a  tower,  without  a  great 
sum  of  money,  and  a  war  against  a  power 
ful  king,  without  a  great  army,  be  difficult 
and  almost  impossible  things,  how  much 
more  difficult  will  it  be  to  accomplish  both 
of  these  ^at  the  same  time  ?  But  we  must 
accomplish  both,  if  we  wish  to  gain  heaven; 
for  a  tower  is  to  be  built  which  must  reach 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     47 

to  heaven ;  that  is,  good  works  are  to  be 
performed  which  will  merit  eternal  life  :  and 
at  the  same  time,  we  have  to  fight  against 
numerous  and  powerful  enemies,  viz.  im 
pure  spirits,  who  with  all  their  might  endea 
vour  to  hinder  the  building  of  the  tower. 
We  have  a  figure  of  this  conflict  ^  in  the 
children  of  Israel,  who,  when  they  wished  to 
rebuild  Jerusalem  that  had  been  destroyed 
by  the  Chaldeans,  were  obliged  with  incre 
dible   toil  and  anxiety,  to  build  with  one 
hand  and  to  fight  with  the  other,  on  account 
of  the  neighbouring  nations  that  attacked 
them.""     From  these  considerations  it  is 
manifest,  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  can 
not  be  obtained  without    great    toil   and 
labour,  by  those  who  are  wedded  to  earthly 
objects,  who  do  not  tame  the  concupiscence 
of  the  flesh,  nor  have  learned  to  fight  with 
their  invisible  enemies.  But  he  who  wishes 
seriously  to  apply,  by  the  grace  of  God,  to 
Christian  perfection ;  to  consider,  not  care 
lessly,  but  most  attentively,  the  words  of 
Christ ;  and  to  follow  His  example  and  that 
of  the  saints,  gradually  the  way  will  be 
opened    before     him ;     his    strength    will 
increase ;   his  enemies  diminish ;    and  by 
the  charity  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  his  yoke 
will  begin  to  appear  sweet  and  his  burden 
light ;  and  then  will  be  accomplished  the 

*  "  Of  them  that  built  on  the  wall  and  that  carried  bur 
dens,  and  that  laded;  with  one  of  his  hands  he  did  the  work, 
and  with  the  other  he  held  a  sword."  (2  Esdras,  chap. 
iv.  17.) 


48  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

words  of  Isaias :  "  They  that  hope  in  the 
Lord  shall  renew  their  strength,  they  shall 
take  wings  as  eagles,  they  shall  run^  and 
not  be  weary,  they  shall  walk  and  not  faint.'* 
(chap.  xl.  ver.  31.)  And  they  will  exclaim 
with  the  royal  Prophet :  "  I  have  run  the 
way  of  thy  commandments,  when  thou 
didst  enlarge  my  heart."  It  was  not  truly 
a  difficult  thing  for  St.  Antony  to  spend  so 
many  sleepless  nights ;  nay,  even  the  night 
appeared  too  short  through  the  sweetness 
he  enjoyed  from  the  divine  contemplation, 
for  he  complained  of  the  sun,  paying: 
<f  Why  dost  thou  hinder  me  by  rising  at 
this  timo,  and  withdrawing  me  from  the 
brightness  of  my  true  Light?"  Neither 
was  it  difficult  for  him  (as  well  as  many 
others  like  him)  to  prolong  their  fasting 
through  a  whole  week,  since  they  were 
refreshed  with  the  heavenly  bread  of  divine 
contemplation.  Neither  was  ^  it  painful  for 
St.  Austin,  to  be  deprived  of  those  carnal 
pleasures  to  which  he  had  been  addicted 
from  his  youth,  when  once  he  began  to 
taste  the  sweetness  of  divine  love,  and  the 
delight  of  inward  contemplation.  Where 
fore  no  one,  whoever  he  may  be,  ought  to 
despond ;  but  rather  to  hope  in  the  power 
of  the  Most  High,  who,  as  He  hath  made 
us  for  Himself,  will  also  draw  us  to  Him 
self  and  place  us  in  His  kingdom,  by  the 

*  Cassian,  (Colloquy  Sth,  chap.  31.) 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      49 

merits  of  His  Son,  by  whose  precious  blood 
we  have  been  redeemed. 

Wherefore,  Christian  soul,  thou  shouldst 
not  despond  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of 
the  way,  but  hope  in  the  Lord,  who  would 
not  have  invited  thee  to  seek  His  kingdom 
in  the  first  place,  unless  He  had  been  pre 
pared  to  aid  thee  by  His  most  powerful 
assistance.  Courageously  therefore  com 
mence  the  journey.  There  is  no  occasion 
here  for  deliberation.  If  the  labour  be 
great,  great  also  is  the  reward  ;  and  if  the 
numerous  forces  of  the  enemy  hinder  thee, 
greater  is  the  power  of  God  who  assists 
thee.  And  if  many  of  every  age  and  sex 
have  been  enabled  to  arrive  at  the  kingdom 
by  this  way,  why  mayest  not  thou  also 
obtain  the  same  ?  They  were  not  made  of 
stone  or  iron,  but  of  flesh ;  they  were  mor 
tal  and  frail,  and  therefore  they  could  do 
nothing  of  themselves,  but  only  by  the  Lord 
their  God.  Canst  not  thou  therefore, 
though  weak  and  infirm,  do  the  same  by 
the  Lord  thy  God?  (t  Cast  thyself  upon 
Him,"  says  St.  Austin,  "  fear  not ;  He  will 
not  withdraw  Himself,  that  thou  shouldst 
fall :  securely  cast  thyself  upon  Him ;  He 
will  receive  thee,  and  will  help  thee."* 
God  is  faithful,  He  cannot  deceive.  Two 
things  only  are  required  of  thee ;  one,  that 
thou  most  firmly  resolve  to  prefer  the  glory 
of  God  and  thy  eternal  salvation  before  all 

4 

*  Lib.  8.    Confess,  cap.  11. 


50  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

things  else ;  the  other,  that  thou  confide 
not  in  thy  own  strength,  or  in  thy  own  wis 
dom,  but  in  the  power  of  God  and  His 
infinite  love.  If  thou  wilt  comply  with  these 
two  conditions,  "  the  crooked  shall  become 
straight,  and  the  rough  ways  plain"  to  thee; 
and  thou  wilt  serve  the  Lord  with  joy  and 
exultation,  and  "  wilt  sing  in  the  ways  of 
the  Lord;  for  great  is  the  glory  of  the 
Lori" 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS       51 


THE 

ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS, 


BOOK  II. 


CHAPTER  I. 

ON  THE  BEAUTY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  GOD. 

"'GLORIOUS  things  are  said  of  thee,  O 
city  of  God:"  wherefore  I  have  desired  to 
behold  thy  glory,  meditating  upon  it  through 
a  glass  in  an  obscure  manner.  But  our 
first  consideration  is,  why  the  happiness  of 
the  saints,  which  in  the  Holy  Scripture  is 
called  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  is  also  called 
the  "  City  of  God."  This  appears  to  me 
to  be  the  reason ;  because  as  it  is  called 
a  kingdom  on  account  of  its  extent,  so  also 
it  ought  to  be  called  a  "  City,"  on  account 
of  its  beauty.  One  might  suppose,  when 
he  heard  of  a  vast  and  extensive  kingdom, 
that  there  are  in  it  many  deserts,  many 
wild  uncultivated  places,  and  mountains 
fit  only  for  the  habitation  of  beasts,  besides 
inaccessible  rocks,  forests,  and  precipices, 
&c.  But  since  all  these  are  far  removed 
from  the  happiness  of  the  saints,  the  Holy 


52          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

Spirit  therefore  teaches  us,  that  the  king 
dom  of  heaven  is  like  to  a  most  "beautiful 
city ;  and  although  it  is  of  a  boundless 
extent,  yet  the  whole  is  so  glorious  as  to 
appear  a  most  populous  and  opulent 
city.  In  large  cities  especially  are  to  be 
seen  beautiful  temples,  splendid  palaces, 
most  delightful  gardens,  noble  forums, 
fountains,  columns,  pyramids,  obelisks, 
theatres,  towers,  and  other  buildings  for 
the  use  of  the  public.  How  beautiful  would 
Italy  be,  if  the  barren  Apennines  were  re 
moved,  and  all  the  country  shone  like  Rome 
did  (not  as  it  appears  now)  under  Augustus 
Csesar !  From  being  of  brick,  he  made  it 
of  marble.  And  how  beautiful  would  Syria 
have  been  formerly,  if  all  parts  had  been 
like  Jerusalem — such  as  it  was  before  its 
destruction  by  the  Romans !  Josephus 
gives  such  a  description  of  it,  that  its  mag 
nificence  must  have  been  the  admiration  of 
the  whole  world  ff  of  it  the  Prophet  justly 
sings,  "  Glorious  things  are  said  of  thee,  O 
city  of  God;"  and  yet  it  had  not  then 
arrived  at  that  eminence  to  which  Herod 
the  Great  carried  it,  after  the  reigns  of 
David  and  Solomon.  How  beautiful  also 
would  Chaldsea,  and  all  Assyria  and  Meso 
potamia,  and  the  whole  East  have  been, 
had  these  been  enclosed  within  the  walls  of 
Babylon !  Pliny  and  Strabo  give  such 
descriptions  of  its  magnitude  and  beauty, 

*  Vide  Lib.  vi.  de  Bello  Judaico,  cap.  6. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     53 

that  they  seem  incredible :  hence  Babylon 
was  considered  one  of  the  seven  w  mders^ol 
the  world.  Now,  what  must  that  city 
above  be — the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  which 
embraceth  the  whole  kingdom  of  heaven? 
This  kingdom  so  far  excels  all  other  king 
doms  in  glory,  majesty,  and  extent,  that 
the  whole  appears  but  one  city,  most  beau 
tiful,  most  noble.  Truly,  then,  this  heavenly 
city  is  such,  that  no  one  can  seriously  think 
of  it  without  frequently  aspiring  after  it; 
and  no  one  can  desire  it  without  imme 
diately  leaving  all  things  to  possess  it, 
and  never  resting  till  he  find  it.  Hear  how 
Tobias,  exulting  in  spirit,  speaks  of  this 
city :  "  Thou  shalt  shine  with  a  glorious 
light,  and  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall 

worship  thee The  gates  of  Jerusalem 

shall  be  built  of  sapphire  and  of  emerald, 
and  all  the  walls  thereof  round  about  of 
precious  stones.  And  all  its  streets  shall 
be  paved  with  white  and  clean  stones  ;  and 
Alleluia  shall  be  s'ung  in  its  streets."  (chap, 
xiii.  21,  22.)  And  St.  John  also,  in  his 
Apocalypse,  agrees  with  Tobias :  ' '  The 
building  of  the  wall  thereof  was  of  jasper- 
stone  ;  but  the  city  itself  pure  gold,  like  to 
clear  glass.  And  the  foundations  of  the 
walls  of  the  city  were  adorned  with  all 

manner  of  precious  stones and  every 

several  gate  was  of  one  several  pearl ;  and 
the  street  of  the  city  was  pure  gold,  as  it 
were  transparent  glass."  (chap,  xxi.)  But 
we  must  not  suppose  the  heavenly  Jerusa- 


54          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

lem  to  be  in  reality  adorned  with  gold'  and 
precious  stones,  but  by  this  mode  of  ex 
pression  we  are  to  understand,  that  the 
heavenly  city  is  as  much  superior  to  earth 
as  gold  is  to  dirt,  as  pearls  to  common 
stone,  the  stars  to  candles,  the  sun  to  a 
torch,  and  mortal  architects  to  God,  the 
immortal  Creator  of  all  things.  But  as  we 
intend  to  speak  of  the  beauty  of  all  the 
parts  of  the  city  of  God,  we  shall  dwell  no 
longer  on  this  point. 


CHAPTER  II 

ON  THE  CONCORD  AND  PEACE  OF  THE  CITY  OF  GOD. 

ANOTHER  reason  why  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  called  the  "city  of  God,"  appears 
to  be  this,  —  because  a  kingdom  usually 
contains  an  almost  infinite  number  of  peo 
ple,  differing  one  from  another  in  their 
language,  manners,  and  laws ;  where  many 
have  never  seen  each  other,  and  much  less 
formed  any  acquaintance.  But  a  city  in 
cludes  those  only  who  are  of  the  same  lan 
guage,  the  same  customs,  and  who  are 
governed  by  the  same  laws.  Wherefore, 
heaven  is  called  both  "a  kingdom  and  a 
city/'  because,  although  the  inhabitants  of 
this  heavenly  kingdom  are  almost  innume 
rable,  and  as  St.  John  tells  us,  are  collected 
from  "  all  nations,  and  tribes,  and  peoples, 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     55 

and  tongues,"  and  also  divided  into  angels, 
archangels,  principalities,  powers,  domina 
tions,  thrones,  cherubim,  and  seraphim, 
who  are  much  more  numerous  than  men, 
and  are  distinguished,  not  by  nations,  and 
peoples,  and  tongues,  but  by  a  specific 
diversity  of  nature  ;  yet  all  these  are  true 
citizens,  living  in  concord  and  unanimity, 
and  governed  by  one  only  law  of  charity. 
Wherefore,  all  have  but  one  heart  and  one 
soul.  And  because  charity  is  contrary  to 
hatred,  envy,  contention,  discord,  strife, 
and  other  vices,  therefore  anger,  conten 
tion,  envy,  &c.,  are  far  removed  from  this 
holy  city  of  Jerusalem  :^  charity  alone 
reigneth,  and  with  it  justice,  peace,  and 
"joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost/'  In  the  begin 
ning  of  creation  there  was  a  great  battle  in 
heaven  between  Michael,  the  archangel, 
and  the  dragon;  but  Michael,  and  the 
angels  who  remained  firm  with  him  in  faith 
and  obedience  to  their  Lord,  gained  the 
victory  over  the  dragon  and  his  angels,  who 
by  their  pride  had  fallen  away  from  God."" 
"And  that  great  dragon  was  cast  out,  that 
old  serpent  who  is  called  the  devil  and 
Satan,  who  seduce  th  the  whole  world  ;  and 
he  was  cast  unto  the  ^  earth,  and  his  angels 
were  thrown  down  with  him."  (Apoc.  chap. 


This  battle  seems  by 


*  See  the  Apocalypse,  chap.  xii 


the  mystery  of  our  Redemption. 
cation  of  St.  Michael,  Sept.  29.) 


56  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

xii.  9.)  From  that  time  the  holy  city  of 
Jerusalem  "  hath  placed  peace  in  its  bor 
ders  ;"  nor  has  the  sound  of  the  war- trum 
pet  been  heard  therein,  neither  will  it  be 
heard  there  for  ever. 

What  then  can  be  sweeter,  what  more 
blessed  than  this  city?  They  who  know 
the  evils  of  war,  its  depredations,  slaughter, 
rapine,  sacrileges,  &c.,  can  easily  imagine 
the  sweetness  of  peace.  But,  leaving  aside 
war,  who  has  not  experienced  in  his  own 
city,  and  even  in  his  own  house,  how  dis 
agreeable  it  is  to  have  anything  to  do  with 
passionate  men,  who  take  the  worst  view  of 
all  our  actions  ?  "  Depart  from  the  unjust, 
and  evil  shall  depart  from  thee,"  saith 
Ecclesiasticus.  But  where  shall  we  go,  and 
not  find  the  unjust  ?  and  if  they  are  every 
where  to  be  found,  evils  will  certainly  be 
found  also,  as  long  as  we  remain  in  this 
land  of  exile.  Hear  how  the  same  Eccle 
siasticus  speaks  of  a  wicked  woman :  "It 
will  be  more  agreeable  to  abide  with  a  lion 
and  a  dragon  than  to  dwell  with  a  wicked 
woman. "  (chap,  xxv.)  Now,  if  the  partner 
of  one's  life  becomes  a  lion  and  a  dragon 
on  account  of  her  wickedness,  to  how  many 
afflictions  are  men  exposed !  "All  that  will 
live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  per 
secution,"  says  the  apostle.  (2  Timothy, 
chap.  iii.  12.)  How  unhappy,  therefore,  is 
the  city  of  this  world,  wherein  we  are 
obliged  to  bear  with  so  many  enemies,  and 
to  fight  our  way.  If  we  wish  to  be  devout, 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     57 

we  shall  be  persecuted  by  men  ;  and  if,  to 
avoid  their  persecution,  we  become  wicked, 
we  shall  then  incur  the  indignation  of  our 
supreme  and  almighty  King,  who  will 
punish  us,  and,  both  alive  and  dead,  will 
take  vengeance,  for  His  anger  no  one  can 
resist.  Oh,  unfortunate  and  miserable 
country,  where  no  one  can  escape  from  war 
or  persecution,  where  no  one  can  find  true 
peace !  Let  us  therefore,  with  our  whole 
heart,  love  and  praise  that  heavenly  city, 
from  which  alone  every  affliction  is  banish 
ed,  and  where  no  war,  no  hatred,  no  strife, 
can  ever  gain  admittance. 


CHAPTER  TIL 

ON  THE  LIBERTY  OF  THE  CITY  OF  GOD. 

A  THIRD  reason  why  the  kingdom  of  God 
is  called  a  "city,"  is  because  a  kingdom  is 
in  the  form  of  a  monarchy,  and  this  seems 
opposed  to  liberty.  But  all  the  citizens 
of  heaven  are  free,  and  Jerusalem,  our 
mother  above,  is  also  "free,"  according  to 
St.  Paul  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Galatians. 
This  blessed  Apostle  knew  what  he  was 
speaking  of,  since  he  had  been  rapt  up  into 
the  third  heaven,  into  paradise,  and  became 
acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the  city. 
Wherefore,  as  a  kingdom  implies  servitude, 
and  a  city  liberty,  that  kingdom  alone  may 


58  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

be  called  a  city  where  they  who  obey  the 
king  are  free.  But  the  blessed  in  heaven 
possess  not  one  simple  liberty,  but  one  that 
is  manifold.  In  the  first  place,  all  the  in 
habitants  are  free  from  the  servitude  of  sin, 
because  the  first  liberty  possessed  in  the 
earthly  paradise  was  to  be  able  not  to  sin ; 
but  the  second  enjoyed  in  heaven  is  far 
more  excellent — "  not  to  be  able  to  sin," 
as  St.  Austin  teaches."* 

Another  liberty  (like  the  former)  is  being 
free  from  the  servitude  of  death.  Adam  in 
the  earthly  paradise  was  free,  so  that  he 
could  have  escaped  death :  the  Sons  ol 
Adam  in  the  heavenly  paradise  are  free,  so 
that  they  cannot  die.  You  must  not  be 
surprised  at  our  making  liberty  to  consist 
in  not  being  able  to  do  anything ;  because 
"^not  ^being  able  to  sin,  and  not  able  to 
die,"  indicate  the  height  of  liberty  from  the 
servitude  of  sin,  and  the  servitude  of  mor 
tality.  For  he  who  cannot  sin,  is  not  only 
free  from  sin,  but  is  also  so  far  removed 
from  its  servitude  that  he  feels  a  sure  secu 
rity  sin  will  never  prevail  within  him ;  and 
he  who  cannot  die  is  not  only  free  from 
death,  but  he  is  so  far  removed  from  it  that 
he  feels  confident  death  will  never  approach 
him.  This  liberty  God  alone  naturally 
enjoys,  for  the  Apostle  says:  "  Who  alone 
hath  immortality."  And  ^  although  the 
angels  and  souls  endowed  with  reason  are 

*  De  Correptione  et  Gratia,  cap.  ii. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     59 

said  to  be  naturally  immortal,  because  they 
have  within  them  no  principle  of  corrup 
tion  ;  yet  God,  who  made  them,  can  also 
destroy  them.  But,  as  we  have  already 
remarked,  the  angels  and  blessed  ^  spirits 
are  certain  that  they  will  never  sin  and 
never  die,  and  therefore  they  are  completely 
free  from  the  servitude  of  sin  and^of  death ; 
this  is  a  most  honourable  participation  in 
the  Divine  liberty. 

The  third  liberty  consists  in  being  free 
from  "necessity"  in  general.  Now  man  is 
obliged  to  eat,  drink,  sleep,  and  labour,  at 
one  time  to  stand  or  walk,  and  at  another 
to  lie  down.  But  the  saints  in  heaven  are 
not  subject  to  any  such  necessity,  but  are 
free  from  every  necessity,  which  is  the 
liberty  of  the  glory  of  the  Sons  of  God,  as 
St.  Paul  expresses  it  in  his  Epistle  to  the 
Romans.  How  great  this  liberty  is,  first 
poor  people,  then  spiritual  men,  and  thirdly 
the  rich  of  this  world  bear  witness.  What 
labour  the  poor  endure  that  they  may  pro 
vide  food  and  clothing  for  themselves  and 
children!  and  how  greatly  would  they 
thank  those  who  would  free  them  from  such 
a  state  of  servitude  !  Many  even  rob  and 
plunder  others,  and  suffer  themselves  to  be 
led  into  bad  habits,  to  be  enabled  to  sup 
port  themselves;  for  they  say  with  the 
unjust  steward  in  the  Gospel,  "  To  dig  I 
am  unable,  to  beg  I  am  ashamed ;  1  know 
what  I  will  do."  I  will  defraud  my  Mas 
ter — that  is,  by  theft  and  injustice  I  will 


60          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

free  myself  from  His  servitude.  But  by 
this  mode  of  acting  we  fall  into  a  far  more 
grievous  servitude,  viz.,  the  servitude  of  sin 
and  the  devil,  the  most  bitter  enemy  of  the 
human  race.  Holy  men,  who  give  them 
selves  up  to  heavenly  contemplation,  consi 
der  the  servitude  of  attending  to  the  body 
to  be  a  grievous  burden,  because  it  standeth 
in  need  of  many  things,  and  steals  a  great 
part  of  their  time  from  other  more  impor 
tant  concerns.  Eusebius,  in  his  Ecclesias 
tical  History,""  relates  from  Philo  that  the 
first  Christians  of  Alexandria,  living  under 
St.  Mark  the  Evangelist,  were  so  taken  up 
with  their  heavenly  meditations  as  never  to 
taste  any  food  until  after  sunset,  that  thus 
they  might  give  the  whole  day  and  a  great 
part  of  the  night  to  such  spiritual  employ 
ment  :  scarcely  did  they  allow  any  portion 
for  the  refreshment  of  the  body.  The 
same  historian  tells  us,  that  some  forgot 
their  food  for  three  days  together,  and  others 
continued  their  fast  for  six  days.  Cassian 
in  his  Colloquies,  and  Theodoret  in  his 
History,  testify  that  many  holy  hermits 
were  accustomed  to  the  same  thing. 
Wherefore,  to  all  these  the  servitude  of  the 
body  was  most  grievous,  and  with  the 
Apostle  they  exclaimed:  "  Unhappy  man 
that  I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the 
body  of  this  death?"  But  to  the  inhabi 
tants  of  this  world,  and  especially  to  those 

*  Lib.  2  cap.  1G. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     61 

who  are  rich,  this  servitude  does  not  appear 
grievous,  but  were  they  wise  they  would 
think  differently.  They  are  addicted  to 
excessive  eating  and  drinking,  and  love  to 
sleep  on  soft  couches,  and  when  they  ex 
ceed  the  bounds  of  moderation,  they  fill 
their  bodies  with  diseases,  and  to  get  free 
from  them  they  are  obliged  to  take  bitter 
medicine,  and  to  endure  many  sharp  pains. 
Wherefore  they  are  necessitated,  whether 
willing  or  unwilling,  either  to  remain 
enemies  to  God  and  to  bear  His  terrible 
wrath,  or  to  fight  against  the  concupiscence 
of  the  flesh  by  temperance  and  sobriety. 
This  is  doubtless  a  most  laborious  and  dan 
gerous  war ;  but  thus  both  poor  and  rich, 
the  good  and  the  wicked,  would  be  free 
from  a  most  painful  "necessity"  and  mise 
rable  servitude. 

The  fourth  liberty  consists  in  being  free 
from  obedience  to  the  law  and  the  divine 
precepts,  for  "  the  law  is  not  made  for  the 
just  man,  but  for  the  unjust,"  as  St.  Paul 
mentions  in  His  Epistle  to  Timothy.  None 
are  more  just  than  the  blessed,  who  are 
confirmed  in  justice,  and  cannot  therefore 
become  unjust.^  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  to 
the  just  living  in  this  world,  the  law  is  not 
a  threatening  one,  because  of  their  own. 
accord  they  willingly  obey  it ;  nevertheless, 
it  cannot  be  denied  but  that  it  is  a  law 
which  directs  and  binds  them  to  do  that 
which  is  commanded,  and  to  avoid  that 
which  is  forbidden.  But  the  just,  who 


62  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

enjoy  the  liberty  of  the  Sons  of  God,  stand 
in  need  of  no  law,  because  they  behold  all 
justice  in  the  divine  "Word,"  and,  being 
confirmed  in  perfect  charity,  they  cannot 
but  accomplish  the  will  of  God.  Great, 
then,  is  this  liberty  which  frees  them  from 
every  solicitude,  and  which  is  so  opposed 
to  captivity  and  the  servitude  of  those  un 
happy  beings,  who,  with  their  hands  and 
feet  bound,  are  "cast  into  the  exterior  dark 
ness/'  and  into  the  "furnace  of  fire,"  which 
they  can  neither  endure  nor  avoid.  And 
yet  either  one  or  the  other  of  these  abodes 
will  be  the  lot  of  every  son  of  Adam.  But, 
alas  !  many  are  so  blinded  by  the  smoke  of 
present  honours,  or  by  the  dust  of  earthly 
goods,  that  they  see  not  these  things, 
neither  do  they  consider  them,  "  until  sud 
den  destruction"  come  upon  them:  then 
their  torments  open  their  eyes,  which  before 
their  sins  had  shut. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

ON  THE  SITUATION  AND  FORM  OF  THE  CITY  OF  GOD. 

BUT  let  us  now  turn  toward  the  Celestial 
city,  and  attentively  consider  its  situation, 
form,  foundation,  gates,  walls,  and  streets. 
It  is  situated  on  the  holy  mountains :  thus 
\ve  read  in  the  Psalmist,  tf  The  foundations 
thereof  are  in  the  holy  mountains ;"  with 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     C3 

this  St.  John  agrees  in   the  Apocalypse, 
where  he  says :  "  And  he  took  me  up  in 
spirit  to  a  great  and  high  mountain :  and 
he   showed  me  the  holy  city  Jerusalem, 
coming  down  out  of  heaven  from  God." 
(chap.  xxi.  10.)     The  situation  of  a  city  on 
a  mountain  is  very  convenient  and  useful, 
both  for  the  purity  of  the  airland  as  a  forti 
fication.     But  what  mountains  are  higher 
than  heaven  ?  and  what  mountain  is  exalt 
ed  above  all  mountains,  except  the  heaven 
of  heavens,  of  which  David  speaks,  "  The 
heaven  of  heavens  is  the  Lord's  1"    This  is 
that  mountain  for  which  the  same  Prophet 
sighed  when  he  said,  "  Who  shall  ascend 
into  the  mountain  of  the  Lord,  or  who  shall 
stand  in  His  holy  place?"     ^And  from  this 
he  implored  and  expected  assistance,  saying, 
"  I  have  lifted  up  my  eyes  to  the  moun 
tains,  from  whence  help  shall  come  to  me." 
Wherefore,  the  situation  of  the  city  of  God 
is  so  high  as  to  shut  out  everything  that 
could  in  any  way  disturb  its  peace  and  har 
mony.     It  is  higher  than  dust,  thorns,  and 
briars,  or  the  poisonous  bite  of  animals  can 
reach:  it  is  so  high  that  neither  vapours 
nor  clouds,  neither  hail,  nor  thunder,  ^  fire, 
nor  lightning  can  terrify  it :  in  fine,  it  is  so 
high  that  those   impure  birds,  which  St. 
Paul,  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  calls 
'f  The  spirits  of  wickedness   in  the  high 
places,"  can  never  reach  it. 

The  form  of  the  City  of  God  is  square,  for 
thus  St.  John  tells  us:  "  And  the  city  lieth 


64  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

in  a  four  square,  and  the  length  thereof  is 
as  great  as  the  breadth."  This  expression 
signifies  nothing  more,  than  that  admirable 
and  perfect  justice  which  is  to  be  found  in 
the  city,  where  nothing  unjust,  nothing 
contradictory,  nothing  deformed  can  gain 
admittance.  ^  Thus  St.  Austin  explains  the 
Psalm,  "  Mirabile  in  eequitate,"  that  is, 
in  justice.  And  truly  wonderful  will  it  be, 
to  behold  the  innumerable  inhabitants  of 
this  city,  all  endowed  with  perfect  free-will; 
and  yet  throughout  all  eternity  nothing 
wrong  or  imperfect  will  be  found  in  any 
one  of  them,  either  in  thought,  word,  or 
deed.  Justly,  therefore,  does  this  city  lie 
in  a  square,  so  that  the  breadth  should  not, 
in  the  least  point,  exceed  the  length,  noi 
the  length  the  breadth.  This  figure  of  a 
square  may  also  signify,  that  the  breadth  of 
its  heavenly  treasures  is  equal  to  their 
length ;  because  as  the  abundance  of  goods 
will  be  infinite,  so  also  will  their  duration. 
In  the  Scripture,  breadth  is  applied  to  mul 
tiplicity,  length  to  the  duration  of  a  thing. 
Thus,  in  the  third  Book  of  Kings,  the 
great  wisdom  of  Solomon  is  said  to  be — • 
"  largeness  of  heart*  as  the  sand  that  is 
on  the  sea- shore:"  and  in  the  90th  Psalm, 
duration  of  time  is  called— "  length  of 
days."  There  will,  therefore,  be  in  the 
city  of  our  God,  as  much  breadth  as  length, 
because  there  will  be  an  immensity  of  good 

*  Latitude  Cordis. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      65 

things,  together  with  an  eternal  duration 
of  them.  St.  John  also  adds,  that  the 
height  of  the  city  is  as  great  as  its  breadth, 
(so  that  it  is  square  in  every  part)  because 
the  goods  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  will 
not  only  be  great  and  eternal,  but  also 
most  noble  and  sublime.  It  is  of  little 
consequence,  that  Vitruvius  and  Yegetius 
do  not  approve  of  a  square  for  the  situation 
of  a  city :  they  speak  of  a  city  that  feareth 
an  enemy.  But  the  Scripture  speaketh  of 
that  holy  city,  which  hath  placed  peace  in 
its  borders,  and  to  which  no  evil  can  come 
on  account  of  its  height. 


CHAPTER  V. 

ON  THE  FOUNDATIONS  AND  GATES  OF  THE  CITY  OF  GOD. 

THE  foundation  is  of  such  a  nature,  that 
the  city  alone  may  justly  be  called  the  foun 
dation.  Thus  speaks  St.  Paul  in  his  Epis 
tle  to  the  Hebrews,  "For  he  looked  for 
a  city  that  hath  foundations ;  whose  builder 
and  maker  is  God/'  (chap.  xi.  10.)  The 
Apostle  gives  the  reason,  why  Abraham 
did  not  build  a  city  in  the  land  of  promise, 
but  dwelt  therein  as  a  stranger :  the  reason 
was,  because  he  knew  that  the  land  of  pro 
mise  was  but  a  figure  of  a  better  land  of 
promise;  and,  therefore,  he  was  unwilling 
to  build  a  house  or  city  that  would  perish, 

6 


66  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

because  he  looked  for  a  city  that  had  a 
strong    foundation,    "whose    builder    and 
maker  is  God/'     Wherefore,  this  heavenly 
city  alone  truly  and  properly  hath  a  founda 
tion,  since  it  was  built  by  God  to  endure 
for  ever.     The  cities  which  Cain,  Nimrod, 
Ninus,   Nabuchodonosor,    Romulus,   &c., 
founded,  have  often  fallen,  and  at  the  last 
day  will  entirely  be  e destroyed:  this  proves 
that  they  had  no  solid  foundation.     Hence, 
we  may  understand  how  much  wiser  were 
the  Patriarchs  than  we  are,  who,  although 
they  lived  more  than  double  the  number  of 
our  years,   and  were   obliged  to  wait  so 
many  thousands  of  years  before  they  could 
enter    the    heavenly    city;   yet  they  built 
neither  cities    nor    houses,    but  dwelt   in 
tabernacles,  as  strangers  and  pilgrims,  be 
lieving  with  an  assured  hope  that  they  were 
destined    to    inhabit  an    Eternal  city    in 
heaven,  and  that  all  things  on  earth  would 
quickly  perish.     But  we,  who  live  to  such  a 
short  period,  and  who  can,  if  we  wish,  im 
mediately  after  death,  enter  into  that  most 
blessed  city,   so  labour  in    erecting    and 
adorning  buildings  on  earth,  as  if  we  were 
either  never  to  die,  or  else  had  no  expecta 
tions  of  entering  Heaven.     In  this  point, 
we  certainly  imitate  not  the  faithful  Patri 
archs,  but  unbelieving  Infidels:  and  yet  we 
are   Christians,  and  we  know  that  Christ 
and  his  Apostles  built  neither  a  city,  nor  a 
tower,  nor  had  even  a  house ;  neither  did 
they  wish  for  one.      But   still,  I  do   not 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      67 

blame  the  princes  of  this  world,  although 
Christians,  for  building  new  cities :  nor  pri 
vate  individuals  for  erecting  houses  for 
their  own  convenience.  For  we  know  that 
David,  a  pious  king,  enlarged  the  city  of 
Jerusalem,  and  built  in  it  a  royal  palace, 
as  we  read  in  the  Second  Book  of  Kings. 
We  also  know  that  St.  Lewis,  king  of 
France,  erected  in  Palestine,  at  his^  own 
expense,  several  cities  for  the  Christians : 
neither  are  we  ignorant,  that  it  is  but  just 
Princes  should  possess  more  magnificent 
habitations  than  private  men,  and  patri 
cians  more  than  the  common  people.  But 
we  only  require  moderation,  and  condemn 
extravagance,  especially  when  individuals 
wish  for  the  palaces  of  princes;  and  princes, 
not  content  with  their  palaces,  erect  im 
mense  buildings  that  look  like  towns :  in 
fine,  we  blame  a  too  great  affection  for 
temporal  goods,  as  if  our  chief  happiness 
consisted  in  them:  but  we  praise  a  con 
tempt  for  the  world,  joined  with  the  humi 
lity  of  Christ. 

The  gates  of  this  city  are  said  by  St. 
John  to  be  made  of  precious  stones,  and 
the  walls  of  the  jaspar- stone;  but  the  whole 
city  itself  of  pure  gold.  All  this  signifies 
that  every  part  is  precious,  pure,  and  trans 
parent;  for  we  know  that  pearls  are  both 
precious  and  white:  the  jaspar-stone  is 
sometimes  found  white,  and  other  times 
green.  But  St.  John  says :  "  And  the  light 
thereof  was  like  to  a  precious  stone,  as  to 


68  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

the  jaspar- stone,  even  as  crystal :"  he  adds, 
"as  crystal,"  to  show  that   he  is  speak 
ing,  not  of  a  green  jaspar,  or  any  other 
colour,  but  of  a  white  and  clear  one.    Thus 
also  when  he  says,  that  the  streets  are  of 
pure  gold,  he  adds,  "like  to  clear  glass;" 
that  is,  transparent  and  white  like  crystal. 
Wherefore,  whether  we  consider  the  whole 
city,  or  the  gates,  the  walls,  or  the  streets, 
all  is  precious:   nothing  is  mean,   unbe 
coming,  fading ;  but  every  thing  is  beauti 
ful,    every    thing    visible,    because    there 
nothing  can  be  found  to  be  hidden  or  con 
cealed  :  all  behold  all  things :  there  no  sus 
picions  nor  stratagems  are  admitted.    This 
perhaps  is  the  reason  why  St.  John  says  in 
the  same  place,  "  And  the  gates  thereof 
shall  not  be  shut/'  because  no  darkness, 
no  robbers,  no  enemies  are  there,  on  ac 
count  of  which  the  gates  should  be  closed 
at  night.     This  verse  is  not  opposed  to  the 
words  of  the  Psalmist,  where  he  praises  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem:  "Praise  the  Lord,  O 
Jerusalem,  because  he  hath  strengthened 
the  bolts  of  thy  gates."     (Psalm  cxlvii.) 
Both  the   Psalmist    and    the    Evangelist 
mean  this  only — that  in  the  heavenly  Jeru 
salem,  no  danger  is  to  be  apprehended  from 
enemies  or  robbers.     By  the  gates  being 
always   shut,   the   one  signified,    that    the 
divine  protection   would  never  permit  any 
enemy  to  enter  the  beloved  city  of  God: 
the  other  meant,  by  the  gates  being  always 
open,  th~t  the   city  was  so   secure  from 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      69 

every  evil  attack,  there  was  no  need^  of 
keeping  the  gates  shut,  nor  of  employing 
any  guards.  But  what  do  the  gates,  the 
walls,  and  streets  Signify?  The  gates 
always  open  signify,  that  by  the  passion  of 
Christ  admittance  has  been  given  to  all 
men,  of  entering  the  city  of  God,  and  of 
His  angels ;  "  Christ  having  overcome  the 
sting  of  death,  hath  opened  to  believers  the 
kingdom  of  heaven."  And  not  one  only, 
but'twelve  gates  are  there,  by  which  chris- 
tians  can  enter  the  city :  thus  St.  John  tells 
us :  "On  the  east,  three  gates ;  and  on  the 
north,  three  gates ;  and  on  the  south,  three 
gates;  and  on  the  west,  three  gates/' 
Therein  enter,  not  the  Jews  alone,  as  they 
imagine ;  but  all  nations  from  every  quar 
ter  of  the  earth:  nay,  so  few  Jews  enter,  as 
to  bear  no  comparison  with  the  others. 
Thus  our  Lord  predicted  when  He  spoke 
of  the  centurion:  "  Amen  I  say  unto  you, 
I  have  not  found  so  great  faith  in  Israel. 
And  I  say  to  you,  that  many  shall  come 
from  the  east  and  the  west,  and  shall  sit 
down  with  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob 
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven :  but  the  children 
of  the  kingdom  shall  be  cast  out  into  the 
exterior  darkness."  And  in  the  parable  of 
the  vineyard,  "  Therefore  I  say  to  you,  that 
the  kingdom  of  God  shall  be  taken  from 
you,  and  shall  be  given  to  a  nation  yielding 
the  fruits  thereof."  But  this  is  most 
clearly  expressed  in  St.  Luke :  {''  There 
shall  'be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth, 


70  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

wlien  you  shall  see  Abraham,  and  Isaac, 
and  Jacob,  and  all  the  prophets  in  the 
kingdom  of  God,  and  yourselves  thrust  out. 
And  there  shall  come  from  the  east  and 
the  west,  and  the  north  and  the  south,  and 
shall  sit  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God/' 
Three  gates  are  said  to  be  from  every  part 
of  the  world,  making  in  all  twelve,  because 
an  entrance  will  be  open,  not  only  from  the 
east  and  the  west,  the  north  and  the  south, 
but  from  the  beginning  of  the  east,  from 
the  middle,  and  from  the  end  of  the  east, 
and  so  of  the  other  parts.  Another  expla 
nation  may  perhaps  please  us  more,  that 
the  three  gates  are  fixed  to  each  part  of 
the  heavenly  city,  to  express  the  mystery 
of  the  Trinity  and  the  three  most  necessary 
virtues:  for  all  those  enter  from  the  four 
quarters  of  the  globe,  who  being  baptized 
in  the  name  of  the  three  divine  Persons, 
have  persevered  to  the  end  in  Faith,  Hope, 
and  Charity. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

ON  THE  WALLS  AND  STREETS  OF  THE  CITY  OF  GOD. 

THE  walls  of  the  city  signify  nothing 
more,^  than  the  divine  protection,  which 
alone  is  sufficient  to  guard  the  city,  without 
the  aid  of  soldiers,  arms,  or  towers.  "And 
I  will  be,  saith  the  Lord,  a  wall  of  fire 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      71 

round  about :  and  I  will  be  in  glory  in  the 
midst  thereof."  (Zacharias  ii.)  Truly  ad 
mirable  promise !  "I  will^be  a  wall  of  fire 
round  about" — to  restrain  the  enemy: 
"  and  I  will  be  in  glory  in  the  midst  there 
of"  —to  honour  the  citizens.  As  if  He  had 
said :  Fire  burns  and  shines :  I  will  there 
fore  burn  mine  enemies,  and  enlighten  my 
friends:  thus  will  I  be  a  "fire  round 
about,"  and  a  light  of  glory  in  the  midst 
thereof.  This  St.  John  explains  where  he 
says:  "And  the  city  hath  no  need  of  the 
sun,  nor  of  the  moon  to  shine  in  it.  For 
the  glory  of  God  hath  enlightened^  it,  and 
the  Lamb  is  the  lamp  thereof."  The 
brightness  of  God,  as  a  sun,  illumines  their 
souls ;  and  Christ,  the  Lamb  of  God,  illu 
mines  the  body.  But  Christ  is  said  to  be 
a  "lamp,"  not  because  it  is  necessary  in 
the  night,  but  with  reference  to  his  divi 
nity  :  for  if  the  just  shall  shine  like  the  sun 
in  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  our  Lord  tells  us 
in  St,  Matthew ;  how  much  more  glorious 
will  Christ  appear — not  as  a  lamp,  but  as 
the  chief  Sun  enlightening  the  city  of  God ! 
And,  therefore,  St.  John  adds,  "  For  there 
shall  be  no  night."  The  streets  of  the  city 
comprehend  the  whole  space  which  is 
within  the  circumference  of  the  walls.  This 
is  the  habitation  of  the  heavenly  citizens — - 
all  of  which  is  pure  gold ;  that  is,  an  ardent 
and  pure  charity  which  embraceth  all,  and 
by  which  all  live  in  each  through  mutual 
love :  and  not  only  all  in  all,  but  all  dwell 


72  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

in  God,  and  God  in  all:  " for  he  that  abid- 
eth  in  charity,  abideth  in  God,  and  God 
in  him."  (1  St.  John  iv.  16.)  And  that 
this  might  be  accomplished,  Christ  our 
Lord  asked  of  His  Father  in  that  prayer 
which  he  made  before  His  passion,  in  pre 
sence  of  all  His  apostles,  saying:  "And 
not  for  them  only  do  I  pray,  but  for  them 
also  who  through  their  word  shall  believe  in 
me:  That  they  may  all  be  one,  as  thou 
Father  in  Me,  and  I  in  Thee;  that  they 
also  may  be  one  in  Us."  (St.  John  xvii. 
20,  21.)  O  blessed  city  which,  placed  on 
the  highest  mountain,  enjoyest  the  purest 
air!  Thou  art  founded  on  a  rock,  that 
thou  mayest  have  eternal  strength:  thy 
gates  shine  as  pearls,  and  are  always  open 
to  those  that  enter :  God  is  thy  wall,  that 
continually  surrounds  thee  by  His  protec 
tion,  and  adorns  thee  as  a  precious  jasper- 
stone  :  thy  street  is  charity,  purer  than  any 
gold,  clearer  than  any  crystal,  which 
maketh  all  that  dwell  within  thee,  to  be  of 
one  heart  and  one  soul ;  which  filleth  them 
with  ineffable  joy,  and  crowneth  them  with 
eternal  peace :  "My  soul  longeth  and  fairit- 
eth"  for  thy  courts.""  What  can  be 


*  0  beatissima  Civitas,  quse  in  monte  altissimo  sita,  aur£ 
purissima  fraeris;  quse  super  petram  fundata  es,  ut  eeternS 
lirmitate  nitaris;  cujus  portaB  ut  margaritse  fulgent,  et 
semper  in  troeuntibus  patent;  cujus  murus  Deus  est,  quite 
protectione  sua  semper  eircumdat,  et  ut  lapis  Jaspis  pretio- 
sus  exornat;  cujus  Platea  Charitas  est  omiii  auro  lucidior, 
et  oinni  crystal  I  o  candidior,  quae  oinnes  in  te  habitantes — 
facit  esse  cor  unum,  et  Animum  unum,"  &c. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     73 

sweeter  to  one  labouring  and  groaning 
amidst  a  corrupt  nation — -amongst  false 
brethren — in  a  world  "  seated  in  iniquity," 
than  to  flee  away  to  a  kingdom  wherein  the 
sweetest  peace  is  found,  wherein  charity 
alone  reigneth?  "  When  shall  I  come  and 
appear  before  the  face  of  my  God?" 
(Psalm  xli.)  What  more  desirable  for  a 
soul  that  loves  God,  than  to  behold  her 
Beloved — to  be  seen  by  her  Beloved — and 
by  an  intimate  and  most  joyful  union,  to 
dwell  within  Him,  and  He  in  her !  It  may 
indeed  appear  an  intolerable  boldness,  that 
dust  and  ashes  should  sigh  after  thy  courts, 
O  holy  city,  and  a  still  greater  audacity, 
that  a  vile  creature  should  aspire  to  the 
embraces  of  his  Creator.  But  He  will  ex 
cuse  this  boldness,  since  He  hath  given  it 
unto  us,  when  he  asked  the  Father,  that 
"all  might  be  one  ;"  and  that  as  the  Father 
is  in  the  Son,  and  the  Son  in  the  Father, 
so  also  we  might  be  one  in  both. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

ON  THE  TEMPLE  OF  THE  CITY  OF  GOD. 

BUT  there  is  something  else  wanting  in 
the  city,  viz  : — a  temple  to  praise  God,  and 
to  take  our  meat  and  drink:  of  garments 
we  shall  stand  in  no  need.  For  if  in  the 
earthly  paradise  Adam  and  Eve  required 


74  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

none,  much  less  will  the  Saints  want  them 
in  their  heavenly  paradise,  where  all  are 
clothed  with  light  as  with  a  garment.  And 
not  only  Adam  and  Eve  required  food,  but 
also  the  angels  themselves,  as  Raphael 
saith :  "  But  I  use  an  invisible  meat  and 
drink,  which  cannot  be  seen  by  men." 
(Tobias  xii.  19.)  And  so  also  in  relation  to 
this  temple,  St.  John  thus  speaks  in  his 
Apocalypse:  "And  I  saw  no  temple  therein. 
For  the  Lord  God  Almighty  is  the  temple 
thereof,  and  the  Lamb."  (chap,  xxi.)  That 
St.  John  saw  no  temple  in  the  holy  city, 
must  not  appear  strange  to  us :  in  the 
church  militant  temples  are  erected,  for 
four  reasons :  That  the  word  of  God  might 
be  preached  to  the  people ;  that  the  sacra 
ments  and  sacrifices  might  be  celebrated; 
that  public  prayer  might  be  offered  to 
God,  and  Psalms  sung  to  the  Lord  with 
joy  and  gladness.  Now  the  preaching  of 
God's  word  will  cease  in  heaven,  where  the 
uncreated  Word  itself  will  clearly  speak 
unto  all,  according  to  the  prediction  of 
Jeremiah  the  prophet:  "And  they  shall 
teach  110  more  every  man  his  neighbour, 
and  every  man  his  brother,  saying :  "Know 
the  Lord :  for  all  shall  know  me  from  the 
least  of  them  even  to  the  greatest,  saith 
the  Lord."  (chap.  xxi.  34.)  Sacraments 
and  sacrifice  likewise  will  not  be  necessary 
there,  where  neither  sin  is  to  expiated,  nor 
signs  are  required,  because  the  thing  signi 
fied  will  then  be  made  manifest.  Prayer 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     75 

and  praise  are  here  on  earth  given  to  God 
in  sacred  temples  dedicated  unto  Him,  be 
cause  He  hath  promised  to  have  His  eyes 
and  ears  open  to  the  prayers  of  those  who 
should  gather  together  in  His  name ;  thus 
He  spoke  to  Solomon  in  the  2nd  Book  of 
Paralipomenon :  "  My  eyes  also  shall  be 
open,  and  my  ears  attentive  to  the  prayer 
of  him  who  shall  pray  in  this  place." 
(chap.  vii.  15.)  But  since  in  the  heavenly 
city,  God  will  be  seen  and  heard  by  all, 
there  is  no  necessity  for  a  temple  in  that 
place.  Thus  we  can  easily  understand 
what  St.  John  saith :  "  And  I  saw  no  tem 
ple  therein:"  but  why  has  he  added,  "  For 
the  Lord  God  Almighty  is  the  temple 
thereof,  and  the  Lamb?"  If  no  temple  be 
required,  why  is  God  himself  said  to  be  the 
Temple  of  that  city,  and  not  only  God, 
but  the  "  Lamb  "  also  ?  Or  who  shall  ex 
plain  for  us,  how  God  and  the  Lamb  are 
called  "  Temples "  in  heaven?  And  what 
use  hath  this  temple  in  heaven?  In  the  holy 
Scripture  it  is  usual  for  one  sentence  to 
serve  as  an  explanation  of  another,  or  an 
obscure  passage  to  be  made  intelligible  by 
another  that  is  clearer.  In  the  90th  Psalm 
it  is  said:  "He  who  dwelleth  in  the  aid 
of  the  Most  High,  shall  abide  under  the 
protection  of  the  God  of  heaven."  The 
meaning  of  these  words  is:  he  who  is 
united  to  God  by  a  sure  confidence,  abides 
as  it  were  in  God,  in  whom  he  dwells  se 
curely,  and  is  protected  from  all  evil.  The 


76  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

same  may  be  said  of  prayer  and  praise  ;  for 
he  that  hy  an  intimate  reverence  is  joined 
to  God,  makes,  as  it  were,  a  house  for  him 
self  in  God,  that  so  whilst  living  in  it,  he 
may  praise  God  and  pray  unto  Him  as  he 
ought.  Thus,  therefore,  the  Lord  God 
Almighty  is  the  "Temple"  in  heaven  of 
the  holy  city,  since  these  blessed  citizens, 
most  attentively  considering  the  omnipo 
tence  of  God,  and  thus  united  to  Him  by  an 
intimate  reverence,  dwell  in  Him,  and  offer 
Him  worthy  praise.  So  also  when  they 
consider  the  merits  of  Christ,  who  as  an 
innocent  Lamb  delivered  himself  an  obla 
tion,  and  a  victim  to  God  as  an  odour  of 
sweetness,  they  are  intimately  united  with 
Him  by  love :  and  reposing  in  Him  as  in  a 
temple,  they  pray  for  us,  and  doubtless  find 
the  eyes  and  ears  of  God  open,  so  that 
whatsoever  they  ask  they  obtain  for  us. 
But  if,  to  praise  God  and  to  intercede  for 
us,  these  blessed  citizens  dwell  in  Him  and 
in  Christ,  as  in  a  temple,  what  must  we  do 
who  neither  see  God  nor  Christ  ?  0 ! 
would  that  by  the  grace  of  God,  we  could 
so  praise  Him  and  pray  unto  Him,  that 
being  first  united  to  Him  by  true  humility, 
and  a  deep  reverence  from  the  consideration 
of  His  Supreme  Majesty,  we  could  dwell  in 
Him  as  in  a  most  sacred  temple !  Then 
not  carelessly  or  with  distraction,  but  most 
attentively  and  devoutly  should  we  sing  our 
grateful  praises  to  God,  and  offer  up  to  the 
Lord  prayers  that  would  benefit  ourselves 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     77 

and  our  brethren ;  then  would  these  words 
be  fulfilled:  "  The  sacrifice  of  praise  shall 

florify  me :  and  there  is  the  way  by  which 
will  show  him  the  salvation  of  God." 
(Psalm  xlix.) 

The  divine  praises,  offered  up  on  the 
altar  of  the  heart  by  the  fire  of  charity, 
ascend  as  an  odour  of  wonderful  sweetness ; 
and  they  obtain  for  us,  that  our  path  may 
be  opened  and  our  heart  enlightened,  to 
behold  the  salvation  which  God  hath  pre 
pared  for  those  that  love  Him.  But  all 
these  benefits  those  miserable  men  lose, 
who  pray  and  sing  the  divine  praises  with 
distraction,  and  a  voluntary  dryness  of 
heart;  they  participate  with  others  in  the 
labour  of  singing  and  praying,  but  they  en 
joy  not  the  divine  consolation,  nor  a  fore 
taste  of  heavenly  happiness. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

ON  THE  MEAT  AND  DRINK  IN  THE  CITY  OF  GOD. 

CONCERNING  the  meat  and  drink  of  the 
city  of  God,  we  find  these  words  in  the 
Apocalypse  :  "  And  he  showed  me  a  river 
of  the  water  of  life  clear  as  crystal,  pro 
ceeding  from  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the 
Lamb.  And  in  the  midst  of  the  street 
thereof,  and  on  both  sides  of  the  river  was 
the  tree  of  life,  bearing  twelve  fruits,  yielding 


78     THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD3  OR  THE 

its  fruits  every  month;  and  the  leaves  of 
the  tree  were  for  the  healing  of  the  nations/' 
(chap,  xxii.)  I  am  afraid,  that  some,  judg 
ing  from  these  words,  may  wonder  at  the 
scantiness  of  food  in  heaven,  and.  think  that 
more  substantial  meat  is  to  be  found  in  this 
land  of  our  exile ;  since  in  the  Apocalypse 
we  read  of  nothing,  but  the  fruit  of  one  tree 
for  food,  and  the  water  of  a  river  for  drink. 
But  those  who  suppose  such  a  thing  should 
remember,  that  in  the  terrestrial  paradise, 
where  doubtless  there  was  better  food  than 
we  have  now,  Adam  was  only  allowed  to 
eat  fruit  and  herbs,  and  drink  water ;  but 
this  fruit  and  water  were  far  superior  to  all 
the  food  and  wine  of  this  life,  though  not  so 
in  any  degree,  to  the  "tree  of  life/'  and 
the  living  water  of  the  heavenly  paradise. 
In  this  vale  of  misery,  all  men  are  sickly 
and  have  their  sense  of  taste  corrupted  by  a 
kind  of  bitterness,  and  therefore  to  remove 
this  nausea,  they  have  invented  various 
kinds  of  food ;  but  this  variety  so  lessens 
the  nausea,  as  to  increase  the  disease.  In 
the  terrestrial  paradise  however,  men  were 
healthy,  for  the  sweetness  and  wholesome- 
ness  of  the  food  and  of  the  water  were  such, 
as  to  be  able  perfectly  to  nourish  them,  and 
to  their  great  delight,  to  keep  them  in  con 
tinual  health ;  we  may  add  also,  that  their 
food  was  abundantly  supplied,  without  the 
labour  and  toil  of  procuring  it.  But  the 
living  water  and  "the  tree  of  life"  in  the 
city  of  God,  are  not  like  the  meat  and  drink 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      79 

of  man  in  common  with  animals,  such  as 
we  have  in  this  world ;  but  so  excellent,  so 
great,  so  divine  are  they,  that  the  Prophet 
sings,  "  They  shall  be  inebriated  with  the 
plenty  of  thy  house,  and  thou  shalt  make 
them  drink  of  the  torrent  of  thy  pleasure." 
(Psalm  xxxv.)  Neither  is  this  meat  or 
drink  any  thing  corporal,  but  it  is  spiritual 
and  divine,  of  which  we  read  in  Ecclesias- 
ticus:  "She  will  give  him  the  water  of 
wholesome  wisdom  to  drink ;"  and  the^tree 
of  life  is  that  bread,  of  which  it  is  written 
in  the  same  place,  "  with  the  bread  of  life 
and  understanding  she  shall  feed  him." 
(chap.  15.)  And  as  St.  Augustine  teacheth, 
"in  corporal  things  food  is  one  thing,  and 
drink  another,"  but  in  spiritual  matters,  food 
and  drink  are  the  same ;  that  is,  wisdom, 
or  understanding,  01^  intelligence,  which 
signify  the  same  thing,  is  food  that  nourishes 
and  drink  that  extinguishes  thirst.  But 
by  the  "  livingVater,"  wisdom  also  may  be 
signified,  and  by  the  "  tree  of  life,"  charity  ; 
thus  St.  John  in  his  first  Epistle,  "  We 
know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  to 
life,  because  we  love  the  brethren.  He  that 
loveth  not,  abideth  in  death."  (chap,  iii.) 
To  love  as  well  as  to  understand,  are  both 
spiritual  actions ;  wherefore,  the  drink  of 
the  saints  in  the  city  of  ^God,  is  to  drink  of 
the  living  river  that  springs  from  the  foun 
tain  of  life,  which  is  God;  this  means,  to 
enjoy  a  participation  of  that  ^  wisdom  by 
which  God  is  wise,  and  which  is  most  pro- 


80  THE  KINGDOM  CF  GOD,  OR  THE 

found,  high,  and  unspeakable.     The  food 
of  the  same  saints  is  to  eat  of  the  "  tree  of 
life ;"    that  is,  to  enjoy  a   share   of  that 
ineffable  love,  whereby  goodness  itself  being 
clearly  seen  can  be  loved,  and  by  which 
God  loves  Himself,  who  is  infinitely  good, 
and  the  fountain  of  all  goodness.      What 
these  signify,  we  cannot,  nor  shall  we  be 
able  to  understand,  until  we  arrive  at  this 
blessed  city.      But   when   St.   John   says, 
ff  that  on  both  sides  of  the  river  is  the  tree 
of  life,  yielding  its  fruit  every  month,"  we 
must  understand  the  passage   metaphori 
cally,  that  by  a  comparison  taken  from 
corporal   things   we   may   understand    the 
spiritual.     The  blessed  Evangelist  intended 
to  point  out  to  us  the  tree  of  infinite  good 
ness;  and  that  he  might  do  this,  he  des 
cribed  the  tree  which  grew  at  the  bank  of 
the  river,  and  which  from  its  excellence, 
being  continually  watered,  produced  fruit 
every  month,  not  every  yoar  as  others  do. 
Neither  does  he  wish  to  intimate,  that  there 
is  only  one  tree,  but  many  of  the  same  kind, 
which  are  so  planted  on  both  sides  of  the 
river  flowing  through   the  middle  of  the 
city,  that  there  is  little  space  between  the 
one  and  the  other ;  and  in  this  manner,  the 
view  of  the  whole  city  can  be  enjoyed,  and 
the  flow  of  the  water  as  well  as  the  fruit  of 
the  tree.     The  goodness  of  the  tree  is  sig 
nified  by  the  words  tree  of  life  ;  its  fruitful- 
ness  by  the  production  of  new  fruit  every 
month.     Hence  it  is,  that  the  inhabitants 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     81 

of  the  city  always  have  fresh  and  ripe  fruit — • 
fresh,  from  having  it  every  month — ripe, 
from  having  had  it  the  month  immediately 
preceding:  it  is  never  rotten,  never  dry, 
never  insipid.  All  this  signifies,  that  the 
food  of  the  blessed,  (that  is,  the  wisdom  by 
which  they  perfectly  see  God,  and  the 
charity  whereby  they  perfectly  love  Him,) 
is  the  best,  .and  never  faileth.  That  which 
the  holy  Evangelist  adds  concerning  the 
leaves  of  the  tree,  "for  the  healing  of  the 
nations/'  seems  to  mean,  that  in  this  our 
exile,  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  life  itself  will 
never  be  given  unto  us,  but  only  its  leaves ; 
these,  however,  although  they  confer  not 
eternal  life,  are  yet  useful  in  "  healing"  our 
disorders,  the  concupiscence  of  the  flesh, 
the  concupiscence  of  the  eyes,  the  pride  of 
life,  &c.,  by  which  all  men  are  enfeebled 
more  or  less.  These  leaves  are  the  divine 
revelations  of  the  prophets  and  apostles, 
sent  to  us  from  heaven.  0  !  how  sweet  an 
odour  would  these  leaves  scatter,  if  we  had 
the  spirit  of  the  Lord.  Read  the  Prophets, 
the  Psalmist,  the  Gospels,  the  Epistles  of 
SS.  Peter,  Paul,  John,  James,  Jude,  all 
these  breathe  humility,  charity,  and  con- 
tinency,  of  which  the  philosophers  make  no 
mention."* 

Wherefore,    Christian    soul,    diligently 

*  St.  Jerome  also  says,  "  Oro  te,  Frater  charissime,  inter 
hrec  vivere,  ista  meditari,  nihil  aliud  nosse,  /lihil  quserere; 
nonne  tibi  yidetur  jam  hie  in  terris  Regni  coai^stis  habitacu- 
lum."  (Epist.  ad  Fauliimm.)  g 


82          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

peruse  these  leaves,  make  unto  thee  from 
them  a  daily  medicine  ;  and  imagine  what 
must  be  the  fruit  thereof.  And,  then  despis 
ing  the  husks  of  swine,  ardently  sigh  for  the 
fruit  of  Eternal  life  which  is  above ;  think 
of  it,  and  as  long  as  it  is  deferred,  let  the 
memory  of  it  never  depart  from  thee. 


CHAPTER  IX 

OX  THE  MYSTICAL  FOUNDATION  OF  THE  CITY  OF  GOD. 

WE  have  already  considered  one  part  of 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  let  us  now  consider 
another  part  of  the  structure.  A  city  not 
only  includes  foundations,  gates,  walls, 
streets,  but  also  a  body  of  citizens,  who 
according  to  the  variety  of  their  functions, 
are  called  the  foundations,  gates  or  walls. 
Hence  perhaps  a  city  may  more  properly  be 
named  a  collection  of  citizens  under  the  same 
laws,  rather  than  a  collection  of  houses 
within  the  same  walls.  Thus  Cicero  speaks 
in  the  Dream  of  Scipio :  "  An  assembly  of 
men  united  by  laws  are  called  citizens." 
Now  concerning  the  heavenly  city,  which 
consists  of  citizens,  not  only  St.  John  men 
tions  it,  but  also  St.  Peter  in  his  first 
Epistle,  and  St.  Paul  in  his  Epistle  to  the 
Ephesians.  We  have  read  in  the  Apoca 
lypse,  that  in  the  twelve  gates  were  twelve 
angels,  and  thereon  were  in  scribed  the  names 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     83 

of  the  twelve  tribes  of  the  children  of  Israel, 
and  in  the  twelve  foundations  the  twelve 
names  of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb. 
In  the  first  Epistle  of  St.  Peter  we  read, 
"  Unto  whom  coming  as  to  a  living  stone, 
rejected  indeed  by  men,  but  chosen  and 
made  honourable  by  God;  be  you  also  as 
living  stones  built  up."  (chap,  ii.)  And  in 
St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  "  Now 
therefore  you  are  no  more  strangers  and 
foreigners,  but  you  are  fellow-citizens  with 
the  saints,  and  domestics  of  God,  built 
upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and 
prophets,  Jesus  Christ  himself  being  the 
chief  corner-stone."  (chap.  ii.  ver.  19.)  In 
the  first  place,  therefore,  the  city  of  God 
has  for  its  foundations  the  apostles  and 
prophets,  because  their  doctrine  supports 
the  whole  fabric.  Faith  is  the  beginning 
of  salvation,  but  faith  has  been  revealed  by 
the  prophets  and  apostles,  either  by  writing 
or  preaching  the  mysteries  of  the  blessed 
Trinity,  the  incarnation,  the  resurrection  of 
the  dead,  everlasting  glory,  eternal  tor 
ments  ;  others  also,  which  are  above  human 
reason,  we  have  learned  from  the  apostles 
and  prophets,  to  whom  God  had  revealed 
them. 

But  although  faith  has  no  place  amongst 
the  blessed,  since  what  they  believed  they 
see,  and  what  is  seen  is  not  believed,  but 
known  and  understood ;  yet  the  apostles 
and  prophets  are  called  the  "Foundations" 
of  the  heavenly  city,  because  faith  being 


84  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OB  THE 

the  beginning  of  salvation,  is  consequently 
the  beginning  of  beatitude.  But  since  St. 
Peter  saith,  that  we  as  living  stones  are 
built  upon  Christ,  and  St.  Paul  in  his  first 
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  "For  other 
foundation  no  man  can  lay,  but  that  which 
is  laid,  which  is  Christ  Jesus;"  therefore 
there  is  but  one  foundation,  because  in  the 
twelve  foundations  of  the  apostles  Christ 
existed,  as  St.  Austin  teacheth  in  his  expla 
nation  of  the  86th  Psalm.  He  himself  or 
His  Spirit  spoke  by  them  and  taught  them : 
hear  the  apostle  Paul,  "Do  you  seek  a 
proof  of  Christ  that  speaketh  in  me :"  hear 
Christ  himself,  "  He  that  heareth  you, 
heareth  me;"  and  again,  "It  is  not  you 
that  speak,  but  the  Spirit  of  your  Father 
that  speaketh  in  you."  It  is  certain  that 
the  Spirit  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  is  one 
and  the  same;  hence  we  may  conclude, 
that  not  only  the  twelve  Apostles  are  ^to  be 
included  in  "  the  twelve  foundations,"  but 
all  those  likewise  who  first  preached  the 
same  faith ;  otherwise  St.  Paul  himself  and 
St.  Barnabas,  and  the  seventy  disciples  who 
were  not  in  the  number  of  the  Apostles, 
could  not  be  called  foundations,  nor  even 
the  Prophets  themselves;  and  we  should 
make  the  apostle  a  liar,  (which  God  forbid,) 
who  hath  said,  "that  we  are  built  on?the 
foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets." 

But  here  occurs  a  rather  difficult  ques 
tion;  how  can  Christ  be  truly  the  founda 
tion  of  the  building,  when  he  is  called  by 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     85 

the  apostle  "  the  chief  corner-stone;"  and 
David  says  of  Him,  that  He  is  exalted  to 
be  the  "head  of  the  corner?"  How  can 
the  same  stone  be  in  the  foundation  and  at 
the  top?  But  if  we  remember  that  these 
expressions  are  metaphorical,  we  shall 
easily  understand,  that  to  one  person  con 
trary  names  may  be  applied,  on  account  of 
the  diversity  of  his  functions.  Now  not 
only  Christ,  who  is  both  God  and  man,  but 
every  prelate  is  the  foundation  and  the  head 
of  his  Church,  because  as  "  the  foundation/' 
he  ought  to  bear  the  weight  of  the  building, 
the  infirmities  of  all,  and  therefore  he  ought 
to  be  below  all;  and  yet  as  " head"  of  the 
building,  he  is  appointed  to  rule  all,  com 
mand  all,  and  be  supported  by  all.  Much 
more  justly,  therefore,  can  Christ  our  Lord 
be  called  the  foundation  of  the  Church, 
because  He  supports  us  all,  and  rules  us  by 
His  power  and  authority ;  at  the  same  time, 
He  is  placed  as  the  "Head,"  to  connect  the 
two  points,  and  of  the  Jews  and  Gentiles 
to  form  one  people,  to  rule  and  govern  all. 


CHAPTER  X. 

ON  THE  MYSTICAL  GATE  OF  THE  CITY  OF  GOD. 

LET  us  now  in  order  consider  the  gates 
of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  According  to 
the  general  exposition  of  interpreters,  the 


86  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

twelve  Apostles  are  to  be  understood  by  the 
gates :  in  this  explanation  they  follow  St. 
Augustine  in  his  exposition  of  the  86th 
Psalm.  But  when  St.  John  in  the  Apoca 
lypse  speaks  of  the  "gates/'  he  mentions 
twelve  angels  and  the  twelve  tribes  of  thei 
children  of  Israel,  whose  names  are  written 
on  the  twelve  gates  of  the  city  of  God :  but 
in  that  verse  he  makes  no  mention  of  the 
apostles.  But  the  opinion  of  St.  Augustine 
and  of  those  who  follow  him  is  not  there 
fore  erroneous",  for  St.  John  speaks  mysti 
cally,  not  literally — as  a  prophet,  not  as  an 
historian.  The  whole  description  is  full  of 
mystical  significations.*  The  land  of  pro 
mise,  according  to  all  interpreters,  was  a 
figure  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  Abra 
ham  was  the  first  to  whom  the  promise  was 
made :  "  All  the  land  which  thou  seest,  I 
will  give  to  thee,  and  to  thy  seed  for  ever." 
(Genesis  xiii.  15.)  And  St.  Paul,  in  his 
Epistle  to  the  Galatians :  '  To  Abraham 
were  the  promises  made,  and  to  his  seed;" 
and  a  little  lower  he  adds :  "But  God  gave 
it  to  Abraham  by  promise."  Isaac  alone 
was  the  heir  of  Abraham,  Ismael  being 
excluded,  who  was  the  son  of  the  free 
woman.  Thus  the  Scripture,  "For  the 

*  It. was  a  saying  of  St.  Jerome,  "that  the  Apocalypse 
contained  as  many  mysteries  as  it  had  words."  It  would 
have  been  well,  had  Newton,  Faber,  Bickersteth,  Keith,  &c., 
remembered  these  words,  when  they  were  publishing  their 
opinions  on  various  chapters  of  the  Apocalypse.  If  St. 
Jerome  could  not  understand  tins  mysterious  book,  much, 
less  could  the  above  mentioned  writers 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      87 

son  of  the  bond-woman  shall  not  be  heir 
with  my  son  Isaac."  Jacob  alone  was  the 
heir  of  Isaac,  Esau,  his  brother,  being  ex 
cluded,  who  sold  his  birthright.  Hence  the 
prophet  Malachias  says,  "  I  have  loved 
Jacob,  but  have  hated  Esau ;"  and  these 
words  the  apostle  repeats  in  his  Epistle  to 
the  Romans.  The  heirs  of  Jacob  were  all 
his  sons,  twelve  in  number,  not  one  of  whom 
was  excluded;  and  thus  the  land  of  pro 
mise  was  divided  amongst  the  twelve  tribes 
of  Israel,  as  we  learn  from  the  Book  of 
Josue.  This  is,  therefore,  the  reason  why 
•St.  John  said  in  the  Apocalypse,  that  on 
the  twelve  gates  were  inscribed  the  names 
of  the  twelve  tribes  of  the  children  of  Israel; 
because  the  entrance  into  the  promised  land 
was  a  right  of  inheritance,  which  belonged 
to  all  the  children  of  Israel  alone.  But,  as 
we  mentioned  above,,  St.  John  speaks  figu 
ratively,  so  that  by  the  twelve  tribes  of 
Israel  are  meant  the  true  Israelites,  not 
according  to  the  flesh,  but  according  to 
faith  and  the  spirit ;  and  therefore  the 
twelve  Apostles  are  included,  as  well  as 
their  spiritual  children.  For,  as  St.  Paul 
clearly  teaches  us  in  his  Epistle  to  the 
Romans:  "All  are  not  Israelites  that  are 
of  Israel,  neither  are  all  they  that  are  of  the 
seed  of  Abraham,  children/'  (chap.  ix.  6.) 
The  same  Apostle  compares  Israel  to  a 
tree,  whose  many  branches  are  broken  on 
account  of  unbelief,  and  others  ingrafted 
by  reason  of  faith.  Thus,  when  the  Gen- 


88          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

tiles  were  converted,  they  began  to  be 
children  of  Israel,  and  many  of  the  Jews 
ceased  to  be  time  Israelites.  St.  Augustine 
thus  proves  this  point  at  length  :*  "  Is  not 
this  a  wonderful  and  deep  mystery,  that 
many,  not  born  of  Israel,  should  belong  to 
Israel,  and  many  not  children,  though  they 
were  of  the  seed  of  Abraham?  How  are 
they  not  ?  How  are  they  sons  ?  It  is,  that 
they  are  not  sons  of  promise*,  belonging  to 
the  grace  of  Christ,  but  sons  of  the  flesh, 
bearing  an  empty  name ;  and  thus,  neither 
are  they  of  Israel  as  we  are,  nor  are  we  of 
Israel  like  they  are :  for  we  are  according 
to  a  spiritual  regeneration,  they  according 
to  a  carnal  one In  the  grand-chil 
dren  of  Abraham,  the  sons  of  Isaac — viz., 
Jacob  and  Esau — this  great  and  profound 
mystery  appears,  of  which  the  Apostle 
speaks  when  he  had  mentioned  the  sons 
promised  to  Abraham  as  belonging  to  the 
grace  of  Christ.  This  the  apostolic  and 
catholic  doctrine  clearly  teaches,  that  the 
Jews  belong  to  Sara,  according  to  the  flesh, 
but  the  Isrnaelites  to  Agar ;  and,  accord 
ing  to  the  spirit,  Christians  belong  to  Sara, 
Jews  to  Agar ;  to  Esau  likewise,  according 
to  the  flesh,  who  is  also  called  Edom,  the 
nation  of  the  Idumeans ;  to  Jacob,  who  is 
also  called  Israel,  the  nation  of  the  Jews ; 
but,  according  to  the  mystery  of  the  Spirit, 
the  Jews  to  Esau  belong,  to  Israel  the 

*  Epistola  ad  Asellicum. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      89 

Christians."  Thus  St.  Augustine  clearly 
proves,  that  Christians  are  true  Israelites, 
not  according  to  the  flesh,  but  according  to 
the  Spirit ;  and  that  thereby  they  are  heirs 
of  the  land  of  promise,  which  is  in  heaven. 
Wherefore,  the  gates  of  the  heavenly  Jeru 
salem  have  inscribed  on  them  the  names  of 
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  because  the  gate 
by  which  we  enter  the  land  of  promise  is 
the  inheritance  of  the  Sons  of  God,  who 
alone  are  true  and  sincere  ChristianS,  the 
children  of  the  blessed  Apostles.  These  are 
signified  by  the  true  Israelites,  that  is,  the 
sons  of  the  patriarch  Jacob  ;  and  when  St. 
John  adds,  that  on  the  gates  were  twelve 
angels,  he  means  that  angels  are  the  guar 
dians  of  those  gates,  whose  office  is  to  pre 
vent  any  one  entering,  that  has  not  the 
right  of  inheritance.  For  this  reason,  per 
haps,  St.  Michael,  the  archangel,  is  repre 
sented  with  scales  in  his  hands,  because 
by  the  angels  under  him  he  examines  the 
merits  of  those  who  aspire  to  this  heavenly 
city. 


CHAPTER  XL 

ON  THE  MYSTICAL  STONES  OF  THE  CITY  OF  GOD. 

THE  rest  of  the  building  consists  of 
stones ;  and  these  are  all  the  faithful,  who 
are  ''built  up,"  according  to  the  expression 


90          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  in  their  Epistles ; 
and  since  this  part  of  the  building  regards 
every  one,  it  will  be  very  desirable  for  us 
to  remember  the  conditions  or  qualities 
which  those  must  possess  who  desire  to  be 
built  on  the  foundation  of  Christ  and  the 
apostles,  under  the  chief  corner-stone, 
Christ  Jesus;  that  so  they  may  not  only  be 
in  the  heavenly  city,  but  may  also  them 
selves  become  the  highest  and  most  happy 
city  8f  God. 

Three  conditions  are  requisite  to  be  built 
on  so  noble  a  foundation:  1st.  That  we  be 
stones ;  2nd.  That  we  be  living  ones ;  3rd. 
That  we  be  well  polished,  and  be  cut 
square.  We  must  therefore  be  stones,  not 
wood,  or  hay,  or  stubble,  that  we  may  make 
the  wall  solid — that  is,  we  should  be  sober 
and  firm,  persevering  in  faith,  in  charity, 
in  humility,  and  obedience  to  the  Com 
mandments,  and  not  allow  ourselves  to  be 
carried  about  "  by  every  wind  of  doctrine," 
as  heretics  dp ;  neither  should  we  be  carried 
away  by  various  inordinate  desires,  as  bad 
Catholics  are  very  often.  These  are  not 
used  as  stones  by  the  builders  of  the  eter 
nal  city,  for  they  serve  only  for  cottages 
which  are  easily  destroyed.  In  the  second 
place,  we  should  be  "  living  stones,"  as  St. 
Peter  admonishes  us,  that  is,  full  of  charity 
and  spiritual  life,  such  as  Christ  is,  "  the 
corner  stone,"  who,  although  He  died  once 
according  to  the  flesh,  yet  He  always  lived 
according  to  the  Spirit,  and  after  death  rose 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     91 

again  to  die  no  more.  Dead  stones  build 
dead  edifices,  that  is,  corporal ;  but  a  spiri 
tual  house,  or  rather  the  city  of  our  great 
King,  which  is  spiritual  and  celestial, 
requires  spiritual  stones,  and  therefore 
"living"  ones.  Thirdly,  we  must  be  square 
and  polished  stones,  not  unpolished  or 
shapeless,  because  thus  it  becometh  the 
building  of  a  city  that  is  superior  to  all 
others.  So  Arphaxat  the  king  built  the 
city  of  Ecbatana  of  square  and  polished 
stones,  as  we  read  in  the  book  of  Judith ; 
and  if  King  Solomon  erected  a  temple  to 
the  Lord  so  beautifully  adorned,  what  ought 
to  be  the  building  of  that  Eternal  city,  which 
so  far  exceeds  all  other  cities  ?  But  this 
beautifying  of  our  building  must  be  done  on 
earth,  not  in  heaven  ;  and  of  this  the  tem 
ple  of  Solomon  was  a  figure.  Thus  we  read 
in  the  third  book  of  Kings :  "And  the  house 
when  it  was  in  building  was  built  of  stones 
hewed  and  made  ready,  so  that  there  was 
neither  hammer  nor  axe,  nor  any  tool  of 
iron  heard  in  the  house  when  it  was  build 
ing."  (chap.  vii.  7.)  The  reason  was,  be 
cause  the  stones  were  cut  and  prepared  at 
a  distance  from  the  house  of  the  Lord ;  and 
thus  they  were  so  perfectly  polished,  that, 
when  they  were  brought  to  the  temple, 
they  were  laid  in  their  proper  places  with 
out  the  sound  of  the  hammer  being  heard. 
In  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  also,  the  sound 
of  the  hammer  will  not  be  heard,  because 
there  no  persecution  will  be,  no  tribulation 


92          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

no  penitential  labour,  no  sighing,  no  sor 
row,  no  sadness.  Wherefore,  those  stones 
that  are  chosen  for  the  glory  of  the 
heavenly  mansions,  ought  in  this  vale  of 
tears  to  be  well  cut  and  polished :  thus  the 
Church  sings : 

"  Tunsionibus,  pressuris, 
Expoliti  Lapides, 
Suis  coaptantur  locis, 
Per  manus  Artificis, 
Disponuntur  permansuri, 
Sacris  sedificiis.'" 

Here  penitential  labour  is  necessary  for 
us,  because  "we  all  offend  in  many  things/* 
as  St.  James  affirmeth:  here  our  carnal 
concupiscence  must  be  tamed,  our  self-will 
conquered,  our  body  chastised  and  brought 
into  subjection :  here  with  indefatigable 
diligence  must  we  oppose  the  "  shield  of 
faith"  against  the  fiery  darts  of  impure 
spirits.  Therefore,  if  we  cannot  bear  the 
stroke  of  the  hammer,  how  can  we,  being 
unpolished,  be  admitted  by  the  heavenly 
Architect  to  form  part  of  the  building  ?  0  ! 
if  men  could  but  comprehend  how  much 

§ood  they  deprive  themselves  of  by  flying 
•om  this  hammer,  and  being  unwilling  to 
endure  anything  that  is^  difficult,  bitter, 
and  contrary  to  their  inclination,  assuredly 
they  would  then  alter  their  mind,  and  fast 
often  instead  of  having  their  banquets; 
throwing  aside  their  soft  garments,  they 
would  put  on  sackcloth,  and  give  themselves 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     93 

up  to  watching  and  prayer,  instead  of  in 
dulging  in  vain  talk ;  and  if  they  received 
any  injury  from  false  brethren,  or  from  open 
enemies,  they  would  not  think  of  revenge, 
but  would  give  thanks  to  God,  and  earnestly 
pray  to  Him  for  their  calumniators  and 
persecutors:  this  they  would  do,  because 
"  The  sufferings  of  this  time  are  not  worthy 
to  be  compared  with  the  glory  to  come, 
that  shall  be  revealed  in  us;"  and  again, 
''  That  which  is  at  present  momentary  and 
light  of  our  tribulation,  worketh  for  us 
above  measure  exceedingly  an  eternal  weight 
of  glory." 

And  truly,  if  we  consider  the  "living 
stones"  that  have  preceded  us  in  the  hea 
venly  building,  we  shall  see  that  all  were 
polished  by  many  strokes  of  the  hammer. 
Christ  Himself,  "  the  corner-stone,"  and 
most  precious,  who  stood  in  need  of  no 
polishing,  yet  suffered  for  us  that  He  might 
leave  us  an  example :  "  Who,  when  He  was 
reviled,  did  not  revile ;  when  He  suffered, 
He  threatened  not."  All  the  Apostles 
could  say  with  St.  Paul :  "  Even  unto  this 
hour  we  both  hunger  and  thirst,  and  are 
naked  and  are  buffeted,  and  have  no  fixed 
abode :  and  we  labour,  working  with  our 
hands:  we  are  reviled,  and  we  bless;  we 
are  persecuted,  and  we  suffer  it.  We  are 
blasphemed,  and  we  entreat ;  we  are  made 
as  the  refuse  of  this  world,  the  offscouring 
of  all  even  until  now."  (1  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians,  chap,  iv.)  What  shall  I  say  of 


94          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

the  martyrs  ?  Did  not  all  ascend  unto  the 
city  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  after  they 
had  been  "cut  and  polished"  by  many 
tribulations  and  most  cruel  deaths  ?  I 
omit  mentioning  the  holy  confessors,  ancho 
rets,  virgins,  widows,  and  all  others  who 
served  God.  Unless  these  had  crucified 
their  flesh,  with  its  vices  and  concupiscen 
ces,  and  had  waged  war  against  themselves, 
they  would  not  have  been  admitted  to  the 
heavenly  building.  But  this  polishing  of 
"  living  stones"  was  necessary,  not  only 
after  the  coming  of  our  Saviour,  but  before 
also,  and  from  the  t  beginning  of  the  world 
itself.  The  first  living  stone  was  Abel, 
cruelly  slain  by  his  brother  Gain;  after 
wards  came  the  holy  patriarch  Joseph,  sold 
by  his  brothers.  The  angel  Raphael  said 
to  Tobias  also :  ''  Because  thou  wast 
pleasing  to  God,  it  was  necessary  that 
temptation  should  try  thee."  He  did  not 
say,  because  thou  wast  a  sinner,  and  hate 
ful  to  God,  it  was  necessary  that  you  should 
be  punished  with  blindness  and  poverty ; 
but  he  said,  because  thou  wast  pleasing 
unto  God,  being  just  and  holy,  therefore,  as 
a  living  stone  destined  for  the  heavenly 
building,  it  was  necessary  that  you  should 
bear  the  stroke  of  the  hammer.  Who 
amongst  the  prophets  did  not  suffer  perse 
cution  from  the  impious  ?  What  torments 
did  not  the  holy  Machabees  endure  ?  Let 
us  hear  the  apostle  Paul  speaking  of  the 
saints  in  the  old  Law,  in  his  Epistle  to  tha 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     95 

Hebrews :  ''  And  others  had  trials  of 
mockeries  and  stripes,  moreover,  also,  of 
bonds  and  prisons.  They  were  stoned, 
they  were  cut  asunder,  they  were  tempted, 
they  were  put  to  death  by  the  sword,  they 
wandered  about  in  sheep-skins,  in  goat 
skins,  in  mountains,  and  in  the  dens  and 
caves  of  the  earth."  (chap.  xi.  37,  38.) 
What  wilt  thou  say,  Christian  soul,  to  these 
words  ?  If  the  hammer  of  the  builder  did 
not  spare  those  of  whom  the  world  was  not 
worthy,  on  account  of  their  great  sanctity, 
that  so  they  might  be  fitly  polished  for  the 
celestial  building,  what  will  become  of  thee, 
and  of  those  like  thee,  who  indulge  in  sin, 
and  consider  penitential  labours  too  heavy? 
One  of  these  two  things  is  necessary:  either 
that  thou  suffer  in  this  life  or  in  purgatory, 
or  be  deprived  of  a  place  in  that  Edifice 
above,  and  made  to  bear  for  ever  the  ham 
mer  of  hell.  Why,  therefore,  dost  thou  not 
choose  (if  thou  be  wise)  rather  to  endure 
the  short  and  momentary  tribulations  of 
this  life,  than  to  be  condemned  to  future 
ones,  eternal  and  intolerable  ? 

•  Despise  not  the  purgatorial  punishments 
of  the  world  to  come ;  although  they  are 
not  eternal,  yet  are  they  more  grievous,  and 
often  of  longer  duration,  than  any  torment 
of  this  life.  Hear  St.  Augustine's  Expia 
tion  of  the  37th  Psalm  :  "  It  is  said,  thou 
shalt  ba  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fiie ;  and  be 
cause  it  is  said,  *'  Thou  shalt  be  saved/  this 
fire  is  contemned;  yet  it  will  be  more 


96          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

grievous  than  any  torment  a  man  can 
endure  in  this  life/'  He  also  adds,  "  that 
the  torments  will  be  more  severe  than  the 
punishments  of  robbers  and  the  torments 
of  the  martyrs :"  wherefore,  those  are  mad 
who  despise  the  fire  of  purgatory,  and  dread 
the  tribulations  of  this  present  life/ ' '  And 
because  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  wit 
nesses  every  word  shall  stand,  hear  St.  Gre 
gory  on  the  third  penitential  Psalm :  "  I 
consider  this  transitory  fire  to  be  more  in 
tolerable  than  all  present  tribulations ;" 
hear  St.  Bernard  in  his  Sermon  on  the 
death  of  Humbert,  a  monk:  "But  this 
know,  that,  after  this  life,  in  purgatory  will 
be  required  a  hundred-fold  what  hath  here 
been  neglected,  even  unto  the  last  far 
thing/'  Hear,  in  fine,  St.  Anselm,  in  his 
Explanation  of  the  third  chapter  of  St. 
Paul's  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians: 
'  We  must  know  that  this  fire  is  more 
grievous  than  anything  a  man  can  endure 
in  this  life ;  all  the  torments  of  the  world  are 
mild  in  comparison  with  it,  and  yet  men  to 


*  St.  Teresa  mentions  in  her  "  Life,"  having  seen  in  Pur 
gatory  the  souls  of  many  persons  of  remarkable  virtue; 
some  in  a  secular,  others  in  a  religious  state,  of  her  ovvr, 
nunnery  and  of  several  other  orders ;  though  she  says,  their 
penitential  and  holy  lives,  their  patience,  their  great  regu 
larity  in  their  convent,  their  tears  and  humility  at  their 
death,  had  persuaded  her  they  would  be  admitted  straight 
to  glory.  "  But,"  (she  continues,)  "amongst  all  the  souls  I 
have  seen,  I  have  not  known  any  one  to  have  escaped 
purgatory  except  three,  F.  Peter  of  Alcantara,  F.  Peter 
Ivagnez,  a  religious  man  of  the  order  of  St.  Dominic,  and  a 
Carmelite  Friar."  (See  her  own  life,  chap.  38,  translated 
\>y  the  pious  Mr.  Woodhead.  2  vols.  4to.  1669.) 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     97 

avoid  them  will  do  whatever  they  are  com 
manded  by  others.  How  much  better 
would  it  be  to  do  what  God  commands,  that 
so  we  might  not  suffer  more  grievous  tor 
ments  !" 


CHAPTER  XII. 

ON  FLYING  FROM  THE  CITY  OF  THIS  WORLD. 

HAVING  spoken  of  the  city  of  God,  it  only 
remains  that  we  now  explain  in  a  few  words 
what  is  especially  required,  as  the  condition 
of  our  being  enrolled  citizens  of  this  most 
blessed  kingdom.  This  can  be  mentioned 
in  one  word ;  that  we  renounce  the  world, 
and  live  in  it  as  strangers  and  pilgrims. 
We  cannot  be  citizens  of  the  world  and  of 
heaven  at  the  same  time ;  and  there  is  no 
one  who  flies  from  the  world,  who  is  not 
immediately  received  into  the  midst  of  the 
city  of  God.  But  let  us  consider  the  whole 
subject  more  at  length. 

Two  cities  are  mentioned  in  the  Holy 
Scripture;  the  city  of  this  world  which 
commenced  in  Cain,  for  he  was  the  first 
who  founded  one,  as  we  read  in  the  book  of 
Genesis;  and  the  city  of  heaven  which 
began  in  Abel,  the  founder  of  which  was 
not  Abel,  but  God,  as  St.  Paul  mentions. 
Babylon  was  a  figure  of  the  first,  which 
signifies  "confusion;*'  but  of  the  latter, 


98          THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

Jerusalem  was  typical,  the  City  of  our  great 
king,  which^  means  the  "vision  of  peace." 
Those  are  inhabitants  of  the  earthly  city 
who  dwell  therein,  not  only  in  body,  but 
also  in  heart,  who  love  the  earth,  pant  after 
its  pleasures,  struggle  for  them,  contend  for 
them.  Of  this  city  the  devil  is  prince,  who 
having  been  cast  down  from  heaven,  pos 
sessed  the  government  of  the  earth.  For 
although  our  Lord  said  when  his  Passion 
drew  nigh,  "  now  is  the  judgment  of  the 
world,  now  shall  the  prince  of  this  world  be 
cast  out ;"  and  although  He  truly  cast  him 
out  by  His  cross,  and  triumphed  over  him, 
according  to  St.  Paul  in  his  Epistle  to  the 
Colossians,  "  And  despoiling  the  principali 
ties  and  powers,  he  hath  exposed  them 
confidently  in  open  show,  triumphing  over 
them  in  himself;"  yet  we  must  not  suppose 
that  the  devil  was  entirely  "cast  out"  of 
the  world,  or  that  he  has  completely  lost 
the  dominion  of  the  world,  but  only  that  he 
was  ^  cast  out  of  all  those,  and  has  lost 
dominion  over  them  who  united  themselves 
with  Christ  and  his  heavenly  city,  and  fled 
from  this  earthly  one.  But  that  the  devil 
hath  yet  power  over  the  city  of  this  world, 
the  Apostle  teaches  us  in  his  Epistle  to  the 
Ephesians:  "For  our  wrestling  is  not 
against  flesh  and  blood,  but  against  princi 
palities  and  powers,  against  the  rulers  of 
the  world  of  this  darkness,  against  the  spirits 
of  wickedness  in  the  high  places."  (chap.  vi. 
12.)  Wherefore  Satan,  together  with  his 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAiNT.3.     99 

satellites,  yet  has  power  in  the  world,  and  is 
the  "ruler"  thereof;  that  is,  of  earthly- 
minded  men,  inhabitants  of  this  earthly 
city,  of  which  St.  John  says,  "  It  is  seated 
in  wickedness."  As  if  he  had  said,  the 
world  is  united  with  its  chief,  who  is  wicked, 
or  the  world  is  under  the  power  and  domin 
ion  of  a  "  wicked"  demon. 

But  the  inhabitants  of  the  heavenly  city, 
are  those  who  reign  happily  in  its  kingdom, 
and  those  also,  who  although  they  dwell  on. 
earth  in  their  mortal  body,  are  far  from  it 
in  their  heart,  for  their  conversation  is  in 
heaven,  and  "  they  desire  to  be  dissolved 
and  to  be  with  Christ. 9 '  But  because  whilst 
on  earth  they  are  mixed  up  with  its  citizens, 
therefore  the  Holy  Scripture  saith,  that  they 
are  in  the  world,  but  not  of  the  world,  and 
in  the  world,  not  as  citizens,  but  as  strangers 
and  pilgrims ;  thus  St.  Peter  teacheth, 
"  Dearly  beloved,  I  beseech  you  as  strangers 
and  pilgrims  to  refrain  yourselves  from  car 
nal  desires  which  war  against  the  soul;" 
on  the  contrary,  the  citizens  of  the  world 
are  said  in  Holy  Scripture  to  be,  "  Strangers 
to  the  Testament,  having  no  hope  of  the 
promise,  and  without  God  in  this  world." 
These  words  St.  Paul  makes  use  of  in  his 
Epistle  to  the  Ephesians.  Since,  then,  this 
is  the  truth,  let  no  one  deceive  himself,  let 
no  one  imagine  that  he  can  be  a  citizen  of 
the  world  and  a  citizen  of  heaven  at  the 
same  time.  Citizens  of  the  world  are  of 
the  world,  citizens  of  heaven  are  not  of  the 


100        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.,  OR  THE 

world.  To  be  of  the  world,  and  not  to  be 
of  the  world,  are  contradictory  terms,  there 
fore  they  cannot  be  united.  Hence  those 
whom  earthly  objects  delight,  can  have  no 
place  in  the  heavenly  city,  unless  they  first 
flee  from  the  world,  unless  they  renounce 
it,  unless  they  despise  its  pleasures. 

And  since  these  considerations  are  impor 
tant  and  understood  by  few,  or  not  con 
sidered  as  they  ought  to  be,  therefore  that 
no  one  may  plead  ignorance  at  the  Last  day, 
the  apostles  and  evangelists  inculcate  and 
repeat  them  over  and  over  again ;  hear  our 
Lord :  "  You  are  of  this  world,  I  am  not  of 
this  world  ;"  and  to  the  Apostles  He  says, 
"  If  you  had  been  of  the  world,  the  world 
would  love  its  own:  but  because  you  are 
not  of  the  world,  bat  I  have  chosen  you  out 
of  the  world,  therefore  the  world  hateth 
you ;"  hear  St.  Paul:  "The  wisdom  of  this 
world  is  foolishness  with  God;"  and  again, 

"  You  must  needs  go  out  of  this  world 

that  we  be  not  condemned  with  it;"  hear 
St.  James:  "  Know  you  not  that  the  friend 
ship  of  this  world  is  the  enemy  of  God? 
Whosoever,  therefore,  will  be  a  friend  of 
this  world,  becometh  an  enemy  of  God;" 
and  St.  Peter  saith:  "  Fly  the  corruption 
of  that  concupiscence  which  is  in  the 
world:"  and  St.  John;  "Love  not  the 
world,  nor  the  things  which  are  in  the 
world.  If  any  man  love  the  world,  the 
chanty  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him."  Hear, 
in  fine,  our  Lord  himself,  in  his  prayer  to  his 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS      101 

Father :  "  I  pray  for  them,  not  for  the 
world  do  I  pray ;  but  for  them  whom  thou 

hast  given  me And  the  world  hath 

hated  them,  because  they  are  not  of  the 
world,  as  I  also  am  not  of  the  world." 
Here  we  can  most  clearly  perceive,  that  the 
world  is  thus  condemned  and  excommuni 
cated  by  God,  that  Christ  does  not  pray 
for  it  all.  But  if  Christ  does  not  pray  for 
the  world,  how  can  He  say  in  another  place, 
"  God  so  loved  the  world  as  to  give  his  own 
beloved  Son?"  Doth  the  Father  love  the 
world,  and  the  Son  hate  it  ?  Or  how  doth 
the  Son  exclude  the  world  from  His  prayer, 
whom  the  Father  doth  not  exclude  from 
His  love  ?  St.  Augustine,  explaining  this 
question,  says,  that  the  $  world  for  which 
Christ  did  not  pray,  signifies  only  the 
wicked,  as  St.  Paul  mentions  in  his  first 
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians ;  "  That  we  be 
not  condemned  with  this  world."  It  may 
also  be  said  that  Christ  did  not  pray  for  the 
world,  because  what  He  then  was  asking  for 
the  Apostles,  did  not  in  the  least  regard  the 
world ;  for  He  prayed  for  the  gift  of  perse 
verance  :  "  Keep  them  in  thy  name."  And 
at  the  same  time  He  prayed  that  they 
might  possess  eternal  glory,  when  He  said, 
(t  Father,  I  will  that  where  I  am,  they  also 
whom  thou  hast  given  me  may  be  with  me, 
that  they  may  see  my  glory."  (St.  John, 
chap.  xvii.  24.)  Now  these  words  cannot 
apply  to  the  world,  for  it  is  not  fit  for  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  unless  it  be  first  puri- 


102        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

fied  ;  as  a  man  covered  with  dirt  and  mire, 
would  not  .be  fit  to  enter  the  chamber  of  a 
king.  But  God  loved  the  world,  and  deli 
vered  his  Son  for  it,  that  he  might  cleanse 
it,  and  make  it  fit  for  his  kingdom.  Where 
fore  Christ  prayed  for  his  enemies,  not  that 
they  might  remain  in  their  wickedness,  but 
that  his  Father  might  pardon  them,  and 
thereby  cleanse  them,  that  so  they  might  not 
be  of  the  world.  This  our  Saviour  observed 
in  his  prayer,  when  he  said,  "  Not  for  the 
world  do  I  pray,"  for  he  added  a  little 
lower,  "  That  the  world  may  believe  that 
thou  hast  sent  me."  The  conclusion, 
therefore,  is,  Christ  prayed  for  his  friends, 
not  for  the  world,  because  unless  we  first 
leave  the  world  before  wo  leave  the  body, 
we  cannot  arrive  at  the  kingdom  of  God. 

Wherefore,  whoever  loveth  this  heavenly 
city,  let  him  hasten  to  depart  from  the 
world,  lest  the  last  day  suddenly  come  upon 
him,  and  he  be  snatched  from  life,  when 
there  will  be  no  hope  of  his  salvation.  And 
when  in  spirit  he  shall  have  left  the  world, 
let  him  forget  it  and  its  pleasures,  and  re 
member  continually  the  city  of  the  Lord 
alone,  vowing  with  the  prophet  David :  "  If 
I  forget  thee,  0  Jerusalem,  let  my  right 
hand  be  forgotten.  Let  my  tongue  cleave 
to  my  jaws,  if  I  do  not  remember  thee  :  if  I 
make  not  Jerusalem  the  beginning  of  my 
joy."  (Psalm  cxxxvi.)  This  is  a  true 
mark  of  being  citizens  of  the  eternal  city, 
if  truly  from  our  heart  we  prefer  rather  to 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS,     103 

be  deprived  of  our  tongue  and  of  our  hands, 
than  to  do  or  say  any  thing  against  the 
love  of  God  our  Father,  and  our  heavenly 
country:  and  if  "the  beginning  of  our  joy  " 
be  indeed  that  City,  which  maketh  its  inha 
bitants  so  blessed  as  not  to  take  pleasure  in 
any  earthly  happiness,  and  the  mere  re 
membrance  and  expectation  of  future  joys, 
be  alone  sufficient  to  gladden  our  heart  in 
this  our  exile. 

We  will  now  conclude  this  book  with  a 
passage  from  St.  Augustine,  that  those  who 
may  not  perhaps  believe  my  words,  may  a,t 
least  credit  those  of  so  great  a  man.  In  his 
Explanation  of  the  61st  Psalm,  he  men 
tions  what  are  the  true  marks  of  the  citizens 
of  the  world,  and  of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
city  of  God :  "  All  who  seek  after  earthly 
things,"  he  saith,  "  all  who  prefer  the  hap 
piness  of  the  world  before  God,  all  who 
mind  their  own  interests,  and  not  those  of 
Jesus  Christ,  belong  to  that  city  which  is 
mystically  called  Babylon,  and  have  for 
their  king,  the  Devil ;  but  all  '  who  mind 
the  things  that  are  above;'  who  meditate 
on  heavenly  truths ;  who  live  in  the  world 
with  fear  lest  they  should  offend  God,  and 
who  when  they  do  offend  him,  are  not 
ashamed  to  confess  their  sins ;  the  mild,  the 
holy,  and  just,  and  good,  all  these  belong 
to  that  city  which  hath  Christ  for  its 
King." 


104        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 


THE 

ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS. 


BOOK  III. 

CHAPTER  I. 

ALL  THE  BLESSED  ARE  THE  FAMILIAR  SONS  OF  GOD. 

"  I  REJOICED  at  the  things  that  were  said 
to  me :  We  shall  go  into  the  house  of  the 
Lord."  (Psalm  cxxi.)  That  good  and 
faithful  servant  has  abundant  and  unspeak 
able  cause  to  rejoice,  who  hath  either  dili 
gently  laboured  in  the  vineyard,  or  multi 
plied  his  ^  talents  in  business,  or  was  the 
first  to  win  the  prize  in  the  race,  or  who 
hath  gained  a  crown  in  Avar  or  single  com 
bat,  who  hath  carefully  fed  the  flock  en 
trusted  to  him,  and  courageously  defended 
them  from  the  wolves:  and  now  having 
completed  all  his  labours,  he  enters  with  joy 
into  the  house  of  his  Lord.  But  let  us 
consider  why  that  is  called  a  '  House/ 
which  before  was  named  a  city:  it  is  not 
because  the  house  is  narrow,  and  therefore 
doth  not  deserve  the  name  of  a  city:  on 
the  contrary,  it  is  infinitely  more  extensive 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     105 

than  any  city  or  kingdom.  Hear  how  the 
prophet  Baruch  exclaims :  f '  0  Israel,  how 
great  is  the  house  of  God,  and  how  vast  is 
the  place  of  his  possession !  It  is  great, 
and  hath  no  end:  it  is  high  and  immense/' 
(chap.  iii.  24.)  But  why  is  the  House  so 
great?  The  first  reason  is,  because  the 
blessed — although  occupying  every  part  of 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  are  all  the  familiar 
friends  and  domestics  of  God.  For  if  men 
tion  were  only  made  of  a  kingdom  or  city, 
it  might  be  supposed  by  some,  that  there 
would  be  many  in  the  city  of  'our  God,  who 
could  never  see  him,  never  speak  unto 
him,  except  they  gained  admittance  by 
other  greater  saints.  But  this  is  not  the 
case ;  for  all  behold  God  always ;  they  hold 
converse  with  Him,  they  speak  with  Him 
face  to  face — whether  seraphim  or  cheru 
bim,  apostles  or  prophets,  or  inferior  angels 
and  saints.  Of  our  angel-guardians  who 
belong  to  the  last  order  of  spirits,  our  Lord 
saith :  "  Their  angels  in  heaven  always  see 
the  face  of  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven." 
And  St.  Paul,  writing  to  the  Ephesians, 
tells  us,  that  all  the  blessed  are  not  only 
citizens  of  the  saints,  but  also  "  domestics 
of  God."  Wherefore,  their  habitation  is 
not  only  called  a  city,  but  likewise  a 
'  House/  There  are  many  mansions  in 
heaven,  some  high,  some  low ;  there  is  also 
a  diversity  of  crowns,  some  great,  some  in 
ferior,  according  to  the  degree  of  merit :  but 
yet  all  the  citizens  are  blessed  and  happy, 


IOC        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

and  all  clean  of  heart,  and  full  of  charity. 
Wherefore,  every  one  in  that '  House '  sees 
God,  and  converses  with  him  as  a  domestic 
and  friend ;  although  in  earthly  kingdoms 
and  cities,  there  are  many  who  can  never 
see  the  king,  and  very  few  who  are  admitted 
to  his  friendship,  or  to  an  interview.  Ano 
ther  reason  appears  to  be,  because  although 
in  a  city  many  do  see  the  king  and  speak 
to  him,  yet  all  are  not  his  sons  and  heirs, 
but  only  those  who  live  in  the  palace,  and 
are  acknowledged  to  be  his  sons  and  heirs. 
But  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  and  in  the 
city  of  our  God,  all  the  saints,  without  any 
exception,  are  true  sons  of  God,  brothers  of 
Christ,  heirs  of  God,  and  co-heirs  with 
Christ:  neither  do  the  great  despise  the 
inferior,  nor  is  there  any  envy  or  jealousy 
amongst  them.  And  when  our  Lord 
taught  us  to  recite  daily  the  "  Our  Father," 
he  therein  excluded  no  one :  and  when  he 
will  say  at  the  last  day,  "Come,  ye  blessed 
of  my  Father,  possess  you  the  kingdon, 
prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world/'  he  will  not  exclude  any  one  of  the 
just :  and  when  the  Apostle  said  to  the  Ro 
mans,  "  Whosoever  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  they  are  the  sons  of  God ;"  and  again, 
"For  the  Spirit  himself  giveth  testimony  to 
our  spirit,  that  we  are  the  sons  of  God. 
And  if  sons,  heirs  also ;  heirs  indeed  of 
God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ,"  no  one 
is  excluded,  neither  great  nor  little,  provided 
he  possess  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  suffer  him- 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      107 

self  to  be  led  by  him.  This  is  also  given  to 
all  who  have  been  regenerated  in  Christ, 
and  who  shall  persevere  in  faith,  hope,  and 
charity.  St.  Peter  also,  in  his  first  Epistle, 
promises  to  the  '  regenerated/  "  an  inheri 
tance  incorruptible  and  undefiled,  that  can 
not  fade,  reserved  in  heaven."  In  fine,  St. 
John  in  his  Epistle  says  to  all  the  Just, 
without  exception :  "  Behold,  what  manner 
of  charity  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon 
us,  that  we  should  be  called,  and  should  be 
the  sons  of  God."  (chap,  iii.) 

Justly,  therefore,  is  the  habitation  of  the 
blessed  called  a  '  House^and  not  merely  a 
city  and  kingdom,  wherein  all  are  sons  and 
heirs  of  our  great  King,  and  all  beloved  by 
Him  as  his  sons,  and  by  Christ  as  his 
brothers:  with  reason  may  they  exclaim 
with  the  prophet:  "  How  good  and  pleasant 
is  it,  for  brethren  to  dwell  ^  together  in 
unity."  What  greater  happiness  can  be 
conceived,  than  to  converse  with  innu 
merable  angels,  to  be  loved  by  them  with  a 
most  sincere  love,  to  be  treated  as  a 
brother,  to  be  embraced  as  a  brother ! 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE  MAGNITUDE  AND  BEAUTY  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  GOD. 

ANOTHER  reason  may  be  assigned,  why 
the   habitation  of    the   saints  is  called  a 


108        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

'  House,'  because  it  has — especially  if  the 
abode  of  royalty — ornaments,  consisting  of 
halls,  chanibers,  and  other  apartments, 
which  a  city  does  not  possess.  For  who 
can  number  the  carpets,  tapestry,  pictures, 
precious  vests,  and  gold  and  silver  vessels 
which  adorn  the  palaces  of  kings?  And 
not  only  the  interior  decorations  are  of  a 
great  value,  but  the  building  itself  also  is 
admirable,  on  account  of  the  precious  mar 
ble,  the  pillars,  the  gilded  or  painted  courts, 
the  hanging  gardens,  and  other  things 
which  it  would  be  too  long  to  enumerate. 
After  Solomon,  king  of  Jerusalem,  had 
built  a  temple  to  the  Lord  of  suitable  mag 
nificence,  he  also  erected  a  palace  for  him 
self  of  such  extent,  that  the  building  thereof 
took  thirteen  years;  though  at  the  same 
time  he  employed  many  men,  and  had  at 
hand  an  abundance  of  precious  stones  and 
cedar- wood.  With  the  same  expense  and 
industry,  he  built  a  palace  for  his  wife,  the 
daughter  of  the  king  of  Egypt,  and  the 
house  "  of  the  forest  of  Libanus,"  of  which 
a  description  is  given  in  the  third  Book  of 
Kings:  and  so  sumptuous  was  it,  that  it 
seems  incredible.  Wherefore,  when  the 
sacred  Scripture  calls  that  the  '  House/ 
which  before  it  had  called  the  city  of  God, 
the  meaning  is,  that  both  the  city  and  the 
kingdom  shine  as  resplendent  as  a  royal 
palace  doth  shine.  For  the  prophet  Ba- 
ruch  hath  told  us,  "  the  house  of  God  is  so 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     109 

great/'  that  it  occupies  the  whole  extent  of 
the  kingdom  of  God. 

If  a  whole  kingdom  possessed  as  much 
magnificence  as  its  chief  city,  this  would 
indeed  excite  our  admiration.  Who  will 
not  therefore  be  astonished,  when  he  recol 
lects  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  called 
the  '  House  of  God/  because  all  the  beauty 
and  value  of  its  ornaments  are  the  same,  as 
the  house  of  God  itself?  Justly  doth  the 
prophet  David  exclaim :  "  My  soul  longeth 
and  fainteth  for  the  courts  of  the  Lord." 
(Psalm  Ixxxiii.)  Who  will  not  then  desire 
with  his  whole  heart,  to  see  and  to  possess 
this  royal  and  most  noble  palace,  which 
equals  in  its  extent  a  whole  kingdom? 
And,  on  the  other  hand,  to  see  and  to  pos 
sess  this  boundless  kingdom,  which  equals 
any  royal  palace  in  beauty  and  magnifi 
cence  ?  But  not  only  would  our  souls  de 
sire  such  a  house  and  such  a  kingdom, 
were  it  attentively  to  consider,  and  faith 
fully  believe  these  words ;  but  it  would  even 
be  quite  ravished  by  the  consideration  of 
the  beauty  and  magnitude  thereof.  But 
alas  !  being  solicitous  for  earthly  goods,  we 
deem  those  objects  alone  great,  which  we 
see  on  earth,  and  therefore  we  think  not  of 
invisible  things :  we  act  just  as  children  do, 
who  never  having  left  their  father's  house, 
love  it  beyond  all  others,  and  never  think 
of  the  palaces  of  kings ;  or  like  rustics  who 
have  never  visited  any  great  city,  they  are 
solicitous  only  about  the  cultivation  of  the 


j  1 0         THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

fields,  about  the  repair  of  their  thatched 
cottages :  but  no  cares  ever  disturb  them 
about  palaces,  towers,  forums,  theatres, 
honours,  dignities,  riches,  or  splendid  ban 
quets.  And,  perchance,  these  rustics  and 
children  are  more  happy  than  rich  citizens 
and  great  princes,  because  those  things 
which  appear  grand,  bring  with  them  more 
trouble  and  danger  than  solid  utility  and 
dignity.  But  the  good  things  in  the  hea 
venly  '  House '  of  God  our  Father,  are  both 
truly  great  and  cause  no  trouble  unto  us, 
nor  danger:  they  will  free  us  from  every 
evil,  not  for  a  time  only,  but  for  ever  and 
ever. 

Wherefore,  St.  Paul  saith,  who  was 
neither  a  child  nor  a  rustic,  who  had  known 
the  goods  of  this  world,  being  a  most  learned 
man,  and  intimate  with  the  Wise;  who  had 
been  in  the  house  of  God,  and  had  visited 
the  heavenly  city,  being  rapt  into  paradise 
and  the  third  heaven — he  saith  of  himself: 
*  While  we  look  not  at  the  things  which 
are  seen,  but  at  the  things  which  are  not 
seen.  For  the  things  which  are  seen  are 
temporal;  but  the  things  which  are  not 
seen,  are  eternal;"  and  again:  "  Our  con 
versation  is  in  heaven Seek  the  things 

that  are  above,  where  Christ  is  sitting  at 
the  right  hand  of  God.  ^  Mind  the  things 
that  are  above,  not  the  things  that  are  upon 
the  earth. ': 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      Ill 
CHAPTER  III. 

THE  CHAMBERS  IX  THE  HOUSE  OF  GOD. 

THERE  is  another  reason  why  the  king 
dom  of  heaven  is  called  the  '  house  of  the 
Lord:'  it  is  derived  from  these  words  of 
our  Master,  "  In  my  Father's  house  there 
are  many  mansions."  In  earthly  dwellings 
there  are  dining-rooms,  couches  to  sleep 
on,  and  halls  or  courts  for  various  purposes, 
which  cannot  be  performed  outside  the  house. 
Now  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  there  are 
many  chambers,  wherein  all  the  saints  not 
only  feast  on  royal  banquets,  but  what  is 
most  wonderful,  and  not  possible  to  be  cre 
dited,  had  not  the  Holy  Spirit  revealed  it 
to  us,  the  King  himself  ministers  unto 
them,  being  girded !  Thus  our  Lord  speaks 
in  St.  Luke :  "  Blessed  are  those  servants, 
whom  when  the  Lord  cometh  he  shall  find 
watching.  Amen  I  say  to  you,  that  he  will 
gird  himself,  and  make  them  sit  down  to 
meat,  and  passing  will  minister  unto  them." 
(chap.  xii.  37.)  What  a  banquet  is  this,  I 
ask  thee !  Who  ever  heard  of  such  a 
feast?  The  Lord  stands,  the  servant  re 
clines  ;  the  Lord  is  girded,  that  He  may 
" minister"  without  impediment,  the  ser 
vant  is  ungirded,  that  he  may  recline  more 
freely ;  the  Lord  passeth  bringing  food,  the 
servant  eateth  with  pleasure  the  royal  food ! 


112        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

O !  did  we  but  consider  and  understand 
these  things,  how  insignificant  would  all 
earthly  pleasures  become !  Our  Lord  on 
one  occasion  girded  himself  with  a  towel, 
that  he  might  wash  the  feet  of  his  disciples. 
But  Peter  was  astonished,  and  could  not 
endure  to  see  his  Lord  wash  the  feet  of  ser 
vants.  -And  with  reason  was  Peter  thus 
astonished,  because  he  beheld  ' majesty' 
humbling  itself  to  give  an  example  of  humi 
lity.  ^  But  in  our  celestial  house,  this 
'ministering '  of  the  Lord  is  not  an  humi 
liation,  but  a  favour;  for  the  servants  of 
God  in  heaven,  where  the  proud  will  not 
enter,  stand  not  in  need  of  an  example  of 
humility,  for  all  are  confirmed  and  made 
perfect  in  every  kind  of  virtue.  Wherefore 
the  ( girding '  of  the  Lord  signifies,  that  He 
will  as  freely  and  as  readily  be  a  Lord  unto 
each  ^one  of  his  servants,  by  loading  and  re 
freshing  them  with  every  blessing,  as  if  He 
had  nothing  else  to  do,  and  were  alone  with 
each  one  of  them  ! 

O  Christian  soul!  what  doth  this  mean? 
Would  that  thou  wert  wise,  and  couldst 
understand  with  what  honour  and  joy  the 
Lord  will  fill  his  servant  for  ever  !  If  these 
truths  could  descend  deeply  into  thy  heart, 
truly  thou  wouldst  become  fervent  in  spirit; 
and  with  thy  loins  girt,  thou  wouldst  joy 
fully  devote  thy  whole  being  to  the  service 
of  so  sweet  a  Lord.  And  if  any  one  of 
his  poor  brethren  met  thee,  not  only  wouldst 
thou  not  despise  him,  or  look  angrily  at 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     113 

him ;  but  with  the  bowels  of  charity  en 
larged,  thou  wouldst  relieve  him  and  nou 
rish  him,  mindful  of  these  words  :  "  Amen 
I  say  to  you,  as  long  as  you  did  it  to  one  of 
these  my  least  brethren,  you  did  it  to  me." 
(St.  Matthew,  xxv.  40.)  Where  it  is  said, 
'  He  will  make  them  sit  down  to  meat/  sig 
nifies,  that  the  blessed  being  now  admitted 
into  their  Father's  house,  can  '  sit  down' 
without  the  least  danger  or  solicitude,  and 
enjoy  all  the  good  things  with  which  the 
house  of  the  Lord  is  filled.  From  hence 
forth,  no  one  will  be  able,  either  by  force  or 
by  fraud,  to  hinder  them  or  forbid  them 
enjoying  every  good  most  freely.  Lastly, 
where  it  is  said  that,  "passing  he  will  min 
ister  unto  them,"  this  signifies,  there  is 
a  special  banquet  for  the  saints  in  the  Lord 
himself,  for  he  is  the  bread  of  life ;  he  is  the 
fountain  of  wisdom ;  he  is  a  hidden  manna, 
which  no  one  knoweth  of  but  he  that  re- 
ceiveth.  Wherefore,  He  passeth  unto  all, 
he  giveth  unto  all  ineffable  banquets,  that 
satiate  without  loathsomeness,  and  fill  with 
out  satiety. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

ON  THE  COUCHES  IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  GOD. 

LET  us  now  pass  from  the  chambers  to 
the  couches.  "  The  saints  shall  rejoice  in 
glory,"  saith  David,  "they  shall  be  joyful 


114        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 


in  their  beds."  (Psalm  cxlix.)  These 
"beds"  signify  nothing  more,  than  the 
eternal  rest  of  the  saints,  and  that  "  sleep  " 
of  which  the  prophet  speaks  in  other  places, 
1  When  he  shall  give  sleep  to  his  beloved ; 
behold  the  inheritance  of  the  Lord,"  &c. 
And  again,  t(  In  peace  in  the  self  same  I 
will  sleep,  and  I  will  rest."  In  fine,  this  is 
that  'rest'  of  which  St.  John  makes  men 
tion;  "Write,  blessed  are  the  dead  who 
die  in  the  Lord.  From  henceforth  now, 
saith  the  Spirit,  that  they  may  rest  from 
their  labours ;  for  their  works  follow  them/' 
(Apocalypse,  chap.  xiv.  13.)  Great  is  this 
blessing,  possessed  only  by  the  saints ;  for 
in  this  life  no  one  is  entirely  free  from 
labour,  and  those  who  seem  at  rest,  such  as 
nobles  and  rich  men,  are  often  oppressed 
with  the  greater  troubles.  Not  without 
reason  hath  our  Lord  compared  riches  to 
thorns,  in  the  parable  of  the  sower;  and  Job 
saith ;  "  Man  s  life  upon  earth  is  a  war 
fare,"  and  one  of  his  companions :  "Man  is 
born  to  labour  and  the  bird  to  fly."  But 
Ecclesiasticus  is  the  clearest  of  all  on  this 
point :  "  Great  labour  is  created  for  all 
men,  and  a  heavy  yoke  is  upon  the  children 
of  Adam,  from  the  day  of  their  coming  out 
of  their  mother's  womb,  until  the  day  of 
their  burial  into  the  mother  of  all.  Their 
thoughts,  and  fears  of  the  heart,  their  ima 
gination  of  things  to  come,  ^and  the  day  of 
their  end :  From  him  that  sitteth  on  a  glp- 
.rious  throne,  unto  him  that  is  humbled  in 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     115 

earth  and  ashes.  From  him  that  weareth 
purple  and  beareth  the  crown,  even  to  him 
that  is  covered  with  rough  linen:  wrath, 
envy,  trouble,  unquietness,  and  the  fear  of 
death,  continual  anger  and  strife."  (chap, 
xl.)  Thus  Ecclesiasticus  most  beautifully 
teacheth  us,  that  no  mortal  can  enjoy  'rest' 
at  any  time.  But  I  will  briefly  explain 
these  words,  that  all  may  understand  how 
great  is  the  ( sleep/  that  is,  the  rest  of  the 
blessed.  "  Great  labour  is  created  for  all 
men,  and  a  heavy  yoke  is  upon  the  children 
of  Adam."  Occupation  is  opposed  to  rest: 
but  because  many  are  occupied  in  pleasant 
things,  in  hunting,  in  games,  in  music,  in 
dancing,  it  is  added — "  A  heavy  yoke,"  to 
show  us  that  he  speaks  of  laborious  and 
troublesome  labours  with  which  no  one  is 
pleased,  and  which  all  fly  from.  But  these 
troublesome  labours  are  "  created  for  all 
men,"  that  is,  destined  for  men  from  their 
creation,  as  their  individual  and  insepara 
ble  companions.  This  Ecclesiasticus  ex 
plains,  lest  perhaps  he  might  not  be  under 
stood  by  some,  "  From  the  day  of  their 
coming  out  of  their  mother's  womb,  until 
the  day  of  their  burial  in  the  mother  of 
all."  Wherefore,  oxen  that  sometimes 
bear  a  heavy  yoke,  but  rest  at  night,  are 
better  off  than  man  who  is  compelled  to 
carry  his  "  heavy  yoke  "  day  and  night. 
He  then  briefly  mentions  a  part  of  the 
troublesome  occupations,  which  like  unto  a 
most  heavy  yoke,  press  upon  the  neck  of 


116        THIS  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

mortals.  "  Their  thoughts  and  fears  of  the 
heart,  their  imagination  of  things  to  come, 
and  the  day  of  their  end."  The  first  por 
tion  of  their  labour  is  the  thought  of  the 
future,  for  they  are  always  solicitous  about 
to-morrow,  saying  within  themselves, 
'What  will  happen  after  this?  Shall  we 
lose  the  little  we  possess  1"  From  this  soli 
citude  proceeds  a  continual  fear,  which 
does^  not  suffer  man  to  be  at  rest.  This 
solicitude,  with  its  offspring,  which  is  fear, 
is  two- fold:  one  which  the  mind  imagines 
to  itself;  the  other  which  is  certain,  and 
which  one  can  avoid.  Of  the  first  Ecclesi- 
asticus  speaks,  '  Their  imagination  of 
things  to  come :"  of  the  latter,  "  The  day 
of  their  end."  Men  imagine,  that  is,  re 
present  to  themselves  various  future  con 
tingencies,  which  no  less  disturb  them  than 
if  they  were  certainly  to  happen.  But  the 
thought  and  fear  of  ' death'  especially 
frightens  them,  which  is  called  "  the  day  of 
their  end :"  all  await  this  with  so  much  ter 
ror,  that  St.  Paul  in  his  Epistle  to  the  He 
brews,  calls  it  a  continual  "  servitude :"  for 
the  expectation  of  death  can  embitter  all 
the  pleasures  of  life.  Lastly,  Ecclesiasticus 
adds,  that  this  laborious  occupation  is  so 
common  to  all  the  sons  of  Adam  as  to  be 
long  to  all  men,  from  the  first  unto  the  last; 
"from  him  that  sitteth  on  a  glorious  throne, 
that  weareth  purple  and  beareth  the  crown, 
unto  him  that  is  humbled  in  earth  and 
ashes."  Thus  all  men,  since  the.  sin  of 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     117 

Adam,  are  more  miserable  even  than  the 
beasts  of  the  field:  for  these  live  without 
fear,  and  are  not  solicitous  for  to-morrow, 
neither  do  they  remember  past  labours,  nor 
are  they  disturbed  by  '  the  imagination  of 
things  to  come/'  And  therefore  hath  Eccle- 
siasticus  said,  that  this  yoke  is  upon  "  all 
the  children  of  Adam,"  in  order  that  he 
might  both  exclude  the  beasts  of  the  field, 
and  show  us  that  the  cause  of  all  this 
misery,  was  the  sin  of  our  first  parent. 

But  the  lot  of  those  who  aspire  not  after 
their  heavenly  home  is  the  most  miserable 
of  all,  because,  after  having  carried  a  heavy 
yoke  in  this  life,  they  will  be  forced  to  bear 
a  still  more  heavy  one  in  hell.  In  this 
world  our  troubles  are  often  united  with 
some  consolations ;  but  in  hell  there  will  be 
labour  and  sorrow,  without  rest  or  consola 
tion  :  for,  in  the  blessed  House  of  God  alone 
can  there  be  rest  without  labour,  and  con 
solation  without  sorrow.  With  reason  doth 
the  prophet  say:  "  The  saints  shall  rejoice 
in  glory :  they  shall  be  joyful  in  their 
beds."  (Psalm  cxlix.)  They  rest  not  as 
those  that  sleep,  who  do  not  feel  their  rest, 
but  they  rest  with  great*' joy/'  knowing 
and  feeling  with  eternal  gratitude  their 
most  happy  rest,  free  from  labour,  pain,  fear, 
and  trouble.  Truly,  if  there  were  nothing 
else  in  the  House  of  the  Lord  but  this  eter 
nal  rest,  would  it  not  be  worthy  of  being 
purchased  by  all  the  sorrows  and  labours  of 
this  life  ?  and  if  in  hell  there  were  no  other 


118        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

torment  but  an  everlasting  want  of  rest, 
would  it  not  be  worthy  of  being  redeemed  by 
the  daily  prayers  and  tears  of  a  whole  life  ? 
As  it  will  be  consoling  to  the  saints  to  be 
hold,  at  their  departure  from  this  world,  the 
end  of  all  their  labours  and  sorrows,  so, 
likewise,  will  it  be  bitter  for  the  wicked  to 
reflect,  at  their  death,  that  henceforth 
they  can  hope  for  no  rest  from  their  sor 
rows. 

Death  is- said  to  be  the  chief  of  all  terrible 
things ;  and  yet,  because  it  appears  to  bring 
some  rest,  therefore  most  miserable  are 
they  who  shall  descend  into  hell,  for  "They 
shall  seek  death,  and  shall  not  find  it :  and 
they  shall  desire  to  die,  and  death  shall  fly 
from  them/'  (Apocalypse  ix.  6.)  Where 
fore,  the  being  deprived  of  all  rest  will  be 
a  more  grievous  evil  than  even  death  itself. 
And  yet,  so  great  is  the  blindness  of  men, 
that  they  think  nothing  of  losing  eternal 
rest,  and  of  descending  into  that  pit  wherein 
their^  torments  will  never  admit  of  con 
solation. 


CHAPTER  V. 

ON  THE  COURTS  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  GOD. 

IN  earthly  houses  certain  places  are  set 
apart  for  various  purposes.  '  But,  in  the 
courts  of  the  blessed,  all  are  occupied  in  one 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     119 

occupation  alone,  the  praise  of  their  great 
King.  Here,  in  this  world,  some  are  occu 
pied  in  gaming  money,  in  acquiring  digni 
ties,  in  acquiring  knowledge,  either  to  teach 
or  to  learn;  whilst  others  devote  themselves 
to  mechanical  arts,  in  order  to  provide  the 
necessaries  of  life.  But  amongst  the  living, 
immortal  inhabitants  of  heaven  there  will 
be  no  wants,  no  ignorance,  no  necessity,  no 
ambition:  all  being  content  with  their  state, 
neither  desire  nor  require  anything  more— - 
they  are  entirely  devoted  to  the  enjoyment, 
love,  and  praise  of  their  "  chief  Good." 

But  some  one  may  say,  that  the  duty  of 
praising  God  in  psalms  and  hymns,  and 
especially  in  reciting  the  canonical  hours,  is 
laborious  and  tiresome;    and  some   there 
are  who  even  consider  it  a  heavy  burden 
imposed  upon  them  to  spend  so  much  time 
in  singing  in  the  Churches,  and  in  praising 
God.  To  whom  we  answer,  that  "praising" 
God  in  this  life  is  a  meritorious  act,  but  in 
the  next  it  will  be  a  reward.     Hence  it  is, 
that  what  may  be  to  many  laborious  here,  in 
heaven  will  be  a  sweet  occupation  to  all  the 
saints.     Now,   we    read    and    sing  many 
things  which  we  do  not  understand,  whilst 
we    labour    much    in    driving  away  vain 
thoughts,  which  are  like  so  many  trouble 
some  flies.     Moreover,  our  body,  which  is 
mortal,  cannot  for  any  long  space  of  time 
attend  to  the  functions  of  the  mind  without 
being  fatigued.     But,  in  our  blessed^  coun 
try,  the  body  will  be  immortal  and  impas- 


120        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

sible ;  vain  thoughts  will  depart ;  we  shall 
most  perfectly  understand  what  we  sing ; 
and,  what  is  the  greatest  of  all,  the  divine 
(i  praise"  will  be  nothing  more  than  the 
exercise  of  our  happiness.  Wherefore,  if 
eternal  happiness  will  not  be  troublesome, 
neither  can  the  eternal  praising  of  God  be. 
That  the  praising  of  God  is  an  exercise  of 
beatitude,  the  prophet  teachethus :  "Bless 
ed  are  they  that  dwell  in  thy  house,  O 
Lord :  they  shall  praise  thee  for  ever  and 
ever/'  (Psalm  Ixxxiii.)  As  beatitude  con 
sists  in  always  loving  and  beholding  the 
"  chief  Good/'  so  the  exercise  of  beatitude 
consists  in  always  admiring  and  praising 
God;  and  as  no  one  will  be  wearied  in 
loving  Him,  so  no  one  will  be  wearied  in 
praising  Him.  And  again:  we  shall  not 
only  not  grow  weary  in  seeing  and  loving 
God,  but  we  shall  never  be  tired  in  seeing 
and  praising  the  works  of  God,  which  will 
always  be  before  us,  showing  forth  His  won 
derful  beauty,  Nor  can  we  praise  the 
beautiful  works  of  God  without  our  praising 
the  Author  of  them  at  the  same  time,  for 
they  will  ever  cry  out  unto  us :  "  He  made 
us,  and  not  we  ourselves."  In  fine,  as  we 
can  never  forget  the  benefits  with  which 
God  hath  loaded  us,  so  we  cannot  but 
exult  with  the  most  grateful  hearts  in  the 
praises  of  our  most  bountiful  Benefactor. 

Let  us  then  conclude  with  St.  Augustine, 
and  say:  "What  else  could  be  done, where 
neither  any  sloth  will  be  admitted,  nor  any 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      121 

want  shall  laoour  ?  God  Himself  will  be 
the  end  of  our  desires :  He  will  be  seen 
without  end,  loved  without  weariness, 
praised  without  fatigue.  This  gift,  this 
love,  this  exercise,  will  be  truly  shared  by 
all,  as  eternal  life  itself  will  be  common  to 
all.  There  we  shall  rest  and  see  :  we  shall 
see  and  love :  we  shall  love  and  praise. 
Behold,  what  will  be  in  the  end  without 
end.  What  other  end  have  we  than  to 
arrive  at  that  kingdom  which  hath  no 
end?"* 


CHAPTER  VI. 

ON  THE  FIRST  GATE  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  GOD,  WHICH 
IS  FAITH. 

HAVING  explained  these  points,  it  now 
remains  for  us  to  consider  what  is  the  gate 
by  which  we  shall  be  enabled  to  enter  that 
most  blessed  House.  But  our  Lord  Him 
self,  in  the  Gospel,  not  only  makes  mention 
of  the  gate,  but  also  tells  us  that  it  is  very 
narrow,  for,  being  asked,  "  Lord,  are  they 
few  that  are  saved?"  He  answered:  "Strive 
to  enter  by  the  narrow  gate,  for  many,  I  say 
to  you,  shall  seek  to  enter,  and  shall  not  be 
able.  But  when  the  Master  of  the  House 
shall  be  gone  in,  and  shall  shut  the  door, 
you  shall  begin  to  stand  without,  and  knock 

*  Do  Civitate  Dei,  cap.  30. 


122        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

at  the  door,  saying :  Lord,  open  to  us.  And 
He  shall  say  to  you :  I  know  not  whence 
you  are  :  depart  from  me,  all  ye  workers  of 
iniquity."  (St.  Luke,  chap,  xiii.)  Thus  our 
Lord  plainly  teaches  us,  that  the  "gate"  of 
the  house  of  God,  which  is  in  heaven,  is 
very  narrow,  although  the  House  itself  is 
most  extensive;  and  that,  because  it  is 
narrow,  many  will  not  enter  therein  who 
otherwise  would ;  that  they  indeed  desire  to 
enter,  but  will  not  strive  for  it,  nor  be  will 
ing  to  suffer  any  violence. 

But  we  will  explain  how  it  is  that  the 
gate  of  this  most  extensive  House  is  narrow. 
The  gate  has  four  divisions — the  threshold, 
the  inner  court,  and  two  side  passages— 
that  is,  four  stones:  one  below,  another 
above,  and  two  at  the  sides  ;  which,  in  our 
gate,  are  four  virtues,  essentially  necessary 
in  order  to  enter  the  heavenly  house.  These 
are  faith,  hope,  charity,  and  humility. 
Faith  and  hope  are  the  two  lateral  stones, 
charity  is  the  inner  court,  humility  is  the 
threshold  on  which  we  walk.  But  all  these 
stones — that  is,  all  these  virtues — have  their 
length  and  breadth  so  small,  that  in  them 
selves  they  are  narrow,  and,  accordingly, 
they  make  the  gate  very  narrow. 

Let  us  begin  with  faith.  True  Christian 
faith  is  so  narrow  that,  unless  the  mind  do 
violence  to  itself,  and  suffer  itself  to  be  re 
duced  as  it  were  into  captivity,  to  be  bound 
and  trampled  upon,  no  one  can  enter  by  it. 
This  is  what  St.  Paul  means  in  his  Second 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     123 

Epistle  to  the  Corinthians :  "Bringing  into 
captivity    every    understanding    unto    the 
obedience  of  Christ."  (chap,  x.)  The  Chris 
tian  faith  proposes  many  things  to  be  be 
lieved,  which  are  so  beyond  all  understand 
ing  that  it  is  most  difficult  to  give  our  con 
sent  to  them ;  and  yet  are  we  commanded 
to  believe  them  so  firmly  that  we  should  be 
prepared  (if  necessary)  to  die  a  thousand 
times  rather  than  deny  one  article  of  faith. 
This  is  a  difficult  duty,  and  110  wonder  so 
few  comply  with  it.     This  is  the  reason  why 
so  many  go  over  to  Mahometanism  and 
other  heresies,  because  they  cannot  bear 
the  strictness  of  faith,  but  have  made  the 
gate  very  wide,  which  nevertheless  leads, 
not  to  life,  but  to  destruction,  according  to 
the  words  of  our  Lord  in  St.   Matthew : 
'  Wide  is  the  gate,  and  broad  is  the  way 
that  leadeth  to  destruction,  and  many  there 
are  who  go  in  thereat.'7  (chap,  vii.)     Every 
one  naturally  desires  knowledge,  but  all  do 
not  readily  assent  to  a  proposition,  unless  it 
be  demonstrated,  or  a  probable  reason  for 
it  be  given.     St.  Paul,  the  Apostle,  expe 
rienced  this;   for,  although  he  eloquently 
preached  from  an    infused   and    acquired 
learning,  and  by  the  gift  of  tongues,  yet 
when  he  spoke  of  the  Resurrection  of  the 
dead  many  laughed  at  him,  and.  others  said, 
"  What  is  it  that  this  word-sower  would 
say?"     And  when  he  preached  "  Christ 
crucified,"  it  appeared  foolishness   to  the 
Gentiles,  and  to    the  Jews  a  stumbling- 


124        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

block,  as  he  mentions  in  his  First  Epistle 
to  the  Corinthians.  Hence,  the  ancient 
heretics,  in  order  to  'Widen  the  narrow  gate, 
invented  various  errors.  Some  denied  the 
mystery  of  the  Trinity,  as  the  Sabellians 
and  Arians ;  others  the  mystery  of  the 
Incarnation,  as  the  Nestorians  and  Euty- 
chians;  others  the  Resurrection  of  the  dead, 
as  the  Origenists,  &c.  But  all  these  gates 
(besides  many  more)  being  built  by  human 
architects,  and  wanting  a  solid  foundation, 
fell  in  a  short  time,  so  that  now  we  scarcely 
know  their  names :  and  these  even  would 
not  have  reached  us,  had  we  not  read  them 
in  the  works  of  those  who  exposed  them,  as 
St.  Irenseus,  Philaster,  St.  Epiphanius,  St. 
Augustine,  Theodoret,  &c.  The  Maho 
metans,  whose  sect  is  now  so  widely  extend 
ed,  have  cast  away  nearly  all  the  most  dif 
ficult  points  in  the  Christian  faith  —  the 
blessed  Trinity,  the  Incarnation  of  the 
divine  Word,  the  death  and  resurrection  of 
the  Son  of  God,  the  sacrament  of  Penance, 
and  the  holy  Eucharist.  These  being  thus 
cast  aside,  the  gate  is  widened  to  admit  an 
innumerable  multitude. 

But  the  heretics  of  our  own  time  have 
endeavoured  to  enter  by  another  way,  for 
they  have  taken  away  those  narrow  barriers 
which  relate  not  so  much  to  the  understand 
ing  as  to  action.  The  Christian  faith 
teaches  that  all  sins  are  to  be  avoided ;  that 
we  shall  have  to  give  an  account  even  of 
every  idle  word ;  that  if  we  fall  into  mortal 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     125 

sin,  we  must  confess  it  to  a  priest,  and  blot 
it  out  by  serious  contrition  and^satisfaction; 
that  good  works,  though  laborious  and  dif 
ficult,  are  to  be  performed  if  prescribed  by 
our  superiors ;  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
can  be  acquired  by  good  works,  as  a  crown 
of  justice,  and  a  reward  of  labour;  that 
" celibacy"  is  to  be  observed  by  priests; 
that  monks  and  nuns  are  obliged  to  keep 
their  vows.  These  and  other  points,  which 
make  the  gate  narrow,  the  heretics  have 
so  taken  away  as  to  make  it  very  wide. 
For  they  assert,  that  "  faith  alone  is  neces 
sary  for  salvation,  so  that  a  Christian  could 
not  perish,  though  denied  with  every  sin, 
provided  only  he  believed ;  that  there  is 
no  need  of  confessing  our  sins  to  a  priest, 
but  only  to  ,God;  that  contrition  is  not 
required,  a  certain  terror  of  the  mind  being 
sufficient ;  that  works  of  penance  and  satis 
faction  are  not  necessary ;  that  a  priest  is 
at  liberty  to  marry,  and  monks  and  nuns  to 
Violate  their  vows ;  that  superiors  cannot 
oblige  the  faithful  to  perform  good  works, 
&c.  These  and  other  doctrines  of  faith 
being  taken  away,  the  heretics  made  the 
gate  of  salvation  very  wide  for  themselves : 
but  they  opened  a  way  that  leadeth  to  de 
struction,  and  through  it  they  brought  to 
perdition,  together  with  themselves,  an 
immense  multitude  of  foolish  men.^  But 
neither  do  all  Catholics  keep  within  the 
narrow  boundaries  of  faith,  for,  although 
they  believe  what  their  faith  teaches  them, 


126        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

yet^because  they  live  differently  from  what 
their  faith  commands,  they  are  proved  to  be 
in  the  number  of  those  of  whom  St.  Paul 
speaks  where  he  says:  "  They  profess  that 
they  know  God,  but  in  their  works  they 
deny  him."  Thus,  these  likewise  enter  in 
at  the  wide  gate  that  leads  to  destruction. 
Wherefore,  with  regard  to  faith,  when  our 
Lord  was  asked,  "  If  they  are  few  who  are 
saved  ? "  we  answer,  few  there  are ;  and 
hence  all  must  strive  to  enter  in  at  the 
narrow  gate. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

ON  HOPE,  WHICH  IS  THE  SECOND  GATE  OF  THE  HOUSE 
OF  GOD. 

HOPE  likewise  has  its  difficulties,  whether 
we  consider  the  greatness  of  the  reward 
promised,  or  our  own  weakness  and  nothing 
ness.  If  an  ignorant  rustic,  without  expe- 
rience^were  commanded  to  hope  that  in  a 
short  time  he  should  possess  the  wisdom  of 
Solomon,  or  that  of  Plato  and  Aristotle, 
and  at  the  same  time  the  kingdom  of  Alex 
ander  the  Great  or  of  Augustus — how,  I 
ask,  could  such  an  humble  individual  be 
persuaded  to  hope  for  such  great  things?  But 
this  is  much  more  easy  than  that  a  mortal 
man  could  hope  to  possess  the  wisdom  and 
power  of  the  angels  in  heaven,  who  are  pure 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      127 

intelligences.  For  this  rustic,  and  Alex 
ander,  and  Aristotle,  were  of  the  same 
nature,  and  alike  mortal ;  and  the  wisdom 
of  Aristotle  did  not  exceed  all  human  wis 
dom,  neither  did  the  empire  of  Alexander 
occupy  a  third  part  of  the  globe.  But  Chris 
tians  are  commanded  to  hope  for  an  equality 
with  the  angels,  according  to  the  words  of 
our  Lord :  "  But  they  that  shall  be  account 
ed  worthy  of  that  world,  and  of  the  resur 
rection  of  the  dead,  shall  neither  be  married 
nor  take  wives.  Neither  can  they  die  any 
more:  for  they  are  equal  to  the  ^  angels, 
and  are  the  children  of  God,  being  the 
children  of  the  resurrection/'  (St.  Matthew, 
chap.  xx.  38.)  Again :  if  a  man  that  crawls 
upon  the  ground  were  commanded  to  hope 
that  in  a  short  time  he  would  fly  through 
the  air,  or  subsist  in  the  water  for  some 
time,  and  go  here  and  there,  how  could  he 
be  induced  to  believe  these  things?  And 
yet  large  birds,  as  cranes  and  storks,  fly 
through  the  air  as  swiftly  as  eagles ;  and 
large  ships,  heavy  laden,  sail  up  and  down 
the  waters  just  as  the  pilot  directs  them. 
But  Christians  are  without  doubt  com 
manded  to  hope,  that  with  their  bodies  they 
will  one  day  ascend  above  the  heavens; 
and  that  from  heaven  to  earth  they  can 
descend  without  the  least  danger  of  falling, 
and  contend  with  the  sun  itself  in  its  course 
from  east  to  west,  with  the  certain  hope  of 
victory.  In  line,  if  some  poor  orphan  were 
commanded  to  hope  that  he  would  be  adopt- 


128        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

ed  as  a  son  by  a  great  king  unknown  to 
him,  truly  it  would  take  much  labour  to 
induce  him  to  think  this  could  be  possible ; 
and  yet  both  are  men,  children  of  the  earth, 
and  doomed  to  die.  But  Christian  hope 
teaches  us,  that  every  one,  provided  he  be 
baptized  in  Christ,  and  observe  his  com 
mandments,  will  have  the  spirit  of  ' '  adop 
tion"  from  God,  will  be  truly  chosen  His 
son,  and  made  heir  of  all  things  which  God 
Himself  possesseth —  co-heir  with  Christ, 
who  is  His  natural  and  only  Son,  and 
whom  the  Father  hath  appointed  Heir  of  all 
things. 

If  these  great  and  sublime  hopes  were 
entertained  by  Christians  as  they  should 
be,  they  would  certainly  make  them  fear 
less  as  lions,  so  that  no  dangers  or  terrors 
could  conquer  them ;  and  they  would  ex 
claim  with  the  prophet:  "  The  Lord  is  my 
keeper:  I  will  not  fear  what  man  can  do 

unto  me If  armies  in  camp  should 

stand  together  against  me,  my  heart  shall 
not  fear ;"  and  with  the  apostle:  "I  can  do 
all  things  in  Him  who  strengtheneth  me;" 
and  again :  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  shall  be 
against  us  ?"  But  few  there  are  who  hope 
for  such  aid  as  they  ought ;  whilst  many  are 
found  who  do  not  look  even  for  temporal 
blessings  from  God,  but  trust  more  to  their 
own  cunning,  to  theft  and  lies,  than  in  the 
aid  of  the  Most  High.  Our  Lord  Himself, 
in  St.  Matthew  and  St.  Luke,  admonishes 
the  faithful  by  most  beautiful  parables,  not 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     129 

to  be  too  solicitous  about  food  and  raiment, 
because  our  heavenly  Father,  who  nourishes 
the  birds  that  neither  sow  nor  reap,  and 
clothes  the  lilies  of  the  field'  that  neither 
labour  nor  spin,  will  much  more  take  care 
of  His  children  for  whom  He  intends  an 
eternal  kingdom:  but  yet,  so  little  confi 
dence  have  many  people  in  God,  that  often 
in  their  troubles  they  rather  have  recourse 
either  to  human  fraud  or  diabolical  arts, 
than  to  the  Almighty.  Wherefore,  if  these 
dp  not  hope  to  receive  from  God  what  He 
gives  to  the  birds  of  the  air,  and  the  lilies 
of  the  field,  and  which  He  hath,  promised 
to  give  them  if  they  trust  in  Him,  this  is  a 
great  proof  that  their  hope  is  not  of  that 
character  which  belongs  to  the  sons  of  God, 
who  hope  to  receive  a  share  in  His  eternal 
kingdom.  And  since  no  one  can  attain 
salvation  without  a  certain  and  living  hope, 
which  is  a  part  of  the  gate  of  the  heavenly 
"  House/'  therefore  few  are  they  that  are 
saved. 

There  are  also  other  and  greater  difficul 
ties  in  the  virtue  of  hope.  It  commands  us 
to  despise  present  things,  which  are  seen, 
and  to  hope  for  future  goods,  which  are  not 
seen  ;  to  give  alms  to  the  poor,  that,  being 
multiplied,  they  may  be  returned  to  us  in 
heaven,  though  no  one  here  can  see  them, 
or  conceive  what  we  shall  there  receive,  if 
we  sow  them  on  earth.  A  rustic  can 
indeed  be  easily  persuaded  to  sow  his  seed 
in  the  ground,  because  the  experience  of 

9 


130        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

many  years  teaches  him  that  what  is  sown 
with  labour  will  be  reaped  with  joy.  But 
no  experience  teaches  us  that  what  is 
given  to  the  poor  will  be  received  back 
again  with  interest  in  heaven.  Therefore, 
it  Appears  difficult  to  men  to  lose  present 
things,  which  are  seen,  and  to  hope  for 
future  blessings,  which  are  not  seen. 

Lastly,  it  is  an  evident  proof  that  a  firm 
confidence  in  God  is  a  very  narrow  gate,  to 
behold  such  a  great  number  that  weep, 
lament,  murmur,  blaspheme,  and  despair. 
Those  who  confide  in  God,  He  either  takes 
away  from  them  their  afflictions,  or  gives 
them  patience,  united  with  such  great  con 
solation,  as  to  enable  them  to  exclaim  wkh 
the  Apostle :  "I  am  filled  with  consolation, 
I  superabound  with  joy  in  all  my  tribula 
tions."  They,  therefore,  that  immode 
rately  weep^  and  lament  in  their  troubles, 
prove — as  St.  Basil  shows  in  his  Explana 
tion  of  the  45th  Psalm — that  they  may  ex 
claim  in  words :  "  The  Lord  is  our  refuge 
and  our  strength  ;"  but  that  few  truly  and 
earnestly  say  so  in  their  hearts. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

ON  CHARITY,  WHICH  IS  THE  THIRD  GATE. 

LET  us  now  speak  of  charity,  which  is 
the  court  of  the  heavenly  gate.  Charity  is 
the  queen  of  virtues,  and  on  one  side  seems 


ETERNAL  HAPFINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     131 

boundless,  because  it  extends  to  God,  to 
the  angels,  to  men — even  those  who  may 
be  unknown  to  us,  and  our  enemies ;  but, 
on  the  other  side  it  is  made  "  narrow,"  on 
account  of  the  incredible  difficulties  it 
brings  along  with  it,  since  its  precepts  are 
to  be  observed,  not  only  in  word  and  in 
tongue,  but  "in  deed  and  in  truth."  For 
what,  I  ask,  doth  this  queen  command  ? 
First,  that  we  love  God  "  with  our  whole 
heart,  with  our  whole  soul,  with  our  whole 
strength."  We  are  reduced  to  great  diffi 
culties  when  we  endeavour  to  fulfil  these 
commands.  For,  to  love  God  with  our 
whole  heart  and  strength,  what  else  is  it 
but  a  true  and  earnest  love  ?  "  With  our 
whole  heart  and  soul"  signifies,  that  our 
love  must  be  real,  not  feigned ;  not  in  word 
and  in  tongue,  as  St.  James  saith,  but  in 
word  and  in  deed.  'With  our  whole 
strength"  signifies,  that  our  love  of  God 
ought  to  be  supreme.  The  force  of  the 
precept,  therefore,  consists  in  loving  God 
with  a  true  and  perfect  love,  so  that  we 
should  prefer  nothing  before  Him,  but  be 
prepared  with  the  patriarch  Abraham,  if 
the  glory  of  God  required  it,  to  sacrifice  our 
only  begotten  and  most  beloved  son.  And 
not  this  merely;  but  also,  as  our  Lord  com 
mands  us  in  the  Gospel,  to  hate  father  and 
mother,  wife  and  children,  brothers  and 
sisters,  even  our  own  soul,  and  to  renounce 
all  that  we  possess :  that  is,  we  should  be 
ready  to  be  deprived  of  all  these  things  with 


132        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

such  promptitude  as  we  should  have,  if  we 
hated  them  in  reality.  This  is  truly  a 
severe  command,  and  who  can  understand 
it?  But  how  easily  will  men  be  found, 
and  these  not  a  few,  who  would  rather  re 
nounce  God  and  his  promises  than  their 
riches  and  temporal  honours,  and  much  less 
their  life  or  that  of  their  sons  !  St.  Cyprian, 
in  his  Treatise  on  the  "  Lapsed/'  beareth 
testimony,  that  in  the  primitive  Church, 
when  the  fire  of  charity'  was  much  more 
ardent  than  now,  there  were  many  deser 
ters,  who  preferred  their  riches  and  their 
lives  before  God;  and  Eusebius,  in  his 
Ecclesiastical  History,  testifies  the  same. 

But  what  shall  we  say  of  charity  towards 
our  neighbours  ?  What  doth  charity  com 
mand  us  to  do  with  regard  to  our  neigh 
bours  ?  That  we  love  them  as  we  love 
ourselves ;  and  that  what  we  wish  to  be 
done  to  ourselves,  we  do  to  our  neighbours 
also.  Who  therefore  is  there,  being  much 
in  need,  would  not  wish  the  rich  to  give 
him  something  out  of  their  superabundance? 
Neither  would  he  consider  it  as  an  excuse, 
if  the  rich  man  answered,  "  That  he  was 
encumbered  with  debt,  that  he  had  pur 
chased  a  villa  at  an  enormous  sum,  that 
he  was  building  a  sumptuous  palace,  or,  at 
least,  adorning  it  with  precious  marble." 
But  these  were  perhaps  not  necessary,  and 
therefore  charity  does  not  allow  our  indigent 
neighbours  to  be  deprived  of  subsistence. 
On  this  point  I  beseech  the  reader  to  con- 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     133 

suit  St.  Basil  in  his  ( Sermon"  to  the 
rich ;  and  also  'St.  Bernard  on  the  words : 
"Behold,  we  have  left  all  things."  He  will 
see,  and  be  terrified  at  the  danger  of  those 
who  do  not  think  they  will  have  to  render 
an  account  to  God  of  their  riches,  but  live 
according  to  their  own  pleasure,  not  accord 
ing  to  the  will  of  God,  and  in  charity 
towards  their  neighbours.  If  we  shall  have 
to  give  an  account  of  "every  idle  word," 
much  more  shall  we  of  money  ill-spent. 

But  let  us  hear  St.  John  the  apostle,  and 
from  him  learn  how  extensive  is  the  duty  of 
charity.  He  saith :  "In  this  we  have  known 
the  charity  of  God,  because  He  hath  laid 
clown  His  life  for  us:  and  we  ought  to  lay 
down  our  lives  for  the  brethren."  (1  Epist. 
chap.  iii.  16.)  Christ  laid  down  His  life  for 
His  servants :  can  it,  therefore,  be  a  great 
thing  if  we  lay  down  our  life  for  our  bre 
thren  ?  The  apostle  does  not  say  we  can, 
but  "  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  life  for  the 
brethren;"  neither  did  he  say,  I  think,  I 
advise,  but  absolutely,  "We  ought."  And 
if  we  ought  to  give  our  life,  why  not  our 
riches  much  more  ?  Wherefore,  St.  Gre 
gory  justly  concludes :  "  Since  our  soul,  by 
which  we  live,  is  incomparably  superior  to 
our  earthly  substance,  which  we  possess, 
who  will  not  give  his  substance  when  he 
ought  to  lay  down  his  life?"  The  same 
may  be  said  on  other  points ;  for  he  who 
ought  to  lay  down  his  life  for  the  brethren, 
ought  much  more  to  pardon  an  injury  or 


134        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

an  affront.  And  ought  he  not  also  to  be 
on  his  guard,  lest  he  injure  his  brother  in 
word  or  in  deed  ?  But,  because  this  pre 
cept  of  charity  towards  God  and  our  neigh 
bour  is  so  difficult  that  few  comply  with  it ; 
therefore,  when  our  Lord  was  asked,  "  If 
feware^saved,"  with  reason  did  He  answer, 
"Few:"  we  must  then  endeavour,  with  our 
whole  strength,  to  enter  with  the  few  the 


narrow  gate. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

OX  HUMILITY,  WHICH  IS  THE  FOURTH  GATE. 

THERE  now  remaineth  humility,  which 
also  hath  its  difficulties,  and  these  not  a 
few.  What  doth  our  Master  command, 
who  hath  most  truly  said  of  Himself: 
*'  Learn  of  me,  because  I  am  meek  and 

humble  of  heart Go,  sit  down  in  the 

last  place?"  When  He  came  into  this 
world,  he  was  born  in  a  stable,  and  died  on 
a  cross.  Truly,  no  one,  when  born,  could 
have  found  a  more  lowly  place ;  nor,  dying, 
a  more  disgraceful  one.  And  whilst  He 
lived,  He  was  poorer,  not  only  than  men, 
but  even  than  the  beasts  of  the  field :  for 
tne  foxes  had  holes,  and  the  birds  of  the 
air  their  nests,  "  but  the  Son  of  man  had 
nowhere  to  lay  His  head."  But  what 
means, "  Sit  down  in  the  last  place?"  This 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     135 

is  the  meaning:  wherever  thou  art,  how 
ever  great  thou  mayest  be,  always  consider 
thyself  worthy  of  the  last  place.  St.  Paul, 
in  his  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  gives  a 
reason  for  this  where  he  says :  "If  any  man 
think  himself  to  be  something,  whereas  he 
is  nothing,  he  deceiveth  himself."  (ch.  vi.  3.) 
He  did  not  say,  he  who  thinks  himself 
to  be  great,  or  superior  to  others,  either  in 
wisdom,  or  power,  or  virtue;  neither  did  he 
bay,  if  any  one  think  himself  not  to  be 
great,  or  superior  to  others,  but  only  equal 
to  them ;  he  said,  "  If  any  man  think  him 
self  to  be  something."  In  fine,  he  did  not 
say,  since  he  is  poor,  or  unlearned,  or  igno 
ble,  but,  "Whereas  he  is  nothing."  Thus 
the  apostle  could  not  descend  lower,  in 
order  to  designate  the  "  lowest  place,"  and 
to  give  a  worthy  explanation  of  the  words 
of  our  Lord.  But  it  may  be  said,  it  is 
necessary  that  men  should  be  in  high  sta 
tions —  such  as,  prelates,  princes,  kings, 
emperors,  and  pontiffs.  Be  it  so  :  but  yet 
each  one  ought  to  sit  down  in  the  lowest 
place,  until  the  Lord  shall  say,  "  Ascend 
higher."  Of  this  St.  Augustine  gives  us 
an  illustrious  example,  which  I  will  men 
tion  in  his  own  words:  "From  these  that 
love  the  world  I  have  separated  myself: 
with  those  who  govern  the  people  I  have 
not  considered  myself  equal,  nor  at  the 
banquet  have  I  chosen  the  highest  place, 
but  the  lower  :  but  the  Lord  said  unto  me, 
*  Ascend  higher/  But  so  much  did  I  fear 


136        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

the  episcopacy,  that  I  would  not  have 
approached  it,  since  amongst  men  the  fame 
of  a  certain  name  had  spread ;  and  in  this 
place  I  knew  there  was  no  bishop.  I  was 
on  my  guard,  and  endeavoured,  as  far  as 
possible,  to  be  saved  in  an  humble  situa 
tion,  not  to  be  in  danger  in  a  high  one. 
But,  as  I  have  said,  the  servant  ought  not 
to  contradict  his  Lord.""'  Oh,  that  all 
men  would  imitate  such  an  example !  we 
should  then  have  many  good  prelates,  many 
good  princes,  many  excellent  magistrates. 
But,  because  many  push  themselves  for 
ward,  not  waiting  for  a  vocation  from  the 
Lord,  the  Almighty  is  oftentimes  angry; 
and  for  an  example  to  others,  He  compels 
many  to  sit  down  in  the  lowest  place,  that 
all  may  learn  how  honours  and  riches,  as 
well  as  spiritual  blessings,  depend  on  Him 
alone.  Hence,  we  frequently  see  very  rich 
men  reduced  in  a  short  time  to  extreme 
poverty,  and  great  princes  cast  down  from 
their  thrones.  ^ 

But  it  is  not  sufficient  to  wait  for  a  voca 
tion  from  God ;  but  we  ought  also,  in  the 
prelacy  or  sovereignty,  not  to  be  overwise, 
but,  according  to  the  advice  of  the  Wise 
man,  the  more  we  are  elevated,  the  more 
humble  should  we  be  unto  all :  not  in  de 
meanour,  but  in  heart,  as  St.  Gregory 
teacheth  in  his  pastoral,  and  St.  Augustine 
more  clearly  in  his  109th  Epistle  :  "  Let 

*  "  De  Vita  Clericonun." 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      137 

your  dignity/'  he  saith,  "be  honourable 
before  men ;  but,  before  God,  place  it 
under  your  feet."  Each  one  ought  to 
think  others  better,  and  therefore  higher 
than  himself.  For  he  is  properly  and  truly 
the  greatest,  who  is  the  greatest  in  the 
sight  of  God ;  and  he  is  the  greatest  who  is 
the  best ;  and  he  is  the  best  who  excels  in 
virtue,  whatever  may  be  his  dignity,  riches, 
titles,  &c.  Virtue  alone  makes  a  man  good, 
not  dignity,  riches,  or  titles ;  and  if  virtues 
make  a  man  good,  greater  virtues  make 
him  better,  and  the  greatest  make  him  the 
best.  And  they  who  possess  virtue  in  a 
higher  degree  excel  all  others.  Now,  we 
may  know  that  humility  is  one  of  _  these 
great  virtues,  because  our  Lord  Himself 
says :  "He  that  shall  humble  himself  shall 
be  exalted,"  which  words  the  blessed  Vir 
gin  follows  in  the  Canticle  :  "He  hath  scat 
tered  the  proud  in  the  conceit  of  their  heart, 
and  hath  exalted  the  humble."  And  St. 
Peter  saith:  "  Be  you  humbled,  therefore, 
under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  that  He 
may  exalt  you  in  the  time  of  visitation;" 
and  St.  James:  "  Be  humbled  in  the  sight 
of  the  Lord,  and  He  will  exalt  you."  In 
fine,  St.  Paul  says  of  Christ :  "He  hum 
bled  Himself,  and  therefore  hath  God 
exalted  Him." 

Since,  therefore,  these  virtues,  and  espe 
cially  those  of  charity  and  humility,  make 
men  good  before  God ;  and  since  again,  no 
one  truly  knows  what  he  is  in  the  sight  of 


138        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  TH"3 

the  Almighty,  or  what  others  are  or  will  be 
— therefore,  it  is  dangerous  to  prefer  our 
selves  to  others,  but  most  useful  to  humble 
ourselves  before  all  men.  Wherefore,  our 
Lord  absolutely  saith :  "Sit  down  in  the 
lowest  place."  But  how  many  comply  with 
this  divine  precept?  For  what  do  men 
contend  more  than  for  precedence  ?  What 
labours  do  those  endure  who  endeavour  to 
reconcile  men  that  quarrel  about  a  point  of 
honour  !  How  many  do  we  often  hear  using 
these  words  of  Scripture,  "  I  will  not  give 
my  honour  to  another  ?"  And  yet  the 
Most  High  speaks  thus  in  Isaiah,  to  whom 
alone  such  words  belong.  God  alone  ought 
not  to  be  humble,  since  humility  is  the  vir 
tue  that  restrains  a  man  from  desiring  to 
ascend  above  himself,  but  since  God 
dwelleth  in  the  highest  heaven,  nothing  can 
be  above  Him.  Wherefore,  pride  is  intole 
rable,  because  a  worm  of  the  earth  dares  to 
say,  "I  will  not  give  my  glory  unto  ano 
ther/' 

And  yet,  these  same  worms  whom  pride 
so  swells  that  they  say  with  God,  "  I  will 
not  give  my  glory  to  another,"  humble 
themselves  as  to  acknowledge  they  are 
the  slaves  of  honour — that  is,  of  a  false 
esteem.  And  so  faithfully  do  these  serve 
their  master,  honour,  that  they  rather  pre 
fer  to  be  cruelly  slain  in  single  combat,  and 
to  descend  into  hell,  (and  thus  lose  eternal 
life,  and  their  temporal  one  at  the  same 
time,)  than  suffer  any  affront  to  be  given  to 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      139 

the  idol  of  their  honour.  0  vanity  of 
vanities  !  Oh,  how  much  doth  this  smoke 
of  honour  blind  the  eyes  of  the  soul !  And 
yet  we  call  ourselves  Christians,  and  know 
that  Christ  heard  from  His  enemies :  "  Be 
hold  a  man  that  is  a  glutton  and  a  wine- 
drinker Thou  art  a  Samaritan,  and 

hast  a  devil He  caste th  out  devils,  by 

Beelzebub,  the  prince  of  devils ;"  and  yet 
no  one  heard  Him  exclaim,  "Thou  art  a 
liar;3'  but,  because  He  was  meek  and  hum 
ble  of  heart,  "  When  He  was  reviled,  He 
did  not  revile ;  when  He  suffered,  He 
threatened  not/'  &c. 

From  these  considerations,  it  is  manifest 
that  the  "gate"  of  life  is  narrow,  both  on 
account  of  humility,  as  well  as  of  the  theo 
logical  virtues,  faith,  hope,  and  charity: 
"Few"  enter  this  gate;  and  therefore,  when 
the  question  is  asked,  "  If  few  are-  saved/' 
rnost  truly  must  we  answer,  "Few;"  be 
cause  few  there  are  who  endeavour,  with 
their  whole  strength,  to  enter  in  at  this 
narrow  gate. 


CHAPTER  X. 

MORE  CONSIDERATIONS  ON  FAITH. 

BUT  lest  we  should  seem,  by  too  much 
severity,  to  drive  men  away  from  entering 
the  gate,  I  will  show  (since  in  this  book  it 


140        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OK  THE 

lias  been  our  endeavour  to  inflame  the 
minds  of  the  faithful  with  a  desire  of  our 
most  delightful  and  happy  country)  that  the 
"gate/' which  on  one  side  appears  most 
narrow,  on  account  of  the  perfection  of  vir 
tue  required;  on  the  other  is  very  wide  and 
easy  to  enter,  by  reason  of  the  omnipotence, 
truth,  and  mercy  of  God,  if  we  be  truly 
desirous  of  entering  it. 

Let  us  begin  again  with  faith.  Faith 
certainly  proposes  for  our  belief  mysteries 
most  difficult,  far  above  our  reason  and 
understanding,  and  sublimely  exalted  even 
above  the  natural  capacity  of  the  angels 
themselves.  But  since  the  doctrine  of  faith 
admonishes  us,  that  these  mysteries  are  to 
be  believed  on  the  authority  of  God,  who 
cannot  deceive,  and  not  on  that  of  angels, 
or  of  men,  then  the  bounds  begin  to  be 
enlarged.  If  faith  said,  "  Believe  in  one 
God,  and  three  persons ;  believe  that  the 
Son  of  God  was  born  of  the  blessed  Virgin; 
believe  that  Christ  rose  immortal  from  the 
dead  on  the  third  day  by  His  own  power  : 
believe  all  these  points  most  firmly  because 
SS.  Peter,  Paul,  and  John,  Isaias,  Jere- 
mias,  and  Ezekiel,  have  said  so/'  I  should 
hesitate,  not  daring  to  believe  men  like 
myself  on  such  difficult  subjects.  It  is  said, 
'''  Every  man  is  a  liar ;"  and  therefore  it  is 
that  we  require  oaths  and  witnesses,  before 
we  put  our  trust  in  men.  But  since  faith 
says,  "All  these  things  hath  God  revealed; 
and  neither  Peter,  nor  Paul,  nor  John,  nor 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     141 

the  other  apostles  and  prophets,  taught 
them  on  their  own  authority,  but  learned 
them  from  God ;  and  since  they  preached 
His  word,  not  their  own,  then  my  heart 
enlargeth  itself,  and  is  prepared  to  believe. 
And  that  it  was  God  who  spoke  by  the 
apostles  and  prophets,  hath  been  manifest 
ed  unto  us  by  Him  in  so  many  signs  and 
wonders,  that  it  would  be  foolish  and  rash 
not  to  believe.  Thus  speaks  the  apostle  to 
the  Hebrews:  " Which  having  begun  to  be 
declared  by  the  Lord,  was  confirmed  unto 
us  by  them  that  heard  Him.  God  also 
bearing  them  witness  by  signs  and  wonders, 
and  divers  miracles,  and  distributions  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  according  to  His  own  will." 
(chap,  ii.)  What  God  says,  who  will  gain 
say  ?  God  cannot  lie,  for  if  He  could,  He 
would  not  be  God. 

But  these  mysteries,  which  are  proposed 
to  our  belief,  are  above  our  reason. — They 
are :  but  they  are  not  above  the  power  and 
wisdom  of  God.  Therefore,  saith  St. 
James,  "  God  is  greater  than  our  heart;" 
because  He  can  do  what  we  cannot  under 
stand,  and  His  essence  and  existence  are 
more  elevated  than  our  mind  can  compre 
hend.  If  an  unlearned  man  easily  believes  the 
many  incredible  things  philosophers  and 
astronomers  mention  concerning  the  magni 
tude  of  the  sun  and  of  the  planets,  why  should 
not  man  readily  believe  also  whatever  God 
hath  deigned  to  reveal,  since  there  is  an 
infinite  distance  between  the  wisdom  and 


142        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

power  of  the  one,  and  the  small  spark  of 
reason  with  which  the  other  is  endowed  ? 
They  therefore,  who  consider  these  remarks, 
will  find  no  difficulty  in  believing  what  the 
Church  proposes. 


CHAPTER  XL 

MORE  CONSIDERATIONS  ON  HOPE. 

WE  may  say  the  same  of  the  virtue  of 
hope  :  for  if  what  we  hope  to  receive  in  the 
life  to  come,  were  said  to  depend  on  the 
promises  of  man,  justly  should  we  be  reject 
ed  as  vain  impostors,  because  men  can  both 
deceive,  and  are  quite  unable  to  give  such 
great  rewards.  But  we  say,  they  are  not 
to  be  hoped  for  from  man,  but  from  God, 
who  can  neither  lie,  since  He  is  truth,  nor 
deceive  us,  since  He  is  goodness:  nor  is 
anything  impossible  with  Him,  since  He  is 
omnipotent.  Wherefore,  justly  would  that 
rustic  think  himself  mocked  at,  were  any 
one  to  promise  him  the  wisdom  of  Solomon 
or  the  power  of  Augustus,  because  he  that 
would  promise  such  things  would  be  a  man, 
deceitful  and  weak.  But  ought  not  a 
Christian  to  hope,  to  whom  God  promises 
eternal  life,  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  a 
paradise  of  every  pleasure?  Perhaps  we 
want  pledge-s  of  this  bountiful  inten 
tion  of  God.  But,  as  a  figure  of  present 
things,  did  not  God  lead  His  people  through 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      143 

a  dry  path  across  the  Red  Sea  ?  Did  He 
not  rain  down  upon  them  manna  from  hea 
ven  ?  Did  He  not  conduct  them  by  Josue 
into  the  promised  land?  ^  Should  such  a 
remarkable  figure  be  considered  vain  and 
useless  ?  Moreover,  if  "  (rod  so  loved  the 
world,  as  to  give  His  only-begotten  Son/' 
hath  He  not  "  with  Him  given  us  all 
things?"  That  which  we  hope  to  receive 
from  God,  is  it  not  excelled  by  the  "  gift" 
which  He  hath  given  to  us,  when  we  neither 
hoped  nor  asked  for  it  ?  If  He  hath  given 
to  sinners  and  to  His  enemies  the  death  of 
His  Son,  will  He  not  give  to  the  justified 
and  to  His  friends  the  life  of  the  same 
divine  Son?  But,  not  content  with  this, 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  added  as  a  pledge  of 
our  inheritance.  IJe  crieth  in  our  heart, 
"Abba  (Father) ;  and  giveth  testimony  to 
pur  spirit,  that  we  are  the  sons  of  God ;  and 
if  sons,  heirs  also — heirs  indeed  of  God,  and 
joint-heirs  with  Christ:  yet  so,  if  we  suffer 
with  Him."  (chap.  viii.  Epistle  to  the 
Romans.) 

Wherefore,  if  the  magnitude  of  the 
things  promised  seems  beyond  our  hopes, 
yet  they  cannot  exceed  the  power  of  the 
Promisor ;  and  since  this  power  is  infinite, 
it  can  easily  strengthen  our  hopes,  that  we 
shall  without  doubt  receive  the  promises. 
And  this  promise  God  hath  confirmed  with 
an  oath,  as  the  apostle  proves  in  his  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews :  so  that  by  two  certain 
things,  .by  the  promise  of  Him  who  cannot 


144        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

lie,  joined  to  an  oath,  we  can  rest  our  hope, 
as  on  a  safe  Anchor,  of  approaching  even 
within  the  veil  where  Jesus  hath  entered 
for  us,  being  a  priest  for  ever  according  to 
the  order  of  Melchisedech. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

OTHER  CONSIDERATIONS  ON  CHARITY. 

BUT  what  shall  we  say  of  chanty  ?  It  is 
very  narrow,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of 
fulfilling  its  precepts ;  but,  because  of  the 
divine  goodness,  to  which  it  directs  us,  it 
may  be  said  to  be  very  wide.  For  why 
should  it  appear  difficult  to  love  God  with 
our  whole  heart,  and.  soul,  and  strength, 
since  He  is  most  beautiful,  most  wise,  and 
most  worthy  of  infinite  love  ?  It  is  not  dif 
ficult  to  love  that  which  is  excellent  and 
beautiful  on  the  earth ;  but  it  is  not  to  love. 
Doth  God,  then,  seem  to  do  us  an  injury 
when  He  so  strictly  commands  us  to  love 
Him,  as  if  we  were  not  bound  to  love  Him 
of  our  own  accord  ?  We  ardently  love 
what  is  beautiful  in  the  world,  because  we 
clearly  see  it,  but  "  God  no  one  hath  ever 
seen/'  Thus  we  do  not  see  God,  but  we 
daily  behold  His  works,  which  are  so 
beautiful,  and  of  which  the  Wise  man 
speaks  :  "With  whose  beauty  if  they,  being 
deceived,  took  them  to  be  Gods,  let  them 
know  how  much  the  Lord  of  them  is  more 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     145 

beautiful  than  they :  for  the  first  Author  of 
beauty  made  all  these  things."  (ch.  xiii.  3.) 
We  also  experience  His  goodness  in  His 
daily  benefits  to  us;  and  we  have  Him 
for  a  testimony  who  beholds  us,  and  who 
cannot  deceive :  viz.  the  Holy  Spirit,  who 
speaks  by  the  apostles  and  prophets  in  the 
holy  Scripture.  God,  therefore,  is  so  good 
and  beautiful,  that  He  alone  deserves  to  be 
called  good  and  beautiful. 

But  you  will  say,  it  is  hard  that  we 
should,  for  the  love  of  God,  be  sometimes 
compelled  to  lose  our  property,  friends,  and 
even  life  itself.  I  acknowledge  that  it  is  so 
to  those  who  love  not  God:  but  to  those 
who  do  love  Him,  and  desire  to  possess 
Him,  I  assert  that  it  is  very  easy,  especially 
since,  if  we  despise  temporal  goods  for  the 
love  of  God,  we  shall  possess  those  that  are 
incomparably  superior  to  them.  And  what 
are  these  ?  You  lose  corruptible  riches,  but 
you  will  acquire  an  eternal  kingdom ;  you 
lose  father,  brothers,  and  friends,  but  you 
will  possess  God  for  your  father,  Christ  for 
your  brother,  and  all  the  angels  and  saints 
for  your  friends  and  companions :  you  lose 
a  temporal  life,  full  of  misery,  but  you  will 
gain  an  eternal  one,  full  of  happiness.  Hear 
the  Canticle  of  divine  love :  "  If  a  man 
should  give  all  the  substance  of  his  house 
for  love,  he  shall  despise  it  as  nothing;" 
and  a  little  above :  "  Many  waters  cannot 
quench  charity,  neither  can  the  floods  drown 
it."  Hear,  again,  a  lover  of  God ;  "  Who 

10 


146        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

then  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of 
Christ  ?  Shall  tribulation  ?  or  distress  ?  or 
famine?  or  nakedness?  or  danger?  or  per 
secution  ?  or  the  sword  ? But  in  all  these 

things  we  overcome,  because  of  Him  that 
hath  loved  us."  (Epistle  to  the  Romans, 
chap.  viii.  35.) 

But  so  to  love  my  neighbour  as  to  share 
my  goods  with  him ;  and,  even  though  he 
were  my  enemy  and  had  grievously  injured 
me,  I  should  be  obliged  not  only  to  par 
don  him,  but  also  to  be  kind  towards  him : 
this  seems  to  be  against  nature.  It  may  be 
against  nature  corrupted  by  sin,  but  not 
against  nature  regenerated  by  the  grace  of 
Christ.  Does  not  God  himself  share  His 
blessings  with  His  enemies,  and  daily  par 
don  them,  and  return  them  good  for  evil  ? 
"He  maketh  His  sun  to  rise  upon  the  good 
and  the  bad,  and  raineth  upon  the  just  and 
the  unjust."  Now,  if  God  thus  acts  towards 
His  enemies,  it  is  not  against  the  nature  of 
God,  nor  the  nature  of  men  created  after 
His  image,  to  love  his  enemies,  and  do 
them  good.  But  it  is  opposite  to  the  nature 
of  beasts,  and  of  those,  "  who,  when  they 
were  in  honour,  did  not  understand;  but 
they  are  compared  to  senseless  beasts,  and 
are  become  like  to  them." 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     147 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

OTHER  CONSIDERATIONS  ON  HUMILITY. 

I  NOW  come  to  humility,  which,  like  its 
other  sisters,  is  hard  to  be  acquired  by  the 
proud  and  the  arrogant;  but  to  those  who 
attend  the  School  of  Christ  and  wish  to 
learn  of  Him,  it  is  very  easy  of  attainment. 
.And  first,  we  should  humble  ourselves 
-  "  under  the  powerful  hand  of  God,"  as  St. 
Peter  admonishes  us,  and  his  co-apostle 
St.  James  confirms.  But  what  difficulty 
can  there  be,  in  a  mortal  man  humbling 
himself  before  his  Immortal  and  Omnipo 
tent  God?  Secondly,  we  should  choose 
the  last  place  amongst  men,  because  "each 
one  should  esteem  others  better  than  them 
selves/'  as  the  apostle  tells  us  in  his  Epistle 
to  the  Philippians.  They  who  know  them 
selves  and  are  conscious  of  their  own 
infirmities,  and  know  not  those  of  their 
neighbour,  find  no  difficulty  in  esteeming 
all  others  before  themselves,  and  conceding 
them  a  higher  place.  For  as  pride  springs 
from  ignorance,  so  does  humility  from  a 
knowledge  of  one's-self.  The  heart  of  the 
proud  man  easily  sees  the  vices  which 
others  have,  because  they  are  all  outside 
him ;  but  his  own  vices,  often  very  numer 
ous,  he  sees  not,  because  they  are  within 
him ;  just  as  the  eye  does  not  behold  what  is 


148        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

within,  but  only  what  is  without.  Of  this 
the  Pharisee  is  an  example  for  us,  who 
gave  thanks  to  God,  that  he  was  not  as  the 
rest  of  men — a  thief,  unjust,  an  adulterer. 
He  did  not  observe  these  vices  in  himself; 
but  there  were  others  concealed  within ; 
pride,  blindness  of  soul,  and  impenitence 
which  he  did  not  see ;  therefore  he  preferred 
himself  to  the  publican  praying  in  the  same 
temple.  But  the  publican,  who  had  better 
eyes,  saw  his  own  faults,  and  not  his  vir 
tues  ;  therefore  he  sat  down  in  the  lowest 
place,  and  standing  afar  off,  struck  his 
breast,  imploring  the  mercy  of  God :  by 
His  j  udgment,  the  one  went  home  justified; 
the  other  condemned.  Wherefore,  if  we 
seriously  endeavour  to  know  ourselves,  we 
shall  find  no  difficulty  in  entering  the 
"gate"  of  the  House  of  the  Lord. 

But  to  all  this  we  must  add,  that  the 
gate  which  appears  so  very  narrow,  and 
almost  impenetrable,  to  those  who  are 
heavy  and  corpulent,  or  covered  with  many 
garments,  or  that  attempt  to  enter  with  an 
erect  body ;  this  same  gate  is  broad  and 
wide  to  those  who  enter  unencumbered, 
naked,  and  lowly.  Wherefore,  we  are  to 
blame,  if  we  cannot  easily  enter  at  the  same 
gate,  through  which  so  many  saints  have 
before  us,  without  any  difficulty  or  trouble. 
Begin  then,  Christian  soul,  to  cast  aside 
the  burden  of  riches :  remember  that  your 
riches  have  been  given  you  by  God,  as  to  a 
steward,  not  as  to  a  master,  in  order  that 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     149 

you  should  distribute  them  amongst  the 
poor,  but  not  to  hoard  them  up  carefully 
for  yourself  alone ;  and  thus  your  soul 
being  free  from  the  love  of  riches,  having 
thrown  aside  as  it  were  a  great  burthen, 
will  easily  enter  the  "  narrow  gate."  Cast 
away  also  a  love  of  carnal  pleasures,  or 
rather  cast  out  those  noxious  humours  that 
produce  wind,  and  inflate  the  body.  In 
fine,  reject  the  opinion  of  your  own  excel 
lence  ;  put  on  the  humility  of  Christ ;  bow 
down  your  neck  to  the  obedience  of  His 
commands,  and  then  complain,  if  you 
cannot  easily  enter  in  at  the  gate  of  sal 
vation. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

THE  NECESSITY  OF  ENTERING  THIS  GATE,  HOWEVER 
NARROW,  IF  WE  WISH  TO  BE  SAVED. 

BUT  whether  this  gate  be  broad  or  nar 
row,  we  must  necessarily  strive  to  enter  by 
it :  for  after  this  life,  which  passeth  as  a 
shadow,  there  is  no  other  place  where  we 
can  well  remain,  except  within  this  gate. 
Therefore  our  Lord  admonishes  us,  saying, 
(l  Strive  ye  to  enter  in  at  the  narrow  gate," 
because,  as  He  adds  in  the  same  place, 
those  who  remain  without,  will  all  be 
banished  to  a  place  where  there  will  be 
eternal  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth : 
these  signify  the  greatest  torments  with  a 


150        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

despair  of  any  remedy ;  and  thence  comes  a 
madness  that  impatiently  endures  what  it 
does  not  wish  to  endure,  and  will  always  be 
compelled  to  endure.  But  how  much  bet 
ter  is  it  to  strive  to  enter  in  at  the  narrow 
gate,  where  rest  and  joy  will  be  found,  after 
we  have  borne  a  little  labour  and  sorrow  ? 
If  indeed  men  could  escape  the  narrowness 
of  the  "gate,  and  the  pains  of  hell  at  the 
same  time,  perhaps  their  frailty  might  ex 
cuse  them  from  using  violence  to  enter. 
But  since  we  are  compelled,  either  to 
labour  here  for  a  time  by  doing  violence, 
or  to  fall  hereafter  into  eternal  sorrows, 
what  judgment — what  reason  can  we  have 
that  would  induce  us  to  avoid  minor  evils, 
and  so  to  find  those  that  are  intolerable 
and  most  grievous  !  But  even  if  no  evils 
would  follow  after  this  life,  but  being  de 
prived  of  the  House  of  God,  where  alone 
are  eternal  joys,  this  ought  to  induce  us 
to  strive  to  enter,  not  only  through  the  nar 
rowness  of  the  gate,  but  through  briars  and 
thorns,  and  fire  and  the  sword.  And  though 
during  this  life  we  cannot  feel  what  a  loss 
it  is  to  be  deprived "  of  beatitude,  yet  after 
the  separation  of  the  soul  from  the  body, 
the  eyes  of  the  mind  will  be  opened  and 
will  most  clearly  see — what  a  loss,  what  an 
infinite  loss  it  is,  not  to  have  obtained  the 
end  for  which  we  were  created.  This 
desire  is  signified  by  those  words  which 
are  mentioned  in  the  Gospel,  as  being 
used  by  those  who  shall  remain  outside : 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     151 

"  Lord,  Lord,  open  unto  us/'  The  desire 
of  their  last  end  will  ever  torment  these 
wretched  beings,  and  the  remorse  of  con 
science  will  never  rest :  thus  the  words 
will  be  fulfilled,  "  Their  worm  will  never 
die,  and  their  fire  shall  never  be  extin 
guished." 

Oh !  if  we  could  now  seriously  think 
with  what  ardour  these  men  will  then  ex 
claim,  "Lord,  Lord,  open  unto  us:"  as  if 
they  said,  we  cannot  live  without  entering 
into  the  House  of  the  Lord,  and  yet  we 
cannot  die!  Wherefore  we  exist  not  to  live, 
but  to  be  for  ever  miserable.  Wherefore 
"  open  unto  us,"  because  we  are  prepared 
to  suffer  every  thing,  provided  only  we  can 
enter.  But  He  will  answer :  "  I  know  you 
not.  The  year  of.  jubilee  has  ended  ; 
when  you  could  have  entered,  you  would 
not;  now  therefore  it  is  but  just,  that  when 
you  wish  to  enter,  you  cannot."  Thus 
though  deprived  of  all  hope,  they  will  never 
cease  exclaiming,  being  impelled  by  a 
natural  desire,  "  Lord,  Lord,  open  unto 
us."  But  because  in  their  lifetime  they 
were  deaf  to  the  exhortations  of  the  Lord 
crying  out  to  them,  "  Strive  ye  to  enter  in 
at  the  narrow  gate,"  now  the  Lord  will 
turn  a  deaf  ear  to  them  exclaiming,  "  Lord, 
Lord,  open  unto  us."  Wherefore,  if  we 
be  wise,  let  us  now  consult  our  own  welfare 
whilst  we  have  time  :  let  us  do  now,  while 
we  are  able,  what  we  shall  then  wish  to 
have  done,  and  shall  not  be  able  to  do  it. 


152        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 


THE 

ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS. 


BOOK  IY. 
CHAPTER  I. 

TEUE  JOY  IS  TO  BE  FOUND  IN  HEAVEN. 

PARADISE   is  a  name   of   pleasure   and 
delight,  for  it  signifies  a  garden,  or  most 
beautiful  orchard,  suitable  both  for  recrea 
tion  and    amusement.      In   the    book    of 
Genesis  this  paradise  of  pleasure  is  not 
once  named,  when  the  terrestrial  paradise 
is  the  subject  of  the  discourse.      But  in 
the  prophet  Ezechiel  speaking  of  the  hea 
venly  paradise,  it  is  said  of  the  chief  angel 
who  afterward  fell  and  became  the  devil : 
'  Thou  wast  in  the  pleasures  of  the  para 
dise  of  God."     But  since  the  Holy  Scrip 
tures  mention  nothing  of  Paradise,  but  that 
there  were  in  it  many  trees  and  the  foun 
tain  of  living  water,    therefore  it   is    my 
intention  under  the  word  "  Paradise,"  to 
explain  the  joys  and  pleasures  which   the 
blessed  possess  in  heaven.     And  this  will 
be,  unless  I  am  deceived,  a  useful  contem- 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      153 

plation  to  excite  our  minds  to  seek  and 
reflect  upon  the  things  above :  and  thus  so 
to  regulate  our  life,  that  when  we  depart 
hence,  it  may  not  be  to  sorrow  and  dark 
ness,  but  by  the  divine  assistance,  to  Eter 
nal  light  and  happiness.  All  men,  with 
few  exceptions,  are  influenced  more  by 
pleasure,  than  by  any  thing  else.  And  the 
Church  in  one  of  her  prayers  says,  "  There 
may  our  hearts  be  fixed,  where  our  true  joy 
is."  And  first  we  shall  consider  what  the 
Holy  Scripture  says  of  the  heavenly  Para 
dise,  whence  we  shall  prove  that  in  it  are 
true  joys;  then  we  shall  endeavour  to  ex 
plain  what  these  joys  are :  and  lastly,  by 
various  reasons,  or  rather  comparisons,  we 
shall  prove  that  these  joys  are  far  more  ex 
cellent  than  we  can  either  comprehend,  or 
think,  or  even  imagine. 

First,  then,  the  name  of  paradise  signifies 
pleasure  and  delight,  as  we  have  already 
seen  from  the  Book  of  Genesis.  And  that 
there  is  a  Paradise  in  heaven,  Ezechiel  tes 
tifies.  Our  Lord  also  testifies  in  the  gos 
pel,  when  he  said  to  the  thief  hanging  by 
him :  "  This  day  thou  shalt  be  with  me  in 
paradise/'  He  used  the  word  paradise  for 
the  kingdom  of  God,  and  its  essential  bea 
titude  :  for  the  good  thief  had  said,  "  Lord, 
remember  me  when  thou  shalt  come  into 
thy  kingdom."  St.  Paul  testifies  in  his 
second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  where 

he  says,  "  I  know  a  man  in  Christ Such 

an  one  rapt  even  to  the  third  heaven,  and 


154        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

was  caught  up  into  paradise."     St.  John 
testifies  in  his  Apocalypse,  where  he  intro 
duces  the  Lord  thus  speaking :  "  To  him 
that  overcometh  I  will  give  to  eat  of  the 
tree  of  life,  which  is  in  the  paradise  of  my 
God."     From  these  passages  it  is  evident, 
that  the  region  of  the  "  blessed  "  is  a  place 
of  happiness  and  delight.     And  when  our 
Lord  says  to  the  good  and  faithful  servant, 
"Enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord/' 
does  He  not  most  clearly  declare,  that  the 
house  or  city  of  God  is  a  place  of  joy,  to 
which  good  and  faithful  servants  are  admit 
ted  when  they  leave  this  world  ?    Our  Lord 
in  many  places  compares  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  to  a  supper,  as  we  read  in  St.  Luke, 
where  it  is  said :  "  A  man  made  a  great 
supper,"  <fcc.      And  again,  "I  dispose  to 
you,  as  my  Father  hath  disposed  to  me, 
a  kingdom :  that  you  may  eat  and  drink  at 
my  table,   in  my  kingdom."     And  when 
likewise  we  are  told  in  the   Apocalypse, 
"  Blessed  are  they  that  are  called  to  the 
marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb."  The  Scrip 
ture,  by  the  figure  of  the  supper,  certainly 
points  out  the  pleasure  and  delight  of  the 
heavenly  paradise  ;  unless  some  one  assert, 
that  there  is  no  pleasure  in  the  sense  of 
taste.     In  addition  to  these  passages,  the 
kingdom  of  God — both  in  the  Gospels  and 
the  Apocalypse — is  compared  to  royal  nup 
tials  :  as  we  learn  from  the  parable  ^  of  the 
king,  who  made  a  marriage  for  his  son; 
and  from  the  parable  of  the  wise  and  foolish 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS       155 

virgins,  of  whom  the  wise  went  with  the 
bridegroom  to  the  marriage;  but  the  foolish 
virgins  remained  without.  The  same  also 
is  found  in  the  Apocalypse,  where  many 
things  are  said  of  the  "  marriage  supper  of 
the  Lamb" — celebrated  with  great  magni 
ficence  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Now 
the  beatitude  of  the  saints  may  be  com 
pared  to  a  royal  marriage,  because  on  such 
occasions  every  variety  of  pleasure  is  expe 
rienced  and  enjoyed.  But  of  this  we  shall 
treat  in  the  following  Book. 

In  fine,  in  the  Apocalypse  St.  John  sees 
a  choir  of  virgins  who  followed  the  Lamb 
wheresoever  He  goeth,  and  sang  a  new 
canticle  which  no  one  else  could  ^  sing. 
Which  passage  St.  Augustine  explains^  in 
his  Book  on  "  Holy  Virginity/'  as  having 
relation  to  certain  joys  and  holy  pleasures, 
which  virgins  alone  will  enjoy.  Thus  it  is 
manifest,  that  in  our  heavenly  kingdom  and 
city,  there  are  many  true  joys  arid  most 
abundant  pleasures. 


CHAPTER  II. 

ON  THE  JOY  OF  THE  UNDERSTANDING. 

SINCE  it  has  been  proved  from  Holy 
Scripture,  that  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
there  is  true  joy,  we  will  now  explain  what 
those  joys  are.  And  first,  we  will  briefly 


156         THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

explain  the  joys  of  the  Understanding,  of 
the  Will,  and  of  the  Memory,  which  relate 
to  the  mind :  afterwards  the  joys  of  the 
other  senses  which  relate  to  the  body.  We 
do  not  here  mean  to  assert,  that  the  under 
standing,  memory,  and  the  senses  of  the 
body  are  the  proper  seat  of  joy;  sincere 
are  not  ignorant  that  joy  as  well  as  desire, 
properly  belong  to  the  will  in  the  superior 
part,  and  to  the  appetite  in  the  inferior. 
But  we  speak  as  men  generally  do-— who 
hesitate  not  to  say,  "  The  eye  is  delighted 
with  the  beauty  of  colour,  and  the  ear  with 
the  harmony  of  sound/'  By  the  joy  of  the 
understanding,  therefore,  or  of  the  memory, 
or  external  senses,  we  mean  the  pleasure 
which  men  experience  from  those  objects, 
which  they  either  understand,  or  remem 
ber,  or  derive  from  their  external  senses. 

The  chief  joy  of  the  "  Blessed"  then  will 
be,  to  behold  with  the  eyes  of  the  soul  God 
face  to  face,  as  St.  Paul  mentions  in  his 
first  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians :  and  to  be 
hold  Him  as  He  is,  according  to  St.  John. 
And  how  great  this  joy  will  be,  we  can  con 
jecture  from  what  the  prophet  Isaias  and 
the  apostle  Paul  testify,  that  it  exceeds  all 
the  joys  which  we  have  seen,  or  heard,  or 
desired,  or  can  imagine:  "  Eye  hath  not 
seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath  it  entered 
into  the  heart  of  man,  what  things  God 
hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him/' 
(1  Corinth,  ii.  9.)  The  holy  Scripture 
also  speaks  of  a  particular  and  essen- 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      157 

tial  happiness  which  consists  in  seeing 
God  —  according  to  the  words  of  our 
Lord :  "  Blessed  are  the  clean  of  heart,  for 
they  shall  see  God :"  and  also :  "  Now  this 
is  eternal  life  :  that  they  may  know  thee, 
the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom 
thou  hast  sent."  (St.  John,  xvii.  3.)  This 
truly  seems  a  great  privilege,  that  no 
one  can  see,  or  hear,  or  desire,  or  imagine 
any  good  equal  to  that  which  the  sight  of  God 
will  convey  to  us  ;  and  yet  this  is  no  exag 
geration,  but  the  simple  truth,  because  the 
eyes,  the  ears,  and  the  heart  of  man  are 
accustomed  to  finite  and  limited  joys :  but 
the  sight  of  G;od  is  a  vision  of  light  inacces 
sible,  of  an  infinite  Good  which  contains 
every  good,  according  to  what  the  Lord 
said  to  Moses  when  he  had  asked,  (t  Show 
me  thy  face."  He  answered,  "  I  will  show 
thee  every  good  thing."  But  that  we  may 
prove  this  from  reason,  we  learn  from  St. 
Thomas  that  delight  which  comes  from 
knowledge  requires  three  things — power,  a 
sensible  object  suitable  to  that  power,  and  an 
union  of  the  object  with  this  power;  and 
that  in  proportion  as  the  power  is  capable  of 
knowledge,  and  the  object  more  noble,  and 
the  union  more  intimate,  so  much  the 
greater  pleasure  is  derived.  ^  But  no  one 
can  doubt  but  that  the  mind  is  much  more 
pure  and  noble,  and  more  capable  of  know 
ledge  than  the  exterior  senses.  ^  Now,  all 
must  admit  that  God  is  the  highest  and 
most  noble  object,  placed  not  only  above 


158        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

all  objects  of  sense,  bat  also  above  those  of 
the  mind,  being  infinite  Goodness  itself. 
But  it  is  also  equally  certain,  that  a  union 
of  the  mind  with  God  by  a  clear  vision  is  so 
intimate  that  the  essence  of  God  will  pene 
trate  the  whole  soul,  whilst  the  soul  herself 
will  be  transformed  into  God  as  if  she  were 
plunged  into  a  great  sea.  Who,  therefore, 
can  imagine  the  greatness  of  this  joy  ?  The 
sweetness  of  this  embrace  from  an  infinite 
Good,  from  a  Spouse  of  infinite  beauty? 
From  the  beautiful  union  of  colour  with 
the  sense  of  sight,  and  the  sweetest  sounds 
with  the  sense  of  hearing,  we  certainly  ex 
perience  great  pleasure ;  and  often  it  is  so 
great,  that  many  by  it  almost  lose  their 
senses.  And  yet  the  sense  of  feeling  is 
material,  and  common  to  us  with  beasts : 
the  objects  also  are  corporal,  and  deceive 
us  as  often  as  they  delight  us.  In  fine,  the 
union  is  superficial  and  external ;  and  in 
many  of  the  senses  it  is  not  an  union  of  the 
object  itself,  but  of  its  image  with  the  mind. 
But  the  spiritual  union  of  God  with  the 
understanding  is  more  firm,  durable,  and 
complete ;  whilst  corporal  pleasures  that 
are  derived  from  the  senses,  because  they 
are  mutable,  cannot  be  durable  nor  com 
plete,  being  given  to  us  as  it  were  by 
drops.  Wherefore,  without  doubt,  the 
pleasure  of  the  mind  is  greater  than  that  of 
the  senses. 

Wherefore,    0    Man !    recollect  thyself, 
and  weigh  impartially  the  pleasure  which 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     159 

the  world  offers  thee,  with  that  which  God 
offers  thee,  when  He  promises  Himself  tc 
those  that  love  Him:  choose  what  thou 
wishest  for.  If  thou  love  pleasure  which 
is  certainly  pleasing  to  thee,  thou  wilt 
choose  the  greatest,  rather  than  the  least ; 
the  ever-enduring,  rather  than  the  momen 
tary.  But  not  oUy  the  sight  of  God  is 
promised  to  the  good^in  heaven,  but  also 
the  sight  of  all  those  things  which  God  hath 
made.  Here  on  earth  we  perceive  by  our 
eyes  the  sun,  moon,  stars ;  the  sea,  rivers, 
animals,  trees  and  minerals.  But  our 
mind  does  not  know  the  substance  of  these 
created  things,  their  essential  difference, 
their  properties  or  power:  we  cannot  see 
even  our  own  soul,  but  like  blind  men  we 
feel  for  effects,  and  by  reasoning,  acquire  a 
little  knowledge.  What  then  will  be  the 
joy,  when  our  mind  in  the  vision  of  God, 
will  clearly  see  the  substance  of  all  things, 
their  difference,  properties  and  power ! 
And  what  great  exultation  will  be  ours, 
when  we  shall  behold  the  innumerable 
army  of  angels,  not  one  of  whom  resembles 
another,  and  shall  clearly  see  the  difference 
of  all !  What  unbounded  joy  will  it  be, 
when  we  shall  behold  those  holy  men,  who 
have  been  from  the  beginning  of  the  world 
even  unto  the  end,  united  together  with  all 
the  angels !  When  we  shall  behold  the 
merits  of  each,  their  crowns  and  palms  of 
victory !  We  shall  also  see  with  feelings 
of  pleasure,  the  crimes  and  torments  of  the 


160         THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

damned,  in  which  the  sanctity  of  the  good, 
and  the  justice   of  God  will  wonderfully 
shine  forth;   for  then  the  just  will  wash 
their  hands  in  the  blood  of  the  wicked,  as 
the  prophet  saith.     And  what  doth  "wash 
ing  their  hands  in  the  blood  of  the  wicked" 
signify,  but  that  the  good  works   of  the 
blessed  will  shine  more  Brightly,  in  compa 
rison  with  the  works  of  the  wicked  ?     The 
virginity  of  some  will  be  more  resplendent, 
when    compared    with    the    adulteries    of 
others:    and  the  fasts  and  alms-deeds  of 
many,  when  compared  with  the  gluttony 
and  revellings  of  others.     It  will  then  be 
said:  this  young  man  was  beautiful,  and 
yet  he  observed  perpetual   chastity:   this 
other  youth  was  beautiful  also,  but  not  con 
tent  with  his  own  wife,  he  often  committed 
adulteries  and  sacrileges.     This  man  was 
rich  and  of  noble  extraction,  and  yet  he 
fasted  and  prayed  often,  and  gave  abundant 
alms :  another  was  equally  rich  and  of  noble 
extraction,  but  being  addicted  to  gluttony 
and  drunkenness,  he  spent   his  money  in 
pleasures,  so  that  he  had  nothing  to  give  to 
the  poor.     Hence  it^will  be,  that  the  joy  of 
the  '  Just '  will  be  increased,  by  knowing 
the  crimes  of  the  wicked.     At  the   same 
time,  their  joy  will  also  be  great,  from  the 
contemplation  of  the  justice  which  will  be 
so    conspicuous,   in    the    rewards    of   the 
blessed  and  the  punishment  of  the  wicked. 
Now,  in  human  affairs,  we  perceive  a  great 
anomaly,  because  crime  is  often  united  with 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS       161 

reward,  and  virtue  with  punishment,  so 
that  the  justice  of  God  seems  in  a  manner 
to  be  obscured  amongst  men.  But  then 
every  crime  will  have  its  punishment,  and 
every  virtue  its  reward,  so  that  the  beauty 
of  God's  justice  will  excite  incredible  joy 
in  the  minds  of  the  blessed. 


CHAPTER  III. 

ON  THE  JOY  OF  THE  WILL, 

THERE  are  three  things  which  produce 
the  greatest  love  in  the  will.  One  is  a 
most  ardent  and  inextinguishable  love  of 
God  and  of  our  neighbour ;  for  love  is  the 
chief  ingredient  of  every  thing  loved.  He 
that  loves,  thinks  that  every  thing  which 
he  loves,  is  most  beautiful  and  excellent ; 
and  therefore  he  rejoices  greatly  when  he 
sees  them;  and  when  absent  from  them 
grieves  inconsolably.  We  see  parents,  who 
naturally  have  great  love  for  their  children, 
consider  them  the  most  beautiful,  talented, 
and  prude-nt,  although  they  are  often  de 
formed  and  devoid  of  judgment  and  know 
ledge.  And  if  a  choice  were  given  to 
them,  they  would  not  exchange  their  sons 
for  any  others,  however  superior  to  their 
own  in  the  judgment  of  men.  We  often, 
too,  behold  people,  either  by  chance  or  any 
other  cause,  in  love  with  deformed  persons, 

11 


162        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

to  converse  with  whom  they  consider  a 
great  pleasure,  and  to  be  separated  from 
them  a  great  calamity.  This  would  cer 
tainly  not  be  the  case,  unless,  as  we  have 
said,  love  is  the  ingredient  of  every  thing 
loved.  And  since  this  is  the  case,  how 
great  will  be  the  joy  of  the  saints,  to  con 
verse  with  God  and  all 'the  blessed,  whom 
they  will  ever  love  with  the  most  ardent 
affection,  and  who  not  falsely,  but  very 
truly,  are  most  beautiful  and  excellent, 
and  from  whom  they  know  they  will  never 
be  removed.  On  the  other  hand,  one  of 
the  greatest  torments  of  hell  will  be,  to  be 
united  with  those  whom  we  shall  hold  in 
the  utmost  horror,  and  who  we  know  cir 
cumvented  us  with  a  thousand  artifices. 

Another  circumstance  that  will  cause 
great  joy  in  the  mind  of  the  blessed,  will 
be  a  certain  inexpressible  repose,  and 
satiety  without  fulness,  which  will  make 
them  happy  and  contented  in  every  way. 
Here  on  earth  no  one  is  contented  with  his 
lot,  no  one  but  wishes  for  more  than  he 
has,  which  he  cannot  obtain.  Hence  all 
are  hungry,  all  thirsty,  all  live  in  discon 
tent.  Nor  ought  this  to  appear  wonderful 
to  us,  since  our  soul  is  capable  of  an  infi 
nite  and  eternal  good,  and  created  things 
are  frail  and  insignificant,  which  cannot 
last  long.  What  then  will  be  the  joy  of 
that  man,  who  shall  see  ^  himself  in  a 
place  where  he  will  live  quite  contented! 
where  he  will  desire  nothing,  fear  nothing. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     163 

require  nothing,  nor  seek  for  any  thing 
more!  0  Peace!  that  exceedeth  every 
pleasure  which  the  world  can  give,  and 
which  alone  is  found  in  the  heavenly  Jeru 
salem,  the  city  of  our  great  and  peaceful 
King !  For  thee  my  soul  sigheth,  full  of 
troubles  and  temptations :  in  the  recollec 
tion  and  expectation  of  thee  alone,  it  rest- 
eth  for  a  little  time. 

The  third  circumstance  that  will  give  joy 
to  the  blessed,  is  perfect  justice,  and  that 
more  perfect  than  original  justice  was  in 
Adam.  The  one  subjected  the  inferior 
part  to  the  superior,  till  the  latter  was  sub 
ject  to  God :  but  the  other  will  subject  the 
inferior  to  the  superior,  and  the  superior  to 
God,  by  a  most  firm  and  indissoluble 
union.  The  one  was  like  a  woollen  or 
linen  vest:  but  the  other  will  be  all  of 
gold  or  silk,  which  will  make  the  will  most 
beautiful  and  lovely  to  God,  to  itself,  to  the 
angels,  and  to  all  the  blessed.  This  is 
that  perfect  justice  which  hath  no  stain, 
not  even  a  venial  one ;  so  that  of  such  a 
soul  clothed  with  such  a  garment  it  may 
be  said :  "  Thou  art  all  beautiful,  my  be 
loved,  and  there  is  no  spot  in  thee."  This 
includes  all  those  virtues  which  admit  of 
no  imperfection,  and  how  great  joy  and 
pleasure  this  justice  brings  with  it,  the 
wise  man  beareth  witness  in  the  Proverbs, 
"  A  secure  mind  is  like  a  continual  feast." 
(chap,  xv.)  That  mind  alone  is  secure, 
whose  conscience  never  stings,  and  which 


164        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

by  perfect  justice  is  so  established  in  good% 
that  it  cannot  fall,  even  for  a  moment.  Of 
this  St.  Paul  beareth  witness  when  he 
says,  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  ^meat 
and  drink;  but  justice,  and  peace,  and  joy  in 
the  Holy  Ghost/'  (Epistle  to  the  Romans, 
chap.  xiv.  17.)  Here  the  holy  Apostle 
plainly  teaches  us,  that  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  possesses  in  itself  great  joy;  but 
that  it  does  not  consist  in  the  pleasure  of 
meat  and  drink,  as  carnal  men  might  per 
haps  wish,  but  in  justice,  which  produces  in 
the  mind  a  solid  peace  and  true  joy.^  For 
he  that  is  perfectly  just,  hath  not  in  his 
heart  any  thing  to  reprehend  him,  nor  in 
his  actions  what  others  might  reprehend. 
Hence  arises  a  solid  and  sweet  peace  with 
God,  with  himself,  and  with  all  others: 
hence,  an  unspeakable  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost,  with  which  no  earthly  or  temporal 
pleasure  can  bear  any  comparison. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

ON  THE  JOY  OF  THE  MEMORY. 

THE  memory  will  supply  no  small  mat 
ter  for  joy,  from  the  recollection  of  the  past. 
First,  the  recollection  of  the  benefits  of 
God  in  the  spiritual  and  corporal,  the  natu 
ral  and  supernatural  life,  as  well  as  the 
temporal  and  eternal,  will  bring  incredible 
joy,  when  the  just  recollect  in  how  many 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS       165 

ways  the  blessings  of  heavenly  sweetness 
were  given  to  them.  Then  the  recollec 
tion  of  the  dangers  from  which  God  deli 
vered  them  so  wonderfully,  in  every  age 
and  every  state,  will  be  a  source  of  un 
bounded  joy.  And  amongst  other  dan 
gers  I  consider  this  the  chief,  that  often 
they  were  near  committing  mortal  sin,  and 
therefore  near  hell,  and  yet  that  God. 
moved  by  His  goodness  alone,  prevented 
the  sin.  This  singular  mercy  of  God  being 
often  considered  by  the  elect  in  their  most 
peaceful  kingdom,  will  give  them  the 
greatest  delight.  And  if  the  saints  had  not 
the  recollection  of  these  things  in  heaven, 
how  could  they,  as  the  Psalmist  saith,  sing 
the  mercies  of  the  Lord  for  ever  ?  "Nothing 
will  be  sweeter  in  the  city/'  says  St.  Au 
gustine,  "  than  this  canticle  for  the  glory  of 
the  grace  of  Christ,  by  which  we  were 
redeemed/'"' 

What  shall  I  say  of  the  course  of  ages 
from  the  beginning,  even  to  the  end  of 
time?  What  pleasure  will  the  remem 
brance  of  so  many  vicissitudes  bring,  of 
such  a  variety  of  things,  which  the  wonder 
ful  providence  of  God  so  wisely  governed, 
ruled,  and  conducted  to  their  proper  ends  ! 
This  perhaps  is  "the  stream  of  the  river 
which  maketh  the  city  of  God  joyful." 
What  is  the  course  of  ages  flowing  with  so 
great  velocity  and  never  interrupting  its 

*  Lib.  22.    "  De  Civitate  Dei." 


166        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

course,  except  'the  stream  of  the  river' 
that  rolls  its  waters  continually,  till  they 
disappear  and  are  lost  in  the  ocean  ?  And 
then,  whilst  the  stream  floweth  and  time 
flieth,  many  doubt  of  the  providence  of 
God:  and  some  even  of  His  servants  are 
disturbed  by  this  ( stream  of  the  river/ 
which  often  brings  evil  to  the  good,  and 
blessings  to  the  wicked ;  which  takes  away 
the  good  land  from  the  just,  and  carries  it 
to  the  camp  of  the  wicked,  and  brings  them 
so  many  temptations,  that  they  seem  to 
complain  of  the  providence  of  God.  Hear 
the  royal  Prophet :  "  But  my  feet  were  al 
most  moved :  my  steps  had  well  nigh  slipt. 
Because  I  had  a  zeal  on  occasion  of  the 
wicked,  seeing  the  prosperity  of  sinners:" 
and  a  little  lower :  ' '  Behold  these  are  sin 
ners  ;  and  yet  abounding  in  the  world  they 
have  obtained  riches.  And  1  said:  then 
have  I  in  vain  justified  my  heart,  and 
washed  my  hands  among  the  innocent. 
And  I  have  been  scourged  all  the  day," 
cfcc.  (Psalm  Ixxii.)  Hear  Jeremias: 
:(  Thou  ^indeed,  0  Lord,  art  just,  if  I  will 
plead  with  thee,  but  yet  I  will  speak  what 
is  just  to  thee.  Why  doth  the  way  of  the 
wicked  prosper:  why  is  it  well  with  all  them 
that  transgress,  and  do  wickedly?  Thou 
hast  planted  them,  and  they  have  taken 
root:  they  prosper  and  bring  forth  fruit: 
thou  art  near  in  their  mouth,  and  %far  from, 
their  reins."  (chap,  xii.)  Hear  the  pro- 
1  het  Habacuc :  "  Why  lookest  thou  upon 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     167 

them  that  do  unjust  things,  and  boldest  thy 
peace,  when  the  wicked  devoureth  the  man 
that  is  more  just  than  himself?  And  thou 
wilt  make  men  as  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  and 
as  the  creeping  things  that  have  no  ruler." 
(chap,  i.)  But  when  the  course  of  time 
shall  be  accomplished,  and  the  river  shall 
be  lost  in  the  sea,  then  the  saints  in  heaven, 
calling  to  mind  all  its  revolutions,  shall 
clearly  read  the  reason  of  its  vicissitudes  in 
the  book  of  .divine  providence,  and  thereby 
it  is  incredible,  how  'the  stream  of  this 
river/  represented  to  them  by  memory, 
will  make  joyful  the  city  of  God !  There 
they  will  see,  why  God  permitted  the  first 
angel  and  the  first  man  to  fall:  why  the 
mercy  of  God  liberated  man,  and  did  not 
liberate  the  angel.  There  they  will  see, 
why  God  chose  for  His  peculiar  people  the 
children  of  Abraham,  who,  nevertheless, 
he  foresaw,  would  be  a  stiff-necked  people : 
and  how  great  blessings  he  was  preparing, 
on  account  of  their  obstinacy,  for  the  Gen 
tiles.  In  fine,  to  omit  speaking  of  His  uni 
versal  providence,  there  they  will  see  why 
He  permitted  many,  and  nearly  all  the 
just,  to  suffer  afflictions;  it  was,  that  He 
might  crown  them  more  gloriously.  And 
thus,  from  the  remembrance  of  them,  they 
will  bless  with  great  joy  all  those  crosses 
which  they  suffered,  since  they  see  them 
changed  into  eternal  crowns,  and  they  will 
exclaim  with  the  Prophet:  "  According  to 


168        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

the  multitude  of  my  sorrows  in  my  heart, 
thy  comforts  have  given  joy  to  my  soul." 


CHAPTER  V. 

ON  THE  JOY  OF  THE  EYES. 

LET  us  now  consider  the  joys  of  a  glori 
fied  body.  And  first,  there  will  be  the  joy 
of  the  sense  of  "  seeing/'  which  amongst 
corporal  senses  is  the  most  noble,  and  its 
office  the  most  extensive.  This  sense  then 
will  rejoice  at  the  splendour  and  beauty  of 
its  own  body  in  heaven ;  for  it  will  see  the 
body  ( reformed  'by  Christ,  '  and  made  like 
to  the  body  of  His  glory/  as  St.  Paul  men 
tions  in  ^his  Epistle  to  the  Philippians. 
Nor  will  its  brightness  be  less  than  that  of 
the  sun,  for  the  Apostle  testifies  in  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  that  he  saw  Christ 
(to  whose  splendour  we  shall  be  made  con 
formable,)  shining  above  the  brightness  of 
the  sun :  and  our  Lord  himself  in  St.  Mat 
thew  says:  "Then  the  just  shall  shine  as 
the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father." 
What  a  glorious  spectacle  therefore  will  be 
presented  to  the  eyes  of  the  blessed,  when 
they  shall  behold  their  hands,  their  feet, 
and  all  their  members,  sending  forth  rays 
of  light ;  so  that  they  will  no  more  stand  in 
need  of  the  sun,  or  of  the  moon,  or  of  any 
other  inferior  light,  to  dissipate  the  dark 
ness  !  But  not  only  will  their  own  bodies 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     169 

shine  as  the  sun,  but  the  bodies  of  all  the 
saints  also,  and  especially  the  body  of 
Christ  himself  and  of  His  most  blessed 
Mother.  How  doth  one  sun  rejoice  at  his 
rising-  the  whole  earth !  What  then  will  it 
be,  to  behold  innumerable  suns,  most  beau 
tiful  not  only  by  their  brightness,  but  also 
by  the  variety  and  glory  of  the  members  ! 
Nor  will  the  blessed  be  here  obliged  to 
close  their  eyes,  lest  they  should  be  injured 
by  the  dazzling  splendour:  for  the  eyes 
themselves  will  be  blessed,  and  therefore 
made  impassible  and  immortal.  For  He 
who  will  make  the  eyes  of  the  soul  like  to 
His  glory,  lest  seeing  God  face  to  face  they 
should  be  overpowered,  will  also  endow  the 
eyes  of  the  body  with  impassibility,  that 
they  may  behold  not  one  sun  only  but 
many  without  injury. 

It  will  also  be  an  addition  to  the  joy  of 
the  eyes,  as  St.  Augustine  teaches  us  in  his 
"  City  of  God/'  that  the  blessed  martyrs 
will  display  the  most  illustrious  marks  of 
their  virtues,  in  those  particular  parts  of  the 
body  in  which  they  endured  torments. 
What  joy,  therefore,  will  it  be  to  see  St. 
Stephen  adorned  with  as  many  illustrious 
jewels  as  he  endured  blows  of  the  stones  in 
his  body !  What  to  see  St.  John  the  Bap 
tist,  St.  James  the  Great,  and  St.  Paul  the 
Apostle — besides  others  almost  infinite  in 
number,  who  suffered  for  Christ — all  shining 
in  unspeakable  beauty,  more  resplendent 
than  any  gold !  What  to  behold  St.  Bar- 


170        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

tholpmew,  who  was  flayed  alive,  then  so 
glorious  beyond  the  beauty  of  the  richest 
purple  !  And,  not  to  mention  others,  what 
will  it  be  to  behold  St.  Peter  and  St. 
Andrew,  and  many  others  who  endured  the 
punishment  of  the  cross,  now  with  their 
hands  and  feet  shining  like  stars  in  the 
greatest  splendour !  And  with  regard  to 
Christ,  the  King  of  the  martyrs,  who  for 
His  own  glory,  and  for  our  comfort,  hath 
deigned  to  bear  the  marks  of  the  cross,  no 
tongue  can  express  with  what  glory  these 
most  sacred  marks  will  shine  !  And  all  the 
glory  of  the  saints,  when  compared  with 
that  of  Christ,  is  less  than  the  beauty  of 
the  stars  when  compared  with  the  beauty  of 
the  sun. 

But  what  shall  I  say  of  the  pleasure  which 
the  eyes  will  derive  from  viewing  this  most 
extensive  city,  which  Tobias  and  St.  John, 
not  being  able  to  find  sufficient  words  to 
express,  have  described  it  as  adorned  with 
gems  and  precious  stones !  What  of  this 
new  heaven  and  new  earth,  which  is  pro 
mised  us  in  the  Holy  Scripture  after  the 
last  day  ?  What  of  the  renovation  of  this 
whole  universe  into  a  better  state?  For, 
as  these  things  are  unknown  to  us,  so  will 
they  delight  the  eyes  of  the  blessed,  when 
their  beautv  shall  be  seen. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     171 
CHAPTER  VI. 

ON  THE  JOY  OF  THE  EARS. 

THAT  the  sense  of  hearing*  will  be  an  in 
strument  of  speech  in  heaven,  we  cannot 
doubt,  for  the  bodies  of  the  blessed  will  be 
truly  animated  and  perfect  in  every  part ; 
such  was  the  body  of  Christ  after  His  resur 
rection,  which  all  the  apostles,  many  of  the 
disciples,  and  many  women  clearly  saw. 
They  heard  Him  speaking,  and  He  answer 
ed  their  questions.  St.  Paul  also  tells  us, 
that  he  heard  Christ  speaking  from  heaven, 
and  that  he  answered  Him.  That  there 
will  likewise  be  '*'  Canticles"  sung  in  hea 
ven,  and  especially  that  of  s<  Alleluia/' 
Tobias  and  St.  John  testify.  From  them 
it  is  evident,  that  there  will  be  in  that  city 
many  most  sweet  canticles,  by  which  God 
will  be  praised,  and  the  ears  of  the  blessed 
wonderfully  delighted.  And  if  everything 
be  in  proportion,  there  can  be  no  doubt  but 
that  this  canticle  will  be  as  sweet  and  ex 
cellent  as  the  cantors  themselves  are  learn 
ed,  as  He  who  will  be  praised  is  so  holy, 
and  as  the  place  wherein  the  canticle  will 
be  sung  is  so  glorious,  and  the  choir  of 
hearers  so  intelligent  and  numerous  !  What 
then  will  it  be  amidst  a  most  profound 
peace,  in  such  concord  of  mind,  and  ardour 
of  charity  towards  their  great  Benefactor, 


172        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

to  hear  the  most  melodious  voices  singing 
Alleluia !  If  St.  Francis,  as  it  is  related 
by  St.  Bonaventure,*  was  so  moved  by  the 
sound  of  a  harp  touched  by  an  angel  for  a 
moment,  that  he  supposed  himself  to  have 
been  in  another  world,  how  will  our  ears  be 
delighted  when  thousands  of  harps  and 
cantors  shall  praise  God  with  most  melo 
dious  voices !  when  other  thousands,  with 
the  like  harmony,  shall  repeat  the  same 
canticles  again  and  again !  But  the  praises 
of  God  only  will  not  be  sung  in  this  city; 
for  the  triumphs  of  the  martyrs  also,  the 
merits  of  the  confessors,  the  glory  of  the 
virgins,  and  the  victories  of  all  over  the 
snares  of  the  devil,  will  be  celebrated  in 
song :  all  these  praises  will  redound  to  the 
glory  of  God.  Ecclesiasticus  says :  "  Who 
hath  been  tried  thereby,  and  made  perfect, 
he  shall  have  glory  everlasting.  He  that 
could  have  transgressed,  and  hath  not 
transgressed ;  and  could  do  evil  things,  and 
hath  not  done  them:  therefore  are  his 
goods  established  in  the  Lord,  and  all  the 
Church  of  the  saints  shall  declare  his  alms." 
(chap,  xxxi.)  Now,  although  these  words 
are  to  be  understood  as  relating  to  the 
praises  of  those  who  dwell  in  the  Church  on 
earth  ;  yet  nothing  prevents  us  from  apply 
ing  them  to  the  blessed  in  heaven,  and  the 
Church  triumphant.  For  there  the  saints 
will  have  true  and  eternal  glory :  there  is 

*  In  his  "  Life"  of  St.  Francis,  chap.  v. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     173 

truly  the  Church  of  the  saints.  And  since 
in  the  Gospel  our  Lord  saith,  that  faithful 
and  prudent  servants  will  be  praised  by 
God  in  heaven  in  these  words:  "Well  done, 

food  and  faithful  servant,  because  thou 
ast  been  faithful  over  a  few  things,  I  will 
place  thee  over  many  things :  enter  thou 
into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord;"  what  prevents 
us  from  supposing  that  these  words  of  ^ our 
Lord  will  be  taken  up  by  the  whole  choir  of 
the  celestial  city,  and  most  sweetly  repeat 
ed  again  and  again  ?  The  Catholic  Church 
has  not  hesitated  to  say  of  St.  Martin : 
"  Martin,  here  poor  and  mean,  now  rich, 
enters  heaven,  and  is  honoured  with  hea 
venly  hymns.''"  In  fine,  St.  Augustine,  in 
the  last  book  of  the  "  City  of  God/7  affirms 
the  same  in  these  eloquent  words :  "  There 
will  be  true  glory,  where  no  one  will  be 
praised,  either  by  the  error  or  flattery  of  the 
praiser.  True  honour  will  be  there,  that 
will  be  denied  to  no  one  who  is  worthy  of 
it,  nor  given  to  any  unworthy  of  it.  Nor 
will  any  unworthy  person  aspire  to  it  there, 
where  none  but  the  worthy  are  admitted." 
Oh,  thrice  blessed  then  will  those  be,  who 
in  this  place  whence  flattery  is  banished, 
and  where^  no  deceit  is  found,  shall  hear 
their  praises  sung  without  danger  of 
pride,  but  not  without  an  increase  of  their 
joy! 


174        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 


CHAPTER  VII. 

OX  THE  JOY  OF  THE  NOSTRILS. 

ON  the  other  senses  only  a  few  remarks 
must  be  made ;  not  because  they  will  not 
have  great  and  peculiar  pleasures,  but  be 
cause  the  Holy  Scripture  does  not  inform 
us  what  these  pleasures  will  be.  But  this 
is  sufficiently  evident,  that  many  bodies 
of  the  saints,  immediately  after  their 
death,  began  to  send  forth  a  most  sweet 
odour,  such  as  no  one  had  perceived  before. 
This  St.  Jerome  relates  of  the  body  of  St. 
Hilarion,  for  he  affirms  that  ten  months 
after  his  burial  his  body  was  found  perfect, 
as  if  he  were  still  living;  and  so  fragrant  was 
it,  that  it  seemed  to  have  been  embalmed. 
St.  Gregory,  in  his  "Dialogues,"  relates  the 
same  thing  of  the  body  of  St.  Servulus,  a 
paralytic.  These  are  his  words:  "At  the 
departure  of  his  soul  such  sweet  fragrance 
was  scattered,  that  all  who  were  present 
were  filled  with  an  inconceivable  sweetness; 
and  until  the  body  was  buried,  every  one 
felt  the  fragrance/'  Other  examples  of  a 
like  nature  are  to  be  found,  both  in  ancient 
and  modern  times.  From  these  cases  we 
may  argue,  that  if  the  bodies  of  the  de 
ceased  saints,  after  the  soul  was  assumed 
to  glory,  breathed  such  a  sweet  odour, 
much  more  will  these  bodies  breathe  the 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      175 

same  when  they  shall  be  glorified  and  alive. 
St.  Gregory  in  his  "  Dialogues"  also 
speaks  of  the  body  of  our  Saviour,  in  the 
following  manner:  "Then  Tarsilla^  the 
virgin,  looking  up,  beheld  Jesus  coming; 
and  suddenly  with  such  a  wonderful  fra 
grance  was  she  covered,  that  it  was  a  proof 
to  all  the  Author  of  sweetness  was  pre 
sent."  And  thus,  if  the  glorified  body  of 
our  Saviour  breathed  such  an  odour  of 
sweetness,  it  is  certain  that  all  the  bodies  of 
the  saints  will  send  forth  the  sweetest 
odours :  for  it  is  meet  that  the  members 
should  be  conformable  to  their  head,  not 
only  in  their  glory,  but  also  in  the  sweet 
ness  of  their  fragrance.  Let  those,  there 
fore,  who  are  delighted  with  odours,  think 
with  what  sweetness  they  will  be  filled, 
when  in  that  divine  garden,  adorned  with 
thousands  of  heavenly  flowers,  they  will 
inhale  such  various  and  sweet  odours. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

ON  THE  JOY  THE  SENSES  OF  TOUCH  AXD  TASTE 
WILL  HAVE. 

ON  the  sense  of  taste  theologians  write, 
that  the  blessed  will  not  use  earthly  food; 
but  yet  that  this  sense  will  have  a  certain 
pleasure,  lest  it  should  appear  to  be  super 
fluous  ;  but  this  pleasure  will  be  suitable  to 


176        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

the  state  and  condition  of  the  just.  On  the 
sense  of  touch,  all  agree  that  it  will  be  pos 
sessed  in  heaven,  since  the  bodies  of  the 
blessed  can  certainly  be  touched,  being  true 
and  animated  bodies,  according  to  the 
words  of  our  Lord :  "Handle  and  see :  for  a 
spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones,  as  you  see 
me  to  have." 

But  we  do  not  wish  to  enter  on  those 
points  which  are  disputed  in  the  schools. 
We  believe,  however,  that  the  sense  of 
touch  will  derive  no  small  pleasure  from  the 
perpetual  beauty  of  the  body  endowed  with 
glorified  properties,  of  which  St.  Paul  speaks 
in  his  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians:  "It 
is  sown  in  dishonour,  it  shall  rise  in  glory. 
It  is  sown^  in  weakness,  it  shall  rise  in 
power.  It  is  sown  a  natural  body,  it  shall 
rise  a  spiritual  body,"  cfec.  (chap,  xv.)  ,  Of 
these  four  endowments  or  privileges  of  a 
glorified  body,  that  concerning  its  splen 
dour  relates  to  the  sense  of  sight,  as  we 
have  already  mentioned;  the  other  three 
seem  properly  to  relate  to  the  sense  of 
touch.  For  as,  when  the  body  is  attacked 
with  any  disorder,  or  receives  a  wound 
which  is  mortal,  it  is  the  sense  of  touch 
that  suffers ;  so  also,  when  the  body  is  in 
health,  the  same  sense  rejoices.  Greatly, 
therefore,  will  the  sense  of  touch  rejoice  in 
heaven,  when,  after  the  resurrection,  the 
bodies  of  the  blessed  will  be  immortal  and 
impassible,  and,  consequently,  endowed 
with  perpetual  health.  What  would  not 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     177 

men  give,  and  especially  princes,  if,  during 
their  whole  life,  they  could  be  free  from  the 
gout,  the  head-ache,  or  any  other  pains? 
What  then  will  be  the  joy  in  heaven,  from 
which  not  only  death,  but  every  disease  and 
sorrow  will  be  far  removed  !  Wherefore, 
those  endowments  by  which  a  corruptible 
body  will  rise  incorruptible,  and  that  which 
is  infirm  will  become  impassible,  relate  to 
the  sense  of  touch.  The  endowments  of 
agility  and  subtility,  by  which  what  is  cor 
poral  will  be  spiritual,  seem  also  to  relate 
to  the  same  sense.  It  will  be  a  spiritual 
and  glorified  body ;  not  because  it  will  not 
have  truly  flesh  and  bones,  but  because  it 
will  be  so  subject  to  the  spirit,  that,  by  the 
mere  nod  of  the  soul,  it  will  be  able  without 
difficulty  to  move  with  the  greatest  velocity, 
to  ascend  and  descend,  to  go  and  to  return, 
to  penetrate  any  place,  as  if  it  were  not  a 
body  but  a  spirit.  As,  therefore,  the  sense 
of  touch  suffers  when  a  heavy  body  is  forced 
to  ascend  upwards,  or  to  be  moved  from 
place  to  place  quickly;  so,  on  the  contrary, 
it  rejoices  when  the  body  without  labour 
either  ascends  or  passes  quickly  from  place 
to  place.  Behold,  then,  from  what  a  servi 
tude  of  corruption  the  "  blessed"  will  be 
free,  when  they  will  no  more  stand  in  need 
of  horses,  or  chariots,  or  arms,  or  servants, 
or  any  other  thing;  but  their  bodies  will  of 
themselves  go  wherever  they  wish,  and 
everywhere  be  free  from  danger,  even  in 
the  midst  of  armed  forces.  12 


178        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

Would  that  those  who  cannot  enjoy  spiri 
tual  delights  because  they  have  a  vitiated 
taste,  would  at  least  consider  these  corpo 
ral  endowments,  which  are  so  excellent 
and  desirable,  and  seek  after  them !  And 
thus  they  might  be  induced  gradually  to 
ascend  higher;  and  by  these  steps,  they 
would  at  length,  by  the  divine  assistance, 
reach  unto  eternal  joys. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

THE  JOYS  OF  HEAVEN  COMPARED  WITH  THOSE 
OF  EARTH. 

WE  have  already  explained,  according  to 
our  ability,  what  joys  are  prepared  in  hea 
ven  for  those  that  love  God ;  we  will  now, 
by  certain  external  arguments,  endeavour 
to  show  how  great  they  are.  And,  first,  we 
shall  consider  the  pleasures  which  God  often 
gives,  even  to  his  enemies,  in  this  life.  And 
truly,  so  great  joys  are  found  in  riches, 
honours,  power,  and  various  other  plea 
sures,  which  God  gives  to  those  that  even 
blaspheme  Him,  or  believe  not  in  Him, 
that  nearly  all  men  consider  them  happy 
beings.  David  exclaims :  ' '  They  have 
called  the  people  happy  that  hath  these 
things/'  (Psalm  cxliii.)  Who  amongst  the 
lovers  of  this  world  does  not  envy  Solomon, 
who  reigned  forty  years,  and  abounded  in 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     179 

riches  and  every  delight,  besides  having 
seven  hundred  wives  and  three  hundred 
concubines?  And  yet,  according  to  the 
opinion  of  Sj.  Augustine,  it  seems  that  he 
was  lost,  for  thus  he  speaks :  "  Solomon 
himself  was  a  lover  of  women,  and  was  cast 
off  by  God/'  And  in  his  book  on  the 
"  City  of  God/'  he  says  of  Solomon  what 
Sallust  said  of  Cataline,  "  He  began  well, 
but  ended  badly."  ^  St.  Gregory  also  fol 
lows  St.  Augustine  in  the  2nd  Book  of  his 
"Morals/'  Not  unlike  Solomon  are,  in  our 
own  times,  the  kings  of  Turkey,  Persia, 
China,  and  ^Tartary,  who  possess  the  most 
extensive  kingdoms,  and  are  addicted  to 
carnal  pleasures ;  they  indulge  their  heart, 
their  eyes,  their  ears,  and  palate  in  every 
thing  they  desire. 

But  not  to  dwell  on  these  pleasures, 
which  belong  only  to  a  few,  how  great  are 
the  joys  which  God  gives  to  mortals  in 
general,  the  greater  part  of  whom  neither 
know,  nor  love,  nor  fear  God !  Hath 
He  not  given  to  all  the  earth  with  its 
riches  and  pleasures,  animals,  fruit,  flowers, 
and  metals?  Hath  He  not  given  to  all 
men  in  general  the  sea,  fountains,  rivers, 
and  lakes,  filled  with  so  many  kinds  of 
fishes?  Hath  He  not  outspread  the  hea 
vens,  to  be  as  it  were  the  roof  of  His  great 
house,  adorned  with  innumerable  stars  ? 
Doth  not  this  same  great  and  most  bounti- 

*  In  Psalraura,  126. 


180        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

ful  Lord  command  His  sun  to  rise  and  His 
rain  to  fall,  both  upon  the  just  and  the 
unjust  ?  Now,  if  He  hath  given  so  many 
pleasures  to  reprobate  sinners  and  ungrate 
ful  slaves,  who  are  deserving  (ff  the  severest 
punishments,  is  it  not  just  that  He  should 
reserve  for  His  friends  and  children  joys 
infinitely  greater?  Hear  St.  Augustine: 
''  To  sinners  that  blaspheme  His  name 
daily,  He  gives  the  heavens  and  the  earth : 
fountains,  fruits,  health,  children,  riches, 
abundance.  He  who  giveth  such  to  sin 
ners,  what  thinkest  thou  will  He  not  give 
to  His  faithful  servants  ?"  It  is  mentioned 
in  the  Life  of  St.  Fulgentius,"'  that  when 
he  once  saw  the  glory  of  the  Roman  senate 
he  exclaimed  :  "  0 !  how  beautiful  must  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem  be,  if  earthly  Rome  be 
so  glorious !  And  if  in  this  world  so  much 
honour  be  given  to  those  that  love  vanity, 
what  honour  and  glory  will  be  given  unto 
the  saints,  who  behold  truth  itself!"  St. 
Augustine,  who  was  such  a  wise  judge  of 
things,  does  not  hesitate  to  assert  there  is 
such  a  difference  between  heavenly  and 
earthly  joys,  that  the  enjoyment  of  celestial 
pleasures  for  one  day  only,  would  be  more 
desirable  than  the  enjoyment  of  earthly 
pleasures  for  thousands  of  ^ages.  These 
are  his  words :  "So  great  is  the  glory  of 
eternal  life,  that,  supposing  we  could  only 
enjoy  it  for  one  day — for  this  alone  counties? 

Apud  Surius,  Tom.  1. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      181 

years  of  this  life,  full  of  earthly  goods  and 
happiness,  should  justly  be  despised ;  for 
not  without  reason  has  it  been  said,  "  Bet 
ter  is  one  day  in  thy  courts  above  thou 
sands/'  What  then  shall  we  say?  If  these 
words  are  true,  as  they  most  certainly  are, 
is  it  not  reasonable  that  we  should  now  at 
length  begin  to  be  wise  ?  Hitherto  we  have 
been  accustomed  to  exhort  you  to  despise 
earthly  goods  because  they  are  momentary, 
and  to  love  heavenly  things  because  they 
are  eternal.  But  now  we  hear  St.  Augus 
tine,  a  most  learned  doctor,  affirming  that 
although  earthly  goods  were  eternal,  and 
heavenly  ones  only  momentary,  yet  that  the 
latter  should  be  preferred  to  the  former ! 
Are  we  not  therefore  deaf,  blind,  stupid, 
and  foolish,  if,  on  account  of  earthly  goods, 
which  are  not  only  vile,  but  frail  and  transi 
tory,  we  despise  heavenly  treasures,  which 
are  most  precious  and  eternal?  Cure,  O 
merciful  Lord !  our  deafness :  enlighten  our 
blindness :  rouse^  our  stupidity :  heal  our 
madness.  Why  is  the  light  of  thy  counte 
nance  signed  upon  us,  0  Lord,  if  we  discern 
not  things  so  great  and  so  necessary  ?  And 
why  hast  thou  given  unto  us  the  judgment 
ot  reason,  if  we  see  not  objects  so  evident  ?"* 

*  Rurope  tu,  Domine  misericors  et  miserator,  surditatem 
nostram:  iilumina  ccecitatem:  excita  stupiditatem:  Sana 
deraentiam.  TJt  quid  enim  signasti  super  nos  lumen  vultus 
tui,  Domine,  si  haec  tarn  magna  et  tarn  necessaria  Don  dis- 
cernimusl  Et  quare  dedisti  nobis  judicium  rationis,  si  kaec 
tain  evidentia  uon  videmus!" 


182        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 
CHAPTER  X. 

THE  EARTHLY  AND  HEAVENLY  PARADISE  COMPARED. 

WE  have  compared  the  joys  of  this  world 
with  the  joys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven :  we 
will  now  compare  in  a  few  words  the  joys 
of  the  earthly  paradise,  with  those  of  the 
heavenly  one.  We  may  know  how  great 
were  the  pleasures  of  the  terrestrial  paradise 
from  this  circumstance,  that  it  was  a  gar 
den  of  pleasure  given  to  men,  who  were 
created  according  to  the  image  and  like 
ness  of  God,  whilst  the  other  parts  of  the 
earth  were  given  to  the  animals.  But 
when  Adam  by  his  sin  had  lost  the  honour 
in  which  he  had  been  placed  by  God, 
and  had  become  like  senseless  beasts, 
he  was  then  cast  out  of  paradise  into 
this  place.  St.  Alchimus,  in  his  poems  on 
Genesis,  and  others  describe  paradise  as  a 
most  beautiful  region,  and  very  temperate ; 
where  neither  the  heat  of  summer  could 
burn,  nor  the  cold  of  winter  injure,  but  a 
perpetual  spring  of  flowers  flourished,  and 
autumn  gave  its  fruits  of  every  kind. 
St.  Basil  thus  speaks  of  it  in  his  book 
on  Paradise  :  "God  planted  paradise  where 
there  is  no  violence  of  wind,  no  in 
clemency  of  seasons,  no  hail,  nor  thun 
der,  nor  storms ;  no  cold  of  winter,  nor 
damp  of  spring,  nor  summer's  heat,  nor 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      183 

autumn's  dryness:  but  the  seasons  are 
temperate,  and  in  peace  among  themselves, 
for  they  dance  around  that  place ;  yea, 
the  pleasures  of  spring,  the  nourishment  of 
summer,  the  joy  of  autumn,  and  the  rest  of 
winter  meet  there  together  with  their  bless 
ings.  Clear  are  its  waters,  affording  great 
joy  to  the  eye,  but  possessing  more  utility 
than  joy.  God,  therefore,  created  this  place 
at  first  as  worthy  to  receive  His  plants. 
Afterwards  he  planted  therein  a  variety  of 
beautiful  trees,  most  pleasing  to  the  sight, 
and  by  them  He  bestowed  a  most  sweet 
enjoyment/' 

St.  Augustine,  in  his  "  City  of  God," 
thus  speaks  of  paradise:  "What  could 
these  fear  or  grieve  for,  being  in  pos 
session  of  such  an  abundance  of  good 
things ;  where  neither  death  was  feared,  nor 
any  distemper  of  the  body,  and  every  thing 
was  present  which  the  will  could  desire ;  nor 
could  anything  enter  to  injure  the  body  or 
soul  of  those  that  lived  so  happily  ?  Their 
love  of  God  was  undisturbed,  and  they 
lived  together  in  a  faithful  and  sincere 
friendship :  from  this  love  came  great  joy. 
There  was  a  tranquil  avoiding  of  sin,  which, 
while  it  remained,  no  evil  could  happen  to 
give  them  sorrow.  How  happy,  therefore, 
were  these  first  men,  whose  minds  were 
agitated  by  no  fears,  nor  their  bodies  in 
jured  by  any  evils !  The  whole  human 
race  would  have  been  as  happy,  had  not 
these  committed  sin,  which  they  passed  to 


184        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

posterity,  and  had  not  every  one  of  their 
descendants  sinned,  and  thus  brought 
damnation."  So  far  St.  Augustine.  I 
omit  others  who  have  written  on  the  won 
derful  beauty  and  fruitfulness  of  the  earthly 
paradise,  such  as  Claudius  Marius  Victor, 
St.  John  Damascene,  St.  Isidore,  &c. 

But  whatever  we  may  think  of  these 
particular  accounts,  we  learn  from  the  Holy 
Scripture  itself  that  paradise  was  doubtless 
a  more  happy  place  than  this  our  habita 
tion,  since,  as  a  punishment  for  sin,  it 
was  said  to  Adam:  "Because  thpu  hast 
hearkened  to  the  voice  of  thy  wife,  and 
hast  eaten  of  the  tree  whereof  I  command 
ed  thee  that  ^thou  shouldst  not  eat,  cursed 
is  the  earth  in  thy  work :  with  labour  and 
toil  shalt  thou  eat  thereof  all  the  days  of 
thy  life.  Thorns  and  thistles  shall  it  bring 
forth  to  thee,"  &c.  And  to  the  woman  He 
said :  "I  will  multiply  thy  sorrows  and  thy 
conceptions ;  in  sorrow  shalt  thou  bring 
forth  children,  and  thou  shalt  be  under  thy 
husband's  power,  and  he  shall  have  domi 
nion  over  thee."  (chap,  iii.)  In  paradise, 
therefore,  there  would  not  have  been  steri 
lity  of  the  earth,  neither  would  its  cultiva 
tion  have  required  labour,  nor  would  it  have 
brought  forth  briars  and  thorns ;  women 
would  always  have  conceived  with  fruit, 
and  although  they  might  be  subject  to  their 
husbands,  the  subjection  would  not  have 
been  despotic,  but  mild  and  moderate. 
These,  therefore,  would  have  led  a  happy 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      185 

life,  without  fear  or  sorrow,  without  labour 
and  trouble. 

Now,  if  the  earthly  paradise,  had  not  sin 
been  committed,  would  have  been  free  from 
every  evil,  and  have  abounded  in  all  good, 
what  ought  we  to  think  of  our  heavenly 
Paradise,  which  must  be  so  much  more 
beautiful  as  it  is  more  excellent,  being 
created  for  more  excellent  beings?  The 
heaven  of  the  blessed  is,  without  any  com 
parison,  much  more  sublime  than  the  para 
dise  of  Adam ;  and  the  blessed  inhabitants 
therein,  as  they  cannot  sin  or  die,  are  there 
fore  far,  far  better  off  than  the  inhabitants 
of  this  earthly  paradise,  who  are  exposed  to 
sin  and  to  death.  This,  then,  being  the 
truth,  let  us  give  thanks  to  God  that  by  the 
Passion  of  His  Son,  instead  of  the  terres 
trial  paradise  snatched  from^us  by  the  envy 
of  the  devil,  we  have  now  gained  a  celestial 
one,  far  more  excellent  than  the  other ;  and 
lest  we  should  be  ungrateful  to  so  great  a 
Redeemer,  let  us  strive  with  our  whole 
strength  to  enter  the  heavenly  paradise,  and 
to  open  its  gates  for  ourselves  by  a  lively 
faith,  by  a  sincere  hope,  perfect  charity,  and 
good  works. 


186        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 


CHAPTER  XI. 

THE  GOODS  OF  THIS  WORLD,  AND  THOSE  OF  THE  EARTHLY 
PARADISE  COMPARED WITH  THE  JOYS  OF  THE  HEA 
VENLY  PARADISE. 

WE  will  now  advance  further,  and  com 
pare  all  the  goods  of  this  world,  as  well  as 
those  of  the  earthly  paradise,  with  the  joys 
of  the  heavenly  paradise  alone ;  and  these 
being  united  together,  we  shall  see  which 
preponderate.  To  accomplish  this,  let  us 
imagine  that  the  riches,  power,  pleasures, 
and  glory  of  Solomon,  and  of  other  like 
fortunate  men,  could  be  acquired  without 
labour,  and  retained  without  fear:  let  us 
also  suppose,  that  these  men  could  never 
sin,  nor  ever  die.  These  points  then  being 
granted,  I  affirm  that  the  joys  of  the  hea 
venly  paradise  alone  far  excel  all  the 
goods  of  this  world  and  those  of  the  terres 
trial  paradise  united  together.  And  hence 
I  conclude,  that  all  these  joined  together 
can  never  fill  the  soul,  can  never  satisfy  her 
desires,  because  the  heart  of  man  is  capable 
of  an  infinite  good:  but  these  are  finite. 
Wherefore,  the  words  of  St.  Augustine, 
which  are  to  be  found  in  the  beginning  of 
his  "  Confessions/'  will  always  be  true : 
''  Thou  hast  made  us,  O  Lord,  for  Thyself; 
and  our  heart  cannot  rest  until  it  rest  ill 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      187 

Thee."*  True  also  are  the  words  of  David, 
"  I  shall  be  satisfied  when  thy  glory  shall 
appear."  (Psalm  xyi.)  But  as  long  as  the 
heart  is  not  at  rest,  it  will  be  miserable,  and 
if  miserable,  it  will  not  be  happy.  Now, 
our  heavenly  paradise  will  both  satiate  the 
soul,  and  take  away  all  fear  and  uneasi 
ness.  For  what  can  he  desire  who  will  be 
like  unto  God,  because  he  will  see  Him  as 
He  is?  What  can  he  desire,  whom  God 
"shall  place  over  all  his  goods ?"  What 
can  he  desire  who  will  reign  with  God,  and 
be  a  co-heir  with  Christ,  "whom  the  Father 
hath  appointed  heir  of  all  things  ?"  More 
over,  because  the  goods  of  this  world,  and 
those  of  the  earthly  paradise  also,  may  be 
lost,  however  great  they  are,  they  are  not 
therefore  perfect  goods ;  nor  can  they 
satiate  and  satisfy  the  soul;  and,  on  this 
account,  they  cannot  make  it  blessed  and 
happy.  But  the  goods  of  the  heavenly 
paradise  are,  in  every  way,  perfect  and 
secure  :  they  cannot  be  lost,  nor  diminish 
ed  in  the  least.  For  the  saints,  placed  on 
their  most  blessed  thrones,  can  neither  die 
nor  sin,  and  are  most  certain  of  their  eter 
nal  happiness ! 

May  mortals  therefore  open  the  eyes  of 
their  soul,  and  seriously  ponder  how  im 
portant  it  is,  not  to  lose  their  heavenly 
paradise.  The  subject  is  truly  of  the  deep 
est  interest,  and  not  concerning  transitory 

*  "  Fecisti  nos,  Domine,  ad  te,  et  in  quietum  est  cor  nos 
trum,  donee  requiescat  in  te."  (Confess.  Lib.  1.  cap.  1.) 


188        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

things ;  for  the  wisdom  of  God  hath  said, 
'  What  doth  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the 
whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?" 


CHAPTER  XII. 

ON  THE  TRICE  THAT  PARADISE  WAS  PURCHASED  AT, 
COMPARED  WITH  PARADISE  ITSELF. 

THE  last  comparison  will  be  on  the 
"  price "  by  which  Christ  purchased  para 
dise  for  us,  and  by  which  we  also  ought  to 
purchase  it  with  all  its  goods.  Christ,  at 
the  price  of  His  blood,  purchased  paradise 
for  us,  which  the  envy  of  the  devil  had 
snatched  from  us  ;  not  that  he  might  pos 
sess  it  himself,  but  that  he  might  deprive 
us  of  it.  For  this  purpose  he  seduced  Eve, 
and  by  her  Adam,  that  he  might  make 
them  both  partakers  of  his  punishment. 
Christ  therefore  is  that  wise  merchant,  who 
sold  all  that  he  had  to  purchase  the  pre 
cious  pearl,  by  which  is  clearly  signified 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  as  He  himself 
teaches,  of  whom  St.  Paul  speaks:  ''You 
are  bought  with  a  great  price;"  and  St. 
Peter  says,  "  Knowing  that  you  were  not 
redeemed  with  corruptible  things  as  gold 
or  silver  ....  but  with  the  precious  blood  of 
Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  unspotted  and  unde- 
filed:"  and  again,  "  They  deny  the  Lord 
who  bought  them/'  Christ  at  the  same 
time  that  He  bought  paradise,  bought  us 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS       189 

also;  for  we  were  captives,  and  had  lost 
paradise  by  sin:  but  Christ  redeeming  us 
from  our  sins,  and  from  the  captivity  of  the 
devil,  made  us  sons  and  heirs  of  God  at  the 
same  time,  and  by  this  means  restored 
paradise  to  us.  Hence,  the  greatness  of 
paradise  is  shown  to  us,  by  appearing  to  the 
wisdom  of  God  worthy  of  an  infinite  price. 
If  amongst  men,  some  wise  and  very  rich 
merchant  were  to  purchase  a  precious  pearl 
by  selling  willingly  all  his  goods,  certainly 
no  one  would  doubt  but  that  this  pearl  was 
so  wonderful  and  valuable,  that  scarcely  a 
sufficient  price  could  be  given  for  it.  How 
greatly  therefore  ought  we  to  value,  if  we 

Eossess  any  judgment,  the  possession  of 
eaven,  which  the  wisdom  of  God,  the 
Word  incarnate,  by  all  his  labours,  suffer 
ings,  and  sorrows  for  the  space  of  thirty 
years  purchased  for  us,  at  the  price  of  His 
most  precious  death !  We  must  truly  be 
quite  senseless,  if  we  sell  for  the  vile  value 
of  any  earthly  goods  whatever,  that  which 
Christ  our  Lord  deemed  worthy  of  an  in 
finite  price. 

But  not  only  Christ  purchased  paradise 
for  us  by  His  blood ;  all  the  saints  like 
wise  taught  by  Him,  most  joyfully  gave  up 
whatever  they  possessed — whatever  they 
were  worth — whatever  they  were,  in  order 
to  purchase  this  same  paradise.  St.  Paul 
exclaims,  "  I  reckon  that  the  sufferings  of 
this  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared 
with  the  glory  to  come,  that  shall  be  re- 


190        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

vealed  in  us."  (Epistle  to  the  Romans, 
viii.  18.)  But  although  the  blood  of  Christ 
was  not  only  a  worthy  price  for  paradise, 
but  also  (if  I  may  so  speak)  more  than 
worthy,  being  supereminent  and  exceeding 
the  dignity  of  the  thing  purchased  ;  yet  He 
wished  to  purchase  us  also,  that  He  might 
honour  and  exalt  us.  Great  is  the  glory  of 
man,  because  he  can  obtain  paradise,  not 
only  through  the  merits  of  Christ,  but  also 
by  his  own  merits,  which  however  derive 
their  efficacy  from  Christ.  He  therefore 
that  is  unwilling  to  purchase  paradise  by 
doing  good  and  avoiding  evil,  is  expelled 
from  the  inheritance  of  Christ,  as  a  wicked 
and  slothful  servant  in  the  parable  of  the 
Talents.  And  the  apostle  seriously  ad 
monishes  us  where  he  says :  "  And  if  sons, 
heirs  also  ;  heirs  indeed  of  God,  and  joint- 
heirs  with  Christ :  yet  so,  if  we  suffer  with 
him,  that  we  may  also  be  glorified  with 
him/'  (Epistle  to  the  Romans,  viii.  17.) 

But  lest  we  should  perhaps  complain  that 
we  have  not  a  worthy  price,  we  must  know 
that  nothing  is  required  of  us  but  what  we 
already  have.  St.  Augustine  thus  speaks : 
''  The  kingdom  of  God  is  worth  as  much 
as  you  possess:"  he  proves  this  by  exam 
ples  from  the  Holy  Scriptures :  "  What  so 
vile,  what  so  earthly,  as  to  break  our  bread 
for  the  hungry  ?  The  kingdom  of  heaven 
is  worth  as  much  ;  for  it  is  written,  '  Pos 
sess  ye  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  because  I 
was  hungry,  and  you  gave  me  to  eat/  The 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     191 

widow  purchased  it  by  her  mite :  Peter 
purchased  it  by  leaving  his  nets :  Zaccheus 
by  giving  away  the  half  of  his  patrimony." 
With  these  words  of  St.  Augustine,  Vene 
rable  Bede  also  agrees  when  he  says :  "The 
kingdom  of  heaven  requires  nothing  else 
but  thyself:  it  is  worth  as  much  as  thou 
art:  give  thyself,  and  thou  shalt  possess 
it."*  Poor  Lazarus  had  nothing  to  give 
but  his  patience  in  affliction,  and  he  was 
carried  by  angels  to  Abraham's  bosom : 
the  good  thief  had  nothing  in  this  world  of 
his  own,  besides  that  voice  by  which  he 
exclaimed,  "  Remember  me  when  thou 
shalt  come  into  thy  kingdom" — and  imme 
diately  he  heard,  "  This  day  shalt  thou  be 
with  me  in  paradise/'  0  !  truly  great  is 
the  goodness  of  God !  0  !  ineffable  hap 
piness  of  man,  who  can  so  easily  pass 
over  every  thing  most  precious,  with  the 
price  of  his  Lord  !  Dost  thou  wish,  O  man! 
to  obtain  from  God  a  paradise  of  every 
pleasure  ?  Give  thyself  to  Him ,  and  thou 
wilt  possess  it.  What  meaneth  "  Give 
thyself?"  Love  God  with  thy  whole  heart: 
humble  thyself  under  His  powerful  hand : 
praise  Him  at  all  times :  be  willing  to  do 
His  will,  whether  He  wish  thee  to  be  rich 
or  poor — illustrious  or  not  illustrious — im. 
health  or  in  sickness.  ^  His  will  is  ador 
able,  and  just  are  all  His  judgments.  Say 
then  unto  God,  I  am  thine :  do  with  me 

*  Serm.  19.    De  Sauctis. 


192        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

according  to  thy  pleasure  :  I  do  not  resist, 
I  do  not  murmur,  I  obey  thy  commands. 
" My  heart  is  ready,  O  Lord!  my  heart 
is  ready.  Not  my  will,  but  thine  be 
done/'  This  holocaust  is  beyond  all  value 
in  the  sight  of  God,  who  standeth  in  no 
need  of  our  goods.  "  Doth  the  Lord  de 
sire  holocausts  and  victims,"  saith  Samuel, 
"  and  not  rather  that  the  voice  of  the  Lord 
should  be  obeyed?"  This  holocaust  of 
obedience  Christ  daily  offered  to  His 
Father,  according  to  His  own  testimony : 
'''  I  do  always  the  things  that  please  Him." 
And  St.  Paul,  the  true  imitator  of  our 
Saviour,  saith :  "  And  therefore  we  labour, 
whether  absent  or  present,  to  please  Him." 
This  perfect  renunciation  of  all  things  we 
possess,  or  desire  to  possess  :  this  denying 
of  one^s  self  in  Border  to  please  God  alone, 
is  the  "true  price  of  paradise."  And  he 
who  gives  himself  in  this  way  to  gain  para 
dise,  does  not  lose  himself;  but  most  truly 
finds  himself,  according  to  our  Lord  :  "He 
that  findeth  his  life,  shall  lose  it ;  and  he 
that  shall  lose  his  life  for  me,  shall  find  it." 
But  since  this  truth  is  hidden  from  the 
wise  and  prudent  of  this  world  (who  are 
fools  before  God ;)  and  since  the  number 
gf  fools  is  infinite,  therefore  "many  are 
called,  but  few  are  chosen." 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     193 


THE 

ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS. 


BOOK  V. 


CHAPTER  I. 

ON  THE  TREASURE  HIDDEN  IN  A  FIELD. 

HITHERTO  I  have  spoken  what  God  hath 
suggested  to  me  in  my  meditations,  con 
cerning  the  happiness  of  the  saints,  under 
the  names  of  those  places  wherein  they  who 
are  truly  happy  and  blessed  dwell ;  that  is, 
concerning  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  the 
City  of  God,  the  House  of  the  Lord,  and 
the  Paradise  of  delights.  I  will  now  add  a 
few  remarks  on  the  same  subject,  under 
the  name  of  those  things  by  which  our  Lord 
hath  described  the  happiness  of  the  Saints, 
in  the  parables.  But  we  must  first  be  in 
formed,  that  these  words  of  our  Lord, 
"  The  Kingdom  of  Heaven  is  like/'  &c., 
which  He  continually  makes  use  of  in  the 
Parables,  do  not  always  refer  to  the  words 
immediately  following:  as  if  when  our  Lord 
saith,  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like 
unto  a  merchant/'  He  meant  that  it  was 

13 


194        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

like  to  this  man :  the  words  relate  to  the 
whole  narration,  in  which  by  a  similitude 
the  way  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  pointed 
out.  And  sometimes  the  happiness  of  this 
heavenly  kingdom  is  described  obscurely  ; 
sometimes  clearly,  and  at  other  times  it 
can  in  no  way  be  comprehended.  I  will 
explain  each  part  of  this  division. 

When  our  Lord,  in  St.  Matthew,  pro 
poses  the  parable  of  the  Sower,  He  de 
scribes  the  fruit  which  the  preaching  of  the 
Gospel  produces  according  to  the  various 
dispositions  of  the  land,  and  this  is  called 
the  "Mystery  of  the  Kingdom  of  God:" 
but  He  mentions  nothing  of  the  happiness 
of  the  saints.  But  when  in  the  same  place, 
He  adds  the  parable  of  the  cockle,  He 
alludes  briefly  to  the  happiness  of  the 
saints,  when  He  saith,  "  The  wheat  gather 
ye  into  my  barn,  but  bind  the  cockle  into 
bundles  to  burn."  But  when  in  the  same 
chapter  He  speaks  of  a  merchant  seeking 
good  pearls,  and  of  one  that  found  a  trea 
sure  hidden  in  a  field,  He  then  clearly  com 
pares  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  the  pearl 
and  the  treasure.  I  find  only  six  parables 
of  this  kind :  the  first  being  of  the  treasure 
hidden  in  a  field ;  the  second  of  the  precious 
pearl ;  the  third  of  the  labourers  in  the  vine 
yard  ;  the  fourth  of  the  talents  ;  the  fifth  of 
the  supper ;  the  sixth  of  the  marriage-feast. 
To  which  I  shall  add  two  similitudes  from 
the  Apostle  Paul ;  one  concerning  those 
that  run  for  the  prize,  the  other  concerning 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      195 

those  that  contend  in  the  race.  Thus  there 
will  be  eight  "  Considerations"  in  the 
blessed  life  of  the  saints,  taken  from  the 
parables. 

The  first  parable,  therefore,  (which  is 
found  in  St.  Matthew,)  makes  "  the  king 
dom  of  heaven  like  unto  a  treasure  hidden 
in  a  field  ;"  and  it  briefly  teaches  us  how 
it  may  be  acquired,  in  these  words : 
"Which  a  man  having  found,  hid  it,  and 
for  joy  thereof  goeth  and  selleth  all  that  he 
hath,  and  buyeth  that  field."  (St.  Matthew, 
xiii.  44.)  A  treasure  signifies  an  immense 
sum  of  gold,  silver,  and  precious  stones; 
and  it  ought  to  be  so  old,  that  no  memory 
of  it  exists,  and  therefore  not  having  a  pro 
per  owner,  it  belongs  of  right  to  him  that 
finds  it.  Now  this  "  treasure"  is  the  Divi 
nity  itself,  which  is  hidden  in  the  field  of 
the  humanity  of  Christ,  according  to  the 
Explanations  of  St.  Hilary,  and  of  St. 
Jerome  in  his  Commentary  on  the  13th 
chapter  of  St.  Matthew ;  for  in  Christ,  as 
the  Apostle  saith,  "are  hid  all  the  treasures 
of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  But  the 
Divinity  is  the  truest  treasure  of  all  good, 
and  so  ancient  is  it,  that  no  memory  re- 
maineth  of  it,  because  it  is  eternal  and 
before  all  ages :  nor  had  this  great  treasure 
ever  any  owner,  since  He  is  himself  the 
Lord  of  all  things.  But  it  is  said  to  belong 
to  those  that  find  it,  because  He  willingly 
gives  it  to  them,  who  having  sold  all  their 
goods,  hasten  to  purchase  it.  But  it  is  said 


196        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

to  be  "  hidden"  in  the  humanity  of  Christ, 
as  if  buried  in  a  field;  because  although 
the  Divinity  be  every  where  present,  yet 
nowhere  is  it  more  so,  than  in  the  humanity 
of  Christ,  with  which  it  is  so  united,  as  to 
make  God  and  man  but  one  person.  Where 
fore  the  Apostle  saith :  "God  was  in  Christ, 
reconciling  the  world  to  himself."  ^  And 
although  he  was  nowhere  more  than  in  the 
humanity  of  Christ,  yet  he  appeared  to  be 
so  hidden,  that  a  "  Light"  was  necessary 
to  show  God  was  in  Christ.  This  Light  was 
St.  John  the  Baptist,  who,  as  St.  John  the 
Apostle  writes,  "  Was  a  burning  and 
shining  light,"  and  of  whom  David  spoke 
in  the  person  of  God  the  Father,  "  I  have 
prepared  a  lamp  for  my  anointed."  (Psalm 
cxxxi.  17.)  St.  John  made  Christ  mani 
fest,  and  truly  proved  Him  to  be  the  only- 
Begotten  Son  of  God,  where  he  says :  "  No 
man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  ;  the  only- 
begotten  Son  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father,  he  hath  declared  Him."  (chap.  i. 
18.)  And  again:  "He  that  come th  from 
heaven,  is  above  all;"  and  a  little  lower, 
"  The  Father  loveth  the  Son  ;  and  He  hath 
given  all  things  into  his  hands.  He  that 
believeth  in  the  Son,  hath  life  everlasting  ; 
but  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son,  shall 
not  see  life ;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth 
on  him."  (chap.  iii.  35, 36.)  But  although 
this  "  burning  and  shining  light"  so 
clearly  proved  Christ  to  be  the  Son  of  God; 
yet  Jie  blind  Jews  could  not,  or  would  not, 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     197 

acknowledge  the  Divinity  hidden  in  Christ; 
for,  as  the  Apostle  saith :  "If  they  had 
known  it,  they  would  never  have  crucified 
the  Lord  of  glory/' 

He  therefore,  who,  being  divinely  en 
lightened,  findeth  the  treasure,  "  hides  it, 
and  for  joy  thereof  goeth  and  selleth  all 
that  he  hath,  and  buyeth  that  field."  To 
hide  the  found  treasure,  is  nothing  more 
than  under  the  veil  of  humility,  to  conceal 
the  grace  we  have  received;  not  to  be 
elated  by  the  light  given  to  us  from  above, 
nor  to  boast  of  our  divine  consolations  and 
revelations,  lest  vain  glory  corrupt  our  true 
glory.  Wherefore,  the  Prophet  Isaias  was 
accustomed  to  say,  "  My  secret  to  myself;" 
and  the  Apostle  Paul,  "  If  I  must  glory  (it 
is  not  expedient  indeed) :  but  I  will  come 
to  the  visions  and  revelations  of  the  Lord. 
I  know  a  man  in  Christ  above  fourteen 
years  ago,"  &c.  (2  Epist.  to  Corinth,  xii.) 
The  wonderful  revelations  he  received  when 
rapt  into  paradise,  he  passed  over  in  silence 
for  fourteen  years ;  and  for  ever  would  he 
have  concealed  them,  had  he  not  been 
obliged  to  reveal  them.  He  plainly  says, 
"it  is  not  expedient"  to  make  known  such 
gifts  ;  and  under  a  feigned  name  he  reveals 
them,  to  show  how  greatly  it  was  against 
his  inclination.  Something  like  this  hap 
pened  to  St.  Francis,  when  the  sacred 
"  Stigmata"  were  miraculously  impressed 
upon  him,  as  St.  Bonaventure  relates  in 


198        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

his  life :'""  he  was  always  accustomed  to 
conceal  his  divine  revelations,  and  to  ex 
claim  with  Isaias,  "  My  secret  to  myself:" 
but  yet  when  he  perceived  it  could  not  be 
concealed,  he  related  the  whole  case  with 
great  fear  to  his  inquiring  brethren. 

With  joy  to  sell  all  that  we  possess,  and 
to  purchase  the  field  where  the  treasure  was 
concealed,  means — that  he  who  wisheth  to 
enjoy  God  and  Christ  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  must  be  entirely  free  from  all  affec 
tion  to  temporal  things,  and  deliver  himself 
and  all  that  he  possesseth,  to  the  disposal  of 
God;  and  this  he  should  do,  not  in  sadness 
or  through  necessity,  but  with  great  joy,  for 
"God  loveth  a  cheerful  giver."  But  he 
that  truly  understandeth  how  great  will  be 
the  treasure  to  enjoy  Christ  in  His  eternal 
country ;  to  see  with  the  eyes  of  the  mind 
His  divinity,  and  with  those  of  the  body  His 
humanity,  and  to  be  made  a  partaker  of  all 
the  good  things  of  God  and  of  Christ,  and 
to  possess  these  securely  for  ever,  to  him 
it  will  not  appear  a  great  sacrifice  to  despise 
all  temporal  goods,  and  life  itself,  for  the 
love  of  God  and  of  eternal  happiness.  Of 
this  St.  Ignatius  the  martyr  is  witness, 
who  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  thus 
writes:  "Let  fire  and  the  cross;  let  the 
companies  of  wild  beasts ;  let  breaking  of 
bones  and  tearing  of  members  ;  let  the 
shattering  in  pieces  of  the  whole  body,  and 
all  the  wicked  torments  of  the  devil  come 

*  Cap.  xiii. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     199 

upon  me  :  only  let  me  enjoy  Jesus  Christ."""" 
He  that  could  speak  thus,  would  much  less 
fear  want,  ignominy,  exile,  and  the  prison, 
in  order  that  he  might  not  lose  that  incom 
parable  treasure.  He  therefore  who  truly 
dqsireth  to  possess  the  treasure  of  eternal 
life,  should  seriously  consider  again  and 
again,  whether  he  be  prepared  to  despise  all 
other  goods ;  otherwise  he  will  never  obtain, 
either  living  or  dead,  that  treasure  without 
which  he  will  be  eternally  poor  and 
miserable. 

Bat  whence  is  it,  that  so  many  anxiously 
seek  after  treasures  of  gold  and  silver ;  and 
not  content  with  human  diligence,  employ 
the  aid  of  evil  spirits,  to  the  great  clanger  of 
their  life  and  character?  But  why  do  so 
few  seek  after  Thy  treasure,  O  Lord,  my 
God,  who  alone  canst  make  men  rich,  and 
which  can  be  found  without  labour,  without 
cost,  or  danger?  I  find  rip  other  cause, 
except  either  the  slender  faith  of  Thy  peo 
ple,  or  their  being  too  occupied  in  temporal 
things,  which  leave  them  not  any  time  for 
considering  Thy  divine  promises  to  men. 
Wherefore,  dear  Lord  !  increase  our  faith 
in  Thy  promises,  and  extinguish  the  thirst 
of  acquiring  temporal  riches  :  thus  we  shall 
be  enabled  with  greater  ardour  to  seek  after 
Thy  treasure  ;  and  when  found,  with  Thy 
especial  assistance  to  purchase  it,  by  selling 
all  our  goods. 

*  Oxford  Ed.  1840.  P.  US. 


200        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 


CHAPTER  II. 

ON  THE  PRECIOUS  PEARL. 

THE  next  parable,  on  the  precious  pearl, 
is  like  to  the  preceding  one:  this  also  conies 
in  St.  Matthew,  (chap,  xiii.)  In  the  former 
was  a  treasure,  and  in  this  is  a  pearl  which 
may  be  considered  like  a  treasure.  In  the 
former  parable,  it  was  necessary  by  the  sale 
of  all  our  goods,  to  purchase  the  hidden 
treasure ;  in  this  one  likewise,  the  merchant 
sold  all  his  goods,  in  order  to  buy  it.  Where 
fore,  it  will  only  be  necessary  to  explain  in 
what  point  this  parable  differs  from  the 
other.  It  differs  in  two  things  ;  for  in  the 
one  a  treasure  is  mentioned,  in  the  other  a 
pearl :  and  whilst  the  treasure  is  accidently 
found,  the  pearl  is  diligently  sought  for  by 
the  merchant.  In  this  parable,  the  hea 
venly  beatitude,  or  Christ  himself,  is  named 
a  "  pearl,"  as  the  holy  fathers  St.  Ambrose 
and  St.  Gregory  Nazianzen  teach.  But 
that  which  in  the  preceding  parable  is  called 
a  "  treasure/'  in  this  is  named  a  "  pearl," 
that  we  may  understand  how  the  divinity  of 
Christ  is  indeed  a  treasure,  but  not  divided 
into  many  parts  of  gold,  silver,  and  precious 
stones,  for  it  is  one  containing  within  itself 
the  value  of  an  infinite  treasure.  A  pearl 
is  one  substance  :  but  according  to  Pliny, 
it  contains  the  essence  of  all  precious  things. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     201 

Besides,  a  treasure  consists  in  money  alone, 
in  immense  sums  ;  and  it  tends  not  to  plea 
sure  and  beauty,  but  to  utility  only.  Where 
fore,  lest  from  the  preceding  parable  any 
one  might  suppose,  that  heavenly  beatitude 
was  only  useful,  and  not  beautiful  nor  glo 
rious,  our  Lord  added  this  other  parable ; 
in  which  He  teacheth  us,  that  the  divinity 
of  Christ  and  our  happiness  are  like  unto 
the  precious  pearl,  which,  beside  the  utility 
of  it  as  a  treasure,  possesses  also  the  beauty 
and  splendour  that  adorn  and  delight  us. 

I  will  also  remark,  that  a  pearl  is  a  sym 
bol  of  Christ,  both  as  the  Son  of  God,  arid 
as  the  Son  of  the  Blessed  Virgin.  For  as 
a  pearl  is  produced  by  the  light  of  the  sun, 
and  from  the  dew  of  heaven,  as  Pliny  and 
others  remark  ;  so  the  Son  of  God  also,  as 
regards  His  divinity,  is  begotten  of  the 
Father  of  Light,  the  uncreated  Sun ;  and 
therefore  we  say  in  the  creed,  ' '  Light  of 
Light,  true  God  of  true  God."  ^  Again, 
Christ  according  to  His  humanity,  was 
born  of  the  dew  of  heaven,  that  is,  conceived 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  not  by  man.  In  fine, 
a  pearl  is  white,  shining,  solid,  pure,  light 
and  round.  Now,  the  humanity  of  Christ, 
and  much  more  His  divinity  without  any 
comparison,  is  white  by  innocence  ;  shining 
by  wisdom ;  solid  by  constancy ;  pure,  be 
cause  without  spot;  light,  because  meek 
and  mild;  and  round,  because  perfect  in 
every  part.  But  the  pearl  is  not  found  by 
"  chance,"  but  is  diligently  sought  after  by 


202        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

the  prudent  merchant.  And  yet,  this  para 
ble  is  not  contrary  to  the  preceding  one,  in 
which  the  treasure  is  said  to  be  found  by 
chance :  both  are  true,  but  the  persons  are 
different :  and  therefore  our  Lord,  in  His 
divine  Providence,  joined  this  parable  to 
the  former  one,  lest  we  should  think  all  men 
may  find  the  treasure  as  it  were  by  chance. 
Some  there  are,  whom  God,  by  a  particular 
grace,  suddenly  enlightens,  so  that  neither 
seeking,  nor  desiring,  nor  thinking,  they 
arrive  at  the  true  faith  and  a  most  ardent 
charity,  and  therefore  have  a  certain  hope 
of  obtaining  eternal  life.  These  find  indeed, 
as  regard  themselves,  the  treasure  by 
chance  :  but  God  pre-ordained  them  to  this 
grace  and  to  future  glory,  not  by  chance, 
but  by  His  eternal  Providence.  Others 
there  are  whom  God  prevents  by  His  grace, 
but  not  suddenly  doth  He  show  them  the 
treasure,  for  He  inspires  them  with  a  desire 
of  seeking  the  truth :  He  makes  them  care 
ful  merchants,  and  then  aids  and  directs 
them  till  they  find  the  precious  pearl.  St. 
Paul  and  St.  Augustine  are  examples  in 
this  respect.  St.  Paul  sought  not  the  true 
treasure — which  is*  Christ,  but  persecuted 
Him  as  a  seducer,  and  the  Christians  as 
men  deluded.  And  when  he  was  on  his 
journey,  "breathing  out  threatening  and 
slaughter  against  the  disciples  of  the  Lord/' 
our  Lord  appeared  unto  him ;  and  at  the 
same  time  that  He  blinded  the  eyes  of  his 
body,  He  illuminated  those  of  the  soul  with 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      203 

such  great  light,  that  immediately  he  be 
came  a  preacher,  from  being  a  persecutor. 
And  although  this  was  a  fortunate  event  to 
him,  yet  what  appeared  chance,  was  in  God 
— Providence.  For  thus  he  speaks  in  his 
Epistle  to  the  Galatians :  "For  you  have 
heard  of  my  conversation  in  time  past  in 
the  Jews'  religion ;  how  that  beyond  mea 
sure  I  persecuted  the  Church  of  God,  and 
wasted  it.  And  I  made  progress  in  the 
Jews'  religion  above  many  of  my  equals  in 
my  own  nation,  being  more  abundantly 
zealous  for  the  traditions  of  my  fathers. 
And  when  it  pleased  him  who  separated  me 
from  my  mother's  womb,  and  called  me  by 
his  grace,  to  reveal  his  Son  in  me,  that  I 
might  preach  him  among  the  Gentiles, 
immediately  I  condescended  not  to  flesh 
and  blood."  (chap,  i.)  Wherefore,  St.  Paul 
was  separated  from  the  womb  of  his  mother 
by  Divine  providence,  that  he  might  preach 
the  Gospel  of  Christ ;  yet  he  did  not  seek 
this  precious  pearl  himself,  nor  the  treasure 
in  the  field  ;  but  the  treasure  was  offered  to 
him,  and  he  became  so  much  in  love  with  it, 
that  he  spared  no  labours ;  yea,  he  endured 
every  danger,  and  <c  counted  all  things  as 
dung,  that  he  might  gain  Christ."  On  the 
other  hand,  St.  Augustine  began  from  his 
youth  to  burn  with  a  desire  of  finding  the 
"  precious  pearl,"  that  is,  true  wisdom  and 
eternal  happiness.  But  when  he  fell  into 
the  sect  of  the  Manichees,  long  and  greatly 
did  he  labour,  complaining  to  himself  and 


204        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

disputing  with  others,  that  he  might  dis 
cover  the  truth  of  the  Christian  religion. 
But  ^when  he  had  discovered  in  that  sect 
nothing  but  fabulous  and  lying  accounts, 
he  then  almost  despaired  of  finding  the 
truth — having  spent  many  years  in  seeking 
it.  Thus  he  speaks  in  his  '  Confessions  :'* 
:<  I  had  come  into  the  depth  of  the  sea,  and 
despaired  of  finding  truth/'  But  yet  it 
pleased  God  that  he  should  at  length  dis 
cover  the  "  precious  pearl:"  and  then  with 
out  any  delay,  having  sold  all  things — that 
is,  having  rejected  carnal  desires  by  which 
he  was  strongly  bound,  and  despising 
honours  and  emoluments,  to  which  he 
ardently  aspired,  (as  he  himself  tells  us,)  he 
gave  himself  up  for  ever  to  the  service  of 
God  alone.  This  therefore,  is  the  reason, 
why  in  the  first  parable  our  Lord  compared 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  a  treasure  found 
without  labour,  and  by  chance  ;  but  in  the 
other  likened  it  to  a  pearl,  sought  after 
by  a  merchant,  with  great  labour  and  dili 
gence. 

It  now  only  remains  that  the  Christian 
soul,  removing  aside  for  a  time  all  other 
occupations,  should  seriously  consider  with 
in  herself,  and  before  God,  what  is  the  nature 
of  ^  this  business — how  useful,  and  how  easy 
it  is  at  the  present  time  ;  .but  how  difficult, 
or  rather  how  impossible  it  will^  become,  if 
worldly  things  occupy  the  attention.  Truly, 

*  Lib.  vi.  Cap.  1. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     205 

the  children  of  this  world  would  not  omit 
the  opportunity  of  purchasing  a  pearl 
which  could  be  sold  for  many  thousands  of 
pounds.  And  shall  the  children  of  light  be 
so  imprudent  as  to  refuse  to  purchase  the 
"  pearl"  which  will  make  them  eternally 
rich  and  happy,  and  when  they  will  neither 
be  compelled  to  receive  money  in  usury, 
nor  to  travel  here  and  there  to  seek  a 
purchaser,  but  it  will  be  quite  sufficient 
willingly  to  give  what  they  possess,  even  if 
they  had  but  two  farthings.  Wherefore, 
O  Lord  my  God,  let  Thy  light  shine  in  my 
heart :  grant  that  I  may  know  the  worth  of 
Thy  invaluable  pearl,  and  at  the  same  time 
the  littleness  of  the  price  which  is  required 
of  me  to  purchase  it.  Add,  0  Lord,  to  thy 
mercies,  that  thou  mayest  not  in  vain  show 
unto  me  so  precious  a  pearl ;  and  Thou 
who  hast  said,  "Cast  ye  not  your  pearls 
before  swine/'  grant  by  Thy  grace  that  if 
at  any  time  I  have  been  like  unto  swine, 
ignorant  of  the  value  of  Thy  pearl,  and  pre 
ferring  the  husks  before  it,  I  may  now, 
enlightened  and  instructed  by  Thee,  disco 
ver  the  pearl,  and  selling  all  my  goods, 
purchase  it  with  joy. 


206         THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 


CHAPTER  IIL 

THE  LABOURERS  IN  THE  VINEYARD. 

THE  third  parable  follows,  concerning  the 
"  penny  a-day,"  promised  by  the  house 
holder  to  those  labouring  in  the  vineyard. 
This  parable  comes  in  St.  Matthew  (c.  xx.) 
and,  at  first  sight,  the  reward  of  eternal  life 
appears  to  be  greatly  lessened  in  it,  since 
what  before  was  likened  to  a  treasure  and 
a  precious  pearl,  is  now  compared  to  "  a 
penny  a-day."  But  this  comparison  is  used 
that  the  reward  may  agree  with  the  toil 
and  labour:  for  the  similitude  would  be 
inappropriate  if  a  great  treasure,  or  a  pearl, 
or  sceptre,  or  royal  diadem  were  promised 
to  those  labouring  in  the  vineyard  but  for 
one  day.  But  it  can  easily  be  proved,  that 
the  "penny"  does  not  consist  in  the  value 
of  a  few  brass  coins,  but  that  it  is  a  hea 
venly  coin,  abundantly  sufficient  for  food 
and  raiment  during  a  whole  eternity.  The 
reward  ought  to  correspond  with  the  labour; 
but  the  toil  of  those  labouring  in  the  vine 
yard  of  Christ  must  not  be  estimated  by  the 
work  alone ;  (for  we  should  all  say  with  the 
Apostle :  "  I  reckon  that  the  sufferings  of 
this  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared 
with  the  glory  to  come,  that  shall  be  reveal 
ed  in  us;")  but  we  must  estimate  the  labour 
from  the  grace  of  God  dwelling  in  the 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     207 

hearts  of  the  just,  which  is  a  "  fountain  of 
living  water/'  springing  up  into  eternal 
life.  And  likewise  from  the  virtue  of 
charity,  which  is  infused  into  us  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  that  is  given  to  us ;  but  a  crown 
of  eternal  life  is  prepared  by  God  for  them 
that  love  Him,  as  St.  James  writes.  Like 
wise,  from  our  union  with  Christ,  who 
being  the  true  vine,  gives  the  greatest  value 
to  the  fruit  of  living  branches,  and  to  the 
works  of  living  members  of  His  mystical 
body,  of  whom  He  is  the  head,  and  to  whom 
He  hath  said:  "Be  glad  and  rejoice,  for 
your  reward  is  very  great  in  heaven."  In 
fine,  will  not  our  Lord  say  at  the  last  day, 
when  the  reward  will  be  given  to  those 
that  labour  in  the  vineyard :  "  Come,  ye 
blessed  of  my  Father,  possess  you  the  king 
dom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation 
of  the  world :  For  I  was  hungry,  and  ye 
gave  me  to  eat?"  &c.  Thus,  works  of 
charity  especially  relate  to  the  labour  by 
which  we  toil  in  the  vineyard  of  the 
Lord. 

Behold,  then,  how  precious  this  "penny" 
is,  which  is  called  by  our  Lord  Himself  a 
kingdom  !  Nor  without  reason  is  it  called 
so,  since  it  represents  Christ  no  less  than 
the  treasure  or  pearl  does.  For  on  the  coin 
is  impressed  the  image  of  a  prince,  and 
words  are  inscribed  on  it,  and  the  figure  is 
round.  Now,  Christ  is  "  the  image  of  the 
invisible  God,"  and  the  "  Word"  of  the 
eternal  Father,  "  having  neither  beginning 


208         THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

of  days  nor  end  of  life,"  which  is  signified 
by  the  round  figure.  And  in  fine,  "  All 
things  obey  money/'  as  Solomon  saith : 
now,  Christ  is  the  "  Lord  of  all,"  as  St. 
Peter  testifieth  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 
Wherefore,  the  «  penny"  given  to  those 
labouring  in  the  vineyard  is  Christ,  true 
God,  and  by  Him  eternal  life,  according  to 
St.  John  in  his  First  Epistle :  "  And  He 
hath  given  us  understanding,  that  we  may 
know  the  true  God,  and  may  be  in  his  true 
Son.  This  is  the  true  God,  and  life  eter 
nal."  (chap,  v.) 

But  let  us  consider  to  whom  this  precious 
reward  is  given,  which,  when  once  possess 
ed,  we  shall  no  more  stand  in  need  of  any 
thing  else.  "  Call  the  labourers,  and  pay 
them  their  hire,"  saith  the  Lord.  The 
reward,  therefore,  will  be  given  to  those 
who  ^  labour  without  intermission,  without 
negligence^  But  it  will  not  be  given  to 
those  standing  in  the  market-place,  idle,  or 
engaged  in  fowling,  hunting,  or  gambling  : 
the  reward  will  be  bestowed  on  the  deser 
ving,  not  given  gratis,  and  much  less  will 
it  be  given^  to  the  undeserving.  When  the 
Apostle  saith,  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death; 
but  the  grace  of  God  life  everlasting,"  he 
therefore  speaks,  because,  without  the  pre 
venting  grace  of  God,  no  one  can  do  good 
so  as  to  merit  the  reward  of  eternal  life; 
but  when  grace  is  received,  which  is  given 
(( gratis,"  and  not  from  our  works,  then  the 
reward  of  good  works  will  be  eternal  life. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     209 

.  Thus  St.  Augustine  speaks  in  his  Epistle 
to  Sixtus,  a  priest  at  Rome  :  "  As  death  is 
the  merited  reward  as  it  were  of  sin,  so 
eternal  life  is  the  reward  of  virtue."*  But 
because  the  same  reward  is  given  to  all,  we 
must  not  suppose  that,  in  the  kingdom  ol 
heaven,  all  the  rewards  are  alike.  The  coin 
signifies  eternal  life,  whether  God  or  Christ ; 
now  eternal  life,  that  is,  God  and  Christ, 
are  common  to  all  the  saints.  But,  as  the 
same  sun  is  seen  more  clearly  by  the  eaglf 
than  by  other  birds,  and  as  the  same  fire 
gives  more  warmth  to  those  that  are  near 
it  than  to  those  at  a  distance,  so  in  eternal 
life  one  will  see  and  enjoy  God  more  clearly 
and  sweetly  than  another ;  for,  since  there 
is  a  diversity  of  merit,  so  also  will  there  be 
a  diversity  of  reward.  This  may  have  been 
the  reason  why  our  Lord  changed  the  order 
in  the  distribution  of  his  payments,  saying, 
c^Call  the  labourers,  and  pay  them  their 
hire,  beginning  from  the  last  even  to  the 
first.  So  shall  the  last  be  first,  and  the 
first  last.  For  many  are  called,  but  few 
chosen/'  But  these  words  relate  to  the 
grace  of  the  New  Testament,  informing  us 
that  we  are  more  happy  than  our  fathers 
under  the  Old  law,  and  therefore  we  should 
be  grateful  to  God,  and  labour  with  more 
cheerfulness  and  diligence  in  his  vineyard. 
The  holy  men  that  cultivated  the  vineyard 
of  our  Lord  before  the  Ascension  of  Christ 

*  Epist.  105. 


210        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

— such  as  Adam,  Noah,  Abraham,  Moses, 
and  other  patriarchs  and  prophets,  who 
were  called  at  the  first,  third,  sixth,  and 
ninth  hour — laboured  not  only  for  a  long 
time  because  they  lived  longer,  but,  even 
after  death,  they  were  expecting  their 
reward  for  many  centuries,  and  some  for 
many  thousands  of  years.  The  apostles, 
martyrs,  and  other  labourers,  who  came  to 
cultivate  the  vineyard  at  the  eleventh  hour, 
jlhat  is,  at  the  last  hour,  accoi'ding  to  the 
interpretation  of  St.  John,)  laboured  but 
for  a  few  years,  and  immediately  after 
death,  having  entered  the  kingdom  of  hea 
ven,  they  received  their  reward.  How  great 
is  this  grace,  by  which,  if  a  Christian  wish, 
after  enduring  but  very  short  labours,  he 
can  immediately  ascend  to  that  place,  for 
which  the  most  holy  patriarchs  and  pro 
phets  sighed  for  so  long  a  period  !  Not 
without  cause  did  these  ancient  saints  mur 
mur  as  it  were  (though  this  seems  to  signify 
admiration  rather  than  complaint)  when 
they  said:  "  These  last  have  worked  but 
one  hour,  and  thou  hast  made  them  equal 
to  us  that  have  borne  the  burden  of  the 
day  and  the  heats."  But  our  Lord 
answered  for  us :  "  Friend,  I  do  thee  no 
wrong :  didst  thou  not  agree  with  me  for  a 
penny  ?  Take  what  is  thine,  and  go  thy 
way :  I  will  also  give  to  this  last,  even  as 
to  thee."  This  answer  does  not  mean  that 
men  under  the  new  law  receive  by  grace, 
and  not  by  their  justice,  a  reward  equal  to 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     211 

those  under  the  Old  law ;  but  that  they  re 
ceived  a  more  abundant  grace,  by  which 
they  have  no  less  laboured  in  the  vineyard 
for  a^short  time  than  the  others  did  during 
a  long  period,  and  therefore  they  have  justly 
received  an  equal,  and  even  greater  reward. 
The  Apostles  certainly  laboured  for  a  short 
time :  but  they  brought  forth  the  greatest 
fruit  in  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord.  When 
did  the  patriarchs  or  prophets,  having  aban 
doned  all  temporal  things,  ever  traverse 
almost  the  whole  earth,  and  bring  so  many 
kingdoms  of  the  Gentiles  to  the  true  wor 
ship  of  God?  When,  in  those  ancient 
times,  did  so  numerous  an  army  of  martyrs 
endure  every  torment  and  the  most  cruel 
deaths  for  the  true  faith  ?  When,  in  the 
Old  Testament,  were  so  many  choirs  of 
holy  virgins  found,  who  followed  the  spot 
less  Lamb,  and  vowed  and  gave  unto  God 
their  soul  and  body  ?  Where  were  then  so 
many  pastors  and  doctors,  who,  watching 
over  their  flocks,  fought  against  the  wolves, 
that  is,  against  heretics  and  pagans,  by  their 
most  learned  writings  ?  Where,  in  fine,  was 
so  great  a  number  of  hermits  and  monks,  and 
other  religious  men,  who,  emulating  the 
life  of  angels,  spent  the  day  and  night  in 
the  praise  of  God  alone  and  in  prayer  ? 
These  and  other  examples  of  the  most 
eminent  virtue  belong  to  the  New  Testa 
ment  and  its  blessings,  on  account  of  which 
our  Lord  justly  concludes  the  parable  in. 
these  words:  "  Thus  the  last  shall  be  first, 


212        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

and  the  first  last.  For  many  are  called, 
but  few  are  chosen;"  that  is,  manyjiave 
been  called  to  cultivate  the  vineyard  in  all 
ages  of  the  world,  but  few  have  been  chosen 
to  the  grace  of  the  New  Testament,  by 
which  they  have  produced  great  fruit,  and 
have  in  a  short  time  received  the  greatest 
rewards. 

But  we  must  not  suppose  that  all  who 
have  been  called  at  the  eleventh  hour,  will 
receive  a  reward ;  but  those  only  who  have 
laboured,  with  their  whole  strength  and  for 
a  short  period,  in  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord. 
For  many  there  are,  who,  knowing  that  this 
hour  is  the  last,  and  that  time  is  short,  say 
not  as  they  ought  to  do :  "Our  life  is  short, 
therefore  let  us  diligently  labour  that,  in  so 
short  a  period,  we  may  bring  forth  much 
fruit."  But  they  speak  as  the  foolish  do  in 
the  Book  of  Wisdom :  "  They  have  said, 
reasoning  with  themselves,  but  not  right : 
The  time  of  our  life  is  short  and  tedious, 
and  in  the  end  of  a  man  there  is  no  remedy, 
and  no  man  hath  been  known  to  have  re 
turned  from  hell Come,  therefore,  let 

us  enjoy  the  good  things  that  are  present, 
and  let  us  speedily  use  the  creatures  as  in 
youth.  Let  us  fill  ourselves  with  costly 
wine  and  ointments ;  and  let  not  the  flower 
of  the  time  pass  by  us.  Let  us  crown  our 
selves  with  roses,  before  they  be  withered : 
let  no  meadow  escape  our  riot:  let  us  every 
where  leave  tokens  of  joy,  for  this  is^our 
portion,  and  this  our  lot."  (chap,  ii.)  Such 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      213 

is  the  language  of  those,  who  either  know 
not  God,  or,  acknowledging  Him,  deny  Him 
by  their  works.  And  these  are  indeed  so 
numerous,  that  to  them  may  be  referred 
the  concluding  words  of  the  parable :  "Many 
are  called,  but  few  are  chosen/'  Many 
are  called  at  the  last  hour,  but  few  chosen, 
because  few  so  labour  as  to  be  deserving  of 
the  reward. 

Woe  therefore  to  us,  who,  being  called  at 
the  last  hour,  spend  the  greater  part  of  it  in 
play  and  sleep,  whilst  we  ought  to  be  so 
careful  of  every  moment  as  not  to  suffer  one 
single  portion  of  it  to  pass  by  unprofitably ; 
for  on  these  moments  dependeth  an  eter 
nity  of  happiness  or  of  misery.  And  doubt 
less,  in  proportion  as  the  grace  granted  to 
Christians  under  the  New  Law  is  greater, 
so  much  more  grievously  will  they  be 
punished  who  receive  this  grace  in  vain. 
And  as  the  last  shall  be  first  in  receiving 
the  reward,  because  they  laboured  dili 
gently  at  the  last  hour ;  so  also  will  the  last 
be  the  first  in  receiving  punishment,  who 
shall  neglect  diligently  to  labour  at  the  last 
hour. 


214        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THIE 


CHAPTER  IV. 

ON   THE    TALENTS. 

THE  fourth  parable  is  that  in  which  our 
Lord  thus  speaks  of  the  reward  of  beati 
tude  :  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  ser 
vant,  because  thou  hast  been  faithful  over 
a  few  things,  I  will  place  thee  over  many 
things :  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy 
Lord/'  (St.  Matthew,  chap.  xxv.  21.)  In 
these  words  two  things  are  promised  to 
faithful  servants,  the  most  ample  power  and 
the  greatest  joy:  "I  will  place  thee  over 
many  things ;"  and  what  these  "  many 
things"  are,  He  explains  in  another  place 
where  it  is  said :  "  Blessed  is  that  servant, 
whom,  when  his  Lord  shall  come,  he  shall 
find  so  doing.  Amen,  I  say  to  you,  he 
shall  place  him  over  all  his  goods."  (chap, 
xxiv.  46.)  But  what  means  being  placed 
"over  all  the  goods"  of  the  Lord,  except  to 
receive  power  over  all  inferior  things,  and 
to  be  made  a  partaker  of  that  sovereignty 
which  God  possesses  over  the  whole  uni 
verse  ?t  Who  can  comprehend  the  great 
ness  of  this  power  ?  What  king  or  empe 
ror  upon  earth  can  be  compared  with  the 
least  of  ^the  saints  ? 

But  since  man  cannot  possess  such  great 
power  without  having  great  care  and  trou 
ble,  therefore  our  Lord  adds:  "Enter 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      215 

into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  As  if  he  wished 
to  say,  "  As  I  make  thee  a  partaker  of  the 
greatest  power,  so  also  dp  I  make  thee 
enjoy  rest  and  pleasure,  which  no  cares  can 
destroy  or  dimmish."  How  ^  great  this 
"joy"  will  be,  which  is  promised  to  the 
just  in  heaven,  is  quite  inexplicable,  nor 
shall  we  know  it  before  we  have  expe 
rienced  it.  But  yet,  from  the  considera 
tion  of  three  words  in  the  sentence,  we  may 
in  some  measure  conceive  how  great  will 
be  the  "  joy."  The  first  word  is  "  enter;'9 
for  as  it  is  not  said,  May  the  joy  of  thy 
Lord  enter  into  thee,  but  enter  thou  into 
the  joy  of  thy  Lord,  this  is  a  proof  that  the 
joy  will  be  greater  than  we  can  conceive. 
Wherefore,  we  shall  enter  into  a  great  sea 
of  divine  and  eternal  joy,  which  will  fill  us 
within  and  without,  and  surround  us  on  all 
sides.  In  this  abundance  of  joy,  what  room 
will  there  be  for  sorrow  ?  Another  word  is 
"  into  the  joy,"  by  which  an  indefinite  joy 
concerning  this  or  that  good  is  not  pro 
mised,  but  a  joy  absolutely  pleasure  itself, 
sweetness  itself,  delight  itself.  And  doth 
not  our  whole  soul  dissolve  as  it  were,  being 
surrounded  with  such  sweetness  ?  But  the 
third  word,  "  of  thy  Lord,"  greatly  in 
creases  this  joy ;  for  we  shall  enter,  not 
into  the  joy  which  men  or  angels  possess, 
but  into  that  which  God  possesses,  in  whom 
are  all  infinite  riches.  Who  can  conceive 
what  this  joy  of  the  Lord  will  be,  but  He 
who  perfectly  knoweth  His  own  infinite 


216        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

goodness,  and  enjoys  it  in  an  infinite  de 
gree  ?  And  yet,  0  Christian  soul !  what 
thou  canst  not  now  conceive,  tliou  wilt  ex 
perience,  and  taste,  and  eternally  enjoy, 
if  thou  be  a  good  and  faithful  servant. 

Let  us  now  consider  to  whom  these  pro 
mises  relate.  They  relate,  without  doubt, 
to  those  who  have  faithfully  endeavoured  to 
multiply  the  talents  entrusted  to  them  by 
God.  The  parable  is  drawn  from  a  rich 
man,  who  went  into  a  far  countiy,  and 
delivered  his  goods  to  his  servants.  And 
to  one  he  gave  five  talents,  and  to  another 
two,  and  to  another  one,  commanding  them 
all  to  multiply  their  talents  by  careful  and 
prudent  business.  Various  are  the  opinions 
of  interpreters  concerning  the  signification 
of  these  "  talents/'  ^  Some  understand  by 
them  "  blessings"  given  gratis;  others  the 
Holy  Scriptures ;  others  the  knowledge  of 
external  things  acquired  by  the  senses,  is 
meant  by  the  five  talents;  that  the  two 
talents  signify  understanding  and  action, 
and  the  one  talent  understanding  alone : 
others,  in  fine,  consider  them  to  refer  to 
natural  gifts,  such  as  genius  and  judgment, 
or  to  the  spiritual  ones  of  faith,  hope, 
and  charity.  But  all  agree  in  this,  that 
the  multiplication  of  the  talents  consists  in 
labouring  diligently  for  our  own  salvation 
as  well  as  that  of  others.  But  another  ex 
planation  occurs  to  me,  not  repugnant  to 
the  others,  and  which  altogether  appears  to 
agree  with  what  our  Lord  says  concerning 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     2IJ 

the  talents.  And  first,  the  talents  are 
called  "  the  goods  of  the  Lord ;"  "  He  de 
livered  to  them  his  goods;"  then  the  ser 
vants  are  commanded  to  multiply  the 
talents :  "  Lord,  thou  didst  deliver  to  me 
five  talents,  behold  I  have  gained  other  five 
over  and  above."  Thirdly,  it  is  said,  "He 
gave  to  every  one  according  ^to  his  proper 
ability."  Lastly,  the  talent  is  taken  away 
from  the  wicked  and  slothful  servant.  I 
therefore  understand  by  the  talents  the 
souls  of  faithful  and  pious  men,  entrusted 
to  the  care  and  fidelity  of  bishops.  These 
are  truly  the  "goods"  of  the  Lord,  which 
are  not  given  to  us,  but  only  committed  to 
our  care  to  be  multiplied.  Our  Lord  did 
not  say  to  Peter,  "  Feed  thy  sheep,"  but 
"Feed  my  sheep."  Other  things  are  our 
own  goods,  although  bestowed  by  God,  as 
genius,  judgment,  the  Holy  Scriptures, 
blessings  given  gratis,  &c.  But  faithful 
and  pious  souls  He  calls  His  "  goods,"  His 
vineyard,  His  family,  His  spouse  :  for  these 
He  came  into  the  world,  for  their  redemp 
tion  He  poured  out  His  blood,  to  gain  these 
He  sent  His  apostles,  to  whom  He  said,  "I 
will  make  you  to  be  fishers  of  men." 

Now  faithful  souls  are  multiplied,  when 
bishops  convert  sinners  by  word  and  by 
example.  This  St.  Peter  did  when,  after 
our  Saviour  had  entrusted  to  him  one  hun 
dred  and  twenty  Christians,  saying,  '  Feed 
my  sheep/  he  converted  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  by  his  first  sermon,  three  thou- 


218        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

sand  people,  then  five  thousand,  and  after 
wards  many  thousands.  And  St.  Gregory 
Thaumaturgus,  when  made  bishop  of  Neo- 
csesarea,  found  only  seventeen  Christians : 
but  he  so  multiplied  them,  that  when  he 
was  on  the  point  of  death  only  seventeen 
infidels  were  left  in  so  large  a  city:  this  cir 
cumstance  St.  Gregory  of  Nyssa  relates,  in 
his  Life  of  St.  Gregory  Thaumaturgus. 
But  these  talents  are  given  to  each  one 
6  according  to  his  proper  ability/  For 
God  who  knoweth  the  strength — that  is, 
the  prudence,  knowledge,  charity,  and 
strength  of  all  men,  commits  souls  to  those 
only  who  He  thinks  are  fit  to  bear  such 
a  burden.  And,  therefore,  no  one  ought 
to  undertake  the  care  of  souls,  an<J  espe 
cially  accept  of  the  episcopacy,  unless 
called  by  Him  who  gives  the  talents,  ac 
cording  to  the  ability  of  each  one.  But  if 
otherwise,  we  cannot  wonder  that  many 
fall  under  the  burden  :  neither  will  it  be  an 
excuse  before  God  to  say,  that  their 
shoulders  were  not  equal  to  such  a  burden: 
He  will  answer,  Who  forced  thee  to  bear 
a  burden  beyond  thy  strength  ?  Didst  thou 
not  wish,  and  ask,  and  endeavour  to  ob 
tain  it  ?  Now  therefore  thou  shalt  be  cast 
out  into  the  exterior  darkness. 

In  fine,  the  talent  given  to  the  slothful 
servant  is  taken  away  from  him.  And  if 
we  say,  that  the  talents  are  the  souls  of  the 
faithful,  this  will  perfectly  agree  with  the 
parable.  For  he  who  received  only  one 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     219 

talent,  that  is,  the  care  of  his  own  soul 
alone,  will  lose  it  if  he  neglect  to  take  pro 
per  care  of  it:  the  devil  will  make  it  his 
property.  And  as  the  blessed  possess  the 
liberty  of  the  sons  of  God,  by  which  they 
freely  remain  where  they  wish,  and  do 
whatever  they  desire ;  so  on  the  contrary 
also,  the  wicked  lose  all  liberty,  and  their 
hands  and  feet  being  bound,  they  can 
neither  walk  where  they  wish,  nor  do  what 
ever  they  desire ;  but  they  are  compelled  to 
remain  where  they  wish  not,  being  unable 
to  do  what  they  wish  :  this  is,  to  lose  their 
soul.  Wherefore  this  interpretation,  in 
which  by  the  talents  faithful  souls  are  un 
derstood,  is  quite  consistent  with  the  para 
ble.  But  how  the  other  opinions  can  be 
reconciled,  it  is  no  easy  matter  to  teach: 
they  are  not,  however,  false  on  this  ac 
count,  or  to  be  rejected,  because  it  is  not 
necessary  to  accommodate  every  explana 
tion  to  the  parable,  as  St.  Chrysostom 
wisely  remarks.""  We  shall  still  continue 
our  exposition,  not  rejecting,  as  we  have 
said,  the  exposition  of  others. 

Wherefore,  our  Lord  has  committed  his 
talents  to  three  sorts  of  men ;  to  those  who 
are  perfect,  such  as  bishops  ought  to  be, 
He  has  given  five  talents,  that  is,  a  great 
number  of  people  to  take  care  of ;  to  others 
less  perfect,  such  as  priests  generally  are, 
He  has  given  two  talents,  that  is,  the  fewer 

*  Homily  48th.  on  St.  Matthew. 


220        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

souls  which  are  contained  in  a  parish  :  but 
to  others  more  rude  and  infirm,  such  as  the 
common  people,  to  each  of  them  He  has 

f'ven  one,  that  is,  the  care  of  his  own  soul, 
hese  also  ought,  as  far  as  they  can,  by 
words  of  private  exhortation  and  good  ex 
ample,  to  lead  others  from  sin  to  the  path  of 
virtue,  and  in  this  way  multiply  the  talent 
entrusted  to  them.  And  what  is  said  of 
bishops  and  priests,  ought  also  to  be  under 
stood  as  relating  to  princes  and  magis 
trates,  and  fathers  of  families.  Thus 
writes  St.  Augustine :  "  Every  head  of  a 
family  should  be  by  his  name,  the  paternal 
love  of  his  family.  For  the  sake  of  Christ 
and  of  eternal  life,  he  should  admonish, 
instruct,  exhort,  and  connect  all  his  depen 
dants:  he  should  manifest  love  to  them, 
and  likewise  exercise  discipline :  thus  in  his 
own  house  he  will  fulfil  in  a  certain  degree, 
the  spiritual  office  of  a  bishop."""  In  this 
sense,  Constantino  the  Great  used  to  say, 
that  he  was  a  bishop  out  of  the  church, 
because  he  was  solicitous  that  the  church 
should  be  protected  and  extended:  but 
yet,  he  did  not  usurp  the  ecclesiastical 
office. 

But  lest  any  one  should  suppose  that 
one  man  alone,  or  one  class  of  men  only  is 
comprehended  in  this  parable,  because  he 
alone  who  received  the  one  talent  was 
punished,  we  must  know,  that  our  Lord 

*  (Tractatus  51,  in  Jofcan.) 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     221 

wishes  us  to  understand  the  dangers  to 
which  superiors  are  exposed.  For  as  at 
the  last  day  he  will  reward  those  who  do 
corporal  works  of  mercy,  and  punish  those 
who  do  them  not;  from  which  we  know 
that  greater  will  be  the  rewards  of  those  who 
perform  spiritual  works  of  mercy,  espe 
cially  of  the  holy  apostles  and  martyrs,  and 
virgins  of  heroic  virtue ;  and  on  the  other 
hand,  that  greater  will  be  the  punishment 
of  thieves,  robbers,  perjurers,  and  the  sacri 
legious,  than  those  who  give  not  alms  to 
the  poor :  so  also  in  this  passage,  because 
he  who  received  the  one  talent  which  he 
might  easily  have  multiplied,  and  yet  did 
not,  was  most  grievously  punished,  we 
must  understand,  that  in  proportion  as 
bishops,  pastors,  and  princes  fail  in  this 
point,  so  will  they  be  punished  the  more 
grievously,  as  the  loss  of  many  souls  is 
greater  than  that  of  one.  Let  us  hear 
what  St.  Augustine  says  on  the  danger  of 
the  ecclesiastical  state:  "Above  all  things, 
I  beseech  you  piously  and  diligently  to 
reflect,  that  in  this  life  and  especially  at 
this  time,  nothing  is  more  easy,  pleasing, 
and  acceptable  to  men,  than  the  office  of  a 
bishop,  priest,  or  deacon,  if  it  be  dis 
charged  in  a  careless  or  fawning  manner ; 
but  before  God  nothing  is  more  afflict 
ing  and  offensive.  Again,  nothing  in  this 
life  and  especially  at  this  time,  is  more 
difficult,  laborious,  and  dangerous,  than 
the  office  of  a  bishop,  priest,  or  deacon; 


222         THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

but  before  God  nothing  is  more  blessed,  if 
it  be  fulfilled  in  the  manner  our  great  king 
commands/'       In   the  remaining  part  of 
this  epistle  he  treats  the  subject  in  such 
a    manner    that    I  wish  all    ecclesiastics 
would  attentively  read  it,  and  especially 
those  who  rashly  aspire  to  the  episcopacy 
or  priesthood.     For  many  when  they  have 
obtained  what  they  asked  for,  and  found 
what  they  sought  after,  either  desert  their 
flock,  or  being  intent  on  other  things,  care 
little  about  attending  to  their  flock  and  in 
creasing  the  number  of  faithful  and  pious 
souls.     On  the  night  of  the  birth  of  our 
Saviour,  the  shepherds  were  keeping  watch 
over  their  flocks :  and  if  this  was  done  for 
senseless  sheep,  by  those  who  were  a  figure 
of  the  shepherds  of  the  church,  how  much 
more  ought  it  to  be  done  by  the  shepherds 
of  that  flock,  for  which  our  Saviour  when 
on  earth,  watched  whole  nights  in  prayer, 
not   for  Himself   certainly,    but    for   His 
sheep  ?  And  if  the  patriarch  Jacob  laboured 
so  much   for  the  flocks  of  his  father-in- 
law,  Laban,  that  he   should    say,  "Day 
and  night  was  I  parched  with  heat,  and 
with  frost,   and   sleep  departed  from  my 
eyes/'  what  Bought  the    shepherd  of  the 
flock  of  Christ  to  do,  for  which  He  shed 
His  blood  ?     And  if  the  devil  goeth  about 
as  a  roaring  lion  seeking  whom  he  may 
devour,  is  it  not  proper  that  the  good  shep- 

*  Epist.  147.  *d  Valerium. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     223 

herd  should  also  go  about,  seeking  whom 
to  save  ? 

But  it  may  be  said,  business  connected 
with  the    Church  often  compels    one    to 
leave  his  flock.      I  admit  this,  when  the 
business  is   important,   and  only  a  short 
time  is  spent  in  attending  to  it :  otherwise 
great  things  are  to  be  preferred  before  less, 
and  the  former  should  be  performed  by 
ourselves,   the  latter  by  others.      For    it 
business  compels   us   to   leave  our  nock 
more    important   business,   even  dreadful 
wars,  compel  us  not  to  leave  our  flock  de 
fenceless.    The  trumpet  of  St.  Paul  sounds 
forth:     "Our    wrestling    is    not    against 
flesh   and    blood,    but   against    principali 
ties    and    powers,    against   the    rulers    ot 
the   world  of  this  darkness,    against   the 
spirits  of  wickedness  in  the  high  places. 
(Ephesians  vi.  12.)     And  if  the  general  be 
absent,  who  shall  teach  the  soldiers  to  ex 
tinguish  the  fiery  darts  of  the  most  wicked 
one  ?    Our  Lord  said  to  Peter,  and  through 
him  to  all  pastors,  "  Feed  my  sheep:"  He 
was  silent  on  other  things,  to  teach  us  that 
this  duty  was  the  chief  duty%    And  in  the 
consecration  of  a  bishop  it  is  said,  •  Go, 
preach  unto  the  people  committed  to  thee; 
but  on  temporal  matters  nothing  is  added, 
that  the  bishop  may  be  admonished,  not  to 
make  temporal  things   equal  to  spiritual, 
much  less  to  prefer  the  first  before  the  lat 
ter.     In  fine,  in  the  fourth  council  of  Car 
thage,  bishops   are  seriously  commanded 


224        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

not  to  undertake  by  themselves  the  care  of 
widows,  minors,  and  strangers,  but  to 
entrust  them  to  their  arch-priest  or 
deacon;  not  to  undertake  the  settling  of 
wills,  not  to  engage  in  law-suits  for  transi 
tory  things,  not  to  be  occupied  with  domes 
tic  cares;  but  to  attend  only  to  reading, 
prayer,  and  preaching.  Wherefore  this 
council,  composed  of  two  hundred  and 
fourteen  bishops,  at  which  St.  Augustine 
was  also  present,  wished  that  bishops 
should  commit  all  temporal  matters  to 
others,  that  they  might  more  freely  attend 
to  the  care  and  increase  of  their  flock. 

As  this  parable  therefore  shows  us,  that 
eternal  happiness  is  an  object  especially  to 
be  desired,  since  it  contains  the  highest 
power  united  with  the  greatest  delight ;  so 
also  it  proves,  that  the  means  of  arriving  at 
this  happiness,  consists  in  labouring  assi 
duously  for  the  salvation  of  our  own  soul, 
and  in  seeking  and  procuring  that  of 
others.  And  they  who  refuse  to  endure 
this  labour,  are  deprived  not  only  of  this 
happiness  and  pleasure,  but  are  condemned 
to  eternal  torments  in  hell,  for  thus  our 
Lord  speaks^  "The  unprofitable  servant 
cast  ye  out  into  the  exterior  darkness. 
There^  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of 
teeth."  Here  we  should  particularly  no 
tice,  that  the  servant  who  is  so  severely 
punished,  is  not  said  to  be  wicked  or  im 
pious,  but  only  "  unprofitable. "  Thus 
although  a  bishop,  or  priest,  a  prince,  or 


ETERNAL  II  API -'/NESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     225 

magistrate,  or  head  of  a  family,  were  free 
from  other  crimes,  yet  should  he  be  unpro 
fitable,  that  is,  neglectful  of  his  salvation 
and  that  of  his  subjects,  he  will  be  cast  out 
into  "  the  exterior  darkness/'  &c.  But  if 
the  unprofitable  servant  shall  suffer  this 
punishment,  what  will^  be  done  to  the 
covetous,  proud,  luxurious  servant,  ad 
dicted  to  various  vices?  If  the  unprofi 
table  servant  be  condemned,  what  an  ac 
count  will  the  impious  prevaricator  have  to 
give  to  God,  of  the  talents  entrusted  to 
him?  Truly  they  that  consider  these 
things,  will  not  seek  after  high  places ;  and 
if  they  should  be  compelled  to  receive 
them,  they  will  ever  watch  with  fear  and 
trembling,  as  having  to  give  a  most  strict 
account  of  the  souls  entrusted  to  them. 


CHAPTER  V. 

THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  SUPPER. 

THE  fifth  parable,  which  is  found  in  St. 
Luke,  makes  the  happiness  of  the  saints 
like  to  a  great  supper :  and  truly,  not  with 
out  reason.  For  in  a  nuptial  or  royal  sup 
per,  every  thing  is  found  that  can  delight 
the  human  sense,  and  exhibit  the  power, 
riches,  and  ^  glory  of  this  world.  Where 
fore  ,  when  king  Assuerus  ruled  over  a  hun 
dred  and  twenty-seven  provinces,  and 


226         THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

wished  to  display  the  riches  of  the  glory  of 
his  kingdom,  and  the  greatness  of  his 
power,  he  found  nothing  more  adapted  for 
his  purpose,  than  to  prepare  a  most  magni 
ficent  banquet.  First,  in  a  great  banquet 
the  eyes  are  delighted  with  the  costly  orna 
ments  of  the  palace,  with  the  numerous  ser 
vants  clad  in  beautiful  and  precious^ robes, 
with  the  gold  and  silver  vases  in  which  the 
viands  are  carried ;  the  ears  are  delighted 
with  various  musical  instruments,  and  the 
songs  of  many  voices ;  the  sense  of  smell  is 
delighted  with  the  odour  of  flowers,  pre 
cious  ointment,  and  scented  water,  &c. ; 
the  sense  of  taste  with  viands  of  every  de 
scription,  and  precious  wines  from  every 
land ;  in  fine ;  the  sense  of  touch  is  charmed 
by  the  softest  and  most  elegant  couches. 
Wherefore,  as  in  a  royal  or  nuptial  ban 
quet,  nearly  every  corporal  good  is  found 
that  can  be  procured  on  earth,  not  without 
reason  did  pur  Lord,  wishing  to  represent 
that  "happiness"  which  in  itself  includes 
all  good  things,  compare  it  to  a  great  sup 
per:  of  this  we  read  in  the  Apocalypse: 
"Blessed  are  they  who  are  called  to  the 
nuptial  supper  of  the  Lamb."  We  may 
learn  how  great  the  supper  of  the  Lord  will 
be,  from  this  circumstance,  that  the  beauty 
of  all  the  glorified  bodies  will  be,  the  table 
on  which  the  last  service  is  placed.  But  so 
great  is  the  sweetness  of  the  '  last  course,' 
that  when  St.  Peter  once  saw  the  body^of 
the  Lord  resplendent  as  the  sun,  he  said, 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS      227 

"It  is  good  for  us  to  be  here."  'And  if 
these  things  be  such,  what  will  the  supper 
itself  be,  which  consists  in  the  enjoyment 
of  the  divinity ! 

In  fine,  all  the  good  things  of  this  world 
are  nothing  else  than  the  rind  and  shell  as 
it  were,  of  the  fruits  of  paradise.  And  if 
these  *  parings'  be  such,  that  men  are  en 
chanted  with  a  love  and  desire  for  them, 
what  will  the  fruit  itself  of  paradise  be ! 
And  if  the  fruit  be  such,  what  will  the  more 
solid  and  excellent  food  be  !  Truly  it  will 
be  such,  as  always  to  be  eaten  without 
satiety,  always  to  be  desired.  But  we  must 
not  suppose,  that  the  supper  in  heaven  will 
be  such  as  great  princes  give  here  on  earth 
at  their  espousals ;  in  heaven  we  shall  be 
as  the  angels  of  God ;  "we  shall  neither 
marry,  nor  be  married/'  nor  shall  we  stand 
in  need  of  food  to  support  life.  The  supper 
therefore  will  consist  of  spiritual  ricnes, 
and  delights,  and  glory,  and  ornament, 
suitable  to  the  state  of  the  blessed.  Riches 
and  delights  are  mentioned  in  this  life,  be 
cause  we  see  not  things  more  excellent. 
But  from  these  we  may  learn,  that  the 
spiritual '  supper '  will  be  so  superior  to  our 
most  splendid  banquets,  as  heaven  is  to 
earth,  and  as  God  who  will  prepare  it,  is 
above  all  mortals  in  power  and  majesty. 

But  some  one  will  say,  Why  is  the  hap 
piness  of  the  saints  compared  to  a  supper, 
rather  than  to  a  dinner?  The  reason  is 
this ;  because  dinner  is  taken  at  mid-day 


228        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

and  after  it  business  is  attended  to  till 
evening:  but  supper  is  taken  towards 
evening,  when  all  business  is  finished,  and 
afterwards  come  rest  and  sleep.  Where 
fore  in  another  parable  which  is  found  in 
St.  Matthew,  respecting  the  Incarnation 
of  our  Lord,  dinner  is  introduced  on  ac 
count  of  the  marriage  which  the  king  made 
for  his  son.  The  reason  is,  because  our 
Lord's  Incarnation,  and  the  marriage  with 
His  spouse  the  Church,  were  commenced 
at  mid-day,  that  is,  a  long  while  before  the 
end  of  the  world.  After  dinner,  the  re 
demption  of  the  world,  and  the  reconcilia 
tion  of  man  with  God,  were  celebrated. 
But  when  the  bride  shall  be  conducted  to 
the  palace  of  the  bridegroom,  and  to  the 
nuptial  supper,  all  business  will  cease,  and 
the  sweetest  sleep  shall  follow,  that  is, 
there  will  be  eternal  rest.  This  therefore 
is  the  reason,  why  the  perfect  glory  of  the 
blessed  is  compared  to  a  supper,  rather 
than  to  a  dinner. 

But  it  will  be  useful  to  consider  what  we 
must  do,  in  order  to  be  admitted  to  the 
supper.  This  our  Lord  plainly  teaches  us 
in  the  parable,  for  He  saith :  "  A  certain 
man  made  a  great  supper  and  invited 

many And  they  began  all  at  once  to 

make  excuse.  The  first  said  to  him:  I 
have  bought  a  farm,  and  I  must  needs  go 
out  and  see  it :  I  pray  thee,  hold  me  ex 
cused.  And  another  said :  I  have  bought 
five  yoke  of  oxen,  and  I  go  to  try  them :  I 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     229 

pray  thee  hold  me  excused.  And  another 
said :  I  have  married  a  wife,  and  therefore 
I  cannot  come/'  (St.  Luke  xiv.)  How 
wonderful !  Men  are  invited  by  God  to 
the  nuptial  supper,  and  they  refuse  !  What 
would  they  do  if  they  were  called  to  mili 
tary  service,  or  to  undertake  a  long  and 
dangerous  journey  ?  Such  is  the  blindness 
of  men,  that  they  can  scarcely  be  induced 
to  believe  what  they  do  not  see.  But  what 
is  that  which  mortals  prefer  before  the  nup 
tial  supper,  that  is,  before  their  greatest, 
eternal  good  ?  Our  Lord  mentions  three 
impediments  to  salvation,  which  of  their 
own  nature  are  not  evil ;  but  yet,  too  great 
an  affection  for  them  hinders  our  eternal 
salvation.  To  buy  a  farm,  to  try  oxen,  to 
marry  a  wife,  are  not  sinful :  but  to  prefer 
them  before  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  is  an 
incredible  blindness.  And  yet,  there  are 
many  Christians  who  pursue  temporal 
goods  with  such  ardour ;  and  honours,  dig 
nity,  and  power,  signified  in  the  purchase 
of  the  farm ;  and  riches,  signified  by  the 
oxen ;  and  pleasure,  by  t?he  marriage ;  that 
they  spend  days  and  nights  in  seeking  and 
enjoying  them,  entirely  forgetting  those 
eternal  rewards  which  God  hath  promised 
to  them  that  love  Him.  And  many  are 
not  content  with  purchasing  farms,  trying 
yokes  of  oxen,  and  marrying ;  but  in  order 
as  it  were,  more  completely  to  neglect  their 
salvation,  they  seize  the  farms  of  other 
men  steal  their  oxen,  and  support  concu- 


230        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

bines:  nor  do  they  ever  consider  what  a 
misfortune  it  will  be,  for  such  husks  of 
swine  to  be  deprived  of  the  supper  of  the 
Lord.  Truly,  if  our  Lord  had  promised 
to  us  ^  worms  of  the  earth,  not  a  sup 
per  of  infinite  sweetness,  but  crumbs  falling 
from  that  table ;  even  then  it  would  be  ad 
vantageous  for  us  to  despise  all  temporal 
goods,  that  so  we  might  possess  those 
crumbs.  ^What  madness  therefore  is  it,  to 
prefer  insignificant  and  fleeting  pleasures, 
before  this  divine  supper,  which  abounds 
with  every  eternal  delight,  and  in  which  we 
shall  sit  down  with  the  holy  angels,  and 
even  with  the  King  of  Angels  in  heaven ! 

After  our  Lord  hath  shown  us  what  are 
the  impediments  to  our  being  present  at 
the  great  supper,  He  also  added  the  means 
by  which  they  may  be  removed :  He  con 
tinues  in  the  parable:  "  Then  the  master 
of  the  house  being  angry,  said  to  his  ser 
vant  :  Go  out  quickly  into  the  streets  and 
lanes  of  the  city,  and  bring  in  hither  the 
poor  and  the  feeble,  and  the  blind  and  the 
lame."  Because  the  rich  were  occupied  in 
buying  farms,  and  oxen,  and  marrying, 
they  refused  to  attend  the  supper  of  their 
great  Master.  He  therefore  calls  the  poor, 
who  have  neither  money  to  purchase  farms 
and  oxen,  nor  are  able  to  support  their 
wives,  if  they  can  find  any.  He  calls  the 
feeble,  who  cannot  visit  farms,  nor  buy 
oxen,  nor  marry  wives :  He  calls  the  blind, 
who  cannot  see  farms,  nor  manage  oxen 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      231 

nor  easily  find  a  wife:  He  calls  the  lame, 
who  cannot  without  the  greatest  difficulty, 
walk  to  a  farm,  manage  oxen,  or  dance  at 
a  marriage.  These  therefore  being  free 
from  every  impediment  by  which  the  others 
are  bound,  and  being  admitted  to  the  sup- 
per,(  ought  justly  to  rejoice  that  God  made 
them  feeble,  and  blind,  and  lame.  Many 
in  this  life  complain,  that  they  were  born 
poor,  or  that  they  are  often  infirm,  or  blind, 
or  lame,  and  they  appear  to  be  most  un 
happy  thereat.  But  they  know  not  what 
good  things  God  hath  prepared  for  them 
hereafter,  on  account  of  that  very  affliction 
which  men  call  "misfortune:"  but  if  they 
did  know,  they  would  certainly  be  glad 
and  rejoice.  No  one  ought  to  complain  of 
the  providence  of  God,  but  in  all  things 
give  thanks  to  God  the  best  of  Fathers, 
who  taketh  care  of  us :  to  His  will  we 
should  always  resign  ourselves. 

But  although  we  must  thus  act,  yet  in 
this  place  those  are  properly  considered 
poor,  who  are  poor  in  spirit,  not  in  riches ; 
who  are  infirm,  not  in  strength,  but  in  con 
fidence  in  themselves ;  who  are  blind,  not 
in  sight,  but  to  craftiness ;  who  are  lame, 
not  in  their  feet,  but  in  their  affections.  I 
will  explain  my  meaning  more  plainly. 
The  poor  who  are  admitted  to  the  supper  of 
the  Lord,  are  those  who  hearing  the  words 
of  the  Apostle,  do  not  wish  to  become  rich: 
and  if  they  possess  money,  do  not  hoard  it 
up,  nor  spend  it  in  vanity,  but  in  doing 


232        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

what  the  Holy  Spirit  speaks  by  the  mouth 
of  David :  "  He  hath  distributed,  he  hath 
given  to  the  poor;  his  justice  remaineth  for 
ever  and  ever."  The  infirm  are  those  who 
confide  not  in  their  virtue,  nor  glory  in 
their  strength.  The  blind  are  they  who 
truly  believe  what  they  do  not  see,  espe 
cially  as  regards  the  rewards  of  the  just, 
and  the  torments  of  the  wicked.  For  he 
who  is  truly  persuaded,  that  the  rewards  of 
the  blessed  are  indeed  most  glorious  and 
eternal,  and  the  torments  of  the  wicked 
most  dreadful  and  everlasting,  will  not  cer 
tainly  be  attached  to  the  earth  nor  to  its 
goods,  ^  but  will  fix  his  heart  there,  where 
alone  is  true  joy.  In  fine,  the  lame  are 
those — and  they  can  justly  aspire  to  the 
supper  of  the  Lord— whose  right  foot  is 
much  longer  than  the  left ;  that  is,  whose 
love  of  God  and  affection  for  eternal  goods, 
are  greater  than  the  love  of  themselves  and 
of  temporal  things,  signified  by  the  left 
foot. 

But  let  us  consider  the  sentence  of  our 
great  Master,  against  those  who  blindly 
and  most  foolishly  despised  His  Supper: 
"  But  I  say  unto  you,  that  none  of  those 
men  that  were  invited  shall  taste  of  my 
supper."  Our  Lord  knew  well,  that  they 
who  had  been  invited,  and  who  through 
love  for  present  goods  despised  the  future 
ones  as  useless,  would  hunger  after  that 
supper  with  an  incredible  ardour  when  the 
senses  of  the  flesh  were  extinct  in  death, 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      233 

and  all  earthly  things  had  been  removed: 
for  the  prophet  David  saith :  "  They  shall 
return  at  evening,  and  shall  suffer  hunger 
like  dogs ;  and  shall  go  round  about  the 
city/'  (Psalm  Iviii.)  At  evening,  when 
the  day  of  this  present  life  is  finished,  they 
will  return  and  repent,  but  their  sorrow  will 
be  useless,  and  they  will  be  hungry  like 
mad  dogs,  and  go  round  about  the  City  of 
God,  seeking  to  obtain,  if  they  can,  a  few 
crumbs  from  that  supper.  But  the  sen 
tence  of  the  Lord  is  fixed — "  None  of  them 
shall  taste  of  my  supper/' 

0 !  if  thou  didst  know,  my  soul,  the 
meaning  of  these  words,  "None  of  them 
shall  taste  of  my  supper;"  if  thou  couldst 
comprehend  how  great  will  be  the  hunger 
of  those  miserable  men,  and  of  what  sweet 
food  they  will  for  ever  be  deprived !  And 
what  would  they  then  give,  if  they  could  but 
taste  of  that  for  which  they  so  ardently 
long  ?  But  nought  will  they  obtain,  even 
if  the  whole  world  were  at  their  disposal, 
and  they  were  willing  to  renounce  it.  Since 
then  this  is  the  case,  let  us  be  converted 
whilst  we  have  time,  whilst  it  is  our  day, 
whilst  penance  is  profitable.  Let  us  now 
hunger  after  that  most  delicious  supper, 
not  as  mad  and  unclean  dogs,  who  think 
of  nothing  but  of  their  food,  but  as  men 
endowed  with  reason ;  let  us  hunger  after 
the  food  of  eternal  life,  and  the  bread  of 
angels,  even  that  hidden  manna  "  which  no 
one  knoweth  but  he  that  receiveth/'  and 


234        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

which  God  Himself  enjoveth  from  eternity 
unto  eternity.  And  letAis  so  live  in  this 
our  exile,  as  not  to  be  in  love  with  it, 
but  to  sigh  after  our  true  country.  When 
we  shall  have  arrived  there,  we  shall  not  be 
obliged  to  "  go  round  about"  the  city,  but 
we  shall  enter  the  open  gate ;  and  being 
admitted  to  the  supper  of  the  Lord,  we 
shall  be  filled  with  the  bread  of  life  and  the 
water  of  wisdom,  a  most  sweet  and  pleasant 
food. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE  PARABLE  OF  THE  WISE  AND  FOOLISH  VIRGINS. 

THE  last  parable  is  that  which  makes  the 
happiness  of  the  saints  like  to  a  royal  mar 
riage,  to  which  ten  virgins  were  invited, 
five  being  wise  and  five  foolish.  We  shall 
first  briefly  explain  who  is  the  bride,  and 
who  the  bridegroom;  then  how  excellent 
a  good  is  signified  by  the  word  "marriage;" 
and  lastly,  what  is  required  for  our  attain 
ing  so  great  an  object. 

First  then,  no  one  can  doubt  but  that 
Christ  is  the  bridegroom.  This  is  expressed 
by  St.  John  the  Baptist,  where  speaking  of 
Christ  he  says :  "He  that  hath  the  bride, 
is  the  bridegroom  ;  but  the  friend  of  the 
bridegroom,  who  standeth  and  heareth  him, 
rejoiceth  with  joy  because  of  the  bride 
groom's  voice."  Our  Lord  Himself  also 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     235 

intimates  the  same  in  the  parable  of  the  king 
who  made  a  marriage  for  his  son.  The 
Apostle  confirms  the  same,  in  his  Epistle  to 
the  Corinthians  :  "  I  have  espoused  you  to 
one  husband,  that  I  may  present  you  as  a 
chaste  virgin  to  Christ/'  So  also  does  St. 
John  in  the  Apocalypse  :  "  Let  us  be  glad 
and  rejoice,  and  give  glory  to  him ;  for  the 
marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come,  and  his 
wife  hath  prepared  herself:"  and  again, 
((  Blessed  are  they  that  are  called  to  the 
marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb."  It  is 
equally  certain,  that  the  Church  is  the 
bride.  This  the  Apostle  clearly  asserts  in 
his  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians:  "  Therefore 
as  the  Church  is  subject  to  Christ,  so  also 
let  the  wives  be  to  their  husbands  in  all 
things.  Husbands,  love  your  wives,  as 
Christ  also  loved  the  Church,  and  deli 
vered  himself  up  for  it,  that  he  might 

sanctify  it For  this  cause  shall  a  man 

leave  his  father  and  mother,  and  shall  cleave 
to  his  wife,  and  they  shall  be  two  in  one 
flesh.  ^  This  is  a  great  sacrament ;  but  I 
speak  in  Christ  and  in  the  Church."  (chap. 
v.  24,  &c.) 

But  although  the  Church  be  the  spouse 
of  Christ,  and  the  faithful  be  called  the 
Sons  of  the  Church,  because  by  baptism 
she  has  brought  them  forth,  as  it  were,  for 
Christ ;  yet,  because  the  Church  is  nothing 
more  than  an  assembly  of  the  faithful, 
therefore  all  pious  souls  are  individual 
spouses,  as  the  Church  is  an  universal 


236        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

spouse.  For  not  falsely  doth  the  Church 
sing  of  holy  virgins,  "  Come,  spouse  of 
Christ,  and  receive  -the  crown  which  the 
Lord  hath  prepared  for  thee  for  ever/'  But 
although  holy  virgins  are,  in  a  special  man 
ner,  called  spouses  of  Christ,  because  they 
have  rejected  a  carnal  marriage,  in  order 
to  be  spiritually  married  to  Christ  alone ; 
yet  other  Christian  souls  are  also  " spouses" 
of  Christ,  for  they  are  espoused  to  Him  by 
faith,  united  to  Him  by  charity,  and  aspire 
to  a  consummation  of  the  spiritual  marriage 
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

But  if  we  could  sufficiently  conceive 
what  a  good  it  will  be  for  the  human  soul 
to  be  united  with  marriage  in  Christ,  we 
should  find  nothing  more  honourable, 
nothing  more  useful,  nothing  more  sweet, 
either  in  this  world  or  in  the  next.  Great 
is  the  glory,  advantage,  and  sweetness  in 
serving  the  King  of  kings  ;  greater  to  be 
numbered  amongst  his  friends  and  domes 
tics  ;  the  greatest  to  be  called  a  son  of  God 
and  the  brother  of  Christ.  But  to  become 
the  "  spouse"  of  God,  a  partner  of  His 
throne,  of  His  crown,  and  of  all  His  titles, 
appears  to  me  to  be  more  than  the  greatest, 
if  I  may  so  speak.  This  it  is  of  which  our 
Lord  speaks  in  Isaias  concerning  spiritual 
eunuchs  :  l '  I  will  give  to  them  in  my  house, 
and  within  my  walls,  a  name  better  than 
sons  and  daughters  ;"  that  is,  I  will  give  to 
them  the  name  of  a  spouse.  Who  can  com 
prehend,  how  noble,  how  honourable  and 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     237 

sweet  it  will  be,  not  only  to  behold  God 
and  to  converse  with  him,  but  to  become 
one  spirit  with  Him,  and  to  be  transformed 
into  Him?  These  are  the  words  of  the 
Apostle  :  "  He  who  is  joined  to  a  harlot,  is 

made  one  body But  he  who  is  joined  to 

the  Lord,  is  one  spirit :"  and  again,  "But 
we  all  beholding  the  glory  of  the  Lord  with 
open  face,  are  transformed  into  the  same 
image  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord/'  (2  Epist.  to  the  Corinth,  iii. 
18.)  How  great  will  be  the  pleasure,  when 
being  united  to  God  and  irradiated  by  the 
brightness  of  His  countenance,  we  shall  be 
transformed  into  His  brightness,  and  made 
most  like  unto  Him  !  "  We  shall  be  like 
to  him/'  saith  St.  John,  "  because  we  shall 
see  him  as  he  is."  We  shall  be  like  to 
Him,  not  only  as  images  created  according 
to  His  likeness ;  but  like  in  glory,  in  beati 
tude,  in  happiness.  St.  Paul  the  apostle, 
in  that  wonderful  rapture  he  had  when  ' '  he 
was  caught  up  into  paradise/'  heard  secret 
words  which  it  was  not  in  the  power  of  man 
to  utter ;  and  yet  he  was  so  absorbed  in 
God,  that  he  knew  not  whether  he  was  in 
the  body  or  out  of  the  body.  How  great, 
therefore,  will  be  that  most  happy  union  of 
the  soul  with  God,  when  absorbed  and  im 
mersed  in  the  sea  of  His  sweetness,  she 
will  be  "one  spirit"  with  God  !  So  great 
will  be  the  joy,  that  as  St.  Bernard  says, 
"  All  other  joy  compared  with  it  will  be  sor 
row  all  sweetness  will  be  bitterness ;  all 


238        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

honour,  dishonour ;  whatever  else,  in  fine, 
can  delight  us,  will  be  troublesome."*  But 
since  this  union  of  the  most  beautiful  spouse 
•with  a  blessed  soul  be  ineffable,  let  us  rather 
inquire  from  the  present  parable — what  are 
the  conditions  on  which  we  can  be  admitted 
to  this  most  happy  marriage  ?  These  we 
shall  learn  from  the  qualities  of  the  wise 
virgins,  for  they  alone  entered  into  the  nup 
tials  of  the  heavenly  spouse.  The  qualities 
or  conditions  are  five  ;  first,  that  we  be  vir 
gins  ;  secondly,  that  we  be  prudent;  thirdly, 
that  we  have  our  lamp  lighted ;  fourthly, 
that  we  have  oil  in  it ;  and  lastly,  that  we 
watch,  and  by  watching  diligently  await 
the  coming  of  the  bridegroom. 

As  far  as  regards  the  first  condition,  the 
spouses  of  Christ  ought  all  to  be  virgins, 
not  necessarily  in  the  flesh,  but  in  faith  and 
morals,  as  St.  Augustine  justly  explains 
in  his  Sermon  on  these  words  of  the  Apos 
tle :  ( ( I  have  espoused  you  to  one  husband, 
that  I  may  present  you  as  a  chaste  virgin 
to  Christ."  By  a  chaste  virgin  he  under 
stands  the  whole  Church  of  Corinth,  in 
which  it  is  evident  that  all  were  not  virgins 
in  the  flesh,  since  the  Apostle  in  his  First 
Epistle  admonishes  married  people  of  their 
duties.  ^  In  this  parable,  therefore,  all  those 
are  virgins  who  are  not  corrupted  in  their 
faith  and  morals,  and  who,  declining 
from  evil,  do  not  defile  their  souls.  But, 

*  Epistle  114. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     239 

•  because  it  is  not  sufficient  for  perfect 
justice  to  decline  from  evil,  but  also  to 
do  good,  therefore  the  second  condition 
is  added,  that  we  be  prudent,  not  fool 
ish.  Nor  must  we  think  it  sufficient, 
if  we  injure  no  one,  nor  kill  any  one,  nor 
steal,  nor  bear  false  testimony ;  but  we 
must  consider  our  last  end,  and  adopt  the 
means  to  attain  it.  And  because  this  end 
is  eternal  life,  and  the  means  the  merit  of 
good  works,  therefore  the  third  condition  is 
added,  that  our  lamp  be  lighted,  which  sig 
nifies  good  works.  This  St.  Augustine 
teaches  in  the  above-mentioned  place,  and 
our  Lord  Himself,  where  He  says :  "So  let 
your  light  shine  before  men,  that  they  may 
see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  leather 
who  is  in  heaven/' 

But  since  good  works  spring  from  charity 
as  from  a  root,  and  cannot  be  preserved 
unless  nourished  by  the  same  charity,  as  a 
lamp  necessarily  goes  out  if  oil  be  wanting; 
therefore,  a  fourth  condition  is  required, 
that  the  prudent  virgin  always  have  oil  in 
her  lamp.  ^  St.  Augustine  teaches  that 
charity  is  signified  by  oil,  because,  as  oil  is 
superior  to  all  liquids,  so  charity  is  superior 
to  all  virtues,  according  to  the  Apostle : 
"And  I  show  unto  you  yet  a  more  excellent 
way;"  and  again:  "And  now  there  remain 
faith,  hope,  charity,  these  three ;  but  the 
greater  of  these  is  charity.3'  If,  there 
fore,  we  should  prefer  anything  in  our  heart, 
or  make  it  equal  with  charity,  immediately 


240        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

she  departs ;  for  she  ought  either  to  have . 
the  first  place,  and  reign  in  our  heart,  or 
she  will  leave  us.  And  because  oil  is  a 
most  subtile  liquid,  which  easily  ascends 
above  other  things,  the  power  of  the  oil  of 
charity  is  so  great  in  ascending,  that  if  it 
be  poured  out  on  the  soul  of  a  public  sin 
ner,  immediately  it  draws  that  soul  up,  and 
of  a  sinner  makes  a  saint,  of  a  carnal  man 
makes  a  spiritual  man.  I  will  even  venture 
to  say,  that  if  this  oil  were  poured  on  the 
souls  of  the  damned,  or  could  drop  on  the 
devils  themselves,  we  should  immediately 
behold  them  all  ascend  on  high.  And  if, 
on  the  contrary,  this  oil  were  to  desert  the 
souls  of  the  holy  angels,  apostles,  martyrs, 
and  virgins,  they  would  quickly  descend 
down  into  hell.  Behold,  then,  the  excellence 
of  this  oil,  and  how  justly  those  virgins  are 
called  foolish  who  have  not  this  oil.  But 
there  is  also  another  reason  why  charity  is 
signified  by  oil,  because  it  maketh  things 
that  are  hard  and  rough  soft  and  pliable. 
This  oil  renders  the  yoke  sweet,  of  which 
our  Lord  speaks, "My  yoke  is  sweet."  What 
made  the  yoke  of  obedience  sweet  to  the 
Apostles,  of  going  into  the  whole  world  and 
preaching  the  Gospel  to  every  creature,  but 
the  oil  of  charity  ?  What  made  the  yoke 
of  patience  sweet  to  the  martyrs,  to  endure 
so  great  and  unheard  of  torments,  but  the 
oil  of  chanty  ?  What  made  the  yoke  of 
poverty,  of  chastity,  and  of  obedience,  so 
sweet  to  many  thousands  of  religious  men 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     241 

and  women,  but  the  yoke  of  charity  ?  No 
thing  is  more  sweet  to  a  lover  than  to  show 
his  love  for  his  Beloved  by  doing  or  endu 
ring  great  and  difficult  things  for  his  sake. 
There  now  remaineth  a  fifth  condition, 
which  is  the  most  important  of  all,  being 
especially  commanded  by  our  Lord  in  this 
parable,  viz.,  watchfulness:  "Watch  ye 
therefore,  because  you  know  not  the  clay 
nor  the  hour."  And  in  order  that  these 
words  may  be  deeply  impressed  upon  the 
hearts  of  the  faithful,  He  constantly  repeats 
'Watch;"  and  again,  in  St.  Matthew: 
"Wherefore,  be  you  also  ready,  because  at 
what  hour  you  know  not  the  Son  of  man 
will  come ;"  and  in  St.  Mark :  "  Watch  ye 
therefore,  for  you  know  not  when  the  Lord 
of  the  house  cometh :  at  even,  or  at  mid 
night,  or  at  the  cock  crowing,  or  in  the 
morning ;  lest  coming  on  a  sudden,  he  find 
you  sleeping.  And  what  I  say  to  you  I  say 
to  all :  Watch."  And  in  St.  Luke :  "  Bless 
ed  are  those  servants  whom  the  Lord  when 
he  cometh  shall  find  watching."  And  by 
the  apostle  Peter  He  speaketh :  "  Be  pru 
dent  therefore,  and  watch  in  prayer ;"  and 
by  St.  Paul  also :  '  Therefore  let  us  not 
sleep,  as  others  do ;  but  let  us  watch  and 
be  sober;"  and  by  St.  John:  "Behold  I 
come  as  a  thief:  blessed  is  he  that  watch- 
eth."  All  these  passages  signify,  that  the 
coming  of  the  Lord  to  judgment,  whether 
at  the  end  of  the  world,  or  at  each  one's 
death  in  particular,  is  uncertain;  and 


242        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

therefore  God  requires  of  us  that  we  should 
always  watch,  waiting  in  expectation  of  His 
coming,  that  so  He  may  find  us  prepared, 
and  may  not  be  compelled  to  exclude  us, 
with  the  foolish  virgins,  from  the  marriage- 
feast.  Wherefore,  to  "  sleep"  meaneth 
nothing  more  than  to  be  careless  of  death 
and  judgment,  or  so  to  live  as  never  to  care 
or  think  of  so  important  a  matter,  on  which 
dependeth  eternal  salvation.  But  corporal 
sleep  is  not  forbidden  the  faithful,  other 
wise  it  would  not  be  said  in  the  parable, 
'l  They  all  slumbered  and  slept :"  only 
forgetfulness  and  want  of  consideration  are 
forbidden. 

Every  Christian  therefore,  to  whom  the 
salvation  of  his  soul  is  dear,  ought  every 
day,  morning  and  evening,  shutting  the 
door  of  his  heart  against  all  other  business, 
attentively  consider  that  this  day  or  night 
may  possibly  be  his  last :  and  therefore  he 
should  seriously  watch,  lest  he  be  found 
unprepared.  All  men  dislike  the  thought 
of  death,  and  gladly  turn  their  mind  to  the 
consideration  of  something  else;  but  the 
sick  man  dislikes  the  bitter  physic,  and  yet 
through  love  of  life  he  willingly  takes  it. 
So  also  it  behoves  a  prudent  man  to  esteem 
the  loss  of  his  soul  more  than  the  fear  of 
death ;  and  therefore,  again  and  again,  he 
should  think  that  there  is  no  hour  in  which 
he  may  not  die.  For  when  this  thought 
deeply  descends  into  the  bottom  of  our 
heart,  it  will  soon  change  the  whole 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      243 

and  from,  carnal  make  him  spiritual,  from 
a  sinner  a  saint :  so  that  he  will  no  more 
fear,  but  love  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  Not 
without  reason,  then,  does  our  Lord  so  fre 
quently  exhort  us  to  watch,  nor  Ecclesias- 
ticus  to  admonish  us :  "  In  all  thy  works 
remember  thy  last  end,  and  thou  shalt  never 
sin."  (chap,  vii.)  For  who,  remembering 
that  he  is  hastening  to  judgment,  and  that 
quickly  he  will  have  to  stand  before  the 
divine  tribunal,  can  dare  to  sin  before  his 
Judge  ?  We  are  all  hastening  every  mo 
ment  to  judgment;  but  yet,  so  great  is 
human  blindness,  that  even  on  the  journey 
itself  we  offend  our  Judge,  and  most  justly 
provoke  His  anger  against  us.  Who  is 
there,  when  condemned  to  suffer  death,  and 
being  led  out  to  execution,  would  laugh 
and  joke,  and  speak  of  his  former  crimes,  or 
of  attaining  dignities,  and  gaining  money 
by  traffic,  unless  he  were  mad  ?  Now,  we 
are  all  certainly  condemned  to  death,  nor 
can  any  son  of  Adam  escape  the  sen 
tence:  our  mortal  life  is  nothing  but  a 
journey  towards  death:  but  yet,  on  this 
journey,  which  cannot  be  a  long  one,  how  do 
the  generality  of  Christians  act  ?  What 
do  they  think  of,  what  do  they  speak  of, 
what  are  they  busy  about,  but  honours, 
riches,  pleasures,  and  even  wickedness, 
as^  if  they  would  never  die  !  And  what  is 
this  but  to  sleep  over  serious  things,  and  to 
watch  over  foolish  things  ? 

Justly,  then,   doth    our  Lord  cry  out: 


244        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 


« 


"  Watch,  watch;"  blessed  are  those  who, 
excited  by  these  words,  reflect  where  they 
are,  and  whither  they  are  going,  and  so 
endeavour  to  have  their  lamp  burning  and 
filled  with  oil,  that  when  the  cry  shall  be 
heard,  "  Behold  the  spouse  cometh,  go  ye 
forth  to  meet  him/'  they  may  with  joy  run 
forth  to  meet  the  Bridegroom,  and  enter 
with  him  into  the  marriage.  Bat  woe  to 
them  who,  forgetful  of  this,  and  deaf  to  the 
voice  of  God,  shall  be  found  sleeping  with 
their  lamps  extinguished:  being  excluded 
from  the  delights  of  the  marriage-feast, 
they  will  in  vain  exclaim,  "Lord,  Lord,  open 
unto  us/ 


CHAPTER  VII. 

ON  THE  PRIZE. 

HAVING  explained  a  few  of  the  parables 
which  are  to  be  found  in  the  gospel,  there 
now  only  remains  the  explanation  of  those 
names  which  are  used  in  St.  Paul's  First 
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians;  these  are  the 
"Prize"  and  "Crown."  Of  the  former 
the  Apostle  thus  speaks :  "  Know  you  not 
that  they  that  run  in  the  race,  all  run 
indeed,  but  one  receive th  the  prize ;  so  run 
that  you  may  obtain."  (chap.  ix.  24.)  The 
same  Apostle  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Corin 
thians  teaches,  that  by  the  "prize"  eternal, 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     245 

happiness  is  signified;  he  says,  "  But  one 
thing  I  do,  forgetting  the  things  that  are 
behind,  and  stretching  forth  myself  to  those 
that  are  before,  I  press  towards  the  mark, 
to  the  prize  of  the  supernal  vocation  of  God 
in  Christ  Jesus/'  (chap.  iii.  13, 14.  Where 
fore  the  prize  is  in  heaven,  and  to  it  the 
Almighty  invites  us  ^by  His  Son  Christ 
Jesus.  The  prize  which  the  kings  of  this 
world  offer  us,  is  no  very  valuable  object ; 
but  our  "  heavenly  prize"  is  in  every  way 
most  glorious,  whether  we  consider  God 
who  promises  it,  a  Prince  of  infinite  power 
and  glory,  of  whom  the  prophet  sings,  "  Thy 
magnificence  is  elevated  above  the  hea 
vens  ;"  or  whether  we  remember,  that  the 
combatants  are  His  children  and  the  bro 
thers  of  Christ,  whom  the^  King  their 
Father,  would  not  certainly  invite  to  run 
in  the  race,  unless  the  prize  was  so  great 
that  it  might  justly  be  desired,  even  by  the 
sons  of  God. 

But  it  is  more  important  for  us  to  know, 
what  is  the  meaning  of  running  for  the 
prize,  and  by  what  art  we  may  so  run  as  to 
be  able  to  gain  it.  To  run  for  the  prize 
means  nothing  more,  than  faithfully  to  ob 
serve  all  the  commandments  of  the  Lord 
our  God.  That  the  "  race7'  signifies  the 
law  of  the  Lord,  David  testifies  where  he 
says,  "  Blessed  are  the  undefiled  in  the 

way,  who  walk  in  the  law  of  the  Lord I 

have  run  the  way  of  thy  commandments, 
when  thou  didst  enlarge  my  heart."  (Psalm 


240        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

cxviii.)  Wherefore,  they  who  run  "the 
way"  of  the  commandments,  run  in  the 
race  for  the  prize.  Now  the  art  of  so  run 
ning  that  we  may  gain  the  prize,  includes 
three  points :  First,  we  must  not  go  out  of 
the  course,  for  they  who  do  so,  however 
quickly  they  may  run,  will  never  reach  the 

foal,  because  they  run  not  for  the  prize, 
ut ' '  at  an  uncertainty. ' '  This  the  Apostle 
tells  us  he  carefully  avoided;  "  I  therefore 
so  run,  not  as  at  an  uncertainty."  What 
is  it  to  run  out  of  the  race,  except  not  to 
run  in  the  way  of  the  commandments,  and 
to  turn  aside  to  the  right  or  to  the  left  ?  For 
example :  the  law  says,  "  Thou  shalt  love 
thy  neighbour  as  thyself;"  he  that  does  this, 
runs  in  the  race  and  for  the  prize.  But  he 
who  loves  his  neighbour  with  so  great  a 
love  as  not  to  fear  offending  God  for  his 
sake,  he  turns  aside  to  the  right  and  runs 
out  of  the  race ;  he  runs  not  for  the  prize, 
but  at  an  uncertainty.  And  the  more 
benefits  he  bestows  upon  that  individual 
who  becomes  an  "idol"  to  him,  the  more 
does  he  wander,  and  the  farther  does  he 
depart  from  the  prize.  But  on  the  other 
hand,  he  that  loves  not  his  neighbour  as 
much  as  he  ought  to  do,  and  when  he  sees 
him  in  want,  and  "  shuts  up  his  bowels  from 
him,"  as  St.  John  expresses  it,  then  he 
turns  aside  to  the  left,  and  neither  runs  in 
the  race  nor  for  the  prize,  even  though  he 
should  appear  to  perform  many  good  works. 
We  must,  therefore,  love  our  neighbours  as 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      247 

ourselves,  neither  more  nor  less  ;  _  that  is, 
we  ought  so  to  act  towards  our  neighbour, 
as  to  do  to  him,  what  we  should  wish  to  be 
done  to  ourselves.  This  is  the  explanation 
given  by  Christ  our  teacher,  who  gave  the 
commandment.  What  I  have  said  con 
cerning  the  love  of  our  neighbour,  which  is 
the  positive  command,  may  also  be  said  of 
the  negative  commands.  For  he  that  steals, 
declines  to  the  right  of  the  commandment, 
"  Thou  shalt  not  steal/'  and  thus  turns 
aside  from  the  course  ;  he  however  that 
steals  not,  but  squanders  away  his  own 
substance,  declines  to  the  left,  and  in  like 
manner  turns  aside  from  the  course.  But 
the  just  man,  who  alone  remains  in  the 
course,  would  no  less  depart  from  it  if  he 
stole,  than  if  he  squandered  his  goods,  be 
cause  liberality,  which  relates  to  justice, 
has  two  opposite  vices,  avarice  and  prodi 
gality.  The  conclusion  is,  that  he  who 
wishes  to  remain  in  the  race,  must  be 
entirely  free  from  mortal  sin. 

The  second  condition  is,  that  he  who 
wishes  to  gain  the  prize,  must  run  quickly 
and  with  perseverance.  He  runs  quickly, 
who  observes  the  "commandments" with  a 
fervent  will,  according  to  the  words  of  the 
Psalmist,  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that  feareth 
the  Lord,  in  His  commands  he  delights 
exceedingly;"  and  the  Apostle  says,  "Fer 
vent  in  spirit  serving  the  Lord."  He  runs 
with  perseverance,  who  is  never  fatigued 
nor  ceases  running,  knowing  what  is  writ- 


248        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

ten,  "  He  only  that  perseveres  to  the  end 
shall  be  saved/'     But  to  run  quickly,  not 
to  be  fatigued,  nor  to  interrupt  our  course — • 
these  seem  almost  contrary  to  one  another, 
or  at  least  very  difficult ;  for  he  that  runs 
quickly,  is  soon  fatigued  and  ceases  run 
ning  ;  whilst  he  that  wishes  not  to  be  tired, 
goes  slowly  and  perseveres  on  his  course  at 
a  moderate  pace.     These  remarks  are  true, 
and  therefore  few  arrive  at  the  prize.     It  is, 
however,  absolutely  necessary  for  him  that 
wishes  to  gain  the  prize,  to  run  both  quickly 
and  with  perseverance,  because  the  time  is 
short  and  the  way  is  long.     But  if  Chris 
tians  wish  to  imitate  those  that  run  for  a 
corruptible  crown,  they  can  easily  run — 
quickly  and  without  intermission— for  "  an 
incorruptible  crown."     What  do  those  do 
who  contend    for    the    corruptible    prize? 
They  carry  nothing  burthensome,  they  cast 
off  their  garments,  that  so  they  may  run 
free  and  unencumbered.     This,  therefore, 
should  Christians  do  ;  they  should  cast  off 
the  burthens  of  worldly  cares,  and  the  gar 
ments  of  carnal  desires,  or  at  least  every 
inordinate  affection  to  earthly  goods.     And 
when  this  is  done,  they  must  glory  not  in 
their  own  strength,  but  place  all  their  hope 
in  God ;  then  they  will  not  be  fatigued  by 
running  quickly  in  the  race.     This  is  not 
my  doctrine,  but  that  of  Isaias  and   St. 
Paul ;   the  former  thus  speaks :  "But  they 
that  hope  in  the  Lord  shall  renew  their 
strength They  shall  run  and    not   be 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     249 

weary,  they  shall  walk  and  not  faint." 
(chap.  xl.  31.)  And  the  Apostle  writes: 
"  This  therefore  I  say  brethren,  the  time  is 
short;  it  remaineth,  that  they  also  who 
have  wives,  be  as  if  they  had  none.  And 
they  that  weep,  as  though  they  wept  not ; 
and  they  that  rejoice,  as  if  they  rejoiced  not ; 
and  they  that  buy,  as  though  they  possessed 
not.  And  they  that  used  this  world,  as  if 
they  used  it  not;  for  the  fashion  of  this 
world  passeth  away."  (1  Epist.  to  Corinth, 
vii.  29,  <fcc.)  By  these  words,  the  Apostle 
does  not  forbid  Christians  from  marrying, 
nor  from  weeping  in  adversity,  nor  rejoicing 
in  prosperity,  nor  purchasing  necessary 
things,  or  using  the  goods  of  this  world ; 
but  he  admonishes  us,  in  all  these  things  to 
use  that  moderation,  and  to  be  as  little 
attached  to  them,  as  if  they  did  not  belong 
to  us. 

The  devout  Melania  is  an  example  for  us 
in  this  respect;  she  was  a  noble  Roman 
lady,  of  whom  St.  Jerome  thus  speaks  in 
his  Epitaph  on  Blosilla :  "  St..  Melania  is 
a  pattern  of  true  nobility  among  the  Chris 
tians  of  our  time ;  for  whilst  the  corpse  of 
her  husband  was  still  warm,  not  yet  being 
buried,  she  lost  her  two  sons  together.  I 
am^about  to  relate  a  thing  almost  incredi 
ble,  but  Christ  is  my  witness  it  is  not  false. 
Who  would  not  suppose  that  she  would  tear 
her  hair,  her  garments,  and  strike  her 
breast,  like  one  mad  ?  but  not  one  tear  did 
she  shed,  she  stood  unmoved,  and  throwing 


250        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

herself  at  the  feet  of  Christ,  as  if  she  ac 
tually  embraced  Him,  she  smiled  saying, 
"  More  freely  shall  I  now  serve  thee,  0 
Lord,  because  thou  hast  delivered  me  from 
so  great  a  burthen/'  Thus  St.  Jerome, 
who  by  this  example  shows  us  who  those 
are  that  have  wives,  and  children,  and 
other  goods  of  this  world,  as  if  they  had 
them  not,  in  order  that  they  might  run  for 
the  prize  more  freely.  But  we  have  a  still 
more  moving  example  in  holy  Job,  who  in 
one  day  lost  all  his  sons  and  daughters,  as 
well  as  his  whole  substance ;  and  thus  he 
lay  full  of  ulcers  on  a  dunghill,  who  a  little 
while  before,  was  esteemed  most  happy 
among  all  the  Orientals.  And  yet,  as  if  all 
these  misfortunes  did  not  concern  him,  he 
uttered  these  words  so  full  of  wisdom: 
"  Naked  came  I  out  of  my  mother's  womb, 
and  naked  shall  I  return  thither ;  the  Lord 
gave  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away ;  as  it 
hath  pleased  the  Lord,  so  is  it  done ; 
blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  (chap.  i. 
21.)  In  fine,  St.  Peter  and  the  other  Apos 
tles  who  first  folio wed^ Christ  in  running  for 
the  prize,  that  they  might  teach  us  what  is 
required  in  the  same  race,  thus  speak: 
'''  Behold  we  have  left  all  things,  and  have 
followed  thee;  what  therefore  shall  we 
have  ?"  our  Lord  approving  what  they  had 
clone,  thus  answers,  clearly  promising  them 
the  prize :  "  Amen,  I  say  to  you,  that  you 
who  have  followed  me,  in  the  regeneration, 
when  the  Son  of  man  shall  sit  on  the  seat  of 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     251 

his  majesty,  you  also  shall  sit  on  twelve 
seats,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel." 
(St.  Matthew  xix.  28.) 

The  third  condition  is,  that  he  who  wishes 
for  the  prize,  must  be  united  with  Christ. 
For  as  the  Apostle  saith,  "  All  run  indeed, 
but  one  receiveth  the  prize;"  now  this 
<f  one"  is  doubtless  our  Saviour,  who  "  hath 
rejoiced  as  a  giant  to  run  the  way ;"  and  of 
Him  St.  John  speaks :  "  And  no  man  hath 
ascended  into  heaven,  but  he  that  descended 
from  heaven,  the  Son  of  man  who  is  in 
heaven."  (chap.  iii.  13.)  But  Christ  hath 
not  ascended  alone,  but  with  all  those  who 
were  "  one"  with  Him  ;  that  is,  who  were 
true  and  living  members  of  His  body,  of 
which  He  is  the  head.  Wherefore  all  who 
run  labour  in  vain,  even  though  they  should 
give  all  their  goods  to  the  poor,  and  deliver 
their  body  to  be  burned,  unless  they  are 
joined  to  Christ  by  faith  and  charity,  and 
become  one  with  Him,  as  He  says  in  St. 
John,  "  That  they  may  be  one,  as  we  also 
are  one,  I  in  them,  and  thou  in  me,  that 
they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one."  (chap, 
xvii.  22.) 

But  there  is  also  another  way  of  being 
united  with  Christ,  which  in  a  wonderful 
manner  helps  us  to  run  quickly  and  with 
perseverance.  Christ  as  man  ran  for  the 
prize,  although  as  God  He  is  the  "prize" 
itself;  He  is  "  true  God  and  life  eternal," 
as  St.  John  testifies;  and  this  also  our 
Saviour  himself  tells  us,  "  I  am  the  way, 


252        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

and  the  truth,  and  the  life.'5  As  the  truth, 
He  guides  us ;  as  the  way,  He  leads  us 
after  Him;  as  the  life,  He  brings  us  to 
Himself.  In  order  to  obtain  the  prize  then, 
nothing  is  more  useful  than,  for  us  never  to 
turn  away  our  eyes  from  Him,  but  to  ex 
claim  with  the  prophet :  "  My  eyes  are  ever 
towards  the  Lord/'  He  that  keeps  the  eye 
of  his  soul  united  with  his  prize,  neither 
sees  nor  hears  what  his  neighbours  say  or 
do,  whether  they  smile  or  mock  at  him ;  he 
heeds  not  the  opinions  of  others,  whether 
they  praise  or  dispraise  him ;  but  he  says 
with  David,  "  And  I  became  as  a  man 
that  heareth  not;3'  and  with  the  Apostle, 
"But  to  me  it  is  a  very  small  thing  to  be 
judged  by  you,  or  by  man's  day."  The 
nearer  he  approaches  the  prize,  the  more 
does  he  see  the  greatness  of  it;  and  this 
greatness  gives  him  additional  strength, 
and  induces  him  though  wearied  and  faint 
ing,  not  to  interrupt  his  course.  Wherefore, 
whoever  aspires  ^ after  this  heavenly  prize, 
must  not  turn  aside  from  the  course  of  the 
divine  commands,  he  must  run  quickly  and 
with  perseverance;  and  being  joined  to 
Christ  with  true  faith  and  charity,  he  must 
never  turn  away  his  eyes  from  the  prize. 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.     253 
CHAPTER  VIII. 

ON  THE  CROWN. 

THE  last  name  given  to  eternal  happiness, 
is  "  a  crown  of  justice/'  of  which  St.  Paul 
thus  speaks  in  the  same  chapter  that  he 
mentions  the  prize  :  "  And  every  one  that 
striveth  for  the  mastery,  refraineth  himself 
from  all  things :  and  they  indeed  that  they 
may  receive  a  corruptible  crown ;  but  we 
an  incorruptible  one."  (1  Corinth,  ix.  25.) 
In  this  passage  by  the  word  "  mastery/'  is 
not  meant  the  race  in  the  course,  but  rather 
a  contest  or  battle ;  and  that  this  compa 
rison  is  different  from  the  former,  the  words 
following  prove :  "  I  therefore  so  run,  not 
as  at  an  uncertainty :  I  so  fight,  not  as  one 
beating  the  air:"  and  so  also  do  these 
words  addressed  to  Timothy :  "I  have 
fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finished  my 
course,  I  have  kept  my  faith.  As  to  the 
rest,  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  jus 
tice/'  <fcc.  (2  to  Timothy,  iv.  7.)  .In  both 
these  passagq§  St.  Paul  distinguishes  the 
course  from  the  fight ;  and  in  one  of  the 
comparisons  he  uses  the  word  "  prize,"  and 
in  the  other  the  word  "  crown,"  which 
names  are  evidently  distinct. 

Now  by  the  "crown"  is  meant  eternal 
happiness,  and  this  is  called  by  St.  Paul 
"  a  crown  of  justice,"  because  it  is  given  as 


254        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

a  reward  for  good  works.  In  St.  James's 
Epistle  it  is  called  "  the  crown  of  life,"  be 
cause  it  comprehends  life  eternal.  By  St. 
Peter  it  is  named  "  a  never-fading  crown 
of  glory."  In  fine,  the  prophet  Isaias  says: 
"  In  that  day  the  Lord  of  hosts  shall  be  a 
crown  of  glory,  and  a  garland  of  joy  to  the 
residue  of  his  people,  "(xxviii.  5.)  From  this 
passage  we  may  conclude,  that  the  crown 
of  which  St.  Paul  speaks,  and  which  is 
given  to  the  victorious  in  battle,  is  a  prize 
most  high  and  noble,  since  God  Himself 
will  be  the  crown  encircling  and  adorn 
ing  the  heads  of  the  residue  of  His  people — • 
that  is,  of  those  few  among  His  people  who 
shall  gain  the  victory,  by  having  been 
valiant  in  war.  And  as  ' ( many  are  called, 
but  few  are  chosen" — a  truth  evident  from 
the  testimony  of  Scripture ;  so  the  crown  of 
the  Saints  will  be  the  more  glorious  in  the 
day  ^  of  judgment,  because  so  few  will 
obtain  it. 

Let  us  now  consider — what  is  the  nature 
of  the  contest  we  are  engaged  in,  and  what 
we  must  do  to  gain  the  victory.  The  con 
test  indeed  is  most  terrible,  and  the  strug 
gle  most  dangerous,  espec^illy  if  it  be 
compared  with  that  contest  in  which  men 
on  earth  engage,  for  a  corruptible  crown. 
The  Apostle  alludes  to  the  games  of  the 
circus,  which  took  place  in  the  presence  of 
the  people.  ^  But  the  combatants  fought 
with  men  like  themselves,  and  used  the 
same  weapons,  and  were  equally  exposed  to 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  «AINTS.     255 

the  danger  of  popular  derision  or  ignominy. 
But  Christians  have  to  fight  with  enemies 
whom  they  see  not,  and  by  whom  they 
themselves  are  observed:  they  are  most 
numerous,  strong,  and  crafty ;  their  arms 
are  not  alike ;  the  contest  is  carried  on  be 
fore  God  and  his  angels,  and  for  a  crown 
of  life  eternal,  and  at  the  risk  of  incurring 
-everlasting  death :  in  fine,  the  contest  is 
not  easy  or  imaginary,  but  real  and  most 
dreadful.  Our  antagonists  are  demons, 
whom  the  Scripture  at  one  time  names 
lions — and  at  another,  dragons  and  basi 
lisks.  And  we  also  have  traitors  in  our 
own  houses — that  is,  in  our  bodies,  the 
concupiscence  of  the  flesh  which  wars 
against  the  spirit,  as  St.  Peter  saith: 
"Dearly  beloved,  I  beseech  you  as  strangers 
and  pilgrims,  to  refrain  yourselves  from 
carnal  desires  which  war  against  the  soul/' 
(1  Epist.  xi.)  Moreover,  what  is  still  most 
miserable,  this  contest  takes  place  at  the 
same  time  that  we  run  in  the  race :  and 
therefore  the  Apostle  joins  these  two  toge 
ther  that  we  may  know  how,  whilst  running 
for  the  prize,  we  are  impeded  throughout 
our  whole  course  by  these  enemies,  and 
hence  that  we  must  both  run  and  fight  at 
the  same  time.  0  !  if  Christians  did  but 
consider  these  truths  and  know  their  true 
condition,  truly  they  would  not  so  easily 
squander  away  their  time  in  temporal 
trifles,  in  jokes,  plays,  and  banquets ;  in 
accumulating  money  and  seeking  after 


256        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OR  THE 

honours,  as  if  their  chief  happiness  con 
sisted  in  these  things :  but  they  would  lis 
ten  to  the  Apostle  crying  out  to  them : 
"  Therefore  take  unto  you  the  armour  of 
God,  that  you  may  be  able  to  resist  in  the 
evil  day,  and  to  stand  in  all  things  perfect. 
Stand  therefore,  having  your  loins  girt 
about  with  truth,  and  having  on  the  breast 
plate  of  justice.  And  in  all  things  taking* 
the  shield  of  faith,  wherewith  you  may  be 
able  to  extinguish  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the 
most  wicked  one.  And  take  unto  you  the 
helmet  of  salvation,  and  the  sword  of  the 
Spirit,  (which  is  the  word  of  God.)  By 
all  prayer  and  supplication  praying  at  all 
times  in  the  Spirit/'  &c.  (Epist.  to  Ephe- 
sians,  vi.  13,  &c.)  0  !  what  an  exhortation 
is  this  ;  how  full  of  terror — how  earnest ! 
especially  if  we  ponder  on  the  words,  "  By 
all  prayer  and  supplication,  praying  at  all 
times."  And  yet,  how  many  of  us  so  act  as 
if  we  neither  had  to  run  in  the  race,  nor 
fight  in  the  battle  ! 

And  now,  I  ask,  what  is  to  be  done,  that 
we  prove  victorious  in  such  a  dreadful  con 
test  ?  St.  Paul  tells  us  when  he  says  :  "And 
every  one  that  striveth  for  the  mastery,  re- 
fraineth  himself  from  all  things:  and  they 
indeed  that  they  may  receive  a  corruptible 
crown  ;  but  we  an  incorruptible  one/'  The 
meaning  of  these  words  is  this :  those  com 
batants,  that  they  might  obtain  a  cor 
ruptible  crown,  abstain  from  all  those  things 
which  might  weaken  their  body,  and  render 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      257 

them  unfit  to  engage  in  such  a  ludicrous 
contest,  viz.,  from  excessive  eating  and 
drinking,  from  carnal  delights,  from  domes 
tic  cares,  and  from  all  other  things,  however 
pleasant  or  useful,  which  might  retard  or 
prevent  the  victory.  We  therefore  who 
labour  for  "  an  incorruptible  crown,"  ought 
much  more  to  refrain  from  every  thing  that 
may  weaken  our  soul,  and  render  it  unfit 
for  that  terrible  fight,  and  for  running  the 
race  in  the  course.  And  what  things  weaken 
the  soul  ?  Excessive  eating,  indulgence  in 
sleep,  too  frequent  visiting,  hunting,  bois 
terous  laughter  and  singing  ;  not  reading 
good  books,  not  praying,  not  meditating, 
not  bewailing  our  sins,  nor  bringing  forth 
worthy  fruits  of  ^  penance.  From  these 
ought  we  to  abstain,  if  we  wish  our  soul  to 
be  strong  and  fit  to  run  in  the  race  and 
fight  in  battle.  "  Take  heed,"  saith  our 
Saviour,  "  lest  your  hearts  be  overcharged 
with  surfeiting  and  drunkenness,  and  the 
cares  of  this  life,  and  that  day  come  upon 
you  suddenly."  But  on  the  other  hand, 
the  food  of  the  soul  which  makes  it  strong, 
is  fasting ;  the  refreshment  of  the  soul  is 
prayer;  the  sleep  of  the  soul — holy  contem 
plation;  the  purgation  from  noxious 
humours — an  humble  confession  of  our 
sins ;  the  joy  and  delight  of  the  soul — tears 
of  compunction  ;  and  the  triumph  of  the 
soul,  the  crucifixion  of  the  flesh  and  the 
concupiscence  thereof.  "  They  that  are 
Christ's,"  saith  St.  Paul,  "  have  crucified 


258        THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OH  THE 

their  flesh,  with  the  vices  and  concupis 
cences:"  and  again,  "I  so  fight,  not  as 
one  beating  the  air :  but  I  chastise  my 
body,  and  bring  it  into  subjection,  lest  per 
haps  when  I  have  preached  to  others,  I  my 
self  should  become  a  cast-away."  Behold 
the  true  explanation  of  these  words,  "  Every 
one  that  striveth  for  the  mastery,  refraineth 
himself  from  all  things."  I  so  fight,  he 
says,  in  the  contest  that  I  abstain  from  all 
those  things,  which  can  please  the  body 
and  which  wage  war  against  me  ;  these  are 
my  carnal  concupiscences.  But  by  chas 
tising  my  body  by  fastings  and  watchings, 
and  other  mortifications  of  the  flesh,  I  re 
duce  it  into  subjection  that  it  may  not 
rebel  against  the  soul,  nor  serve  my 
enemies. 

But  who  does  not  f3ar  and  tremble  with 
his  whole  heart,  when  he  remembers  these 

words: "Lest    perhaps    when    I  have 

preached  to  others,  I  myself  should  become 
a  cast-away?"  If  this  vessel  of  election — 
called  by  God  Himself  to  be  an  Apostle, 
and  who  was  rapt  up  into  the  third  heaven, 
feared  lest  he  should  become  a  "cast-away," 
if  he  did  not  chastise  his  body  and  bring 
it  into  subjection,  who  amongst  us  will  not 
also  fear  to  be  condemned,  unless  we  crucify 
our  flesh  with  its  vices  and  concupiscences? 
This  example  of  the  Apostle  ought  truly  to 
admonish  all  men,  that  they  must  not  ven 
ture  to  hope  for  the  crown,  unless  they  be 
Beriously  converted;  unless  they  bring  forth 


ETERNAL  HAPPINESS  OF  THE  SAINTS.      259 

worthy  fruits  of  penance,  and  endeavour  by 
every  possible  means  to  bring  the  flesh  into 
subjection  to  the  spirit.  But  how  deplorable 
are  the  blindness  and  foolishness  of  the 
many,  who  mind  not  these  things,  nor 
abstain  from  what  is  unlawful,  but  live  so 
securely  as  if  they  had  received  a  most  as 
sured  promise  from  God,  that  their  salva 
tion  was  certain  !  But  this  is  only  another 
proof,  as  we  have  already  said,  that  few  are 
saved,  and  "  that  many  are  called  but  few 
are  chosen." 

Unto  Thee  then  do  I  fly,  0  good  Lord  ! 
I  am  thy  servant,  and  the  son  of  thy  hand 
maid  :  I  desire  with  my  whole  soul  that 
heavenly  prize  and  most  glorious  crown, 
which  Thou  hast  prepared  and  promised  to 
those  that  love  Thee.  I  know  the  greatness 
of  the  contest  and  the  length  of  the  course ; 
I  know  my  weakness,  and  I  confess  before 
Thee  who  searchest  the  reins^and  the  heart, 
that  I  possess  little  or  no  virtue :  neither 
am  I  ignorant  of  the  great  power  and  cruel 
hatred  of  my  invisible  enemies,  who  lament 
that  we  so  insignificant  are  destined  for  that 
immense  glory,  from  which  they  fell  by 
pride.  "  Enlighten  my  eyes  that  I  never 
sleep  in  death ;"  increase  my  strength,  lest 
I  faint  on  the  way  :  may  Thy  grace  defend 
me,  "  lest  at  any  time  my  enemy  say :  ] 
have  prevailed  against  him."  But  what  I 
ask  for  myself,  I  ask  for  all  my  Brethren 
also ;  and  especially  for  those  placed  by 
Thee  in  high  dignities,  whether  ecclesias- 


260  THE  KINGDOM.  OF  GOD,  &C. 

tical  or  secular :  their  danger  is  so  much 
the  -greater,  as  their  functions  are  more 
excellent.  But  the  more  glorious  will  be 
their  crown,  if  they  perform  their  duties 
properly ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  the  more 
terrible  the  punishment  if  through  their 
fault  those  souls  perish,  whom  Thou  hast 
redeemed  by  Thy  precious  blood. 


LA.US   DEO   SEMPER. 


RICHARDSON    AND    SON,    PRINTERS,    DERBY. 


261 

tic; 

the' 

exc< 

the 

pro| 

tei 

fan] 

re< 


S®lit 
IStilfe 

Iliiiii 


