Title: The Life of the Blessed Peter Favre (Faber), of the Society of
  Jesus: First Companion of St. Ignatius Loyola
Creator: Giuseppe Boero (Author) (Henry James Coleridge, S.J.,
  Translator)
Publisher: London: Burns and Oates, 1873
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Explicit `NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT` possible-copyright-status
  confirmed directly against the Internet Archive item's own metadata,
  2026-09-24, this session ("no visible notice of copyright and date
  found" per the scanning record).
Source: Internet Archive item lifeofpeterfavre00boeruoft
  (archive.org/details/lifeofpeterfavre00boeruoft), fetched directly
  (curl, raw bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text file,
  2026-09-24, this session.
Content note: A biography of Peter Faber, not a full translation of
  his own Memoriale (spiritual diary) - it is not yet established how
  much of the Memoriale's own text this volume quotes verbatim versus
  narrates; a future pass should check this directly before treating
  any passage as Faber's own words rather than Boero's paraphrase.
  Rights-clear and by the same translator (Coleridge) already vendored
  for this world's Xavier volumes.
Provenance note: Body text unaltered including its own OCR errors; not
  independently spot-checked for OCR quality beyond the opening pages
  this session.

JOHN  M.  KELLY  LIBRARY 


Donated  by 

The  Redemptorists  of 
the  Toronto  Province 

from  the  Library  Collection  of 
Holy  Redeemer  College,  Windsor 


University  of 
St.  Michael's  College,  Toronto 


<n, 


ItU 


K 


Huatterlp  Series* 

EIGHTH   VOLUME. 


THE  LIFE  OF 
THE  BLESSED  PETER  FAVRE. 


ROEHAMPTON : 
1'RIXTEO  BY  JAMES  STANLEY. 


[All  rig/its  reserved.] 


THE  LIFE  OF  THE  BLESSED 
PETER   FAVRE 

OF  THE  SOCIETY  OF  JESUS, 
FIRST  COMPANION  OF  ST.  IGNATIUS  LOYOLA. 

From  the  Italian  of 

'FATHER  GIUSEPPE  BOERO, 


OF  THE  SAME  SOCIETY. 


LONDON: 
BURNS  AND   GATES,   PORTMAN  STREET 

AND   PATERNOSTER   ROW. 
1873. 


PREFACE. 

[BY  THE  AUTHOR.] 

THE  first,  and  I  may  say,  the  only  complete  Life  of 
Blessed  Peter  Favre  was  the  Latin  Life  by  Father 
Nicolas  Orlandini,  which  has  been  translated  into 
several  languages,  and  published  at  different  times  and 
in  various  places.  It  is  from  this  work  that  other 
authors  have  taken,  whatever  particulars  are  contained 
in  their  lives  and  panegyrics,  except,  indeed,  Father 
Daniel  Bartoli,  who  in  the  first  book  of  his  History  of 
Italy,  has  written  at  greater  length  and  added  other 
details  omitted  by  Orlandini. 

As  it  has  become  my  duty,  since  the  sanction  given 
by  the  Sacred  Congregation  of  Rites  to  the  veneration 
of  this  great  servant  of  God,  to  relate  his  glorious 
actions  and  heroic  virtues,  I  have  thought  well  to  take 
up  the  subject  from  the  very  beginning,  and  to  compose 
an  entirely  new  life — the  first  part  comprising,  in  order 
of  time,  everything  new  which  can  be  gathered  from 
the  three  regular  Processes,  and  from  other  authentic 
writings  not  known  to  early  authors. 

In  the  second  part  I  shall  give  an  Italian  translation 
of  the  entire  '  Memoriale '  written  by  Blessed  Peter 
Favre's  own  hand.  For  it  ought  to  be  known  that  in 
the  year  1542  he  was  divinely  inspired  to  note  down 
in  writing  all  his  interior  sentiments,  all  the  mental 
illuminations  and  special  graces  which  he  received  in 
prayer  and  meditation,  that  so,  having  them  always 


vi  Preface. 

before  him,  he  might  thereby  be  moved  to  gratitude 
to  the  Giver  of  all  good.  Thus,  going  through  his 
life  from  his  childhood  and  youth,  he  set  down  in 
succession  everything  which  went  on  day  by  day  in 
his  soul,  together  with  the  resolutions  which  he  made 
as  to  the  exercise  of  Christian  and  religious  virtues. 

This  memoir  or  diary  of  his  life,  discovered  by  God's 
special  providence  and  arrangement  after  the  death  of 
its  blessed  writer,  is  the  truest  and  most  exact  likeness 
of  the  man,  and,  above  all,  of  the  interior  perfection  of 
his  soul,  that  can  possibly  be.  Father  Orlandini  made 
good  use  of  it  in  compiling  his  second  book,  which 
treats  of  Blessed  Peter's  virtues  ;  but  I  think  that 
devout  persons  will  find  still  greater  pleasure  in  reading 
it  in  full,  and  in  the  very  words  of  the  author. 

And,  indeed,  every  one  who  is  in  any  degree  able  to 
appreciate  spiritual  perfection  will  take  delight  in  seeing 
how  liberally  God  communicated  His  lights  to  that 
soul,  so  free  from  all  earthly  taint,  and  how  faithfully 
it  corresponded  with,  and  put  in  practice  those  divine 
inspirations.  It  will  be  seen,  too,  with  astonishment, 
how  a  man  always  engaged  in  long  journeys  and 
Apostolical  labours,  was,  notwithstanding,  so  continually 
united  to  God  in  heart  and  soul,  that  his  thoughts  and 
affections  were  immovably  fixed  upon  Him.  It  seems, 
indeed,  to  me,  that  the  peculiar  and  distinguishing 
characteristic  of  Blessed  Peter  Favre's  perfection  and 
sanctity  is  a  close  and  unbroken  union  with  God,  com 
bined  with  an  unwearied  and  constant  zeal  for  the 
eternal  salvation  of  his  neighbour. 

But  I  will  dwell  no  longer  on  this,  but  will  leave  the 
prudent  reader  to  form  his  own  judgment.  It  remains 


Preface.  vii 

for  me  only  to  state  that  in  translating  the  '  Memoriale,' 
I  have  thought  it  well  here  and  there  to  express  the 
spiritual  ideas  more  concisely,  especially  when  almost  the 

same  things  are  repeated  in  different  words. 

G.  B. 


NOTE. 

[BY  THE   ENGLISH   EDITOR.] 

THE  translation  of  the  Life  of  Blessed  Peter  Favre,  now 
presented  to  the  English  reader,  is  a  faithful  version  of  the 
Italian  of  Father  Boero.  I  have,  however,  in  order  to  make 
the  book  correspond  to  the  other  volumes  of  the  series  in 
which  it  appears,  made  his  sections  into  chapters,  and  I 
have  also  substituted  an  analytical  table  of  contents  at  the 
beginning  for  the  short  summaries  prefixed  to  his  sections. 
There  is  somewhat  more  discrepancy  between  the  second 
part  of  the  volume,  which  contains  the  'Memoriale'  of 
Blessed  Peter,  as  it  appears  respectively  in  the  Italian  text 
and  in  the  English  version.  I  thought  it  better  that  the 
English  translation  should  be  made  from  the  Latin  litho 
graph,  which  has  been  for  some  years  in  limited  circulation, 
than  from  the  Italian  translation,  and  a  large  part  of  the 
whole  had  been  translated  in  this  way  when  I  discovered 
that  the  Italian  version  here  and  there  differed  from  the 
common  Latin  copy,  especially  in  being  often  a  great  deal 
shorter.  I  have  not  thought  it  necessary  always  to  abbre 
viate  the  English  version  in  order  that  it  may  correspond 
exactly  with  the  Italian,  but  this  has  been  done  in  many 
cases.  There  is  often  a  good  deal  of  difficulty  in  clearly 
expressing  the  meaning  of  the  original — a  difficulty  only  to 
be  expected  in  the  case  of  a  diary  jotted  down  from  time 
to  time,  sometimes  in  Latin,  sometimes  in  Spanish,  and 
evidently  meant  for  the  writer's  own  use  and  for  nothing 
else.  I  have  often  found  that  Father  Boero's  version  makes 
a  passage  far  more  intelligible  than  it  is  in  the  Latin.  At 
the  same  time  the  Latin  (or  Spanish)  original  seems  now 
and  then  in  a  word  or  two  to  differ  importantly  from  the 


viii  Preface. 

Italian  version,  and  in  this  case  I  have  followed  the  original, 
I  have  been  able  to  use  a  very  early  transcript  of  the 
original,  contained  in  an  old  manuscript  volume  which 
formerly  belonged,  I  believe,  to  the  College  of  Coimbra, 
and  which  was  of  great  service  to  me  in  writing  the  Life 
and  Letters  of  St.  Francis  Xavier.  This  volume  contains 
a  copy  of  Father  Favre's  '  Memorialed  more  complete  than 
the  common  lithograph,  inasmuch  as  it  contains  the  addi 
tional  matter  mentioned  by  Father  Boero  in  his  note  to 
page  389,  but  the  copyist  has  omitted,  apparently  by 
mistake,  a  good  many  of  the  notes  made  in  the  early 
part  of  the  year  1543.  In  one  or  two  places,  also,  this 
transcript  is  fuller  than  the  Latin  lithograph,  and,  as  far 
as  I  can  judge  from  the  Italian  translation,  than  the  copy 
from  which  Father  Boero's  version  is  made. 

It  is  perhaps  worth  while  to  add  a  word  as  to  the  family 
name  of  the  Blessed  Peter,  who  is  known  to  many  of  us  as 
1  Peter  Faber '  or  as  '  Pierre  Lefevre.'  There  has  been  some 
controversy  among  continental  writers  as  to  the  proper  name, 
and  there  can  be  no  doubt  at  all  that  Blessed  Peter  always 
called  himself  Favre  in  his  own  language.  His  family,  as 
Father  Boero  tells  us  (page  i,  note),  still  exists,  and  is  called 
by  that  name.  If  either  of  the  two  other  forms,  Faber  or 
Lefevre  (both  of  which  are  found  in  old  English  Catholic 
books),  had  acquired  a  prescriptive  right  in  our  language, 
I  should  not  have  hesitated  to  use  that  form,  just  as  I  should 
use  the  names  Erasmus,  Canisius,  or  Cornelius  a  Lapide. 
But  I  have  been  unable  to  find  any  satisfactory  proof  that 
this  is  so,  and  I  have  in  consequence,  though  not  without 
some  hesitation,  adopted  the  original  form,  at  the  risk  of 
seeming  to  introduce  a  novelty.  I  trust  that  the  reader, 
under  whatever  name  he  may  please  to  invoke  him,  will  ask 
the  Blessed  Peter's  intercession  for  those  who  have  under 
taken  the  labour  of  making  his  life  and  virtues  better  known 
than  before  to  English-speaking  Catholics. 

H.  J.  C. 

London,  Feast  of  the  Holy  Innocents,  rSjj. 


CONTENTS. 


PART     THE     FIRST. 
The  Life  of  Blessed  Peter  Favre. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Birth  and  early  years  of  Peter 
Favre.     (1506—1513.) 

Parentage  of  Peter  Favre  .  i 
His  early  piety  ...  2 
His  zeal  for  souls  ...  3 
Traditions  of  his  preaching  as 

a  child         .  .         -4 

Memory  of  him  at  Villaret     .       5 

CHAPTER  III. 

First  studies  and  early  piety. 
(1514—1524.) 

Peter  sent  to  school        .         .  6 

At  the  College  of  La  Roche   .  7 

Peter  Veillard          ...  7 

Peter  Favre' s  vow  of  purity    .  8 

His  advance  in  studies    .         .  8 

CHAPTER  III. 

Meeting  with  St.  Ignatius. 
(1525—1532.) 

Peter  at  the  College  of  St. 

Barbara       ....       9 

Arrival  of  Ignatius  .         .     10 

Peter's  scruples       .  .  '     .     10 

Set  at  rest  by  Ignatius  .         .11 

Intimate  friendship  .         .     ir 

Other  companions  .  .         .12 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Priesthood  and  First  Vows. 

(IS34-) 

Peter  visits  Villaret  .  -13 
The  Exercises  at  Paris  .  .13 
First  meeting  of  the  com 
panions  .  .  .  .14 
Agreement  as  to  rule  of  life  .  15 
The  Assumption,  1534  .  .  16 

CHAPTER  V. 

At  Paris  during  the  absence  of 
St.  Ignatiiis.     ( 1 535 . ) 

Illness  of  Ignatius  .         .  .17 

He  leaves  for  Biscay       .  .     17 

Claude  Le  Jay         .         .  .18 

Paschase  Brouet     .     -   .  .     19 

John  Codure  .                 .  .20 

Influence  of  Favre  at  Paris  .     20 
Occupation  of  the  companions    21 


CHAPTER  VI. 
Venice  and  Rome.     (1536 — 1538.) 

Journey  to  Venice  .  .  .22 
The  companions  go  to  Rome  23 
Their  ordinations  .  . .  .24 
At  Rome  a  second  time  .  .  24 
St.  Lorenzo  in  Damaso  .  .  25 


Contents. 


CHAPTER  VII. 
Peter  Favre  at  Parma. 


Favre  sent  to  Parma       . 
Reformation  of  religion  . 
Favre  and  the  Exercises 
Jerome  Domenech  .         . 
Antonio  Criminale          . 


CHAPTER  VIII. 
In  the  Parmcsian  territory. 

Strada  at  Brescia  .  .  .  31 
Favre's  visit  .  .  .  .32 
I  Better  from  Parma  .  .  33 
Congregation  of  the  Holy 

Xame.         .         .        .         -36 
Favre's  illness         .        .        .36 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Rules  for  the  Congregation  of 
the  Name  of  Jesus. 

Rules  for  the  Congregation  of 
the  Name  of  Jesus        .     37  —  41 

CHAPTER  X. 
The  Diet  of  Worms. 

Favre  sent  to  Germany  with 

Ortiz  .  .  .  .42 
The  disputants  at  Worms  .  43 
Timidity  of  Granvelle  .  .  43 
Favre's  letter  to  Rome  .  .  44 
Uselessness  of  the  conference  45 
Bad  state  of  things  at  Worms  46 
Favre's  work  there  .  .  .47 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Spires  and  Ratisbon.  (1541  .  ) 
Favre  at  Spires  .  '  .  .48 
Devotion  to  guardian  angels  .  49 
His  way  of  travelling  .  .  50 
Use  of  conversation  .  .51 
Adventure  with  robbers  .  .  52 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Peter  Favre  at  Ratisbon. 
The  Diet  at  Ratisbon      .        .     53 
Desperate  state  of  the  Catholic 

cause  .  .        .     54 

Letter  from  Spires  as  to  the 

Exercises  .  .  -55 
John  Cochleus  .  .  -55 
Distinguished  men  at  Ratisbon  56 
Favre's  work  among  them  .  57 
At  Nuremberg  .  .  -58 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

Instructions  how  to  deal  with 
heretics. 

Instructions  how  to  deal  with 
heretics         .         .         .     59 — 62 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

Election  of  the  General,  and 
Solemn  Vows. 

Favre's  letter  on  the  confirma 
tion  of  the  Society       .         .     63 
Election  of  Ignatius  as  General     64 
Favre's  profession  .        .         .65 
Favre  sent  to  Spain  with  Ortiz     66 

CHAPTER  XV. 
Peter  Favre  in  Savoy. 

Journey  through  Germany  .     67 

Plots  of  the  heretics       .  .     68 

Peter  Favre  at  Alex         .  .     69 

At  Villaret  .        .  .70 

At  Thonon     .        .        .  .71 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

First  Visit  to  Spain. 
Imprisonment  in  France         .     72 
Favre's  devotion  on  arriving  in 

Spain  .        .  •  .         -73 

Letter  from  Madrid  .  .  74 
The  Archbishop  of  Toledo  .  75 
Favre  ordered  to  return  to 

Germany     .        .         .        -77 
John    Aragonio    and    Alvaro 

Alfonso  .     78 


Contents. 


XI 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

Peter  Favre  at  Barcelona.  (1542.) 
Meeting  with  Araoz  .  .  79 
The  Viceroy  Francis  Borgia  .  80 
Favre's  sermon  before  Dona 

Leonora  .  .  .  .80 
Introduction  to  Francis  Borgia  81 
The  Convent  of  St.  Clare  .  82 

CHAPTER    XVIII. 

Return  to  Spires. 

Journey  to  Germany        .  .  82 

Otho  Truchses  at  Spires  .  83 

False  reports  against  Favre  .  84 

Zeal  of  the  Vicar  General  .  85 

Reformation  of  clergy  and  laity  86 

Favre  wins  the  people     .  .  86 

Letter  to  Laynez    .        .  -87 

Great  interior  consolations  .  88 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

Peter  Fa  vre  at  May  en  ce.  ( 1 543 . ) 
Albert  of  Brandenburg  .  .  89 
Favre  preaches  at  Mayence  .  90 
Great  fruit  among  the  people  91 
The  parish  priest  of  St. 

Christopher's  .  .  .91 
Peter  Canisius  .  .  .92 
He  becomes  a  novice  .  .  93 
Sent  to  Cologne  .  .  -94 

CHAPTER  XX. 
The  Archbishop  of  Cologne. 
Favre  removed  to  Cologne     .     95 
The    Archbishop    leaning    to 

heresy  .  .  .  .96 
He  promises  amendment  .  97 
Favre  ordered  to  go  to  Portugal  97 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

An  illness  at  Louvain. 
Students  at  Louvain        .        .     98 
Cornelius  Vi  shaven          .         .     98 
Illness  of  Favre      .        .  -      .     99 
Strada's  sermons    .         .         -99 


PAGE 

Favre's  apostolate  while  ill  .  100 
Maria  Vander  Hove  .  .  101 
Severe  trials  of  Cornelius 

Vishaven   ....     102 
Recovery  of  Favre        .         .102 


CHAPTER  XXII. 
The  Louvain  Students. 

Favre  to  remain  at  Cologne  .  103 
Letter  to  Ignatius          .         .  104 
Students  to  be  sent  to  Por 
tugal  105 

Maximilian  Cappella     .         .  106 

List  of  the  novices        .         .  107 

Indignation  in  the  city  .         .  108 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 
Second  stay  at  Cologne.      (1544.) 

Favre  again  at  Cologne  .  109 
His  great  exertions  .  .  109 
Sermons  and  Spiritual  Exer 
cises  i  no 
Melancthon  and  Bucer .  .  in 
St.  Ursula's  Chapel  .  .112 
Letter  from  Canisius  .  .  113 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 
The  Carthusians. 

Gerard   Hammond,  Prior  of 

the  Chartreuse  .         .         .114 

His  letter  about  Favre  .         .  115 

Favre  at  the  Chartreuse         .  116 

Decree  of  the  General  Chapter  117 

Friendship  with  the  Society  ..  118 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

Peter  Canisius  and  his  family. 

Peter      Canisius      and      his 

property  .  .  .  .119 
Complaints  of  his  stepmother  119 
Letter  of  Favre  to  her  .  120 


Xll 


Contents. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 
Peter  Favre  sent  to  Portugal. 

(IS4S-) 

King  John's  request  for  Favre     122 
Leaving  Cologne  .         .         .     123 
Arrival  at  Evora    .         .         .124 
The     King     determines    to 
retain  him          .        .         -125 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 
The  College  of  Coimbra. 

Favre  at  Coimbra          .  .125 

Fervour  of  the  students  .  126 

Letter  to  Ignatius          .  .  126 

Admissions  to  the  Society  .  127 

John  Nunez  Barret o      .  .  128 

Favre's  advice  to  him    .  .  129 

He  enters  the  Society    .  .  130 

CHAPTER  XXVIII. 
Favre  leaving  Portugal. 
Favre  at  the  Court        .         .     131 
Sent  into  Spain  with  Araoz  .     132 
Letter  to  the  College  at  Co 
imbra         ....     133 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

At  the  Court  of  Prince  Philip. 
Salamanca  and  Valladolid  .  136 
Prejudices  against  the  Society  137 
Removed  by  Favre  and  Araoz  137 
Favre  and  the  porter  .  .  138 
Spanish  and  Portuguese 

nobles  .  .  .  .139 
Death  of  the  Princess  Maria  140 
The  Court  moved  to  Madrid  141 

CHAPTER  XXX. 
Valladolid  and  Cologne. 

A  conversion  at  the  Court     .  141 

Troubles  at  Cologne      .         .  143 

Letter  from  Canisius     .         .  144 

The  students  ordered  to  leave  145 

Five  of  them  remain     .         .  146 

Letter  from  Favre         .         .  147 
Letter  to  Hammond     .        .148 


PACK 

CHAPTER   XXXI. 

Favre  at  Madrid. 

Favre's  work  at  the  Court  .  149 

The  two  Princesses        .  .150 

Foundation  at  Alcala    .  .  151 

Story  about  the  fathers  .  151 

Don  Alvaro  de  Cordova  .  152 

Foundations  in  Spain    .  .  153 

Influence  of  Favre        .  .  154 

CHAPTER  XXXII. 
Favre  summoned  to  Rome.    ( 1546. ) 
Perfect  obedience  of  Favre  .     155 
The  Council  of  Trent   .  155 

Favre  ordered  to  join  it  .156 
Letter  of  Ignatius  to  Ortiz  156 
The  Patriarchate  of  Ethiopia  157 
Favre's  leavetakings  in  Spain  158 
Sermon  at  Valentia  .  .  159, 

CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

Foundation  of  the  College  at 
Gandia. 

Death    of   PYancis    Borgia's 

wife 160 

The  College  and  University 

at  Gandia  .         .         .         .  161 

Favre  lays  the  first  stone       .  161 

Gives  the  Exercises  to  Borgia  161 
The  Pope's  approval  of  the 

Exercises  .         .         .         .162 

Miracle  at  Gandia         .         .  162 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 
Favre 's  return  to  Rome,  and  death. 
Favre's  illness  at  Barcelona  .  163 
Arrival  at  Rome  .  .  .  164 
Joy  of  the  fathers  .  .165 
Illness  of  Favre  .  .  .  165 
He  dies  on  the  feast  of  St. 

Peter's  Chains  .  .  .166 
Sorrow  and  consolation  .  167 
Vision  of  Francis  Borgia  .  168 
He  enters  the  Society  .  .  169 
St.  Ignatius  assured  of  Favre's 

beatitude   ....     170 


Contents. 


Xlll 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 
Testimonies  to  Favre  s  sanctity. 
Letter  of  Peter  Canisius        .     171 
Letter  of  Hermes  Poen        .     173 
Rejoicings  at  Gandia    .         .     174 
Simon  Rodriguez  and  Riba- 

deneira      .         .         .         •     I7S 
St.  Francis  Xavier         .         .176 
He    invokes     Favre's    inter 
cession       ....     177 

CHAPTER  XXXVI. 
Veneration  of  Favre  in  Savoy. 
Devotion  to  Favre  at  Villaret  178 
Chapel  where  he  was  born  .  179 
Restoration  of  the  chapel  .  180 
Honore  d'Urfey  .  .  .181 
He  founds  some  Masses  .  182 
Testimony  of  Peter  Critan  .  183 
Inscription  ....  184 
Continuance  of  veneration  .  185 
Hospital  at  Annecy  .  .186 

CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

St.  Francis  de  Sales  and  Peter 
Favre. 

Devotion  of   St.  Francis    to 

Favre  .  .  .  .187 
Visitation  ....  188 
Consecration  of  the  altar  .  189 
Letter  of  St.  Francis  to  Father 

Polliens  .  .  .  .190 
Congregation  of  Priests  .  191 
Successors  of  St.  Francis  .  192 
Toleration  of  cuttm  .  .  193 
Peter  Camus  .  .  •  *94 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 
The  last  Process. 

Testimony  of  the  inhabitants 
of  Villaret  .  .  195 — 198 

CHAPTER  XXXIX. 
Graces  and  miracles. 

Peter  Critan          .  .  .  199 

Honore  d'Urfey    .  .  .  200 

Peter  Vacheran     .  ,  .  201 

Pernette  de  la  Motte  .  .  202 

Auguste  Larvaz     .  .  .  202 

Josephine  Dubourial  .  .  202 

Rose  Perillat  Charlat  .  .  203 

Frances  Suize         .  .  .  203 

Euphrosyne  Blanchet  .  .  204 

Michael  Perissin   .  .  .  205 

CHAPTER  XL. 

The  Immemorial '  Cult  us.' 

Bartoli's  account  of  the  Pro 
cess  206 

Decision  of  the  Bishop  of 
Annecy  ....  207 

Visit  of  Father  Maurel  to 
Villaret  .  .  .  .208 

Petition  of  the  clergy  of 
Annecy  ....  209 

CHAPTER  XLI. 

Decree  approving  and  confirming 
the  Cultus. 

Decree  approving  and  con 
firming  the  Cultus  .  211 — 214 


(End  of  the  First  Part.} 


xiv  Contents. 


PART    THE    SECOND. 

'Memorial1  or  Spiritual  Diary  of  Blessed  Peter 
Favre,  of  the  Society  of  Jesus. 

PAGE 

Introduction  ...........     217 

Recollections  of  childhood    (1506 — 1513)      .        .  .         .     218 

of  schooling    (1516—1524) 219 

of  University  of  Paris  (1525—1528)  .  ...  220 
of  meeting  with  Ignatius  (1529—1533)  .'  . '_  .  220 
of  Orders  and  First  Vows  (1534 — 1535)  .  .  .  223 
of  Venice  and  Rome  (1536 — 1538).  .  .  .  224 
of  Parma,  Worms,  and  Ratisbon  (1539—1541)  .  225 

of  first  visit  to  Spain     (1541) 230 

Notes  in  Germany    (1542) 234—311 

(1543)     •         •        .        .        .        .         .    311—376 
,,     in  Germany  and  Portugal     (1544)        .        .  .         .     376 

,,     in  Portugal  and  Spain     (1545) 377—396 

„     in  Spain     (1546)  .         .        .        .....         .396 


PART   THE   FIRST. 


CHAPTER   I. 
Birth  and  early  years  of  Peter  Favrc. 

THE  Blessed  Peter  Favre,  who  was,  as  St.  Francis  of 
Sales  says,  the  first  priest,  the  first  preacher,  and  the 
first  theologian  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  as  well  as  the 
first  companion  of  St.  Ignatius  of  Loyola,  its  founder,  was 
born  at  Villaret,  a  little  village  situate  in  the  valley  of 
the  Great  Bornand,  amidst  the  most  rugged  mountains 
of  Savoy.  It  belonged  at  that  time  to  the  diocese  of 
Geneva,  which  was  not  yet  infected  by  the  pestilent 
heresy  of  Calvin.1  The  day  of  his  birth  was  the  i3th 
or  i4th  of  April,  in  the  year  1506,  for  in  his  memoir  he 
mentions  that  he  was  born  during  the  festival  time  of 
Easter,  which  in  that  year  fell  on  the  i2th  of  the  month. 
His  parents  were  Louis  Favre  and  Marie  Perissin. 
Though  the  family  of  neither  was  rich  in  this  world's 
goods,  they  were  not  badly  off  for  poor  people,  in 
a  village  where  all  were  poor.  We  gather  from  old 
documents  that  the  mountain  called  Mairolle,  in  the 
Great  Bornand,  belonged  to  the  Favre  family,  and  that 
several  of  its  members  were  employed  in  the  service  of 

1  We  find  Blessed  Peter's  surname  differently  written  by  different 
authors,  especially  among  the  French.  Some  make  it  Favre,  others 
Fabre,  Faure,  Febre,  Lefevre,  and  Lefebre.  In  his  own  autograph 
letters,  written  in  French,  Spanish,  Italian,  and  Latin,  it  is  his  constant 
habit  to  subscribe  himself  Favre,  Fabro,  and  Faber.  There  are  several 
descendants  of  his  family  still  living,  and  they  are  all  known  by  the 
original  name,  Favre. 
B 


Early  piety. 


their  native  place,  as  mayors,  counsellors,  and  notaries 
of  the  commune.  But  the  parents  of  Blessed  Peter 
possessed  more  important  distinctions  than  these,  being 
richly  endowed  with  solid  piety,  steadfast  religion,  and 
Christian  virtues.  Not  only  they,  but  all  their  posterity, 
as  we  learn  from  the  Processes,  always  enjoyed  the  repu 
tation  of  good  and  fervent  Catholics,  who  had  never 
let  themselves  be  contaminated  by  the  errors  of  the 
heretics,  whose  doctrines  had  spread  from  the  neighbour 
ing  cantons  of  Switzerland  into  the  surrounding  districts.2 

As  soon  as  he  was  more  than  an  infant,  Peter  received 
from  his  mother  his  first  impulses  to  piety.  She  in 
structed  him  in  the  rudiments  of  Christian  doctrine,  often 
to  invoke  the  sacred  names  of  Jesus  and  Mary,  and  to 
recite  the  prayers  of  the  Church,  especially  our  Lady's 
rosary.  But  his  chief  teacher  was  the  Holy  Spirit,  Who 
took  to  Himself  the  charge  of  that  beautiful  soul,  and 
began  to  fashion  it  after  His  own  designs.  As  the  child 
advanced  in  age  he  became  more  and  -more  amiable  and 
attractive  from  the  composure  of  his  demeanour  and  a 
certain  gravity  of  bearing,  which  won  affection  as  well 
as  reverence  from  all.  He  took  absolutely  no  pleasure 
in  childish  pastimes ;  all  that  he  cared  for  was  to  dwell 
upon  the  lessons,  and  lovingly  repeat  the  prayers,  taught 
him  by  his  mother. 

At  about  seven  years  old,  that  is  to  say,  as  soon  as 
he  came  to  the  use  of  reason,  he  felt  rising  in  his  soul 
such  tender  feelings  of  devotion,  and  such  an  attraction 
of  his  whole  being  to  God,  that  thenceforth,  as  he  himself 
says,  our  Lord  seemed  to  desire  to  become  the  Bride 
groom  of  his  soul,  and  to  take  entire  possession  of  it. 
At  about  this  time  his  father  gave  him  the  charge  of  a 
small  flock  of  sheep.  The  good  child  took  occasion 
from  the  secluded  country  life  which  he  had  to  lead  in 

2  Process,  ord.  1626,  testis  i. 


A  child's  zeal  for  souls. 


consequence,  to  unite  himself  more  closely  to  God,  and 
to  detach  himself  from  earthly  things.  Poor  and  scanty 
as  was  his  daily  fare,  he  began  to  fast  strictly  twice  a 
week,  denying  himself  even  necessary  things  from  the 
love  of  abstinence.3  Besides  the  prayers  which  he 
recited  many  times  in  the  day,  he  never  failed  to  assist 
at  the  holy  sacrifice  of  the  Mass.  There  is  near  Vallaret 
a  little  spring  of  very  clear  fresh  water,  still  called  by 
the  peasants  the  '  blessed  fountain,'  or  '  Blessed  Peter 
Favre's  fountain.'  It  is  said  that  the  holy  child,  not 
being  able  to  find  the  means  of  watering  his  flock  con 
veniently,  near  at  hand,  caused  it  to  flow  miraculously 
from  the  rock ;  and  certainly  there  is  still  something 
wonderful  about  this  spring,  for  even  in  times  of  the 
greatest  drought  its  waters  have  never  been  known  to 
fail.  The  story  goes,  that  no  sooner  did  the  little 
shepherd  Peter  hear  the  first  stroke  of  the  bell  for 
Mass  from  his  parish  church  of  St.  Jean  de  Sixt,  than 
he  gathered  his  sheep  round  the  spring  and  ran  off  to 
the  church,  and  that  he  never  once  found  that  they  had 
strayed — there  they  all  were,  collected  together  just 
where  he  had  left  them.4 

But  the  thing  that  struck  every  one  as  marvellous  at 
that  early  age,  was  Peter's  zeal  for  souls.  When  he  was 
in  the  fields  he  would  gather  round  him  the  boys  and 
girls  who  kept  sheep  like  himself,  and  very  patiently 
teach  them  all  that  he  knew  of  the  Christian  doctrine, 
ending  by  reciting  with  them  various  prayers  and  the 
holy  rosary.  He  would  also  very  gently  admonish  them 
and  tell  them  of  their  faults,  endeavouring  at  suitable 
times  and  places  to  move  them  to  the  love  of  virtue  by 
his  little  sermons.  On  Sundays  and  festivals,  when  he 
used  to  stay  longer  in  the  village,  he  used  even  to  preach 

3  Process,  ord.  1596,  testis  4. 

4  Process,  ord.  1869,  part  3. 
B    2 


Traditions. 


publicly  in  the  streets.  A  stone  is  still  pointed  out  on 
which  he  used  to  mount  and  invite  the  people  to  listen 
to  him.  And  not  children  only,  but  grown  men  and 
women  hastened  to  the  spot,  wondering  greatly  at  the 
wisdom  and  fervour  displayed  by  so  young  a  child,  and 
weeping  with  emotion  as  they  prophesied  that  he  would 
one  day  be  a  zealous  preacher  and  champion  of  the 
Gospel.  When  the  sermon  was  ended,  each  vied  with 
the  rest  in  giving  him  apples,  walnuts,  filberts,  and 
such  fruits,  as  well  as  a  few  coins.  He  used  to  divide 
the  fruit  among  the  poorest  of  the  little  boys,  and  the 
money  he  took  to  his  mother,  begging  her  to  give  him 
more  lessons  which  he  might  make  the  subject  of  his 
discourses.5 

All  these  seeds  of  virtue,  which  were  seen  springing 
up  in  Peter's  childhood,  were  so  generally  known  and 
notorious  that  they  passed  into  traditions  among  those 
simple  peasants.  His  words  and  actions  were  minutely 
related  by  fathers  to  sons  and  grandsons,  places  and 
persons  were  pointed  out,  and  every  circumstance  was 
particularly  recorded.  Hence  many  years  after  the 
Blessed  Father's  death  the  events  of  his  childhood 
were  talked  of  at  Villaret  as  though  they  had  but  just 
occurred.  We  may  give  an  instance.  In  the  Process 
of  1596,  Peter,  his  nephew,  said  'that  he  had  heard  his 
father,  Louis,  say  that  when  Peter  was  only  six  or 
seven  years  old,  he  was  followed,  whilst  keeping  the 
'sheep  of  the  family,  by  the  little  shepherd  boys  and 
girls,  who  delighted  to  hear  him  preach ;  and  that 
seated  on  a  stone,  like  a  little  preacher,  he  used  to 
teach  them  to  pray  to  God  and  to  say  the  rosary  and 
other  devotions  which  he  had  learnt  from  his  mother, 
with  so  much  sweetness,  that  the  grown  up  inhabitants 
of  Villaret  were  drawn  to  hear  him,  especially  on  feast 

5  Process,  ord.  1596  and  1626. 


Traditions. 


days.  His  manner  of  doing  this  was  so  attractive  that 
his  near  relations  were  seen  weeping  for  joy;  and  it  was 
a  marvel  to  behold  how  every  one  listened  to  him  as 
attentively  as  though  he  had  been  a  regular  preacher. 
So  that  it  became  a  common  saying  that  the  child  would 
some  day  be  a  great  and  illustrious  person.'6  And  George 
Favre,  first  cousin  to  the  servant  of  God,  makes  declara 
tion  in  the  same  Process — 'That  from  his  childhood  he 
was  thought  to  be  a  saint,  and  chosen  by  God  to  convert 
sinners.  At  the  age  of  six  or  seven  he  used  to  preach 
about  what  he  knew  to  both  children  and  grown  persons, 
who  flocked  to  hear  him  on  feast  days ;  and  the  place 
was  shown  where  he  used  to  seat  himself  like  a  little 
teacher,  while  thirty  persons  or  so,  both  men  and  women, 
took  their  places  around  him,  listening  as  gravely  as  if 
he  had  been  a  preacher.  More  than  this,  when  any  of 
his  audience  made  a  noise,  he  would  with  an  air  of  autho 
rity  desire  them  to  be  silent ;  and  when  he  had  finished 
speaking,  his  hearers  were  so  pleased  with  what  he  had 
said,  that  they  gave  him  nuts  and  apples,  which  he 
divided  among  the  shepherd  children  of  his  own  age, 
by  whom  he  was  greatly  loved  and  reverenced.  The 
men  also  gave  him  money,  but  he  took  that  to  his 
mother,  begging  her  to  teach  him  more  prayers,  which 
he  learnt  with  great  ease,  for  the  child  was  both  very 
quick  at  learning  and  accurate  in  retaining  what  was 
taught  him.'7 

These  are  the  words  of  George  Favre.  The  same 
things  are  declared  by  the  witnesses  in  the  Process  of 
1626,  nay,  the  very  same  particulars  are  related  in  our 
own  day  by  the  inhabitants  of  Villaret.  And  yet  this 
Blessed  Father  lived  but  a  very  few  years  in  his  native 
place.  He  quitted  it  in  1534  for  the  last  time,  except 
that  he  spent  a  day  or  two  there  in  1541.  It  is  plain 

fi  Process,  f.  8.  7  Process,  f.  10. 


Desire  for  schooling. 


that  the  things  which  were  remarked  in  his  childhood 
must  have  been  very  extraordinary  to  be  borne  in  mind 
and  vividly  remembered  after  so  long  a  lapse  of  time. 


CHAPTER   II. 

First  studies,  and  early  piety. 

A  MIND  so  well  disposed  by  nature,  talent,  and  incli 
nation  as  that  of  Peter,  a  mind  so  occupied  with  the 
interests  of  God  and  of  his  neighbour,  did  not  seem 
intended  to  waste  its  existence  in  so  mean  an  employ 
ment  as  the  keeping  of  a  flock  of  sheep.  And  therefore 
God,  Who  designed  him  for  far  greater  things  in  His 
service  and  that  of  His  Church,  kindled  in  him  at  this 
time  an  insatiable  desire  of  knowledge  and  study.  The 
good  boy,  unable  to  resist  the  interior  impulse  of  his 
heart,  began  earnestly  to  beg  his  parents  to  send  him  to 
school.  They  desired  it  as  much  as  he  did,  being  well 
aware  that  he  was  in  no  way  suited  for  advancement  in 
temporal  affairs,  in  which  he  took  no  interest  whatever. 
They  knew  too,  that  if  his  mind  were  properly  cultivated., 
he  might  in  time  bring  great  honour  as  well  as  great  help 
to  his  family.  Their  poverty  was  their  hindrance  to  their 
carrying  their  wishes  into  effect.  The  boy,  however, 
pleaded  his  cause  with  so  many  arguments,  entreaties,, 
and  tears,  that  he  ended  by  prevailing  on  them  to  send 
him  to  begin  his  studies  in  the  little  town  of  Thonon,  two 
long  leagues  from  Villaret.  There,  under  the  guidance 
of  a  devout  priest,  he  learnt  to  read  and  write,  and  he 
studied  so  diligently  that  in  two  years  he  completed  his. 
course  of  Latin. 


Peter 's  first  teacher. 


His  success  delighted  his  parents  and  encouraged 
them  to  redouble  their  exertions,  and  it  was  decided  that 
he  should  be  removed  to  the  College  of  La  Roche,  nine 
miles  from  Villaret,  where  he  might  pursue  higher  studies. 
No  place  could  have  been  better  chosen  for  the  ability 
and  wisdom  of  the  master  who  presided  over  it.  This 
was  Dr.  Peter  Veillard,  a  very  learned,  and  better  still, 
a  very  holy  man,  who  had  been  induced,  not  by  the 
love  of  gain,  but  solely  by  the  desire  of  guiding  the 
young  in  piety  and  good  manners,  to  undertake  the 
troublesome  office  of  teaching  boys,  with  whom  he  lived 
a  community  life  in  his  little  college.  Besides  the  other 
means  employed  by  this  holy  man  for  inspiring  devotion 
and  the  fear  of  God,  he  had  a  singular  gift  for  introducing 
into  whatever  he  was  teaching  or  explaining,  appropriate 
spiritual  instructions  and  examples  of  virtue.  He  had 
the  art  of  drawing  useful  comparisons  with  the  history 
and  moral  teaching  of  the  Gospel,  even  from  tales  and 
sentiments  of  profane  authors,  and  by  these  means 
instilling  into  the  minds  of  his  scholars  a  perfect  taste 
in  the  Greek  and  Latin  languages,  at  the  same  time  that 
he  turned  them  betimes  from  whatever  might  soil  the 
mind  and  heart. 

Under  such  a  master  Peter  made  great  progress  both 
in  learning  and  piety.  As  for  piety,  being  already  so 
well  disposed  naturally,  he  advanced  in  this  so  rapidly 
that  he  left  all  his  companions  behind,  though  there  were 
among  them  several  of  rare  excellence,  and  some  who 
lived  and  died  with  the  reputation  of  consummate 
perfection.  Favre's  whole  mind  was  given  exclusively 
to  study  and  prayer,  so  that,  when  his  school  tasks 
were  over,  his  whole  time  was  spent  in  vocal  prayer 
and  reading  pious  books.  He  approached  the  holy 
Sacraments  of  Penance  and  the  Eucharist  as  frequently 
as  his  director  permitted.  His  manners  were  remarkably 


8  Vow  of  purity. 

winning,  his  conversation  frank  and  simple,  and  above 
all,  his  face  expressed  such  innocence  and  purity  of 
heart  that  he  gained  the  homage  and  veneration  of  all. 
Of  this  purity  he  was  most  tenderly  jealous  ;  he  omitted 
no  possible  means  of  keeping  his  mind  and  body  pure, 
and  of  avoiding  everything  that  might  bring  a  stain  of 
guilt  upon  his  soul.  And  he  gave  solid  proof  of  this,  for 
when  he  was  only  twelve  years  old,  and  had  gone  home 
for  the  usual  holidays,  he  one  day  withdrew  to  a  wild 
and  solitary  place  in  the  country,  and  there,  lifting  up  his 
soul  to  God,  he  began  to  consider  within  himself  what 
would  be  the  most  acceptable  offering  which  he  could 
make  to  Him,  in  return  for  the  favours  he  had  received. 
He  heard  as  it  were  an  inward  voice,  which  answered, 
'virginal  purity.'  Without  a  moment's  delay,  he  knelt 
down  and  made  a  vow  of  perpetual  chastity.  Thence 
forward  he  regarded  and  accounted  himself  as  something 
consecrated,  and  he  promised  to  serve  God  in  some 
higher  way  of  life,  although  he  was  unable  to  decide 
definitely  on  a  particular  state.  A  wonderful  arrangement 
this  of  Divine  Providence,  Who  was  preparing  him 
unconsciously  to  become  the  first  companion  of  the 
holy  founder  of  a  religious  order. 

As  to  his  studies,  being  very  quick  and  intelligent, 
and  gifted  besides  with  an  excellent  memory,  Peter  very 
soon  mastered  the  Greek  and  Latin  languages ;  he  then 
applied  himself  to  rhetoric,  and  studied  unaided  some 
treatises  in  philosophy  and  scholastic  theology,  which 
he  had  copied  from  the  writings  of  M.  Veillard.  He 
remained  at  the  College  of  La  Roche  for  nine  years, 
and  he  would  have  stayed  longer  if  Dr.  Veillard  had 
been  able  to  direct  his  higher  studies.  But,  as  he  was 
fully  engaged  with  the  younger  pupils,  he  advised  Favre 
to  go  to  some  celebrated  University.  This  counsel  was 
opposed  by  Peter's  parents,  both  from  a  dislike  to  part 


Peter  at  Paris. 


with  their  son,  and  because  their  small  income  was  not 
sufficient  to  bear  the  expense  of  his  maintenance  in  a 
distant  country.  But  Peter  pressed  the  point,  offering  to 
live  very  sparingly  if  only  he  might  study,  so  that  they 
were  prevailed  upon,  partly  by  his  entreaties,  and  partly 
by  the  arguments  adduced  in  his  favour  some  years 
before  by  his  near  relation,  Dr.  George  Favre,  prior  of 
the  Carthusian  Monastery  of  Reposoir,1  to  sanction  his 
going  to  the  University  of  Paris,  where  at  that  time, 
the  study  of  all  sciences,  human  and  divine,  flourished 
exceedingly. 


CHAPTER   III. 

Meeting  with  St.  Ignatius. 

PETER  FAVRE  was  nineteen  years  old  when,  in  the 
September  of  1525,  he  went  to  Paris,  and  entered  the 
College  of  St.  Barbara,  there  to  commence  the  course 
of  philosophy,  which  in  those  days  was  completed  in 
three  years  and  a  half.  His  master  was  John  Pegna,  a 
distinguished  doctor  of  the  Sorbonne ;  and  he  had  as 
college  companion  Francis  Xavier,  a  young  gentleman 
of  Navarre,  who  for  some  time  also  shared  his  room. 
His  bright  intelligence,  purity  of  manners,  and  sweetness 
of  disposition  gained  the  love  of  his  fellow-students  and 
the  esteem  of  his  master.  He,  on  his  part,  ever  watchful 
over  himself,  did  not  readily  admit  particular  friendships 
and  intimacies.  Grave  and  reserved  by  nature,  he  applied 
himself  to  the  cultivation  of  his  mind,  and  studied  philo 
sophy  with  unwearied  assiduity.  Pegna  honoured  him 

1  The  Rev.  Father  G.  M.  Favre,  as  we  learn  from  the  archives  of  the 
monastery,  was  prior  from  1508  till  1522,  the  year  of  his  death. 


io  Ignatius  Loyola. 

with  a  greater  share  of  his  confidence  than  the  rest  of 
his  scholars,  and  often  when  he  came  to  an  obscure  and 
difficult  passage  in  the  Greek  text  of  Aristotle,  he  would 
consult  Favre,  who  was  extremely  well  versed  in  that 
language,  as  the  best  interpreter  of  the  philosopher's 
meaning.  On  the  loth  of  January,  1529,  he  was  made 
Bachelor,  and  after  Easter  in  the  same  year,  Licentiate  ; 
a  year  later  he  took  his  Doctor's  degree,  and  was 
appointed  to  read  philosophy  publicly  for  a  time,  as 
was  usual  in  that  University. 

It  was  in  the  October  of  1529,  when  Favre  was  about 
to  commence  the  theological  couse,  that  Ignatius  of 
Loyola  came  to  reside  in  the  College  of  St.  Barbara. 
He  had  arrived  at  Paris  from  Salamanca  the  previous 
year,  and  was  preparing  to  recommence  his  philosophy 
from  the  beginning,  having  studied  it  very  superficially 
in  Spain.  He  explained  how  matters  stood  to  Pegna, 
who  very  willingly  received  him,  and,  the  better  to  assist 
him  in  his  studies,  introduced  him  to  Peter  Favre,  that 
he  might  go  over  privately  with  him  the  lessons  given 
in  the  schools.  These  two  understood  and  appreciated 
each  other  from  the  time  of  their  first  familiar  intercourse. 
Ignatius,  discerning  Favre's  excellent  disposition,  ability, 
and  learning,  formed  the  idea  of  getting  him  to  join  in 
the  great  work  which  he  was  meditating ;  and  Favre, 
full  of  admiration  for  the  prudence  and  sanctity  of 
Ignatius,  attached  himself  greatly  to  him,  determining 
to  take  the  opportunity  of  availing  himself  of  him  to 
the  benefit  of  his  own  soul. 

He  was  at  this  time  tormented  by  frequent  and  violent 
carnal  temptations,  which  were  an  intolerable  distress  and. 
torment  to  a  holy  soul  like  his,  all  the  more  because 
of  his  vow  of  chastity.  In  addition,  he  was  often 
assailed  by  temptations  to  gluttony  and  vainglory,  and 
his  mind  burthened  by  a  crowd  of  scruples  which  filled 


Peter  and  Ignatius.  1 1 

his  soul  with  a  thousand  doubts,  perplexities,  and  fears. 
His  heart  was  dry,  his  mind  agitated,  and  he  was  in  a 
state  of  continual  interior  conflict.  He  prayed  to  God 
with  many  tears  for  help  and  succour,  but  finding  no 
relief  from  his  inward  trials,  he  thought  of  retiring  alto 
gether  from  the  world  and  shutting  himself  up  in  some 
solitary  place  where  he  might  lead  a  life  of  austere 
penance  in  continual  fasting  and  mortification  of  his 
body. 

He  was  always  brooding  over  these  things  in  silence, 
without  having  courage  to  tell  his  troubles  to  any  one : 
and  this  only  made  his  condition  doubly  miserable.  At 
last,  one  day,  when  more  oppressed  than  ever  by  sadness 
and  melancholy,  it  pleased  God  that  he  should  break 
through  his  reserve  and  open  his  whole  heart  to  Ignatius, 
who,  having  already  suffered  in  the  same  way  at  the 
beginning  of  his  conversion,  was  enabled  by  the  teach 
ing  of  experience  to  apply  the  proper  remedies.  He 
consoled  Favre,  advised  him  to  make  a  very  exact 
general  confession,  to  purify  his  soul  over  and  over 
again  by  frequent  spiritual  examination,  and  to  fortify 
it  by  frequent  communion. 

By  these  and  other  means  Favre  speedily  regained 
complete  peace  and  tranquillity  of  soul.  From  that  time 
forward,  instead  of  being  the  master,  he  became  the 
scholar  of  Ignatius  in  spiritual  matters,  holding  frequent 
and  delightful  conversations  with  him  concerning  God 
and  heavenly  things.  So  great,  indeed,  was  the  pleasure 
he  took  in  them,  that  it  was  necessary  to  put  some  check 
upon  it.  For  when  they  met  in  the  evenings  to  go  over 
their  lessons  of  philosophy,  it  would  happen  that  one 
of  them  starting,  even  accidently  perhaps,  some  pious 
subject,  they  would  unconsciously  prolong  the  conver 
sation  on  the  same  topic  late  into  night.  This  was  a 
serious  hurt  to  the  studies  of  St.  Ignatius,  and  they 


12         First  Companions  of  Ignatius. 

agreed  not  to  make  these  digressions,  nor  to  allow 
themselves  to  be  diverted  from  the  matter  in  hand 
during  the  hours  appointed  for  their  scholastic  con 
ferences. 

It  is  quite  true  that,  in  undertaking  the  charge  of 
Favre's  soul,  Ignatius  looked  not  only  to  the  present 
necessity,  but  aimed  at  higher  things,  namely,  to  lead 
him  gradually  to  a  loftier  pitch  of  perfection.  And  thus 
for  nearly  'two  years  he  laboured  by  slow  and  sure 
degrees,  till,  having  detached  him  from  every  earthly 
affection,  and  perceiving  him  to  be  capable  of  generous 
thoughts,  he  one  day  confided  to  him,  in  the  familiarity 
of  intercourse  which  subsisted  between  them,  that  it  was 
his  intention,  as  soon  as  he  should  have  completed  his 
theological  studies,  to  go  beyond  the  seas  to  the  Holy 
Land,  and  there  pass  his  life  in  labouring  for  the  conver 
sion  of  the  infidels,  or,  in  case  this  should  be  impossible, 
to  offer  himself  to  the  Sovereign  Pontiff,  to  be  employed 
by  him  wherever  he  pleased,  so  that  he  might  but  pro 
mote  the  eternal  salvation  of  souls.  On  hearing  this 
Favre  was  greatly  moved,  and,  as  if  he  heard  from 
Ignatius  the  express  voice  of  God,  he  instantly  gave 
himself  to  him,  to  be  his  follower  and  companion  in  that 
interprize.  After  him  Francis  Xavier  joined  Ignatius, 
and  then  four  other  youths  of  equal  talent  and  merit 
— James  Laynez,  Alfonso  Salmeron,  Nicolas  Bobadilla, 
.and  Simon  Rodriguez. 


CHAPTER   IV. 

Priesthood  and  First   Vows. 

FILLED  with  consolation  by  this  generous  and  absolute 
offer  of  himself  to  God  and  St.  Ignatius  which  he  had 
made,  Peter  continued  his  theological  studies  with  great 
ardour.  In  the  year  1533,  when  the  course  was  nearly 
completed,  he  left  Paris  for  Villaret,  to  pay  a  last  visit  to 
his  family,  and  to  take  leave  of  his  father  and  receive  his 
blessing.  His  mother  had  already  passed  to  a  better  life. 
He  spent  seven  months  in  his  native  place,  where,  with  a 
heart  filled  with  the  love  of  God,  he  not  only  gave  the 
example  of  a  holy  and  perfect  life,  but  succeeded  by 
his  admonitions  in  confirming  his  countrymen  in  the 
Catholic  faith  and  in  Christian  virtue.  Having  thus 
accomplished  his  duty  to  his  father,  he  returned  to  Paris 
without  so  much  as  a  single  coin,  trusting  to  the  charity 
of  Ignatius,  who  undertook  to  maintain  him  and  his 
other  companions  by  means  of  the  liberal  alms  which 
he  received  from  the  Spanish  merchants. 

On  arriving  at  Paris,  he  withdrew  himself  into  the 
solitude  of  a  poor  house,  in  order  to  go  through  the 
Spiritual  Exercises,  which,  by  the  advice  of  St.  Ignatius, 
he  had  deferred  till  now.  It  was  an  extremely  severe 
winter,  snow  and  ice  everywhere  \  even  the  river  Seine, 
which  runs  through  the  city,  was  frozen  so  hard  as  to 
bear  the  weight  of  carts.  Nevertheless,  Favre  used  to 
spend  long  hours,  by  night  as  well  as  day,  praying  and 
meditating  in  a  courtyard  open  to  the  sky,  in  that  bitter 


14  Holy  Orders. 


weather.  He  would  have  no  fire  in  his  room,  and  the 
only  use  he  made  of  a  great  heap  of  fuel  which  had 
been  placed  there,  was  to  lie  down  upon  it  to  take  a  few 
hours  of  uneasy  sleep.  He  also  imposed  on  himself  a 
strict  fast,  and  passed  the  first  six  days  without  taking 
a  morsel  of  bread  or  a  drop  of  water.  And  he  was 
disposed  to  go  on  still  further,  if  St.  Ignatius,  coming  to 
see  him,  and  perceiving  his  state  of  exhaustion,  had  not 
prayed  about  it,  and  then  commanded  him  to  refresh 
himself  immediately  with  food  and  a  fire.  Besides  other 
advantages  which  were  the  result  of  this  extraordinary 
fast,  Favre  derived  this  gain  in  particular — that  hence 
forward  he  was  never  again  troubled  by  the  slightest 
return  to  those  temptations  to  gluttony,  which  formerly 
had  been  so  constant  that  he  was  unable  ever  to  satisfy 
his  hunger  without  annoying  scruples.  And  it  is  a  thing 
which  frequently  occurs  to  God's  servants,  that  one 
heroic  act  of  virtue  entirely  roots  out  of  the  soul  all 
inclination  to  the  contrary  vice.  After  having  gone 
through  the  forty  days  of  the  Exercises  with  great 
fervour,  he  prepared  to  receive  Holy  Orders,  and  on  the 
22nd  of  July,  1534,  the  feast  of  St.  Mary  Magdalene, 
his  especial  patroness  and  protectress,  he  for  the  first 
time  offered  the  holy  sacrifice. 

Meanwhile,  Ignatius,  having,  as  has  been  said,  gained 
five  companions  besides  Favre,  thought  that  the  time 
was  coming  for  inaugurating  the  great  work  which  he  had 
planned,  and  that  the  first  step  should  be  to  unite  all  his 
associates  for  one  common  end,  both  as  to  their  way 
of  life  and  their  work.  As  yet  no  one  knew  anything 
about  the  rest,  and  each  one  thought  himself  alone.  He 
spoke  to  them  one  by  one,  exhorting  them  to  consider 
seriously,  and  decide  what  kind  of  of  life  was  most  suited 
for  the  service  of  God  and  the  conversion  of  souls. 
They  were  to  prepare  themselves  by  prayer  and  penance, 


Formation  of  the  Society.  15 

and  a  day  was  fixed  on  which  they  were  to  bring  their 
answer  to  his  room,  where  they  would  find  other 
companions  who  were  meditating  the  same  undertaking. 
This  was  done,  and  when  they  came  back  to  Ignatius, 
nothing  can  express  the  joyful  surprise  with  which  that 
number  of  young  men,  so  distinguished  for  talents  and 
virtue,  and  who  regarded  each  other  with  mutual  affec 
tion  and  respect,  found  themselves  for  the  first  time 
united  and  bound  together  for  a  common  end.  They 
embraced  with  tears  of  tenderness.  After  they  had  given 
vent  to  their  feelings,  St.  Ignatius  was  the  first  to  speak. 
He  said  that  it  was  his  intention  to  conform  his  life  to 
that  of  Christ,  the  most  perfect  example  of  all  sanctity, 
and  more  than  that,  besides  the  care  of  his  own  salva 
tion,  to  cooperate  with  Christ  for  that  of  the  world.  He 
thought  that  the  first  choice  of  place  should  be  given  to 
the  holy  places  of  Palestine,  which  he  had  already 
visited,  and  which  he  knew  to  be  in  pressing  need  of 
help,  there  to  labour  with  the  sweat  of  his  brow,  and 
there,  if  he  should  be  found  worthy,  to  shed  his  blood 
also,  for  the  propagation  of  the  faith.  Meanwhile,  until 
a  favourable  opportunity  occurred  for  making  this  voyage, 
he  had  resolved  to  offer  himself  to  God  by  a  vow  of 
perpetual  chastity  and  voluntary  poverty. 

Hardly  had  he  ended,  when  all  the  rest  declared  with 
one  voice,  that  such,  neither  more  nor  less,  were  their 
own  sentiments,  such  the  resolutions  which  they  had 
formed.  Only  some  of  them  prudently  suggested  that 
they  should  consider  what  to  do  in  case  of  being 
prevented  by  some  impediment  either  from  going  to 
Palestine,  or  from  remaining  there.  After  a  long  discus 
sion  of  this  question,  they  agreed  to  wait  in  Venice  for  a 
year,  at  the  end  of  which  time,  if  they  were  not  able  to 
accomplish  the  voyage  to  the  East,  they  would  proceed 
to  Rome,  and  offer  themselves  to  the  Supreme  Pontiff 


1 6  Vows  at  Montmartre. 

to  labour  for  the  salvation  of  souls  wherever  it  pleased 
him.  In  the  meantime,  those  among  them  who  had 
not  yet  completed  their  course  of  theology,  were  to 
continue  it  in  Paris  till  January  2$th,  1537,  when  they 
were  all  to  go  to  Venice. 

All  this  being  decided  by  common  consent,  they 
resolved  to  confirm  it  briefly  by  vow,  and  for  doing  so 
fixed  on  the  i5th  of  August,  on  which  is  commemorated 
the  glorious  Assumption  of  our  Blessed  Lady.  On  the 
i5th  of  August,  then,  1534,  they  all  met  together  in 
the  Church  of  our  Lady  at  Montmartre,  half  a  league 
outside  Paris.  Peter  Favre,  the  only  priest  among  them, 
celebrated  the  holy  Mass,  and  before  communicating, 
they  all,  one  after  the  other,  pronounced  the  vow  binding 
them  to  poverty  and  to  perpetual  chastity,  to  go  to 
the  Holy  Land,  and  to  present  themselves,  in  case  of 
the  circumstances  already  mentioned,  to  the  Sovereign 
Pontiff;  and  lastly,  not  to  accept  any  stipend  or  alms 
for  the  administration  of  the  sacraments.  And  in  this 
manner  were  sown  the  first  seeds  of  the  Society  of 
Jesus,  which  afterwards  sprang  up  in  Rome,  and  grew 
into  a  great  and  wide-spreading  tree.  After  making  their 
thanks  to  God,  they  refreshed  themselves,  in  inde 
scribable  consolation  and  spiritual  joy,  with  a  frugal 
meal,  which  was  prepared  beside  a  fountain  flowing  at 
the  foot  of  the  hill.  The  rest  of  the  day  was  spent  in 
arranging  the  mode  of  life  which  they  should  thenceforth 
lead  in  Paris.  As  to  this,  they  left  themselves  entirely  to 
the  direction  of  Ignatius,  whom  they  began  to  regard  as 
their  master  and  father.  He  appointed  a  certain  uniform 
number  of  prayers  and  penances,  made  it  a  rule  to 
communicate  on  Sundays  and  festivals,  and  every  year, 
on  the  same  day,  and  in  the  same  place,  to  renew  the 
vows  they  had  just  made.  Lastly,  they  were  to  meet 
together  frequently  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  up  and 


Ignatius  goes  to  Spain.  i  7 

increasing  their  mutual  charity,  and  of  encouraging  each 
other,  by  spiritual  conversations,  to  the  attainment  of 
perfection. 


CHAPTER  V. 
At  Paris  during  the  absence  of  Ignatius. 

THE  companions  of  Ignatius  were  still  in  the  enjoyment 
of  these  sweet  spiritual  consolations,  when  an  incident 
occurred  which  made  it  necessary  for  the  holy  father  to  go 
to  a  distance  from  them  for  a  short  time.  The  life  of  con 
tinual  fasting  and  mortification  which  he  had  been  lead 
ing  had  so  injured  his  digestion  that  his  strength  seemed 
entirely  gone,  and  all  the  remedies  of  art  were  in  vain. 
The  only  thing  which  the  doctors  could  suggest  to  save 
his  life  was  that  he  should  try  the  effect  of  his  native  air 
for  a  time.  Ignatius  was  disinclined  to  this,  but  his 
companions  urged  it  so  strongly  that  at  last  he  yielded — 
all  the  more  readily,  because  some  of  them,  Xavier. 
Laynez,  and  Salmeron,  not  wishing  to  return  home  them 
selves,  begged  him  to  undertake  the  settlement  of  their 
domestic  affairs. 

Ignatius  left  Paris  for  Biscay  in  the  early  part  of  the  year 
1535.  Before  starting,  he  commended  his  companions 
to  the  care  and  guidance  of  Peter  Favre,  his  firstborn, 
whose  singular  prudence  and  virtue  were  respected  and 
venerated  by  all.  And  well  did  Peter  justify  the  con 
fidence  of  his  holy  father.  He  not  only  maintained  his 
companions  in  unity  of  spirit  and  charity,  but  increased 
their  number  by  the  addition  of  three  more,  who  were 
already  masters  in  theology.  The  first  was  Claude 
Le  Jay,  a  Savoyard,  a  native  of  Aise,  in  the  district 
of  Faussigny.  He  had  made  his  last  studies  in  the 
c 


1 8  Claude  Le  Jay. 


College  of  La  Roche,  under  Peter  Veillard,  and  it  seems 
certain  that  while  there  he  had  contracted  a  friendly 
intimacy  with  Favre.  There  is  ample  proof  of  this  in  a 
valuable  manuscript  which,  a  few  years  ago,  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  Jesuit  fathers  in  Paris,  at  the  beginning  of 
which  we  find  the  following  attestation — '  This  manu 
script  contains  the  commentary  on  the  fourth  Book  of 
Sentences,  dictated  by  Master  Veillard,  and  copied  with 
his  own  hand  by  our  father,  Peter  Favre,  of  blessed 
memory,  in  the  College  of  La  Roche,  about  the  year  of 
our  Lord  1519.  I  have  compared  it  with  the  manuscript 
of  Father  Claude  Le  Jay.  The  matter  and  contents  are  the 
same,  on  the  subject  of  the  sacraments.  From  this  we 
gather  that  these  two  men  were  at  La  Roche  together, 
as  Father  Claude  himself  seems  to  hint  at  the  close  of 
the  first  part  of  his  manuscript.  They  appear  also  to 
have  gone  together  to  Paris,  as  I  was  told  a  few  years 
ago  by  an  old  man  of  the  Le  Jay  family,  the  son  of 
Father  Claude's  cousin.  And  in  further  confirmation  of 
this  fact,  I  and  another  father  of  the  Society  carefully 
compared  these  writings  of  Father  Favre  with  those  of 
Father  Le  Jay,  and  we  found  them  to  be  the  same,  dic 
tated  by  Master  Veillard  in  the  year  above  mentioned,  and 
this,  by  order  of  Father  Brossard,  rector  of  the  College, 
I  certify  under  my  own  hand,  this  ist  day  of  August, 
on  which  is  commemorated  the  happy  death  of  Blessed 
Peter  Favre.  Chambery,  1619.  Nicholas  Polliens,  a 
native  of  the  same  diocese  of  Geneva  in  which  those  two 
fathers  were  born,  and  admitted  into  the  same  Society, 
and  tolerated  therein  for  thirty  years,  although  the  most 
unworthy  of  all  who  have  been,  are,  or  shall  be  in  it.'1 

1  In  the  other  page  of  the  manuscript,  Father  Polliens  again  attests 
the  authenticity  of  Father  Favre's  writing,  comparing  it  with  an  original 
letter  written  to  the  prior  of  the  Charterhouse  of  Reposoir.  I,  too, 
having  seen  and  read  the  manuscript,  am  able  to  assert  positively  that 
it  is  written  in  Blessed  Favre's  own  hand  (Author}. 


Paschase  Broiiet.  19 

These  are  the  words  of  Father  Polliens.  But  be  it  as  it 
may,  whether  Father  Claude  came  to  Paris  with  Favre,  or 
whether,  as  Bartoli,  and  Favre  in  his  '  Memorial,'  say, 
he  did  not  arrive  there  till  this  very  year,  1535,  when 
he  was  already  ordained  priest,  it  is  certain  that  having 
heard  and  seen  the  great  things  which  were  being  done 
by  the  companions  of  Ignatius,  and  the  still  greater  things 
which  they  were  preparing  themselves  for,  he  was  moved 
by  God  to  join  them. 

Le  Jay  was  a  man  of  angelic  disposition,  and  of  rare 
ability,  and  he  afterwards  laboured  greatly  in  the  cause 
of  the  faith  in  Germany,  where  he  was  much  loved 
by  William,  Duke  of  Bavaria,  Ferdinand,  King  of  the 
Romans,  and  by  Cardinal  Otho  Truchses,  Bishop  of 
Augsburg,  who  appointed  him  to  be  his  theologian  and 
procurator  in  the  Council  of  Trent.  The  second  was 
Paschase  Brouet,  a  Frenchman.  He  was  born .  in  the 
district  of  Bertraincour,  five  leagues  distant  from  Amiens ; 
and  being  sent  to  school  at  a  very  early  age,  made  such 
rapid  progress  in  learning  and  virtue,  that  as  soon  as  he 
came  to  the  proper  age  he  was  admitted  to  Holy  Orders, 
and  made  a  priest  on  the  i2th  of  March,  1523.  Desiring 
to  improve  himself  in  learning,  especially  in  theology, 
he  went  to  the  University  of  Paris,  where  he  made 
Favre's  acquaintance.  Under  him,  he  went  through  the 
Spiritual  Exercises,  and  came  forth  from  them  so  detached 
from  worldly  things,  that  he  instantly  asked  leave  to  be 
aggregated  to  the  little  Society.  It  was  this  Paschase 
Brouet  whom  St.  Ignatius  used  to  call  '  the  angel  of  the 
Society,'  on  account  of  his  great  purity  and  simplicity  of 
manners,  which  were  combined  with  so  high  a  degree  of 
Evangelical  prudence,  that  Ignatius  did  not  hesitate  to 
propose  him,  after  Favre,  as  Patriarch  of  Ethiopia.  The 
last  of  the  three  was  John  Codure,  another  Frenchman, 
a  man  of  most  spotless  life,  born  at  Embrun,  a  city  of 

C    2 


2o  Good  works  at  Paris. 

Dauphine,  on  the  festival  of  St.  John  the  Baptist.  On  the 
anniversary  of  which  day  he  was  consecrated  to  the 
priesthood,  and  on  the  same  festival  also  he  died  at 
Rome  in  1541,  being  exactly  the  age  of  the  holy  Pre 
cursor.  His  was  the  first  death  in  the  Society,  and  his 
soul  was  seen  by  Ignatius  ascending  to  heaven  accom 
panied  by  a  choir  of  angels.  These  three  new  associates 
made  their  vows  on  the  same  day  on  which  the  others 
renewed  theirs,  that  is  to  say,  on  the  feast  of  the  Assump 
tion,  1535,  and  they  all  renewed  them  together  in  the 
following  year,  1536. 

Not  satisfied  with  this,  Favre  having  now  completed 
his  studies,  devoted  himself  entirely  henceforth  to  the 
Apostolic  ministry,  and  to  the  gaining  of  souls.  One 
invaluable  gift  which  he  had  received  from  heaven  was 
a  remarkable  grace  in  conversing  on  spiritual  subjects. 
He  used  to  fall  quite  naturally  and  without  any  effort 
into  discourses  of  this  kind,  and  adroitly  stealing  into 
the  minds  of  his  hearers,  he  gained  their  hearts  and 
gradually  purified  them  from  sinful  and  earthly  affections, 
and  drew  them  to  the  love  of  God  and  of  heavenly 
things.  He  had  besides  so  skilful  a  way  of  conducting 
the  Spiritual  Exercises,  that  St.  Ignatius  considered  that 
there  was  not  his  equal  in  this  respect.  Partly  in  con 
sequence  of  this  gift,  and  partly  by  the  example  of  his 
holy  life,  Favre  worked  great  good  in  Paris  during  the 
two  years  that  he  spent  there  awaiting  the  time  fixed  for 
starting  for  Venice.  He  won  over  many  young  men  of 
the  University  from  the  path  of  destruction  to  better  ways, 
and  was  the  means  of  inducing  several  priests  and  eccle 
siastics  of  high  dignity  to  reform  their  mode  of  life, 
and  of  inspiring  them  with  great  spiritual  fervour.  It  is 
enough  to  mention  that  when  the  report  got  abroad  that 
he  was  soon  about  to  leave,  an  illustrious  doctor  of  the 
Sorbonne  raised  the  question  whether  he  would  not  be 


Occupations  of  the  Companions.         2  i 

incurring  the  guilt  of  mortal  sin  by  leaving  the  certain 
good  which  he  was  doing  in  Paris,  gaining  so  many  souls 
to  God,  for  that  which  perhaps  he  might  do  elsewhere, 
but  which  was  uncertain.  And  in  order  to  show  that  his 
opinion  was  not  without  foundation,  he  offered  to  get 
it  confirmed  and  subscribed  by  all  the  theologians  of  the 
University. 

Favre  also  kept  up  this  active  zeal  for  souls  in  the 
hearts  of  the  companions  committed  to  his  charge.  He 
frequently  assembled  them  together  in  the  College  of 
St.  Barbara,  or  in  some  other  retired  place  •  often  he 
got  them  to  meet  at  a  frugal  and  simple  meal,  and  with 
holy  discourses  encouraged  them  to  make  trial  of  their 
Apostolic  vocation.  They,  on  their  part,  did  not  fail 
so  far  as  their  studies  permitted,  to  labour  in  the  spiritual 
culture  of  their  neighbours  ;  such  among  them  as  were 
not  priests,  by  means  of  private  conversations  and  timely 
advice ;  and  Claude  Le  Jay,  Paschase  Broue't,  and  Peter 
Favre,  by  their  priestly  ministrations,  the  preaching  of 
God's  Word,  and  hearing  confessions.  Thus,  from  that 
early  time,  they  prepared  themselves  beforehand  for  the 
great  things  which,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  they  afterwards 
wrought  in  different  parts  of  the  world,  among  Christians 
and  infidels,  Catholics  and  heretics,  for  the  service  of 
God  and  His  Church. 


CHAPTER     VI. 
Venice  and  Rome. 

BEFORE  Ignatius  left  Paris  for  Spain,  it  was  agreed 
among  the  fathers  that  they  should  all  meet  in  Venice  by 
the  25th  of  January,  1537,  as  we  have  already  mentioned. 
But  as  the  Emperor  Charles  V.  was  making  war  against 
Francis  I.,  King  of  France,  and  had  already  entered 
Provence  with  a  powerful  army.  Peter  Favre  and  his 
companions,  after  consulting  together,  resolved  to  hasten 
their  departure,  before  all  the  passes  from  France  into 
Italy  were  stopped.  They  already  knew  that  their 
beloved  father,  St.  Ignatius,  had  been  nearly  a  year  in 
Venice,  and  was  anxiously  expecting  them ;  so  without 
further  delay,  leaving  a  few  of  their  number  in  Paris  to 
see  after  their  common  property,  and  to  distribute  the 
little  they  had  among  the  poor,  the  rest  set  out  on  the 
1 5th  of  November,  1536,  for  Meaux,  where  they  were  all 
to  meet  and  begin  their  journey  together.  In  order  to 
avoid  the  scouts  of  both  armies,  who  were  going  about 
the  country,  they  had  to  make  a  considerable  detour  by 
way  of  Lorraine  and  Germany,  and  this  occasioned  them 
many  serious  inconveniences  and  dangers.  They  all 
travelled  on  foot,  poorly  clad,  and  with  their  books  and 
papers  carried  in  bundles  on  their  backs.  The  weather 
was  rainy  and  cold,  as  it  mostly  is  in  that  part  of  the 
country  at  the  beginning  of  winter,  and  the  roads  they 
had  to  traverse  were  broken  up  by  the  heavy  rains  and 
blocked  by  snow  so  deep,  that  sometimes  they  had  to 


The  Companions  at  Rome. 


wait  three  days  till  the  passes  were  open.  In  the  parts 
of  the  country  which  were  inhabited  by  heretics,  they 
had  also  to  bear  abuse  and  insults,  and  in  some  places 
their  lives  even  were  in  danger.  I  do  not  here  enter 
into  particulars,  which  are  related  in  full  length  in  the 
Life  of  our  holy  father  St.  Ignatius. 

At  length,  as  it  pleased  God,  after  a  trying  journey  of 
fifty-four  days,  they  arrived  safe  and  sound  at  Venice,  on 
the  8th  of  January,  1537.  Great  was  their  joy  at  once 
more  seeing  and  embracing  Ignatius,  and  especially  that 
of  the  three  new  companions,  who  had  probably  only 
known  him  hitherto  by  reputation.  After  a  short  time 
of  rest,  they  divided  their  number  between  two  hospitals, 
where  they  practised  the  spiritual  and  corporal  works 
of  mercy,  to  the  great  edification  of  the  people  ;  and 
when  the  season  of  Lent  approached,  they  all,  with  the 
exception  of  Ignatius,  set  out  together  for  Rome,  to  beg 
for  the  Sovereign  Pontiff's  blessing,  and  to  ask  his  leave 
to  go  to  the  Holy  Land  and  there  exercise  their  Apostolic 
ministry.1  They  were  introduced  to  the  Pope  by  Dr. 
Pedro  Ortiz,  the  representative  of  the  Emperor  Charles  V., 
and  Paul  III.  not  only  received  them  with  every  expres 
sion  of  affection,  but  desired  to  hear  them  dispute  on 
theological  questions,  in  which  he  greatly  admired  their 
learning  and  ability.  When  he  heard  their  request,  he 
raised  his  hands  and  eyes  to  heaven,  and  tenderly 
blessed  them.  When  they  took  leave  of  him,  he  ordered 
•seventy  crowns  to  be  given  to  them  as  an  alms,  and  gave 
permission  to  those  among  them  who  were  not  priests, 
including  Ignatius,  who  was  not  present,  to  be  ordained 

1  The  original  rescript  of  the  Cardinal  Qitatuor  Sanctorum,  Grand 
Penitentiary,  still  exists,  in  which  faculties  are  granted  to  Master  Peter 
Favre  and  his  companions,  for  going  to  Jerusalem  and  visiting  the 
holy  places,  and  remaining  there  as  long  as  their  zeal  and  devotion 
shall  move  them  to  do  so  ;  also  for  receiving  relics,  either  to  keep  them 
themselves  or  to  give  them  away  to  others. 


24  Deliberations  at    Vicenza. 

by  any  bishop,  under  the  title  of  voluntary  poverty  and 
competent  learning.  They  returned  to  Venice  as  they 
came,  on  foot,  and  begging  their  way ;  and  renewed 
their  vows  before  Jerome  Veralli,  the  Papal  Nuncio,  on 
the  festival  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  in  1537.  Ignatius, 
Xavier,  Laynez,  Salmeron,  Rodriguez,  Bobadilla,  and 
Codure  were  ordained  priests. 

But  the  hopes  of  a  passage  to  the  East  grew  daily 
fainter.  War  had  broken  out  between  Soliman,  the 
Turkish  Sultan,  and  the  Venetian  Republic,  and  the 
seas  were  swept  in  every  direction  by  the  two  hostile 
fleets,  so  that  other  vessels  were  not  free  to  sail  to 
Palestine.  The  fathers  being  thus  released  from  their 
first  vow,  determined  to  retire  to  some  solitary  place, 
where  they  might  have  time  for  deliberation,  and  also  for 
preparing  to  celebrate  their  first  Masses  with  fervour. 
Ignatius,  together  with  Peter  Favre  and  James  Laynez, 
went  to  Vicenza,  and  there  spent  forty  days  in  intimate 
union  with  God,  in  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  monastery, 
which  they  only  quitted  for  the  purpose  of  going  into 
the  city  to  beg  the  small  supply  of  bread  on  which  they 
lived.  When  their  retreat  was  over,  Ignatius  summoned 
his  other  companions  to  him  and  proposed  that,  since 
the  impossibility  of  their  going  to  the  East  was  plain, 
they  should  consider  what  to  do  in  order  to  fulfil  the 
other  part  of  their  vow.  The  opinion  of  each  was  fully 
discussed,  and  in  the  end  it  was  agreed  that  Ignatius, 
Favre,  and  Laynez  should  go  to  Rome  and  offer  them 
selves  to  the  Pope,  while  the  rest,  dispersed  in  different 
cities  of  Italy,  should  give  themselves  up  to  labouring  for 
the  good  of  souls,  and  wait  for  the  answer  from  Rome. 

In  the  October  of  1537,  Favre  arrived  at  the  holy  city 
for  the  second  time.  The  Pope  was  delighted  with  the 
offer  made  to  him,  and  at  once  appointed  Favre  Expositor 
of  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  and  Laynez  reader  of  scholastic 


Return  to  Rome.  25 

theology  in  the  University  of  the  Sapienza.  Ignatius 
applied  himself  to  the  work  of  gaining  souls,  and  of 
sketching  the  first  outlines  of  the  Society  of  Jesus  which 
he  intended  to  form.  As  soon  as  he  had  thoroughly 
formed  his  plan,  he  summoned  the  rest  of  his  companions 
to  Rome,  where  they  were  distributed  among  different 
churches  to  preach  the  Word  of  God.  It  fell  to  the 
lot  of  Favre  and  Xavier  to  preach  in  the  Church  of 
St.  Lorenzo  in  Damaso.  During  the  time  which  was 
not  occupied  in  spiritual  offices  or  in  the  lectures  of  the 
schools,  they  met  together  for  the  purpose  of  discussing 
and  considering  the  main  points  of  the  Institute  which 
were  proposed  by  Ignatius.  There  is  an  old  book  still 
preserved  in  our  archives,  in  which  these  first  resolutions, 
made  by  common  consent,  are  registered,  and  they  are 
written  in  Favre's  own  hand,  so  that  he  may  fairly  be 
considered  as  the  first  secretary  to  the  Society.2 

But  he  wras  not  long  engaged  in  these  multifarious 
labours,  for  God  had  opened  a  wider  field  for  the  exercise 
of  his  burning  zeal.  Indeed,  what  we  have  hitherto 
written  of  his  life  and  actions  is  nothing  to  what  now  lies 
before  us,  furnishing  matter  for  a  copious  narrative.  He 
lived  only  eight  years  after  this  time,  and  in  that  brief 
space  he  attained  such  a  height  of  spiritual  perfection, 
and  accomplished  so  many  enterprizes  for  the  glory  of 
God  and  the  good  of  souls,  as  to  make  it  very  difficult 
for  others  to  equal  him  in  the  space  of  a  long  life. 

2  It  has  been  said  that  St.  Francis  Xavier  was  the  first  whom 
St. Ignatius  employed  as  a  kind  of  official  secretary.  But  the  fact  is, 
that  all  these  early  writings  are  undoubtedly  partly  Favre's  and  partly 
Codure's,  and  that  there  are  none  at  all  in  Xavier's  hand. 


CHAPTER   VII. 
Peter  Favre  at  Parma. 

IN  the  May  of  1539,  Ennio  Filonardi,  Cardinal  of  the 
title  of  St.  Angelo,  being  sent  from  Rome  to  the  duchy 
of  Parma  as  Legate  Apostolic  of  that  State,  which  then 
belonged  to  the  Church,  requested  permission  before 
starting  of  Paul  III.,  and  by  means  of  Ignatius  succeeded 
in  obtaining  it,  to  take  with  him  Father  Peter  Favre  and 
Father  James  Laynez,  that  they  might  labour  for  the 
profit  of  the  people  by  spiritual  ministrations  and  exer 
cises,  so  as  to  reform  their  manners  and  inspire  them 
with  fervour  and  Christian  piety.  On  arriving  at  Parma 
the  Cardinal  wished  them  both  to  live  with  him  in  the 
palace.  But  they,  according  to  directions  given  them  by 
their  holy  father,  refused,  and  chose  the  hospital  for  their 
lodging,  living  on  what  they  begged  day  by  day  of  the 
charity  of  the  faithful.  Soon  after,  Laynez  was  sent  to 
work  in  Piacenza  and  its  environs,  leaving  Favre  alone 
in  Parma,  to  bear  the  burthen  of  the  labours  which  he 
had  undertaken,  and  from  which  he  allowed  himself  no 
rest.  He  began  by  preaching  the  Word  of  God  in  the 
Church  of  SS.  Cosmas  and  Damian.  At  first  people 
were  drawn  out  of  mere  curiosity  to  hear  a  new  preacher 
sent  from  Rome.  But  very  soon  they  were  attracted  by 
the  holiness  of  his  life,  the  charm  of  his  manner,  and 
the  force  of  his  words,  and  every  day  greater  numbers 
flocked  to  hear  him,  desiring  to  profit  by  his  teaching. 
There  were  numerous  conversions  of  sinners  who  were 


Renovation  at  Parma.  27 

moved  by  divine  grace  to  change  their  lives,  and  who 
had  recourse  to  the  holy  father  to  set  in  order  the  affairs 
of  their  souls,  and  to  obtain  his  counsel  and  direction. 

At  the  same  time  he  began  to  instruct  the  boys  and 
girls  in  the  Christian  doctrine,  which  had  been  neglected 
for  many  years.  He  exhorted  and  moved  the  school 
masters  and  some  priests  to  do  the  same,  and  practise 
themselves  in  this  most  useful  ministration.  In  some 
families  there  were  girls  who,  because  they  were  approach 
ing  womanhood  or  for  other  reasons,  were  ashamed  to 
come  and  be  taught  in  the  church.  Peter  stirred  up  the 
zeal  of  some  pious  matrons  who  were  highly  esteemed 
for  their  virtue  and  gravity,  to  go  from  time  to  time  into 
the  houses  of  the  citizens,  and  there  teach  the  rudiments 
of  the  Christian  faith. 

One  of  the  most  efficacious  means  which  he  employed 
for  effecting  a  reformation  of  manners,  and  for  forming 
and  strengthening  good  resolutions,  was  the  frequentation 
of  the  sacraments.  At  that  time  very  few  persons  con 
fessed  except  at  Easter.  Thus  when  Favre  succeeded 
in  inducing  a  great  many  to  approach  the  holy  mysteries 
weekly,  a  great  noise  was  raised  in  Parma  in  opposition 
to  him  :  there  was  one  person  who  even  went  so  far 
as  to  blame  his  conduct  in  this  respect  publicly  from 
the  pulpit,  as  being  more  productive  of  disrespect  to 
the  sacraments  than  of  an  increase  of  devotion.  Not 
withstanding  this,  he  remained  firm,  and  continued  to 
recommend  his  method,  in  which  he  was  supported 
by  the  Legate  and  the  ecclesiastical  authorities.  In  the 
end,  the  example  of  the  nobility,  with  Dona  Ippolita 
Gonzaga,  Countess  of  Mirandola,  at  their  head,  and  that 
of  the  most  respectable  citizens,  so  encouraged  the 
people  to  persevere  in  frequenting  the  sacraments,  that 
Favre  himself  says  that  any  one  who  did  not  cleanse 
his  soul  by  sacramental  confession  at  least  once  a  month 


28  The  Spiritiial  Exercises. 

became  a  marked  man.     This  pious  practice  was  kept 
up  throughout  the  duchy  of  Parma  for  a  long  time. 

But  Peter  Favre's  zeal  was  most  wonderfully  dis 
played  in  giving  the  Spiritual  Exercises  of  St.  Ignatius, 
in  which,  as  we  have  already  said,  he  had  a  remarkable 
skill  and  grace.  No  sooner  did  it  become  known  what 
great  fruit  had  resulted  from  this  means  in  the  case 
of  certain  persons  who  had  put  themselves  under  his 
direction,  than  great  numbers,  especially  of  the  nobility 
and  clergy,  offered  themselves  to  make  the  Exercises, 
and  after  experiencing  their  virtue  in  their  own  case, 
urged  others  to  do  the  same,  and  instructed  them  in 
doing  so.  Among  these  was  Dona  Zerbina,  a  very 
devout  lady,  who  passed  for  a  saint .  in  Parma.  She 
had  been  for  a  long  time  confined  to  her  bed  by 
continual  and  severe  illness,  and  at  her  desire  her 
confessor,  who  had  been  instructed  by  Favre,  gave  her 
the  Exercises.  She  found  in  them  so  much  spiritual 
sweetness  and  consolation,  that  she  could  not  keep  it 
to  herself,  and  spoke  of  it  to  those  who  were  in  the 
habit  of  visiting  her.  They  all  afterwards  came  to 
Favre,  entreating  him  to  impart  to  them  this  wonderful 
means  of  perfection.  In  this  manner  the  desire  of 
making  the  Exercises  became  general,  and  we  have  an 
account  of  more  than  a  hundred  persons  of  all  conditions 
and  ranks  who  went  into  retreat  at  the  same  time,  to 
go  through  the  course  under  Favre's  guidance  and  direc 
tion.  He  says  himself,  writing  on  the  subject  to  Rome 
to  his  dear  friend  St.  Francis  Xavier — '  The  multitude  of 
persons  who  communicate  every  Sunday  here  in  Parma 
and  the  neighbourhood  is  incredible.  As  to  the  Exercises, 
we  cannot  enter  into  minute  particulars  about  them,  but 
I  may  say  that  there  so  many  who  have  made  them  and 
who  are  giving  them  to  others  that  we  cannot  count 
them.  Every  one  is  anxious  to  go  through  them  :  and 


Jerome  Domenech.  29 

every  priest  as  soon  as  he  has  made  them  comes  out 
from  them  a  master,  and  teaches  them  to  others.'  These 
are  Favre's  own  words. 

There  would  be  matter  for  a  long  narrative  in  the 
successive  particulars  of  the  results  which  followed  from 
Favre's  method  of  preaching,  by  simple  and  familiar 
explanation  of  the  Spiritual  Exercises.  Convents  and 
other  religious  communities  which  had  become  some 
what  relaxed  and  free  in  their  way  of  life,  were  seen 
to  return  to  the  rules  of  regular  observance.  Curates, 
parish  priests,  ecclesiastics  of  every  rank,  reformed  their 
lives,  and  became  full  of  zeal  not  only  for  their  own 
salvation,  but  for  that  of  others.  Men  and  women  of 
every  age  and  condition  turned  from  a  sinful  to  a 
blameless  life,  or  passed  from  a  virtuous  life  to  a  still 
better  and  more  perfect.  The  habit  and  method  of 
meditating  well  on  the  eternal  truths,  and  on  the 
examples  of  the  Life,  Passion,  and  Death  of  Christ, 
was  introduced  among  a  great  number  with  all  the 
profit  which  is  the  consequence  of  this  practice.  In 
short,  the  face  of  the  whole  city  of  Parma  was  altered, 
and  could  hardly  have  been  recognized  as  the  same 
place  in  rather  less  than  a  year  and  a  half  that 
Blessed  Favre  spent  in  labouring  there. 

The  infant  Society,  too,  gained  greatly  not  only  in 
the  high  place  to  which  it  rose  in  the  esteem  of  persons 
of  all  ranks,  but  also  by  the  accession  of  several  men 
who  afterwards  added  great  lustre  to  it.  The  first  of 
these  was  Jerome  Domenech,  canon  of  the  Cathedral 
of  Valence,  who,  passing  through  Parma  on  his  way 
from  Rome  to  Paris,  made  the  Spiritual  Exercises 
under  Favre.  This  was  enough  to  make  him  at  once 
give  himself  up  to  him  as  a  son  and  companion.  Among' 
the  Italians  who  offered  themselves  were  Paul  Achilli, 
who  was  already  a  priest,  Elfridio  Ugoletti,  John  Baptist 


30  Antonio  Criminate. 

Viola,  John  Baptist  Pezzani,  and  Silvester  Landini.  The 
first  martyr  also  of  the  Society,  Father  Criminale,  came  • 
from  among  the  scholars  of  Favre.  Criminale  was  a 
native  of  Sissa,  a  large  town  ten  miles  from  Parma.  He 
had  come  to  that  city  for  the  purpose  of  study,  and 
was  introduced  by  his  countryman,  Pezzani,  who  has 
just  been  mentioned,  to  Favre,  under  whom  he  made 
the  Spiritual  Exercises,  and  then  consecrated  himself 
to  God,  being  ordained  subdeacon.  Burning  with  zeal 
for  the  salvation  of  others,  he  took  Favre  with  him  to 
sow  the  seed  of  God's  Word  in  Sissa,  his  native  place, 
and  there  observing  more  nearly  the  example  of  his  life, 
his  heart  wras  touched  by  God,  and  he  resolved  to  enter 
the  Society.  Accordingly,  the  following  year,  he  went 
on  foot  as  a  pilgrim  to  Rome,  and  gave  himself  to 
St.  Ignatius  as  a  son.  Being  afterwards  sent  to  the 
Indies,  and  appointed  by  St.  Francis  Xavier  to  the 
charge  of  the  Christians  of  the  Fishery  Coast,  he  met, 
at  the  hands  of  the  enemies  of  the  faith,  with  the 
glorious  death  which  he  so  greatly  longed  for. 


CHAPTER   VIII. 
/;/  the  Parmesan  territory. 

THE  zeal  of  the  Blessed  Father  was,  as  we  have  seenr 
not  confined  to  the  city  of  Parma,  but  extended  to  the 
towns  and  villages  of  the  immediate  neighbourhood  and 
elsewhere.  We  possess  five  original  letters  of  his,  written 
during  his  residence  at  Parma.  The  first  three,  dated 
December  4th,  1539,  and  March  25th  and  April  yth, 
1540,  are  addressed  to  Father  Peter  Codacio  and  Father 
Francis  Xavier ;  and  the  last  two,  of  the  1 6th  April  and 
the  ist  September,  to  his  father,  St.  Ignatius.  One  of 
them  is  written  from  Brescia.  The  circumstances  which 
led  to  his  visiting  that  city  were  as  follows. 

Francis  Strada,  a  very  young  man,  not  yet  a  priest,  but 
exceedingly  fervent,  and  possessing  a  natural  eloquence, 
had  arrived  at  Brescia  from  Siena,  where  he  had  been 
with  Father  Paschase  Brouet,  and  where  his  preaching 
had  gained  him  a  great  reputation.  Immediately  after  his 
arrival  he  began  to  preach  the  Word  of  God  in  various 
churches  with  unusual  fervour  and  spirit.  Great  numbers 
came  to  hear  him,  and  many  wonderful  conversions  fol 
lowed  ;  amongst  others,  there  were  more  than  a  hundred 
young  men  who  agreed  together  to  change  their  lives 
and  to  serve  God  faithfully,  either  in  the  world  or  in 
religion.  Several  of  them  joined  the  Society  ;  among 
them  John  Angelo  Paradisi,  who,  soon  afterwards  falling 
dangerously  ill,  and  desiring  to  confess  to  and  be  con 
soled  by  one  of  our  priests,  information  of  this  was  sent 


Brescia. 


by  letter  to  Favre,  who  immediately  went  to  Brescia 
and  remained  there  ten  days,  till  the  young  man  had 
recovered.  He  soon  made  himself  known  by  his  charac 
teristic  gentleness,  and  won  the  hearts  of  the  citizens, 
who  entreated  him  to  prolong  his  stay  among  them ;  but 
he  was  not  of  himself  able  to  make  any  promise,  as 
he  was  at  the  disposal  of  the  Cardinal  Legate  of  Parma. 
They  then  begged  that  at  least  he  would  intercede  for 
them  that  Strada  might  not  be  at  once  taken  from 
them;  and  accordingly,  on  the  i6th  of  April,  as  soon 
as  he  had  returned  to  Parma,  he  wrote  a  letter  to 
Ignatius,  in  which  he  says,  among  other  things,  'As 
regards  Master  Francis  Strada,  I  now  repeat  what  1 
before  wrote  from  Brescia,  that  every  one  is  making 
efforts  to  keep  him,  so  great  is  the  delight  of  all  the 
principal  citizens  in  his  learning,  virtue,  and  holy  life. 
They  have  written  to  Mgr.  Datario,  begging  him  to  speak 
of  this  to  your  Reverence.  The  Vicar  of  Brescia  also 
wishes  for  him  very  much,  and  would  also  like  to  have 
a  priest  of  the  Society  to  assist  him  in  his  spiritual 
ministrations.  As  I  could  not  possibly  remain,  he  has 
begged  me  to  make  intercession  with  your  Reverence 
on  the  subject.' 

Thus  he  writes1.  And  even  before  going  to  Brescia, 
and  seeing  with  his  own  eyes  the  fruit  which  was  the 
result  of  Francis  Strada's  sermons,  he  had  written  to 
St.  Francis  Xavier  from  Parma — '  A  good  priest,  a  friend 
of  ours,  has  told  us  that  a  person  from  Brescia  has 
brought  news  of  the  immense  crowds  who  go  to  hear 
Master  Francis  Strada  preach,  and  that  the  whole  city  is 
in  consequence  stirred  up  to  great  fervour  of  devotion, 
insomuch  that  more  than  a  hundred  of  the  principal 

1  St.  Ignatius  received  Favre's  mediation  favourably,  and  satisfied  the 
wishes  of  the  citizens  by  sending  to  Brescia  Claude  Le  Jay,  one  of  his 
earliest  companions,  who,  together  with  Strada,  continued  to  reap  a 
rich  harvest  of  souls. 


Letter  from  Parma.  33 

citizens  of  Brescia  have  resolved  to  serve  God  with  their 
whole  heart. 

He  had  often  promised  in  his  letters  to  give  a  minute 
report  of  all  the  good  which,  by  God's  goodness,  had 
been  effected  at  Parma.  But  he  was  so  oppressed  by 
incessant  labours  that  he  was  only  able  to  do  so  very 
superficially,  just  as  he  was  on  the  point  of  setting  out 
for  Germany.  We  shall  here  quote  his  letter  to  the 
Society  at  Rome,  translated  from  the  original  Spanish — 

'  May  the  grace  and  love  of  Christ  our  Lord  be  with  us 
always. 

'  As  I  fear  that  I  shall  not  have  time  for  writing  any 
more  letters  from  this  city  of  Parma,  I  will  go  a  little 
into  detail  in  this.  And  as  to  the  plentiful  harvest  that 
has  been  reaped  in  this  evangelical  field,  I  will  just  say 
that  it  is  a  thing  of  frequent  occurrence  to  see  persons 
come  every  day  to  the  Hospital  where  I  am  to  confess 
and  communicate.  As  a  rule,  a  good  number  commu 
nicate  every  Sunday ;  and  many  of  them  are  men  and 
young  students.  I  say  nothing  of  the  other  parishes  of 
the  city  in  which  this  good  custom  has  been  introduced 
by  several  priests  who  went  through  the  Spiritual  Exer 
cises  during  the  first  days  of  our  residence  in  Parma,  and 
who  then  became  masters  in  them  and  have  greatly  pro 
pagated  their  use.  Thus,  even  teachers  in  the  schools 
have  given  them  to  such  of  their  scholars  as  are  most 
capable  of  making  them.  There  are  also  some  married 
ladies  who  make  it  their  business  to  go  from  house  to 
house  to  instruct  the  young  girls  who  cannot  freely  come 
to  the  church.  It  would  be  impossible  to  say  how  much 
fruit  has  been  obtained  by  these  means  in  Parma  and  its 
neighbourhood.  Neither  can  I  express  what  good  has 
been  done  in  the  city  and  neighbourhood  outside  it  by 
means  of  frequent  confessions.  It  is  enough  to  say 
D 


34  Letter  from  Parma. 

that  no  one  is  now  considered  to  be  leading  a  good 
life  unless  he  goes  to  confession  at  least  once  a  month. 
In  one  little  village  more  than  three  hundred  persons 
went  to  communion  on  the  feast  of  the  Assumption. 
Canon  Jerome  Domenech  will  tell  you  by  word  of 
mouth  better  than  I  can  write  how  many  priests,  and 
of  what  quality,  have  been  moved  by  the  Exercises  to 
lead  good  lives,  and  how  they  have  not  only  persevered 
in  virtue,  but  have  induced  others  to  do  as  themselves. 
Much  of  this  fruit  is  owing  to  the  sermons,  which  are 
given  not  only  by  us  two,  but  by  three  or  four  other 
priests,  who,  having  made  the  Spiritual  Exercises,  have 
given  themselves  up  to  the  work  of  spreading  God's 
Word  in  the  country  about.  Already  ten  or  twelve  of 
the  most  populous  villages  in  the  Parmegiano  have 
returned  to  the  way  of  salvation.  I  say  nothing  of  the 
fruit  which  has  been  gained  at  Sissa,  where  there  is  a 
good  priest  named  Orlando,  who  has  devoted  himself 
entirely  to  hearing  confessions,  catechizing  children,  and 
preaching  on  all  festivals  in  three  or  four  different  places 
successively.  The  lady  of  the  manor  there,  together 
with  other  noble  ladies,  has  been  to  confession  regularly 
every  week  from  the  Epiphany  till  now.  And  her 
husband  also,  hearing  that  I  wras  about  to  leave,  des 
patched  a  messenger  begging  me  to  go  to  Sissa,  that  I 
might  hear  his  confession.  The  noble  Pallavicini  family, 
who  live  in  a  place  at  no  great  distance,  made  the  same 
request  to  me.  There  is  a  lady  named  Giacoma,2  who 
has  an  income  of  about  five  hundred  scudi,  besides  her 
dowry,  and  she  has  offered  voluntarily  to  spend  all  that 
she  possesses  in  good  wrorks  prescribed  by  me.  This 
lady,  having  heard  about  a  week  ago  of  my  approaching 

2  This  lady  appears  to  be  Giacoma  Pallavicini,  to  whom  St.  Ignatius 
wrote  on  the  i7th  February,  1554,  praising  her  for  the  good  and  holy 
desires  with  which  God  had  inspired  her. 


Congregation  of  Priests.  35 


departure,  went  to  the  house  of  the  lady  Laura,  who  is 
the  most  distinguished  matron  in  the  city,  and  a  relative 
of  the  Pope,  begging  her,  with  tears  in  her  eyes,  to  write 
to  the  Lord  Cardinal  of  Sta.  Flora  to  use  his  influence 
with  his  Holiness,  that  I  might  not  be  removed  from 
Parma.  I  know  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  stir  in  the 
city  on  the  subject,  and  that  the  Pope  has  been  written 
to.  I  do  not  take  any  part  myself,  you  may  be  sure, 
in  these  matters.  I  beseech  the  Divine  Goodness  that 
the  more  we  are  separated  in  body  the  more  we  may 
be  united  in  spirit ;  and  so  it  will  be  if  we  pray  to  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord,  Who  fills  the  whole  earth,  to  direct 
us  all  according  to  His  most  holy  will. 

'  PETER  FAVRE. 

'Parma,  the  ist  of  September,  1540.' 

By  way  of  rendering  permanent  the  rich  harvest  which 
had  been  reaped  at  Parma,  Peter  established  a  congre 
gation  of  excellent  priests,  his  spiritual  disciples,  the 
object  of  which  was  to  attend  incessantly  to  the  salvation 
of  souls  and  to  promote  those  exercises  of  devotion  and 
piety  which  he  had  introduced.  Besides  this  he  formed 
another,  consisting  of  laymen,  to  whom  he  gave  very 
wise  rules  for  their  increase  in  number  and  in  fervour. 
This  congregation  continued  to  flourish  for  many  years, 
to  the  great  profit  of  the  city.  In  perpetual  remembrance 
of  its  founder,  there  was  placed  on  the  facade  of  the 
church  belonging  to  it  a  stone  bearing  the  following- 
inscription,  which  we  translate  from  the  Latin — '  This 
oratory,  dedicated  to  St.  John  the  Baptist  in  honour  of 
his  decollation,  belongs  to  the  Congregation  of  the  most 
Holy  Name  of  Jesus,  erected  by  Father  Peter  Favre, 
eldest  son  of  St.  Ignatius,  founder  of  the  Society  of 
Jesus,  for  the  greater  glory  of  God  and  the  salvation 
of  souls.' 

D     2 


Peter 's  illness. 


Peter's  strength  gave  way  under  such  great  and  inces 
sant  labours,  and  he  fell  sick.  He  was  confined  to  his 
bed  for  three  months;  and  while  he  was  in  that  state, 
God,  ever  liberal  of  His  graces  to  His  faithful  servants, 
visited  him,  pouring  into  his  soul  the  most  sublime 
sentiments  and  indescribable  spiritual  consolations.  The 
citizens  came  to  see  him  very  often  ;  and  he,  thinking 
nothing  of  his  own  state  of  suffering,  was  always  ready 
to  receive  everybody,  to  hear  their  confessions,  and  to 
strengthen  their  good  resolutions  by  his  holy  counsel. 
So  that  it  may  be  truly  said  that  even  in  his  sickness 
he  did  not  cease  to  work  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the 
salvation  of  his  neighbour.  It  seems  that  at  this  time 
his  devoted  followers  would  not  allow  him  to  remain 
in  the  hospital.  They  succeeded  by  their  entreaties  in 
having  him  removed  to  a  private  house,  where  he  could 
be  better  nursed,  and  where  also  it  was  more  convenient 
for  his  penitents  to  visit  and  converse  with  him.  He 
mentions  this  himself  in  his  *  Memorial/  thanking  God, 
and  saying,  *  Remember  also  how  greatly  I  am  indebted 
to  Master  Laurence  and  Master  Marino,  in  whose  house 
I  lay  ill  and  had  so  many  good  opportunities  granted 
me.' 


CHAPTER  IX. 
Rules  for  the  Congregation  of  the  Name  of Jesiis. 

As  soon  as  his  health  was  somewhat  recovered,  Peter 
Favre  was  about  to  resume  his  ministrations  with 
redoubled  energy,  when  he  had  orders  from  Rome  to 
prepare  to  go  to  Germany  with  Dr.  Pedro  Ortiz,  Ambas 
sador  of  Charles  V.  As  soon  as  the  news  spread  in 
Parma,  all  the  inhabitants  were  greatly  troubled.  Some  of 
them,  men  of  influence,  wrote  letters,  as  has  been  before 
mentioned,  to  Paul  III.,  humbly  entreating  him  not  to 
call  away  from  them  so  dear  a  father  and  so  fervent  a 
minister  of  the  Gospel.  But  the  Pope,  looking  rather  to 
the  general  good  of  the  Church  than  to  that  of  one  par 
ticular  city,  remained  firm,  and  repeated  the  order  for 
his  departure.  Then  all  pressed  round  Favre,  particularly 
the  numerous  associates  of  the  Confraternity  of  the  Holy 
Name,  which  he  had  founded,  entreating  him  to  leave 
them  some  rules  for  their  direction.  The  holy  man  con 
sented,  and  wrote  down  full  instructions  for  their  manner 
of  living  and  working,  which  we  shall  follow  Orlandini  in 
translating,  as  they  may  be  useful,  not  only  to  societies 
of  the  same  kind,  but  to  all  good  Christians. 

'  I  would  not  have  you  misled  by  the  false  notion,  that 
in  order  to  grow  in  godliness  you  require  any  sustenance 
other  than  that  which  has  heretofore  served  to  maintain 
you  therein.  Such  was  not  the  opinion  or  teaching  of 
the  philosopher,  who,  treating  of  bodily  aliment,  asserts 


38  Rules  for  the  Congregation 

that  the  substances  suitable  for  the  nourishment  of  our 
bodily  frames,  avail  likewise  for  the  increase  of  the  same. 
Taught  as  you  have  been,  by  your  own  experience,  that 
the  holy  exercises  you  are  wont  to  perform  are  most 
efficacious  in  fostering  the  spirit  of  piety,  you  must  needs 
be  convinced  that  they  will  be  of  no  less  use  in  forwarding 
its  increase.  Among  these  you  will  ever  chiefly  prize 
the  frequent  partaking  of  that  heavenly  Bread,  the  soul's 
choicest  food,  whence  the  angels  and  spirits  of  the 
blessed  continually  draw  their  nourishment.  This  Bread 
is  far  more  necessary  for  the  life  of  the  soul  than  that  we 
daily  break  for  our  bodily  sustenance.  You  will,  in  like 
manner,  value  your  devout  practices,  such  as  calling 
oneself  daily  to  account,  getting  rid  of  sin  by  confession, 
meditating  on  the  things  of  God  and  the  truths  that 
concern  salvation,  and,  lastly,  assiduity  in  works  of 
mercy.  If  by  these  several  practices  you  have  made 
any  progress  in  self-knowledge,  or  in  the  love  of  God  and 
your  neighbour,  be  assured  that,  in  order  to  advance 
in  the  ways  of  Ghrist,  you  must  persevere  in  these 
works  with  ever  increasing  fervour  and  diligence. 

'  Your  daily  life  may  be  ordered  as  follows — Every 
evening,  before  retiring  to  rest,  kneel  down,  and  think 
over  the  four  last  things  :  the  day  of  death,  the  final 
Judgment,  the  pains  of  hell,  and  the  glories  of  Paradise. 
And  I  should  like  you  to  give  as  much  time  to  medi 
tating  on  one  or  other  of  these  things,  as  it  would  take  to 
recite  three  times  the  Pater  nostcr  and  the  Ave  Maria. 
After  this,  pass  in  review  your  spiritual  condition,  making 
your  examination  on  all  the  actions  of  the  day;  and 
after  rendering  due  thanks  to  the  divine  mercy  for 
favours  received,  be  truly  penitent  for  the  sins  you  have 
committed,  and  resolve  to  confess  them  at  a  given  time, 
and  to  a  particular  confesssor.  For  this  is  a  kind  of 
spiritual  confession,  when  a  man  finding  out  his  sins, 


of  the  Name  of  Jesus.  39 

accuses  himself  of  them  before  God  with  due  sorrow, 
and  with  a  firm  resolution  to  confess  them  to  the  priest 
on  an  appointed  day.  Lastly,  you  must  pray  God  to 
give  to  you  and  all  the  living  a  quiet  and  peaceful  night, 
and  to  the  dead  who  are  in  purgatory,  pardon  and  relief, 
reciting  three  Paters  and  Aves  for  this  intention. 

*  The  same  prayers  in  kind  and  number  you  must  say 
on  the  following  morning,  that  God  may  keep  you  and 
all  living  men  from  all  stain  of  sin  that  day,  and  may 
give  to  the  departed  some  relief  from  the  fires  of  pur 
gatory.  If  you  have  time,  you  may,  before  your  crucifix, 
or  during  Mass,  meditate  on  some  point  of  the  life  of 
Jesus  Christ,  with  the  desire  to  conform  your  life  and 
conduct  to  that  great  Model.  After  the  priest  has 
consecrated  the  Body  of  Christ,  or  when  he  elevates 
Lt  in  sight  of  the  people,  ask  God  to  grant  you  the 
cure  of  your  impurities  and  tribulations,  and  the  graces 
you  desire,  such  as  fortitude  of  mind,  the  knowledge 
of  yourselves,  mutual  fraternal  charity ;  and,  lastly,  that 
hunger  and  thirst  after  justice,  which  is  one  of  His 
most  precious  gifts.  You  must  also  ask  Jesus  Christ 
to  visit  your  soul  in  spiritual  communion  ;  and  this 
manner  of  communicating  will  increase  within  you  a 
certain  hunger  after  this  sublime  mystery,  while  your  soul 
rejoices,  both  in  the  remembrance  of  having  received  it 
not  long  ago,  and  in  the  hope  of  soon  doing  so  again. 
This  spiritual  communion  will  be  an  excellent  prepara 
tion  for  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist,  just  as  the 
spiritual  confession,  of  which  I  have  spoken,  is  for  the 
Sacrament  of  Penance.  Nevertheless,  I  wish  every  one 
to  keep  looking  forward  to  the  day,  even  while  it  is  still 
distant,  on  which  he  is  to  cleanse  his  soul  by  confession, 
and  to  nourish  it  with  the  food  of  heaven.  Wake  up 
and  renew  daily  in  your  mind  the  thought  of  this  sacra 
ment,  arranging  your  time  in  such  a  way  that  you  may 


40  Rules  for  the  Congregation 

spend  some  of  the  days  in  thanksgiving  for  having 
received  it,  and  the  others  in  preparation  for  receiving 
it  again.  In  this  way,  it  will  be  clearly  seen  that  you 
honour  and  reverence  these  holy  and  venerable  mysteries  ; 
otherwise  there  will  be  danger  either  of  your  not  preserving 
this  heavenly  food  within  you,  as  you  ought,  or  of  your 
not  receiving  it  with  becoming  eagerness  of  desire.  Do 
not  be  wanting  to  yourselves  in  this  matter,  and  endeavour 
to  receive  these  holy  sacraments  at  least  once  a  week. 

'  Now,  with  regard  to  other  devotions,  such  as  prayerr 
meditation,  and  the  like,  take  care  to  direct  them  accord 
ing  to  the  following  intentions,  either  to  all,  or  to  any 
one  in  particular.  First  to  the  glory  of  God  and  of  the 
saints,  then  to  the  good  of  your  own  soul,  and  lastly  to 
the  profit  of  others ;  thus  you  will  every  day  by  means  of 
these  pious  duties  progress  in  virtue,  such  as  humility, 
patience,  prudence,  and  others  like  these,  rendering 
yourselves  by  their  means  more  fit  to  do  good  works. 
You  will  grow  in  the  knowledge  and  love  of  God,  your 
charity  to  men  will  be  increased,  and  so  advancing 
steadily,  as  by  certain  steps,  in  the  spiritual  paths,  you 
will  surely  and  safely  proceed  along  the  way  of  salvation. 

'As  regards  the  affairs  of  this  world,  and  everything  con 
cerning  the  body,  you  must  so  regulate  your  thoughts  and 
intentions  that  all  your  bodily  occupations  and  exertions 
may  be  directed  to  the  glory  of  God,  your  own  spiritual 
good,  or  that  of  those  for  whom  you  are  outwardly  labour 
ing.  Strive  therefore  that,  working  or  resting,  God  may 
be  your  first  motive,  then  your  own  and  your  neigh 
bour's  salvation,  and  afterwards  the  welfare  of  your  body 
and  of  that  of  others ;  and  last  of  all,  the  care  of  your 
family  and  whatever  may  be  judged  needful  for  the  life 
and  sustenance  of  the  body.  Thus  there  will  be  no  con 
fusion  or  disorder  in  your  life,  so  long  as  worldly  goods- 
are  made  subservient  to  the  body,  the  body  to  the  soul,. 


of  the  Name  of  Jesus.  4 1 

the  soul  to  God  ;  if  your  gains  are  made  with  a  view  to  the 
necessities  of  the  body ;  if  the  health  of  the  body  is  con 
sidered  with  reference  to  the  salvation  of  the  soul ;  and  if 
the  aims  of  your  soul  are  always  guided  by  the  rule  of  the 
eternal  law.  This  last  then  must  be  the  first  thing  from 
which  you  start,  and  your  duties  must  be  arranged  in  this 
order  :  your  first  duty  is  to  your  soul,  and  then  other 
things  may  come,  always  remembering  that  the  good  of 
the  soul  is  to  be  the  final  object  in  everything.  We 
must  not  be  like  those  who  think  that  they  ought  to 
begin  from  family  cares  and  the  interests  of  the  body, 
and  that  when  these  things  are  set  in  order,  they  will 
find  it  easier  to  attend  to  their  spiritual  concerns.  In 
the  same  way  as  regards  your  neighbour;  you  should, 
as  far  as  possible,  consider  his  soul  before  your  body, 
so  that,  supposing  it  were  in  your  power  by  the  use  of 
one  and  the  same  means  to  save  yourselves  from  the 
death  of  the  body,  and  him  from  that  of  the  soul,  you 
should  far  more  readily  think  of  the  danger  of  the  latter, 
than  of  the  destruction  of  the  former.  If  you  observe 
this  order  in  your  actions,  you  will  easily  obtain  that 
perseverance  in  leading  a  good  life,  which  you  desire.'' 


CHAPTER  X. 

TJie  Diet  of  Worms. 

WE  must  now  relate  the  cause  which  obliged  Blessed 
Peter  Favre  to  leave  Parma  and  go  to  Germany,  there 
to  begin  a  new  kind  of  apostolate,  fighting  against  the 
Lutheran  heretics  and  leading  back  into  the  right  way 
those  Catholics  who  had  strayed  from  it.  It  was  now 
for  many  years  that  Dr.  Peter  Ortiz,  in  the  name  of 
the  Emperor  Charles  V.,  had  been  in  Rome,  pleading 
the  cause  of  Queen  Katharine,  who  had  been  unjustly 
divorced  by  Henry  VIII.,  King  of  England.  On  the 
failure  of  the  efforts  made  by  the  Pope  and  others  to 
arrange  this  affair,  Ortiz  was  recalled  to  Spain,  but  with 
an  order  to  go  first  to  Worms,  and  there  assist  at  a  con 
ference  which  had  been  already  announced  to  take  place 
between  the  Catholics  and  Protestants.  Ortiz,  a  man 
of  great  piety  and  judgment,  not  wishing  to  undertake 
so  very  serious  a  charge  unless  he  were  accompanied  by 
a  good  theologian  and  faithful  counsellor,  made  request 
to  Paul  III.,  and  through  him  obtained  from  St.  Ignatius 
Father  Favre  to  go  with  him.  Favre,  as  soon  as  he 
received  notice  from  Rome,  broke  off  in  mid  career  all 
his  labours  in  Parma,  and  set  out  with  Ortiz  for  Worms, 
where  he  arrived  on  the  24th  of  October,  1540.  In  the 
September  of  that  year  the  Society  of  Jesus  had  been 
approved  and  confirmed  as  a  religious  order  by  Apostolic 
authority,  and  Father  Favre  was  the  first  of  its  members 
who  set  foot  in  Germany.  So  God  ordered  it,  that  it 


Disputants  at  Worms.  43 


might  fall  to  the  lot  of  a  man  eminent  both  for  learning 
and  sanctity  to  make  the  Institute  known,  and  thus  to 
inspire  princes  and  prelates  with  a  desire  to  receive  the 
Society  into  their  states  and  dioceses.  So  that  the  five 
provinces  which  it  afterwards  possessed,  and  the  nume 
rous  houses  and  colleges  which  were  founded  in  that 
vast  country,  were  in  great  measure  due  to  the  virtue 
and  merits  of  this  truly  apostolic  man. 

Eleven  heretics  and  eleven  Catholics  were  already 
met  at  Worms  to  dispute  on  religious  questions.  Out 
of  the  latter,  three  were  evidently  inclined  to  the 
Lutherans,  and  the  other  eight  were  either  weak  or 
suspected.  Thus  the  enemies  of  the  faith,  divided  in 
opinion  as  they  were  among  themselves,  but  thoroughly 
united  in  the  matter  of  hostility  to  the  Church,  were 
already  triumphantly  shouting  victory.  In  the  private 
houses  all  about  and  even  in  the  pulpits  of  the  churches 
they  were  disseminating  fearlessly  their  errors,  openly, 
with  public  challenges,  defying  the  Catholic  party  to 
combat ;  and,  because  their  opponents,  either  from 
disunion  or  fear  of  defeat,  did  not  answer  the  challenge, 
boasting  with  intolerable  arrogance,  to  the  disgrace  of  all 
religion.  The  leader  and  chief  support  of  the  heretics 
was  Philip  Melancthon,  then  a  young  and  fiery-spirited 
man,  who,  puffed  up  with  conceit,  had  passed  from  the 
school  of  humanities,  which  he  taught,  to  the  professor's 
chair,  as  a  teacher  of  false  theology.  Favre's  arrival  put 
the  good  Catholics  into  fresh  heart,  for  they  hoped,  that 
once  confronted  with  the  heretic,  as  he  desired  and 
requested  to  be,  even  if  it  were  only  in  a  private  con 
ference,  he  would  soon  quell  his  audacity.  But  Antony 
Perrenot  de  Granvelle,  who  presided  over  the  conference 
in  the  Emperor's  name,  could  never  be  induced  to 
consent  to  this.  He  was  one  of  those  men  whose 
only  idea  of  prudence  is  to  give  and  take  time ;  and 


44  Timidity  of  the  Catholics. 

who,  while  waiting  for  what  they  call  a  favourable 
opportunity,  let  the  mischief  have  free  course  without 
taking  the  least  trouble  to  check  it  effectually.  He 
fancied  that  the  opposite  party  might  be  gained  by 
patient  toleration  and  soothing  attention,  and  was  afraid 
of  making  them  still  worse  by  irritating  them.  With 
this  object  he  had  strictly  ordered  the  eleven  Catholic 
disputants  to  exercise  the  greatest  moderation,  and  to 
discuss  the  points  of  controversy  only  in  writing,  and  in 
a  tone  and  letters  full  of  respect.  As  for  Favre,  though 
he  pledged  and  bound  himself  to  keep  within  proper 
limits,  he  not  only  refused  his  consent  to  a  dispute 
between  him  and  Melancthon,  but  would  not  even 
allow  him  to  teach  the  elements  of  the  Catholic  faith 
to  the  children,  for  fear  that  the  Lutherans  might  thence 
take  excuse  for  greater  violence. 

But  it  will  be  better  to  hear  what  Favre  himself  says 
in  a  letter  to  the  fathers  in  Rome,  dated  the  2yth  of 
December. 

'  As  to  the  conference/  he  says,  '  I  cannot  say  that, 
so  far,  any  good  whatever  has  been  done.  Not  a 
single  Lutheran,  either  belonging  to  Worms  or  who 
has  come  thither  from  other  places,  has  abandoned  his 
errors  through  the  efforts  of  those  who  are  assembled 
here  for  their  conversion.  Meanwhile  it  is  evident  that 
they  are  gaining  ground,  and  the  right  cause  losing  it ; 
for  three  out  of  the  eleven  Catholics  opposed  in  the 
conference  to  eleven  Lutherans  have  agreed  with  the 
heretics  in  several  articles,  and  some  of  the  remaining 
eight  are  wavering  before  the  fight  begins.  .  .  .  Many 
of  these  doctors  were  anxious  that  I  should  have  a 
meeting  with  Melancthon,  saying  that  it  was  better  for 
me  to  see  him  than  the  others,  who  show  that  they  have 
certain  reserves  on  the  controverted  points.  To  tell  the 


Timidity  of  the  Catholics.  45 

truth,  I  am  conscious  of  good  desires  which  have  been 
awakened  in  my  heart  as  to  the  matter ;  but  I  do  not 
like  to  do  anything  against  the  judgment  and  opinion 
of  the  presidents,  and  they  will  not  allow  any  viva  voce 
dispute  with  the  heretics,  for  fear  that  it  might  hinder 
the  good  progress  of  affairs.  For  this  reason  Dr.  Ortiz 
also  has  desired  me  to  refrain,  although  his  private 
inclination  is  the  other  way,  knowing  that,  with  the 
help  of  God,  I  should  not  be  likely  to  argue  with  them 
out  of  a  spirit  of  contradiction,  nor  by  exasperating 
any  one  to  hinder  the  good  which  is  hoped  for.  The 
presidents  think  it  best  for  the  eleven  Catholics  to  reply 
in  writing  to  the  articles  of  the  Protestants,  and  to  discuss 
the  points  which  they  can  or  cannot  yield,  with  courtesy. 
Up  to  this  time,  however,  no  answer  has  been  given,  on 
account  of  their  want  of  union  among  themselves,  and 
this  furnishes  the  Protestants  with  a  good  argument  for 
becoming  more  confirmed  in  their  opinions.  For,  however 
much  they  may  differ  in  certain  ways  of  thinking,  they 
are  all  agreed  in  receiving  the  Confession  of  Augsburg 
and  the  Apology  of  Melancthon,  and  consequently  in 
attacking  the  Catholic  faith.' * 

In  another  letter,  dated  January  ist,  1541,  he  adds — 

'  The  Catholic  doctors  have  at  last  sent  in  to  the 
presidents  their  answers  in  writing  to  the  Protestant 
articles,  but  there  has  not  been  any  meeting  with  them. 
This  does  not  satisfy  our  adversaries ;  they  would  like 
to  dispute  man  against  man,  with  the  eleven  Catholics, 
and  only  with  them  ;  for  they  are  in  hopes  of  gaining 
them  all  over  to  their  side,  as  they  have  gained  the  first 
three,  and  in  a  measure  unsettled  the  rest.  Besides, 
they  want  to  protract  the  whole  thing,  and  meanwhile 
1  Autograph  letter. 


46  Decay  of  religion. 

to  get  together  the  German  princes  and  detach  them 
from  the  Roman  Church  and  from  the  spiritual  authority 
of  the  bishops.  ...  I  have  no  confidence  in  the  success 
of  this  plan  for  bringing  back  Germany  to  the  unity 
of  the  faith.  .  .  .  These  Protestants  pretend  that  all 
that  they  desire  is  the  reformation  of  the  Church ; 
and  there  are  too  many  people  ignorant  and  stupid 
enough  to  believe  them,  even  when  they  are  seen  to 
profane  the  sacred  images  and  to  destroy  the  altars 
in  the  churches  ;  besides  forbidding  private  Masses 
and  denying  the  worship  of  the  saints.  It  is  really 
a  melancholy  thing  to  see  the  blindness  which  has 
fallen  upon  this  nation.'2 

As  there  was  no  possibility  for  the  holy  man  to  deal 
directly  with  the  heretics,  he  turned  his  attention  to  the 
task  of  doing  good  to  the  Catholic  laity  and  clergy, 
more  particularly  the  latter.  And  indeed  the  need  of 
it  in  both  cases  was  so  pressing,  that  it  is  sad  to  hear 
the  account  given  of  it  by  Favre  himself.  '  I  can  only 
wonder/  he  says,  '  that  the  number  of  the  heretics  is  not 
ten  times  greater  than  it  is,  since  a  bad  life  naturally 
leads  to  a  false  belief.  The  apostasy  of  so  many 
countries,  the  rebellion  of  so  many  cities  and  provinces, 
is  to  be  attributed,  not  to  the  garbled  Scriptures,  not 
to  the  plots,  open  or  secret,  of  the  Lutherans,  but  to 
the  scandalous  lives  of  the  clergy.  Would  to  God  that 
there  were  in  this  city  of  Worms  but  two  or  three  priests 
not  living  in  concubinage,  or  guilty  of  other  public  and 
notorious  crimes  !  I  feel  convinced  that  if  even  those 
two  or  three  possessed  a  little  fire  of  zeal  for  the  salva 
tion  of  souls,  they  could  do  what  they  liked  with  this 
simple  people.  I  speak  of  cities  which  have  not  as  yet 
revoked  the  laws,  abandoned  the  customs,  and  shaken 

"  Autograph  letter. 


Favres  work  at  Worms.  47 


off  the  authority  of  the  Apostolic  See,  but  where  those 
who  are  bound  by  their  sacred  calling  to  inspire  the 
heretics  with  the  desire  of  being  Christians,  are  the  very 
persons  whose  bad  lives  occasion  the  Catholics  to  turn 
Lutherans.' 

Notwithstanding  all  difficulties,  he  devoted  himself 
with  fervent  zeal  during  the  time  (little  more  than  two 
months)  that  he  spent  in  Worms  to  confirm  the  faith 
of  the  Catholic  laity  by  his  sermons,  and  by  private 
exhortations  to  heal  the  wounds  of  the  clergy.  He  was 
powerfully  seconded  in  his  efforts  by  the  dean,  who  was 
at  the  same  time  Inquisitor  and  Vicar  General  of  Worms. 
Left,  as  he  had  been,  almost  alone  to  defend  the  cause 
of  God  and  religion,  he  had  done  his  utmost  to  stem 
the  torrent  of  impiety  and  corruption,  but  finding  himself 
deserted  by  every  one,  and  deprived  of  advice  and 
succour,  he  was  on  the  point  of  going  away  and  leaving 
his  wretched  flock  a  prey  to  wolves.  Favre  encouraged 
him  to  remain,  and  persuaded  several  persons  whom  he 
had  previously  brought  to  a  better  mind,  to  cooperate 
with  the  Vicar  for  the  common  good. 

He  had,  besides,  a  great  deal  to  do  for  the  spiritual 
advantage  of  the  courtiers  and  attendants  of  the  princes 
assembled  at  Worms  :  and  he  himself  mentions  in  his 
letters  the  gentlemen  attached  to  the  service  of  the 
Minister,  de  Granvelle,  of  his  son,  the  Bishop  of  Arras,  of 
the  Papal  Nuncio,  John  Morone,  and  others  who  followed 
his  counsel  and  direction  in  spiritual  things.  And  the 
fruits  of  these  labours  of  his  were  all  the  more  abundant 
for  their  not  being  showy  and  conspicuous ;  and  he  says 
distinctly  that  he  had  in  his  heart  a  strong  feeling  of 
affection  for  the  German  nation,  and  a  great  confidence 
that  in  time  the  Society  would  do  a  great  work  there, 
adding  these  words — '  I  have  no  doubt  whatever  that 
these  interior  feelings  of  mine  proceed  from  some  great 


48  Favre  at  Spires. 

good  which  our  Lord  has  in  store  for  this  country  and 
people.'  Subsequent  events  proved  the  truth  of  this 
prediction. 


CHAPTER   XI. 
Spires  and  Ratisbon. 

ON  the  1 6th  of  January,  1541,  Father  Favre  left  Worms 
with  Ortiz,  and  went  to  Spires,  whither  the  conference 
was  transferred,  the  eleven  being  reduced  to  one  on 
each  side — Melancthon  for  the  Lutherans,  and  John 
Eckius  for  the  Catholics.  There  he  witnessed  the  second 
utterly  unprofitable  dispute  on  original  sin,  which  had 
to  be  broken  off  after  three  days  (during  which  time 
nothing  was  settled),  and  everything  was  put  off  until 
the  General  Imperial  Diet,  which  was  to  be  held  at 
Ratisbon  in  April. 

In  these  journeys,  the  holy  man,  as  he  has  left  us  in 
writing  in  his  '  Memorial/  began  to  use  a  method  of  his 
own  for  keeping  himself  constantly  united  to  God  by 
means  of  prayer,  partly  mental,  partly  vocal,  which  he 
afterwards  continued  and  added  to  during  the  rest  of  his 
life.  And  before  going  further,  we  may  here  explain 
this  method  for  the  instruction  of  others,  together  with 
other  particulars  connected  with  his  Apostolic  journey- 
ings.  No  sooner,  then,  did  he  catch  sight  in  the  distance 
of  the  walls  or  tower  of  any  hamlet,  village,  or  city,  than 
lie  raised  his  heart  and  mind  to  God,  affectionately 
invoking  first  the  archangels  to  whom  were  committed 
the  protection  and  guardianship  of  the  place,  and  then 
all  the  angels  who  had  charge  of  its  inhabitants,  and 
lastly,  Jesus  Christ,  the  Redeemer  of  them  all.  He  gave 


Devotion  to  Guardian  Angels.         49 

them  most  humble  thanks  for  the  benefits  bestowed 
upon  the  bodies  and  souls  of  those  persons,  and 
besought  them  to  enlighten  their  minds  with  holy  inspi 
rations,  and  to  inflame  their  hearts  with  divine  love ;  to 
confirm  the  strong,  to  support  the  weak,  and  to  raise  up 
the  fallen.  He  especially  commended  to  them  the  sick 
and  the  afflicted,  the  persecuted,  the  poor,  the  dying 
and  the  dead,  asking  for  them  health,  comfort,  succour, 
patience,  and  refreshment.  He  found  out  what  saints 
were  venerated  as  patrons  of  the  different  places  as  he 
passed  on,  or  wThose  bodies  lay  in  the  churches  dedicated 
to  their  names,  and  he  invoked  them  from  a  distance, 
lovingly  commending  the  welfare  of  the  citizens  to  their 
care.  So,  on  seeing  the  mountains,  hills,  farms,  and 
lands  which  he  passed  on  the  road,  he  gave  God  thanks 
for  their  lords  and  owners,  begging  pardon  for  those  who 
were  guilty  of  ingratitude  to  God  by  abusing  the  gifts 
which  He  had  mercifully  given  them.  On  arriving  at 
inhabited  places,  he  visited  the  Blessed  Sacrament,  then 
the  churches  of  their  holy  patrons,  and  renewed  his 
prayers  for  the  souls  of  others,  adding  a  petition  for 
strength,  energy,  and  zeal  in  advancing  the  honour  and 
glory  of  God. 

He  himself  bears  witness  to  many  very  special  graces 
and  benefits  which  he  obtained  from  God  for  himself 
and  others  by  means  of  this  method  of  prayer,  especially 
by  devotion  to  the  guardian  angels  of  places  ;  saying 
that  he  had  thus  escaped  many  serious  and  mortal  perils, 
many  plots  and  snares  of  heretics  who  sought  his  life, 
and  obtained  the  signal  conversion  of  apostates,  unbe 
lievers,  and  hardened  sinners.  Hence  it  became  his 
custom  to  recommend  this  devotion  to  the  ministers  of 
the  Gospel,  and  to  all  with  whom  he  had  intercourse ; 
as  St.  Francis  of  Sales  affirms,  who  practised  it  himself, 
and  thus  speaks  of  it  in  the  sixteenth  chapter  of  his 
E 


50  Favre  s  way  of  travelling. 

i 

Introduction  to  a  devout  life — '  The  great  Peter  Favre, 
passing  through  this  diocese  of  Geneva,  in  which  he  was 
born,  on  his  return  from  Germany,  where  he  had  achieved 
great  things  for  God's  service,  related,  that  in  travel 
ling  through  several  heretical  districts,  he  had  received 
numberless  consolations  by  means  of  his  custom  of 
saluting  the  guardian  angels  of  whatever  parish  he  came 
to.  Of  this  he  had  had  sensible  proof,  both  in  their 
delivering  him  from  the  plots  of  the  heretics,  and  in 
making  a  great  number  of  souls  pliant  and  well  inclined 
to  receive  from  him  the  truths  of  salvation.  And  by 
relating  this  experience  of  his  own  he  so  greatly  recom 
mended  the  practice  to  others,  that  a  lady  who  was  then 
young  told  me,  four  years  ago,  with  great  feeling,  that 
she  had  heard  it  spoken  of  by  Favre  himself,  when  she 
was  young,  sixty  years  since.'  And  in  the  Process  which 
was  made  at  Thonon,  in  1596,  the  same  thing  is  attested 
by  a  noble  lady,  Dona  Wilhelmina  of  Arenthon,  of  whom 
we  shall  have  to  speak  in  due  course. 

As  to  his  way  of  travelling,  he  went  mostly  on  foot, 
carrying  the  bundle  of  his  writings  round  his  neck. 
He  had  made  a  vow  never  to  take  any  payment  or 
compensation  for  his  spiritual  ministrations ;  and  this 
was  afterwards  made  a  rule  in  the  Constitutions  by 
St.  Ignatius.  All  his  provision  for  sustenance,  there 
fore,  was  his  trust  in  God,  and  the  charity  of  the  faithful. 
At  night  he  used  to  retire  to  take  a  brief  repose  in  the 
hospitals ;  and  in  places  Avhere  there  were  none,  he  went 
to  some  house  or  small  inn,  always  choosing  one  of 
the  poorest  and  meanest.  When  it  chanced  that  he 
had  to  stop  for  a  short  time  at  any  village  or  hamlet, 
he  took  the  first  opportunity  of  speaking  publicly  and 
privately  on  sacred  subjects.  The  religious  communities 
to  whom  he  was  already  known  by  reputation  vied  with 
each  other  in  eagerness  to  hear  him,  and  sometimes 


Spiritual  conversation.  51 

begged  him  to  turn  a  little  out  of  the  way  to  console 
them.  In  one  place  he  preached  two  or  three  times  to 
different  congregations ;  and  we  are  told  of  some  famous 
abbey  in  Germany  where  the  lord  abbot  and  all  his 
monks,  after  hearing  Favre  deliver  an  extempore  dis 
course  on  religious  perfection,  were  so  impressed,  that 
after  vainly  trying  to  induce  him  to  stay  a  little  longer, 
they  insisted  on  accompanying  him  for  a  good  distance, 
with  many  marks  of  reverence  and  affection,  till  he  was 
again  on  the  main  road. 

But,  apart  from  incidents  like  this,  the  holy  man  was 
so  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  with  a  burning  zeal 
for  souls,  that  he  might  be  described  as  sowing  the  seed 
of  the  Divine  Word  during  the  whole  of  his  journey. 
Whomever  he  fell  in  with  by  land  or  by  sea,  in  inns  or 
private  houses,  everywhere  and  at  all  times,  he  was  always 
on  the  watch,  always  at  work  to  gain  souls  for  God.  From 
everything  he  saw,  from  everything  that  happened,  from 
everything  that  turned  up  in  conversation,  he  took  at 
once  occasion  to  speak  of  spiritual  things ;  and  he  did 
this  not  in  a  forced  or  studied  manner,  but  so  naturally 
and  appropriately,  that  nothing  could  seem  more  fitting 
and  timely.  He  used  to  say  in  his  humility,  and  we 
record  it  to  his  honour,  that  he  was  the  broom  of  God's 
house,  always  employed  in  sweeping  the  floor — that  is, 
in  cleansing  sinners  from  the  stains  of  sin.  He  used  to 
add,  that  all  the  sons  of  the  Society  ought  to  be  the 
same,  because  their  vocation  obliges  them  to  occupy 
themselves  in  every  possible  way  with  the  salvation  of 
their  neighbour.  And  as  he  was  gifted  both  by  nature 
and  grace  with  an  incomparable  power  of  sweetly  and 
powerfully  winning  all  hearts  to  himself,  these  accidental 
meetings  were  invariably  followed  by  great  conversions. 
Once  as  he  was  travelling  from  Parma  to  Rome  to  join 
Dr.  Pedro  Ortiz,  he  was  overtaken  by  the  night  between 
E  2 


52  Adventure  with  highwaymen. 

Florence  and  Siena,  and  not  being  able  to  find  any  place 

of  shelter,  he  turned  a  little  out  of  the  way,  and  going 

up  to  a  poor  labourers  cottage,  begged  the  peasant  who 

lived  there  to  take  him  in.     A  few  hours  later,  a  party 

of  sixteen  highwaymen  came  unexpectedly  to  the  same 

place,  and   ordering  supper  to  be   got  ready  for  them, 

ate  and  drank  voraciously,  diverting  themselves,  as  low 

people  of  that  brutal   sort  will  do,  with  very  indecent 

talk.     Favre  was  sitting  silent  in  the  chimney  corner, 

with  his  heart  and  mind  fixed  on  God,  thinking  over 

what  he  should  say  in  case  these  wretched  men  spoke 

to  him.    By  and  bye,  one  of  them,  irritated  at  his  silence, 

said — '  Now,   you  stupid  priest ;    what  are  you  about  ? 

Why  don't  you  share  in  our  merriment  ?     What  are  you 

thinking  about,  sitting  there  sad  and  silent  ? '     Then  the 

holy  man,  turning  full  round  on  them,  answered,  with 

his  face  full  of   compassion  and  also   of  love — '  I  am 

thinking    how   sorrowful   a   thing   is  the   merriment   of 

sinners,  who  are  the  enemies  of  God ;  and  this  fire,  by 

which  I  am  sitting,  brings  vividly  before  me  the  hell  to 

which  those  wretched  men  are  already  condemned  for 

their  wickedness.     I  am  thinking  how  they,  who  have 

no  certainty  of  living  another  moment,  and  are  in  danger 

every  instant  of  falling  into  that  abyss  without  any  hope 

of  coming  out  again,  can  nevertheless  go   on  laughing 

and  rejoicing  and  boldly  offending  God,  without  restraint, 

as  if  it  were  all  nothing.     Reflect,  dear  brothers,  that  the 

divine  justice  may  strike  you  with  its  chastisements  when 

least  you  expect  it ;  and  that  if  once  you  lose  your  souls, 

they  are  lost  for  ever/     And  then  he  went  on,  pointing 

out  the  danger  they  were  in  of  everlasting  damnation., 

and  the  way  of  escaping  it,  by  leaving  the  bad  ways  in 

which  they  were  living,  and  turning  to  God  with  true 

penitence.     And  he  said  it  all  with  such  fervent  zeal 

and  such  affectionate  tenderness,  that  those  poor  wretches 


Ratisbon.  5  3 


were  filled  with  compunction,  and  all  sixteen  repented, 
and  resolved  to  lead  a  new  life,  beseeching  Favre  to 
hear  their  confessions  at  once,  and  reconcile  them  to  God 
on  the  spot.  And  all  that  night  was  spent  by  the  blessed 
father  in  a  holy  joy  of  spirit  over  the  treasure  he  had 
gained  in  those  lost  souls.  Other  occurrences  like  this 
happened  in  the  course  of  his  travels,  which  we  shall 
relate  from  time  to  time  in  due  order.  It  is  now  time  to 
resume  the  thread  of  our  narrative. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Peter  Favrc  at  Ratisbon. 

THERE  were  already  assembled  at  Ratisbon,  to  be 
present  or  to  vote  at  the  Diet,  great  numbers  of  the 
German  princes  and  prelates,  the  delegates  of  the  free 
cities,  the  ambassadors  of  kings,  together  with  the  flower 
of  the  Spanish  and  Italian  nobility,  whom  the  Emperor 
Charles  V.  had  brought  with  him.  The  two  nuncios, 
John  Morone  and  John  Pozzi,  were  there  to  represent 
the  Pope,  with  Cardinal  Gaspar  Contarini  as  legate 
extraordinary.  Those  chosen  to  take  part  in  the  con 
ference  on  religious  questions  were,  on  the  Catholic  side, 
John  Eckius,  Julius  Pflug,  and  John  Gropper,  Archdeacon 
of  Cologne  ;  and  their  three  Lutheran  opponents  were 
Philip  Melancthon,  Martin  Bucer,  and  John  Pistorius. 
The  propositions  and  the  answers  were  put  in  writing, 
and  copies  of  them  were  distributed  everywhere,  to  the 
great  scandal  of  the  faithful,  who  saw  there  the  most 
essential  articles  of  the  Catholic  faith  impugned  and 
denied. 


54  Favre  at  Ratisbon. 

Peter  Favre  was  more  grieved  at  this  than  any  one. 
Writing  on  the  subject  to  St.  Ignatius,  he  says — 

'  It  pierces  my  very  heart  to  see  so  great  and  noble 
a  country  of  Europe  as  Germany,  where  the  lustre  of 
religion  and  the  incomparable  dignity  of  the  churches 
and  clergy  were  formerly  the  glory  of  Christendom, 
threatened  now  with  total  ruin,  and  to  find  that  so  great 
and  wise  an  Emperor,  with  all  his  Ministers,  and  so 
dignified  a  body  as  this  Diet,  are  utterly  powerless  to 
check  this  wreck  of  the  faith,  or  even  to  re-establish  the 
poor  remains  of  this  Church.' 

Nevertheless,  desiring  greatly  to  oppose  some  barrier 
to  the  mischief  which  was  threatening  to  burst,  he  was 
divinely  inspired  to  adopt  a  course  which  reason  and 
experience  showed  him  to  be,  perhaps,  the  only  way 
likely  to  be  successful.  This  was  to  induce  the  more 
influential  Catholics  to  amend  their  lives,  so  that,  having 
inflamed  them  with  a  zeal  for  God's  glory,  he  might 
encourage  them  to  cooperate  for  the  help  and  defence  of 
religion.  With  regard  to  the  heretics,  seeing  that  the 
only  result  of  disputes  and  conferences  was  to  make  them 
more  obstinate  in  their  error,  he  resolved  to  attack  and 
conquer  them  by  gaining  over  their  perverted  will,  con 
vinced  that  if  this  were  conquered  the  intellect  would 
follow,  being  darkened  more  by  vice  than  false  doctrine. 
As  to  the  Catholics,  he  had  already  begun  to  work 
upon  many  of  them,  both  at  Worms  and  Spires.  The 
Dean  of  St.  Martin's,  at  Worms,  had  only  been  able  to 
'finish  the  first  week  of  the  Spiritual  Exercises,  as  Favre 
was  on  the  point  of  departure,  yet  even  this  had  so 
impressed  him  that  he  could  not  sufficiently  praise  the 
holiness  and  excellence  of  this  means  of  grace,  and  wrote 
letters  to  the  Bishop  of  Spires  in  hearty  commendation  of 
it.  Favre,  writing  from  Spires  to  the  fathers  in  Rome, 
on  the  23rd  of  January,  says — 


Fr2iit  of  the  Exercises.  55 

'  I  think  no  one  was  more  grieved  and  troubled  at 
my  departure  from  Worms  than  the  good  Dean  of 
St.  Martin's,  who  had  begun  the  Spiritual  Exercises,  and 
had  scarcely  finished  the  first  week.  He  has,  by  God's 
grace,  so  profited  by  this  that  he  is  burning  with  zeal  to 
soften  the  hearts  of  others,  which  are  as  hard  as  stones. 
There  are  many  such  in  this  city  of  Spires,  to  whom  he 
has  written  about  our  concerns,  and  who,  in  consequence, 
have  a  great  wish  to  make  the  Exercises.  He  has  also 
written  to  the  bishop  here,  who  is  one  of  the  princes  of 
Germany,  and  very  well  disposed.  I  have  spoken  to 
him  several  times,  describing  our  manner  of  life,  with 
which  he  is  much  edified.  Last  Thursday,  he  invited  me 
to  dine  with  him,  when  there  were  present  the  Duke  of 
Bavaria  and  the  Archbishop  of  Treves,  and  he  afterwards 
sent  to  me  his  vicar  general,  whom,  judging  from  our 
conversations  on  spiritual  subjects,  I  consider  very 
desirous  of  making  the  Exercises.  I  cannot,  however, 
begin  them,  or  undertake  anything  solid,  as  our  departure 
for  Ratisbon  has  just  been  fixed.  However,  as  his 
lordship  the  bishop  is  to  be  there  with  the  other  German 
princes,  it  will  be  possible  to  take  up  the  affair  again, 
and  to  cultivate  these  good  dispositions.' 

Dr.  John  Cochleus  also,  an  exceedingly  learned  man, 
and  theologian  to  the  King  of  the  Romans,  having  heard 
Favre  discourse  on  the  difference  that  there  is  between 
the  knowledge  and  the  relish  of  divine  things,  was  quite 
beside  himself  with  delight.  '  I  am  full  of  pleasure  and 
joy,'  he  said,  '  that  there  are  such  people  as  masters  of 
affective  theology.'  He  afterwards  made  the  Spiritual 
Exercises  under  Favre,  and  came  out  such  an  altered 
man,  that  instead  of  a  scholar  he  became  a  master  in 
the  art,  and  gave  them  to  the  Bishop  of  Meissen  and  to 
others  of  equal  dignity.  These  men  and  several  others, 
first  by  letters,  and  then  by  word  of  mouth  after  their 


56  Prelates  and  nobles. 

arrival,  raised  the  reputation  of  Favre's  sanctity  to  the 
greatest  height  in  the  Diet  of  Ratisbon.  Hence  the 
majority  of  those  princes  and  noblemen  applied  to  him 
for  counsel  and  direction  in  matters  concerning  their 
souls.  In  this  manner,  he  opened  a  regular  spiritual 
school  in  Ratisbon,  and  one  or  other  of  these  great 
persons  was  so  continually  coming  to  him,  that  he  had  no 
time  for  saying  the  divine  office  except  by  cheating  himself 
of  his  night's  rest.  To  mention  a  few  of  those  who  were 
most  constant  in  visiting  him.  There  were  D.  Jerome 
della  Cerda,  son  of  the  Duke  of  Medina  Cceli,  D.  Juan 
Manriquez,  brother  of  the  Duke  of  Najara,  D.  Sancho 
of  Castille,  D.  Francis  of  Toledo,  D.  Juan  of  Granada, 
and  the  regent  Figueroa,  all  of  whom  were  Spaniards  ; 
and  of  the  Italians,  the  two  Apostolic  Nuncios,  Morone 
and  Pozzi,  the  Bishop  of  Girgenti,  the  Marquis  of 
Terranuova  and  his  two  sons,  the  Count  of  Mirandola 
and  his  son,  and  Prince  Camillo  Colonna.  Ortiz  also 
introduced  to  him  Charles  III.  of  Savoy,  called  "the 
Good/"  who  inquired  whether  he  were  one  of  those 
priests  who  went  about  the  world  after  the  manner  of  the 
Apostles,  for  the  purpose  of  doing  good  to  their  neigh 
bours.  Favre  gave  him  a  brief  account  of  the  Institute, 
and  the  Duke  was  much  delighted  with  it,  and  was  lavish 
of  courteous  and  kind  words  and  acts.  Afterwards  he 
chose  Favre  for  his  confessor  and  spiritual  father,  never 
letting  a  day  pass  without  hearing  him  discourse  for  an 
hour  on  the  things  of  eternity.  The  same  thing  was  done 
by  the  Ambassador  of  D.  Juan,  King  of  Portugal,  and 
D.  Sancho  of  Castille,  whom  Favre  calls  his  eldest  son  in 
that  Court. 

But  it  was  in  the  German  prelates  and  ecclesiastics, 
who  were  there  in  great  numbers,  that  the  holy  man 
strove  most  to  kindle  a  more  fervent  spirit  of  Apostolic 
zeal.  He  placed  before  their  eyes  the  melancholy 


Results  of  Favre  s  work.  5  7 

condition  into  which  religion  had  fallen,  and  the  obli 
gation  laid  upon  them  to  use  every  means  for  defending, 
supporting,  and  advancing  it.  And  as  his  manner  of 
doing  this  was  both  most  sweet  and  most  forcible,  he 
induced  them  to  promise  this  with  all  their  hearts,  and, 
after  returning  to  their  churches,  to  keep  their  promise. 
of  which  they  gave  signal  proof  in  instructing  and 
reforming  the  clergy  and  laity.  These  good  desires  and 
magnanimous  resolutions  were,  in  a  great  measure,  the 
fruit  of  the  Spiritual  Exercises,  which,  being  handled  by 
Favre  with  his  usual  incomparable  ability  and  address, 
always  produced  wonderful  results.  He  began  by  giving 
them  to  a  few  persons  privately,  then  to  several  together, 
and  at  length  the  numbers  of  clergy  and  laity  of  all  ranks 
so  increased,  that  not  being  sufficient  for  the  work  by 
himself,  he  asked  to  have  ten  of  the  Society  to  help  him. 
'  I  can  say  with  truth/  he  writes  to  St.  Ignatius,  '  that  if 
ten  others  of  the  Society  were  here  we  should  have 
quite  work  enough  to  do  in  accordance  with  our  Institute. 
Dr.  Ortiz  would  like  a  hundred  of  us,  as  he  says  there 
would  be  plenty  of  employment  for  them  all  in  this 
Court.  You  may  imagine,  therefore,  how  incessantly 
I  am  occupied  here,  principally  from  having  to  converse 
with  numerous  princes,  each  of  whom  would  require  a 
much  better  workman  than  poor  Favre.'1  But  whatever 
he  may  say  out  of  humility  to  himself,  the  fact  is  that 
every  one  in  the  Court  was  speaking  of  the  sudden  and 
thorough  changes  from  evil  to  good,  and  from  good  to 
better  still,  which  were  seen  to  result  in  those  who  had 
gone  through  the  Exercises.  Many  persons,  indeed,  not 
being  able  to  guess  at  the  cause,  openly  accused  Favre  of 
magic  and  witchcraft.  When  he  heard  this,  he  was  very 
glad,  hoping  to  be  accused  of  these  arts  by  the  heretics 
before  the  Diet,  for  he  did  not  doubt  that  if  he  should 
1  Autograph  letter,  May  23, 1541. 


58  Nuremberg. 


have  to  give  an  account  of  himself  before  that  great 
assembly,  and  to  explain  what  kind  of  magic  it  was  that 
was  practised  in  the  Exercises,  he  should  be  able  to 
bring  over  the  most  stubborn  and  obstinate,  and  therefore 
the  most  in  need  of  help,  to  make  proof  in  themselves 
of  what  they  could  not  understand  in  others,  and  in  this 
way  he  hoped  to  gain  over  many  even  of  the  heretics. 

But  without  this  opportunity  he  really  did  gain  several, 
partly  by  private  conversations,  and  partly  by  the  Exer 
cises.  He  made  it  his  aim  to  win  their  affection,  and 
then  taking  their  souls,  as  it  were,  by  surprise,  to  discover 
and  heal  the  sores  which  sin  had  made  there.  And  it 
frequently  happened  that,  after  breaking  off  evil  habits 
and  emptying  their  hearts  of  sinful  affections,  they  found 
their  minds  at  once  cleared  of  doubts  and  errors.  On  one 
occasion,  when  he  was  sent  for  to  Nuremberg  to  attend 
an  Italian  who  was  dying,  he  not  only  helped  the  poor 
man  to  make  a  good  death,  but  induced  another  of  the 
family  and  two  rich  merchants  who  had  apostatized  to 
renounce  their  heresy  and  be  reconciled  to  the  Church, 
besides,  in  addition,  baptizing  two  Mahometans.  We 
have  no  record  of  any  other  particular  cases,  but  wye 
possess  a  full  account  in  his  own  words  of  the  plain  and 
successful  method  which  is  to  be  observed  for  the  con 
version  of  heretics.  He  wrote  a  letter  full  of  wisdom 
on  this  subject  to  Father  James  Laynez,  who  had  asked 
for  it,  and  in  it  he  may  be  said  to  describe  himself. 
And  I  have  thought  well  to  translate  it  faithfully,  for 
the  good  of  other  labourers  in  the  Gospel. 


CHAPTER   XIII. 

Instructions  how  to  deal  with  heretics. 

'  You  have  more  than  once  written  to  ask  me  to  trace 
out  some  sort  of  rules  for  the  guidance  of  those  who 
may  desire  to  labour  among  heretics  for  the  salvation  of 
others  without  prejudice  to  their  own.  I  have  not 
hitherto  answered,  for  many  sufficient  reasons.  In  the 
first  place  I  have  never  yet  been  able  to  find  time  for 
maturing  the  subject  sufficiently,  as  the  concerns  I  am 
occupied  in  leave  me  no  leisure ;  next,  my  late  illness 
has  so  weakened  me  that  it  is  with  difficulty  that  I  can 
guide  my  pen ;  and  lastly,  nothing  that  satisfied  me  came 
to  my  mind.  However,  I  will  now  write  down  what 
comes  to  my  pen. 

'  First  of  all,  it  is  essential  that  whoever  desires  to  be 
useful  to  heretics  in  our  day  should  both  nourish  in 
himself  a  great  affection  for  them  and  show  it  in  action, 
removing  from  his  own  mind  those  unfavourable  imagi 
nations  which  make  us  think  less  well  of  them.  The  next 
thing  is,  to  win  their  goodwill  and  inclinations  to  such  an 
extent  that  they  may  reciprocate  our  kind  feelings  and 
think  well  of  us.  This  may  easily  be  done  by  speaking 
to  them  affectionately,  and  dwelling  in  familiar  conver 
sations  on  those  points  only  on  which  they  agree  with 
us,  avoiding  everything  like  a  dispute,  in  which  one  side 
always  assumes  an  air  of  superiority,  and  shows  contempt 
of  the  other.  Those  subjects  should  be  first  chosen  in 


60  Hoiu  to  deal  with  heretics. 

which  there  is  a  sympathy  and  union  of  wills,  rather 
than  those  which  tend  to  disunite  them  by  opposition 
of  opinion.  These  Lutherans  are,  as  the  Apostle  says, 
children  led  away  to  their  destruction.  The  first  thing 
that  they  lose  is  their  piety  and  power  of  doing  good 
works  ;  after  this  comes  the  loss  of  the  true  faith.  Hence 
the  work  of  their  redemption  should  begin  by  replanting 
in  the  will  good  principles  leading  to  right  actions,  and 
then  go  on  to  those  which  lead  to  a  right  belief.  This 
order  of  proceeding  is  the  reverse  of  that  which  was 
followed  in  the  early  times  of  the  infant  Church,  when 
Gentiles  were  being  converted  by  the  faith.  Then,  the 
first  thing  was  to  convince  unbelievers  of  their  errors, 
and  afterwards,  with  great  prudence,  lead  them  on  to  the 
ways  of  living  and  acting  according  to  the  rules  of  the 
faith. 

1  Therefore,  if  it  falls  to  our  lot  to  have  the  care  of  the 
soul  of  a  person  whose  intellect  is  darkened  by  errors, 
and  at  the  same  time  whose  heart  is  full  of  vices,  we 
must  first  employ  every  effort  and  art  to  heal  him  of  his 
vices,  and  then  to  convince  him  of  his  errors.  A  priest 
once  came  to  me,  begging  and  entreating  that  I  would,  if 
possible,  prove  to  him  by  sound  arguments  the  falsehood 
of  the  opinion  which  he  held,  that  priests  ought  to  be 
allowed  to  marry.  When  I  had  heard  this  I  got  him,  by 
courtesy  and  kindness,  to  open  his  heart  to  me,  and 
discovered  that  his  soul  had  been  for  many  years  in  a 
bad  state  from  his  being  ensnared  by  love  for  wicked 
women.  I  put  the  question  of  his  doubts  altogether 
aside  for  the  time,  and  tried  to  lead  him  adroitly  to 
detest  his  evil  ways,  and  the  result  was  that  no  sooner 
had  he,  by  the  help  of  God,  abandoned  his  sin,  and 
dismissed  a  woman  of  bad  life  whom  he  maintained,  than 
his  mind  was  set  free  from  all  doubts,  and  I  heard  no 
more  of  those  errors  contrary  to  the  Church's  teaching 


How  to  deal  with  heretics.  61 

which   had  arisen  and  increased  in  consequence  of  his 
dissolute  life. 

'Since  one  of  the  commonest  errors  of  the  Lutherans 
is  the  ascribing  merit  to  faith  alone,  denying  it  altogether 
to  good  works,  the  right  way  to  proceed  in  the  matter  of 
their  conversion  is  to  begin  by  exciting  them  to  the  per 
formance  of  good  works,  and  to  come  to  the  question 
of  faith  afterwards.  Thus,  when  a  heretic  denies  the 
Church's  power  to  make  the  hearing  Mass  or  reciting 
the  divine  office  an  obligation  under  pain  of  grievous  sin, 
we  should  strive  to  bring  him  to  practise  these  and  other 
pious  exercises,  because  he  abandoned  them  before  for 
saking  the  faith.  Besides  this,  we  should  remember  what 
is  the  principal  prop  on  which  these  leaders  and  teachers 
of  heresy  rely  in  maintaining  their  errors,  in  opposition 
to  the  precepts  of  the  Church  and  the  rules  of  the  holy 
Fathers.  They  say  that  they  have  not  sufficient  strength 
to  obey  God,  and  that  the  Church's  laws  and  precepts 
are  intolerable  to  human  nature.  They  ought,  therefore, 
to  be  encouraged  to  trust  in  God  with  all  the  energy  of 
their  minds,  and  so  to  make  themselves  capable,  by  His 
help  and  grace,  not  only  of  keeping  the  precepts,  but  of 
advancing  to  greater  and  more  perfect  things. 

'  My  own  belief  is,  that  if  it  were  possible,  by  force  of 
learning  and  ardent  zeal,  to  persuade  Luther  himself  to 
root  out  his  vicious  inclinations  and  observe  the  pious 
practices  of  the  Church,  and  so  to  resolve  readily  on 
obeying  the  precepts,  he  would  by  these  means  alone, 
without  any  religious  controversy,  cease  to  be  a  heretic. 
It  is  nevertheless  true  that  it  demands  great  force  of 
virtue,  and  much  grace  from  God,  to  acquire  this  interior 
submission  of  mind  and  readiness  of  will ;  and,  as  it  is 
difficult  to  conceive  the  existence  of  such  sentiments  in 
these  men,  steeped  as  they  are  in  the  mire  of  vice,  and 
wholly  estranged  from  God,  there  can  be  little  or  no 


62  How  to  deal  with  heretics. 

hope  of  bringing  them  back  to  a  better  way.  However 
this  may  be,  it  is  my  opinion  that  there  is  more  good  to 
be  done  to  the  souls  of  heretics  by  conversing  with  them 
familiarly  on  the  amendment  of  life,  the  beauty  of  virtue, 
the  diligent  practice  of  prayer,  the  final  judgment,  eternal 
punishment,  and  every  subject  relating  and  tending  to  a 
reformation  of  morals,  than  by  confounding  them  with 
many  arguments  and  authorities.  To  sum  up  the  whole 
briefly,  what  I  say  is,  that  these  persons  need  to  be 
properly  incited  and  encouraged  to  correct  their  vicious 
habits,  and  to  open  their  hearts  to  the  fear  and  love  of 
God  and  the  desire  of  doing  good  works.  By  these 
remedies  they  will  be  healed  of  their  spiritual  diseases, 
especially  of  that  disgust  for  divine  things  which  is  found 
in  them,  and  of  their  continual  mental  distraction ;  for 
these  are  not  the  least  of  their  spiritual  maladies,  seeing 
that  they  have  the  effect,  not  only  of  blunting  the  edge 
of  their  intellects,  but  of  weakening  their  whole  mental 
and  bodily  vigour.  May  Jesus  Christ,  the  Redeemer  of 
men,  Who  well  knows  that  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  His 
written  Word  thoroughly  to  soften  their  hearts,  deign  to< 
touch  and  move  the  souls  of  the  heretics  by  His  divine 
grace!' 


CHAPTER   XIV. 

Election  of  the  General,  and  Solemn   Vows. 

WHILE  Blessed  Peter  Favre  was  making  the  Society  of 
Jesus  known  in  Germany  by  his  successful  labours,  and 
gaining  for  it  great  respect  by  the  holiness  of  his  life, 
St.  Ignatius  and  his  other  companions  were  in  Rome, 
engaged  in  regulating  it  and  establishing  it  on  a  proper 
footing.  As  far  back  as  the  2yth  of  September  in  the 
preceding  year,  1540,  Pope  Paul  III.  had  issued  an 
Apostolic  Bull  confirming  it  and  declaring  it  an  Order. 

Favre  had  heard  this  on  his  way  from  Italy  to 
Germany ;  and  on  his  arrival  at  Worms  he  received 
letters  from  Rome  containing  fuller  information.  In 
his  answer,  dated  the  zyth  of  December,  1540,  he  says— 
'  I  have  already  written  this  week,  to  let  you  know  that  I 
received  your  letters  and  the  copies  of  those  written  by 
our  brothers  on  the  zyth  of  this  month.  I  am  not  able, 
at  present,  to  write  or  explain  the  pleasure  they  gave 
me ;  principally  because  they  show  how  every  day 
our  designs  are  more  and  more  blessed  by  God.  I 
rejoice  exceedingly  at  the  spiritual  privileges  granted  to 
the  Society  by  his  Holiness,  and  at  his  approbation  of 
it,  and  I  have  great  confidence  in  God  that  all  this  is  but 
the  pledge  of  more  and  greater  graces  which  Christ, 
Whose  Vicar  his  Holiness  is,  will  give  us  if  we  do  not 
make  ourselves  unworthy  of  them.  If  I  had  nothing- 
else  to  do,  I  could  certainly  find  matter  in  these  things 


64  Election  of  Ignatius. 

to  occupy  myself  for  many  days  in  praising  and  thanking 
the  Divine  Goodness,  from  Whom  come  all  these  mercies 
to  us.' 

The  Society,  being  thus  established  by  Apostolic 
authority,  it  was  decided  by  election,  in  the  spring  of 
1541,  who  should  govern  it  as  General.  Before  starting 
for  Portugal,  Father  Francis  Xavier  and  Father  Simon 
Rodriguez  had  left  their  votes  in  a  sealed  letter,  and 
Father  Peter  Favre,  who  was  then  in  Ratisbon,  sent 
three  copies  of  his  by  different  routes,  to  avoid  all 
danger  of  miscarriage  and  delay.  When  the  letters 
were  opened,  it  was  found  that  Ignatius  was  elected 
General  by  the  unanimous  votes  of  the  three  who  were 
absent  and  the  five  who  were  present.  And  indeed 
there  could  be  no  doubt  that  the  voices  of  all  would 
be  given  for  him  whom  all  already  acknowledged  as 
their  common  father  and  master.  Nevertheless  some, 
particularly  those  who  were  absent,  who  desired  to  name 
more  than  one  by  way  of  guarding  against  any  possible 
accident,  agreed  in  voting,  after  Ignatius,  for  Favre  only. 
This  was  done  by  Francis  Xavier  and  Simon  Rodriguez, 
and  also  among  those  who  were  present  by  John  Codure, 
who  gave  a  reason  for  it  which  reflects  the  highest  praise 
on  Favre.  After  naming  Ignatius,  he  adds  these  words 
—'After  him,  I  think  the  venerable  Father  Dr.  Peter 
Favre  ought  to  be  preferred  as  being  a  man  of  equal 
virtue/  And  it  is  certain  that  if  they  had  all  named 
more  than  one,  they  would  all,  in  like  manner,  have 
voted  for  Favre,  after  Ignatius.  He  himself  named 
Xavier  after  Ignatius,  as  Xavier  had  named  him,  and 
this  shows  the  mutual  esteem  of  these  two  great  and 
saintly  men. 

As  soon  as  Peter  Favre  had  news  of  the  election  of 
St.  Ignatius  he  prepared  to  make  his  solemn  profession, 
which  the  others  had  made  alreadv  in  the  Church  of 


Favres  Profession.  65 

St.  Paul  fuori  le  mura.  He  made  his  preparations  very 
devoutly,  and  on  the  octave  of  our  Lady's  Visitation,  the 
9th  of  July,  1541,  in  the  Church  of  our  Lady  in  Ratisbon, 
called  the  Old  Chapel,  he  offered  himself  to  God  by  the 
vows  of  religion,  with  the  deepest  feelings  of  humility 
and  submission,  and  placed  himself  entirely  at  the  dis 
posal  of  the  Vicar  of  Jesus  Christ  and  of  the  General 
of  the  Society.  In  his  '  Memorial '  he  has  himself 
preserved  for  us  the  form  which  he  used,  there  not 
being  at  that  time  any  common  form  in  existence.  This 
is,  however,  a  little  different  from  that  written  by  his  own 
hand,  which  he  sent  to  Rome,  and  which  we  still  possess. 
It  runs  thus — 

*  I,  Peter  Favre,  promise  to  Almighty  God,  in  the 
presence  of  His  Virgin  Mother  and  all  the  company 
of  heaven,  and  to  my  Reverend  Father  Ignatius  of 
Loyola,  who  is  in  the  place  of  God  in  the  Society  of 
the  Name  of  Jesus,  perpetual  chastity,  poverty,  and 
obedience,  according  to  the  rule  of  life  enjoined  in  the 
Bull  and  in  the  Constitutions  of  the  Society  of  our 
Lord  Jesus,  already  promulgated  or  hereafter  to  be  pro 
mulgated.  In  like  manner,  I  promise  special  obedience 
to  the  Sovereign  Pontiff  regarding  the  missions  mentioned 
in  the  Bull.  And  lastly,  I  promise  obedience  with  regard 
to  the  instruction  of  children  in  the  rudiments  of  the 
faith  according  to  the  same  Bull,  and  to  the  Consti 
tutions.  At  Ratisbon,  in  the  Church  of  our  Lady, 
called  the  Old  Chapel,  before  the  high  altar,  July  gth, 
being  the  octave  of  the  Visitation  of  our  Lady,  Mother 
of  God,  1541.  Which  profession  and  vow  I  confirm 
and  repeat  to  Almighty  God,  to  His  Virgin  Mother,  and 
to  all  the  saints,  and  to  you,  Reverend  Father,  who 
hold  the  place  of  God,  as  though  I  were  present  before 
all  the  Society,  praying  your  Paternity  and  all  the 


66  Favre  sent  to  Spain. 

Society  to  be  pleased  to  accept  and  receive  this  my 
profession,  incorporating  me,  though  unworthy,  in  your 
holy  Society.  And  all  this  I  write  with  my  own  hand, 
signing  it  with  my  name.  This  loth  day  of  the  same 
month  and  year.  PETER  FAVRE/ 

Words  cannot  express  the  floods  of  consolation  which 
deluged  his  soul  in  thinking  over  and  attentively  con 
sidering  the  wonderful  ways  by  which  God  had  guided 
Ignatius  and  the  companions  he  had  gained  in  Paris 
up  to  this  last  step  by  which  they  were  all  united  in 
one  and  the  same  purpose,  and  joined  together  by  one 
and  the  same  bond  of  religion.  The  life  which  he  had 
leg!  up  to  this  time  had  been  one  of  great  hardship, 
long  journeys,  continual  dangers,  incessant  labours,  and 
privations  of  every  kind  ;  but  he  had  ample  compen 
sation  in  seeing  the  work  begun  by  him  and  the 
others,  under  the  direction  of  St.  Ignatius,  in  our  Lady's 
Church  at  Montmartre  in  Paris,  thus  firmly  and  durably 
established.  For  this  he  gave  infinite  thanks  to  God, 
and  felt  his  heart  inspired  with  new  strength  and  vigour 
to  undertake  greater  labours,  and  to  endure  greater 
sufferings  for  the  good  of  souls.  At  the  same  time  he 
received  new  lights  from  God  on  different  methods  of 
prayer,  and  on  detaching  his  heart  from  created  things, 
and  entirely  subjecting  his  will  to  the  orders  and  injunc 
tions  of  holy  obedience. 

As  to  this  last  point,  he  gave  proof  of  it  a  few  days 
later.  Dr.  Ortiz  had  pressed,  as  soon  as  the  Diet  was 
concluded,  for  permission  to  take  Father  Favre  with  him 
to  Spain.  The  holy  man  no  sooner  received  notice  of  this 
from  Rome  than  he  immediately  broke  off  all  his  success 
ful  labours  and  prepared  to  start.  There  were  many 
who  opposed  this  resolution  of  his,  on  account  of  the 
spiritual  good  he  was  effecting  in  Germany.  But  they 


In  Savoy.  67 


did  not  prevail  with  him;  for  it  was  his  invariable  habit 
to  abandon  himself  completely  into  God's  hands,  and 
to  execute  His  orders,  as  manifested  to  him  through  his 
-Superiors,  without  delay  ;  leaving  without  a  moment's 
hesitation  all  the  works  he  had  begun.,  or  nearly  com 
pleted,  to  betake  himself  to  the  new  country  whither  he 
was  sent,  to  begin  everything  over  again.  Indeed,  he 
protested,  as  he  told  St.  Ignatius  in  a  letter,  that  he 
•desired  never  to  do  anything  except  by  obedience,  and 
that  he  was  ready,  if  his  Superiors  so  pleased,  to  do 
nothing  but  travel  for  the  rest  of  his  life. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Peter  Favrc  in  Savoy. 

ON  the  2  jth  of  July,  1541,  Peter  Favre  left  Ratisbon 
with  Dr.  Ortiz.  In  passing  through  Germany,  he  was 
exposed  to  the  secret  attacks  of  the  heretics,  who  hated 
him  mortally,  who  plotted  and  lay  in  wait  for  him,  and 
posted  assassins  ready  to  kill  him  in  different  parts. 
But  God,  and  the  guardian  angels  of  places,  whom, 
according  to  his  custom,  he  invoked  as  he  travelled, 
protected  and  saved  him  from  every  danger.  He  was 
well  acquainted  with  the  intentions  and  designs  of  those 
treacherous  sectaries,  yet  so  far  from  fearing  them,  he 
may  rather  be  said  courageously  to  have  confronted  their 
fury ;  frequently  stopping  on  the  way  to  sow  the  seed  of 
the  Word  of  God,  and  to  defend  the  cause  of  religion,  in 
cities  and  towns  which  were  in  great  measure  infested  by 
heresy.  As  he  approached  Switzerland,  the  danger  to 
his  life  increased  in  consequence  of  his  having  discovered 
F  2 


68  Favre  in  Savoy. 


a  secret  and  horrible  conspiracy  while  he  was  in  Ratisbon. 
ile  came  to  know  that  the  heretical  cantons  had  com 
bined  with  Geneva  and  some  German  cities,  in  a  plot  for 
making  a  sudden  descent  upon  Savoy,  occupying  the 
fortresses,  reducing  the  country  to  their  detestable  rule, 
and  rooting  out  the  Catholic  religion.  He  gave  infor 
mation  of  this  to  the  Duke,  his  sovereign,  who  promptly 
dispatched  soldiers  and  arms  to  the  frontiers,  so  that 
the  wicked  designs  of  the  traitors  came  to  nothing,  and 
the  only  harm  done  was  the  burning  of  a  few  little 
villages,  which  were  found  unprovided  with  means  of 
defence. 

In  spite  of  this,  the  plague  of  heresy  had  crept 
into  several  places  in  Savoy,  and  this  was,  as'  I  think,, 
the  motive  which  induced  Favre,  as  he  had  entered  the 
diocese  of  Geneva,  to  go  a  little  out  of  his  way  to  visit 
his  native  place,  to  purify  it  from,  or  fortify  it,  according 
to  the  necessity  of  the  case,  against  the  infection  of  false 
doctrine.  He  only  remained  nine  or  ten  days  among 
those  rugged  mountains  of  Upper  Savoy ;  yet  in  that 
short  time  the  hearts  of  all  the  mountaineers  were  so 
filled  with  love  and  veneration  for  him,  on  account  of  the 
holiness  of  his  life  and  wonderful  works,  and  he  left  behind 
him  such  recollections  of  himself,  that  in  the  year  1596, 
Dr.  Peter  Critan,  the  parish  priest  at  Thonon,  drew  up 
a  little  process  in  which  he  collected  the  testimony  on 
oath  of  five  persons,  almost  all  of  them  eighty  years  old, 
concerning  the  childhood  of  Favre,  and  this  visit  of  his 
to  his  native  country.  And  it  is  from  the  acts  of  this 
process,  which  was  approved  and  confirmed  in  1607  by 
the  saintly  bishop,  Francis  of  Sales,  that  I  shall  extract 
the  notices  of  those  particulars  which  are'  about  to  be 
related. 

He  travelled  then  through  Savoy,  in  company  with 
a  priest,  who,  the  witnesses  say,  belonged  to  the  Society,. 


At  Alex.  6c) 


and  a  noble  layman.  I  find  no  mention  in  our  annals 
of  his  having  taken  one  of  our  fathers  with  him  on  this 
journey  :  so  that  the  priest  must  have  been  Dr.  Ortiz, 
and  the  gentleman  one  of  his  suite.  They  all  travelled 
on  foot ;  and  when  they  reached  Alex,  a  small  village 
not  far  from  Geneva,  they  fell  in  with  the  noble  D.  Mark 
of  Arenthon.  the  lord  of  the  place,  who  recognized  Favre, 
and  courteously  invited  him  to  take  up  his  abode  in  his 
house,  and  rest  there  for  awhile.  He  stayed  there  three- 
days,  to  the  infinite  consolation  of  all  the  family,  who 
were  never  weary  of  gathering  round  him  to  hear  him 
speak  of  heavenly  things,  and  of  his  hopes  for  the  con 
version  of  the  German  heretics.  He  never  went  out 
•during  that  time,  and  passed  many  hours  in  prayer,  either 
in  the  solitude  of  his  chamber,  or  in  the  chapel  of  the 
castle,  where  he  said  Mass  daily.  Wilhelmina  d' Aren 
thon,  Mark's  daughter,  at  that  time  a  girl  of  eighteen, 
was  determined,  with  some  companions  of  hers,  to  watch 
and  find  out  what  the  father  did  when  he  was  alone, 
and  not  once  only,  but  many  times,  she  saw  him  with 
his  face  all  on  fire,  quite  out  of  himself,  and  rapt  in  an 
ecstasy.  Struck  with  astonishment,  she  ran  to  tell  what 
she  had  seen  to  the  household,  and  she  always  retained 
so  lively  a  recollection  of  it,  that  fifty-five  years  afterwards 
she  was  able  to  declare  it  on  oath  in  the  Process,  always 
•speaking  of  Favre  as  '  Blessed '  or  '  the  Saint/  Another 
miraculous  thing  happened  which  increased  the  veneration 
in  which  he  was  held.  There  was  a  servant  of  the  house 
named  Claude  Morac,  who  had  lain  sick  of  almost 
incessant  fever  for  a  year  and  a  half.  When  Peter  Favre 
heard  of  his  state,  he  paid  him  a  visit,  and  after  hearing 
his  confession  and  giving  him  Holy  Communion,  he- 
recited  a  few  prayers  over  him,  and  without  more  the 
disease  left  him  and  he  was  perfectly  cured.  All  these 
-things  made  so  deep  an  impression,  that  after  the  three 


Favre  at  Villaret. 


days,  when  the  holy  man  was  about  to  take  leave,  all 
that  noble  family  came  and  knelt  before  him  weeping, 
and  begging  his  blessing  ;  and  Mark,  not  satisfied  with 
this,  insisted  on  accompanying  him  on  foot  for  more  than 
a  league  on  his  way. 

From  Alex  he  went  to  his  native  place,  Villaret,  and 
finding  that  the  inhabitants  kept  very  firm  in  the  old 
faith  and  in  solid  piety,  he  set  himself  vigorously  to 
increase  their  zeal  for  good  works.  He  preached  several 
times  in  the  Church  of  St.  Jean  cle  Sixt,  fervently 
enjoining  on  all  a  great  devotion  to  the  Blessed  Virgin 
Mary,  and  teaching  them  how  to  recite  with  profit  the  holy 
rosary.  He  introduced  the  custom  of  wearing  our  Lady's 
beads  round  the  neck,  which  continued  for  many  years 
after.  He  visited  one  by  one  all  the  sick  in  the  village, 
heard  their  confessions,  and  tried  to  soothe  their  sufferings, 
by  the  sweetest  spiritual  discourses.  In  the  neighbouring 
parish  of  the  Great  Bornand,  he  preached  four  times,, 
besides  instructing  the  children  in  the  Christian  doctrine.. 
There  he  was  told  that  an  old  aunt  of  his,  named  Jane 
Kavre,  had  lain  for  eight  months  grievously  and  hope 
lessly  sick  in  a  poor  cottage  at  the  top  of  one  of  the 
mountains.  He  determined  to  visit  her,  and  finding  her 
surrounded  by  a  numerous  family,  he  was  filled  with- 
compassion.  He  celebrated  the  holy  Mass ;  and  then,, 
making  her  drink  some  holy  water,  and  commending  her 
to  God  in  a  few  short  prayers,  he  restored  her  whole  and 
in  health  to  her  poor  children.  In  short,  during  the  one 
week  that  he  spent  in  those  parts,  he  did  great  things 
for  the  service  of  God,  preaching  to  the  people,  adminis 
tering  the  sacraments,  sowing  the  good  seed  everywhere, 
as  the  witnesses  say,  and  doing  infinite  good  in  saving 
and  consoling  so  many  souls.  The  good  people  of  that 
country  left  all  their  occupations,  and  hastened  to  see  the 
saint,  to  hear  him,  and  to  have  his  help  in  settling  their 


At  Thonon.  71 


consciences.  It  is  no  wonder,  therefore,  that  when  he 
was  going  away,  all  the  inhabitants  of  Villaret,  and  many 
others  from  the  neighbourhood,  including  his  two  younger 
brothers,  John  and  Louis,  went  with  him  as  far  as  Thonon, 
where  they  knelt  for  his  last  blessing,  and  then  returned 
home  rejoicing  that  they  had  seen  him,  and  grieving  that 
they  had  so  soon  lost  him.  At  Thonon,  he  was  requested 
to  preach,  and  produced  such  an  impression  that  the 
small  body  of  clergy  there  did  all  they  could  to  keep  him 
with  them  for  a  few  days  ;  but  he  was  not  able  to  give 
them  that  satisfaction,  being  compelled  to  resume  the 
journey  with  Ortiz  which  had  been  interrupted  ;  and  so, 
having  given  them  all  his  blessing,  which  they  earnestly 
entreated,  he  finally  quitted  Savoy,  and  turned  his  steps 
towards  France. 

This  was  the  visit  which  he  paid  to  his  native  place, 
a  truly  Apostolic  visit.  He  left  behind  him  so  great  a 
name  and  reputation,  that  on  hearing  of  his  death  five 
years  later,  all  the  people  of  the  place  immediately  began 
calling  him  '  Saint ;  and  '  Blessed/  invoking  him  as  their 
advocate  and  patron  in  all  their  troubles,  and  going  in 
procession  to  the  devout  little  chapel  which  they  dedicated 
to  his  honour.  And  this  popular  devotion  was  not  a 
passing  one,  but  it  went  on  increasing  up  to  our  own 
days,  as  we  shall  show  in  the  proper  place. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

First  visit  to  Spain. 

WAR  had  broken  out  afresh  between  the  King  of  France 
and  the  Emperor  Charles  V.,  and  as  they  were  passing 
by  a  fortress,  Ortiz  and  his  suite,  being  surprised  and 
recognized  as  Spaniards  by  the  scouts  who  were  scouring 
the  country,  were  taken  prisoners  and  led  off.  Favre, 
who  had  the  art  of  making  an  opportunity  of  labouring 
for  the  good  of  souls  out  of  everything  that  happened, 
won  over  the  soldiers  of  the  garrison  by  his  sweet  and 
loving  manner  of  conversing  with  them  about  God,  and 
especially  the  governor  of  the  fortress,  who,  having  heard 
him  several  times,  invited  him  to  a  private  and  con 
fidential  interview,  in  which  he  was  so  moved  by  the 
grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  he  made  a  general  con 
fession  to  him,  and  received  from  him  rules  for  the  new 
way  of  life  which  he  resolved  in  future  to  lead.  After  a 
week,  during  which  time  he  treated  his  prisoners,  for  the 
sake  of  Favre,  with  the  greatest  courtesy,  he  set  them  at 
liberty  without  demanding  a  penny  of  ransom.  Such  is 
the  power  of  virtue  in  a  holy  man  to  make  friends  and 
benefactors  even  of  the  most  determined  enemies. 

Having  passed  through  France  and  set  foot  for  the 
first  time  on  Spanish  ground,  Favre  saw  what  a  vast 
field  was  opening  to  him  for  promoting  the  glory  of  God. 
Distrusting  his  own  strength  for  the  work,  he  turned, 
as  he  always  did,  to  ask  help  from  heaven.  With  a 
wonderful  warmth  of  fervour,  he  entreated  the  angels 


Favre  in  Spain.  73 

guardian  of  that  kingdom  to  be  favourable  to  him ; 
then  he  prayed  our  Blessed  Lady,  enumerating  in  his 
mind  all  the  places  where  she  is  specially  honoured ; 
and  lastly,  the  most  celebrated  saints  of  Spain,  St.  James, 
St.  Narcissus,  St.  Isidore,  St.  Ildephonsus,  St.  Eulalia,  and 
the  rest,  begging  them  to  give  efficacy  to  his  words  and 
fruit  to  his  labours.  He  was  the  first,  after  Father 
Antonio  Araoz  (who  had  been  there  for  a  very  short 
time  the  year  before),  who  went  to  that  country  to  prepare 
the  way  for  the  Society,  and  to  incline  the  minds  of  the 
inhabitants  to  receive  it.  And  truly  he  attained  his  end, 
although  ^this  first  visit  was  more  like  a  rapid  course 
through  the  country  than  a  regular  stay.  His  very 
presence  removed  many  hindrances  out  of  the  way, 
destroyed  many  adverse  prejudices  and  false  charges 
which  clouded  men's  minds,  and  he  left  behind  him  an 
inheritance  of  fair  fame  and  reputation  for  his  suc 
cessors. 

In  company  with  Dr.  Ortiz  he  visited  the  principal 
cities,  leaving  everywhere  traces  of  his  Apostolic  zeal. 
The  long  intercourse  he  had  had  in  Paris  and  Rome 
with  St.  Ignatius  had  made  him  master  of  the  Spanish 
language,  which  he  both  spoke  and  wrote  fluently.  Hence 
all  his  letters  to  Ignatius  are  in  Spanish.  He  was  thus 
able  without  any  difficulty  to  preach  God's  Word,  to  hear 
confessions,  and  to  converse  familiarly  on  the  things  of 
God  and  the  salvation  of  souls.  Here,  as  elsewhere, 
he  had  only  to  be  seen  and  heard  to  win  all  hearts,  such 
was  the  power  of  his  spirit  and  the  sweetness  of  his 
manner.  He  found  matter  for  valuable  instructions  to 
high  and  low  in  everything  that  came  before  him. 
Neither  did  he  disdain,  great  as  was  his  credit,  to  gather 
around  him  the  roughest  of  the  populace  and  the  most 
neglected  of  the  children,  and  to  teach  them  the  Christian 
doctrine.  There  is  a  letter  of  his,  in  which  he  says  that 


74  Letter  from  Madrid. 

he  had  received  special  heavenly  illuminations  and  great 
spiritual  consolation  in  doing  this. 

On  arriving  at  Madrid,  lie  gave  a  particular  account  of 
his  journey  in  Spain. 

'  We  left  Ratisbon/  he  writes  to  the  fathers  at  Rome, 
*  three  months  ago,  and  it  has  taken  us  all  that  time  to 
reach  Madrid.  In  my  last  letter,  from  our  Lady  of 
Montserrat,  I  related  all  that  had  happened  up  to  that 
time,  repeating  some  things  which  I  had  already  written 
from  Lyons  and  Narbonne.  I  will  now  tell  the  story  of 
our  journey  from  Montserrat  to  Madrid.  We  were  very 
kindly  received  at  Saragossa  by  the  leading  persons  of 
the  city.  I  in  particular  found  great  favour  shown  to 
myself  and  the  Society  in  the  House  of  the  Hieronymites, 
and  by  the  canons  of  our  Lady  of  the  Pillar,  and  those 
of  the  Cathedral.  A  doctor  of  theology,  Michael  of 
Santangelo,  who  was  with  us  in  Paris,  offered  very  wil 
lingly  to  make  the  Spiritual  Exercises,  if  I  had  stayed 
there  for  any  time.  At  Medina  Celi  I  found  the  Bachelor 
Guttierez,  a  native  of  Almazan,  a  famous  advocate,  and 
a  very  devoted  disciple  of  Father  Master  Laynez.  He 
promised  me  to  go  to  Galapagar,  to  make  the  Exercises  for 
a  whole  month.  I  also  spoke  to  the  Duke,  the  father  of 
D.  Hernando  della  Cerda,  who,  after  some  conversation, 
took  me  apart  and  opened  his  whole  soul  to  me  with 
intense  feeling,  as  if  he  had  been  on  the  point  of  death. 
There  was  with  the  Duke  a  brother  of  the  Count  of 
Monteacuto,  the  Lord  of  Almazan,  who  is  well  acquainted 
with  our  affairs.  I  wrote  a  long  letter  to  the  father  of 
Master  Laynez,  not  having  been  able  to  get  permission 
from  Dr.  Ortiz  to  go  to  that  place,  which  is  six  leagues- 
off,  though  I  wished  to  do  so  more  than  if  it  had  been 
my  own  native  spot.  From  Medina  Celi  we  went  to 
Torrigo,  where  a  sister  of  D.  Hernando  della  Cerda.. 


Letter  from  Madrid.  75 

a  daughter  of  the  Duke's,  named  Catarina,  lives.  1 
preached  there,  and  held  long  spiritual  conversations  with 
her  and  her  husband.  The  Bachelor  Guttierez  insisted 
on  accompanying  us  as  far  as  Siguenza,  where  again  we 
found  many  persons  of  distinction  acquainted  with  our 
affairs,  especially  some  who  were  in  Rome  at  the  time  of 
our  persecutions.  From  Torrigo  we  went  to  Guadalaxara, 
and  as  several  relations  and  connections  of  Dr.  Ortiz 
\vere  living  there,  we  stayed  there  four  days,  not  without 
spiritual  profit.  Leaving  Guadalaxara  we  came  to  Alcala, 
and  there  remained  more  than  ten  days.  In  this  place 
I  became  very  intimate  with  the  vicar  general,  who 
opened  to  me  his  whole  conscience,  as  though  I  had 
been  his  confessor,  and  manifested  a  keen  desire  to 
make  the  Exercises.  To  begin  at  the  beginning,  you 
must  know  that,  as  I  wished  the  morning  after  our 
arrival  to  say  Mass  at  St.  Giusto's  Church,  the  sacristan 
called  a  young  man,  who  took  me  to  the  vicar  to  obtain 
permission  to  celebrate,  as  I  was  a  foreigner  and  not 
known  to  him.  He  asked  me  a  few  questions,  to  which 
L  replied,  then  taking  me,  first  to  the  reception-room  and 
then  to  his  own  apartments,  we  talked  on  various 
subjects  till  we  fell  to  speaking  of  our  concerns,  and 
of  our  Father  Ignatius  and  his  companions,  of  whom  he 
had  heard  something.  He  was  so  pleased  and  edified 
that  I  cannot  describe  it.  After  spending  an  hour  or 
two  in  this  way,  he  took  me  himself  to  the  church  and 
gave  orders  that  I  should  be  supplied  with  everything, 
begging  me  afterwards  to  dine  with  him.  I  did  so, 
and  after  dinner  we  spent  two  more  hours  in  various 
discourses.  After  leaving  Alcala,  it  was  God's  will  that 
\ve  should  meet  the  Cardinal  Archbishop  of  Toledo  at 
about  two  leagues  from  the  town.  I  went  up  to  kiss  his 
hand,  and  the  Doctor  spoke  of  me  and  our  affairs. 
Then  the  Cardinal  asked  us  to  return  with  him  to  Alcala, 


/  6  Letter  from  Madrid. 

so  that  I  was  able  *tjfir:  inform  him  fully  and  at  leisure 
•of  "everything  concerning  the  Society.  He  was  much 
pleased,  and  gave  me  in  writing  ample  faculties  for 
exercising  my  ministry  throughout  his  archdiocese,  as 
you  will  see  by  the  copy  which  I  send.  The  Cardinal 
was  accompanied  by  Dr.  Bernard,  one  of  his  most 
trusted  counsellors,  and  who  has  long  been  much 
attached  to  the  Society.  With  him  I  had  a  familiar 
conversation  on  spiritual  matters,  and  also  with  two 
others,  doctors  of  arts,  Master  Miranda  and  Master 
Campos,  whom  I  had  known  in  Paris,  one  of  whom 
promised  to  come  to  Galapagar  to  make  a  month  of 
Exercises.  On  my  taking  leave,  the  vicar  said  to  me  with 
great  feeling,  that  if  I  were  able  to  remain  with  him  a 
few  days  he  should  be  ready  and  willing  to  follow  me  to 
prison  and  to  death.  We  arrived  here  at  Madrid  last 
Thursday,  and  I  find  many  opportunities  and  various 
ways  of  labouring  with  profit,  for,  independently  of  my 
being  known  and  approved  by  the  Cardinal,  Don  Pedro 
•of  Castille,  who  was  my  spiritual  son  in  Ratisbon,  is  here. 
Two  days  before  our  arrival,  Don  Francis  Manriquez, 
who  made  the  Exercises  with  me  in  Ratisbon,  came 
here  from  the  Imperial  Court.  But  nothing  will  come 
of  all  these  good  opportunities,  because,  having  several 
other  places  to  visit,  we  are  unable  to  remain  here.  I 
was  anxious  to  write  full  particulars  of  all  these  things, 
that  you  may  see  that  1  have  not  been  burnt  in  effigy  in 
Spain,  and  that  our  work  here  is  regarded  with  greater 
favour  than  I  can  describe.  And  if  I  am  to  say  what  J 
think,  it  is  my  belief  that  this  fair  weather  which  we 
are  enjoying  was  merited  by  the  storms  of  persecution 
endured  here  by  our  Father  Ignatius,  God  so  ordering 
things,  that  where  he  went  through  so  many  sufferings  we 
should  find  so  much  favour.  I  pray  Christ  our  Lord,  of 
,His  divine  clemency,  to  grant  us  grace  not  to  grow 


Favre  ordered  to  return  to  Germany.      /  / 

v/eary  of  labouring  in  His  vineyard,  for  which  He  gave 
Mis  blood  and  His  life.'1 

From  Madrid  Peter  went  to  Galapagar,  which  is  a 
large  town,  from  which  Dr.  Ortiz  received  a  great  part 
of  his  ecclesiastical  revenues.  On  his  way,  Father  Favre 
preached  a  kind  of  mission  in  three  places,  and  heard 
the  confessipns  of  several  persons,  who  were  moved  by 
his  sermons  to  turn  to  God.  In  Galapagar,  where  he 
remained  longer  than  anywhere  else,  he  took  on  himself 
the  instruction  of  boys  and  girls  in  the  Christian  doctrine 
daily  in  church,  and  not  only  those  belonging  to  the  spot, 
but  many  from  neighbouring  places,  who  were  sent  by 
their  parents  to  hear  him.  The  people,  too,  flocked  in 
crowds,  and  the  holy  man,  seeing  them  so  desirous  of 
the  Word  of  God,  undertook  the  additional  labour  of 
preaching  on  every  festival  to  the  adults,  and  giving 
them  more  solid  instruction  on  the  precepts  of  the  law 
of  God.  And  the  fruit  which  was  the  result  was  so 
abundant,  that  when  the  Doctor  had  to  go  to  Occagna 
to  visit  the  Infantas  of  Spain,  he  had  not  the  heart  to 
deprive  his  people  of  the  presence  of  Favre,  but  left  him 
behind  to  continue  his  Apostolic  labours.3 

Fie  was  in  the  midst  of  these  labours  when,  quite 
unexpectedly,  he  received  letters  from  Rome  containing 
express  orders  from  the  Sovereign  Pontiff  to  return 
immediately  to  Germany,  as  things  there  were  taking  a 
bad  turn,  and  required  his  presence  and  assistance.  He, 
perfect  in  obedience,  without  delay,  prepared  to  go  back 
all  that  long  and  dangerous  journey  by  himself,  but  God 
provided  him  most  opportunely  with  t\vo  companions, 
the  more  welcome  for  being  unexpected.  In  passing 
through  Occagna,  he  was  obliged  to  yield  to  a  pressing 

1  Autograph  letter,  October  27,  1541. 
"  Autograph  letter. 


78  Two  novices. 


request  made  to  him,  that  he  would  give  two  daughters 
of  the  Emperor  Charles  V.  the  consolation  of  a  visit 
from  him.  They  were  Mary,  afterwards  married  to  the 
Emperor  Maximilian,  and  Jane,  afterwards  wife  of 
Don  Juan,  Prince  of  Portugal.  He  stayed  a  very  short 
time  in  that  Court,  yet  he  did  much  good  there,  and 
gained  the  veneration  of  the  Princesses,  who,  when  he 
was  about  to  leave,  desired  two  priests  attached  to  them 
as  chaplains  to  bear  him  company  as  far  as  Toledo. 
Their  names  were  John  Aragonio  and  Alvaro  Alfonso. 
On  the  way  they  entered  into  familiar  discourses  with 
Favre,  and  were  so  struck  with  his  exalted  virtue  that  the 
heart  of  each  was  at  the  same  time  touched  by  God,  and 
they  obtained  leave  from  the  Princesses  to  follow  him  to 
Germany,  not  only  as  companions  for  the  journey,  but  as 
brothers  in  religion. 

The  holy  man  received  them  as  novices,  and  he  so 
trained  them  during  the  journey,  and  afterwards  in 
Germany,  by  the  brightness  of  his  example  and  the 
power  of  his  words,  to  a  high  degree  of  virtue  and  per 
fection,  that  they  both,  as  we  shall  see.  became  very 
zealous  labourers  in  the  Lord's  vineyard.  In  1544, 
Aragonio  went  to  Portugal ;  after  finishing  his  studies  at 
Coimbra,  he  was  appointed,  with  two  others,  to  found 
the  College  of  St.  Antony  at  Lisbon.  Father  Balthasar 
Tellez.  in  his  Chronicle  of  Portugal,  writes  of  him  thus- - 
'  This  Father  was  a  great  servant  of  God,  much  given 
to  prayer,  and  very  zealous  for  the  salvation  of  souls, 
which  he  strove  to  compass  by  every  means,  chiefly  by 
the  Sacrament  of  Penance.  And  as  he  was  singularly 
attractive  and  affectionate,  he  gained  the  hearts  of  all 
with  whom  he  had  to  do.  By  his  holy  words  and  efforts 
he  not  only  persuaded  every  one  whom  he  came  across 
to  be  reconciled  to  God,  and  to  begin  a  new  life,  but 
as  soon  as  he  had  gained  any  one  he  made  him  an 


At  Barcelona.  79 


instrument    for   gaming   also    his   family,  relations,   and 
friends.' 

Father  Alvaro  Alfonso  remained  at  Cologne  to  study, 
from  which  place  he  too  was  sent  to  Portugal  and  to 
Spain.  He  was  a  most  zealous  labourer  for  the  divine 
.glory  and  for  the  salvation  of  his  neighbours ;  indeed 
his  fervour  had  to  be  somewhat  restrained  by  Father 
Favre,  who,  on  leaving  Germany,  left  for  him  some 
written  spiritual  counsels,  full  of  wisdom. 


CHAPTER   XVII. 

Peter  Favrc  at  Barcelona. 

FAVRK,  joyful  at  having  gained  these  two  companions, 
began  his  journey  with  them  at  the  beginning  of  January, 
1542.  On  arriving  at  Barcelona  he  unexpectedly  found 
there  Father  Antonio  Araoz  and  Father  Diego  d'Eguia, 
who  had  been  sent  to  Spain  by  St.  Ignatius,  for  the 
purpose  of  publishing  in  that  country  the  Bull  approving 
.and  confirming  the  Society.  They  had  arrived  the  night 
before,  having  walked  all  the  way  from  Rome  to  Barcelona 
without  any  means  of  support,  except  the  alms  which 
they  begged  from  pious  persons  on  the  journey.  The 
fathers'  mutual  joy  and  consolation  in  seeing  and 
embracing  each  other  was  all  the  greater  for  being  so 
unexpected.  And  as  Favre  was  obliged  to  wait  for  a  time 
for  better  weather  for  his  journey  to  France,  he  at  once 
took  counsel  with  Araoz ;  and  the  two  Apostolic  men 
resolved  to  begin  their  sacred  ministrations  the  next  day, 
preaching  the  Word  of  God  to  the  citizens  of  the  place, 
whose  remembrance  of  and  veneration  for  St.  Ignatius 


So  Francis  Borgia. 

were  still  fresh.  A  few  years  before,  he  had  made  himself 
a  great  name  in  the  city,  for  his  holy  life  and  wonderful 
works.  Father  Araoz  preached  in  the  parish  Church  of 
St.  Maria  del  Pino,  and  Father  Favre  in  the  Church  of 
St.  Clare,  belonging  to  the  Benedictine  nuns. 

There  was  at  this  time  in  Barcelona,  in  quality  of 
viceroy,  lieutenant,  and  captain-general  of  the  princi 
pality  of  Catalonia,  Don  Francis  Borgia.  Ever  since 
his  great  change  for  the  better,  after  seeing  the  disfigured 
countenance  of  the  deceased  Empress  Isabella  at  Granada, 
he  had  given  himself  entirely  to  the  concerns  of  his  soul, 
and  was  leading  a  very  holy  life  in  frequent  fastings,  long 
prayers,  and  works  of  great  piety,  as  well  as  of  mercy  and 
zeal  towards  others.  He  was  admired  and  praised  as 
the  mirror  and  model  of  true  Christian  princes,  and  his 
Court  was  more  like  a  religious  community  than  an 
assemblage  of  knights  and  grandees  of  the  State.  He  did 
not  then  know  the  Society  of  Jesus — perhaps  not  even  by 
name ;  and  I  will  now  relate  the  way  in  which  he  learnt 
first  to  know  and  love  it,  then  to  advance  it,  and  lastly 
to  resolve  on  dedicating  himself  to  it. 

His  wife,  Dona  Leonora  di  Castro,  who  resembled  him 
perfectly  in  piety,  was  that  morning  at  the  Church  of 
St.  Clare  with  some  of  her  ladies,  to  hear  the  sermon  of 
Father  Favre.  She  was '  so  greatly  struck  and  moved  to 
compunction  by  his  powerful  words  and  zeal,  that  when 
the  sermon  was  over,  she  went  to  him  to  speak  on 
spiritual  subjects,  and  having  thus  tasted  the  sweetness 
and  unction  of  his  spirit,  she  earnestly  begged  him  to  be 
so  kind  as  to  preach  another  sermon  the  following  day. 
On  returning  to  the  palace  she  told  everything  to  her 
husband,  Don  Francis,  and  was  profuse  in  praise  of  the 
virtue  and  sanctity  of  Father  Favre.  Soon  after,  Father 
Araoz  called  upon  her,  and  set  forth  briefly  the  purpose 
for  which  he  had  come  to  Spain,  giving  her  an  account 


Favre  s  Sermon.  Si 


of  the  institute  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  founded  in  Rome 
by  Ignatius,  and  approved  as  a  religious  order  by  Pope 
Paul  III.  All  this  was  related  to  Don  Francis,  and 
kindled  in  him  the  desire  to  make  closer  acquaintance 
with  the  two  fathers,  and  to  learn  from  them  the  true 
object  of  their  vocation. 

Accordingly,  next  day,  he  was  present  with  his  whole 
Court  at  Father  Favre's  sermon.  That  first  time  of 
hearing  him  was  sufficient  to  bind  his  heart  to  that  great 
man,  and  give  him  the  highest  esteem  for  him.  Francis 
made  him  dine  with  him  ;  and  all  dinner  time  was  spent 
in  hearing  him  speak  of  God,  and  give  a  full  account  of 
the  object  of  the  Society,  and  of  the  great  good  to  souls 
which  it  was  already  doing  in  Italy,  Germany,  and  Por 
tugal.  Francis  conceived  so  high  an  opinion  of  the 
perfection  and  wisdom  of  St.  Ignatius,  that  from  that 
time  he  began,  and  continued,  as  long  as  he  remained  in 
the  world,  to  write  to  him  for  advice  and  direction  as  to 
the  rules  he  should  observe  in  frequenting  the  sacraments 
and  in  the  practice  of  virtue.  And  as  he  could  not  keep 
Favre,  he  earnestly  requested  and  obtained  leave  to  have 
Father  Araoz  for  some  time  in  Barcelona.  When,  after 
the  death  of  his  father  Don  John,  he  went  to  rule  and 
govern  his  duchy  of  Gandia,  his  first  thought  was  to 
establish  there  first  a  college,  and  then  a  university  for 
the  Society.  And  at  length,  as  we  shall  see  in  due  course, 
he  resolved  to  leave  the  world,  and  to  give  himself  to 
St.  Ignatius  as  his  son  in  place  of  Father  Favre,  whom 
he  saw  after  his  death  ascending  gloriously  into  heaven. 

For  the  rest,  during  the  few  days  that  Favre  remained 
at  Barcelona,  he  won  the  goodwill  and  affection  of  every 
one,  as  he  always  did  even  in  the  shortest  visit,  by  his 
winning  manners  and  exemplary  life.  The  Benedictine 
nuns  of  the  Convent  of  St.  Clare,  where  he  often  preached, 
desired  to  hear  him  discourse  privately  on  the  perfection 

G 


82  Favre  s  return  to  Spires. 

suited  to  their  state.  He  complied,  exhorting  them  to  a 
complete  union  with  God  by  means  of  prayer,  detachment 
from  the  world,  and  continual  mortification.  Many  of 
them  were  very  spiritual  persons  ;  and  remarkable  among 
these,  were  Dona  Geronima  Oluia,  and  Dona  Teresa  Rega- 
della,  both  of  very  noble  birth,  and,  which  is  a  far  higher 
distinction,  favoured  by  God  with  singular  gifts  and  graces. 
The  holy  conversation  of  Favre  inspired  them  with  so 
strong  an  affection  for  the  institute  of  the  Society,  that  they 
wrote  to  Rome  for  permission  from  the  Apostolic  See  to 
place  themselves  under  the  obedience  and  direction  of 
our  fathers.  But  St.  Ignatius,  who,  for  very  valid  reasons, 
was  exceedingly  averse  from  undertaking  the  direction  of 
nuns,  or  women  living  in  community,  constantly  refused 
to  accept  the  charge,  and  exhorted  them  to  persevere 
cheerfully  in  the  path  of  perfection,  according  to  their 
rule,  as  may  be  seen  in  his  letters  to  Dona  Teresa 
Regadella. 


CHAPTER     XVIII. 

Return  to  Spires. 

THE  weather  being  now  somewhat  improved,  Father 
Favre  took  leave  of  the  holy  viceroy,  Don  Francis,  of 
his  two  companions,  and  of  his  friends  in  Barcelona, 
and  resumed  his  journey  with  his  two  novices.  Before 
leaving  Spain  he  was  in  danger  of  meeting  with  the  assas 
sins  who  infested  the  roads  ;  in  France  he  was  on  the 
point  of  again  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  soldiers,  and 
in  Switzerland  of  being  seized  by  the  heretics.  The 
journey  was  long,  and  full  of  disasters,  in  the  depth  of 
winter,  sometimes  in  floods  of  rain,  sometimes  through 


Otho  Truchses. 


ice  and  snow.  The  plague  was  raging  in  some  cities, 
some  were  in  all  the  confusion  of  war,  others  were  the 
prey  of  intestine  discord  and  strife.  Nevertheless,  full  of 
trust  in  God,  he  generously  overcame  every  difficulty, 
though  often  delayed  by  failure  of  strength  and  by 
illness.  He  was  ready  and  willing  to  lay  down  life 
itself  if  only  he  might  obediently  accomplish  the  will  of 
the  Vicar  of  Jesus  Christ.  Thus,  visited  by  continual 
spiritual  consolations  and  bodily  sufferings,  he  only 
reached  Soleure,  on  the  borders  of  Switzerland,  on  Holy 
Thursday,  after  preaching  at  a  place  in  Savoy  which  was 
in  great  spiritual  need.  On  Easter  Day  he  came  to  a 
place  where  there  was  no  priest,  and  there,  acting  as 
parish  priest,  he  sang  solemn  Mass,  to  the  great  delight 
of  the  good  inhabitants  ;  and  not  there  only,  but  else 
where  in  Germany,  he  found,  as  we  see  from  his  letters, 
many  quite  populous  places  where  there  was  but  one 
priest,  and  some  where  there  was  not  one,  all  of  them 
having  either  died  of  the  plague  or  been  perverted  to  the 
Lutheran  heresy. 

On  the  1 4th  of  April  he  arrived  at  Spires,  where  he 
was  very  courteously  received  by  Otho  Truchses,  who 
gave  him  a  letter  which  Father  Nicolas  Bobadilla  had 
left  for  him  a  few  days  before,  informing  him  that 
Morone,  the  Bishop  of  Modena,  and  the  Pope's 
Nuncio,  left  it  to  his  choice  either  to  join  Mgr.  Jerome 
Veralli  at  the  Court  of  the  King  of  the  Romans,  or  to 
remain  at  Spires  till  further  orders  from  his  Holiness. 
After  imploring  to  be  enlightened  from  heaven  as  to 
his  course,  he  yielded  at  last  to  the  pressing  entreaties 
of  Truchses,  and  remained,  with  his  two  companions,  at 
Spires.  He  was  already  well  known  there  by  his  labours 
in  God's  service  during  the  preceding  year.  Now  that  he 
returned  he  was  greatly  surprised  to  find  the  minds  of  the 
inhabitants,  particularly  of  the  clergy,  prejudiced  against 
o  2 


84  False  reports  aboiit  Favre. 

him.  The  reason  of  this  feeling  was  that,  shortly  before 
his  arrival,  a  report  had  been  set  on  foot,  which  spread 
among  the  people,  that  he  was  sent  by  the  Pope  and  his 
Nuncio,  with  the  most  ample  faculties,  in  the  character 
of  a  reformer  of  the  clergy ;  and  as  the  very  name 
of  a  reformer  is  always  hateful,  every  one  was  filled 
with  horror  and  indignation,  and,  in  consequence,  stood 
upon  his  guard  and  held  himself  in  readiness  as  if  to 
repel  the  attacks  of  a  declared  enemy.  Neither  were 
these  guilty  feelings  merely  cherished  in  secret,  they 
showed  themselves  openly,  and  men  avoided  speaking 
to  Favre,  and  even  seeing  him.  He  perceived  the  state 
of  things,  but  appeared  not  to  know  it.  After  asking  the 
help  of  God  with  fervent  prayers  and  many  tears,  he  set 
himself  to  gain  by  meekness  and  patience  the  goodwill 
and  affection  of  some  few  of  the  clergy,  showing  them 
that  the  only  commission  he  held  was  supplied  to  him  by 
his  own  zeal,  which  was,  to  promote,  with  all  discretion, 
the  eternal  welfare  both  of  the  clergy  and  laity.  Having 
won  over  these  persons,  it  was  not  a  difficult  matter  to- 
him  gradually  to  draw  over  others  by  their  means ;  and 
indeed  there  was  much  need  that  they  should  reform 
their  lives,  which  were,  for  the  most  part,  very  irregular 
and  scandalous.  He  had  to  endure  many  labours  and 
sufferings  in  bringing  them  back  to  purity,  but  at  length, 
by  private  exhortations,  and  still  more  by  the  Spiritual 
Exercises,  he  succeeded  in  persuading  them  to  abandon 
their  vices  altogether,  and  to  lead  lives  worthy  of  their 
state.  In  order  to  make  their  conversion  permanent,  and 
any  relapse  difficult,  he  stirred  up  the  zeal  of  the  bishop,. 
Philip  Fleschein,  whom  he  had  known  before,  both  at 
Spires  itself  and  at  the  Diet  of  Ratisbon.  He  spent  four 
whole  days  in  conversing  with  him  on  the  great  obliga 
tions  of  the  pastoral  office,  at  the  same  time  devising 
exceedingly  wise  laws  and  regulations  for  the  extirpation 


Reformation  of  clergy  and  laity.        85 

of  scandals  and  abuses,  and  for  driving  away  the  devour 
ing  wolves  from  the  flock.  The  zeal  and  energy  of  the 
bishop's  vicar  general  were  of  no  slight  assistance  to  him 
in  this  work.  He  was  able  to  spend  only  eleven  days  in 
retreat,  making  the  Spiritual  Exercises ;  but  in  that  time 
he  found  himself  changed  so  entirely  into  another  man, 
that,  filled  with  a  profound  disgust  for  worldly  greatness 
.and  rank,  he  determined  on  giving  himself  up  to  Favre 
for  life  as  a  disciple  of  his  wisdom  and  his  companion  in 
religion.  But  good  and  zealous  prelates  were  too  scarce 
in  Germany  in  those  days  to  allow  of  the  few  that  there 
were  leaving  the  cities  in  which  they  were.  Favre  was 
obliged  to  persuade,  or  rather  to  command,  him  to 
remain  at  his  post,  and  to  do  all  he  could,  animated 
by  the  true  spirit  of  charity,  for  the  salvation  of  his 
neighbours.  And  so,  indeed,  he  did ;  beginning  by 
declaring  war  on  the  practice  of  concubinage,  especially 
among  priests,  insisting  that  such  women  should  either 
lead  a  virtuous  life  or  be  altogether  banished  from 
Spires. 

And  now  that  Favre  had  restored  the  clergy  to  primitive 
simplicity  and  austerity  of  life,  and  thus  removed  that 
great  excitement  to  evil,  he  turned  his  attention  to  the  in 
struction  and  amendment  of  the  laity ;  and,  with  the  help 
of  his  two  novices,  Aragonio  and  Alfonso,  he  effected  so 
much,  that  when  the  parish  priests  and  their  curates  took 
the  account  of  the  confessions  and  communions  the  fol 
lowing  Easter  they  were  found  to  be  more  numerous  than 
those  of  all  the  twenty  preceding  years  put  together. 
Besides  this,  he  brought  back  several  religious  communi 
ties  of  both  sexes  to  the  observance  of  their  rule,  and 
purified  them  from  the  taint  of  some  Lutheranism  which 
secretly  lurked  among  them.  He  saved  from  impending 
ruin  a  learned  and  gifted  man,  who  had  fallen  into  the 
hands  of  a  treacherous  master,  from  whom  he  had  already 


86  The  people  conciliated. 

imbibed  the  poison  of  heresy,  and  so  was  on  the  point  of 
doing  serious  injury  to  the  Church.  He  made  him  enter 
into  himself,  and  convinced  him  of  his  errors ;  and  then 
turned  him  into  so  ardent  a  champion  of  the  Catholic 
faith  that  thenceforward  the  teacher  who  had  perverted 
him  had  no  more  terrible  opponent,  nor  one  whom  he 
feared  more.  In  like  manner  he  earned  the  goodwill 
of  a  religious  preacher,  who  was  in  the  habit  of  boldly 
propagating  false  doctrines  from  the  pulpit,  and  whom 
Favre  induced  to  retract  publicly.  Moreover,  lest  he 
should  be  tempted  by  poverty,  which  is  often  the  worst 
of  counsellors,  to  do  wrong  again,  he  obtained  ample 
help  and  alms  for  him  and  his. 

So  marvellous  were  the  effects  produced  in  the  city  of 
Spires  by  the  gentle  spirit  of  Father  Favre  that,  having 
begun  by  being  shunned  and  hated  by  every  one  in  it, 
there  was  at  last  not  one,  even  of  the  heretics,  who  did 
not  greatly  love  and  respect  him.  He  speaks  of  this 
himself,  in  his  letters  to  Rome,  as  something  wonderful, 
giving  the  glory  to  God. 

'  I  laboured  in  this  city,'  he  says,  '  with  my  two  Spanish 
companions,  till  the  loth  of  October,  making  the  people 
friendly  to  my  person  and  to  our  habit,  which  is  that 
commonly  worn  by  priests  in  Spain.  My  previous  letters 
have  made  your  charity  acquainted  with  all  that  hap 
pened  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  time.  Blessed  be  God, 
Who  has  made  the  end  and  issue  so  much  better  than 
the  beginning.  At  the  present  time  there  is  no  one  in 
Spires,  priest  or  layman,  who  is  not  very  well  and  kindly 
disposed  towards  us  ;  even  those  who  most  differed  from 
us  on  points  of  faith,  have  become  friendly  to  us  from 
observing  our  way  of  living  and  working.  We  quitted 
Spires  with  regret,  and  it  may  truly  be  said  that  we  have 
left  our  hearts  there.' 


Letter  to  Laynez.  87 

At  the  same  time  he  did  not  neglect  the  spiritual  culti 
vation  of  his  two  novices,  John  Aragonio  and  Alvaro 
Alfonso.  Having  by  this  time  thoroughly  initiated  them 
in  the  things  of  God,  he  sent  first  one  and  then  the 
other  as  pilgrims  to  Cologne,  begging  their  bread  on 
the  journey.  They  had  to  endure  many  inconveniences, 
and  no  slight  danger,  on  the  way  ;  but  they  returned 
full  of  joy  at  the  great  benefit  which  had  resulted  to 
their  souls.  The  good  father  received  them  again  with 
expressions  of  the  tenderest  affection  ;  and,  on  hearing 
the  account  of  their  adventures,  he  was  transported  with 
spiritual  joy,  and  dwelt  a  long  time  in  contemplation  on 
the  effects  of  the  divine  goodness  and  providence,  giving 
infinite  thanks  to  Him  and  to  the  saints  of  heaven.  And 
it  was  very  common  with  him  to  lift  up  his  soul  in 
this  manner  to  God,  and  to  be  favoured  by  Him  with 
frequent  lights  and  supernatural  inspirations,  which  he 
was  often  unable  to  explain  in  words  when  he  wished  to 
do  so.  As  an  instance,  we  give  a  passage  from  a  letter 
which  he  wrote  from  Spires,  on  the  3oth  of  August  of 
this  very  year,  1542,  to  Father  James  Laynez,  his  inti 
mate  confidant. 

'  Would  that  it  might  please  the  Blessed  Mother  of  our 
Lord  and  God  to  enable  me  to  relate  to  you  the  many 
and  great  spiritual  goods  which,  since  I  left  you  at 
Placenza  till  this  day,  have  come  into  my  mind  and 
remained  there,  both  as  to  knowing  and  as  to  feeling 
aright  the  things  which  concern  our  Lord  and  His 
most  Blessed  Mother,  the  saints  and  angels,  and  the 
souls  in  purgatory.  And  what  can  I  say  of  my  own 
interior?  Of  the  elevation  and  depression  of  my  soul, 
of  the  way  in  which  I  have  entered  into  and  gone  forth 
again  from  myself?  How  can  I  speak  of  the  manner  in 
which  I  have  learned  to  purify  my  body,  soul,  and  spirit, 


88  Letter  to  Laynez. 

to  cleanse  my  heart,  and  by  removing  every  hindrance  to 
prepare  it  for  receiving,  retaining,  and  preserving  the 
floods  of  divine  favour ;  asking  for  all  these  various 
graces,  and  striving  and  praying  with  importunity  to 
gain  them?  And  as  to  what  regards  my  neighbour 
also,  I  could  tell  you  many  things  of  the  methods  and 
ways  which  my  God  has  shown  me ;  how  He  has  revealed 
His  truths,  and  laid  bare  to  me  the  lives  of  men  that  I 
might  know  them  ;  so  as  to  rejoice  in  their  welfare,  and 
for  Christ's  sake  to  compassionate  their  misfortunes  : 
showing  love  to  some,  bearing  with  and  pitying  others ; 
teaching  me  again  to  return  thanks  for  one,  and  beg 
mercy  and  pardon  for  another,  seeking  and  rinding 
excuses  for,  and  speaking  well  of,  this  and  that  man  in 
the  presence  of  God  and  His  saints.  In  short,  I  declare  to 
you,  my  brother,  Master  Laynez,  that  I  should  never  be 
able  to  come  up  to  in  word  or  deed,  nor  even  to  conceive 
in  thought,  the  favours  which  our  Lord  God  has  shown, 
and  is  still  showing,  and  is  most  willing  to  continue  to 
show  me — dressing  and  binding  up  all  my  wounds, 
healing  all  my  infirmities,  and  showing  Himself  so  won 
derfully  good  in  blotting  out  all  my  sins.  To  Him  be 
all  the  glory  given  !  Amen.  Blessed  be  His  Name  every 
where,  and  by  all  creatures  !  Amen.  May  He  be  for 
ever  honoured  in  Himself,  His  Mother,  His  angels,  and 
all  His  saints  !  Amen.  May  He  be  magnified  and 
exalted  above  all  things  by  all  His  creatures  !  Amen. 
I  say  this  Amen  for  myself,  and  I  entreat  you  to  praise 
Him  for  me,  your  brother,  as  I  do  for  all  the  Society.' 


CHAPTER    XIX. 
Peter  Favre  at  Mayence. 

FROM  Spires,  Father  Favre  went,  by  permission  of  the 
Nuncio,  John  Morone,  on  whose  commands  he  was 
dependent,  to  Mayence,  whither  he  was  invited  by  the 
Cardinal  Archbishop  and  Elector,  Albert  of  Brandenburg. 
They  entered  into  familiar  discourse  on  the  grievous 
injury  that  heresy  was  doing  to  religion  in  Germany, 
and  Favre,  taught  by  his  experience  elsewhere,  proposed 
and  suggested  to  the  Cardinal  various  measures  and 
plans  to  be  adopted  for  saving  his  States  from  the 
infection.  The  Cardinal,  a  very  single-minded  and 
zealous  man,  took  up  these  proposals  without  delay, 
and  issued  very  wise  and  timely  regulations.  This 
stirred  up  the  blood  and  bad  humours  of  some  who 
sought  to  escape  from  the  hand  of  the  physician  who 
wished  to  cure  them ;  so  that  here  in  Mayence,  as 
formerly  in  Spires,  Favre  met  with  aversion  and  dislike. 
But  he,  employing  the  same  means  as  before,  very  soon 
succeeded  so  completely,  by  the  modesty  of  his  deport 
ment,  the  affability  of  his  manners,  and  the  gentleness 
and  forbearance  of  his  speech,  in  gaining  the  regard, 
not  only  of  his  opponents,  but  of  all  classes  of  persons, 
that  there  was  not,  perhaps,  a  city  in  Germany  where 
he  was  more  loved  and  respected.  He  availed  himself 
of  these  favourable  dispositions  to  cultivate  the  souls  of 
both  clergy  and  laity  by  means  of  the  Exercises,  which 
produced,  as  was  infallibly  the  case,  abundant  fruit. 


Sermons  at  Mayence. 


Meanwhile,  the  Ecumenical  Council  was  announced 
as  to  meet  at  Trent,  and  the  Archbishop  had  intended 
to  send  Favre  there  in  his  place  as  his  proctor  and  theo 
logian.  But  the  opening  of  the  Council  was  deferred 
to  a  more  fitting  time,  in  consequence  of  the  war  which 
was  still  raging  among  the  Christian  princes,  and  so  he 
kept  him  with  him  at  Mayence.  After  Christmas  he 
took  him  with  him  to  Aschaffenburg,  and  intrusted  him 
with  some  very  private  controversial  writings  and  treatises, 
leaving  to  his  learning  and  discretion  the  task  of  separat 
ing  the  good  from  the  bad,  which  had  been  artfully 
mixed  up  therein.  On  returning  to  Mayence,  Favre 
undertook  to  explain  the  Psalms  of  David  in  the  Uni 
versity,  and  to  preach  in  Latin  in  the  church  on  Sundays. 
A  numerous  and  distinguished  circle  of  men  of  letters 
crowded  to  hear  him,  as  well  as  ecclesiastics  of  every 
rank.  All  were  astonished  at  the  depth  of  his  learning 
and  the  fervour  of  his  zeal.  In  his  sermons  he  touched 
very  lightly  on  controverted  points  of  religion,  dwelling 
more  at  length  on  the  eternal  truths  of  faith,  the  necessity 
of  good  works,  and  the  reformation  of  manners.  At  the 
same  time  he  continued  to  give  the  Spiritual  Exercises, 
sometimes  to  a  few,  sometimes  to  a  large  number.  He 
gave  them  also  to  two  bishops,  the  Suffragan  of  Mayence, 
and  the  Bishop-Elect  of  Naumburg.  Each  came  forth 
from  them  with  a  firm  resolution  to  do  everything  in 
his  power  to  promote  the  salvation  of  the  souls  of  his 
neighbour.  By  the  same  means  he  effected  the  conver 
sion  of  several  priests  who  had  for  some  time  led  a 
scandalous  life,  and  were  in  consequence,  as  so  often 
happens,  wavering  in  their  faith  also.  As  for  the  laity, 
as  they  did  not  all  know  Latin,  and  were  therefore  not 
able  to  enjoy  the  privilege  they  so  much  desired,  a 
good  interpreter  was  found  to  translate  Favre's  instruc 
tions  and  meditations  into  their  own  language  for  them. 


Success  with  the  people.  9 1 

People  were  continually  going  to  him  for  spiritual  advice 
and  his  direction  as  to  their  souls,  and  those  thought 
themselves  very  fortunate  who  were  able  to  make  even 
a  single  confession  to  him.  In  short,  his  labours  were 
rewarded  by  such  abundant  fruit,  that  it  was  that  which 
chiefly  made  him  begin  to  hope  for  a  possibility  of  curing 
the  many  evils  of  Germany,  if  the  supply  of  zealous 
Gospel  labourers  could  be  increased.  And  writing  on 
the  subject  to  St.  Ignatius,  he  had  no  hesitation  in 
saying  that  as  the  fruit  gained  in  Parma  had  prevented 
his  regretting  leaving  Rome,  so,  trusting  in  the  merit  of 
obedience,  he  had  received  great  consolation  from  God 
in  leaving  Parma  for  Germany,  Germany  for  Spain,  and 
then  again,  Spain  for  Spires,  and  Spires  for  Mayence. 
It  is  true,  moreover,  that  at  the  same  time  he  did  not 
forget  or  neglect  the  places  which  he  had  visited,  nor 
the  persons  whom  he  had  instructed ;  for  besides  con 
tinually  bearing  them  in  mind  and  commending  them 
to  God  in  prayer,  he  often  wrote  them  letters  full  of 
power  and  breathing  the  fire  of  charity,  encouraging 
some  and  consoling  others  ;  supporting  and  animating 
the  weak,  and  restraining  the  bolder  spirits  within  the 
bounds  of  discretion. 

At  first  the  Cardinal  wished  him  to  lodge  in  his 
palace  with  him,  so  as  to  converse  more  at  ease  with 
him  on  public  and  private  matters  ;  but  as  soon  as 
Favre  had  satisfied  this  wish  for  a  time,  he  asked  and 
obtained  permission  to  live  elsewhere  in  a  poor  manner. 
The  public  hospital  would,  as  usual,  have  been  his 
choice ;  but  as  he  had  to  receive  frequent  visits  from 
great  persons,  and  to  converse  with  many  people  on  their 
spiritual  concerns,  he  hired  some  humble  little  rooms, 
where  he  stayed  for  a  time,  and  then  went  to  live  with 
a  certain  Conrad,  the  parish  priest  of  St.  Christopher's, 
whom  he  had  brought,  by  means  of  the  Exercises,  to- 


92  Peter   Canisius. 

that  bright  spiritual  perfection  of  which  he  afterwards 
made  profession  as  a  Carthusian  monk.  In  the  beginning 
of  the  May  of  1543,  he  received  immense  consolation 
by  gaining  for  himself,  for  the  Society,  for  Germany,  and 
for  the  Church,  a  new  and  most  valiant  soldier. 

There  was  at  that  time  studying  at  Cologne  a  young 
man  from  Nimeguen,  named  Peter  Canisius.  He  was 
already  famous,  though  but  twenty-two  years  old,  for  his 
keenness  of  intellect,  virtuous  life,  and  religious  zeal. 
Having  heard  what  great  things  were  spoken  of  the 
virtues  and  learning  of  Peter  Favre,  he  greatly  desired 
to  make  his  acquaintance  and  consult  him  on  questions 
of  conscience,  especially  as  to  his  choice  of  a  state  of 
life,  about  which  he  was  in  doubt  and  uncertainty. 
Accordingly,  late  in  April  or  early  in  May,  he  went 
from  Cologne  to  Mayence,  and  called  on  the  priest  of 
St.  Christopher's,  by  whom  he  was  most  kindly  received. 
As  Favre  was  not  at  home  at  the  time,  the  priest  told 
him  so  many  wonderful  things  about  that  saintly  man, 
that  the  ardent  youth  longed  impatiently  for  his  return, 
that  he  might  have  an  interview  with  him  and  open  his 
heart  to  him.  Favre  came  in ;  and  after  Canisius  had 
heard  him  speak  a  few  times  on  divine  subjects,  and 
had  learnt  from  him  the  institute  and  object  of  the 
Society  of  Jesus,  he  felt  no  doubt  at  all  that  this  was 
that  new  community  of  priests  which,  according  to  a 
prediction  made  to  him  many  years  before  at  Arnheim, 
he  was  to  join.  Nevertheless,  in  order  to  make  himself 
more  sure  as  to  the  will  of  God,  he  made  the  Spiritual' 
Exercises  under  Favre's  direction  ;  and  hardly  had  he 
gone  through  the  first  meditations  than,  utterly  unable 
to  resist  the  vivid  light  which  God  communicated  to 
his  soul,  he  bound  himself  on  the  8th  of  May,  by  a 
vow  signed  with  his  hand,  to  dedicate  himself  wholly 
to  the  Society. 


Canisius  becomes  a  novice.  93 

No  words  can  describe  the  consolation,  joy,  and 
fervour  which  took  possession  of  him  when,  at  the  close 
of  the  Exercises,  Favre  received  him  as  a  novice.  He 
went  about  in  an  almost  ecstatic  state  with  wonder  and 
interior  emotion.  And  after  he  had,  in  calmer  moments, 
had  a  more  thorough  taste  of  Favre's  spirit,  he  spoke 
of  him  as  an  incomparable  man,  and  could  never  satisfy 
himself  with  hearing  him  and  learning  from  his  life  ever 
new  lessons  of  perfection.  Indeed,  unable  to  keep  to 
himself  the  high  opinion  and  veneration  with  which 
Favre  inspired  him,  he  communicated  his  sentiments  to 
an  intimate  friend  of  his  at  Cologne,  to  whom  he  wrote 
from  Mayence  in  the  following  terms — 

1  Here  I  am,  thank  God,  safe  and  sound  at  Mayence  ; 
and  I  have  been  very  fortunate  in  finding  the  man  here 
of  whom  I  came  in  search ;  if,  indeed,  he  is  a  man,  and 
not  rather  an  angel  of  the  Lord.  I  have  never  seen 
nor  heard  a  more  learned  or  profound  theologian,  nor 
any  person  equal  to  him  in  sanctity.  His  only  desire 
is  to  labour  for  the  salvation  of  souls,  in  union  with 
Christ.  Whether  he  is  working,  or  speaking,  or  con 
versing  familiarly,  even  when  sitting  at  table,  whatever 
he  says  or  does  is  full  of  God;  and  although  he  is 
exceedingly  fluent,  it  is  never  possible  to  be  weary  of 
hearing  him,  however  long  he  speaks.  So  great  is  his 
credit  and  reputation,  that  many  doctors,  religious, 
and  bishops  have  made  him  their  master  and  guide 
in  spiritual  things.  Among  the  number  is  Cochleus 
himself,  who  declares  that  he  shall  never  be  able  to 
repay  the  vast  debt  that  he  feels  that  he  owes  him  for 
his  direction  in  the  spiritual  life.  Several  priests  and 
ecclesiastics  of  every  rank  have  dismissed  and  separated 
entirely  from  the  women  with  whom  they  had  formerly 
been  living,  or  have,  by  his  persuasion,  abandoned 


94  Letter  of  Canisius. 

other  grievous  sins  and  begun  to  lead  a  better  life,  so 
much  as  even  to  have  retired  altogether  from  the  world. 
And  if  I  must  speak  of  my  own  case,  I  can  hardly  find 
words  to  tell  you  how  these  Spiritual  Exercises  have 
made  my  soul  better,  changed  my  heart,  enlightened  my 
mind  with  the  brightness  and  beams  of  heavenly  light, 
and  inspired  me  with  extraordinary  strength  and  courage, 
so  that  this  abundance  of  choice  favours  overflows  even 
into  my  body,  and  I  feel  altogether  invigorated  and 
changed  into  another  man.' 

A  few  days  later,  having  received  instructions  from 
Favre  how  to  go  through  the  usual  probations  of  the 
novitiate,  he  was  sent  with  Father  John  Aragonio  and 
Father  Alvaro  Alfonso  to  Cologne,  to  continue  the 
course  of  theology  which  he  had  begun  there.  This  is 
that  Peter  Canisius  who,  on  account  of  his  shining 
virtues  and  Apostolic  labours  in  aid  and  defence  of 
religion,  was  afterwards  called  the  Apostle  of  Germany, 
and  in  the  end  raised  to  the  altars  of  the  Church. 


CHAPTER    XX. 

The  Archbishop  of  Cologne. 

BLESSED  PETER  FAVRE  had  been  labouring  unweariedly 
in  Mayence  for  nearly  a  year,  when  a  messenger  arrived 
unexpectedly  from  Cologne  with  very  pressing  letters 
from  the  inhabitants  of  that  city,  and  from  the  Nuncio, 
John  Pozzi,  requesting  him  to  go  thither  immediately  to 
minister  to  the  spiritual  needs  of  the  Church  there,  which 
was  in  great  peril.  The  Archbishop  Albert  was  not  then 
in  Mayence,  and  Favre  would  not  leave  without  his 
consent.  He  therefore  detained  the  messenger,  who  was 
a  priest  and  theologian,  and  in  this  interval  took  him 
through  the  Spiritual  Exercises  as  he  desired,  and  this 
alone  was  sufficient  to  make  him  dedicate  himself  for 
ever  to  the  Society.  When  the  Archbishop  of  Mayence 
returned  and  heard  of  the  envoy's  mission,  he  was  very 
much  grieved  at  the  prospect  of  losing  such  a  man,  whom 
he  so  greatly  loved  and  respected.  But  as  so  important 
a  service  to  religion  was  in  question,  he  did  not  dare  to 
oppose  his  going.  As  a  mark  of  his  gratitude  and 
affection,  he  sent  him  a  great  many  valuable  presents, 
among  others  some  silver  plate  of  great  value.  But  Favre 
sent  back  everything  with  much  courtesy  of  manner, 
saying  that  he  was  not  a  man  to  use  silver  plate,  but  so 
poor  that  wherever  he  went  or  stayed,  he  carried  all  his 
property  with  him.  The  next  day,  however,  when  Favre 
came  to  take  leave  of  the  Archbishop  and  to  ask  his 
blessing,  the  latter  held  him  by  the  arm,  and  by  force  put 


96  Weakness  of  the  Archbishop. 

a  hundred  gold  florins  in  the  bag  which  hung  from  his 
girdle  to  carry  his  breviary  in  ;  and  courtesy  forbidding 
him  to  refuse,  the  holy  man  accepted  them  with  thanks. 
He  would  not,  however,  keep  any  of  the  money  himself, 
but  sent  part  to  the  members  of  the  Society  at  Louvain, 
who  were  living  in  great  poverty,  and  distributed  the 
rest  among  the  most  necessitous  of  the  poor. 

He  arrived  at  Cologne,  probably,  before  the  middle  of 
September,  and  found  religion  in  a  very  bad  state  there. 
The  Archbishop,  Hermann  von  Weiden,  had  not  only 
been  for  same  time  wavering  in  his  faith,  but  leant, 
though  so  far  secretly,  to  the  Lutherans.  The  clergy  and 
laity,  being  convinced  by  many  signs  of  the  existence  of 
hidden  plots,  were  much  scandalized,  and  trembled  for 
the  fate  of  that  flourishing  Church.  No  one,  however, 
ventured  to  face  the  Archbishop,  nor  to  give  him  the 
slightest  hint  of  the  sinister  reports  which  were  current 
about  him.  Favre  being  informed  of  all  this,  in  the  first 
place  commended  the  matter  to  God,  then,  putting  aside 
all  human  respect,  he  presented  himself  before  the 
Archbishop,  and  with  the  utmost  freedom  and  boldness, 
explained  to  him  how  much  his  flock  feared  that  they 
had  in  him,  no  longer  a  loving  shepherd,  but  a  hireling 
keeper  ready  to  leave  them  in  the  mouths  of  devouring 
wolves.  He  bade  him  think  on  the  terrible  account  he 
would  have  to  render  to  God,  should  this  ever  happen 
by  his  fault,  and  besought  him,  for  the  love  of  Jesus 
Christ,  not  to  fall  a  prey  to  the  wicked  devices  of  the 
heretics,  but  to  cleave  firmly  to  the  old  faith,  and  to 
maintain  it  undefiled  among  his  people,  who  were  so  well 
disposed  to  resist  the  recent  innovations  of  the  reformers. 
Hermann  listened  in  motionless  silence,  and  the  words 
pierced  his  soul.  No  sooner  had  Favre  ceased  speaking 
than  he  broke  out  into  violent  weeping,  professing, 
whether  deceitfully  or  at  the  time  sincerely,  who  can 


Temporary  recovery.  97 

say  ?  that  he  was  convinced,  and  repented  of  his  error, 
and  promising  to  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  the 
heretics.  Full  of  joy,  Favre  wrote  to  the  Nuncio  Pozzi, 
who  was  at  Bonn,  saying  that  as  his  business  was  accom 
plished  he  thought  of  returning  according  to  his  promise 
to  Mayence.  But  Pozzi  had  no  confidence  in  the 
steadfastness  of  the  Archbishop  of  Cologne,  and  con 
sidered  Favre's  presence  there  necessary,  so  he  replied 
by  commanding  him  to  remain  where  he  was,  saying 
that  he  would  take  it  upon  himself  to  obtain  the  consent 
of  the  Archbishop  of  Mayence. 

Things  were  in  this  state  when  a  letter  arrived  from 
Ignatius,  with  positive  instructions  to  Favre  to  leave 
Cologne  and  proceed  to  Portugal  with  John  Aragonio. 
The  reason  was,  that  King  John  III.,  having  betrothed 
his  daughter  Mary  to  Don  Philip,  Prince  of  Spain,  was 
going  to  send  her  to  that  country,  and  had  most  earnestly 
begged  Ignatius  to  let  him  have  two  fathers  to  accompany 
her,  expressly  mentioning  Favre  as  one  of  them.  He 
knew  him  only  by  reputation,  but  had  the  greatest  desire 
to  see  and  converse  with  him.  Ignatius  could  not  refuse 
so  pious  a  prince,  who  had  moreover  deserved  so  well  of 
the  Society.  He  therefore  laid  the  matter  before  the 
Pope,  and  on  his  signifying  his  approval  ordered  Favre 
to  start.  News  of  this  reaching  the  Nuncio  Pozzi,  he 
represented  to  the  Pope  that  Cologne  would  run  great 
risk  by  Favre' s  absence.  Favre  himself  wrote,  informing 
Ignatius  of  everything,  and  then  set  out  for  Louvain 
without  delay. 


ii 


CHAPTER   XXI. 
An  illness  at  Louvain. 

THERE  were  at  Louvain  several  young  men  of  the  Society, 
principally  Spaniards,  who  had  come  from  Paris,  where 
they  had  been  prevented  from  remaining  by  the  war 
which  was  still  going  on  between  Francis,  King  of 
France,  and  the  Emperor  Charles  V.  They  all  lodged 
in  the  house  of  a  good  priest  named  Cornelius  Vishaven, 
a  man  of  very  holy  life,  exceedingly  strict  and  austere 
towards  himself,  liberal  and  charitable  to  the  poor,  most 
zealous  for  the  honour  of  God  and  the  salvation  of  souls, 
and  regarded  by  all  as  a  saint  on  account  of  his  great 
works,  some  of  which  seemed  even  to  surpass  nature. 
This  man  longed  exceedingly  to  see  and  make  the 
acquaintance  of  Father  Peter  Favre,  of  whom  he  had 
heard  many  wonderful  things  from  those  of  the  Society 
A>rho  were  living  with  him,  and,  quite  recently,  from  his 
intimate  friend,  Peter  Canisius,  who  had  written  to  him 
about  Favre.  On  seeing  Favre,  therefore,  come  quite  un 
expectedly  to  seek  a  lodging  with  him,  he  was  extremely 
consoled,  and  made  great  rejoicings  over  it.  But  no 
sooner  had  Favre  embraced  him  than  he  said — '  I  know 
who  you  are,  Cornelius,  and  know  what  you  desire ;  but 
at  the  end  of  two  days  we  shall  be  separated  by  obe 
dience.'  Immediately  Cornelius  answered — '  I  shall  not 
oppose  or  contradict  obedience ;  but  I  shall  have 


Strada  at  Louvain.  99 

recourse  to  God,  Who  is  able  and  knows  how  to  detain 
even  obedient  people  if  He  pleases,  and  I  shall  ask  Him 
to  detain  you  for  the  good  of  the  people  here.'  Favre 
smiled ;  and  the  day  after  went  to  Antwerp,  and  to 
the  port  of  Vera,  where,  finding  that  the  ships  for 
Portugal  were  on  the  point  of  sailing,  he  went  back  to 
fetch  his  companions,  who  were  to  accompany  him  to 
Lisbon. 

But  hardly  had  he  reached  Louvain,  than  he  was 
attacked  by  a  violent  fever,  which  compelled  him  to  take 
to  his  bed  ;  it  turned  out  to  be  of  the  kind  called  tertian, 
and  lasted  two  months.  This  long  and  tedious  illness  did 
not  prevent  Favre  from  labouring  zealously  for  the  salva 
tion  of  souls,  and  the  fruit  which  followed  very  plainly 
showed  that  it  was  God's  special  providence  which 
detained  him  in  that  city.  Among  the  students  of  the 
Society  who  have  been  mentioned  was  Francis  Strada, 
then  a  young  man  of  four-and-twenty,  whom  Father 
Ignatius  had  received  in  Rome,  and  trained  for  some 
time  in  his  spiritual  school.  He  had  a  great  force  and 
vigour  in  speaking,  more  from  nature  than  art,  and 
wherever  he  had  been  God  wrought  numerous  conver 
sions  by  his  means,  as  has  been  said  in  speaking  of  what 
happened  at  Brescia.  He  attended  the  course  of  philo 
sophy  in  the  college  known  as  the  College  of  the  Falcon, 
where  his  courteous  manners  and  pious  discourse,  and 
still  more  his  holy  life,  had  gained  the  esteem  and 
goodwill  not  only  of  the  masters  but  of  the  students, 
whom  he  strove  to  advance  in  virtue  and  piety.  Favre, 
knowing  how  much  might  be  done  by  such  a  genius  if 
it  were  properly  disciplined,  undertook  to  instruct  and 
train  him  in  sacred  eloquence,  and  by  way  of  practice 
ordered  him  to  compose  and  recite  some  Latin  sermons 
in  the  University.  And  the  result  was  that  his  audience 
daily  increased,  till  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  move  two 
H  2 


TOO  Strada  s  Sermons. 


or  three  times  to  a  larger  and  more  convenient  place, 
and  at  last  he  was  requested  to  explain  the  Word  of  God 
every  Sunday  at  the  Church  of  St.  Michael,  one  of  the 
principal  churches  in  Louvain.  Favre  consented  to  this, 
and  in  order  that  his  study  of  philosophy  might  not  suffer 
by  it,  undertook  the  task,  while  confined  to  his  bed,  of 
giving  him  the  subject  of  his  discourse,  dividing  and 
arranging  the  matter  and  arguments,  and  showing  him, 
step  by  step,  the  method  and  the  limits  to  be  observed 
in  enlarging  on  his  theme,  and  giving  full  course  to  his 
eloquence.  With  these  instructions,  Strada  gained  the  repu 
tation  of  an  excellent  preacher,  and,  what  is  a  far  greater 
distinction,  he  was  the  means  of  rousing  men's  souls  and 
producing  very  fervent  conversions  ;  religious  of  different 
orders,  and  the  flower  of  the  men  of  letters,  professors 
and  students  of  the  University,  all  flocked  to  hear  him. 
Not  being  yet  a  priest,  he  sent  on  to  Favre  all  those  who 
consulted  him  about  their  souls.  As  to  Vishaven,  he 
was  beside  himself  with  delight,  speaking  in  terms  of  the 
highest  praise  of  Favre's  perfection  and  sanctity  ;  and 
as  he  was  a  man  very  much  thought  of,  he  inspired  every 
one  with  a  great  desire  to  see  and  know  him,  and  to 
profit  by  his  counsel.  Thus  great  numbers  of  persons  of 
every  sort  and  grade  began  to  visit  Favre's  bedroom  : 
some  to  set  their  souls  in  order,  others  for  his  advice  in 
choosing  a  state,  or  amending  their  life.  The  holy  man 
denied  himself  to  no  one ;  he  was  always  ready  to 
receive,  instruct,  confess,  and  direct  all  who  came  ;  the 
fervour  of  his  spirit  strengthening  the  weakness  of  his 
body,  and  the  abundant  fruit  which  blessed  his  labours 
filling  him  with  consolation.  There  were  several  who 
even  desired  to  make  the  Spiritual  Exercises  under 
him,  among  these  were  Ruardo  Tapper,  chancellor  of 
the  University,  and  dean  of  St.  Peters  at  Louvain.  and 
Theodore  Hesius,  who  had  been  secretary  and  confessor 


Cornelius  Vishaven.  101 


to  Pope  Adrian  VI.  Although  far  advanced  in  years,  he 
wished  to  leave  the  world  and  spend  the  remainder  of 
his  life  in  the  Society.  But  Favre  did  not  think  that  he 
ought  to  leave  Liege,  where  he  was  Vice-dean  of  the 
Cathedral  and  Inquisitor  of  the  Faith.  He  advised  him 
rather  to  use  his  influence  and  official  position  for  the 
honour  of  God,  the  glory  of  the  Church,  and  the  good 
of  souls.  So  well  did  the  good  old  man  follow  this 
advice,  that  Favre  was  able  by  his  means  to  reform 
several  convents  of  nuns  in  Louvain,  to  whom  he  gave 
very  useful  regulations  for  the  observance  of  their 
religious  rule. 

A  miraculous  occurrence  which  took  place,  greatly 
increased  the  reputation  of  Favre.  There  was  at  Louvain 
a  girl  of  nineteen,  named  Maria  Vander  Hove,  who 
afterwards  dedicated  her  virginity  to  God  as  a  Carmelite 
nun.  She  suffered  many  different  kinds  of  mortal  maladies, 
besides  being  frequently  tormented  by  devils.  She  was 
taken  to  Favre,  who  exhorted  her  to  put  her  confidence 
in  God,  and  for  nine  days  recited  over  her  the  Gospel  in 
the  Ritual,  and  other  prayers  ;  on  the  last  day  she  was,  as 
the  father  had  predicted,  entirely  delivered  from  all  her 
troubles.  In  the  year  1600,  on  the  2oth  of  April,  fifty- 
seven  years  afterwards,  she  affirmed  every  particular  on 
oath,  in  the  presence  of  five  witnesses,  who  signed  her 
deposition. 

But  there  was  no  one  who  made  better  progress  in 
Favre's  school  than  Cornelius  Vishaven.  He  had,  very 
early  in  his  acquaintance  with  the  father,  begged  to  be 
admitted  into  the  Society,  but  before  giving  him  any 
assurance  on  this  point,  Favre  saw  fit  to  put  him  to  a 
severe  trial  in  order  to  eradicate  from  his  mind  certain 
methods  of  conduct  in  spiritual  matters  to  which  he  was 
addicted,  which  savoured  too  much  of  ostentation  and 
eccentricity,  and  were  in  consequence  liable  to  fallacy 


IO2  Severe  trials  of  Vis  haven. 

and  illusion.  He  put  this  before  Cornelius  as  a  con 
dition,  and  the  good  priest  accepted  it,  giving  himself 
absolutely  into  the  hands  of  Favre,  to  be  treated  just  as 
he  pleased.  The  latter  began  his  work  by  mortifying 
him  in  his  will,  which  he  crossed  in  everything  and  in 
every  possible  way.  If  he  showed  an  inclination  for 
anything,  even  though  in  itself  praiseworthy,  it  was 
abruptly  refused.  Everything  he  did  was  badly  done, 
and  he  was  blamed  and  reproached  for  it,  and  ordered 
to  do  it  over  again  three  or  four  times.  Very  often  he 
was  sharply  reprimanded  before  the  inmates  of  his  house 
for  very  slight  things  in  which  there  was  no  blame.  In 
spiritual  matters  he  was  placed  under  obedience  to 
Strada,  whom  he  had 'to  attend  as  companion  while  he 
was  preaching,  having  to  sit  in  sight  of  the  people  on 
the  pulpit-steps,  with  the  hour-glass  in  his  hand  to  mark 
the  time.  As  to  obedience,  Favre  told  him  every 
evening  what  he  was  to  do  the  next  day,  purposely 
mixing  up  and  confusing  things  in  his  instructions ; 
afterwards  he  called  him  to  give  an  account  of  himself, 
and  when,  according  to  his  own  judgment,  he  had  no  fault 
to  find,  he  received  a  reproof  and  a  penance.  For  two 
months,  Vishaven's  virtue  was  tried  in  these  and  other 
ways,  and  he  not  only  stood  the  test  with  imperturbable 
peace  and  serenity  of  mind,  but  showed  himself  ready  to 
persevere  in  this  till  death.  Then  Favre,  laying  aside 
the  false  semblance  of  severity  and  rigour  which  he  had 
assumed,  embraced  him  with  marks  of  the  tenderest 
affection,  and  received  him  into  the  Society,  nominating 
him  Superior  at  Lou  vain. 

All  this  time  the  fever  continued,  and  the  physicians 
seeing  all  the  remedies  which  the,y  had  successfully 
employed  in  similar  cases  to  be  in  vain,  were  obliged  to 
say  that  this  sickness  did  not  follow  any  natural  law,  but 
that  perhaps  God  had  sent  it  because  of  the  great  good 


Favre  needed  at  Cologne. 


which  his  presence  in  Louvain  produced.  And  these 
words  of  theirs  recalled  to  Favre's  mind  the  last  words 
spoken  to  him  by  Vishaven  on  the  day  of  his  arrival  ; 
and,  therefore,  calling  him  to  him,  he  said,  *  This  fever 
came  to  me  through  you,  and  it  is  now  time  that  it 
should  leave  me  through  you.  You  prayed,  and  I  fell 
ill.  Let  your  prayers  now  cure  me.'  Vishaven  did  not 
deny  the  fact,  he  promised  to  pray,  and  as  soon  as  he 
had  done  so,  Favre  rose  from  his  bed  cured  of  the  fever, 
and  very  quickly  regained  his  former  strength. 


CHAPTER   XXII. 

The  Louvain  Students. 

WHILST  these  things  were  passing  at  Louvain,  letters 
came  from  Rome  ordering  Favre  to  send  our  students 
to  Coimbra,  in  Portugal,  where  the  King,  Don  John,  was 
establishing  and  founding  a  college  of  arts  and  sciences 
for  the  Society,  and  to  return  immediately  himself  to 
Cologne,  where  Pope  Paul  III.,  having  received  the 
information  sent  to  him  by  the  Nuncio  Pozzi,  con 
sidered  his  presence  absolutely  necessary  to  prevent  the 
imminent  ruin  which  evidently  threatened  the  Church 
there,  in  consequence  of  the  apostasy  of  Archbishop 
Hermann.  Pozzi  had  before  this  written  to  Favre, 
telling  him  that  the  Pope's  intention  was  that  he  should 
return  to  Cologne  ;  but,  not  having  received  an  explicit 
order  to  that  effect,  such  as  the  order  commanding  him 
to  go  to  Portugal  had  been,  the  holy  man  was  in  some 
perplexity,  not  knowing  which  course  to  take  to  perform 


104  Letter  to  Ignatius. 

his  obedience  exactly.  On  the  6th  of  December,  accord 
ingly,  he  wrote  to  St.  Ignatius  from  Louvain,  in  these 
words— 

'  I  wrote  a  letter  with  my  own  hand,  from  Antwerp,  on 
the  1 3th  of  October,  informing  your  Reverence  that  a 
week    after   receiving  orders    to  go    to    Portugal    I    left 
Cologne,   and  went   direct   to    Antwerp,    fearing  that  I 
might  be  too  late  to  find  an  opportunity  of  sailing.     I 
showed    your    Reverence's    letter    to    the   agent,    who 
offered  to  find  what  was  requisite  for  the   sea  voyage, 
and   told    me    to    wait    at    Louvain,    where    he    would 
let    me   know   when   the    time    came    for    starting.       I 
accordingly  returned  to  this  city,  and  was  attacked  by 
fever  immediately  on  my  arrival.     May  the  will  of  Jesus 
Christ  be  done,  Who   knows,  that  if  it  had  been  pos 
sible,  we  would  have  acted  in  simple  obedience.     Mean 
while   an    incident    occurred,    which    only   God   knows 
whether  or  not  it  is  for  His  greater  service.     Mgr.  Pozzi 
having  been  informed  of  the  order  I  had  for  Portugal, 
began,  before  I  left  Cologne,  to  try  every  means  to  stop 
me,  thinking  that  it  was  more  useful  for  me  to  remain  in 
Germany  than  anywhere  else.      He  wrote  to  me  on  the 
1 2th  of  last  month,  saying  that  he  hoped  very  soon  to 
get  the  Pope's  permission  for  me  to  remain,   and  that 
Mgr.  di  Santa  Croce  had  written  to  him  after  the  feast  of 
St.  Andrew,  giving  him  a  promise  to  this  effect.    He  after 
wards  sent  me  word  by  one  of  his  secretaries  that  some 
despatch  or  letter  had  arrived  from  his  Holiness,  giving 
him  full  license  to  keep  me  in  these  parts.      Up  to  this 
time  I  have  neither  seen  this  letter,  nor  been  informed  of 
its  contents.      Nevertheless,   I   am  in  great  perplexity  ; 
seeing,  on  the  one  hand,  your  Reverence's  order,  and 
on   the    other,  his    Holiness'  will    to   the   contrary.      It 
surprises    me    extremely   that    your    Reverence    should 


The  Students  of  the  University.       105 

know  nothing  of  this  letter  from  his  Holiness,  more 
especially  considering  the  mediation  of  Mgr.  di  Santa 
Croce  in  the  affair ;  for  in  his  reply  to  a  letter  of  mine 
of  the  1 8th  October,  he  did  not  appear  to  know  any 
thing  of  my  being  sent  to  Portugal.  I  say  all  this,  not 
that  I  am  in  the  least  more  inclined  one  way  than  the 
other,  but  merely  to  let  your  Reverence  know  every 
thing.  If,  in  the  letter  which  Mgr.  Pozzi  has,  I  should 
see  the  Pope's  will  clearly  expressed,  I  shall  still  not  be 
able  to  set  my  mind  at  ease  until  I  receive  a  reply  from 
your  Reverence.  I  entreat  you,  therefore,  for  the  love 
of  Jesus  Christ,  to  do  all  you  can  to  give  me  a  speedy 
an  s  Aver.'1 

In  this  letter  he  shows,  as  always,  an  entire  indifference 
in  his  obedience,  ever  ready  to  undertake  or  to  abandon 
anything  at  the  sign  of  the  will  of  his  Superiors.  And  his 
father,  St.  Ignatius,  was  so  struck  and  touched  by  his 
conduct,  that  he  could  not  refrain  from  marking  these 
beautiful  words  of  Favre  with  his  own  hand,  and  writing 
twice  on  the  margin  of  the  letter,  as  an  expression  of  his 
admiration,  these  words — '  See  what  obedience  !  See  what 
obedience  ! ' 

Soon  after  this,  having  received  fresh  letters  from 
Rome,  in  which  the  will  of  his  Superiors  was  clearly 
notified,  he  at  once  prepared  to  send  several  of  his 
companions  to  Portugal,  and  to  return  himself  to 
Cologne.  But  as  soon  as  it  was  rumoured  through 
the  city  that  the  members  of  the  Society  were  about 
to  leave,  there  was  a  very  great  and  general  lamenta 
tion  ;  but  there  were  several  young  men  belonging  to 
the  University  who,  on  the  contrary,  were  full  of  joy  on 
hearing  it.  Cod  had  already  deeply  touched  their  hearts 
by  means  of  Francis  Strada's  sermons,  and  they  were 

1  Autograph  letter. 


io6  Maximilian  Cappella. 

firmly  resolved  to  dedicate  themselves  to  His  service 
in  the  Society  ;  they  no  sooner  heard  that  the  fathers 
were  on  the  point  of  leaving,  than  they  courageously 
determined  to  follow  them.  Eighteen  came  at  the 
same  time  to  Favre,  who,  after  examining  them  very 
closely,  was  satisfied  of  their  vocation,  and  received 
them  all.  Since  the  shortness  of  the  time  did  not 
allow  of  a  longer  instruction,  he  assembled  them  all 
in  a  room,  and  gave  them  lessons,  full  of  wisdom,  for 
their  guidance  in  the  new  life  which  they  had  embraced. 
They  were  all  of  one  mind,  full  of  spiritual  consolation, 
and  ready  to  beg  their  way  on  foot  wherever  they  should 
be  commanded  by  obedience  to  go. 

The  general  gladness  was  increased  by  the  accession 
of  another  companion,  the  more  welcome  for  being  un 
expected.  Maximilian  Cappella,  a  youth  of  eighteen,  of 
an  excellent  disposition  and  great  talents,  had  for  several 
months  had  an  inspiration  to  join  the  Society ;  but, 
fearing  that  this  mental  attraction  might  arise  from 
some  lightness,  and  not  from  the  voice  of  God,  he 
had  paid  no  attention  to  it.  On  hearing  of  the  depar 
ture  of  our  fathers,  he  was  conscious  in  his  heart  of  the 
revival  of  the  same  desire  ;  yet  even  then  he  resisted  the 
interior  movement,  arguing  with  himself,  and  purposely 
seeking  reasons  for  rejecting  and  setting  aside  the  idea. 
He  was  strengthened  in  this  course  by  a  certain  preacher, 
who  spoke  publicly  against  our  fathers  and  particularly 
Francis  Strada,  pitying  people  who  were  so  blinded  as  to 
crowd  to  hear  a  beardless  boy.  Nevertheless,  as  Cappella 
had  several  times  been  to  confession  to  Favre,  he  thought 
it  only  courteous  to  pay  him  a  farewell  visit ;  and  going 
to  Vishaven's  house  for  that  purpose,  he  met  Favre  on 
the  threshold  just  in  the  act  of  leaving.  As  soon  as  he 
saw  Cappella,  he  said,  *  You,  too,  Maximilian,  do  you 
wish  to  join  us  ?'  At  these  words,  as  he  afterwards  said 


Novices  sent  to  Portugal.  107 

himself,  Ma.ximilian  felt  his  mind  instantaneously  cleared 
of  all  doubts,  his  heart  glowing  with  fervour,  and  irre 
sistibly  impelled  to  answer  with  resolution,  '  Yes,  father, 
I,  too;  I  desire  to  be  with  you.'  'Very  well/  rejoined 
Favre  ;  '  go  upstairs,  and  you  will  find  some  more  com 
panions.'  He  obeyed,  and  when  he  saw  that  band  of 
youths,  all  of  whom  he  knew,  five  of  them  masters  in 
philosophy,  and  the  rest  either  bachelors  of  theology  or 
some  of  the  first  students  in  civil  and  canon  .law,  he 
burst  into  tears  of  emotion,  embraced  them  one  by  one ; 
and,  that  he  might  never  leave  them  again,  he  gave  the 
keys  of  his  rooms  to  a  friend,  begging  him  to  take 
charge  of  his  effects,  and  to  send  them  to  his  parents 
at  Lille. 

The  numbers  of  the  Society  having  so  greatly  increased, 
Favre  did  not  think  it  well  to  remove  them  all  from 
Louvain,  especially  as  some  of  the  more  influential 
citizens  were  meditating  an  appeal  to  Charles  V.  for 
the  establishment  of  a  college.  He  therefore  made 
choice  of  twelve  to  be  sent  to  Portugal,  three  who 
had  been  some  time  admitted,  Francis  Strada,  Andrew 
Ovieda,  and  John  Aragonio,  with  nine  novices,  Peter 
Favre  de  Hallis,2  Leonard  Kessel,  Hermes  Poen,  James 
Lost,  John  Covillon,  Daniel  Dondermund,  Cornelius 
Vishaven,  the  younger,  Thomas  Pogh,  and  Maxi 
milian  Cappella ;  leaving  the  rest  in  Louvain  under 
the  direction  of  Father  Cornelius  Vishaven,  the  elder, 
with  the  exception  of  Emiliano  di  Loyola,  nephew  to 
St.  Ignatius,  and  Lambert  Castrio,  from  Liege,  bachelor 
of  theology,  whom  he  took  with  him  to  Cologne.  But 
immediately  after  Favre's  departure  a  perilous  tempest 
unexpectedly  arose,  which  all  but  ruined  everything. 
The  professors  of  the  University,  who  had  at  first  been 

3  He  added  the  name  of  Favre  to  his  own  name,  Peter,  on  account 
of  his  great  affection  for  the  holy  father,  and  he  kept  it  all  his  life. 


io8  Indignation  in  the  city. 

so  kindly  disposed,  now,  irritated  by  the  loss  of  so 
many  promising  students,  became  suddenly  hostile ;  and, 
not  satisfied  with  complaining,  they  worked  upon  the 
natural  affection  of  the  parents  and  relations  of  the 
young  men,  till  the  whole  city  was  in  a  tumult  against 
the  fathers.  The  good  Father  Cornelius  Vishaven  was 
marked  out  for  universal  indignation.  Instead  of  being 
regarded,  as  before,  in  the  light  of  a  saint,  and  being 
respected  and  venerated  by  every  one,  he  was  looked 
upon  as  a  person  who  went  about  deceiving  the  young, 
and  who  deserved  to  be  shunned  as  a  domestic  enemy. 
Things  reached  such  a  pitch  that  the  members  of  the 
Society  were  Obliged  to  keep  in  the  house  by  themselves 
for  several  days,  not  venturing  to  show  themselves  in 
public.  Yet  none  of  the  novices  wavered  or  yielded 
to  either  the  threats  or  entreaties  of  their  families. 
They  all  bravely  defended  their  own  cause,  repelled 
every  attack,  and  conquered  every  trial.  And  so  far 
from  the  students  of  the  University  being  deterred 
from  the  desire  of  a  religious  life,  five  more,  influenced 
by  the  example  of  such  constancy  in  their  fellow- 
students,  joined  them.  These  were  Adrian  Adriaen, 
Anthony  Vinck,  Peter  Gillon,  Nicholas  Gauden,  and 
Oliver  Manara,  all  of  whom  were  afterwards  of  great  use 
to  their  country  and  to  religion. 


CHAPTER   XXIII. 

Second  stay  at  Cologne. 

WE  must  now  return  to  Father  Favre.  He  quitted 
Louvain  at  the  end  of  December,  1543.  He  stayed 
a  few  days  at  Lie'ge,  Maestricht,  and  Aix-la-Chapelle, 
to  sow  the  Word  of  God  in  those  cities  ;  leaving  in  them 
all  such  a  desire  of  his  presence,  that  soon  afterwards 
several  of  the  inhabitants  followed  him  to  Cologne,  in 
order  to  confer  with  him  more  at  leisure,  and  to  make 
the  Spiritual  Exercises  under  him.  On  reaching  Cologne, 
he  found  reason  for  the  bitterest  sorrow,  religious  matters 
having  fallen  into  a  much  worse  condition  since  he  left 
it.  The  Archbishop  Elector,  Hermann,  faithless  to  the 
promises  he  had  made  at  the  Diet  to  the  Emperor, 
and  a  few  months  before  to  Favre  at  Cologne,  had 
begun  to  take  the  part  of  the  heretics  openly.  Nor 
was  this  all,  he  had  summoned  Martin  Bucer  from 
Strasbourg,  and  Melancthon,  Pistorius,  and  Sarcerus, 
all  leaders  and  teachers  of  their  sect,  from  Saxony, 
giving  them  the  fullest  power  to  propagate  their  false 
doctrines  with  impunity. 

Favre  was  filled  with  a  burning  zeal  at  the  sight  of 
these  terrible  evils,  and  he  generously  resolved  to 
employ  eveiy  exertion,  every  means  to  remedy  them, 
not  hesitating,  in  case  of  necessity,  to  lose  his  own 
life.  And,  finding  the  clergy,  nobility,  and  people  well 
disposed  to  resist  the  assaults  of  the  heretics,  and  to 


no         Favres  exertions  at  Cologne. 

refuse  to  admit  their  new  doctrines,  he  mounted  the 
pulpit,  and  continued  to  preach  for  many  months, 
encouraging  his  hearers  to  remain  firm  and  faithful  to 
the  old  faith  of  their  fathers.  He  set  forth  the  true 
sense  of  the  Scriptures  with  great  solidity  and  clearness, 
drawing  thence  arguments  and  proofs  in  confutation  of 
the  new  heretics.  Combining  the  characters  of  theologian 
and  preacher,  he  mingled  instruction  with  the  defence  of 
true  doctrine  in  his  discourses  ;  thus,  at  one  and  the  same 
time,  enlightening  the  intellects  of  his  hearers  that  they 
might  know  the  truth,  and  moving  their  wills  to  the 
amendment  of  their  lives.  From  the  very  beginning 
the  first  persons  in  the  city  crowded  to  hear  him : 
consuls  and  senators,  doctors  and  members  of  the 
University,  canons,  and  all  orders  of  the  clergy,  the 
Bishop  of  Liege,  and  other  distinguished  strangers  ; 
and,  as  the  fame  of  the  servant  of  God  spread  abroad 
in  the  city,  the  numbers  of  his  audience  continued  to 
increase.  The  fruit  of  these  labours  of  his  was,  that 
some  members  of  the  University,  who  had  partially 
joined  the  Lutherans  in  opinion  and  way  of  living, 
returned  to  the  right  path.  Many  more,  whose  faith 
was  wavering  and  in  imminent  danger  of  altogether 
giving  way,  were  confirmed  in  the  truth. 

The  man  of  God  did  a  still  greater  work  by  his 
familiar  conversations  in  society,  and  by  giving  the 
Spiritual  Exercises  privately.  No  heart,  however  hardened 
and  obstinate,  could  long  resist  him,  or  refuse  to 
be  softened  by  his  gentle  persuasions,  and  by  the 
attractions  of  his  most  loveable  spirit.  Those  who  had 
had  personal  experience  of  his  power  inspired  others 
with  a  desire  to  know  him,  and  undertook  to  introduce 
and  present  them  to  Favre.  He  was  now  constantly 
besieged  by  penitents,  who  wished  to  make  their  confes 
sions  to  him ;  and,  not  being  able  to  hear  them  all, 


Melancthon  and  Bucer.  1 1 1 

he  was  compelled  to  avail  himself  of  the  assistance  of 
Father  Alvaro  Alfonso,  although  he  was  new  to  the 
work.  Before  this  time,  very  few  indeed  approached  the 
sacraments,  except  at  Easter ;  but  now  great  numbers, 
many  of  them,  too,  persons  of  consideration,  did  so  very 
frequently,  to  the  great  edification  of  the  people.  The 
rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  Church,  and  the  pious 
practices  of  religion,  began  once  more  to  be  reverenced, 
and  several  convents  and  religious  communities  were 
brought  back  to  ancient  discipline  and  to  the  strict 
observance  of  their  rule. 

Having  thus,  as  far  as  possible,  repaired  the  losses 
of  religion  among  the  Catholics,  he  next  set  himself 
to  quell  the  pride  and  blunt  the  weapons  of  the 
heretics.  He  wrote  very  pressing  letters  to  John 
Gropper  and  Antonio  Perrenot  de  Granvelle,  entreat 
ing  them  to  interpose  with  the  Emperor,  at  whose 
Court  they  were,  to  prevail  upon  him  to  provide  for 
the  Church  of  Cologne,  by  driving  out  the  heretics  by 
public  proclamation,  seeing  that  they  made  his  name  a 
pretext  for  the  purpose  of  dissemination  of  errors  with 
impunity,  under  the  name  of  reform.  And  that  they 
might  not  venture  in  the  meantime  to  pervert  the  people 
with  their  sophistries,  he  challenged  the  two  leaders  of 
their  party,  Philip  Melancthon  and  Martin  Bucer,  to  a 
public  disputation.  Puffed  up  with  pride,  and  trusting 
to  their  own  boldness,  they  both,  one  after  the  other, 
accepted  his  challenge  and  met  Favre,  who,  pressing 
them  with  incontrovertible  arguments  and  proofs,  and 
entangling  them  in  their  own  answers,  reduced  them  to 
silence,  their  intellects  convinced,  but  their  wills  remain 
ing  more  obstinate  than  before.  The  consequence  was 
just  that  which  Favre  aimed  at.  They  were  ashamed 
again  to  risk  their  reputation  after  being  thus  publicly  dis 
graced,  and  therefore  left  Cologne,  to  diffuse  the  poison 


H2  St.  Ursulas  chapel. 

of  their  heresy  secretly  in  the  country  round.  P^ven  the 
Archbishop,  seeing  these  champions  thus  defeated,  con 
trary  to  his  expectation,  was  somewhat  checked  in  his 
mad  course,  and  the  senate  by  public  edict  banished  the 
heretical  preachers  beyond  the  bounds  of  the  city.  Thus 
was  Cologne  then  saved,  mainly  by  the  instrumentality  of 
Favre. 

It  is  true  that  he  used  another,  and  a  most  effica 
cious,  means  besides  these  labours  for  accomplishing 
his  object,  namely,  prayer.  He  very  often  retired  to 
St.  Ursula's  Church,  and  there,  in  the  chapel  called  the 
'  golden  chamber/  where  rests  her  relics  and  those  of  the 
holy  virgins  her  companions,  spent  long  hours  in  prayer 
to  God,  commending  to  Him  the  cause  of  religion  and 
the  salvation  of  the  citizens.  Every  day  he  said  Mass 
there,  shedding  an  abundance  of  tears,  and  crying  to  God 
for  mercy.  He  returned  infinite  thanks  to  the  angels 
guardian  and  the  holy  patrons  of  the  city  for  the  firm 
allegiance  of  its  inhabitants  to  the  true  faith  and  for  their 
perseverance  in  Christian  virtue,  of  which  he  had  fresh 
evidence  every  day.  And  we  know  that  he  became  so 
strongly  attached  to  the  people  of  Cologne,  that  even 
when  he  was  far  away  from  them  he  kept  them  in 
remembrance.  The  following  year  he  wrote  thus  to 
our  students  whom  he  had  left  at  Cologne— 

'  I  always  knew  perfectly  well  that  in  other  universi 
ties  you  might  make  greater  advance  in  study  than  in 
Cologne  ;  but,  notwithstanding  this,  I  thought  the  good 
of  so  many  souls  was  a  more  important  consideration. 
The  very  tender  affection  that  I  bear  to  this  city  has 
made  me  prefer  exposing  you  to  the  danger,  or  rather  I 
preferred  that  you  should  be  less  learned  in  Cologne  than 
exceedingly  learned  elsewhere.  God  grant  that  this  zeal 
may  be  in  conformity  with  His  will.  Who  gave  His  only- 


Letter  from  Canisius.  113 

begotten  Son  for  the  salvation  of  sinners.  Don  Alvaro  is 
well  acquainted  with  these  sentiments  of  mine,  which 
may  have  seemed  to  be  to  his  own  detriment ;  but,  as  I 
have  already  said,  my  mind  was  made  up  on  the  point, 
and  I  may  add  that  I  would  rather  hear  that  any  one  of 
you,  including  Master  Peter  Canisius  and  Don  Alvaro, 
had  died  and  was  buried  at  Cologne,  like  Master 
Lambert,  than  that  he  was  living  and  in  good  health 
elsewhere.' 

Not  to  speak  of  the  others,  Canisius  entered  thoroughly 
into  these  feelings,  and  in  his  reply  to  the  holy  father  on 
the  subject,  he  says — '  Since  I  have  been  admitted  to  the 
baccalaureate,  my  friends  insisted  on  me  giving  the 
lectures  on  the  Scriptures  ;  and  I  do  this  three  times  a 
week  in  the  school  of  theology.  I  am  engaged  upon  that 
golden  epistle  of  St.  Paul  to  Timothy.  My  audience  is 
very  numerous,  and  it  increases  daily,  for  my  lectures  are 
public.  I  continue  also  to  preach  to  the  clergy,  and  I  do 
the  same  on  all  feasts,  at  the  Gymnasium,  where  I  explain 
St.  Matthew's  Gospel.  Moreover,  I  very  often  have  to 
dispute  before  the  professors  of  the  University.  You  may 
easily  imagine  how  all  these  things  tax  my  poor  wits  ;  but 
1  am  very  happy  in  thus  labouring  for  the  service  of  my 
neighbour,  more  particularly  as  it  is  done  to  please  my 
venerable  father,  Peter  Favre,  who  loves  me  so  truly  in 
Jesus  Christ.  I  am  sure  that  if  he  were  here  he  would 
give  me  energy  and  strength.  I  feel  nothing  too  much 
for  me,  nothing  a  trouble,  if  only,  by  fulfilling  your 
wishes,  I  can  be  of  some  use  to  the  citizens  of 
Cologne ;  for  I  well  know  how  greatly  your  Reve 
rence  desires  to  do  them  good  by  your  prayers  and 
labours,  and  by  those  of  your  sons.  And  I  tell  you 
frankly  that,  unless  obedience  should  summon  me  else 
where,  I  am  ready  and  willing  to  devote  this  soul  and 
i 


U4        Kindness  of  the  Carthusians. 

body  of  mine,  with  all  my  time  and  study — my  whole 
self,  in  short — to  live  and  to  die,  to  teach  and  to  labour, 
for  the  good  of  the  citizens  of  Cologne/ l 

The  affection  borne  by  Favre  to  the  people  of  Cologne 
was  equally  returned  by  them,  and  they  proved  it  in  the 
July  of  this  year,  1544,  when  they  had  the  first  news  of 
his  intended  departure.  They  were  full  of  grief  about  it, 
and  knowing  that  the  holy  man  would  not  consent  to 
accept  any  other  mark  of  their  gratitude,  they  offered 
him  the  heads  of  six  of  the  holy  virgins,  St.  Ursula's 
companions,  which  he  valued  more  than  any  amount  of 
treasure,  and  took  with  him  to  Portugal.  But  before 
speaking  of  his  departure,  I  must  relate  two  circum 
stances  which  are  connected  with  the  affairs  of  Cologne. 


CHAPTER    XXIV. 
The  Carthusians. 

THE  first  of  the  two  things  alluded  to  in  the  last  chapter, 
was  that  Father  Favre  gained  for  the  Society,  not  only 
the  affection  of  the  sacred  and  venerable  Carthusian 
Order,  but  its  formal  brotherhood,  and  a  participation  in 
all  its  good  works.  When  Peter  Canisius  returned  to 
Cologne  full  of  holy  fervour,  and,  as  it  were,  out  of  himself 
with  rapture  at  the  wonderful  things  he  had  seen  in  Favre, 
and  at  the  Exercises  which  he  had  made  under  him  at 
Mayence,  he  poured  forth  all  that  was  in  his  heart  to 
Father  Gerard  Hammond,  the  prior  of  the  Carthusians, 
telling  him  so  much  of  the  holy  life  of  the  man  of  God, 
and  of  the  wonderful  effect  of  the  Exercises  when  handled 
1  Autograph  letter. 


Letter  of  the  Prior.  1 1 5 

by  him,  that  he  was  full  of  eagerness  to  know  Favre  and 
to  have  personal  experience  of  the  Exercises.  He  more 
over  desired  to  inform  the  Prior  of  Treves  of  the 
particulars  related  by  Canisius,  and  wrote  to  him, 
accordingly  on  the  last  day  of  May,  1543,  as  follows — 
'Amidst  the  storms  with  which  all  Christendom  is 
shaken  in  these  deplorable  times  of  ours,  it  has  pleased 
God,  blessed  be  His  Name  !  not  to  forsake  His  Church, 
but  to  raise  up  to  help  her  some  Apostolic  men,  fitted 
with  His  Spirit,  and  adorned  with  virtue  from  on  high, 
who  labour  with  fervent  charity  in  leading  back  wranderers 
and  sinners  into  the  path  of  salvation.  This  they  do, 
and  great  is  the  fruit  which  blesses  their  work ;  for  the 
Master  of  these  men  works  invisibly  in  their  souls,  and 
their  words,  like  sparks  from  red-hot  iron,  set  on  fire 
the  hearts  on  which  they  fall.  There  is  one  of  their 
number  with  the  Cardinal  of  Mayence,  Master  Peter 
Favre  by  name,  a  theologian  of  the  University  of  Paris, 
and  a  man  of  great  sanctity.  He  puts  the  souls  under 
his  direction  through  certain  Spiritual  Exercises,  which 
are  so  powerful  and  efficacious,  that  in  a  very  short  time 
they  produce  in  those  who  follow  them  a  true  know 
ledge  of  themselves  and  of  their  sins,  with  the  gift  of 
tears,  and  of  a  real  and  hearty  conversion  to  God,  their 
last  end  ;  together  with  growth  in  virtue,  and  the  enjoy 
ment  of  an  intimate  familiarity  and  loving  union  with 
Him.  Would  to  heaven  that  it  might  be  given  to  me 
to  find  out  some  necessity  for  travelling  to  Mayence  ! 
Certainly,  it  would  be  worth  while  to  go  as  far  as  the 
Indies  to  find  such  a  treasure.  However,  I  trust  before 
I  die  to  be  permitted  to  see  this  servant  and  dear  friend 
of  God,  and  to  be  guided  by  him  to  the  reformation  of 
my  interior  spirit  and  to  union  with  God.' 

Favre  was  unable  to  satisfy  his  wishes  on  the  occasion 
of  his  first  visit  to  Cologne,  as  he  only  stayed  there  a 

I    2 


1 1 6  Favre  at  the  Chartreuse. 

fortnight  or  a  very  little  more.  But  in  this  second  stay, 
which  lasted  six  months,  he  had  leisure  for  long  con 
versations  with  Hammond  ;  indeed  he  lodged  in  his- 
monastery,  and  was  able  to  give  the  Spiritual  Exercises  to 
that  devout  community.  So  marked  was  the  fruit  and 
consolation  which  those  holy  men  experienced  from  this, 
that  they  were  never  tired  of  sufficiently  praising  to  the 
skies  that  divine  teaching  of  the  spiritual  life.  In  order 
to  have  it  always  within  reach,  and  to  profit  by  its  in 
structions,  they  requested  to  have  a  copy  of  the  Exercises, 
which  they  preserved  ever  after  among  the  most  precious 
manuscripts  of  the  monastery.  It  is  unnecessary  to  say 
that  they  cherished  an  undying  remembrance  of  the 
virtues  and  sanctity  of  Favre.  After  his  death,  two  years, 
later,  he  was  never  named  amongst  them  except  by  the 
title  of  'Blessed;'  and  he  is  so  styled  by  Theodore 
Petreius,  in  his  Carthusian  Library,  where,  speaking 
of  the  bright  example  he  gave  in  the  Charterhouse  of 
Cologne,  he  says — '  So  great  was  Blessed  Peter  Favre's. 
gravity  of  manners  and  holiness  of  life  when  he  was  a 
guest  in  the  Carthusian  monastery  at  Cologne,  before  the 
name  and  labours  of  the  Society  were  so  well  known 
in  the  world  as  they  afterwards  became,  that  he  carried 
every  one  away  with  admiration  of  him,'  2  and  it  was 
mainly  for  his  sake,  that  from  that  time  the  Carthusian 
fathers  began,  and  afterwards  continued,  to  consider  and 
cherish  as  brothers  all  who  belonged  to  the  Society.  It 
is  certain  that  so  close  a  bond  of  mutual  charity  was. 
formed  between  them  and  us  in  Cologne,  that  each 
regarded  the  others  as  one  with  themselves  ;  and  on 
the  death  of  Lambert  Castrio,  who  had  accompanied 
Favre  from  Louvain,  the  Carthusians  buried  him  among 
their  own  dead,  and  admitted  him  to  a  share  of  their, 
suffrages. 

-  Vol.  i.  pp.  35,  36. 


Decree  of  the  General  Chapter.       117 

In  the  following  year,  1544,  when  the  General  Chapter 
was  being  held  at  the  Grande  Chartreuse,  the  fathers 
assembled  not  only  approved  of  the  union  subsisting 
between  our  Society  and  their  House  at  Cologne,  but 
resolved  unanimously  to  give  the  former  a  share  in  all 
•their  spiritual  goods,  and  the  decree,  drawn  up  in  proper 
form,  signed,  and  sealed,  was  sent  to  St.  Ignatius  at 
Rome.  The  following  is  a  translation  of  it. 

'  Brother  Peter,  the  unworthy  prior  of  the  Grande 
Chartreuse,  and  all  the  other  definitors  of  the  General 
Chapter  of  the  Carthusian  Order,  to  the  Reverend 
Father  in  Christ,  Ignatius,  General  of  the  new  Society  of 
the  Name  of  Jesus,  and  to  his  devout  brethren,  in  every 
part  of  the  world,  that  salvation  which  God  has  prepared 
for  those  who  love  Him. 

'  Ever  since  we  have  known,  dearest  brethren  in  the 
Lord,  of  the  sweet  odour  of  your  holy  life,  salutary 
doctrine,  voluntary  poverty,  and  all  the  other  virtues 
by  which  we  understand  that  you,  as  lights  shining 
in  the  darkness  of  this  miserable  world,  labour  to 
turn  into  the  narrow  path  of  salvation  those  who  are 
in  the  broad  way  leading  to  destruction,  to  confirm  the 
wavering,  to  urge  on  the  tepid  and  spur  them  to  progress 
in  virtue,  and  so  to  be  of  great  use  to  the  Catholic 
Church,  we  have  been  filled  with  joy  in  the  Lord,  and 
give  Him  thanks  that  even  in  this  so  great  desolation  of 
His  Church,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  heavy  calamities 
which  have  befallen  us,  He  has  been  mindful  of  His 
mercies,  and  has  raised  you  up  and  sent  you  forth  as 
new  labourers  in  His  vineyard.  In  which  holy  under 
taking  we  also,  greatly  desiring  to  aid  you,  so  far  as  is 
possible  to  our  weakness,  earnestly  beseech  you,  brethren, 
by  the  love  of  that  dear  Lord  Who  vouchsafed  to  die  for 
us,  ne  in  vacuum  gratiam  Dei  reripiatis ;  but  continuing 


ii8       Communication  of  good  works. 

to  persevere  in  your  holy  resolution,  exhibeatis  vos  siaif 
Dei  ministros  in  miilta  patientia,  not  relaxing  in  your 
labours,  nor  being  cowed  by  danger,  or  the  persecutions 
which  are  always  in  store  for  such  as  will  live  a  holy 
life,  tenipore  enim  sno  metetis  non  deficient es.  And  for 
ourselves,  brethren,  if  our  divine  sacrifices,  our  prayers, 
fastings,  and  pious  exercises,  in  all  of  which  we  give  a 
share  to  you  and  to  your  successors,  living  and  dead,  are 
of  any  avail  before  the  Lord,  we  gladly  unite  in  all  your 
holy  intentions  and  labours,  entreating  you  likewise  to 
admit  us  in  return  to  a  share  of  your  prayers  and  spiritual 
goods. 

*  Given  at  the  Chartreuse,  under  our  seal,  in  the  year  of 
our  Lord  1544,  on  the  Thursday  after  Cantate  Sunday,, 
May  1 5th,  during  our  General  Chapter.' 

This  decree,  together  with  other  favours,  was  again 
confirmed  in  another  General  Chapter,  held  in  1583. 
And  as  time  went  on  this  mutual  brotherhood  and  par 
ticipation  of  spiritual  privileges,  far  from  diminishing, 
continued  to  increase  in  the  two  orders.  But,  to  return 
to  early  days,  it  is  certain  that  the  Society  owed  its 
existence  at  Cologne  to  the  Carthusian  fathers.  It  was 
the  Prior  Hammond  who,  in  1553,  provided  a  house 
for  our  fathers  to  live  in,  and  who,  the  following  year,, 
promised  what  was  necessary  for  their  support.  He  it 
was,  too,  who,  with  John  Gropper  and  Everard  Villichius,. 
induced  the  consuls  and  magistrates  of  Cologne  to  give 
to  the  Society  the  College  and  University  there,  known 
as  those  of  the  '  Three  Crowns  ; '  and  all  this  was  due,  in, 
the  first  instance,  to  the  merits  of  Peter  Favre  ;  for  it  was- 
he  who  won  for  the  Society  the  love  and  protection  of 
those  venerable  fathers.  And  the  holy  patriarch  Ignatius* 
did  not  fail  to  correspond,  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,, 
with  the  great  affection  of  the  Carthusians,  especially 


Canisius  and  his  family.  i  r  9 

those  of  Cologne,  writing  many  times  to  thank  them  for 
their  kindness  to  his  Society.  There  is  one  of  these 
letters,  dated  the  nth  of  June  1547,  in  which  he 
expressly  speaks  of  having  admitted  them  to  a  share  in 
the  works,  prayers,  and  merits  of  the  Society. 


CHAPTER   XXV. 

Peter  Canisius  and  his  family. 

ANOTHER  event  happened  while  Favre  was  at  Cologne 
which  deserves  mention,  although  it  was  of  a  private 
nature.  Peter  Canisius  had  been  suddenly  summoned 
to  Nimeguen,  his  native  place,  to  attend  his  father,  James, 
in  his  last  moments.  As  soon  as  he  had  passed  to  a 
better  life,  the  pious  youth,  following  the  Evangelical 
counsel,  distributed  among  the  poor  his  portion  of  the 
inheritance,  reserving  only  a  sum  of  money  sufficient  for 
the  maintenance  of  himself  and  his  companions,  who 
were  living  at  Cologne  very  hardly,  on  alms.  His  step 
mother,  Wendelina  Vanden  Berg,  was  very  angry  at  this, 
and,  not  satisfied  with  raising  a  great  commotion  on  the 
subject  in  the  family,  she  spread  a  false  report,  that 
F'ather  Peter  Favre,  whom  she  described  as  a  vagabond 
foreigner,  had  used  certain  arts  to  bewitch  her  step-son, 
and  attach  him  to  himself  for  his  own  ends,  which  were 
to  appropriate  the  largest  and  most  valuable  portion  of 
the  property,  and  to  ruin  the  family.  She  wrote  the  most 
insulting  letters  on  the  subject  to  Cologne,  spreading  her 
complaints  and  lamentations  all  through  that  distant 
city. 


I2O         The  step-mother  of  Canisius. 

Favre,  who  knew  by  experience  how  prejudicial  such 
damaging  reports  and  false  accusations  are  to  the 
Apostolic  ministry,  thought  it  necessary  to  put  a  stop 
to  them.  He  took  up  his  pen  and  wrote  to  the  lady 
in  question  a  letter  full  of  boldness  and  prudence  in 
defence  of  himself  and  her  son. 

'  Very  dear  and  honoured  lady  in  Christ, — 

'You  complain  that  Master  Peter  Canisius, 
hitherto  your  much  loved  son,  has  degenerated  from  that 
respect  which  he  has  of  old  paid  to  you,  and  you  say 
that  the  blame  of  this  rests  with  me.  I,  on  the  other 
hand,  who  behold  this  excellent  and  most  virtuous  young 
man  united  with  me  in  the  closest  bonds  of  spiritual 
affection,  so  that  we  are  one  in  heart  and  mind,  cannot 
but  desire  and  wish  every  kind  of*  good  for  him  and 
for  his  relations  and  friends.  And  in  saying  this,  I  do 
not  mean  those  only  who  are  united  to  him  by  Christian 
charity  and  Evangelical  perfection,  but  those  also  who 
are  his  friends  and  relations  according  to  the  flesh.  For 
this  reason,  I  often  pray  to  our  Lord  God  for  the  soul  of 
his  late  father,  and  for  your  consolation  and  for  your 
children  and  relations.  But  perhaps  you  will  say,  Why, 
in  that  case,  have  you  taken  from  us  Master  Peter,  who 
was,  by  his  presence  and  counsel,  our  joy  and  conso 
lation  ?  I  answer,  What  would  you  do,  pious  and  excellent 
lady,  if  you  saw  on  the  one  side  Jesus  Christ  wishing 
that  he  should  serve  Him,  and  delighting  in  his  spiritual 
profit,  and  on  the  other  his  natural  relations  and  friends, 
wishing,  at  any  cost,  to  enjoy  his  society  in  the  midst  of 
the  deceitful  and  transitory  pleasures  of  this  world  ?  If 
you  think  my  judgment  right  in  the  matter,  you  certainly 
must  agree  with  me,  that  I  have  done  wisely  in  helping 
and  confirming  him  in  this  resolution  of  his,  all  the  more 
because  in  doing  so  I  have  not  regarded  my  own  interests, 


Letter  of  Favre.  1 2 1 

nor  derived  any  advantage  from  the  smallest  portion  of 
his  property.  The  whole  question,  as  it  seems  to  me,  is 
made  one  of  worldly  interest;  and  it  seems  to  cost  no  one 
a  thought  that  Master  Canisius'  soul  should  go  to  per 
dition.  People  find  it  too  hard  to  bear  that  the  property 
which  falls  to  him  by  right  of  succession  should  be 
.alienated.  It  is  thought  a  great  matter  that  our  lands 
should  be  diminished  by  a  few  inches — a  miserable  hand's 
breadth  of  soil ;  and  it  is  a  thing  of  no  moment  that  a 
soul  should  be  separated  from  God,  Who  is  our  supreme 
felicity  !  For  the  rest,  I  declare  that  not  the  very  smallest 
portion  of  these  worldly  goods  is  applied  to  my  advantage. 
God  is  faithful,  Who  has  for  His  own  glory  kept  me  free  in 
this  respect,  and  it  would  be  impossible  for  me  even  to 
think  of  putting  my  trust  in  any  earthly  thing.  Why 
then,  you  may  say,  do  you  not  forbid  his  doing  what  you 
.are  aware  must  be  displeasing  to  us  ?  I  am  ignorant 
what,  or  how  much  property  he  has  disposed  of ;  but  if 
I  am  to  express  my  opinion  freely,  I  can  only  say  that  I 
do  not  disapprove  of  what  he  has  done.  I  know  that 
the  disposal  he  has  made  is  for  pious  objects  •  and  that 
therefore,  to  speak  correctly,  so  far  from  having  alienated 
his  property,  he  has  restored  it  to  the  one  real,  rightful, 
and  supreme  Master,  that  is,  to  God.  What  can  there 
be  wrong  in  this?  Besides,  the  possessions  which  he 
brought  with  him  are  his  own  to  dispose  of  as  far  as  he 
pleases.  Our  Society  aims  at  objects,  at  desires,  and  at 
gains  very  different  from  these  poor  and  perishable  things. 
As  to  the  reports  spread  about  me,  they  are,  I  think,  too 
trivial  and  contemptible  to  be  believed,  at  all  events  by 
persons  like  yourself,  who  fear  God,  and  are  not  given 
to  think  evil  of  their  neighbours.  They  say  that  I  am  an 
unknown  person  and  a  stranger ;  and  I  do  not  deny  it. 
Yes,  I  am  a  pilgrim,  and  so  are  all  my  companions,  and 
not  only  in  this  part  of  the  country,  but  all  the  world 


122  Favre  sent  to  Portugal. 

over,  and  so  I  shall  be,  thank  God,  till  my  death.  For 
all  my  cares  and  all  my  efforts  are  directed  to  one  only 
end — that  I  may  one  day  be  an  inmate  of  the  house  of 
God  and  a  fellow-citizen  of  the  saints.' 

After  receiving  this  letter,  Wendelina  withdrew  her 
opposition  :  indeed,  a  few  years  later,  she  gave  her  son,. 
Theodoric  Canisius,  to  the  Society. 


CHAPTER   XXVI. 

Peter  Favre  sent  to  Portugal. 

MEANWHILE,  Don  John,  King  of  Portugal,  had  not  at 
all  abandoned  his  resolution  already  mentioned.  He 
besieged  his  Ambassador  at  Rome  with  letters  in  which 
he  continually  urged  him  to  press  for  Father  Favre's- 
departure.  It  was  not  possible  to  resist  the  reiterated 
request  of  so  great  a  prince.  Accordingly  St.  Ignatius, 
with  the  Pope's  consent,  ordered  Favre  to  leave  Cologne 
and  begin  his  journey  to  Portugal  immediately.  As 
soon  as  this  news  was  told  to  Father  Claude  Le  Jay,  also 
one  of  the  first  ten  companions,  who  was  in  Germany  at 
the  time,  he  represented  in  vivid  colours  the  irreparable 
loss  to  religion  which  would  be  the  consequence.  '  For,' 
he  writes  to  St.  Ignatius,  '  there  is  here  so  high  an 
opinion  of  Father  Favre's  sanctity  and  wisdom,  that  the 
very  sound  of  his  name  is  a  support  and  an  encourage 
ment  to  the  Catholics.  And  it  is  by  means  of  his 
presence  and  labours  that  their  princes  and  nobles  hope 
to  repair  the  losses  sustained  by  the  faith  in  this  country.' 
But  Favre,  although  a  vast  harvest  lay  before  him,. 


Leaving  Cologne. 


promising  abundant  fruit,  showed  all  willingness  to  take 
a  final  leave  of  Cologne,  being  firm  in  that  principle  of 
his,  that  every  change  of  place  made  under  obedience 
would  lead  to  greater  glory  for  God  than  remaining 
where  he  was.  And  so  indeed  it  turned  out  in  those 
two  last  years  of  his  life  which  he  spent  in  Portugal  and 
Spain.  And  so,  taking  leave  of  the  clergy,  nobility,  and 
people,  he  quitted  Cologne  on  the  i2th  of  July,  1544,. 
leaving  there  eight  of  the  Society,  under  the  government 
of  Father  Leonard  Kessel,  who  had  returned  from 
Portugal.  Among  them  was  Peter  Canisius,  the  heir, 
of  his  spirit  and  zeal.  He  continued  the  work  of 
supporting  the  Catholic  cause  in  that  city,  and  after 
two  missions,  to  George  of  Austria,  the  Bishop  of  Liege, 
and  to  the  Emperor  Charles  V.,  succeeded  in  obtaining 
the  removal  of  the  wicked  pastor,  Hermann,  against 
whom  Pope  Paul  III.  had  issued  sentence  of  excom 
munication.  In  his  stead  was  appointed  Adolphus  of 
Schaumburg,  a  prelate  of  irreproachable  life  and  faith. 

At  Louvain,  Favre  was  greatly  consoled  by  the  society 
of  his  dear  children,  and  when  he  was  about  leaving, 
Father  Cornelius  Vishaven  insisted  on  bearing  him 
company  as  far  as  the  port  of  Vera,  where  the  Portuguese 
ships  lay  at  anchor.  To  reach  that  port  from  Antwerp, 
it  is  necessary  to  cross  a  wide  arm  of  the  sea,  and  while 
doing  so,  it  happened  that  a  dead  calm  came  over,  and 
obliged  the  sailors  to  take  to  their  oars  to  hold  on  their 
way.  While  they  were  doing  this,  Favre  and  Vishaven 
were  talking  together  on  spiritual  subjects,  and  one  of 
the  crew  said,  half  angrily,  as  he  passed  them — '  What  is 
the  good  of  your  chattering  there?  Why  do  you  not 
get  us  a  breath  of  favourable  wind  from  God  by  your 
prayers?  We  shall  never  be  in  port  to-night  without 
it.'  Favre,  not  knowing  Flemish,  asked  his  companion 
what  the  sailor  had  said ;  and  when  he  was  told,  he 


124  Favre  at  Evora. 

added  pleasantly — '  The  good  fellow  is  quite  right ;  let 
us  begin  to  pray.'  They  both  knelt  down,  and  imme 
diately  a  fair  wind  blew,  and  took  them  into  the  port  in 
two  hours,  to  the  wonder  and  delight  of  the  passengers. 
There,  with  a  last  embrace,  the  two  holy  men  parted  ; 
and  Vishaven  returned  to  Louvain,  whilst  Favre  sailed 
for  Lisbon,  where  he  arrived  safely  on  the  feast  of 
St.  Bartholomew. 

We  are  told  by  Father  Balthazar  Tellez,  in  his 
Chronicles  of  Portugal,  that  after  visiting  our  brethren 
in  the  House  of  St.  Antony,  Favre  went  straight  to 
Evora,  the  residence  of  King  John,  his  Queen,  Dona 
Catarina,  and  the  Princess  Dona  Maria,  who  was 
betrothed  to  Philip  II.  He  was  introduced  to  the 
King  by  Father  Antonio  Araoz,  and  he  thanked  his 
Highness  humbly  and  gratefully  for  the  many  and  signal 
favours  which  he  had  granted  with  so  free  and  lavish 
a  hand  to  the  Society,  and  for  the  fatherly  care  which 
he  took  of  it  in  supporting  and  extending  it,  not  only 
in  his  own  dominions,  but  in  other  countries  also  by 
his  good  offices  and  recommendation.  % 

King  John,  who  had  been  led  by  the  great  things 
spoken  of  Favre  by  Father  Simon  Rodriguez  and 
Father  Antonio  Araoz  to  form  a  very  high  opinion  of 
him,  now  that  he  had  seen  him,  and  still  more  when 
he  had  conversed  with  him  familiarly,  thought  that  the 
reality  far  surpassed  the  idea  that  he  had  conceived. 
He  was  a  very  practised  observer  and  judge  of  character. 
He  seemed  to  see  in  Favre  the  exact  and  living  likeness, 
as  it  were,  of  the  spirit  of  Ignatius,  and  thought  that, 
as  regarded  personal  holiness,  and  the  gift  of  governing- 
others,  the  Society  did  not  possess  his  equal  in  Portugal. 
He  therefore,  after  consulting  with  the  Queen,  who  was 
as  much  delighted  with  Favre  as  himself,  abandoned  the 
idea  of  attaching  him  to  the  service  of  his  daughter, 


At  Coimbra.  125 


for  whose  sake  he  had  begged  for  him,  and  determined 
to  keep  him  in  Portugal,  and  not  to  suffer  him  to  leave 
his  Court. 

The  holy  man,  not  guessing  at  the  King's  intentions, 
and  supposing  that  he  should  soon  be  going  to  Spain 
with  the  Princess  Maria,  took  a  journey  to  Coimbra, 
for  the  purpose  of  embracing  the  fathers  and  brothers 
there,  who  were  very  desirous  of  seeing  him  ;  and  after 
spending  a  few  days  at  the  College,  returned  in  haste 
to  Evora.  But  his  health  suffered  from  the  journey 
in  the  rainy  autumn  season,  and  he  fell  sick.  This 
strengthened  the  King  in  his  determination,  now  that 
he  saw  it  to  be  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God  ; 
and  without  more  delay  he  sent  some  of  his  own  suite 
to  accompany  the  Princess  to  Spain,  and  then  turned 
his  attention  to  the  diligent  use  of  every  means  for 
restoring  the  health  of  Favre. 


CHAPTER   XXVII. 
The  College  of  Coimbra. 

AT  the  beginning  of  the  new  year,  1545,  when  Peter  Favre 
had  recovered  from  his  illness,  he  returned  to  Coimbra, 
to  inspect  more  at  his  ease  the  beginnings  of  the  College, 
and  to  enjoy  a  longer  time  of  intercourse  with  the  nume 
rous  students.  Words  cannot  tell  the  joy  and  reverence 
with  which  he  was  received,  not  as  a  stranger  or  a  guest, 
but,  to  use  his  own  words,  as  if  he  had  been  the  common 
father,  lord,  and  master  of  all,  ardently  desired  and 
loved  by  all.  There  were  there  upwards  of  sixty  young 
men  of  different  nations — Portuguese,  Spaniards,  Italians, 


126  Letter  to  St.  Ignatius. 

and  Flemings — but  all  united  most  closely  in  heart  and 
mind.  They  pursued  their  scientific  studies  with  the 
greatest  ardour,  without  neglecting  their  own  perfection, 
and  the  whole  city  was  greatly  edified  by  their  generous 
acts  of  humility,  mortification,  and  self-contempt.  All  of 
them,  from  the  oldest  there  down  to  the  novices,  rendered 
him  a  most  exact  account  of  their  consciences,  and  he, 
who  possessed  a  remarkable  gift  and  grace  of  discern 
ment  of  spirit  and  of  direction  of  souls,  gave  to  each 
the  particular  guidance  and  counsel  which  was  most 
suited  to  his  disposition.  The  result  was  such  an 
unusual  revival  of  fervour,  and  such  a  wonderful 
progress  in  the  practice  of  the  most  difficult  virtues, 
that  the  Superiors  were  obliged  to  restrain  the  exces 
sive  zeal  of  some  who  were  inclined  to  outrun  the 
bounds  of  discretion.  Favre  was  filled  with  consola 
tion  at  this,  and  wrote  letters  to  St.  Ignatius,  speaking 
highly  in  praise  of  the  students.  In  one  of  these  letters 
he  says — 

'  It  is  a  month  since  1  came  from  Evora  to  visit  our 
brethren  here  at  Coimbra,  where,  by  the  grace  of  our 
Lord,  I  was  received,  not  as  a  guest,  but  as  the  father, 
lord,  and  master  of  all.  I  must  put  in  the  first  place. 
Father  Santa  Croce,  the  Rector  of  the  College.  I  assure 
your  Reverence  that  if  no  fruit  had  come  of  my  visit  here 
except  the  indescribable  joy  it  caused  to  all  the  brothers, 
and  to  other  persons  who  desired  it,  the  fault  must  be 
entirely  my  own,  either  because  I  take  too  much  advan 
tage  of  their  perfect  humility  and  obedience,  or  because 
I  have  not  been  able  to  direct  each  one  to  his  own  real 
profit.  I  do  not  believe  there  is  a  single  person,  out  of 
more  than  sixty  who  are  in  this  house,  who  has  not  been 
making  great  exertions  to  increase  daily  in  perfection, 
and  to  persevere  unto  death  in  the  fervour  with  which 


Fervour  in  the  College.  127 

they  have  begun.  Great  peace  and  harmony  reign  among 
them.  There  is  brotherly  charity,  there  is  obedience, 
humility,  and  entire  submission  of  every  one.  Order 
is  observed  in  everything — in  bodily,  literary,  spiritual 
exercises  ;  and  in  saying  this,  I  do  not  make  my  own 
way  of  thinking  and  acting  a  standard,  knowing  that 
there  is  always  a  great  want  of  order  in  it,  but  I  mean 
that  everything  is  done  exactly  as  your  Reverence 
would  desire.  Thanks  be  to  Him  Who  is  the  author 
of  all  good/'1 

At  the  close  of  this  letter  he  defends  some  of  the 
fathers  who  had  been  suspected  by  Ignatius,  not 
without  apparent  reason,  of  following  certain  rules  in 
the  government  and  direction  of  others  which  did 
not  seem  in  harmony  with  the  spirit  of  the  Society. 
Nevertheless,  he  observes,  with  his  usual  prudence, 
that  this  unwonted  and  impetuous  fervour  requires 
regulation  to  prevent  its  becoming  excessive,  and 
shaking  off  the  restraint  of  obedience  from  too  much 
freedom  being  allowed  to  individual  judgment.  This 
very  thing  happened  a  few  years  later,  and  to  correct 
it  St.  Ignatius  was  obliged  to  use  firm  and  vigorous 
measures.  Outside  the  house,  men's  minds  were  no 
less  stirred  up  by  the  Blessed  Father.  He  preached 
several  times  from  the  pulpit  of  the  principal  church, 
and  drew  to  himself  the  admiration  and  affection  of 
many  who  came  to  him  for  the  purpose  of  private 
conversation  and  to  make  the  Spiritual  Exercises 
under  him.  It  will  be  enough  to  say  that  about 
thirty  of  the  choicest  students  of  the  University  came 
to  him,  requesting  admission  into  the  Society.  He 
only  received  some  few  of  them,  all  men  worth  many 
others  from  their  noble  birth,  talents,  learning,  and 
1  Autograph  letter,  January  3,  1545. 


128  John  Nunez  Barreto. 

virtue,  such  as  Manuel  Sa,  Antonio  Gomez,  a  doctor 
of  the  Sorbonne,  Michael  de  Sousa,  John  Azpilqueta, 
a  relation  of  the  famous  Martin  Navarro  and  of 
St.  Francis  Xavier,  and  Louis  Gonzalez  de  Camera, 
son  of  the  Count  della  Calleta.  The  last  mentioned 
had  known  both  Favre  and  his  companion  at  the 
University  of  Paris.  At  Coimbra  he  now  observed 
the  example  of  his  holy  life  more  closely,  and  became 
inflamed  with  a  desire  to  imitate  it ;  so,  generously 
abandoning  the  wealth  and  honours  of  his  paternal 
home,  he  entered  the  Society,  thereby  closing  the  door 
to  any  dignity,  ecclesiastical  or  secular. 

But  no  vocation  was  so  wonderful  and  worthy  of 
record  as  that  of  John  Nunez  Barreto.  He  was 
already  a  priest  and  commendatory  abbot  of  a  noble 
church,  and  was  leading  in  the  world  a  truly  saintly 
life.  He  had  felt  drawn  by  an  interior  attraction 
from  God  to  make  the  last  sacrifice  which  remained 
for  him  to  make,  that  of  his  own  will,  by  placing 
himself  under  obedience  in  the  Society,  of  which  his 
brother  Melchior  was  already  a  member.  He  could 
not  make  up  his  mind  to  this,  fearing  that  that  new- 
kind  of  active  life,  devoted  to  the  welfare  of  others, 
might  check  the  flow  of  that  stream  of  sweetness  and 
consolation  which  he  drew  from  the  contemplation  of 
heavenly  things,  in  which  lie  passed  a  great  part  of 
both  day  and  night.  He  was  in  this  state  of  uncer 
tainty,  when  he  dreamed  that  he  saw  a  foreign  priest 
celebrating  High  Mass,  and  that  he  himself  was 
assisting  as  deacon.  He  was  offering  him  the  pax  to 
kiss  in  the  usual  way,  with  the  right  hand,  when  the 
priest  made  him  a  sign  to  use  the  left.  There  fol 
lowed  a  dispute  between  them,  each  persisting  in 
maintaining  his  own  opinion.  On  awaking,  and 
thinking  over  the  vision,  he  heard  an  interior  voice 


Favre 's  advice.  129 

telling  him  not  to  seek  the  peace  of  his  soul  only  in 
the  contemplative  life,  represented  by  the  right  hand, 
but  in  the  active  life  also.  Nevertheless,  in  order  to 
know  God's  will  more  clearly,  he  promised  to  say 
•several  Masses  for  this  intention,  and  meanwhile  he 
constantly  prayed  for  light  from  heaven,  begging  for 
the  intercession  of  our  Blessed  Lady,  to  whom  he  was 
.greatly  devoted.  The  Mother  of  God  appeared  to 
him  visibly,  having  by  her  side  the  priest  whom  he 
had  seen  in  his  dream,  and  ordered  him  to  go  to 
'Coimbra,  where  a  faithful  servant  of  hers  would  tell 
him  what  it  was  God's  will  that  he  should  do.  He 
obeyed  instantly ;  and  no  sooner  did  he  reach 
Coimbra  and  present  himself  to  Father  Favre,  than 
he  recognized  him  as  the  priest  whom  he  had  already 
seen  twice.  Throwing  himself  at  his  feet,  full  of  joy, 
he  opened  his  whole  heart  to  him,  giving  him  a  full 
account  of  himself,  and  asking  his  advice  and  direction. 
When  Favre  had  heard  everything,  he  warned  him, 
that  in  embracing  a  mixed  life  he  would  have  to  be 
ready  to  give  up  sensible  consolation  and  spiritual 
sweetness.  '  For/  he  said,  '  so  long  as  you  thought 
you  could  not  do  better  than  lead  a  solitary  life, 
God  gave  you  undisturbed  peace  and  tranquillity  of 
soul  in  large  measure.  But  when  your  obedience 
places  you  in  the  midst  of  the  labours,  dangers,  and 
persecutions  which  always  attend  an  Apostolic  life, 
and  you  no  longer  feel  in  your  soul  those  interior 
delights  of  spiritual  consolation,  will  you  have  strength 
to  go  forward,  to  conquer  yourself,  and  to  labour 
effectually  for  the  promotion  of  God's  glory  and  the 
salvation  of  souls  ? '  John  replied  that  he  certainly 
should.  '  Well,  then/  rejoined  Favre,  '  rise  to-night, 
according  to  your  habit,  to  pray ;  defy  the  devil  to 
make  all  those  attacks  on  you  which  he  would  make 
J 


130  Nunez  enters  the  Society. 

if  you  were  in  religion,  then,  in  the  morning,  after 
saying  Mass  and  again  asking  God  to  enlighten  you, 
decide  on  your  state  of  life.'  He  obeyed,  and  after 
meeting  and  conquering  the  enemy,  who  assailed  him 
with  every  kind  of  temptation,  he  offered  himself  to 
God,  in  the  act  of  celebration,  as  a  perpetual  holo 
caust,  and  resolved  to  live  and  die  in  the  Society, 
entirely  subject  to  obedience.  And  perfectly  did  he 
accomplish  this,  so  that  Favre  himself,  having  observed 
his  conduct,  was  obliged  to  say,  in  great  astonishment, 
that  he  had  never  seen  any  one  who  suffered  himself 
to  be  ruled  and  guided  by  the  will  of  others  in  the 
smallest  things,  as  Nunez  did. 

This  was  the  John  Nunez  Barreto  who,  after  endur 
ing  many  fatigues  and  dangers  in  Africa  for  the 
redemption  of  Christian  slaves,  took  the  place  of 
Favre,  as  we  shall  see  later,  in  the  dignity,  or  rather 
the  Apostolic  burthen,  of  Patriarch  of  Ethiopia,  and 
who,  being  prevented  from  making  the  passage  to  his 
Church,  lived  and  died  in  a  saintly  manner  at  Goa,. 
in  India. 


CHAPTER   XXVIII. 
Favrc  leaving  Portugal. 

PETER  FAVRE  was  not  able  to  remain  at  Coimbra  longer 
than  a  month,  as  the  King  was  very  pressing  for  him 
to  return,  that  he  might  converse  confidentially  with 
him  both  on  his  own  spiritual  concerns  and  on  the 
affairs  of  the  Society.  Accordingly  he  returned  to 
Evora ;  and  when  there,  he  went  regularly  on  appointed 
days  to  the  Court,  which  he  never  left  without  having 
given  a  bright  example  of  virtue  and  sanctity.  His 
gracious  and  winning  manners  gained  the  respect  and 
attention  of  all  the  noblemen,  who -crowded  about  him 
to  hear  him  speak  of  divine  things.  Not  that  he  needed 
pressing  to  do  this  ;  he  had  a  graceful  way  of  volun 
tarily  entering  into  discourses  of  this  kind,  and  the 
enthusiasm  with  which  he  spoke  communicated  itself  to 
all  who  heard  him.  He  had  the  art  of  making  even 
indifferent  and  worldly  topics,  and  the  gossip  of  the 
Court,  lead  gradually  to  discourses  about  the  soul  and 
to  reflections  of  a  higher  order.  Ever  united  in  mind 
to  God,  he  found  God  in  everything,  and  turned  every 
thing  to  his  own  spiritual  profit  and  that  of  others. 
One  day,  as  he  was  leaving  the  palace,  he  came  upon 
a  numerous  and  splendid  cavalcade,  which  was  in 
attendance  on  a  leading  duke ;  and  in  order  to  avoid 
it,  he  turned  back  and  withdrew  into  a  neighbouring 
church.  There,  by  one  of  those  sudden  impulses  which 
take  the  reason  by  surprise,  he  felt  a  desire  of  once 
J  2 


132  Favre  sent  to  Spain. 

more  seeing  the  very  spectacle  which  he  had  come 
there  to  avoid.  But  no  sooner  was  he  aware  of  the 
temptation,  than  he  instantly  fixed  his  eyes  upon  a 
picture  of  our  crucified  Lord,  and  bursting  into  a  flood 
of  sweet  tears,  he  poured  forth  his  inmost  heart  in 
gratitude  to  God,  thanking  Him  for  deigning  to  admit 
him  to  His  presence,  and  saying  to  himself  that  there- 
was  not  in  the  world  so  delightful  and  profitable  a  sight 
as  that  of  Christ  hanging  on  the  Cross  for  love  of  us. 
Hither  should  all  our  thoughts  and  affections  be  turned, 
here  may  we  satisfy  all  the  cravings  of  our  feelings,  for 
the  desire  of  that  spectacle  infinitely  transcends  the 
deceitful  pleasures  given  by  all  the  sensible  objects  in 
the  \vorld. 

Meanwhile,  the  love  and  reverence  of  King  John 
for  Father  Peter  Favre  increased  daily.  His  modesty, 
gravity,  humility,  prudence,  union  with  God,  and  all 
the  other  singular  gifts  of  nature  and  grace  which  he 
perceived  in  him,  made  the  King  love  and  regard  him 
exceedingly.  All  this  confirmed  him  in  the  determi 
nation  to  use  every  effort  to  keep  him  in  Portugal,  and 
to  recall  the  permission  to  leave  which  he  had  inad 
vertently  given  at  first.  Favre,  however,  had  already 
received  orders  from  his  father,  St.  Ignatius,  to  go  to 
Spain  with  Father  Antonio  Araoz,  and  to  find,  in  the 
Court  of  Prince  Philip,  some  means  of  introducing 
the  Society  into  that  country.  Embracing  therefore 
a  favourable  opportunity  which  presented  itself,  he  went 
into  the  King's  presence,  and  told  him  of  the  order 
he  had  received,  together  with  the  reasons  which 
dictated  it.  This  was  sufficient  to  induce  that  prudent 
sovereign  to  prefer  the  good  of  the  whole  Society  to 
his  private  advantage,  and  to  conform  his  designs  to 
those  of  St.  Ignatius.  Indeed,  he  voluntarily  expressed 
himself  most  willing  to  help  on  the  work,  by  giving  to 


Letter  to  Coimbra. 


the  fathers  the  most  earnest  letters  of  recommendation 
to  his  daughter,  Dofia  Maria,  to  Prince  Philip,  and  to 
his  Ambassador  at  that  Court.  Favre  thanked  him  with 
all  possible  gratitude,  and  as  his  poverty  prevented  him 
from  testifying  it  in  any  other  manner,  he  presented 
him  with  two  of  the  heads  of  companions  of  St.  Ursula, 
which  he  had  brought  from  Cologne.  The  King- 
accepted  the  holy  relics  with  the  greatest  delight,  and 
made  Favre  place  them  with  his  own  hand  in  a  rich 
reliquary  in  the  Queen's  private  oratory. 

Favre  sent  a  third  head  to  the  College  of  Coimbra, 
where  it  was  received  with  much  veneration.  As  he 
was  not  able  to  make  a  farewell  visit  there  to  those 
fervent  young  sons  of  the  Society,  he  wrote  them  the 
following  affectionate  letter  from  Kvora. 

1  Dearest  brothers  in  Christ, — 

'  May  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
and  the  love  of  the  Holy  Ghost  be  in  your  hearts  !  I 
cannot  yet  give  you  positive  information  concerning  our 
departure.  Soon  after  my  coming  to  this  Court,  the 
King  gave  me  leave  to  go,  but  after  awhile  he  retracted 
that  permission.  Believing  as  I  did  that  it  was  God's 
will  that  I  should  go,  I  set  myself  to  remove  the 
difficulties  which  were  in  the  way,  so  by  arguments 
and  prayers  I  have  prevailed ;  and  I  am  free  to  go  to 
Castile.  I  pray  God,  Who  is  the  life  and  defence  of 
us  all,  to  be  my  Guide  and  Protector  on  the  journey. 
The  day  of  our  departure  is  not  settled  ;  we  hope  it 
may  be  next  week,  but  there  is  still  some  important 
business  to  be  despatched.  I  shall  not  be  able  to  take 
your  College  in  my  way,  as  would  be  my  wish  and 
yours  also.  This  is  a  great  disappointment  to  me  ; 
and  also,  I  think,  to  your  charity.  Our  Lord  knows 
the  joy  it  would  be  to  me  to  spend  a  few  days  among 


134  Letter  to  Coimbra. 

you,  and  to  be  thus  both  consoled  and  edified  by  your 
company.     But  we  must  sacrifice  everything,  as  our  only 
desire  is  the  perfect  accomplishment  of  God's  will,  not 
of  our  own.     I    am  therefore  obliged  to    do   by  letter 
what  I  would  so  much  rather  do  by  word  of  mouth, 
and  beg  you  to  remember  me  before  God,  knowing,  as 
you  well  do,  my  dearest   brothers,  how  greatly  I  need 
your  prayers  and  sacrifices.     I  do  not  know  how  long 
I  shall  be  separated  from  you.     I  am  afraid  that,  on  the 
one  hand,  it  would  be  rash  to  say  that  I  will  come  and 
see  you  once  more   before   I   die ;    and,  on  the   other 
hand,  it  would  be  a  great  want  of  confidence  to  despair 
of   meeting  many  of   you   again.      All  this   is  a  great 
sorrow  to  me ;  and  I  think  to  you  too.     As  it  is,  you 
must  take  this  letter  as  my  substitute,  and  as  a  token 
of  my  remembrance    of   you ;    for   you   know,    dearest 
brothers,    the   love   that    I    bear  you.     So  all  good  be 
with  you.     Go  on  serving  Christ  our  Lord  in  gladness 
of  heart,  and  conform  yourselves  entirely  to  His  divine 
management.     Be  steadfast  in  this,  and  attach  yourselves 
to  no  one  but  Jesus   Christ,  Who  can  never  be  taken 
from  you.     From  time  to  time  we  may  enjoy  the  society 
of  men,   but,   as   it  is   often   rather  a.  hindrance   to  us 
than  otherwise,  let  us  turn  our  affections  to  the  things 
of  heaven.     Now  and  then  you  may  converse  on  earthly 
subjects,   but  such  conversations  must   all   be    ordered 
to   eternal  truths.     Hence  the  pleasure  which  proceeds 
from    conversing   with   men   must   be  directed   to    that 
interior  satisfaction  that  dwells   in   the   heart.     And    I 
say  the  same   of  all   our  other  feelings  and  affections, 
which   are   only  profitable  in   proportion  to   the  degree 
in  which  they  are   directed  to  the  things  of  the  spirit. 
And  this  is  understood  by  all  those  to  whom  it  is  given 
by  divine  wisdom  to   enter  into   the  spirit  of   Christ's 
words — Audi  filia,  et  vide,  et  inclina  aurem  tuam.      And 


L  eavctaking.  135 


let  this  be  said  for  those  who  are  wont  to  grieve  bitterly 

at  separation  from  their  friends.     If  it  was  a  desirable 

thing    for    Christ's    Apostles   to    be    deprived    of    the 

Presence  of  Him  Who  by  His  Presence  gave  salvation 

to  the  world,  shall   it  not  be  useful  and  necessary  for 

us  to  be  not  only  separated,  but  entirely  cut  off  from 

those  in  whose  society  we  have  always  lived  ?     Let  it 

be  enough  for  us  that  we  are  always  united  with  God, 

and  with  Jesus   Christ,  Who  is  the   Mediator  between 

the  Father  and  men.     He  is  all  things  to  all.     Let  us 

keep  ourselves  always  in  His  presence ;   let  us  rest  in 

Him  Who  is  the  source  of  all  good ;  in  Him  every  one 

will  ind  both  himself  and  those  dear  to  him.     Let  us 

also  meet  together  in  prayer  to  our  Blessed  Lady.     And 

so,  my  dearest  brothers,  I  leave  you  now,  with  my  last 

farewell,  under  the  protection  of  God — Citjus  vale  diccre 

etfacere  est  confcrre  ipsam  valetudinem  :  beseeching  Him 

in  de  rore  cjus,  ct  de  pijiguedine  ejus  sit  benedictio  Tcstra. 

B'ne  valetc,  ct  in  eodem  /esu  Christo  Domino  nostro, 

'  Your  most  loving  brother  in  Christ, 

'PETER  FAVRE.'T 


1  Tellez,  Chronica  de  C.  de  Jesu  en.  Portugal,  t.  i.  p.  207.  This 
author  gives  March  2oth,  1545,  as  the  date  of  this  letter ;  but 
probably  this  is  an  error,  and  it  should  have  been  the  2nd  of  March, 
as  Favre  in  his  '  Memorial '  mentions  that  he  left  Evora  on  the  4th  of 
that  month. 


CHAPTER   XXIX. 

At  the  Court  of  Prince  Philip. 

Ox  the  4th  of  March,  after  taking  a  last  leave  ot  the- 
King  and  Queen  of  Portugal,  Favre  left  Evora  with 
Father  Araoz;  and  on  the  i2th  of  the  same  month 
they  reached  Salamanca.  They  remained  a  few  days- 
in  that  city  to  rest,  but  the  rest  they  took  was  1o 
excite  the  people  to  the  practice  of  Christian  pietr, 
Araoz  by  preaching,  and  Favre  by  private  conversl- 
tion.  There  were  then  in  the  University  two  vejy 
famous  professors,  greatly  distinguished  by  their  taleit 
in  learning  :  Alfonso  di  Castro,  of  the  holy  Order  of 
St.  Francis,  and  Francis  Vittoria,  of  that  of  St.  Dominic. 
•  They  had  known  Favre  intimately  at  the  University 
of  Paris,  and  so  received  him  with  every  mark  of 
affection,  speaking  so  much  in  his  praise  and  that 
of  the  Society  founded  by  Ignatius,  that  the  weight 
of  their  authority  induced  the  citizens  to  apply  for  a 
College.  But  the  fathers,  satisfied  with  sowing  these 
few  seeds,  and  leaving  behind  them  a  great  deal  of 
regretful  desire,  continued  their  journey,  and  on  the 
1 8th  of  March  reached  Valladolid,  where  the  Court 
was.  They  took  up  their  abode,  as  usual,  in  the 
hospital. 

There  was  not  yet  a  single  house  of  the  Society  in 
Spain,  and,  moreover,  many  people  there  had  a  bad 
opinion  of  the  Society  in  consequence  of  false  and  dis 
torted  reports  of  the  persecutions  raised  against  Ignatius 


Removal  of  prejudices.  137 

and  his  companions  in  Venice  and  Rome,  which  had 
spread  in  that  country,  and  were  even  repeated  from  the 
pulpits  of  the  churches.  But  a  great  deal  was  done 
towards  banishing  all  these  evil  suspicions  from  the 
minds  of  men  by  the  presence  at  Court  of  Mgr.  Pozzi, 
who  was  now  Nuncio  in  Spain  instead  of  Germany, 
and  of  Doctor  Peter  Ortiz,  who,  as  eye-witnesses, 
were  able,  to  testify  to  the  sanctity,  wisdom,  and 
Apostolic  labours  of  this  new  Order  which  God  had 
raised  up  for  the  aid  and  defence  of  His  Church. 
Another  powerful  supporter  of  its  interests  at  Court, 
as  Favre  himself  says  in  a  letter  to  St.  Ignatius,  dated 
April  14,  was  Don  John  Bernal  Diez  de  Lugo,  a  man 
of  great  learning,  recently  appointed  to  the  episcopal 
see  of  Calahorra.  By  his  influence,  and  still  more  by 
the  letters  of  Don  John,  King  of  Portugal,  and  by 
the  active  exertions  of  his  daughter,  Dona  Maria,  the 
two  fathers  had  a  very  kind  and  courteous  reception 
from  Don  Philip,  to  whom  Favre,  with  that  marvel 
lously  attractive  way  of  speaking  which  was  habitual 
to  him,  briefly  explained  the  object  of  the  Society,  the 
means  employed  for  attaining  it,  and  the  advantage 
which  its  establishment  in  any  city  would  secure,  in  the 
good  of  souls  and  the  education  of  the  young. 

But,  in  truth,  far  more  persuasive  than  his  words 
\vas  the  example  of  the  lives  of  the  fathers,  and  their 
labours  in  the  Apostolic  ministry.  Favre,  seeing  so- 
promising  a  ministry  open  to  him  in  Valladolid,  gave 
full  reins  to  his  burning  zeal  in  incessant  labours.  He 
daily  visited,  one  by  one,  all  the  sick  in  the  hospital 
\vhere  he  lodged,  consoling  them,  assisting  them,  and 
ministering  to  them  in  all  their  corporal  and  spiritual 
necessities.  In  the  day-time,  collecting  the  children 
round  him  in  the  public  square,  he  instructed  them  in 
the  rudiments  of  faith  and  Christian  piety ;  and  afterwards 


138  Favre' s  humility. 

he  taught  the  people  from  the  pulpits  of  the  churches, 
inciting  them  to  the  love  of  virtue  and  hatred  of  sin. 
There  was  no  poor  soul  in  the  city,  who  was  in  want 
of  spiritual  help,  whom  he  did  not  hasten  to  visit  as 
soon  as  he  heard  of  him.  Many,  after  having  expe 
rience  of  the  sweetness  of  his  spirit,  confided  to  him 
the  secrets  of  their  consciences,  that  he  might  console 
them  in  dryness,  counsel  them  in  doubt,  and  guide 
them  into  a  safe  path  in  uncertainty.  All  admired 
the  truly  perfect  life  which  he  led,  and  the  unbroken 
union  with  God  which  breathed  in  his  every  word 
and  action.  One  morning,  soon  after  coming  to 
Valladolid,  he  was  going  to  the  sermon  which  was 
being  preached,  probably  one  of  the  Lent  course,  in. 
the  royal  chapel.  When  he  entered  the  palace,  the 
porter,  who  did  not  yet  know  him  by  sight,  shut  the 
door  of  the  ante-chamber  upon  him,  and  would  not 
suffer  him  to  go  any  further.  The  holy  man  did  not 
let  him  know  who  he  was,  neither  did  he  appeal  to 
any  of  the  noblemen  about  the  Court  ;  but  withdrew, 
with  great  peace  and  tranquillity  of  soul,  to  a  retired 
place,  and  there,  reflecting  on  himself,  he  said,  '  Alas, 
how  often  have  I  shut  the  door  of  my  heart  against 
God !  And  when  Thou,  good  Jesus,  earnest  unto 
Thine  own,  Thine  own  did  not  receive  Thee.  Every 
day  Thou  knockest  at  the  door  of  our  souls,  and  we 
do  not  open  to  Thee.'  And  in  such  considerations  he 
passed  the  whole  of  the  time,  praying  and  humbling 
himself  before  God. 

As  all  these  things  became  generally  known,  the 
Court  began  to  show  the  two  fathers  open  and  daily- 
increasing  favour.  They  were  often  sent  for  to  the 
palace ;  their  discourses  about  God  were  gladly 
listened  to,  and  frequent  recourse  was  made  to  them 
for  the  disburdening  of  consciences  in  important 


Letters  of  St.  Francis  Xavier.       1 39 

matters.  The  consequence  was,  that  all  the  grandees, 
both  those  in  attendance  on  the  Prince  and  his 
consort,  and  those  who  came  on  business  from  a 
distance,  abandoned  all  the  suspicions  which  they 
might  have  had  of  the  Society,  and  used  the  two 
fathers  for  the  arrangement  of  their  consciences.  We 
shall  soon  see  what  wonderful  changes  of  life  were 
the  result.  They  were  besides  encouraged  in  this  by 
the  example  and  words  of  the  Portuguese  nobles 
who  had  accompanied  the  Princess  Maria  to  Spain. 
They  had  all  made  choice  of  Favre  and  Araoz  for 
their  directors,  and  spoke  in  terms  of  the  highest 
praise  both  of  them  and  of  the  Society,  extolling  the 
great  benefits  of  which  it  had  been  the  cause,  both  to 
Portugal  and  the  whole  of  the  East  Indies.  Just 
then,  too,  arrived  most  opportunely  the  first  letters 
of  St.  Francis  Xavier,  with  the  account  of  the  many 
idolaters  converted  to  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ. 
These  letters  were  published  by  order  of  the  King  of 
Portugal,  and  distributed  everywhere,  and  exceedingly 
raised  the  credit  of  the  Society.  Hence,  Favre,  writing 
to  St.  Ignatius,  was  able  to  say — 

'  Our  Society  has  now  become  known  throughout 
Spain  :  so  that,  whereas  formerly  it  had  either  never 
been  heard  of  at  all,  or  only  by  the  horrible  false 
hoods  that  had  been  spread  here  from  Rome ;  now, 
thank  God,  there  is  no  place,  high  or  low,  palace  or 
prison,  Court  or  hospital,  and  no  persons,  rich  or 
poor,  gentle  or  simple,  learned  or  ignorant,  even 
women  and  children,  who  are  not  acquainted  with 
our  way  of  life,  our  institute  and  its  object.' 

And,  going  on  to  speak  of  himself  and  of  the  honours 
which  he  was  obliged,  against  his  will,  to  receive,  he 


140  Death  of  the  Princess. 

adds,  that  it  was  no  small  consolation  to  him  to  be 
often  stared  and  pointed  at,  and  afterwards  to  be  told 
that  it  was  reported  all  over  Spain  that  Ignatius  and  his. 
companions  had  been  convicted  of  heresy  at  Rome, 
some  of  them  publicly  burnt,  and  others  condemned 
to  the  same  punishment.  He  would  reply,  with  a 
sweet  smile,  that  he  might  truly  be  said  to  have  been 
condemned  by  the  Society  of  Ignatius  itself  to  be 
exposed,  not  indeed  to  flames  at  Rome,  but  to  shame 
in  Spain,  in  consequence  of  the  unmerited  honours  which 
were  paid  him  there. 

In  this  way  the  state  of  things  in  Spain  seemed  to 
pass  from  good  to  better,  and  Favre,  instead  of  taking 
the  glory  and  merit  to  himself,  ascribed  them  to  the 
labours  and  persecutions  which  his  father,  St.  Ignatius, 
had  formerly  suffered  there,  as  has  been  already 
mentioned.  On  the  8th  of  July  there  was  universal 
rejoicing  for  the  birth  of  a  son,  to  whom  the  Princess 
Doiia  Maria  gave  birth.  The  whole  Court  was  in 
festival,  but  the  joy,  like  most  earthly  joys,  was  ver)r 
short,  and  soon  turned  into  the  deepest  mourning  ;  for 
in  a  few  days  after  the  birth  of  her  child,  the  Princess, 
died.  Feeling  her  last  hour  approach,  she  sent  for 
Favre,  received  the  last  sacraments  from  him,  and 
desired  him  and  Araoz  to  assist  her  to  her  last  breath  ; 
thus,  even  in  the  moment  of  death,  remembering  her 
love  for  the  fathers  and  the  Society,  like  a  true 
daughter  of  John  III.  of  Portugal.  Favre  grieved 
for  her  loss,  at  the  same  time  that  he  rejoiced  at  the 
excellent  dispositions  with  which  she  prepared  for  her 
end.  He  wrote  an  account  of  her  death  to  the  Duke  of 
(iandia,  Francis  Borgia,  who  replied  by  an  admirable 
letter,  full  of  the  Spirit  of  God  and  of  that  contempt 
of  the  world  with  which  he  was  so  thoroughly  imbued.1 

1  Alcazar,  History  of  Toledo,  p.  50. 


A  conversion.  141 

After  the  solemn  celebration  of  the  Princess'  obsequies, 
Philip's  deep  grief  would  not  permit  him  to  remain  at 
Valladolid.  He  therefore  dismissed  his  Court,  and  went 
to  Madrid,  ordering  the  two  fathers  to  follow  him.  Mean 
while,  Favre,  having  received  large  contributions  from 
persons  of  condition,  founded,  with  the  Prince's  consent, 
a  House  of  the  Society  at  Valladolid,  leaving  there,  for 
the  work  of  the  ministry,  James  Mendez,  John  Consalvo, 
.and  Hermes  Poen  of  Flanders,  all  of  whom  had  recently 
.arrived  from  Portugal. 


CHAPTER   XXX. 

Valladolid  and  Cologne. 

BEFORE  leaving  Valladolid,  I  think  it  well  to  record 
the  things  which  happened  there,  as  instances  of 
Father  Favre's  prudent  method  of  directing  souls  into 
the  way  of  salvation,  and  of  his  tenderness  of  heart 
in  supporting  and  comforting  the  persecuted  and 
.afflicted. 

There  was  a  very  illustrious  personage  belonging  to 
the  Court  of  Prince  Philip,  a  man  .of  the  world,  and 
altogether  devoted  to  enjoyment  and  pleasure,  and 
who,  therefore,  was  in  the  habit  of  treating  his  body 
with  self-indulgent  delicacy.  This  man,  hearing  many 
persons  speak  very  highly  of  the  sanctity  of  Father 
Favre,  introduced  himself  to  him  one  day,  and  rather 
out  of  curiosity  to  hear  some  rare  spiritual  maxim, 
than  from  any  desire  of  profit  to  his  soul,  asked  the 
father  to  give  him  some  short  method  or  rule  of  life. 
The  servant  of  God,  perceiving  what  sort  of  a  man 


14-  converson. 


he  had  to  deal  with,  and  that  his  idea  was  to  combine 
the  service  of  God  and  of  the  world,  carnal  enjoyments 
and  spiritual  consolations,  said,  '  I  shall  suggest  to  you 
nothing  more  than  frequently  to  repeat  in  your  heart, 
"  Christ  poor,  and  I  rich  ;  Christ  fasting,  and  I  full  ; 
Christ  naked,  and  I  clad ;  Christ  suffering,  and  1 
living  in  enjoyment.'"  Having  said  this,  he  was 
silent.  The  gentleman,  on  hearing  this,  laughed  in 
his  heart  at  Favre's  simplicity,  and  at  the  still  greater 
simplicity  of  the  numbers  who  followed  him  and 
considered  him  a  greater  master  of  the  spiritual  life, 
whereas,  when  put  to  the  test,  he  was  no  wiser  than 
the  rest  of  the  world.  Then,  presently  recalling  to 
mind  the  words  he  had  heard,  he  said  that  he  found 
in  them  nothing  extraordinary,  nothing  but  what  every 
one  had  often  heard  and  knew  quite  well.  But  one 
day,  when  he  was  seated  at  a  sumptuous  banquet, 
suddenly,  in  the  midst  of  the  abundant  dainties  and 
delicate  wines,  there  darted  into  his  mind,  and  sank 
into  his  heart,  those  words — '  Christ  fasting,  and  I 
full  ;  Christ  suffering,  and  I  living  in  luxury  and 
enjoyment.'  Then,  comparing  the  two  terms,  he  was 
seized  with  remorse,  horror,  and  interior  commotion, 
and,  by  the  help  of  divine  grace,  he  entered  thoroughly 
into  himself,  and,  penetrating  into  the  depths  of  that 
short  and  simple  sentence,  which  just  before  seemed 
to  have  nothing  in  it,  he  saw  revealed  there  the 
deformity  of  his  life.  Unable  to  restrain  the  over 
powering  feelings  which  crowded  in  upon  his  soul,  he 
hastily  left  the  company,  and,  seeking  a  retired  and 
solitary  place,  he  relieved  himself  by  tears  of  sorrow 
and  penitence.  As  soon  as  possible  he  went  again  to 
Favre,  and  gave  him  a  full  account  of  his  past  life. 
The  holy  man,  in  the  most  tender  and  affectionate 
manner,  began  to  instruct  him  in  the  spiritual  life  ; 


Troubles  at  Cologne.  143 


afterwards,  making  him  enter  on  the  Exercises,  he 
drew  him  on  to  make  a  general  confession,  and  to 
reform  his  life  so  thoroughly  that  he  became  the 
mirror  and  model  of  a  truly  Christian  nobleman  to 
the  whole  Court. 

It  has  been  already  related  that  Peter  Favre,  when 
he   went    away   from    Cologne    the    second    time,    left 
there    Father  Leonard    Kessel,   and   eight  more   of  the 
Society.      All  these  fervent  labourers,  and  in  particular 
Blessed   Peter  Canisius,  continued  to  work  most  vigo 
rously  in  that  city,   cultivating  the   souls  of  the  people 
by  sermons,  instructions,  and  private  conversations,  and 
teaching  the   Christian   doctrine   to   the   children.      The 
consequence    was    that    the    heretics    lost    both    credit 
and  followers    every  day  ;  while,   on    the    contrary,   the 
Catholic  faith  began   to   rise  from    its   ruins,  and  good 
Christians,  gaining  courage,  forcibly  opposed  the  propa 
gation    of  error.      The   Lutherans   were   mad  with   rage 
at  all  this  ;  they  had  before   now  determined   to   strain 
every  nerve  to   drive  the  fathers  out  of  Cologne,    but 
they  did   not   venture   to    take    any  steps   while    Favre 
was    there,    on    account    of    the    high    reverence    with 
which  he  was  universally  regarded.     No  sooner  was  he 
gone  to  Portugal  than  they  set  in  motion  the  machina 
tions  they  had  devised  among  themselves,  being  urged 
on  also  by  the  instigation  of  the  treacherous  Archbishop 
Hermann,  who   had  made   up   his  mind   to   rid   himself 
altogether   of    those    courageous    young   men,    who,    by 
their   holy   lives    and   burning   zeal,    hindered    so    effec 
tually   the    spread    of    the    heresy,    of    which    he    now 
made    open    profession.       Accordingly   they   presented 
to    the    senate    a    list    of    horrible    accusations    against 
the  religious    in    question,    demanding    their   immediate 
banishment  from   the  city  ;    and  they  had   contrived  to 
give  so  fair  a  colour  to  their  calumnies,  and  to  manage 


1 44  Letter  from  Canisius. 

matters  so  cunningly,  that  the  senators,  some  of  whom 
were  gained  over  beforehand,  and  others  bribed,  acceded 
to  their  petition.  We  have  a  long  letter  on  this  subject 
from  Peter  Canisius  to  Favre,  and  the  sentiments  of 
intense  zeal  and  fervour  which  it  expresses  render  it 
very  worthy  of  being  perused  at  length.  For  the 
sake  of  brevity  we  must  content  ourselves  with  a  short 
extract. 

'  I  have  undertaken,'  he  says,  '  to  relate,  by  God's 
favour,  and  in  the  best  way  that  I  can,  the  miserable 
tragedy  which  is  beginning  to  be  acted  here — a  thing 
which  none  of  our  brothers  have  yet  been  able  to  do  ; 
.and  without  being  too  long  I  will  explain  to  your 
paternal  solicitude  the  unhappy  condition  of  your 
children.  After  you  left  us,  on  the  i2th  of  July,  we 
remained  here,  united  among  ourselves  in  brotherly 
charity,  pursuing  our  studies  tranquilly,  and  more 
/ealously  than  ever  before.  Kach  one  of  us  attended 
to  himself  and  his  own  particular  duty,  according  to 
the  instructions  you  left  with  us ;  and  it  seemed  as 
though  the  disturbances  against  us,  which  had  been 
excited  in  the  senate,  would  have  the  effect  of 
strengthening  our  cause  rather  than  weakening  it.  But 
on  the  28th  of  July  the  same  consul  who  had  before 
been  sent  by  the  senate  when  you  were  here,  came 
to  us  again,  and  this  time  he  was  not  alone,  but 
accompanied  by  a  numerous  party  of  senators.  Hap 
pening  to  find  here  Master  Peter  de  Hallis  and 
myself,  he  began  thus :  "  We  have  related  to  the  senate 
what  you  stated  concerning  your  mode  of  life ;  we 
are  aware  now  that  your  numbers  have  increased, 
and  that  there  are  now  about  eleven  of  you  living 
together."  "That  was  exactly  our  number/1'  I  replied, 
"  but  now  there  are  only  nine  of  us."  "  However 


Order  to  leave  Cologne.  145 

that  may  be,"  he  said,  "  I  am  come  to  declare  to  you 
the  sentence  and  decree  of  the  senate,  which  is,  that 
you  all  quit  this  city  immediately,  and  go  wherever 
you  like  ;  and  the  senators  have  given  no  reason  for 
this  resolution  of  theirs."  I  replied,  "  Very  well,  but 
as  we  are  to  leave  this  city,  we  must  request  the  noble 
senators  to  furnish  us  with  a  written  testimonial  of  our 
good  and  innocent  conduct,  in  order  that  we  may  be 
able  to  prove,  wherever  we  may  go,  that  we  have  not 
been  sent  away  on  account  of  any  fault  on  our  part, 
which  would  otherwise  be  supposed  by  every  one  to 
be  the  case."  They  refused  this  request  of  mine  con 
temptuously,  and  said,  "  As  you  came  here  without 
our  consent,  you  may  go  away  without  any  testimonial 
from  us."  I  rejoined,  "  If  will  and  nothing  else  is  to 
stand  instead  of  reason,  I  would  beg  their  lordships 
to  consider  how  unworthy  a  thing  it  is  to  banish  inno 
cent  persons,  living  at  their  own  expense,  and  engaged 
on  their  studies  ;  and  next,  to  reflect  more  at  leisure 
on  the  account  they  will  have  to  render  to  God  of 
this  injustice."  At  these  words  they  became  angry, 
and  said,  in  an  excited  manner.  "  You  again  threaten 
us  then,  do  you?"  I  answered  quietly,  "I  have  no 
intention  of  threatening  anybody.  I  merely  remind  you 
that  you  will  have  to  answer  to  Christ,  the  Judge  of 
all  men,  for  inflicting  a  very  severe  punishment  on 
innocent  men."  The  consul  then  said,  "  Take  care 
not  to  oblige  us  to  intimate  the  will  of  the  senate  to 
you  a  second  time.  We  give  you  a  week  to  settle  your 
affairs;  in  the  meanwhile  prepare  for  departure."  With 
these  words  they  went  away,  and  in  taking  leave  of 
them  I  said,  "  We  will  cheerfully  remember  to  pray 
to  God  for  you  wherever  we  may  go."  Happy  are  we 
in  being  counted  worthy  of  so  great  an  honour  !  For 
surely  it  is  an  honour  and  glory  for  us  to  be  so  hardly 
K 


146  Five  remain  at  Cologne. 

judged,   proscribed,   and  driven   away  against   all   right 
reason,  and  for  no  fault  of  ours.;1 

Canisius  goes  on  to  speak  of  the  insults,  sarcasms, 
and  ill-treatment  which  they  were  daily  receiving, 
including  even  threats  of  imprisonment ;  then  of  the 
arts  and  cajoleries  which  many  people  tried  upon 
him  to  detach  him  from  the  rule  of  the  Society  which 
he  had  embraced,  promising  him  all  sorts  of  ecclesi 
astical  honours,  dignities,  preferments,  and  benefices  ; 
and,  finally,  he  gives  the  history  of  the  persecution, 
showing  how  it  all  emanated  from  Archbishop  Hermann, 
and  how,  in  the  end,  the  heretics  and  the  senate  agreed 
to  their  remaining  at  Cologne,  provided  they  did  not 
live  in  community,  but  separate  from  one  another ; 
hoping,  by  that  means,  that  when  once  the  union 
which  kept  them  together  was  broken,  it  would  be 
easier  to  dissolve  the  body  altogether,  and  that  they 
might  then,  without  much  noise,  be  made  to  go  into 
exile.  But  they  -were  deceived  in  their  anticipations, 
for  only  four  of  the  number,  the  youngest  in  the  house, 
went  to  Augsburg,  whither  they  were  summoned  by 
Father  Le  Jay.  The  remaining  five  were  enabled,  by 
the  help  of  the  Carthusian  fathers,  to  remain  at  Cologne, 
parted,  indeed,  from  each  other,  as  Canisius  says,  as  to 
bodily  presence,  but  all  the  more  closely  united  in  spirit, 
and  full  of  readiness  to  endure  all  kinds  of  trial  and 
suffering,  even  to  prison,  chains,  and  death  itself,  for 
the  sake  of  the  faith. 

Favre,  on  receiving  this  letter  and  others  from  Father 
Leonard  Kessel  and  his  companions,  highly  approved 
the  resolution  they  had  taken,  and,  writing  from 
Valladolid  on  the  9th  of  July,  1545,  he  exhorted 
them  to  patience  and  endurance. 


1  Autograph  letter  from  Cologne,  August  21  and  September 


21,  1544- 


Letter  from  Favre.  147 

'  In  the  packet  which  I  have  from  Cologne/  he  says, 
<  I  find  a  letter  from  Master  Peter  Canisius  to  me.  I 
have  read  and  read  it  again,  and  I  cannot  say  whether 
it  has  given  me  more  joy  or  sorrow  of  heart.  For  would 
not  any  one  be  moved  to  tears  on  hearing  that  you,  who 
are  so  entirely  one  and  the  same  in  the  union  of  your 
wills,  are  not  allowed  to  dwell  together  in  one  house  in 
that  place  ;  that  you,  who  have  shown  so  plainly  that 
you  have  but  one  heart  and  soul,  are  thought  unworthy 
to  live  in  community  ?  I  could  laugh  for  joy  and  weep 
for  sorrow  at  the  same  time,  when  I  think  that  these 
men  insist  on  your  living  apart,  and  cannot  endure 
you  to  be  together ;  as  if  you  would  be  better, 
separated  in  this  way,  than  you  were  assembled  in 
the  same  dwelling.  I  would  fain  say  to  these  men 
who  are  disturbing  and  tormenting  you,  "  If  you  think 
the  tree  good,  so  also  ought  you  to  think  the  fruit ; 
and  if  you  think  the  tree  evil,  in  like  manner  ought 
you  to  think  the  fruit  evil."  But  it  is  not  prudent  to 
tell  the  whole  truth,  especially  in  these  troublous  times. 
Our  Lord  be  praised,  Who  gives  you  union  in  the  spirit, 
though  you  are  separated  in  the  body.  He  will  know 
how  to  gather  together  again  the  scattered  remnant  of 
Israel.  Do  you,  on  your  part,  place  your  whole  trust  in 
Him  Who  is  the  fountain  of  all  grace.' 

And,  in  conclusion,  after  exhorting  them  to  constancy, 
lie  prays  our  Lord  and  God  to  open  the  eyes  of  the 
minds  of  those  who  were  the  authors  of  this  disturb 
ance,  and  to  make  them  know  what  a  blessing  it  would 
bring  upon  their  city  if  there  were  many  more  inflamed 
with  the  same  fire  of  zeal  and  charity  which  burnt  in 
the  heart  of  Master  Peter  Canisius.^  He  also  wrote 
to  Gerard  Hammond,  the  prior  of  the  Carthusians, 

2  Valladoiid,  July  4,  1545. 
K    2 


148      Letter  to  the  Carthusian  Prior. 

thanking  him  for  the  charity  he  had  shown  to  our 
brethren  at  Cologne,  and  informing  him  that  he  had 
related  the  whole  of  it  to  Father  P>ancis  Xavier,  in 
India,  and  asked  him  to  give  his  prayers  in  payment 
of  the  debt  which  the  Society  owed  to  that  order.. 
Nor  did  this  satisfy  him,  for  the  following  year,  in 
replying  to  a  letter  from  Hammond,  he  says — 

'  Do  not  fear,  my  dearest  father,  that  I  shall  ever 
forget  you.  Go  on  making  ever  more  favourable  to 
you  that  Divine  Spirit,  Who  intercedes  for  you  in  the 
hearts  of  your  friends.  He  watches  over  you  with 
special  care,  and  moves  me  to  hold  you  in  remem 
brance.  I  am  also  moved  to  do  so  by  the  benefits 
you  have  lavished  on  me  and  my  brethren,  and,, 
above  all,  in  obtaining  for  our  Society  a  share  in  the 
good  works  of  your  order.  That  is  reason  enough 
for  all  our  brethren  having  a  very  special  remem 
brance  of  you  and  your  monastery.  Last  year  I  wrote 
to  Master  Francis  Xavier,  who  is  in  India,  begging 
him  to  make  mention  of  you  all  in  his  prayers.  At 
this  time  we  are  sending  out  thither  ten  of  our 
Portuguese  brethren,  who  are  well  acquainted  with 
the  favours  we  have  received  from  you,  and  also 
with  the  love  that  I  bear  to  your  order,  and  to  all 
Germany.  They  are  conveying  another  letter  from  me 
to  Master  Francis,  in  which  I  have  spoken  of  you  and 
my  other  friends  in  Cologne,  begging  him  further  to 
acknowledge  his  share  of  our  debt,  and  to  help  me 
with  his  prayers,  that  I  may  not  be  ungrateful  to  those 
who  feel  and  act  so  kindly  to  me,  beyond  any  desert 
of  mine.':5 

'  Madrid,  March  i2th,  1546.' 

y  Ada  Sanctorum,  Julii  31. 


Favre  at  Madrid.  149 

This  storm  which  was  raised  at  Cologne  was  not  of 
long  duration,  as  Favre  had  predicted  in  his  letter ; 
for  the  efforts  of  the  Catholics,  including  several  of 
the  wisest  professors  of  the  University,  succeeded  in 
discovering  the  machinations  of  the  heretics,  and  in 
proving  the  innocence  of  our  fathers  ;  so  that  the  new 
senators  came  to  see  the  mistake,  and  revoked  the 
decree. 


CHAPTER    XXXI. 

At  Madrid. 

IN  Madrid  Philip  ordered  two  rooms  to  be  prepared 
for  the  fathers,  as  they  wished,  in  the  Hospital  of  our 
Lady  del  Campo,  opposite  the  palace.  Immediately 
on  their  arrival  they  both  resumed  their  ministerial 
functions.  But  Favre  in  particular  was  not  able  to 
undertake  much  settled  work,  for  from  the  time  that 
he  was  first  seen  publicly  he  was  continually  visited 
by  noblemen  about  the  Court,  who  had  already  learnt 
to  love  and  respect  him  at  Valladolid,  and  who  now 
had  recourse  to  him  for  confession,  and  to  request 
him  to  give  them  written  directions  for  the  spiritual 
life,  and  rules  of  perfection.  It  was  a  beautiful  thing 
to  see  the  chief  nobility  of  Spain  and  Portugal  coming 
to  him  in  the  hospital,  and  saying  to  each  other,  '  Let 
us  go  to  the  holy  priest.'  The  most  frequent  and 
zealous  of  those  who  made  use  of  his  ministry  were 
Mgr.  Pozzi,  the  Pope's  Nuncio,  John  di  Zugniga, 
Philip's  tutor,  and  his  wife  Stefana  Requesens ; 


150  The  two  Princesses. 

Bernardino  Pimentel,  the  Marquis  of  Tavora,  and 
Ferdinand  da  Silva,  Count  of  Cifuentes,  the  Secretary 
of  the  Court.  He  had  formerly  been  Imperial 
Ambassador  at  Rome,  and  had  been  a  great  friend  to 
the  Society  in  its  early  days.  As  he  was  a  man  of 
extraordinary  virtue  and  piety,  Favre  enabled  him  to 
attain  a  very  high  degree  of  perfection,  giving  him 
.  rules  and  directions  for  meditating  profitably  on  the 
eternal  truths,  and  for  cleansing  his  soul  by  frequent 
examinations  of  conscience ;  and  his  spiritual  profit 
was  not  for  himself  alone,  but  he  made  every  exertion 
possible  to  make  the  labours  of  Favre  bear  fruit  in  the 
souls  of  others  also. 

He  had  the  charge  of  the  two  Princesses,  Maria 
and  Joanna,  daughters  of  Charles  V.  and  sisters  to 
Philip,  who  had  had  an  opportunity  four  years  before, 
though  only  for  a  very  short  time,  of  having  some 
intercourse  with  Favre  at  Occagna.  Now  that  they 
were  at  Alcala,  they  were  exceedingly  desirous  of 
seeing  him  again,  and  of  having  longer  conversations 
with  him  on  spiritual  subjects.  Don  Ferdinand  then 
obtained  leave  to  take  him  to  Alcala,  and  in  the  few 
days  that  he  stayed  there  he  brought  the  Court  to  a 
regularity  like  that  of  a  religious  house.  When  he 
took  his  leave  he  left  written  rules  of  life  with  the 
Infantas  and  their  ladies,  and  also  instructions  how 
to  meditate  profitably  on  the  eternal  truths  and  the 
Passion  of  our  Lord.  After  this  the  Princesses  used 
to  go  from  time  to  time  to  Madrid,  under  pretext  of 
paying  a  visit  to  their  brother,  and  went  to  the  hospital 
to  converse  with  Favre  and  give  him  an  account  of 
their  state.  Their  piety  was  fostered  and  their  holy 
resolutions  strengthened  by  the  example  and  advice 
of  their  governante,  Dona  Leonora  Mascarenas,  a 
very  devout  lady,  and  so  much  attached  to  the  Society 


The  College  at  Alcald.  151 

that  St.  Ignatius  used  to  call  her  its  '  mother.'  And  so, 
indeed,  she  was,  not  merely  in  affection,  but  in  the 
protection  and  continual  support  which  she  afforded  it 
She  had  already  largely  contributed  to  the  establish 
ment  of  our  House  at  Valladolid  ;  and  now  at  Alcala, 
while  Favre  was  there,  she  arranged  with  the  Prin 
cesses,  and  got  together  a  sufficient  sum  to  purchase  a 
house  and  maintain  some  of  our  number,  whom  Father 
'Simon  Rodriguez  sent  for  the  purpose  from  Coiinbra. 
Their  names  were  Francis  di  Villanova,  Manuel  Lopez, 
and  that  Maximilian  Cappella  whose  wonderful  conver 
sion  has  been  already  related.  These  were  the  small 
beginnings  of  the  College  which  the  Society  afterwards 
had  at  Alcala,  and  which  did  so  much  for  souls, 
especially  among  the  young  students  of  the  University, 
as  Father  Peter  Favre  foretold  from  the  beginning  would 
be  the  case. 

I  am  here  unwilling  to  omit  to  mention  a  circum 
stance  which  reflects  great  honour  and  praise  on  Favre. 
There  were  some  ill-disposed  people,  who,  not  being  able 
to  detect  the  slightest  blemish  in  his  way  of  mixing  with 
people  about  the  Courts,  and  especially  with  persons  of 
the  opposite  sex,  spread  a  report  that  the  fathers  of 
the  Society  carried  about  them  a  certain  herb  which 
possessed  the  property  of  paralyzing  all  seeds  of  concupi 
scence,  and  that,  consequently,  it  was  not  to  be  wondered 
at  that  they  preserved  their  purity.  This  tale  came  to 
the  ears  of  Philip,  who,  whether  he  believed  it  or  not, 
charged  his  tutor,  Don  John  di  Zugniga,  to  inquire  into 
the  truth  of  the  matter.  The  first  of  the  fathers  whom 
he  met  was  Father  Araoz,  and  to  him  Don  John  con 
fidentially  imparted  the  Prince's  wish.  The  father,  after 
a  little  reflection,  replied,  '  The  report  which  you  have 
heard  about  us  is  true,  and  I  may  add,  that  this  herb 
which,  by  the  favour  of  heaven,  we  make  use  of,  not 


152  Alvaro  de  Cordova. 

only  destroys  carnal  temptations,  but  restrains  the 
appetite,  checks  the  tongue,  moderates  the  anger, 
eradicates  all  vices  and  implants  all  virtues  in  the  soul  ; 
and  if  you  wish  to  know  its  name,  it  is  called  in  plain 
Castilian  the  holy  fear  of  God,  and  the  Holy  Spirit 
has  bestowed  upon  it  the  power  of  producing  all  those 
effects  which  I  have  mentioned/  The  father's  reply 
was  repeated  at  Court,  and  raised  him  still  higher  in 
the  respect  and  veneration  of  all. 

As  the  number  of  illustrious  persons  who  flocked  to 
the  hospital  increased  every  day,  the  Prince  had  the 
fathers  removed  thence,  and  allotted  to  them  a  better 
place  of  residence.  Favre  availed  himself  of  the  change 
to  give  the  Spiritual  Exercises  more  conveniently  to 
many  people,  who  most  earnestly  desired  to  make 
them.  Among  these  were  bishops  and  ecclesiastics 
of  every  grade,  more  than  I  can  tell,  besides  several 
gentlemen  and  nobles  of  the  Court,  whose  change  of 
life  was  the  subject  of  general  admiration  and  edifica 
tion.  I  will  only  relate  one  among  many,  that  of  Don 
Alvaro  de  Cordova,  Grand  Master  of  the  Horse  to 
the  Prince,  whose  wife,  Dona  Maria  of  Aragon,  used 
to  say  that  before  Favre  came  to  Madrid  she  was  the 
wife  of  a  courtier-noble  ;  but  that  now,  thanks  to  God 
and  to  the  father,  she  was  not  only  married  to  a  Christian 
nobleman,  but  to  a  saint.  And  this  was  true,  for  Don 
Alvaro,  after  making  the  Exercises,  adopted  a  way  of 
life  so  entirely  different  from  his  former  use,  that  he 
seemed  a  different  man.  After  discharging  the  duties 
of  his  office  at  Court,  it  was  his  custom  to  retire  to  his 
chamber  to  pray  and  meditate  alone ;  and  when  the 
Prince  went  for  change  and  recreation  to  the  Pardo, 
the  royal  villa,  he  would  retire  apart  from  the  rest, 
into  a  grove,  where,  hidden  from  the  eyes  of  all,  he 
spent  the  whole  time  conversing  with  God.  He  was 


Foundation  of  Colleges.  153 

liberal  and  charitable  to  the  poor  and  needy  of  all 
sorts,  and  there  was  not  a  single  act  of  heroic  charity 
which  he  did  not  practise  towards  the  sick,  especially 
those  in  the  hospitals,  even  carrying  on  his  back  their 
mattrasses,  and  whatever  they  required.  And  all  these 
good  works  of  his  were  shared  and  imitated  by  his 
son,  Don  Antonio,  who  afterwards  entered  the  Society, 
and  became  a  glory  to  his  country  by  the  lustre  of  his 
sanctity. 

The  fame  of  the  labours  of  Father  Favre,  and  of  the 
fruits  which  they  produced,  spread  from  Madrid  to  the 
different  provinces,  and  the  result  was  that  people  formed 
a  high  opinion  of  the  Society,  and  greatly  desired  its 
establishment  among  them.  Many  persons  who  did  not 
know  its  name,  said  that  the  '  Ignatians '  had  come  to 
Spain ;  others  called  them  '  Papists,'  in  allusion  to  their 
vow  of  obedience  to  the  Pope  and  the  Apostolic  See. 
Some,  hearing  how  much  the  fathers  dwelt  on  the 
importance  of  an  amendment  of  life,  and  seeing  that 
there  was  no  outward  difference  between  them  and 
the  rest  of  the  clergy,  called  them  '  reformed  priests  or 
clerics.'  There  were  not  wanting  some  who  formed  even 
too  high  an  opinion  of  them,  and  said  that  God  had 
sent  out  new  apostles  for  the  salvation  of  the  world. 
Several  cities  requested  that  they  might  have  colleges 
of  the  Society,  among  these  were  Toledo,  Salamanca, 
Saragossa,  Barcelona,  and  others.  But  Favre  was  unable, 
from  the  lack  of  subjects,  to  embrace  many  offers;  and  for 
the  present  confined  himself  to  Madrid,  Alcala,  Valentia, 
Valladolid,  and  Gandia,  in  which  last  place  the  holy 
duke,  Francis  Borgia,  this  year  began  the  College  and 
University,  the  first  in  Spain  committed  to  the  Society.  It 
was  to  supply  these  infant  colleges  that  Favre  received 
a  suitable  number  of  novices,  over  and  above  the 
students  who  had  come  from  Portugal.  He  trained 


154  Progress  in  Spain. 

them  carefully  as  their  spiritual  master,  and  he  gave 
Father  Araoz  the  office  of  establishing  everywhere, 
and  putting  in  force,  regular  religious  discipline  and 
observance.  These  were  the  first  seeds  of  the  Society  in 
Spain,  which  afterwards,  by  God's  grace,  sprang  up  and 
spread  not  only  in  that  part  of  Europe,  but  throughout 
the  vast  regions  of  the  West  Indies.  A  large  part  of  this 
great  work  is  due  to  Peter  Favre,  who  was  the  first  to 
make  the  Society  known  and  valued  by  all  ranks  and 
conditions  of  persons. 

This  is  so  true  that  when,  a  year  later,  the  holy  father 
St.  Ignatius  appointed  Father  Antonio  Araoz  first  Pro 
vincial  of  Spain,  he  said,  in  the  patent  from  Rome,  on 
September  i — '  We  are  moved  to  lay  this  burthen  on 
you  by  the  consideration  of  the  abundant  fruit  which 
has  been  gathered  in  the  last  few  years  in  Spain  by 
your  labour  and  industry,  and  especially  also  by  those 
of  Father  Master  Peter  Favre,  now  resting  in  the  Lord. 
For  already  several  colleges  have  been  founded  there,, 
and  others  are  either  begun  or  will  soon  be  begun, 
scholastics  have  been  placed  for  their  studies  in 
different  Universities  ;  and  a  great  number  of  well- 
disposed  persons  have  been  led,  some  of  them,  to 
enter  the  Society  and  profess  the  Evangelical  counsels  ; 
while  others  have  been  roused  to  change  their  life  for 
the  better  by  spiritual  admonitions  and  ministrations/ 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 

Farcrc  summoned  to  Rome. 

ST.  IGNATIUS  had  fixed  a  year  as  the  limit  of  Favre's  stay 
in  Spain.  Accordingly,  at  the  beginning  of  1546,  this 
good  son  of  obediencef  reminded  his  holy  father  of  the 
order  he  had  received,  placing  himself  in  his  hands 
with  entire  indifference,  perfectly  ready  to  remain  where 
he  was,  or  to  go  anywhere  else ;  or,  as  he  said  himself, 
to  have  to  spend  his  time  in  continual  journeys,  without 
pausing  or  reposing,  merely  in  visiting  his  companions 
and  preparing  a  habitation  for  them,  without  himself 
having  port  or  home  of  his  own  anywhere.  I  do  not 
see  how  it  would  be  possible  to  desire  more  in  the  way 
of  most  perfect  obedience  in  the  face  of  all  that  nature 
could  suggest  to  the  contrary.  For  any  one  who  has 
the  slightest  appreciation  of  spiritual  things  will  see  and 
feel  how  painful  it  must  be  to  a  man  of  truly  Apostolic 
mind  to  break  off  his  labours  in  the  midst,  when  the 
fruit  is  just  ready  to  be  gathered,  to  abandon  everything 
at  the  call  of  obedience,  and  to  turn  in  an  entirely 
different  direction,  without  any  certainty,  or  even  hope, 
of  its  leading  to  greater  good. 

At  the  same  time  that  Favre  wras  writing  on  this 
subject,  the  question  of  recalling  him  for  the  service 
of  the  Universal  Church  was  being  agitated  at  Rome. 
The  first  session  of  the  Ecumenical  Council  had  been 
held  at  Trent  on  the  i3th  of  December  ;  and  as  the 
difficult  subjects  of  original  sin  and  justification  were  to 


156         Letter  of  Ignatius  to  Ortiz. 

be  prepared  in  time  for  the  subsequent  sessions,  Pope 
Paul  III.  had  asked  Ignatius  for  three  men  of  the 
Society  whom  he  might  send  there  in  quality  of  Papal 
theologians.  The  holy  founder,  after  commending  the 
matter  to  God,  fixed  upon  Father  James  Laynez,  Father 
Alfonso  Salmeron,  and  Father  Peter  Favre  for  that 
office.  The  first  two  were  at  Rome,  and  therefore 
would  be  able  to  go  straight  to  Trent  in  May.  As  to 
Favre,  Ignatius  foresaw  all  the  difficulties  and  hindrances 
which  would  be  put  in  the  way  of  his  leaving  by  the 
Court  of  Madrid  :  he  therefore  wrote  to  the  Prince, 
Don  Philip,  humbly  laying  before  him  the  necessity 
laid  upon  him  by  his  obedience  to  the  Pope,  of  recalling 
Favre  to  Rome.  At  the  same  time  he  begged  his 
intimate  friend,  Dr.  Peter  Ortiz,  to  interpose  his  good 
offices  for  the  same  object.  The  letter  to  Ortiz  is  dated 
the  i yth  of  February,  1546,  and  runs  thus — 

'May  the  supreme  grace  and  the  everlasting  love  of 
Christ  our  Lord  ever  be  our  help  and  protection. 

'  His  Holiness  has  resolved  and  commanded  that  some 
of  this  least  Society,  which  is  as  much  yours  as  it  is 
ours,  should  go  to  the  Council.  One  of  those  who  are 
to  go  is  Master  Favre.  That  he  may  start  on  his 
journey  with  the  good  pleasure  and  satisfaction  of  all, 
I  have  written  on  the  matter  to  the  Prince.  I  entreat 
you,  for  the  love  and  glory  of  God  our  Lord,  to  give 
us  the  help  of  your  good  offices,  so  far  as  time  and 
place  permit,  and  to  obtain  free  permission  for  Father 
Favre  to  leave  the  Court.  Not  only  shall  we  thus  be 
doing  the  will  of  the  Sovereign  Pontiff,  but  I  hope 
that,  by  God's  great  goodness,  everything  will  turn  out 
to  His  greater  glory  and  honour ;  and  for  our  own  part, 
whether  we  are  together  or  dispersed,  we  shall  always 
be  towards  you  as  we  have  hitherto  been,  that  is, 


The  Ethiopian  Church.  157 

cherishing  you  most  affectionately  in  our  hearts,  and 
owning  ourselves  infinitely  obliged  to  you  in  the  Lord. 
I  do  not  in  this  letter  write  at  such  length  about  yourself 
personally  as,  for  the  glory  and  honour  of  God,  I  fain 
would  do,  because  I  am  also  writing  to  Master  Favre 
something  on  that  subject,  as  well  as  on  the  affairs  of 
the  Society — yours  more  than  ours — which  God  vouch 
safes  to  guide  and  direct  with  His  hand.  I  will  only 
add  that  Peter  Ribadeneira  is  at  Padua,  and  excites 
universal  admiration  by  his  progress,  both  in  studies  and 
in  virtue.  I  am  convinced  that  if  God  gives  him  life 
he  will  do  great  things  and  be  a  true  servant  of  God. 
Lastly,  I  beseech  the  Divine  Majesty,  and  will  not 
cease  to  entreat  Him,  by  His  great  and  infinite  goodness, 
to  give  us  grace  perfectly  to  know  His  will,  and  to 
] perform  it  always  and  in  all  things. 

'  Yours  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

'  IGNATIUS.1 

'  Rome,  the  lyth  of  February,  1546.' 

At  the  very  time  when  Paul  III.  asked  to  have  Favre 
as  his  theologian  at  Trent,  King  John  III.  of  Portugal 
was  asking  for  him  as  Patriarch  of  Ethiopia.  It  must 
be  explained  that  the  Portuguese  trading  along  the 
western  coast  of  Africa  had  gradually  penetrated  into 
the  interior  and  entered  Ethiopia,  a  vast  country  extend 
ing  from  Nubia  towards  the  east.  They  found  the 
Ethiopians  all  Christians,  and  in  many  points  very  strict 
observers  of  ancient  religious  customs.  But,  as  from 
very  early  times  they  had  been  in  the  habit  of  receiving 
their  'Abuna,'  or  Patriarch,  from  the  Church  of  Alex 
andria,  they  were  infected  with  the  schism  of  Dioscorus 
and  the  heresy  of  Eutyches.  The  good  Portuguese 
merchants,  in  the  course  of  conversations  which  they 

1  Alcazar,  p.  66. 


158  Arrangements  in  Spain. 

had  with  David,  the  Emperor  of  Ethiopia,  introduced 
religious  topics,  and  made  him  desire  to  reunite  his 
people  to  the  Roman  Church.  David  himself  died 
shortly  after ;  and  his  son  Claudius,  who  succeeded 
him  in  the  empire,  was  at  last  induced  to  write  to  the 
King  of  Portugal,  begging  him  to  make  request  for  him 
to  the  Sovereign  Pontiff  for  a  Catholic  Patriarch.  Don 
John  III.,  ever  most  zealous  for  the  propagation  of  the 
faith,  lost  no  time  in  the  matter,  and  soon  fixed  his 
choice  on  Peter  Favre,  of  whose  virtue,  learning,  and 
sanctity  he  had  been  an  admiring  witness.  Accordingly, 
he  wrote  to  his  Ambassador  in  Rome,  with  strict  injunc 
tions  to  obtain  the  Pope's  express  command,  foreseeing 
that  without  this  nothing  would  ever  induce  Favre  to 
accept  such  a  dignity.  But  God  had  already  otherwise 
disposed  of  His  faithful  servant.  It  was  His  will  to 
have  him,  not  as  theologian  at  Trent,  nor  Patriarch  in 
Ethiopia,  but  blessed  in  the  enjoyment  and  possession 
of  Himself  in  heaven. 

Meanwhile,  the  holy  man,  having  received  the  letters 
summoning  him  to  Rome,  prepared  for  immediate 
departure.  He  went  to  Toledo  to  pay  his  respects  to 
the  Cardinal  Archbishop,  Don  John  of  Tavora,  who  had 
twice  committed  to  him  the  visitation  and  reformation 
of  his  diocese,  furnishing  him  with  ample  powers  for 
that  purpose,  and  also  Dr.  Peralta,  canon  of  the  Cathe 
dral,  whom  he  used  to  know  at  Paris.  After  that  he 
went  to  Galapagar,  to  see  once  more  and  take  leave 
of  Dr.  Peter  Ortiz.  He  had  as  his  companion  on  this 
journey  Manuel  Lopez,  one  of  our  young  students,  and 
he  insisted  on  his  making  use  of  the  horse  which  some 
of  his  friends  had  lent  him,  while  he  himself  travelled 
on  foot,  entirely  absorbed  in  God.  On  his  return  to 
Madrid  he  appointed  Father  Antonio  Araoz  Superior  of 
all  our  brethren  in  Spain,  Francis  Villanova,  though  not 


Sermon  at  Valentia.  159 

yet  a  priest,  Rector  of  the  College  of  Alcala,  and  Father 
Diego  Mirone  of  that  at  Valentia ;  and  so,  after  giving 
his  blessing  to  Philip's  son,  the  little  Don  Carlos,  who 
was  brought  to  him  by  Dona  Leonora  de  Mascarefias, 
he  left  Madrid  as  secretly  as  he  could  on  the  Tuesday 
in  Holy  Week,  which  fell  that  year  on  the  2oth  of  April. 
And  he  had,  indeed,  to  take  every  precaution  in  order 
to  get  away  privately,  and  to  make  all  possible  haste, 
although  he  \vas  still  weak  from  an  illness  which  had 
lasted  ten  days.  At  the  first  news  of  his  approaching 
departure  there  was  great  agitation  in  the  city.  Many 
of  the  principal  inhabitants  prepared  to  make  every 
effort  to  prevent  his  going,  so  high  was  the  esteem  in 
which  he  was  held,  so  great  the  love  which  he  had 
won  from  all  classes  of  people.  '  And  well  indeed 
did  he  deserve  it/  wrote  Father  Araoz  to  St.  Ignatius  ; 
'  for  no  words  can  say  how  his  Apostolic  labours  had 
strengthened  and  confirmed  in  Christian  piety  men 
\vho  may  be  called  the  pillars  of  this  Court.  Blessed 
indeed  are  the  city  and  people,  in  Italy  or  elsewhere, 
that  are  to  have  the  presence  of  Father  Favre,  for  in 
him  they  will  have  a  soul  full  of  grace  and  overflowing 
with  the  mercies  of  God.' 

On  arriving  at  Valentia,  he  took  a  little  rest  and 
comfort  among  our  brothers  at  the  College  there.  He 
was  asked  to  make  a  discourse  to  the  people,  who 
greatly  desired  to  hear  him.  He  did  so  accordingly, 
with  indescribable  fervour,  in  the  pulpit  of  the  parish 
church  of  St.  Andrew,  taking  as  his  subject  the  works 
of  mercy  to  the  poor.  The  citizens  were  exceedingly 
delighted;  and  many  years  afterwards  they  retained  an 
affectionate  remembrance  of  this  sermon,  and  of  the 
fruit  it  produced  in  all  classes  of  persons.  They  were 
very  desirous  to  keep  him  with  them  a  few  days  longer 
for  their  spiritual  needs ;  but  the  holy  man  was  not  able 


160  Favrc  at  Gandia. 

to  consent  to  their  wish,  as  he  had  to  hasten  to  Gandia, 
where  he  was  anxiously  expected  for  reasons  which  must 
now  be  related. 


CHAPTER    XXXIII. 

Foundation  of  the  College  at  Gandia. 

ST.  IGNATIUS  had  enjoined  Favre  to  stop  at  Gandia  in 
his  journey  through  Spain.  The  saintly  duke,  Francis 
Borgia,  greatly  desired  this  visit ;  for,  four  years  pre 
viously,  when  he  was  Viceroy  of  Catalonia,  he  had 
made  the  acquaintance  of  Favre  at  Barcelona,  and  was 
continually  sending  him  repeated  and  very  pressing 
letters  and  messages,  begging  him  to  come  and  see 
him.  And  quite  recently  circumstances  had  occurred 
which  made  it,  in  his  opinion,  highly  necessary  to  have 
an  interview  with  the  father,  and  to  lay  open  to  him 
his  inmost  soul,  so  as  to  receive  his  direction  and 
advice.  In  the  April  of  this  year,  1546,  his  duchess, 
Leonora  di  Castro  y  Meneses,  had  left  this  world  for 
a  better,  and  Duke  Francis  being  thus  freed  from 
the  marriage  tie,  had  resolved  to  fulfil  the  promise 
which  he  had  made  at  Granada  on  beholding  the  dis 
figured  face  of  the  Empress  Isabella  after  her  death, 
binding  himself  by  a  vow  to  quit  the  world  and  enter 
religion,  if  he  should  survive  his  wife.  The  only  thing 
that  remained  was  to  consider  in  what  particular  order 
it  was  God's  will  that  he  should  serve  Him.  And  he 
expected  to  find  in  the  prudence,  sagacity,  and  discretion 
of  Father  Favre,  all  the  spiritual  assistance  by  which  he 
might  be  enabled  to  ascertain  the  divine  will  in  this 
important  affair. 


Francis  Borgia  and  the  Exercises.      1 6 1 

There  was  a  further  reason  still.  The  Duke,  not 
satisfied  with  having  given  a  College  to  the  Society, 
meditated  raising  a  new  building  of  regal  magnificence, 
and  making  it  a  public  University  in  all  the  sciences, 
endowed  with  privileges  equal  to  those  of  Alcala  and 
Salamanca.  The  foundations  were  already  dug,  and  he 
was  waiting  for  the  arrival  of  Favre,  in  order  that  he 
might,  as  the  eldest  son  of  St.  Ignatius,  lay  the  first 
stone  of  the  first  University  intrusted  to  the  Society. 
Accordingly,  when  Favre  came  to  Gandia  the  ceremony 
took  place ;  and  on  the  5th  of  May,  after  offering  the 
holy  sacrifice  in  the  ducal  chapel,  he  proceeded, 
accompanied  by  all  the  Court  and  followed  by  great 
numbers  of  people,  to  the  site  of  the  building,  where 
he  solemnly  blessed  and  laid  the  first  stone.  After  him 
the  Duke  laid  another ;  then  his  children,  one  by  one ; 
next  the  fathers  of  the  College,  with  the  Rector  at  their 
head.  This  was  that  holy  man,  Father  Andrew  Oviedo, 
afterwards  created  Bishop  of  Heliopolis,  and  successor 
to  Father  Joan  Nunez  Barreto,  who  was  made  Patriarch 
of  Ethiopia  instead  of  Favre. 

When  the  function  was  concluded,  the  Duke  shut 
himself  up  in  a  retired  place  to  make  the  Spiritual 
Exercises  under  Father  Favre's  direction.  The  fruit 
which  this  retreat  produced  was,  in  the  first  place,  that 
lie  formed  the  determination  of  definitively  entering  the 
Society,  and  in  the  second,  that  he  formed  so  high  an 
opinion  of  the  Exercises  when  explained  by  so  expe 
rienced  a  master,  that  he  immediately  wrote  to  the 
Pope,  humbly  entreating  him  to  condescend  to  approve 
and  recommend  them  by  his  Apostolic  authority,  that 
so  they  might  produce  more  extensive  fruit,  and  the 
faithful  be  induced  to  avail  themselves  of  them  the 
more  readily,  to  the  great  benefit  of  their  souls.  And, 
in  fact,  after  having  them  examined  by  Cardinal  John 
L 


1 6  2    The  Popes  approval  of  the  Exercises. 

Alvaro  di  Toledo,  Bishop  of  Burgos,  Mgr.  Philip 
Archinto,  Vicar  of  Rome,  and  Father  Giles  Foscarari, 
Master  of  the  Sacred  Palace,  Paul  III.  approved  them 
in  a  Brief  dated  July  3151,  1548,  in  which  it  is  expressly 
said  that  he  was  induced  to  do  so  by  the  request  of  his 
beloved  son,  the  noble  Duke  of  Gandia,  Francis  Borgia, 
and  by  the  great  good  which  results  from  these  Exer 
cises,  in  proof  of  which  the  said  Duke  Francis  adduces 
not  only  what  was  reported  in  several  places,  but  the 
experience  of  what  he  himself  has  been  an  eye-witness 
to  at  Barcelona,  Valentia,  and  Gandia.  The  Duke  had 
already  made  the  Exercises  more  than  once  at  Barcelona 
under  Father  Araoz,  and  the  year  before  at  Valentia 
under  Father  Diego  Mirone.  Now  that  at  Gandia  they 
were  given  by  Father  Favre,  they  seemed  to  him  quite 
a  new  system  of  teaching ;  and  the  interior  effects  they 
produced  were  so  wonderful  and  powerful,  that  he  was 
not  satisfied  till  he  had  made  them  generally  known 
and  appreciated. 

Favre  stayed  in  Gandia  about  a  month,  edifying  by 
his  holy  life  not  the  Court  only,  but  all  the  inhabitants 
of  the  city,  who  greatly  loved  and  venerated  him. 
This  feeling  was  increased  by  a  wonderful  prodigy, 
the  remembrance  of  which  was  handed  down  to  later 
times.  There  was  in  the  ducal  chapel  a  devout  picture 
of  our  Lady.  It  had  belonged  to  a  holy  hermit  at 
Valentia,  who,  at  his  death,  left  it  to  Leonora  Borgia. 
One  day  when  Favre  was  kneeling  in  prayer  before  this 
image,  the  Blessed  Virgin,  whose  eyes  were  half  closed, 
suddenly  opened  them,  and  turned  them  lovingly  on 
her  dear  servant.  The  miracle  was  witnessed  by  many 
persons  who  were  in  the  chapel  at  the  time,  and  the 
news  of  it  speedily  spread  through  the  city;  and  ever 
after  the  sacred  picture  was  known  as  '  Our  Lady  of  the 
Miracle.5  Dona  Leonora  Borgia  bequeathed  it  to  Sister 


Favre  at  Barcelona.  163 

Jane  of  the  Cross,  first  Abbess  of  the  royal  Discalced 
Carmelite  Convent  at  Madrid,  and  it  was  taken  thither 
and  placed  in  the  chapel  of  our  Lady  of  Nazareth. 
The  numerous  miracles  which  God  wrought  there  so 
increased  the  popular  worship  and  devotion,  that  every 
year  a  solemn  festival,  with  an  octave,  was  observed  in 
its  honour,  at  which  the  royal  family  of  Spain  assisted, 
and  the  preachers  on  the  occasion  always  made  mention, 
of  this  first  miracle  with  which  Father  Peter  Favre  was 
favoured. 


CHAPTER   XXXIV. 

Favrc's  return  to  Rome,  and  death. 

FROM  Gandia  Favre  went  lo  Barcelona,  intending  to 
sail  for  Italy  from  that  port.  But  he  was  detained 
there  by  a  tertian  fever,  which  for  a  fortnight  so  preyed 
upon  his  strength,  already  so  much  weakened  by  the 
continual  and  severe  fatigues  of  the  last  three  years 
of  his  life.  Barcelona  was  exceedingly  devoted  to 
..St.  Ignatius  and  to  the  Society ;  and  as  soon  as  it 
was  known  that  Favre  had  arrived,  a  great  many 
people  hastened  to  avail  themselves  of  his  help  for 
the  good  of  their  souls.  The  servant  of  God,  supply 
ing  by  the  vigour  of  his  spirit  the  strength  which  his 
body  lacked,  gave  himself  entirely  up  to  Apostolic 
ministrations,  hearing  confessions,  and  even  preaching 
in  the  churches  on  the  days  which  intervened  between 
his  attacks.  And  such  abundant  fruit  was  the  result,  that 
Father  Araoz  was  firmly  persuaded  that  this  sickness 
had  been  sent  by  a  particular  providence  of  God  for 

L    2 


164  Favre  at  Rome. 


the  sake  of  those  many  souls  who  were  assisted  by  his 
charity  in  the  concerns  of  their  salvation. 

When  the  news  of  his  illness  reached  Rome,  the  holy 
leather  Ignatius  began  to  think  it  better  not  to  risk  the 
life  of  such  a  man  at  that  season  of  the  year,  which  the 
excessive  heat  already  made  very  dangerous  ;  and  he 
was  on  the  point  of  writing  to  tell  him  to  put  off 
coming  till  the  end  of  the  summer.  But  the  other 
fathers,  who  longed  exceedingly  to  see  Favre  again, 
and  to  enjoy  his  holy  conversation,  prevented  his  doing 
so,  thinking  there  was  no  cause  for  alarm.  The  servant 
of  God,  not  having  received  any  contrary  order,  firmly 
withstood  his  friends  at  Barcelona,  who  advised  him 
to  delay ;  and  he  persisted  in  his  determination  to  fulfil 
his  obedience  by  hastening  as  quickly  as  possible  to 
the  feet  of  the  Sovereign  Pontiff,  who  had  sent  for 
him,  even  though  it  should  be  at  the  cost  of  his  life. 
As  soon,  therefore,  as  he  was  in  some  degree  recovered 
from  his  sickness,  he  left  Barcelona  on  the  2ist  of  June, 
and  on  the  iyth  of  the  following  July,  when  it  is  usually 
dangerous  even  for  persons  in  strong  health  to  enter 
Rome,  he  arrived  unexpectedly  in  the  holy  city.  We 
must  say  that  all  this  was  ordered  by  God,  Whose 
will  it  was  to  crown  the  labours  and  to  reward  the 
merits  of  His  faithful  servant,  and  to  leave  us  in  him 
an  example  of  that  heroic  obedience  which  our  holy 
Father  Ignatius  wished  to  be  the  distinguishing  charac 
teristic  of  his  sons.  And,  indeed,  we  have  the  testimony 
of  an  express  revelation  from  God  Himself,  as  we  shall 
see  presently,  that  this  judgment  is  quite  in  accordance 
with  the  truth. 

Words  cannot  tell  the  joy  and  consolation  of  the 
fathers  at  Favre's  arrival  in  Rome.  It  was  seven 
years  since  they  had  seen  him,  during  which  time 
they  had  heard  and  read  most  wonderful  accounts. 


His  last  illness.  165 

•of  his  Apostolic  labours.  And  now  they  had  the 
incomparable  delight  of  hearing  from  his  own  lips 
the  story  of  the  good  and  ill  fortune  which  had 
befallen  him ;  of  the  beginnings  and  progress  of 
the  Society  in  Germany,  Flanders,  Portugal,  and 
Spain ;  of  the  sufferings  he  had  undergone  in  God's 
service ;  of  the  methods  he  had  employed  for  the 
spiritual  profit  of  his  neighbour,  of  the  hopes  that 
existed  of  the  extirpation  of  heresies,  the  reforma 
tion  of  morals,  and  the  sanctification  of  souls.  Favre, 
on  his  part,  was  quite  beside  himself  with  the  joy  of 
finding  himself  in  the  midst  of  so  many  brothers  who 
had  lately  embraced  the  same  rule  of  life ;  and,  above 
all,  of  being  able  to  converse  personally  with,  and  open 
his  whole  soul  to,  St.  Ignatius,  whom  he  so  tenderly 
loved. 

All  these  mutual  joys  were  very  short-lived.  A  week 
after  his  arrival,  on  the  24th  of  July,  the  good  father 
was  suddenly  attacked  by  a  violent  double  tertian  fever, 
which,  coming  as  it  did,  when  he  was  already  worn  out 
by  fatigue  and  debilitated  .by  his  late  sickness,  very 
soon  became  malignant.  Every  remedy  in  use  at  that 
time  for  such  cases  was  tried,  but  it  was  impossible  to 
save  him.  While  all  besides  himself  were  struck  with 
consternation,  he  alone  was  calm,  tranquil,  and  serene 
in  mind  and  countenance.  Banishing  every  thought  of 
this  world,  he  fixed  all  his  desires  and  affections  on 
heaven  ;  and,  impatient  to  be  set  free  from  the  bonds 
of  the  body,  he  panted  to  be  for  ever  united  to  God, 
and  to  enjoy  that  supreme  blessedness,  on  the  posses 
sion  of  which  it  almost  seemed  that  he  had  already 
entered.  He  addressed  sweet  words  of  consolation  to 
his  brethren,  who  were  clinging  round  him  in  tears, 
exhorting  them  to  give  infinite  thanks  to  God,  Who 
was  pleased  to  take  him  out  of  this  life  with  the  merit 


1 66  Day  of  Favre  s  death. 


of  obedience,  and  let  him  die,  as  he  had  always  desired,, 
in  the  arms  of  his  dearest  father,  St.  Ignatius.  On  the- 
morning  of  the  ist  of  August,  which  that  year  fell  on 
a  Sunday,  he  received  the  holy  Viaticum  with  the- 
utmost  piety  and  devotion,  and,  soon  after,  Extreme 
Unction.  Then,  with  his  whole  soul  fixed  on  God, 
and  his  heart  filled  with  the  tenderest  love,  he  died 
most  peacefully,  between  noon  and  evening,  in  the 
presence,  not  only  of  St.  Ignatius  and  the  brethren  in 
Rome,  but  of  others  who  had  hastened  thither  to 
witness  the  precious  passage  to  a  better  life  of  a  man 
of  such  high  merit  and  repute  for  sanctity.  He  was 
three  months  and  a  half  more  than  forty  years  old.. 
John  Codure  was  the  first,  Favre  the  second,  of  the 
first  ten  fathers  who  were  summoned  to  transplant  the 
Society  to  heaven,  while  the  rest  were  still  labouring 
to  spread  it  on  earth ;  and  it  was  remarked  by  many 
that  the  blessed  deaths  of  those  two  fell  each  on  a 
day  on  which  a  special  feast  of  their  name-saints  is 
celebrated  :  Codure  dying  on  the  Decollation  of  St.  John 
the  Baptist,  and  Favre  on  the  feast  of  St.  Peter's  Chains. 
Inconsolable  was  the  grief  for  the  loss  of  such  a  man 
in  the  full  vigour  of  his  age.  He  wras  regarded  with 
universal  admiration  as  a  model  of  consummate  perfec 
tion,  an  indefatigable  labourer  in  the  Lord's  vineyard, 
an  Apostle  burning  with  zeal  for  God's  glory  and  for 
the  eternal  salvation  of  souls,  and  possessing  all  those 
gifts,  both  of  nature  and  of  grace,  all  those  virtues,, 
moral  and  divine,  which  are  essential  in  forming  a 
character  of  perfect  sanctity.  Considering  in  the  seven 
years,  which  were  the  short  term  of  his  Apostolic 
ministry,  how  many  journeys  he  had  taken,  how  many 
dangers  and  sufferings  he  had  encountered,  how  many 
heretics  and  sinners  he  had  converted,  how  many  good 
Christians  he  had  led  to  a  stricter  and  holier  life  and. 


Consolation  in  his  loss.  167 

besides  all  this,  in  how  many  lands  he  had  planted  and 
propagated  the  Society,  and  raised  it  very  high  in  credit 
and  reputation,  what  might  not  have  been  expected 
from  him  if  he  had  been  allowed  for  a  longer  time  to 
continue  labouring  with  the  same  strength  and  energy 
of  spirit  ?  Lastly,  seeing  what  remarkable  prudence  and 
unequalled  skill  he  possessed  in  directing  souls,  in  dis 
cerning  spirits,  and  carrying  through  the  most  important 
affairs,  every  one  had  reckoned  on  seeing  in  him  a 
worthy  successor  of  Ignatius  as  the  head  of  the  whole 
Society,  in  case  of  his  surviving  him.  The  fathers  at 
Rome  were  filled  with  such  deep  grief  at  seeing  all  these 
hopes  cut  off  in  a  moment,  that  St.  Ignatius'  found  it 
necessary  to  encourage  and  console  them  by  making- 
it  known  that  another  would  shortly  join  the  Society, 
who,  as  regarded  his  services  to  it  and  the  Church, 
would  compensate  for  the  loss  of  Favre.  He  referred 
to  Francis  Borgia,  Duke  of  Gandia,  whose  vow  to 
enter  the  Society,  taken  a  month  before,  the  last 
time  he  made  the  Exercises,  Favre  had  confided  to 
the  saint. 

We  find,  however,  that  as  soon  as  they  had  recovered 
from  the  first  shock  of  grief,  not  only  those  living  at 
Rome,  but  all  wherever  the  death  of  Father  Favre  was 
made  known,  shared  in  one  and  the  same  feeling  of 
joy  and  consolation,  which  arose  from  the  confident 
belief  that  he  was  without  doubt  already  received  into 
heaven,  and  in  the  hope  that  now  that  he  was  with  God 
his  intercession  would  be  so  much  more  powerful  for 
the  protection,  support,  and  spread  of  the  Society,  and 
that  he  would  transfuse  into  his  brethren  the  same  spirit 
of  charity  and  zeal  for  the  propagation  of  the  faith  and 
the  conversion  of  souls  which  had  been  in  his  own  heart. 
And  this  assurance  was  opportunely  strengthened  by  a 
letter  received  at  this  very  time  from  Father  Andrew 


1 68  Vision  of  Francis  Borgia. 

of  Oviedo,  Rector  of  the  College  at  Gandia,  in  which 
he  mentioned  a  divine  revelation  made  to  a  devout 
person  greatly  favoured  by  God,  in  which  the  soul  of 
Favre  was  seen  in  great  glory,  like  that  of  the  saints, 
and  in  which  he  had  spoken  many  times  with  the  person 
who  saw  the  vision,  and  said  great  things  concerning 
Christ's  obedience  and  his  own,  expressing  the  greatest 
happiness  at  having  died  by  obedience ;  and,  lastly, 
promising  never  to  cease  to  pour  forth  supplications 
to  God  for  His  Church.1  Father  Oviedo  does  not 
mention  the  name  of  the  person  who  had  this  vision 
of  the  glory  of  Favre,  but  it  is  certain  that  it  is  the 
holy  duke,  Francis  Borgia.  Father  Daniel  Bartoli  had 
already  expressed  his  opinion  in  his  Historical  Memoirs 
of  the  Men  and  Deeds  of  the  Society,  in  these  words — 
'  No  one  was  greatly  surprised  at  what  Father  Andrew 
of  Oviedo  wrote  at  that  time  from  Gandia  to  Rome, 
concerning  a  person  of  well-known  sanctity,  perhaps 
St.  Francis  Borgia/2  But  what  Bartoli  in  his  time 
conjectured,  was  positively  affirmed  afterwards  by 
Father  Philip  Ghisolfi,  and  still  more  strongly  by 
Father  Alvaro  Cienfugos,  afterwards  a  Cardinal,  in 
his  copious  Life  of  the  Saint,  which  was  in  great  part 
taken,  as  he  says  in  the  Preface,  from  the  manuscript 
accounts  of  Father  Dionysius  Vasquez  and  of  Father 
Peter  Domenech,  the  former  of  whom  was  the  con 
fessor,  the  latter  the  companion  of  Borgia.  The  following 
is  the  statement  of  this  exceedingly  accurate  writer — 

'  The  death  of  Favre  at  Rome  was  known  at  Gandia 
so  speedily,  that  it  seemed  as  though  his  last  breath  had 
been  borne  thither  on  the  air.  For  at  the  moment  he 
died  the  holy  Duke  saw  him  surrounded  by  a  bright 
cloud,  and  in  the  company  of  many  saints  of  heaven. 

1  Original  letter  from  Gandia,  October  13,  1546. 
a  Mtmoric  htoriche,  lib.  i. 


Borgia  enters  the  Society.  169 

He  saw  that  Favre  enjoyed  a  special  glory  by  reason 
of  having  lost  his  life  from  starting  immediately  on 
his  journey,  and  exactly  following  the  painful  course 
pointed  out  to  him  by  obedience.  Father  Andrew  of 
Oviedo  wrote  an  account  of  this  glorious  vision  to 
St.  Ignatius,  saying  that  it  was  revealed  to  a  person 
of  eminent  holiness,  from  whom  he  heard  it ;  and 
Father  Philip  Ghisolfi,  in  his  biography  of  St.  Francis 
Borgia,  says  that  he  was  the  person  referred  to.  And 
it  was  very  fitting  that  he  should  be  a  witness  of  the 
glory  of  the  holy  man  whom  he  succeeded  on  earth, 
in  order  that  he  might  be  encouraged  to  imitate  his 
spirit  and  his  zeal  by  the  spectacle  of  so  splendid  a 
triumph.  It  is  certain  that  on  seeing  this  vision  the 
Duke  felt  his  heart  on  fire  within  him,  and  a  great 
eagerness  to  enter  the  Society,  and  to  put  on  the 
victorious  armour  which  that  departed  soldier  had 
left  behind  him  ;  and  in  Gandia  this  death  was  hailed 
with  every  mark  of  triumph  and  jubilation.  All  this 
is  related  by  Father  Domenech.'3  So  writes  Father 
Alvaro  Cienfugos,  and  we  now  see  why  it  was  not 
possible  for  Father  Oviedo,  who  was  the  Duke's  con 
fessor  at  the  time,  to  speak  more  plainly,  or  to  reveal 
the  name  of  the  holy  person  to  whom  the  vision 
concerning  Father  Favre's  glory  had  been  granted. 
For  the  rest,  it  is  true  that  Borgia  was  most  anxious 
to  hasten  on  the  time  of  his  entering  the  Society ;  that, 
immediately  after  the  death  of  Favre,  he  despatched 
one  of  his  people  to  Rome  with  letters  to  St.  Ignatius, 
begging  him  to  receive  him  as  one  of  his  sons  ;  and 
not  only  did  the  saint  consent  to  do  so,  but,  soon  after, 
he  obtained  leave  for  him  from  the  Pope  to  bind 
himself  by  solemn  vows,  and,  notwithstanding  this, 
yet  to  continue  to  govern  his  States  in  the  secular 

3  Life  of  St.  Francis  Borgia,  bk.  iii.  ch.  v. 


1 70  Assurance  of  St.  Ignatius. 

habit   till   such   time   as   he   should   have  arranged  his- 
private  affairs. 

Besides  Borgia,  it  seems  beyond  a  doubt  that  the 
glory  of  Favre  in  heaven  was  revealed  to  St.  Ignatius. 
There  is  extant  a  copy  of  the  circular  letter  sent  to 
the  Houses  of  the  Society,  bearing  date  August  yth,. 
1546,  and  having  these  words  written  on  the  margin, 
DC  mortc  sancti  Patris  Pctri  Fabri — '  Concerning  the 
death  of  the  holy  Father  Peter  Favre/  This  letter 
says  that  Peter  Favre  died  on  the  ist  of  August,  the 
feast  of  St.  Peter's  Chains,  as  John  Codure  had  died 
on  that  of  the  Decollation  of  St.  John  the  Baptist  ; 
and  that  *  their  souls  arc  together  in  heaven,  as  their 
bodies  arc  in  the  Church  of  Sta.  Maria  del  la  Strada? 
Then,  without  giving  any  directions  for  Masses  and 
prayers  to  be  offered  up  for  the  soul  of  the  deceased, 
as  is  done  in  every  other  instance,  the  letter  goes 
on  to  say  expressly,  that,  '  as  we  have  need  of  tJic 
intercession  of  friends  and  saints  on  our  behalf,  wt 
must  all  hope  that  Favre  will  not  help  us  less  powerfully 
in  heaven  than  he  could  have  on  earth}  St.  Ignatius 
then  asserts,  not  conditionally,  but  absolutely,  that  the 
soul  of  Favre  is  in  heaven,  together  with  that  of  Codure. 
Now  all  his  biographers  are  agreed  that  scarcely  was- 
Codure  dead  before  God  gave  Ignatius  the  consola 
tion  of  seeing  him  enter  heaven,  surrounded  with 
light,  and  accompanied  by  angels  who  had  descended 
from  Paradise  to  conduct  him  thither.  In  the  same 
way,  therefore,  it  is  fair  to  say  that  he  saw  the  soul 
of  Favre  also  received  into  the  company  of  the  blessed 
in  heaven  ;  and  that,  for  this  reason,  instead  of  prescrib 
ing  the  usual  suffrages,  he  enjoined  on  the  Society 
confidence  in  him,  in  that,  as  a  friend  and  a  saint,  he 
will  intercede  for  us  unto  God. 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 

Testimonies  to  Fain'cs  sanctity. 

IT  has  been  seen  from  time  to  time  in  the  course  of  this 
biography,  how  every  one  who  knew  and  conversed 
intimately  with  Peter  Favre  considered  and  esteemed 
him  as  a  saint.  We  shall,  therefore,  here  only  add  a 
few  facts  which  have  reference  to  persons  who,  by  his. 
means  were  brought  to  God,  and  entered  the  Society. 
No  words  can  describe  the  affection  and  reverence  - 
which  they  always  professed  and  manifested  towards- 
him  on  every  occasion,  writing  to  him  wherever  he 
might  be,  and  asking  for  his  advice  and  direction  in 
everything.  We  may  give  the  first  place  to  Blessed 
Peter  Canisius,  who,  writing  from  Cologne,  after  telling 
him  that  he  is  cherished  in  the  undying  remembrance 
of  all  the  principal  citizens,  and  that  they  begged  his. 
prayers  to  God  for  them,  adds  these  words — 

*  And  if  they  commend  themselves  to  your  prayers,, 
how  much  more  earnestly  should  we  do  so,  who  have 
been  trained  in  your  school  to  acknowledge  Jesus  Christ 
as  our  Father  in  this  holy  Society  of  God's  children? 
It  remains  therefore,  Reverend  Father,  that  by  your 
prayers  to  Christ  you  help  us  your  children,  whom  you 
have -so  happily  begotten  to  Him.  Without  you,  we  are 
indeed  orphans,  but  we  shall  be  full  of  joy  and  gladness 
if  our  weakness  is  helped  by  your  prayers  with  God  and 
the  saints.  Oh,  if  you  own  as  your  children  those  who^ 
will  never  cease  to  claim  you  as  their  father,  behold 


172  L  etter  of  Canisius. 

them  one  and  all  kneeling  before  you  with  clasped 
hands  and  prostrate  bodies,  and  their  eyes  bathed  in 
tears ;  listen  to  the  words  with  which  they  implore  you, 
by  your  tender  and  fatherly  affection,  to  have  pity  on 
them,  left  here  as  poor  and  orphan  children  in  need  of 
food  and  clothing.  But  why  do  I  ask  bread  for  one 
who  still  requires  milk,  and  who  is  unfit  for  stronger  diet 
till  he  is  more  advanced  in  age  ?  No,  I  am  mistaken  in 
my  judgment  to  suppose  others  to  be  like  myself;  they 
indeed  have  abundance  of  bread  in  the  house  of  our 
Heavenly  Father,  where  they  are  more  highly  esteemed 
than  hired  servants.  No,  it  is  only  Canisius,  I  confess, 
who  is  perishing  of  hunger,  and  there  is  no  one  to  take 
pity  on  his  misery  but  you,  my  dear  father  and  my 
support,  in  whose  hands  is  my  fate.  Hasten  then  to 
help  me  ;  rejoice  the  heart  of  your  servant ;  say  to  my 
soul  that  God  is  my  salvation ;  say  to  me,  "  Take 
courage,  my  son,  and  fear  not :  may  blessing  and  peace 
be  upon  thee,  day  and  night :  I  will  be  with  thee  always 
in  all  thy  ways."  Ah,  yes,  my  father,  if  you  are  at  my 
side  I  shall  indeed  have  nothing  to  fear,  and  my  con 
fidence  will  be  firm  and  constant,  if  only  you  bless  me 
from  your  heart  in  the  name  of  our  Lord,  by  the  merits 
of  the  saints,  and  by  the  chanty,  simplicity,  patience, 
fortitude,  and  salvation,  which  are  in  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord. 

'  Your  meanest  servant  and  son, 

4  PETER  CANISIUS.  1 

'  Cologne,  December  301!),  1545.' 

Another  of  his  children,  Hermes  Poen  of  Rotterdam, 
whom  Favre  had  gained  to  God  and  the  Society  at 
Louvain,  and  afterwards  sent  to  study  in  Portugal,  as 
soon  as  he  heard  that  Blessed  Favre  had  arrived  at 

1  Autograph  letter  of  Canisius. 


Letter  of  Hermes  Poen.  173 


Evora,  wrote  to  him  from  Coimbra,  on  the  last  day  of 
September,  a  very  affectionate  letter  in  which  he  says 
among  other  things — 

'  It  would  be  difficult  to  express  our  joy  at  the  news  of 
your  arrival  in  this  country.  As  loving  children,  we 
longed  ardently  to  see  our  father  once  more.  Grant  us 
the  happiness  of  having  you  amongst  us  one  day.  The 
soul  of  your  Hermes  is  pining  for  you,  as  a  son  tenderly 
desirous  of  seeing  his  father.  For  indeed  you  are  my 
own  father  in  Christ ;  you  have  begotten  me,  you  have 
saved  me  from  the  storms  of  a  treacherous  world  by  the 
help  and  grace  of  Him  Who  draws  all  things  to  Himself. 
You  have  snatched  me  from  the  jaws  of  the  devil,  and 
fed  me  with  the  Word  of  Life.  Do  not  cease  to  train 
and  guide  the  son  to  whom  you  have  deigned  to  give 
birth.  I  am  ready  to  bear  the  sweet  yoke  of  our  Lord 
in  everything.  Do  you  dispose,  form,  direct,  command 
me.  There  is  nothing,  however  hard,  which  I  am  not 
willing  to  undertake  with  the  utmost  cheerfulness.  I 
will  venture  to  say  that  I  am  ever  more  ready  to  obey 
than  you  are  to  command.  Do  you  then  direct,  instruct, 
teach,  and  guide  your  son  in  the  way  of  salvation.  You 
have  subjected  him  to  your  rule,  you  have  numbered 
him  amongst  your  children.  Do  you  act  a  father's 
part  towards  me,  and  never,  by  God's  grace,  will  I  fail  in 
the  duty  of  a  son.' 

Of  the  same  tenor  are  the  letters  of  other  young  men, 
either  belonging  or  about  to  belong  to  the  Society, 
which  he  received  while  he  was  in  Spain,  from  Coimbra 
and  from  Cologne.  The  letters  show,  not  only  their 
affection  and  reverence  for  him,  but  the  spiritual  fervour 
and  solid  virtue  which  the  holy  man  had  known  how 
to  transfuse  into  his  disciples. 

After  his  death  this  general  opinion  and  veneration 
of  his  sanctity  increased  rather  than  diminished.  In 


i  74  Festival  at  Gandia. 

Upper  and  Lower  Germany,  in  Flanders,  Portugal, 
Spain,  and  Italy,  no  sooner  was  his  happy  passage  from 
this  life  known,  than  his  virtues  found  as  many  to 
praise  them  as  had  before  admired  them.  The  gran 
dees  of  the  Court  of  Madrid  could  find  no  better  way 
•of  expressing  their  sentiments  than  by  saying  that  the 
Society  would  soon  fall  to  pieces,  now  that  it  was 
deprived  of  the  pillar  which  supported  it.  At  Galapa- 
gar,  Dr.  Ortiz  and  all  the  inhabitants  celebrated,  instead 
of  funeral  solemnities,  solemn  festivities  of  jubilation 
and  triumph.  At  Gandia  things  went  still  farther.  The 
excitement  throughout  the  city  was  such  that,  as  we 
learn  from  Father  Andrew-  of  Oviedo,  an  eye-witness, 
there  was  a  public  festival  held  to  honour  the  heavenly 
birthday  of  Blessed  Peter  Favre,  and  for  many  years 
•after  the  anniversary  of  the  day  of  his  death  was  kept 
like  that  of  a  canonized  saint,  and  all  felt  their  souls 
strengthened  by  invoking  him.  As  long  as  Father 
Oviedo  was  at  Gandia,  it  was  his  custom  to  send  a 
candle  to  St.  Ignatius  to  burn  before  the  tomb  of  Favre, 
whom  he  called  'Blessed.'  The  Carthusian  fathers  at 
•Cologne  preserved  some  letters  and  other  writings  of 
his  as  relics,  and  never  spoke  of  him  but  as  'Blessed.' 

It  would  take  too  long  to  quote  the  testimony  of  his 
religious  brethren  one  by  one,  and  so  to  prove  to  every 
one  their  high  opinion  of  the  virtue  and  holiness  of  Favre. 
•'  They  were  all  firmly  convinced/ writes  Orlandini, 'that 
he  had  gained  the  glory  of  heaven  and  the  honour  of 
being  in  the  number  of  the  Blessed,  and  therefore  there 
was  an  end  of  sorrow  and  of  weeping.  All  feelings 
were  merged  in  those  of  joy  and  consolation  because 
he  who  on  earth  had  been  a  teacher  and  pattern  of 
perfection  was  now  gained  as  a  patron  and  advocate  in 
heaven.'-  The  first  fathers,  whose  intercourse  with  him 

2  Vita  B.  Pctri  Fabri,  cap.  ult. 


Simon  Rodriguez  and  Ribadeneira.     i  /  5 

had  been  the  longest,  could  find  no  words  or  phrases 
for  expressing  what  they  had  come  to  think  of  him. 
Father  Simon  Rodriguez,  in  the  History  which  he  wrote 
in  the  year  1577,  on  the  origin  and  progress  of  the 
.Society  down  to  the  period  of  its  confirmation,  says— 

'  The  first  who  joined  our  Father  Ignatius  was  Master 
Peter  Favre,  a  Savoyard,  who  was  moved  by  the  confi 
dential  and  holy  conversation  and  the  saintly  life  of  the 
Blessed  Father  to  lead  a  truly  wonderful  life  and  to 
•consecrate  himself  to  God.  He  burnt  with  an  incredible 
desire  to  visit  Jerusalem  and  the  other  holy  places  of 
Palestine,  and  to  spend  his  life  in  labouring  for  the 
.salvation  of  men  and  bringing  them  from  darkness  to 
the  light  of  the  truth,  from  death  to  life.  Not  to  speak 
-of  a  great  multitude  of  other  virtues,  there  was  in  this 
father  a  rare  and  sunny  grace  and  sweetness  in  his 
intercourse  with  others,  such  as  I  confess  I  have  never 
seen  in  any  one  else.  I  am  at  a  loss  for  words  to 
express  the  way  in  which,  by  his  amiable  and  pleasant 
manners,  he  gained  every  one's  goodwill  and  affection, 
and  won  all  with  whom  he  had  intercourse  to  the  love 
^of  God.';j 

Equally  strong  is  the  testimony  of  Father  Ribadeneira, 
who,  from  his  youth,  had  known  Favre,  both  at  Rome 
and  at  Louvain.  He  says — '  Father  Favre  was  a  man 
of  great  learning  and  virtue,  possessing  a  wonderful  gift 
of  knowledge  and  discretion  of  spirits,  and  also  of  healing 
the  sick.  He  practised  himself  much  in  continual  prayer 
and  meditation,  and  his  abstinence  was  such  that  some 
times  he  neither  ate  nor  drank  anything  for  a  week.  He 
was  most  obedient,  and  a  great  despiser  of  himself.  His 
zeal  for  the  Church  and  for  the  salvation  of  his  neighbour 
was  very  great.  When  he  spoke  of  the  things  of  God,  it 

:!  De  origine  ct  progrcsszi  Socictatis  Jesu  usque  ad  ejus  confirmationem. 
.Roma,  1869.  Typ.  Civilta.  Cathol. 


176  St.  Francis  Xavier. 

seemed  as  though  he  held  the  keys  of  men's  hearts  on 
his  tongue,  so  powerfully  did  he  move,  and  so  strongly 
did  he  attract  them ;  and  the  affection  he  inspired  them 
with  was  fully  equalled  by  the  reverence  which  they  felt 
for  the  sweet  gravity  and  solid  virtue  which  shone  in  all 
that  he  said.  Our  Lord  God  favoured  him  with  many 
communications  of  Himself,  and  filled  his  soul  with 
sweetness  by  marvellous  lights  and  divine  revelations.'4 
But  the  holy  Apostle  of  the  Indies,  St.  Francis  Xavier, 
went  even  farther  than  Ribadeneira  in  shoAving,  both  by 
word  and  deed,  his  high  estimation  of  the  virtue  and 
merits  of  Favre.  These  two  great  souls  were  always 
very  closely  united  in  heart  and  mind  from  the  time 
when  they  shared  the  same  room  in  the  same  College 
in  the  University  of  Paris.  They  were  the  first  two  who 
made  acquaintance  with  Ignatius,  to  whom  he  gave  the 
Spiritual  Exercises,  and  who  offered  themselves  to  him 
as  companions  and  fellow-helpers  in  the  great  work 
which  he  was  projecting.  There  was  a  very  great  simi 
larity  in  their  characters  :  the  same  rectitude  of  life, 
the  same  charm  and  sweetness  in  words  and  manner, 
the  same  burning  zeal,  and  the  same  generosity  in- 
undertaking,  and  constancy  in  carrying  through,  the 
most  difficult  and  arduous  projects,  at  the  cost  of  great 
sufferings  and  the  risk  of  life  itself.  Both  were  sent  by 
the  Pope,  one  to  convert  the  heathen,  the  other  to 
reconcile  heretics.  They  had  a  great  love  and  reverence 
one  for  the  other ;  and,  as  a  proof  of  this,  it  will  be 
remembered  that  their  conscientious  judgment  led  them 
to  give  their  votes  each  for  the  other,  after  Ignatius,  as 
General  of  the  Order.  When  Xavier,  who  was  in  India, 
received  news  of  the  death  of  his  beloved  Father  Favre, 
he  was  so  firmly  convinced  of  his  beatitude  in  heaven, 
that  he  began  at  once  to  invoke  him  in  his  greatest 

4  Vita  di  Santi  Ignazio,  lib.  iii.  cap.  xi. 


Favre' s  intercession  invoked.          177 

clangers.  '  In  returning  from  Malacca  to  Goa/  he  writes 
to  the  fathers  at  Rome,  'I  met  with  great  perils.  For 
three  days  and  nights  the  ship  was  exposed  to  the 
most  fearful  storm  I  ever  remember  to  have  witnessed. 
When  the  tempest  was  at  its  height,  I  turned  to  God 
and  pleaded  with  Him  the  intercession  of  our  fathers, 
our  spiritual  friends,  and  all  faithful  Christians,  between 
us  and  the  impending  danger.  Then,  invoking  all  the 
spirits  of  the  Blessed,  I  particularly  appealed  to  Peter 
Favre.'5  And  from  that  time  he  began  the  practice  of 
inserting  in  the  Litany  of  the  Saints,  which  he  was  in 
the  habit  of  reciting  almost  every  day,  Sancte  Petrc 
Fabcr,  ora  pro  nobis — 'Holy  Peter  Favre,  pray  for  us.'c 
So,  by  the  providence  of  God,  hardly  was  Favre  dead 
before  he  was  venerated  at  Rome  by  St.  Ignatius,  at 
( Jandia  by  St.  Francis  Borgia,  and  in  India  by  St.  Francis 
Xavier. 

5  Epist.  S.  Franc.  Xav.  lib.  iv.  cap.  8.     [English   edition,  Life  and 
Letters  of  St.  Francis  Xavier,  vol.  i.  p.  419.] 

6  Bartoli,   Mem.  Istor.  lib.  i.  cap.  20  ;    Cienfugos,    Vita  di  S.  F. 
Rorgia,  lib.  i.  cap.  18. 


M 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

Veneration  of  Favre  in  Savoy. 

BUT  the  place  where  the  veneration  and  worship  of 
Blessed  Peter  Favre  spread  and  increased  more  than 
anywhere  was  Savoy,  and  above  all  his  native  town, 
Villaret.  On  the  ist  and  2nd  of  October,  in  the  year 
1596,  D.  Peter  Critan,  the  cure  of  Thonon,  D.  Justus 
Balliat,  the  cure  of  Sixt,  and  D.  John  Fournier,  cure' 
of  the  Great  Bornand,  drew  up  a  little  process,  in  which 
they  summoned  five  witnesses  who  had  known  Father 
Favre,  to  give  their  testimony  as  to  the  childhood  and 
the  reputation  for  sanctity  of  the  servant  of  God.  All  of 
them  in  their  depositions  invariably  speak  of  Favre 
as  'the  Saint/  or  'Blessed,'  and  desire  that  this  fact 
should  be  noted  as  having  been  a  thing  constantly  done 
for  some  time  throughout  the  Great  Bornand  and  the 
neighbourhood. 

Together  with  the  title  of '  Blessed/  and  the  veneration 
appertaining  to  it,  various  kinds  of  public  cultus  were 
introduced,  with  the  cognizance  of  the  bishops  and 
ordinaries  of  the  diocese.  The  Blessed  Father  had 
only  been  dead  sixteen  years,  when  the  little  room  in 
which  he  was  born  was  made  into  a  chapel,  and  the 
Vicar  General  of  the  Bishop  of  Geneva  granted  faculties 
for  the  celebration  of  Mass  there.  The  original  decree 
of  the  Episcopal  Court  is  still  extant.  The  following  is 
a  literal  translation  from  the  Latin — 

'  We  give  permission  for  the  holy  sacrifice  of  the  Mass 
to  be  celebrated  in  the  chapel  of  Villaret,  in  the  parish 


Chapel  at  Villaret.  1 79 

of  St.  Jean  de  Sixt,  lately  built  by  the  Rev.  John  Favre, 
priest,  and  by  the  honourable  John  Favre,  doctor  of 
medicine,  in  honour  of  God  and  of  the  holy  Apostles 
Peter  and  Paul,  and  in  memory  of  the  Reverend  Father 
Peter  Favre,  companion  of  the  founder  of  the  Society  of 
Jesus,  who  was  a  native  of  the  above  place  :  provided 
that  the  altar  be  a  portable  one,  and  that  nothing  be 
<lone  to  the  prejudice  of  the  cure  of  the  place  as  to 
the  feast  of  St.  John  the  Baptist. 

'S.  DECOMBA,  Vicar-Substitute.1 

'  Annecy,  August  i6th,  1561.' 

The  chapel  was  dedicated  as  stated  in  the  document, 
in  honour  of  the  Apostles  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  and  in 
memory  of  Father  Favre,  for,  at  that  time,  it  was  the 
custom  in  Savoy  to  dedicate  chapels  and  altars  to  more 
.than  one  saint.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact,  thenceforward 
down  to  the  present  day,  the  title  of  the  Apostles  was 
.altogether  dropped,  and  it  never  was  nor  is  it  known 
•except  as  the  chapel  of  the  Saint  of  Villaret,  or  of 
Blessed  Peter  Favre. 

One  of  the  two  founders,  the  Dr.  Favre,  left  his  own 
country  and  settled  at  Janville,  a  city  of  the  province  of 
Champagne,  in  France.  He  there  heard  that  God  was 
working  many  miracles  by  the  intercession  of  His  blessed 
servant,  and  learning  that  the  room  at  Villaret,  which 
had  come  to  be  venerated  by  his  means,  was  in  a  very 
bad  condition,  he  resolved  to  return,  after  an  absence  of 
thirty-nine  years,  to  his  native  place,  in  order  entirely  to 
rebuild  and  beautify  the  chapel.  Accordingly,  in  the 
year  1600,  he  undertook  that  journey  of  eighty  leagues, 
which  is  the  distance  from  Janville  to  Villaret,  and 
immediately  on  his  arrival  he  and  that  other  relative 
of  his  again  met,  and  having  obtained  possession  of  the 

1  From  the  original. 
M    2 


iSo  Devotion  at  Villarct. 

site  of  the  poor  cottage  where  Favre  was  born,  they  built 
upon  it  in  his  honour  a  little  church,  or  public  chapel. 
This  is  the  statement  of  one  of  the  witnesses  in  the 
Process  of  1626 — 

'He  says,  moreover,  that  after  the  death  of  Father 
Favre,  a  chapel  by  the  title  of  St.  Peter  was  built  in  the 
village  of  Villaret,  by  Dr.  John  Favre,  priest,  and  the 
paternal  uncle  of  the  deponent,  and  by  the  honourable 
John  Favre,  physician,  both  natives  of  the  same  place,  on 
account  of  the  great  and  daily  increasing  reputation  of 
the  Reverend  Father  Peter  Favre.  The  said  John  Favre 
began  building  the  chapel  in  the  year  1600,  he  having 
returned  from  the  province  of  Champagne,  in  France,, 
where  he  had  lived  for  thirty  years  without  once  revisiting 
his  own  country ;  and  while  the  building  was  going  on, 
the  witness  has  frequently  heard  his  uncle,  John  Favre, 
say  that  nothing  would  ever  have  brought  him  back  to 
this  country  but  the  desire  he  had  to  build  that  chapel 
in  honour  of  Blessed  Peter  Favre  (for  by  that  title  re 
called  him),  because  he  saw  that  he  was  esteemed 
Blessed,  and  wrought  great  prodigies  in  every  place  he- 
had  visited.'2  From  which  words  we  infer  that  as  early  as. 
at  that  time,  Father  Favre  was  considered  and  venerated 
as  Blessed,  and  believed  to  have  worked  numerous 
miracles,  not  only  in  Savoy,  but  in  France  and  elsewhere. 

After  the  rebuilding  of  the  chapel,  the  devotion  of  the 
villagers  and  neighbouring  inhabitants  to  the  Blessed 
Father  went  on  increasing.  Great  numbers  of  persons 
were  induced  to  visit  the  oratory  by  the  fame  of  the 
many  graces  by  which  God  honoured  the  merits  of 
His  faithful  servant,  and  these  were  not  only  people  of 
low  condition,  but  personages  of  noble  birth  and  high 
rank.  Antony  Favre,  the  famous  lawyer,  President 
of  the  Senate  of  Chambery,  and  the  intimate  friend  of 
2  Process  of  the  vear  1626. 


Honor 6  cTUrfcy.  181 

St.  Francis  of  Sales,  paid  several  visits  of  devotion  to 
the  chapel,  and  had  a  Latin  inscription  of  his  own 
composition,  in  praise  of  the  Blessed  Father,  carved 
thereon.  But  the  person  who  most  distinguished  himself 
in  this  way  was  the  noble  Don  Honore  d'Urfey,  Marquis 
of  Val  Romey,  Baron  of  Castle  Morand,  and  lieutenant 
of  the  Duke  of  Mayne.  We  will  hear  him  tell  in  his  own 
words  how  and  why  he  went  from  Thonon,  where  he 
commanded  the  forces  of  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  to  visit  the 
chapel  of  Villaret  and  to  venerate  the  memory  of  Blessed 
Favre,  to  whom  he  was  tenderly  devoted.  He  writes 
thus  to  the  Father  Rector  of  the  College  of  Chambery — 

'  I  had  read  in  the  Life  of  the  Blessed  Ignatius  that 
his  first  companion,  the  Blessed  Peter  Favre,  was  a 
native  of  a  place  called  Villaret,  in  the  diocese  of  Geneva, 
and  being  at  Thonon  I  was  smitten  with  a  great  wish  to 
render  the  honour  due  to  the  birthplace  of  so  great  a 
saint.  I  was  told  that  it  is  very  near  to  this,  and  this 
morning  I  went  there  with  the  cure  of  this  place,  who  is 
much  attached  to  your  holy  Society,  to  hear  Mass  in  the 
devout  chapel  which  has  been  built  in  the  house  of  the 
servant  of  God.  On  my  arrival,  I  reflected  how  holy  a 
place  that  must  be  which  had  witnessed  the  birth  of  this 
-great  friend  of  God,  and  my  conscience  so  smote  me  that 
I  felt  unable  to  enter  that  holy  house  till  I  had  been 
eased  of  the  burden  of  my  sins  ;  and  thus,  by  the  help  of 
God  and  the  holy  patron  of  the  place,  I  confessed  and 
communicated,  returning  thanks  to  the  Reverend  Father 
for  all  the  favours  and  benefits  which  I  have  received  from 
that  Society,  of  which  he  is  the  second  founder.  At  the 
same  time,  I  made  a  resolution  to  have  a  picture  of  that 
blessed  saint  painted,  and  placed  on  the  altar.  Now,  as 
I  cannot  do  this  without  your  help,  as  I  have  no  portrait 
of  him,  I  have  recourse  to  your  Reverence,  begging  that 


1 82  Foundation  at  Villaret. 

you  will  get  it  painted  by  some  good  painter,  and  I  will 
send  the  requisite  sum  immediately.  I  think  the  best 
way  of  representing  him  would  be  in  an  ecstasy,  lifted 
in  the  air  before  the  Blessed  Virgin  holding  the  Infant 
Jesus,  for  I  have  read  in  a  deposition  made  by  a  pious 
lady,  the  mother  of  the  cure  I  have  mentioned,  that  she 
had  frequently  seen  him  in  that  state,  and  in  this  very 
place.  I  wish  to  say,  however,  that  this  is  only  a  notion 
of  my  own,  and  that  I  leave  it  entirely  to  your  choice. 
I  also  wished  to  have  a  lamp  made  to  burn  before  the 
altar,  and  to  make  a  permanent  fund  for  keeping  it  up. 
But  the  aforesaid  cure  thinks  it  would  be  better  to 
establish  a  solemn  High  Mass,  which  the  priests  from 
Thonon  shall  be  bound  to  go  every  year  in  procession  to 
sing.  I  do  not  like  to  determine  anything  on  the  matter 
without  your  wise  counsel.  But  it  is  not  so  much  for 
that  reason  that  I  am  writing  to  you,  as  to  congratulate 
all  your  holy  Society  for  the  consolation  which  I  have 
received  from  visiting  this  holy  place,  and  which  no 
words  can  describe  unless  they  are  inspired  by  God. 
Will  you  then  let  me  know  which  of  these  two  plans  you 
prefer?  because  if  you  incline  to  the  Mass,  I  should 
think  it  ought  to  be  said  on  the  day  of  St.  Peter's  Chains, 
both  because  the  Blessed  Fathers  name  was  Peter,  and 
because  he  passed  from  this  life  to  everlasting  bliss  on 
that  day.  And  since,  in  course  of  time,  the  remembrance 
of  almost  everything  wears  out,  I  will  get  an  instrument 
drawn  up  before  I  leave,  which  I  will  sign,  so  that  there 
may  not  be  any  doubt  hereafter  that  this  chapel  is  built 
on  the  site  of  the  house  of  this  great  saint,  and  I  hope 
that  this  will  be  an  additional  stimulus  to  the  devotion  of 
those  who  in  future  shall  venerate  this  great  servant  of 
God.  I  will  also,  if  you  approve,  have  an  inscription 
made  on  brass,  to  be  placed  over  the  entrance  of  the 
chapel,  and  all  this  shall  be  for  the  glory  of  God,  Who 


Foundation  at  Villaret.        .      183 

delights  to  be  honoured  in  His  saints,  and  also  as  a 
testimony  of  the  affection  which  I  bear  to  this  Blessed 
Father  and  to  all  your  holy  Society.  And  so,  with  a 
heart  filled  with  gratitude  for  the  benefits  I  have  received 
therefrom,  I  kiss  your  hands,  and  commending  myself  to 
your  prayers,  of  which  I  pray  God  that  I  may  never 
make  myself  unworthy, 

'  I  remain, 

'Your  most  devoted  servant  and  son  in  Christ, 
'  HONORE  D'URFEY.S 

'Thonon,  the  vigil  of  the  Epiphany,  1618.' 

All  the  Marquis'  intentions,  as  regards  the  picture  to 
be  placed  over  the  altar  and  the  inscription  in  front  of 
the  chapel,  were  punctually  carried  out ;  and  as  to  the 
Mass,  he  founded  not  one,  but  two  High  Masses,  for 
which  he  contributed  eight  hundred  florins.  All  these 
things  were  deposed  on  oath  in  the  Processes  by 
Dr.  Peter  Critan,  the  cure  of  Thonon,  the  same  who 
went  to  Villaret  with  the  Marquis.  '  The  illustrious  lord, 
Honore  d'Urfey,'  he  says,  'being  quartered  at  Thonon 
with  the  troops  in  the  service  of  his  Serene  Highness, 
and  hearing  that  there  was  at  Villaret  a  chapel  built 
upon  the  site  of  the  house  in  which  Father  Favre  was 
born,  had  a  pious  desire  to  go  there  to  hear  Mass  ; 
and  he  begged  me  to  accompany  him  and  to  say  it. 
On  our  arrival,  just  as  the  Marquis  was  in  the  act  of 
entering  the  chapel,  he  experienced  a  movement  of 
intense  awe,  so  that  he  did  not  dare  to  go  further  till 
he  had  made  a  general  confession  to  me.  Having  done 
this,  not  only  did  he  feel  no  return  of  that  fear,  but 
after  assisting  at  Mass  and  communicating,  his  heart 
was  so  filled  with  consolation  and  devotion  to  Father 
Favre,  that  he  called  him  Saint,  and  always  continues 
3  Process  at  Annecy,  1869. 


1 84  Inscription. 


to  call  him  so.  Afterwards  he  gave  eight  hundred 
florins,  currency  of  Savoy,  to  the  aforesaid  chapel,  and 
on  this  foundation  two  Masses  are  solemnly  sung  there 
every  year;  one  on  the  ist  of  August,  the  day  on  which 
the  Reverend  Father  Peter  Favre  died,  and  the  other  on 
Whit  Tuesday.  He  also  sent  to  the  said  chapel  a  large 
brass  plate,  which  cost  a  hundred  ducats,  on  which  was 
engraved  an  inscription  in  gold  letters,  stating  that  it 
had  been  the  house  of  the  Blessed  Peter  Favre,  for  by 
that  title  he  speaks  of  him.  Lastly,  he  presented  an 
oil  painting  representing  the  Blessed  Virgin  with  her 
Divine  Child  in  her  arms,  and  Father  Favre  kneeling 
at  their  feet,  in  the  act  of  taking  a  lily  from  the  hand 
of  the  Infant.'  The  following  is  the  inscription  put  up 
by  the  Marquis  d'Urfey,  according  to  the  style  of  the 
times — 

D  '  O  '  M  •  VIRGINIQUE  '  MATRI 

HIC   •    QUONDAM    '    DOMUS    '    HUMILIS 

DOMUS  '  NUNC  *  SANCTISSIMA 

NE  '  MIRERIS  '  VIATOR 

JAM  *  TUNG  *  DOMUS  '  ERAT  '  DEI  '  SANCTISSIMA 
CUM    '    IN   '    EA   '   NATUS    '    EST   '    B    '    PETRUS    '    FABER, 

FABER  '  INQUAM  '  ILLE 
QUI  '  NON  '  SOLUM  '  B  '  IGNATII  '  LOYOL/E 

PRIMUS  '  SOCIUS  '  FUIT 
ET   '    PRIMUS   '    PR^EDICATOR 

ITA  '  UT 

PETRUS  '  ISTE  '  FABER 

ET   '    PETRA   '    ET   '    FABER 

SOCIETATIS  '  JESU  '  VERE  '  DICI  '  POSSIT. 

In  this  inscription  it  may  be  seen  by  every  one  that 
there  is  no  mention  made  of  the  title  of  the  Apostles 
St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  but  it  is  simply  intimated  that  the 
chapel  is  dedicated  to  Blessed  Peter  Favre.  And  so,  also, 
no  picture  was  exposed  on  the  altar  for  the  veneration 
of  the  faithful  but  that  of  Blessed  Favre. 


Continuance  of  veneration.          185 

This  increase  of  worship  was  a  great  means  of  rekind 
ling  the  devotion  of  the  people  to  the  Blessed  Father. 
And  indeed,  far  from  slackening  as  time  went  on,  it 
kept  on  increasing,  and  was  propagated  for  more  than 
two  centuries  throughout  Savoy  and  elsewhere.  Not 
only  did  the  neighbouring  parishes  begin  and  continue 
the  custom  of  going  in  procession  from  time  to  time  to 
visit  the  chapel,  but  pilgrims  and  devout  people  came 
at  all  times  of  the  year  from  a  distance  to  venerate  the 
Blessed  Father  and  to  fulfil  vows  made  in  thanksgiving. 
In  the  Processes  the  witnesses  make  deposition  that  the 
peasants  of  Villaret  never  go  out  in  the  morning  to  their 
work  in  the  fields  till  they  have  knelt  at  the  door  of 
the  chapel  to  pray  and  to  ask  the  saint  to  bless  them. 
Besides  the  perpetual  Masses  founded  in  his  honour 
by  Dr.  Favre  and  the  Marquis  d'Urfey,  the  records  of 
pastoral  visitations  prove  that  there  were  others  to  the 
number  of  several  hundreds,  and  that  the  founders  were 
not  all  inhabitants  of  the  small  village  of  Villaret,  but 
also  of  neighbouring  parishes.  A  great  portion  of  these 
foundations  was  lost  at  the  end  of  the  last  century, 
during  the  French  Revolution,  and  the  church  itself, 
with  all  its  sacred  contents,  was  utterly  destroyed  by 
sacrilegious  hands.  In  the  year  1826,  however,  thanks 
to  the  exertions  and  piety  of  M.  Etremont,  the  cure  of 
St.  Jean  de  Sixt,  it  was  rebuilt,  and  restored  to  the 
devotion  of  the  faithful.  This  venerable  priest,  with  the 
assistance  of  a  few  other  benefactors,  contributed  as 
much  as  he  was  able  to  the  restoration  of  the  building, 
the  erection  of  the  altar,  and  the  purchase  of  the 
vestments  necessary  for  divine  worship;  and  thus  the 
veneration  of  the  people  for  the  Blessed  Father  once 
more  flourished.  Masses  were  once  more  celebrated, 
and  the  pilgrimages  from  the  neighbourhood  and  else 
where  resumed. 


1 86  Hospital  at  Annecy. 

All  this  is  amply  proved  on  oath  by  the  witnesses  in 
the  last  Processes  drawn  up  by  the  Bishop  of  Annecy 
in  1869;  the  first  of  whom  says — 'I  have  always  heard 
that  there  was  a  great  veneration  for  this  chapel,  and  I 
have  seen  it  with  my  own  eyes.  I  have  seen  the  faithful 
in  the  neighbourhood  come  there  to  pray  and  to  hear 
Mass.  I  have  now  and  then  seen  some  foreign  priests 
who  came  there  to  say  Mass ;  and  I  have  heard  that 
these  marks  of  devotion  were  paid  to  Father  Favre  as 
"Blessed."'  And  the  second  witness,  who  is  the  cure 
of  the  parish,  adds — "'  From  the  time  of  my  being 
appointed  to  St.  Jean  de  Sixt  I  have  always  heard  that 
there  has  existed  a  constant  veneration  to  this  chapel ;, 
and  I  am  led  to  believe  the  truth  of  this  from  what  1 
have  seen  myself.  There  is  a  pilgrimage  to  this  chapel,, 
but  it  is  not  habitually  practised  except  by  the  faithful 
of  the  place  and  of  the  adjoining  parishes.  From  the 
observations  I  have  been  able  to  make  since  I  have 
been  here,  I  am  led  to  believe  that  the  object  of  these 
visits  is  to  testify  a  special  devotion  to  the  Venerable 
Father  Favre.  I  myself,  personally,  have  often  received 
offerings  from  the  faithful  of  the  parish  for  Masses  to 
be  celebrated  in  the  chapel  of  Villaret,  or  elsewhere,  in 
honour,  as  they  said,  of  the  Blessed  Peter  Favre/5 

In  1699  a  second  chapel,  or,  more  correctly  speaking,, 
an  entire  hospital  with  a  chapel  attached,  was  dedicated 
to  Blessed  Peter  Favre  in  the  same  city  of  Annecy,, 
where  the  bishops  of  Geneva  resided.  M.  Christoval 
Joseph  Gautier,  a  citizen  of  Annecy,  bequeathed  a 
valuable  inheritance  for  the  foundation  of  a  hospital, 
stipulating,  among  other  dispositions,  that  the  chapel 
and  the  entire  hospital  should  be  dedicated  to  the  most 
Holy  Trinity,  the  Blessed  Virgin,  the  Blessed  Amadeus, 
Duke  of  Savoy,  St.  Gautier  Abbot,  and  Blessed  Peter 
4  Process  at  Annecy,  1869.  5  Ibid. 


St.  Francis  of  Sales.  1 8  7 

Favre  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  and  that  a  picture  should 
be  painted  and  placed  on  the  altar  of  the  chapel,  and 
two  on  the  credence  tables,  representing  their  figures  ; 
and  concluding  with  the  request  that  the  Bishop  of 
Geneva,  or  his  Vicar  General,  would  ratify  and  confirm 
this  deed.  The  testator's  written  document,  drawn  up 
by  a  notary,  is  preserved  in  the  archives  of  Annecy, 
together  with  the  recommendation  of  the  bishop's  pro 
curator-fiscal  and  the  ratification  and  approval  of  the 
Rev.  D.  Joseph  Falcaz,  doctor  of  the  Sorbonne,  canon 
and  vicar  general  of  the  diocese  of  Geneva.6  Here, 
then,  we  see  two  public  oratories  consecrated,  with  the 
approval  of  the  bishops  of  the  diocese,  to  the  honour 
and  worship  of  Blessed  Peter  Favre,  one  at  his  native 
place,  Villaret,  and  the  other  at  Annecy;  in  both  of 
which  his  picture  was  exposed  for  public  veneration. 


CHAPTER   XXXVII. 
St.  Francis  of  Sales  and  Peter  Favre. 

WHAT  greatly  aided  in  the  propagation  and  increase 
of  the  honour  and  worship  of  Blessed  Peter  Favre 
throughout  Savoy,  was  the  example  of  the  saintly 
Bishop  and  Prince  of  Geneva,  Francis  of  Sales.  He 
had  a  very  great  devotion  to  Favre,  and  not  only 
did  he  honour  him  with  the  title  of  '  Blessed,'  but  he 
exerted  himself  in  every  possible  way  to  make  others 
know  and  venerate  him.  In  the  year  1604  he  was 
unable  personally  to  visit  the  parishes  of  the  Great 
Bornand,  and  therefore  he  sent  Dr.  Peter  Critan,  the 

6  Positio  de  Cultu  Summ.  addit. 


1 88  Visitation  by  P.  Critan. 

cure  of  Thonon,  to  Villaret,  to  visit  and  arrange,  in 
his  name,  everything  belonging  to  the  oratory,  or 
public  chapel,  erected  in  honour  of  Blessed  Favre. 
The  authentic  record  of  this  visitation  is  still  pre 
served  at  Villaret.  It  is  as  follows — 

'On  the  i5th  of  January,  1604,  I,  Peter  Critan,  a 
citizen  of  Thonon,  did,  by  commission  of  my  lord 
and  father  in  Christ,  Mgr.  Francis  of  Sales,  Bishop 
and  Prince  of  Geneva,  visit  the  chapel  of  St.  Peter 
founded  by  the  MM.  Favre  in  the  village  of  Villaret, 
on  the  identical  spot  where  once  stood  the  house  of 
the  Reverend  Father  Peter  Favre,  one  of  the  first 
founders  of  the  Reverend  Jesuit  Fathers.  This  chapel 
is  excellently  well  built,  and  furnished  with  chalices, 
missals,  vestments,  and  very  precious  relics.  Before- 
leaving,  I  charged  the  above-named  gentlemen,  the 
founders,  in  the  name  of  my  lord  the  bishop,  to  set 
about  the  completion  of  whatever  they  considered 
remained  to  be  done  in  the  aforesaid  chapel.  To 
preserve  the  memory  of  so  great  a  father  in  his  native 
place,  we  purpose  representing  in  the  chapel  the  life 
of  the  said  father,  of  the  first  Jesuits,  and  of  the  first 
founders  of  that  holy  Society;1  and  also  providing 
everything  requisite  for  the  divine  sacrifice,  and  I 
attest  this  by  affixing  my  signature  and  seal  to  this 
paper. 

'  JUSTE  BALLIAT,  cure  of  Villaret. 

'  PETER  CRITAN,  citizen  of  Thonon,  and  deputy 
of  my  Most  Reverend  Lord  Bishop.'  2 

1  It  seems  that  M.  Critan  intended  having  the  events  of  Favre's  life 
and  those  of  other  saints  of  the  Society  painted  on  the  walls  of  the 
chapel.     It  was,  indeed,  the  custom  in  Savoy  at  that  time  to  represent 
on  canvas  in  the  churches  the  acts  of  the  saints  most  venerated  there, 
as  St.  Francis  of  Sales  himself  bears  witness,  in  a  letter  of  his  dated 
September  i6th,  1609. 

2  Proc.  fol. 


Consecration  of  the  altar.  189 

Three  years  later,  when  the  holy  bishop  was  at 
Thonon,  he  experienced  great  consolation  at  reading 
the  Process,  made  in  1596,  on  the  life  and  reputation 
for  sanctity  of  Favre,  and,  as  it  was  not  of  sufficient 
authority  (having  been  made  by  three  cures  without 
competent  jurisdiction),  he  heard  the  witnesses  again 
himself,  and  approved  of  the  deeds.  Then,  making 
his  visitation  at  St.  Jean  de  Sixt,  he  determined  to 
consecrate  the  altar  of  the  chapel  at  Villaret,  where 
his  predecessor  had  only  allowed  a  portable  altar. 
The  function  was  very  solemn,  and  lasted  three  hours. 
The  Lords  of  Alex,  and  all  the  parishes  of  the  valley 
of  the  Great  and  Little  Bornand  assisted  at  the  pro- ' 
cession.  After  the  consecration  the  saint  preached  to 
a  large  congregation,  dwelling,  with  the  tenderest  affec 
tion,  on  the  virtues,  merits,  and  holy  life  of  Blessed 
Favre ;  and  he  has  left  a  brief  notice  of  all  this  in  the 
sixteenth  chapter  of  the  Introduction  to  a  devout  life, 
which  he  published  in  the  July  of  the  following  year, 
1608,  where  he  says — *  It  was  a  great  consolation  to  me 
last  year  to  consecrate  an  altar  in  the  birthplace  of  that 
blessed  man,  the  little  village  of  Villaret,  situated  among 
our  wildest  mountains.' 

This  visitation  of  the  chapel  of  Villaret  is  also 
mentioned  by  Charles  Auguste  de  Sales,  in  his  Life 
of  his  saintly  uncle,  in  the  seventh  book  of  which  he 
says — '  On  the  9th  (of  October,  1607)  he  visited  the 
parishes  of  our  Lady  in  the  Great  Bornand,  and  of 
St.  Jean  de  Sixt,  and  the  chapel  built  in  honour  of  the 
Blessed  Father  Peter  Favre,  the  first  priest,  theologian, 
and  companion  of  St.  Ignatius  of  Loyola,  the  founder, 
of  the  Society  of  Jesus ;  he  would  also  see  his  rela 
tions,  and  the  house  where  he  was  born,  and  he  said 
many  beautiful  things  in  praise  of  that  truly  great  man/3 

;}  Process,  1869. 


The  'Memorial! 


Father  Nicolas  Polliens,  the  Rector  of  the  College 
of  Chambery,  had  sent  the  holy  bishop  a  copy  (as  I 
believe)  of  the  '  Memorial  '  written  by  Blessed  Favre, 
and  the  saint,  after  he  had  read  it,  returned  it  with 
a  letter,  which  was  submitted  to  the  appointed  judges, 
and  by  them  acknowledged  in  due  form  as  authentic, 
and  inserted  in  the  Process  of  1626.  It  breathes  a 
spirit  of  the  tenderest  devotion  to  the  Blessed  Father, 
and  we  here  give  a  translation  of  it. 

1  To   the  Reverend   Father  in    our  Lord,   Father  Nicolas 
Polliens,  of  the  Society  of  the  Holy  Name  of  Jesiis. 

'  Very  Reverend  Father,  — 

'  It  is  high  time  for  me  to  return  you  the 
little  book  concerning  the  holy  life  of  our  Blessed 
Peter  Favre.  I  have  faithfully  refrained  from  copying 
it,  as,  when  you  sent  it  to  me,  you  spoke  of  it  as 
being,  for  the  present,  a  thing  exclusively  reserved 
for  your  Society.  I  should  very  much  like,  however, 
to  possess  a  copy  of  so  holy  a  history,  and  that,  too, 
of  a  saint  to  whom  I  am  —  as  for  many  reasons  I  am 
bound  to  be  —  greatly  attached,  for  my  memory  is  not 
sufficiently  good  to  retain  the  details  of  what  I  read  ; 
L  only  carry  away  a  general  impression.  I  cannot 
but  believe  that  the  Society  will  resolve  to  gain  for 
this  first  companion  of  its  founder  the  honour  which 
it  has  already  secured  for  the  rest,  for  although  his 
life  cannot  furnish  such  copious  matter  to  the 
biographer  as  those  of  some  others,  both  from  its 
shortness,  and  because  in  those  days  they  did  not 
take  note  of  all  that  passed  ;  still,  what  we  do  possess 
is  full  of  the  sweetest  honey  of  devotion.  The  good 
M.  Favre,  our  doctor  in  this  city,  has  lately  discovered 
in  the  Chartreuse  of  the  Sepulchre,  an  autograph  letter 


Congregation  of  Priests.  1 9 1 

of  this  Blessed  Father,  which  I  have  had  the  happiness 
of  seeing  and  kissing.  In  conclusion,  I  thank  you  for 
your  charity  in  kindly  communicating  to  me  what  you 
have  done,  and  I  beg  you  to  continue  to  remember  me 
in  your  prayers,  for  I  am,  with  all  my  heart,  your  humble 
and  very  affectionate  brother  and  servant, 

'  FRANCIS,  Bishop  of  Geneva.4 

'January  loth,  1612.' 

In  the  year  1612  the  Life  of  Favrc,  written  in  Latin 
by  Father  Nicolas  Orlandini,  was  published  at  Lyons. 
The  printer,  Pierre  Rigaud,  well  knowing  the  affection 
with  which  the  Bishop  of  Geneva  regarded  the  servant 
•of  God,  dedicated  it  to  him.  It  was  soon  afterwards 
translated  into  French,  and  the  saint  procured  a  great 
many  copies,  which  he  dispersed  through  his  diocese. 
Lastly,  we  must  not  omit  a  circumstance,  which  clearly 
•shows  how  far  the  holy  bishop  went  in  his  respect, 
veneration,  and  devotion  towards  Father  Favre.  There 
was  at  Thonon  a  congregation  or  society  of  priests, 
called  Altarians,  all  devoted  by  their  rule  to  their  own 
sanctification,  and  to  the  spiritual  culture  of  the  people 
by  Apostolic  ministrations.  Each  lived  in  his  own 
house,  and  they  met,  from  time  to  time,  for  the  purpose 
•of  consulting  together  as  to  their  method  of  working. 
St.  Francis  of  Sales  persuaded  them  to  live  in  com 
munity,  and  gave  them  rules  and  laws  for  preserving 
and  increasing  their  spiritual  fervour,  and  in  order  to 
encourage  them  still  more  in  their  labours  for  souls, 
he  not  only  put  Blessed  Peter  Favre  before  them  as 
a  model,  but  declared  him  patron  of  their  holy  society. 
These  rules,  placed  under  his  protection  as  titular 
patron,  and  sealed  by  St.  Francis  of  Sales,  and  con 
firmed  by  his  successor,  were  laid  before  the  judges 
4  Process,  1626. 


192  Successors  of  St.  Francis. 

in   the    Process  of  1626,    by    Dr.  Peter   Critan,   as  he 
himself  affirms  in  these  words — 

'  The  said  respondent  then  added,  in  further  proof 
of  the  reputation  for  sanctity  enjoyed  by  the  said 
Reverend  Father  Favre,  that  the  late  Blessed  Mgr. 
Francis  of  Sales,  of  happy  memory,  and  also  the  present 
Most  Reverend  John  Francis  of  Sales,  his  brother,  and 
most  worthy  successor,  gave  their  approbation  to  the 
laws  and  rules  for  the  good  performance  of  the  cure  of 
souls,  and  of  the  divine  offices,  which  are  established 
in  the  said  parish  church  of  Thonon,  under  the 
patronage  of  the  Reverend  Father  Peter  Favre,  which 
laws  and  rules  he  has  laid  before  us,  and  shown  us  to 
be  signed  by  the  aforesaid  most  reverend  bishops,  and 
sealed  with  the  great  seal  of  the  diocese.'5 

All  the  successors  of  St.  Francis  of  Sales  in  the 
episcopal  see  of  Geneva  and  Annecy  followed  his 
example.  Not  only  did  they  tolerate  the  many  marks 
of  public  worship  paid  to  Blessed  Favre,  but  they 
greatly  kindled  the  devotion  of  the  people  by  personally 
visiting  the  chapel  of  Villaret,  and  praying  before  the 
picture  of  the  Blessed  Father.  In  1626  Mgr.  John 
Francis  of  Sales  ordered  an  authentic  Process  to  be 
drawn  up,  in  which  all  the  acts  of  public  worship  and 
veneration  paid  to  the  Blessed  Father  are  deposed  to 
by  many  witnesses.  When  Mgr.  Michael  Gabriel  de 
Rossillon  visited  the  parish  of  St.  Jean  de  Sixt,  in 
1705,  he  gave  his  approbation  to  the  vow  which  the 
inhabitants  of  Villaret  had  made  to  keep  the  ist  of 
August  as  a  day  of  abstinence  from  work  and  a  high 
festival,  and  that,  not  on  account  of  the  feast  of 
St.  Peter's  Chains,  which  is  very  little  known  in  that 

5  Process,  1626. 


Toleration  of  'cultus?  193 

part  of  the  country,  but  for  the  greater  honour  of 
Blessed  Favre  ;  all  the  more  because,  for  more  than  a 
century,  it  had  been  the  custom  to  sing  High  Mass  on 
that  day  in  the  chapel  of  the  Blessed  Father,  according 
to  the  foundation  made  by  the  Marquis  d'Urfey. 

To  be  brief,  all  the  witnesses  examined  in  the  last 
Process  of  1869  are  agreed  that  the  bishops  of  the 
diocese  not  only  did  not  prevent,  but  constantly  pro 
moted  the  public  and  ecclesiastical  cultus  paid  to 
Blessed  Peter  Favre,  both  before  and  after  the  decrees 
of  Urban  VIII.  We  will  quote  but  two.  The  first 
•nays — 

'  I  never  heard  of  any  opposition  on  the  part  of  the 
diocesan  authority  to  these  tokens  of  public  and 
ecclesiastical  veneration  paid  to  the  Blessed  Father 
by  the  faithful,  either  before  or  after  the  decrees  of 
Urban  VIII.  in  1634.'° 

And  the  second  adds — 

4 1  know  of  no  act  proceeding  from  the  diocesan 
authority  condemning  the  various  marks  of  public  and 
ecclesiastical  cultus  paid  to  the  Reverend  Father  Favre. 
Prior  to  the  decrees  of  Urban  VIII.,  both  St.  Francis 
of  Sales  and  his  brother  and  successor,  John  Francis, 
had  implicitly  approved  of  the  said  worship  by  placing 
the  association  of  the  priests,  called  "  Altarians,"  under 
the  patronage  of  Blessed  Favre.  After  the  decree  of 
Urban  VIII.,  the  said  veneration  seems  to  have  been 
implicitly  approved  by  the  visits  of  devotion  succes 
sively  made  by  the  bishops  in  the  course  of  their 
pastoral  visitations,  as  I  have  already  said  in  my 
replies  to  former  questions.'7 

6  Process  at  Annccy,  1869.  7  Ibid. 

N 


194  Camus. 


Not  only  the  bishops,  first  of  Geneva  and  then  of 
Annecy,  but  the  other  bishops  in  the  neighbourhood, 
united  in  proclaiming  and  venerating  Father  Peter 
Pavre  as  Blessed.  Mgr.  John  Peter  Camus,  Bishop  of 
Belley,  the  intimate  friend  and  associate  of  St.  Francis 
of  Sales,  preached  a  course  of  sermons  during  the 
octave  of  St.  Ignatius,  in  1622,  in  the  Church  of  the 
Society  of  Jesus,  at  Chambery ;  and  on  the  ist  of 
August,  taking  his  subject  from  the  feast  of  St.  Peter's 
Chains,  and  the  anniversary  of  the  death  of  Favre, 
which  both  occur  on  that  day,  he  combined  the 
praises  of  St.  Peter  the  Apostle,  of  St.  Ignatius,  and 
of  Blessed  Favre  in  his  discourse.  '  On  this  same 
clay/  he  said,  '  another  Peter  was  loosed  from  the 
chains  of  this  mortal  life,  on  whom,  after  St.  Ignatius,, 
the  Society  of  Jesus  may  be  said  to  have  been  founded. 
He  was  a  son  of  thine,  O  Savoy,  a  fellow-citizen  of  yours, 
my  dear  hearers  ;  at  once  the  honour  and  glory  of  the 
diocese  of  Geneva.  I  speak  of  the  Blessed — yes,  I  will 
call  him  so,  for  his  virtues  entitle  him  to  the  honour — 
the  Blessed  Peter  Favre,  the  first  priest,  the  first  preacher,, 
the  first  theological  professor  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  and 
the  first  companion  of  its  founder,  St.  Ignatius/'8  And 
he  continues,  all  through  the  sermon,  to  combine  the 
praises  of  the  three,  according  to  his  thesis,  describing 
the  labours  endured  by  Father  Favre  in  defence  of  the 
Church,  which  is  founded  on  the  Apostle  St.  Peter, 
•And  in  propagating  and  making  glorious  the  Society  of 
Jesus,  instituted  by  St.  Ignatius,  and  exalting  the  many 
virtues  which  raised  him  to  so  high  a  degree  of 
sanctity,  by  which  he  finally  merited  the  glory  of  the 
Beatified. 

3  Panegyrics  on  St.  Ignatius  of  Loyola,  Panegyric  vii.      Lyons,  1623. 


CHAPTER   XXXVIII. 
The  last  Process. 

IN  conclusion,  all  that  remains  for  the  completion  of 
this  subject  is  to  quote  the  minute  testimony  recently 
given  by  the  best-informed  inhabitants  of  Villaret  as  to 
the  antiquity,  publicity,  and  legitimate  character  of  the 
worship  rendered  by  them  and  their  ancestors  to  Blessed 
Peter  Favre. 

'  We,  the  undersigned  inhabitants  of  the  village  or  the 
neighbourhood  of  Villaret,  in  the  parish  of  St.  Jean  de 
Sixt,  in  the  diocese  of  Annecy,  having  just  heard  the 
holy  Mass  in  our  chapel  by  the  Rev.  Silvain  Vittoz, 
cure  of  the  Little  Bornand,  in  the  same  diocese,  give 
the  following  testimony,  which  we  are  ready  to  confirm 
by  oath — 

"'  I.  We  declare  that  there  is,  in  the  village  of  Villaret, 
a  public  chapel  which  has  always  been  called,  by  our 
fathers  and  ourselves,  the  chapel  of  St.  Peter  Favre, 
the  Jesuit.  A  constant  and  unanimous  tradition  fixes 
the  date  of  its  building  at  twelve  or  fifteen  years  after 
the  death  of  the  aforesaid  Saint,  or  Blessed,  Peter  Favre. 
The  same  tradition  has  always  witnessed,  that  it  was 
built  by  the  relations  of  the  saint  on  the  ruins  and  the 
site  of  the  house  in  which  the  said  Blessed  Peter  Favre 
was  born.  This  chapel  having  been  plundered,  and 
almost  destroyed,  by  wicked  men  during  the  French 
Revolution  of  1793,  it  was  rebuilt  by  the  care  and  the 
offerings  of  our  families  in  1826. 
N  2 


196  Witnesses  at  Villaret. 


'  II.  We  are  also  able  to  declare,  having  heard  it  from 
our  ancestors  as  well  as  from  persons  not  belonging  to  our 
country,  that  a  Mass,  founded  by  bequests  made  in  this 
and  neighbouring  parishes,  is  celebrated  weekly  in  this 
chapel.  The  same  tradition  also  relates  that  after  the 
building  of  this  chapel — that  is  to  say,  after  more  than 
three  centuries — some  of  the  faithful,  at  a  great  distance 
from  Villaret,  among  whom  were  residents  in  the  epis 
copal  city,  more  than  seven  leagues  off,  very  often  came 
to  have  Mass  said  in  this  chapel,  both  to  implore  the 
protection  of  our  saint,  Peter  Favre,  and  to  thank  him 
for  blessings  which  he  had  obtained  for  them. 

'III.  Our  ancestors  always  declared  that  this  devotion 
was  begun  immediately  after  the  building  of  the  chapel 
by  those  who  had  known  the  saint  either  in  his  child 
hood,  or  in  a  visit  of  a  few  days  which  he  paid  to  his 
native  place  when  he  was  a  holy  priest,  before  whom 
they  fell  on  their  knees  and  prostrated  themselves,  as 
they  always  related. 

'  IV.  We  declare  openly  and  most  positively,  that 
there  has  always  been  a  very  lively  and  fervent  devo 
tion  to  the  aforesaid  Blessed  Father  in  our  village  ;  in 
proof  of  which,  we  have  heard  by  oral  tradition,  that 
our  fathers  never  used  to  go  to  work  in  the  fields  in 
the  morning  without  first  kneeling  in  the  chapel,  or  on 
its  threshold,  to  recite  some  little  prayer  by  which  to 
dedicate  the  day  to  him. 

'  V.  There  is  a  constant  tradition  that  a  great  number 
of  pilgrims,  men  and  women,  priests,  nobles,  lawyers, 
soldiers,  &c.,  have  been  seen  thronging  from  all  parts 
both  of  our  own  and  of  the  neighbouring  dioceses,  to 
venerate  the  chapel  and  picture  of  Blessed  Peter  Favre. 
Many  of  them  went  to  confession  before  hearing  Mass, 
in  order  that  they  might  communicate  in  the  said 
chapel. 


Witnesses  at  Villaret.  197 

'  VI.  We  have  heard,  both  from  the  lips  of  foreign 
pilgrims  and  from  the  witness  of  our  fathers,  that  during 
the  episcopate  of  St.  Francis  of  Sales,  and  that  of  his 
immediate  successors,  processions  of  whole  parishes, 
carrying  blessed  banners,  were  seen  to  come  to  the 
chapel  of  Villaret. 

*  VII.  We  feel  it  our  duty  to  declare  that  not  only 
in  Villaret,  but  in  adjoining  villages  and  parishes,  the 
name  of  "  Saint "  and  of  "  Blessed "  has  always  been 
bestowed  on  our  fellow-citizen.  Peter  Favre.  This  public 
opinion  acquired  additional  strength  from  St.  Francis  of 
Sales  having  given  him  the  title,  in  his  work  on  the 
Introduction  to  a  devout  life.  After  reading  the  sixteenth 
chapter  of  this  book,  which  is  to  be  found  in  all  our 
households,  it  was  not  possible  for  our  fathers  to  give 
Peter  Favre  any  title  but  that  of  "  Blessed.''  We  have, 
all  of  us,  from  our  childhood,  read  or  heard  read  those 
words  written  by  St.  Francis  of  Sales  more  than  two 
centuries  and  a  half  ago — "  Last  year  I  had  the  conso 
lation  of  consecrating  an  altar  in  the  little  village  of 
Villaret,  the  place  where  it  was  God's  will  that  this 
blessed  man  should  be  born." 

'  VIII.  We  declare  that  a  great  number  of  prodigies, 
and  especially  of  miraculous  cures,  have  at  all  times 
been  ascribed  to  the  intercession  of  the  saint  invoked 
in  the  chapel.  Our  fathers  have  assured  us  that  the 
sacrilegious  hands  of  the  Iconoclasts  of  1793  destroyed 
many  ex  voto  offerings,  among  which  were  the  crutches 
left  in  the  chapel  by  a  peasant  as  evidence  of  his  cure ; 
and  that  the  same  profane  hands  took  down  and  tore  the 
picture  of  the  Blessed  Father,  which  had  been  over  the 
altar  for  two  centuries. 

'  IX.  We  affirm  that  ever  since  St.  Francis  of  Sales, 
the  bishop  of  this  diocese,  preached  the  panegyric  of 
the  saint,  previous  to  consecrating  the  altar,  all  the 


198  Witnesses  at  Villaret. 

bishops  of  the  diocese,  when  making  a  visitation  of  our 
parish  church,  have  come  to  pray  in  this  chapel,  which 
is  a  league  distant  from  the  Church  of  St.  Jean ;  and 
many  of  the  undersigned,  since  the  restoration  of  the 
chapel  in  1826,  have  seen  four  of  our  bishops  in  succes 
sion  come  to  pray  before  the  picture  of  St.  Peter  Favre. 

'JOHN  BAPTIST  ANTHOINE, 

*  CLAUDE  CHOVEX, 
'  DOMINIC  FAVRE, 

'  ISIDORE  FAVRE, 
'  FRANCOIS  MISSILIER, 
'JOSEPH  LARVAZ, 
'AUGUSTE  LETHUILLE, 

*  JOSEPH  FAVRE, 

4  MAURICE  DUPONT, 

'N.  DUPONT, 

'  N.  LAMBEL,  Secretary  of  the  Commune. 

'Villaret,  feast  of  SS.  Fabian  and  Sebastian,  January  20,  1872. 

1  And  I,  the  undersigned  Maria  Bernard,  parish  priest 
of  St.  Jean  de  Sixt,  declare  that  the  preceding  signatures 
are  authentic  and  original;  and  likewise  that  all  the 
undersigned  witnesses  are  honourable  and  religious  men. 
some  of  them  of  much  piety.  And  hereto  I  add  my 
signature. 

'  MARIA  BERNARD. 

•Villaret,  1872.' 


CHAPTER     XXXIX. 

Graces  and  Miracles. 

GOD  Himself  was  pleased  to  add  fresh  lustre  to  the 
sanctity  and  worship  of  Blessed  Peter  Favre,  by  working- 
many  miracles  through  his  intercession.  Some  of  these 
were  sworn  to  on  oath  in  the  Processes,  others  were 
related  by  credible  witnesses,  and  in  quoting  them  we 
shall  frequently  make  use  of  the  simple  and  truthful 
language  in  which  they  are  reported  in  the  original 
depositions. 

Dr.  Peter  Critan,  being  questioned  whether  he  ever 
knew  or  heard  of  any  one  who  had  recourse  to  the 
prayers  and  intercession  of  Father  Favre  after  his  death, 
and  whether  by  these  means  graces  had  been  obtained 
-and  miracles  wrought,  makes  answer  and  deposes,  '  that 
as  he  was  returning,  on  the  i5th  of  February,  1625,  from 
Annecy,  where  he  had  been  to  learn  from  the  Most 
Rev.  Mgr.  the  Bishop  of  Geneva,  when  he  would  be 
pleased  to  make  his  general  visitation  at  Thonon,  he  was 
riding  past  the  place  called  Les  Peirasses,  near  Thonon, 
when  the  night  was  pretty  far  advanced,  when  he  sud 
denly  remembered  a  dream  which  he  had  had  the  night 
before,  in  which  dream  he  seemed  to  see  a  religious  of 
the  Society  of  Jesus,  whom  he  believed  to  be  the  Blessed 
Father  Peter  Favre,  to  whom  he  has  always  been  greatly 
devoted,  following  in  this  the  example  of  his  mother, 
Madame  Wilhelmina  d'Arenthon,  who  used  often  to  tell 
him  that  she  obtained  many  graces  by  the  merits  and 
intercession  of  the  said  father.  Now,  as  he  was  thinking 


2  co  Miracles. 


on  this  dream  of  his,  his  horse  fell  with  him,  and  struck 
violently  against  some  sharp  points  of  a  rock.  In  falling 
he  invoked  Blessed  Favre,  and  it  seemed  to  him  that  he 
fell  close  to  him.  Certain  it  is  that  he  was  in  no  way 
hurt  by  the  fall,  although  his  head  and  side  struck 
against  those  hard  rocks,  and  he  remained  lying  there  for 
some  time  head  downwards.  There  were  travelling  with 
him  from  Annecy,  M.  George  Gerface,  Maurice  de  la 
Thullie,  and  Mdlle.  Claude  Fournier,  all  of  whom  thought 
he  was  dead,  and  were  utterly  amazed  at  seeing  him  safe 
and  sound,  with  no  other  harm  done  but  the  fright. 
And  he  believes  that  he  was  preserved  in  this  danger  by 
the  merits  of  Blessed  Peter  Favre.'"1 

The  Marquis  Honore  d'Urfey,  who  has  been  mentioned 
several  times,  suffered,  after  his  first  visit  to  Villaret,  from 
so  severe  an  inflammation  of  the  eyes,  that  he  was  on  the- 
point  of  losing  his  sight  altogether.  He  had  recourse 
with  all  confidence  to  the  help  of  Blessed  Favre,  and 
the  result  was  a  complete  cure.  Being  very  grateful  for 
the  benefit  he  had  received,  he  resolved  to  return  as  a 
pilgrim,  on  foot,  to  the  chapel  of  Villaret,  there  to  offer 
due  thanks  to  his  benefactor,  and  to  pay  his  vow,  as  is 
attested  by  M.  Andre  Trombet,  citizen  of  Thonon— 

'  He  says  further,  that  about  three  years  ago,  the  Lord 
Marquis  d'Urfey  came  on  foot  to  this  city  of  Thonon^ 
accompanied  by  some  gentlemen  and  pages,  and  by  a 
hermit  father,  that  they  were  all  on  foot,  and  that  the 
Marquis  had  his  lodging  in  the  house  of  the  deponent, 
who  was  much  surprised,  and  asked  some  of  his  suite  the 
reason  of  his  coming.  They  told  him  that  the  Marquis- 
had  come  there,  as  a  pilgrim,  to  visit  the  chapel  of 
Blessed  Peter  Favre,  as  an  act  of  thanksgiving  for  a 
favour  which  he  had  received  through  the  intercession  of 

1  Process  of  1626. 


Miracles.  201 


the  said  Blessed  Peter  Favre,  which  was  his  being  cured 
of  a  bad  inflammation  of  the  eyes.  Afterwards,  deponent 
heard  all  this  from  the  said  lord  marquis,  who  gave  him 
the  account  that  night  after  supper.  Next  morning,  the 
Marquis,  with  all  his  suite,  went  to  the  chapel  of  Villaret, 
accompanied  by  the  cure  and  some  of  the  other  principal 
persons  of  Thonon,  who  related  on  their  return,  that  all 
these  gentlemen  had  confessed  and  communicated  in  the 
said  chapel.'2 

Peter  Vacheran  declares,  '  That  he  had  gone  one  day 
to  cut  wood  on  the  mountain  of  Thonon,  to  which  place 
he  belonged,  when,  finding  a  part  of  the  road  very  much 
broken  up,  he  set  about  making  it  level  by  filling  up  the 
crevices  with  stones  and  earth.  Whilst  he  was  digging- 
out  earth  under  a  large  mass  of  what  he  believed  to  be 
solid  rock,  it  chanced  that  this  mass,  which  measured 
about  eighteen  feet  square  and  more  than  two  high, 
burst  up  from  the  surrounding  earth,  falling  upon  him, 
so  that  only  his  head  and  left  arm  were  free.  He  lay 
five  hours  in  this  condition,  crying  aloud  on  God  and 
man  for  help.  At  the  e"nd  of  that  time  some  comrades 
of  his  came  by  that  way,  and  quickly  removed  the  stone 
and  carried  him  home,  with  all  his  body  bruised  and  in 
pain.  He  was  three  weeks  in  bed,  and  when  he  left  it 
lie  found  himself  unable  to  move,  except  by  supporting 
himself  on  crutches.  He  was  advised  by  the  priest, 
Peter  Critan,  to  go  to  Villaret,  and  to  hear  the  Mass 
said  on  the  ist  of  August  in  the  chapel  of  Blessed  Favre. 
He  managed  as  well  as  he  could  to  go  there  on  horse 
back,  and  recommending  himself  to  the  Blessed  Father 
with  his  whole  heart,  he  found  himself  cured  by  the  end 
of  the  Mass ;  and  as  a  perpetual  remembrance  of  the 
miracle,  he  left  his  crutches  hanging  in  the  chapel.' 

~  Process  of  1626. 


2O2  Miracles. 


Pernette  de  la  Motte  declared  that  she  had  a  little- 
daughter  named  Claude,  two  years  and  a  half  old,  who 
fell  into  the  fire,  and  was  much  injured  in  the  eyes  and 
face.  The  poor  mother,  fearing  that  Claude  would 
become  quite  blind  as  she  had  not  been  able  to  open 
her  eyes  once  for  nine  days,  betook  herself  with  great 
confidence  to  the  intercession  of  St.  Peter  of  Villaret, 
making  a  vow  to  have  a  thanksgiving  Mass  said  in  the 
chapel  of  Villaret.  No  sooner  had  she  made  the  vow 
than  the  little  girl  was  cured,  and  recovered  her  sight. 
When  the  mother  was  asked  what  St.  Peter  she  meant 
when  she  spoke  of  making  a  vow  to  St.  Peter,  she 
replied  that  she  meant  that  St.  Peter  who  had  been  a 
native  of  Villaret  and  a  religious  of  the  Society  of  Jesus, 
whom  she  had  often  heard  that  he  was  *  Blessed ;'  and 
she  is  convinced  that  her  child's  cure  was  owing  to  his 
merits  and  his  prayers  to  God.3 

The  miracles  which  we  have  here  described  are  those 
the  reports  of  which  are  given  in  the  old  Processes.  We 
will  add  some  others  which  have  happened  lately  and 
are  inserted  in  the  Process  of  1869.  A  young  man  of 
St.  Jean  de  Sixt,  named  Auguste  Larvaz,  had  fallen 
desperately  ill.  He  was  given  over  by  the  doctors, 
and  his  death  was  expected  from  hour  to  hour.  His 
father,  who  was  in  the  greatest  affliction,  reanimated  his 
faith  and  invoked  Blessed  Favre,  promising  to  have  a 
Mass  said  in  the  chapel  of  Villaret.  The  grace  followed 
close  upon  the  vow,  and  the  young  man  was  cured  at 
that  instant.4 

A  lady,  Josephine  Dubourial  by  name,  belonging  to 
the  parish  of  St.  Jean  de  Sixt,  deposed  on  oath  that  a 
married  sister  of  hers  in  Paris,  who  was  on  the  point 
of  death,  was  cured  at  the  moment  when  she  made  a 

3  Process  of  1626  ;  eighth  witness. 

4  Process  of  1869,  part  iii.  fol.  16. 


Miracles.  20 


vow  to  have  a  Mass  said  in  the  chapel  of  Blessed 
Favre.5 

Rose  Perillat  Charlat,  of  Villaret,  a  woman  of  sixty, 
had  lost  the  use  of  her  limbs  from  incurable  paralysis. 
Not  being  able  to  support  herself  on  crutches,  she  was 
compelled  to  remain  helplessly  sitting,  or  lying  in  bed. 
At  length  she  was  conscious  in  her  heart  of  a  firm  con 
viction  that,  by  invoking  the  intercession  of  Blessed 
Peter  Favre,  she  should  be  cured.  She  accordingly 
began  a  novena  of  prayers,  and  determined  to  go  each 
day  to  hear  Mass  in  the  chapel  of  the  Blessed  Father. 
Her  neighbours,  knowing  her  pious  intentions,  willingly 
offered  to  carry  her  to  the  sanctuary  in  their  arms,  but 
she  refused,  and  insisted  on  going  by  herself,  though 
with  the  greatest  difficulty,  crawling  on  her  hands  and 
knees.  On  the  last  day  of  the  novena,  after  having 
renewed  her  supplications  to  the  Blessed  Father,  she 
rose  up  perfectly  well  and  with  the  free  use  of  her  limbs, 
and  as  long  as  she  lived  she  never  had  any  return  of 
her  malady.  The  miracle  was  attested  in  the  presence 
of  witnessses  by  her  nephew,  John  Paul  Perillat.0 

Another  member  of  the  same  family,  Frances  Mary 
Perillat,  a  child  of  six,  paralyzed  from  her  birth,  was 
carried  by  her  parents  to  Blessed  Peters  chapel,  and 
there  she  said  with  a  loud  voice,  '  My  blessed  St.  Peter, 
give  me  the  use  of  my  legs.'  On  the  ist  of  August  the 
mother  had  a  Mass  said  in  the  chapel,  and  at  that  very 
time  her  daughter  was  cured,  and  was  seen  walking  and 
running  about  like  other  children  of  her  age,  to  the  great 
astonishment  of  all.7 

In  the  parish  of  the   Great  Bornand,  about  half  an 

hour's  walk  from  Villaret,  a  woman,  forty-one  years  of 

age,  named  Frances  Suize,  told  the  Abbe  Antoine  Perret, 

the  principal  priest,  that  from  twelve  years  of  age  she 

*  Process  of  1869,  part  iii.  fol.  16.        6  Ibid.        "  Ibid. 


204  Miracles. 


had  been  almost  entirely  blind,  and  had  her  eyes  con 
stantly  bandaged,  not  being  able  to  bear  the  light.  Her 
mother  made  her  pray  to  Blessed  Feter  Favre,  and 
took  her  to  the  chapel  of  Villaret,  where  she  entirely 
recovered  her  sight,  which  ever  since  continued  to  be 
excellent8 

Euphrosyne  Blanchet,  whose  maiden  name  was  Peris- 
sin,  and  so  descended,  on  the  mother's  side,  from  the 
family  of  Blessed  Favre,  had  a  son  named  Joseph,  whose 
legs  had  been  strangely  deformed  and  contorted  from 
his  birth.  When  he  was  an  infant  she  took  him  to  the 
Carthusian  Monastery  of  the  Sepulchre,  where  she  recom 
mended  him  to  God's  mercy,  and  the  result  was  a  degree 
of  improvement  in  his  condition.  At  the  age  of  five, 
however,  the  boy  was  still  in  very  poor  health.  His 
nerves  were  in  a  very  weak  state,  and  he  suffered  so 
severely  from  pains  in  the  loins,  that  he  could  not  walk 
without  great  discomfort.  The  good  mother,  accom 
panied  by  her  sister  and  sister-in-law,  took  her  child  to 
Entremont,  where  many  precious  relics  are  exposed  for 
veneration.  She  did  not,  however,  receive  the  grace 
she  desired,  and  the  party  returned  towards  the  Great 
Bornand.  As  they  were  passing  the  chapel  of  Blessed 
Peter  Favre  at  Villaret,  the  child  stopped  and  asked  to 
go  in ;  but  the  women,  who  were  anxious  to  get  home 
before  dark,  paid  no  attention  to  him  and  went  on. 
Little  Joseph,  however,  sat  down  on  the  steps  of  the 
chapel,  declaring  that  he  would  not  stir  till  the  door  was 
opened.  His  mother  then  turned  back,  and  taking  him 
in  her  arms,  showed  him  the  altar  and  the  picture  of 
Blessed  Peter  through  the  window ;  but  the  child  was 
not  satisfied  with  this,  and  kept  saying  most  positively, 
'No,  no,  I  will  go  in;  I  want  St.  Peter  to  cure  me.' 
There  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  get  the  key  of  the  chapei 

8  Process  of  1869,  purt  iii.  fol.  16. 


Miracles.  205 


And  no  sooner  had  the  child  entered  and  remained  for 
a  short  time  before  the  altar  and  picture,  than  he  sprang 
to  his  feet,  exclaiming  joyfully,  '  This  time  I  am  really 
cured!'  He  then  went  out,  and  running  before  his 
mother  and  the  other  two  women,  he  was  the  first  to 
reach  his  home,  full  of  glee  and  delight,  and  entirely 
healed  of  all  his  maladies.9 

The  same  Euphrosyne,  soon  after  her  son's  cure,  fell 
dangerously  ill,  was  given  over  by  the  doctors,  and  had 
received  the  last  sacraments.  Nevertheless  she  had 
recourse  with  great  confidence  to  Blessed  Favre,  and 
recovered  her  health,  contrary  to  all  human  expectation. 
She  also  declared  that  she  had  often  heard  her  brother, 
Michael  Perissin,  who  was  a  priest,  say  that  he  had  never 
.asked  any  favour  in  vain  of  Blessed  Favre.  And  out  of 
gratitude  to  his  benefactor,  he  contributed  largely  to  the 
restoration  of  the  chapel  built  in  Blessed  Peter's  honour 
at  Villaret  before  setting  out  for  India,  where  he  went  as 
Apostolic  missionary.10 

0  Process  of  1869,  part  iii.  fol.  16.  10  Ibid. 


CHAPTER   XL. 
The  Immemorial  'Cultus? 

FOR  more  than  three  centuries,  therefore,  the  servant  of 
God  had  received  in  Savoy  a  public  and  ecclesiastical 
veneration,  supported  by  the  testimony  of  saints,  by  the 
sufferance  and  permission  of  the  bishops,  by  the  devotion 
and  visits  of  great  numbers  of  the  laity,  and,  moreover, 
divinely  confirmed  by  constant  and  numerous  miracles 
wrought  by  the  invocation  of  his  name.  Little  or 
nothing  of  all  this  was  known  beyond  Savoy,  and  the 
only  ancient  writer  who  makes  any  special  mention  of  it 
is  Father  Daniel  Bartoli,  who  gives  a  short  resume  of 
what  he  had  read  in  the  Process,  drawn  up  in  1626,  by 
Mgr.  John  Francis  de  Sales,  the  immediate  successor 
of  his  brother,  the  saintly  bishop.1 

It  was  the  reading  this  very  History  of  Bartoli's  that 
kindled  in  me  the  desire  of  seeing  and  reading  the 
ancient  Process  from  which  he  quotes,  and  having,  after 
a  long  search,  happened  to  find  a  copy  of  it  in  the 
archives  containing  the  acts  of  the  Causes  of  God's 
servants  belonging  to  the  Society,  I  perceived)  after 
reading  it,  that  it  contained  sufficient  proof  to  show  that 
the  Cause  of  Blessed  Peter  Favre  ought  to  be  reckoned 
in  the  number  of  those  which  are  excepted  from  the 
decrees  of  Urban  VIII.,  and  therefore  that  it  would  not 
be  difficult  to  obtain  the  confirmation  of  his  veneration 
from  the  Apostolic  See.  All  that  remained  to  be  proved 

1  P.artoli,  fstoria  delta  Compagnia  di  GesU,  I' Italia,  lib.  i. 


The  Bishop  of  Annecy.  207 

was,  that  from  that  time  to  the  present  the  fervour  and 
devotion  in  the  veneration  paid  to  the  servant  of  God  as 
•  Blessed ;  had  not  failed.  This  could  not  be  done 
\vithout  a  new  Process,  in  which  the  depositions  of  the 
witnesses  and  the  documents  referring  to  them  should 
he  collected.  A  request  to  this  effect  was  made  to 
Mgr.  Claude  Marie  Magnin,  Bishop  of  Annecy,  who, 
having  always  had  a  great  devotion  to  Blessed  Peter 
Favre,  very  gladly  furthered  the  desire,  which  he  cher 
ished  as  ardently  as  ourselves.  Accordingly,  he  gave 
orders  that  a  Process  concerning  the  veneration  paid 
to  Blessed  Peter  Favre  in  Savoy  should  be  immediately 
drawn  up,  and  the  acts  were  begun  on  the  23rd  of 
June,  1869.  Fight  of  the  most  credible  witnesses  were 
examined,  and  several  documents  collected  by  grave  and 
learned  persons.2  The  two  ancient  Processes  of  1597 
and  1626  were  again  acknowledged  to  be  authentic,  and 
lastly,  all  necessary  care  and  diligence  having  been 
previously  taken,  Mgr.  the  Bishop  solemnly  published 
the  following  decision  on  the  23rd  of  July,  1869 — 

'  In  the  name  of  Christ,  we  say,  affirm,  declare,  pro 
nounce,  and  definitively  decree,  that  it  is  evident  that 
from  time  almost  immemorial  there  has  been  veneration, 
together  with  the  title  of  Blessed,  paid  to  the  Venerable 
Father  Peter  Favre,  priest  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  and 
that  from  his  death  to  the  year  1634,  in  which  the  last 
decrees  of  Urban  VIII.  were  published,  only  twelve 
years  of  the  prescribed  century  are  wanting,  and  it  is  also 
evidently  among  the  cases  excepted  by  Urban  on  two 

-  We  must  mention,  as  especially  devoted  to  Blessed  Favre,  the 
Rev.  D.  Silvain  Vittoz,  cure  of  the  Little  Bornand,  who  had  been 
occupied  for  many  years  in  collecting  and  collating,  with  unwearied 
care,  the  most  credible  documents  relative  to  the  origin  and  continuance 
of  the  veneration,  and  we  have  to  thank  him  in  a  great  measure  for  the 
successful  issue  of  the  Process. 


2o8  Completion  of  the  Process. 


other  grounds,  namely,  the  writings  of  the  saints,  and 
the  knowledge  and  sufferance  of  the  ordinaries,  which  are 
proved  from  a  very  early  period  down  to  the  present 
time.  Wherefore  we  declare  that  this  Cause  is  among 
those  cases  which  are  excepted  by  the  said  decrees 
concerning  the  absence  of  cultus ;  and,  therefore,  that 
there  is  in  this  case  no  infraction,  but  rather  compliance 
with  the  aforesaid  decrees,'  &c. 

It  is  impossible  to  describe  the  joyful  excitement 
which  pervaded  the  diocese  of  Annecy  during  the  com 
pletion  of  the  Process  on  the  veneration  of  Blessed 
Favre,  by  the  appointed  judges.  Father  Antonine  Maurel, 
who  was  appointed  Vice-Postulator  of  the  Cause,  was 
received  at  Villaret,  whither  he  went  to  collect  accurate 
information,  with  so  many  and  great  demonstrations  of 
joy,  that  I  cannot  describe  them  better  than  by  quoting 
the  original  narrative  inserted  in  the  Process — 

'On  the  28th  of  June,  1869,  Father  Antonine  Maurel, 
and  M.  Silvain  Vittoz,  the  cure'  of  the  Little  Bornand. 
had  hardly  begun  to  mount  the  hill,  on  the  top  of  which 
is  situated  the  Church  of  St.  Jean  de  Sixt,  when  the 
ringers  began  to  peal  the  bells,  and  the  workmen  to  fire 
salutes,  which  were  echoed  far  and  near  by  the  mountains. 
The  cure  and  the  mayor,  together  with  the  members  of 
the  council-general  of  the  department,  came  to  meet 
them,  while,  at  the  same  time,  the  little  bell  of  the 
chapel  and  the  petards  of  Villaret  answered  those  of 
St.  Jean  de  Sixt,  and  bonfires  were  kindled  on  the  crests 
of  the  neighbouring  mountains.  The  chapel  of  Blessed 
Favre,  wThich  had  been  decked  with  flowers  and  garlands 
during  the  day,  was  illuminated  all  night,  and  all  the 
village  kept  gala.  The  next  day,  the  2Qth  of  June,  the 
bells  were  again  rung,  and  salutes  fired  at  daybreak,  both 


The  clergy  at  Annecy.  209 

at  St.  Jean  de  Sixt  and  at  Villaret.  The  mayor  and 
municipality  conducted  the  two  visitors  into  the  chapel 
of  Blessed  Favre,  which  was  completely  rilled,  and 
surrounded  by  a  crowd  of  at  least  five  hundred  persons. 
After  the  celebration  of  Mass,  which  was  preceded  and 
followed  by  other  Masses,  Father  Maurel  spoke  to  the 
assembled  multitude,  who  were  overflowing  with  joy  and 
fervour,  wishing  in  this  manner  to  express  their  devotion 
to  Blessed  Favre,  and  their  delight  at  the  reopening  of  a 
cause  so  dear  and  so  glorious  to  the  whole  country.  In 
the  evening,  the  father  and  the  cure  went  to  pass  the 
night  at  the  Great  Bornand,  after  having  made  an  excur 
sion  to  Thonon.  Everywhere  there  was  a  repetition  of 
the  same  marks  of  piety  and  rejoicing,  and  the  discharge 
of  small  mortars.  On  the  following  day,  the  3oth  of 
June,  the  father  was  again  obliged  to  preach  in  the 
parish  church  to  a  very  numerous  audience.  It  would 
be  difficult  to  recount  all  the  honours  paid  during  these 
three  days  to  the  holy  memory  of  Blessed  Favre,  and  all 
the  manifestations  of  hope  and  rejoicing  made  by  all  the 
parishes  of  those  valleys.'3 

At  this  time,  a  hundred  and  eighty-seven  priests  of  the 
diocese  were  assembled  at  Annecy  for  the  purpose  of 
making  the  Spiritual  Exercises,  and  they  all  signed  :i 
humble  petition,  which  they  sent  to  the  Sovereign  Pontiff, 
and  which  I  will  here  quote,  as  a  proof  of  their  piety  and 
devotion  to  Blessed  Favre — 

'  Most  Holy  Father,— 

'  A  Process  has  recently  been  drawn  up,  in 
the  episcopal  court  of  this  diocese  of  Annecy,  on  the 
subject  of  the  veneration  paid  from  time  immemorial 
to  the  servant  of  God,  Peter  Favre,  of  the  Society  of 
Jesus,  a  native  of  this  diocese.  And  although  we  have 
3  Process  of  Annecy,  part  iii.  fol.  14. 


210  Petition  to  the  Pope. 


good  hope,  as  this  Process  has  been  sent  to  the  Sacred 
Congregation  of  Rites,  that  your  Holiness  will  shortly 
enable  us,  by  your  approbation,  to  pay  public  veneration 
to  the  Venerable  Father  Favre,  nevertheless  we,  the 
undersigned  canons,  parish  priests,  arch-priests,  and 
priests,  here  assembled  to  make  the  Spiritual  Exercises, 
prostrate  at  the  feet  of  your  Holiness,  implore  you,  with 
all  humility  and  earnestness,  to  lose  no  time  in  declaring, 
by  Apostolical  authority,  that  the  aforesaid  servant  of 
God  is  numbered  in  the  company  of  the  "  Blessed." 
We  entreat  you,  most  Holy  Father,  graciously  to  receive 
this  our  pious  and  most  earnest  request ;  and  to  grant 
to  the  diocese  of  Annecy,  so  devoted  to  the  Holy  See, 
the  favour  of  being  at  liberty  to  invoke  with  all  confi 
dence  this  new  patron  so  pleasing  to  God,  the  Father  of 
all  mercy  and  consolation.  All  we  priests  of  the  diocese 
of  Annecy  greatly  wonder  that  this  man  of  God  has  not 
already  been  placed  in  the  list  of  saints ;  he  who  was  the 
first  companion  of  St.  Ignatius  of  Loyola,  the  first  priest 
and  preacher  of  the  divine  word  and  the  corner-stone  of 
the  Society  of  Jesus,  the  unwearied  labourer  in  the  Lord's, 
vineyard,  who  was  called  and  honoured  as  "  Blessed  " 
by  St.  Francis  Xavier  and  St.  Francis  of  Sales,  and  other 
men  remarkable  for  sanctity,  following  St.  Ignatius  ;  who 
has  always  been  so  regarded,  and  publicly  invoked  and 
worshipped  by  the  people,  especially  those  of  the  valley 
in  which  his  native  place,  Villaret,  is  situated.  We 
entreat  your  Holiness  to  deign  graciously  to  grant  our 
petition,  and  by  your  supreme  authority  to  approve  of 
the  veneration  hitherto  rendered  to  the  servant  of  God, 
Peter  Favre  ;  and  lastly,  to  give  your  Apostolical  bene 
diction  to  the  undersigned  priests,  whose  pride  it  is  to 
declare  themselves  your  Holiness'  most  devoted  and 
affectionate  sons.'4 

4  Summ.  n.  14. 


Decree  of  Approval.  2 1 1 

The  Process,  together  with  the  documents  collected  in 
Savoy,  having  been  sent  to  Rome,  the  Cause  was  laid 
before  the  Sacred  Congregation  of  Rites  on  the  3ist  of 
August,  1872.  Their  Eminences  the  Cardinals,  after 
having  fully  discussed  the  matter,  declared  that  the 
case  was  one  of  those  excepted  by  the  decretals  of 
Urban  VIII.  All  this  being  related  to  his  Holiness, 
Pius  IX.,  he,  on  the  5th  of  September,  confirmed  the 
sentence  of  the  Sacred  Congregation  of  Rites,  and 
sanctioned  the  public  and  ecclesiastical  veneration  paid 
to  Blessed  Peter  Favre,  as  is  shown  in  the  decrees 
here  annexed  as  the  conclusion  of  this  Life. 


CHAPTER  XLI. 

Decree  Approving  and  Confirming  the  Cultus. 

DIOCESE   OF   ANNECY. 

Confirmation  of  the  Cultus  paid  to  the  Servant  of  God, 
Peter  Favre,  Professed  Priest  of  the  Society  of  Jesus, 
and  first  companion  of  St.  Ignatius,  commonly  called 
'Blessed.' 

'  IN  Villaret,  a  village  of  Savoy,  in  what  was  formerly 
the  diocese  of  Geneva,  was  born  Peter  Favre,  one  of 
those  Apostolic  men  who  shed  a  lustre  on  the  beginnings 
of  the  glorious  Society  of  Jesus.  His  childhood  was 
passed  in  tending  a  small  flock  of  sheep  in  his  native 
place  :  afterwards  he  was  the  first  of  those  companions 
in  the  University  of  Paris  who  devoted  themselves  to 
o  2 


2 1 2  Decree  of  Approval. 

following  Ignatius  of  Loyola  in  the  way  of  perfection  : 
the  first,  also,  who,  by  command  of  the  Sovereign 
Pontiff,  Paul  III.,  went  to  Germany,  and  there  defended 
the  pure  doctrine  of  the  Catholic  faith  and  the  divine 
authority  of  the  Church,  both  by  word  of  mouth  and 
by  his  writings.  He  then  traversed  nearly  all  the 
provinces  of  Belgium,  Spain,  and  Portugal;  everywhere 
gathering  abundant  fruit  in  labouring  in  the  field  of 
the  Gospel,  and  in  keeping  it  free  from  the  infection 
of  heresy.  At  length,  having,  in  the  brief  space  of  his 
life  accomplished  many  great  things,  he  rested  from  his 
labours  by  a  blessed  death,  at  the  age  of  forty,  on  the 
ist  of  August,  1546,  at  Rome,  whither  he  had  gone 
shortly  before,  out  of  obedience,  although  broken  in 
health  and  worn  out  by  labours.  The  marks  of  sanctity 
which  he  left  behind  him  were  so  evident,  and  God 
Himself  so  plainly  pointed  them  out,  as  has  been 
credibly  attested,  by  signs  and  miracles,  that  he  began 
at  once  to  be  honoured,  especially  in  his  native  place, 
by  popular  devotion  and  ecclesiastical  veneration ;  and, 
shortly  after  his  happy  death,  a  public  chapel  was 
canonically  erected  at  Villaret,  on  the  site  of  the  very 
house  in  which  he  was  born ;  and  in  it  the  worship 
openly  rendered  to  him  from  the  beginning,  continued 
to  be  vigorously  kept  up  and  propagated  up  to  the 
present  time.  There  was,  also,  not  only  the  sufferance 
and  permission  of  the  bishops,  but  the  testimony  and 
authority  of  St.  Francis  Xavier  and  St.  Francis  Borgia, 
and  most  especially  that  of  the  holy  Bishop  of  Geneva, 
St.  Francis  of  Sales,  who  not  only  declared  both  by 
word  and  deed  his  very  high  opinion  of  Peter  Favre;s 
sanctity,  but  did  all  he  could  to  promote  his  public 
veneration. 

'In  proof  whereof,  important  and  appropriate  docu 
ments  having  been  collected  from  different  places,  at  the 


Decree  of  Approval.  2 1 3 

request  of  the  Rev.  Father  Joseph  Boero,  Postulator- 
General  of  the  Causes  of  God's  servants  belonging  to 
the  aforesaid  Society  of  Jesus,  the  Very  Reverend  Bishop 
of  Annecy,  in  whose  jurisdiction  the  village  of  Villaret 
now  is,  drew  up  a  legal  Process,  and  having  considered 
the  various  reasons  therein  specified,  gave  judgment  on 
the  case  as  one  excepted  from  the  prescriptions  of  the 
General  Decrees. 

'All  these  facts  having  been  communicated  to  the 
Sacred  Congregation  of  Rites  ;  at  the  request  of  the 
aforesaid  Very  Reverend  Bishop  and  of  the  Clergy  of 
Annecy,  as  also  of  the  Postulator,  and  of  the  entire 
Society  of  Jesus,  the  undersigned  Cardinal,  Prefect  of  the 
said  Sacred  Congregation  and  "Relator"  of  this  Cause, 
did  at  the  ordinary  meeting  held  this  day  at  the  Vatican, 
propose  the  following  doubts,  i.e.,  Whether  the  judgment 
delivered  by  the  Most  Reverend  Bishop  of  Annecy  on  the 
veneration  paid  to  the  aforesaid  Servant  of  God,  as  being 
a  case  excepted  by  the  decree  of  Urban  VIII.  of  holy 
memory,  should  be  confirmed  in  the  case  a?id  for  the 
object  in  question  ?  Whereupon,  the  Very  Eminent  and 
Reverend  Cardinals  of  the  Sacred  Congregation  of 
Rites,  after  having  with  mature  deliberation  weighed 
and  discussed  each  and  all  of  the  circumstances  adduced 
in  this  Cause,  and  after  hearing  the  Rev.  Dr.  Lorenzo 
Salvati,  Coadjutor  of  the  Promoter  of  the  Holy  Faith, 
returned  the  following  rescript,  that,  All  things  considered, 
this  was  one  of  the  cases  excepted  from  the  decrees  of  Pope 
Urban  VIII.  of  blessed  memory, 

'August  31,  1872. 

'All  which,  having  been  faithfully  reported  to  his 
Holiness,  Pope  Pius  IX.,  by  the  undersigned  deputy  of 
the  Secretariat  of  the  Congregation  of  Sacred  Rites, 


214  Decree  of  Approval. 

his  Holiness  ratified  the  rescript  of  the  Sacred  Con 
gregation,  and  confirmed  the  public  and  ecclesiastical 
veneration  paid  to  Blessed  Peter  Favre,  confessor. 

'5th  of  September  of  the  same  year. 

« _|_  CONSTANTINE,  Bishop  of  Ostia  and  Velletri,  CARD.  PATRIZI, 
'  Prefect  of  the  Sacred  Congregation  of  Rites. 

'  By  Rev.  D.  Dominic  Bartolini,  Secretary. 
1  Joseph  Ciccolini,  Deputy. ' 


PART    THE    SECOND. 


'MEMORIAL' 

OR 

SPIRITUAL    DIARY    OF    BLESSED    PETER    FAVRE, 
OF   THE    SOCIETY    OF    JESUS. 


BLESS  the  Lord,  O  my  soul,  and  forget  not  all  His 
benefits,  Who  redeemeth  thy  life  from  destruction,  and 
orowneth  thee  with  mercy  and  compassion,  Who  filleth  thy 
desire  with  good  things,  and  Who  has  forgiven  and  daily 
forgiveth  all  thy  sins,  and  healeth  all  thy  diseases,  giving 
thee  good  hope  that  thy  youth  will  be  renewed  as  the 
eagle's.  Give  thanks  ever,  O  my  soul,  and  never  forget 
the  many  benefits  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  both  has 
done  thee  and  doeth  thee  every  moment,  through  the 
intercession  of  His  Blessed  Mother,  our  Lady,  and  of  all 
the  saints  of  heaven,  as  well  as  of  all  who  pray  for  thee  in 
the  Catholic  Church.  Adore,  O  my  soul,  the  Heavenly 
Father,  ever  honouring  and  serving  with  all  thy  might, 
and  all  thy  wisdom,  Him  Who  with  His  love  and  mercy 
is  so  continually  helping  and  strengthening  thee.  Adore 
thy  Redeemer,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Who,  as  the  Way, 
the  Truth,  and  the  Life,  with  His  grace  alone  teaches  and 
enlightens  thee.  Adore  the  Person  of  thy  Glorifier,  the 
Holy  Ghost,  the  Paraclete,  Who  by  His  kindly  commu 
nication  of  Himself,  renders  thy  body,  soul,  and  spirit, 
pure,  right,  and  good  in  all  things. 

In  the  year  1542,  in  the  octave  of  Corpus  Christi  our 
Lord,  I  had  a  certain  notable  desire  of  doing  for  the 


2 1 8  Birth  and  childhood. 

future  what  up  to  that  time  I  had  omitted  solely  out  of 
negligence  and  sloth ;  I  mean,  of  noting  down,  with  a 
view  to  their  remembrance,  some  of  the  spiritual  lights 
with  which  the  Lord  had  favoured  me,  whether  they 
tended  to  my  improvement  in  prayer  or  in  understanding 
or  in  any  way  of  working,  or  to  any  other  kind  of  spiritual 
help.  Before,  however,  speaking  of  the  future,  it  seemed 
good  to  note  some  points  in  my  past  life  up  to  this  hour, 
just  as  it  presents  itself  to  me  now,  and  as  I  can  recall 
my  feelings  in  those  days,  together  with  any  notable 
sentiments  of  thanksgiving,  contrition,  or  compassion, 
or  any  other  spiritual  emotion  raised  within  me  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  or  from  admonition  on  the  part  of  my  own 
good  angel. 

1506—1509. 

The  first  benefit,  then,  which  I  have  noted  with  thanks 
giving,  was  that  in  the  Easter  of  1506  our  Lord  brought 
me  into  the  world,  in  the  village  called  Villaret,  in  the 
diocese  of  Geneva,  which  was  then  very  Catholic,  that 
He  vouchsafed  me  the  grace  of  baptism,  and  that  of 
being  brought  up  by  good,  Catholic,  and  pious  parents. 
Although  they  were  peasants  they  had  enough  of  this 
world's  goods  to  aid  me  in  all  that  was  requisite  for 
the  salvation  of  my  soul,  conformably  to  the  end  of 
my  creation.  For  they  so  brought  me  up  in  the  fear  of 
the  Lord,  that  from  my  very  childhood  I  began  to  have 
great  understanding  ;  but,  what  was  a  sign  of  still  greater 
preventing  grace,  even  in  my  seventh  year  I  several  times 
experienced  special  instincts  of  devotion,  so  that  from 
that  time  forth  our  Lord  on  His  part  wished  to  take  full 
possession  of  my  soul  as  its  Spouse.  Oh,  that  I  had 
been  wise  !  Oh,  that  I  had  then  been  wise  enough  to 
welcome  Him  and  to  follow  Him,  and  never  to  separate 
myself  from  Him  ! 


Schooling.  2 1 9 


1516—1517. 

When  I  was  about  ten  years  old,  I  felt  a  certain  desire 
to  study,  and  being  a  shepherd,  and  intended  by  my 
father  to  live  in  the  world,  I  could  not  rest,  and  I  wept  so 
much  in  consequence  of  the  great  wish  I  had  to  go  to 
school,  that  my  parents  were  obliged,  contrary  to  their 
intention,  to  send  me  there  ;  but  when  they  saw  plainly 
the  fruit  and  the  progress  I  made  in  my  studies,  they  did 
not  like,  nor  indeed  were  they  able  to  prevent,  my  con 
tinuing  them,  especially  as  the  Lord  permitted  that  I  was 
not  fit  for  worldly  affairs.  My  master  was  Peter  Veillard, 
a  man  whose  learning  and  life  were  so  Catholic  and  holy, 
that  he  may  be  said  to  have  made  all  the  heathen  poets 
and  authors  Christian,  because  he  applied  everything  to 
the  edification  of  youth  in  the  holy  and  chaste  fear  of 
God. 

1518-1524. 

Hence  it  was  that  all  we,  his  scholars,  by  means  of  the 
teaching  and  example  of  such  a  master,  grew  in  the  fear 
of  God,  and  so,  when  I  was  twelve  years  old,  I  had 
certain  stirrings  of  spirit  to  offer  myself  to  the  service  of 
God  ;  so  that  one  day,  in  holiday  time,  when  I  was  in  a 
joyful  mood,  in  a  pleasant  open  country,  feeling  in  my 
soul  a  great  desire  of  purity,  I  promised  to  our  Lord 
perpetual  chastity.  Oh,  great  mercy  of  God,  Who  wast 
my  leader  and  guide,  and  wast  pleased,  from  that  time, 
to  draw  me  to  Thyself!  Ah,  why  did  I  not  know  Thee 
well  ?  O  Holy  Spirit,  why  did  I  not  know  at  that  time 
how  to  detach  myself  from  all  things  to  seek  Thee,  and  to 
come  to  Thy  school,  since  Thou  didst  invite  me,  prevent 
ing  me  with  Thy  blessings?  Nevertheless,  Thou  hast 
made  me  Thine  :  Thou  hast  signed  me  with  the  indelible 
mark  of  Thy  holy  fear.  And  if  Thou  hadst  permitted 
this,  together  with  Thy  other  gratuitous  gifts,  to  be  taken 


220  University  of  Paris. 

from  me,  I  should  have  shared  the  fate  of  those  of  Sodom 
and  Gomorrha. 

I  went  to  that  school  for  nine  years,  growing  in  age  and 
in  knowledge,  but  not  so  constantly  in  goodness  of  life 
and  in  custody  of  the  eyes.  And  here  I  have  to  grieve 
greatly  for  the  sins  which  I  committed  every  day  against 
my  God,  and  I  should  have  committed  many  others  if  the 
divine  goodness  had  not  permitted  that,  together  with 
His  fear,  there  should  be  aroused  in  my  heart  a  certain 
inordinate  desire  of  knowing  and  learning.  For  it  was 
by  this  means  that  He  removed  me  from  my  native  place, 
where  I  was  not  able  to  serve  Him  wholly  and  duly. 
Blessed  for  ever  be  Thou,  my  Lord,  for  so  great  a  kind 
ness  as  Thou  didst  then  show  me,  taking  me  away  from 
the  flesh  and  from  my  corrupt  nature,  and  gradually 
drawing  me  to  know  and  enjoy  Thy  Divine  Majesty. 

1525—1528. 

In  the  year  1525,  and  the  nineteenth  of  my  age,  I  left 
my  native  place,  and  went  to  Paris.  Call  to  mind,  O  my 
soul,  the  spiritual  spurs  with  which  the  Lord  pricked  thy 
conscience  in  His  fear,  that  is  to  say,  the  scruples  and 
remorse  with  which  the  devil  tormented  thee,  that  thoti 
mightest  seek  thy  Maker,  and  without  which  neither 
would  Father  Ignatius  have  been  able  to  move  thee, 
nor  wouldst  thou  have  sought  assistance  from  him,  as  it 
came  to  pass. 

1529—1533- 

In  the  year  1529,  and  the  twenty-third  of  my  age,  on 
the  loth  of  January,  I  was  made  bachelor,  and,  after 
Easter,  licentiate  under  Master  John  Pegna  (now  a 
doctor  of  medicine),  in  the  College  of  St.  Barbara.  And 
now,  may  the  divine  goodness  grant  me  a  grateful 
memory  to  acknowledge  His  many  corporal  and  spiritual 
favours  which  He  bestowed  on  me  in  various  ways  in  the 


Meeting  with  Ignatius.  2  2 1 

course  of  these  three  years  and  a  half,  giving  me  such  a 
teacher  and  such  a  companion  as  I  found  in  that  house, 
namely,  Master  Francis  Xavier,  who  is  now  one  of  our 
Society  of  Jesus.  In  the  same  year  Ignatius  of  Loyola, 
a  Spaniard,  came  to  be  admitted  into  the  aforesaid 
College  of  St.  Barbara,  and  into  the  same  room  with 
us,  as  he  intended  to  begin  the  course  of  philosophy 
by  the  next  feast  of  St.  Remigius,  when  I  was  to  begin  to 
lecture.  For  ever  blessed  be  the  Divine  Providence,  Who 
so  ordered  it  for  my  good  and  salvation,  that,  having  to 
teach  the  holy  man  I  have  named,  I  had  first  exterior 
and  then  interior  intercourse  with  him,  and  living 
together,  as  we  did,  in  the  same  room,  at  the  same 
table,  and  of  the  same  purse,  he  was  my  teacher  in 
spiritual  things,  showing  me  the  way  to  rise  to  the  know 
ledge  of  the  divine  will.  And  in  this  way  we  became 
altogether  one  in  our  desires,  and  in  the  firm  resolution 
to  choose  this  life  which  we  now  lead  in  this  Society,  of 
which  I  am  not  worthy.  May  the  divine  clemency  give 
me  grace  to  remember  and  well  consider  the  benefits 
which  He  granted  me  at  this  time  by  means  of  this  man ! 
— and  especially  of  having  first  enabled  me  to  know  my 
conscience,  and  the  temptations  and  scruples  in  which  1 
had  been  for  so  long  a  time  entangled,  without  finding  a 
way  to  escape  from  them.  These  scruples  arose  from  the 
fear  that  I  had  not,  for  a  long  time,  made  a  good  con 
fession  of  my  sins,  and  I  was  so  tormented  by  these 
scruples  that,  to  cure  them,  I  would  willingly  have 
chosen  to  dwell  in  a  desert  and  always  to  live  on  roots 
and  herbs.  As  to  the  temptations,  they  consisted  in  vile 
and  impure  thoughts  which  were  suggested  by  the  evil 
spirit  of  fornication ;  which  things  I  did  not  then  know 
by  spiritual  light,  but  only  by  learning  and  letters. 
Ignatius  then  advised  me  to  make  a  general  confession 
of  my  whole  life  to  Dr.  Castro,  and  afterwards  to  confess, 


222  Blessings  at  Paris. 

and  receive  the  Sacrament  of  Communion,  every  eight 
days.  He  also  gave  me  a  daily  examen  of  conscience, 
and  for  the  present  would  give  me  no  other  spiritual 
exercises,  although  I  had  a  great  wish  for  them. 

About  four  years  passed  in  this  way,  and  every  day 
I  made  spiritual  progress,  to  my  own  profit  and  that  of 
others.  During  nearly  all  the  time  that  I  was  at  Paris,  I  was 
assailed  in  different  ways  by  various  temptations,  some 
times  of  vainglory,  sometimes  of  gluttony.  As  a  remedy 
for  the  former,  our  Lord  gave  me  a  great  knowledge  of 
myself  and  of  my  defects,  permitting  me  to  search  into 
them  deeply  with  interior  anguish  ;  and  thus,  by  His 
grace,  He  gave  me  great  peace  in  this  respect.  As  to  the 
other  temptation,  of  gluttony,  I  was  never  able  to  find 
rest  till  I  made  the  Exercises,  when  I  tasted  nothing  for 
six  days,  except  when  I  received  Holy  Communion.  I 
had  many  other  temptations  besides,  such  as  dwelling  on 
the  faults  of  others,  false  suspicions,  and  rash  judgments, 
in  which  also  I  was  assisted  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  my  Com 
forter,  Who  was  leading  me. to  the  highest  degree  of  charity 
towards  my  neighbour.  I  also  had  scruples  about  almost 
everything,  and  many  imperfections  which  I  did  not 
know  till  I  was  leaving  Paris.  The  Lord  then  instructed 
me  in  various  ways,  giving  me  a  remedy  for  much  sadness 
which  sprang  from  these  causes,  all  which  it  would  hardly 
be  possible  for  me  to  recollect.  This  I  can  indeed  say 
with  truth,  that  I  was  never  in  any  affliction,  or  temp 
tation,  or  scruple  for  which  I  did  not,  either  at  the  time, 
or  shortly  after,  find  the  true  remedy  by  the  grace  of  our 
Lord,  Who  gave  me  grace  to  pray,  and  beg,  and  sup 
plicate  (which  is  a  source  of  countless  blessings),  and 
made  me  know  the  diversity  of  affections  and  of  spirits. 
"For  our  Lord  had  left  in  me  certain  impulses  which  did 
not  allow  me  to  be  tepid.  But  with  regard  to  the  know 
ledge  and  discerning  of  evil  spirits  and  affections,  as  also 


Visit  to  Villaret.  223 

with  regard  to  those  things  which  concerned  myself  and 
my  neighbour,  our  Lord,  as  I  have  said,  never,  so  far 
as  I  am  able  to  judge,  permitted  me  to  be  deceived,  but 
always  delivered  me  at  the  right  time  from  those  delu 
sions  by  the  illumination  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  of  the 
holy  angels.  Having  come  to  the  end  of  the  four  years 
I  have  spoken  of,  and  finding  myself  fixed  in  the  resolu 
tion  that  I  had  made  more  than  two  years  before,  to 
follow  Ignatius  in  poverty  of  life,  and  waiting  for  nothing 
but  the  end  of  my  studies,  and  those  of  Ignatius,  and 
Master  Francis  Xavier,  and  other  companions  who  were 
of  the  same  mind,  I  went  to  my  native  place  to  visit  my 
relations,  and  stayed  some  months  with  my  father — my 
mother  having  died  before  this  time. 

1534—1535- 

In  the  year  1534,  and  the  twenty-eighth  of  my  life* 
having  returned  to  Paris  to  finish  the  theological  course, 
I  made  the  Exercises,  and  received  all  the  sacred  Orders. 
\  then  said  my  first  Mass  on  the  feast  of  St.  Mary  Magda 
lene,  my  patroness,  and  that  of  all  sinners.  Herein  are 
contained  innumerable  benefits  which  the  Lord  granted 
to  my  soul,  in  calling  me  to  so  high  a  rank  as  that  of  the 
priesthood,  and  giving  me  the  grace  to  do  all  my  actions 
for  love  of  His  Divine  Majesty,  and  not  from  the  worldly 
motive  of  acquiring  temporal  goods  and  honours,  which 
had  influenced  me  before  I  applied  my  mind  to  the  rule 
of  life  given  to  me  by  our  Lord  by  means  of  Father 
Ignatius.  At  that  time  I  sometimes  had  a  wish  to  be  a 
physician,  sometimes  a  doctor  of  laws,  or  of  theology, 
now  a  master  of  a  school,  now  a  private  priest,  at  other 
times  a  monk,  according  as  I  was  moved  by  various 
affections.  From  all  of  which  being,  as  I  have  said, 
delivered  by  the  Lord,  I  resolved  to  be  a  priest  wholly 
dedicated  to  His  divine  service  in  this  high  and  perfect 


224  Montmartre. 


vocation,  of  which  I  acknowledge  myself  unworthy, 
and  with  which  I  shall  never  be  able  worthily  to  corres 
pond  with  all  the  strength  of  my  spiritual  and  corporal 
powers. 

On  our  Lady's  feast  in  the  August  of  the  same  year, 
all  of  us,  except  Master  Francis  Xavier,  having  made  the 
Exercises,  we  all  went  with  one  accord  to  the  Church  of 
St.  Mary,  at  Montmartre,  to  make  a  vow  there  to  go  to 
Jerusalem,  at  the  right  time,  and  after  our  return  to  offer 
ourselves  in  obedience  to  the  Sovereign  Pontiff,  and  at 
once  to  begin  to  abandon  our  relations  and  everything 
but  what  was  needful  for  the  journey.  The  names  of 
those  of  us  who  were  together  this  first  time,  were  Father 
Ignatius,  Master  Francis  Xavier,  and  I  Favre,  Master 
Bobadilla,  Master  Laynez,  Master  Salmeron,  and  Master 
Simon  (Master  Le  Jay  had  not  yet  come  to  Paris,  and 
Master  John  and  Paschase  had  not  yet  joined  us). 
On  the  same  day  in  the  following  year  and  the  year 
after  that  also,  we  all  went  again  to  the  same  church 
to  confirm  the  same  determination,  feeling  every  day 
greater  spiritual  profit ;  and  on  this  last  occasion  of 
renewing  our  vows  there  were  present  Master  Le  Jay, 
Master  Codure,  and  Master  Paschase. 

1536. 

On  the  1 5th  of  November,  1536,  all  we  nine  above- 
named  left  Paris,  Master  Ignatius  having  done  so  a  year 
and  a  half  before,  and  having  gone  to  Venice  where  he 
was  waiting  for  us,  and  where  we  arrived  after  Christmas. 
In  this  journey  the  Lord  granted  us  so  many  favours  that 
it  would  never  be  possible  to  write  them  down.  We 
Avent  on  foot ;  we  passed  through  Lorraine  and  Germany, 
where  there  were  already  several  Lutheran  and  Zuinglian 
cities,  such  as  Basle,  Constance,  and  others.  The  season 
was  winter,  and  very  cold  ;  and  the  war  was  still  going 


Venice  and  Rome. 


on  between  the  Kings  of  France  and  Spain  :  and  from 
all  these  dangers  the  Lord  delivered  us.  We  reached 
Venice  in  good  health  and  spirits,  and  four  of  us  went 
to  the  Hospital  of  SS.  John  and  Paul,  and  five  to  the 
Hospital  of  the  Incurables,  waiting  till  the  season  of  Lent 
to  go  to  Rome  to  ask  permission  of  Pope  Paul  III.  to 
make  the  journey  to  Jerusalem. 

1537- 

After  Easter,  in  the  year  1537,  having  obtained  the 
Pope's  permission,  but  not  being  able  to  start  then,  in 
consequence  of  certain  hindrances,  we  dispersed  our 
selves  in  various  places  of  the  Venetian  territory,  deter 
mining  to  live  there  retired  for  three  months,  without 
attending  to  others,  in  order  that  such  of  us  as  were 
not  priests  might  be  better  disposed  and  prepared  for 
so  great  a  ministry.  Master  Ignatius,  I,  and  Master 
Laynez  went  to  Vicenza,  Master  Francis  Xavier,  went 
with  Salmeron  to  a  place  twelve  miles  from  Padua, 
Master  John  and  the  Bachelor  Hosius  to  Treviso, 
Master  Le  Jay  and  Master  Simon  to  Bassano,  Bobadilla 
and  Paschase  to  Verona.  After  this  time  we  were 
summoned,  in  the  month  of  October,  to  Rome,  where 
we  three,  who  were  at  Vicenza,  went. 

1538. 

In  the  year  1538,  all  our  other  companions  having 
returned  to  Rome,  and  as  we  saw  for  that  year  the  way 
was  not  open  for  us  to  go  to  Jerusalem,  we  obtained 
faculties  from  the  Pope,  empowering  us,  as  Apostolic 
missioners,  to  preach  the  Word  of  God  and  to  hear 
confessions  everywhere.  The  patent  was  granted  in  the 
month  of  May  by  the  Cardinal  of  Naples,  who  was  then 
Legate  of  Rome.  Would  to  God  that  I  knew  how  to 
acknowledge,  on  my  part,  the  very  many  favours  which 
p 


226  Parma. 


He  granted  us  all  in  that  year,  in  which  also  we  endured 
much  opposition  to  our  good  intentions,  principally  from 
the  Inquisition,  which  we  ourselves  induced  diligently  to 
take  informations,  and  make  known  the  truth.  And,  in 
effect,  it  did  give  a  definitive  sentence  in  our  favour, 
notwithstanding  many  obstacles.  It  was  also  a  notable 
favour,  and  as  it  wrere  a  foundation  of  the  whole  Society, 
that  on  our  presenting  ourselves  in  that  same  year  to 
the  Sovereign  Pontiff,  Paul  III.,  as  a  holocaust,  that  he 
might  see  in  what  way  we  could  serve  Christ  to  the 
edification  of  our  neighbour  in  perpetual  poverty,  being 
also  prepared  to  go,  in  obedience  to  his  Holiness,  even 
to  the  farthest  parts  of  the  Indies,  he  graciously  accepted 
us,  and  congratulated  us  on  our  good  resolutions.  For 
which  I  and  the  whole  Society  shall  be  ever  bound  to 
return  thanks  to  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  for  His  having 
vouchsafed  to  declare  by  the  mouth  of  His  Vicar  on 
earth  (which  is  a  very  evident  vocation),  that  He  is  well 
pleased  with  our  service,  and  is  willing  to  employ  it  for 
ever. 

1539- 

In  the  month  of  May  of  the  year  1539,  Master 
Laynez  and  I  went,  by  order  of  the  Pope,  with  Cardinal 
S.  Angelo  to  Parma,  and  remained  there  till  the  month 
of  September  of  the  year  1540,  gathering  much  fruit. 
Remember,  O  my  soul,  the  favours  thou  didst  receive  in 
that  city  from  God,  Who  produced  so  much  fruit  by  our 
means,  and  that  of  Dr.  Jerome  Domenech,  that  is  to  say, 
by  confessions,  sermons,  and  other  spiritual  exercises. 
Neither  will  I  be  silent  concerning  my  sickness  which 
lasted  nearly  three  months,  beginning  on  the  25th  of 
April,  1540,  from  which  thou  knowest  wrhat  great  fruits 
I  was  enabled  to  gain,  according  to  the  knowledge  given 
to  me  by  the  Lord.  Remember  also  how  greatly  I  am 
indebted  to  Master  Laurence  and  to  Master  Marino,  in 


Worms  and  Ratisbon.  227 

whose  house  I  lay  sick,  and  where  so  fair  an  opportunity 
was  offered  to  me.  Remember,  too,  how  greatly  thou 
wast  stirred  to  devotion  on  the  feast  of  SS.  Peter  and 
Paul,  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  and  of  the  Visitation  of 
our  Lady,  to  whom  thou  art  so  greatly  indebted,  and 
oughtest  to  preserve  eternal  remembrance  of  and  grati 
tude  to  them. 

1540. 

In  the  same  year,  1540,  when  I  was  by  commission 
from  his  Holiness  to  go  to  Spain  with  Dr.  Ortiz,  he 
received  a  summons  from  the  Emperor,  and  took  me 
with  him  to  Germany  to  the  Diet  of  Worms,  where  we 
arrived  on  the  28th  of  October.  Remember,  O  my 
soul,  the  remarkable  devotion  which  our  Lord  gave  thee 
on  that  day  to  the  life  of  Christ  and  that  of  the  Blessed 
Virgin,  so  as  to  commemorate  them  daily  at  the  canonical 
hours  j  that  is,  the  life  of  Christ  beginning  from  the 
Incarnation  to  the  Ascension,  and  that  of  our  Lady 
from  her  Conception  to  her  death.  Remember  also  the 
notable  consolations  which  our  Lord  gave  thee  at  Worms 
in  thy  prayers,  and  the  great  light  in  discovering  different 
methods  of  prayer,  and  of  asking  graces  for  thyself,  for 
the  living  and  dead,  and  especially  for  Germany.  This 
year  the  Society  of  our  Lord  Jesus  was  founded,  and 
confirmed  by  a  Bull  of  his  Holiness. 

1541- 

In  the  month  of  January  of  the  year  1541,  we  went 
to  Ratisbon,  where  the  Imperial  Diet  was  held. 
During  the  journey  we  had  great  consolations  in  various 
prayers  and  contemplations,  many  methods  and  much 
matter  for  prayer  suggesting  themselves  to  me  while 
travelling,  seeing,  and  hearing ;  such  as  asking  of  our 
Lord  the  grace  that  the  archangel  guardian  of  that 
province,  together  with  all  the  guardian  angels  of  its 
p  2 


228  Ratisbon. 


several  towns  might  be  propitious  to  us,  and  that  the 
true  Guardian,  Jesus  Christ,  might  assist  us  and  provide 
for  all  the  necessities  of  the  inhabitants  of  each  place,  of 
the  sinners  there  who  were  at  the  point  of  death,  of  the 
souls  of  the  departed,  and  of  those  in  any  sort  of  afflic 
tion  and  tribulation.  Again,  while  passing  by  mountains, 
fields,  and  vineyards,  various  methods  suggested  them 
selves  to  me  of  prayer  with  reference  to  the  variety  of  these 
good  gifts,  so  that  they  might  be  multiplied,  and  of  render 
ing  thanks  in  place  of  the  owners,  or  of  asking  pardon  for 
those  who  do  not  know  how  to  acknowledge  in  spirit 
these  goods,  nor  God  from  Whom  they  come.  In  like 
manner  I  invoked  the  saints  who  have  the  care  of  those 
places,  begging  them  to  do  what  the  inhabitants  do  not 
know  how  to  do,  namely,  to  beg  pardon,  and  give  thanks 
for  them,  and  to  ask  things  necessary  for  them. 

That  same  year  I  received  countless  other  graces  at 
.Ratisbon.  The  first  of  these  was  that  the  Lord  granted 
to  me  to  effect  great  things  in  His  service,  especially  as 
to  the  confessions  of  the  nobility  of  the  Imperial  Court,, 
and  of  the  Duke  of  Savoy,  my  prince,  who  chose  me 
for  his  confessor ;  which  confessions  produced  much 
fruit,  and  were  the  beginning  of  much  more,  which  was- 
the  result  of  the  Exercises  that  were  made  by  Spanish, 
German,  and  Italian  personages,  by  means  of  whom, 
nearly  all  the  good  which  afterwards  followed  in  Germany 
was  accomplished.  Besides,  I  also  received  other 
methods  of  prayer,  as  on  the  litanies,  on  the  mysteries 
of  Christ,  and  the  Christian  doctrine,  in  which  I  asked 
different  graces  answering  to  each  of  these  methods.  I 
also  went  over  the  three  powers  of  the  soul,  the  five 
senses,  and  the  principal  parts  of  the  body ;  and  the 
temporal  benefits  received,  not  only  by  myself,  but  also- 
by  other  persons,  living  as  well  as  dead,  and  I  applied, 
moreover,  the  holy  sacrifice  of  the  Mass  for  that 


Profession.  229 


intention,  that  the  aforesaid  benefits  might  have  their 
effect  more  perfectly.  I  also  fell  in  with  a  book  of 
the  holy  virgin,  St.  Gertrude,  in  which  some  of  her  par 
ticular  devotions  were  written,  and  from  them  I  learnt 
various  methods  of  prayer  to  my  very  great  profit. 

In  the  same  year  our  Lord  granted  me  another  very 
memorable  favour,  that  is,  that  on  the  octave  of  the 
Visitation  of  our  Lady,  I  made  my  solemn  vows  of 
profession  at  Ratisbon,  before  the  high  altar  of  the 
Church  of  our  Blessed  Lady,  which  is  called  the  Old 
Chapel.  I  did  this  with  great  spiritual  consolation,  and 
with  a  great  increase  of  strength  to  my  soul  in  renounc 
ing  the  goods  which  I  had  already  renounced,  in  leaving 
the  pleasures  which  I  had  already  left,  and  in  placing 
under  entire  subjection  my  own  will  which  I  had  already 
made  subject.  The  vows  which  I  made  were  of  poverty, 
chastity,  and  obedience  to  the  Superior  General  of  the 
Society,  besides  the  vow  of  obedience  which  we  all 
render  to  the  Supreme  Pontiff  as  to  the  missions.  This 
profession  I  made  before  the  Blessed  Sacrament,  just  as 
I  was  about  to  communicate,  according  to  the  following 
form,  a  copy  of  which  I  sent  to  Master  Ignatius,  who 
had  been  elected  General. 

*  I,  Peter  Favre,  promise  and  vow  to  God  our  Lord, 
and  to  the  Blessed  Virgin,  and  to  all  the  saints  of 
heaven,  to  observe  with  their  aid  perpetual  chastity,  and 
perpetual  poverty,  and  perpetual  obedience  to  the  Superior 
General  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  and  likewise  to  observe 
perpetual  obedience  to  the  Supreme  Pontiff  as  to  the 
missions ;  and  all  this  I  promise  to  observe  in  con 
formity  to  the  constitutions  and  rules  of  this  Society 
aforesaid.  And  this  is  my  profession,  and  so  I  have 
made  it,  and  such  is  the  truth,  and  I  make  it  again  to 
.our  Lord  God,  and  to  the  Blessed  Virgin,  and  to  you, 


230  Captivity. 


Master  Ignatius  of  Loyola,  as  vicegerent  of  Christ  and 
Superior  General  in  the  said  Society,  and  in  confirma 
tion  thereof  I  subscribe  this  with  my  own  hand. 

'PETER  FAVRE. 

'July  9,  1541.' 

The  27th  of  July  in  the  same  year,  Dr.  Ortiz  and 
myself,  with  his  whole  family,  set  out  from  Ratisbon, 
passing  through  my  native  country  and  France,  where  we 
Avere  detained  and  imprisoned  for  seven  days.  Where 
fore  be  not  unmindful  of  the  great  benefits  of  our  Lord, 
Who  set  us  at  liberty,  and  granted  us  the  grace  of 
conversing  with  our  captors  and  producing  fruit  in  their 
souls,  to  such  an  extent  that  even  their  leader  made  his 
confession  to  me.  And  things  so  fell  out  that  the  desires 
which  our  Lord  granted  us  to  do  good  towards  the 
whole  world,  were  not  interfered  with,  or  disturbed  by  this 
accident.  Nevertheless,  I  felt  some  temptation  to  diffi 
dence  and  fear  lest  we  might  not  escape  thence  without 
some  delay  and  great  expense  to  Dr.  Ortiz  ;  but  I  also 
received  from  God,  on  the  other  hand,  much  consolation 
and  good  confidence  as  to  everything  that  happened  in 
cur  liberation. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  Elisabeth,  Queen  of  Hungary,1  I 
felt  great  devotion,  and  a  desire  of  keeping  certain 
persons  in  my  memory  to  pray  for  them,  not  looking  to 
their  defects.  These  were  the  Supreme  Pontiff,  the 
Emperor,  the  King  of  France,  the  King  of  England, 
Luther,  the  Grand  Turk,  Bucer,  and  Philip  Melancthon ; 
and  the  occasion  was  that  I  had  felt  in  my  soul  that  the 
aforesaid  were  having  judgment  passed  upon  them  by 
many,  whence  there  arose  within  me  a  certain  holy  com 
passion  proceeding  from  the  good  spirit.  The  same  day 
I  promised  Christ,  and  I  made  a  vow,  never  to  receive 

November  19. 


In  Spain.  231 


anything  for  confessions,  Masses,  or  sermons,  nor  to  live 
on  any  income,  even  if  it  were  offered  to  me,  except  it 
were  in  some  way  which  I  cannot  with  a  good  conscience 
set  my  face  against,  and  of  this  vow  it  behoves  me  to  be 
very  mindful,  as  of  a  singular  benefit  from  Christ  our 
Lord,  Who  thus  aids  me  to  keep  the  better  my  vow 
of  poverty. 

On  the  day  of  the  Presentation  of  our  Lady,2  with  the 
help  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  I  made  a  vow  of  perfect  chastity, 
and,  the  better  to  keep  it,  God  granted  me  a  certain 
feeling  of  special  reverence  towards  that  most  pure 
infant,  our  Lady.  In  testimony  and  memory  of  which 
reverence  I  resolved  to  refrain  for  ever  from,  and  to  be 
on  my  guard  against,  putting  my  face  near  any  child  of 
either  sex,  even  with  any  lawful  intention  whatsoever. 
So  much  more  may  God  protect  me  from  doing  the 
same  with  more  grown-up  persons. 

This  same  year,  on  entering  Spain,  I  felt  remarkable 
devotion  and  spiritual  tenderness  in  the  invocation  of  the 
principal  archangels,  guardian  angels,  and  saints  of  Spain. 
I  felt  specially  moved  towards  St.  Narcissus,  who  lies  at 
Gerona,  also  to  St.  Eulalia,  in  Barcelona,  towards  our 
Lady  of  Montserrat,  our  Lady  of  the  Pillar  and  of 
Guadaloupe,  St.  James  and  St.  Isidore,  St.  Ildefonsus, 
the  holy  martyrs,  Justus  and  Pastor,  and  St.  Engrazia, 
who  lies  at  Saragossa ;  beseeching  all  these  saints  gra 
ciously  to  favour  my  journey  into  Spain,  and  to  help  me 
by  their  prayers  to  produce  some  good  fruit,  as  really 
happened,  more  through  their  intercession  than  from  my 
diligence.  This,  too,  I  resolved  to  do  in  every  kingdom 
or  province  where  I  might  happen  to  be — namely,  to 
commend  myself  to  the  principal  angels,  archangels, 
angels  guardian,  and  saints  whom  I  knew  to  be  chiefly 
honoured  in  such  province  or  kingdom  ;  whence  also  my 
2  November  21. 


Devotions. 


devotion  was  confirmed  to  certain  saints  venerated  in 
Italy,  whom  I  have  noted  and  entered  in  my  Roman 
Breviary,  and  to  others  whom  I  have  seen  venerated 
in  Germany,  especially  to  the  Three  Kings,  and  to  the 
eleven  thousand  virgins,  more  particularly  to  St.  Ursula 
and  St.  Pinosa,  whose  head,  along  with  the  very  arrow  by 
which  it  was  transfixed,  I  saw  with  my  own  eyes  in  a 
monastery  of  St.  Benedict,  as  well  as  to  St.  Helvetus  in 
Nuremberg,  and  St.  Maximin  at  Treves.  In  France,  also, 
I  took  up  a  devotion  to  St.  Genevieve  and  St.  Marcellus, 
Bishop  of  Paris,  whose  bodies  are  a  great  protection  to 
the  city  •  as  well  as  to  St.  Denis  the  Areopagite,  whose 
body  is  in  the  Church  of  St.  Denis,  in  France.  Like 
wise  in  Narbonne  to  St.  Paul  Sergius,  at  Marseilles  to 
St.  Mary  Magdalene  and  Martha,  her  sister,  and  to 
St.  Lazarus.  In  Savoy,  also,  I  felt  a  devotion  that  1 
must  not  omit,  to  St.  Bruno,  the  founder  of  the  Chartreuse, 
to  St.  Amandus,  who  belongs  to  Nancy,  where  we  were 
imprisoned,  and  to  St.  Claude,  to  Brother  John  of 
Burgos,  to  my  professor,  Master  Peter  Veillard,  whom, 
though  not  canonized,  I  regard  as  saints.  Many  other 
saints  I  marked  down  at  this  period,  taking  them  for  my 
advocates.  I  resolved  never  to  forget  them,  but  to 
invoke  them  for  myself,  for  the  living  and  dead,  and 
especially  for  those  who  are  either  living  or  dead  in  the 
places  were  such  saints  were  born,  grew  up,  or  died.  I 
invoked,  also,  the  Apostles  and  other  saints  who  had 
produced  fruit  in  divers  parts  of  the  world,  to  engage 
them  to  take  particular  care  of  our  Society,  and  of  all 
its  members  dwelling  in  such  countries  or  provinces,  for 
which  they  once  applied  their  charitable  exertions.  This 
is  the  plan  I  adopt,  as  often  as  I  wish  to  pray  specially 
for  any  place  or  kingdom,  namely,  to  invoke  those  saints 
and  angels  who  have,  and  have  had,  special  care  of 
such  souls  of  the  living  or  dead. 


Devotions. 


About  this  time  I  began  a  devotion  vouchsafed  me 
from  God,  for  the  better  reciting  of  the  canonical  hours, 
namely,  of  saying  between  the  psalms,  for  the  renewal  of 
spirit,  this  short  prayer,  which  I  found  very  useful — 
Heavenly  Father,  give  me  Thy  good  Spirit ! 

Another  devotion  I  took  up,  to  be  prefixed  to  each  of 
the  seven  canonical  hours,  applying  each  to  some  inten 
tion.  That  is,  to  say  ten  times,  Jesus !  Mary !  at  the 
beginning  of  each  hour — (i)  For  the  honour  of  our 
Lord;  (2)  the  glory  of  His  saints;  (3)  the  improvement 
of  the  good,  that  they  may  advance  in  every  good  inten 
tion  they  may  happen  to  have  in  this  hour ;  (4)  for  the 
conversion  of  those  who  during  this  hour  shall  be  in 
mortal  sin  ;  (5)  for  the  increase  of  the  Catholic  Church  ; 

(6)  for  peace  amongst  Christian  and   Catholic  princes ; 

(7)  for  those  who  during  this  hour  shall  be  in  tribulation 
of  body ;  (8)  for  those  suffering  tribulation  and  affliction 
of  spirit ;    9)   those    that   are   at    the    point    of  death ; 
(10)  those  that  are  in  purgatory,  that  during  that  hour 
and  at  the  time  corresponding  to  the  office  I  am  then 
reciting,  they  may  receive  some  relief  from  their  punish 
ments  and  labours. 

Observe  here,  O  my  soul,  how  the  Lord  freed  thee 
from  so  many  and  such  grievous  perturbations  of  spirit, 
and  from  the  distress  and  temptations  I  underwent  from 
thy  defects,  from  the  disturbance  of  the  spirit  of  forni 
cation,  and  from  my  negligence  in  advancing  in  good. 
Remember  what  clear  light  thou  didst  receive  on  the 
occasion  of  such  temptations,  and  that  thou  scarcely 
ever  hadst  a  notable  temptation  in  which  thou  wast  not 
consoled,  not  only  by  a  clear  knowledge,  but  also  by  a 
spirit  opposed  to  sadness,  to  fear,  to  pusillanimity,  the 
world,  the  flesh,  the  devil,  and  all  inordinate  affections. 
Thou  didst  receive  also  from  the  Lord  a  great  desire, 
together  with  good  hope,  that  thou  mightest  be  the 


234  In  Germany. 


dwelling-place  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  that  the  malignant 
spirits  might  not  dwell  in  the  animal  or  vital  spirits  of 
the  body.  For  this  end  I  used  to  make  various  enumera 
tions  of  the  powers,  senses,  and  principal  members  of  the 
whole  body,  beseeching  our  Lord  that  He  would  deign 
wholly  to  cleanse  me.  I  had  also  much  light  and  feeling 
as  to  the  virtues  of  sobriety,  chastity,  and  diligence,  and, 
on  the  other  hand,  of  humility,  patience,  and  charity. 
I  received  many  gifts  in  thought  and  feeling,  our 
Lord  inspiring  me  with  many  prayers  concerning  them, 
together  with  many  affections  of  faith  and  hope  ;  may 
He  be  blessed  for  ever  and  ever !  Amen. 

I  likewise  received  many  lights  regarding  the  Catholic 
doctrine,  conformably  to  the  Roman  Church,  regarding 
its  constitutions  and  ceremonies,  pious  pilgrimages,  vows, 
fastings,  the  worship  of  the  saints  of  both  sexes,  of  the 
angels,  and  of  our  Lady,  and  of  the  souls  in  purgatory, 
feeling  in  all  great  relish  and  great  devotion  in  the  approv 
ing  of  such  things. 

1542. 

In  .the  month  of  January,  in  the  year  1542,  I  set  out 
from  Spain  and  returned  to  Germany,  by  order  of  the 
Pope.  During  this  journey  the  Lord  conferred  on  me 
innumerable  favours,  especially  by  satisfying  the  great 
desire  I  felt  that  I  might  be  granted  some  one  to  keep 
me  good  company  for  His  service,  and  so  I  had  with  me 
Master  John  Aragonio  and  Master  Alvaro  Alfonso ;  also, 
by  freeing  us  during  so  long  and  perilous  a  journey  from  all 
temporal  evils,  contrary  to  all  human  hope  ;  for  instance, 
in  Catalonia  from  robbers  and  imprisonment,  in  France 
from  soldiers,  and  on  entering  Switzerland,  on  the  borders 
of  Savoy,  from  heretics,  in  Germany  from  plagues  and 
pestilences,  and  finally  a  greater  deliverance  than  all, 
from  temptations  to  discord,  that  is,  from  the  spirit  of 
division.  Many  were  the  feelings  of  love  and  hope, 


In  Germany.  235 


regarding  heretics  and  the  whole  world,  which  the  Lord 
granted  to  me  during  this  journey,  and  had  granted  me 
before,  but  especially  a  certain  devotion,  to  be  continued 
till  my  death,  for  the  good  of  these  seven  cities,  namely, 
Wittemberg,  in  Saxony,  and  the  chief  city  of  Sarmatia, 
whose  name  I  do  not  know,  Geneva  in  the  duchy  of 
Savoy,  Constantinople  and  Antioch  in  Greece,  Jerusalem 
and  Alexandria  in  Asia  or  Africa.  This  resolution  I  deter 
mined  to  keep  ever  in  memory,  with  the  hope  that  I,  or 
some  one  of  the  Society  of  Jesus  Christ,  might  at  some 
future  time  be  able  to  say  Mass  in  each  of  the  said  cities. 

In  the  octave  of  Corpus  Christi,  as  I  was  desiring  to 
have  a  conversation  with  the  Dean  of  Spires,  for  his 
benefit,  and  could  not  in  effect  attain  my  object,  but 
only  by  prayer,  I  conceived  a  devotion  which  I  had  not 
felt  hitherto,  namely,  to  invoke  first,  his  Heavenly  Father, 
secondly,  his  loving  Mother  and  Lady  the  Mother  of 
God,  thirdly,  his  teacher,  and  as  it  were,  tutor,  the  angel 
guardian,  fourthly,  the  saints  of  both  sexes  who  par 
ticularly  felt  towards  him  like  brothers  and  sisters.  This 
seemed  to  me  a  good  plan  of  canvassing  to  secure 
any  one's  friendship,  and  it  occurred  to  me  to  recite  for 
the  first  of  the  said  persons  the  Pater  noster,  for  the 
second  the  Ave  Maria,  for  the  third  the  Deus  qui  miro 
ordine  angelorum,  and  for  the  fourth  the  Omnes  sancti 
tui  quczsumus  Domine,  and  it  presented  itself  to  me  as 
very  necessary  for  gaining  any  one's  good  will  (besides 
what  may  be  done  by  deeds)  to  have  a  devotion  to- 
all  the  guardian  angels,  who  have  it  in  their  power  to 
predispose  persons,  and  to  check  the  violence  and 
temptations  of  our  enemies. 

And  here  note,  my  soul,  and  be  mindful,  that  our  Lord 
hath  given  thee  in  the  past  an  abundance  of  knowledge 
about  the  temptations  and  annoyances  of  the  demons, 
whence  thou  hast  sometimes  made  reflections  in  prayer 


In  Germany. 


about  the  lives  of  the  saints,  or  about  the  mysteries  of 
Christ  or  the  Christian  doctrine,  or  about  the  members 
of  the  body,  asking  for  grace  against  the  enemy  and 
especially  against  the  spirit  of  fornication,  that  he  might 
lose  all  power  against  thee,  nor  ever  molest  thy  intellect, 
memory,  or  will.  And  for  this  I  prayed  with  much 
devotion  of  spirit,  and  had  much  firm  confidence  that 
so  it  might  come  to  pass  before  my  death.  And  the 
Holy  Spirit  would  suggest  that  I  should  earnestly  beseech 
of  His  divine  goodness  and  purity  to  dwell  in  my  body 
as  in  His  temple  and  in  my  spirit  as  well,  and  that  the 
angels  might,  as  it  were,  find  a  corporal  habitation  in 
me,  driving  away  our  enemies.  Of  gaining  this  purity  I 
had  great  hope,  and  I  determined  again  (as  I  had  done 
for  a  long  time  before)  to  observe  much  temperance  in 
eating  and  drinking,  and  much  modesty  in  all  exterior 
acts,  in  order  to  prevent  the  bad  spirits  from  having  such 
great  power  to  dwell  in  me,  or  influence  my  flesh,  not 
finding  rny  heart  weighed  down  with  meat  or  drink. 
Bless  therefore  the  Lord,  O  my  soul,  for  so  great  a  desire 
granted  to  thee,  with  such  a  wish  for  corporal  sanctity 
and  spiritual  cleanliness,  together  with  the  hope  of 
obtaining  it.  Being,  too,  specially  devoted  to  my  own 
angel,  I  experienced  an  abundance  of  aid  from  him, 
praying  that  he  would  defend  me  from  the  evil  spirit, 
chiefly  from  the  spirit  of  fornication. 

On  St.  John  the  Baptist's  day3  I  had  and  felt  in  my 
spirit,  a  notable  sentiment  of  reverence  towards  St.  John, 
and  I  felt  great  spiritual  grief  that  here  in  Germany  his 
feast  is  not  made  so  much  of  or  cared  for  so  much  as  it 
is  in  other  countries.  And  therefore  I  longed  with  great 
affection  to  have  it  in  my  power  to  move  those  who 
possess  authority  and  spiritual  rulership  to  have  his  feast 
rendered  more  solemn. 

0  June  24. 


In  Germany.  237 


On  the  feast  of  SS.  John  and  Paul,4  I  received  a 
certain  help  towards  the  better  saying  of  office.  It  was 
this — to  notice  that  four  limits  and  bounds  should  be 
marked  out,  beyond  which  there  was  to  be  no  exit  in 
time  of  office  :  first,  the  place  where  it  was  being  recited ; 
second,  the  persons  or  saints  occurring  in  such  prayer ; 
thirdly,  the  words,  and  fourthly,  the  external  actions 
that  occur  in  such  office.  This  is  useful  for  the  better 
resisting  of  the  wanderings  of  the  memory,  intellect, 
senses,  or  desires,  to  other  places,  persons,  conversations, 
or  external  actions  that  occur. 

Another  help  too  I  noted,  which  I  had  often  before 
found  to  be  useful  to  the  same  end.  It  consists  in  this, 
that  before  saying  office,  each  principal  part  of  such  office 
or  hour  should  be  thought  of,  however  remote  it  be,  with 
a  great  desire  of  being  engaged  in  it,  as  if  a  person  were 
to  say  to  himself,  See,  you  have  to  recite  first  this  psalm, 
then  that  psalm,  or  prayer ;  and  with  such  consideration 
to  enter  upon  and  begin  office.  Likewise  at  the  end  of 
office  to  take  care  that  the  mind  does  not  wander  else 
where,  but  retains  as  far  as  possible  the  same  holy  thoughts. 
It  is  useful  too,  for  whoever  is  occupied  in  other  things, 
to  withdraw  the  mind  as  far  as  can  be,  before  beginning 
office,  from  all  other  matters,  often  directing  our  desires 
to  things  that  tend  and  belong  to  the  office,  or  fixing  on 
a  certain  time  for  saying  it,  before  which  time  all  business 
is  to  be  got  through,  so  that  we  may  be  then  free  from 
other  cares,  and  so  have  nothing  else  to  think  of,  and  be 
able  to  remain  awhile  quiet  with  the  mind  raised  to  God. 
Otherwise,  one  who  only  forms  a  desire  to  pray  at  the 
moment  when  he  is  to  begin,  can  have  no  well-founded 
devotion,  except  by  a  miracle.  For  this,  then,  it  is  well 
to  have  our  time  well  arranged,  and  often  to  remember 
our  prayer  and  desire  it ;  and  also,  when  distractions  of 
4  June  26. 


238  In  Germany. 


mind  come,  to  grieve  and  be  sorry  for  them,  and  to  keep 
up  this  sorrow  till  the  time  for  the  next  exercise  comes. 
This  sorrow,  moreover,  must  be  for  the  love  of  God,  and 
out  of  devotion  to  the  words  of  the  office,  and  not  only 
for  the  disagreeable  character  of  such  distractions.  For 
there  are  many  who  are  sorry  rather  because  they  hate 
the  distractions,  than  from  pure  love  of  prayer.  This 
way,  however,  is  good  to  lead  us  to  love  prayer,  and 
when  once  we  love  it,  we  next  come  to  desire  to  attend  to 
what  we  recite,  and  this  not  with  the  attention  of  the  mind 
alone,  but  with  intent  affection  also,  for  the  pure  love  of 
Cod. 

At  the  same  time,  within  the  octave  of  St.  John  the 
Baptist,  I  observed  something  very  necessary  for  the 
direction  of  our  own  affairs,  our  desires  and  cares,  and  in 
brief  the  whole  tenour  of  our  life,  and  for  the  obtaining 
of  tranquillity  in  spiritual  and  corporal  occupations.  It 
was  to  follow  that  injunction  of  Jesus  Christ,  Nolitc 
curare  de  crastino ;  that  is,  in  spiritual  desires  and  cares 
it  is  proper  as  far  as  possible  to  have  no  care  for  the 
morrow,  but  a  man  ought  to  dispose  of  his  hours  and 
of  the  time  of  that  day  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  allow 
himself  to  be  distracted,  or  to  think  or  care  with  too 
much  joy  or  sorrow  of  what  is  afterwards  to  happen. 
For  when  the  attention  is  thus  divided  by  thoughts  of 
many  and  different  matters,  the  present  cannot  go  on 
well,  or  be  attended  to  as  perfectly  as  it  might  if  the 
mind  were  more  collected. 

Another  petition  likewise  occurred  to  me,  to  be  pre 
sented  to  the  most  Holy  Trinity,  namely,  for  grace,  that 
when  I  have  any  good  desire,  all  my  faculties  might 
work  together  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  no  obstacle  one 
to  another,  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  whenever  any  of 
them  happened  to  be  distracted,  the  others  might  never 
concur,  but  rather  be  a  hindrance  to  the  distraction. 


In  Germany.  239 


On  the  day  of  the  Visitation  of  the  Blessed  Mary,5  in 
connection  with  the  subjection  and  the  humility  we  owe  to 
those  over  us,  and  to  every  creature  for  the  love  of  our 
Lord,  I  had  a  certain  good  feeling  about  the  humility  of 
our  Lady  who  went  to  serve  her  cousin  St.  Elisabeth, 
humbling  herself  to  her  as  being  the  mother  of  the 
precursor  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Hereupon  I  felt  a 
desire  within  my  spirit  that  all  who  live  in  any  way  under 
obedience  should  exercise  themselves  till  they  obtain 
perfect  humility,  patience,  and  charity,  supporting  and 
honouring  those  placed  over  them,  good  and  bad, 
looking  at  and  being  affected  towards  what  is  good 
alone  and  not  what  is  bad,  and  that  how  much  soever 
the  Superior  might  seem  less  good  in  his  degree,  by  so 
much  the  more  the  inferior  might  be  perfected  in  his 
own,  which  is  to  be  an  obedient,  diligent,  and  faithful 
servant  for  the  fear  and  love  of  our  Lord.  For  one 
who  served  in  this  way  would  merit  to  be  afterwards 
Superior,  and  to  have  good  subjects,  and  on  the  other 
hand,  one  who  had  been  a  bad  Superior  would  deserve  to 
become  subject  and  have  a  bad  Superior  over  him,  and 
one  who  has  been  or  is  a  bad  subject  does  not  deserve 
a  good  Superior. 

On  a  certain  day  that  fell  within  the  octave  of  the 
Visitation  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  I  felt  certain  interior 
desires,  in  which  I  besought  of  God  the  Father  that  He 
would  be  to  me,  though  unworthy,  a  Father  in  a  special 
manner,  so  that  He  might  make  me  His  obedient  and 
dutiful  son.  Of  the  Son  I  begged  that  He  would  deign 
to  be  my  Lord,  and  to  give  me  grace  that  I  might  be 
His  faithful  servant.  From  the  Holy  Ghost  I  begged 
that  He  would  be  my  Master,  and  teach  me  to  be  His 
good  disciple.  To  obtain  all  these  petitions  I  implored 
with  great  devotion  the  help  and  intercession  of  the 

5  July  2. 


240  In  Germany. 


chosen  daughter  of  God  the  Father,  of  the  handmaid 
and  Mother  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  the  pupil  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  that  is,  the  Virgin  Mary,  for  whom  it  is 
easy  to  obtain  with  God  the  above-mentioned  favours. 
I  desired,  too,  that  she  herself  might  teach  me  the 
true  mode  of  being  a  son,  a  servant,  and  a  disciple, 
after  her  own  example  and  as  she  herself  is  ;  and  that  as 
Jesus  Christ  was  her  Son,  servant,  and  disciple,  so  I  too 
should  be  in  the  same  way  humble  as  He  was,  and 
such  as  it  becomes  me  to  be  in  each  of  the  said  three 
characters.  Entering  still  further  on  this  subject,  I  came 
to  see  how  necessary  it  was  that  this  humility  should  be 
practised,  for  when  subjects  have  arrived  at  the  condition 
of  true  obedience,  humility,  subjection,  and  reverence 
towards  those  placed  over  them,  they  would  deserve  that 
our  Lord  should  give  Himself  to  them,  and  grant  them 
also  a  Superior  according  to  His  own  Heart.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  may  be  said  that  one  who  is  indisposed  to 
receive  a  favour,  deserves  to  be  deprived  of  it,  and  he 
who  has  not  yet  become  a  true  subject  does  not  deserve 
to  have  a  Superior  given  him  whose  goodness  he  may 
enjoy.  Whence  also  it  is  to  be  hoped,  that  when 
subjects  have  attained  such  humility,  patience,  and 
charity,  as  suffice  to  enable  them  to  honour,  serve,  and 
bear  with  any  Superior,  however  bad,  not  losing  their 
goodwill,  but  rather  increasing  in  it,  with  the  resolution 
of  persevering  thus  even  to  death,  then  I  say  there  is 
ground  for  hope  that  our  Lord  will  be  moved  to  grant 
other  and  better  Superiors.  Not  so  if  the  contrary  be  the 
case,  that  is,  if  the  bad  are  seen  to  grow  worse  every  day 
as  regards  obedience. 

On  another  day,  also  during  the  same  octave  of  the 
Visitation,  as  I  wished  to  begin  as  usual  my  meditations 
on  the  mysteries  of  the  life  of  Christ  with  the  Annunci 
ation,  I  was  considering  how  the  Blessed  Virgin  offers 


In  Germany.  241 


her  whole  self  to  be  the  Redeemer's  handmaid,  and 
then  there  came  to  me  great  and  most  excellent  desires 
that  whatever  I  was  destined  to  do  I  might  first  rightly 
understand,  as  it  were,  by  the  grace  of  that  Annunciation. 
And  in  the  same  way  that  all  women  before  they  con 
ceive  might  even  then  direct  their  intention  that  their 
children  might  be  in  all  things  obedient  to  the  will  of 
the  Lord ;  and  in  the  same  way  of  corporal  fathers  and 
spiritual  fathers,  who  have  spiritual  sons  or  disciples  that 
obey  them.  I  desired  too  that  whatever  profit  I  may 
have  derived  from  my  past  good  works,  or  labours,  or 
studies,  should  be  directed  to  the  good  and  advantage  of 
this  nation  of  the  Germans. 

In  my  meditation  on  the  Visitation,  considering  the 
grace  of  the  Virgin  who  was  so  pleasing  to  the  Most 
High,  I  desired  that  as  she  was  able  to  obtain  the  sancti- 
fication  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  she  might  also  obtain 
for  me  the  sanctification  of  my  habitation,  my  body,  and 
of  whatever  I  had  done  of  good  works,  and  that  they 
might  be  pleasing  to  God,  and  if  there  was  anything 
impure,  that  it  might  be  cleansed  -away.  On  the  passage 
about  the  shepherds  coming  to  Jesus  at  His  birth,  I 
begged  the  grace  that  the  Lord  would  deign  to  raise  my 
heart  to  higher  things,  as  He  raised  the  shepherds ;  and 
to  humble  it  to  lowly  things,  as  He  humbled  the  Magi. 

The  same  day,  during  Mass,  I  was  considering  how 
God  is  compassionate  and  merciful,  and  how  all  things 
are  present  to  Him;  and  I  asked  Him  to  deign  to 
have  mercy  on  this  German  nation,  and  to  compas 
sionate  it  in  the  evils  which  I  foresaw  will  come  upon  it 
if  it  does  not  return  to  the  Gatholic  faith  and  to  its 
devotion  to  the  Roman  Church. 

On  the  octave  of  the  Visitation,6  I  was  consider 
ing  that  that  was  the  day  on  which  I  had  made  my 

6  July  9- 
Q 


242  In  Germany. 


profession.     I  felt  a  great  devotion  for  my  vows,  asking 
grace   from   God   the    Father   for    perseverance   and    a 
continual  increase  of  chastity  against  all  carnal  concu 
piscences.     To  the  Son   I   committed   the   care  of   my 
obedience    even   unto    death.      To   the    Holy  Ghost   I 
commended  my  poverty,  praying  that  He  may  always 
of    His   goodwill    keep   me    well    affectioned    towards 
poverty,  so  that  I  might  never  give  up  my  love  for  it. 
I  also  begged  that  my  three  powers  might  ever  increase 
in  knowledge,  memory,  and  desire,  conformably  to  the 
aforesaid  vows,  and  that  for  this  end  the  Father  would 
infuse  His  power  into  each  one  of  them,  taking  special 
care  of  my  memory,  that  the  Son  might  in  like  manner 
infuse  wisdom  and  light,  and  might  take  care  of  my  intel 
lect,  and  that  the  Holy  Ghost  might  infuse  His  gifts,  and 
take  care  of  my  will.  I  also  prayed  the  most  Holy  Trinity 
(One  in  Essence)  to  reside  in  my  heart,  diffusing  in  Its 
goodness  the  Personal  attributes  through  my  three  powers. 
And  my  Lady  I  begged  to  be  my  advocate  for  every 
thing,  seeing  that  she  is  such  a  true  example  of  chastity, 
obedience,  and  poverty,  having  flesh  the  most  pure,  and 
a  soul  the  most  undefiled,  and  a  most  holy  spirit,  each 
of  these   graces  being  wrought   out   in   her   with   such 
power  of  the  divine  virtue,  and  such  wisdom  and  good 
ness,  that  each  of  them  would  suffice  of  itself  to  keep 
the  other  two  in  its  purity;  that  is,  her  flesh  so  perfectly 
undefiled,  that  it  would  suffice  to  prevent  any  defilement 
from  actually  or  possibly  approaching  or  reaching  the 
soul  or  the  spirit,  and  in  like  manner  her  spirit  so  full  of 
gifts  that  it  would  suffice  to  detach  the  soul  in  such  a 
way  that  nothing  which  was  not  most  pure  could  enter 
either   it   or   the   flesh.       In   the   same   way,    her    soul 
possessed  such  great  perfection  as  sufficed  to  shed  lustre 
on  the  spirit  and  the  flesh. 


In  Germany.  243 

On  the  day  of  the  Division  of  the  Apostles,7  I  had 
certain  great  desires  that  a  feast  like  this  should  be 
celebrated  with  great  veneration  everywhere.  I  had 
also  in  my  prayer  great  consolations  and  desires  that 
the  Apostles  might  follow  Jesus  Christ  into  my  soul, 
since  they  knew  better  how  to  honour  Him,  minister 
to  Him,  and  understand  His  will,  conversations,  and 
words,  making  excuses  for  my  ignorance  in  the  like 
duties.  Several  recommendations  to  be  made  on  behalf 
of  my  dispersed  brethren  also  occurred  to  me. 

On  St.  Alexius'  day,8  certain  considerations  occurred 
to  my  mind  as  I  was  going  through  the  mysteries  of 
Christ  and  the  Three  Kings,  and  I  felt  a  great  desire  that 
the  pilgrimage  of  Dr.  John  Aragonio  should  represent  the 
pilgrimage  of  the  Three  Kings  coming  to  adore  Christ ; 
and  I  saw  that  it  was  very  fitting  they  should  be  visited 
in  their  relics,  as  having  so  much  honoured  our  Lord. 
Whence,  too,  certain  reflections  occurred  to  me  as  to  the 
pilgrimages  of  St.  Alexius,  St.  James,  St.  Roch,  of  Jesus 
Christ,  our  Lady  the  Blessed  Mary,  and  the  Apostles  ; 
and  from  all  I  felt  great  hope  that  such  pilgrimages 
would  be  very  acceptable  to  our  Lord  and  to  all  the 
saints,  especially  in  these  times  and  in  these  countries, 
where  now  so  few  pilgrimages  are  made,  on  account  of 
the  heresies  which  turn  men  away  from  valuing  and 
esteeming  works  of  this  kind,  which  are  of  so  great 
moment. 

On  a  certain  day,  when  the  Annunciation  of  the 
Blessed  Virgin  Mary  had  come  into  my  mind,  and  I 
was  desirous  of  having  some  visits  from  my  companions, 
I  came  to  know  how  much  it  pleased  God  in  that 
respect  to  give  me  a  certain  degree  of  sadness  and 
bitterness,  for  three  reasons — first,  that  I  might  know 
that  this  was  not  pleasing  to  God  and  His  saints,  on 

7  July  15.  8  July  17. 

Q  2 


244  In  Germany. 


account  of  my  imperfections  and  defects  ;  secondly,  that 
I  might  think  myself  very  far  from  the  Lord ;  thirdly, 
because  I  produced  so  little  fruit  in  the  service  of  His 
Divine  Majesty.  Hence  I  felt  a  vehement  desire  that 
the  Virgin  Mary  herself,  as  being  full  of  grace,  might 
render  me  pleasing  to  God ;  secondly,  that  seeing  that  she 
had  Christ  always  with  her,  she  might  unite  me  to  Him  ; 
thirdly,  since  she  is  blessed  amongst  all  women,  that  I 
might  not  deserve  to  be  accursed  amongst  men.  And 
since  the  fruit  of  her  womb  is  blessed,  that  she  might 
obtain  grace  for  me  to  produce  some  fruit  in  the  service 
of  Christ  our  Lord. 

On  a  certain  day,  namely,  when  Don  John  was  about 
to  make  his  pilgrimage  to  Cologne,  I  felt  certain  great 
desires  that  it  might  be  very  acceptable  to  God,  to  our 
Lady  His  Mother,  to  all  the  angels,  and  all  the  saints, 
but  especially  to  the  Three  Kings,  and  to  St.  Ursula  and 
her  companions ;  all  this  for  the  advantage  of  Don  John 
himself,  for  the  extinction  of  war,  for  peace  in  our  time, 
as  a  recompence  for  the  pilgrimages  which  the  Germans 
formerly  made  in  Spain,  visiting  St.  James  in  Galicia, 
our  Lady  of  Montserrat,  and  our  Lady  of  Guadaloupe, 
and  also  for  the  safety  of  his  journey  from  robbers  and 
all  other  dangers,  and  to  appease  our  Lord  and  His 
saints  for  the  insults  offered  them  for  some  years  past, 
in  the  contempt  shown  for  pilgrimages  and  other  pious 
and  holy  works  undertaken  in  the  spirit  of  penance  and 
for  the  honour  of  God  and  His  saints,  and  for  all  other 
good  works  whatsoever. 

At  the  same  time  an  inspiration  presented  itself  to  me 
to  do  every  kind  of  work  of  piety  purely  for  love  of  God 
•and  to  the  glory  of  His  saints  ;  and  I  felt  a  keen  pang 
of  sorrow  in  seeing  that  the  works  of  the  saints  are  not 
considered,  and  that  the  acts  of  the  life  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  are  not  pondered  and  meditated  on.  I 


In  Germany.  245 


grieved  especially  that  the  pains  and  sufferings  of  .the 
martyrs  are  not  more  deeply  considered  ;  and  here  I 
noted  four  points,  from  which  we  may  easily  perceive 
whether  a  work  was  well  done.  The  first  point  is  to 
consider  what  the  work  is ;  whether  it  is  for  the  glory  of 
God,  the  honour  of  the  saints,  or  the  advantage  of  one's 
own  soul,  or  for  the  benefit  of  our  neighbour.  The 
second  point  is,  why  it  is  done,  looking  to  the  end 
and  intention  of  the  doer.  The  third  is,  the  spirit  in 
which  it  is  done,  that  is,  whether  from  a  servile  or  a 
filial  fear  of  God,  from  love  of  God  or  our  neighbour, 
or  from  some  pious  and  proper  motive  that  stirs  the 
will ;  or,  in  fine,  from  the  dictate  of  right  reason  which 
the  will  obeys.  The  fourth  is,  the  order  in  which  it  is 
done,  that  is,  whether  it  is  offered  in  union  with  the 
merits  of  Christ,  for  He  it  is  Who  makes  our  good 
works  of  any  value. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  Praxedes,9  as  I  was  pondering  the 
mysteries  of  Christ's  life,  it  occurred  to  me  to  petition 
for  graces  from  God  through  the  merits  of  the  Annun 
ciation,  the  Incarnation,  and  the  Visitation,  and  to  pray 
God  to  make  known  to  me  the  practical  way  how  to 
praise  Him,  honour  Him,  know  Him  intimately,  love 
Him,  desire  Him,  and  serve  Him,  applying  to  this  all 
my  faculties,  and  this  in  a  way  that  was  conformable  to 
the  ordinations  and  practices  of  His  holy  Church,  and 
to  the  true  and  Catholic  teaching,  both  as  to  the  holy 
sacraments,  as  to  prayers  and  invocations  of  the  saints, 
and  as  to  good  works  in  remembrance  of  and  suffrage 
for  the  souls  in  purgatory. 

During  Mass  another  pious  desire  came  into  my  mind, 
namely,  to  do  all  my  future  good  works  under  the  direc 
tion  of  the  good  and  Holy  Spirit.  I  also  desired  that 
no  reform  should  be  made  in  accordance  with  the  desire 

9  July  21. 


246  In  Germany. 


of  heretics  ;  for,  although  they,  like  the  demons,  profess 
many  truths,  still  they  do  not  profess  them  in  the  spirit 
of  truth,  and  therefore  are  not  pleasing  to  God. 

Lastly,  after  Mass,  on  not  perceiving  within  myself 
that  delight  which  I  felt  before,  and  which  I  intensely 
longed  for,  the  thought  came  to  me  to  ask  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  to  cause  me  thoroughly  to  know  the  faults 
of  my  intellect,  memory,  will,  and  other  faculties,  and 
also  to  have  the  virtues  and  gifts  which  I  lack  and  of 
which  I  am  in  need. 

I  had  also  another  desire,  namely,  that  our  Lord 
would  deign  to  guide  me  according  to  His  own  good 
will  in  all  things  that,  with  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
I  sought  for  myself  and  others  ;  for  I  am  wont  to  say, 
write,  and  do,  much  without  that  fervour  of  spirit  with 
which  I  began.  For  example,  I  sometimes  give  utter 
ance,  in  a  calm  and  joyous  frame  of  mind  and  with 
external  signs  of  pleasure,  to  thoughts  which  I  had 
previously  conceived  in  a  penitential  mood  and  with  a 
kind  of  spiritual  groaning.  Hence  it  results  that  the 
hearer  gets  less  good  from  these  things,  because  they 
are  not  given  forth  in  the  same  good  spirit  as  that  by 
which  they  were  first  suggested  by  God.  I  prayed 
therefore  that  our  Lord  would  deign  to  give  me  the 
grace  of  having  the  same  fervour  in  the  progress  as 
in  the  beginning  of  the  work,  the  same  fervour  in 
speech  or  writing  as  in  the  conception  ;  and  this  will 
be  the  case  when  the  same  spirit  reigns  over  the  feeling 
and  thought,  the  word  and  work.  From  this  I  saw  a 
special  sense  and  meaning  in  that  passage,  Ductus  cst 
Jesus  in  dcsertum  a  Spiritu,  and  of  that  other,  Venit 
in  Spiritu  in  templum,  in  which  a  special  "'  spirit '  is 
intimated,  which  moves  a  person  to  act  or  to  speak, 
and  does  not  leave  him  in  his  own  human  and  proper 
feeling. 


In  Germany.  247 


On  the  feast  of  St.  James,10  in  the  introit  and  begin 
ning  of  the  Mass,  feeling  myself  enchained  by  my  faults 
and  imperfections,  as  I  said  the  verse,  Quare  tristis  incedo 
dum  affligit  me  inimicus,  this  sort  of  interpretation  seemed 
to  me  as  if  the  Spirit  said  to  me,  '  Why  are  you  sad  on 
account  of  your  troubles  and  the  suggestions  of  the 
< enemy?  You  would  have  reason  to  be  sad  if  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  the  Person  Who  afflicted  you,  or 
if  you  thought  this  affliction  came  to  you  because  you 
are  not  according  to  His  will.' 

The  same  day  a  thought  occurred  to  me  which  I  had 
often  had  before,  that  if  a  man  wishes  to  purify  his  soul 
more  and  more,  he  should  keep  his  first  intention  always 
directed  to  God,  and  in  this  consists  his  profit.  Hence 
we  must  not  fix  our  chief  attention  (as  I  have  often  done 
up  to  this)  on  the  remedies  of  troubles,  temptations,  and 
sadness.  For  he  who  sought  our  Lord  solely  and  chiefly 
in  order  to  be  free  from  temptations  and  sadness,  would 
not  seek  devotion  principally  for  itself,  but,  on  the  con 
trary,  would  seem  to  show  that  he  would  little  esteem  it, 
unless  he  were  suffering ;  and  this  is  seeking  love  from  a 
fear  of  imperfection  and  misery,  and  in  order  to  escape 
evil.  For  this  reason  God,  in  His  justice  and  mercy, 
allows  you  to  be  troubled  for  a  time,  because  your  affec 
tions  were  not  directed  to  Him ;  and  in  order  that  you. 
may  shake  off  tepidity  and  idleness,  He  sends  you  these 
pains  and  distresses  as  goads  and  spurs  to  urge  you  to 
walk  on  in  the  way  of  the  Lord  without  seeking  rest,  until 
you  repose  solely  in  God  Himself,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Nay,  even  though  you  were  not  to  feel  any  trouble  from 
the  enemy,  or  any  temptations,  or  evil  and  vain  feelings, 
or  imperfections,  you  ought  never  to  remain  inactive,  as 
do  the  tepid  and  idle,  and  all  those  who  care  only  not  to 
.fall  or  go  back.  For  not  to  make  progress  in  the  way  of 

10  July  25. 


248  In  Germany. 


the  Lord,  is  to  go  back.  Do  not  then  be  content  with 
merely  not  falling  or  going  down  the  hill,  but  '  lay  up  in 
your  heart  ascensions/  increase,  and  progress  towards 
interior  perfection ;  and  this  not  from  fear  of  any  fall, 
but  from  the  love  of  holiness.  Desire  and  thirst  after 
spiritual  things,  not  as  if  they  were  remedies  against  bad 
or  vain  feelings,  but  on  account  of  what  they  are  and 
contain  in  themselves.  Thus  you  will  at  length  attain 
to  the  perfect  love  of  God,  and  so  you  will  no  longer 
think  of  things  vain  and  idle,  nor  fear  sins,  which  are 
the  hindrances  which  impede  our  attaining  to  God  and 
being  intimately  united  with  and  at  rest  in  Him. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  Martha,11  the  hostess  of  Jesus  Christ, 
while  praying  for  the  soul  of  Lady  Tullia,  the  news  of 
whose  death  had  just  reached  me,  as  well  as  of  that  of 
Dona  Antonia,  who  had  been  an  attendant  of  the 
Marchioness  de  Pescara,  I  felt  great  devotion,  and  on 
reading  certain  prayers  which  are  commonly  said  in  the 
church  at  the  burial  of  the  dead,  I  felt  a  great  devorion 
towards  these  pious  recommendations.  These  prayers 
often  came  back  to  my  mind  with  a  deep  feeling  of  faith, 
and  I  desired  that  now,  even  more  than  ever  before,, 
they  should  be  recited  at  the  burial  of  Catholics,  even 
supposing  that  we  knew  for  certain  that  their  souls  were  in 
heaven.  For  I  felt  that  these  prayers  for  the  resurrection 
of  their  bodies  were  pleasing  to  God,  and  that  from  them 
we  might  gain  some  knowledge  of  that  supreme  wisdom 
by  which  the  wondrous  resurrection  is  to  be  wrought,  and 
the  dust  which  we  now  see  in  the  tomb  is  to  be  one 
day  so  beautiful  a  body,  to  the  glory  of  each  one  of  us. 
God  should  be  thanked  also,  Who  by  means  of  these 
relics,  so  humble  in  appearance,  has  often  wrought  great 
good.  By  these  and  such  like  thoughts,  Christians  may 
not  only  be  invited  to  remember  the  souls  of  the  dead, 

«  July  29. 


In  Germany.  249 


and  to  thank  .God  if  those  souls  are  now  in  heaven,  and 
to  pray  for  them  if  they  are  in  purgatory,  but  also  to 
increase  their  own  faith  in  the  article  of  the  Creed  on  the 
resurrection  of  the  body. 

On  the  day  of  the  Dedication  of  the  Portiuncula,1:i 
which  is  the  feast  of  our  Lady  of  the  Angels,  I  had  many 
spiritual  feelings,  and  felt  a  great  devotion  in  the  desire 
that  my  soul  and  body  might  now  be  dedicated  as  a 
living  temple  to  the  Lord,  to  receive  and  keep  within 
it  the  spiritual  gifts  of  God.  I  also  had  an  intense 
longing  that  everything  which  I  had  up  to  this  received 
from  God,  in  words,  acts,  or  holy  inspirations,  should  be 
noted  by  me  and  all  men  with  great  consideration  and 
attention.  Also,  that  all  which  had  been  established  in 
the  church  by  our  holy  and  pious  predecessors,  should 
be  considered  with  great  thankfulness  and  fear,  lest  it 
be  taken  from  us  as  unworthy  and  ungrateful. 

I  also  gave  thanks  to  God  during  Mass  for  all  the 
public  corrections  which  had  been  inflicted  or  permitted 
by  God  up  to  this  time  on  peoples  or  provinces  or  states 
or  persons,  with  the  view  of  an  amendment  of  life  ;  and 
I  grieved  that  such  matters  were  not  noticed,  as  for 
example,  plagues,  earthquakes,  wars,  floods,  droughts  and 
other  such  like  temporal  evils,  from  which  we  may  know 
the  most  high  and  dread  Judge,  Who  by  these  methods 
puts  before  us  the  memory  of  our  last  end,  desirous  that 
We  should  return  to  the  way  of  penance,  that  so  we  may 
recognize  the  gifts  of  His  goodness  and  mercy,  and 
brings  before  us  His  second  coming  when  He  sees  that 
we  have  lost  sight  of  His  first  and  lowly  coming.  He 
also  wishes  to  impress  us  with  the  Day  of  Judgment 
and  the  coming  of  the  reign  of  His  majesty  and  justice, 
seeing  the  Gospel  of  His  Kingdom  despised  and  rejected 
by  us. 

32  August  2. 


250  In  Germany. 


On  this  day  I  also  noted  how  I  ought  each  night  to 
make  the  sign  of  the  Cross  with  great  attention,  and  also 
the  versicles — Dignare  me  laudare  te,  Virgo  sacrata :  da 
mihi  virtutem  contra  hostes  tuos.  These  enemies  are  those 
of  faith,  humility,  chastity,  and  purity,  of  meekness  and 
charity.  Also — Procul  recedant  somnia  ;  Noctem  quietam 
et  finem  perfectum  ;  and  Hostem  repdlas  longius,  pacemqut. 
dones  protinus,  adding  a  Pater  noster,  an  Ave  Maria,  a 
Credo,  and  I  must  do  this  after  the  litanies  and  the 
examination  of  conscience,  and  after  having  set  in 
order  the  duties  which  I  have  to  do  on  the  following 
day.  In  the  morning,  on  rising  from  bed  and  before 
my  work,  I  must  say  these  same  versicles  or  others 
according  to  the  time,  as  well  as  Pater  noster,  Ave 
Maria,  and  the  Credo. 

The  same  day,  going  over  in  my  mind  the  text,  Omnc 
quod  calcaverit  pes  tuus,  tuum  erit,  considering  how  the 
holy  fathers  had  been  strangers  in  the  land  which  after 
wards  belonged  to  them,  I  conceived  in  spirit  a  great 
hope  to  be  able  to  arrive  at  the  spiritual  kingdom  and 
the  inheritance  of  the  Lord,  holding  myself  always  as  a 
stranger  on  the  earth. 

On  the  day  of  the  Invention  of  St.  Stephen13  the  proto- 
martyr,  while  thinking  of  the  bodies  which  were  found  at 
the  same  time  with  his,  I  began  with  a  pious  desire  to 
ask  Christ  our  Lord  to  grant  me  by  and  bye  to  see 
with  these  eyes  those  glorious  bodies,  whose  relics  I  had 
already  seen,  and  in  general  the  bodies  of  the  Blessed. 

While  saying  office,  I  felt  some  distractions  which  1 
wished  removed  from  me.  I  heard  within  me  a  voice 
which  said  that  I  should  have  tried  out  of  prayer  time 
to  discover  the  causes  of  distractions,  with  a  desire  of 
having  my  mind  in  peace  at  the  right  time,  if  I  wished 

13  August  3.  The  bodies  mentioned  are  those  of  SS.  Gamaliel, 
Nicodemus,  and  Abibon. 


In  Germany.  251 


during  prayer  time  to  enjoy  the  sweets  of  conversation 
with  God. 

In  the  same  way  during  Mass,  as  I  was  longing  to 
adore  devoutly  the  Body  of  Christ,  I  observed  that  I  did 
not  gain  that  grace  because  I  neglected  to  exercise  myself 
out  of  the  time  of  prayer  in  such  like  desires,  whence  it 
was  that  I  did  not  then,  deserve  any  grace,  like  a  person 
who  might  grieve  when  at  table  at  not  having  any  appe 
tite,  when  he  had  not  taken  the  trouble  before  dining  to 
get  an  appetite  ;  or  as  if  a  man  who  was  to  receive  some 
precious  liquor  from  another,  if  he  brought  at  a  fixed 
time  to  the  house  some  clean  vessels  to  hold  it,  were 
to  forget  to  wash  the  vessels,  and  so  not  be  ready  at  the 
time  of  the  distribution,  and  have  to  wait  for  another 
occasion  to  receive  the  precious  liquor. 

Once,  when  grieving  that  I  could  not  adore  Christ  as 
the  Three  Kings  did,  nor  weep  like  Magdalene,  nor  find 
grace  to  hear  the  many  words  of  consolation  which 
Christ  spoke  in  this  world,  I  felt  this  answer  within  me — 
that  I  had  not  prepared  my  soul  as  the  Three  Kings  did, 
who  had  abandoned  such  wealth,  and  left  their  country 
so  far  away,  and  all  their  goods,  and  had  brought  their 
offerings  themselves ;  and  thus  I  arrived  at  the  know 
ledge  of  the  dispositions  in  which  those  persons  were  to 
whom  Christ  granted  similar  graces ;  and  it  seemed  to 
me  that  I  should  have  rejoiced  very  much  if  I  heard 
those  words — Remittuntur  tibi  peccata,  and  also  those 
others — Hodie  mecum  en's  in  Paradiso,  not  considering 
how  far  I  am  from  the  state  of  soul  in  which  those 
persons  were ;  and  that  I  have  never  desired  to  come  to 
that  state  in  which  the  good  thief  on  the  cross  was,  or  the 
weeping  Magdalene  at  the  banquet ;  and  how  I  have  never 
felt  such  pain  at  my  spiritual  blindness,  as  the  blind 
man  possibly  felt  for  his  corporal  blindness,  although  1 
have  no  lack  of  faith  as  to  obtaining  the  grace  of  spiritual 


252  In  Germany. 


sight.  Thus  too  with  regard  to  my  other  spiritual  weak 
nesses,  I  compared  them  to  the  corresponding  corporal 
ills  which  Christ  our  Lord  (Who  takes  account  of  the 
toils  and  suffering  and  faith  of  those  who  suffer  in 
sympathy  with  Himself)  used  to  cure,  and  daily  cures, 
considering  the  wants  of  every  one  with  His  eyes  of 
kindness  and  His  Heart  full  of  charity. 

On  the  feast  of  our  Lady  of  the  Snow,14  I  saw  how  our 
Lord  had  kept  me  for  several  days  past  in  constant 
weariness  of  spirit,  because  I  do  not  find  devotion  in 
prayer  and  meditation.  He  stirred  up  also  within  me 
a  great  desire  to  recover  it,  and  it  appeared  to  me  to 
be  a  splendid  boon  not  to  have  to  experience  again  the 
disgusts  and  troubles  which  disappointed  my  desire  of 
finding  devotion  in  my  soul  towards  my  God  and  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  And  in  this  I  saw  that  I  had  received 
grace  better  to  govern  my  soul,  so  that  my  heart's  first 
wishes  and  cares  might  be  centred  in  what  is  of  chief 
and  primary  importance — that  is,  seeking  and  finding 
God  by  means  of  my  spiritual  exercises,  which  are  the 
way  to  Him  :  I  mean  prayer,  meditation,  and,  above  all, 
the  Mass. 

On  the  feast  of  the  Transfiguration,15  feeling  great  sad 
ness  at  not  having  experienced  any  devotion,  I  consoled 
myself  in  the  knowledge  that  this  trouble  which  had  lasted 
for  some  days,  had  not  been  able  to  distract  me  or  drive 
me  away  from  God.  For  I  found  myself  full  of  affection 
and  anxiety  to  find  God  again,  and  yet  I  had  allowed 
myself  to  be  carred  away  by  some  other  desire  or  grief, 
longing  for  the  edification  of  my  neighbour,  or  the  increase 
of  God's  worship  among  others.  Or,  when  I  was  grieving 
over  my  temptations  or  imperfections,  grief  of  this  sort 
had  taken  away  the  better  sorrow  which  came  from  the 
longing  after  God.  On  that  day,  then,  I  saw  clearly  that 

14  August  5.  15  August  6. 


In  Germany.  253 


God  conferred  on  me  more  abundant  favours  in  propor 
tion  as  my  griefs  had  been  caused  by  desires  and  longings 
after  Him,  which  could  not  be  cancelled  by  any  grief  of 
an  inferior  kind. 

Here,  too,  I  observed  another  grace  to  my  soul,  which 
ought  to  be  valued  much,  namely,  that  I  had  never  felt 
so  much  lifted  above  all  rejoicings  or  sorrows  which  from 
time  to  time  visited  me  from  the  temporal  profit  or  loss 
of  souls  :  I  mean  profit  which  depended  on  me.  I  had 
been  wont  to  rejoice  or  grieve  very  much  in  this  matter, 
according  as  things  went  well  or  ill.  But  it  now  seemed 
to  me  that  no  good  fortune  in  any  matter  could  console 
me  unless  our  Lord  gave  me  an  overflowing  devotion  to 
Himself  and  the  saints,  and  that  no  sorrow  could  enter 
my  soul  that  arose  only  from  the  fewness  of  the  occupa 
tions  offered  me  in  working  for  Him. 

Blessed  be  the  Lord,  Who  has  so  many  ways  of 
leading  us  to  perfection,  according  to  the  many  kinds 
of  fear,  of  grief  and  hatred,  which  reign  over  these  lower 
creatures  in  which  there  is  no  peace.  And  yet  they 
are  the  means  of  man's  rising  to  the  love  of  God,  and 
•enjoying  Him.  For  if  a  man's  union  with  God  has 
begun  by  the  way  of  fear,  he  can  always  return  to  it 
by  the  way  of  love.  But  if  it  has  begun  by  the  way  of 
pure  love,  he  can  always  go  on  increasing  therein,  and 
penetrating  still  more  deeply  the  things  of  God,  and  at 
the  same  time  he  can  come  down  from  Him  more 
.securely  in  order  to  busy  himself  with  the  salvation  of 
his  neighbour. 

May  God  grant  such  love  to  me  and  to  all  my 
brothers,  yea,  and  to  all  men.  For  I  confess  that  I  am 
as  yet  far  from  this  charity  of  the  perfect ;  nevertheless,  I 
believe  I  am  not  altogether  out  of  all  charity,  as  I  am 
not  altogether  out  of  the  grace  of  Christ.  And  here  we 
must  note  that  Christ  is  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life. 


254  In  Germany. 


Now  there  are  three  ways  :  the  purgative,  the  illuminative, 
and  the  perfective.  In  the  first  are  beginners,  in  the 
second  proficients,  in  the  third  the  perfect.  Although 
all  may  be  in  charity,  still  to  be  in  charity  and  to  live 
and  abide  in  charity  are  different  things.  Beginners  have 
charity,  inasmuch  as  they  know  and  hate  sin.  Proficients 
have  charity,  inasmuch  as  they  act  from  desire  of 
charity,  in  which  they  endeavour  every  day  to  increase. 
The  perfect  have  charity,  inasmuch  as  their  only  motive 
for  action  is  the  love  of  God,  and  they  seek  His  most 
holy  will  in  everything.  In  beginners,  their  charity 
produces  the  result  that  they  detest  and  lay  aside  their 
sins  ;  in  proficients,  that  they  give  themselves  to  the 
acquisition  of  the  virtues  that  they  desire  to  have ;  in  the 
perfect,  that  they  grow  to  the  knowledge  and  close  love  of 
God,  directing  thereto  all  their  thoughts,  affections,  and 
actions.  And  as  the  beginners  who  hate  sin  endeavour 
to  lay  aside  the  old  man,  so  also  the  proficients  who 
desire  virtue,  strive  to  put  on  the  new  man  and  adorn 
him  ever  more  and  more,  while  the  perfect  aim  at  appear 
ing  clothed  on  all  sides  with  the  marriage  garment.  And 
we  should  also  consider  that  in  each  of  these  three  degrees 
there  are  three  orders,  that  is,  in  each  there  is  beginning, 
middle,  and  end,  so  that  we  may  say  that  among  the 
perfect  there  are  beginners  and  proficients,  and  others 
who  are  altogether  perfect. 

On  the  day  on  which  I  celebrated  the  feast  of  the 
Patriarch  St.  Dominic,17  while  I  was  communicating  in  the 
Mass,  I  felt  a  great  desire  that  Jesus  Christ  might  enter 
my  heart  and  dwell  in  the  midst  thereof,  and  that  at  the 
same  time  all  my  vicious  propensities  might  melt  away 
as  the  wax  before  the  fire.  Before  Mass  I  was  reflecting 
as  usual  on  the  mysteries  of  the  life  of  Christ,  and  I 
asked  through  the  intercession  of  St.  Dominic  that  God 

16  August  4  (it  seems  to  have  been  translated). 


In  Germany.  255 


would  give  me  grace  to  relish  and  understand  each 
mystery  in  the  way  in  which  that  great  saint  relished  and 
understood  the  same  when  he  was  alive. 

The  same  day  I  was  going  along  the  street,  and  I 
found  no  joy  in  the  things  which  I  saw  there,  but  rather 
sadness,  distractions,  and  temptations  to  vanity  and  evil 
thoughts,  and  then  I  had  this  answer  made  to  me 
interiorly — You  ought  not  to  be  displeased  because  you 
do  not  find  peace  in  vain  things,  you  should  rather 
rejoice  thereat,  and  give  thanks  for  this  to  God.  You 
should  rather  be  sorry  because  you  do  not  find  conso 
lation  in  prayer,  in  holy  exercises  and  in  heavenly 
conversation.  Many  would  not  care  for  these  things, 
if  they  found  peace  in  the  things  of  this  world.  Raise 
therefore  the  eyes  and  ears  of  your  mind,  and  all  your 
interior  senses,  to  heavenly  things,  and  then  you  will 
never  hear  or  see  anything  that  does  not  edify  and 
console  you.  Here  on  earth  if  thou  wast  to  desire,  like 
a  man  at  full  liberty,  to  see  everything  that  might  meet 
thee,  thou  wouldst  see  nothing  but  things  pleasing  to  the 
senses,  laughable  or  shameful ;  thou  wouldst  hear  nothing 
but  vain  and  scandalous  words,  nothing,  in  short,  serious 
or  grave,  nothing  that  can  conduce  to  the  praise  of  God. 
Let  him  then  who  is  withdrawn  from  these  things,  and 
who  is  moved  to  seek  those  things  that  are  true  and 
eternal,  thank  God  for  that  He  wills  not  that  he  should 
lose  his  time  in  thoughts  so  low. 

On  the  feast  of  SS.  Cyriacus,  Largus,  and  Smaragdus,17 
I  desired  that  our  Lord  would  grant  me  by  the  merits  of 
His  blessed  life,  Passion,  and  glory,  that  my  Mass  might 
as  efficaciously  assist  the  souls  of  purgatory,  as  if  I 
offered  it  with  all  the  desires,  prayers,  sighs,  anguish,  and 
thanksgivings  which  are  felt  or  made  by  each  soul  in 
purgatory  which  cannot  assist  itself.  I  desired  also  that 

17  August  8. 


256  In  Germany. 


our  Lord  would  give  me  those  same  feelings  which  the 
souls  in  purgatory  have  as  to  their  own  sins  and  the 
benefits  which  they  have  received  from  God.  And  as  I 
did  not  deserve  such  grace,  I  prayed  that  my  deficiency 
might  be  supplied  by  the  divine  sacrifice  and  by  the 
intercession  of  these  glorious  saints. 

On  the  same  day  it  came  to  my  mind  that  it  would 
be  a  thing  very  helpful  to  the  souls  in  purgatory,  if  when 
I  prayed  for  them  I  were  to  represent  and  offer  to  Christ 
that  charity  and  compassion  with  which  He  said,  Hodic 
mecum  en's  in  Paradiso.  For  it  may  be  said  in  general 
that  a  faithful  soul  that  is  in  purgatory  is  in  greater 
necessity  than  the  thief  to  whom  those  words  of  Christ 
on  the  Cross  were  said.  It  also  occurred  to  me  that 
those  souls  might  repeat  the  seven  words  of  Christ  on 
the  Cross,  praying,  that  is,  for  their  enemies  whom  they 
have  left  behind  in  the  world,  and  for  their  friends  and 
debtors,  grieving  over  the  sins  and  ills  which  they 
commit ;  or  again,  showing  their  heartfelt  charity  to 
them,  and  especially  to  those  who  are  most  united  to 
them  in  blood,  for  whose  prosperity  and  salvation  they 
would  do  all  kinds  of  good  if  they  could.  And  in  the 
same  way  these  holy  souls  would  desire  to  be  able  to 
say,  Consummatum  est,  that  is,  to  be  delivered  from  those 
torments  which  can  never  be  described,  and  go  forth 
thence  to  the  glory  of  heaven. 

On  the  vigil  of  St.  Laurence,18  which  is  the  feast  of 
St.  Romanus,  martyr,  it  came  into  my  mind  before  Mass 
to  ask  for  grace  against  all  distraction,  so  that  I  might  be 
master  and  ruler  of  all  my  passions,  for  I  felt  myself  then 
much  distracted.  I  found  good  help  in  reflecting  on 
those  sufferings  which  our  Lord  underwent  when  His 
Soul  was  in  agony,  and  when  He  was  on  the  Cross, 
saying,  Deus  metis,  Deus  metis,  ut  quid  dercliquisti  me  ?  and 
18  August  9. 


In  Germany.  257 


especially  in  making  my  petition,  through  the  most  holy 
grace  of  Christ  which  was  in  the  hypostatic  union.  In 
the  Mass  I  desired  to  communicate  with  great  devotion, 
and  I  besought  our  Lord  to  deign  to  receive  me  a  sinner 
and  to  pardon  me  my  sins.  After  Mass,  I  went  home 
through  a  certain  street,  and  there  I  felt  great  devotion 
as  to  what  had  happened  to  me,  and  each  part  of  the 
Mass  came  back  to  my  mind.  I  prayed  our  Lord  that 
as  it  often  happened  to  me  that  my  memory  was  dis 
tracted  about  various  business,  thoughts,  or  considerations 
of  matters  which  were  not  immediately  directed  to  God, 
He  would  grant  me  that  in  the  time  of  meditation  I 
might  have  my  affections  so  thoroughly  in  order  according 
to  true  charity,  that  I  might  not  feel  any  disturbance  in 
mind,  understanding,  or  will.  This  grace  I  hoped  to 
obtain,  because  those  affections  of  which  I  speak  were 
not  altogether  disordered,  but  only  wanting  in  perfection, 
inasmuch  as  they  did  not  unite  me  to  God  with  all  my 
heart  and  soul  and  strength.  But  to  have  them  in  that 
higher  state,  that  it  is  in  which  consists  true  charity,  and 
consequently  true  peace  and  tranquillity  of  soul,  never 
disturbed  either  in  the  memory,  the  understanding,  or 
the  will.  But  that  supreme  perfection  belongs  properly 
only  to  that  home  of  the  Blessed  to  which  we  now  aspire. 
On  that  same  vigil  of  St.  Laurence,  after  compline, 
Don  John  Aragonio  came  back  from  his  pilgrimage  to 
Cologne.  The  Lord  gave  me  such  consolation  thereat 
as  I  had  never  felt  before,  and  moreover,  He  gave  me 
grace  not  to  be  above  measure  excited  in  spirit  by  the 
joy  of  his  return  and  the  desire  I  felt  to  converse  with 
him,  as  at  other  times  had  happened  to  me  with  some 
damage  to  devotion  and  fervour  in  meditation.  On  this 
account  I  gave  many  thanks  to  the  most  Holy  Trinity, 
the  Blessed  Virgin,  the  Three  holy  Kings,  and  St.  Ursula, 
praying  for  all  those  people  who  had  done  any  kindness 


258  In  Germany. 


to  Don  John,  and  also  for  all  those  who  had  been  cause 
of  his  suffering  any  ill. 

On  St.  Laurence's  day,19  as  I  was  meditating  in  the 
morning  on  the  holy  mysteries,  according  to  the  matter 
before  me,  I  felt  an  indescribable  desire  that  the  Mass 
might  supply  and  avail  for  all  the  labour  that  it  would 
cost  me  to  go  over  the  several  calendars  of  particular 
dioceses,  in  order  specially  to  honour  the  saints  that  are 
contained  therein.  I  also  felt  the  strongest  faith  that 
could  be  as  to  the  great  aid  which  our  Lord  would  never 
fail  to  give  to  me  and  to  the  Society  by  means  of  His 
saints.  If  a  single  saint  can  do  much  more  towards  the 
bringing  back  of  the  heretics  to  the  Christian  faith  and 
the  practice  of  good  works  than  an  Emperor  can  do,  how 
much  more  will  all  the  saints  together  be  able  to  do  to 
help  me  and  the  Society  ! 

I  experienced  great  devotion  on  reciting  that  verse 
which  says — Adjuva  me  et  salmis  ero,  et  meditabor  in 
jnstificationibus  tuis.  At  the  Pater  noster  in  the  Mass, 
when  I  said,  Panetn  nostrum  quotidianum  da  nobis  ho  die, 
I  felt  an  interior  desire  that  the  Heavenly  Father  might 
make  me  feel  how  it  is  that  He  gives  bread  both  for  the 
soul  and  for  the  body,  and  I  said  within  myself,  Lord, 
let  me  feel  how  it  is  that  'Thou  givest  to  me  that  Bread 
which  is  Thine  own  Son. 

On  the  feast  of  SS.  Tiburtius  and  Susanna,20  I  was 
considering  how  St.  Tiburtius  reproved  with  so  much 
fervour  of  spirit  Fabian  the  judge,  because  he  took 
delight  in  carnal  things,  and  gloried  in  them  alone,  and 
desired  so  much  to  be  pleasing  to  others,  and  especially 
to  women ;  and  there  came  to  me  a  desire  to  pray  this, 
saint  to  obtain  for  me  the  grace  never  to  desire  to  please 
myself  or  to  glory  in  myself,  and  also  not  to  desire  to 
please  others,  but  only  God,  before  Whom  and  in  Whose 

19  August  10.  co  August  ii. 


In  Germany.  259 


sight  we  ought  to  stand  in  such  guise  as  worthily  to 
please  Him  only  and  His  saints. 

When  I  was  making  my  memento  before  Mass,  I 
thought  of  all  those  persons  who  had  been  kind  to 
Don  John  Aragonio  on  his  journey,  and  I  devoutly 
prayed  our  Lord  that  with  His  liberality  and  mercy 
He  would  recompense  them  for  the  good  which  they 
had  done,  both  in  giving  him  alms  and  in  showing  him 
his  way,  and  also  in  welcoming  him  to  their  houses  and 
treating  him  with  charity.  And  I  did  not  omit  to  pray 
for  those  also  who  had  behaved  to  him  in  a  different 
way,  since  our  good  Lord  Jesus  is  wont  often  to  permit 
such  things,  in  order  to  try  the  humility  and  patience  of 
His  servants,  and  to  rouse  them  to  pray  for  those  who 
have  treated  them  ill. 

As  I  was  praying  in  a  certain  oratory  dedicated  to 
St.  John,  I  felt  a  desire  that  everything  that  I  asked  for 
the  benefit  of  that  house  and  of  the  persons  who  dwelt 
in  it,  might,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  happen  also  to  all  the 
houses  and  other  people  in  the  city.  May  our  Lord  in 
His  goodness  grant  this,  as  if  I  were  dwelling  in  each 
one  of  them. 

On  the  same  day,  I  felt  a  great  movement  of  devotion, 
to  ask  that  when  I  begged  any  grace  from  God  for 
myself,  or  for  the  living,  or  for  the  dead,  His  Divine 
Majesty  might  deign  to  grant  it  me,  as  if  our  Blessed 
Redeemer  Himself  were  to  ask  it,  or  the  Blessed  Virgin 
.Mary,  or  the  saint  whose  feast  I  that  day  celebrated. 
This  kindled  my  devotion  to  say  Mass,  since  Mass  is  of 
so  great  value  in  itself,  on  account  of  the  victim  and 
sacrifice  that  are  offered  therein,  that  there  is  nothing 
that  we  can  ask,  if  it  be  just,  which  may  not  be  granted 
to  us  by  virtue  of  that  same  sacrifice  made  upon  the 
Cross,  especially  if  we  have  great  confidence  in  our 
Lord. 

R    2 


260  In  Germany. 


On  the  feast  of  St.  Clare,21  while  I  was  saying  Mass  I 
had  a  distraction  from  a  desire  to  give  edification  to  the 
people  present,  and  to  feel  devotion  in  order  that  I  might 
do  so  ;  and  I  did  not  know  that  it  was  a  temptation,  and 
even  if  I  had  known  it  I  did  not  then  know  how  to  get 
rid  of  that  desire,  as  it  has  since  been  granted  me  to 
know,  His  Divine  Majesty  granting  me  light  to  seek 
always  purely  the  glory  of  God,  and  not  to  feel  any 
more  such  imperfections. 

On  the  Sunday  within  the  octave  of  St.  Laurence,22  I 
had  certain  remarkable  spiritual  feelings  as  I  was  saying 
the  matins  of  the  Sunday,  and  so  I  prayed  most  earnestly 
to  the  most  Holy  Trinity  that,  for  the  sake  of  the  glory 
of  the  Resurrection,  I  might  have  special  grace  given  to 
me  in  reciting  all  the  Sunday  offices,  to  such  a  degree 
that  the  help  which  I  had  received  on  that  day  might 
be  preserved  to  me  for  all  the  other  orifices  during  the 
week.  In  the  same  way  I  prayed  at  the  Mass. 

The  same  day  I  prayed  our  Lord,  with  great  confi 
dence,  that  for  His  bounty  and  patience  He  would 
supply  all  my  defects,  delivering  me  from  all  confusion 
that  I  might  have  deserved  by  my  negligence,  and  not 
allowing  me  to  suffer  such  except  in  such  degree  as  was 
for  the  glory  of  His  Divine  Majesty  and  for  the  good  of 
my  neighbours.  Then  I  prayed  that  the  evil  spirits 
might  never,  because  of  me,  have  any  power  over  any 
who  might  see  or  feel  my  defects.  And  here  take 
note,  my  soul,  how  many  manifest  defects  thou  hast 
committed,  in  so  many  places,  and  in  the  presence  of 
so  many  men ;  which  defects  of  thine  have  neverthe 
less  not  been  remarked  or  considered  as  in  rigour  and 
justice  they  deserved.  And  therefore  thou  art  under 
great  obligations  to  thy  Lord,  Who,  out  of  His  own 
goodness,  and  by  the  prayers  of  His  saints,  and  the 

21  August  12.  22  August  13  (1542). 


In  Germany.  261 


ministry  of  His  holy  angels,  does  not  permit  thy 
actions  to  be  looked  into  or  judged  hardly,  especially 
when  they  are  so  manifest.  And  how  many  things 
thou  hast  done  and  said  which  might  and  ought  to 
have  been  taken  amiss,  and  yet  nevertheless  no  notice 
has  been  taken  nor  memory  preserved  thereof ! 

As  the  eve  of  our  Lady's  feast  in  August23  was 
approaching,  and  I  was  saying  the  office  of  St.  Hippolytus 
and  his  companions,  and  was  reading  about  St.Concordia, 
whose  body  was  thrown  into  the  sewer  and  then  taken 
from  thence  by  Irenaeus,  to  the  great  consolation  of 
St.  Justinus,  I  felt  great  compunction  of  spirit  at  the 
thought  that  in  doing  so  lowly  an  office  he  was  perform 
ing  an  action  so  holy  and  pleasing  to  God.  And  on  this 
I  made  an  earnest  prayer  to  the  Blessed  Mother  of  our 
Lord,  to  obtain  for  me  grace  to  know  and  be  able  to 
serve  her  Son  with  a  perfect  will  in  my  office  as  priest, 
since  he  in  the  discharge  of  his  humble  office  had  found 
an  opportunity  of  doing  a  thing  of  so  much  moment  in 
the  service  of  His  Divine  Majesty.  I  prayed,  likewise, 
for  men  of  all  conditions,  that  our  Lord  might  give  them 
grace  that  in  the  work  that  they  do  they  may  be  able  to 
do  something  for  the  praise  of  His  Divine  Majesty,  the 
salvation  of  their  souls,  and  the  good  of  their  neighbours, 
living  and  dead. 

As  I  was  saying  lauds  after  matins,  and  when  I  came  to 
the  psalms  Benedicite  and  Laudate,  I  felt  in  myself  great 
confusion,  considering  that  all  the  creatures  serve  man 
effectually,  to  his  comfort,  his  use,  his  healing,  or  the 
supply  of  his  necessities,  as  the  sun  giving  him  light,  the 
water  refreshment,  the  fire  warmth,  and  so  on  with  the 
rest,  and  that  I,  on  the  other  hand,  was  doing  no  good 
to  the  honour  and  glory  of  Him  Who  had  created  all 
things  for  man.  I  thought  over  the  many  excellent  and 

23  August  13. 


262  In  Germany. 


noble  results  which  the  Blessed  Virgin  saw  in  the  Nativity, 
Annunciation,  Visitation,  and  Assumption  ;  as  for  instance, 
in  the  Nativity  of  her  Son  she  saw  the  shepherds  raised  to 
so  great  a  knowledge  of  divine  things,  and  the  kings  so 
deeply  humbled,  and  upon  this  I  prayed  her  to  obtain  for 
me  grace  to  produce  some  fruit,  as  her  loving  servant. 
And  it  seemed  to  me  that  at  that  moment  I  felt  within 
me  the  affection  of  one  who  desires  to  serve  some  great 
prince,  and  wild  begins  by  serving  other  servants  of  his 
Court,  and  so  seeks  to  make  himself  known  to  the  prince 
as  worthy  to  serve  him. 

At  the  first  vespers  of  our  Lady's  Assumption,  I  was  in 
the  Church  of  St.  Mary  at  Spires,  and  all  the  ceremonies, 
lights,  organs,  chants,  relics,  and  decorations  moved  me  to 
an  extent  of  devotion  that  I  do  not  know  how  to  describe. 
And  in  that  spirit  I  blessed  the  man  who  had  lighted  the 
candles,  the  man  who  had  left  revenue  for  that  purpose, 
the  organs  also  and  the  organists,  the  music  and  the 
singers,  the  relics  and  those  who  had  discovered  them 
and  placed  them  in  that  place,  and  also  the  vestments 
and  decorations  which  I  saw  there.  And  then  I  seemed 
to  feel  that  God  had  great  bounty  and  mercy  for  all  those 
who  apply  some  part  of  what  is  theirs  to  His  external 
worship  and  that  of  the  saints,  whether  it  is  by  giving  of 
their  riches,  or  working  with  their  hands,  or  in  any  other 
manner. 

When  the  feast  of  the  Assumption  came,  and  as  I 
recited  matins  and  said  Mass,  I  felt  that  I  was  altogether 
as  it  were,  in  myself,  that  is,  without  any  motion  of  the 
spirit,  good  or  bad,  and  this  made  me  know  my  own 
frailty,  being  left  alone  by  our  Lord.  And  then  I 
prayed  Him  to  give  me  grace  to  grow  daily,  and  become 
a  vessel  of  larger  capacity  and  greater  purity,  always  well 
prepared  to  receive  good  inspirations  only.  And  I  remem 
bered  that  almost  always  on  the  most  solemn  feasts  I 


In  Germany.  263 


found  myself  without  devotion,  and  also  how  the  interior 
moving  of  the  spirit  is  wont  to  change  a  man  from  his 
own  being  into  another  that  is  better,  and  so  it  seemed 
to  me  a  great  gift  of  God  that  a  man  should  often  find 
himself  left  in  his  own  life,  as  it  were,  with  the  grace  that 
is  essential  to  him,  in  order  that  he  may  learn  better  how 
to  discern  his  own  spirit,  which  belongs  to  his  common 
mode  of  acting,  from  that  which  comes  from  without, 
good  or  bad,  and  to  understand  the  ups  and  downs  that 
belong  to  each  state,  as  well  as  the  increase  and  decrease 
that  may  happen  in  whatever  state  he  may  be — as,  for 
example,  in  one  state  we  may  say,  with  a  good  meaning 
to  the  words,  not  excluding  God's  grace,  Vivo  ego,  et  jam 
ego — '  I  live,  it  is  I ; '  in  the  second,  Vivo  ego,  et  jam  11011 
ego,  vivit  vero  in  me  Christus — *  I  live,  but  it  is  not  I  that 
live,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me  ;'  and  in  the  third,  Vivo  ego, 
jam  11011  ego,  vivit  vero  in  me  peccatum  aut  mains  spiritus — 
'I  live,  but  it  is  not  I,  but  sin  or  the  evil  spirit  liveth 
in  me.' 

After  Mass,  as  I  was  giving  thanks  to  God  and  to  the 
Blessed  Virgin,  I  considered  the  singular  perfection  which 
she  possessed  in  her  own  nature,  and  that  though  she  was 
always  full  of  grace,  and  our  Lord  was  always  with  her, 
and  she  was  always  blessed  above  all  women,  never 
theless  it  was  possible,  as  I  think,  that  she  should  not 
always  have  the  same  amount  of  sensible  consolation  and 
the  same  sensible  fervour  of  the  spirit,  in  order  that  there 
might  be  room  in  her  for  more  perfect  humility,  and 
greater  hunger  and  thirst,  and  desire  to  be  pleasing  to  the 
Most  High,  and  fear  lest  she  might  not  always  be  as 
useful  as  God  willed.  And  I  prayed  her  to  obtain  for 
me  grace  that  I  might  be  so  reformed  and  strengthened, 
that  when  it  happened  to  me  that  the  actual  motion 
and  cooperation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  were  withdrawn  from 
me,  I  might  not  become  disordered  or  unmindful  of  the 


2  64  In  Germany. 


gifts  of  God,  and  so  become  tepid  and  negligent  in  the 
spiritual  life.  May  it  please  the  goodness  of  God  that  I 
may  so  cooperate  with  His  essential  grace  that  I  may 
become  every  day  more  strong,  more  wise,  and  better  in 
the  work  which  I  do,  and  that  in  my  soul  and  body  and 
spirit  there  may  be  such  habits  of  good,  that  when  the 
fervour  which  I  ordinarily  feel  in  my  actions  fails  me,  I 
may  still  be  able  ever  to  grow  in  God's  grace  ! 

The  day  after  the  Assumption  I  made  commemoration 
of  St.  Roch,  and  resolved  to  do  so  every  year,  because  so 
it  is  done  in  Paris. 

In  the  Mass  I  had  great  devotion  and  feeling  on  those 
words,  Gloria  in  excelsis  Deo,  and  those  others,  Mariam 
sanctificans,  Mariam  gubernans,  Mariam  coronans,  and  I 
prayed  our  Blessed  Lady  with  great  faith  and  hope  to 
obtain  for  me,  first,  the  grace  of  chastity  and  purity  both 
of  body  and  spirit,  then  the  grace  to  be  able  to  regulate 
and  order  well  my  life  in  the  service  of  her  Son,  and 
lastly,  peace  in  all  things,  so  as  to  acquire  virtue  in  this 
world  and  glory  in  the  next. 

I  was  afterwards  before  the  Blessed  Sacrament,  and 
wishing  to  pay  to  it  devout  adoration,  I  remembered  how 
the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary  is  placed  above  all  the  choirs, 
of  the  angels,  and  that  she  it  is  who  pays  more  reverence 
to  the  Divine  Majesty  than  all  other  creatures,  and  that 
her  favour  and  protection  over  men  is  much  greater  than 
that  of  the  angels  and  seraphim.  For  she  not  only  is- 
Queen  over  all  creatures,  but  also  more  than  all  she 
magnifies,  praises,  and  serves  her  Son  and  the  most 
Holy  Trinity  as  Queen,  Virgin  Mother,  and  advocate  for 
the  renewal  of  all  creatures  who  as  yet  have  not  arrived 
at  the  knowledge  of  their  own  perfection,  essential  and 
accidental,  and  so  she  procures  daily  new  gifts  of  grace 
to  men  on  earth,  and  fresh  gifts  of  accidental  glory  to  the 
Blessed. 


In  Germany.  265 


On  the  feast  of  St.  Bernard,24  I  had  infinite  devotion 
and  many  tears  at  Mass,  as  I  considered  the  diminution 
of  the  honour  due  to  the  most  Holy  Sacrament  which  is 
the  results  of  the  tepid  lives  of  Christians,  and  of  the 
loss  which  is  caused  by  men  who  leave  the  Church.  I 
considered  also  the  loss  that  befalls  the  souls  in  purgatory 
on  account  of  these  false  opinions,  and  also  the  irreve 
rence  which  is  done  to  prelates  and  to  the  things  of  God, 
and  also  the  many  faults  of  evil  speaking  against  men's 
neighbours  which  prevail,  and  how  no  one  can  bear 
another  unless  he  does  as  he  himself  does. 

The  same  day  I  felt  a  great  devotion  in  offering  myself 
to  St.  Bernard,  praying  him  to  be  willing  to  accept  me 
for  his  disciple,  because  he  himself  was  so  entirely 
pleasing  to  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  Louis,25  bishop  and  confessor,  I  had 
much  devotion,  thinking  that  I  would  apply  my  Mass, 
among  other  things,  for  all  my  negligences  committed  as 
to  examining  and  attentively  noting  down  the  benefits 
which  are  offered  to  me  every  day  by  means  of  the  works 
of  God,  and  His  words  interior  and  exterior,  and  also  by 
means  of  His  own  Body,  which  every  day  I  have  in  my 
hands  and  before  my  eyes.  From  this  there  rose  in  me 
a  great  clearness  of  understanding,  and  a  great  desire 
which  I  ought  always  to  retain  in  my  mind,  as  to  that 
verse,  Revela  oculos  meos,  et  considerabo  mirabilia  de  legc 
tua. 

In  like  manner,  I  had  often  a  certain  feeling  of  marvel 
which  occurred  to  me  as  to  the  changes  which  follow 
in  a  mind  which  at  one  time  is  disconsolate  and  at 
another  joyful,  considering  at  the  first  the  reality  of  its 
own  defects,  and  at  the  other  the  mercy  of  our  Lord, 
and  on  this  subject  an  interpretation  came  into  my  mind 
of  that  verse  of  the  offertory,  Veritas  mea  et  misericordia 

24  August  20.  25  August  19. 


266  In  Germany. 


mea  cum  ipso,  that  is,  that  our  Lord  at  one  time  sets  forth 
His  truthfulness,  showing  justice  ;  at  another,  His  mercy, 
giving  signs  of  peace ;  and  in  these  two  ways  He  exercises 
His  servants. 

On  the  octave  of  the  Assumption,26  I  received  an 
excellent  light  as  to  the  Passion  of  our  Lord,  which  made 
me  recover  my  devotion  in  the  office  and  in  my  prayers. 
It  was  chiefly  about  these  words,  Tristis  cst  antma  mea 
usque  ad  mortem.  Transcat  a  me  calix  iste.  Deus  meus, 
Deus  metis,  ut  quid  me  dereliquisti  ?  Midler  ecce  Filius 
tuus!  and  Pater,  in  manus  tuas  commendo  spiritum  meum, 
understanding  all  with  relation  to  the  Assumption,  that 
it  was  by  means  of  the  compassion  of  the  Blessed  Virgin 
which  she  had  for  the  Passion  of  her  Son  (that  Passion 
being  the  direct  and  perfect  road  to  go  to  heaven  by), 
that  she  was  raised  above  all  the  choirs  of  angels.  And 
so  it  appeared  to  me  a  proper  means  for  contemplating 
the  Assumption  of  our  Blessed  Lady,  to  contemplate 
first  the  Passion  of  the  Son,  and  then  the  compassion  of 
the  Mother. 

In  the  Mass,  before  and  after  the  consecration,  and 
after  my  communion,  I  reflected  on  three  things,  or 
times,  that  relate  to  Christ — (i)  before  the  Incarna 
tion;  (2)  \vhile  He  was  in  the  world;  (3)  after 
the  Ascension.  In  like  manner  there  are  three  other 
times  as  to  our  Blessed  Lady — (i)  up  to  the  con 
ception  of  her  Son;  (2)  up  to  His  death  and  Ascension; 
(3)  from  the  time  of  His  Ascension  to  her  death.  And 
on  this  a  desire  occurred  to  me  that  new  graces  might 
be  communicated  to  me  that  I  might  be  able  better  to 
know  and  love  Christ  by  means  of  His  Mother's  inter 
cession,  so  that  I  might  have  given  me,  in  accordance 
with  what  I  have  said  about  the  Mass,  (i)  some  gifts 
that  answer  to  the  time  before  the  Incarnation,  which  is 

26   AugUSt  22. 


In  Germany.  267 


represented  to  me  by  the  part  of  the  Mass  before  the 
consecration ;  (2)  some  gifts  which  belong  to  the  time 
between  the  Incarnation  and  the  Passion ;  (3)  others 
that  relate  to  the  time  after  the  Passion  up  to  the 
Judgment. 

I  also  desired,  for  the  great  devotion  which  I  have 
towards  the  Blessed  Virgin,  that  each  year,  according  to 
the  time  which  intervenes  between  one  of  her  feasts  and 
another,  our  Lord  might  grant  me  grace,  like  to  those  of 
which  she  was  full,  taking  (i)  the  time  from  the  Conception 
of  our  Lady  up  to  her  Annunciation,  to  be  therein  con 
tinually  prepared,  so  that  I  might  truly  say,  Behold  the 
servant  of  the  Lord,  already  become  the  Tabernacle  of 
the  Most  High ;  (2)  for  the  time  between  the  Annuncia 
tion  and  the  death  of  her  Son,  to  feel  Christ  always 
present  with  me,  by  means  of  my  compassion  with  and 
imitation  of  Him ;  and  (3)  for  the  time  after  that  up  to 
her  Assumption,  to  bear  therein  His  absence,  with  holy 
desires  of  following  Him  into  glory,  after  having  here  on 
earth  done  His  holy  will. 

On  the  same  day  I  reflected  that  the  Passion  of  Christ 
and  the  compassion  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  are  as  it  were 
two  ladders  by  which  to  ascend  straight  to  the  knowledge 
of  the  mysteries  of  the  Ascension  and  the  Assumption, 
and  I  felt  great  devotion  in  offering  to  our  Lord  that 
little  amount  of  knowledge  that  I  possessed  of  these 
eathly  things,  as  well  of  heavenly  things,  and  I  desired 
that  He  would  give  me  grace  never  to  let  myself  either 
be  sad  or  rejoice  except  in  accordance  with  the  sadness 
and  joy  which  Christ  shared  with  His  Blessed  Mother. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  Bartholomew,27  among  other  things, 

I  applied  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass  for  the  labours,  not 

only  present,  but  past  and  future  also,  of  our  fathers  and 

brothers,  adding  all  due  thanksgiving  to  our  Lord,  asking 

27  August  25. 


268  In  Germany. 


pardon  also  for  all  negligences  committed,  and  begging 
the  graces  which  are  acquired  by  means  of  such  toils.  I 
wished  also  that  I  could  be  present  at  the  execution  of 
the  martyrs,  and  be  able  to  say  to  each  one  of  them — 
Exaudiat  te  Deum  in  die  tribulationis.  Tribuat  tibi 
Dominus  secujidnm  cor  tuum  ct  omne  consilium  tuum  con- 
firmct.  Impleat  Dominus  omncs  petitiones  tuas  d  holo- 
caustum  tuum  piugue  fiat! 

On  the  same  day  I  was  trying  to  say  compline,  and  I 
felt  a  certain  sadness  of  mind  and  distraction  on  account 
of  my  defects,  such  as  I  could  not  have  wished  to  have 
felt  on  a  day  like  that.  But  there  came  over  me  after 
that  a  certain  feeling  of  consolation,  inasmuch  as  it 
pleased  our  Lord,  on  days  of  that  sort  more  particularly, 
to  discover  to  me  my  own  imperfections,  in  order  that 
those  saints  seeing  it  might  pray  for  me  and  might  deliver 
me  from  them.  So  I  gathered  much  hope  from  all  this, 
and  prayed  that  not  only  our  Lord,  but  His  Mother  also, 
and  the  Apostles,  St.  John  Baptist,  St.  Anne,  St.  Mary 
Magdalene,  and  all  the  saints,  might  thus  come  to  know 
my  spiritual  necessities. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  Louis,  King  of  France,28  I  felt  much 
devotion  in  saying  Mass  for  a  certain  cardinal,  and  in 
praying  for  the  whole  of  France,  in  which  so  many  good 
deeds  have  been  done  and  so  many  sins  pardoned,  and 
for  all  the  kings,  dukes,  counts,  and  other  nobles,  for  the 
archbishops,  bishops,  abbots,  and  parish  priests,  and  for 
the  universities  and  cities,  in  which  there  are  so  many 
necessities  both  of  body  and  soul. 

On  a  Sunday,  as  I  was  saying  office  and  reciting  the 
words  of  the  psalm — Diligam  te  Domine,  fortitude  meet, 
Dominus  firmamentum  meum  et  refugium  meum  ct  liberator 
metis,  Deus  metis  adjutor  meus,  ct  sperabo  in  eum,  protector 
metis  et  cor nu  salutis  mece,  et  susceptor  metis — I  went  on 

28  August  25. 


In  Germany.  269 


pondering  these  things  with  great  faith  and  hope  and 
desire  to  love  my  Lord,  but  considering  the  frailty  of 
the  flesh,  and  that  the  soul  is  so  blind  and  the  spirit 
so  perverse  in  judging  of  its  own  wants,  I  felt  arise  within 
me  a  strong  feeling  of  devotion,  suggesting  to  me  to 
commend  to  the  Almighty  Father  my  body,  praying  Him 
to  strengthen  it,  and  my  soul  to  the  Son,  that  He  might 
deign  to  enlighten  it,  and  my  spirit  to  the  Holy  Ghost, 
that  He  might  bless  and  improve  it  so  much  that  it 
should  never  forget  its  duty.  By  the  soul  I  mean  the 
sensitive  part  together  with  the  lower  portion,  that 
faculty  which  deals  with  those  things  which  are  made 
known  by  the  senses.  By  the  spirit  I  mean  that  higher 
part  which  is  engaged  with  divine  things.  I  also  asked 
the  Son  that  He  would  grant  me  these  gifts  in  the 
receiving  of  His  most  precious  Body,  Soul,  and  Divinity 
present  in  the  Sacrament. 

On  the  feast  of  the  Decollation  of  St.  John,'20  finding 
myself  somewhat  distracted,  and  seeing  my  difficulty 
in  recollecting  myself,  I  had  much  devotion  at  the 
thought  how  the  most  Holy  Sacrament  is  peculiarly 
that  source  from  which  grace  is  found  for  such  recol 
lection,  as  our  Lord  therein  is  ever  longing  to  enter 
into  us  and  enlighten  us. 

I  prayed  St.  John  Baptist  to  teach  me  the  manner  of 
preparing  the  way  of  the  Lord,  since  he  is  the  voice 
crying  out  in  the  desert,  Par  ate  viam  Domini,  and  I 
considered  three  ways  of  receiving  and  finding  Christ 
— one  in  ourselves,  because  regnum  Dei  intra  vos  cst; 
the  second  in  heaven,  whither  He  has  ascended  to 
draw  us  after  Him ;  the  third  in  the  Blessed  Sacrament, 
wherein  He  has  left  Himself  as  the  food  of  our  soul,  in 
which  way  we  can  draw  Him  to  ourselves,  according  to 
that  saying  of  His — Ad  eum  rente mus  ct  mansionem  apud 

29  August  29. 


270  In  Germany. 


cum  fademus,  and  that  other — Si  quis  aperuerit  mihi 
januani)  intrabo  et  ccenabo  cum  illot  ct  ipse  mecum. 

Whilst  saying  the  office  of  St.  Sabina,30  martyr,  a 
feeling  of  devotion  arose  within  me  to  bear  in  mind  at 
the  same  time  during  all  the  hours,  St.  Serafia,  virgin  and 
martyr,  who  whilst  frequenting  the  house  of  St.  Sabina 
was  converted  and  instructed  in  the  faith  by  her. 

On  the  same  day,  considering  how  almost  all  sins  are 
committed  with  much  application  of  mind,  as  men  speak 
and  listen  willingly  about  their  subject-matter,  I  had  a 
certain  train  of  thought  which  led  me  to  pray  God  to  deign 
to  prevent  the  evil  spirits  from  tempting  men  so  much,  as 
for  example,  to  the  sin  of  gluttony,  in  which  people 
plunge  nowadays  with  as  much  affection  and  thought, 
as  if  they  were  thinking  of  nourishing  their  soul  itself, 
which  seeks  other  food  ;  and  so  also  as  to  the  sin  of 
carnality,  in  which  men  are  so  unbridled  in  fulfilling  all 
their  evil  desires,  and  so  have  no  taste  for  spiritual  and 
divine  food.  Whereas,  on  the  other  hand,  the  body 
should  rather  be  drawn  to  the  spiritual  tastes  of  the 
soul,  and  this  cannot  be  done  unless  we  recollect  our 
selves  interiorily  in  all  things,  raising  our  minds  to  those 
things  in  which  there  is  nothing  that  can  be  perceived  by 
any  sense,  as  the  Divinity  of  Christ,  which  is  the  same  as 
that  of  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  seeking  the 
Humanity  of  Christ  in  heaven  rather  than  on  earth  ;  and 
so  also  the  Blessed  Virgin,  and  after  the  Blessed  Virgin 
the  angelic  spirits  and  the  rest  of  the  souls  of  the  just 
who  are  in  heaven.  But  if  we  would  remain  on  earth, 
being  ignorant  how  to  ascend  to  heavenly  things,  let  us 
put  before  our  eyes  Jesus  Christ  fastened  to  the  Cross, 
and  His  holy  life,  and  in  the  same  way  the  life  of  our 
Blessed  Lady,  and  of  infinite  holy  martyrs  and  confessors 
who  despised  the  world. 

30  August  29. 


In  Germany.  271 


On  the  same  feast  of  St.  Sabina,  considering  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  under  the  species  of  bread  and  wine,  there 
came  to  me  in  my  mind  a  good  sentiment,  as  to  how 
His  infinite  goodness  was  willing  to  take  upon  Himself 
the  office  and  form  of  material  bread  and  wine  for  the 
nourishment  of  our  souls  and  the  reformation  of  our 
bodies  to  a  better  state,  which  material  bread  and  wine 
are  not  able  to  bring  about. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  Giles,31  abbot,  after  I  had  delivered 
a  short  exhortation  before  some  who  were  going  to  com 
municate,  I  felt  a  great  desire  to  preach,  a  desire  which  I 
had  often  felt  before,  and  I  resolved  to  use  all  endeavours 
to  preach  and  lecture  in  Germany,  seeing  that  great  evil 
came  from  the  long  silence  of  the  pulpit ;  and  I  felt  also 
that  it  was  necessary  for  the  future  to  correspond  to  that 
spirit  which  urged  me  on  to  fervour  in  the  Word  of  God, 
both  in  public  sermons  and  private  exhortations,  and  not 
only  in  the  church,  but  in  the  private  houses  and  public 
places,  even  though  there  be  few  who  listen,  and  also  at 
the  tables  of  princes  and  nobles. 

On  the  first  Sunday  of  September,32  while  applying  my 
consideration  on  the  mysteries  of  the  life,  and  death,  and 
resurrection  of  Christ,  to  the  soul  of  a  certain  doctor,  a 
theologian  of  Paris,  I  felt  a  great  devotion  to  say  Mass 
for  him,  remembering  some  matters  in  which  he  might 
have  sinned,  as  concerning  obedience,  poverty,  and 
chastity,  for  he  had  been  a  Franciscan  friar,  as  also  in 
defects  in  teaching,  having  been  a  professor  and  preacher, 
and  as  to  overweening  curiosity  in  learning,  and  also 
vainglory,  which  is  wont  to  wait  on  such  men.  And 
at  the  memento  for  the  dead,  it  occured  to  me  with 
much  devotion  to  beg  the  most  Holy  Trinity  to  deign 
to  be  glorified  in  that  soul,  and  to  receive  him  into 
the  number  of  the  holy  doctors,  according  to  the  promise 
31  September  i.  S2  September  3. 


272  In  Germany. 


of  the  Prophet  Daniel — Qid  ad  justitiam  erudiunt  multos 
fulgebunt  quasi  stella  in  perpctuas  ceternitates. 

On  the  feast  of  SS.  Cosmas  and  Damian,33  I  felt  certain 
great  and  interior  yearnings  for  the  veneration  of  the 
most  Holy  Sacrament  and  the  saints  in  heaven  and  the 
images  and  relics  of  saints,  and  I  could  have  wished  to 
be  able  to  be  present  before  the  most  Holy  Sacrament 
wherever  it  is  kept  in  all  Germany,  and  also  before  any 
picture  whatever  of  Christ,  or  the  Virgin  Mother  of  God, 
or  any  saint,  man  or  woman,  whatever.  And  deeming 
this  desire  impossible  to  fulfil,  I  asked  our  Lord  to 
supply,  by  our  holy  guardian  angels,  my  defects  with 
regard  to  this  devotion  and  those  of  all  others,  so  that 
what  men  fail  to  do  may  be  done  by  their  guardian 
angels. 

While  I  was  also  considering,  with  a  certain  elevation 
of  mind,  Christ  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  the  power  of 
God  the  Father,  and  that  He  sees  all  things  that  take 
place  under  the  sun,  I  felt  a  certain  sense  of  wonder  at 
His  great  patience  and  goodness,  that  being  so  powerful 
in  heaven  and  on  earth  He  yet  tolerates  so  many 
iniquities.  As  I  was  reflecting  on  this,  I  seemed  to 
myself  to  see  another  thing  also,  namely,  that  in  old 
times  men  crucified  the  Lamb  bodily  while  He  was 
mortal,  and  now  that  He  is  immortal  and  is  reigning 
in  heaven,  they  nevertheless  crucify  Him  spiritually. 
And  in  this  I  found  more  to  wonder  at  in  His  patience, 
inasmuch  as  it  is  a  greater  evil  to  offend  Him  now  that 
He  is  in  glory  than  it  was  to  offend  Him  when  He  was 
liable  to  suffering. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  Michael  the  Archangel,34 1  had  many 

reflections  and  pious  feelings  with  reference  to  him  and 

all  the  angels.    While  saying  office,  I  felt  a  desire  that 

the   angels    should   praise    our    Lord   as   often  as  such 

33  September  27.  34  September  29. 


In  Germany.  273 


words  are  said,  inasmuch  as  it  is  they  who  feel  and  under 
stand  them  better.  I  desired  also  that  the  saints  should  do 
the  same,  not  only  those  who  are  named  in  the  prayers, 
but  also  all  the  others,  and  that  my  saying  office,  my 
words  and  thoughts,  might  always  be  to  them  an  occasion 
for  praising  our  Lord,  of  thanking  Him  in  our  behalf,  or 
asking  favours  from  Him  for  us  ;  and  that  they  may  not 
on  account  of  my  want  of  attention  omit  taking  note  of 
the  good  words  which  are  pronounced  by  my  tongue,  and 
in  like  manner  of  the  actions  and  ceremonies  performed 
for  God,  although  they  are  often  done  only  in  the  faith 
of  the  Church,  or  in  my  own  habitual  faith  alone. 

At  the  offertory  of  the  Mass,  I  felt  a  certain  desire 
that  it  might  be  applied  to  the  glory  of  St.  Michael  and 
the  army  of  the  angels,  just  as  if  they  had  been  in  this 
world  in  mortal  flesh  and  perfectly  imitated  Jesus  Christ ; 
as  also  for  my  own  greater  merit  and  that  of  others,  just 
as  though  we,  having  the  power  and  knowledge  of  the 
angels,  praised  Christ  here  below  even  as  He  is  praised 
in  His  glory.  And  so  I  should  rejoice  much  if  God 
had  given  me  grace  to  take  the  place  of  the  angels  in 
many  labours,  and  if  they,  on  the  other  hand,  supplied 
for  me  all  that  I  am  bound  to  for  the  honour  of  His 
Divine  Majesty,  to  Whom  thousands  of  thousands  minis 
ter,  and  ten  times  a  hundred  thousand  stand  before 
Him.  But  I  know  very  well  that  it  should  be  enough  for 
me  to  serve,  praise,  and  honour  Christ,  considering  Him 
in  that  guise  in  which  He  lived  in  the  world,  and  with 
which  He  chose  to  be  satisfied,  seeing  that  in  this  He  has 
left  here  those  who  hold  His  place,  of  whom  He  says, 
Qui  vos  audit,  me  audit,  and  also  the  poor  of  whom  He 
says,  Quod  uni  ex  minimis  meis  fedstis,  mihi  fedstis. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  Jerome,35  I  learnt  with  special  cer 
tainty,  that  to  obtain  his  favour,  and  that  of  any  other 

35  September  30. 


2  74  In  Germany. 


saint,  it  helps  much  to  have  a  great  devotion  towards 
that  angel  who  was  his  guardian  in  this  world.  And  so 
we  may  ask  of  such  angels  to  obtain  us  the  help  of 
those  saints,  or,  again,  a  share  of  that  spirit  from  God 
which  they  had  in  this  life. 

Whilst  saying  office  I  felt  great  devotion,  considering 
how  the  angels  and  saints  can  take  occasion  from  our 
words  to  praise  God  and  to  help  us  to  obtain  what  we 
ask  ;  and  so  I  felt  it  to  be  a  very  useful  thing  to  implore 
them  devoutly  to  assist  us  in  contemplating  and  praising 
God,  inasmuch  as  they  see  Him  as  He  is.  It  is  also 
of  advantage  that  a  man  should  desire  that  they  should 
make  up  in  all  things  for  his  deficiencies,  and  excuse 
his  faults  by  the  words  of  their  blessed  mouths.  I  felt 
likewise  a  great  desire  and  a  great  joy  that  the  saints  who 
are  in  heaven  should  now  have  the  means,  power,  and 
knowledge,  and  will  to  do  and  make  up  for  all  that 
which  they  had  not  the  will,  or  the  knowledge,  or  the 
power  to  effect  with  regard  to  undertakings  for  God  or 
their  neighbour,  both  alive  and  dead.  I  also  felt  a 
longing  to  be  able  to  express  in  deed  or  words,  or  any 
other  way,  to  all  the  saints  and  angels,  all  those  things 
which  God  has  done  in  this  world,  and  whatever  gifts 
God  has  communicated  to  us,  that  each  one  of  the  saints 
might  in  this  manner  be  able  to  know  and  see  in  them 
God  the  Glorifier,  to  His  own  greater  accidental  glory, 
which  admits  of  increase,  even  by  occasions  which  come 
from  us. 

Here  I  also  remarked  a  certain  feeling  of  devotion, 
which  I  found  arise  from  looking  on  the  crucifix36  in  the 
Church  of  Holy  Cross  at  Mayence,  which  pierced  my 
heart  so  thoroughly,  that  I  have  retained  an  almost 

26  This  seems  to  have  been  a  crucifix  which  was  said  to  have  shed 
blood  on  receiving  an  insulting  blow  from  a  ruffian,  on  whom  the  blood 
fell,  and  who  was  converted. 


In  Germany. 


continual  remembrance  of  it,  and  a  great  impression  of 
that  high  degree  of  God's  goodness  shown  therein,  in 
so  often  shedding  His  Blood  for  the  sinner  who  has 
offended  Him.  So,  too,  He  gave  it  after  His  death  to 
the  blind  Longinus,  who  received  his  sight  thereby. 
And  so  it  appears  to  me  that  when  I  commit  so  many 
faults  and  show  so  much  ingratitude  to  my  Lord,  He 
•does  nothing  in  return  for  so  many  wounds  but  to  give 
me  new  grace  in  order  that  I  may  receive  benefit  from 
that  very  Blood  so  shed.  And  so  it  is,  that  whereas  so 
many  wickednesses  and  blasphemies  in  dishonour  of  God 
and  of  His  saints  are  current  in  the  world,  the  Divine 
Goodness  still  does  not  cease  from  shedding  marks  of 
the  Blood  of  His  love  upon  those  who  behave  so,  allow 
ing  Himself  sometimes  to  be  cruelly  wounded,  in  order 
that  after  all  they  may  enter  into  themselves,  repent  of 
their  cruelty,  and  turn  to  that  purest  Blood,  in  order  to 
heal  their  souls. 

As  T  was  making  these  reflections  on  the  Blood  of 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Immaculate  Lamb,  I  perceived  the 
great  force  of  that  meekness  which  Christ  taught  us  by 
words  and  work ;  for  there  is  nothing  more  efficacious 
against  cruelty  and  anger,  and  whatever  is  contrary  to 
charity,  than  to  be  so  meek  as  to  make  no  resistance 
to  the  persecutor,  so  as  at  last  to  appease  and  soften 
him  by  patience  and  gentleness.  But  woe  is  me !  I 
.am  too  hard  and  savage,  and  too  slow  in  believing  and 
listening  to  Christ,  Who  has  so  many  times  shed  tears 
and  blood  for  me  in  vain  !  O  wretched  and  cruel  soul 
of  mine  !  Why  have  not  those  tears  softened  thee  which 
He  shed  for  thee  as  soon  as  He  had,  for  love  of  thee, 
left  His  heavenly  Home  and  entered  on  the  path  of 
His  mortal  life  ?  Why  hast  thou  held  out  till  He  shed 
blood?  See,  even  as  a  Child  eight  days  old  He  shed 
tears  and  blood  in  the  Circumcision,  and  yet  thou  hast 
s  2 


276  In  Germany. 


not  been  moved.  What  dost  thou  wait  for  ?  See, 
unhappy  soul,  see  that  that  shedding  of  tears  which 
came  upon  Hin  over  Jerusalem,  weeping  over  the  ingra 
titude  and  ultimate  ruin  of  that  nation — that  shedding 
of  tears  was  made  for  thee  and  over  thee.  See  also 
those  tears  which,  as  He  gives  up  on  the  Cross  His  Soul 
into  the  hands  of  His  Father,  He  sheds  so  plentifully 
for  thy  salvation  !  Ah  !  if  these  tears  and  this  blood 
be  not  enough  for  thee,  and  if  thou  wouldst  see  a  still 
greater  outpouring,  see  Him  in  the  Garden  all  sweating 
in  His  Agony,  and  how  tears  and  blood  are  mingled 
there.  See,  moreover,  the  blood  which  issues  from 
every  part  of  His  Body,  bound,  smitten,  torn,  and 
crowned  with  thorns ;  and,  to  end  all,  consider  how  on 
the  Cross  all  His  veins  were  entirely  emptied  of  that 
most  precious  Blood,  and  how  after  death  He  opened 
His  most  sacred  side,  sending  forth  thence  water  and 
blood  to  heal  and  enlighten  thee  as  well  as  Longinus. 
Do  not  seek,  then,  for  any  greater  sign  of  His  divine 
goodness  in  the  sufferings  of  His  Sacred  Humanity,  for 
now  He  can  suffer  no  more.  Christus  enim  resurgens  ex 
mortuis  jam  non  moritur,  mors  illi  ultra  non  dominabitur. 
The  day  before  the  feast  of  St.  Francis,37  whilst  I  was 
reciting  the  office  of  a  martyr,  my  advocate,  towards  whom 
I  have  had  for  a  long  time  a  great  devotion,  I  applied 
the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass  for  my  relations  living  and  dead, 
and  for  all  of  our  family  who  have  departed  this  life,  and 
then  also  for  all  the  families  of  my  brothers  who  are  in 
the  Society  of  Jesus  Christ.  Whilst  I  was  doing  this, 
there  arose  in  me  a  strong  and  pious  recollection  of  those 
towards  whom  we  are  under  obligations  by  nature.  And  so 
it  seemed  to  me  that  it  would  be  a  very  excellent  thing  to 
invoke  the  guardian  angels  of  such  families,  past,  present, 
and  future,  and  at  the  same  time  to  invoke  the  saints,  after 

S7  October  3. 


In  Germany.  277 


our  Blessed  Lady,  who  have  had  special  care  of  them, 
or  who  have  now,  or  who  shall  have  in  future.  And 
so  I  resolved  to  do  three  things  —  (i)  to  intercede 
for  the  remission  of  their  sins ;  (2)  to  give  thanks 
for  the  benefits  which  they  have  hitherto  received ; 
(3)  to  Prav  also  tnat  new  blessings  may  be  granted  to 
them.  I  desired  also  that  by  means  of  that  sacrifice, 
I  and  all  my  brethren  might  be  excused  for  all  faults 
and  negligences  committed  in  prayer,  in  thanksgiving, 
and  in  making  intercession  for  those  to  whom  we  are 
under  obligations. 

After  communion,  I  had  a  great  desire,  which  I  also 
had  felt  after  the  same  action  on  the  day  before,  that 
Christ,  whom  I  had  received  within  myself,  might  inclose 
me  altogether  within  Himself  and  with  Him,  so  that  He 
might  dwell  in  me,  and  might  work  with  me  for  my 
renovation.  I  desired  also  that  He,  under  Whose  power 
lie  infinite  modes  of  being,  would  vouchsafe,  at  least 
accidentally,  to  renew  my  being  within  me — my  being, 
my  life,  my  working,  that  after  a  new  manner  I  might 
direct  towards  Him  my  whole  self  and  all  other  things, 
and  that  He  Who  alone  is  immutable  in  His  being,  His 
life,  and  His  actions,  might  change  all  my  doings  day 
after  day  from  good  to  better. 

On  the  day  of  St.  Francis,38  among  other  good  desires 
which  I  felt  in  my 'meditation,  there  was  the  special 
wish,  which  I  begged  with  much  spiritual  fervour  from 
our  Lord,  that  by  virtue  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass  He 
might  grant  me  that  St.  Francis,  and  each  one  of  the 
other  saints,  might  for  the  future  always  remember  me 
and  intercede  for  me,  and  this  as  earnestly  as  if  at  the 
moment  of  the  death  of  each  I  had  asked  it  of  him 
with  tribulation  of  heart  in  those  words  of  the  thief — 
Memento  mci  cum  veneris  in  regnum  Christi. 

38  October  4. 


278  In  Germany. 


Whilst  thinking  on  that  same  day  on  certain  points 
concerning  the  method  of  praying  well,  and  of  performing 
my  actions  well,  and  in  a  proper  manner,  also  how  good 
desires  conceived  in  prayer  are  certain  paths  which  lead 
to  good  works,  and  how  on  the  other  hand  good  works 
are  like  paths  which  lead  to  good  prayers  and  good 
desires,  I  felt  that  one  who  seeks  the  Spirit  of  God  in 
good  works,  will  find  it  better  afterwards  in  prayer.  Who 
ever  then  seeks  and  finds  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  good 
works,  makes  much  more  solid  progress  than  the  one  who 
seeks  it  in  prayer  alone  ;  for  one  who  has  Christ  both  in 
work  and  in  prayer,  is  like  one  who  has  Him  in  affection 
and  effect  both.  You  must  then  mortify  yourself  and  dis 
pose  yourself  to  gain  all  good  by  means  of  good  works. 
'For  by  this  means  you  will  perceive  that  this  is  a  most 
excellent  preparation  for  mental  prayer.  Let  then  your 
life  be  conducted  in  this  manner,  both  Avith  Martha  and 
Magdalene,  that  is,  made  up  of  action  and  contemplation, 
pursuing  the  one  for  the  other,  and  not  one  only  for  itself. 

So  you  should  practise  prayer  as  a  means  for  good 
actions,  and  so  on  the  other  hand,  add  good  works  as  the 
best  means  for  praying  more  fervently.  It  must  also  be 
observed  that  before  going  to  good  works,  prayer,  either 
mental  or  oral,  should  be  well  made,  because  it  is  in 
prayer  that  the  good  spirit  is  gained  ;  and  what  I  say  of 
good  works,  I  intend  to  be  understood  also  of  exhortations, 
sermons,  and  discourses,  public  or  private.  This  is  very 
necessary  when  things  have  to  be  done  which  are  con 
trary  to  natural  inclination,  or  to  our  own  will,  in  order 
that  thus  we  may  better  understand  and  more  readily  will 
the  good  that  is  to  be  found  in  such  actions.  And  since 
for  doing  such  things  in  which  we  feel  difficulty  or 
repugnance,  we  require  greater  grace,  so  also  in  doing 
them  we  acquire  greater  spiritual  grace.  One  who  is 
devoted  to  the  mixed  life  must  be  adorned  with  many 


In  Germany.  279 


more  virtues  than  one  who  leads  a  contemplative  life, 
because  he  has  many  things  above  him,  under  him, 
within  him,  around  him,  which  require  various  degrees 
of  patience,  humility,  and  charity,  in  due  order  ;  some  to 
the  sick,  or  sinners,  or  persecutors,  others  towards  his 
inferiors  or  his  superiors. 

With  regard  to  this  subject  of  good  works,  we  must 
know  that  there  are  three  kinds  of  them,  in  which  we 
must  practise  ourselves.  Some  have  reference  to  our 
selves,  some  to  our  neighbours,  and  some  to  God.  To 
ourselves  pertain  works  of  penance,  which  consist  in 
mortification  and  abnegation  of  our  own  will  and  judg 
ment,  and  in  the  abandonment  of  riches  and  temporal 
comforts.  To  our  neighbours  we  owe  all  those  works 
which  assist  him  either  spiritually  or  temporally,  such  as 
consolation,  help,  alms.  To  God  peculiarly  belong  all 
those  things  which  relate  to  His  honour  and  that  of  the 
saints,  such  as  the  administration  of  the  sacraments, 
sermons,  divine  office,  and  the  decoration  of  churches. 
In  the  first  of  these  three  ways,  a  man  makes  himself  in  a 
certain  manner  an  enemy  to  himself;  in  the  second,  a 
friend  to  his  neighbour  ;  in  the  third,  pleasing  to  God. 

One  day  I  was  about  to  say  a  Mass  for  the  dead  in  the 
Church  of  Holy  Cross  at  Spires,  for  the  benefactors, 
founders,  and  all  the  city,  and  it  came  to  my  mind  to 
say  the  Mass  of  the  Holy  Cross,  because  there  was  there 
a  cross  which  had  wrought  such  great  miracles.  At  that 
moment  our  Lord  gave  me  a  very  great  spirit  of  devotion 
to  that  cross  and  to  any  other,  understanding  with  great 
clearness  of  faith  the  marvellous  power  of  the  cross 
against  the  devil.  For  this  reason  I  desired  always  to 
have  a  cross  actually  on  my  heart,  and  to  have  by  me 
always  the  pictures  of  the  Crucifix,  our  Lady,  and  the 
saints,  and  their  relics,  and  in  like  manner  to  have  holy 
water  always  at  hand,  and  to  use  it  for  everything. 


280  In  Germany. 


Moreover,  I  desired  that  all  that  holy  temple  with  its 
sacred  things  therein,  and  also  all  the  most  holy  Body  of 
Christ,  the  true  temple  of  divine  goodness,  might  ever  be 
in  me  and  I  in  it  in  spirit.  O  my  soul,  if  thou  couldst 
relish  and  understand  well  the  sweet  name  of  Jesus,  in 
which  is  fulness  of  salvation,  or  at  least  the  name  of  the 
the  Cross,  or  of  the  Blessed  Mary  our  Lord's  Mother, 
and  of  the  saints,  how  lasting  would  be  thy  joy  and  how 
much  strength  from  God  wouldst  thou  receive  !  Thou 
wouldst  appear  far  different  from  what  thou  now  art, 
both  to  angels  and  to  devils.  Advance  therefore,  my 
soul,  in  thy  devotion  to  all  sacred  things,  sign  thee  with 
the  sign  of  the  Cross,  and  consider  all  these  things  day 
after  day,  until  thou  comest  to  the  fountain-head  from 
whence  they  are  all  derived. 

On  another  day  I  was  thinking  of  that  saying  of  our 
Lord — Auferetur  ab  eis  sponsus  and  numquid  possimt  filii 
sponsi  lugere  quamdiu  cum  illis  est  sponsus,  and  a  great 
feeling  of  marvel  came  over  me,  and  in  much  piety  of 
spirit  towards  our  Lord,  I  exclaimed,  '  O  Lord,  what  is 
this  ?  Thou  speakest  of  Thyself  to  Thy  disciples,  and 
callest  Thyself  a  Bridegroom,  and  nevertheless  Thou 
showest  Thyself  not  at  all  as  a  dainty  Bridegroom,  but 
rather  as  an  abject  servant  and  slave  of  all.  Thou  dost 
labour  and  sweat,  Thou  art  despised  and  reviled  even 
unto  the  Passion  and  death  on  the  Cross.  Thou  dost 
toil,  that  Thine  may  rest,  Thou  dost  afflict  Thyself  that 
they  may  rejoice,  and  to  crown  all  Thou  dost  choose  to 
die,  in  order  to  give  them  life.' 

Truly  this  is  something  like  that  saying  of  the 
poet's — 

Sic  vos  non  vobis  vellera  fertis,  oves, 
Sic  vos  non  vobis  mellificatis,  apes. 

May  Thy  holy  Name  be  blessed  and  praised  and  exalted 
for  ever,  O  good  Jesus,  and  for  ever  and  for  ever.   Amen. 


In  Germany.  281 


On  a  Sunday  morning,  as  I  was  reciting  the  divine 
office,  I  found  myself  distracted,  and  implored  the  aid 
of  God  and  of  the  Blessed  Virgin.  Then  I  received 
many  good  helps  to  devotion,  which  incited  me  to 
continue  the  actual  attention  of  my  spirit  and  my  self- 
recollection,  a  thing  God  is  wont  to  grant  to  those 
who  use  all  diligence  that  they  may  understand  the 
words  that  they  recite  well,  and  receive  that  grace  which 
is  in  them  as  in  a  seed.  And  as  I  was  drawing  near  to 
the  end  of  the  office,  I  considered  that  the  nearer  Christ 
drew  to  the  end  of  His  life,  so  much  greater  were  the 
torments  which  He  suffered,  and  so  I  ought  to  go  on 
always  increasing  in  niy  devotion  to  His  Passion,  so  that 
when  I  came  to  the  hour  of  none  I  might  be  able  to  feel 
the  efficacy  of  His  death  and  of  the  breathing  out  of  His 
Soul,  which  took  place  at  that  hour. 

On  the  day  on  which  I  recited  the  office  of  St.  Mark,38 
pope  and  confessor,  I  had  many  good  sentiments.  Among 
other  things  it  came  into  my  heart  to  wish  that  all  the 
good  desires  which  that  blessed  Pope,  when  on  earth, 
had  for  the  salvation  of  the  Germans  and  other  infidels, 
might  be  fulfilled  in  our  time,  and  also  the  desires  of  all 
the  saints,  in  order  that  that  saying  might  be  more 
universally  fulfilled,  Desiderium  animce  ejus  tribuisti  ei,  in 
that  each  saint  beholds  fulfilled,  not  only  the  desires 
which  he  has  in  his  life  in  glory,  but  also  every  other 
desire  for  the  honour  of  God  and  the  salvation  of  souls 
which  he  had  in  this  life. 

On  the  same  day,  as  I  was  about  to  say  Mass,  I  had 
another  desire,  that  God  might  vouchsafe  to  accept  that 
sacrifice  for  so  high  a  degree  of  spiritual  fruit  for  the 
benefit  of  this  city  of  Spires,  as  I  and  all  my  companions 
might  gain  if  we  were  to  stay  here  until  our  death.  After 
Mass,  as  I  was  examining  myself  how  I  had  borne  myself 

39  October  7. 


282  In  Germany. 


therein,  I  begged  earnestly  by  the  merits  of  the  Passion 
of  Christ,  which  is  our  principal  subject  of  remembrance, 
that  I  might  have  memory  given  me  to  call  to  mind  all 
my  past  spiritual  exercises,  attention  of  mind  for  those 
which  I  am  now  occupied  on,  and  a  good  desire  as  to 
those  which  I  shall  perform  in  future. 

On  the  following  day,  as  I  was  saying  the  office  of 
St.  Stephen,40  pope  and  martyr,  whose  head  is  preserved 
and  venerated  in  the  chief  church  at  Spires,  I  felt  some 
strong  desires,  together  with  a  firm  faith,  that  they  would 
be  accomplished.  They  were  that  St.  Stephen  might  be 
the  first  to  open  to  me  a  door  for  the  exercise  of  my 
spiritual  ministry  in  the  vineyard  of  Christ,  and  I  prayed 
him  to  promote  and  arrange  by  means  of  God's  grace 
the  work  in  which  I  was  to  occupy  myself,  as  it  seemed 
to  me  not  enough  that  I  myself  alone  should  be  moved 
to  it  and  disposed  for  such  an  undertaking. 

When  I  made  my  communion  in  the  Mass,  I  begged 
with  great  feeling  that  that  most  Sacred  Sacrament  might 
deign  to  make  me  an  obedient  instrument  of  His  Divine 
Majesty,  His  Mother,  the  angels  and  saints,  and  all  the 
souls  in  purgatory  and  all  the  living,  an  instrument  which 
each  might  use  to  work  with  according  to  the  will  of  God. 
May  it  please  God  to  give  me  grace  to  accomplish  what 
I  have  promised,  and  to  be  the  property  of  all,  to  live  for 
all,  and  to  work  for  all,  to  the  praise  of  God  and  to  the 
salvation  of  the  living  and  of  the  dead. 

On  the  day  of  St.  Denis,41  the  Areopagite,  and  his 
companions,  I  was  visited  by  much  devotion,  praying 
them  to  vouchsafe  to  obtain  for  me  some  lasting  grace 
from  the  Heavenly  Father,  another  from  the  Son,  and 
another  from  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  also  some  grace 

40  St.  Stephen's  day  is  the  and  of  August,  perhaps  the  feast  at  Spires 
was  that  of  his  translation. 

41  October  9. 


In  Germany.  283 


from  the  Blessed  Virgin  and  the  other  saints  whom  I 
named. 

Besides  this,  I  asked  them  to  obtain  for  me  some 
principle  of  good  sentiments  in  my  heart,  so  as  to  break 
forth  into  words  of  love,  of  the  fear  of  God,  or  of  any 
virtue  that  I  might  be  most  in  need  of,  and  in  the  same 
way,  some  blessing  for  all  the  needs  of  my  body.  I  felt 
also  a  new  desire,  that  the  Blessed  Sacrament,  when  It 
entered  my  stomach,  might  deign  to  feed  my  soul,  as  the 
natural  food  of  bread  and  wine  feeds  and  nourishes  the 
flesh  and  body  which  belong  to  my  soul. 

On  the  day  of  St.  Cerbonius,42  bishop  and  confessor, 
as  I  was  reflecting  on  the  life  and  death  of  Christ,  there 
came  to  my  mind  certain  colloquies  with  much  tenderness 
of  spirit,  and  I  said,  '  O  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  Thy 
death  be  my  life,  make  me  learn  how  to  find  life  in  Thy 
death,  let  Thy  travail  be  my  repose,  Thy  human  weakness 
my  strength,  Thy  confusion  my  glory,  Thy  sadness  my 
joy,  and  in  Thy  humiliation  let  me  be  exalted.  In  brief, 
let  all  my  good  lie  in  the  ills  which  Thou  hast  suffered, 
since  Thou,  O  Lord,  hast  repaired  my  life,  which  was  on 
the  road  to  death  without  any  hope  of  remedy/ 

On  the  day  of  the  Seven  Friar  Martyrs,43  who  were 
companions  of  St.  Francis,  I  was  celebrating  Mass,  and 
felt  a  sort  of  fear  that  I  was  not  large  enough  in  charity 
towards  certain  persons,  whose  defects  came  before  me. 
On  this  I  heard  the  answer — If  you  shut  your  heart 
against  your  neighbours,  God  will  shut  His  Heart  against 
you,  and  if  you  open  your  heart  wide  to  your  neighbours, 
God  will  open  His  Heart  wide  to  you.  Seek  first  the 
love  of  God,  and  then  you  will  easily  find  the  love  that 
you  ought  to  have  to  enemy  as  well  as  to  friend.  And 
whenever  there  may  be  need  of  some  actual  reconcili 
ation  with  your  neighbour  either  in  word  or  deed,  let  it 

42  October  12.  43  October  13. 


• 

284  In  Germany. 

be  done  as  soon  as  possible  as  a  means  of  making  your 
peace  with  God.  But  when  certain  feelings  come  to 
you  from  nothing  but  what  passes  in  your  mind  alone, 
then  interior  reconciliation  of  spirit  is  all  that  is  needed. 
Such,  for  instance,  are  certain  bitternesses  and  estrange 
ments,  which  must  be  chased  away  at  once  from  the 
heart,  that  it  may  take  to  itself  feelings  of  kindness  and 
patience  towards  your  neighbour.  In  that  way  you  will 
relieve  your  understanding  from  the  error  that  was  in  it 
by  means  of  false  representations  which  beset  it  from  mere 
human  reason  or  from  the  evil  spirit,  and  you  will  at  the 
same  time  relieve  your  will  from  the  error  that  was  upon 
it  in  consequence  of  false  impressions.  Then  you  must  be 
on  your  guard  in  such  aversions  of  the  mind  not  to  let 
yourself  attempt  to  conquer  by  flying,  that  is,  by  avoiding 
the  person  or  the  things  from  which  you  may  feel  averse. 
We  ought  rather  to  seek  their  presence,  imitating  Christ 
our  Lord,  Who  was  always,  as  it  were,  so  given  to  drawing 
near  to  His  persecutors,  that  even  after  His  death,  when 
Longinus  came  with  hatred  to  pierce  His  Heart  with  his 
lance  and  so  offend  Him,  not  only  did  He  not  evade  the 
blow,  but  with  great  love  exposed  His  own  Body  and 
also  shed  His  Blood  in  order  to  heal  him. 

On  a  Sunday,  which  fell  on  the  22nd  October,  1542, 
I  determined  to  consent  to  the  wish  of  the  Archbishop 
of  Mayence,  who  desired  that  I  should  go  with  him  to 
the  Council  of  Trent,  which  was  to  begin  on  the  ist  of 
November.  Before  I  made  up  my  mind,  however,  I 
had  various  feelings  in  my  mind  and  some  sadness,  from 
which  I  was  delivered  by  our  Lord  by  virtue  of  holy  and 
blind  obedience,  which  knows  how  not  to  look  at  its  own 
insufficiency,  nor  at  the  difficulty  of  the  things  which  are 
commanded  it. 

As  I  was  saying  that  morning  the  canonical  hours,  I 
felt  myself  distracted  concerning  the  affair  just  mentioned, 


In  Germany.  285 


and  as  to  a  certain  answer  which  I  had  to  give  to  Mgr. 
the  Bishop  Suffragan,  and  then  I  had  some  clear  lights 
which  admonished  me,  that  while  one  is  saying  the  divine 
office,  one  must  not  admit  any  thoughts  or  applications 
which  are  not  according  to  the  words  and  their  sense,  in 
order  that  we  may  be  entirely  occupied  in  mind  on  that 
matter  with  which  what  we  say  is  concerned.  And  when 
ever  at  such  times  we  feel  ourselves  drawn  off  to  any 
other  subject,  however  good  it  be,  as  a  sermon  or  an 
exhortation,  we  should  remember  at  once  that  all  that  is 
outside  the  disposition  of  mind  which  is  required  for  the 
divine  office  and  the  things  which  relate  to  God.  May- 
it  please  our  Lord  to  grant  us  the  grace  not  to  bring 
ourselves  into  confusion  as  to  the  arrangement  of  our 
actions,  our  words,  and  our  desires,  but  to  do  everything 
in  its  proper  order  and  time  ! 

One  day  in  the  same  month  I  chanced  to  be  lodged  in- 
a  small  castle  of  a  certain  count  at  Spires,  and  when  I 
rose  at  midnight  to  pray,  I  entered  on  certain  colloquies 
with  God,  praying  for  all  the  people  there  with  much 
devotion  and  many  tears,  saying — '  O  Lord  God,  who  is 
there  among  all  these  who  acknowledge  Thy  great  good 
ness,  with  which  Thou  hast  brought  it  about  that  there 
should  be  so  many  temporal  good  things  in  these  parts, 
and  that  for  so  long  a  time  they  have  had  the  most  holy 
Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist,  and  the  other  sacraments, 
the  ceremonies  of  Holy  Church,  and  the  true  Christian 
teaching  ?  Pardon,  O  Lord,  this  poor  people  which  thinks 
not  at  all  of  these  things,  knows  them  not,  nor  asks  for 
them.  Pardon  them  also,  because  they  are  not  mindful 
at  all  of  the  souls  in  purgatory.  Vouchsafe,  O  Lord,  to 
give  and  preserve  to  them  all  these  blessings,  and  con 
sider  not  their  ignorances,  or  their  ingratitude,  but  look 
rather  on  Christ  our  Redeemer,  on  the  angels  and  the 
saints,  who  most  perfectly  acknowledge  not  only  the 


286  In  Germany. 


greatness  of  Thy  benefits,  but  also  the  grievousness  of 
the  sins  which  would  have  been  committed  in  this  place 
if  Thou  hadst  altogether  withdrawn  the  hand  of  Thy 
mercy  from  them.'  And  so  I  went  on  discoursing  in  my 
prayer,  and  I  asked  from  our  Lord  for  the  inhabitants  of 
this  place  abundance  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  peace  and 
good  government  on  the  part  of  their  temporal  lords,  and 
also  the  Catholic  faith,  churches,  holy  pictures,  Masses, 
holy  water,  relics  of  the  bodies  of  the  saints,  and 
obedience  to  the  bishops  and  elders  of  Holy  Church, 
with  many  other  good  things,  desiring  that  they  should 
acknowledge  them  as  received  from  God  and  Jesus 
Christ,  and  the  Blessed  Virgin. 

On  the  day  of  SS.  Crysanthus  and  Daria,44  martyrs, 
before  I  began  the  office,  I  found  great  devotion,  and 
in  it  I  offered  myself,  with  all  the  good  works  which  I 
might  in  future  do  down  to  the  time  of  my  death,  for  my 
benefactors,  of  whatever  state  and  condition,  and  for  those 
of  my  companions,  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  for  the 
salvation  of  my  soul  and  of  my  neighbours.  This  made 
me  feel  the  abundance  of  the  charity  of  Christ,  and  I 
invoked  His  grace,  by  which  for  all  men,  present  and 
future,  He  merited  superabundantly  everything  necessary 
both  for  their  salvation  in  the  state  of  grace  and  for  their 
glorification  in  the  heavenly  country,  although  it  is  true 
that  with  an  absolute  will,  according  to  the  order  of  what 
theologians  call  the  voluntas  signi,  He  has  not  willed  that 
all  this  merit  shall  be  applied  to  everything.  So  I  prayed 
our  Lord  that  He  would  vouchsafe  to  receive  me  and 
each  one  of  my  companions  as  regenerated  in  Christ, 
and  receive  also  all  our  works  and  labours  as  actually 
directed  and  ordered  in  Him,  and  as  united  to  the  life 
and  Passion  of  Christ. 

41  October  25. 


In  Germany.  287 


I  also  felt  a  very  lively  pain  that  I  had  not,  from  the 
.beginning  of  my  life,  asked  nor  endeavoured  to  gain,  or 
at  least  in  some  degree  desired,  that  spiritual  grace  which 
has  since  been  granted  to  me,  and  I  thanked  the  Son  of 
God,  that  in  His  everlasting  charity  He  had  determined 
to  grant  me  those  gifts  which  now  I  enjoy,  and  that  He 
willed  that  all  the  labours  and  sorrows  which  He  suffered 
in  His  Humanity  for  me,  should  be  really  applied  to  me, 
and  be  treasures  of  my  own.  May  He  be  praised  for 
ever. 

And  here  I  remembered  a  certain  desire  which  I  had 
before  felt,  after  this  manner — Oh,  that  God  had  granted 
me  to  be,  for  love  of  Jesus  Christ,  servant  to  Adam,  to 
Abraham,  to  David,  and  lastly  to  the  Blessed  Virgin 
Mary,  who  conceived  Him,  bare  Him,  and  nursed  Him  : 
and  so  again  to  the  Apostles,  to  each  Pope,  successors  of 
St.  Peter,  down  to  Paul  III.,  under  whom  we  now  are, 
and  of  all  the  Popes  who  are  to  be  hereafter.  I  desired, 
in  the  first  place,  considering  the  Sacred  Humanity  of 
Christ,  to  serve  with  bodily  service  all  the  ancient  fathers, 
from  whom  He  was  descended  according  to  the  flesh, 
and  then,  dwelling  on  the  thought  of  His  Divinity,  to 
serve  with  spiritual  exercises  the  fathers  of  the  New 
Testament,  who  have  to  serve  Christ,  and  at  the  same 
time  as  in  spiritual  offices. 

On  the  day  of  St.  Evaristus,45  pope  and  martyr,  I  rose 
three  hours  after  midnight,  and  felt  a  great  devotion  and 
many  pious  desires  to  pray  for  the  needs  of  my  neigh 
bours — Christians,  Jews,  Turks,  heathen  and  heretics. 
And  there  came  into  my  mind  various  kinds  of  maladies 
of  men,  that  is,  their  various  infirmities,  sins,  despair, 
lamentations,  deaths,  famine,  pestilence,  and  other  travails. 
And  in  relation  to  all  of  these  I  set  before  me  our  Lord 
God  and  Redeemer  Christ,  our  Comforter  and  our 

45  October  26. 


288  In  Germany. 


Deliverer,  praying  Him  to  vouchsafe  to  give  to  all  succour, 
comfort,  and  aid.  And  here  again  I  desired  and  prayed 
with  an  abundance  of  feeling,  that  I  might  be  allowed 
to  be  servant  and  minister  of  Christ,  so  that  by  means 
of  Him  I  might  have  power  to  succour,  console,  and 
liberate  many  from  divers  evil,  spiritual  as  well  as 
corporal,  so  as  to  practise  in  such  a  manner  all  the  offices 
of  charity  to  my  neighbours,  whether  in  relation  to  the 
soul  or  to  the  body.  Remember  this,  my  soul,  and  that  at 
that  and  other  times  it  was  given  thee  to  confide,  not  in 
thyself  nor  in  thine  own  merits,  but  in  Christ  alone ;  and 
this  as  to  things  which  cannot  be  done  by  natural  power, 
such  as  healing  the  sick,  giving  sight  to  the  blind,  cleans 
ing  the  lepers,  driving  out  devils — so  far  did  thy  desire 
and  thy  spirit  stretch,  and  that  without  vanity  or  foolish 
ness,  making  thee  desire  all  things  possible  unto  charity, 
from  which,  even  though  it  be  no  larger  than  a  grain  of 
mustard-seed,  confidence  is  wont  to  spring  without  rash 
ness  or  presumption.  Otherwise,  that  faith  which  is  not 
kindled  by  charity  is  of  little  help  to  him  who  worketh, 
as  the  Apostle  says — Si  enim  habuero  tantam  fidem  ita  ut 
monies  transferam,  charitatem  autem  non  Jiabnero,  nihil 
mihi prodest — although  it  may  profit  my  neighbour.  It  is 
necessary,  therefore,  that  the  faith  which  is  to  work  great 
things  towards  our  neighbours,  be  the  child  of  and 
awakened  by  this  charity  which  we  feel  towards  them, 
by  means  of  which  we  come  to  understand  what  is  useful 
and  what  is  necessary  for  our  neighbour,  and  this  without 
being  moved  by  any  other  feeling  than  pure  charity — 
for  this  is  often  wont  to  be  the  case  when  we  see  others 
in  extreme  necessity,  and  less  often  in  others,  on  account 
of  our  human  imperfection,  which  makes  it  difficult  to 
feel  the  smaller  needs  of  our  neighbours,  as  we  do  our 
own  smaller  needs.  A  man  in  love  with  the  glory  of 
God,  who  by  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost  knows  how  to 


In  Germany1.  289 


weigh  to  the  very  life  the  things  that  are  of  God,  will  be 
•  able  more  easily  than  another  to  obtain  this  faith  by 
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  means  of  which  he  will 
be  able  to  work  great  and  wonderful  things  to  the  glory 
of  God  at  a  fitting  time.  Again,  in  your  own  necessities, 
•especially  when  they  are  very  extreme  and  great,  and 
-tend  to  deep  affliction  of  the  heart,  it  is  not  difficult  to 
-find  faith,  by  means  of  which,  contrary  to  all  human 
hope,  you  may  be  able  to  obtain  some  small  grace  for 
soul  or  body,  such  as  a  deliverance  from  some  evil  or 
•the  acquisition  of  some  necessary  good  which  otherwise 
could  not  be  had.  In  such  a  case  it  is  of  the  very 
.first  importance  that  a  man  should  not  love  himself  for 
.himself,  but  should  be  directed  in  everything  to  the 
glory  of  God,  the  salvation  of  his  own  soul  and  of  his 
neighbours.  Keep,  therefore,  thine  eye  in  everything 
on  the  most  perfect  of  graces  and  gifts,  that  is,  on 
charity,  and  practise  thyself  in  this,  making  continual 
.advances  therein,  and  then  it  will  be  easy  for  thee  to 
.acquire  other  graces  also  relating  to  good  for  thyself 
and  thy  neighbour.  Ask  the  grace  of  little  things,  and 
thou  shalt  find  grace  to  aim  at  and  hope  for  great 
things.  Practise  thyself  in  the  least  matters,  and  God 
will  give  you  the  greater ;  do  all  that  thou  canst  do, 
.and  then  God  will  give  thee  strength  also  to  do  what 
is  above  thee. 

There  are  many  who  are  often  very  anxious  and  eager 
to  do  good  works  that  are  great  and  universal  in  their 
range,  and  meanwhile  they  neglect  lesser  and  more  par 
ticular  good  works,  for  which  they  might  well  have  found 
sufficient  grace  to  help  them.  If  you  find  you  have  one 
single  talent,  do  not  hide  it,  but  make  use  of  it,  and  you 
will  gain  thereunto  another  in  addition  to  it.  Never 
fail  to  execute  the  good  works  that  are  present  to 
your  hand,  for  the  sake  of  the  idle  consideration  of  other 


2  go  In  Germany. 


future  good  works,  which  are  far  off  from  thee.  Desires 
are  good,  when  they  are  from  God  and  conceived  for 
Him  and  directed  to  Him.  Hence,  also,  it  sometimes 
happens  that  in  our  prayers  we  desire  impossible  things, 
and  things  which  will  never  be  granted  to  us  :  the  desires 
are,  nevertheless,  not  displeasing  to  God,  to  Whom  they 
are  directed. 

It  often  happens  that  when  you  look  on  yourself,  and 
on  your  own  strength,  you  seem  to  yourself  not  to  have 
the  knowledge  or  the  power  to  do  anything  at  all  for  the 
service  of  your  neighbour.  But  if  the  Spirit  of  our  Lord 
guides  you,  He  will  make  you  see  the  most  difficult 
things  accomplished  most  easily  by  His  grace,  so  to 
excite  you  to  undertake  great  works,  and  that  you  may 
never  be  without  hope  in  any  matter.  And  even  if  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord,  as  is  possible,  were  to  make  you  feel 
a  perfect  certainty  as  to  some  misfortune,  some  utter 
condemnation  of  certain  cities  or  persons,  and  you  were 
to  seem  to  know  that  such  was  the  will  of  God,  not  for 
all  that  ought  you  to  cease  from  supplicating  His  divine 
goodness  for  such  cases,  and  asking  for  mercy  on  them, 
knowing  by  faith  that  that  will  of  God  is  not  absolute 
but  conditional,  since  God  declares  many  things  to  His 
servants  as  well  as  in  the  Scriptures  in  an  absolute 
manner,  while  yet  He  does  not  decree  them  absolutely,, 
on  account  of  the  many  variable  conditions  of  contingent 
things. 

On  the  vigil  of  SS.  Simon  and  Jude,4G  I  happened  to 
be  making  my  prayers  in  the  silence  of  the  night,  and 
I  felt  myself  strongly  inspired  to  use  every  effort  in  order 
that  the  poor  sick  people  who  are  to  be  found  up  and 
down  the  streets  of  the  city  of  Mayence,  might  be 
collected  together  and  received  into  some  hospital,, 
where  they  might  be  well  tended  and  governed. 
40  October  27. 


In  Germany.  291 


And  here  I  remembered  many  cases  of  negligence  of 
my  own  and  of  want  of  care  for  certain  poor  persons 
with  wounds  and  sores,  whom  I  had  seen  and  even 
visited  more  than  once,  but  with  tepidity.  And  although 
I  had  then  no  means  of  helping  them,  yet  I  might  have 
gone  from  door  to  door  begging  for  them,  and  I  might 
have  found  others  who  might  have  helped  them,  prelates, 
lords,  magistrates,  or  doctors  of  the  places  in  which  these 
poor  creatures  were. 

I  felt  myself  also  moved  to  pray  all  those  of  the 
Blessed  in  heaven  who  had  been  weak  and  of  bad 
health  in  this  life,  to  deign  to  be  the  advocates  of  the 
poor  sick  people  of  this  and  other  cities,  and  also  to 
obtain  for  me  fresh  grace  to  help  the  poor  in  such  a 
state. 

On  the  day  of  the  holy  Apostles  Simon  and  Jude,47 
I  had  much  consolation  after  Mass  in  certain  meditations 
and  colloquies  which  I  made  either  immediately  with 
God,  or  with  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost, 
as  also  with  the  Sacred  Humanity  of  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord,  and  in  them  I  felt  greater  consolation  than  I  am 
wont  to  feel  when  I  invoke  the  saints,  or  when  I  pray 
for  the  salvation  of  others,  although  in  these  two  last 
ways  I  am  more  frequently  visited  by  our  Lord  than  in 
those  reflections  which  I  make  immediately  upon  the 
knowledge  and  love  of  God.  But  it  is  abundantly 
enough  for  me  that  our  great  and  mighty  Lord  should 
communicate  Himself  to  me  in  His  saints  and  through 
them,  for  my  good  and  the  benefit  of  my  neighbours, 
towards  whom  I  am  warmest  in  feeling  when  I  am 
coldest  in  work.  Hence  it  is  that  I  am  often  most 
anxious  and  full  of  various  desires  for  their  salvation 
and  profit,  at  the  time  that  I  do  not  exert  myself  enough 
in  doing  for  them  what  I  can,  and  hence  I  often  fail 

47  October  28. 
T    2 


2  9  2  In  Germany. 


in  external  execution  of  good  at  the  time  that  1  am 
overflowing  with  internal  affections.  May  it  please  our 
Lord  God  to  set  in  order,  direct,  and  arrange  all  that 
I  do  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  His  will,  so  that 
I  may  not  only  be  in  search  of  what  He  is,  but  also  of 
what  He  desires  me  to  do.  He  in  His  own  Essence  is 
most  high  and  infinitely  great  beyond  all  capacity  and 
intelligence  of  all  men,  and  yet  in  His  will,  which  He 
lays  on  us  by  precept,  He  is  so  modest  and  limited  that 
He  never  obliges  man  to  anything  which  He  cannot  do, 
never  commands  anything  that  is  beyond  the  force  of 
any  one,  however  weak,  and  more  than  this,  He  helps 
him  with  His  grace  which  is  always  more  ready  at  hand 
to  help  man  than  he  is  to  himself.  It  is  right  therefore 
that  God  should  be  greatly  praised  for  this,  in  that  being 
Himself  in  all  respects  infinite  and  immense,  He  yet 
contents  Himself  with  what  our  nature,  so  limited  and 
measured,  can  do,  and  that  the  burning  force  of  the 
grace  that  He  gives  us  is  so  tempered  that  He  does 
not  require,  as  of  necessity,  that  we  should  do  the  very 
extreme  of  what  our  power  and  knowledge  and  will  can 
effect. 

On  the  following  Sunday,48  after  I  had  been  delivered 
from  a  certain  perplexity  of  mind  and  had  regained  all 
that  serenity  which  is  of  the  good  spirit,  I  seemed  to 
hear  some  words  of  consolation,  to  the  effect  that  He 
Who  knows  how  to  take  away  from  us  the  fear  of  an 
evil,  knows  also  and  is  able  to  drive  away  as  well  that 
•evil  from  which  that  fear  and  anxiety  of  mind  proceeded, 
and  He  Who  can  give  us  good  hope  in  adversity  can 
also  give  us  the  thing  itself  which  we  hope  for.  May 
He  then  be  blessed,  Who  is  not  less  powerful  in  over 
coming  all  the  obstacles  that  meet  us  and  contradict  us, 
than  in  soothing  all  the  disturbances  of  our  spirit ! 
48  October  29. 


In  Germany.  293 


On  the  solemnity  of  All  Saints,49  I  felt  a  great  desire 
that  there  should  be  the  same  sort  of  solemn  remem 
brance  made  of  them  in  heaven  as  on  earth  to-day,  as 
well  as  great  mercy  and  pity  for  all  that  now  dwell  in 
the  world,  especially  sinners,  so  that  no  one  should  be 
left  out,  and  memorial  of  all  be  made  in  heaven.  I 
desired  the  same  thing  for  the  souls  in  purgatory;  for 
each  of  the  saints  can  easily  see  in  the  mirror  of  the 
Divinity  every  one  who  is  on  earth  or  in  purgatory,  and 
so  remember  them  before  God. 

On  All  Souls'  day,  I  had  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end  of  Mass,  and  even  from  the  time  that  I  began  to 
prepare  for  it,  great  devotion  in  the  thought  of  the  dead, 
such  as  I  never  had  before  on  this  day,  and  it  all  came 
by  the  spirit  moving  me  to  compassion  for  the  departed. 
There  was  given  to  me  an  abundant  flow  of  tears ;  I 
thought  of  my  father  and  mother  and  relations,  of  my 
deceased  brothers  of  the  Society,  of  our  benefactors,  of 
the  relations  of  all  my  brothers  ;  there  were  present  to 
my  thoughts  those  who  in  life  were  specially  devoted 
to  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary,  and  to  certain  particular 
saints,  and  to  the  angels,  and  also  to  those  who  had 
no  one  in  this  world,  which  is  the  place  of  meriting, 
to  pray  for  them. 

I  had  also  a  feeling  of  humility  as  to  the  continual 
hunger  and  thirst  I  have  to  be  able  to  serve  Christ  in 
His  work  of  saving  souls.  The  words  which  seemed  to 
come  to  me  with  this  feeling  were  to  this  effect — '  For 
as  much  as  thou  art  not  worthy  to. serve  Christ  Himself, 
the  Lord  of  all  lords,  nor  even  to  be  employed  in  the 
harvest  of  souls,  take  comfort  in  this  at  least  that  thou 
mayest  find  something  that  thou  canst  do  for  Christ's 
sake,  as  the  servant  of  some  lord  of  lesser  dignity,  as 
some  particular  saint,  or  the  souls  of  the  departed  who 
49  November  i. 


294  I11  Germany. 


are  being  punished  in  purgatory.  And  this  last  is  indeed 
a  great  affair,  and  one  to  which  in  times  past  great  many 
others  have  served  Him.' 

On  that  same  All  Souls'  day,  just  as  I  had  finished 
none  after  dinner,  I  felt  great  devotion  accompanied  with 
various  illustrations  of  holy  light  as  to  certain  classes  of 
men,  which  may  be  put  down  as  five.  The  first,  in  every 
way  more  perfect  than  the  rest,  of  the  souls  already  in 
heaven  and  blessed.  The  second,  of  souls  in  purgatory, 
who  are  afflicted  with  the  deepest  sorrows,  and  for  a  time 
are  kept  fast  in  the  greatest  torments.  The  third  is  of 
the  souls  of  children  in  Limbus,who  have  died  in  original 
sin  and  who  have  missed  all  the  good  that  Christians  can 
gain  through  Christ,  although  they  neither  have  nor  ever 
will  have  any  pain  of  sense  internal  or  external.  The 
fourth  is  of  the  souls  of  those  who  have  been  condemned 
to  eternal  punishment,  and  who  are  now  and  will  be  for 
all  eternity  tormented  in  every  way.  The  fifth  is  of  the 
souls  of  those  who  are  in  this  world  and  who  are  journey 
ing  on  still  between  the  hope  of  life  in  heaven  and  the 
fear  of  the  pains  of  hell.  These  have  in  their  own  hands 
power  to  save  themselves  or  to  be  lost ;  the  latter,  spring 
ing  from  their  own  nature  alone,  the  other  springing  from 
that  divine  grace  which  is  always  in  our  power  and  may 
be  said  to  be  more  ours  than  our  own  free  will. 

I  pondered  then  these  five  classes  with  varying 
affections,  feeling  chiefly  moved  in  the  thought  of  the 
souls  in  purgatory,  and  the  souls  of  those  still  alive  in 
this  corrupt  world.  I  felt  desires  that  the  saints,  who, 
now  that  they  are  in  their  glory  can  do  so  much,  should 
pray  for  us ;  and  that  the  souls  in  purgatory  should  also 
pray  for  us  in  those  groanings  and  contrition  of  theirs, 
which,  for  the  rest,  do  not  profit  themselves,  but  which  if 
they  were  the  sorrows  of  heart  still  mortal,  could  not  fail 
to  merit  in  the  shortest  moment  anything  in  heaven,  and 


In  Germany.  295 


thus  can  avail  much  and  far  more  than  can  be  said  for  us 
who  live  in  faith  and  have  not  yet  come  to  know  by 
•sight  the  things  of  God.  May  Christ  grant  that  these 
groanings  may  plead  in  His  sight  for  us  !  I  understood 
also  that  it  might  be  most  salutary  that  the  souls  in 
purgatory  should  be  invoked  to  obtain  for  us  a  true 
knowledge  and  a  true  sense  of  our  sins,  diligence  in  good 
works,  solicitude  in  bringing  forth  fruits  of  penance,  and 
in  general  all  those  graces  for  want  of  which  they  them 
selves  are  now  suffering  so  great  a  punishment. 

On  the  day  after  All  Souls'  day,  in  the  morning,  I 
observed  many  things  that  occurred  to  me  as  to  the 
nakedness  of  my  soul  and  spirit,  and  for  that  reason  I 
begged  our  Lord  with  some  fervour  of  devotion,  that 
through  the  intercession  of  all  the  saints  He  would  deign 
to  clothe  me  with  a  garment  of  purity,  innocence,  chastity, 
and  cleanness,  against  all  the  stains  and  defilements  of 
this  deceitful  life,  and  with  the  garment  of  a  fervent  love 
of  Himself  and  of  my  neighbour  against  all  the  chills 
•of  the  evils  that  threaten  us  from  without,  against  the 
wickedness  of  men  or  any  other  adverse  accidents. 

I  had  also,  it  seemed  to  me,  a  clear  understanding  of 
'the  nakedness  of  the  souls  in  purgatory,  which  taught 
me  that  I  ought  to  account  their  sufferings  as  far  heavier, 
inasmuch  as  they  suffer  in  the  soul  deprived  of  the  body. 
For  just  as  a  soul  which  does  not  yet  possess  a  glorified 
body  is  better  able  to  feel  consolation  when  separate 
from  its  body  than  when  united  to  it,  so  a  soul  which 
suffers  away  from  its  body  because  this  has  not  yet  been 
given  up  to  punishment,  suffers  more  in  this  naked  state 
than  if  it  were  still  clothed  with  its  mortal  body ;  and  the 
reason  is  this,  that  pain  which  pierces  through  soul  and 
spirit  directly,  is  deeper  and  far  more  keen  than  pain  that- 
only  reaches  the  soul  through  the  body,  because  a  mortal 
body,  and  even  the  senses  of  the  body,  would  necessarily 


296  In  Germany. 


absorb  or  divert  not  only  some  of  the  corporal  punish 
ment  that  is  inflicted,  but  also  all  that  part  of  the  spiritual 
punishment  that  is  received  either  through  the  organs  of 
the  body,  or  through  those  faculties  of  the  soul  that  are, 
as  it  were,  buried  therein. 

On  another  day  within  the  octave  of  All  Saints,  I 
began  to  feel  a  new  and  lively  desire  for  greater  per 
fection,  so  as  to  stretch  myself  out  to  those  things  that 
are  before,  forgetting  the  things  that  are  behind.  Here 
upon  I  determined  to  direct  my  thoughts  and  desires  and 
affections  to  the  things  that  are  better  and  higher,  more 
perfect  and  more  pleasing  to  God.  This  favour,  too, 
was  granted  to  me,  at  least  in  part,  while  saying  office 
and  Mass  on  that  same  day,  namely,  that  I  strove  to 
attain  to  a  more  perfect  attention  and  more  perfect 
understanding  of  the  words  that  I  said,  and  that  my 
soul,  instead  of  being  drawn  away  to  other  things,  should 
attend  more  resolutely  to  its  own  greater  and  better 
profit. 

I  noted  also  here  how  very  much  every  one  must  be 
on  his  guard  not  to  let  himself  be  pierced  by  those  cold 
winds  which  arise  from  the  attentive  consideration  of  the 
defects  of  others,  for  from  this  it  often  comes  about  that 
we  lose  the  hope  which  we  had  of  our  neighbour's  salva 
tion,  our  good  opinion  of  him  goes,  and  our  confidence 
in  him,  our  love  and  charity  towards  him.  These  evils 
must  be  overcome  by  the  fervour  of  the  spirit,  not  only 
when  they  exist  only  in  our  opinion,  but  when  the 
defects  are  truly  to  be  found  in  our  neighbour ;  that  so- 
evil  may  be  overcome  in  good,  and  we  may  not  desist 
from  intercourse  with  him  and  care  concerning  him  on 
account  of  his  miseries.  On  this  account  it  is  of  the 
highest  importance  in  such  cases  that  things  should  not 
be  considered  in  themselves  but  in  God,  and  in  what  we 
know  of  His  good  pleasure.  A  man  who  does  not  raise 


In  Germany.  297 


his  mind  and  his  spiritual  senses  to  the  things  which  are 
of  God,  but  rather  dwells  on  things  in  themselves,  full  of - 
defects  and  evil,  as  they  are  in  themselves,  such  a  man 
will  be  quickly  disturbed  and  quickly  grow  cold,  and 
despair  of  success  in  what  he  undertakes.  He  will  be 
dejected  and  take  to  flight  in  sadness  and  indolence, 
will  easily  be  deceived,  and  will  judge  of  the  issues  of 
things  all  on  the  worst  side  and  be  filled  with  many 
suspicions. 

And  here  I  noted  how  sometimes  it  may  help  us  very 
much  not  to  have  great  sensible  devotion,  for  it  is  very 
expedient  that  we  should  learn  to  work  with  but  little 
grace  to  help  us,  or,  to  put  it  in  better  words,  to  co 
operate  to  that  lesser  grace  which  our  Lord  gives  us, 
straining  ourselves  to  do  what  we  can  and  what  God 
requires  of  us,  so  that,  with  but  a  small  aid  of  grace  to 
help  us,  we  may  cherish  some  good  desire  or  gain  some 
sort  of  spiritual  profit.  Sometimes  God  pours  into  the 
soul  His  holy  fear,  and  this  fear  is  often  more  profitable 
than  a  great  fervour  of  devotion.  Hence  we  must  esteem 
highly,  not  only  devotion,  but  also  the  desire  and  the 
effort  to  have  devotion,  as  also  the  sorrow  because  we 
have  it  not.  These  are  seeds  of  great  worth,  which  in 
due  time  bring  their  fruit  to  maturity. 

Desires,  therefore,  are  good  things,  and  so  are  prayers 
and  petitions,  although  they  be  accompanied  by  but  little 
grace  of  devotion.  For  in  this  way  we  go  on,  although 
slowly,  though  with  difficulty  and  tears,  we  go  on  and  we 
arrive  at  God ;  whereas  with  an  abundance  of  devotion 
and .  consolation  we  are  in  a  certain  way  drawn  to  Him 
self  by  God,  Who  consoles  us.  When  St.  Paul  says  that 
we  are  not  sufficient  of  ourselves  even  to  think  anything 
of  ourselves,  he  does  not  infer  that  we  can  do  absolutely 
nothing  as  of  ourselves,  but  he  says  that  we  are  not 
sufficient,  that  our  own  forces  alone  are  not  enough  to 


298  In  Germany. 


do  good.  For  it  behoves  us  that  grace  should  go  before, 
and  accompany,  and  follow  that  very  little  or  nothing 
which  comes  from  us,  as  of  ourselves,  and  which  is  of 
itself  insufficient.  In  order,  therefore,  that  we  may  have 
sufficiency  given  to  us,  even  in  the  least  things,  our  own 
work  is  required,  which  is  to  cooperate  with  the  grace  of 
God,  and  receive  therefrom  its  sufficiency  even  in  the 
first  apprehension  of  that  good  which  it  does.  Let  no 
one,  then,  say  that  he  cannot  do  good  always  and  every 
where.  For  although  our  sufficiency  comes  from  God, 
Who  works  in  us,  yet  nevertheless  it  is  always  within 
us,  because  grace  is  always  standing  at  the  door  and 
knocking,  it  is  always  and  everywhere  anticipating  and 
expecting  us,  but  we  may  work  together  with  it  with 
that  force  which  is  our  own.50 

On  the  fifth  day  within  the  octave  of  the  same  feast  of 
All  Saints,  in  the  morning,  after  I  had  made  my  daily 
prayer  and  contemplation  of  the  life  of  Christ,  I  felt  a 
great  devotion  to  the  holy  angels,  and  the  saints,  and  the 
souls  in  purgatory,  and  I  besought  the  angels  of  all  the 
saints,  and  of  the  souls  in  purgatory,  that  is,  those  angels 
who  had  at  one  time  been  their  guardians,  that  they 
would  be  propitious  to  me  through  the  merits  of  Jesus 
Christ,  that  so  I  might  be  able  to  overcome  the  malice  of 
the  evil  spirits  who  by  God's  permission  try  even  the 
saints  in  their  cause  of  virtue. 

I  made  my  petition  also  with  great  devotion  to  Christ 
our  Lord,  pondering  how  He  had  subjected  Himself 
externally  to  the  power  of  the  bad  angels,  as  of  Herod, 
of  Archelaus,  of  Annas,  of  Caiaphas,  of  Pilate,  and  of 
the  others  who  afflicted  Him  with  bodily  sufferings  ;  and 

50  In  these  few  sentences  it  may  be  said  that  the  whole  treatise  of 
Divine  Grace  is  summed  up.  We  may  learn  from  them  what  were  the 
doctrines  on  that  subject  taught  at  the  time  in  the  University  of  Paris, 
where  Father  Favre  learnt  them. 


In  Germany.  299 


even  to  Satan,  the  tempter,  who  with  external  violence 
tempted  Him  in  the  desert,  as  if  wishing  to  allure  Him 
to  the  things  that  belong  to  the  flesh  and  to  the  pride  of 
life  and  to  the  love  of  riches.  I  desired,  therefore,  that 
by  the  grace  won  by  this  so  great  humility,  it  might  be 
ordained  that  the  devils  and  bad  angels  should  have 
no  power  over  my  interior,  but  rather,  if  it  were  not 
expedient  that  it  should  be  otherwise,  over  my  exterior 
only.  Here  I  considered  how  the  devils  were  able 
indeed  to  afflict  Christ  by  the  hands  of  men,  by  the 
scourges,  the  nails,  and  other  external  things,  but  could 
not  do  so  by  any  evil  thoughts  or  suggestions  so  as  to 
provoke  His  flesh,  or  spirit,  to  evil.  In  the  same  way 
I  thought  how  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary  and  many  of 
the  saints,  suffered  external  afflictions,  but  not  internal, 
although  some  holy  men  and  holy  women  (but  not  the 
Blessed  Virgin  Mary)  were  sometimes,  even  repeatedly, 
attacked  by  interior  trials  connected  with  the  vanities  of 
the  world  and  the  pleasures  of  the  flesh,  caused  by  the 
ministry  of  evil  spirits. 

On  the  1 3th  of  November,  the  day  on  which  the  Canon 
Bartholomew  Monson  was  buried,  I  was  in  the  town  of 
Lower  Ingelheim,  two  leagues  from  Mayence.  I  felt  some 
sadness,  thinking  I  had  not  taken  all  the  care  I  might  of 
him.  I  seemed  to  myself  to  have  done  nothing  for  him  • 
but  then  I  took  comfort  from  a  sort  of  answer  that  came 
to  my  mind  that  it  was  well  that  a  person's  will  should 
go  far  beyond  any  good  work  that  he  does,  and  not  that 
the  will  should  be  exhausted  and  borne  down  by  its 
works.  I  received  also  instruction  in  thinking  over  the 
repugnances  that  are  wont  to  be  experienced  by  those 
who  exercise  themselves  in  such  works  of  charity  to  the 
sick,  and  especially  if  they  are  poor,  wounded,  or  if  there 
is  contagion.  And  the  instruction  came  to  this,  that  it 
behoves  every  one  who  attends  to  such  good  works,  or 


300  In  Germany. 


to  any  others  for  Christ's  sake,  to  be  willing  to  give  even 
his  life  in  the  performing  of  any  such  work  of  charity. 
Here  also,  whilst  I  was  searching  within  myself  for  some 
reason  for.  devotion  and  thanksgiving,  and  reflecting  on 
the  time  of  the  death  of  the  aforesaid  Master  Canon 
Bartholomew,  which  was  after  midnight  on  Sunday  night, 
that  is,  about  two  o'clock  on  Monday  morning,  this 
reason  for  good  hope  occurred  to  me,  that  the  deceased 
had  been  for  many  years  most  earnestly  and  constantly 
devout  in  honouring  St.  Michael  the  Archangel,  to  whom, 
together  with  all  the  other  angels,  Monday  is  con 
secrated  in  many  churches  by  a  special  commemoration. 
I  rejoiced  that  he  had  died  on  that  day,  and  was  thus 
myself  consoled. 

Another  day  when  I  was  celebrating  Mass  for  one 
of  our  religious  brethren,  who  had  died  at  Louvain  the 
preceding  day,  as  I,  unworthy  that  I  am,  held  in  my 
hands  the  most  Blessed  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist,  I 
saw  and  understood  a  great  benefit  done  me  by  God 
that  I  had  hitherto  not  thought  of,  this,  namely,  that  He 
had  left  me  my  body  as  the  instrument  of  my  soul,  to  aid 
me  in  many  ways  in  the  service  of  both  Christ  Himself 
and  His  Father.  I  besought  Christ,  therefore,  that  He 
would  vouchsafe  to  bestow  this  grace  in  answer  to  the 
prayers  of  all  my  friends  and  others,  that  I  might  not 
breathe  forth  my  spirit  from  my  body  till  such  time  as  my 
soul  should  be  rightly  disposed  to  merit  to  be  received 
into  the  hands  of  Almighty  God. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  Catharine  of  Alexandria,51 1  received 
a  singular  light  as  to  a  practice  which  would  help  very 
much  to  the  proper  reciting  of  the  divine  office.  It  was 
this — '  Persuade  yourself  that  as  long  as  you  give  the 
attention  you  ought  to  the  divine  words,  so  long  will  our 
Lord  Himself  be  solicitous  for  your  interests,  both  in 
61  November  25. 


In  Germany. 


your  affairs  of  business  and  your  other  works  ;  and  take 
care,  therefore,  not  to  allow  yourself  to  be  distracted  by 
thoughts  of  good  and  .pious  works,  be  they  of  what  sort 
or  what  importance  they  may,  lest  you  should  thereby 
prevent  God  Himself  from  being  solicitous  for  them  in 
your  stead.'  I  saw  also  how  fitting  it  would  be  when 
saying  office  to  consider  on  the  one  hand  God  Himself 
present  and  His  good  angel,  who  notes  and  weighs  most 
exactly  all  my  exertions,  on  the  other  hand  the  enemy  of 
men,  that  is,  the  malignant  spirit,  who  notes  down  every 
fault  I  commit,  that  he  may  some  day  be  able  to  charge 
it  against  me  before  God. 

On  the  day52  before  the  feast  of  St.  Saturninus,  as  I  was 
saying  the  translated  office  of  St.  Csesarius,  martyr,  1 
experienced  a  great  feeling  of  devotion  towards  this  holy 
martyr,  and  this,  although  I  knew  nothing  special  about 
either  his  life  or  martyrdom.  The  favour  was  then,  for 
the  first  time,  granted  to  me  to  understand  the  benefits 
to  be  gained  by  making  a  contemplation  regarding  each 
saint  as  his  feast  occurs,  the  contemplation  to  have,  after 
the  ordinary  preludes,  five  points,  as  follows,  (i)  Offer 
thanks  to  God  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  Who 
from  all  eternity  predestined  this  saint,  Who  chose,  called, 
justified,  sanctified,  and  finally  placed  him  in  glory. 
(2)  Thank  the  Blessed  Virgin,  St.  Michael,  and  the 
saint's  good  angel,  and  all  the  saints,  men  and  women, 
who,  by  their  prayers,  or  in  any  other  way,  helped  this 
saint  before  God  in  the  saving  of  his  soul.  (3)  Pray  to 
God  and  to  the  saint  himself  for  the  souls  in  purgatory, 
and  all  those  still  alive,  who  were  or  are  devout  to  the 
saint.  (4)  Beseech  God  (pondering  at  the  same  time 
how  much  profit  must  ensue  from  your  prayers  being 
granted)  that  He  would  vouchsafe  to  preserve  for  us  the 
writings  and  books  from  which  we  might  be  able  to  keep 

52  November  28. 


3<D2  In  Germany. 


in  our  minds,  either  some  of  the  words  of  the  saints,  or 
at  least  some  of  the  good  deeds  that  the  saints  performed 
for  our  edification  when  on  the  earth.  (5)  Consider  how 
good  and  profitable  it  is  that  the  relics  of  the  saint  have 
been  preserved  to  us,  and  are  held  in  such  great  venera 
tion,  or  how  good  and  profitable  it  would  be  if  they  had 
been  so  preserved.  If,  however,  any  one  should  not 
find  in  these  five  points  matter  on  which  to  exercise 
his  understanding,  let  him  exercise  his  will  by  desiring 
from  his  heart  that  all  the  things  named  should  be 
done,  and  should  be  still  better  and  better  clone. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  Saturninus,53  which  was  also  the  vigil 
of  St.  Andrew  the  Apostle,  when  I  was  about  to  say  Mass, 
the  grace  was  given  me  to  make  the  following  petitions 
with  my  whole  heart,  namely,  to  God  the  Father  for  the 
grace  and  all  other  things  needed  by  my  memory,  to  God 
the  Son  for  everything  needed  by  my  intellect,  and  to 
God  the  Holy  Ghost  for  everything  needed  by  my  will. 
In  this  way  I  commended  to  the  Supreme  Trinity  my 
three  powers.  Besides  this  I  commended  my  soul  to  the 
Soul  of  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  and  lastly  my  whole 
self,  all  that  makes  what  is  called  man,  to  Christ  made 
man  for  us. 

Here  also  with  a  singular  feeling  of  misery  and 
depression  of  spirit,  I  prayed  for  the  grace  of  the 
elevation  of  my  mind ;  both  that  it  might  not  now 
remain,  as  it  had  hitherto  been,  inclining  downwards  to 
the  things  of  earth,  and  that  by  the  grace  of  Jesus  Christ 
it  might  be  always  turned  and  soaring  up  to  that  which 
is  above.  While  thinking  of  this  prayer,  this  also 
occurred  to  me  as  it  had  indeed  often  occurred  to 
me  before,  namely,  to  recommend  myself  to  that  holy 
woman  who  was  delivered  by  Christ  from  the  infirmity 
by  which  she  had  been  made  unable  to  look  upwards 
53  November  29. 


In  Germany.  303 


even  with  the  eyes  of  her  body,  but  who,  after  her  deliver 
ance,  was  at  once  able  to  do  so.  For  it  is  of  much  avail 
to  invoke  those  who  have  received  certain  graces  with 
the  view  that  they  may  obtain  the  same  or  similar 
favours  for  us.  It  is,  therefore,  consonant  to  piety  and 
true  doctrine  to  say  that  certain  particular  saints  should 
be  specially  invoked  for  certain  particular  graces  both  of 
the  spiritual  and  of  the  temporal  order.  For  although 
God  can  do  everything  directly  Himself,  or  by  any 
one  saint  He  chooses  as  well  as  by  another,  it  is  not 
His  will  to  bring  about  everything  by  one  and  the 
same  means. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  Eligius,54  bishop  and  confessor, 
I  asked  with  great  devotion  for  two  graces  that  are  con 
tained  in  the  collect  of  the  common  of  confessors,  when 
we  beg  ut  augeat  devotionem  et  salutcm,  that  is,  that  we 
may  be  increased  in  devotion  and  salvation.  In  the 
Mass,  also,  I  besought  God  that  He  would  take  from 
me  all  that  can  offend  His  divine  eyes,  all  that  can 
separate  me  from  Him,  or  make  me  dry  and  wandering 
and  unworthy  of  giving  Him  honour. 

From  the  feast  of  St.  Andrew  to  that  of  St.  Saba,55 
I  was  considering  a  thing  which  before  I  had  not  con 
sidered,  namely,  that  before  this  I  used  to  pass  from 
distraction  to  devotion,  moved  and  exerted  by  external 
things,  as  for  instance,  the  troublesomeness  of  tempta 
tions,  or  the  remorse  of  conscience,  or  fear,  which  drew 
me  to  seek  devotion  and  a  remedy  against  distraction. 
But  now  I  asked  the  grace  of  God,  and  partly  obtained 
it,  to  be  moved  by  interior  things  instead,  the  fervour  of 
spirit  and  the  affection  of  the  heart.  I  took  courage  to 
ask  this  grace  by  considering  the  life  of  Christ,  which 
began  with  interi9r  things  and  then  went  on  to  external. 
In  the  first  thirty  years  of  His  life,  before  He  began  to 
54  December  i.  55  November  30 — December  5. 


304  In  Germany. 


teach  by  word,  it  was  His  will  to  teach  by  deeds,  to  be 
first  disciple,  then  teacher,  first  subject,  and  then  master 
and  Lord. 

On  that  day  of  St.  Saba,  abbot,  I  was  desirous  to 
celebrate  Mass  for  my  confessor,  and  I  called  to  mind 
all  the  confessors  I  have  had  in  past  times,  feeling  by  the 
favour  of  God  a  great  and  unusual  gratitude  towards 
them.  And  in  this  same  way  I  felt  to  him  who  baptized 
me,  who  gave  me  confirmation,  and  those  who  conferred 
on  me  Sacred  Orders  or  any  other  sacrament.  I  remem 
bered  also  to  pray  in  general  for  all  my  teachers,  and  in 
short  for  all  those  who  have  ministered  unto  me  any 
grace  of  God,  either  by  their  words  or  in  any  other  way. 
I  did  the  same  in  the  name  of  all  my  brethren,  desiring 
in  this  matter  in  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  to  supply  for 
them,  as  they  supply  for  me,  and  are  my  excuse  in  many 
things  before  God,  as  one  limb  of  a  body  is  wont  to  help 
the  rest.  For  just  as  God,  in  regard  of  my  gratitude  or 
thanksgiving,  may  communicate  to  me  some  grace  which 
He  has  not  communicated  to  others,  so  on  the  other 
hand  there  will  be  very  many  things  that  others  will 
think  of  acknowledging  which  I  have  nevef  thought  of. 
I  felt  also  a  great  desire  for  the  salvation  of  all  those  who 
have  administered  to  me  the  sacraments,  as  I  have  said, 
or  any  other  gift  or  good  thing  from  God.  I  desired  also 
that  our  good  God  might  vouchsafe  to  allow  that  those 
whom  He  has  chosen  to  minister  to  me  His  grace  and 
the  good  things  which  are  received  in  turn,  may  also  be 
His  ministers  to  me  as  to  the  glory  and  the  good  things 
of  heaven.  I  had  also  a  good  sentiment  of  humility,  and 
with  it  a  desire  to  pray  that  by  the  grace  and  mercy  of 
Jesus  Christ  it  might  be  given  me  that  my  benefactors 
who  have  so  kindly  helped  me  in  this  life  might  be 
glorious  in  heaven,  and  that  I  might  find  grace  to  be 
subject  in  a  glorious  kind  of  servitude  here  to  all  those 


In  Germany.  305 


whom  I  have  in  any  way  served  in  this  life,  which  is  led 
in  the  state  of  grace.  So  be  it ! 

On  the  solemn  feast  of  the  Conception  of  the  most 
Blessed  Virgin  Mary,  I  felt  what  seemed  a  new  interior 
firmness  and  stability,  by  means  of  which  it  seemed  that 
I  should  be  stronger  in  future  to  overcome  the  floods  of 
temptation.  I  did  not  find  great  devotion  in  the  appre 
hensive  part  of  my  soul,  moving  me  to  great  tenderness 
and  feelings  of  lively  devotion,  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
neither  was  I  so  much  disturbed  by  thoughts  from  the 
evil  and  unclean  spirit,  because  I  felt  in  myself,  by  the 
grace  of  God,  a  kind  of  new  strength  and  vigour,  much 
as  if  a  man  were  to  say  that  his  house  had  been  repaired 
and  strengthened  in  the  foundations,  the  walls,  and  the 
supports,  although  it  had  not  received  any  increase  of 
decoration.  At  other  times  I  felt  very  frequent  impulses  of 
divine  inspirations  and  movements,  though  I  acknowledged 
at  the  same  time  that  I  was  very  weak  and  inconsistent. 
May  our  most  gracious  Jesus,  the  Saint  of  saints,  grant 
me  by  the  intercession  of  His  Blessed  Mother,  and  all 
the  angels  and  saints  of  heaven,  that  I  may  be  able  to 
renew  myself  every  day,  advance  in  grace,  and  diminish 
my  imperfections.  Oh,  that  God  would  so  have  it !  that 
He  would  renew  my  being  and  my  life,  my  senses  and 
my  powers,  my  qualities  and  all  that  is  necessary  to  me 
•for  the  heavenly  life,  and  all  that  may  give  pleasure  to 
my  God ! 

At  the  same  time,  that  is,  on  the  feast  of  the  Con 
ception,  I  observed  something  as  to  my  temptations,  that 
is,  that  I  was  no  longer  overshadowed  by  darkness,  but 
that  I  had  a  greater  interior  clearness,  my  memory  more 
capable  and  vigorous,  and  that  I  was  no  longer  so  much 
disturbed  as  used  to  be  the  case  before.  Oh,  that  these 
things  might  be  the  beginning  of  so  great  a  good  to  me 
that  I  may  at  last,  once  for  all,  pass  from  my  darkness  to 
u 


306  In  Germany. 


that  inaccessible  light,  and  from  the  depth  of  my  con 
fusion,  weakness,  and  infirmity,  to  that  most  bright  life,  full 
of  all  strength  and  firmness !  Our  Lord  knows  who  I  am, 
and  what  I  am  worth,  my  own  peculiar  deformities,  the 
stains  of  my  soul,  and  all  that  I  have  of  evil ;  but  the 
Blessed  Virgin  Mary,  our  Mother  and  our  advocate, 
altogether  fair  and  entirely  without  stain  of  any  kind, 
she,  our  gracious  Lady,  can  obtain  for  me  from  the 
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  grace  whereby 
I  shall  be  entirely  formed  anew,  adorned  and  sanctified. 
fiat,  fiat !  Whatever  thing  may  be  granted  me,  it  will 
proceed  from  the  Power  of  the  Father,  it  will  be  commu 
nicated  to  me  by  the  Wisdom  of  the  Son,  and  given  to 
me  by  the  Goodness  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Fiat,  fiat ! 

On  the  most  sacred  night  in  which  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  was  born,  while  I  was  at  matins  in  the  cathedral 
church  in  front  of  the  relics,  and  was  saying  the  nocturns, 
I  felt  great  devotion  and  shed  an  abundance  of  tears 
from  the  first  beginning  on  to  the  end.  The  words  of 
the  Prophet  Jeremias  that  are  read  in  the  first  nocturn, 
especially  affected  me.  There  were  given  to  me  also 
great  desires,  that  so  I  might  beg  from  my  heart  that  I 
might  be  '  bom  of  God,'  and  '  not  of  bloods,  nor  of  the 
will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  men/ 

I  desired  also,  my  soul  thirsting  and  longing  for  the 
granting  of  the  petition,  that  there  might  be  born  on  that 
night  some  good  and  efficacious  means  to  build  up  what 
is  good  and  pull  down  what  is  evil  in  this  our  century. 
I  felt,  too,  a  great  desire  that  I  myself  might  now  be  born 
to  the  performing  of  every  good  work,  both  for  pursuing 
the  work  of  my  own  salvation,  and  for  the  glory  of  God 
and  the  good  of  my  neighbour.  I  should  be  thus  born 
again,  I  understood,  if  our  Lord  gave  me  such  a  spirit  that 
in  it  and  through  it  I  should  be  able  to  devote  and  order 
my  whole  self  to  every  good  work,  imitating  Him  Who 


In  Germany.  307 


with  His  whole  self  was  for  each  one  of  us  conceived, 
for  each  one  of  us  was  born  and  died.  Hence  we  ought 
in  spirit  to  wish  to  live  all  that  yet  remains  of  our  lives 
so  as  to  do  everything  for  this  end,  the  good  of  our 
neighbour  and  the  praise  of  God.  It  is  enough,  and  more 
than  enough,  that  we  have  lived  hitherto  for  ourselves 
and  for  our  own  temporal  commodities,  as  if,  indeed,  we 
had  been  born  for  ourselves  alone. 

Here  observe  that  three  things  concurred  to  produce 
our  carnal  birth.  First,  the  flesh  and  blood  of  which  we 
are  made,  as  the  material  cause ;  secondly,  the  will  of  the 
parents  that  begat  us ;  thirdly,  that  other  intention  and 
will  of  our  parents  to  have  sons  that  might  be  rich  and 
prosperous  in  this  world,  which  is  so  often  the  reason  of 
the  wish  for  children.  He,  therefore,  who  is  to  be  born 
again  of  God  Himself,  of  Him  Whose  nature  is  most 
perfect,  and  His  every  will  most  right  and  holy,  must  so 
be  born  and  so  live  that  he  be  no  longer  guided  by  the 
inclination  of  his  own  corrupt  nature  of  flesh  and  blood, 
or  be  moved  to  act  according  to  those  movements  of  his 
will  that  belong  to  the  men  of  this  world.  It  is  in  fruits 
like  these  that  can  be  seen  the  signs  of  a  true  birth,  that 
is,  of  birth  that  is  from  God. 

The  first  Mass  which  I  said  at  midnight  I  applied,  as 
far  as  depended  on  my  intention,  to  our  Society,  for 
which  I  earnestly  begged  the  birth  to  all  good  desires, 
to  sanctity,  and  to  justice  before  God;  and  I  prayed  that 
every  member  of  it  might  be  born  to  a  new  life,  so  as  to 
help  the  whole  world.  I  said  this  Mass  in  the  Cathedral. 
I  offered  up  the  second  in  the  monastery  of  the  Carmel 
ites,  and  I  applied  it  for  the  prosperous  issue  of  all  good 
desires  of  the  Bishop  of  Mayence,  and  for  the  spiritual 
birth  of  the  whole  district  of  the  Rhine  intrusted  to  my 
charge.  I  said  the  third  Mass  in  the  Church  of  our 
Lady,  where  I  took  an  opportunity  of  contemplating  her 
u  2 


308  In  Germany. 


birthgiving.  And  I  offered  up  this  Mass  to  obtain  the 
remedies  which  these  sad  times  so  much  need — that  is, 
peace  amongst  Christian  princes,  and  the  destruction  of 
heresy. 

In  the  first  Mass,  I  felt  no  fervour  before  communion, 
and  whilst  I  was  grieving  that  the  habitation  of  my  soul 
was  not  better  disposed,  I  felt  an  answer  made  within 
me  which  rilled  me  with  devotion  and  moved  me  to 
tears,  that  'the  present  slate  of  my  soul  harmonized  well 
with  the  stable  where  Jesus  chose  to  be  born,  because 
it  was  so  poor  a  place.  If  my  soul  were  filled  with 
fervour,  it  would  not  represent  well  that  lowly  stable, 
nor  should  I  see  our  Lord's  Humanity  come  to  me.'  I 
was  consoled  then  in  our  Lord,  Who  deigned  to  come  to 
so  unworthy  a  dwelling-place.  I  had  wished  my  house 
to  be  well  furnished,  that  I  might  draw  comfort  from 
that;  but  I  was  consoled  instead  in  seeing  my  Lord 
come  to  me  because  of  my  very  deformity.  May  it  be 
granted  to  me  henceforward,  whenever  I  shall  be  unable 
to  discover  in  myself  the  form,  character,  and  disposition 
with  which  I  would  wish  to  present  myself  adorned  in  the 
sight  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  of  His  holy  Mother,  and  His 
saints,  whenever,  I  say,  this  same  shall  be  denied  me  for 
some  just  reason,  may  this  be  granted  to  me,  to  know 
how  they,  on  the  other  hand,  are  disposed  towards  me. 

Hitherto  I  have  always  sought  to  clothe  myself  in 
some  feelings  of  devotion,  or  other  splendid  robes,  with 
which  I  might  invite  God  and  His  saints  to  come  to  me, 
and  which  would  render  me  worthy  of  their  love  and 
acceptance.  On  the  other  hand,  I  did  not  employ  a  far 
easier  method  of  approaching  to  them,  which  consists  in 
contemplating  the  gifts  they  themselves  possess,  which 
render  them  so  amiable  and  attractive.  May  the  Almighty 
Father,  and  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  grant  me  the 
grace  to  know  at  the  right  time  both  of  these  truths,  and 


In  Germany.  309 


may  I  have  the  power  and  the  will  to  seek  and  to  ask ; 
to  ask  that  I  may  be  loved  by  God  and  His  saints,  to 
seek  that  I  may  love  God  and  His  saints.  Henceforth  I 
must  be  more  solicitous  to  follow  the  better  and  the 
more  generous  course,  and  that  which  I  have  least  pursued 
hitherto,  that  is,  to  wish  to  love  rather  than  to  be  loved. 
I  must  therefore  seek  with  greater  diligence  the  marks 
which  will  prove  that  I  love.  These  will  be  labours  for 
Christ  and  my  neighbour,  according  to  the  words  of  our 
Lord  to  St.  Peter — '  Lovest  thou  Me  more  than  these  ? 
Feed  My  sheep.'  Strive  then  to  be  first  Peter,  that 
afterwards  you  may  be  John,  who  was  the  more  beloved 
by  Christ,  and  in  whom  greater  grace  dwelt.  Hitherto 
you  have  wished  to  be  first  John  and  then  Peter.  I 
wrote  this  on  the  eve  of  St.  Stephen,  after  reciting  the 
vespers  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist,  I  said  Mass 
for  some  spiritual  needs  of  mine,  and  to  obtain  assistance 
against  the  chilling  influences  of  certain  evil  spirits, 
which  oftentimes  so  dispose  me  to  some  of  my  neigh 
bours,  and  them  towards  me,  that  we  are  unable  to 
endure  or  correct  one  another.  I  found  in  this  Mass 
great  devotion,  and  great  confidence  against  the  annoy 
ance  of  the  demons ;  against  those  annoyances,  that  is, 
which  cause  men  to  shut  their  hearts  against  each  other, 
and  which  are  wont  to  render  them  unable  to  endure 
one  another,  or,  when  their  defects  ought  not  to  be 
endured,  make  men  unable  or  unwilling  to  correct  each 
other,  but  rather  anxious  to  be  entirely  separated, 
on  account  of  the  disquiet  caused  by  that  spirit  of 
division. 

Here  I  earnestly  begged  the  guardian  angels  of  men, 
and  all  other  angels,  that  they  would  deign  to  be  born  to 
us  with  Christ,  and  I  prayed  in  like  manner  with  regard  to 
the  holy  saints  reigning  in  heaven.  I  also  desired  the  same 


In  Germany. 


for  all  those  in  this  life,  that  every  one  of  them  should  be 
born  unto  his  own  salvation,  and  the  salvation  of  all  his 
neighbours  ;  that  is,  that  each  would  now  begin  seriously 
to  adapt  and  direct  his  whole  being,  first  to  the  spiritual 
profit  of  his  neighbours,  and  then  to  their  temporal 
profit. 

During  the  Mass,  whilst  I  was  reading  the  words 
which  tell  of  the  love  of  Jesus  for  St.  John,  I  felt  a 
great  desire  to  love  and  honour  this  saint,  for  it  was 
given  to  me  to  understand  that  our  Lord  is  much  pleased 
when  this  is  done,  for  whosoever  wishes  to  love  Christ 
must  love  all  that  He  loves,  but  above  all  he  must  love 
the  salvation,  the  spiritual  life,  the  consolation,  and  the 
refection  of  souls,  which  are  the  sheep  and  lambs  of 
Christ,  according'  to  the  charge  which  He  gave  to 
St.  Peter  after  He  had  asked  him  three  times  over, 
'Lovest  thou  Me?' 

On  these  Christmas  feasts,  it  seems  to  me  that  I  have 
gained  for  my  spiritual  birth  this  special  grace,  that  I 
desire,  with  an  anxiety  hitherto  unknown  to  me,  to  seek 
the  marks  of  love  for  God  and  His  Divine  Son,  and 
what  concerns  them,  and  this  grace  will  urge  me  hence 
forward  to  think  more,  to  desire  more,  to  say  and  do 
more  willingly,  the  things  which  are  of  God.  My  chief 
anxiety  hitherto  was  about  such  feelings  as  might  prove 
to  me  what  it  is  to  be  loved  by  God  and  His  saints ;  for 
I  wished  especially  to  understand  what  were  their  dispo 
sitions  with  regard  to  me.  And  this  is  not  a  bad  thing, 
on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  first  thing  that  happens  to  such 
as  are  going  to  God,  or,  to  speak  more  exactly,  to  such 
as  are  appeasing  God  in  their  own  regard.  For  we  must 
not  suppose  or  assume  with  unwavering  faith,  as  some 
wrongly  do,  that  in  the  very  beginning  of  our  conver 
sion,  and  much  less  before  the  beginning,  God  Himself 
and  His  Divine  Son,  and  all  the  heavenly  court,  laid 


In  Germany.  311 


aside  the  great  anger  they  felt,  and  became  most  favour 
able  to  us.  Neither  must  we  conceive  that  when  He  is 
appeased,  so  far  as  the  threats  of  eternal  punishment  are 
concerned,  that  therefore  He  does  not  threaten  us  with 
labours  and  penances,  since  He  said  of  St.  Paul,  whom 
He  had  chosen  for  a  vessel  of  election,  '  I  will  show  him 
what  great  things  he  must  suffer  for  My  name.'  We  are 
wont  then,  and  it  is  the  right  way  to  proceed  in  our  first 
attempt  to  lead  a  good  life,  to  be  most  anxious  to  please 
God  by  preparing  in  ourselves  a  dwelling-place  corporal 
and  spiritual  in  body  and  soul.  But  there  is  a  certain 
period  (which  the  unction  of  the  Holy  Ghost  alone 
teaches  every  one  who  advances  correctly),  when  the 
grace  is  granted  to  us,  and  demanded  from  us,  to  direct 
our  attention  principally  to  love  God,  instead  of  seeking 
to  know  what  He  likes  or  dislikes  in  us  His  creatures. 
In  that  former  stage  we  endeavour  to  draw  God  to  us, 
in  the  latter  we  go  towards  Him.  In  the  first  we  seek 
that  He  may  remember  us,  and  be  careful  of  us,  in  the 
second  that  we  may  remember  Him,  and  be  careful  to 
do  all  that  pleases  Him ;  the  first  is  the  way  of  fear  and 
filial  reverence,  the  second  of  perfection  and  charity. 
May  our  Lord  then  grant  to  me  and  to  every  one  these 
two  feet,  true  fear  and  true  love,  for  with  them  we  must 
mount  the  ladder  of  the  way  of  God.  Hitherto,  in  my 
case,  fear,  I  think,  has  been  the  right  foot,  love  the  left ; 
now  I  desire  that  love  may  be  the  right  foot,  and  the 
one  I  depend  upon  most;  fear  the  left,  and  the  one  I 
depend  upon  least.  And  oh,  may  God  will  that  I  may 
be  born  now  in  this  new  grace,  to  grow  therein  unto 
the  perfect  man  ! 

J543- 

During  first  vespers  on  the  feast  of  the  Circumcision 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I  was  at  the  Cathedral  of 
Aschaffemburg,  and  I  experienced  great  devotion  in 


12  In  Germany. 


listening  to  the  vespers  and  in  looking  at  the  decora 
tions  of  the  church.  And  I  had  many  desires  both  for 
myself  in  particular,  and  for  all  nations,  that  they  might 
be  renewed  in  peace,  love  for  the  Catholic  faith,  and  for 
the  splendour  of  the  worship  of  God. 

During  Mass  this  morning  a  good  spirit  strongly 
moved  me,  and  made  me  feel  how  good  and  happy  a 
thing  it  is  to  be  manifest  to  God  alone,  and  to  be  seen 
by  Him  alone  in  our  work,  without  caring  for  anything 
else. 

This  too  I  observed,  that  Christ  was  unwilling  to  take 
His  name  Jesus  publicly  in  the  Jewish  Church  before 
He  shed  His  Blood.  And  from  this  I  concluded  that 
we  ought  to  pray  Him  most  earnestly  to  grant  us  the 
grace  that  whatever  abides  in  us  that  does  not  work  to 
perfect  fruit  may  be  circumcised  so  completely  that  we 
may  deserve  to  bear  some  name  in  Jesus  Christ.  And 
let  us  seek  no  name  for  ourselves  in  this  life  which  is 
not  included  under  the  name  of  Jesus — that  is,  Saviour. 
For  he  who  seeks  the  name  of  father,  or  teacher,  without 
doing  what  belongs  to  the  name,  would  work  in  a 
different  way  from  Christ,  Who  took  the  name  of  Jesus 
when  He  was  fulfilling  the  work  of  Saviour,  and  also  all 
the  other  parts  of  Father,  Teacher,  Leader,  and  the 
like,  all  which  titles  are  included  in  this  most  holy 
name. 

On  this  feast  I  desired  with  a  holy  desire  that  the  four 
seasons  might  run  their  course  spiritually  in  my  soul 
during  this  year.  I  desired  a  spiritual  winter,  that  the 
divine  seeds  committed  to  the  soil  of  my  soul  might  be 
fostered  and  be  able  to  take  root ;  a  spiritual  spring,  that 
the  soil  of  my  soul  may  have  power  to  put  forth  with 
vigour  its  fruit;  a  spiritual  summer,  that  the  fruit  may 
have  the  opportunity  of  ripening  into  a  rich  harvest ; 
and  lastly,  a  spiritual  autumn,  that  the  ripe  fruits  may 


In  Germany. 


be  collected  and  stored  in  the  granaries  of  heaven,  and 
may  be  preserved  and  never  perish. 

I  desired  also  that  through  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  Who  was  circumcised  in  the  flesh,  and  finally 
suffered  death  in  the  same  as  a  proof  of  His  obedience 
to  His  Heavenly  Father,  that  there  might  be  granted  to 
me  some  real  circumcision  of  the  spirit  which  might  be 
a  mark  and  a  warrant  of  my  love  towards  Christ  and  of 
His  love  towards  me. 

During  vespers,  whilst  I  contemplated  the  modesty 
expressed  in  a  picture  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary,  I  felt 
in  some  degree  how  powerful  is  that  grace  of  God  which 
makes  a  person  throw  his  whole  being  into  serving  God 
Himself,  and  retaining  His  grace  in  his  soul,  like  one 
who  does  not  know  how  to  induce  any  creature  to  love 
him  or  think  of  him.  In  this  way,  then,  all  the  beauty 
of  Mary  was  within,  and  was  hidden  within  her  for  God. 

On  the  octave  of  the  feast  of  St.  Stephen,  I  celebrated 
Mass  in  a  chapel  of  his  lordship  the  Bishop  of  Mayence. 
The  chapel  was  solemnly  adorned  on  my  account  with 
all  its  relics  and  treasures.  On  the  following  day,  the 
octave  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist,  I  celebrated  Mass  in 
another  chapel  in  the  Cathedral,  which  was  also  solemnly 
decorated.  Yet  in  both  these  places,  though  they  were 
decorated  in  this  manner,  when  I  approached  the  altar, 
I  felt  very  little  devotion,  nay,  more  than  this,  I  entered 
the  sanctuary,  remained  there,  and  came  forth  from  it, 
full  of  dryness.  Hence  it  came  to  pass,  through  the 
grace  of  Christ  crucified,  that  I  became  much  colder  in 
the  desire  of  seeking  for  myself  so  many  and  so  great 
external  helps  to  increase  my  devotion  and  to  find  more 
easily  Christ  crucified.  For  it  often  happens,  as  it  did  to 
me  on  these  occasions,  that  whilst  one  finds  great  favour 
amongst  men,  he  is  more  abandoned  interiorly  by  Christ 
and  His  Spirit.  Hence  I  felt  in  my  soul  an  aversion  to 


14  In  Germany. 


the  favour  of  men  and  to  influence  with  the  great  ones 
of  the  earth,  seeing  how  much  more  efficacious  a  means 
to  obtain  the  grace  of  God  it  is  to  be  abandoned  of 
men,  and  to  become  most  like  Christ  crucified.  All 
human  favour,  then,  if  any  must  be  sought  and  must  be 
accepted  when  offered,  is  to  be  referred  and  directed  to 
our  neighbour's  edification  and  not  to  our  own  profit, 
since  we  can  more  easily  find  the  Saviour  of  our  souls 
without  such  human  favour.  We  must,  therefore,  direct 
our  course,  and  incline  in  spirit  towards  that  road  which 
leads  to  the  Cross.  For  Christ  crucified  is  the  true 
way  that  leads  to  the  glory  of  our  soul  and  body,  and 
not  the  way  only,  but  the  truth  and  the  life  as  well. 
When,  therefore,  you  shall  desire  for  yourself  your  own 
edification,  or  shall  seek  true  consolation,  or  your  own 
advancement,  see  that  you  always  despise  favour  or 
influence  with  men,  and  seek  instead  the  lowlier  things 
which  are  the  companions  of  the  Cross. 

There  are  some  who  up  to  a  certain  point  will  advance 
better  in  thanksgiving,  and  will  with  greater  ease  be 
strongly  moved  to  glorify  God,  Who  is  Almighty,  and 
in  every  manner  infinite,  by  the  sight  of  His  Eternal 
Beauty,  Power,  and  Goodness  as  they  are  presented  to 
them.  Nevertheless  it  is  necessary  (if  it  should  not 
have  been  done  from  the  beginning)  that  we  should 
finally  come  to  the  Cross  upon  which  hung  our  Salvation. 
For  in  Christ  crucified  is  our  salvation,  our  life,  and  our 
resurrection,  and  these  three  things  precede  the  glory 
which  awaits  us  in  heaven,  and  which,  like  the  rest,  is 
through,  from,  and  in  the  same  Christ  crucified. 

We  must  seek,  then,  first  the  virtue  of  Christ  crucified, 
and  then  of  Christ  in  His  glory,  and  not  the  opposite, 
that  is,  we  must  seek  the  virtue  of  Christ  crucified,  by 
which  our  death  was  destroyed.  He  dissolved,  destroyed, 
and  reduced  to  nought  death,  He  Who  alone  of  His  own 


In  Germany.  315 


free  choice  took  flesh  and  offered  Himself  for  our  sakes 
to  undergo  sufferings  and  death.  So  we  ought  to  arm 
ourselves  with  the  same  thought,  and  resolve  to  offer 
ourselves  voluntarily  for  His  sake  to  sufferings  and  death 
to  the  laying  aside  the  body  of  sin,  that  we  may  at  length 
find  the  body  of  the  grace  and  the  glory  of  God  in 
Christ  our  Lord,  in  which  our  souls  must  find  their 
existence  and  life  and  motion. 

On  the  Epiphany,  which  is  the  feast  of  the  holy  Wise 
Kings,  I  felt  great  spiritual  consolation,  and  especially 
in  the  litanies  which  I  am  wont  to  recite,  whilst  I 
prayed  that  all  the  saints  would  deign  to  adore  in  my 
name  Almighty  God  and  His  Divine  Son,  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.  Here  in  great  earnestness  I  desired  for  myself 
and  all  others  that  all  the  external  movements  of  my 
body  and  of  others  who  desire  to  serve  God,  might  be 
always  acceptable  to  Him,  even  though  the  heart  and 
soul,  though  free  from  the  flesh,  should  at  times  know 
not  how  to  rise  to  God. 

On  this  day,  also,  I  felt  compassion  for  the  insults 
which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  suffered  during  His  lifetime 
up  to  the  moment  of  His  death,  and  which  were  so 
unlike  the  honours  He  received  from  the  three  Magi. 
I  had  also  a  desire  that  the  grace  might  be  granted  to 
me  never  to  rejoice  except  in  God  or  my  neighbour,  and 
never  to  be  sad  on  account  of  any  temporal  discomforts 
of  my  own,  but  for  such  only  as  affect  my  neighbour  or 
for  offences  against  God  Himself.  I  also  felt  the  highest 
esteem  and  value  for  the  good  works  of  the  different 
persons  who  are  engaged  in  any  way  in  labouring  for 
me  or  for  others,  or  who  in  any  other  way  occupy  them 
selves  for  the  love  of  God. 

Whilst  I  was  present  at  the  Mass  which  was  sung  at 
the  altar  of  the  three  Kings,  I  felt  a  great  desire  that 
the  grace  might  be  granted  to  me  to  leave  behind  me 


3 1 6  In  Germany. 


various  outward  objects  which  would  serve  to  remind 
people  of  God  and  His  saints,  and  I  desired  also  that 
if  their  memory  should  perish  in  these  parts,  all  memory 
might  be  lost  of  me  in  the  world.  These  desires  were 
suggested  to  me  by  pictures  of  the  saints,  and  different 
representations  of  the  mysteries  of  Christ,  by  means  of 
which  many  recollections  and  perceptions  of  holy  things 
were  given  to  me  at  that  time,  just  as  at  other  times  they 
are  always  granted  to  me.  For  the  same  reason  my  love 
and  veneration  increased  for  his  lordship  Albert,  Arch 
bishop  and  Prince  of  Mayence,  who  has  had  during  all 
his  lifetime  and  still  has  so  great  an  anxiety  about  the 
relics  of  the  saints,  and  so  great  a  desire  to  preserve 
their  memory  and  to  hand  it  down  to  posterity.  More 
over,  these  outward  memorials  are  so  much  the  more 
necessary  in  proportion  as  men  esteem  them  of  little 
value,  and  are  themselves  cold  and  indifferent.  For 
unless  they  were  so  much  honoured,  it  might  easily  come 
to  pass  that  men  would  despise  everything  of  this  kind. 
For  how  could  they  help  despising  all  sacred  things,  if 
they  were  treated  without  fitting  respect,  since  they  seem 
utterly  to  contemn  them  when  they  are  held  in  so  much 
honour  ? 

During  Mass  I  felt  a  great  desire  that  Alvaro  Alfonso, 
who  is  at  Cologne  where  the  bodies  of  the  three  Kings 
are  preserved,  might  remember  in  particular  to  supply 
my  place  at  their  tomb,  and  not  my  place  only,  but  that 
of  all  my  companions.  I  also  desired  that  the  same 
might  be  done  by  all  others  who  are  in  any  place  where 
such  saints  as  are  held  in  peculiar  veneration  amongst 
us  are  worshipped. 

On  the  Sunday  within  the  octave  of  the  Epiphany,  I 
applied  the  Mass  amongst  other  intentions  as  a  sacrifice 
and  oblation  of  thanksgiving,  which  I  owe  and  have 
never  sufficiently  and  can.  never  sufficiently  render  for 


In  Germany.  317 


the  gifts  of  faith  and  humility  in  spirit  infused  into  me 
in  common  with  other  Catholics,  in  answer  not  only  to 
our  own  prayers,  but  also  to  the  prayers  of  the  Church, 
and  by  force  of  its  faith. 

On  another  day  I  perceived  and  noted  how  those  who 
withdraw  from  the  Church  begin  first  to  grow  tepid  in 
works  and  holy  exercises,  and  consequently  make  little 
account  of  and  place  no  value  upon  whatever  they  do 
not  know  to  have  discovered  themselves  and  approved 
by  their  own  judgment.  So  it  comes  to  pass  that  they 
begin  to  seek  reasons  for  their  faith  and  hope,  making 
everything  doubtful,  and  in  this  manner  they  lose  the 
infused  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  true  faith  which 
depended  upon  the  Catholic  faith  and  the  communion  of 
saints.  And  when  they  have  lost  this  they  make  another 
for  themselves,  according  to  their  own  judgment.  For 
they  seek  reasons  and  examine  them  for  themselves,  and 
they  search  for  the  interpretations  of  the  Scriptures,  and 
judge  of  its  meaning  according  to  their  own  caprice,  and 
so  form  a  faith  of  their  own,  or  rather,  erroneous  opinions. 
And  when  they  wish  to  draw  any  one  into  their  errors 
they  ask  this  first  from  him  as  a  foundation  and  first 
principle,  that  he  must  lay  aside  all  passion,  for  so  they 
style  the  tenacity  with  which  it  becomes  a  Christian  and 
a  Catholic  to  cling  to  the  opinions  and  teaching  of  the 
doctors,  and  the  authoritative  decisions  of  the  Church. 
What  else  is  it  for  a  man  to  lay  aside  this  passion,  as  they 
call  it,  except  to  abandon  and  lose  of  his  own  free  choice 
the  Catholic  faith,  and  the  simplicity  and  humility  of 
an  understanding  submissive  to  the  obedience  of  faith  ? 
And  when  they  have  emancipated  a  person  from  this 
holy  and  necessary  submission,  then  they  ask  him  to 
seek  another  faith  altogether  after  their  fashion,  and  if 
any  one  doing  this  finds  that  he  has  either  already  lost,  or 
is  gradually  losing  the  faith  he  had,  then  they  say  that 


1 8  In  Germany. 


faith  and  the  power  to  form  by  oneself  a  good  judgment 
upon  the  Scriptures  and  other  matters,  must  be  prayed 
of  and  sought  from  God,  for  that  faith  is  of  God,  and 
that  not  every  one  has  it,  and  other  such  assertions,  which 
are  indeed  most  true,  but  which  are  not  made  by  them 
with  good  intention,  and  do  not  help  to  the  edification  of 
others.  Oh,  how  much  better  would  they  have  done  if 
they  had  understood  that  these  gifts  can  be  lost  by  any 
one  ! 

Whoever,  then,  of  his  own  accord  has  thus  lost  the 
faith  which  he  possessed  as  long  as  he  belonged  to  the 
Church  and  had  not  yet  abandoned  her,  ought  not  to 
wonder  if  he  perceives  that  when  he  seeks  faith  by  other 
ways  which  he  has  chosen  himself,  he  does  not  find  it. 
Much  less  ought  he  to  blame  God  as  if  he  were  unwilling 
to  give  it  to  him,  for  God  wishes  to  give  faith  to  every 
one,  but  He  will  not  give  it  to  one  who  desires  not  to 
live  in  the  Church,  for  out  of  her  there  is  neither  salvation, 
nor  life,  nor  true  resurrection.  Every  faithful  Christian, 
then,  in  the  Catholic  Church,  has  knowledge  of  religious 
things  and  many  graces  bestowed  upon  him,  but  if  he 
were  to  seek  by  himself  the  reasons  for  each  of  them,  he 
would  suffer  harm  in  many  ways.  Eve  had  received  a 
great  gift  of  grace  to  believe  the  word  of  God's  command 
made  known  to  her  by  the  mouth  of  Adam,  but  as  soon 
as  she  listened  with  attention  to  the  question  of  the 
serpent,  and  began  to  seek  for  reasons  with  which  to 
answer  him,  she  lost  the  gift  of  faith.  And  when  this 
was  lost  it  was  easy  for  the  serpent  to  deceive  her  and 
persuade  her  to  do  what  she  afterwards  did.  And  so 
she  who  had  received,  not  by  reason,  but  by  infused 
grace,  at  the  word  of  Adam,  the  faith  that  in  whatsoever 
hour  she  should  eat  the  forbidden  fruit  she  should  die, 
by  reasoning  about  the  commandment  and  judging  for 
herself,  ran  into  the  false  opinion  that  by  eating  the  apple 


In  Germany.  319 


she  would  attain  to  the  condition  of  God,  the  knowledge 
of  good  and  evil.  We  must,  then,  acknowledge  with 
much  thanksgiving  the  gifts  we  possess,  and  which  we 
have  received  from  God,  apart  from  any  judgment  of  our 
own,  and  though  we  did  not  pray  for  them  nor  under 
stand  what  was  given  to  us,  as  happened  in  baptism, 
in  which,  in  the  faith  of  the  Church  and  of  our  parents, 
the  seeds  of  the  Catholic  and  orthodox  faith,  hope,  and 
charity  were  infused  into  our  souls.  So,  too,  is  it  in  the 
other  sacraments,  for  in  all  of  them  graces  are  bestowed, 
not  in  accordance  with  the  measure  of  our  intelligence, 
nor  in  proportion  to  our  knowledge  and  appreciation  of 
the  form  and  matter  of  the  sacraments,  but  graces  which 
far  exceed  what  we  pray  for,  or  what  we  could  ever  con 
ceive  or  desire.  If  a  person  puts  questions  to  you,  and 
is  neither  able  or  prepared  to  edify,  and  cannot  or  will 
not  be  edified  by  you,  do  not  join  in  conversation  with 
him,  but  avoid  and  shun  him  as  you  would  a  serpent  or 
a  scorpion.  Do  not  reply  to  his  questions,  for  if  you 
answer  well  he  will  not  be  edified,  and  if,  on  the  con 
trary,  you  answer  ill,  he  will  not  show  you  your  mistake. 

On  the  same  day,  during  Mass,  whilst  I  held  the  most 
precious  Body  of  our  Lord  in  my  hands,  I  saw  in  a  very 
clear  manner  how  great  a  grace  it  is  to  assist  at  the 
sacrament  of  truth,  and  at  this  sacred  pledge  which  con 
tains  within  itself  all  truth  and  goodness,  and  to  which 
we  must  not  approach  except  after  much  purification 
and  examination  of  our  transgressions.  For  he  who 
approaches  this  sacrament  without  first  reconciling  him 
self  with  God,  in  receiving  it  shall  receive  his  own 
condemnation.  Take  the  case  of  one  who  has  received 
a  command  in  the  name  of  his  earthly  prince  to  leave 
the  country  on  account  of  some  crime  by  which  he  has 
incurred  the  anger  of  the  prince.  Now,  if  he  were  to 
despise  that  command  and  would  not  attend  to  it  and  fly 


In  Germany. 


from  the  country,  and  if,  moreover,  before  being  recon 
ciled,  he  were  to  presume  to  go  into  the  presence  of  his 
prince,  it  is  evident  that  he  would  receive  a  severe  con 
demnation  from  him.  For  inasmuch  as  the  crime  was 
evil,  and  on  many  accounts  unendurable,  the  prince  was 
unwilling  that  the  culprit  should  appear  before  him,  and 
ordered  him  to  be  exiled  from  his  State  ;  but  the  culprit 
in  his  pride  takes  the  pains  to  approach  still  more  nearly 
and  to  present  his  fault  before  the  eyes  of  his  prince.  So 
is  it  with  the  man  who,  loaded  with  the  burthen  of  his 
sins,  on  account  of  which  he  had  been  dismissed  from 
the  number  of  God's  children,  presents  himself  unrecon 
ciled  before  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,  Whom  he  receives 
in  Holy  Communion.  It  is  just  as  if  these  words  were 
spoken  to  the  sinner — 'Take  away  this  disgusting  thing 
out  of  My  sight,  that  I  may  not  look  upon  it,'  and  he, 
instead  of  removing  it,  draws  near  to  the  Prince  in  order 
that  he  may  not  only  look  upon  it  but  even  touch  it  and 
embrace  it  with  a  kiss.  So  the  sinner  answers  in  effect 
— '  I  know  that  You  cannot  endure  to  look  upon  me, 
but  I  would  have  You  kiss  me :  I  know,  my  Lord,  that 
You  cannot  bear  the  sight  of  me,  but  I  will  introduce 
You  into  my  inmost  soul,  which  is  full  of  all  foulness  and 
uncleanness.' 

On  the  third  day  of  the  octave  of  the  Epiphany 
of  our  Lord,  there  came  to  my  mind  a  train  of  thought 
I  had  formerly  conceived  as  to  the  graces  which  I 
had  understood  were  to  be  sought  and  asked  for 
according  to  the  order  of  the  litanies  which  I  am 
wont  to  say.  And  this  instruction  was  given  to  me 
by  means  of  a  comparison  to  be  taken  from  one  who 
was  to  serve  some  great  king.  Some  of  the  good 
qualities  of  such  a  man  may  be  put  down  in  this 
order :  First,  and  above  all  other  qualities,  he  should 
know  and  have  the  power  and  knowledge  and  desire  to 


In  Germany.  321 


serve  his  Lord.  So  we  must  beg  from  the  three  Divine 
Persons  of  the  Trinity  the  triple  grace  that  we  may  have 
the  power  and  knowledge  and  the  will  to  serve  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.  Secondly,  he  who  would  thus  serve 
must  be  in  the  good  graces  of  the  prince ;  and  as  I  have 
need  of  grace  and  our  Blessed  Lady  was  full  thereof, 
I  will  beg  her  to  obtain  it  for  me  of  our  Lord,  that 
my  service  may  be  wholly  pleasing  to  God  and  His 
saints.  Thirdly,  it  is  necessary  that  such  a  servant  be 
diligent  and  fit  to  fulfil  his  duties,  and  for  this  I  will  beg 
the  ministering  spirits  who  serve  God  to  obtain  for 
me  this  aptitude  and  assiduity  in  serving.  Fourthly,  it  is 
necessary  that  this  servant  should  be  a  lover  of  all  that  is 
seemly  and  decorous,  lest  anything  should  present  itself 
to  his  lord  which  might  offend  his  gaze ;  he  will,  there 
fore,  be  always  anxious  and  desirous  that  everything  may 
be  becoming  and  well  prepared.  I  will,  therefore,  seek 
the  intercession  of  the  patriarchs  and  prophets,  that  I 
may  be  able  to  prepare  all  the  ways  of  the  Lord  like  a 
faithful  forerunner  of  Christ.  Fifthly,  this  servant  must 
be  quick  and  diligent  in  following  the  Court  whithersoever 
it  shall  go,  and  for  this  I  may  invoke  the  apostles  to 
obtain  for  me  the  grace  to  follow  our  Lord,  as  His  holy 
will  shall  think  good.  The  sixth  quality  of  a  servant  at 
Court  is  that  he  should  be  most  attentive  to  every  word 
of  his  lord,  and  for  this  I  will  ask  the  intercession  of 
the  disciples,  that  I  may  be  in  truth  a  disciple  of  Christ, 
and  an  attentive  listener  to  His  words  and  those  of  all 
the  saints.  The  seventh  quality  required  in  such  a 
servant,  is  that  he  must  be  always  on  his  guard  never  to 
offend  any  of  those  who  live  at  Court,  but  must  strive  on 
the  contrary  to  be  useful  to  all  in  every  way,  and  hurtful 
to  none,  so  that  no  one  may  be  able  to  lodge  a 
complaint  against  him  with  his  lord.  In  accordance 
with  this,  I  will  beg  the  grace  from  the  Holy  Innocents 
v 


,22  In  Germany. 


never  to  injure,  or  scandalize,  or  disedify  any  one. 
Eighthly,  this  servant  must  be  ready  to  suffer  even 
unto  death,  for  the  honour  and  interests,  or  in  the  just 
defence  and  preservation  of  his  master.  And  for  this  1 
will  invoke  the  martyrs  to  obtain  for  me  such  virtue  as  to 
be  ready  to  undergo  any  tribulations  for  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  for  His  honour  and  for  the  fulfilment  of  His  will. 
Ninthly,  this  servant  ought  to  speak  in  all  places  and  at 
all  times  in  praise  of  his  lord,  from  a  desire  to  extend 
his  renown  and  fame.  So  I  will  invoke  the  confessors 
of  Christ,  that  through  their  prayers  I  may  be  able  at  all 
times  and  in  all  places  to  praise  and  magnify  in  every 
way  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Tenthly,  a  servant  such  as 
we  have  been  describing  should  dilgently  fly  from  and 
avoid  all  pleasures,  amusements,  places,  conversations, 
and  all  other  things  which  could  prevent  him  from  duly 
fulfilling  the  wishes  of  his  lord.  For  this  I  may  invoke 
the  intercession  of  the  monks  and  hermits  who  abandoned 
all  worldly  things  that  they  might  be  able  to  fulfil  the 
will  of  their  Lord  as  it  was  revealed  to  them.  Eleventhly, 
this  servant  should  strive  to  be  spotless  in  person  and 
dress,  that  so  he  may  be  beloved  by  his  master ;  and  for 
this  I  may  call  upon  the  holy  virgins,  who  strove  in 
every  way  to  be  pleasing  to  Christ,  their  Spouse,  alone. 
Twelfthly,  after  one  has  won  the  affection  of  his  master, 
and  has  been  admitted  to  his  familiar  confidence,  he 
should  strive  to  be  faithful,  not  abusing  the  love  of  his 
lord,  but  corresponding  to  it;  for  this  I  will  invoke 
the  holy  women  who  have  kept  their  faithfulness  in 
matrimony.  The  last  quality  may  consist  in  this,  that 
if  such  a  servant  be  deprived  of  the  presence  of  his 
loving  master,  nay,  even  if  he  be  for  a  time  quite 
separated  from  him,  his  affection  for  him  is  never 
lessened,  and  he  never  turns  aside  to  seek  the  favours 
of  others,  by  which  he  might  easily  be  prevented  after- 


In  Germany.  323 


wards  from  reunion  with  his  lord.  This  suggests  to  me 
the  form  of  my  last  petition,  and  in  it  I  ask  the  aid  of 
the  widows  and  such  as  lived  in  chastity,  that  they  would 
obtain  for  me  the  grace  never  to  seek  any  consolation 
except  from  God,  nay,  when  it  shall  be  denied  me  to 
enjoy  our  Lord,  to  prefer  rather  to  mourn  and  sorrow  for 
His  absence  than  turn  to  seek  any  pleasure  whatever 
which  has  its  source  in  anything  else  but  Him,  and  is  not 
supplied  to  me  by  Him.  So  be  it ! 

Another  day,  during  the  same  octave  of  the  Epiphany 
of  our  Lord,  I  considered  what  a  great  favour  of  God  it 
was  that  I  now  beheld,  for  the  thirty-seventh  time  in  my 
life,  this  feast  of  the  Epiphany,  and  so  I  went  through 
the  other  feast-days  which  have  passed  during  the  recur 
rence  of  so  many  years.  I  however  have  gained  but 
little  fruit  from  them,  and  was  never  grateful  enough 
even  to  acknowledge  that  so  great  kindness  of  God,  Who 
has  on  these  occasions  offered  me  so  many  means  of  pro 
curing  my  salvation,  and  of  repairing  the  losses  of  past 
neglect.  I  gave  thanks  therefore,  and  I  acknowledged 
my  ingratitude,  carelessness,  negligence,  and  thought 
lessness,  beseeching  Him  to  grant  that  henceforward  I 
may  increase  daily  and  in  many  ways  in  the  holy  know 
ledge  of  Him.  For  this  divine  goodness  and  mercy, 
which  has  given  to  me  and  to  others  to  understand  our 
own  negligence,  I  offered  the  divine  sacrifice  of  praise 
and  propitiation  as  a  holocaust  and  victim  for  our  sins, 
and  may  God  the  Father  deign  to  accept  it  as  pleasing 
in  His  sight.  After  matins,  when  I  went  to  say  Mass,  I 
received  a  very  clear  light  about  the  Child  Jesus,  lately 
born  and  given  to  us.  I  understood  that  by  the  power 
of  His  Divinity  He  had  drawn  the  shepherds  to  Him, 
though  they  were  far  removed  from  the  power  of  recog 
nizing  His  Divinity,  hidden  in  the  Humanity  j  so  too  in 
the  case  of  the  Magi,  for  though  they  were  by  no  means 

V    2 


324  In  Germany. 


poor  in  mind  and  intellect,  yet  were  they,  on  account  of 
their  worldly  greatness,  far  removed  from  the  knowledge 
of  the  Divinity  of  Christ,  made  a  little  Babe  for  us.  I 
reflected  too,  on  the  Innocents  who  were  called  to 
martyrdom,  without  any  cooperation  ot  their  own.  I 
prayed  to  Jesus,  Who  in  these  different  ways  had  mani 
fested  Himself  to  those  who  were  far  distant,  that  He 
would  deign  to  receive  whatever  supplications  and 
prayers  are  offered  for  those  who  either  know  not  how 
to  seek  their  salvation,  which  is  in  Him,  or  will  not  seek 
it,  as  sinners  or  little  children  who  are  still  in  their 
mother's  womb. 

After  Mass  there  occurred  to  me  the  various  salutary 
uses  for  which  Christ  gave  Himself  to  us,  and  was  given 
to  us  by  the  Father.  For  He  was  given  us  as  medicine, 
as  food,  as  drink,  as  victim,  as  physician,  as  salvation  of 
body  and  soul,  as  strength  in  death,  as  pledge  of  resur 
rection,  and  lastly,  what  is  most  striking  of  all,  He  gave 
Himself  to  be  ill-used  in  all  ways  and  killed  by  us.  Here 
then  I  grieved  from  my  heart  that  I  had  not  as  yet,  in 
any  way,  given  myself  wholly  to  Him,  to  do  with  me 
whatever  He  wishes,  or  shall  wish  in  life  or  death.  I 
asked  Him  therefore  now,  to  employ  me  and  all  my 
labour  in  every  way  just  as  it  may  seem  good  to  Him, 
for  His  own  glory,  the  good  of  my  neighbour,  and  the 
salvation  of  my  soul,  and  that  He  may  grant  me  to  will, 
and  feel,  and  think,  and  do  in  all  things  according  to  the 
order  of  His  holy  will  and  wisdom. 

After  the  feast  of  the  Epiphany,  on  the  i5th  of  January, 
I  celebrated  the  feast  of  the  most  Holy  Name  of  Jesus, 
and  I  found  very  great  devotion  and  many  different 
affections  towards  this  sweet  name.  I  said  Mass  on  that 
day  for  the  whole  of  our  Society,  because  it  is  called  the 
Society  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  During  these  days,  I 
found  out  a  great  means  of  help  to  concentrating  my 


In  Germany.  325 


mind  in  prayer.  This  help  was  to  represent  to  myself 
the  presence  of  Christ  hanging  on  the  Cross,  and  uttering 
the  words,  Mulier,  ecce  Filius  tuus  !  Parce  illis  !  Deus, 
Deus  meus,  itt  quid  dereliquisti  me  ?  Hodie  mecum  eris  in 
Paradiso !  Pater,  in  maims  tuas  commendo  spiritual 
meum!  Sitio !  etc.  And  whilst  I  reflected  upon  these 
words,  and  considered  Christ  in  this  way  hanging  on  the 
Cross,  I  felt  that  my  heart  was  sensibly  drawn  and 
calmed,  and  attained  a  more  perfect  peace,  nay,  was 
lifted  up  with  greater  attention. 

About  this  time  there  came  from  the  Sovereign  Pontiff 
the  Bull  of  the  Jubilee,  and  in  accordance  with  the  contents 
of  it,  I  prepared  myself  to  receive  the  grace  which  that 
Bull  spoke  of,  and  for  that  end  God  infused  into  my  soul 
a  great  increase  of  faith  and  hope  with  regard  to  sucli 
spiritual  goods.  I  besought  our  Lord  to  bestow  on  me 
•the  grace  to  regain  back  whatever  riches  of  the  soul 
I  ever  alienated  or  lost,  considering  the  example  of  the 
Jubilee  among  the  Jews,  in  which  each  used  to  return  to 
the  possession  of  his  property,  which  he  had  before  lost. 
I  had  also  many  affections  with  regard  to  reconciliation 
with  God.  I  desired  that  all  the  faults  I  had  contracted 
by  ignorance,  or  culpable  weakness,  malice,  ingratitude, 
or  which  in  any  other  way  had  stained  my  soul  or  body, 
might  be  so  blotted  out  that  nothing  might  remain  in  me 
which  would  offend  God,  His  Mother,  or  the  saints. 
And  with  regard  to  the  temporal  punishment  I  had 
incurred,  I  desired  most  earnestly  that  I  might  be 
perfectly  reconciled  with  God  and  His  saints,  and  that 
no  more  public  evils  might  come  about  in  the  world  on 
account  of  my  sins.  For  it  almost  always  happens  that 
calamities,  such  as  plagues,  wars,  famine,  and  the  like, 
befall  men  on  account  of  the  accumulated  sins  of  multi 
tudes  of  men,  so  that  every  one  is  partly  the  cause  for 
.this  kind  of  affliction. 


26  In  Germany. 


On  the  Saturday50  immediately  preceding  Septuagesima 
Sunday,  while  I  was  praying  during  the  night  that  all  my 
sins  might  be  pardoned,  and  while  I  prayed  especially 
that  I  might  not  fall  back  into  them  on  account  of  past 
demerits,  I  experienced  intense  consolation,  considering 
the  joy  which  one  would  feel  if  he  knew  and  felt  that 
God,  His  Mother,  and  the  saints  were  reconciled  to  him. 
I  seemed  to  hear  within  me  the  words  that  Christ,  the 
Blessed  Virgin,  and  some  saints,  my  special  patrons, 
might  say  to  me;  but  this  thought  was  one  connected 
rather  with  their  possible  than  their  real  presence.  As  if 
one  addressed  me  in  this  manner — '  Oh  !  if  you  were  to 
hear  the  voice  of  such  a  saint,  who  is  your  friend  ! ' 

On  St.  Agnes' 57  day,  the  glorious  virgin  and  martyr, 
whilst  I  was  pondering  and  reflecting  upon  different 
necessities  of  those  in  this  life,  in  which  men  can  have 
no  relief  except  by  means  of  Christ  and  His  saints,  I  felt 
a  great  desire  that  the  saints  in  heaven  would  deign  to 
pray  for  us  and  excuse  us,  each  pleading  in  particular  for 
those  who  labour  in  his  own  country,  and  for  the  souls  in 
his  own  lands.  While  I  was  offering  Mass  for  this  end, 
I  prayed  the  Father  of  Heaven  that  as  often  as  I  should 
pronounce  the  name  of  His  Son,  that  is,  Jesus,  He  would 
condescend  to  look  favourably  upon  all  those  in  any 
quarter  that  need  help  for  their  salvation,  whether  in  this 
world  or  in  purgatory,  and  also  that  He  would  remember 
all  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  all  the  desires  that  He 
had  for  the  salvation  of  men  as  long  as  He  lived  on  this 
earth. 

To-day,  when  the  thought  once  presented  itself  to  my 
mind  that  a  time  might  come  when  we  might  lack  even 
necessary  food,  I  felt  a  great  and  strong  desire  to 
possess  nothing ;  and  so  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart  I 
prayed  Christ,  Who  lay  on  the  altar  before  my  eyes,  that 
56  January  20,  1543.  5"  January  21. 


In  Germany.  327 


if  it  were  His  will  and  pleasure,  I  might  never  as  long  as 
I  am  in  this  life  pass  a  year  in  which  I  might  not  find 
myself  once  at  least  in  extreme  indigence,  without  having 
anything  to  support  me.  And  if  this  grace,  and  I  looked 
upon  it  as  a  great  grace,  should  not  be  brought  about  by 
human  changes  and  chances,  I  prayed  that  light  be  given 
me  to  know  whether  it  were  God's  will  I  should  deprive 
myself  once  in  the  year  of  all  earthly  necessaries,  and  in 
this  way  reduce  myself  to  true  and  actual  poverty.  The 
desire  of  effecting  this  has  through  the  grace  of  God 
often  been  in  my  soul.  But  God  then  granted  me  grace 
to  know  what  His  will  is  in  this  respect,  and  what  I  say 
of  myself  I  say  also  of  my  brethren  who  live  with  me. 
As  for  myself,  God  has  long  since  given  me  grace  to  wish 
and  desire  everywhere  to  beg  my  living  from  door  to 
door.  I  pray  God  that  this  desire,  as  well  all  other 
cesires  which  tend  to  my  own  abnegation  and  abjection, 
and  to  any  virtue  or  grace,  may  always  increase  in  my 
soul  with  increase  of  virtue  and  grace.  For  many  persons 
rot  being  accustomed  to  the  exercises  of  actual  poverty, 
and  other  holy  acts  of  the  Cross  of  Christ,  easily  lose  the 
affection  they  ought  to  have  to  these  acts.  But  we  must 
beseech  Jesus  Christ  crucified,  that  it  may  not  happen  to 
.is  to  be  diverted  or  even  retarded  in  the  race  which  we 
ought  to  be  ever  running  towards  the  Cross  and  the 
death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  For  whosoever  runs 
in  this  direction,  runs  safely  to  salvation,  true  life,  and 
true  resurrection.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  lovers  of 
this  temporal  life  pursue  difficult  and  dangerous  ways. 

On  the  festival  of  the  virgin  St.  Emerantiana,58 1  under 
stood  that  I  ought  to  bless  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who, 
on  this  day,  drew  to  Himself  this  virgin  and  martyr, 
whilst  but  a  catechumen.  And  I  think  it  was  the  effect 
of  her  prayers  that  I  felt  great  devotion  both  during  my 

58  January  23. 


o 


2  8  In  Germany. 


office  and  at  Mass,  for  whilst  saying  the  latter  I  received 
abundant  consolation,  and  I  shed  many  tears.  And  I 
desired  especially  that  our  Lord,  looking  on  the  sacrifice  I 
was  offering,  and  the  sacrifice  which  was  offered  to  Him 
on  this  day  in  the  person  of  St.  Emerantiana,  would 
forget  the  sins  of  the  men  who  had  stoned  this  saint. 
And  so  I  felt  that  it  was  a  good  thing  in  God's  sight,  that 
day  by  day  as  we  celebrate  the  memory  of  the  martyrs, 
we  present  to  Christ  the  good  works  and  merits  of  these 
saints,  so  that  by  the  sight  of  them  God  may  be  appeased 
towards  us  who  of  ourselves  perform  no  such  deeds,  and 
at  the  same  time  may  not  remember  the  evil  and  malice 
which  were  displayed  against  these  saints. 

On  this  day,  finding  myself  in  great  consolation  and 
spiritual  joy,  the  desire  came  to  me  that  this  consolation 
might  be  communicated  to  a  certain  person  and  to  others, 
but  it  was  quickly  answered  by  a  response  which  seemed 
to  say — '  Would  that  you  yourself  could  taste  and  partake 
of  the  consolation  which  Jesus  would  communicate  to 
you,  which  the  Blessed  Virgin  and  the  martyr  St.  Emer- 
entiana  would  gladly  make  you  share.'  At  the  same  time 
I  had  a  strong  feeling  which  I  had  never  felt  before,  and 
which  I  may  thus  express — '  Would,  my  Jesus,  that  [ 
might  clearly  know  Thy  will  in  all  my  actions,  for  this 
would  be  to  me  the  sweetest  life  in  the  world  ! ' 

On  the  day  of  the  Purification  of  our  Blessed  Lady,50 
I  received  many  lights  concerning  the  Gospel,  and  felt 
great  devotion  during  the  blessing  of  the  candles.  I 
earnestly  desired  that  I  might  not  depart  out  of  this 
world  ere  I  had  attained  an  intimate  knowledge  of  Jesus 
Christ  and  beheld  Him  abiding,  as  it  were,  in  my  soul, 
keeping  it  in  peace  despite  all  the  assaults  of  the  enemy, 
delivering  it  from  peril,  enlightening  it  as  to  whatever 
regards  His  service,  and  strengthening  it  against  sadness, 

™  February  2. 


In  Germany.  329 


trouble  and  perplexities.  On  the  same  day  I  was  in  many- 
ways  made  sensible  of  the  misery  of  my  imperfections 
and  shortcomings,  chiefly  in  my  outward  work.  Yet  was 
I  encouraged  in  spirit,  seeing  that  God  was  ever  favour 
able  to  me,  and  that  if  I  but  cleave  to  Him,  I  can  make 
myself  all  that  I  ought  to  be,  I  also  felt,  on  this  very 
day,  a  certain  joy  in  beholding  how  needy  and  destitute 
I  am  in  spirit,  since  this  affords  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary 
an  opportunity  of  compassionating  me  on  account  of  my 
shortcomings.  I  proposed,  moreover,  frequently  to  recite 
the  following  prayer — ;  O  Lord  God  Almighty,  grant  me 
this  grace,  that  till  my  death  I  may  enjoy  the  peace 
which  consists  in  beholding  Thy  salvation,  in  the  light 
given  to  all  nations,  and  the  glory  of  Thy  Christian 
people/  For  by  obtaining  this,  I  should  come  to  the 
perfect  knowledge  of  Christ  our  Saviour,  Enlightener, 
and  Glorifier. 

Soon  after  the  feast  of  the  Purification,  I  had  a  lively 
apprehension  of  the  promise  made  by  Christ  to  them 
that  forsake  father  and  mother,  &c.,  saying  that  they 
shall  inherit  life  everlasting.  On  that  same  day,  while 
questioning  myself  interiorly  about  the  account  we  shall 
have  to  give  of  time,  I  understood  how  it  is  that  He  Who 
alone  can  give  us  time,  is  to  call  us  to  account  as  to  our 
use  of  it.  Another  may  inquire  into  what  I  have  done 
with  the  things  he  has  intrusted  me  withal,  but  God  will 
ask  an  account  of  time  itself,  no  less  than  of  all  His 
other  gifts,  as  He  alone  can  give  and  prolong  time. 

In  the  Carnival  time,  I  felt  overwhelmed  with  sadness 
at  the  sight  of  my  natural  imperfections,  arising  from  the 
corruption  of  human  nature.  This  sadness  of  mind  came 
not  so  much  from  the  imperfections  themselves,  as  from 
the  consideration  of  them,  suggested  not,  as  is  usual,  by 
the  Divine  Spirit,  but  either  by  my  own,  or  by  the  angel 
of  Satan  sent  to  buffet  and  to  exercise  me.  I  was  at  that 


33°  In  Germany. 


time  very  slack  in  well  doing,  distracted  and  withdrawn 
from  the  intimate  knowledge  and  feeling  of  the  things  that 
are  above.  Mine  only  consolation  was  in  the  thought 
that  this  was  to  be  my  cross,  as  I  had  heretofore  so  often 
experienced :  a  cross  made  up  of  these  three  parts — of 
the  inconstancy  of  my  carnal  mind  in  regard  to  spiritual 
things,  of  the  effect  of  the  imperfection  which  compasses 
me  round  about  both  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left 
when  I  consider  my  shortcomings  in  respect  of  charity 
to  my  neighbour,  and  thirdly,  of  what  arises  from 
my  want  of  devotion  and  inattention  to  what  directly 
concerns  God  and  His  saints.  This  consideration  of 
my  three  chief  defects  forms,  so  to  speak,  the  three  arms 
of  the  cross  that  has  so  long  pressed  heavily  on  my 
shoulders,  of  which  I  oft-times  feel  the  burthen,  that  I 
may  learn  to  bear  that  other  cross  far  more  pleasing  to 
God,  which  is  to  undergo  grievous  and  continual  labours 
in  order  to  kindle  within  me  the  love  of  God,  for  the 
sake  of  mine  own  sanctifi cation  and  my  neighbour's 
salvation,  ever  rising  higher  and  higher  to  God,  ever 
descending  in  myself  into  lower  depths  of  humility,  and 
as  regards  my  neighbour,  never  failing  to  stretch  out  on 
both  sides  helpful  hands.  But  because  I  fail  diligently 
to  bear  this  cross,  my  spirit  groans  within  me  under  the 
weight  of  the  other. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  Dorothy,60  virgin  and  martyr,  I 
yearned  longingly  for  the  salvation  of  my  neighbours 
who  are  in  affliction  or  any  strait,  I  therefore  earnestly 
intreated  God  that  He  would  move  them  that  were  in 
misfortune  to  implore  His  mercy  on  their  sufferings  ; 
and  I  was  deeply  grieved  at  thinking  of  the  numerous 
sufferers  who,  knowing  not  how  to  lay  open  their  misery 
before  God  and  His  saints,  have  constant  recourse  to 
human  and  temporal  means  of  relief  wherein  there  is  no 

60  February  6. 


In  Germany.  331 


help.  Let  us  then  ever  pour  forth  our  afflicted  hearts 
in  His  presence  Who  beholdeth  sorrow  and  trouble,  and 
knows  full  well  what  each  one  is  able  to  bear. 

On  St.  Apollonia's  day61  I  found  great  devotion  in 
applying  the  Mass  to  the  person  who  was  most  desirous- 
of  the  suffrages  of  the  Church.  I  further  begged  the 
release  from  purgatory  for  the  soul  that  had  best  reason 
to  complain  of  me  and  the  greatest  claim  to  my  prayers. 
I  also  called  to  mind  how,  when  a  child,  I  was  wont  to 
recite  a  prayer  to  St.  Apollonia,  in  thanksgiving  for  her 
having  cured  me  of  toothache,  which  I  have  never  since 
felt.  I  therefore  rendered  fresh  thanks  to  this  virgin, 
who  was  able  to  obtain  for  me  at  so  light  a  cost  to  be 
preserved  from  this  ailment,  and  I  asked  that  henceforth 
through  her  merits  and  intercession  with  Christ,  that  not 
only  I,  but  every  one  of  my  brethren,  might  be  kept 
from  this  and  all  other  diseases.  I,  moreover,  besought 
this  saint  to  intercede  in  our  behalf  with  the  other  saints, 
according  to  the  ministry  allotted  to  them  by  Christ  in 
the  care  of  the  faithful,  that  they  would  obtain  for  us  not 
only  increase  in  virtue  and  the  salvation  of  our  souls, 
but  vigour  of  body,  deliverance  and  preservation  from 
bodily  ailments.  For  myself  I  desired  that  some  one  of 
them  would  obtain  for  me  humility,  and  have  especial 
care  of  me  in  this  respect ;  that  another  would  get  me 
patience,  another  bodily  health,  and  so  forth.  And  I 
put  up  the  same  petition  on  behalf  of-  all  who  belong 
to  the  Society,  descending  to  the  most  minute  particulars 
in  the  spirit  of  holy  piety,  and  with  faith  unfeigned  and 
steadfast  hope. 

May  God,  Who  has  created  us  and  all  things,  enable 
us  by  His  Spirit  to  discern  all  that  we  receive  from  Him, 
and  to  render  Him  due  thanks.  Oh,  that  we  could  know 
all  that  God  works  in  us,  both  in  our  bodies  and  in 

61  February  9. 


3  3 2  In  Germany. 


our  souls,  whether  of  Himself  or  through  His  several 
ministers !  Oh,  that  we  could  at  length  behold  Him,  Who 
is  and  Who  works  all  things  in  us,  by  Whom  all  things 
are,  and  are  moved,  and  in  Whom  are  all  things  !  But 
we  must  ascend  to  this  first  and  supreme  principle  and 
cause  of  all  by  the  second  causes,  even  as  we  reach  the 
first  Mediator  by  intermediate  steps;  and  the  final  end, 
the  term  and  perfection  of  all  that  is,  by  other  inter 
mediate  ends  and  forms.  The  Father  is  the  first 
principle,  from  Whom  are  all  things  ;  the  Son  the  first 
by  Whom,  the  Holy  Spirit  the  first  in  Whom,  are  all 
things.  The  Father  from  Whom  all  created  being 
derives  its  origin,  the  Son  by  Whom  all  things  are  made, 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  Whom  all  is  brought  to  perfection. 
This,  of  course,  is  to  be  taken  in  an  attributive  sense, 
the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  being  the  sole 
principle  of  whatever  is  created,  formed,  and  perfected  ; 
from  which  sole  principle  all  things  do  proceed,  by 
Whom  all  are  directed,  in  Whom  all  subsist.  Blessed  be 
God  for  evermore.  Amen. 

On  the  festival  of  St.  Scholastica,02  virgin,  I  celebrated 
Mass  in  her  honour  for  my  own  intention.  I  observed  and 
understood  on  this  occasion  that  it  was  most  necessary 
and  suitable  on  these  festivals  of  holy  virgins,  to  ask  for 
those  graces  which  help  one  to  advance  in  perfection. 
All  these  holy  virgins,  who  spared  no  pains  to  build  up 
in  themselves  the  temple  of  God  in  the  Spirit,  and  sought 
to  become  vessels  of  holiness  to  please  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Bridegroom  to  WThom  they  had  vowed  themselves,  such 
souls  as  these,  I  say,  cannot  but  desire  most  earnestly  to 
see  us  decked  with  spiritual  graces,  so  that  cleansed  from 
all  blemish  offensive  to  the  eyes  of  God,  wre  may  be 
pleasing  to  Him  in  all  holiness  and  justice.  Hence, 
these  virgins  are  anxious  to  obtain  for  us  the  graces  we 

02  February  10. 


In  Germany.  333 


demand  through  their  intercession.  The  other  saints 
may  be  fitly  invoked  according  to  the  rank  they  hold, 
and  the  peculiar  merits  and  graces  wherewith  it  pleased 
God  to  distinguish  them  here  below,  and  whereby  they 
have  attained  glory  everlasting  in  Christ  Jesus,  their 
Lord  and  ours.  For  God,  in  His  dealings  with  His 
saints,  keeps  to  this  order,  in  virtue  of  which,  each  one 
desires  that  God  should  be  imparted  to  others,  even  as 
He  has  graciously  communicated  Himself  to  them.  For 
each  one  was  led  by  a  different  path  in  his  lifetime,  nor 
were  all  endowed  with  the  same  gifts,  nor  was  it  God's 
purpose  that  they  should  be  exercised  in  the  same  good 
works  and  spiritual  practices.  Wherefore,  then,  should 
it  be  otherwise  than  pleasing  to  the  saints  that  we  should 
be  led  to  the  knowledge  and  worship  of  God  by  the 
same  path  as  they  followed,  that  the  good  works  wherein 
they  found  God  should  be  practised  by  us,  by  such  of  us, 
at  least,  as  call  upon  them  here  below  ? 

On  the  first  Sunday  in  Lent,C;5  while  praying  and 
beseeching  God  to  drive  from  me  all  mine  enemies,  I 
received  this  answer — '  Do  thou  strive  that  the  Lord 
may  raise  thee  far  above  the  dwelling-place  of  thine 
enemies,  for  not  here  below  is  thy  dwelling,  yet  is  it 
the  abode  of  thine  enemies/ 

This  same  day,  while  reciting  office,  I  wound  up  the 
clock  without  any  necessity,  and  it  was  suggested  to  me  to 
beseech  God  that  by  His  grace  He  would  fit  and  dispose 
me  for  praying  well,  for  it  were  far  easier  for  Him  so  to 
dispose  me,  than  it  could  be  for  me  to  arrange  and  set  in 
order  with  mine  own  hands  any  mechanism  whatsoever. 
I  further  took  occasion  herefrom  to  rebuke  myself  for 
having  heretofore  too  frequently  allowed  myself  to  be 
distracted  by  handling,  looking,  or  putting  things  in  order 
without  necessity,  when  I  ought  rather  to  have  kept 
63  February  n. 


334  ?n  Germany. 


myself  attentive  and  disposed  for  my  prayers  or  godly 
meditations,  inasmuch  as  my  sole  care  at  such  times 
should  be  to  set  myself  to  perform  aright,  both  in  speech 
and  thought,  the  duty  I  had  in  hand.  For  we  can  acquit 
ourselves  perfectly  of  these  holy  exercises,  only  when 
they  are  performed  by  the  whole  man,  and  with  the 
concurrence  of  all  his  requisite  powers.  When  this  is 
the  case  his  good  angel  will  not  fail  him,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost,  Who  is  God,  will  not  be  absent,  and  will  surely 
perfect  his  action. 

On  the  day  that  I  kept  the  transferred  feast  of 
St.  Martina,  virgin  and  martyr,  the  lessons  of  the 
nocturns  inspired  me  with  a  lively  faith  in  her  credit 
with  the  holy  angels,  and  her  power  over  the  spirits 
of  evil,  whose  temples  and  idols  fell  in  her  presence. 
I  therefore,  while  celebrating  Mass,  made  a  firm  resolu 
tion  of  invoking  her  protection  against  them,  and  I 
further  determined  to  put  this  resolution  into  practice 
every  Monday,  a  day  whereon  it  is  my  wont  to  com 
memorate  the  good  angels.  For  as  it  is  profitable  to 
invoke  the  good  angels  and  to  be  devout  to  them,  it 
is  of  no  less  advantage  to  choose  a  day  wrhereon  to 
beg  the  grace  of  God  and  these  blessed  spirits,  and 
their  protection  against  the  fiends  who  in  so  many  ways 
molest,  delude,  and  ruin  us.  God  send  that  I  may  ever 
enjoy  the  favour  of  this  holy  virgin  whose  feast  I  kept  on 
the  Monday  after  the  first  Sunday  in  Lent,64  that  I  may 
never  fail  to  recall  to  mind  every  Monday,  not  only,  of 
the  good  angels  (which  has  long  been  my  wont),  but  also 
of  the  evil  spirits,  in  order  to  baffle  them.  I  had  never 
until  then  felt  the  importance  of  this  latter.  Blessed  be 
He  from,  by,  and  in  Whom  such  sentiments  and  lights 
as  these  have  been  vouchsafed  to  me. 

64  February  12. 


In  Germany.  335 


On  the  1 4th  of  February,  St.  Valentine's  day,  Stephen 
took  leave  of  us  and  set  out  for  Rome.  I  felt  urged 
to  invoke,  with  great  devotion,  his  good  angel,  as  well  as 
the  angels  of  others,  on  his  behalf,  that  he  might  be 
encouraged  with  a  lively  hope  in  face  of  the  perils 
•of  his  journey.  I  moreover  felt  a  great  desire  that 
many  good  and  patient  travellers  might  confront  these 
dangers,  and  so  by  their  patience  and  prayers  obtain 
•God's  grace  for  those  who  shall  hereafter  make  the 
same  journey. 

On  the  occasion  of  his  departure  I  felt  moved  by  the 
good  spirit,  at  considering  how  long  his  good  angel  had 
tarried  in  our  household,  yet  that  I  had  never  noticed 
him,  and  that  he  was  now  locally  parted  from  us.  And 
I  grieved  that  I  had  not  invoked  him  concerning  the 
care  of  the  youth  of  whom  he  was  in  charge,  for  all  that 
this  angel  had  kept  him  humble  and  submissive  to  me, 
nor  had  allowed  his  bad  spirit  to  be  as  troublesome  to 
me  as  I  deserved.  Thus,  while  considering  the  ministries 
•  of  angels  on  behalf  of  men,  I  fully  realized  how  necessary 
it  is  that  the  Divine  Spirit,  Who  upholdeth  all  things 
most  perfectly,  should  quicken  our  souls,  and  guide  them 
by  the  outpouring  of  His  gifts.  We  must,  therefore, 
beseech  Christ  that  He  would  keep  His  Spirit  within 
us,  failing  Whose  influence,  the  good  angels  themselves 
would  be  powerless  to  direct  our  souls.  For  without  this 
Spirit,  their  imvard  suggestions  would  be  void  of  efficacy, 
And  could  not  penetrate  into  our  innermost  soul.  It 
is  the  Word  of  God  that  is  quick  and  powerful,  and 
•sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword,65  piercing  even  to  the 
dividing  asunder  of  soul  and  spirit,  of  the  joints  and 
marrow,  of  the  thoughts  and  interests  of  the  heart. 
.Such  is  the  virtue  of  the  Divine  Word  when  taught 
.and  recalled  to  us  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 


136  In  Germany. 


On  the  same  day,  while  considering  the  divers  spirits 
that  frequently  disturbed  me,  and  made  me  in  turns 
hopeful  or  despondent  about  the  possibility  of  doing 
good  in  Germany,  I  observed  that  we  ought  not  to 
rely  on  the  words  of  that  spirit  whose  wont  it  is  to 
exaggerate  the  impossibilities  and  difficulties  of  every 
undertaking,  but  rather  to  give  ear  to  him  who  shows 
how  possible  things  are,  and  who  gives  encouragement. 
Yet  must  we  take  heed  lest  we  run  too  far  to  the  right 
hand,  and  forsake  the  middle  path  which  prudence  marks 
out  for  us,  so  as  neither  to  be  unduly  elated  by  ground 
less  hopes,  nor  to  be  weighed  down  by  despondency. 
Tf  this  may  not  be  done,  and  we  must  needs  go  either  to 
the  right  or  to  the  left,  it  would  be  safer  and  less  perilous 
to  yield  ourselves  up  to  the  hope  that  cheers  us,  than 
to  the  opposite  extreme.,  where  there  are  countless  errors 
and  delusions,  countless  roots  of  bitterness,  involving  us 
in  a  trackless  labyrinth.  He  who  can  discern  the  spirit 
of  hope  and  his  words,  and  likewise  the  spirit  of  tempta 
tion  and  trouble,  is  enabled  to  gather  useful  lessons  from 
both.  We  should  then  strive  to  lay  hold  of  and  to  keep 
the  spirit  of  hopefulness,  and  when  we  have  lost  it,  to 
seek  it  anew,  to  preserve  the  joy,  the  consolation,  the 
peace,  and  other  dispositions  that  arise  from  good 
inspirations ;  to  these  must  we  ever  come  back  in 
order  that  they  may  strike  deeper  root  within  us.  We 
must  not,  however,  receive  all  the  thoughts  that  may 
occur  to  us,  as  if  they  could  not  possibly  have  some- 
ingredient  of  truth,  for  even  the  wicked  spirit  can  dis 
guise  himself  as  an  angel  of  light.  In  regard  of  the 
adversary  and  his  suggestions,  we  must  deal  with  them  by 
wcvy  of  contradiction ;  the  spirit  himself,  and  the  senti 
ments  he  inspires,  is  to  be  driven  forth  and  to  be 
shunned.  Not  so,  however,  as  to  all  his  suggestions,  for 
you  may  draw  from  them  many  warnings,  and  learn 


In  Germany.  337 


thereby  prudence  in  secular  business,  for  many  of  them 
may  be  true  and  useful,  if  they  be  quickened  hereafter 
by  another  spirit. 

On  the  transferred  feast  of  St.  Hyginus,60  pope  and 
martyr,  when  about  to  celebrate  for  the  intention  of  the 
Sovereign  Pontiff,  Paul  III.,  I  considered  the  goodness 
and  liberality  of  Jesus  Christ,  Who  deigns  to  impart  Him 
self  not  only  to  the  just,  but  to  sinners  likewise,  as  He 
did  to  the  traitor  Judas  at  the  Last  Supper.  And  here  I 
was  reminded  that  as  Jesus  Christ  imparts  Himself  to 
me  daily  in  the  holy  sacrifice,  and  is  ever  ready  to  com 
municate  Himself  in  manifold  ways,  whether  in  prayer 
or  in  other  pious  works,  I  ought  in  like  manner  to 
dedicate,  and  wholly  yield  up  myself  to  Him,  and  for 
His  sake,  to  the  welfare  of  my  neighbour  in  preaching, 
instructing,  consoling  him,  and  by  spending  myself  for 
him  with  all  that  I  have. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  Brigid,07  virgin,  I  had  various 
thoughts  concerning  the  salvation  of  souls ;  and  I  grieved 
at  the  remembrance  that  in  this  province  there  are  so 
many  parishes  without  a  pastor,  even  wholly  destitute  of 
any  priest.  Yet  had  I  then  great  consolation  in  con 
sidering  how  earnestly  St.  Brigid  yearned  for  the  salva 
tion  of  souls,  as  appears  from  her  writings  and  prayers 
which  are  still  extant.  I  therefore  gave  thanks  to  God 
for  all  the  benefits  conferred  on  Holy  Church  by  means 
of  this  sainted  woman. 

On  the  transferred  feast  of  St.  Gilbert,08  confessor,  I 
was  affected  during  Mass  with  a  great  devotion  and 
compassion  for  the  departed  souls,  and  my  tears  ceased 
not  to  fall  during  the  Mass.  I  felt  a  desire  of  giving 

66  Transferred  from  January  n. 

67  Transferred  from  February  i.     This  seems  to  have  been  the  Irish 
St.  Brigid,  as  the  feast  of  St.  Bridget,  wido\v,  occurs  either  in  July  or 
October  in  various  calendars. 

63  Transferred  from  February  4. 
W 


338  In  Germany. 


myself  up  to  Christ,  and  I  saw  that  there  was  no  better 
way  of  so  doing  than  to  take  part  in  His  sufferings,  not 
bodily  only,  but  those  He  underwent  in  His  Soul,  which 
grieved  over  the  everlasting  torments  to  which  so  many 
souls  are  doomed,  and  over  their  temporal  sufferings, 
especially  those  of  the  souls  in  purgatory. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  Peter's  Chair,69  while  saying  Mass, 
I  felt  the  wonted  anguish  my  imperfections  cause  me,  and 
there  occurred  to  me  this  good  thought,  to  wit,  that  1 
should  not  make  so  much  account  of  these  imper 
fections,  nor  spend  so  much  time  in  considering  them, 
since  by  making  little  of  them  they  quickly  vanish, 
and  the  mere  contemplation  of  them  adds  to  my 
imperfection. 

On  the  day  on  which  I  celebrated  the  feast  of 
St.  Genevieve,70  virgin  and  patroness  of  Paris,  while 
my  mind  was  filled  with  the  thoughts  of  the  innumer 
able  difficulties  in  the  way  of  the  conversion  of 
souls,  difficulties  which  in  nowise  depended  on  me,  I 
felt  overwhelmed  with  disgust  and  grief,  which  under 
mined  the  confidence  I  had  hitherto  felt.  In  order  to 
dissipate  this  melancholy,  it  was  given  to  me  to  consider 
that  the  following  things  are  necessary — (i)  that  I  am 
not  to  undertake  what  does  not  concern  me,  or  other 
work  than  what  I  have  presently  in  hand ;  (2)  that  1 
ought  not  to  extend  my  care  to  so  many  things  at  once  ; 
(3)  that  I  ought  to  use  all  diligence  in  regard  of  what 
I  have  actually  to  do ;  (4)  that  I  should  proceed  in 
these  works  of  charity,  as  one  who  by  their  means  paves 
the  way  to  higher  and  more  important  deeds. 

On  the  day  on  which  I  celebrated  the  feast  of  our 
holy  Angel  Guardians,  which  was  on  the  ist  of  March, 
I  felt  great  devotion,  especially  during  the  Mass,  which  I 

09  i.e.  at  Antioch.     lrcbruary  22. 
70  Transferred  from  January  2. 


In  Germany.  339 


celebrated  for  our  Society,  and  I  besought  the  Lord  that 
it  would  please  Him  to  compass  it  round  about  and  to 
protect  it,  as  with  a  hedge,  through  the  guardianship  and 
patronage  of  the  holy  angels. 

While  celebrating  the  office  and  Mass  of  St.  Bruno,71 
the  founder  and  patriarch  of  the  Carthusian  Order,  I 
felt  an  earnest  desire  that  this  holy  order,  together  with 
the  other  orders  of  monks  and  hermits,  might  flourish 
anew.  I  then  said  Mass  for  the  Society,  praying  that  it 
might,  according  to  God's  will,  contribute  by  its  labours 
and  toils  to  the  reformation  of  every  religious  com 
munity  which  the  Roman  Church  has  approved  and 
instituted. 

I  felt  at  the  same  time  an  ardent  wish  that  there  might 
be  many,  who,  for  the  love  of  Christ,  would  humble 
themselves  even  to  the  lowest  works,  and  many  so  well 
trained  in  spiritual  exercises  as  to  be  ready  to  undertake 
any  duty,  and  to  deem  themselves  as  slaves  who  are 
prepared  for  all.  I  likewise  prayed  that  there  might  be 
many  who  would  account  it  gain  and  glory  to  serve  at 
Mass  and  to  assist  the  ministers  of  God.  Fiat !  Fiat ! 

The  same  day  I  called  to  mind  how  advantageous 
it  was  for  a  man  to  be  held  in  the  remembrance  of  the 
just,  wherefore  I  conceived  a  heartfelt  desire  that  the 
saints,  who  are  for  ever  enjoying  the  visible  presence 
of  God,  might  be  mindful  of  me. 

I  desired  also  to  find  place  in  the  remembrance  of 
Christ,  for  whatever  belongs  to  His  Manhood  is  most 
perfect  and  well  pleasing  to  God,  so  that  if  He  but 
vouchsafe  to  bear  me  in  mind,  I  shall  in  a  certain  way 
exist  in  Him,  and  hence  come  to  be  most  pleasing  to 
God  in  that  respect,  for  He  takes  delight  in  whatever 

71  St.  Bruno's  feast  falls  in  October.     This  and  the  preceding  para 
graphs  may  perhaps  show  us  the  special  devotion  of  Father  Favre,  as 
he  may  have  said  votive  masses  of  the  saints  commemorated. 
W    2 


;4O  In  Germany. 


He  finds  in  Him.  I  further  craved  that  the  fruit 
thereof  might  be  a  love  wherewith  I  might  love  God 
and  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ. 

As  regards  the  Society,  for  which  by  God's  help  I 
have  ever  been  most  solicitous,  I  felt  an  ardent  desire 
that  it  might  increase  in  numbers  and  virtue,  in  the 
quantity  and  spiritual  quality  of  its  members,  so  as  to 
compensate  for  the  falling  off  of  other  religious  bodies. 
I  further  prayed  that  there  might  be  found  a  great 
multitude  of  laics  and  clerics,  who,  forsaking  all  worldly 
things,  would  offer  themselves  to  obey  in  all  things  which 
with  the  approval  and  according  to  the  order  of  the 
Church  are  practised  in  religious  orders,  and  that  of 
these  some  might  select  one  order,  and  some  another. 
God  grant  that  this  may  come  to  pass,  and  provide  fit 
persons  to  try  the  spirits  whether  they  be  of  God,  and 
to  determine  what  calling  is  most  suited  to  each  one. 
May  Jesus  send  a  good  number  of  persons  so  well 
grounded  in  faith,  charity,  and  other  virtues,  so  as  to  fill 
the  religious  houses,  so  that,  what  is  beyond  all  else 
to  be  desired,  they  may  all  be  sanctified  and  perfected 
in  Christ. 

Another  day,  while  reciting  the  office  of  St.  Roch, 
confessor,  I  had  good  thoughts  concerning  the  advan 
tages,  truth,  and  necessity  of  the  outward  worship  of 
Christ  and  His  saints.  I  felt,  thereupon,  deeply  grieved 
that  the  heretics  make  no  account  of  the  ceremonies 
and  rites  of  the  Church,  which  are  so  necessary  to 
maintain  men  in  humility,  concord,  and  religion. 

For  if  under  the  Old  Testament  there  was  so  great 
a  variety  of  ceremonies  and  sacrifices  of  irrational  beasts, 
prefiguring  what  was  to  have  its  fulfilment  in  Christ, 
how  can  it  be  against  God's  will  that  we  should  have 
n  form  of  outward  worship  under  the  New  Testament, 
and  make  use  of  certain  ceremonies  with  regard  to 


In  Germany.  341 


the  Body  of  Christ  ?  The  ceremonies  of  the  Old  Testa 
ment  foreshadowed  those  of  the  New,  and  these  last 
are  entirely  spiritual.  The  former  rites  foreshadowed 
not  only  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  but  His  most  holy  Body 
also.  Thus  in  the  outward  ritual  of  the  New  Testa 
ment  we  practise  that  which  was  before  represented 
in  figure,  and  we  worship  the  holiness  of  Christ's  Body, 
and  make  Him  our  model,  not  only  in  the  spirit,  but 
in  the  flesh  likewise,  since  our  bodies  are  temples  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Under  the  former  covenant,  the  flesh 
of  beasts  was  offered,  but  under  ours  the  Body  of  Christ ; 
they  washed  their  own  bodies  in  material  water,  that 
we  might  understand  to  wash  the  old  man  in  spiritual 
water.  We  have,  therefore,  an  external  worship  con 
sisting  of  actions  cognizable  by  the  outward  senses, 
as  a  fulfilment  of  the  Old  Law  and  of  its  figures,  and 
not  that  we  prefigure  or  represent  what  is  to  come.  We 
have  also  a  service  of  worship  for  the  Word  of  God, 
of  His  Christ,  and  of  His  Church,  and  also  for  the 
Holy  Ghost  To  hold  this  outward  worship  in  no 
account  is,  therefore,  to  ignore  the  Manhood  of  Christ, 
and  to  show  little  care  for  the  holiness  of  one's  body 
and  flesh.  Certain  ceremonies  of  the  New  Law  are, 
however,  figures  of  the  heavenly  and  glorified  worship 
paid  on  high  to  our  Lord. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  Gregory,72  pope  and  confessor,  I 
was  penetrated  with  intense  gratitude  to  so  illustrious 
a  pontiff  and  doctor,  for  that,  more  than  all  others, 
he  had  left  behind  him  the  necessary  teaching  con 
cerning  the  souls  of  the  departed.  For  had  he  not 
spoken  so  plainly  of  purgatory,  and  of  what  may 
give  relief  to  the  souls  therein  detained,  there  might 
have  been  nowadays  a  greater  number  of  those  that 
withhold  belief  from  this  dogma.  Blessed  be  God 

72  March  12. 


34 2  In  Germany. 


for  having  divinely  instructed  so  great  a  doctor  con 
cerning  the  compassion  we  ought  to  feel  for  these 
poor  souls,  and  for  having  given  them  His  Son,  Jesus 
Christ,  for  their  Advocate  !  I  here  made  the  resolution 
for  the  future  to  keep  a  remembrance  of  this  sainted 
Pope  when  I  call  to  mind  the  souls  in  purgatory, 
and  to  endeavour  to  inspire  devotion  to  these  holy 
souls  to  such  as  are  devout  to  this  saint ;  and  on  the 
other  hand,  to  persuade  those  who  pray  for  the  souls 
of  the  departed,  not  to  forget  to  implore  on  their  behalf 
the  aid  of  this  holy  Pontiff. 

On  the  day  of  our  Lord's  Passion,73  I  was  made  aware 
of  and  noted  down  what  follows.  The  first  thought  that 
occurred  to  me  was,  that  though  I  had  been  much 
troubled  and  agitated  throughout  Lent,  and  though  these 
trials  had  seemed  to  renew  the  wounds  of  my  miseries  and 
failings,  yet  I  could  not  feel  sorrow  for  the  imperfection 
of  my  doings,  whether  they  regarded  Christ,  my  neigh 
bour,  or  myself.  My  mind  was  distracted  from  all  wherein 
it  was  wont  to  find  peace.  My  flesh  was  wholly  taken  up 
with  those  things  in  which  from  childhood  it  had  found 
disquiet  and  death.  It  seemed  to  me  that  torpor  and 
ignorance  had  regained  their  hold  on  mine  actions,  and 
that  all  the  sentiments  I  had  fondly  thought  to  have  died 
out,  were  quickened  anew.  It  was  therefore  not  without 
cause  that  I  grieved,  and  was  saddened  at  these  dis 
turbances,  which  so  much  afflicted  both  my  soul  and  body. 

When  the  day  on  which  is  made  the  commemoration 
of  our  Lord's  Passion  had  dawned,  and  I  began  to 
revolve  these  things  in  my  mind,  it  came  to  pass 
that,  feeling  inwardly  strengthened,  I  perceived  that 
all  this  had  been  to  my  profit  and  advantage.  For 
is  not  this  the  season,  are  not  these  the  days,  whereon 
we  renew  the  memory  of  Christ's  Passion,  of  His 

73  March  23. 


In  Germany.  343 


stripes,  His  wounds,  the  reproaches  and  other  sufferings 
of  our  Saviour  ?     And  surely  it  is  expedient  to  me  that 
my  spiritual   wounds   and   all   the   vestiges   of   my   ail 
ments,  as  yet  so  imperfectly  cured,  should  be,  as  it  were, 
renewed.     I  was  thus  moved  by  the  grace  of  God  to 
entreat  Him,  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  crucified  and  dying 
for  me,   to  grant  me   that  I  might  be  healed   of   these 
infirmities ;    and    I    moreover   prayed   that   through  the 
merits  of  Christ's  Blood,  all  my  carnal  affections  might 
be  mortified,  deliverance  from  which  I  craved  in  these 
words  :  '  Deliver  me,  Thou  God  of  my  salvation,  from 
all  these  evils.'     I  also  prayed  that  the  virtue  of  Christ's 
most  Sacred    Body,   entombed  in  the  sepulchre,   might 
heal  the  infirmities  of  my  flesh ;  and  lastly,  I  besought 
the  blessed  Soul  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  had  descended  into 
hell  on  parting  from  His  Body,  to  hallow  my  spirit  and 
soul,  by  ridding  it  of  all  root  of  imperfection,  &c.     I 
resolved,   moreover,   this   same  day,  to  offer  the  divine 
sacrifice  I  was  to  celebrate  on  the  morrow — namely,  on 
Holy  Saturday — to   obtain  of  God  the  grace   of  hearty 
contrition  and  renewal,   and  this  through  the  death  of 
Jesus,   whereby  that  most   holy  temple   was    destroyed 
and  His  Soul  was  parted  from  His  Body.     I  purposed 
also  to  recite  oftener  and   more  frequently  the  prayer, 
Anima  Christi  sanctified  me.     And  I  was  at  the    same 
time  specially  touched  by  a  light  concerning  the  bliss 
and  power  of  the  Soul  of  Christ,  when  parted  from  His 
Body,   yet  united  to    His  Godhead,  as  it  appeared   in 
Limbus  to  the  holy  fathers,  and  to  the  souls  in  purgatory 
at  its  descent  into  hell.     While  contemplating  the  soul 
less  corpse  of  Christ  in  the  sepulchre,  still  united  to  the 
Godhead,    I    felt   powerfully   moved   to   ask  for  a  real 
separation  from   sin  and  all   vanity,    and   the   grace  of 
being  quickened  by  God  through  the  merits  of  His  risen 
Christ. 


344  In  Germany. 


On  Easter  eve,  there  occurred  to  me  some  precious 
lights  on  the  two  articles  of  the  Creed — 'He  suffered 
tinder  Pontius  Pilate,  was  crucified,  dead  and  buried  : 
He  descended  into  hell,  the  third  day  He  rose  again 
from  the  dead.'  To  this  God  added  the  favour  of  an 
earnest  wish  for  suffering  somewhat  for  Christ,  daily  to 
bear  my  cross,  to  die  to  sin,  to  be  buried  to  the  world, 
by  being  deprived  of  all  relish  for  this  temporal  life,  and 
to  rise  again  renewed  both  in  soul  and  body,  in  order 
that  I  may  be  fashioned  after  the  pattern  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  Who  died  for  our  sins  and  rose  again  for 
our  justification,  that  we,  being  dead  to  sin,  might  live 
unto  justice,  so  as  not  to  relapse  into  sin,  or  faU 
any  more  under  the  yoke  of  death,  the  death  of  sin, 
conformably  with  Christ,  Who  having  arisen,  now  dies  no 
more,  nor  hath  death  any  dominion  over  Him. 

On  the  day  of  our  Lord's  Resurrection  I  experienced 
an  unwonted  consolation  during  Mass,  yet  without  that 
sensible  devotion  I  but  too  frequently  desire  for  mine 
own  gratification  and  the  edification  of  others.  There 
was  in  that  desire  something  of  mine  own,  and  I  was 
conscious  of  an  inordinate  impulse,  inordinate,  at  least, 
so  far  forth  as  regards  the  vehemence  of  my  craving. 

While  contemplating  the  glory  of  Christ's  Manhood 
united  to  the  Godhead,  a  clear  knowledge  thereof  was 
vouchsafed  to  me,  and  I  was  penetrated  with  amazement 
and  admiration.  For  it  is  surely  a  matter  for  wonderment 
that  a  human  body  united  to  the  Godhead  should  serve 
as  its  instrument  for  corporeal  operations,  and  more 
wondrous  still  that  the  principle  of  life -within  the  body, 
in  other  words,  the  reasonable  soul,  should  be  immedi 
ately  united  to  the  divine  nature,  for  the  action  in  this 
case  is  just  as  much  in  kind  and  degree  the  action  of  a 
physical  and  organic  body  united  to  the  Godhead,  as  it  is 
the  action  of  a  sensible  and  rational  principle  of  life. 


In  Germany.  345 


The  human  spirit,  that  is,  the  rational  soul,  considered 
as  exalted  above  the  flesh  and  intent  on  things  spiritual 
and  eternal,  is  infinitely  more  noble,  when  we  consider 
it  as  united  with  God,  and  deriving  from  Him  its  every 
impulse  and  motion. 

I  then  prayed  most  earnestly  that  God,  through  the 
merits  of  His  risen  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  would  graciously 
grant  my  body  and  soul  to  be  one  day  glorified  for  the 
praise  of  His  holy  name,  from  Whom,  in  Whom,  and  by 
Whom  is  all  grace  and  glory  and  whatever  natural  gift  I 
possess. 

I  also  desired  that  the  bodies  and  souls  of  all  men, 
being  as  they  are  most  capacious  vessels  of  grace,  might 
be  filled  from  the  overflowing  fulness  of  the  Sacred 
Humanity,  which  contains  within  Itself  all  the  fulness 
of  the  Godhead.  May  God  grant  that  I  too  may  be 
enriched  with  this  plentiful  grace. 

I  made  use  of  the  consideration  of  the  four  qualities  of 
Christ's  glorified  Body,  to  ask  certain  analogous  gifts  for 
my  soul,  to  wit,  that  through  His  grace  I  might  be  ready 
and  swift  in  well  doing,  and  in  bearing  evil,  more  intelli 
gent  and  enlightened,  and  less  sensitive  to  sufferings. 

On  Easter  Monday,  after  the  nocturnal  office,  I  fell  into 
mine  accustomed  distress,  that  is,  I  grew  sad  for  these  three 
motives — (i)  I  failed  to  mark  within  me,  as  I  desired, 
sensible  tokens  of  God's  love  for  me  ;  (2)  I  discovered  in 
me  more  than  I  expected  of  the  traces  of  the  old  Adam ; 
(3)  I  was  not  able  to  reap  among  my  neighbours  the  fruit 
I  wished  for.  In  these  three  things  does  my  cross  consist. 
In  the  course  of  the  day,  while  revolving  these  thoughts, 
I  heard,  as  it  were,  an  inward  answer  to  this  effect — 
'  Thou  oft-times  desirest  to  be  taken  down  from  the  cross 
ere  thou  art  dead  ;  Christ  died  upon  His,  wherefore  then 
shouldst  thou  not  begin  to  be  willing  to  die  upon  thine 
own  cross  ?  But  thou  art  willing  just  to  suffer  somewhat  in 


346  In  Germany. 


order  to  lead  a  life  full  of  consolations,  and  to  be  kept 
from  feeling  the  burthen  of  thy  corrupt  nature.  Henceforth 
desire  rather  to  die  to  this  life   of  thine,  which  is  too 
fluctuating,  too  unstable  and  changeable.      Thou  canst 
no  way  die  so  well  to  this  life  as  by  the  death  of  the  Cross, 
which  goes  counter  to   it  and  consists    in   these  three 
things— ( i )  that  thy  soul   be  so  far  in  repose  as  never 
to  desire,  or  to  seek  to  feel,  for  thine   own   sake,  any 
accidental  devotion ;  (2)  not  to  be  troubled  even  though 
thy  old  man  rise  again  by  putting  forth  his  roots  and 
inclinations  to  mortal   or  venial   sin  ;    (3)    to    maintain 
thyself  in  peace,  when  thine  outward  works  appear  void 
of  all  fruit  whether  to  thyself,  or  to  those  who  look  into 
thy  doings,  be  it  to  profit  by  thy  good  example,  or  to 
slander  and  to  slight  thee.     When  thou  shalt  have  died 
on  this  cross,  and  shalt,  so  to  speak,  be  buried,  taking  no 
heed  of  the  esteem  or  contempt  of  men,  then  shalt  thou 
taste    of  a   new   spiritual    consolation    and    feel    thyself 
quickened  with  a  new  life,  the  root  and  fruits  whereof 
shall  not  be  of  the  same  kind  as  the  former,  but  far  more 
excellent  and  lasting.  Hitherto  thou  hast  delighted  rather 
in  the  greatness  of  the  tree  which  draws  its  increase  from 
divine  grace  than  in  its  roots,  in  which  its  virtue  mainly 
resides  ;    thou   hast   regarded    the    leaves   and   flowers 
which  are  but  passing,  and  not  the  fruits  which  tend  to 
perfection.     This   is  why  thou   canst   not  enjoy   stable 
consolation.     Seek  not  then  the  root  of  this  tree  for  the 
sake  of  its  fruits,  but  rather  its  fruits  to   obtain  the  root, 
and,  moreover,  desire  that  the  root  rather  than  the  fruits 
may  abide  in  thee,  for  it  is  by  the  root  thou  shalt  attain 
glory.     Let  then  the  root  be  the  object  of  thy  toil  and 
cares,  for  this  it  is  that  shall   one   day  appear  in  glory, 
even  as  the  root  of  all  good,  which  is  Christ,  has  now  first 
been  glorified.     In  the  world  to  come,  the  root  will  be, 
and  be  seen  to  be,  the  fruit ;  not  so  in  this  wretched  life. 


In  Germany.  347 


where  it  is  laid  low  and  trampled  under  foot.  Wherefore, 
if  thou  wilt  go  in  search  of  the  fruits,  seek  such  as  are 
such  in  the  next  life.' 

Another  day  during  the  Easter  week,  as  I  was  moving 
into  a  house  I  had  hired,  I  felt  divers  pious  motions  and 
desires  for  a  prosperous  entrance  into  this  new  dwelling ; 
so  I  recited  the  following  prayer  of  the  Church  in  every 
part  of  the  building — '  Visit,  O  Lord,  this  abode,  and 
drive  far  from  it  the  snares  of  the  enemy,  let  Thy  holy 
angels  dwell  herein  to  keep  us  in  peace,  and  may  Thy 
blessing  be  ever  upon  us,  through  the  merits  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Amen.'  This  I  did  with  a  sentiment  of 
devotion,  feeling  it  was  proper  to  act  in  this  wise  when 
ever  one  goes  into  a  new  dwelling.  I  also  called  upon 
the  good  angels  of  the  circumjacent  places  to  guard  both 
myself  and  my  companions  against  the  assaults  of  the  evil 
spirits  lurking  in  the  neighbourhood,  especially  the  spirit 
of  fornication,  which,  I  doubt  not,  dwells  with  fallen 
women  and  fornicators,  and  other  vicious  persons  who, 
as  I  learned,  lived  hard  by.  I  also  invoked  St.  Otillia, 
St.  Jodoc,  and  St.  Lucy,  the  patrons  of  the  chapel  near 
the  house  I  had  taken.  I  was  penetrated  with  deep 
sorrow  on  beholding  that  this  chapel  was  defiled  and 
profaned  by  the  fornications  of  those  who  pass  that 
way,  and  felt  on  that  account  an  earnest  wish  to  repair 
it,  and  to  restore  the  veneration  of  the  saints  aforesaid, 
whose  memory  had  wholly  ceased  to  be  honoured  in  this 
chapel,  which  had  in  former  times  been  a  place  of  great 
devotion  to  them  and  of  confidence  in  their  help.  I 
celebrated  holy  Mass  for  this  intention,  that  it  might 
remedy  the  sins  committed  through  the  neglect  of  this 
devotion,  and  that  I  might  be  enabled  to  restore  it  to 
some  extent.  God  grant,  through  the  intercession  of 
these  saints,  and  of  all  the  others,  that  I  may  be  allowed 
to  labour  at  this  restoration. 


In  Germany. 


In  the  evening  of  this  same  day,  when  about  to  retire 
to  rest  for  the  first  time  in  this  house,  as  I  felt  an  indis 
position,  which  occasioned  a  certain  heaviness  of  spirit, 
I  began  to  beseech  our  Lord  to  grant  me  to  prosper  in 
this  dwelling,  by  rendering  the  air  of  the  place  whole 
some,  or  to  dispose  things  otherwise  according  to  His 
good  pleasure.  I  begged  the  like  prosperity  for  my 
neighbours,  that  they  might  be  shielded  from  all  evil, 
and  my  coming  among  them  might  be  favourable  and 
propitious  to  them,  and  I  ended  by  praying  that,  by 
the  merits  of  St.  Lucy,  we  might  be  guarded  against 
every  ill.  Thinking  of  this  excited  within  me  hearty 
gratitude  to  God,  seeing  that  as  I  had  been  so  often 
compelled  in  the  course  of  my  life  to  change  my  abode, 
though  I  never  did  so  with  a  view  to  greater  conveni 
ence,  yet  it  had  never  befallen  me  to  contract  any  illness 
through  such  change,  though  I  had  frequently  gone  to 
dwell  in  dangerous  and  unwholesome  places.  Thus,  for 
instance,  I  have  often  had  to  lodge  in  filthy  hospitals, 
more  often  still  in  wretched  apartments,  which  sometimes 
were  very  cold ;  and  now  and  then  in  miserable  huts, 
where,  saving  a  little  straw,  all  was  wanting — not  to  speak 
of  those  nights  when  I  had  to  lie  down  under  the  canopy 
of  heaven.  Blessed  be  Pie  Who  in  these  straits,  and 
many  others  of  like  nature,  has  preserved  and  helped 
me.  On  this  account  did  I  give  thanks,  which  were 
well  due,  trusting  that  He  Who  never  failed  to  protect 
me  in  other  places  of  abode  would  surely  not  forget  to 
come  to  mine  aid  in  my  present  dwelling.  I  also  prayed 
for  all  to  whom  it  has  happened,  or  ever  may  in  future 
happen,  to  go  to,  or  to  dwell,  in  the  places  I  have  passed 
through,  or  where  I  had  lived  or  prayed.  May  it  please 
my  God,  Who  has  inspired  me  with  these  sentiments,  to 
fulfil  them  according  to  His  will,  rather  than  according 
to  what  I  may  wish  for  or  demand. 


In  Germany.  349 


The  same  day,  as  I  was  writing  to  the  Countess  de 
Montfort,  and  the  Vicar  General  of  the  Most  Reverend 
Bishop  of  Spires,  there  occurred  to  me  certain  thoughts 
concerning  the  Resurrection  which  I  never  had  before. 
They  consisted  in  certain  practical  lessons,  resulting  from 
the  fact  that  our  souls  will  be  glorified  ere  they  are 
reunited  to  the  body,  even  as  Christ  was  glorified  in  the 
spirit  before  glorifying  His  flesh.  Now,  the  consideration 
that  our  souls  can,  and,  in  very  deed,  will  be,  in  bliss 
apart  from  the  body,  should  teach  us  to  despise  it,  and 
to  realize  more  deeply  those  words  of  the  Apostle, '  We 
are  debtors  not  to  the  flesh,  that  we  should  live  according 
to  its  lusts.'  As  also  that  we  are  not  called  upon  to  give 
full  satisfaction  to  our  bodily  wants,  seeing  that  the  body 
is  not  so  necessary  to  us  as  might  appear  from  the  care 
we  take  of  it,  as  if  without  it  we  could  not  be  happy ;  for, 
on  the  contrary,  the  soul  will  be  in  bliss  before  the  body, 
and  they  who  suffer  in  hell  are  tormented  in  the  soul  long 
before  the  body  is  put  to  torture.  May  Jesus,  Who  for 
our  sake  laid  down  His  life,  and  ere  He  rose  again  shed 
happiness  on  the  holy  fathers,  grant  us  to  learn  to  lead 
a  spiritual  life,  instead  of  this  wretched  life,  which  is 
wholly  taken  up  with  evil  thoughts  and  guilty  memories 
and  yearnings,  and  to  live  a  life  which  is  the  very  opposite 
of  this. 

On  the  feast  of  St.  George  the  martyr,74  while  saying 
Mass  in  St.  Christophers  Church,  I  made  a  memento  of 
a  person  lately  departed,  the  day  of  whose  burial  or 
deposition  was  then  being  kept:  I  felt  a  great  consola 
tion  at  the  lively  apprehension  of  the  glory  Christ  bestows 
upon  souls.  I  was  principally  touched  by  the  great 
generosity  He  gives  proof  of  in  rewarding  what  is  done 
for  His  sake,  in  recompensing  each  work  with  the  guerdon 
that  is  its  due.  And  of  a  truth,  the  reward  of  any  work 

•"*  April  23. 


35°  In  Germany. 


whatsoever  done  in  and  by  His  grace  must  needs  be  very 
great  (those  which  are  performed  without  grace  can,  of 
course,  claim  no  reward),  since  to  God  it  belongs  to 
appraise  them  according  to  His  charity  and  liberty,  and 
to  reward  them  in  the  measure  of  the  Almighty  power 
of  His  Godhead.  And  as  the  lowlimindedness  of  Christ 
knows  no  bounds,  He  disdains  not  to  reward,  and  to 
make  account  of  the  slightest  things  which  are  done  for 
His  sake ;  and  as  His  riches  are  infinite,  immense  too  is 
the  recompense  He  awards  them.  I  next  began  to  be 
intensely  grieved,  that  nowadays  so  little  thought  is  taken 
of  the  rewards  awaiting  our  good  deeds,  whence  comes 
heedlessness  and  want  of  fear  of  the  chastisements  in 
store  for  our  bad  deeds.  In  this  way  do  we  lose  the  hope 
of  reaping  what  was  sown  in  tears,  and  the  dread  of  sin  ; 
since  we  are  blind  to  the  punishment  that  corresponds 
to  it.  In  a  word,  while  no  heed  is  taken  of  good  or  evil 
doings,  we  lose,  moreover,  true  knowledge  of  the  deified 
Humanity,  made  manifest  to  us  in  the  Incarnation  of  the 
Word,  in  order  that  our  salvation  might  be  wrought  out 
by  Christ,  Who  is  both  God  and  Man,  Who  is  to  come 
again  to  judge  all  the  living  and  the  dead  and  to  take 
account  of  each  one's  doings  in  his  lifetime,  and  to 
come  in  that  same  Manhood  which  was  seen  ascending 
into  heaven,  according  to  those  words  which  were  spoken 
to  His  disciples — '  He  shall  so  come,  in  like  manner,  as 
ye  have  seen  Him  go  up  into  heaven.'  The  liberality, 
and  gratitude  men  give  proof  of  to  their  servants  must 
exist  in  a  far  greater  measure  in  Christ.  It  is  unques 
tionable  that  any  mortal  prince  can  confer  the  greatest 
happiness  on  the  meanest  of  his  servants  by  merely 
taking  notice  of  his  work,  and  make  him  as  it  were 
beside  himself  for  joy  and  wonderment  at  the  conde 
scension  of  his  prince,  who  deigns  to  appreciate  what 
the  servant  himself  made  little  or  no  account  of.  They 


In  Germany.  351 


therefore  are  in  the  wrong,  who  preach  and  speak  of 
Christ's  Godhead,  omitting  all  mention  of  His  Manhood, 
thus  doing  away  with  all  comparisons  and  resemblances 
between  God  and  man,  though  not  stripping  Him  of  the 
iiesh  He  took  to  Himself.  He  was  pleased  to  take  upon 
Himself  a  body  and  to  become  a  slave,  that  we,  despite 
the  meanness  of  our  origin,  might  more  easily  be  brought 
to  the  belief  that  we  are  able  to  attain  the  likeness  unto 
God  promised  to  us,  in  that  we  hold  for  God  and  Man 
Him  Whom  we  are  to  worship  and  serve,  not  only 
in  spirit,  but  bodily  too,  since  it  pleased  Him  to  take 
that  nature  of  ours  wherein  He  suffered,  and  where 
with  He  is  now  gloriously  reigning  at  the  right  hand 
of  God  the  Father.  This  human  nature,  so  highly 
exalted  by  God,  claims  to  be  venerated  by  us  in  holiness 
and  justice,  seeing  that  it  is  a  most  perfect  instrument  of 
•our  redemption,  justification,  sanctification,  and  consum 
mation  in  glory,  and  the  temple  of  the  whole  Godhead. 

Lucifer  refused  to  submit  to  this  nature,  and  by  sub 
mission  to  the  Humanity  of  the  Word  to  become  subject 
to  the  Most  High ;  he  chose  rather  to  enter  into  the 
joy  and  glory  of  his  Lord  by  his  own  strength  and  virtue. 
He  had  set  before  him  the  mystery  predestined  in  the 
eternal  counsels,  the  mystery  of  the  humiliation  of  the 
Son  of  God,  whereby  it  had  been  foreordained  and 
decreed  from  eternity  that  He  should  become  Man, 
and  by  this  means  to  be  subject  to  Him  Who  before  all 
ages  had  begotten  Him  coequal  to  Himself.  Lucifer 
refused  to  humble  himself  to  the  God  made  Man  Who 
had  thus  from  the  greatest  become  the  least.  And  since 
he  would  not  consent  to  humble  himself,  by  means  of 
the  faith  and  grace  wherein  he  was  created,  to  Him 
Who  was  to  take  our  human  nature,  he  lost  the  gift  of 
faith,  and  fell  back  upon  himself,  saying, '  I  will  ascend 
above  the  height  of  the  clouds,  I  will  be  like  unto 


352  In  Germany. 


the    Most    High ;'    an  ascent  which  was   his  ruin   and 
degradation. 

Before  celebrating  Mass  on  St.  Mark's  day,75  I 
became  conscious  of  a  downward  motion  to  evil,  and 
was  overwhelmed  with  such  grief  and  sadness  that  I 
was  moved  even  to  tears  that  I  should  still  be  liable 
to  such  disturbances.  I  therefore  besought  the  Lord  in 
the  spirit  of  compunction,  which,  as  my  past  experience 
taught  me,  was  the  true  remedy  for  these  temptations, 
to  enable  me  by  His  grace  to  employ  myself  wholly 
in  discovering  and  acquiring  the  good  that  is  still 
wanting  to  me,  so  that  if  I  have  occasion  to  grieve,  I 
may  grieve  rather  at  beholding  myself  so  devoid  of 
virtue,  than  for  the  evil  motions  I  may  chance  to  feel, 
and  may  be  so  taken  up  with  desiring  and  seeking  after 
my  perfection,  that  no  room  may  be  left  for  thinking  of 
what  may  draw  me  down  or  backwards. 

I  perceived  most  distinctly  on  this  occasion,  as  was 
most  frequently  the  case  before,  how  necessary  it  is  to 
distinguish  the  several  degrees  of  perfection,  so  that 
when  once  we  know  them  we  may  strive  to  attain  them  ; 
not  that  we  are  to  take  our  rest  at  any  determinate  stage, 
but  rather  should  make  good  our  footing  in  order  to  an 
advance.  Now  this  advance  can  be  made  in  three  ways, 
according  to  the  three-fold  relation  of  our  virtues — 
(i)  with  regard  to  what  appertains  to  the  knowledge 
and  love  of  God;  (2)  with  regard  to  what  concerns  our 
neighbour,  for  it  is  certain  that  we  daily  stand  in  need  of 
fresh  knowledge,  and  renewed  affections,  concerning  the 
interests  and  the  spiritual  and  bodily  needs  of  our 
neighbour.  From  these  two  things  results  a  third,  to 
wit,  our  own  progress  in  good,  which  is  to  be  directed 
toward  God,  and  through  God  to  our  neighbour.  But  as 
our  progress  in  perfection  necessarily  supposes  that  we 

73  April  25. 


In  Germany.  353 


strip  ourselves  of  the  old  man,  and  put  on  the  new,  we 
must  needs,  whether  we  like  it  or  not,  suffer  temptations 
and  prickings  both  in  the  spirit  and  the  flesh,  for  this  it 
is  which  helps  us  in  our  path,  and  by  temptations  and 
prickings  are  meant  not  only  such  as  disturb  our  peace, 
but  those  that  goad  us  on  to  sin,  otherwise  we  should 
have  no  knowledge  of  our  own  soil,  on  which  we  might 
be  building  before  having  laid  the  foundation-stone, 
which  is  Christ,  a  stone  which  cannot  be  laid  ere  our  old 
man  is  destroyed.  We  have  then  need  of  patience,  and 
as  we  have  heretofore  observed,  we  should  strive  might 
and  main  to  acquire  what  we  still  lack,  and  to  endure  the 
stings  of  sin  until  it  shall  please  God  to  send  us  relief. 
It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  these  distinctions  drawn 
out  above  need  no  new  terms,  or  names  which  are  not 
in  use  with  doctors  of  positive  or  scholastic  theology. 

The  reason  whereof  is,  that  we  should  be  most  careful 
not  to  depart  from  the  common  mode  of  speaking  of 
Catholic  doctors,  nor  should  we  multiply  the  books  to  be 
read,  especially  those  of  the  Divine  Scriptures,  according 
to  the  diversity  of  spirits,  since  the  same  passage  may 
suit  different  dispositions.  Besides,  if  every  man  writes 
and  composes  books  in  terms  of  his  own  devising,  we 
shall  see,  what  has  partly  come  to  pass  already,  countless 
sects,  and  diversities  of  doctrine  and  of  views  concerning 
sacred  things.  We  are  not  therefore  to  think  that  we 
should  adapt  what  has  already  been  written  and  approved 
to  our  new-fangled  terminology,  but  rather  our  termin 
ology  should  be  made  conformable  to  what  is  written. 
Wherefore,  every  spiritual  light  and  sentiment  not  in 
conformity  with  the  teaching  of  the  Catholic  Church  and 
its  approved  doctors  is  to  be  rejected. 

On  the  feast  of  the  holy  martyrs  Cletus  and  Marcel- 
linus,76  Popes,  after  saying  matins,  I  felt  intense  devotion 

™  April  26. 
x 


354  IH  Germany. 


in  considering  how  the  mercy  of  Christ  brought  to  a 
better  mind  the  holy  Pope  Marcellinus,  whom  fear  of 
death  had  led  into  idolatry,  so  that  he  attained  the 
martyr's  crown. 

It  was  given  to  me  by  the  grace  of  the  good  spirit  to 
mourn  on  this  occasion  over  my  backsliding  in  the  way 
of  virtue,  for  which  I  had  never  yet  wept  enough.  I 
also  admired  the  mercy  or  justice  of  God  in  my  regard, 
which  consists  herein,  that  I  have  never  or  but  seldom 
felt  within  me  the  threatenings  or  rebukes  of  His  Holy 
Spirit  on  account  of  my  sins  and  shortcomings,  since  the 
reproaches  inwardly  addressed  to  me  came  either  from 
my  conscience,  or  from  the  spirit  given  me  to  buffet  me 
and  to  exercise  my  virtue.  I  then  received  grace  to  beg 
earnestly  of  the  Most  High,  that  He  would  enable  me 
for  the  future  to  hear  the  warnings  and  rebukes  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  For  the  which  end  I  said  the  following 
prayer — '  My  Lord  and  my  God,  methinks  that  Thou  hast 
hitherto  kept  silent  at  the  sight  of  my  past  sins  and  my 
present  imperfections ;  that  no  word  of  Thine  has  yet  been 
spoken  to  my  heart  and  soul  concerning  my  sins,  while 
Thou  hast  in  manifold  ways  taught  me  to  follow  Thy 
counsels  and  to  do  good.  Begin  therefore  in  a  new  way, 
that  is  with  no  intermediary,  but  by  Thine  own  Spirit  to 
suggest  to  me  the  words  and  sentiments  of  true  contrition; 
stir  up  my  soul  by  Thy  Spirit  to  mourn  for  my  sins,  even 
as  Thou  hast  hitherto  done  so  by  means  of  other  spirits.' 
I  conceived  this  desire,  not  because  I  was  depressed  by 
any  sin,  or  that  I  felt  the  prickings  of  conscience,  but 
because  I  was  conscious  of  that  higher  spirit,  the  Spirit  of 
God  within  me,  and  therefore  I  desired  that  the  sense  of 
my  sins,  and  the  knowledge  of  what  it  is  to  offend  Godr 
should  be  renewed  in  my  soul. 

Another  day,  while  visiting  Master  Peter  of  Gueldres 
(Canisius),  who  was  going  through  the  Spiritual  Exercises, 


In  Germany.  355 

most  cogent  arguments  came  into  my  mind,  which  gave 
me  to  understand  far  more  clearly  than  ever  before,  that 
it  is  of  great  advantage  for  the  discernment  of  spirits  if 
we  attend  not  to  the  thoughts  and  inward  suggestions, 
but  rather  to  the  spirit  itself,  which  is  wont  to  manifest 
itself  by  means  of  desires  and  affections,  the  strength  or 
weakness  of  the  soul,  tranquillity  or  disquiet,  sadness 
or  joy,  or  other  spiritual  affections  of  the  like  kind. 
By  means  of  such  marks  one  may  more  easily  know 
and  judge  of  the  soul,  and  of  the  spirits  which  move  it, 
than  by  means  of  thoughts.  There  are  some,  who,  by 
means  of  many  and  various  exercises  of  prayer  and  con 
templation,  are  scarcely  able  to  distinguish  the  diversity 
of  spirits,  but  seem  always  agitated,  now  more  now  less, 
by  one  and  the  same  spirit.  The  most  effectual  means, 
however,  for  distinguishing  this  diversity,  is  to  propose 
the  choice  of  the  state  of  life  to  be  embraced.  But 
generally  speaking,  the  more  any  one  applies  himself, 
with  all  his  affections,  to  do,  or  hope  for,  or  believe,  or 
love,  a  higher  and  more  perfect  thing,  the  better  he  will 
be  able  to  know  the  diversity  of  the  good  and  the  evil 
spirit.  In  some  the  evil  spirit  is  not  recognized,  chiefly  in 
those  who  are  given  up  to  piety  and  devotion,  because  they 
have  no  thoughts  which  are  outside  the  limits  of  goodness 
and  truth,  nor  any  evidently  inordinate  affections.  But 
if  these  persons  can  be  induced,  however  perfect  they 
may  be,  to  examine  themselves,  and  see  to  what  higher 
degree  of  perfection  they  might  aspire,  and  whether  the 
sort  of  life  already  embraced  by  them  is  immutable,  and 
what  more  perfect  sort  to  embrace,  they  will  then  easily 
distinguish  both  these  spirits,  that  which  strengthens 
and  that  which  debilitates  ;  that  which  enlightens,  and 
that  which  produces  darkness ;  that  which  justifies,  and 
that  which  defiles— that  is  to  %ay,  the  good  and  the 
bad  spirit. 
x  2 


356  In  Germany. 


On  the  fifth  Sunday  after  Easter,  I  noted  certain  things, 
the  order' and  manner  of  which  had  been  already  clearly 
enough  shown  to  me  the  preceding  Friday,  and  they  had 
reference  to  what  may  be  and  usually  is  asked  in  the 
colloquies  of  the  four  weeks  of  the  Exercises.   In  the  first, 
these  three  graces  are  rightly  asked  for,  namely,  a  true 
knowledge  of  and  contrition  for  the  sins  committed  in 
our  past  life,  knowledge  and  resolution  of  a  real  amend 
ment,  and  a  true  regulation  of  our  life  for  the  future.  In  the 
second  week,  in  accordance  with  the  end  of  the  contem 
plations  of  the  life  of  Christ,  which  end  is  to  know  Him 
in  order  to  imitate  Him,  these  three  graces  are,  with  good 
reason,  put  into   the   colloquies   (I  am  speaking  of  the 
principal  colloquies  to  the  Blessed  Virgin,  to  Christ,  and 
to  the  Eternal  Father).     The  first  is  the  abnegation  of 
self,  the  second  the  perfect  contempt  of  the  world,  the 
third  the  perfect  love  of  the  service  of  Christ  our  Lord. 
There  are  many  persons  who  think  that  they  have  a  great 
esteem  for  the  Person  of  Christ,  and  that  they  love  Him, 
when,  notwithstanding,  they  do  not  like  the  things  in 
which  the  service  of  Christ  consists.     Such  persons,  to 
say  the  truth,  think  frequently,  and  not  without  consola 
tion,  of  Christ,  and  of  His  virtues  and  perfections,  but 
very  seldom  of  the  works  which  He  requires  from  His 
servants,  and  in  which  He  desires  His  followers  to  be 
exercised,  in  order  that,  being  where  He  was,  they  may 
hereafter  be  where  Fie  now  is.    In  the  third  week,  during 
which  we  meditate  on  the  Passion  of  Christ,  those  three 
graces  seem  to  me  very  suitable,  namely,  compassion  for 
Christ's  bodily  sufferings,  compassion  for  His  poverty  and 
His  privation  of  all  things,  compassion  for  the  insults  and 
reproaches  He  suffered,  for  there  are  many  sufferings  in 
these  things  the  diversity  of  which  we  cannot  feel  without 
the  help  of  God.     In  the  fourth  week,  which  has  for  its 
subject-matter  the  contemplation  of  Christ,  risen  in  glory, 


In  Germany.  357 


are  placed  these  three  graces — the  first  the  love  of  God 
and  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  second  perfect  joy  in  Christ 
alone,  and  the  third  true  peace,  which  is  only  to  be  found 
in  Him. 

On  the  vigil  of  the  Ascension,77  when  I  was  troubled  and 
afflicted  in  considering  that  which  is  a  hindrance  in  me  to 
the  service  of  Christ,  I  found  myself,  all  on  a  sudden, 
strengthened,  and  full  of  consolation  and  resolution. 
Then  it  was  given  to  me  to  see  that  such  consolations 
are  no  less  to  be  shunned  than  desolations,  in  so  far  as 
both  are  hindrances  to  the  solid  profit  which  sometimes 
is  delayed  by  both,  that  is,  by  vain  sadness  and  vain  joy, 
and  sometimes  more  by  the  latter  than  the  former, 
although  it  is  true  that  the  joy  with  which  there  is 
united  a  little  spiritual  vanity,  is  more  helpful  in  doing 
good  than  the  sadness  with  which  some  disturbance  is 
mingled.  This  disturbance  proceeds  from  the  evil  spirit, 
although  afterwards  it  ends  in  the  good  spirit,  just 
as,  on  the  contrary,  the  joy  usually  proceeds  from  the 
good  spirit  and  ends  in  the  evil  spirit.  For  just  as  the 
good  spirit  is  wont  to  take  occasion  from  sadness  to 
draw  us  to  what  is  good  and  solid,  to  give  us  true  and  not 
vain  consolation,  so  our  enemy  is  wont  to  take  occasion 
from  joy  to  lead  us  to  a  vain  gladness,  the  end  of  which 
is  real  sadness.  Let  us  then  consider  attentively,  and 
observe  these  things  both  in  the  beginning  and  the  end, 
in  order  to  know  from  which  spirit  the  interior  move 
ments  of  the  soul  proceed. 

On  the  feast  of  the  Ascension,  it  was  given  me  to  under 
stand  what  is  meant  by  seeking  God  and  Jesus  Christ  above 
every  creature,  and  by  desiring  to  know  them  perfectly. 
I  was  also  able  to  understand  the  difference  that  there 
is  between  knowing  the  creature  in  God,  or  God  in  the 
creature,  or  God  without  the  creature.  And  this  is  the 
77  May  2. 


358  In  Germany. 


true  ascent  of  mind  and  spirit,  to  ascend,  by  means  of 
creatures,  to  the  knowledge  and  love  of  their  Creator, 
and  not  to  rest  in  considering' them  only.  In  the  second 
place,  we  ought  to  rise  to  the  Creator  by  considering 
Him  as  He  lives  and  works  in  creatures.  But  neither 
ought  we  to  rest  there,  but  to  seek  God  in  Himself  above 
every  other  creature,  without,  for  that  reason,  excluding 
Him  from  the  creature.  After  that,  let  all  creatures  be 
known  in  Him  more  perfectly  than  as  they  are  in 
themselves.  Oh,  quickly  may  that  time  come  in  which 
I  shall  neither  see,  nor  love,  nor  fear,  any  creature  apart 
from  God,  and  from  this  may  I  rise  as  by  a  ladder,  to 
know  Him  in  Himself,  and  lastly,  all  in  Christ  that  He 
may  always  be  to  me  all  in  all.  By  means  of  these  steps 
I  will  strive  that  Christ,  Who  is  the  way,  the  truth,  and 
the  life,  may  be  in  the  centre  of  my  heart  and  my  interior, 
that  is,  within  myself;  and  then  above  me  by  the  mind, 
and  outside  of  me  by  the  senses.  And  thus  we  ought  to 
pray  that  the  Father,  Who  is  said  to  be  above,  may 
communicate  power  to  us ;  that  the  Son,  Who  in  His 
Humanity  is  said  to  be  ab  extra,  may  give  us  wisdom  ; 
and  that  the  Holy  Spirit,  Who,  in  a  certain  way,  is 
beneath,  that  is,  within  us,  may  give  us  goodness.  For 
in  no  other  way  could  our  interior  open  itself  and  see 
God  there,  nor  could  our  superior  part  rise  to  invisible 
things,  nor  feel  within  our  body  Him  Who  is  outside  of 
and  above  all  things. 

The  day  after  the  feast  of  the  Ascension,78  on  which  was 
kept  that  of  the  most  Holy  Cross,  I  celebrated  Mass  in 
the  church  called  the  Church  of  the  Cross,  which  is 
outside  the  city  of  Mayence,  and  in  which  is  preserved 
the  memory  of  those  wonderful  miracles  which  once 

78  The  feast  of  the  Ascension  in  1543  fell  on  the  feast  of  the  Invention 
of  the  Cross,  May  3,  the  latter  feast  being  therefore  transferred  to  the 
following  day. 


In  Germany.  359 


happened,  one  of  which  was  with  regard  to  the  crucifix 
that  is  kept  there,  which  was  found  floating  on  the 
Rhine,  going  against  the  current  of  the  river.  The  other  • 
miracle  happened  to  another  crucifix,  also  venerated 
there,  which  being  struck  by  a  gambler,  there  gushed 
forth  blood  from  the  wounded  head,  and  to  this  day  it 
may  be  seen  to  have  oozed  from  the  picture.  While  cele 
brating  the  holy  Mass,  then,  in  that  church,  I  experienced 
very  great  devotion,  and  felt  great  sorrow  at  seeing 
how  forgetful  men  are  in  these  days  of  such  illustrious 
miracles.  After  which,  I  prayed  to  my  Lord  to  give  me 
grace  that  I  might  be  able  to  know  all  miracles  and 
favours  of  this  kind,  and  that  He  would  receive  these 
particular  feelings  of  mine  as  though  they  were  those  of 
all  the  members  of  the  Society,  and  of  all  the  pious 
persons  I  have  known,  and  as  though  this  sacrifice  were 
offered  by  all  those  to  His  praise  and  in  thanksgiving 
for  similar  benefits. 

Then  I  promised  to  return  once  more  to  this  church, 
before  I  left  Germany,  in  order  to  celebrate  Mass  at  the 
altar  of  the  other  crucifix  which  floated  on  the  water. 

On  the  feast  of  the  Apparition  of  St.  Michael  the 
Archangel,79  I  had  a  special  inspiration  to  thank  God  for 
the  gifts  bestowed  upon  the  holy  angels.  And  it  seemed 
to  me  that  one  of  these  benefits  was  their  exemption 
from  the  infirmities  belonging  to  our  souls,  which  are 
shut  up  in  the  prisons  of  our  bodies,  thereby  causing  in 
us  so  great  a  difference  and  contrariety  of  feelings,  and 
so  many  inclinations  to  do  evil,  which  those  angelic 
natures  cannot  have.  It  is  also  a  great  advantage  to 
the  angels,  that  they  have  not,  like  us,  a  superior  and 
inferior  part,  and  those  interior  conflicts  which  we  have, 
but  which  they  did  not  have  even  before  they  were 
•confirmed  in  good,  although  the  evil  angels  then  made 
7»  May  8. 


;6o  In  Germany. 


war  upon  them.  But  in  us  there  is  so  great  a  variety, 
that  even  if  some  part  seems  to  be  good,  we  have  many 
others  which  lead  to  evil.  For  the  entire  will  does  not 
at  once  go  with  the  understanding,  nor  the  understanding 
with  the  will;  and,  again,  sense  often  inclines  to  go 
begond  what  reason  proposes.  It  thus  comes  to  pass 
that  man  is  not  altogether  good  and  upright  all  at  once, 
because  there  is  in  him  a  part  which  is  not  so.  I  was 
enabled,  however,  to  know  this  is  a  great  benefit,  for 
although  some  part  in  a  man  may  be  bad,  it  does  not 
therefore  follow  that  he  must  be  wholly  lost ;  and,  in  like 
manner,  though  he  may  be  lost  for  a  short  time,  yet  his 
very  changeableness  and  inconstancy  make  it  possible 
that  he  shall  not  be  eternally  lost.  Often  the  sensitive 
part  in  man  seems  corrupt,  although  the  rational  part  is 
not  so  ;  and  this  is  a  misery  which  could  not  exist  in  the 
angels,  even  when  they  were  not  confirmed  in  grace.  Yet 
from  this  very  thing  sprang  a  great  danger,  that,  namely, 
of  their  being  lost  like  the  other  angels  who  were  apos 
tates  ;  for  immediately  on  their  contracting  evil,  it  would 
have  happened,  through  the  simplicity  of  their  nature,, 
that  that  nature  would  have  been  infected  therewith,, 
and  there  might  have  been  in  them  no  possibility  of  one 
part  consenting,  and  the  other  resisting,  but,  of  necessity, 
their  nature  must  either  have  instantly  remained  good, 
or  been  wholly  infected  by  evil.  I,  then,  seeing  myself 
so  prone  to  evil,  and  surrounded  by  so  many  seductions 
of  the  flesh,  the  world,  and  the  devil,  rejoice  that  I  do 
not  possess  this  simple  nature  ;  for  if  it  were  so  it  would 
speedily  happen  that  my  soul  would  be  imbued  with 
some  evil  spirit  and  be  wholly  defiled.  In  my  actual 
state,  although  some  evil  spirit  may  imbue,  for  example,. 
my  flesh,  my  understanding,  or  appetite,  my  nature  does 
not  therefore  become  bad  at  once,  because  I  am  able  not 
to  consent  to  such  things,  but  to  resist  them  with  the  full 


In  Germany.  361 


force  of  my  will.  I  desired,  therefore,  to  be  so  imbued 
by  the  good  spirit,  that  in  this  respect  my  nature  may  be 
entirely  simple  and  constant ;  but  when  bad  spirits  assail 
me,  then  I  would  rather  it  was  not  so,  that  is,  I  would 
rather  have  a  nature  that  was  inconstant,  and  not  simple, 
otherwise  I  should  run  a  grievous  risk  of  being  instantly 
denied,  and  of  my  fall  being  irreparable. 

Blessed,  then,  be  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Who  for  us 
became  Incarnate,  and  died;  because,  having  given  us  so 
variable  a  nature  for  our  help  in  the  various  accidents  we 
may  meet  with,  He  nevertheless  permits  us,  by  His  grace, 
to  attain  to  that  perfect  simplicity  and  immutability  in 
good  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  although  the  state  of 
the  damned  is  that  of  immutability  in  torment  and  in 
evil.  And  thus  the  saints  will  be  one  day  wholly  pene 
trated  by  that  chief  Good  to  Whom  they  will  be  eternally 
united,  and  the  wicked,  on  the  contrary,  by  every  kind 
of  misery  by  which  they  will  be  always  overwhelmed. 

On  the  holy  festival  of  Pentecost  I  had  a  keen  desire 
to  receive  from  the  Holy  Spirit  an  understanding  and  a 
Avill  that  were  wholly  spiritual,  and  therefore  I  asked  also 
that  my  existence,  and  life,  and  thoughts,  and  words  might 
be  spiritual,  for  which  word  I  had  a  particular  affection. 
I  understood  also  the  very  great  difference  that  there  is 
in  divine  movements,  which  may  take  place  in  the  vital, 
animal,  and  rational  spirit  of  man;  and  I  also  con 
sidered  how  great  a  difference  there  is  between  feeling 
a  thing  in  the  flesh  and  feeling  it  in  spirit — between 
existing  and  living  in  the  flesh,  and  existing  and  living 
in  the  spirit. 

Then,  with  many  prayers  I  besought  that  Holy  Spirit, 
that  for  the  time  to  come  my  being,  life,  and  thoughts 
might  be  spiritual,  and  that  I  might  thus  perform  the 
work  of  my  salvation,  and  be  delivered  from  those  carnal 
motions  and  thoughts  by  which  I  am  now  distressed. 


;62  In  Germany. 


For  then  are  things  truly  appreciated  when  they  are 
apprehended  by  the  spirit,  especially  when  the  things 
are  spiritual  and  suggested  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  also 
noted  the  manner  in  which  I  experienced  carnal  move 
ments  in  my  flesh,  since  it  happens  that  they  sometimes 
come  from  the  evil  spirit  in  the  flesh,  and  sometimes, 
also,  by  means  of  the  same  wicked  spirit,  in  the  vital,  or 
animal,  or  also  in  the  rational  part  of  man.  Again,  it 
may  sometimes  happen,  that  spiritual  things  are  learnt 
in  a  carnal  manner,  as  it  also  happens  with  regard  to 
corporal  things  that  they  are  felt  and  understood  spirit 
ually.  We  ought  therefore,  above  all  things,  to  beg  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  vouchsafe  to  guide  whatsoever  spirit  is  in 
us,  both  that  which  is  the  cause  of  life  and  of  sensation, 
and  that  which  is  the  reason  of  thoughts  and  affections, 
and  to  continue  to  do  so  till  there  comes  that  time  and 
blessedness  when  God  will  be  to  us  all  in  all. 

Another  time,  during  the  octave  of  Pentecost,  I  ex 
perienced  great  devotion  in  thinking  of  the  gifts  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  considering  what  it  is  that  is  meant  by  the 
gifts  of  understanding,  of  wisdom,  of  fear,  of  knowledge, 
of  counsel,  of  piety,  and  of  fortitude ;  and  so,  in  order 
to  obtain  them,  I  prayed  to  the  Holy  Spirit  by  His 
Procession  from  the  Father  and  the  Son.  In  like  manner 
I  prayed  to  Him  as  He  was  the  Guide  and  Sanctifier  of 
the  Soul  of  Christ,  as  He  it  was  by  Whose  operation 
Christ  was  conceived,  and  He  it  is  Who  enriched  with 
His  gifts  the  Virgin  Mary,  the  angels,  prophets,  apostles, 
martyrs,  confessors,  monks,  virgins,  widows,  and  the  rest. 
Furthermore,  I  prayed  to  Him  as  He  is  the  Destroyer 
of  the  suggestions  of  the  devil,  and,  in  short,  as  He  it 
is  Who  fills  all  things  and  in  Whom  everything  has 
movement.  Then  I  understood  how  excellent  and  great 
a  grace  it  is  to  enjoy  the  protection  of  Him  Who  abides 
in  all  things,  as  their  beginning,  middle,  and  end. 


In  Germany.  363 


On  that  occasion  I  prayed  the  Holy  Spirit  to  be  for 
ever  my  Guardian  and  Protector,  that,  indeed,  I  might 
be,  and  live,  and  feel  in  Him,  and  that  I  might  be  able 
to  drive  away  the  wicked  suggestions  of  the  evil  spirit, 
which  are  those  bad  thoughts  and  affections,  and  the 
incitements  to  do  wrong  which  come  to  us  from  our 
malicious  enemy.  For  bad  spirits  have  great  power  in 
our  bodies,  but  the  Holy  Spirit  strengthens  us  against 
them  either  by  Himself,  or  by  means  of  the  angelic 
spirits. 

On  the  feast  of  the  most  Holy  Trinity,  I  desired  greatly 
that  it  might  be  celebrated  with  much  solemnity,  as  it  is 
the  festival  of  those  Three  Persons,  than  Whom  it  is 
impossible  to  believe  or  imagine  anything  more  excellent 
and  worthy. 

I  also  prayed  that  all  my  powers  and  strength  might  be 
employed  by  the  means  of  the  Divine  and  Eternal  Father 
in  His  service,  that  they  might  be  guided  by  the  Son, 
and  lastly,  that  all  my  appetites,  inclinations,  and  affec 
tions  might  be  purified  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 

I  experienced  great  devotion  whilst  I  was  occupied  in 
considering  and  understanding,  as  clearly  as  I  could,  the 
manner  in  which  God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  are  in  every  place,  and  outside  of  all  things,  and 
within  all  things,  and  everywhere,  and  in  us  all ;  and  I 
asked  God  that  He  would  be  pleased  to  grant  me  grace 
that  I  might  be  able  to  seek  Him  in  every  way,  and  to 
find  Him  according  to  my  desires.  I  understood,  also,  in 
some  degree,  how  God  is  said  to  be  omnipotent,  that  is 
-to  say,  that  He  is  so  great  as  to  be  able  to  cause,  in  every 
possible  way,  everything  which,  of  itself,  could  not  exist 
either  corporally  or  spiritually,  or,  to  speak  more  generally, 
either  in  a  substantial  or  accidental,  a  simple  or  complex 
manner.  And  here  I  began  to  reason  on  the  order  and 
gradation  which  there  is  from  less  perfect  to  more  perfect 


;64  In  Germany. 


things  ;  and  this  was  the  order  in  which  they  came  before 
me.  In  the  first  place,  I  considered  all  the  accidents, 
the  perfection  of  which  may  be  classed  and  arranged 
from  the  subjects  to  which  they  are  united  ;  next,  the 
matter  of  corporal  things  ;  thirdly,  the  substantial  forms 
of  inanimate  and  corruptible  things  ;  fourthly,  the  form  of 
the  heavens  ;  fifthly,  the  corruptible  forms  of  animate 
things,  such  as  plants  ana  brutes  ;  in  the  sixth  place  I 
considered  inanimate  and  also  corruptible  vegetable  sub 
stances  ;  seventhly,  heavenly  substances  and  the  corporeal 
heavens  ;  then  brute  animals,  rational  souls,  and,  lastly, 
the  angels.  After  that  I  considered  the  Father,  the  Son, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost,  God,  Three  in  Persons  and  One  in 
most  perfect  Substance. 

On  the  Tuesday  after  the  feast  of  the  most  Holy 
Trinity,  while  saying  Matins,  I  felt  within  myself  a 
certain  grace  which  I  had  never  before  had,  though  I 
had  greatly  desired  to  have  it,  namely,  an  elevation  and 
fixedness  of  my  mind  in  God,  Who  is  in  heaven.  At 
other  times  I  had  often  had  greater  devotion  concerning 
the  understanding  of  the  words  that  I  recited,  and  con 
cerning  the  spirit  of  them  by  which  I  was  moved  to 
compunction  ;  but  what  I  now  felt  was  a  sublime  eleva 
tion  of  mind,  by  means  of  which  it  was  given  to  me  to 
know  the  power  of  God,  Who  dwells  in  heaven  as  in  His 
temple ;  and  thus  I  was  moved  to  desire  and  ask  for  an 
increase  in  myself  of  this  grace,  in  order  to  be  able  to 
attend  better  to  vocal  and  mental  prayer.  This  con 
centration  of  the  mind  on  God  appeared  to  me  a 
difficult  thing  to  attain ;  but  I  hoped  to  be  assisted 
and  strengthened  by  grace  in  this  matter. 

It  seemed  to  me,  also,  easier  to  fix  the  mind  during 
prayer  on  Jesus  crucified,  or  on  His  Virgin  Mother,  or 
some  saint,  as  though  they  were  present,  or  on  God,  as 
He  truly  is  in  heaven.  And  here  I  took  note  that  it  was 


In  Germany.  365 


very  necessary  for  every  one  who  desires  to  pray,  either 
mentally  or  vocally,  to  have  present  to  him  these  three 
things,  namely,  the  thought  of  the  person  to  whom  the 
prayers  are  addressed,  the  meaning  of  the  words  which 
are  said,  or  which  are  in  the  mind  daring  prayer,  and 
lastly,  the  spirit  of  devotion  and  affection  with  which 
these  things  are  to  be  done. 

It  will  also  be  a  help  to  the  perfection  of  prayer  for 
the  memory  to  be  raised  to  the  throne  of  the  Divine 
Majesty,  for  the  understanding  to  be  enlightened  by  the 
wisdom  of  the  Son,  and  the  will  inflamed  by  the  love  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  without  which  there  is  no  sweetness  in 
the  interior  of  the  soul.  May  Jesus  Christ  give  us  grace 
that  we  may  be  able  to  attain  to  this,  and  to  increase  in 
it  every  day!  These  feelings  which  I  had  concerning  the 
devotion  of  the  mind  to  God,  as  soon  as  I  paused  to 
consider  the  miseries  of  my  flesh  and  spirit,  I  recognized 
to  be  a  fruit,  so  to  speak,  of  the  festival  of  the  most  Holy 
Trinity.  Wherefore  I  resolved  to  recollect  myself  every 
year,  in  readiness  for  this  feast,  and  to  see  whether  I  had 
made  progress  in  preparing  my  soul  to  be  a  habitation  of 
the  most  Holy  Trinity,  in  which  mystery  meet  together 
all  the  mysteries  of  the  life  of  Christ,  and  all  the  feasts 
and  solemnities  of  the  Church. 

On  the  feast  of  the  most  Blessed  Sacrament  of  the 
Body  of  Christ,  I  had  many  lights  with  regard  to  the 
manner  of  celebrating  that  festival  and  of  adoring  Jesus 
Christ.  During  the  procession  I  was  moved  to  devotion 
by  the  sight  of  its  pomp,  and  of  the  multitude  of  people, 
and  by  the  way  in  which  every  one  endeavoured  to 
increase  the  devotion  of  the  function  by  his  reverence, 
his  actions,  and  the  affections  of  his  soul;  and  I  rejoiced 
to  think  how  the  senses  and  members  of  the  body  and 
the  mechanical  works  of  artificers  may  be  made  useful  for 
this  purpose,  in  the  same  way  as  the  voice  in  singing, 


,66  In  Germany. 


instruments  of  music,  plants,  flowers,  garlands,  and  other 
things  which  are  additions  to  the  ceremony.  Thus  all 
men  may  serve  God  with  their  bodies,  and  offer  their 
members  as  a  homage  to  Him  from  Whom  they  have 
received  them. 

On  the  same  day  I  felt  great  devotion  in  offering  my 
whole  being  for  the  worship  of  Christ.  I  offered  my 
understanding,  my  memory,  and  my  will,  my  five  exterior 
senses,  and  all  that  is  in  me,  both  to  glorify  and  honour 
Him,  and  to  serve  and  obey  Him  with  regard  to  my  own 
sanctification,  as  also  to  labour  for  the  good  of  my  neigh 
bour,  having  for  my  object  the  love  of  God.  I  also 
desired  to  imitate  Jesus  Christ  with  my  whole  soul  and 
body  in  these  two  things,  namely,  to  be  altogether  used 
and  consumed  for  Him  in  good  works,  and  to  accustom 
myself  to  endure  sufferings  in  soul  and  body,  as  He 
suffered  for  me  and  for  all  men,  in  all  His  members, 
even  to  the  death  upon  the  Cross. 

On  the  Octave  of  the  same  feast,  whilst  anxiously  con 
sidering  my  defects,  it  was  given  to  me  to  ask  grace  that 
the  punishments  of  those  sins  which  proceed  from  bad 
habits  and  inclinations,  from  temptations,  and  from  the 
concupiscence  of  my  nature,  might  be  remitted  to  me.  I 
also  felt,  in  a  certain  way,  how  it  is  the  will  of  Christ,  by 
means  of  this  admirable  Sacrament  of  His  Body  and 
Blood,  to  exercise  the  faith  of  His  spouse,  the  Church. 
For  in  believing  that  under  those  sensible  species  there  is 
the  Body  and  the  Blood  of  Christ,  we  are  exercised  in 
the  faith  of  those  things  which  are  not  seen,  and  we 
believe  the  Real  Presence  of  the  Body  under  the  species 
of  bread,  and  of  the  Blood  under  the  species  of  wine, 
and,  by  concomitance,  the  presence  of  the  Soul  and 
the  Divinity.  Furthermore,  we  are  exercised  in  adoring 
the  Divine  Sacrament  in  various  ways  and  by  various 
acts,  not  only  in  spirit  and  by  interior  acts  of  faith  and 


In  Germany.  367 


devotion,  but  exteriorily  also,  by  the  worship  of  latria^ 
as  though  Christ  were  visibly  present.  Lastly,  we  are 
exercised  in  promoting  our  salvation  when  we  make 
use  of  this  heavenly  food  for  the  nourishment,  strength 
ening,  enlightenment,  and  consolation  of  our  soul,  and 
for  receiving  within  ourselves  all  heavenly  treasures. 
Those,  therefore,  are  very  wretched  and  unhappy,  who 
do  not  pay  to  this  Sacrament  the  same  veneration  and 
worship  which  they  would  pay  to  the  visible  Person  of 
Christ.  No  less  a  thing  is  given  to  us  than  that  which 
was  given  to  the  Apostles  at  the  Last  Supper;  that  Body, 
not  dead,  but  living,  was  given  to  them,  which  was, 
shortly  after,  to  be  betrayed  and  crucified. 

On  the  fourth  Sunday  after  Pentecost,  as  I  was  about 
to  say  Mass,  I  asked  the  grace  that  my  soul  might  be 
defended  from  the  evil  spirits  of  devils  and  men.  I  took 
notice  that  I  had  often  been  troubled  and  distressed  by 
the  idea  that  some  wicked  men  were  plotting  against  my 
soul  and  spirit.  It  seemed  to  me  that  I  was  weak  in 
opposing  these  imaginary  plots,  and  I  thought  it  would 
be  a  lesser  evil  if  all  men  in  the  world  were  to  set 
themselves  to  persecute  me  in  the  body,  than  if  a  single 
man  were  to  set  to  work  to  attack  the  weakness  of  my 
soul.  And  then  I  invoked  the  protection  of  God  that  I 
might  bear  those  persecutions  of  spirit  which  we  suffer 
by  means  of  the  demons  and  of  men. 

And  here  began  again  that  torturing  affliction  which  I 
have  experienced  ever  since  I  came  to  Germany,  on 
witnessing  the  defection  of  this  nation.  God  grant  that 
the  event  may  not  verify  what  was  presented  to  my 
imagination  by  the  operation,  not  of  the  good  spirit, 
but  rather  by  the  spirit  of  diffidence,  which  has  tor 
mented  me  in  various  ways,  suggesting  to  me  to  hope 
for  no  fruit  from  my  labours,  to  flee  away  and  quit 
these  parts  committed  to  my  charge.  I  pray  God  that 


368  In  Germany. 


the  tepidity,  malice,  and  defection  of  these  wicked  men, 
whether  real  or  imaginary,  may  cease  to  assail  my  soul 
and  spirit,  which  is  already  in  itself  so  tepid,  cold,  and 
imperfect ;  that  there  may  be  an  end  of  this  changeable- 
ness  of  mine,  which  makes  things  appear  to  me  at  one 
time  prosperous  and  favourable,  at  another  adverse  and 
desperate.  This  would  not  happen  if  I  did  not  know 
the  causes  and  the  occasions  from  which  such  great 
-  evils  proceed  and  grow.  I  have  spent  too  much  time 
in  considering  and  weighing  them,  and  inquiring  into 
the  ways  which  lead  to  error  and  sin.  My  experience 
also  of  the  infirmities  and  imperfections  of  others  has 
increased  my  alarm.  Hence  it  has  happened  that  I 
have  not  given  heed  to  the  virtues  and  good  qualities 
which  God  has  sown  in  men ;  the  consideration  of 
which  good  qualities  with  a  single  eye,  contrasting 
them  with  the  bad,  would  bring  greater  peace,  and 
greater  fruit  would  be  gained  by  endeavouring  to 
cherish  those  good  qualities. 

On  the  loth  of  June,  which  at  Mayence  is  a  solemn 
feast  of  St.  Albanus  the  martyr,  I  celebrated  Mass  at 
the  high  altar  of  the  Church  of  St.  Albanus,  where, 
besides  other  relics,  the  body  of  that  most  blessed 
martyr  was  exposed.  I  had  great  devotion  in  reflect 
ing  on  the  many  journeys  of  this  martyr,  and  that  he 
came  here,  in  the  time  of  the  Arians,  to  give  his  life 
for  the  salvation  of  the  people  of  Mayence.  Hence  I 
took  courage  and  confidence  of  gaining  some  fruit  out 
of  these  Lutheran  heresies,  which  desolate s almost  all 
•Germany.  The  consequence  of  these  heresies  is  that 
many  persons,  falling  away  from  the  Catholic  Church, 
and  rejecting  her  discipline,  believe  and  say  whatever 
they  please,  so  that  the  heretics  of  these  days  may  well 
be  called  teachers  of  rebellion  and  defection.  God  send 
us  men  of  opposite  sentiments,  who  may,  by  word  and 


In  Germany.  369 


deed,  promote  unity  and  obedience  to  the  Church,  and 
progress  in  every  Christian  virtue. 

On  St.  John  the  Baptist's  day,  before  Mass,80  I  was 
moved  to  devotion,  and  to  ask  the  grace  rightly  to 
regulate  myself  and  all  my  spiritual  exercises.  In  the 
first  place,  I  desired  to  be  pleasing  and  acceptable  to 
God,  through  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ ;  in  the  second 
place,  to  perform  worthily  all  offices  of  the  priesthood, 
such  as  preaching,  offering  the  holy  sacrifice,  medi 
tating,  and  the  like.  Thirdly,  to  be  enabled  to  exercise 
my  ministrations  to  the  profit  of  my  neighbour,  accord 
ing  to  the  dispositions  of  the  divine  will,  both  in  respect 
to  my  friends  and  to  all  others.  Fourthly,  to  have  a 
particular  grace  for  well  directing  those  whom  I  am  to 
instruct. 

While  considering  St.  John  the  Baptist  as  a  model  of 
penance,  I  received  some  lights  illustrating  the  teaching 
of  the  Exercises  with  regard  to  sins.  It  seemed  to  me 
that  the  first  thing  of  all  is  to  inquire  what  is  penitence, 
.and  not  to  desire  all  at  once  a  compunction  full  of 
tears  and  tenderness,  although  this  is  the  end  towards 
which  we  tend,  but  to  discover  the  various  ways  of  per 
forming  exterior  penance.  Many  persons  complain  that 
they  have  not  compunction  of  heart,  when  they  have  not 
the  patience  to  seek  that  in  which  this  compunction 
consists.  They  would  like  to  feel  inward  sorrow  of 
soul,  but  they  are  not  willing  to  afflict  their  flesh  in 
anything.  God  often  delays  communicating  to  us  His 
more  perfect  gifts,  and  leading  us  to  the  attainment  of 
the  end,  in  order  that  we  may  learn  to  make  use  of  His 
lesser  gifts,  and  of  the  means  which  lead  to  the  end. 
Some  persons  desire  to  have  spiritual  feelings,  and  to 
experience  in  their  flesh  compunction  of  heart,  whilst, 
on  the  other  hand,  they  lack  patience  and  other  virtues, 
80  June  24. 


3  70  In  Germany. 


the  want  of  which  they  neither  feel  nor  know.  But  it 
is  the  will  of  God  that  we  should  possess  our  soul,  and 
we  can  only  possess  it  by  patience,  according  to  the 
words — In  patient  ia  vestra  possidebitis  animas  vestras. 
And  how  can  he  who  does  not  possess  his  soul  by 
patience  expect  to  possess  God  by  sensible  consolation  ? 

On  the  day  of  SS.  John  and  Paul,  on  rising  from  bed 
in  the  morning,  I  had  a  very  remarkable  grace  of  pre 
paring  my  heart  to  say  office  without  admitting  affections 
of  sadness  and  of  joy.  Nevertheless,  while  dressing  and 
arranging  other  things,  I  was  very  careful  to  desire  to 
pray  with  all  devotion  and  attention,  and  my  only  fear 
was  of  not  continuing  in  these  dispositions,  which, 
however,  lasted  till  the  end  of  Mass  ;  and  I  desired  that 
it  might  be  so  always.  And  here  I  noted  that  it  was  a 
good  thing  that  our  heart  should  always  be  in  a  state 
either  of  a  certain  sadness  at  the  privation  of  the  divine 
assistance  and  illumination,  which  is  wont  to  come  from 
actual  devotion,  or  of  a  certain  consolation  in  conse 
quence  of  possessing  them.  And  this  seemed  to  me  a 
good  exercise  for  knowing  thoroughly  what  it  is  to  be 
deprived  of  the  vision  and  fruition  of  God,  which  is  the 
portion  of  the  damned,  or  what  it  is  to  possess  it,  which 
is  the  portion  of  the  blessed. 

That  day  I  said  Mass  for  the  soul  of  that  most  pious 
and  learned  man,  Lansperg,  the  Carthusian,  whose  good 
state  I  desired.  While  making  the  memento  of  the  dead, 
I  came  to  know  that  the  deliverance  of  a  soul  from 
purgatory  must  bring  great  glory  to  God  and  the  saints, 
as  well  as  great  assistance  to  those  who  live  upon  this 
earth.  For  in  purgatory  the  soul  is,  as  it  were,  bound, 
and  can  do  nothing  for  our  salvation  and  for  the  glory  of 
God,  whilst  the  blessed,  who  are  in  heaven,  cause  the 
Divine  Father  and  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  to  be  evermore 
glorified,  and  the  glory  of  God  and  Christ  for  the  salva- 


In  Germany.  371 

tion  of  the  souls  of  the  living  to  appear  upon  earth, 
according  to  the  angelic  hymn — Gloria  in  excclsis  Deo, 
d  in  terra  pax  hominibus  bonce  voluntatis. 

Another  day  in  the  octave  of  St.  John,  whilst  hearing 
a  person's  general  confession,  I  received  great  knowledge 
concerning  works  of  mercy  towards  the  living  and  dead, 
and  I  wept  abundantly,  without,  at  the  same  time,  being 
distracted  from  listening  to  my  penitent.  I  learnt  that  to 
show  mercy  to  others  is  a  very  effectual  means  of  finding 
mercy  ourselves  with  God  ;  and  how  easy  a  thing  it  is 
freely  to  receive  from  God  His  spiritual  gifts,  if  we  will 
freely  practise  towards  others  the  corporal  works  of 
mercy.  Thus  it  happens,  that  some  persons  much  given 
to  prayer  do  not  find  sometimes  that  which  they  desire 
for  their  spiritual  consolation,  because  they  do  not  show 
spiritual  mercy  towards  their  neighbour.  There  are 
others  who,  being  entirely  occupied  with  the  salvation  of 
their  neighbour,  though  they  may  be  able  to  spend  but 
little  time  in  prayer,  find  God  propitious,  not  only  as 
regards  the  remission  of  their  sins,  but  also  as  regards 
the  gaining  of  various  heavenly  gifts.  Henceforth  I 
resolved  to  exhort  all  persons  to  pay  greater  attention 
to  works  of  mercy. 

On  the  day  of  the  holy  Apostles  SS.  Peter  and  Paul,81 
vvhile  saying  Mass  for  a  friend,  it  was  granted  me  to 
hope  that  he  might  be  able  to  obtain  some  necessary 
graces  from  the  mercy  of  God,  by  the  intercession  of  the 
Blessed  Virgin  and  of  the  holy  Apostles.  While  medi 
tating  on  the  mysteries  of  the  life  of  Christ,  and 
considering  the  shedding  of  His  Blood,  and  the  other 
sufferings  of  His  Passion,  I  recited  this  prayer — *  O  Lord 
God  Almighty,  I  pray  that  by  the  merit  of  Thy  Blood 
shed  upon  the  earth,  Thou  wouldst  grant  me  the  grace 
which  I  ask  for  this  person,  that  thus  there  may  not  be 

8]  June  29. 
Y   2 


372  In  Germany. 


lost  so  great  an  abundance  of  Blood,  which  has  not, 
so  to  speak,  been  yet  applied/  For  I  represented 
to  myself  that  some  drops  of  blood,  some  particular 
sufferings  of  the  members  of  Christ,  some  of  His 
words  or  actions,  had  never  been  applied  by  any 
one  to  his  healing  and  salvation  ;  therefore  I  prayed 
that  they  might  be  applied  for  that  grace  which  I  was 
asking. 

After  the  feast  of  the  Visitation,  I  had  a  great  desire 
to  know,  in  my  works,  what  was  the  good,  pleasing,  and 
perfect  will  of  God.  I  had  also  great  consolation  in 
perceiving  the  manner  in  which  I  ought  to  manage  a 
certain  affair. 

On  the  feast  of  the  dedication  of  the  Cathedral  of 
Mayence,  I  found  great  devotion  in  offering  my  prayers 
and  actions  in  the  name  and  in  the  person  of  those  of 
whom  I  bear  especial  remembrance.  I  adored  Christ  in 
ray  person  as  though  I  were  representing  my  brothers 
and  relations.  In  like  manner  I  venerated  the  relics 
exposed  on  the  altar  in  the  name  of  others,  and  par 
ticularly  of  those  who  are  wont  to  delight  in  honouring 
them.  I  desired  also  that  the '  saints  who  are  in  heaven 
might  adore,  honour,  and  glorify  God,  giving  thanks 
to  Him  for  me  and  for  the  rest  of  us  who  are  in  the 
world. 

On  the  day  before  the  octave  of  the  holy  Apostles,  I 
had  many  good  desires  for  myself,  and  for  my  brothers 
and  relations,  and  generally  for  many  others  who  came 
into  my  mind ;  and  I  asked  the  Lord  to  be  pleased  to 
accept  these  desires  as  though  they  had  been  offered  by 
the  persons  themselves  for  whom  I  prayed,  desiring  in 
this  matter  to  be,  as  it  were,  the  vicar  of  Christ,  and 
especially  in  the  Mass  I  was  about  to  celebrate. 

On  the  Octave,  I  had  great  devotion  in  taking  holy 
water  on  entering  the  church,  and  I  besought  the  Divine 


In  Germany.  373 


Father  that  all  the  power  of  sanctification  and  benediction 
possessed  by  that  water  might  be  applied  to  the  cleansing 
of  my  soul,  and  to  its  defence  against  invisible  enemies. 
Then,  on  turning  towards  the  crucifix,  I  had  a  lively 
understanding  of  the  usefulness  of  images  or  pictures 
which  represent  persons  to  us  to  the  life,  as  though  they 
were  present.  Moreover,  I  besought  the  Divine  Father 
that  I  might  enjoy  in  my  mind  the  presence  of  Christ  as 
I  enjoyed  that  of  the  figure ;  and  the  same  thing  I 
desired  with  regard  to  the  Blessed  Virgin,  namely,  that 
she  might  be  always  present  to  my  mind,  and  also  that 
I  might  receive  greater  fervour  of  devotion  in  church, 
that  my  prayers  there  might  be  better  heard,  according 
to  the  divine  promise.  In  short,  I  understood  the  virtue 
of  these  holy  things  to  be  very  great,  not  only  in  conse 
quence  of  the  piety  and  faith  of  Christians,  but  by  divine 
ordinance  and  the  commandment  of  our  holy  mother 
the  Church.  Then,  kneeling  before  the  Blessed  Sacra 
ment,  I  experienced  great  devotion,  thinking  that  there 
in  reality  was  the  Body  of  Christ,  and  consequently 
the  assistance  of  the  most  Holy  Trinity  in  an  ineffable 
manner,  such  as  does  not  exist  in  other  things  and  in 
other  places.  Other  sacred  things,  as  pictures,  holy  water, 
churches,  represent  to  us  Christ  and  the  saints  spiritually 
present,  but  in  this  Sacrament  we  have  Christ  really 
present  under  the  sacramental  species,  and  for  this, 
blessed  be  His  name  ! 

On  the  same  day  of  the  Octave,  while  calling  to  mind 
the  graces  and  benefits  of  God,  I  felt  in  my  soul  a  kind 
of  lamentation,  such  as  I  had  never  felt  before.  It 
seemed  to  me  that,  by  the  grace  of  God,  I  enjoyed 
interiorly  an  abundance  of  consolation  and  peace,  but 
that  I  corresponded  very  ill  with  the  grace  of  God  in 
the  exterior  works  of  charity.  First,  I  did  not  feel  my 
defects  whether  interior  or  exterior,  as  also  I  did  not. 


374  IJl  Germany. 

either  interiorly  or  exteriorly,  reflect  on  grace.  After 
wards,  it  happened  that  I  sought  grace  and  peace 
purposely,  and  then  I  complained  of  my  exterior,  which 
seemed  to  me  without  feeling,  though  both  mind  and 
body  were  working  much.  Lastly,  by  the  superabundance 
of  divine  mercy,  it  was  in  addition  given  me  to  know 
that  I  was  too  inactive  in  the  love  of  God  and  my 
neighbour,  and  that  I  failed  in  exercising  and  making 
the  most  of  my  talents.  May  the  good  Jesus  grant  that 
I  may  not  find  so  much  peace  in  myself  till  I  am,  in 
every  way,  exercised  in  the  victory  over  myself,  and  in 
fighting  with  the  devil  and  my  evil  inclinations. 

On  another  day  within  the  same  octave,  as  I  was  con 
sidering  the  various  necessities,  tribulations,  adversities, 
and  oppressions  of  men,  I  conceived  a  great  desire  of 
having  them  always  present  to  me,  so  as  to  be  able 
always  to  pray  to  God,  and,  like  Moses,  to  hold  up  my 
arms,  while  those  I  pray  for  are  fighting,  and  suffering, 
and  waiting  for  help  from  others ;  and  for  the  obtaining 
of  this  grace  I  offered  the  divine  sacrifice.  In  the  Mass, 
at  the  words,  Orate,  fratres,  I  eagerly  desired  that  all 
present  might  pray  for  me,  and  as  I  saw  that  many  were 
not  doing  so,  I  asked  the  guardian  angels  of  those  present 
to  make  up  what  was  wanting  in  men.  The  same  day  I 
felt  and  knew  clearly,  that  whoever  desires  to  be  united 
with  God,  and  to  grow  in  His  love,  must  be  humble  in 
spirit,  and  mortified  in  his  flesh  and  his  passions.  For 
by  mortification  of  the  flesh  and  abnegation  of  spirit  one 
comes  to  possess  God.  We  must  enter  by  the  narrow 
gate,  and  this  gate  is  that  which  leads  to  the  heart  where 
dwell  truth  and  life.  The  heart  of  man  is  that  part 
which  is  the  first  to  receive  life  and  the  last  to  lose  it. 
To  the  heart,  then,  we  must  go,  so  that  being  there 
recollected  and  united,  we  may  have  that  spiritual  life 
which  is  hidden  with  Christ  in  God. 


In  Germany.  375 

On  the  octave  of  the  Visitation  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,8'2 
I  remembered  the  grace  that  I  received  on  that  day  to 
make  my  profession  according  to  the  rule  of  the  Society 
of  Jesus,  and  I  prayed  to  be  enabled  to  grow  in  per 
fection,  so  that  by  the  vow  of  chastity  I  might  be  pure 
and  clean  in  mind  and  body ;  that  by  means  of  the  vow 
of  poverty  I  might  be  free  from  every  worldly  affection, 
and  from  the  desire  of  possessing  anything ;  and  that  by 
means  of  obedience  I  might  be  a  fitting  instrument  for 
diligently  performing  all  good  works. 

On  the  day  of  St.  Anacletus,  pope  and  martyr,83  having 
to  celebrate  Mass  in  the  convent  of  the  monks  of 
St.  Augustine,  for  the  intention  of  their  prior,  it  came 
into  my  mind,  and  I  desired  to  do  everything  that  I 
could  for  every  superior  whatever  of  a  community,  as 
though  I  did  it  for  a  disciple  of  the  first  founder  of  that 
order,  as  for  instance  of  St.  Augustine,  of  St.  Francis, 
St.  Dominic,  St.  Benedict,  St.  Bernard  ;  and  so  also  with 
regard  to  the  nuns.  And  if  I  did  it  for  any  particular 
religious,  I  desired  to  do  so  as  for  a  disciple  of  the 
disciple,  or  for  a  brother  of  the  disciple  of  that  saint. 
I  resolved  to  demean  myself  towards  the  generals  of 
orders,  as  towards  the  vicars  and  immediate  represen 
tatives  of  those  saints.  So,  with  regard  to  the  Roman 
Pontiff,  as  to  the  vicar  of  the  Person  of  Christ,  and  His 
successor  and  lieutenant ;  and  to  bishops,  as  vicars  of 
the  other  Apostles ;  and  to  priests,  as  vicars  of  the 
disciples  of  Christ;  and  to  deacons,  as  successors  and 
vicars  of  the  disciples  of  the  Apostles.  But  the  Sovereign 
Pontiff  should  be  honoured  by  me  and  by  all  Christians 
as  though  he  were  the  very  Person  of  Christ,  inasmuch 
as  Christ  is  the  Head  of  the  Church,  the  Priest  and 
Prince  of  pastors,  the  Dispenser  of  graces,  gifts,  virtues, 
and  all  good  things,  of  Whose  fulness  all  we  have 
received. 

83  Juty  9«         **  Juty  J3- 


376  In  Germany. 


While  saying  the  office  of  SS.  Processus  and  Martin- 
ianus,84  as  I  fastened  my  eyes  upon  the  crucifix,  there 
came  into  my  mind  these  considerations  concerning  the 
Five  Wounds.  The  Wounds  of  the  Hands  and  the  Feet 
admonished  me  to  be  diligent  and  to  increase  in  good 
desires  and  in  good  works,  and  with  that  object  to 
undertake  with  good  courage  long  journeys  and  wander 
ings,  so  that  we  may  show  in  our  hands  and  feet  the 
marks  of  our  labours,  as  St.  Paul  says  of  the  whole 
body — Ego  stigmata  Domini  Jesu  in  corporc  meo  porto. 
I  took  notice  that  the  Wound  of  the  Side  was  opened 
after  the  death  of  Christ,  when  our  redemption  was 
already  accomplished ;  and  the  water  which  issued  from 
it  was  a  superabundance  of  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ. 
And  from  this  we  may  learn  that  we  shall  not  be  able 
till  after  death  to  taste  those  interior  gifts  which  constitute 
the  perfect  and  complete  salvation  and  glory  of  the  soul. 

1544- 

On  the  feast  of  our  Lord's  Circumcision,  which  was 
the  first  day  of  the  year  1544,  as  I  was  considering  how 
Jesus  Christ  was  pleased  for  us  to  receive  the  sign  of 
circumcision,  and  to  be  accounted  as  a  man  of  the 
Jewish  nation,  and  how  He  was  pleased  to  take  a  name 
among  men,  I  asked  of  God  these  two  graces :  first,  that 
by  God's  grace  a  sign  of  true  circumcision  might  be  seen 
on  my  soul ;  and  secondly,  that  henceforth  my  name 
might  be  written  in  the  book  of  life. 

After  the  feast  of  the  Epiphany  I  was  called  from  the 
journey  which  I  had  already  begun  in  the  direction  of 
Portugal,  and  returned  to  Cologne.  I  sent  to  Portugal 
Francis  Strada,  Andrew  Oviedo,  John  Aragonio,  and 
nine  others  whom  I  had  won  at  Louvain.  These  were 
Master  Peter  Favre  de  Hallis,  Master  Hermes,  Master 

84  Transferred  from  July  2. 


In  Portugal.  37 


John,  Master  Maximilian,  Don  Leonardo,  Master  James, 
Master  Daniel,  Thomas,  and  the  young  Cornelius.  On 
returning  to  Cologne  I  took  with  me  Master  Lambert  and 
Master  Emilian  ;  and  I  hired  a  house  in  which  I  lived 
till  the  month  of  July,  preaching  in  the  Latin  language 
every  Sunday  and  feast  day  in  the  College  of  Arts, 
besides  other  occasional  sermons.  I  left  at  Cologne 
Don  Alvaro  with  nine  other  scholastics ;  and  God  grant 
that  they  may  be,  as  it  were,  the  foundation  of  the  Society 
in  that  place.  Having  received  fresh  orders  to  go  to 
Portugal,  where  the  King  wanted  me,  I  set  out  on  the 
1 2th  of  July,  taking  with  me  seven  heads  of  the 
companions  of  St.  Ursula,  with  many  other  holy  relics.. 
One  of  these  heads  was  given  to  me  by  the  nuns  of 
St.  Maximin,  another  by  the  Convent  of  White  Ladies, 
another  by  the  parish  of  St.  Columba,  and  one  came  from 
Don  Alvaro  Alfonso  through  Dona  Leonora  Mascarenas, 
who  received  it  from  a  good  lady  of  Cologne. 

On  the  day  of  St.  Bartholomew  the  Apostle  I  landed 
at  Lisbon. 

1545- 

On  the  feast  of  the  Three  Kings  in  the  year  1545, 
these  reflections  suggested  themselves  to  me  for  my 
sermons  :  that  Jesus  Christ,  among  other  reasons,  was 
pleased  to  hide  Himself  in  His  humility,  in  order  that 
men  might  learn  to  show  themselves  such  as  they  really 
are  in  regard  to  Him.  He  chose  to  hide  beneath  His 
humility  all  the  treasures  of  divine  wisdom  and  know 
ledge,  to  give  us  the  opportunity  of  better  understanding 
the  treasures  that  we  have  received  from  the  Divine 
Majesty.  And  thus  He  ordered  it,  that  the  Magi,  seeing 
His  poverty,  should  open  their  treasures.  And  so,  again, 
He  hides  His  power,  and  so  He  causes  the  angels  to 
manifest  it;  He  hides  His  purity,  choosing  to  be  baptized 
by  St.  John  the  Baptist,  and  so  He  moves  the  Father 


378  In  Portugal. 


to  reveal  Him  in  these  words — This  is  My  beloved  Son  : 
He  hides  His  charity  at  the  marriage  of  Cana,  and  so  He 
moves  His  Mother  to  speak,  and  to  manifest  His  glory 
before  the  time.  These  are  the  three  manifestations 
which  the  Church  celebrates  this  day. 

The  Magi  offer  to  the  Infant  Jesus  gold,  as  though 
they  wished  to  assist  Him  in  His  poverty,  and  at  the 
same  time  to  acknowledge  that  they  received  every  good 
thing  from  Him.  They  offer  incense  for  the  odour  of 
sweetness,  as  though  they  wished  to  comfort  His  mind 
and  spirit,  and  notwithstanding,  they  believe  and  declare 
that  it  is  from  Him  alone  that  they  can  have  good 
desires  and  a  good  understanding.  They  offer  myrrh 
with  the  desire  that  that  holy  Body  of  the  Infant  may 
not  be  subject  to  corruption,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it 
is  from  His  Passion  that  the  glory  and  incorruption  of 
our  bodies  is  to  come. 

And  here  I  experienced  in  myself  a  certain  dryness 
and  desolation  which  debarred  me  from  the  devotion 
and  joy  which  I  desired  to  have  on  so  great  a  feast. 
Only,  I  heard  within  myself  a  reply  like  this — '  This  is 
the  day  of  the  Three  Kings,  and  of  the  adoration  of  the 
true  King.  Bear,  therefore,  with  patience  this  dryness 
and  desolation;  for  by  this  means  thou  shalt  be  the 
better  able  to  know  whether  or  not  thou  art  master  of 
thyself.  It  is  not  difficult  to  govern  and  to  conquer 
oneselves,  when  we  are  near  to  Christ  by  devotion.  The 
real  victory  and  dominion  is  shown  when  our  King  and 
Lord  is  far  from  us,  Who  fights  for  us  till  such  time  as 
we  are  made  masters  of  ourselves.' 

When  is  it  said — O  nines  de  Saba  venient  et  omnes  reges 
adorabunt  eum,  omnesque  gentes  servient  <?/,  we  may  under 
stand  that  God  desires  all  men  to  be  saved,  and  that 
Christ,  as  Mediator,  gives  to  all  means  sufficient  for  their 
being  saved ;  and  it  may  further  be  understood,  that  as 


In  Portugal.  379 


such  great  kings  submitted  to  Christ,  it  is  to  be  hoped 
that  others  of  greater,  equal,  and,  still  more,  of  less 
authority,  will  do  the  same. 

On  the  Saturday  before  the  octave  of  Epiphany,  while 
I  was  hearing  confessions,  I  considered  how  a  confessor 
ought  to  endeavour,  not  only  to  instruct,  correct,  and 
perfect  his  penitents,  but  also  to  move  them  to  help  the 
souls  of  the  departed,  and  to  relieve  the  corporal  and 
spiritual  necessities  of  their  neighbours  by  their  prayers 
and  works  of  charity  and  almsdeeds. 

On  the  Sunday  within  the  octave  of  the  Epiphany,  in 
considering  Christ's  going  up  to  and  remaining  in  the 
Temple,  I  noted  seven  things  which  He  teaches  us  in  this 
action — (i)  That  He  chooses  to  absent  Himself  from 
His  natural  parents  to  do  the  will  of  His  Heavenly 
Father;  (2)  that  it  is  His  will  to  be  sought  for  by  His 
parents;  (3)  that  it  is  His  will  to  be  found  in  the  Temple 
in  the  midst  of  the  doctors  ;  (4)  that  it  is  His  will  to 
place  Himself  again  in  subjection ;  (5)  that  it  is  His  will 
to  condescend  to  His  parents  ;  (6)  that  it  is  His  will  to 
dwell  at  Nazareth,  and  (7)  to  be  subject  to  His  parents. 

His  parents,  having  fulfilled  their  ceremonial  obser 
vance,  went  back  from  Jerusalem  according  to  their 
custom ;  but  Jesus  Christ  has  greater  things  to  do  in  the 
temple,  which  cannot  be  accomplished  in  the  usual  time. 
And  so  we  ought  not  to  regard  ordinary  custom,  when  it 
involves  the  discontinuance  of  practices  of  devotion.  It 
may  well  be  that  we  have  satisfied  ourselves,  but  not 
God;  and  therefore,  if  we  know  that  God  requires  from 
us  greater  and  longer  service,  let  us  abide  with  Him.  1 
certainly  would  rather  be  forsaken  by  relations  and 
friends,  than  forsake  God.  Let  all,  then,  who  boast  of 
being  learned  and  prudent,  learn  of  Jesus,  Who,  at  the 
age  of  twelve  years,  sits  in  the  midst  of  the  doctors,  to 
hear  and  ask  them  questions ;  let  them  learn,  I  say,  not 


380  In  PortugaL 


to  desire  to  know  more  than  ought  to  be  known.  Let 
heretics  also  learn  a  lesson  from  the  humility  of  Christ : 
let  them  listen  to,  and  inquire  of  the  doctors  of  the 
Church,  who  are  seated  in  the  midst  of  them. 

In  the  octave  of  the  Epiphany,  having  taken  for  the 
text  of  a  sermon  those  words — Vidit  Joannes  Jesum 
venientem,  and,  as  I  was  about  to  say  Mass,  I  conceived 
a  great  desire,  as  it  were,  to  see  and  to  feel  Jesus  coming 
into  my  heart.  And  afterwards,  when  I  received  the 
Blessed  Sacrament,  I  knew  that  Christ  had  entered  into 
me  without  my  having  seen  Him  enter.  Hereupon,  I 
prayed  to  God,  the  Blessed  Virgin,  and  the  saints,  that  I 
and  my  brethren  and  all  who  communicate  might,  with 
the  eyes  of  our  mind,  see  Jesus  coming  to  us,  and  so 
might  be  able  to  reverence  Him,  and  dispose  ourselves 
to  receive  Him  by  a  worthy  preparation.  Whilst  putting, 
on  the  sacred  vestments,  I  stirred  myself  up  to  have 
that  modesty  of  demeanour  which  a  person  would  have 
who  saw  with  his  own  eyes  Jesus  coming  towards  him. 

By  withdrawing  in  time  from  His  subjection  to  His 
parents,  in  order  to  go  to  receive  baptism  from  John, 
Jesus  teaches  us  that  those  who  think  of  changing  their 
state  of  life,  ought  not  to  seek  the  liberty  of  the  flesh,  as  he 
does  who  passes  from  a  strict  rule  to  an  easier  one,  but 
rather  to  attach  themselves  to  that  which  is  more  perfect. 
In  leaving  the  obedience  of  His  parents,  Christ  submits, 
in  a  certain  way  to  John's  discipline.  Hence,  He  does 
not  seek  for  some  one  of  greater  consideration  than  His 
parents,  nor  to  shake  off  all  obedience,  since  He  is 
desirous  to  make  Himself  the  servant  of  all.  He  comes 
into  the  world  to  accomplish  the  salvation  of  all.  It  is 
fitting,  therefore,  that  every  one  should  go  forth  to  meet 
Him,  to  receive  the  grace  of  this  Immaculate  Lambr 
Who.  Himself  bears  and  takes  away  the  sins  of  the 
world. 


In  Portugal.  381 

The  day  after  the  octave  of  the  Epiphany,  while 
considering  the  coming  of  Christ  as  Judge,  I  called  to 
mind  those  tremendous  signs  which  will  precede  the 
judgment :  the  wars,  seditions,  earthquakes,  pestilences 
and  famines,  as  also  the  disturbance  of  the  heavens  and 
the  sea,  the  darkening  of  the  sun,  and  all  the  other 
appearances  which  will  cause  men  to  tremble  ;  and  con 
sidering  all  these  things,  I  prayed  the  Lord,  with  tears, 
to  give  grace  to  me  and  to  all  men,  present  and  future, 
that  we  may  watch  over  ourselves  and  fear  His  Judgment. 
War,  famine,  earthquake,  and  pestilence,  are  things  which 
fill  men  with  exceeding  fear  :  much  more,  then,  will  those 
awful  signs  in  heaven  terrify  those  whose  hearts  cling  to 
earthly  things,  and  are  weighed  down  with  gluttony  and 
drunkenness.  It  is  right,  therefore,  for  men  to  be  very 
vigilant  and  careful  with  regard  to  the  Day  of  Judgment, 
which  is  to  be  preceded  by  so  great  tribulations.  And 
here  there  came  into  my  mind  those  words  in  the  twenty- 
first  chapter  of  St.  Luke — -Vigilate  itaqne,  omni  tempore 
or  antes,  ut  digni  habeamini  fugerc  ista  omnia  qua  futitra 
sitnt,  et  stare  ante  f ilium  hominis. 

The  following  prayer,  therefore,  seemed  to  me  a  good 
one,  which  I  should  like  to  be  recited  in  public  and 
private  by  all  Christians — 

'O  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Son  of  the  living  God,  Who  hast 
commanded  us  always  to  watch  and  pray,  that  we  may 
be  able  to  escape  all  the  evil  signs  of  Thy  tremendous 
Judgment,  and  to  be  worthy  to  stand  before  the  Son  of 
Man ;  graciously  hear  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  asking  this 
thing  with  fear  and  confidence,  and  let  not  that  day 
overwhelm  any  of  us  unprepared.  Who  livest  and 
reignest/  &c. 

Once,  when  I  was  saying  Mass  for  my  spiritual  brethren 
and  children,  there  came  into  my  mind  the  words  of  the 


;82  In  Portiigal. 


Apostle — Patrcs  debcnt  thesaurizare  filiis;  and  I  desired 
greatly  that  I,  too,  might  be  able  to  heap  up  spiritual 
treasures,  which  should  be  for  the  advantage  and  con 
solation  of  others,  in  imitation  of  Him  Who  has  in 
Himself  all  the  treasures  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge 
of  God.  I  also  took  consolation  in  considering  that  the 
holy  fathers,  whose  true  sons  we  are  and  ought  to  ber 
have  amassed  for  us  many  treasures,  not  only  of  glory  in 
heaven,  but  of  grace  on  earth.  And  in  this  all  also  who 
lead  a  religious  life,  subject  to  obedience,  ought  to  find 
consolation,  because,  although  they  may  not  have  much 
opportunity  of  laying  up  spiritual  treasures,  they  never 
theless  know  that  their  fathers  and  ancestors  have  gained 
them  for  them.  Superiors,  also,  who  govern,  ought  to 
be  careful  to  amass  these  spiritual  treasures  for  those 
under  them,  first  making  themselves  capable  of  such  gifts. 
And,  generally,  it  is  fitting  that  he  who  has  temporal 
goods  from  others  should  return  spiritual  goods  for  them. 
And  I  would  say  the  same  of  those  who  serve  Christ  in 
offices  which  are  meaner  and  of  less  account,  with  regard 
to  those  who  serve  Him  in  higher  and  more  dignified 
positions.  For,  as  they  share  in  the  labours  and  suf 
ferings,  so,  also,  ought  they  to  share  in  the  rest  and 
consolation.  And  to  this  those  words  refer  which 
Christ  will  say  to  all  His  saints — Infra  in  gaudium 
Domini  tui ;  that  is,  thou  who  hast  entered  into  a 
share  of  My  labours  and  consolations. 

On  the  day  of  the  five  holy  martyrs  of  the  Order  of 
Friars  Minor,  Bernard,  Peter,  Accursius,  Adjutus,  and 
Otho,85  while  present  at  the  divine  office  in  the  Church  of 
Santa  Croce,  at  Coimbra,  where  their  bodies  rest,  I  was 
filled  with  a  great  feeling  of  compassion  towards  all  those 
in  general  who  are  in  evident  danger  of  damnation. 
There  came  into  my  mind  Luther,  the  King  of  England, 

83  January  16.     This  was  the  day  of  their  martyrdom. 


In  Portugal.  38, 


the  Turk,  and  many  others.  I  then  considered  the  great 
mercy  of  God,  Who  had  waited  so  long  a  time  for  their 
conversion.  And  reflecting  upon  myself,  I  noted  how  it 
can  be  that  God  not  only  gives  to  men  like  these  time  for 
repentance,  and  waits  for  their  conversion,  but  that  He 
also  waits  for  some  one  who  may  be  willing  to  pray  for 
them,  and  to  labour  to  convert  them.  Wherefore  we,  to 
whom  is  given  the  power  of  preaching  and  instructing, 
ought  to  fear  greatly  lest  many  should  be  lost  through 
our  fault  and  neglect.  Many  are  stretching  their  arms 
towards  us ;  let  us,  then,  hasten  to  help  them.  The 
blood  of  the  martyrs  calls  to  us  to  win  the  salvation 
of  those  amongst  whom  and  for  whose  salvation  they 
were  slain.  And  thus  may  God  grant  that  one  day 
some  of  the  Society  may  have  the  opportunity  and 
means  of  cultivating  that  country  of  the  Mahometans 
where  these  five  martyrs  shed  their  blood. 

On  the  day  of  the  holy  martyrs  Fabian  and  Sebastian,86 
there  was  at  Coimbra  a  great  flood  which  did  much 
damage,  not  only  to  the  country,  but  to  the  houses  also.  I 
offered  the  Mass  in  suffrage  for  a  deceased  monk  whom 
Father  Martin  Santa  Croce  recommended  to  me  as  a  holy 
man,  and  thus  I  experienced  a  great  desire  to  deliver  the 
souls  in  purgatory.  I  had  also  a  new  spiritual  feeling 
with  regard  to  souls  who  are  detained  in  purgatory  for 
very  small  faults,  imagining  them  to  myself  as  arriving  by 
successive  degrees  at  the  possession  of  eternal  happiness  ; 
and  here  I  am  speaking  of  accidental  beatitude,  because 
that  which  is  essential  is,  as  theologians  say,  Tota  simul 
et  pcrfecta  possessio  vitce  interminabilis,  statusquc  bonorum 
omnium  aggregatione  pcrfectus.  I  conceived  great  hope  of 
the  fair  weather  which  was  desired,  praying  God  to 
take  pity  on  the  poor  people  whose  property  was  suffering 
by  the  flood  ;  and  I  imagined  that  property  as  belonging 

86  January  20. 


384  In  Portugal. 


to  pious  and  holy  persons,  such  as  the  monk  in  question, 
and  others  already  blessed  in  heaven.  I  also  desired 
that  the  will  of  God  might  be  always  done  in  us,  and  the 
will  of  the  saints  which  is  inspired  to  them  by  God, 
especially  in  that  which  concerns  the  honour  of  God, 
.the  salvation  of  souls,  and  our  perfection.  Then  I  took 
courage  to  ask  of  God  the  fulfilment  of  certain  desires 
of  mine,  which  came  to  me  from  Him,  with  regard  to 
the  bringing  back  of  Germany  and  of  the  heathen  to 
the  true  faith  and  the  profession  of  Christians. 

On  the  day  of  the  glorious  virgin  martyr,  Agnes,87  when 
I  said  Mass,  I  prayed  God  to  grant  the  grace  to  our 
Society  by  a  special  privilege,  that  the  sins  of  those  who 
enter,  or  shall  enter  it,  may  not  be  imputed  to  that 
Society.  And  I  say  this  both  in  reference  to  sins  com 
mitted  before  entering  it,  and  to  all  others  which  may  be 
committed  afterwards.  And  this  I  asked  of  the  Lord, 
because  I  had  felt  a  certain  pious  fear  lest  the  Society 
should  be  less  flourishing  and  less  esteemed  by  our 
neighbours  in  consequence  of  the  sins  of  its  present  and 
future  members.  Ascribe  not,  then,  O  good  Jesus,  the 
particular  sins  of  each  one  of  us  to  this  holy  Society,  and 
suffer  not  anything  we  attempt  to  succeed  which  is 
opposed  to  Thy  honour  and  to  the  salvation  of  souls  ; 
but  let  those  things  only  have  a  favourable  issue  which 
are  good  and  edifying.  O  Lord  God,  I  pray  Thee  to 
forget  our  old  offences ;  and  even  if  it  is  Thy  pleasure 
that  we  should  suffer  for  them  chastisement,  reproaches, 
bodily  sufferings,  and  poverty,  at  least  permit  us  nor 
to  be  punished  with  those  scourges  which  are  in 
flicted  on  wretched  sinners  as  the  punishment  of  their 
sins.  May  these  punishments  for  sin,  I  pray  Thee, 
O  Lord,  be  far  from  this  young  and  tender  family  of 
Thine. 

87  January  21. 


In  Portugal.  385 


On  the  feast  of  the  Purification,88  I  conceived  a  great 
and  lively  desire  not  to  pass  out  of  this  life  till  I  should 
have  settled  all  the  affairs  of  my  soul,  according  to  the 
will  of  God  ;  to  see  my  mind  at  peace  before  the  dissolu 
tion  of  my  body  ;  to  taste  true  life  in  Jesus  Christ  before 
my  death  ;  and  lastly,  to  witness  the  glory  of  the  Church 
and  of  our  Society.  I  desired  also  to  have  the  grace  to 
let  no  day  pass  without  gaining  some  fruit,  since  God 
gives  me  health  that  I  may  work,  and  prolongs  the  days 
of  my  life  that  I  may  do  good.  Do  Thou,  O  my  God, 
continue  in  me  these  good  desires,  so  that  I  may  do  not 
only  what  at  the  end  of  my  life  I  should  desire  to  have 
done,  but  that  also  which  Thou  wouldst  have  me  do 
daily.  Oh,  how  happy  would  that  man  be  who  should 
be  able  to  know  what  God  requires  of  him  every  day  ! 

On  the  feast  of  St.  Blaise,89  I  gave  Father  M.  Simon 
Rodriguez  one  of  the  heads  of  the  holy  virgins,  which 
was  taken  to  the  College  of  Coimbra  in  the  confidence 
that  it  would  there  be  honoured  and  venerated  till  the 
day  of  the  general  resurrection  of  the  body. 

On  the  Friday90  after  Ash  Wednesday,  as  I  was  thinking 
that  our  fathers,  who  follow  the  Roman  Breviary,  recite 
a  shorter  office  than  others,  I  desired  that  they  might 
make  up  for  this  by  exercising  themselves  in  mental 
prayer,  and  in  the  ministrations  of  preaching  and  hearing 
confessions,  and  in  everything  profitable  to  the  living  and 
dead. 

On  the  Saturday91  after  Ash  Wednesday  there  came  into 
my  mind  the  affliction  of  a  person  who  had  opened  his 
whole  heart  to  me ;  and  thinking  over  the  various  tribula 
tions  and  adversities  which  many  people  suffer  in  temporal 
things,  my  eyes  filled  with  tears  of  interior  compunction, 
because,  while  all  others  who  are  in  the  world  have  some 

88  February  2.  89  February  3.  9°  February  20. 

91  February  21. 


386  In  Portugal. 


trouble,  I  had  not  any.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  one  who 
aspires  solely  after  eternal  and  invisible  things,  is  free 
from  the  tribulations  which  spring  from  temporal  and 
visible  things ;  but  I  lamented  that  in  order  to  attain  these 
eternal  goods,  I  did  not  suffer  what  worldly  persons  do 
in  order  to  gain  temporal  goods. 

On  the  same  day,  as  I  was  leaving  the  King's  palace 
towards  evening,  I  fell  in  with  a  party  and  cavalcade  of 
gentlemen  who  were  preparing  to  receive  a  duke,  and 
many  people  were  crowding  to  see  the  sight.  To  avoid 
the  meeting  and  the  noise,  I  turned  into  a  church  close 
at  hand,  and  feeling  a  certain  curiosity  arise  in  my  heart 
to  see  the  very  thing  that  I  had  been  avoiding,  I  fixed 
my  eyes  on  the  crucifix,  and  I  understood  that  to  be  the 
one  sight  truly  worthy  of  contemplation — how  God  was 
pleased  to  take  human  flesh,  and  to  die  between  two 
thieves.  Let  those  who  are  possessed  with  a  curiosity 
after  external  things  gaze  on  Him,  and  then  there  will  be 
an  end  of  all  insatiable  appetites  of  the  eyes,  ears,  and 
other  senses.  And  if,  as  yet,  thou  dost  not  take  pleasure 
in  this  sight,  at  least  desire  to  do  so :  so  shalt  thou  take 
from  thyself  the  curiosity  of  worldly  and  earthly  spec 
tacles.  If,  as  yet,  thou  canst  not  enter  into  the  sepulchre, 
at  least  stand  outside  with  Magdalene  and  weep  before 
the  sepulchre. 

On  the  day  of  the  Apostle  St.  Matthias,  I  gave  the 
King  and  Queen  of  Portugal  two  heads  of  the  holy 
virgins  which  I  had  from  the  Carthusian  Convent  and 
the  Monastery  of  St.  Maximin,  and  two  of  the  four  bones 
of  the  companions  of  St.  Gereon,  which  I  had  from  the 
canons  ;  and  to  the  Prince  of  Portugal  I  gave  a  bone  of 
the  eleven  thousand  virgins.  I  said  that  I  did  not  know 
where  to  place  them  better  than  in  their  Highnesses' 
hands,  and  they  ordered  me  to  place  them  in  a  casket  in 
the  Queen's  oratory. 


In  Spain.  387 


On  the  Wednesday  after  '  Invocabit '  Sunday,92  while 
reciting  the  litanies  according  to  custom,  I  prayed  the 
Lord  to  grant  to  me  and  my  brethren  the  grace  to 
perform  well  all  those  actions  of  which  we  ought  to 
render  a  special  account,  namely,  observing  the  order 
and  discipline  of  the  house,  examining  our  conscience, 
reciting  the  canonical  hours,  making  a  good  confession 
with  sentiments  of  sorrow,  celebrating  Mass,  communi 
cating,  administering  the  sacraments,  handling  the  Word 
of  God  well  in  public  and  private,  and  giving  good 
edification  to  those  with  whom  we  have  intercourse. 

On  the  4th  of  March,  having  obtained  permission 
from  the  King  of  Portugal,  I  started  with  Father  Antonio 
Araoz  from  Evora;  we  reached  Salamanca  on  St.  Gregory's 
day,  and  on  that  of  St.  Gabriel,  the  i8th,  Valladolid ; 
and  thus  I  have,  by  the  divine  favour,  accomplished  the 
obedience  which  commanded  me  to  go  from  Cologne  to 
Portugal,  and  thence,  with  the  King's  leave,  to  proceed 
to  Valladolid.  And  blessed  be  the  Lord,  Who  was 
always  and  everywhere  propitious  to  me  in  this  long 
journey. 

On  the  eve93  of  St.  Benedict  I  commended  myself  with 
many, tears  to  God,  to  the  Blessed  Virgin,  and  to  all  the 
saints  who,  in  this  life,  endured  labours  and  sufferings.  I 
also  begged  that  all  sinners  might  have  sorrow  and  con 
trition,  having  in  my  mind  those  words — Lavabo  per 
singulas  nodes  lectum  meum,  lacrymis  stratum  meum  rigavi. 
Afterwards,  having  heard  some  persons  in  the  adjoining 
rooms  talking  improperly,  I  was  much  grieved  at  their 
preparing  themselves  for  sleep  in  such  a  manner,  and  I 
recited  this  prayer — 'Visita,  qusesumus,  Domini,  habita- 
tiones  istas,  et  reliquas  omnes  in  quibus  homines  degunt, 

<J-  i.e.  the  first  Sunday  in  Lent.     Ash  Wednesday  was  February  25, 
the  day  after  St.  Matthias. 
9»  March  20. 
Z   2 


388  In  Spain. 


et  omnes  insidias  inimicorum  invisibilium  ab  eis  longe 
repelle ;  angeli  tui  sancti  habitant  cum  ipsis,  qui  nos  et 
reliquos  omnes  in  pace  custodiant  Per  Christum ;'  etc. 

On  St.  Benedict's 94  feast,  I  offered  the  Mass  for  our 
Society,  begging  that  holy  patriarch,  that  as  he  had  great 
power  with  God,  he  would  protect  it  from  all  evil  spirits, 
and  defend  it  from  all  error,  culpable  ignorance,  and  from 
all  sin. 

Thou  oughtest  to  pay  honour,  reverence,  and  submis 
sion  to  those  over  thee,  and  especially  to  thy  superiors, 
and  to  all  who  are  thy  betters  in  authority,  learning, 
virtue,  and  age.  There  are  many  persons  who  bear 
affection  for  parents  and  superiors,  and  who  obey  them, 
and  help  them  in  their  necessities ;  but  there  are  few  who 
really  honour  and  reverence  them  from  their  hearts.  Do 
thou  love  all  thy  neighbours,  and  do  them  all  the  good 
in  thy  power.  Have,  to  thy  superiors,  affections  of 
honour,  reverence,  and  modesty;  to  thy  equals,  affec 
tions  of  brotherly  love,  endeavouring  always  to  yield  to 
them  ;  and  to  thy  inferiors  be  amiable,  kind,  and 
courteous,  nay,  be  friendly  and  gracious  even  to  the 
lowest  and  meanest ;  and  so  shalt  thou  imitate  Christ, 
Who  stooped  to  the  very  lowest. 

One  day,  when  I  had  gone  to  the  palace  to  hear  the 
sermon  in  the  Prince's  chapel,  the  porter,  not  knowing 
me,  did  not  admit  me,  and  so,  remaining  outside  the 
door,  I  called  to  mind  the  many  times  that  I  had  given 
free  entrance  into  my  soul  to  so  many  vain  thoughts  and 
bad  spirits,  and  had  refused  it  to  Jesus,  Who  was  knock 
ing  at  the  door.  I  also  thought  how  Jesus  Christ 
was  everywhere  ill-received  by  the  world.  I  prayed  for 
myself  and  for  the  porter,  that  the  Lord  might  not  make 
us  wait  very  long  in  purgatory,  before  entering  heaven. 
Many  other  good  things  came  into  my  mind  on  that 
94  March  2I. 


In  Spain.  389 


occasion,  and  therefore  I  felt  great  affection  for  that 
porter,  who  had  been  to  me  a  cause  of  so  much  devotion. 
I  also  desired  that  none  of  the  Society  might  suffer  any 
hurt  to  their  souls  through  similar  or  greater  repulses,  as 
often  happens  to  the  proud  and  impatient. 

On  the  feast  of  the  Annunciation95  of  the  Blessed 
Mother  of  God,  I  desired  that  I,  too,  might  have 
announced  to  me  the  good  news  of  my  eternal  salvation. 
I  considered,  on  that  day,  how  I  might  be  certain  of 
eternal  life ;  and  deemed  him  happy  who  knows  that  he 
has  found  grace  with  God,  is  united  with  God,  and  does 
work  well  pleasing  to  God.  Oh,  how  unhappy  are  those 
who  place  all  their  anxiety  in  seeking  the  favour  of  men, 
in  expecting  a  reward  from  them,  and  in  rejoicing  that 
their  services  are  pleasing  to  them  !  Then,  considering 
how  on  that  day  the  Eternal  Word  became  Incarnate, 
and,  in  fact,  began  the  work  of  our  salvation,  I  prayed 
the  Lord  to  give  me  grace  to  begin  with  works  and 
actions  that  which  had  hitherto  stopped  short  at  inten 
tions  and  affections.96 

On  Maundy  Thursday  I  greatly  rejoiced  that  Jesus 
Christ  has  been  pleased  to  leave  to  His  Apostles  and  to 
us,  not  only  the  example  of  all  the  good  works  which  He 
did  in  His  Body,  but  also  that  very  same  Body.  Woe 
to  us  Christians,  if,  having  as  our  meat  and  drink  the 
instrument  made  use  of  by  the  Divinity,  we  do  not 
become  active  and  unwearied  labourers  ! 

On  Good  Friday,  while  hearing  the  confessions  of 
some  children,  who  were  the  sons  of  a  nobleman  who 

95  March  25.     Wednesday  in  Passion  week. 

96  Here  several  manuscript  copies  of  this  'Memorial'  end  ;  among 
them  that  which  has  been  already  lithographed  at  Vals.     But  I  have  in 
my  possession  a  very  old  copy,  which  formerly  belonged  to   Father 
Antonio  Spinelli,  and  was,  perhaps,  copied  by  him ;  and  this  continues 
almost  up  to  the  October  of  this  year,   1545,  and  concludes  with 
a  short  appendix  of  1546.     [Italian  translator.] 


390  In  Spain. 


was  a  penitent  of  mine,  there  came  into  my  mind  some 
annoying  thoughts,  as  though  I  was  losing  time  with 
those  little  ones,  when  I  might  be  labouring  for  older 
and  more  capable  persons.  On  becoming  conscious  of 
this,  I  resolved  to  spend  my  whole  life  even,  if  such 
were  the  will  of  God,  in  those  employments,  which,  in 
themselves,  seem  small  and  mean ;  and  I  found  great 
comfort  in  the  spirit  of  humility,  and  understood  better 
the  value  of  those  works  which  are  done,  with  a  right 
intention,  for  the  good  of  low  and  obscure  persons. 
Wherefore,  I  desire  for  my  part,  and  esteem  it  a  very 
honourable  thing,  always  to  be  able  to  teach  children 
and  uneducated  people,  the  poor,  and  above  all,  the  most 
abandoned.  For,  although  it  may  seem  to  us  that  more 
fruit  is  to  be  gained  by  attending  to  the  great  ones  of 
the  world,  yet  God  is  wont  to  grant  greater  fruit  to  the 
labours  which  are  spent  on  little  ones,  according  to  those 
words  of  His — Quod  uni  ex  minimis  meis  feristis,  mihi 
faislis.  Certainly  He  values  more  highly  what  is  done 
for  the  sake  of  one  who  is  abandoned  by  all,  than  if 
thou  wert  to  perform  the  same  work  for  the  good  of  the 
Emperor.  As,  then,  the  poor  man  is  left  to  the  care  of 
God,  so  do  thou  think  that  he  is  left  to  thee,  that  thou 
mayest  help  him  who  has  no  one  else  to  do  so. 

Another  time  I  was  sad,  considering  that  I  was 
performing  nothing  great,  and  deeming  myself,  for  that 
reason,  the  most  unhappy  of  my  companions.  But 
presently  I  took  notice  that  in  this  God  is  wonderful, 
that  He  adds  something  of  His  own  even  to  the  least 
of  our  works.  And,  therefore,  that  if  we  are  united  to 
Him,  we  shall  receive  from  Him  a  more  abundant 
blessing  on  our  labours.  Do  not,  therefore,  consider 
what  the  work  is  in  itself,  but  how,  and  with  how  much 
perfection  thou  hast  done  it.  Endeavour  to  increase 
grace  in  thyself,  and  thou  shalt  be  great  in  little  works 


In  Spain.  391 


while,  in  the  other  way,  thou  shalt  be  little  in  great 
ones.  Little  works,  accompanied  by  much  grace,  last 
longer  and  edify  more  than  very  great  works  with  little 
grace. 

Those  words,  Popule  meus,  quid  fed  tibi  ?  which  are 
said  in  the  Adoration  of  the  Cross,  have  touched  and 
pierced  my  heart.  More  keenly  than  in  past  days,  have 
I  felt  the  words  in  which  Jesus  Christ  complains  that 
His  vineyard  made  itself  bitter  to  Him,  that  His  people 
preferred  Barabbas  to  Him,  that  they  bound  Him  to  the 
pillar  Who  had  given  them  light  in  the  wilderness  by 
the  pillar  of  fire,  that  they  gave  vinegar  to  Him  Who 
made  water  gush  forth  from  the  rock  for  them.  And  I 
considered  all  these  reproaches  as  addressed  directly  to 
myself. 

On  the  feast  of  our  Lord's  Resurrection97  I  encouraged 
myself  to  raise  my  spirit  to  Christ,  and  to  acknowledge 
the  cause  of  my  consolation  to  be  from  Him.  Hitherto 
I  have  too  much  grieved  and  rejoiced  at  the  good  and 
evil  I  was  conscious  of  in  myself.  God  grant  that 
henceforth  I  may  love  and  value  Jesus  Christ  rather  for 
the  price  of  my  redemption  which  He  has  paid,  than  for 
my  works  and  the  changes  in  myself.  God  grant  that  I 
may  fear,  rather  because  I  have  been  bought  with  the 
Precious  Blood  of  Christ,  than  because  of  the  danger 
that  my  soul  may  be  punished  with  everlasting  pains 
and  banished  from  the  society  of  God.  God  grant  that, 
for  the  future,  my  life  may  consist  in  dying  daily  to  the 
world,  that  so  Christ  may  be  my  life  and  salvation,  my 
peace  and  my  joy. 

Man  hardly  considers  the  dealings  of  God  with  him 
in  all  His  works,  in  his  creation,  redemption,  and  glori 
fication.  And  yet  there  is  no  one  who,  in  human  affairs, 
does  not  consider  how  men  deal  with  Him  in  their 

°7    Aprils. 


392  In  Spain. 


works.  But  do  thou  fix  thy  eyes  on  God,  Who  sees 
thee,  and  care  nothing  at  all  to  be  seen  by  men  in  thy 
actions.  We  see  the  charity  of  many  persons  suddenly 
fail,  because  there  are  few  who  freely  practise  the 
spiritual  works  of  mercy,  or  who  apply  themselves  to 
them  in  that  spirit  which  the  Apostle  is  speaking  of 
when  he  says — Caritas  benigna  est,patiens  esty  £c.  Even 
those  who  preside  over  works  of  charity  are  wanting  in 
patience  and  kindness  ;  they  believe  and  hope  little ; 
they  cannot  bear  any  inconvenience,  not  feel  a  hearty 
compassion  for  the  imperfections  of  others.  It  is  thus 
that  many  persons  inveigh  against  abuses  rather  from 
motives  of  impatience  than  of  charitable  zeal.  Let 
charity,  therefore,  possess  all  the  conditions  enumerated 
by  the  Apostle,  and  then  it  will  not  fail. 

One  day  I  was  expecting  a  young  man,  who  had  twice 
promised  to  come  to  confession,  and  had  twice  deceived 
me.  I  was  feeling  some  sadness  of  soul,  and  it  seemed 
to  me  that  I  had  fruitlessly  wasted  six  hours  in  waiting 
for  him,  when  I  received  great  consolation  from  God, 
for  Whose  honour  I  had  so  done  ;  and  there  came  to 
my  mind  this  consideration — If,  for  the  love  of  God,  thou 
spendest  many  hours  in  waiting  at  the  doors  of  nobles 
and  princes  without  feeling  weariness,  knowing  that  thou 
will  have  a  reward  from  Him,  why  art  thou  sad  when 
one  ex  minimis  Christi  makes  thee  wait  a  little  while  ? 
Dost  thou  suppose,  because  he  is  lower  than  those  others, 
thou  wilt  not  therefore  have  a  reward  from  God  ?  How 
many  times  dost  thou  keep  Christ  waiting  at  the  door  of 
thy  heart,  and  then  wilt  not  allow  that  He  has  any 
reason  to  complain  of  thee  !  Do  then,  as  Jesus  Christ 
would  do,  if  He  were  here  upon  the  earth  in  visible 
flesh.  And  at  this  point  I  conceived  the  wish  and 
desire  to  labour  and  suffer  in  every  way,  not  only 
generally,  but  particularly,  even  for  one  single  soul,  in 


In  Spain.  393 


imitation  of  Christ,  Who  gave  His  life,  and  suffered  and 
died  for  each  one  in  particular. 

On  the  1 6th  of  April  I  gave  one  of  the  heads  of  the 
eleven  thousand  virgins  to  Don  Philip,  Prince  of  Spain, 
son  of  the  Emperor  Charles  V.,  and  another  to  the 
Princess,  his  consort.  I  desired  to  see  each  of  them 
placed  in  a  befitting  casket ;  and  far  more,  that  by  the 
intercession  of  these  holy  virgins,  those  two  royal 
personages  might  live  in  a  perpetual  bond  of  peace  and 
charity. 

On  the  last  day  of  April,  the  feast  of  St.  Catharine  of 
Siena,  I  said  Mass  for  the  good  success  of  the  Council 
of  Trent,  beseeching  the  Lord  to  be  pleased  to  help 
His  Church  by  means  of  that  Council.  I  had  before 
my  mind  the  necessities  of  sinners,  who  would  be  more 
easily  converted  after  the  reformation  of  the  ministers 
of  the  Divine  Word  and  of  the  sacraments,  the  neces 
sities  of  poor  troubled  souls,  who  would  find  help  when 
charity  should  receive  fresh  vigour;  lastly,  the  necessities 
of  the  sick,  and  of  the  souls  in  purgatory,  which  would 
find  relief  when  Church  property  and  pious  bequests 
should  be  distributed  according  to  the  intentions  of  the 
testators.  These  things  I  desired  to  be  effected  by  the 
Council. 

One  day  when  I  was  greatly  depressed  and  humbled, 
in  consequence  of  certain  vexations  and  heartburnings 
arising  from  a  want  of  true  brotherly  charity  and  of 
humility  towards  those  who  had  to  give  reproofs,  I  lifted 
up  my  mind  to  God,  and  the  whole  thing  then  seemed 
to  me  a  mere  nothing.  And  this  I  knew  to  be  an 
excellent  remedy  in  similar  cases ;  because  the  more  the 
soul  is  raised  on  high,  the  less  can  the  arrows  of  human 
things  reach  it  so  as  to  hurt  it.  And  this  desire  came  to 
me  while  considering  our  Lord's  Ascension  into  Heaven. 
If  we  would  ascend  with  Him,  we  should  rise  above  all 


394  IH  Spain. 

earthly  things,  in  spirit  now,  and  in  due  time  with  our 
bodies  also. 

On  the  feast  of  the  Apparition  of  St.  Michael  the 
Archangel,98  I  arrived  from  Valladolid,  at  Madrid,  whither 
I  came  to  visit  several  noblemen  and  friends  in  Christ. 
On  the  way,  I  had  the  opportunity  of  instructing  a 
certain  old  man  and  some  of  the  travelling  party,  and 
also  of  consoling  a  woman  who  was  in  great  trouble,  and 
who  opened  her  whole  heart  to  me  in  an  inn.  This 
made  me  think  that  it  was  a  good  thing  to  leave  traces 
of  good  and  holy  conversation  wherever  one  may  be 
lodging,  and  to  endeavour  everywhere  to  sow  and  to 
reap  fruits  of  salvation.  For  we  are  debtors  to  all  men 
in  every  condition  and  in  every  place ;  as  the  Lord,  with 
Whom  we  are  fellow-workers,  in  every  place  assists  and 
comforts  us.  And  herein  I  acknowledged  many  negli 
gences  committed  by  me  in  various  and  long  journeys, 
and  chiefly  with  regard  to  the  instruction,  correction, 
and  consolation  which  I  ought  to  have  imparted  to  the 
persons  who  conversed  with  me,  or  whom  I  had  seen  in 
the  course  of  the  journey.  These  opportunities  ought 
never  to  be  passed  over;  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
acted  thus,  seeking,  by  land  and  by  sea,  and  in  every 
place,  to  save  souls. 

I  took  note  of  a  very  effectual  remedy  against  the  carnal 
temptations  which  are  wont  to  occur  on  going  into  inns 
where  there  is  a  crowd  of  men  and  women  of  all  sorts. 
Not  only  ought  we  to  say  immediately,  at  our  first 
entrance  into  these  places,  Pax  hide  domui,  &c.,  but  we 
should  show  plainly  by  our  words  and  deeds  that  we 
profess  piety  and  truth,  and  begin  at  once  to  speak  of 
things  leading  to  edification.  By  this  means  we  shall  bar 
the  way  against  wicked  suggestions.  Some  religious  allow 
themselves  to  be  overcome  by  this  diabolical  temptation, 

88  May  8. 


In  Spain.  395 


namely,  of  concealing  their  religious  character ;  and  thus 
give  an  opening  to  others,  and  embolden  them  to  display 
their  impurity.  By  this  method  they  think  that  they  will 
be  able  to  draw  the  others  to  themselves,  and  the  end  of 
it  is  that  they  are  drawn  by  the  others. 

On  the  festival  of  our  Lord's  Ascension,"  while  turning 
over  in  my  mind  that  saying  of  the  Apostle — Cum  essem 
parvulus  loquebar  ab  parvulus,  &c.,  I  conceived  a  great 
desire  that  I  too  might  be  able  to  ascend  and  press 
forward,  rising  from  the  state  of  a  child  to  that  of  a 
man,  from  these  earthly  and  transitory  things  to  heavenly 
and  eternal  things.  And  then  I  prayed  that  these  things, 
which  pass  away,  might  not  touch  my  soul,  and  that  the 
esteem  of  eternal  things  might  increase  in  me. 

One  day,  as  I  was  returning  from  Galapagar  to  Valla- 
dolid,  there  occurred  to  me  the  devotion  of  praying  for 
each  of  the  places  through  which  I  passed,  by  reciting 
a  Pater  and  Ave,  considering  the  various  needs  which 
might  be  there,  and  begging  the  necessary  graces.  I 
then  extended  this  devotion  to  all  the  places  where  I  or 
others  of  the  Society  are  in  the  habit  of  staying,  and  for 
this  intention  I  offered  the  Mass  next  day,  in  order  that, 
by  the  merits  of  Christ's  Passion,  those  whom  we  were 
not  able  to  help,  might  find  relief. 

Once  when  I  was  saying  office,  and  reciting  that 
passage  of  the  Psalmist  where  he  says — Ideo  convertetur 
populus  meus  hie,  et  dies  pads  invenientur  in  eis,  I  experi 
enced  in  myself  a  great  sorrow  because  I  had  not  truly 
turned  to  God,  nor  spent  rightly  every  day  and  hour  of 
my  life.  God  grant  that  henceforth  my  days  may  be 
filled  with  good  actions,  not  empty  through  idleness. 

On  the  eve  of  the  Visitation  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  at 
at  a  quarter  past  ten  o'clock,  the  Princess  Dona  Maria, 
daughter  of  the   King  of  Portugal,  was  delivered  of  a 
80  May  14. 


In  Spain. 


son,100  and  the  next  day,  in  saying  the  Mass  of  the  Visi 
tation,  I  commemorated  the  Nativity  of  Christ,  of  the 
Virgin  Mary,  and  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  which  I  had 
also  done  the  day  before,  and  I  desired  that  the  new 
born  babe  might  be  blessed  by  these  three  heavenly 
persons.  In  doing  this  I  felt  great  devotion.  On  the 
1 2th  of  the  same  month  of  July,  towards  four  o'clock  in 
the  afternoon,  the  Princess  died.  May  her  soul  rest  in 
holy  peace  ! 

On  the  feast  of  the  Exaltation  of  the  Holy  Cross,101  just 
as  I  was  going  to  say  Mass,  a  person  stopped  me,  saying 
that  he  wished  to  confess  and  cleanse  his  soul  from  sins. 
And  I  answered,  that  I  desired  to  be  the  Lord's  broom, 
and  to  cleanse  not  only  his  conscience,  but  those  of  all 
others.  And  this  saying  of  mine  brought  various  con 
siderations  to  my  mind ;  and  I  compared  myself  to  the 
broom  which,  while  taking  away  dirt,  remains  sometimes 
dirty  itself,  and  often,  too,  gets  undone.  Notwith 
standing,  I  found  great  devotion  in  offering  myself  to 
Christ  as  a  broom  for  His  house,  always  ready  to  cleanse 
souls.  I  also  desired  that  all  our  Society  might  be 
designed  by  God  to  cleanse  the  Church,  that  He  might 
might  make  use  of  it  as  a  preparatory  and  mean  utensil ; 
and  for  this  intention  I  offered  the  Mass  of  the  Holy 
Cross,  beseeching  God  that  after  having  on  earth  per 
formed  the  part  of  a  mean  broom,  of  which  lowly  office 
even  I  am  not  worthy,  He  would  one  day  admit  me  to 
the  glory  of  heaven. 

1546. 

On  the  feast  of  SS.  Fabian  and  Sebastian,102  when  I  was 
with  a  person  who  needed  comfort,  the  only  thing  which 

100  In  the  Life,  p.  140,  instead  of  the  ist  of  July,  the  8th  has  been 
mentioned,  by  mistake. 

101  September  14. 

102  January  20. 


In  Spain.  397 


occurred  to  me  by  way  of  spiritual  consolation  was  this  : 
that  the  spiritual  tribulations  which  men  suffer  proceed 
from  their  too  great  fear  of  being  brought  into  a  state 
such  as  was  endured  by  Christ,  the  Blessed  Virgin,  the 
good  thief,  and  the  holy  Apostles.  But  in  all  tribulations, 
whether  spiritual  or  temporal,  there  is  this  distinction  to 
be  made.  Some  are  afraid  of  falling  justly  into  condem 
nation,  like  the  good  thief;  others,  of  being  unjustly 
brought  into  the  condition  of  Christ  on  the  Cross; 
others  are  afraid,  not  for  themselves,  [but  for  those  they 
love,  which  was  the  case  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mother 
of  God ;  others,  again,  are  afraid  for  those  by  whom 
they  are  loved,  like  the  Beloved  Disciple  who  stood  with 
that  Mother  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross  of  Christ,  by  Whom 
he  was  loved.  Therefore,  in  our  tribulations,  let  us  put 
before  us  these  four  persons — Christ  hanging  on  the 
Cross,  the  good  thief,  the  Blessed  Virgin,  and  St.  John 
the  Evangelist.  While  celebrating  Mass,  I  begged  the 
most  holy  martyrs  to  obtain  for  me  light  and  knowledge 
concerning  the  troubles  and  adversities  of  our  Society. 

In  the  early  days  of  this  new  year,  while  considering 
my  faults,  I  sought  for  a  new  way  of  amending  them; 
and  I  found  that  I  need  greater  recollection,  and  that  I 
ought  to  endeavour  to  be  more  united  to  God  in  my 
exterior  actions,  if  I  desire  to  find  and  to  continue  in  the 
Spirit  of  God,  Who  sanctifies,  corrects,  and  consoles. 
Above  all,  I  was  convinced  that  I  require  more  solitude 
and  silence.  During  these  days,  also,  I  knew,  by  the 
experience  of  temptations,  that  I  require  much  grace,  so 
as  to  arm  myself  against  feelings  contrary  to  poverty, 
and  against  vain  fears  of  want  and  penury. 

THE     END. 


QUARTERLY  SERIES. 


Conducted  by  the  Managers  of  the   "Month? 


1872. 

1.  THE   LIFE  AND   LETTERS  OF  ST.  FRANCIS   XAVIER 

By  the  Rev.  H.  J.  COLERIDGE.     Vol.  I.     Price  7s.  6d. 

2.  THE     LIFE    OF     ST.   JANE    FRANCES    FREMYOT     DE 

CHANTAL.     By  EMILY  BOWLES.     With  Preface  by  the  Rev. 
PI.  J.  COLERIDGE.     Price  55.  6d. 

3.  THE   HISTORY  OF  THE   SACRED   PASSION.     By  Father 

Luis  DE  LA  PALMA,  of  the  Society  of  Jesus.     Translated  from 
the  Spanish.     With  Preface  by  the  Rev.  H.  J.  COLERIDGE.     Price 

7s.  6d. 

4.  THE   LIFE  AND  LETTERS    OF   ST.  FRANCIS   XAVIER. 

By  the  Rev.  H.  J.  COLERIDGE.     Vol.  II.     Price  ics.  6d. 


5.  IERNE  OF  ARMORICA  :  A  Tale  of  the  Time  of  Chlovis.     By 

J.  C.  BATEMAN.     Price  6s.  6d. 

6.  THE   LIFE   OF   DONA   LUISA   DE  CARVAJAL.     By  Lady 

GEORGIANA  FULLERTON.     Price  6s. 

7.  THE     LIFE    OF    THE    BLESSED    JOHN    BERCHMANS 

By  the  Rev.  F.  GOLDIE.     Price  6s. 

8.  THE     LIFE    OF    THE    BLESSED    PETER    FAVRE,    first 

companion  of  St.  Ignatius.     By  Father  BOERO. 


LONDON:  BURNS  AND  GATES, 

PORTMAX    STREET    AND     PATERNOSTER     ROW. 


QUARTERLY   SERIES. 


Conducted  by  the  Managers  of  the   "Month" 


IN   PREPARATION. 

THE  DIALOGUES  OF  ST.  GREGORY.  Old  English  version 
modernized.  [In  March,  1874. 

THE  LIFE  OF  SISTER  ANNE  CATHARINE  EMMERICH, 
with  a  Prefatory  Essay  on  her  Contemplations  on  our  Lord's  Life 
and  Passion. 

THE  DAUPHIN  AND  HIS  COMPANIONS  IN  THE  TEMPLE. 
By  M.  O'C.  MORRIS. 

THE  LIFE  OF  LADY  FALKLAND,  mother  of  the  great  Lord 
Falkland.  By  Lady  GEORGIANA  FULLERTON. 

THE  LIFE  OF  OUR  LIFE.     By  the  Rev.  H.  J.  COLERIDGE. 
[The  first  volume  will  appear  in  the  course  of  1874.] 

THE  LIFE  OF  ST.  STANISLAUS  KOSTKA.    By  Father  BOERO. 

THE  LIFE   AND    LETTERS    OF    ST. TERESA. 

THE   LIFE  'OF   PIUS   THE   SEVENTH. 

ST.  JEROME   AND   HIS   CORRESPONDENTS. 

THE  CONFESSIONS  OF  ST.  AUGUSTINE.  Old  translation 
modernized. 

THE  LIFE  OF  BLESSED  MARY  OF  THE  INCARNATION 
(Madame  ACARIE).  By  E.  BOWLES. 

THE  LIFE  OF   CARDINAL   BELLARMINE.     By  Rev.  Father 

GOLDIE. 


LONDON  :  BURNS  AND  OATES, 

PORTMAN  STREET  AND  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 


BX  4705  .F2115  B6413  1873 
SMC 


BOERO,  GIUSEPPE, 

THE  LIFE  OF  THE  BLESSED 

PETER  FAVRE  OF  THE 
47235653  (AWSK) 


