     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: Institutes of the Christian Religion, Vol. II
      Creator(s): John Calvin
                  Henry Beveridge (Translator)
     Print Basis: Edinburgh: The Calvin Translation Society, 1845
          Rights: Public Domain
Source Collection: Internet Archive, archive.org identifier
                  institutesofchribeve02calv, "possible-copyright-status":
                  "NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT" per the item's own metadata API.
                  Fetched directly (curl, raw bytes).
    Rights basis: 1845 publication date places this well out of US
                  copyright; independently confirmed by archive.org's own
                  copyright-status field.
   OCR quality: Raw, uncorrected djvu OCR. Runs of 2+ spaces collapsed to
                  one throughout; no wording changed. Library
                  accession/stamp noise left as-is.
     __________________________________________________________________

Seel 


C 


V i ,4*"- 


INSTITUTED A.D. 1843, 
FOR THE PUBLICATION OF 

THE WORKS OF JOHN CALVIN 

IN ENGLISH. 


patrons. 


HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF MANCHESTER. 

THE MOST HON. THE MARQUESS CHOLMONDELEY. 

THE MOST HON. THE MARQUESS OF BREADALBANE. 

THE RIGHT HON. LORD CALTHORPE. 

THE RIGHT HON. LORD ASHLEY, M.P. 

Honorary Treasurers, 
ROBERT WILLIAMS, ESQ., 20, Birchin Lane, London ; 
ARCHIBALD BONAR, ESQ., Manager of Edinburgh and Glasgow Bank, Edinburgh. 


Acting and Editorial Secretary, 

ROBERT PITCAIRN, Esq., F.S.A. Sc, 9, Northumberland Street East, Edinburgh, 
(to u/iom all correspondence is to be addressed.) 


Principal Depositary and Agent in Scotland, 
MR WILLIAM RITCHIE, London Bible Warehouse, 7, St Andrew Street, Edinburgh. 

Depositary in England, 
MR JOHN PETHERAM, 71, Chancery Lane. 

Depositaries and Agents in Ireland, 
MESSRS CURRY, JUNIOR, & CO., Sackville Street, Dublin. 


The Subscribers are particularly invited and solicited to aid the 
endeavours which are now being made to complete the number o/" Annual 
Subscriptions to 3000. 

The expenses, as it must be obvious to all, were very materially increased 
by the adoption of the New and Original Translations, prepared 
expressly for the present Series, and these were calculated on the footing 
of the List being completed to the full number of 3000, as had been 
contemplated on the institution of this scheme. 

New Subscribers may still be admitted on the original Subscription 
of One Pound annually (to whom all the Works hitherto issued will be se- 
cured,') on payment of the four years'1 Contributions, already due, by Bank - 
Orders or Cheques, or by Post-Office Orders, made payable to The Secre- 
tary, Robert Pitcairn, F,S.A. Sc. 9, Northumberland Street East, 
Edinburgh, and transmitted direct to The Office in Edinburgh. 


REPORT 


FOR THE YEAR 1845. 


AUGUST 1846. 


In consequence of the determination of the Syndicate under 
whose auspices and directions all the original arrangements had 
taken place, connected with the institution and carrying out the 
Scheme Established for the publication of Calvin's Works in 
English, as well as the generally expressed wish of the Sub- 
scribers, after the Books prepared for the year 1843 had been 
circulated, it was Resolved, early in the Spring of the following 
year, wholly to abandon the plan of issuing merely Reprints 
of those Old Translations which had been so deservedly 
popular in England and Scotland during the reigns of Queen 
Elizabeth and King James I., with proper Editorial annotations, 
&c. It was felt by nearly all that the quaintness of the language, 
and the obsolete style which more or less prevail in all these 
Works, greatly marred their utility and popularity, and rendered 
them equally unsuitable to the taste of modern readers, and un- 
palatable to the great body of the Subscribers. 

It was accordingly announced in the Report for the year 
1844, that New and Original Translations would thenceforth 
be adopted. Thus it became imperatively necessary that no 
time should be lost in taking immediate steps for the preparation 
of a New Series of Translations of the Commentaries of Calvin, 
and to place a sufficient number of Volumes forthwith in the hands 
of learned and skilful Editors, on a scale of magnitude which 
would prove fully adequate, alike to guard against the danger of 


4 REPORT FOR THE YEAR 1845. 

protracted stoppages at press, arising from whatever cause, and 
if possible, to secure stated and regular deliveries of the various 
Issues during the future continuance of the entire Series. 

There being no fund or capital on hand to provide for carry- 
ing out to the final conclusion this most desirable object, except- 
ing the ordinary and fluctuating Annual Subscriptions — which 
in any case were obviously inadequate to initiate and follow up 
so costly a plan, the more especially as at that date the number 
of Subscribers did not nearly amount to 2000 — the Syndicate 
came to a decided resolution to decline to interpose any guar- 
antee, or to carry on the plan on this new footing. At length, 
however, Mr Pitcairn, the Acting and Editorial Secretary, un- 
willing that so important a Work should fall, resolved to under- 
take, at his own risk, the whole pecuniary responsibility of 
providing funds for preparing and issuing these New Transla- 
tions, and, from time to time, to defray all the heavy outlays 
and expenses unavoidably attending such an undertaking, such 
as paper, printing, editorship, binding, &c, &c. 

After various conferences, and previous correspondence, in 
the early part of the Spring of 1844, this matter was definitively 
arranged, and announced to the Subscribers in the Report of 1st 
July of that year. The Seci'etary lost no time in forthwith 
placing himself in active correspondence with various Clergy- 
men who had been strongly recommended, not only as sound 
Divines, but as persons distinguished alike for their learning and 
skill in the original text of the Holy Scriptures, as well as 
eminently qualified by their previous experience, for undertaking 
the onerous and responsible duty of editing Works of such value 
and importance to the Subscribers and the Christian world. 

The Subscribers have now in their possession ample proofs 
that such selections have, on the whole, been carefully and 
judiciously made, and they have also the best opportunities of 
judging how well and faithfully these Editors have discharged 
their laborious and highly valued task. 

It may be equally useful and interesting briefly to recapitu- 
late, in this place, the Translations of Calvin which have been 
delivered to the Subscribers, in the order of the respective Issues, 
(including the Sixth Issue, now in the course of distribution,) as 
well as the Works which are at press, or in progress in Manuscript, 
under the care of various Editors. This will give the reader, at 
one glance, a comprehensive idea not only of the extent of the 


REPORT FOR THE TEAR 1845. 5 

past exertions which have been made in carrying out this great 
and important undertaking, but also of the arrangements which 
have been adopted for preparing and issuing the future portions 
of the Works of the great Genevan Reformer. 


I. 
BOOKS ISSUED FOR THE FIRST YEAR, (1843-4.) 

COMMENTARY ON THE ROMANS, {completed.') ^ Ft T 

TRACTS ON THE REFORMATION. Vol. I. j" '" SSU6' 

COMMENTARY ON THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES, in TWO ? r< j r 

Volumes, {completed.) | Second Issue' 


II. 
BOOKS ISSUED FOR THE SECOND YEAR, (1844-5.) 

THE INSTITUTES OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. Vol. I. 7 m ■ j T 

-,T , T r lhird Issue. 

THE HARMONY OF THE EVANGELISTS. Vol. 1. ) 

THE INSTITUTES OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. Yol. II. 7 r, ,, T 

-r7 , T > rourth Issue. 

COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF PSALMS. VOL 1. j 


m. 

BOOKS ISSUED FOR THE THIRD YEAR, (1845.) 

THE HARMONY OF THE EVANGELISTS. Vols. II. & HI.,) -r-f.j T 

completed.) ) J 

THE INSTITUTES OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 

Vol. III., {completed.) }» Sixth Issue. 

COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF PSALMS. Vol. H. 


REPORT FOR THE YEAR 1845. 


IV. 


BOOKS AT PRESS AND IN PREPARATION FOR THE 
FOURTH YEAR, (1846.) 

COMMENTARY ON THE TWELVE MINOR PROPHETS. Vols. I. and II. 
COMMENTARY ON THE GOSPEL BY ST JOHN. Vols. I. and II. 

or 
COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF PSALMS. Vol. IH. 

N.B Tlie Seventh and Eighth Issues to consist of four Volumes of 

the above Works, which shall first be completed at press. 

The 7th Issue is expected to be circulated in November or December 
1846, and the 8th Issue in March or April 1847. 

Future Issues are already in preparation. 


WORKS NOW PROCEEDING IN MANUSCRIPT, AND IN 

PREPARATION, TO PROVIDE MATERIALS FOR 

EARLIER AND MORE REGULAR ISSUES 

IN FUTURE YEARS. 

I. commentary on the book of psalms. The 4th and 5th Vols. 
II. commentary on the minor prophets. The 3d, 4th, & 5th Vols. 

III. COMMENTARY ON THE EPISTLES TO THE CORINTHIANS, in 

Two Vols. 

IV. COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF GENESIS, in Two Vols. 

V. COMMENTARY ON THE PROPHECIES OF ISAIAH, in Three Vols. 
VI. COMMENTARY ON THE PROPHECIES OF EZEKIEL, in Two Vols. 
VII. COMMENTARY ON THE PROPHECIES OF DANIEL, in TWO Vols. 


The Secretary, deeming it to be of very great importance 
to the Subscribers that the utmost facilities of reference and con- 
sultation should be given, for the purpose of rendering every one 
of these Commentaries readily accessible to the Clergy, Students 
of Divinity, as well as the laity, resolved that in future each 
Work should have a Series of Tables and Indices appended 
to it, constructed on an uniform plan and system. 

The first Commentary having these Tables and Indices is the 
Harmony of the Evangelists, Matthew, Makk, and Luke. 
To secure greater uniformity, the same Editor (the Rev. William 
Pringle) was specially requested to prepare those required for the 
Institutes of the Christian Religion, which is now in the course 


REPORT FOR THE YEAR 1845. 7 

of being circulated with this Report. The skilful and admirable 
manner in which these various Tables and Indices have been 
compiled will be fully acknowledged by all who shall have 
occasion to consult the present series of Calvin's Works. 

In conclusion, the Subscribers are respectfully reminded and 
requested to order prompt payment to be regularly made of their 
Annual Subscriptions, (£1, payable in advance on 1st January 
yearly,) at the Office, by Bank-Orders or Cheques, or Post- 
Office Orders made payable to Robert Pitcairn, F.S.A. Sc, 
9, Northumberland Street East, Edinburgh. 

Receipts will be ready at the Office previous to the close of 
each successive year, to be forwarded to Subscribers making re- 
mittances, in course of post. 

It is recommended that due precaution be observed that no 
gold or bank-notes should ever be sent through the post. 

Robert Pitcairn, 
Acting and Editorial Secretary. 


Office of the Calvin New Translations, 
3d August 1846. 


REPORT FOR THE YEAR 1845. 


REGULATIONS FOR DELIVERY OF THE BOOKS. 

I. All Issues will henceforward be made direct from the 
Office, in Edinburgh, to the addresses of the respective 
Subscribers. 

II. They will be delivered free of expense in London, or within 
three miles of the General Post- Office. 

III. They will be sent to any place in England beyond the 

distance of three miles from the General Post-Office, 
London, by any conveyance a Subscriber may point out. 
In this case, the parcels will be booked ; but the car- 
riage must be paid by the Subscribers to whom they 
are sent, and the books to be at the risk of the Sub- 
scribers in case of loss or damage. 

IV. They will be delivered in Edinburgh and Dublin as in 

London, and forwarded from thence to Subscribers 
in other parts of Scotland and Ireland, in the same 
manner as is mentioned above in respect to England. 

V. They may remain at either of the Depositaries until the 

Subscribers apply for them ; but, in that case, any dam- 
age which may happen from fire or other accident will 
be at the risk of such Subscribers entirely. 

VI. They will be sent to any Correspondent or Agent, each 

Subscriber paying such Correspondent or Agent a share 
of the carriage of the parcel in which the books were 
included. Arrangements are made for the delivery, on 
this plan, in many of the cities and large towns where 
a sufficient number of the Subscribers reside ; and it 
will be esteemed a favour if Gentlemen who are willing to 
further the Calvin Translations, by taking the charge of 
the books for the Subscribers in their respective neighbour- 
hoods, will write to the Office on the subject. 


INSTITUTES 


CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 


VOL. II. 


THE CALVIN TRANSLATION SOCIETY, 


INSTITUTED IN MAY M.DCCC.XLIII. 


FOR THE PUBLICATION OF TRANSLATIONS OF THE WORKS OF 
JOHN CALVIN. 


INSTITUTES 


THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 


BY JOHN CALVIN. 


A NEW TRANSLATION, 

BY HENRY BEVERIDGE, ESQ. 


VOLUME SECOND. 


EDINBURGH: 

PRINTED FOE THE CALVIN TRANSLATION SOCIETY. 
M.DCCC.XLV. 


CEntereli at Stationer* ' JI)att,] 


THE EDINBURGH PRINTING COMPANY, 

12, South St David Street 


INSTITUTES 

OF 

THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 

BOOK SECOND 

CONTINUED. 

CHAPTER XII. 


CHRIST, TO PERFORM THE OFFICE OF MEDIATOR, BEHOVED 
TO BECOME MAN. 

The two divisions of this chapter are, I. The reasons why our Mediator 
behoved to be very God, and to become man, sec. 1-3. II. Disposal of 
various objections by some fanatics, and especially by Osiander, to the 
orthodox doctrine concerning the Mediator, sec. 4-7. 

Sections. 

1. Necessary, not absolutely, but by divine decree, that the Mediator 

should be God, and become man. Neither man nor angel, though 
pure, could have sufficed. The Son of God behoved to come down. 
Man in innocence could not penetrate to God without a Mediator, 
much less could he after the fall. 

2. A second reason why the Mediator behoved to be God and man, 

viz., that he had to convert those who were heirs of hell into 
children of God. 

3. Third reason, that in our flesh he might yield a perfect obedience, 

satisfy the divine justice, and pay the penalty of sin. Fourth 
reason, regarding the consolation and confirmation of the whole 
Church. 
VOL. II. A 


2 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

4. First objection against the orthodox doctrine : Answer to it. Con- 

firmation from the sacrifices of the Law, the testimony of the Pro- 
phets, Apostles, Evangelists, and even Christ himself. 

5. Second objection: Answer: Answer confirmed. Third objection: 

Answer. Fourth objection by Osiander : Answer. 

6. Fifth objection, forming the basis of Osiander's errors on this subject: 

Answer. Nature of the divine image in Adam. Christ the head 
of angels and men. 

7. Sixth objection : Answer. Seventh objection : Answer. Eighth ob- 

jection : Answer. Ninth objection : Answer. Tenth objection : 
Answer. Eleventh objection : Answer. Twelfth objection : An- 
swer. The sum of the doctrine. 

1. It deeply concerned us, that he who was to be our 
Mediator should be very God and very man. If the neces- 
sity be inquired into, it was not what is commonly termed 
simple or absolute, but flowed from the divine decree on 
which the salvation of man depended. What was best for 
us, our most merciful Father determined. Our iniquities, 
like a cloud intervening between Him and us, having utterly 
alienated us from the kingdom of heaven, none but a person 
reaching to him could be the medium of restoring peace. 
But who could thus reach to him ? Could any of the sons 
of Adam ? All of them, with their parent, shuddered at 
the sight of God. Could any of the angels ? They had 
need of a head, by connection with which they might adhere 
to their God entirely and inseparably. What then ? The 
case was certainly desperate, if the Godhead itself did not 
descend to us, it being impossible for us to ascend. Thus 
the Son of God behoved to become our Emmanuel, i.e. God 
with us ; and in such a way, that by mutual union his 
divinity and our nature might be combined ; otherwise, 
neither was the proximity near enough, nor the affinity 
strong enough, to give us hope that God would dwell with 
us ; so great was the repugnance between our pollution and 
the spotless purity of God. Had man remained free from 
all taint, he was of too humble a condition to penetrate to 
God without a Mediator. What, then, must it have been, 
when by fatal ruin he was plunged into death and hell, 
defiled by so many stains, made loathsome by corruption ; in 
fine, overwhelmed with every curse? It is not without 


CHAP. XII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 5 

cause, therefore, that Paul, when he would set forth Christ 
as the Mediator, distinctly declares him to be man. There 
is, says he, " one Mediator between God and man, the man 
Christ Jesus," (1 Tim. ii. 5.) He might have called him 
God, or at least, omitting to call him God he might also 
have omitted to call him man ; but because the Spirit, 
speaking by his mouth, knew our infirmity, he opportunely 
provides for it by the most appropriate remedy, setting the 
Son of God familiarly before us as one of ourselves. That 
no one, therefore, may feel perplexed where to seek the 
Mediator, or by what means to reach him, the Spirit, by 
calling him man, reminds us that he is near, nay, contiguous 
to us, inasmuch as he is our flesh. And, indeed, he intimates 
the same thing in another place, where he explains at greater 
length that he is not a high priest who " cannot be touched 
with the feeling of our infirmities ; but was in all points 
tempted like as we are, yet without sin," (Heb. iv. 15.) 

2. This will become still clearer if we reflect, that the 
work to be performed by the Mediator was of no common 
description : being to restore us to the divine favour, so as to 
make us, instead of sons of men, sons of God; instead of 
heirs of hell, heirs of a heavenly kingdom. Who could do 
this unless the Son of God should also become the Son of 
man, and so receive what is ours as to transfer to us what 
is his, making that which is his by nature to become ours by 
grace ? Relying on this earnest, we trust that we are the 
sons of God, because the natural Son of God assumed to 
himself a body of our body, flesh of our flesh, bones of our 
bones, that he might be one with us ; he declined not to 
take what was peculiar to us, that he might in his turn 
extend to us what was peculiarly his own, and thus might 
be in common with us both Son of God and Son of man. 
Hence that holy brotherhood which he commends with his 
own lips, when he says, " I ascend to my Father, and your 
Father, to my God, and your God," (John xx. 17.) In this 
way, we have a sure inheritance in the heavenly kingdom, 
because the only Son of God, to whom it entirely belonged, 
has adopted us as his brethren ; and if brethren, then partners 
with him in the inheritance, (Rom. viii. 17.) Moreover, it 


4 INSTITUTES OP THE BOOK II. 

was especially necessary for this cause also that be who was 
to be our Redeemer should be truly God and man. It was 
his to swallow up death : who but Life could do so ? It was 
his to conquer sin : who could do so save Righteousness 
itself? It was his to put to flight the powers of the air and 
the world : who could do so but the mighty power superior 
to both ? But who possesses life and righteousness, and the 
dominion and government of heaven, but God alone ? There- 
fore, God, in his infinite mercy, having determined to redeem 
us, became himself our Redeemer in the person of his only 
begotten Son. 

3. Another principal part of our reconciliation with God 
was, that man, who had lost himself by his disobedience, 
should, by way of remedy, oppose to it obedience satisfy 
the justice of God, and pay the penalty of sin. Therefore, 
our Lord came forth very man, adopted the person of Adam, 
and assumed his name, that he might in his stead obey the 
Father ; that he might present our flesh as the price of satis- 
faction to the just judgment of God, and in the same flesh 
pay the penalty which we had incurred. Finally, since as 
God only he could not suffer, and as man only could not 
overcome death, he united the human nature with the divine, 
that he might subject the weakness of the one to death as 
an expiation of sin, and by the power of the other, maintain- 
ing a struggle with death, might gain us the victory. Those, 
therefore, who rob Christ of divinity or humanity, either 
detract from his majesty and glory, or obscure his goodness. 
On the other hand, they are no less injurious to men, under- 
mining and subverting their faith, which, unless it rest on 
this foundation, cannot stand. Moreover, the expected 
Redeemer was that son of Abraham and David whom God 
had promised in the Law and in the Prophets. Here be- 
lievers have another advantage. Tracing up his origin in 
regular series to David and Abraham, they more distinctly 
recognise him as the Messiah celebrated by so many oracles. 
But special attention must be paid to what I lately explained, 
namely, that a_common nature is the pledge of our union 
with the Son of God ; that, clothed with our flesh, he warred 
to death with sin that he might be our triumphant conqueror ; 


CHAP. XII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 5 

that the flesh which he received of us he offered in sacrifice, 
in order that by making expiation he might wipe away our 
guilt, and appease the just anger of his Father. 

4. He who considers these things with due attention, will 
easily disregard vague speculations, which attract giddy 
minds and lovers of novelty. One speculation of this class 
is, that Christ, even though thei'e had been no need of his 
interposition to redeem the human race, would still have 
become man. I admit that in the first ordering of creation, 
while the state of nature was entire, he was appointed head 
of angels and men ; for which reason Paul designates him 
"the first-born of every creature," (Col. i. 15.) But since 
the whole Scripture proclaims that he was clothed with 
flesh in order to become a Redeemer, it is presumptuous to 
imagine any other cause or end. We know well why Christ 
Avas at first promised, viz., that he might renew a fallen 
world, and succour lost man. Hence under the Law he was 
typified by sacrifices, to inspire believers with the hope that 
God would be propitious to them after he was reconciled by 
the expiation of their sins. Since from the earliest age, 
even before the Law was promulgated, there was never any 
promise of a Mediator without blood, we justly infer that he 
was destined in the eternal counsel of God to purge the 
pollution of man, the shedding of blood being the symbol of 
expiation. Thus, too, the prophets, in discoursing of him, fore- 
told that he would be the Mediator between God and man. 
It is sufficient to refer to the very remarkable prophecy of 
Isaiah, (Is. liii. 4, 5,) in which he foretells that he was 
" smitten for our iniquities ;" that " the chastisement of our 
peace was upon him ;" that as a priest " he was made an 
offering for sin ;" " that by his stripes we are healed ;" that 
as all " like lost sheep have gone astray," " it pleased the 
Lord to bruise him, and put him to grief," that he might 
" bear our iniquities." After hearing that Christ was divinely 
appointed to bring relief to miserable sinners, whoso overleaps 
these limits gives too much indulgence to a foolish curiosity. 

Then when he actually appeared, he declared the cause of 
his advent to be, that by appeasing God he might bring us 
from death unto life. To the same effect was the testimony 


6 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

of the Apostles concerning him, (John i. 9 ; x. 14.) Thus 
John, before teaching that the Word was made flesh, nar- 
rates the fall of man. But above all, let us listen to our 
Saviour himself when discoursing of his office : " God so 
loved the Avorld, that he gave his only begotten Son, that 
whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have ever- 
lasting life." Again, " The hour is coming, and now is, when 
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God : and they 
that hear shall live." " I am the resurrection and the life : 
he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he 
live." " The Son of man is come to save that which was 
lost." Again, " They that be whole need not a physician."1 
I should never have done were I to quote all the passages. 
Indeed, the Apostles, with one consent, lead us' back to this 
fountain; and assuredly, if he had not come to reconcile 
God, the honour of his priesthood would fall, seeing it was 
his office as priest to stand between God and men, and 
" offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins," (Heb. v. 1 ;) nor 
could he be our righteousness, as having been made a pro- 
pitiation for us in order that God might not impute to us our 
sins, (2 Cor. v. 19.) In short, he would be stript of all the 
titles with which Scripture invests him. Nor could Paul's 
doctrine stand. " What the law could not do, in that it 
was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in 
the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the 
flesh," (Rom. viii. 3.) Nor what he states in another pass- 
age : " The grace of God that bringeth salvation hath 
appeared to all men," (Tit. ii. 11.) In fine, the only end 
which the Scripture uniformly assigns for the Son of God 
voluntarily assuming our nature, and even receiving it as a 
command from the Father, is,^that he might propitiate the 
Father to us by becoming a victim. " Thus it is written, 
and thus it behoved Christ to suffer ;" — " and that repent- 
ance and remission of sins should be preached in his name." 
" Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my 
life, that I might take it again." — "This commandment have 
I received of my Father." " As Moses lifted up the serpent 
in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted 
1 John iii. 16 ; v. 25 ; xi. 25 ; Matth. xviii. 11 ; ix. 12. 


CHAI\ XII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION, 7 

up." " Father, save me from this hour : but for this cause 
came I unto this hour. Father, glorify thy name."1 Here 
he distinctly assigns as the reason for assuming our nature, 
that he might become a propitiatory victim to take away 
sin. For the same reason Zacharias declares, (Luke i. 79,) 
that he came " to perform the mercy promised to our 
fathers," " to give light to them that sit in darkness, and in 
the shadow of death." Let us remember that all these 
things are affirmed of the Son of God, in whom, as Paul 
elsewhere declares, were " hid all the treasures of wisdom 
and knowledge," and save whom it was his determination 
" not to know any thing," (Col. ii. 3 ; 1 Cor. ii. 2.) 

5. Should any one object, that in this there is nothing to 
prevent the same Christ who redeemed us when condemned 
from also testifying his love to us when safe by assuming 
our nature, we have the brief answer, that when the Spirit 
declares that by the eternal decree of God the two things 
were connected together, viz., that Christ should be our 
Redeemer, and, at the same time, a partaker of our nature, 
it is unlawful to inquire further. He who is tickled with a 
desire of knowing something more, not contented with the 
immutable ordination of God, shows also that he is not 
even contented with that Christ who has been given us as 
the price of redemption. And, indeed, Paul not only de- 
clares for what end he was sent, but rising to the sublime 
mystery of predestination, seasonably represses all the wanton- 
ness and pruriency of the human mind. " He hath chosen 
us in him before the foundation of the wrorld, that we 
should be holy and without blame before him in love : 
having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by 
Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of 
his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he 
hath made us accepted in the Beloved : In whom we have 
redemption through his blood," (Eph. i. 4-7.) Here cer- 
tainly the fall of Adam is not presupposed as anterior in 
point of time, but our attention is directed to what God 
predetermined before all ages, when he was pleased to pro- 
vide a cure for the misery of the human race. If, again, it is 
1 Luke xxiv. 46 ; John x. 17 ; iii. 14 ; xii. 27, 28. 


8 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

objected that this counsel of God depended on the fall of 
man, which he foresaw, to me it is sufficient and more to 
1 reply, that those who propose to inquire, or desire to know 
\ more of Christ than God predestinated by his secret decree, 
are presuming with impious audacity to invent a new Christ. 
Paul, when discoursing of the proper office of Christ, justly 
prays for the Ephesians that God would strengthen them 
" by his Spirit in the inner man," that they might " be able 
to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth and length, 
and depth and height ; and to know the love of Christ 
which passeth knowledge," (Eph. iii. 16, 18 ;) as if he in- 
tended of set purpose to set barriers around our minds, and 
prevent them from declining one iota from the gift of recon- 
ciliation whenever mention is made of Christ. Wherefore, 
seeing it is as Paul declares it to be, " a faithful saying, and 
worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the 
world to save sinners," (1 Tim. i. 15,) in it I willingly 
acquiesce. And since the same Apostle elsewhere declares 
that the grace which is now manifested by the Gospel " was 
given us in Christ Jesus before the world began," (2 Tim. i. 
9,) I am resolved to adhere to it firmly even to the end. 
This moderation is unjustly vituperated by Osiander, who 
has unhappily, in the present day, again agitated this ques- 
tion, which a few had formerly raised. He brings a charge 
of overweening confidence against those who deny that the 
Son of God would have appeared in the flesh if Adam had 
not fallen, because this notion is not repudiated by any pass- 
age of Scripture. As if Paul did not lay a curb on perverse 
curiosity when, after speaking of the redemption obtained 
by Christ, he bids us " avoid foolish questions," (Tit. iii. 9.) 
To such insanity have some proceeded in their preposterous 
eagerness to seem acute, that they have made it a question 
whether the Son of God might not have assumed the nature 
of an ass. This blasphemy, at which all pious minds justly 
shudder with detestation, Osiander excuses by the pretext 
that it is no where distinctly refuted in Scripture ; as if Paul, 
when he counted nothing valuable or worth knowing " save 
Jesus Christ and him crucified," (1 Cor. ii. 2,) were admitting 
that the author of salvation is an ass. He who elsewhere 


CHAP. XII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 9 

declares that Christ was by the eternal counsel of the Father 
appointed " head over all things to the church," would never 
have acknowledged another to whom no office of redemption 

had been assigned. 

6. The principle on which Usiander founds is altogether 
frivolous. He will have it that man was created in the 
iniasre of God, inasmuch as he was formed on the model of 

O ' p ■ 

the future Messiah, in order to resemble him whom the 
Father had already determined to clothe with flesh. Hence 
he infers, that though Adam had never fallen from his first 
and pure original, Christ would still have been man. How 
silly and distorted this view is, all men of sound judgment at 
once discern ; still he thinks he was the first to see what the 
image of God was, namely, that not only did the divine glory 
shine forth in the excellent endowments with which he was 
adorned, but God dwelt in him essentially. But while I 
grant that Adam bore the image of God, inasmuch as he was 
united to God, (this being the true and highest perfection of 
dignity,) yet I maintain, that the likeness of God is to be 
sought for only in those marks of superiority with which God 
has distinguished Adam above the other animals. All, like- 
wise, with one consent, acknowledge that Christ was even 
then the image of God, and, accordingly, whatever excellence 
was engraven on Adam had its origin in this, that by means 
of the only begotten Son he approximated to the glory of 
his Maker. Man, therefore, was created in the image of 
God, (Gen. L 27,) and in him the Creator was pleased to be- 
hold, as in a mirror, his own glory. To this degree of honour 
he was exalted by the kindness of the only begotten Son. 
But I add, that, as the Son was the common head both of 
men and angels, so the dignity which was conferred on man 
belonged to the angels also. For when we hear them called 
the sons of God, (Ps. lxxxii. 6,) it would be incongruous to 
deny that they were endued with some quality in which 
they resembled the Father. But if he was pleased that 
his glory should be represented in men and angels, and 
made manifest in both natures, it is ignorant trifling in 
Osiander to say, that angels were postponed to men, because 
they did not bear the image of Christ. They could not con- 


10 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

stantly enjoy the immediate presence of God if they were not 
like to him ; nor does Paul teach (Col. iii. 10) that men are 
renewed in the image of God in any other way than by being 
associated with angels, that they may be united together 
under one head. In fine, if we believe Christ, our felicity 
will be perfected when A\re shall have been received into the 
heavens, and made like the angels. But if Osiander is en- 
titled to infer that the primary type of the image of God was 
in the man Christ, on the same ground may any one main- 
tain that Christ behoved to partake of the angelic nature, 
seeing that angels also possess the image of God. 

7. Osiander has no reason to fear that God would be found 
a liar, if the decree to incarnate the Son was not previously 
immutably fixed in his mind. Even had Adam not lost his in- 
tegrity, he would, with the angels, have been like to God ; and 
yet it would not therefore have been necessary that the Son of 
God should become either a man or an angel. In- vain does 
he entertain the absurd fear, that unless it had been deter- 
mined by the immutable counsel of God, before man was 
created, that Christ should be born, not as the Redeemer, but 
as the first man, he might lose his precedence, since he would 
not have been born, except for an accidental circumstance, 
namely, that he might restore the lost race of man; and 
in this way would have been created in the image of Adam. 
For why should he be alarmed at what the Scripture plainly 
teaches, that " he was in all points tempted like as we are, 
yet without sin?" (Heb. iv. 15.) Hence Luke, also, hesitates 
not to reckon him in his genealogy as a son of Adam, (Luke 
iii. 38.) I should like to know why Christ is termed by Paul 
the second Adam, (1 Cor. xv. 47,) unless it be that a human 
condition was decreed him, for the purpose of raising up the 
ruined posterity of Adam. For if in point of order, that condi- 
tion was antecedent to creation, he ought to have been called 
the first Adam. Osiander confidently affirms, that because 
Christ was in the purpose of God foreknown as man, men were 
formed after him as their model. But Paul, by calling him the 
second Adam, gives that revolt which made it necessary to 
restore nature to its primitive condition an intermediate place 
between its original formation and the restitution which we 


CHAP. XII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 11 

obtain by Christ : hence it follows, that it was this restitu- 
tion which made the Son of God be born, and thereby 
become man. Moreover, Osiander argues ill and absurdly, 
that as long as Adam maintained his integrity, he would have 
been the image of himself, and not of Christ. I maintain, on 
the contrary, that although the Son of God had never become 
incarnate, nevertheless the image of God was conspicuous 
in Adam, both in his body and his soul ; in the rays of this 
image it always appeared that Christ was truly head, and had 
in all things the pre-eminence. In this way we dispose of 
the futile sophism put forth by Osiander, that the angels 
would have been without this head, had not God purposed 
to clothe his Son with flesh, even independent of the sin of 
Adam. He inconsiderately assumes what no rational person 
will grant, that Christ could have had no supremacy over the 
angels, so that they might enjoy him as their prince, unless 
in so far as he was man. But it is easy to infer from the 
words of Paul, (Col. i. 15,) that inasmuch as he is the eternal 
Word of God, he is the first-born of every creature, not because 
he is created, or is to be reckoned among the creatures, but 
because the entire structure of the world, such as it was from 
the beginning, when adorned with exquisite beauty, had no 
other beginning ; then, inasmuch as he was made man, he is 
the first-born from the dead. For in one short passage, 
(Col. i. 16-18,) the Apostle calls our attention to both views: 
that by the Son all things were created, so that he has 
dominion over angels ; and that he became man, in order that 
he might begin to be a Redeemer. Owing to the same 
ignorance, Osiander says that men would not have had Christ 
for their king unless he had been a man ; as if the kingdom 
of God could not have been established by his eternal Son, 
though not clothed with human flesh, holding the supre- 
macy, while angels and men were gathered together to 
participate in his celestial life and glory. But he is always 
deluded, or imposes upon himself by this false principle, that 
the church would have been uxstpaXov — without a head — had 
not Christ appeared in the flesh. In the same way as angels 
enjoyed him for their head, could he not by his divine 
energy preside over men, and by the secret virtue of his 
Spirit quicken and cherish them as his body, until they 


12 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

were gathered into heaven to enjoy the same life with the 
angels ? The absurdities which I have been refuting, Osi- 
ander regards as infallible oracles. Taking an intoxicating 
delight in his own speculations, his wont is to extract ridicu- 
lous pasans out of nothing. He afterwards says that he has 
a much stronger passage to produce, namely, the prophecy 
of Adam, who, when the woman was brought to him, said, 
" This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh," (Gen. 
ii. 23.) But how does he prove it to be a prophecy ? Because 
in Matthew Christ attributes the same expression to God ! as 
if every thing which God has spoken by man contained a pro- 
phecy. On the same principle, as the law proceeded from God, 
let Osiander in each precept find a prophecy. Add, that our 
Saviour's exposition would have been harsh and grovelling, 
had he confined himself to the literal meaning. He was not 
referring to the mystical union with which he has honoured 
the Church, but only to conjugal fidelity, and states, that the 
reason why God declared man and wife to be one flesh, 
was to prevent any one from violating that indissoluble tie 
by divorce. If this simple meaning is too low for Osiander, 
let him censure Christ for not leading his disciples to the 
hidden sense, by interpreting his Father's words with more 
subtlety. Paul gives no countenance to Osiander's dream, 
when, after saying that " we are members of his body, of 
his flesh, and of his bones," he immediately adds, " This is a 
great mystery," (Eph. v. 30-32.) For he meant not to refer 
to the sense in which Adam used the words, but sets forth, 
under the figure and similitude of marriage, the sacred union 
which makes us one with Christ. His words have this 
meaning ; for reminding us that he is speaking of Christ and 
the Church, he, by way of correction, distinguishes between 
the marriage tie and the spiritual union of Christ with his 
Church. Wherefore, this subtlety vanishes at once. I deem it 
unnecessary to discuss similar absurdities : for from this very 
brief refutation, the vanity of them all will be discovered. 
Abundantly sufficient for the solid nurture of the children 
of God is this sober truth, that " when the fulness of the 
time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, 
made under the law, to redeem them who were under the 
law," (Gal. iv. 4, 5.) 


CHAP. XIII. 


CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 


13 


CHAPTER XIII. 


CHRIST CLOTHED WITH THE TRUE SUBSTANCE OF HUMAN 
NATURE. 

The heads of this chapter are, I. The orthodox doctrine as to the 
true humanity of our Saviour, proved from many passages of Scripture, 
sec. 1. II. Refutation of the impious objections of the Marcionites, 
Manichees, and similar heretics, sec. 2-4. 

Sections. 

1. Proof of the true humanity of Christ, against the Manichees and 

Marcionites. 

2. Impious objections of heretics farther discussed. Six objections an- 

swered. 

3. Other eight objections answered. 

1. Of the divinity of Christ, which has elsewhere been 
established by clear and solid proofs, I presume it were super- 
fluous again to treat. It remains, therefore, to see how, when 
clothed with our flesh, he fulfilled the office of Mediator. In 
ancient times, the reality of his human nature was impugned 
by ihe iMjjjichjeasj and Marcionites, 't the latter figuring to 
themselves a phantom ipg?^H niX+hA body of Christ, and 
the former dreammg_cdMii_sJiajan^begn invested with celes- 
tial flesh. The passages of Scripture contradictory to both 
are numerous and strong. The blessing is not promised in 
a heavenly seed, or the mask of a man, but the seed of 
Abra.hajn and .Tnf.nb ; nor is the everlasting throne promised 
to an aerial man, but to the Son of David, and the fruit of 
his loins. Hence, when manifested in the flesh, he is called 
the Son of David and Abraham, not because he was born of 
a virgin, and yet created in the air, but because, as Paul 
explains, he was " made of the seed of David, according to 
the flesh," (Rom. i. 3,) as the same apostle elsewhere says, 
that he came of the Jews, (Rom. ix. 5.) Wherefore, our 
Lord himself, not contented with the name of man, frequently 


*Jt 


14 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

J> calls himself the Son of man, wishing to express more clearly 
that he was a man by true human descent. The Holy Spirit 
having so often, by so many organs, with so much care and 
plainness, declared a matter which in itself is not abstruse, 
who could have thought that mortals would have had the 
effrontery to darken it with their glosses ? Many other 
passages are at hand, were it wished to produce more : for 
instance, that one of Paul, that " God sent forth his Son, 

T made of a wnman," (Ci-aL.. iv. 4,) and innumerable others, 
• which show that he was subject to hunger, thirst, cold, and 
the other infirmities of our nature. But from the many we 
must chiefly select those which may conduce to build up our 
minds in true faith, as when it is said, " Verily, he took not 
on him the nature of angels, but he took on him the seed of 
Abraham," " that through death he might destroy him that 
had the power of death," (Heb. ii. 16, 14.) Again, " Both 
he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one : 
for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren." 
" Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto 
his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high 
priest," (Heb. ii. 11, 17.) Again, " We have not an high priest 
which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities," 
(Heb. iv. 15,) and the like. To the same effect is the passage 
to which we lately referred, in which Paul distinctly declares, 
that the sins of the world behoved to be expiated in our flesh, 
(Rom. viii. 3.) And certainly every thing which the Father 
conferred on Christ pertains to us for this reason, that " he 
U is the head," that from him the whole bodyjs " fitly joined 
together, and compacted by that which every joint supplieth," 
(Eph. iv. 16.) Nay, in no other way could it hold true as is 
said, that the Spirit was given to him without measure, (John 
i. 16,) and that out of his fulness have all we received; since 
nothing could be more absurd than that God, in his own 
essence, should be enriched by an adventitious gift. For this 
reason also, Christ himself elsewhere says, " For their sakes 
I sanctify myself," (John xvii. 19.) 

2. The passages which they produce in confirmation of 
their error are absurdly wrested, nor do they gain any thing 
by their frivolous subtleties when they attempt to do away 


CHAP. XIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 15 

with what I have now adduced in opposition to them. Marcionj 
imagines that Christ, instead of a body, assumed a phantom, 
because it is elsewhere said, that he was made in the likeness 
of man, and found in fashion as a man. Thus he altogether 
overlooks what Paid is then discussing, (Philip, ii. 7.) His 
object is not to show what kind of body Christ assumed, but 
that, when he might have justly asserted his divinity he was 
pleased to exhibit nothing but the attributes of a mean and 
despised man. For, in order to exhort us to submission by 
his example, he shows, that when as God he might have 
displayed to the world the brightness of his glory, he gave 
up his right, and voluntarily emptied himself; that he 
assumed the form of a servant, and, contented with that 
humble condition, suffered his divinity to be concealed under 
a veil of flesh. Here, unquestionably, he explains not what 
Christ was, but in what way he acted. Nay, from the whole 
context it is easily gathered, that it was in the true nature of 
man that Christ humbled himself. For what is meant by 
the words, he was " found in fashion as a man," but that for 
a time, instead of being resplendent with divine glory, the 
human form only appeared in a mean and abject condition ? 
Nor would the words of Peter, that he was " put to death 
in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit," (1 Pet. iii. 18,) 
hold true, unless the Son of God had become weak in the 
nature of man. This is explained more clearly by Paul, 
when he declares that " he was crucified through weakness," 
(2 Cor. xiii. 4.) And hence his exaltation ; for it is dis- 
tinctly said, that Christ acquired new glory after he humbled 
himself. This could fitly apply only to a man endued with a 
body and a soul. " Man^s^jdream£of_aii.a^ali)o.dy, because 
Christ is called the second Adam, the Lord from heaven. 
But the apostle does not there speak of the essence of his 
body as heavenly, but of the spiritual life which derived from 
Christ quickens us, (1 Cor. xv. 47.) This life Paul and Peter, 
as we have seen, separate from his flesh. Nay, that passage 
admirably confirms the doctrine of the orthodox, as to the 
human nature of Christ. If his body were not of the same 
nature with ours, there would be no soundness in the argu- 
ment which Paul pursues with so much earnestness, — If 


16 INSTITUTES OP THE BOOK II. 

Christ is risen, we shall rise also ; if we rise not, neither hath 
Christ risen. Whatever be the cavils by which the ancient 
Manichees, or their modern disciples, endeavour to evade 
this, they cannot succeed. It is a frivolous and despicable 
evasion to say, that Christ is called the Son of man, because 
he was promised to men; it being obvious that, in the Hebrew 
idiom, the Son of man means a true man : and Christ, doubt- 
less, retained the idiom of his own tongue.1 Moreover, there 
cannot be a doubt as to what is to be understood by the sons 
of Adam. Not to go farther, a passage in the eighth psalm, 
which the apostles apply to Christ, will abundantly suffice : 
" What is man, that thou art mindful of him ? and the son 
of man, that thou visitest him ?" (Ps. viii. 4.) Under this 
figure is expressed the true humanity of Christ. For although 
he was not immediately descended of an earthly father, 
yet he originally sprang from Adam. Nor could it other- 
wise be said in terms of the passage which we have already 
quoted, " Forasmuch, then, as the children are partakers of 
flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the 
same ;" these words plainly proving that he was an associate 
and partner in the same nature with ourselves. In this sense 
also it is said, that " both he that sanctifieth and they who 
are sanctified are all of one." The context proves that this 
refers to a community of nature ; for it is immediately added, 
" For which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren," 
(Heb. ii. 11.) Had he said at first that believers are of 
God, where could there have been any ground for being 
ashamed of persons possessing such dignity ? But when Christ 
of his boundless grace associates himself with the mean and 
ignoble, we see why it was said that " he is not ashamed." 
It is vain to object, that in this way the wicked will be the 
brethren of Christ ; for we know that the children of God 
are not born of flesh and blood, but of the Spirit through 
faith. Therefore, flesh alone does not constitute the union 
of brotherhood. But although the apostle assigns to believers 
only the honour of being one with Christ, it does not how- 
ever follow, that unbelievers have not the same origin accord- 
ing to the flesh ; just as when we say that Christ became 
1 The last clause of this sentence is omitted in the French. 


CHAP. XIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 17 

man, that he might make us sons of God, the expression does 
not extend to all classes of persons ; the intervention of faith 
being necessary to our being spiritually ingrafted into the 
body of Christ. A dispute is also ignorantly raised as to the 
term first-born. It is alleged that Christ ought to have been 
the first son of Adam, in order that he might be the first-born 
among the brethren, (Rom. viii. 29.) But primogeniture 
refers not to age, but to degree of honour and pre-emi- 
nence of virtue. There is just as little colour for the frivolous 
assertion that Christ assumed the nature of man, and not that 
of angels, (Heb. ii. 16,) because it was the human race that 
he restored to favour. The apostle, to magnify the honour 
which Christ has conferred upon us, contrasts us with the 
angels, to whom we are in this respect preferred. And if 
due weight is given to the testimony of Moses, (Gen.iii. 15,) 
when he says that the seed of the woman would bruise the 
head of the serpent, the dispute is at an end. For the words 
there used refer not to Christ alone, but to the whole human 
race. Since the victory was to be obtained for us by Christ, 
God declares generally, that the posterity of the woman 
would overcome the devil. From this it follows, that Christ 
is a descendant of the human race, the purpose of God in 
thus addressing Eve being to raise her hopes, and prevent 
her from giving way to despair. 

3. The passages in which Christ is called the seed of 
Abraham, and the fruit of the loins of David, those per- 
sons, with no less folly than wickedness, wrap up in alle- 
gory. Had the term seed been used allegorically, Paul surely 
would not have omitted to notice it, when he affirms clearly, 
and without figure, that the promise was not given " to 
seeds, as of many ; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is 
Christ," (Gal. iii. 16.) With similar absurdity they pretend 
that he was called the Son of David, for no other reason but 
because he had been promised, and was at length in due 
time manifested. For Paul, after he had called him the Son 
of David, by immediately subjoining according to the Jlesh, 
certainly designates his nature. So also, (Rom. ix. 5,) while 
declaring him to be " God blessed for ever," he mentions 
separately, that, " as concerning the flesh, he was descended 

VOL. II. b 


18 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

from the Jews." Again, if he had not been truly begotten 
of the seed of David, what is the meaning of the expression, 
that he is the " fruit of his loins;" or what the meaning of the 
promise, " Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne" ? 
(Ps. cxxxii. 11.) Moreover, their mode of dealing with the 
genealogy of Christ, as given by Matthew, is mere sophistry ; 
for though he reckons up the progenitors not of Mary, but of 
Joseph, yet as he was speaking of a matter then generally 
understood, he deems it enough to show that Joseph was 
descended from the seed of David, since it is certain that 
Mary was of the same family. Luke goes still farther, 
showing that the salvation brought by Christ is common to 
the whole human race, inasmuch as Christ, the author of 
salvation, is descended from Adam, the common father of 
us all. I confess, indeed, that the genealogy proves Christ 
to be the Son of David, only as being descended of the Virgin; 
but the new Marcionites, for the purpose of giving a gloss to 
their heres)T, namely, to prove that the body which Christ 
assumed was unsubstantial, too confidently maintain that the 
expression as to seed is applicable only to males, thus subvert- 
ing the elementary principles of nature. But as this discussion 
belongs not to theology, and the arguments which they ad- 
duce are too futile to require any laboured refutation, I will 
not touch on matters pertaining to philosophy and the medical 
art. It will be sufficient to dispose of the objection drawn 
from the statement of Scripture, that Aaron and J ehoiadah 
married wives out of the tribe of Judah, and that thus the 
distinction of tribes was confounded, if proper descent could 
come through the female. It is well known, that in regard 
to civil order, descent is reckoned through the male; and yet 
the superiority on his part does not prevent the female from 
having her proper share in the descent. This solution ap- 
plies to all the genealogies. When Scripture gives a list of 
individuals, it often mentions males only. Must we therefore 
say that females go for nothing? Nay, the very children 
know that they are classified with men. For this reason, 
wives are said to give children to their husbands, the name 
of the family always remaining with the males. Then, as the 
male sex has this privilege, that sons are deemed of noble or 


CHAP. XIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 19 

ignoble birth, according to the condition of their fathers, so, 
on the other hand, in slavery, the condition of the child is 
determined by that of the mother, as lawyers say, partus sequitur 
ventrem. Whence we may infer, that offspring is partly pro- 
created by the seed of the mother. According to the common 
custom of nations, mothers are deemed progenitors, and with 
this the divine law agrees, which could have had no ground to 
forbid the marriage of the uncle with the niece, if there was 
no consanguinity between them. It would also be lawful 
for a brother and sister uterine to intermarry, when their 
fathers are different. But while I admit that the power 
assigned to the woman is passive, I hold that the same thing 
is affirmed indiscriminately of her and of the male. Christ is 
not said to have been made by a woman, but of a woman, 
(Gal. iv. 4.) But some of this herd, laying aside all shame, 
publicly ask whether we mean to maintain that Christ was 
procreated of the proper seed of a Virgin.1 I, in my turn, ask, 
whether they are not forced to admit that he was nourished 
to maturity in the Virgin's womb. Justly, therefore, we 
infer from the words of Matthew, that Christ, inasmuch as 
he was begotten of Mary, was procreated of her seed; as 
a similar generation is denoted when Boaz is said to have 
been begotten of Rachab, (Matth. i. 5, 16.) Matthew does 
not here describe the Virgin as the channel through which 
Christ flowed, but distinguishes his miraculous from an ordi- 
nary birth, in that Christ was begotten by her of the seed 
of David. For the same reason for which Isaac is said to 
be begotten of Abraham, Joseph of Jacob, Solomon of David, 
is Christ said to have been begotten of his mother. The 
Evangelist has arranged his discourse in this way. Wishing 
to prove that Christ derives his descent from David, he deems 
it enough to state, that he was begotten of Mary. Hence 
it follows, that he assumed it as an acknowledged fact, that 
Mary was of the same lineage as Joseph. 

4. The absurdities which they wish to fasten upon us are 
mere puerile calumnies. They reckon it base and dishonour- 

1 Latin, " An dicere velimus ex semine rnenstruali virginis procreatur 
esse Christum." 


20 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

ing to Christ to have derived his descent from men ; because, 
in that case, he could not be exempted from the common 
law which includes the whole offspring of Adam, without 
exception, under sin. But this difficulty is easily solved by 
Paul's antithesis, "As by one man sin entered into the 
world, and death by sin" — " even so by the righteousness of 
one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life," 
(Rom. v. 12, 18.) Corresponding to this is another passage, 
" The first man is of the earth, earthy : the second man is the 
Lord from heaven," (1 Cor. xv. 47.) Accordingly, the same 
apostle, in another passage, teaching that Christ was sent 
" in the likeness of sinful flesh, that the righteousness of the 
law might be fulfilled in us," distinctly separates him from 
the common lot, as being true man, and yet without fault 
and corruption, (Rom. viii. 3.) It is childish trifling to main- 
tain, that if Christ is free from all taint, and was begotten of 
the seed of Mary, by the secret operation of the Spirit, it is 
not therefore the seed of the woman that is impure, but only 
that of the man. We do not hold Christ to be free from all 
taint, merely because he was born of a woman unconnected 
with a man, but because he was sanctified by the Spirit, so that 
the generation was pure and spotless, such as it would have 
been before Adam's fall. Let us always bear in mind, that 
wherever Scripture adverts to the purity of Christ, it refers 
to his true human nature, since it were superfluous to say 
that God is pure. Moreover, the sanctification of which 
John speaks in his seventeenth chapter is inapplicable to 
the divine nature. This does not suggest the idea of a two- 
fold seed in Adam, although no contamination extended to 
Christ, the generation of man not being in itself vicious or 
impure, but an accidental circumstance of the fall. Hence, 
it is not strange that Christ, by whom our integrity was to 
be restored, was exempted from the common corruption. 
Another absurdity which they obtrude upon us, viz., that 
if the Word of God became incarnate, it must have been 
enclosed in the narrow tenement of an earthly body, is 
sheer petulance. For although the boundless essence of the 
Word was united with human nature into one person, we 


CHAP. XIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 21 

have no idea of any enclosing. The Son of God descended 
miraculously from heaven, yet without abandoning heaven ; 
was pleased to be conceived miraculously in the Virgin's 
womb, to live on the earth, and hang upon the cross, and yet 
always filled the world as from the beginning. 


22 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 


CHAPTER XIV. 

HOW TWO NATURES CONSTITUTE THE PERSON OF 
THE MEDIATOR. 

This chapter contains two principal heads : I. A brief exposition of 
the doctrine of Christ's two natures in one person, sec. 1-4. II. A 
refutation of the heresies of Servetus, which destroy the distinction of 
natures hi Christ, and the eternity of the divine nature of the Son. 

Sections. 

1. Proof of two natures in Christ — a human and a divine. Illustrated 

by analogy, from the union of body and soul. Illustration applied. 

2. Proof from passages of Scripture which distinguish between the two 

natures. Proof from the communication of properties. 

3. Proof from passages showing the union of both natures. A rule to 

be observed in this discussion. 

4. Utility and use of the doctrine concerning the two natures. The 

Nestorians. The Eutychians. Both justly condemned by the 
Church. 

5. The heresies of Servetus refuted. General answer or sum of the 

orthodox doctrine concerning Christ. What meant by the hypos- 
tatic union. Objections of Servetus to the deity of Christ. Answer. 

6. Another objection and answer. A twofold filiation of Christ. 

7. Other objections answered. 

8. Conclusion of the former objections. Other pestilential heresies of 

Servetus. 

1. When it is said that the Word was made flesh, we 
must not understand it as if he were either changed into 
flesh, or confusedly intermingled with flesh, but that he made 
choice of the Virgin's womb as a temple in which he might 

(dwell. He who was the Son of God became the Son of 
man, not by confusion of substance, but by unity of person. 
■ For we maintain, that the divinity was so conjoined and 
I united with the humanity, that the entire properties of each 
nature remain entire, and yet the two natures constitute only 
one Christ. If, in human affairs, any thing analogous to this 


CHAP. XIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 23 

great mystery can be found, the most apposite similitude1 
seems to be that of man, who obviously consists of two sub- 
stances, neither of which however is so intermingled Avith 
the other as that both do not retain their own properties. 
For neither is soul body, nor is body soul. Wherefore that X 
is said separately of the soul which cannot in any way apply 
to the body ; and that, on the other hand, of the body which 
is altogether inapplicable to the soul ; and that, again, of the 
whole man, which cannot be affirmed without absurdity either 
of the body or of the soul separately. Lastly, the properties 
of the soul are transferred to the body, and the properties of 
the body to the soul, and yet these form only one man, not 
more than one. Such modes of expression intimate both 
that there is in man one person formed of two compounds, 
and that these two different natures constitute one person. 
Thus the Scriptures speak of Christ. They sometimes attri- 
bute to him equalities which should be referred specially to 
his humanity, and sometimes qualities applicable peculiarly 
to his divinity, and sometimes qualities which embrace both 
natures, and do not apply specially to either. This com- 
bination of a twofold nature in Christ they express so 
carefully, that they sometimes communicate them with each 
other, a figure of speech which the ancients termed idiu/u.uru» 
■/.oivuvia, (a communication of properties.) 

2. Little dependence could be placed on these statements, 
were it not proved by numerous passages throughout the 
sacred volume that none of them is of man's devising. What ^ 
Christ said of himself, " Before Abraham was I am," (John 
*». 58,) was very foreign to his humanity. I am not unaware 
of the cavil by which erroneous spirits distort this passage, 
viz., that he was before all ages, inasmuch as he was fore- 
known as the Redeemer, as well in the counsel of the Father as 
in the minds of believers. But seeing he plainly distinguishes 
the period of his manifestation from his eternal existence, 
and professedly founds on his ancient government, to prove 
his precedence to Abraham, he undoubtedly claims for him- 
self the peculiar attributes of divinity. Paul's assertion that 

1 Augustine employs the tame similitude, Epist. cii. 


24 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

he is " the first-born of every creature," that " he is before 
all things, and by him all things consist," (Col. i. 15, 17;) 
his own declaration, that he had glory with the Father before 
the world was, and that he worketh together with the Father, 
are equally inapplicable to man. These and similar proper- 
ties must be specially assigned to his divinity. Again, his 
being called the servant of the Father, his being said to grow 
in stature, and wisdom, and favour with God and man, not 
to seek his own glory, not to know the last day, not to speak 
of himself, not to do his own will, his being seen and handled,1 
apply entirely to his humanity ; since, as God, he cannot be 
in any respect said to grow, works always for himself, knows 
every thing, does all things after the counsel of his own 
will, and is incapable of being seen or handled. And yet he 
not merely ascribes these things separately to his human 
nature, but applies them to himself as suitable to his office 
of Mediator. There is a communication of Idiu/udra, or pro- 
perties, when Paul says, that God purchased the Church 
"with his own blood," (Acts xx. 28,) and that the Jews 
crucified the Lord of glory, (1 Cor. ii. 8.) In like manner, 
John says, that the Word of God was "handled." God cer- 
tainly has no blood, suffers not, cannot be touched with hands; 
but since that Christ, who was true God and true man, shed 
his blood on the cross for us, the acts which were performed 
in his human nature are transferred improperly, but not. 
causelessly, to his divinity. We have a similar example in the 
passage where John says that God laid down his life for us, 
(1 John hi. 16.) Here a property of his humanity is commu- 
nicated with his other nature. On the other hand, when 
Christ, still living on the earth, said, " No man hath ascended 
up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the 
Son of man, which is in heaven," (John iii. 13,) certainly 
regarded as man in the flesh which he had put on, he was not 
then in heaven, but inasmuch as he was both God and man, 
he, on account of the union of a twofold nature, attributed 
to the one what properly belonged to the other. 


1 Isaiah xli. 1, &c. ; John v. 17 ; Luke ii. 52 ; John viii. 50 ; Mark 
xiii. 32 ; John xiv. 10 ; vi. 38 ; Luke xxiv. 39. 


CHAP. XIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 25 

3. But, above all, (the true substance of Christ is most 
clearly declared in those passages which comprehend both 
natures at once. Numbers of these exist in the Gospel of 
John. /What we there read as to his having received power 
from the Father to forgive sins ; as to his quickening whom 
he will; as to his bestowing righteousness, holiness, and salva- 
tion; as to his being appointed judge both of the quick and the 
dead ; as to his being honoured even as the Father,1 are not 
peculiar either to his Godhead or his humanity, but applicable 
to both. In the same way he is called the Light of the world, 
the good Shepherd, the only Door, the true Vine. With such 
prerogatives the Son of God was invested on his manifestation 
in the flesh, and though he possessed the same with the 
Father before the world was created, still it was not in the 
same manner or respect ; neither could they be attributed to 
one who was a man and nothing more. In the same sense 
we ought to understand the saying of Paul, that at the end 
Christ shall deliver up " the kingdom to God, even the 
Father," (1 Cor. xv. 24.) The kingdom of God assuredly 
had no beginning, and will have no end : but because he was 
hid under a humble clothing of flesh, and took upon himself 
the form of a servant, and humbled himself, (Phil. ii. 8,) and, 
laying aside the insignia of majesty, became obedient to the 
Father ; and after undergoing this subjection was at length 
crowned with glory and honour, (Heb. ii. 7,) and exalted to 
supreme authority, that at his name every knee should bow, 
(Phil. ii. 10 ;) so at the end he will subject to the Father both 
the name and the crown of glory, and whatever he received 
of the Father, that God may be all in all, (1 Cor. xv. 28.) 
For what end were that power and authority given to him, 
save that the Father might govern us by his hand ? In the 
same sense, also, he is said to sit at the right hand of the 
Father. But this is only for a time, until we enjoy the imme- 
diate presence of his Godhead. And here we cannot excuse 
the error of some ancient writers, who, by not attending to 
the office of Mediator, darken the genuine meaning of almost 
the whole doctrine which we read in the Gospel of John, and 

1 John i. 29 ; v. 21-23 ; ix. 5 ; x. 9-11 ; xv. 1. 


26 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

entangle themselves in many snares. Let us, therefore, re- 
gard it as the key of true interpretation, that those things 
which refer to the office of Mediator are not spoken of the 
divine or human nature simply.1 Christ, therefore, shall 
reign until he appear to judge the world, inasmuch as, accord- 
ing to the measure of our feeble capacity, he now connects us 
with the Father. But when, as partakers of the heavenly 
glory, we shall see God as he is, then Christ, having accom- 
plished the office of Mediator, shall cease to be the vicegerent 
of the Father, and Avill be content with the glory which he 
possessed before the world was. Nor is the name of Lord 
specially applicable to the person of Christ in any other 
respect than in so far as he holds a middle place between God 
and us. To this effect are the words of Paul, " To us there 
is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we 
in him ; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, 
and Ave by him," (1 Cor. viii. 6 ;) that is, to the latter a tem- 
porary authority has been committed by the Father until his 
divine majesty shall be beheld face to face. His giving up 
of the kingdom to the Father, so far from impairing his 
majesty, will give a brighter manifestation of it. God will 
then cease to be the head of Christ, and Christ's own God- 
head will then shine forth of itself, whereas it is now in a 
manner veiled. 

4. This observation, if the readers apply it properly, will 
be of no small use in solving a vast number of difficulties. 
For it is strange how the ignorant, nay, some wTho are not 
altogether without learning, are perplexed by these modes of 
expression which they see applied to Christ, without being 
properly adapted either to his divinity or his humanity, not 
considering their accordance with the character in which he 
was manifested as God and man, and with his office of Me- 
diator. It is very easy to see how beautifully they accord 
with each other, provided they have a sober interpreter, one 
who examines these great mysteries with the reverence which 
is meet. But there is nothing which furious and frantic 
spirits cannot throw into confusion.2 They fasten on the 

1 Vide Calv. Epist. ad Polonos adversus Stancarum. 

2 See August, in Enchir. ad Laurent, c. 36. 


/ 


CHAP. XIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 27 

attributes of humanity to destroy his divinity ; and, on the 
other hand, on those of his divinity to destroy his humanity: 
while those which, spoken conjointly of the two natures, apply 
to neither, they employ to destroy both. But what else 
is this than to contend that Christ is not man because he is 
God, not God because he is man, and neither God nor 
man because he is both at once. Christ, therefore, as God 
and man, possessing natures which are united, but not con- 
fused, we conclude that he is our Lord and the true Son of 
God, even according to his humanity, though not by means 
of his humanity. For we must put far from us the heresy of 
esloriusj who, presuming to dissect rather than distinguish -^ £f* 
etween the two natures, devised a double Christ. But we 
see the Scripture loudly protesting against this, when the 
name of the Son of God is given to him who is born of a 
Virgin, and the Virgin herself is called the mother of our 
Lord, (Luke i. 32? 43.) We must beware also of the insane 
fancy of /EutychesJ lest, Avhen we would demonstrate the I AKi 
unity of person, we destroy the two natures. The many 
passages we have already quoted, in which the divinity is 
distinguished from the humanity, and the many other pass- 
ages existing throughout Scripture, may well stop the mouth 
of the most contentious. I will shortly add a few obser- 
vations, which will still better dispose of this fiction. For 
the present, one passage will suffice — Christ would not have 
called his body a temple, (John ii. 19,) had not the Godhead 
distinctly dwelt in it. Wherefore, as Nestorius had been 
justly condemned in the Council of Ephesus, so afterwards 
was Eutyches in those of Constantinople and Chalcedon, it 
being not more lawful to confound the two natures of Christ 
than to divide them. 

pur acre, also, has arisen a not less fatal monster, 
Michael Servpt.n^hvho for the Son of God has substituted a 
figment composed of the essence of God, spirit, flesh, and 
three uncreaied-xktfteii^ First, indeed, he denies that 
Christ is the Son of God, for any other reason than because 
he was begotten in the womb of the Virgin by the Holy 
Spirit. The tendency of this crafty device is to make out, 
by destroying the distinction of the two natures, that Christ 


28 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

is somewhat composed of God and man, and yet is not to 
be deemed God and man. His aim throughout is to estab- 
lish, that before Christ was manifested in the flesh there 
were only shadowy figures in God, the truth or effect of which 
existed for the first time, when the Word who had been 
destined to that honour truly began to be the Son of God. 
We indeed acknowledge that the Mediator who was born of 
the Virgin is properly the Son of God. And how could the 
man Christ be a mirror of the inestimable grace of God, had 
not the dignity been conferred upon him both of being and of 
being called the only-begotten Son of God ? Meanwhile, how- 
ever, the definition of the Church stands unmoved, that he is 
accounted the Son of God, because the Word begotten by the 
Father before all ages assumed human nature by hypostatic 
union, — a term used by ancient writers to denote the union 
which of two natures constitutes one person, and invented 
to refute the dream of Nestorius, who pretended that the 

\ Son of God dwelt in the flesh in such a manner as not to 
be at the same time man. Servetus calumniously charges 

\S us with making the Son of God double, when we say that 
the eternal Word before he was clothed with flesh was 
already the Son of God : as if we said anything more than 
that he was manifested in the flesh. Although he was God 
before he became man, he did not therefore begin to be a 
new God. Nor is there any greater absurdity in holding 
that the Son of God, who by eternal generation ever had the 
property of being a Son, appeared in the flesh. This is in- 
timated by the angel's words to Mary : " That holy thing 
which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God," 
(Luke i. 35 ;) as if he had said that the name of Son, which 
wras more obscure under the law, would become celebrated and 
universally known. Corresponding to this is the passage of 
Paul, that being now the sons of God by Christ, we " have 
received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, 
Father," (Kom. viii. 15.) Were not also the holy patri- 
archs of old reckoned among the sons of God ? Yea, trusting 
to this privilege, they invoked God as their Father. But 
because ever since the only-begotten Son of God came forth 
into the world, his celestial paternity has been more clearly 


CHAP. XIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 29 

manifested, Paul assigns this to the kingdom of Christ as 
its distinguishing feature. We must, however, constantly 
hold, that God never was a Father to angels and men save 
in respect of his only-begotten Son : that men, especially, who 
by their iniquity were rendered hateful to God, are sons by 
gratuitous adoption, because he is a Son by nature. Nor is 
there anything in the assertion of Servetus, that this de- 
pends on the filiation which God had decreed with himself. 
Here we deal not with figures, as expiation by the blood of 
beasts was shown to be ; but since they could not be the 
sons of God in reality, unless their adoption was founded in 
the head, it is against all reason to deprive the head of that 
which is common to the members. I go farther : since 
the Scripture gives the name of sons of God to the angels, 
whose great dignity in this respect depended not on the 
future redemption, Christ must in order take precedence of 
them that he may reconcile the Father to them. I will 
again briefly repeat and add the same thing concerning the 
human race. Since angels as well as men were at first 
created on the condition that God should be the common 
Father of both ; if it is true, as Paul says, that Christ always 
was the head, " the first-born of every creature — that in all 
things he might have the pre-eminence," (Col. i. 15, 18,) I 
think I may legitimately infer, that he existed as the Son of 
God before the creation of the world. 

6. But if his filiation (if I may so express it) had a begin- 
ning at the time when he was manifested in the flesh, it 
follows that he was a Son in respect of human nature also. 
Servetus, and others similarly frenzied, hold that Christ who 
appeared in the flesh is the Son of God, inasmuch as but 
for his incarnation he could not have possessed this name. 
Let them now answer me, whether, according to both 
natures, and in respect of both, he is a Son ? So indeed they 
prate ; but Paul's doctrine is very different. We acknow- 
ledge, indeed, that Christ in human nature is called a Son, 
not like believers by gratuitous adoption merely, but the true, 
natural, and, therefore, only Son, this being the mark which 
distinguishes him from all others. Those of us who are re- 
generated to a new life God honours with the name of sons ; 


30 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

the name of true and only-begotten Son he bestows on 
Christ alone. But how is he an only Son in so great a mul- 
titude of brethren, except that he_j2QS£££^sJay^ mature what 
we acquire by gift ? This honour we extend to his whole 
character of Mediator, so that He who was bom of a Virgin, 
and on the cross offered himself in sacrifice to the Father, 
is truly and properly the Son of God ; but still in respect of 
his Godhead : as Paul teaches when he says, that he was 
" separated unto the gospel of God, (which he had promised 
afore by his prophets in the Holy Scriptures,) concerning his 
Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of 
David according to the flesh ; and declared to be the Son 
of God with power," (Rom. i. 1-4.) When distinctly call- 
ing him the Son of David according to the flesh, why should 
he also say that he was " declared to be the Son of God," 
if he meant not to intimate, that this depended on some- 
thins: else than his incarnation ? For in the same sense in 
which he elsewhere says, that " though he was crucified 
through weakness, yet he liveth by the power of God," 
(2 Cor. xiii. 4,) so he now draws a distinction between the 
two natures. They must certainly admit, that as on account 
of his mother he is called the Son of David, so, on account 
of his Father, he is the Son of God, and that in some respect 
differing from his human nature. The Scripture gives him 
both names, calling him at one time the Son of God, at 
another the Son of Man. As to the latter, there can be no 
question that he is called a Son in accordance with the 
phraseology of the Hebrew language, because he is of the 
offspring of Adam. On the other hand, I maintain that he 
is called a Son on account of his Godhead and eternal 
essence, because it is no less congruous to refer to his divine 
nature his being called the Son of God, than to refer to his 
human nature his being called the Son of Man. In fine, in 
the passage which I have quoted, Paul does not mean, that 
he who according to the flesh was begotten of the seed of 
David, was declared to be the Son of God in any other 
sense than he elsewhere teaches that Christ, who descended 
of the Jews according to the flesh, is " over all, God 
blessed for ever," (Rom. ix. 5.) But if in both passages the 


CHAP. XI V. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 31 

distinction of two natures is pointed out, bow can it be de- 
nied, that be who according to the flesh is the Son of Man, 
is also in respect of his divine nature the Son of God ? 

7. They indeed find a blustering defence of their heresy in 
its being said, that " God spared not his own Son," and in 
the communication of the angel, that He who was to be born 
of the Virgin should be called the " Son of the Highest," 
(Rom. viii. 32 ; Luke i. 32.) But before pluming them- 
selves on this futile objection, let them for a little consider 
with us what weight there is in their argument. If it is 
legitimately concluded, that at conception he began to be 
the Son of God, because he who has been conceived is called 
a Son, it will follow, that he began to be the Word after his 
manifestation in the flesh, because John declares, that the 

'■ '■ i ii ilium in i in i ■!■'"' ■■ / 

Word of life of which he spoke was that which " our hands 
have handled," (1 John i. 1.) In like manner Ave read 
in the prophet, u Thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou 
be little among the thousands of Israel, yet out of thee 
shall he come forth that is to be a ruler in Israel ; Avhose 
goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting," (Mic. 
v. 2.) How will they be forced to interpret if they will 
follow such a method of arguing ? I have declared that we 
by no means assent to Nestorius, who imagined a twofold 
Christ, when we maintain that Christ, by means of brotherly 
union, made us sons of God with himself, because in the 
flesh, which he took from us, he is the only-begotten Son 
of God. Arid Augustine wisely reminds us,1 that he is 
a bright mirror of the wonderful and singular grace of God, 
because as man he obtained honour which he could not 
merit. With this distinction, therefore, according to the 
flesh, was Christ honoured even from the womb, viz., to 
be the Son of God. Still, in the unity of person we are 
not to imagine any intermixture which takes away from 
the Godhead what is peculiar to it. Nor is it more absurd 
that the eternal Word of God and Christ, uniting the two 
natures in one person, should in different ways be called 
the Son of God, than that he should in various respects be 

1 See August. De Corruptione et Gratia, cap. xi., et De Civitate Dei, 
lib. x. cap. 29, et alibi. See also cap. xvii. s. 1. 


32 INSTITUTES OF TIIE BOOK II. 

called at one time the Son of God, at another the Son of 
Man. Nor are we more embarrassed by another cavil of 
Servetus, viz., that Christ, before he appeared in theJlesh, is 
nowhere called the Son of God, except under a figure. For 
though the description of him was then more obscure, yet it 
has already been clearly proved, that he was not otherwise 
the eternal God, than as he was the Word begotten of the 
eternal Father. Nor is the name applicable to the office of 
Mediator which he undertook, except in that he was God 
manifest in the flesh. Nor would God have thus from the 
beginning been called a Father, had there not been even 
then a mutual relation to the Son, " of whom the whole 
family in heaven and earth is named," (Eph. hi. 15.) Hence 
it is easy to infer, that under the Law and the Prophets 
he was the Son of God before this name was celebrated in 
the Church. But if we are to dispute about the word merely, 
Solomon, speaking of the incomprehensibility of God, affirms 
that his Son is like himself, incomprehensible : " What is his 
name, and what is his Son's name, if thou canst tell ?" (Prov. 
xxx. 4.) I am well aware that Avith the contentious this 
passage will not have sufficient weight ; nor do I found much 
upon it, except as showing the malignant cavils of those 
who affirm that Christ is the Son of God only in so far as 
he became man. We may add, that all the most ancient 
writers, with one mouth and consent, testified the same 
thing so plainly, that the effrontery is no less ridiculous than 
detestable, which dares to oppose us with Irenaeus and Ter- 
tullian, both of whom acknowledge that He who was after- 
wards visibly manifested was the invisible Son of God.1 

8. But although Servetus heaped together a number of 
horrid dogmas, to which, perhaps, others would not subscribe, 
you will find, that all who refuse to acknowledge the Son of 
God except in the flesh, are obliged, when urged more 
closely, to admit that he was a Son, for no other reason 
than because he was conceived in the womb of the Virgin 
by the Holy Spirit ; just like the absurdity of the ancient 

1 See Irenreus, lib. iv. cap. 14 et 37 ; TertulKan aclversus Praxeam. 
The above passage from The Proverbs is quoted by Augustine, Ep. 49, 
Qua3s. 5. 


CHAP. XIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 33 

Manichees, that the soul of man was derived by transfusion 
from God, from its being said, that he breathed into Adam's 
nostrils the breath of life, (Gen. ii. 7.) For they lay such 
stress on the name of Son that they leave no distinction 
between the natures, but babblingly maintain that the man 
Christ is the Son of God, because, according to his human 
nature, he was begotten of God. Thus, the eternal genera- 
tion of Wisdom, celebrated by Solomon, (Prov. viii. 22, seq.) 
is destroyed, and no kind of Godhead exists in the Mediator : 
or a phantom is substituted instead of a man. The grosser 
delusions of Servetus, by which he imposed upon himself and 
some others, it were useful to refute, that pious readers might 
be warned by the example, to confine themselves within the 
bounds of soberness and modesty : however, I deem it super- 
fluous here, as I have already done it in a special treatise.1 
The whole comes to this, that the Son of God was from the 
beginning an idea, and was even then a preordained man, who 
was to be the essential image of God. Nor does he acknow- 
ledge any other word of God except in external splendour. The 
generation he interprets to mean, that from the beginning a 
purpose of generating the Son was begotten in God, and that 
this purpose extended itself by act to creation. Meanwhile, he 
confounds the Spirit with the Word, saying that God arranged 
the invisible Word and Spirit into flesh and soul. In short, 
in his view the typifying of Christ occupies the place of 
generation ; but he says, that he who was then in appearance 
a shadowy Son, was at length begotten by the Word, to which 
he attributes a generating power. From this it will follow, 
that dogs and swine are not less sons of God, because created 
of the original seed of the Divine Word. But although he 
compounds Christ of three uncreated elements, that he may 
be begotten of the essence of God, he pretends that he is the 
first-born among the creatures, in such a sense that, according 
to their degree, stones have the same essential divinity. But 
lest he should seem to strip Christ of his Deity, he admits 
that his flesh is o^oovovov, of the same substance with God, and 
that the Word was made man, by the conversion of flesh 

1 Vide Calv. Defensio Orthodoxy Fidei Sacra Trinitatis adversus Pro- 
digiosos Errores Michaelis Serveti Hispani. 

VOL. II. C 


34 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

into Deity. Thus, while he cannot comprehend that Christ 
was the Son of God, until his flesh came forth from the 
essence of God and was converted into Deity, he reduces the 
eternal personality (hypostasis) of the Word to nothing, and 
robs us of the Son of David, who was the promised Redeemer. 
It is true, he repeatedly declares that the Son was begotten 
of God by knowledge and predestination, but that he was at 
length made man out of that matter which, from the begin- 
ning, shone with God in the three elements, and afterwards 
appeared in the first light of the world, in the cloud and pillar 
of fire. How shamefully inconsistent with himself he ever and 
anon becomes, it were too tedious to relate. From this brief 
account sound readers will gather, that by the subtle ambigui- 
ties of this infatuated man, the hope of salvation was utterly 
extinguished. For if the flesh were the Godhead itself, it 
would cease to be its temple. Now, the only Redeemer we 
can have is He who being begotten of the seed of Abraham 
and David according to the flesh, truly became man. But 
he erroneously insists on the expression of John, " The Word 
was made flesh." As these words refute the heresy of Nes- 
torius, so they give no countenance to the impious fiction 
of which Eutyches was the inventor, since all that the 
Evangelist intended was to assert a unity of person in two 
natures. 


CHAP XV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 35 


CHAPTER XV. 

THREE THINGS CHIEFLY TO BE REGARDED IN CHRIST ; VIZ., 
HIS OFFICES OF PROPHET, KING, AND PRIEST. 

The principal parts of this chapter are — I. Of the Prophetical Office 
of Christ, its dignity and use, sec. 1, 2. IT. The nature of the Kingly 
power of Christ, and the advantage we derive from it, sec. 3-5. III. Of 
the Priesthood of Christ, and the efficacy of it, sec. 6. 

Sections. 

1. Among heretics and false Christians, Christ is found in name only ; 

but by those who are truly and effectually called of God, he is 
acknowledged as a Prophet, King, and Priest. In regard to the Pro- 
phetical Office, the Redeemer of the Church is the same from whom 
believers under the Law hoped for the full light of understanding. 

2. The unction of Christ, though it has respect chiefly to the Kingly Office, 

refers also to the Prophetical and Priestly Offices. The dignity, 
necessity, and use of this unction. 

3. From the spirituality of Christ's kingdom its eternity is inferred. 

This twofold, referring both to the whole body of the Church, and 
to its individual members. 

4. Benefits from the spiritual kingdom of Christ. 1. It raises us to 

eternal fife. 2. It enriches us with all things necessary to salvation. 

3. It makes us invincible by spiritual foes. 4. It animates us to 
patient endurance. 5. It inspires confidence and triumph. 6. It 
supplies fortitude and love. 

5. The unction of our Redeemer heavenly. Symbol of this unction. 

A passage in the apostle reconciled with others previously quoted, to 
prove the eternal kingdom of Christ. 

6. What necessary to obtain the benefit of Christ's Priesthood. We 

must set out with the death of Christ. From it follows, 1. His inter- 
cession for us. 2. Confidence in prayer. 3. Peace of conscience. 

4. Through Christ, Christians themselves become priests. Griev- 
ous sin of the Papists in pretending to sacrifice Christ. 

1. Though heretics pretend the name of Christ, truly 
does Augustine affirm, (Enchir. ad Laurent, cap. v.,) that the 
foundation is not common to them with the godly, but belongs 
exclusively to the Church : for if those things which pertain 


26 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

to Christ be diligently considered, it will be found that Christ 
is with them in name only, not in reality. Thus, in the pre- 
sent day, though the Papists have the words, Son of God, 
Redeemer of the world, sounding in their mouths, yet, be- 
cause contented with an empty name, they deprive him of 
his virtue and dignity ; what Paul says of " not holding 
the head," is truly applicable to them, (Col. ii. 19.) There- 
fore, that faith may find in Christ a solid ground of salvation, 
and so rest in him, we must set out with this principle, that 
the office which he received from the Father consists of three 
parts. For he was appointed both Pmphet, King, and 
Priest ; though little were gained by holding the names unac- 
companied by a knowledge of the end and use. These too 
are spoken of in the Papacy, but frigidly, and with no great 
benefit, the frill meaning comprehended under each title not 
being understood. We formerly observed, that though God, 
by supplying an uninterrupted succession of prophets, never 
left his people destitute of useful doctrine, such as might 
suffice for salvation ; yet the minds of believers were always 
impressed with the conviction that the full light of under- 
standing was to be expected only on the advent of the Messiah. 
This expectation, accordingly, had reached even the Samari- 
tans, to whom the true religion had never been made known. 
This is plain from the expression of the woman, " I know 
that Messias cometh, which is called Christ : when he is 
come, he will tell us all things," (John iv. 25.) Nor was this 
a mere random presumption which had entered the minds of 
the Jews. They believed what sure oracles had taught them. 
One of the most remarkable passages is that of Isaiah, " Be- 
hold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader 
and commander to the people," (Is. Iv. 4 ;) that is, in the 
same way in which he had previously in another place styled 
him " Wonderful, Counsellor," (Is. ix. 6.1) For this reason, 
the apostle commending the perfection of gospel doctrine, 
first says that " God, at sundry times and in divers manners 
spake in times past unto the prophets," and then adds, that he 
" hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son," (Heb. 

1 Calvin translates, " Angelum vel Interpretem magni consilii ;" — " the 
Angel or Interpreter of the great eounsel." 


CHAP. XV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 37 

i. 1, 2.) But as the common office of the prophets was to 
hold the Church in suspense, and at the same time support 
it until the advent of the Mediator ; we read, that the faith- 
ful, during the dispersion, complained that they were deprived 
of that ordinary privilege. " We see not our signs : there 
is no more any prophet, neither is there among us any that 
knoweth how long," (Ps. lxxiv. 9.) But when Christ was 
now not far distant, a period was assigned to Daniel " to 
seal up the vision and prophecy," (Daniel ix. 24,) not only 
that the authority of the prediction there spoken of might be 
established, but that believers might, for a time, patiently 
submit to the want of the prophets, the fulfilment and com- 
pletion of all the prophecies being at hand. 

2. Moreover, it is to be observed, that the name Christ 
refers to those three offices : for we know that under the 
Law, prophets as well as priests and kings were anointed 
with holy oil. Whence, also, the celebrated name of Mes- 
siah was given to the promised Mediator. But although I 
admit (as, indeed, I have elsewhere shown) that he was so 
called from a view to the nature of the kingly office, still the 
prophetical and sacerdotal unctions have their proper place, 
and must not be overlooked. The former is expressly men- 
tioned by Isaiah in these words : " The Spirit of the Lord God 
is upon me : because the Lord hath anointed me to1 preach 
good tidings unto the meek ; he hath sent me to bind up the 
broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captive, and the 
opening of the prison to them that are bound ; to proclaim 
the acceptable year of the Lord," (Is. Ix. 1, 2.) We see that 
he was anointed by the Spirit to be a herald and witness of 
his Father's grace, and not in the usual way ; for he is distin- 
guished from other teachers who had a similar office. And 
here, again, it is to be observed, that the unction which he 
received, in order to perform the office of teacher, was not for 
himself, but for his whole body, that a corresponding efficacy 
of the Spirit might always accompany the preaching of 
the Gospel. This, however, remains certain, that by the 
perfection of doctrine which he brought, an end was put to 
all the prophecies, so that those who, not contented with the 
Gospel, annex somewhat extraneous to it, derogate from its 


38 INSTITUTES OF THE t BOOK II. 

authority. The voice which thundered from heaven, " This 
is my beloved Son, hear him," gave him a special privilege 
above all other teachers. Then from him, as head, this 
unction is diffused through the members, as Joel has foretold, 
" Your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old 
men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see 
visions," (Joel ii. 28.) Paul's expressions, that he was 
" made unto us wisdom," (1 Cor. i. 30,) and elsewhere, that 
in him " are hid all the treasures of wisdom and know- 
ledge," (Col. ii. 3,) have a somewhat different meaning, 
namely, that out of him there is nothing worth knowing, and 
that those who, by faith, apprehend his true character, 
possess the boundless immensity of heavenly blessings. For 
which reason, he elsewhere says, " I determined not to know 
any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified," 
(1 Cor. ii. 2.) And most justly : for it is unlawful to go 
beyond the simplicity of the Gospel. The purpose of this 
prophetical dignity in Christ is to teach us, that in the doc- 
trine which he delivered is substantially included a wisdom 
Avhich is perfect in all its parts. 

3. I come to the Kingly office, of which it were in vain 
to speak, without previously reminding the reader that 
its nature is spiritual; because it is from thence we learn 
its efficacy, the benefits it confers, its whole power and 
eternity. Eternity, moreover, which in Daniel an angel 
attributes to the office of Christ, (Dan. ii. 44,) in Luke an 
angel justly applies to the salvation of his people, (Luke i. 
33.) But this is also twofold, and must be viewed in two 
ways ; the one pertains to the whole body of the Church, the 
other is proper to each member. To the former is to be 
referred what is said in the Psalms, " Once have I sworn by 
my holiness, that I will not lie unto David. His seed shall 
endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me. It 
shall be established for ever, as the moon, and as a faithful 
witness in heaven," (Ps. lxxxix. 35, 37.) There can be no 
doubt that God here promises that he will be, by the hand of 
his Son, the eternal governor and defender of the Church. 
In none but Christ will the fulfilment of this prophecy 
be found ; since immediately after Solomon's death the king- 


CHAP. XV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 39 

dom in a great measure lost its dignity, and, with ignominy 
to the family of David, was transferred to a private indivi- 
dual. Afterwards decaying by degrees, it at length came 
to a sad and dishonourable end. In the same sense are we 
to understand the exclamation of Isaiah, " Who shall declare 
his generation ?" (Isaiah liii. 8.) For he asserts that Christ 
will so survive death as to be connected with his members. 
Therefore, as often as we hear that Christ is armed with 
et ernal j^gjver, let us learn that the perpetuity of the Church 
is thus effectually secured ; that amid the turbulent agita- 
tions by which it is constantly harassed, and the grievous 
and fearful commotions which threaten innumerable disasters, 
it still remains safe. Thus, when David derides the auda- 
city of the enemy who attempt to throw off the yoke of God 
and his anointed, and says, that kings and nations rage " in 
vain," (Ps. ii. 2-4,) because he who sitteth in the heaven is 
strong enough to repel their assaults, assuring believers of the 
perpetual preservation of the Church, he animates them to 
have good hope whenever it is occasionally oppressed. So, 
in another place, when speaking in the person of God, he 
says, " The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right 
hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool," (Ps. ex. 1,) 
he reminds us, that however numerous and powerful the ene- 
mies who conspire to assault the Church, they are not pos- 
sessed of strength sufficient to prevail against the immortal 
decree by which he appointed his Son eternal King. Whence 
it follows that the devil, with the whole power of the world, 
can never possibly destroy the Church, which is founded on 
the eternal throne of Christ. Then in regard to the special 
use to be made by each believer, this same eternity ought to 
elevate us to the hope of a blessed immortality. For we see 
that every thing which is earthly, and of the world, is tem- 
porary, and soon fades away. Christ, therefore, to raise our 
hope to the heavens, declares that his kingdom is not of this 
world, (John xviii. 36.) In fine, let each of us, when he 
hears that the kingdom of Christ is spiritual, be roused by 
the thought to entertain the hope of a better life, and to 
expect that as it is now protected by the hand of Christ, so 
it will be fully realised in a future life. 


40 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

4. That the strength and utility of the kingdom of Christ 
cannot, as we have said, be fully perceived, without recog- 
nising it as spiritual, is sufficiently apparent, even from this, 
that having during the whole course of our lives to war 
under the cross, our condition here is bitter and wretched. 
What then would it avail us to be ranged under the govern- 
ment of a heavenly King, if its benefits were not realised 
beyond the present earthly life ? We must, therefore, know 
that the happiness which is promised to us in Christ does not 
consist in external advantages — such as leading a joyful and 
tranquil life, abounding in wealth, being secure against all 
injury, and having an affluence of delights, such as the flesh is 
wont to long for — but properly belongs to the heavenly life. 
As in the world the prosperous and desirable condition of 
a people consists partly in the abundance of temporal good 
and domestic peace, and partly in the strong protection which 
gives security against external violence ; so Christ also en- 
riches his people with all things necessary to the eternal 
salvation of their souls, and fortifies them with courage to 
stand unassailable by all the attacks of spiritual foes. Whence 
we infer, that he reigns more for us than for himself, and 
that both within us and without us ; that being replenished, 
in so far as God knows to be expedient, with the gifts of the 
Spirit, of which we are naturally destitute, we may feel from 
their first fruits, that we are truly united to God for perfect 
blessedness ; and then trusting to the power of the same 
Spirit, may not doubt that we shall always be victorious 
against the devil, the world, and every thing that can do us 
harm. To this effect was our Saviour's reply to the Pharisees, 
u The kingdom of God is within you." " The kingdom of God 
cometh not with observation," (Luke xvii. 21, 22.) It 
is probable that on his declaring himself to be that King 
under whom the highest blessing of God was to be expected, 
they had in derision asked him to produce his insignia. But 
to prevent those who were already more than enough in- 
clined to the earth from dwelling on its pomp, he bids them 
enter into their consciences, for "the kingdom of God" is 
" righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost," (Rom. 
xiv. 17.) These words briefly teach what the kingdom of 


CHAP. XV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 41 

Christ bestows upon us. Not being earthly or carnal, and so 
subject to corruption, but spiritual, it raises us even to eter- 
nal life, so that we can patiently live at present under toil, 
hunger, cold, contempt, disgrace, and other annoyances ; 
contented with this, that our King will never abandon us, 
but will supply our necessities until our warfare is ended, 
and we are called to triumph : such being the nature of his 
kingdom, that he communicates to us whatever he received of 
his Father. Since then he arms and equips us by his power, 
adorns us with splendour and magnificence, enriches us with 
wealth, we here find most abundant cause of glorying, and 
also are inspired with boldness, so that we can contend in- 
trepidly with the devil, sin, and death. In fine, clothed with 
his righteousness, we can bravely surmount all the insults of 
the world : and as he replenishes us liberally with his gifts, so 
we can in our turn bring forth fruit unto his glory. 

5. Accordingly, his-xoyal unction is not set before us as com- 
posed of oil or aromatic perfumes ; but he is called the Christ 
of God, because " the Spirit of the Lord" rested upon him ; 
" the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of 
counsel and might, the Spirit of knowledge and of the fear 
of the Lord," (Isaiah xi. 2.) This is the oil of joy with which 
the Psalmist declares that he was anointed above his fel- 
lows, (Ps. xlv. 7.) For, as has been said, he was not enriched 
privately for himself, but that he might refresh the parched 
and hungry with his abundance. For as the Father is said to 
have given the Spirit to the Son without measure, (John iii. 
34,) so the reason is expressed, that Ave might all receive of 
his fulness, and grace for grace, (John i. 16.) From this 
fountain flows the copious supply (of which Paul makes men- 
tion, Eph. iv. 7) by which grace is variously distributed to 
believers according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Here 
we have ample confirmation of what I said, that the kingdom 
of Christ consists in the Spirit, and not in earthly delights 
or pomp, and that hence, in order to be partakers with him, 
we must renounce the world. A visible symbol of this grace 
was exhibited at the baptism of Christ, when the Spirit rest- 
ed upon him in the form of a dove. To designate the Spirit 
and his gifts by the term unction is not new, and ought not 


42 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

to seem absurd, (see 1 John ii. 20, 27,) because this is the 
only quarter from which we derive life ; but especially 
in what regards the heavenly life, there is not a drop of 
vigour in us save what the Holy Spirit instils, who has chosen 
his seat in Christ, that thence the heavenly riches, of which 
we are destitute, might flow to us in copious abundance. 
But because believers stand invincible in the strength of their 
King, and his spiritual riches abound towards them, they are 
not improperly called Christians. Moreover, from this eter- 
nity of which we have spoken, there is nothing derogatory 
in the expression of Paul, " Then cometh the end, when 
he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the 
Father," (1 Cor. xv. 24;) and also, "Then shall the Son 
also himself be subject unto him that put all things under 
him, that God may be all in all," (1 Cor. xv. 28 ;) for the 
meaning merely is, that, in that perfect glory, the adminis- 
tration of the kingdom will not be such as it now is. For 
the Father hath given all power to the Son, that by his hand 
he may govern, cherish, sustain us, keep us under his 
guardianship, and give assistance to us. Thus, while we 
wander far as pilgrims from God, Christ interposes, that he 
may gradually bring us to full communion with God. And, 
indeed, his sitting at the right hand of the Father has the 
same meaning as if he was called the vicegerent of the 
Father, entrusted with the whole power of government. For 
God is pleased, mediately (so to speak) in his person to rule 
and defend the Church. Thus also his being seated at the 
right hand of the Father is explained by Paul, in the Epistle 
to the Ephesians, to mean, that " he is the head over all 
things to the Church, which is his body," (Eph. i. 20, 22.) 
Nor is this different in purport from what he elsewhere 
teaches, that God hath " given him a name which is above 
every name ; that at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, 
of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the 
earth, and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ 
is Lord, to the glory of God the Father," (Phil. ii. 9-1 1.) For 
in these words, also, he commends an arrangement in the 
kingdom of Christ, which is necessary for our present in- 
firmity. Thus Paul rightly infers that God will then be the 


CHAP. XV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 43 

only Head of the Church, because the office of Christ, in 
defending the Church, shall then have been completed. For 
the same reason, Scripture throughout calls him Lord, the 
Father having appointed him over us for the express pur- 
pose of exercising his government through him. For though 
many lordships are celebrated in the world, yet Paul says, 
" To us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all 
things, and we in him ; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom 
are all things, and we by him," (1 Cor. viii. 6.) Whence it 
is justly inferred that he is the same God, who, by the 
mouth of Isaiah, declared, " The Lord is]our Judge, the Lord 
is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King : he will save us," 
(Isaiah xxxiii. 22.) For though he every where describes 
all the power which he possesses as the benefit and gift of 
the Father, the meaning simply is, that he reigns by divine 
authority, because his reason for assuming the office of Me- 
diator was, that descending from the bosom and incompre- 
hensible glory of the Father, he might draw near to us. 
Wherefore there is the greater reason that we all should 
with one consent prepare to obey, and with the greatest 
alacrity yield implicit obedience to his will. For as he 
unites the offices of King and Pastor towards believers, who 
voluntarily submit to him, so, on the other hand, we are told 
that he wields an iron sceptre to break and bruise all the 
rebellious like a potter's vessel, (Ps. ii. 9.) We are also 
told that he will be the Judge of the Gentiles, that he will 
cover the earth with dead bodies, and level down every 
opposing height, (Ps. ex. 6.) Of this examples are seen 
at present, but full proof will be given at the final judg- 
ment, which may be properly regarded as the last act of his 
reign. 

6. With regard to his Priesthood, we must briefly hold its 
end and use to be, that as a Mediator, free from all taint, he 
may by his own holiness procure the favour of God for us. 
But because a deserved curse obstructs the entrance, and 
God in his character of Judge is hostile to us, expiation 
must necessarily intervene, that as a priest employed to 
appease the wrath of God, he may reinstate us in his favour. 
Wherefore, in order that Christ might fulfil this office, it 


44 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

behoved him to appear with a sacrifice. For even under the 
law of the priesthood it was forbidden to enter the sanctuary 
without blood, to teach the worshipper that however the 
priest might interpose to deprecate, God could not be pro- 
pitiated without the expiation of sin. On this subject the 
Apostle discourses at length in the Epistle to the Hebrews, 
from the seventh almost to the end of the tenth chapter. 
The sum comes to this, that the honour of the priesthood was 
competent to none but Christ, because, by the sacrifice of 
his death, he wiped away our guilt, and made satisfaction for 
sin. Of the great importance of this matter, we are reminded 
by that solemn oath which God uttered, and of which he 
declared he would not repent, " Thou art a priest for ever, 
after the order of Melchizedek," (Ps. ex. 4.) For, doubtless, 
his purpose was to ratify that point on which he knew that 
our salvation chiefly hinged. For, as has been said, there is 
no access to God for us or for our prayers until the priest, 
purging away our defilements, sanctify us, and obtain for us 
that favour of which the impurity of our lives and hearts de- 
prives us. Thus we see, that if the benefit and efficacy of 
Christ's priesthood is to reach us, the commencement must 
be with his death. Whence it follows, that he by whose 
aid we obtain favour, must be a perpetual intercessor. From 
this again arises not only confidence in prayer, but also the 
tranquillity of pious minds, while they recline in safety on the 
paternal indulgence of God, and feel assured, that whatever 
has been consecrated by the Mediator is pleasing to him. 
But since God under the Law ordered sacrifices of beasts to 
be offered to him, there was a different and new arrange- 
ment in regard to Christ, viz., that he should be at once 
victim and priest, because no other fit satisfaction for sin 
could be found, nor was any one worthy of the honour of 
offering an only begotten son to God. Christ now bears the 
office of priest, not only that by the eternal law of reconcilia- 
tion he may render the Father favourable and propitious to 
us, but also admit us into this most honourable alliance. For 
we though in ourselves polluted, in him being priests, (Rev. 
i. 6,) offer ourselves and our all to God, and freely enter the 
heavenly sanctuary, so that the sacrifices of prayer and praise 


CnAP. XV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 45 

which we present are grateful and of sweet odour before 
him. To this effect are the words of Christ, " For their 
sakes I sanctify myself," (John xvii. 19 ;) for being clothed 
with his holiness, inasmuch as he has devoted us to the Father 
with himself, (otherwise we were an abomination before him,) 
we please him as if we were pure and clean, nay, even 
sacred. Hence that unction of the sanctuary of which men- 
tion is made in Daniel, (Dan. ix. 24.) For we must attend 
to the contrast between this unction and the shadowy one 
which was then in use ; as if the angel had said, that when 
the shadows were dispersed, there would be a clear priest- 
hood in the person of Christ. The more detestable, therefore, 
is the fiction of those who, not content with the priesthood 
of Christ, have dared to take it upon themselves to sacrifice 
him, a thing daily attempted in the Papacy, where the mass 
is represented as an immolation of Christ. 


46 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 


CHAPTER XVI. 

HOW CHRIST PERFORMED THE OFFICE OF REDEEMER IN 
PROCURING OUR SALVATION. THE DEATH, RESURREC- 
TION, AND ASCENSION OF CHRIST. 

This chapter contains four leading heads — I. A general consideration 
of the whole subject, including a discussion of a necessary question 
concerning the justice of God and his mercy in Christ, sec. 1-4. II. How 
Christ fulfilled the office of Redeemer in each of its parts, sec. 5-17. 
His death, burial, descent to hell, resurrection, ascension to heaven, seat 
at the right hand of the Father, and return to judgment. III. A great 
part of the Creed being here expounded, a statement is given of the 
view which ought to be taken of the Creed commonly ascribed to the 
Apostles, sec. 18. IV. Conclusion, setting forth the doctrine of Christ 
the Redeemer, and the use of the doctrine, sec. 19. 

Sections. 

1. Every thing needful for us exists in Christ. How it is to be obtained. 

2. Question as to the mode of reconciling the justice with the mercy of 

God. Modes of expression used in Scripture to teach us how 
miserable our condition is without Christ. 

3. Not used improperly ; for God finds in us ground both of hatred and 

love. 

4. This confirmed from passages of Scripture and from Augustine. 

5. The second part of the chapter, treating of our redemption by Christ. 

First generally. Redemption extends to the whole course of our 
Saviour's obedience, but is specially ascribed to his death. The 
voluntary subjection of Christ. His agony. His condemnation 
before Pilate. Two things observable in his condemnation. 1. That 
he was numbered among transgressors. 2. That he was declared 
innocent by the judge. Use to be made of this. 

6. Why Christ was crucified. This hidden doctrine typified in the Law, 

and completed by the Apostles and Prophets. In what sense Christ 
was made a curse for us. The cross of Christ connected with the 
shedding of his blood. 

7. Of the death of Christ. Why he died. Advantages from his death. 

Of the burial of Christ. Advantages. 

8. Of the descent into hell. This article gradually introduced into the 

Church. Must not be rejected, nor confounded with the previous 
article respecting burial. 


CHAP. XVI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 47 

9. Absurd exposition concerning the Limbus Patrum, This fable refuted. 

10. The article of the descent to hell more accurately expounded. A 

great ground of comfort. 

11. Confirmation of this exposition from passages of Scripture and the 

works of ancient Theologians. An objection refuted. Advantages 
of the doctrine. 

12. Another objection that Christ is insulted, and despair ascribed to 

him in its being said that he feared. Answer, from the statements 
of the Evangelists, that he did fear, was troubled in spirit, amazed, 
and tempted in all respects as we are, yet without sin. Why 
Christ was pleased to become weak. His fear without sin. Refu- 
tation of another objection, with an answer to the question, Did 
Christ fear death, and why ? When did Christ descend to hell, 
and how ? What has been said refutes the heresy of Apollinaris 
and of the Mono thelites. 

13. Of the resurrection of Christ. The many advantages from it. 1. 

Our righteousness in the sight of God renewed and restored. 
2. His life the basis of our life and hope, also the efficacious cause 
of new life in us. 3. The pledge of oxu- future resurrection. 

14. Of the ascension of Christ. Why he ascended. Advantages derived 

from it. 

15. Of Christ's seat at the Father's right hand. What meant by it. 

16. Many advantages from the ascension of Christ. 1. He gives access 

to the kingdom which Adam had shut up. 2. He intercedes for us 
with the Father. 3. His virtue being thence transfused into us, 
he works effectually in us for salvation. 

17. Of the return of Christ to judgment. Its nature. The quick and 

dead who are to be judged. Passages apparently contradictory 
reconciled. Mode of judgment.^^*- 

18. Advantages of the doctrine of Christ's return to judgment. Thud 

part of the*chapter, explaining the view to be taken of the Apostles' 
Creed. Summary of the Apostles' Creed. 

19. Conclusion of the whole chapter, showing that in Christ the salva- 

tion of the elect in all its parts is comprehended. 

1. All that we have hitherto said of Christ leads to this 
one result, that condemned, dead, and lost in ourselves, we 
must in him seek righteousness, deliverance, life and salva- 
tion, as we are taught by the celebrated words of Peter, 
u Neither is there salvation in any other : for there is none 
other name under heaven given among men whereby we 
must be saved," (Acts iv. 12.) The name of Jesus was 
not given him at random, or fortuitously, or by the will of 
man, but was brought from heaven by an angel, as Jhe herald 


48 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

of the supreme decree;1 the reason also being added, "for 
he shall save his people from their sins," (Matt. i. 21.) In 
these words attention should be paid to what we have else- 
where observed, that the office of Redeemer was assigned 
him in order that he might be our Saviour. Still, however, 
redemption would be defective if it did not conduct us by an 
uninterrupted progression to the final goal of safety. There- 
fore, the moment we turn aside from him in the minutest 
degree, salvation, which resides entirely in him, gradually 
disappears ; so that all who do not rest in him voluntarily 
deprive themselves of all grace. The observation of Bernard 
well deserves to be remembered : The name of Jesus is not 
only light but food also, yea, oil, without which all the food 
of the soul is dry ; salt, without which as a condiment what- 
ever is set before us is insipid ; in fine, honey in the mouth, 
melody in the ear, joy in the heart, and, at the same time, 
medicine ; every discourse where this name is not heard is 
absurd, (Bernard in Cantica., Serm. 15.) But here it is 
necessary diligently to consider in what way we obtain 
salvation from him, that we may not only be persuaded that 
he is the author of it, but having embraced whatever is 
sufficient as a sure foundation of our faith, may eschew all 
that might make us waver. For seeing no man can 
descend into himself, and seriously consider what he is, without 
feeling that God is angry and at enmity with him, and 
therefore anxiously longing for the means of regaining his 
favour, (this cannot be without satisfaction,) the certainty here 
required is of no ordinary description, — sinners, until freed 
from guilt, being always liable to the wrath and curse of 
God, who, as he is a just judge, cannot permit his law to be 
violated with impunity, but is armed for vengeance. 
ji_ 2. But before we proceed farther, we must see in passing, 
how can it be said that God, who prevents us with his mercy, 
was our enemy until he was reconciled to us by Christ. For 
how could he have given us in his only-begotten Son a singular 
pledge of his love, if he had not previously embraced us with 
free favour ? As there thus arises some appearance of contra- 

1 Latin, " Supremi decreti." French, " Decret eternel et inviolable ;" — 
Eternal and inviolable decree. 


CHAP. XVI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 49 

diction, I will explain the difficulty. The mode in which 
the Spirit usually speaks in Scripture is, that God was the 
enemy of men until they were restored to favour by the 
death of Christ, (Rom. v. 10 ;) that they were cursed until 
their iniquity was expiated by the sacrifice of Christ, (Gal. 
iii. 10, 13 ;) that they were separated from God, until by 
means of Christ's body they were received into union, (Col. 
i. 21, 22.) Such modes of expression are accommodated to jT 4- 
our capacity, that we may the better understand how miser- 
able and calamitous our condition is without Christ. For 
were it not said in clear terms, that Divine wrath, and ven- 
geance, and eternal death, lay upon us, we should be less 
sensible of our wretchedness without the mercy of God, and less 
disposed to value the blessing of deliverance. For example, 
let a person be told, Had God at the time you were a 
sinner hated you, and cast you off as you deserved, horrible 
destruction must have been your doom ; but spontaneously 
and of free indulgence he retained you in his favour, not 
suffering you to be estranged from him, and in this way 
rescued you from danger, — the person will indeed be affected, 
and made sensible in some degree how much he owes to 
the mercy of God. But again, let him be told, as Scripture 
teaches, that he was estranged from God by sin, an heir of 
wrath, exposed to the curse of eternal death, excluded from 
all hope of salvation, a complete alien from the blessing of 
God, the slave of Satan, captive under the yoke of sin ; 
in fine, doomed to horrible destruction, and already involved 
in it ; that then Christ interposed, took the punishment 
upon himself, and bore what by the just judgment of God 
was impending over sinners ; with his own blood expiated 
the sins which rendered them hateful to God, by this expi- 
ation satisfied and duly propitiated God the Father, by this 
intercession appeased his anger, on this basis founded peace 
between God and men, and by this tie secured the Divine 
benevolence toward them ; will not these considerations 
move him the more deeply, the more strikingly they represent 
the greatness of the calamity from which he was delivered ? 
In short, since our mind cannot lay hold of life through the 
mercy of God with sufficient eagerness, or receive it with 
VOL. II. D 


50 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

becoming gratitude, unless previously impressed with fear of 
the Divine anger", and dismayed at the thought of eternal 
death, we are so instructed by divine truth, as to perceive 
that without Christ God is in a manner hostile to us, and 
has his arm raised for our destruction. Thus taught, we 
look to Christ alone for divine favour and paternal love. 

3. Though this is said in accommodation to the weakness 
of our capacity, it is not said falsely. For God, who is per- 
fect righteousness, cannot love the iniquity which he sees in 
all. All of us, therefore, have that within which deserves 
the hatred of God. Hence, in respect, first, of our corrupt 
nature ; and, secondly, of the depraved conduct following 
upon it, Ave are all offensive to God, guilty in his sight, and 
by nature the children of hell. But as the Lord wills not to 
destroy in us that which is his own, he still finds something 
in us which in kindness he can love. For though it is by our 
own fault that we are sinners, we are still his creatures ; 
though we have brought death upon ourselves, he had created 
us for life. Thus, mere gratuitous love prompts him to 
receive us into favour. But if there is a perpetual and irre- 
concilable repugnance between righteousness and iniquity, so 
long as Ave remain sinners Ave cannot be completely received. 
Therefore, in order that all ground of offence may be removed, 
and he may completely reconcile us to himself, he, by means 
of the expiation set forth in the death of Christ, abolishes 
all the evil that is in us, so that Ave, formerly impure and 
unclean, uoav appear in his sight just and holy. Accord- 
ingly, God the Father, by his love, prevents and anticipates 
our reconciliation in Christ. Nay, it is because he first loves 
us, that he afterwards reconciles us to himself. But because 
the iniquity, AA'hich deserves the indignation of God, remains 
in us until the death of Christ comes to our aid, and that 
iniquity is in his sight accursed and condemned, Ave are not 
admitted to full and sure communion with God, unless in so 
far as Christ unites us. And, therefore, if Ave Avould indulge 
the hope of having God placable and propitious to us, Ave 
must fix our eyes and minds on .Chxist_qlcn.e, as it is to him 
alone it is owing that our sins, Avhich necessarily provoked 
the AATath of God, are not imputed to us. 


CHAP. XVI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 51 

4. For tliis reason Paul says, that God " hath blessed us 
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ : ac- 
cording as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of 
the world," (Eph. i. 3, 4.) These things are clear and con- 
formable to Scripture, and admirably reconcile the passages 
in which it is said, that " God so loved the world, that he 
gave his only begotten Son," (John iii. 16 ;) and yet that it 
was " when we were enemies Ave were reconciled to God by 
the death of his Son," (Rom. v. 10.) But to give additional 
assurance to those who require the authority of the ancient 
Church, I will quote a passage of Augustine to the same 
effect : " Incomprehensible and immutable is the love of 
God. For it was not after we were reconciled to him by the 
blood of his Son that he began to love us, but he loved us 
before the foundation of the world, that with his only be- 
gotten Son Ave too might be sons of God before Ave were 
any thing at all. Our being reconciled by the death. of 
Christ must not be understood as if the Son reconciled us, 
in order that the Father, then hating, might begin to love 
us, but that Ave were reconciled to him already, loving, 
though at enmity with us because of sin. To the truth of 
both propositions Ave have the attestation of the Apostle, 

' God commendeth his love tOAvard us, in that while we 
were yet sinners, Christ died for us,' (Rom. v. 8.) There- 
fore he had this love toAvards us even AAThen, exercising 
enmity toAvards him, we Avere the Avorkers of iniquity. Ac- 
cordingly, in a manner wondrous and divine, he loved even 
when he hated us. For he hated us AArhen we Avere such as 
he had not made us, and yet because our iniquity had not 
destroyed his Avork in every respect, he kneAV in regard to 
each one of us, both to hate Avhat we had made, and love 
Avhat he had made." Such are the Avords of Augustine, 
(Tract in Jo. 110.) 

5. When it is asked then Iioav Christ, by abolishing sin, 
removed the enmity betAveen God and us, and purchased a 
righteousness Avhich made him favourable and kind to us, it 
may be ansAvered generally, that he accomplished this by the 

~r" Avhole course of his obedience. This is proved by the testi- 
mony of Paul, " As by one man's disobedience many Avere 
made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made 


52 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

righteous," (Rom. v. 19.) And indeed he elsewhere extends 
the ground of pardon which exempts from the curse of the 
law to the whole life of Christ, " When the fulness of the 
time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, 
made under the law, to redeem them that were under the 
law," (Gal. iv. 4, 5.) Thus even at his baptism he declared 
that a part of righteousness was fulfilled by his yielding 
obedience to the command of the Father. In short, from the 
moment when he assumed the form of a servant, he began, 
in order to redeem us, to pay the price of deliverance. Scrip- 
ture, however, the more certainly to define the mode of 
salvation, ascribes it peculiarly and specially to the death of 
Christ. He himself declares that he gave his life a ransom 
for many, (Matth. xx. 28.) Paul teaches that he died for 
our sins, (Rom. iv. 25.) John Baptist exclaimed, "Behold 
the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world," 
(John i. 29.) Paul in another passage declares, "that we 
are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that 
is in Christ Jesus : whom God hath set forth to be a propi- 
tiation through faith in his blood," (Rom. iii. 25.) Again, 
being "justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath 
through him," (Rom. v. 9.) Again, "He hath made him to 
be sin for us, who knew no sin ; that we might be made the 
righteousness of God in him," (2 Cor. v. 21.) I will not 
search out all the passages, for the list would be endless, and 
many are; afterwards to be quoted in their order. In the 
Confession of Faith, called the Apostles' Creed, the transi- 
tion is admirably made from the birth of Christ to his death 
and resurrection, in which the completion of a perfect salva- 
tion consists. Still there is no exclusion of the other part of 
obedience which he performed in life. Thus Paul compre- 
hends, from the beginning even to the end, his having 
assumed the form of a servant, humbled himself, and become 
obedient to death, even the death of the cross, (Phil. ii. 7.) 
And, indeed, the first step in obedience was his voluntary 
subjection ; for the sacrifice would have been unavailing to 
justification if not offered spontaneously. Hence our Lord, 
after testifying, " I lay down my life for the sheep," distinctly 
adds, " No man taketh it from me," (John x. 15, 18.) In the 
same sense Isaiah says, " Like a sheep before her shearers is 


CHAP. XVI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 53 

dumb, so he opened not his mouth," (Is. liii. 7.) The Gospel 
History relates that he came forth to meet the soldiers ; and 
in presence of Pilate, instead of defending himself, stood to 
receive judgment. This, indeed, he did not without a 
struggle, for he had assumed our infirmities also, and in this 
way it behoved him to prove that he was yielding obedi- 
ence to his Father. It was no ordinary example of incom- 
parable love towards us to struggle with dire terrors, and 
amid fearful tortures to cast away all care of himself that he 
might provide for us. We must bear in mind, that Christ 
could not duly propitiate God without renouncing his own 
feelings, and subjecting himself entirely to his Father's will. 
To this effect the Apostle appositely quotes a passage from 
the Psalms, u Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is 
written of me) to do thy will, O God7" (Heb. x. 5 ; Ps. xl. 
7, 8.) Thus, as trembling consciences find no rest without 
sacrifice and ablution by which sins are expiated, we are pro- 
perly directed thither7 the source of our life being placed in 
the death of Christ. Moreover, as the curse consequent upon 
guilt remained for the final judgment of God, one principal 
point in the narrative is his condemnation before Pontius 
Pilate, the governor of Judea, to teach us, that the punishment 
to which we were liable was inflicted on that Just One. We 
could not escape the fearful judgment of God ; and Christ, 
that he might rescue us from it, submitted to be condemned 
by a mortal, nay, by a wicked and profane man. For the 
name of Governor is mentioned not only to support the ere-, 
dibility of the narrative, but to remind us of what Isaiah says,/ V 
that " the chastisement of our peace was upon him ;" and! 
that "with his stripes we are healed," (Is. liii. 5.) For, in' 
order to remove our condemnation, it was> not sufficient to 
endure any kind of death. To satisfy our ransom, it was 
necessary to select a mode of death in which he might deliver 
us, both by giving himself up to condemnation, and under- 
taking our expiation. Had he been cut off by assassins, or 
slain in a seditious tumult, there could have been no kind of 
satisfaction in such a death. But when he is placed as a 
criminal at the bar, where witnesses are brought to give 
evidence against him, and the mouth of the judge condemns 
him to die, we see him sustaining the character of an offender 


54 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

and evil-doer. Here we must attend to two points which 
had both been foretold by the prophets, and tend admirably 
to comfort and confirm our faith. When we read that Christ 
was led away from the judgment-seat to execution, and was 
crucified between thieves, we have a fulfilment of the prophecy 
which is quoted by the Evangelist, " He was numbered with 
the transgressors," (Is. liii. 12 ; Mark xv. 28.) Why was it 
so ? That he might bear the character of a sinner, not of a 
just or innocent person, inasmuch as he met death on account 
not of innocence, but of sin. On the other hand, when we 
read that he was acquitted by the same lips that condemned 
him, (for Pilate was forced once and again to bear public tes- . 
timony to his innocence,) let us call to mind what is said by 
another prophet, " I restored that which I took not away," 
(Ps. lxix. 4.) Thus we perceive Christ representing the 
character of a sinner and a criminal, while, at the same time, 
his innocence shines forth, and it becomes manifest that he 
surfers for another's and not for his own crime. He there- 
fore suffered under Pontius Pilate, being thus, by the formal 
sentence of the judge, ranked among criminals, and yet he is 
declared innocent by the same judge, when he affirms that 

I he finds no cause of death in him. Our acquittal is in this 
that the guilt which made us liable to punishment was 

1 transferred to the head of the Son of God, (Is. liii. 12.) We 
must specially remember this substitution in order that we 
may not be all our lives in trepidation and anxiety, as if the 
just vengeance, which the Son of God transferred to himself, 
were still impending over us. 

6. The very form of the death embodies a striking truth. 
The cross was cursed not only in the opinion of men, but by 
the enactment of the Divine Law. Hence Christ, while 
suspended on it, subjects himself to the curse. And thus it 
behoved to be done, in order that the whole curse, which on 
account of our iniquities awaited us,iev-rather lay upon us,J 
might be taken from us by being transferred to him. This was 
also shadowed in the Law, since ni/bBW > tne word by which 
sin itself is properly designated, was applied to the sacrifices 
and expiations offered for sin. By this application of the 
term, the Spirit intended to intimate, that they were a kind 
of xaduoft&ruv, (purifications,) bearing, by substitution, the 


CHAP. XVI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 55 

curse due to sin. But that which was represented figura- 
tively in the Mosaic sacrifices is exhibited in Christ the 
archetype. Wherefore, in order to accomplish a full expia- 
tion, he made his soul Ofc^&> •*. e., a propitiatory victim for 
sin, (as the prophet says, Is. liii. 5, 10,) on which the guilt 
and penalty being in a manner laid, ceases to be imputed to 
us. The Apostle declares this more plainly when he says, 
that " he made him to be sin for us, Avho knew no sin ; that 
we might be made the righteousness of God in him," (2 Cor. 
v. 21.) For the Son of God, though spotlessly pure, took! 
upon him the disgrace and ignominy of our iniquities, and in j ' 
return clothed us with his purity. To the same thing he seems ( 
to refer, when he says, that he " condemned sin in the flesh," 
(Rom. viii. 3,) the Father having destroyed the power of 
sin when it was transferred to the flesh of Christ. This 
term, therefore, indicates that Christ, in his death, was 
offered to the Father as a propitiatory victim ; that, expiation 
being made by his sacrifice, we might cease to tremble at the 
divine wrath. It is now clear what the prophet means when 
he says, that " the Lord hath laid upon him the iniquity of us 
all," (Is. liii. 6 ;) namely, that as he was to wrash away the 
pollution of sins, they were transferred to him by imputa- 
tion. Of this the cross to which he was nailed was a symbol, 
as the Apostle declares, " Christ hath redeemed us from the 
curse of the law, being made a curse for us : for it is written, 
Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree : that the blessing 
of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus 
Christ," (Gal. iii. 13, 14.) In the same way Peter says, 
that he " bare our sins in his own body on the tree," (1 Peter 
ii. 24,) inasmuch as from the very symbol of the curse, we 
perceive more clearly that the burden with which we were 
oppressed was laid upon him. Nor are we to understand 
that by the curse which he endured he was himself over- 
whelmed, but rather that by enduring it he repressed, broke, 
annihilated all its force. Accordingly, faith apprehends 
acquittal in the condemnation of Christ, and blessing in his 
curse. Hence it is not without cause that Paul magnificently 
celebrates the triumph which Christ obtained upon the cross, 
as if the cross, the symbol of ignominy, had been converted 


56 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

into a triumphal chariot. For he says, that he blotted out 
the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which 
was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to 
his cross : that, " having spoiled principalities and powers, he 
made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it," 
(Col. ii. 14, 15.) Nor is this to be wondered at; for, as 
another Apostle declares, Christ, " through the eternal Spirit, 
offered himself without spot to God," (Heb. ix. 14,) and 
hence that transformation of the cross which were otherwise 
against its nature. But that these things may take deep root 
and have their seat in our inmost hearts, we must never lose 
sight of sacrifice and ablution. For, were not Christ a vic- 
tim, we could have no sure conviction of his being anoXvrgueig, 
avriXvrgov, xa/ iXaerrigiov, our substitute-ransom and propitia- 
tion. And hence mention is always made of blood whenever 
Scripture explains the mode of redemption : although the 
shedding of Christ's blood was available not only for propi- 
tiation, but also acted as a laver to purge our defilements. 

7. The Creed next mentions, that he " was dead and 
buried." Here again it is necessary to consider how he sub- 
stituted himself in order to pay the price of our redemption. 
Death held us under its yoke, but he in our place delivered 
himself into its power, that he might exempt us from it. 
This the Apostle means when he says, " that he tasted death 
for every man," (Heb. ii. 9.) By dying he prevented us 
from dying ; or (which is the same thing) he by his death 
purchased life for us, (see Calvin in Psychopann.) But in 
this he differed from us, that in permitting himself to be 
overcome of death, it was not so as to be ingulfed in its 
abyss, but rather to annihilate it, as it must otherwise have 
annihilated us ; he did not allow himself to be so subdued 
by it as to be crushed by its power ; he rather laid it pros- 
trate, when it was impending over us, and exulting over us 
as already overcome. In fine, his object was, " that through 
death he might destroy him that had the power of death, 
that is, the devil, and deliver them who through fear of 
death were all their lifetime subject to bondage," (Heb. ii. 
14, 15.) This is the first fruit which his death produced 
to us. Another is, that by fellowship with him he mortifies 


CHAP. XVI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 57 

our earthly members, that they may not afterwards exert 
themselves in action, and kills the old man, that he may not 
hereafter be in vigour and bring forth fruit. An effect of 
his burial, moreover, is, that we as his fellows are buried to 
sin. For when the Apostle says, that we are ingrafted 
into the likeness of Christ's death, and that we are buried 
with him unto sin, that by his cross the world is crucified 
unto us and we unto the world, and that we are dead with 
him, he not only exhorts us to manifest an example of his 
death, but declares that there is an efficacy in it which 
should appear in all Christians, if they would not render his 
death unfruitful and useless. Accordingly, in the death and 
burial of Christ a twofold blessing is set before us, viz., de- 
liverance from death, to which we were enslaved, and the 
mortification of our flesh, (Rom. vi. 5 ; Gal. ii. 19, vi. 14 ; 
Col. iii. 3.) 

8. Here we must not omit the descent to hell, which was >\ 
of no little importance to the accomplishment of redemption. 
For although it is apparent from the writings of the ancient 
Fathers, that the clause which now stands in the Creed was 
not formerly so much used in the churches, still, in giving a 
summary of doctrine, a place must be assigned to it, as con- 
taining a matter of great importance which ought not by 
any means to be disregarded. Indeed, some of the ancient 
Fathers do not omit it,1 and hence we may conjecture, that 
having been inserted in the Creed after a considerable lapse 
of time, it came into use in the Church not immediately but 
by degrees.2 This much is uncontroverted, that it was in 
accordance with the general sentiment of all believers, since 
there is none of the Fathers who does not mention Christ's 
descent into hell, though they have various modes of explain- 
ing it. But it is of little consequence by whom and at what 
time it was introduced. The chief thing to be attended to 
in the Creed is, that it furnishes us with a full and every way 

1 It is not adverted to by Augustine, Lib. i. De Synibolo de Catechu- 
menos. 

2 The French of this sentence is, " Dont on peut conjecturer qu'il a este 
tantost apres le terns des Apostres adjouste ; mais que peu a peu il est 
venu en usage." — Whence we may conjecture that it was added some time 
after the days of the Apostles, but gradually came into use. 


58 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

complete summary of faith, containing nothing but what 
has been derived from the infallible word of God. But 
should any still scruple to give it admission into the Creed, 
it will shortly be made plain, that the place which it holds in 
a summary of our redemption is so important, that the 
omission of it greatly detracts from the benefit of Christ's 
death. There are some again who think that the article 
contains nothing new, but is merely a repetition in different 
words of what was previously said respecting burial, the 
word Hell (Infernis) being often used in Scripture for 
sepulchre. I admit the truth of what they allege with re- 
gard to the not unfrequent use of the term infernis for 
sepulchre ; but I cannot adopt their opinion, for two obvious 
reasons. First, What folly would it have been, after ex- 
plaining a matter attended with no difficulty in clear and 
unambiguous terms, afterwards to involve rather than 
illustrate it by clothing it in obscure phraseology ? "When 
two expressions having the same meaning are placed to- 
gether, the latter ought to be explanatory of the former. 
But what kind of explanation would it be to say, the 
expression, Christ was buried, means, that he descended into 
hell ? My second reason is, the improbability that a super- 
fluous tautology of this description should have crept into 
this compendium, in which the principal articles of faith are 
set down summarily in the fewest possible number of 
words. I have no doubt that all who weigh the matter with 
some degree of care will here agree with me. 

9. Others interpret differently, viz., That Christ descended 
to the souls of the Patriarchs who died under the law, to 
announce his accomplished redemption, and bring them out 
of the prison in which they Mere confined. To this effect 
they wrest the passage1 in the Psalms, " He hath broken 
the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in sunder," 
(Ps. cvii. 1 G ;) and also the passage in Zechariah, " I have 
sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water," 
(Zech. ix. 11.) But since the psalm foretells the deliverance of 

1 Tlic French is, " Pour colorer lew fantasie, ils tirent par les eheveux 
quelques temoignages." — To colour their fancy, they pull by tie hair 
(violently wrest) certain passages. 


CnAP. XVI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 59 

those who were held captive in distant lands, and Zechariah 
comparing the Babylonish disaster into which the people had 
been plunged to a deep dry well or abyss, at the same time 
declares, that the salvation of the whole Church was an 
escape from a profound pit, I know not how it comes to 
pass, that posterity imagined it to beji subterraneous cavern, 
to which they gave the name of Limbus.) Though this fable 
has the countenance of great authors, and is now also seri- 
ously defended by many as truth,1 it is nothing but a fable. 
To conclude from it that the souls of the dead are in prison is 
childish. And what occasion was there that the soul of Christ 
should go down thither to set them at liberty ? I readily 
admit that Christ illumined them by the power of his Spirit, 
enabling them to perceive that the grace of which they had 
only had a foretaste was then manifested to the world. And 
to this not improbably the passage of Peter may be applied, 
wherein he says, that Christ " went and preached to the 
spirits that were in prison," (or rather " a watch-tower,") 
(1 Pet. iii. 19.) The purport of the context is, that believers 
who had died before that time Avere partakers of the same 
grace with ourselves : for he celebrates the power of Christ's 
death, in that he penetrated even to the dead, pious souls 
obtaining an immediate view of that visitation for Avhich 
they had anxiously waited ; while, on the other hand, the 
reprobate were more clearly convinced that they were com- 
pletely excluded from salvation. Although the passage in 
Peter is not perfectly definite, we must not interpret as if he 
made no distinction between the righteous and the wicked : 
he only means to intimate, that the death of Christ was made 
known to both. 

10. But, apart from the Creed, we must seek for a surer 
exposition of Christ's descent to hell : and the word of God 
furnishes us with one not only pious and holy, but replete 
with excellent consolation. Nothing had been done if Christ 
had only endured corporeal death. In order to interpose 
between us and God's anger, and satisfy his righteous judg- 

1 See Justin, Ambrose, Jerome. The opinions of the Fathers and 
Rabbis on Hell and Limbus arc collected by Peter Martyr, Loci Com- 
munes, Lib. iii. Loc. xvi. sect. 8 ; see Augustine, Ep. 99. 


60 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

ment, it was necessary that he should feel the weight of 
divine vengeance. Whence also it was necessary that he 
should engage, as it were, at close quarters with the powers 
of hell and the horrors of eternal death. We lately quoted 
from the Prophet, that the " chastisement of our peace was 
laid upon him," that he "was bruised for our iniquities," that he 
" bore our infirmities ;" expressions which intimate, that, like 
a sponsor and surety for the guilty, and, as it were, subjected 
to condemnation, he undertook and paid all the penalties 
which must have been exacted from them, the only exception 
being, that the pains of death could not hold him. Hence 
there is nothing strange in its being said that he descended 
to hell, seeing he endured the death which is inflicted on 
the wicked by an angry God. It is frivolous and ridicul- 
ous to object that in this way the order is perverted, it being 
absurd that an event which preceded burial should be placed 
after it. But after explaining what Christ endured in the 
sight of man, the Creed appropriately adds the invisible and 
incomprehensible judgment which he endured before God, 
to teach us that not only was the body of Christ given up as 
the price of redemption, but that there was a greater and 
more excellent price — that he bore in his soul the tortures of 
condemned and ruined man. 

11. In this sense, Peter says that God raised up Christ, 
" having loosed the pains of death : because it was not pos- 
sible he should be holden of it," (Acts ii. 24.) He does not 
mention death simply, but says that the Son of God 
endured the pains produced by the curse and wrath of God, 
the source of death. How small a matter had it been to 
come forth securely, and as it were in sport to undergo 
death. Herein was a true proof of boundless mercy, that 
he shunned not the death he so greatly dreaded. And there 
can be no doubt that, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, the 
Apostle means to teach the same thing, when he says that 
he " was heard in that he feared," (Heb. v. 7.) Some, 
instead of " feared," use a term meaning reverence or piety, 
but how inappropriately, is apparent both from the nature 
of the thing and the form of expression.1 Christ then praying 

' French, " Les autres translatcnt Reverence ou Piete ; mai» la Gram- 


CHAP. XVI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 61 

in a loud voice, and with tears, is heard in that he feared, 
not so as to be exempted from death, but so as not to be swal- 
lowed up of it like a sinner, though standing as our repre- 
sentative. And certainly no abyss can be imagined more 
dreadful than to feel that you are abandoned and forsaken 
of God, and not heard when you invoke him, just as if he 
had conspired your destruction. To such a degree was 
Christ dejected, that in the depth of his agony he was 
forced to exclaim, " My God, my God, why hast thou for- 
saken me ?" The view taken by some, that he here expressed 
. the opinion of others rather than his own conviction, is most 
improbable ; for it is evident that the expression was wrung 
from the anguish of his inmost soul. We do not, however, 
insinuate that God was ever hostile to him or angry with 
him.1 How could he be angry with the beloved Son, with 
whom his soul was well pleased ? or how could he have ap- 
peased the Father by his intercession for others if He were 
hostile to himself? But this we say, that he bore the 
weight of the divine anger, that, smitten and afflicted, he 
experienced all the signs of an angry and avenging God. 
Hence Hilary argues, that to this descent we owe our 
exemption from death. Nor does he dissent from this view 
in other passages, as when he says, " The cross, death, hell, 
are our life." And again, " The Son of God is in hell, but 
man is brought back to heaven." And why do I quote the 
testimony of a private writer, when an Apostle asserts the 
same thing, stating it as one fruit of his victory that he de- 
livered " them who through fear of death were all their lifetime 
subject to bondage ?" (Heb. ii. 15.) He behoved, therefore, to 
conquer the fear which incessantly vexes and agitates the 
breasts of all mortals ; and this he could not do without a 
contest. Moreover, it will shortly appear with greater 
clearness that his was no common sorrow, was not the result 
of a trivial cause. Thus by engaging with the power of the 


maire et la matiere qui est la tracte monstrent que c'est mal a propos." — 
Others translate Reverence or Piety ; but Grammar and the subject- 
matter show that they do it very unseasonably. 

1 See Cyril. Lib. ii. De Recta Fide ad Reginas ; Rem, Hilarius de 
Trinitate, Lib. iv. c. 2 and 3. 


62 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

devil, the fear of death, and the pains of hell, he gained the 
victory, and achieved a triumph, so that we now fear not 
in death those things which our Prince has destroyed.1 

12. Here some miserable creatures, who, though unlearned, 
are however impelled more by malice than ignorance, cry 
out that I am offering an atrocious insult to Christ, because 
it were most incongruous to hold that he feared for the 
safety of his soul. And then in harsher terms they urge 
the calumnious charge that I attribute despair to the Son of 
God, a feeling the very opposite of faith. First, they wickedly 
raise a controversy as to the fear and dread which Christ 
felt, though these are openly affirmed by the Evangelists. 
For before the hour of his death arrived, he was troubled 
in spirit, and affected with grief ; and at the very onset began 
to be exceedingly amazed. To speak of these feelings as 
merely assumed, is a shamefid evasion. It becomes us, there- 
fore, (as Ambrose truly teaches,) boldly to profess the agony 
of Christ, if we are not ashamed of the cross. And cer- 
tainly had not his soul shared in the punishment, he would 
have been a Redeemer of bodies only. The object of his 
struggle was to raise up those who were lying prostrate ; 
and so far is this from detracting from his heavenly glory, 
that his goodness, which can never be sufficiently extolled, 
becomes more conspicuous in this, that he declined not to bear 
our infirmities. Hence also that solace to our anxieties and 
griefs which the Apostle sets before us : " We have not an 
high priest who cannot be touched with the feeling of our 
infirmities ; but was in all respects tempted like as we are, 
yet without sin," (Heb. iv. 15.) These men pretend that a 
thing in its nature vitious is improperly ascribed to Christ ; 
as if they were wiser than the Spirit of God, who in the same 
passage reconciles the two things, viz., that he was tempted 
in all respects like as we are, and yet was without sin. 
There is no reason, therefore, to take alarm at infirmity 
in Christ, infirmity to which he submitted not under the 
constraint of violence and necessity, but merely because he 
loved and pitied us. Whatever he spontaneously suffered, 
detracts in no degree from his majesty. One thing which 

1 Yide Lutbcr, torn. i. in Condone tie Morte, fol. 87. 


CHAP. XVI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 63 

misleads these detractors is, that they do not recognise in 
Christ an infirmity which was pure and free from every 
species of taint, inasmuch as it was kept within the limits of 
obedience. As no moderation can be seen in the depravity of 
our nature, in which all affections with turbulent impetuosity 
exceed their due bounds, they improperly apply the same 
standard to the Son of God. But as he was upright, all 
his affections were under such restraint as prevented every 
thing like excess. Hence he could resemble us in grief, 
fear, and dread, but still with this mark of distinction. 
Thus refuted, they fly off to another cavil, that although 
Christ feared death, yet he feared not the curse and wrath 
of God, from which he knew that he was safe. But let the 
pious reader consider how far it is honourable to Christ to 
make him more effeminate and timid than the generality of 
men. Robbers and other malefactors contumaciously hasten 
to death, many men magnanimously despise it, others meet 
it calmly. If the Son of God was amazed and terror-struck 
at the prospect of it, where was his firmness or magnanimity ? 
AYe are even told, what in a common death would have 
been deemed most extraordinary, that in the depth of his 
agony his sweat was like great drops of blood falling to the 
ground. Nor was this a spectacle exhibited to the eyes of 
others, since it was from a secluded spot that he uttered his 
groans to his Father. And that no doubt may remain, it 
was necessary that angels should come down from heaven to 
strengthen him with miraculous consolation. How shame- 
fully effeminate would it have been (as I have observed) to 
be so excruciated by the fear of an ordinary death as to 
sweat drops of blood, and not even be revived by the presence 
of angels ? What ? Does not that prayer, thrice repeated, 
" Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me," 
(Matth. xxvi. 39,) a prayer dictated by incredible bitterness 
of soul, show that Christ had a fiercer and more arduous 
struggle than with ordinary death ? 

Hence it appears that these triflers, with whom I am 
disputing, presume to talk of what they know not, never 
having seriously considered what is meant and implied by 
ransoming us from the justice of God. It is of consequence 


64 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

to understand aright how much our salvation cost the Son 
of God. If any one now ask, Did Christ descend to hell at 
the time when he deprecated death ? I answer, that this was 
the commencement, and that from it we may infer how dire 
and dreadful were the tortures which he endured when he 
felt himself standing at the bar of God as a criminal in our 
stead. And although the divine power of the Spirit veiled 
itself for a moment, that it might give place to the infirmity 
of the flesh, we must understand that the trial arising from 
feelings of grief and fear was such as not to be at variance 
with faith. And in this was fulfilled what is said in Peter's 
sermon as to having been loosed from the pains of death, 
because " it was not possible he could be holden of it," (Acts 
ii. 24.) Though feeling, as it were, forsaken of God, he did 
not cease in the slightest degree to confide in his goodness. 
This appears from the celebrated prayer in which, in the 
depth of his agony, he exclaimed, " My God, my God, why 
hast thou forsaken me?" (Matth. xxvii. 4Q.) Amid all his] 
ao-ony he ceases not to call upon his God, while exclaiming 
that he is forsaken by him. This refutes the Apollinarian 
heresy, as well as that of those who are called Monothelites. 
Apollinaris pretended, that in Christ the eternal Spirit sup- 
plied the place of a soul, so that he was only half a man ; as 
if he could have expiated our sins in any other way than by 
obeying the Father. But where does the feeling or desire of 
obedience reside but in the soul ? and we know that his soul 
was troubled in order that ours, being free from trepidation, 
might obtain peace and quiet. Moreover, in opposition to 
the Monothelites, we see that in his human he felt a repug- 
nance to what he willed in his divine nature. I say nothing of 
his subduing the fear of which we have spoken by a contrary 
affection. This appearance of repugnance is obvious in the 
words, " Father, save me from this hour : but for this cause 
came I unto this hour. Father, glorify thy name," (John 
xii. 27, 28.) Still, in this perplexity, there was no violent 
emotion, such as we exhibit while making the strongest 
endeavours to subdue our own feelings. 

13. Next follows the resurrection from the dead, without 
which all that has hitherto been said would be defective. 


CHAP. XVI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 65 

For seeing that in the cross, death, and burial of Christ, 
nothing but weakness appears, faith must go beyond all these, 
in order that it may be provided with full strength. Hence, 
although in his death we have an effectual completion of 
salvation, because by it we are reconciled to God, satisfaction 
is given to his justice, the curse is removed, and the penalty 
paid ; still it is not by his death, but by his resurrection, that 
we are said to be begotten again to a living hope, (1 Pet. i. 
3 ;) because, as he, by rising again, became victorious over 
death, so the victory of our faith consists only in his resur- 
rection. The nature of it is better expressed in the words 
of Paul, "Who (Christ) was delivered for our offences, and was 
raised again for our justification," (Rom. iv. 25 ;) as if he had 
said, By his death sin was taken away, by his resurrection 
righteousness was renewed and restored. For how could he 
by dying have freed us from death, if he had yielded to its 
power ? how could he have obtained the victory for us, if he 
had fallen in the contest ? 

Our salvation may be thus divided between the death and 
the resurrection of Christ : by the former sin was abolished 
and death annihilated; by the latter righteousness was restored 
and life revived, the power and efficacy of the former being still 
bestowed upon us by means of the latter. ( Paul accordingly 
affirms, that he was declared to be the Son of God by his 
resurrection, (Rom. i. 4,) because he then fully displayed that 
heavenly power which is both a bright mirror of his divinity, 
and a sure support of our faith ; as he also elsewhere teaches, 
that " though he wras crucified through weakness, yet he liveth 
by the power of God," (2 Cor. xiii. 4.) In the same sense, 
in another passage, treating of perfection, he says, " That I 
may know him and the power of his resurrection," (Phil. iii. 
10.) Immediately after he adds, "being made conformable 
unto his death." In perfect accordance with this is the passage 
in Peter, that God " raised him up from the dead, and gave 
him glory, that your faith and hope might be in God," (1 Pet. 
i. 21.) Not that faith founded merely on his death is vacil- 
lating, but that the divine power by which he maintains our 
faith is most conspicuous in his resurrection. Let us remem- 
ber, therefore, that when death only is mentioned, everything 
VOL. II. E 


66 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

peculiar to the resurrection is at the same time included, and 
that there is a like synecdoche in the term resurrection, as 
often as it is used apart from death, everything peculiar to 
death being included. But as, by rising again, he obtained 
the victory, and became the resurrection and the life, Paul 
justly argues, "If Christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye 
are yet in your sins," (1 Cor. xv. 17.) Accordingly, in 
another passage, after exulting in the death of Christ in 
opposition to the terrors of condemnation, he thus enlarges, 
" Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even 
at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for 
us," (Rom. viii. 34.) Then, as we have already explained that 
the mortification of our flesh depends on communion with the 
cross, so we must also understand, that a corresponding 
benefit is derived from his resurrection. For as the Apostle 
says, " Like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the 
glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness 
of life," (Rom. vi. 4.) Accordingly, as in another passage, 
from our being dead with Christ, he inculcates, "Mortify 
therefore your members which are upon the earth," (Col. iii. 
5 ;) so from our being risen with Christ he infers, " seek 
those things which are above, where Christ sitteth at the 
right hand of God," (Col. iii. 1.) In these words we are not 
only urged by the example of a risen Saviour to follow new- 
ness of life, but are taught that by his power we are renewed 
unto righteousness. A third benefit derived from it is, that, 
like an earnest, it assures us of our own resurrection, of which 
it is certain that his is the surest representation. This sub- 
ject is discussed at length, (1 Cor. xv.) But it is to be 
observed, in passing, that when he is said to have "risen 
from the dead," these terms express the reality both of his 
death and resurrection, as if it had been said, that he died 
the same death as other men naturally die, and received 
immortality in the same mortal flesh which he had assumed. 
14. The resurrection is naturally followed by the ascension 
into heaven. For although Christ, by rising again, began 
fully to display his glory and virtue, having laid aside the 
abject and ignoble condition of a mortal life, and the igno- 
miny of the cross, yet it was only by his ascension to heaven 


CHAP. XVI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 67 

that his reign truly commenced. This the Apostle shows, 
when he says he ascended "that he might fill all things," (Eph. 
iv. 10;) thus reminding us, that under the appearance of con- 
tradiction, there is a beautiful harmony, inasmuch as though 
he departed from us, it was that his departure might be more 
useful to us than that presence which was confined in a hum- 
ble tabernacle of flesh during his abode on the earth. Hence 
John, after repeating the celebrated invitation, " If any man 
thirst, let him come unto me and drink," immediately adds, 
u the Holy Ghost was not yet given ; because that Jesus was 
not yet glorified," (John vii. 37, 39.) This our Lord him- 
self also declared to his disciples, " It is expedient for you 
that. I go away : for if I go not away, the Comforter will not 
come unto you," (John xvi. 7.) To console them for his 
bodily absence, he tells them that he will not leave them 
comfortless, but will come again to them in a manner invisible 
indeed, but more to be desired, because they were then taught 
by a surer experience that the government which he had 
obtained, and the power which he exercises, would enable his 
faithful followers not only to live well, but also to die happily. 
And, indeed, we see how much more abundantly his Spirit 
was poured out, how much more gloriously his kingdom was 
advanced, how much greater power was employed in aiding 
his followers and discomfiting his enemies. Being- raised to 
heaven, he withdrew his bodily presence from our sight, not 
that he might cease to be with his followers, who are still 
pilgrims on the earth, but that he might rule both heaven 
and earth more immediately by his power; or rather, the 
promise which he made to be with us even to the end of the 
world, he fulfilled by this ascension, by which, as his body 
has been raised above all heavens, so his power and efficacy 
have been propagated and diffused beyond all the bounds of 
heaven and earth. This I prefer to explain in the words of 
Augustine rather than my own : " Through death Christ was 
to go to the right hand of the Father, whence he is to come 
to judge the quick and the dead, and that in corporal pre- 
sence, according to the sound doctrine and rule of faith. 
For, in spiritual presence, he was to be with them after his 
ascension," (August. Tract, in Joann. 109.) In another pass- 


G8 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

age he is more full and explicit : " In regard to ineffable and 
invisible grace, is fulfilled what he said, Lo, I am with you 
alway, even to the end of the world, (Matth. xxviii. 20 ;) but 
in regard to the flesh which the Word assumed, in regard to 
his being born of a Virgin, in regard to his being apprehended 
by the Jews, nailed to the tree, taken down from the cross, 
wrapt in linen clothes, laid in the sepulchre, and manifested 
on his resurrection, it may be said, Me ye have not always 
with you. Why ? because, in bodily presence, he conversed 
with his disciples forty days, and leading them out where 
they saw, but followed not, he ascended into heaven, and is 
not here : for there he sits at the right hand of the Father : 
and yet he is here, for the presence of his Godhead was not 
withdrawn. Therefore, as regards his divine presence, we 
have Christ always : as regards his bodily presence, it was 
truly said to, the disciples, Me ye have not always. For a 
few days the Church had him bodily present. Now, she 
apprehends him by faith, but sees him not by the eye," 
(August. Tract. 51.) 

15. Hence it is immediately added, that he " sitteth at 
the right hand of God the Father ;" a similitude borrowed 
from princes, who have their assessors to whom they commit 
the office of ruling and issuing commands. Thus Christ, in 
whom the Father is pleased to be exalted, and by whose hand 
he is pleased to reign, is said to have been received up, and 
seated on his right hand, (Mark xvi. 19 ;) as if it had been 
said, that he was installed in the government of heaven and 
earth, and formally admitted to possession of the administra- 
tion committed to him, and not only admitted for once, 
but to continue until he descend to judgment. For so the 
Apostle interprets, when he says, that the Father " set him 
at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all 
principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every 
name that is named not only in this world, but also in that 
which is to come ; and hath put all things under his feet, and 
given him to be the head over all things to the Church."1 
You see to what end he is so seated, namely, that all crea- 

1 Ephes. i. 20 ; Phil. ii. 9 ; 1 Cor. xv. 27 ; Ephes. iv. 15 ; Acts ii. 33 ; 
iii. 21 ; Heb. i. 4. 


CHAP. XVI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION". 69 

tures both in heaven and earth should reverence his majesty, 
be ruled by his hand, do him implicit homage, and submit to 
his power. All that the Apostles intend, when they so 
often mention his seat at the Father's hand, is to teach, that 
every thing is placed at his disposal. Those, therefore, are in 
error, who suppose that his blessedness merely is indicated. 
We may observe, that there is nothing contrary to this doc- 
trine in the testimony of Stephen, that he saw him standing, 
(Acts vii. 56,) the subject here considered being not the 
position of his body, but the majesty of his empire, sitting 
meaning nothing more than presiding on the judgment-seat 
of heaven. 

16. From this doctrine faith derives manifold advantages.1 
First, it perceives that the Lord, by his ascension to heaven, 
has opened up the access to the heavenly kingdom, which 
Adam had shut. For having entered it in our flesh, as it 
were in our name, it follows, as the Apostle says, that we 
are in a manner now seated in heavenly places, not enter- 
taining a mere hope of heaven, but possessing it in our head. 
Secondly, faith perceives that his seat beside the Father is 
not without great advantage to us. Having entered the 
temple not made with hands, he constantly appears as our 
advocate and intercessor in the presence of the Father ; 
directs attention to his own righteousness, so as to turn it 
away from our sins ; so reconciles him to us, as by his interces- 
sion to pave for us a way of access to his throne, presenting 
it to miserable sinners, to whom it would otherwise be an ob- 
ject of dread, as replete with grace and mercy. Thirdly, it 
discerns his power, on which depend our strength, might, 
resources, and triumph over hell, " When he ascended up on 
high, he led captivity captive," (Eph. iv. 8.) Spoiling his 
foes, he gave gifts to his people, and daily loads them with 
spiritual riches. He thus occupies his exalted seat, that, 
thence transferring his virtue unto us, he may quicken us to 
spiritual life, sanctify us by his Spirit, and adorn his Church 
with various graces, by his protection preserve it safe from 
all hai'm, and by the strength of his hand curb the enemies 

1 August, de Fide ct Symbolo, cap. 8 ; Eph. ii. 6 ; Heb. vii. 25 , be. 11. 


70 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

raging against his cross and our salvation ; in fine, that he 
may possess all power in heaven and earth, until he have 
utterly routed all his foes, who are also ours, and completed 
the structure of his Church. Such is the true nature of the 
kingdom, such the power which the Father has conferred 
upon him, until he arrive to complete the last act by 
judging the quick and the dead. 

17. Christ, indeed, gives his followers no dubious proofs of 
present power, but as his kingdom in the world is in a manner 
veiled by the humiliation of a carnal condition, faith is most 
properly invited to meditate on the visible presence which 
he will exhibit on the last day. For he will descend from 
heaven in visible form, in like manner as he was seen to 
ascend,1 and appear to all, with the ineffable majesty of his 
kingdom, the splendour of immortality, the boundless power 
of divinity, and an attending company of angels. Hence we 
are told to wait for the Redeemer against that day on which 
he will separate the sheep from the goats, and the elect from 
the reprobate, and when not one individual either of the 
living or the dead shall escape his judgment. From the ex- 
tremities of the universe shall be heard the clang of the 
trumpet summoning all to his tribunal ; both those whom 
that day shall find alive, and those whom death shall pre- 
viously have removed from the society of the living. There 
are some who take the words, quick and dead, in a different 
sense ;2 and, indeed, some ancient writers appear to have 
hesitated as to the exposition of them ; but our meaning being 
plain and clear, is much more accordant with the Creed, 
which was certainly written for popular use. There is nothing 
contrary to it in the Apostle's declaration, that it is appointed 
unto all men once to die. For though those who are sur- 
viving at the last day shall not die after a natural manner, 
yet the change which they are to undei'go, as it shall resem- 
ble, is not improperly called, death, (Heb. ix. 27.) " We 
shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed," (1 Cor. xv. 

J Acts i. 11 ; Matth. xxiv. 30 ; xxv. 31 ; 1 Thess. iv. 16, 17. 

2 The French is, " H y en a aucuns qui exposent par les vivans et les 
morts, les bons et les mauvais." — There are some who, by the quick and 
the dead, understand the good and the bad. 


CHAP. XVI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 71 

51.) What does this mean ? Their mortal life shall perish 
and be swallowed up in one moment, and be transformed 
into an entirely new nature. Though no one can deny that 
that destruction of the flesh will be death, it still remains true 
that the quick and the dead shall be summoned to judgment, 
(1 Thess. iv. 16 :) for " the dead in Christ shall rise first ; then 
we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together 
with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air." In- 
deed, it is probable, that these words in the Creed were 
taken from Peter's sermon as related by Luke, (Acts x. 42,) 
and from the solemn charge of Paul to Timothy, (2 Tim. 
iv. 1.) 

18. It is most consolatory to think, that judgment is vested 
in him who has already destined us to share with him in the 
honour of judgment, (Matth. xix. 28 ;) so far is it from being 
true, that he will ascend the judgment-seat for our condem- 
nation. How could a most merciful prince destroy his own 
people ? how could the head disperse its own members ? how 
could the advocate condemn his clients ? For if the Apostle^ 
when contemplating the interposition of Christ, is bold to 
exclaim, " Who is he that condemneth ?" (Rom. viii. 33,) 
much more certain is it that Christ, the intercessor, will not 
condemn those whom he has admitted to his protection. It 
certainly gives no small security, that we shall be sisted at 
no other tribunal than that of our Redeemer, from whom 
salvation is to be expected ; and that he who in the Gospel 
now promises eternal blessedness, will then as judge ratify 
his promise.1 The end for which the Father has honoured 
the Son by committing all judgment to him, (John v. 22,) 
was to pacify the consciences of his people when alarmed at 
the thought of judgment. Hitherto I have followed the order 
of the Apostles' Creed, because it states the leading articles 
of redemption in a few words, and may thus serve as a tablet 
in which the points of Christian doctrine, most deserving of 
attention, are brought separately and distinctly before us.2 I 

1 Vide Ambros. de Jac. et Vita Beata, Lib. i. c. 6. 

2 The French is, " Jusques ici j'ay suivi l'ordre du Syinbole qu'on 
appelle des Apostres, pource que la nous pouvons voir comme en un 
tableau, par les articles qui y sont contenus, en quoy gist nostre salut : et 


72 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK IT. 

call it the Apostles' Creed, though I am by no means solicitous 
as to its authorship. The general consent of ancient writers 
certainly does ascribe it to the Apostles, either because they 
imagined it was written and published by them for common 
use, or because they thought it right to give the sanction of 
such authority to a compendium faithfully drawn up from the 
doctrine delivered by their hands. I have no doubt, that, 
from the very commencement of the Church, and, therefore, 
in the very days of the Apostles, it held the place of a public 
and universally received confession, whatever be the quarter 
from which it originally proceeded. It is not probable that 
it was written by some private individual, since it is certain 
that, from time immemorial, it was deemed of sacred authority 
by all Christians. The only point of consequence we hold 
to be incontrovertible, viz., that it gives, in clear and suc- 
cinct order, a full statement of our faith, and in every thing 
which it contains is sanctioned by the sure testimony of 
Scripture. This being understood, it were to no purpose to 
labour anxiously, or quarrel with any one as to the author- 
ship, unless, indeed, Ave think it not enough to possess the 
sure truth of the Holy Spirit, without, at the same time, 
knowing by whose mouth it was pronounced, or by whose 
hand it was written. 

19. When we see that the whole sum of our salvation, and 
every single part of it, are comprehended in Christ, we must 
beware of deriving even the minutest portion of it from any 
other quarter. If we seek salvation, Ave are taught by the 
Arery name of Jesus that he possesses it ;x if Ave seek any 
other gifts of the Spirit, Ave shall find them in his unction ; 
strength in his government ; purity in his conception ; indul- 
gence in his nativity, in which he was made like us in all 
respects, in order that he might learn to sympathise with 
us : if Ave seek redemption, Ave shall find it in his passion ; 

par ce moyen aussi entendons a quelles choses il nous faut arrester pour 
obtenir salut en Jesus Christ." — Hitherto I have followed the order of 
what is called the Apostles' Creed, because there we may see, as in a 
tablet, by the articles which are contained in it, wherein consists our sal- 
vation, and by this means also understand on what things we ought to 
dwell, in order to obtain salvation in Jesus Christ. 
1 Acts iv. 12 ; 1 Cor. i. 30 ; Heb. ii. 17 ; Gal. iii. 13. 


CHAP. XVI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 73 

acquittal in his condemnation ; remission of the curse in his 
cross ; satisfaction in his sacrifice ; purification in his blood ; 
reconciliation in his descent to hell ; mortification of the 
flesh in his sepulchre ; newness of life in his resurrection ; 
immortality also in his resurrection ; the inheritance of a 
celestial kingdom in his entrance into heaven ; protection, 
security, and the abundant supply of all blessings, in his king- 
dom ; secure anticipation of judgment in the power of judg- 
ing committed to him. In fine, since in him all kinds of 
blessings are treasured up, let us draw a full supply from him, 
and none from any other quarter. Those who, not satisfied 
with him alone, entertain various hopes from others, though 
they may continue to look to him chiefly, deviate from the 
right path by the simple fact, that some portion of their 
thought takes a different direction. No distrust of this de- 
scription can arise when once the abundance of his blessings 
is properly known. 


74 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 


CHAPTER XVII. 

CHRIST RIGHTLY AND PROPERLY SAID TO HAVE MERITED 
GRACE AND SALVATION FOR US. 

The three leading divisions of this chapter are, — I. A proof from reason 
and from Scripture that the grace of God and the merit of Christ (the 
prince and author of our salvation) are perfectly compatible, sec. 1 and 2. 

II. Christ, by his obedience, even to the death of the cross, (which was 
the price of our redemption,) merited divine favour for us, sec. 3-5. 

III. The presumptuous rashness of the Schoolmen in treating this branch 
of doctrine. 

Sections. 

1. Christ not only the minister, but also the author and prince of salva- 

tion. Divine grace not obscured by this mode of expression. 
The merit of Christ not opposed to the mercy of God, but depends 
upon it. 

2. The compatibility of the two proved by various passages of Scripture. 

3. Christ by his obedience truly merited divine grace for us. 

4. This grace obtained by the shedding of Christ's blood, and his obe- 

dience even unto death. 

5. In this way he paid our ransom. 

6. The presumptuous manner in which the Schoolmen handle this 

subject. 

1. A question must here be considered by way of supple- 
ment. Some men too much given to subtilty, while they 
admit that we obtain salvation through Christ, will not hear 
of the name of merit, by which they imagine that the grace of 
God is obscured ; and therefore insist that Christ was only the 
instrument or minister, not the author or leader, or prince of 
life, as he is designated by Peter, (Acts iii. 1 5.) I admit that 
were Christ opposed simply, and by himself, to the justice of 
God, there could be no room for merit, because there cannot 
be found in man a worth which could make God a debtor ; 


CHAP. XVII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. VO 

nay, as Augustine says most truly,1 " The Saviour, the man 
Christ Jesus, is himself the brightest illustration of predes- 
tination and grace : his character as such was not procured 
by any antecedent merit of works or faith in his human 
nature. Tell me, I pray, how that man, when assumed into 
unity of person by the Word, co-eternal with the Father, 
as the only begotten Son of God, could merit this." — " Let 
the very fountain of grace, therefore, appear in our head, 
whence, according to the measure of each, it is diffused 
through all his members. Every man, from the commence- 
ment of his faith, becomes a Christian, by the same grace by 
which that man from his formation became Christ." Again, 
in another passage, " There is not a more striking example 
of predestination than the Mediator himself. He who made 
him (without any antecedent merit in his will) of the seed 
of David a righteous man never to be unrighteous, also con- 
verts those who are members of his head from unrighteous 
into righteous," and so forth. Therefore, when we treat of 
the merit of Christ, we do not place the beginning in him, 
but we ascend to the ordination of God as the primary cause, 
because of his mere good pleasure he appointed a Mediator 
to purchase salvation for us. Hence the merit of Christ is 
inconsiderately opposed to the mercy of God. It is a well- 
known rule, that principal and accessory are not incompatible, 
and therefore there is nothing to prevent the justification of 
man from being the gratuitous result of the mere mercy of 
God, and, at the same time, to prevent the merit of Christ 
from intervening in subordination to this mercy. The free 
favour of God is as fitly opposed to our works as is the 
obedience of Christ, both in their order : for Christ could not 
merit anything save by the good pleasure of God, but only 
inasmuch as he was destined to appease the wrath of God 
by his sacrifice, and wipe away our transgressions by his 
obedience : in one word, since the merit of Christ depends 
entirely on the grace of God, (which provided this mode of 
salvation for us,) the latter is no less appropriately opposed 
to all righteousness of men than is the former. 

1 August, de Praadest. Sanct. Lib. i. c. xv. ; De Bono Perseverantia, 
cap. ult. See supra, chapter xiv. sec. 7. 


76 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK IT. 

2. This distinction is found in numerous passages of 
Scripture : " God so loved the world, that he gave his only 
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him might not 
perish," (John iii. 16.) We see that the first place is assigned 
to the love of God as the chief cause or origin, and that 
faith in Christ follows as the second and more proximate 
cause. Should any one object that Christ is only the formal 
cause,1 he lessens his energy more than the words justify. 
For if we obtain justification by a faith which leans on him, 
the groundwork of our salvation must be sought in him. 
This is clearly proved by several passages : " Herein is love, 
not that Ave loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his 
Son to be the propitiation for our sins," (1 John iv. 10.) 
These words clearly demonstrate that God, in order to 
remove any obstacle to his love towards us, appointed the 
method of reconciliation in Christ. There is great force in 
this word propitiation ; for in a manner which cannot be 
expressed, God, at the very time when he loved us, was 
hostile to us until reconciled in Christ. To this effect are 
all the following passages : " He is the propitiation for our 
sins ;" " It pleased the Father that in him should all fulness 
dwell, and having made peace by the blood of his cross, by 
him to reconcile all things unto himself ;" " God was in 
Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing 
their trespasses unto them ;" " He hath made us accepted in 
the Beloved," " That he might reconcile both into one body 
by the cross."2 The nature of this mystery is to be learned 
from the first chapter to the Ephesians, where Paul, teaching 
that we were chosen in Christ, at the same time adds, that 
we obtained grace in him. How did God begin to embrace 
with his favour those whom he had loved before the founda- 
tion of the world, unless in displaying his love when he was 
reconciled by the blood of Christ ? As God is the fountain 
of all righteousness, he must necessarily be the enemy and 
judge of man so long as he is a sinner. Wherefore, the 
commencement of love is the bestowing of righteousness, as 

1 The French adds, " C'est a dire, qui n'emporte en soy vrai effect ;" 
— that is to say, which in itself produces no true effect. 

2 1 John ii. 2 ; Col. i. 19, 20; 2 Cor. v. 19 ; Epli. i, 6 ; ii. 16. 


CTTAT. XVII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 77 

described by Paul : " He hath made him to be sin for us 
who knew no sin ; that we might be made the righteousness 
of God in him," (2 Cor. v. 21.) He intimates, that by the 
sacrifice of Christ we obtain free justification, and become 
pleasing to God, though we are by nature the children of 
wrath, and by sin estranged from him. This distinction is 
also noted whenever the grace of Christ is connected with 
the love of God, (2 Cor. xiii. 13;) whence it follows, that 
lie bestows upon us of his own which he acquired by purchase. 
For otherwise there would be no ground for the praise 
ascribed to him by the Father, that grace is his, and pro- 
ceeds from him. 

3. That Christ, by his obedience, truly purchased and 
merited grace for us with the Father, is accurately inferred 
from several passages of Scripture. I take it for granted, 
that if Christ satisfied for our sins, if he paid the penalty 
due by us, if he appeased God by his obedience ; in fine, if 
he suffered the just for the unjust, salvation was obtained for 
us by his righteousness ; which is just equivalent to meriting 
Now, Paul's testimony is, that we were reconciled, and 
received reconciliation through his death, (Rom. v- 11.) 
But there is no room for reconciliation unless where offence1 
has preceded. The meaning, therefore, is, that God, to 
whom we were hateful through sin, was appeased by the 
death of his Son, and made propitious to us. And the anti- 
thesis which immediately follows is carefully to be observed, 
" As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so 
by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous," 
(Rom. v. 19.) For the meaning is — As by the sin of Adam 
we were alienated from God and doomed to destruction, so 
by the obedience of Christ we are restored to his favour as if 
Ave were righteous. The future tense of the verb does not 
exclude present righteousness, as is apparent from the con- 
text. For he had previously said, " the free gift is of many 
offences unto justification." 

4. When we say, that grace was obtained for us by the 
merit of Christ, our meaning is, that we were cleansed by his 

1 French, " Offense, liaine, divorce ;" — offence, hatred, divorce. 


78 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

blood, that his death was an expiation for sin, " His blood 
cleanses us from all sin." " This is my blood, which is shed 
for the remission of sins," (1 John i. 7 ; Luke xxii. 20.) If 
the effect of his shed blood is, that our sins are not imputed 
to us, it follows, that by that price the justice of God was 
satisfied. To the same effect are the Baptist's words, " Be- 
hold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the 
world," (John i. 29.) For he contrasts Christ with all the 
sacrifices of the Law, showing that in him alone was fulfilled 
what these figures typified. But we know the common ex- 
pression in Moses — Iniquity shall be expiated, sin shall be 
wiped away and forgiven. In short, we are admirably taught 
by the ancient figures what power and efficacy there is in 
Christ's death. And the Apostle, skilfully proceeding from 
this principle, explains the whole matter in the Epistle to the 
Hebrews, showing that without shedding of blood there is 
no remission, (Heb. ix. 22.) From this he infers, that Christ 
appeared once for all to take away sin by the sacrifice of 
himself. Again, that he was offered to bear the sins of many, 
(Heb. ix. 12.) He had previously said, that not by the 
blood of goats or of heifers, but by his own blood, he had 
once entered into the holy of holies, having obtained eternal 
redemption for us. Now, when he reasons thus, "If the 
blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprink- 
ling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh : how 
much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal 
Spirit offered himself to God, purge your consciences from 
dead works to serve the living God?" (Heb. ix. 13, 14,) it is 
obvious that too little effect is given to the grace of Christ, 
unless we concede to his sacrifice the power of expiating, 
appeasing, and satisfying : as he shortly after adds, " For 
this cause he is the mediator of the new testament, that by 
means of his death, for the redemption of the transgressions 
that were under the first testament, they which are called 
might receive the promise of eternal inheritance," (Heb. ix. 
15.) But it is especially necessary to attend to the analogy 
which is drawn by Paul as to his having been made a curse 
for us, (Gal. iii. 13.) It had been superfluous and therefore 
absurd, that Christ should have been burdened with a curse, 


CHAP. XVII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 79 

had it not been in order that, by paying what others owed, 
he might acquire righteousness for them. There is no am- 
biguity in Isaiah's testimony, " He Avas wounded for our 
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities : the chastise- 
ment of our peace was laid upon him ; and with his stripes 
we are healed," (Is. liii. 5.) For had not Christ satisfied 
for our sins, he could not be said to have appeased God by 
taking upon himself the penalty which we had incurred. 
To this corresponds what follows in the same place, " for the 
transgression of my people was he stricken," (Is. liii. 8.) 
We may add the interpretation of Peter, who unequivocally 
declares, that he " bare our sins in his own body on the tree," 
(1 Pet. ii. 24,) that the whole burden of condemnation, of 
which we were relieved, was laid upon him. 

5. The Apostles also plainly declare that he paid a price 
to ransom us from death : " Being justified freely by his 
grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus : whom 
God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his 
blood," (Rom. iii. 24, 25.) Paul commends the grace of 
God, in that he gave the price of redemption in the death of 
Christ ; and he exhorts us to flee to his blood, that having 
obtained righteousness, we may appear boldly before the 
judgment-seat of God. To the same effect are the words 
of Peter : " Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed 

with corruptible things, as silver and gold," " but with 

the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and 
without spot;" (1 Pet. i. 18, 19.) The antithesis would be 
incongruous if he had not by this price made satisfaction for 
sins. For which reason, Paul says, " Ye are bought with a 
price." Nor could it be elsewhere said, there is " one 
mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus ; 
who gave himself a ransom for all," (1 Tim. ii. 5, G,) had 
not the punishment which we deserved been laid upon him. 
Accordingly, the same Apostle declares, that " we have 
redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins," 
(Col. i. 14 ;) as if he had said, that we are justified or ac- 
quitted before God, because that blood serves the purpose of 
satisfaction. With this another passage agrees, viz., that he 
blotted out " the handwriting of ordinances which was against 


V 


80 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II. 

us, which was contrary to us," (Col. ii. 14.) These words 
denote the payment or compensation which acquits us from 
guilt. There is great weight also in these words of Paul : 
" If righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead in 
vain," (Gal. ii. 21.) For we hence infer, that it is from 
Christ we must seek what the Law would confer on any 
one who fulfilled it ; or, which is the same thing, that by the 
grace of Christ we obtain what God promised in the Law to 
our works : " If a man do, he shall live in them," (Lev. 
xviii. 5.) This is no less clearly taught in the discourse at 
Antioch, when Paul declares, " That through this man is 
preached unto you the forgiveness of sins ; and by him all 
that believe are justified from all things, from which ye 
could not be justified by the law of Moses," (Acts xiii. 38, 
39.) For if the observance of the Law is righteousness, 
who can deny that Christ, by taking this burden upon him- 
self, and reconciling us to God, as if we were the observers 
of the Law, merited favour for us ? Of the same nature is 
what he afterwards says to the Galatians : " God sent forth 
his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem 
them that were under the law," (Gal. iv. 4, 5.) For to 
what end that subjection, unless that he obtained justification 
for us by undertaking to perform what we were unable to 
pay ? Hence that imputation of righteousness without 
works, of which Paul treats, (Horn. iv. 5,) the righteousness 
found in Christ alone being accepted as if it were ours. 
And certainly the only reason why Christ is called our 
"meat," (John vi. 55,) is because we find in him the sub- 
stance of life. And the source of this efficacy is just that 
the Son of God was crucified as the price of our justification ; 
as Paul says, Christ " hath given himself for us an offering 
and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour," (Eph. 
v. 2 ;) and elsewhere, he " was delivered for our offences, 
and. was raised again for our justification," (Rom. iv. 25.) 
Hence it is proved not only that salvation was given us by 
Christ, but that on account of him the Father is now pro- 
pitious to us. For it cannot be doubted that in him is com- 
pletely fulfilled what God declares by Isaiah under a figure, 
"I will defend this city to save it for mine own sake, and 


CHAP. XYII. CHRISTIAN- RELIGION. 81 

for my servant David's sake," (Isaiah xxxvii. 35.) Of this 
the Apostle is the best witness, when he says, " Your sins 
are forgiven you for his name's sake," (1 John ii. 12.) For 
although the name of Christ is not expressed, John, in his 
usual manner, designates him by the pronoun " He," (aurdg.) 
In the same sense also our Lord declares, "As the living- 
Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father : so he that 
eateth me, even he shall live by me," (John vi. 57.) To 
this corresponds the passage of Paul, " Unto you it is given 
in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe in him, but also 
to suffer for his sake," (Phil. i. 29.) 

6. To inquire, as Lombard and the Schoolmen do, (Sent. 
Lib. III. Dist. 18,) whether he merited for himself, is foolish 
curiosity. Equally rash is their decision when they answer 
in the affirmative. How could, it be necessary for the only 
Son of God to come down in order to acquire some new 
quality for himself? The exposition which God gives of 
his own purpose removes all doubt. The Father is not said 
to have consulted the advantage of his Son in his services, 
but to have given him up to death, and not spared him, 
because he loved the world, (Rom. viii.) The prophetical 
expressions should be observed: "To us a Son is born;" 
" Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion : shout, O daughter 
of Jerusalem : behold, thy King cometh unto thee," (Isaiah 
ix. 6 ; Zech. ix. 9.) It would otherwise be a cold commen- 
dation of love which Paul describes, when he says, " God 
commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet 
sinners, Christ died for us," (Rom. v. 8.) Hence, again, we 
infer that Christ had no regard to himself; and this he 
distinctly affirms, when he says, " For their sakes I sanctify 
myself," (John xvii. 19.) He who transfers the benefit of 
his holiness to others, testifies that he acquires nothing for 
himself. And surely it is most worthy of remark, that Christ, 
in devoting himself entirely to our salvation, in a manner 
forgot himself. It is absurd to wrest the testimony of Paul 
to a different effect: "Wherefore God hath highly exalted 
him, and given him a name which is above every name," 
(Phil. ii. 9.1) By what services could a man merit to be- 

1 The sentence stands thus in the French : — " Les Sorbonnistes per- 
VOL. II. F 


82 INSTITUTES OF THE, ETC. BOOK IT. 

come the judge of the world, the head of angels, to obtain 
the supreme government of God, and become the residence 
of that majesty of which all the virtues of men and angels 
cannot attain one thousandth part? The solution is easy 
and complete. Paul is not speaking of the cause of Christ's 
exaltation, but only pointing out a consequence of it by 
way of example to us. The meaning is not much different 
from that of another passage : " Ought not Christ to have 
suffered these things, and to enter into his glory ?" (Luke 
xxiv. 26.) 

vertissent le passage cle S. Paul, l'appliquans a ce propos c'est que pource 
que Jesus Christ s'est humilie, le Pere l'a exalte et lui donne un nom 
souverain ;" — The Sorbonnists pervert the passage of St Paul, and apply 
it in this way, — that because Christ humbled himself, the Father exalted 
him, and gave him a sovereign name. 


END OF THE SECOND BOOK. 


INSTITUTES 


THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 


BOOK THIRD. 

THE MODE OF OBTAINING THE GRACE OF CHRIST. 

THE BENEFITS IT CONFERS, AND THE 

EFFECTS RESULTING FROM IT. 


SUBJECT. 

The two former Books treated of God the Creator and Redeemer. 
This Book, which contains a full exposition of the Third Part of the 
Apostles' Creed, treats of the mode of procuring the grace of Christ, the 
benefits which we derive and the effects which follow from it, or of the 
operations of the Holy Spirit in regard to our salvation. 

The subject is comprehended under seven principal heads, which 
almost all point to the same end, namely, the doctrine of faith. 

I. As it is by the secret and special operation of the Holy Spirit that 
we enjoy Christ and all his benefits, the First Chapter treats of this opera- 
tion, which is the foundation of faith, new life, and all holy exercises. 

II. Faith being, as it were, the hand by which we embrace Christ the 
Redeemer, offered to us by the Holy Spirit, Faith is fully considered in 
the Second Chapter. 

III. In further explanation of Saving Faith, and the benefits derived 
from it, it is mentioned that true repentance always flows from true 
faith. The doctrine of Repentance is considered generally in the Third 
Chapter, P.opish Repentance in the Fourth Chapter, Indulgences and 
Purgatory in the Fifth Chapter. Chapters Sixth to Tenth are devoted 
to a special consideration of the different parts of true Repentance, viz., 
mortification of the flesh, and quickening of the Spirit. 

rv. More clearly to show the utility of this Faith, and the effects 
resulting from it, the doctrine of Justification by Faith is explained in 
the Eleventh Chapter, and certain questions connected with it explained 
from the Twelfth to the Eighteenth Chapter. Christian liberty a kind 
of accessory to Justification, is considered in the Nineteenth Chapter. 

V. The Twentieth Chapter is devoted to Prayer, the principal exercise 
of faith, and, as it were, the medium or instrument through which we 
daily procure blessings from God. 

VI. As all do not indiscriminately embrace the fellowship of Christ 
offered in the Gospel, but those only whom the Lord favours with the 
effectual and special grace of his Spirit, lest any should impugn this 
arrangement, Chapters Twenty-First to Twenty-Fomth are occupied 
with a necessary and apposite discussion of the subject of Election. 

VII. Lastly, As the hard warfare which the Christian is obliged con- 
stantly to wage may have the effect of disheartening him, it is shown 
how it may be alleviated by meditating on the final resurrection. Hence 
the subject of the Resurrection is considered in the Twenty-Fifth 
Chapter. 


INSTITUTES 


THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 


BOOK THIRD. 

THE MODE OF OBTAINING THE GRACE OF CHRIST. 

THE BENEFITS IT CONFERS, AND THE 

EFFECTS RESULTING FROM IT. 


CHAPTER I. 

THE BENEFITS OF CHRIST MADE AVAILABLE TO US BY 
THE SECRET OPERATION OF THE SPIRIT. 

The three divisions of this chapter are, — I. The secret operation of the 
Holy Spirit, which seals our salvation, should be considered first in Christ 
the Mediator as our Head, sec. 1 and 2. II. The titles given to the 
Holy Spirit show that we become members of Christ by his grace and 
energy, sec. 3. IH. As the special influence of the Holy Spirit is mani- 
fested in the gift of faith, the former is a proper introduction to the latter, 
and thus prepares for the second chapter, sec. 4. 

Sections. 

1. The Holy Spirit the bond which unites us with Christ. This the re- 

sult of faith produced by the secret operation of the Holy Spirit. 
This obvious from Scripture. 

2. In Christ the Mediator the gifts of the Holy Spirit are to be seen in 

all their fulness. To what end. Why the Holy Spirit is called 
the Spirit of the Father and the Son. 


86 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

3. Titles of the Spirit,— 1. The Spirit of adoption. 2. An earnest and 

seal. 3. Water. 4. Life. 5. Oil and unction. 6. Fire. 7. A 
fountain. 8. The word of God. Use of these titles.- 

4. Faith being the special work of the Holy Spirit, the power and efficacy 

of the Holy Spirit usually ascribed to it. 

1. We must now see in what way we become possessed of 
the blessings which God has bestowed on his only-begotten 
Son, not for private use, but to enrich the poor and needy. 
And the first thing to be attended to is, that so long as we 
are without Christ and separated from him, nothing which 
he suffered and did for the salvation of the human race is of 
the least benefit to us. To communicate to us the blessings 
which he received from the Father, he must become ours 
and dwell in us. Accordingly, he is called our Head, and 
the first-born among many brethren, while, on the other 
hand, we are said to be ingrafted into him and clothed with 
him,1 all which he possesses being, as I have said, nothing to 
us until we become one Avith him. And although it is true 
that we obtain this by faith, yet since we see that all do not 
indiscriminately embrace the offer of Christ which is made 
by the gospel, the very nature of the case teaches us to 
ascend higher, and inquire into the secret efficacy of the 
Spirit, to which it is owing that we enjoy Christ and all his 
blessings. I have already treated of the eternal essence and 
divinity of the Spirit, (Book I. chap. xiii. sect. 14, 15 ;) let 
us at present attend to the special point, that Christ came 
by water and blood, as the Spirit testifies concerning him, 
that we might not lose the benefits of the salvation which he 
has purchased. For as there are said to be three witnesses 
in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, so there are 
also three on the earth, namely, water, blood, and Spirit. It 
is not without cause that the testimony of the Spirit is twice 
mentioned, a testimony which is engraven on our hearts by 
way of seal, and thus seals the cleansing and sacrifice of Christ. 
For which reason, also, Peter says, that believers are " elect" 
" through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and 
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ," (1 Pet. i. 2.) By 

1 Eph. iv. 15 ; Rom. vi. 5 ; xi. 17 ; viii. 29 ; Gal. iii. 27. 


CHAP. I. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 87 

these words he reminds us, that if the shedding of his sacred 
blood is not to be in vain, our souls must be washed in it by 
the secret cleansing of the Holy Spirit. For which reason, 
also, Paul, speaking of cleansing and purification, says, " But 
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in 
the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God," 
(1 Cor. vi. 11.) The whole comes to this, that the Holy 
Spirit is the bond by which Christ effectually binds us to 
himself. Here we may refer to what" was said in the last 
Book concerning his anointing. 

2. But in order to have a clearer view of this most im- 
portant subject, we must remember that Christ came pro- 
vided with the Holy Spirit after a peculiar manner, namely, 
that he might separate us from the world, and unite us in the 
hope of an eternal inheritance. Hence the Spirit is called 
the Spirit of sanctification, because he quickens and cherishes 
us, not merely by the general energy Avhich is seen in the 
human race, as well as other animals, but because he is the 
seed and root of heavenly life in us. Accordingly, one of 
the highest commendations which the prophets give to the 
kingdom of Christ is, that under it the Spirit would be poured 
out in richer abundance. One of the most remarkable pass- 
ages is that of Joel, " It shall come to pass afterward, that 
I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh," (Joel ii. 28.) For 
although the prophet seems to confine the gifts of the Spirit 
to the office of prophesying, he yet intimates under a figure, 
that God" will, by the illumination of his Spirit, provide him- 
self with disciples who had previously been altogether igno- 
rant of heavenly doctrine. Moreover, as it is for the sake of 
his Son that God bestows the Holy Spirit upon us, and yet 
has deposited him in all his fulness Avith the Son, to be the 
minister and dispenser of his liberality, he is called at one 
time the Spirit of the Father, at another the Spirit of the 
Son : " Ye are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if so be that 
the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now, if any man have not 
the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his," (E,om. viii. 9 ;) and 
hence he encourages us to hope for complete renovation : 
" If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead 
dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall 


88 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in 
you," (Rom. viii. 11.) There is no inconsistency in ascribing 
the glory of those gifts to the Father, inasmuch as he is the 
author of them, and, at the same time, ascribing them to Christ, 
with whom they have been deposited, that he may bestow 
them on his people. Hence he invites all the thirsty to come 
unto him and drink, (John vii. 37.) And Paul teaches, that 
" unto every one of us is given grace, according to the mea- 
sure of the gift of Christ," (Eph. iv. 7.) And we must re- 
member, that the Spirit is called the Spirit of Christ, not 
only inasmuch as the eternal Word of God is with the 
Father united with the Spirit, but also in respect of his office 
of Mediator; because, had he not been endued with the 
energy of the Spirit, he had come to us in vain. In this sense 
he is called the " last Adam," and said to have been sent 
from heaven "a quickening Spirit," (1 Cor. xv. 45,) where 
Paul contrasts the special life which Christ breathes into his 
people, that they may be one with him, with the animal life 
which is common even to the reprobate. In like manner, 
when he prays that believers may have " the grace of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God," he at the same time 
adds, " the communion of the Holy Ghost," without which 
no man shall ever taste the paternal favour of God, or the 
benefits of Christ. Thus, also, in another passage he says, 
" The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy 
Ghost, which is given unto us," (Rom. v. 5.) 

3. Here it will be proper to point out the titles which the 
Scripture bestows on the Spirit, when it treats of the com- 
mencement and entire renewal of our salvation. First, he 
is called the " Spirit of adoption." because he is witness to us 
of the free favour with which God the Father embraced us 
in his well-beloved and only-begotten Son, so as to become 
our Father, and give us boldness of access to him ; na)r, he 
dictates the very wrords, so that we can boldly cry, " Abba, 
Father." For the same reason, he is said to have " sealed us, 
and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts," because, 
as pilgrims in the world, and persons in a manner dead, he 
so quickens us from above as to assure us that our salvation 
is safe in the keeping of a faithful God. Hence, also, the 


C1IAI\ I. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 89 

Spirit is said to be " life because of righteousness." But 
since it is his secret irrigation that makes us bud forth and 
produce the fruits of righteousness, he is repeatedly described 
as water. Thus in Isaiah, " Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters." Again, " I will pour water upon 
him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground." Cor- 
responding to this are the words of our Saviour, to which I 
lately referred, " If any man thirst, let him come unto me and 
drink." Sometimes, indeed, he receives this name from his 
energy in cleansing and purifying, as in Ezekiel, where the 
Lord promises, " Then will I sprinkle you with clean water, 
and ye shall be clean." As those sprinkled with the Spirit 
are restored to the full vigour of life, he hence obtains the 
names of iljQiV' and " Unction" On the other hand, as he 
is constantly employed in subduing and destroying the vices 
of our concupiscence, and inflaming our hearts with the love 
of God and piety, he hence receives the name of Firtfc In 
fine, he is described to us as a Fountain, whence all heavenly 
riches flow to us ; or as the ,Han^ by which God exerts his 
power, because by his divine inspiration he so breathes divine 
life into us, that we are no longer acted upon by ourselves, 
but ruled by his motion and agency, so that everything good 
in us is the fruit of his grace, while our own endowments 
without him are mere darkness of mind and perverseness of 
heart. Already, indeed, it has been clearly shown, that un- 
til our minds are intent on the Spirit, Christ is in a manner 
unemployed", because we view him coldly without us, and so 
at a distance from us. Now we know that he is of no avail 
save only to those to whom he is a head and the first-born 
among the brethren, to those, in fine, who are clothed with 
him.1 To this union alone it is owing that, in regard to us, 
the Saviour has not come in vain. To this is to be referred 
that sacred marriage, by which we become bone of his bone, 
and flesh of his flesh, and so one with him, (Eph. v. 30,) for 
it is by the Spirit alone that he unites himself to us. By 
the same grace and energy of the Spirit we become his 

1 Rom. viii. 15 ; Gal. iv. 6 ; 2 Cor. i. 22 ; Eph. i. 13, 14 ; Rom. viii. 10 ; 
Isa. Iv. 1 ; xliv. 3 ; John viii. 37 ; Ezek. xxxvi. 25 ; John ii. 14 ; 1 John 
ii. 20, 27 ; Luke iii. 1(3 ; Acts xi. 21. 


90 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

members, so that he keeps us under him, and we in our turn 
possess him. 

4. But as faith is his principal, Fork, all those passages 
which express his power and operations are, in a great mea- 
sure, referred to it, as it is only by faith that he brings us 
to the light of the Gospel, as John teaches, that to those 
who believe in Christ is given the privilege " to become the 
sons of God, even to them that believe in his name, which 
were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of 
the will of man, but of God," (John i. 12.) Opposing God 
to Jlesh and blood, he declares it to be a supernatural gift, 
that those who would otherwise remain in unbelief receive 
Christ by faith. Similar to this is our Saviour's reply to 
Peter, " Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but 
my Father which is in heaven," (Matt. xvi. 17.) These 
things I now briefly advert to, as I have fully considered 
them elsewhere. To the same effect Paul says to the Ephe- 
sians, " Ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise," 
(Eph. i. 13 ;) thus showing that he is the internal teacher, by 
whose agency the promise of salvation, which would other- 
wise only strike the air or our ears, penetrates into our minds. 
In like manner, he says to the Thessalonians, " God hath 
from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through sancti- 
fication of the Spirit and belief of the truth," (2 Thess. ii. 
13 ;) by this passage briefly reminding us, that faith itself is 
produced only by the Spirit. This .John explains more dis- 
tinctly, " We know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit 
which he hath given us ;" again, " Hereby know we that 
we dwell in him and he in us, because he hath given us of 
his Spirit," (1 John hi. 24; iv. 13.) Accordingly, to make 
his disciples capable of heavenly wisdom, Christ promised 
them " the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive," 
(John xiv. 17.) And he assigns it to him, as his proper 
office, to bring to remembrance the things which he had 
verbally taught ; for in vain Avere light offered to the blind, 
did not that Spirit of understanding open the intellectual 
eye ; so that he himself may be properly termed the key by 
which the treasures of the heavenly kingdom are unlocked, 
and his illumination, the eye of the mind by which we are 


CHAP. I. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 91 

enabled to see : hence Paul so highly commends the ministry 
of the Spirit,1 (2 Cor. iii. 6,) since teachers would cry aloud 
to no purpose, did not Christ, the internal teacher, by means 
of his Spirit, draw to himself those who are given him of the 
Father. Therefore, as we have said that salvation is per- 
fected in the person of Christ, so, in order to make us par- 
takers of it, he baptizes us " with the Holy Spirit and with 
fire," (Luke iii. 16,) enlightening us into the faith of his 
Gospel, and so regenerating us to be new creatures. Thusj 
cleansed from all pollution, he dedicates us as holy temples 
to the Lord. 

1 The French adds, " qui vaut autant a dire corame la predication 
ayant avec soy vivacite spirituelle ;" — that is to say, preaching carrying 
spiritual quickening along with it. 


92 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 


CHAPTER II. 

OF FAITH. THE DEFINITION OF IT. ITS PECULIAR 
PROPERTIES. 

This chapter consists of three principal parts. — I. A brief explanation 
of certain matters pertaining to the doctrine of Faith, sec. 1-14. First, 
of the object of faith, sec. 1. Second, of Implicit Faith, sec. 2-6. Third, 
Definition of Faith, sec. 7. Fourth, the various meanings of the term 
Faith, sec. 8-13. II. A full exposition of the definition given in the 
seventh section, sec. 14-40. III. A brief confirmation of the definition 
by the authority of an Apostle. The mutual relation between faith, 
hope, and charity, sec. 41-43. 

Sections. 

1. A brief recapitulation of the leading points of the whole discussion. 

The scope of this chapter. The necessity of the doctrine of faith. 
This doctrine obscured by the Schoolmen, who make God the object 
of faith, without referring to Christ. The Schoolmen refuted by 
various passages. 

2. The dogma of implicit faith refuted. It destroys faith, which_ con- 

sists in a knowledge of the divine will. What this will is, and how 
necessary the knowledge of it. 

3. Many things are and will continue to be implicitly believed. Faith, 

however, consists in the knowledge of God and Christ, not in a 
reverence for the Church. Another refutation from the absurdities 
to which this dogma leads. 

4. In what sense our faith may be said to be implicit. Examples in the 

Apostles, in the holy women, and in all believers. 

5. In some, faith is implicit, as being a preparation for faith. This, how- 

ever, widely different from the implicit faith of the Schoolmen. 

6. The word of God has a similar relation to faith, the word being, as 

it were, the source and basis of faith, and the mirror in which it 
beholds God. Confirmation from various passages of Scripture. 
J Without the knowledge of the word there can be no faith. Sum 
of the discussion of the Scholastic doctrine of implicit faith. 

7. What faith properly has respect to in the word of God, namely, the 

promise of grace offered in Christ, provided it be embraced witli 
faith. Proper definition of faith. 


CHAP. IT. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 93 

8. Scholastic distinction between faith formed and unformed, refuted by 

a consideration of the nature of faith, which, as the gift of the Spirit, 
cannot possibly be disjoined from pious affection. 

9. Objection from a passage of Paul. Answer to it. Error of the 

Schoolmen in giving only one meaning to faith, whereas it has 
many meanings. The testimony of faith improperly ascribed to 
two classes of men. 

10. View to be taken of this. Who those are that believe for a time. 

The faith of hypocrites. With whom they may be compared. 

11. Why faith attributed to the reprobate. Objection. Answer. What 

perception of grace in the reprobate. How the elect are distin- 
guished from the reprobate. 

12. Why faith is temporary in the reprobate, firm and perpetual in the 

elect. Reason in the case of the reprobate. Example. Why God 
is angry with his children. In what sense many are said to fall 
from faith. 

13. Various meanings of the term faith. 1. Taken for soundness in the 

faith. 2. Sometimes restricted to a particular object. 3. Signifies 
the ministry or testimony by which we are instructed in the faith. 

14. Definition of faith explained under six principal heads. 1. What 

meant by Knowledge in the definition. 

15. Why this knowledge must be sure and firm. Reason drawn from 

the consideration of our weakness. Another reason from the 
certainty of the promises of God. 

16. The leading point in this certainty. Its fruits. A description of 

the true believer. 

17. An objection to this certainty. Answer. Confirmation of the 

answer from the example of David. This enlarged upon from the 
opposite example of Ahaz. Also from the uniform experience and 
the prayers of believers. 

18. For this reason the conflict between the flesh and the Spirit in the 

soul of the believer described. The issue of this conflict, the 
victory of faith. 

19. On the whole, the faith of the elect certain and indubitable. Con- 

firmation from analogy. 

20. Another confirmation from the testimony of an Apostle, making it 

apparent, that, though the faith of the elect is as yet impeifect, it is 
nevertheless firm and sure. 

21. A fuller explanation of the nature of faith. 1. When the believer is 

shaken with fear, he betakes himself to the bosom of a merciful 
God. 2. He does not even shun God when angry, but hopes in him. 
3. He does not suffer unbelief to reign in his heart. 4. He opposes 
unbelief, and is never finally lost. 5. Faith, however often assailed, 
at length comes off victorious. 

22. Another species of fear, arising from a consideration of the judgment 

of God against the wicked. This also faith overcomes. Exam- 


94 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

pies of this description, placed before the eyes of believers, repress 
presumption, and fix then- faith in God. 

23. Nothing contrary to this in the exhortation of the Apostle to work J 

out our salvation with fear and trembling. Fear and faith mutu- / 
ally connected. Confirmation from the words of a Prophet. 

24. This doctrine gives no countenance to the error of those who dream 

of a confidence mingled with incredulity. Refutation of this error, 
from a consideration of the dignity of Christ dwelling in us. The 
argument retorted. Refutation confirmed by the authority of an 
Apostle. What we ought to hold on this question. 

25. Confirmation of the preceding conclusion by a passage from Bernard. 

26. Time fear caused in two ways, viz., when we are required to rever- 

ence God as a Father, and also to fear him as Lord. 

27. Objection from a passage in the Apostle John. Answer founded on 

the distinction between filial and servile fear. 

28. How faith is said to have respect to the divine benevolence. What 

comprehended under this benevolence. Confirmation from David 
and Paul. 

29. Of the Free Promise which is the foundation of Faith. Reason. 

Confirmation. 

30. Faith not divided in thus seeking a Free Promise in the Gospel. 

Reason. Conclusion confirmed by another reason. 

31. The word of God the prop and root of faith. The word attests the 

divine goodness and mercy. In what sense faith has respect to 
the power of God. Various passages of Isaiah, inviting the godly 
to behold the power of God, explained. Other passages from 
David. We must beware of going beyond the limits prescribed by 
the word, lest false zeal lead us astray, as it did Sarah, Rebekah, 
and Isaac. In this way faith is obscured, though not extinguished. 
We must not depart one iota from the word of God. 

32. All the promises included in Christ. Two objections answered. A 

third objection drawn from example. Answer explaining the faitb 
of Naaman, Cornelius, and the Eunuch. 

33. Faith revealed to our minds, and sealed on our hearts, by the Holy 

Spirit. 1. The mind is purified so as to have a relish for divine 
truth. 2. The mind is thus established in the truth by the agency 
of the Holy Spirit. 

34. Proof of the former. 1. By reason. 2. By Scripture. 3. By ex- 

ample. 4. By analogy. 

35. 5. By the excellent qualities of faith. 6. By a celebrated passage 

from Augustine. 
3G. Proof of the latter by the argument a minore ad majus. Why the 

Spirit is called a seal, an earnest, and the Spirit of promise. 
37. Believers sometimes shaken, but not so as to perish finally. They 

ultimately overcome their trials, and remain stedfast. Proofs 

from Scripture. 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 95 

38. Objection of the Schoolmen. Answer. Attempt to support the 

objection by a passage in Ecclesiastes. Answer, explaining the 
meaning of the passage. 

39. Another objection, charging the elect in Christ with rashness and 

presumption. Answer. Answer confirmed by various passages 
from the Apostle Paul. Also from John and Isaiah. 

40. A third objection, impugning the final perseverance of the elect. 

Answer by an Apostle. Summary of the refutation. 

41. The definition of faith accords with that given by the Apostle in the 

Hebrews. Explanation of this definition. Refutation of the 
scholastic error, that charity is prior to faith and hope. 

42. Hope the inseparable attendant of true faith. Reason. Connection 

between faith and hope. Mutually support each other. Obvious 
from the various forms of temptation, that the aid of hope necessary 
to establish faith. 

43. The terms faith and hope sometimes confounded. Refutation of the 

Schoolmen, who attribute a twofold foundation to hope, viz., the 
grace of God and the merit of works. 

1. All these things will be easily understood after we have 
given a clearer definition of faith, so as to enable the readers 
to apprehend its nature and power. Here it is of importance 
to call to mind what was formerly taught, first, That since 
God by his Law prescribes what we ought, .to do, failure in 
any one respect subjects us to the dreadful judgment of 
eternal death, which it denounces. Secondly, Because it is 
not only difficult, but altogether beyond our strength-and 
ability, to fulfil the demands of the Law, if we look only to 
ourselves and consider what is due to our merits, no ground of 
hope remains, but we lie forsaken of God under eternal death. 
Thirdly, That there is only one method of deliverance which 


can rescue us from this miserable calamity, viz., when .Christ 
the Redeemer appears, by whose hand our heavenly Father, 
out of his infinite goodness and mercy, has been pleased to 
succour us, if we with true faith embrace this mercy, and 
with firm hope rest in it. It is now proper to consider the 
nature of this faith, by means of which, those who are 
adopted into the family of God obtain possession of the 
heavenly kingdom. For the accomplishment of so great an 
end, it is obvious that no mere opinion or persuasion is 
adequate. And the greater care and diligence is necessary 
in discussing the true nature of faith, from the pernicious 


3 


96 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

delusions which many, in the present day, labour under with 
regard to it. Great numbers, on hearing the term, think 
that nothing more is meant than a certain common assent to 
the Gospel History ; nay, when the subject of faith is dis- 
cussed in the Schools, by simply representing God as its 
object, they by empty speculation, as we have elsewhere 
said, (Book II. chap. vi. sec. 4,) hurry wretched souls away 
from the right mark instead of directing them to it. For 
seeing that God dwells in light that is inaccessible, Chi-ist 
must intervene. Hence he calls himself " the light of the 
world ;" and in another passage, " the way, the truth, and 
the life." None cometh to the Father (who is the fountain 
of life) except by him ; for " no man knoweth who the 
Father is but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal 
him." For this reason, Paid declares, " I count all things 
as loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus 
my Lord." In the twentieth chapter of the Acts, he states 
that he preached u faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ ;" 
and in another passage, he introduces Christ as thus address- 
ing him : " I have appeared unto thee for this purpose, to 

make thee a minister and a witness ;" " delivering thee 

from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I 

send thee," " that they may receive forgiveness of sins, 

and inheritance among them which are sanctified through 
faith which is in me." Paul further declares, that in the 
person of Christ the glory of God is visibly manifested to 
us, or, which is the same thing, wre have " the light of the 
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ."1 
It is true, indeed, that faith has respect to God only ; but to 
this we should add, that it acknowledges Jesus Christ whom 
he hath sent. God would remain far off, concealed from us, 
were we not irradiated by the brightness of Christ. All 
that the Father had, he deposited with his only begotten 
Son, in order that he might manifest himself in him, and 
thus by the communication of blessings express the true 
image of his glory. Since, as has been said, we must be led 
by the Spirit, and thus stimulated to seek Christ, so must we 

> 1 Tim. vi. 16 ; John viii. 12 ; xiv. 6 ; Luke x. 22 ; 1 Cor. ii. 2 ; Acts 
xx. 21 ; xxvi. 17, 18 ; 2 Cor. iv. 0. 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 97 

also remember that the invisible Father is to be sought 
nowhere but in this image. For which reason Augustine, 
treating of the object of faith, (De Civitate Dei, Lib. xi. 
c. 2,) elegantly says, " The thing to be known is, whither 
Ave are to go, and by what way;" and immediately after 
infers, that " the surest way to avoid all errors is to know 
him who is both God and man. It is to God we tend, 
and it is by man we go, and both of these are found 
only in Christ."1 Paul, when he preaches faith towards God, 
surely does not intend to overthrow what he so often incul- 
cates, viz., that faith has all its stability in Christ. Peter 
most appropriately connects both, saying, that by him " we 
believe in God," (1 Pet. i. 21.) 

2. This evil, therefore, must, like innumerable others, be 
attributed to the [Schoolmen/2 who have in a manner drawn 
a veil over Christ, to whom, if our eye is not directly turned, 
we must always wander through many labyrinths. But 
besides impairing, and almost annihilating, faith by their 
obscure definition, they have invented the fiction of implicit 
faith, with which name decking the grossest ignorance, they 
delude the wretched populace to their great destruction.3 
Nay, to state the fact more truly and plainly, this fiction not 
only biu-ies true faith, but entirely destroys it. Is it faith 
to understand nothing, and merely submit your convictions 
implicitly to the Church ? Faith consists not in ignorance, 
but in knowledge — knowledge not of God merely, but of the 
divine will. We do not obtain salvation either because we 
are prepared to embrace every dictate of the Church as true, 
or leave to the Church the province of inquiring and deter- 
mining ; but when we recognise God as a propitious Father 
through the reconciliation made by Christ, and Christ as 
given to us for righteousness, sanctification, and life. By 
this knowledge, I say, not by the submission of our under- 
standing, we obtain an entrance into the kingdom of heaven. 

1 The French is, "Car nous tendons a Dieu, et par l'humanite de 
Jesus Christ, nous y sommes conduits ;" — For we tend to God, and by 
the humanity of Christ are conducted to him. 

2 French, " Theologiens Sorboniques ;" — Theologians of Sorbonne. 

3 In opposition to this ignorance, see Chrysostom in Joann. Homil. 
xvi. 

VOL. II. G 


98 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

For when the Apostle says, " With the heart man believeth 
unto righteousness ; and with the mouth confession is made 
unto salvation," (Rom. x. 10;) he intimates, that it is not 
enough to believe implicitly without understanding, or even 
inquiring. The thing requisite is an explicit recognition of 
the divine goodness, in which our righteousness consists. 

3. I indeed deny not, (so enveloped are we in ignorance,) 
that to us very many things now are and will continue to be 
completely involved until we lay aside this weight of flesh, 
and approach nearer to the presence of God. In such cases 
the fittest course is to suspend our judgment, and resolve to 
maintain unity with the Church. But under this pretext, to 
honour ignorance tempered with humility with the name 
of faith, is most absurd. Faith consists in the knowledge 
of God and Christ, (John xvii. 3,) not in reverence for the 
Church. And we see what a labyrinth they have formed out 
of this implicit faith — every thing, sometimes even the most 
monstrous errors, being received by the ignorant as oracles 
without any discrimination, provided they are prescribed to 
them under the name of the Church. This inconsiderate 
facility, though the surest precipice to destruction, is, however, 
excused on the ground that it believes nothing definitely, but 
only with the appended condition, If such is the faith of the 
Church. Thus they pretend to find truth in error, light in 
darkness, true knowledge in ignorance. Not to dwell longer 
in refuting these views, we simply advise the reader to compare 
them with ours. The clearness of truth will itself furnish 
a sufficient refutation. For the question they raise is not, 
whether there may be an implicit faith with many remains 
of ignorance, but they maintain, that persons living and even 
indulging in a stupid ignorance duly believe, provided, in 
regard to things unknown, they assent to the authority and 
judgment of the Church : as if Scripture did not uniformly 
teach, that with faith understanding is conjoined. 

4. We grant, indeed, that so long as we are pilgrims in the 
world fjaith is implicit, not only because as yet many things 
are hidden from us, but because, involved in the mists of 
error, we attain not to all. The highest wisdom, even of him 
who has attained the greatest perfection, is to go forward, and 


CHAP. ir. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 99 

endeavour in a calm and teachable spirit to make further pro- 
gress. Hence Paul exhorts believers to Avait for further 
illumination in any matter in which they differ from each 
other, (Phil. hi. 15.1) And certainly experience teaches, 
that so long as we are in the flesh, our attainments are less 
than is to be desired. In our daily reading we fall in 
with many obscure passages which convict us of ignorance. 
With this curb God keeps us modest, assigning to each a 
measure of faith, that every teacher, however excellent, may 
still be disposed to learn. Striking examples of this implicit 
faith may be observed in the disciples of Christ before they 
were fully illuminated. >Ye see with what difficulty they 
take in the first rudiments, how they hesitate in the minutest 
matters, how, though hanging on the lips of their Master, 
they make no great progress ; nay, even after running to the 
sepulchre on the report of the women, the resurrection of 
their Master appears to them a dream. As Christ previously 
bore testimony to their faith, we cannot say that they were 
altogether devoid of it ; nay, had they not been persuaded 
that Christ would rise again, all their zeal would have been 
extinguished. Nor was it superstition that led the women 
to prepare spices to embalm a dead body of whose revival 
they had no expectation; but, although they gave credit to 
the words of one whom they knew to be true, yet the igno- 
rance which still possessed their minds involved their faith in 
darkness, and left them in amazement. Hence they are said 
to have believed only when, by the reality, they perceive the 
truth of what Christ had spoken ; not that they then began 
to believe, but the seed of a hidden faith, which lay as it were 
dead in their hearts, then burst forth in vigour. They had, 
therefore, a true but implicit faith, having reverently em- 
braced Christ as the only teacher. Then, being taught by 
him, they felt assured that he was the author of salvation : 
in fine, believed that he had come from heaven to gather 


1 See Augustin. Ep. 102, " Si propter eos solos Christus mortuus est, 
qui certa intelligentsia possunt ista discernera, paene frustra in ecclesia 
laboramus," &c. ; — If Christ died for those only who are able to discern 
these things with true understanding, our labour in the Church is almost 
in vain. 


100 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

disciples, and take them thither through the grace of the 
Father. There cannot be a more familiar proof of this, than 
that in all men faith is always mingled with incredulity. 

5. We may also call their faith implicit, as being properly 
nothing else than a preparation for faith. The Evangelists 
describe many as having believed, although they were only 
roused to admiration by the miracles, and went no farther 
than to believe that Christ was the promised Messiah, with- 
out being at all imbued with Evangelical doctrine. The 
reverence which subdued them, and made them willingly sub- 
mit to Christ, is honoured with the name of faith, though it 
was nothing but the commencement of it. Thus the noble- 
man who believed in the promised cure of his son, on return- 
ing home, is said by the Evangelist (John iv. 53) to have 
again believed ; that is, he had first received the words which 
fell from the lips of Christ as an oracular response, and there- 
after submitted to his authority and received his doctrine. 
Although it is to be observed that he was docile and disposed 
to learn, yet the word iibelieved'''' in the former passage de- 
notes a particular faith, and in the latter gives him a place 
among those disciples who had devoted themselves to Christ. 
Not unlike this is the example which John gives of the 
Samaritans, who believed the woman, and eagerly hastened 
to Christ ; but, after they had heard him, thus express them- 
selves, " Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we 
have heard him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the 
Christ, the Saviour of the world," (John iv. 42.) From these 
passages it is obvious, that even those who are not yet im- 
bued with the first principles, provided they are disposed to 
obey, are called believers, not properly indeed, but inasmuch 
as God is pleased in kindness so highly to honour their pious 
feeling. But this docility, with a desire of further progress, 
is widely different from the gross ignorance in which those 
sluggishly indulge who are contented with the implicit faith 
of the Papists. If Paul severely condemns those who are 
" ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of 
the truth," how much more sharply ought those to be re- 
buked who avowedly affect to know nothing ? 

6. The true knowledge of Christ consists in receiving him 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 101 

as he is offered by the Father, namely, as invested with his 
Gospel. For, as he is appointed as the end of our faith, so 
we cannot directly tend towards him except under the 
guidance of the Gospel. Therein are certainly unfolded to 
us treasures of grace. Did these continue shut, Christ would 
profit us little. Hence Paul makes faith the inseparable 
attendant of doctrine in these words, " Ye have not so learned 
Christ ; if so be that ye have heard him, and have been 
taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus," (Eph. iv. 20, 21.) 
Still I do not confine faith to the Gospel in such a sense as 
not to admit that enough was delivered to Moses and the 
Prophets to form a foundation of faith ; but as the Gospel 
exhibits a fuller manifestation of Christ, Paul justly terms it 
the doctrine of faith, (1 Tim. iv. 6.) For which reason, also, 
he elsewhere says, that, by the coming of faith, the Law was 
abolished, (Rom. x. 4,) including under the expression a new 
and unwonted mode of teaching, by which Christ, from the 
period of his appearance as the great Master, gave a fuller 
illustration of the Father's mercy, and testified more surely 
of our salvation. But an easier and more appropriate method 
will be to descend from the general to the particular. First, 
we must remember, that there is an inseparable relation 
between faith and the word, and that these can no more be 
disconnected from each other than rays of light from the 
sun. Hence in Isaiah the Lord exclaims, " Hear, and your 
soul shall live," (Is. Iv. 3.) And John points to this same 
fountain of faith in the following words, " These are written 
that ye might believe," (John xx. 31.) The Psalmist also 
exhorting the people to faith says, " To-day, if ye will hear his 
voice," (Ps. xcv. 7,) to hear being uniformly taken for to believe. 
In fine, in Isaiah the Lord distinguishes the members of the 
Church from strangers by this mark, " All thy children shall 
be taught of the Lord," (Is. liv. 13;) for if the benefit was 
indiscriminate, why should he address his words only to a 
few ? Corresponding with this, the Evangelists uniformly 
employ the terms believers and disciples as synonymous. This 
is done especially by Luke in several passages of the Acts. 
He even applies the term disciple to a woman, (Acts ix. 36.) 
Wherefore, if faith declines in the least degree from the mark 


102 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

at which it ought to aim, it does not retain its nature, but 
becomes uncertain credulity and vague wandering of mind. 
The same word is the basis on which it rests and is sustained. 
Declining from it, it falls. Take away the word, therefore, 
and no faith will remain. We are not here discussing 
whether, in order to propagate the Avord of God by which 
faith is engendered, the ministry of man is necessary, (this 
will be considered elsewhere;) but we say that the word 
itself, whatever be the way in which it is conveyed to us, is 
a kind of mirror in which faith beholds God. In this, there- 
fore, whether God uses the agency of man, or works imme- 
diately by his own power, it is always by his word that he 
manifests himself to those whom he designs to draw to him- 
self. Hence Paul designates faith as the obedience which is 
given to the Gospel, (Rom. i. 5 ;) and writing to the Phi- 
lippians, he commends them for the obedience of faith, (Phil, 
ii. 17.) For faith includes not merely the knowledge that God 
is, but also, nay chiefly, a perception of his will toward us. It 
concerns us to know not only what he is in himself, but also 
in what character he is pleased to manifest himself to us. 
We now see, therefore, that faith is the knowledge of the 
divine will in regard to us, as ascertained from his word. 
And the foundation of it is a previous persuasion of the truth 
of God. So long as your mind entertains any misgivings as 
to the certainty of the word, its authority will be weak and 
dubious, or rather it will have no authority at all. Nor is it 
sufficient to believe that God is true, and cannot lie or 
deceive, unless you feel firmly persuaded that every word 
which proceeds from him is sacred, inviolable truth. 

7. But since the heart of man is not brought to faith by 
every word of God, we must still consider what it is that 
faith properly has respect to in the word. The declaration 
of God to Adam was, " Thou shalt surely die," (Gen. ii. 17 ;) 
and to Cain, " The voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto 
me from the ground," (Gen. iv. 10 ;) but these, so far from 
being fitted to establish faith, tend only to shake it. At the 
same time, we deny not that it is the office of faith to 
assent to the truth of God whenever, whatever, and in what- 
ever way he speaks : we are only inquiring what faith can 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 103 

find in the word of God to lean and rest upon. When 
conscience sees only wrath and indignation, how can it but 
tremble and be afraid ? and how can it avoid shunning the 
God whom it thus dreads ? But faith ought to seek God, not 
shun him. It is evident, therefore, that we have not yet 
obtained a full definition of faith, it being impossible to give 
the name to every kind of knowledge of the divine will. Shall 
we, then, for will, which is often the messenger of bad news 
and the herald of terror, substitute the benevolence or mercy 
of God ? In this way, doubtless, we make a nearer approach 
to the nature of faith. For we are allured to seek God 
when told that our safety is treasured up in him ; and we 
are confirmed in this when he declares that he studies and 
takes an interest in our welfare. Hence there is need of the 
gracious promise, in which he testifies that he is a propitious 
Father ; since there is no other way in which we can 
approach to him, the promise being the only thing on which 
the heart of man can recline. For this reason, the two 
things, mercy and truth, are uniformly conjoined in the 
Psalms as having a mutual connection with each other. 
For it were of no avail to us to know that God is true, did 
He not in mercy allure us to himself; nor could we of our- 
selves embrace his mercy did not He expressly offer it. " I 
have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation : I have not 
concealed thy loving-kindness and thy truth. Withhold not 
thy tender mercies from me, O Lord : let thy loving-kind- 
ness and thy truth continually preserve me," (Ps. xl. 10, 11.) 
" Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the heavens ; and thy faithful- 
ness reacheth unto the clouds," (Ps. xxxvi. 5.) "All the 
paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep 
his covenant and his testimonies," (Ps. xxv. 10.) " His 
merciful kindness is great toward us : and the truth of the 
Lord endureth for ever," (Ps. cxvii. 2.) " I will praise thy 
name for thy loving-kindness and thy truth," (Ps. cxxxviii. 
2.) I need not quote what is said in the Prophets, to the 
effect that God is merciful and faithful in his promises. 
It were presumptuous in us to hold that God is propitious 
to us, had we not his own testimony, and did he not prevent 
us by his invitation, which leaves no doubt or uncertainty 


104 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

as to his will. It has already been seen that Christ is the 
only pledge of love, for without him all things, both above 
and below, speak of hatred and wrath. We have also seen, 
that since the knowledge of the divine goodness cannot be 
of much importance unless it leads us to confide in it, we 
must exclude a knowledge mingled with doubt, — a know- 
ledge which, so far from being firm, is continually wavering. 
But the human mind, when blinded and darkened, is very 
far from being able to rise to a proper knowledge of the 
divine will; nor can the heart, fluctuating with perpetual 
doubt, rest secure in such knowledge. Hence, in order that 
the word of God may gain full credit, the mind must be 
enlightened, and the heart confirmed, from some other 
quarter. We shall now have a full definition of faith1 if we 
say that it is a firm and sure knowledge of the divine favour 
toward us, founded on the truth of a free promise in Christ, 
and revealed to our minds, and sealed on our hearts, by the 
Holy Spirit. 

8. But before I proceed farther, it will be necessary to 
make some preliminary observations for the purpose of re- 
moving difficulties which might otherwise obstruct the reader. 
And first, I must refute the nugatory distinction of the 
Schoolmen as to formed and unformed faith.2 For they 
imagine that persons who have no fear of God, and no sense 
of piety, may believe all that is necessary to be known for 
salvation ; as if the Holy Spirit were not the witness of our 
adoption by enlightening our hearts unto faith. Still, how- 
ever, though the whole Scripture is against them, they 
dogmatically give the name of faith to a persuasion devoid 
of the fear of God. It is unnecessary to go farther in 
refuting their definition, than simply to state the nature of 
faith as declared in the word of God. From this it will 
clearly appear how unskilfully and absurdly they babble, 
rather than discourse, on this subject. I have already done 


1 This definition is explained, sections 14, 15, 28, 29, 32, 33, 31, of 
this chapter. 

* See Lombard, Lib. iii. Dist. 23. See the refutation in the middle of 
sections 41, 42, 43, where it is shown that faith produces, and is insepar- 
able from hope and love. 


CHAP. H. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 105 

this in part, and will afterwards add the remainder in its 
proper place. At present, I say that nothing can be ima- 
gined more absurd than their fiction. They insist that faith 
is an assent with which any despiser of God may receive 
what is delivered by Scripture. But we must first see 
whether any one can by his own strength acquire faith, or 
whether the Holy Spirit, by means of it, becomes the wit- 
ness of adoption. Hence it is childish trifling in them to 
inquire whether the faith formed by the supervening quality 
of love be the same, or a different and new faith. By 
talking in this style, they show plainly that they have never 
thought of the special gift of the Spirit ; since one of the 
first elements of faith is reconciliation implied in man's 
drawing near to God. Did they duly ponder the saying of 
Paul, " With the heart man belie veth unto righteousness," 
(Rom. x. 10,) they would cease to dream of that frigid 
quality. There is one consideration which ought at once to 
put an end to the debate, viz., that assent itself (as I have 
already observed, and will afterwards more fully illustrate) 
is more a matter of the heart than the head, of the affection 
than the intellect. For this reason, it is termed " the obe- 
dience of faith," (Rom. i. 5,) which the Lord prefers to all 
other service, and justly, since nothing is more precious to 
him than his truth, which, as John Baptist declares, is in a 
manner signed and sealed by believers, (John iii. 33.) As 
there can be no doubt on the matter, we in one word 
conclude, that they talk absurdly when they maintain that 
faith is formed by the addition of pious affection as an 
accessory to assent, since assent itself, such at least as the 
Scriptures describe, consists in pious affection. But we are 
furnished with a still clearer argument. Since faith embraces 
Christ as he is offered by the Father, and he is offered not 
only for justification, for forgiveness of sins and peace, but 
also for sanctification, as the fountain of living waters, it is 
certain that no man will ever know him aright without at 
the same time receiving the sanctification of the Spirit ; or, 
to express the matter more plainly, faith consists in the 
knowledge of Christ ; Christ cannot be known without the 
sanctification of his Spirit. : therefore faith cannot possibly be 
disjoined from pious affection. 


106 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

9. In their attempt to mar faith by divesting it of love, 
they are wont to insist on the words of Paul, " Though I 
have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have 
not charity, I am nothing," (1 Cor. xiii. 2.) But they do 
not consider what the faith is of which the Apostle there 
speaks. Having, in the previous chapter, discoursed of the 
various gifts of the Spirit, (1 Cor. xii. 10,) including diver- 
sity of tongues, miracles, and prophecy, and exhorted the 
Corinthians to follow the better gifts, in other words, those 
from which the whole body of the Church would derive 
greater benefit, he adds, "Yet show I unto you a more 
excellent way," (1 Cor. xii. 30.) All other gifts, how excel- 
lent soever they may be in themselves, are of no value unless 
they are subservient to charity. They were given for the 
edification of the Church, and fail of their purpose if not so 
applied. To prove this he adopts a division, repeating the 
same gifts which he had mentioned before, but under different 
names. Miracles and faith are used to denote the same 
thing, viz., the power of working miracles. Seeing, then, 
that this miraculous power or faith is the particular gift of 
God, which a wicked man may possess and abuse, as the gift 
of tongues, prophecy, or other gifts, it is not strange that he 
separates it from charity. Their whole error lies in this, 
that while the term faith has a variety of meanings, over- 
looking this variety, they argue as if its meaning were 
invariably one and the same. The passage of James, by 
which they endeavour to defend their error, will be elsewhere 
discussed, {infra, chap. xvii. sec. 1 1.) Although, in discours- 
ing of faith, we admit that it has a variety of forms ; yet, 
when our object is to show what knowledge of God the 
wicked possess, we hold and maintain, in accordance with 
Scripture, that the pious only have faith. Multitudes un- 
doubtedly believe that God is, and admit the truth of the 
Gospel History, and the other parts of Scripture, in the same 
way in which they believe the records of past events, or 
events which they have actually witnessed. There are some 
who go even farther : they regard the Word of God as an 
infallible oracle ; they do not altogether disregard its precepts, 
but are moved to some degree by its threatenings and pro- 
mises. To such the testimony of faith is attributed, but by 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 107 

catachresis; because they do not with open impiety impugn, 
reject, or contemn, the Word of God, but rather exhibit 
some semblance of obedience. 

10. But as this shadow or image of faith is of no moment, 
so it is unworthy of the name. How far it differs from true 
faith will shortly be explained at length. Here, however, we 
may just indicate it in passing. Simon Magus is said to 
have believed, though he soon after gave proof of his unbe- 
lief, (Acts viii. 13-18.) In regard to the faith attributed to 
him, we do not understand with some, that he merely pre- 
tended a belief which had no existence in his heart: we 
rather think that, overcome by the majesty of the Gospel, he 
yielded some kind of assent, and so far acknowledged Christ 
to be the author of life and salvation, as willingly to assume 
his name. In like manner, in the Gospel of Luke, those in 
whom the seed of the word is choked before it brings forth 
fruit, or in whom, from having no depth of earth, it soon 
withereth away, are said to believe for a time. Such, we 
doubt not, eagerly receive the word with a kind of relish, 
and have some feeling of its divine power, so as not only to 
impose upon men by a false semblance of faith, but even to 
impose upon themselves. They imagine that the reverence 
which they give to the word is genuine piety, because 
they have no idea of any impiety but that which consists 
in open and avowed contempt. But whatever that assent 
may be, it by no means penetrates to the heart, so as to 
have a fixed seat there. Although it sometimes seems to 
have planted its roots, these have no life in them. The 
human heart has so many recesses for vanity, so many lurk- 
ing places for falsehood, is so shrouded by fraud and hypocrisy, 
that it often deceives itself. Let those who glory in such 
semblances of faith know that, in this respect, they are not 
a whit superior to devils. The one class, indeed, is inferior 
to them, inasmuch as they are able without emotion to hear 
and understand things, the knowledge of which makes devils 
tremble, (James ii. 19.) The other class equals them in this, 
that whatever be the impression made upon them, its only 
result is terror and consternation. 

11. I am aware it seems unaccountable to some how faith is 


108 INSTITUTES OF TIIE BOOK III. 

attributed to the reprobate, seeing that it is declared by Paul 
to be one of the fruits of election ;' and yet the difficulty is 
easily solved : for though none are enlightened into faith, and 
truly feel the efficacy of the Gospel, with the exception of 
those who are fore-ordained to salvation, yet experience 
shows that the reprobate are sometimes affected in a way so 
similar to the elect, that even in their own judgment there is 
no difference between them. Hence it is not strange, that 
by the Apostle a taste of heavenly gifts, and by Christ him- 
self a temporary faith, is ascribed to them. Not that they 
truly perceive the power of spiritual grace and the sure light 
of faith; but the Lord, the better to convict them, and leave 
them without excuse, instils into their minds such a sense of 
his goodness as can be felt without the Spirit of adoption. 
Should it be objected, that believers have no stronger testi- 
mony to assure them of their adoption, I answer, that though 
there is a great resemblance and affinity between the elect of 
God and those who are impressed for a time with a fading faith, 
yet the elect alone have that full assurance which is extolled 
by Paul, and by which they are enabled to cry, Abba, Father. 
Therefore, as God regenerates the elect only for ever by 
incorruptible seed, as the seed of life once sown in their 
hearts never perishes, so he effectually seals in them the grace 
of his adoption, that it may be sure and stedfast. But in 
this there is nothing to prevent an inferior operation of the 
Spirit from taking its course in the reprobate. Meanwhile, 
believers are taught to examine themselves carefully and 
humbly, lest carnal security creep in and take the place of 
assurance of faith. We may add, that the reprobate never 
have any other than a confused sense of grace, laying hold 
of the shadow rather than the substance, because the Spirit 
properly seals the forgiveness of sins in the elect only, ap- 
plying it by special faith to their use. Still it is correctly 
said, that the reprobate believe God to be propitious to them, 
inasmuch as they accept the gift of reconciliation, though 
confusedly and without due discernment ; not that they are 
partakers of the same faith or regeneration with the children 

1 1 Thess. i. 3, 4 ; 2 Thess. ii. 13 ; Tit. i. 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 109 

of God ; but because, under a covering of hypocrisy, they seem 
to have a principle of faith in common with them. Nor do I 
even deny that God illumines their minds to this extent, that 
they recognise his grace ; but that conviction he distinguishes 
from the peculiar testimony which he gives to his elect in 
this respect, that the reprobate never attain to the full result 
or to fruition. When he shows himself propitious to them, 
it is not as if he had truly rescued them from death, and 
taken them under his protection. He only gives them a 
manifestation of his present mercy.1 In the elect alone he 
implants the living root of faith, so that they persevere even 
to the end. Thus we dispose of the objection, that if God 
truly displays his grace, it must endure for ever. There is 
nothing inconsistent in this with the fact of his enlightening 
some with a present sense of grace, which afterwards proves 
evanescent. 

12. Although faith is a knowledge of the divine favour 
towards us, and a full persuasion of its truth, it is not strange 
that the sense of the divine love, which though akin to faith 
differs much from it, vanishes in those wrho are temporarily 
impressed. The will of God is, I confess, immutable, and his 
truth is always consistent with itself; but I deny that the 
reprobate ever advance so far as to penetrate to that secret 
revelation which Scripture reserves for the elect only. I 
therefore deny that they either understand his will consi- 
dered as immutable, or steadily embrace his truth, inasmuch 
as they rest satisfied with an evanescent impression ; just as 
a tree not planted deep enough may take root, but will in 
process of time wither away, though it may for several years 
not only put forth leaves and flowers, but produce fruit. In 
short, as by the revolt of the first man, the image of God 
could be effaced from his mind and soul, so there is nothing 
strange in His shedding some rays of grace on the reprobate, 
and afterwards allowing these to be extinguished. There 
is nothing to prevent His giving some a slight knowledge 
of his Gospel, and imbuing others thoroughly. Meanwhile, 
we must remember that however feeble and slender the 

1 The French adds, " Comme par une bouffee ;" — as by fits and starts. 


110 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

faith of the elect may be, yet as the Spirit of God is to 
them a sure earnest and seal of their adoption, the impres- 
sion once engraven can never be effaced from their hearts, 
whereas the light which glimmers in the reprobate is after- 
wards quenched.1 Nor can it be said that the Spirit there- 
fore deceives, because he does not quicken the seed which 
lies in their hearts, so as to make it ever remain incorruptible 
as in the elect. I go farther : seeing it is evident, from the doc- 
trine of Scripture and from daily experience, that the reprobate 
are occasionally impressed with a sense of divine grace, some 
desire of mutual love must necessarily be excited in their 
hearts. Thus for a time a pious affection prevailed in Saul, 
disposing him to love God. Knowing that he was treated 
with paternal kindness, he Avas in some degree attracted by 
it. But as the reprobate have no rooted conviction of the 
paternal love of God, so they do not in return yield the love 
of sons, but are led by a kind of mercenary affection. The 
Spirit of love was given to Christ alone, for the express pur- 
pose of conferring this Spirit upon his members ; and there 
can be no doubt that the following words of Paul apply to 
the elect only : " The love of God is shed abroad in our 
hearts, by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us," (Rom. v. 
5 ;) namely, the love which begets that confidence in prayer 
to which I have above adverted. On the other hand, we see 
that God is mysteriously offended with his children, though 
he ceases not to love them. He certainly hates them not, 
but he alarms them with a sense of his anger, that he may 
humble the pride of the flesh, arouse them from lethargy, and 
urge them to repentance. Hence they, at the same instant, 
feel that he is angry with them or their sins, and also pro- 
pitious to their persons. It is not from fictitious dread that 
they deprecate his anger, and yet they betake themselves to 
him with tranquil confidence. It hence appears that the 
faith of some, though not true faith, is not mere pretence. 
They are borne along by some sudden impulse of zeal, 
and erroneously impose upon themselves, sloth undoubtedly 
preventing them from examining their hearts with due care. 

1 See section 13, where it is said, that this impression sometimes exist- 
ing in the reprobate is called faith, but improperly. 


CFLAP. II. CnEISTIAN EELIG10N. Ill 

Such probably was the case of those whom John describes as 
believing on Christ ; but of whom he says, " Jesus did not 
commit himself unto them, because he knew all men, and 
needed not that any should testify of man : for he knew 
what was in man," (John ii. 24, 25.) Were it not true that 
many fall away from the common faith, (I call it common, 
because there is a great resemblance between temporary and 
living, ever-during faith,) Christ would not have said to his 
disciples, " If ye continue in my word, then are ye my dis- 
ciples indeed ; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth 
shall make you free," (John viii. 31, 32.) He is addressing 
those who had embraced his doctrine, and urging them to 
progress in the faith, lest by their sluggishness they extin- 
guish the light which they have received. Accordingly, 
Paul claims faith as the peculiar privilege of the elect, inti- 
mating that many, from not being properly rooted, fall away, 
(Tit. i. 1.) In the same way, in Matthew, our Saviour says, 
11 Every plant which my heavenly Father hath not planted 
shall be rooted up," (Matth. xvi. 13.) Some who are not 
ashamed to insult God and man are more grossly false. Against 
this class of men, who profane the faith by impious and lying 
pretence, James inveighs, (James ii. 14.) Nor would Paul 
require the faith of believers to be unfeigned, (1 Tim. i. 5,) 
were there not many who presumptuously arrogate to them- 
selves what they have not, deceiving others, and sometimes 
even themselves, with empty show. Hence he compares a 
good conscience to the ark in which faith is preserved, be- 
cause many, by falling away, have in regard to it made ship- 
wreck. 

13. It is necessary to attend to the ambiguous meaning of 
the term : for faith is often equivalent in meaning to sound 
doctrine, as in the passage which Ave lately quoted, and in 
the same Epistle where Paul enjoins the deacons to hold " the 
mystery of the faith in a pure conscience ;" in like manner, 
when he denounces the defection of certain from the faith. 
The meaning again is the same, when he says that Timothy 
had been brought up in the faith ; and in like manner, when he 
says that profane babblings and oppositions of science, falsely 
so called, lead many away from the faith. Such persons he 


112 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

elsewhere calls reprobate as to the faith. On the other hand, 
when he enjoins Titus, " Rebuke them sharply, that they 
may be sound in the faith j"1 by soundness he means purity 
of doctrine, which is easily corrupted, and degenerates through 
the fickleness of men. And indeed, since in Christ, as 
possessed by faith, are " hid all the treasures of wisdom and 
knowledge," (Col. i. 2, 3,) the term faith is justly extend- 
ed to the whole sum of heavenly doctrine, from which it 
cannot be separated. On the other hand, it is sometimes 
confined to a particular object, as when Matthew says of those 
who let down the paralytic through the roof, that Jesus saw 
their faith, (Matth. ix. 2 ;) and Jesus himself exclaims in 
regard to the centurion, " I have not found so great faith, 
no, not in Israel," (Matth. viii. 10.) Now, it is probable 
that the centurion wras thinking only of the cure of his son, 
by whom his whole soul was engrossed ;2 but because he is 
satisfied with the simple answer and assurance of Christ, and 
does not request his bodily presence, this circumstance calls 
forth the eulogium on his faith. And we have lately shown 
how Paul uses the term faith for the gift of miracles — a gift 
possessed by persons who were neither regenerated by the 
Spirit of God, nor sincerely reverenced him. In another pass- 
age, he uses faith for the doctrine by which we are instructed 
in the faith. For when he says, that " that which is in part 
shall be done away," (1 Cor. xiii. 10,) there can be no doubt 
that reference is made to the ministry of the Church, which 
is necessary in our present imperfect state ; in these forms 
of expression the analogy is obvious. But wrhen the name of 
faith is improperly transferred to a false profession or lying 
assumption, the catachresis ought not to seem harsher than when 
the fear of God is used for vitious and perverse worship ; as 
when it is repeatedly said in sacred history, that the foreign 
nations which had been transported to Samaria and the neigh- 
bouring districts, feared false gods and the God of Israel : in 
other words, confounded heaven with earth. But we have 
now been inquiring what the faith is which distinguishes the 

1 1 Tim. iii. 9 ; iv. 1, 6 ; 2 Tim. ii. 15 ; iii. 18 ; Tit. i. 13 ; ii. 2. 
* The French adds, " Comme il montre par ses propos quel souci il en 
avoit ;" — as he shows by his urgency what anxiety he felt. 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 113 

children of God from unbelievers, the faith by which we 
invoke God the Father, by which we pass from death unto 
life, and by which Christ our eternal salvation and life dwells 
in us. Its power and nature have, I trust, been briefly and 
clearly explained. 

14. Let us now again go over the parts of the definition 
separately : I should think that, after a careful examination 
of them, no doubt will remain. By knowledge we do not 
mean comprehension, such as that which we have of things 
falling under human sense. For that knowledge is so much 
superior, that the human mind must far surpass and go 
beyond itself in order to reach it. Nor even when it has 
reached it does it comprehend what it feels, but persuaded 
of what it comprehends not, it understands more from mere 
certainty of persuasion than it could discern of any human 
matter by its own capacity. Hence it is elegantly described 
by Paul as ability " to comprehend with all saints what is 
the breadth, and length, and depth, and height ; and to know 
the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge," (Eph. iii. 18, 
19.) His object was to intimate, that what our mind em- 
braces by faith is every way infinite, that this kind of 
knowledge far surpasses all understanding. But because the 
" mystery which hath been hid from ages and from generations" 
is now " made manifest to the saints," (Col. i. 26,) faith is, for 
good reason, occasionally termed in Scripture understanding, 
(Col. ii. 2 ;) and knowledge, as by John, (1 John iii. 2,) when 
he declares that believers know themselves to be the sons of 
God. And certainly they do know, but rather as confirm- 
ed by a belief of the divine veracity than taught by any 
demonstration of reason. This is also indicated by Paul 
when he says, that " whilst we are at home in the body, we 
are absent from the Lord : (For we walk by faith, not by 
sight,)" (2 Cor. v. 6, 7 :) thus showing, that what we under- 
stand by faith is yet distant from us and escapes our view. 
Hence we conclude that the knowledge of faith consists more 
of certainty than discernment. 

15. We add, that it is sure and firm, the better to express 
strength and constancy of persuasion. For as faith is not 
contented with a dubious and fickle opinion, so neither is it 

VOL. II. II 


114 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

contented with, an obscure and ill-defined conception. The 
certainty which it requires must be full and decisive, as is 
usual in regard to matters ascertained and proved. So deeply 
rooted in our hearts is unbelief, so prone are we to it, that while 
all confess with the lips that God is faithful, no man ever believes 
it without an arduous struggle. Especially when brought to 
the test,1 we by our wavering betray the vice which lurked 
within. Nor is it without cause that the Holy Spirit bears 
such distinguished testimony to the authority of God, in 
order that it may cure the disease of which I have spoken, 
and induce us to give full credit to the divine promises : 
" The words of the Lord" (says David, Ps. xii. 6) " are pure 
words, as silver tried in a furnace of earth, purified, seven times:" 
cl The word of the Lord is tried : he is a buckler to all those 
that trust in him," (Ps. xviii. 30.) And Solomon declares the 
same thing almost in the same words, " Every word of God is 
pure," (Prov. xxx. 5.) But further quotation is superfluous, as 
the cxix. Psalm is almost wholly occupied with this subject. 
Certainly, whenever God thus recommends his word, he indi- 
rectly rebukes our unbelief, the purport of all that is said being 
to eradicate perverse doubt from our hearts. There are very 
many also who form such an idea of the divine mercy as yields 
them very little comfort. For they are harassed by miserable 
anxiety while they doubt whether God will be merciful to them. 
They think, indeed, that they are most fully persuaded of the 
divine mercy, but they confine it within too narrow limits. 
The idea they entertain is, that this mercy is great and 
abundant, is shed upon many, is offered and ready to be 
bestowed upon all ; but that it is uncertain whether it will 
reach to them individually, or rather whether they can reach 
to it. Thus their knowledge stopping short leaves them only 
mid-way ; not so much confirming and tranquillizing the mind 
as harassing it with doubt and disquietude. Very different 
is that feeling of full assurance (crX?jgopog/a) which the Scrip- 
tures uniformly attribute to faith — an assurance which leaves 
no doubt that the goodness of God is clearly offered to us. 

1 Latin, " Praesentim ubi ad rem ventum est." — French, " Principale- 
ment quand les tentations nous pressent ;" — especially when temptations 
press us. 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 115 

This assurance we cannot have without truly perceiving its 
sweetness, and experiencing it in ourselves. Hence from 
faith the Apostle deduces confidence, and from confidence 
boldness. His words are, " In whom (Christ) we have bold- 
ness and access with confidence by the faith of him," (Eph. 
iii. 12 :) thus undoubtedly showing that our faith is not true 
unless it enables us to appear calmly in the presence of God. 
Such boldness springs only from confidence in the divine 
favour and salvation. So true is this, that the term faith is 
often used as equivalent to confidence. 

16. The principal hinge on which faith turns is this : We 
must not suppose that any promises of mercy which the Lord 
offers are only true out of us, and not at all in us : we should 
rather make them ours by inwardly embracing them. In this 
way only is engendered that confidence which he elsewhere 
terms peace, (Rom. v. 1;) though perhaps he rather means to 
make peace follow from it. This is the security which quiets 
and calms the conscience in the view of the judgment of God, 
and without which it is necessarily vexed and almost torn 
with tumultuous dread, unless when it happens to slumber 
for a moment, forgetful both of God and of itself. And 
verily it is but for a moment. It never long enjoys that 
miserable obliviousness, for the memory of the divine judg- 
ment, ever and anon recurring, stings it to the quick. In 
one word, he only is a true believer who, firmly persuaded 
that God is reconciled, and is a kind Father to him, hopes 
every thing" from his kindness, who, trusting to the promises 
of the divine favour, with undoubting confidence anticipates 
salvation ; as the Apostle shows in these words, " We are 
made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our 
confidence stedfast unto the end," (Heb. iii. 14.) He thus 
holds, that none hope well in the Lord save those who con- 
fidently glory in being the heirs of the heavenly kingdom. 
No man, I say, is a believer but he who, trusting to the 
security of his salvation, confidently triumphs over the devil 
and death, as we are taught by the noble exclamation of 
Paul, "I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor 
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor 
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, 


116 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in 
Christ Jesus our Lord," (Rom. viii. 38.) In like manner, the 
same Apostle does not consider that the eyes of our under- 
standing are enlightened unless we know what is the hope 
of the eternal inheritance to which we are called, (Eph. i. 
18.) Thus he uniformly intimates throughout his writings, 
that the goodness of God is not properly comprehended 
when security does not follow as its fruit. 

17. But it will be said that this differs widely from the 
experience of believers, who, in recognising the grace of 
God toward them, not only feel disquietude, (this often 
happens,) but sometimes tremble, overcome with terror,1 so 
violent are the temptations which assail their minds. This 
scarcely seems consistent wTith certainty of faith. It is 
necessary to solve this difficulty, in order to maintain the 
doctrine above laid down. When we say that faith must 
be certain and secure, we certainly speak not of an assur- 
ance which is never affected by doubt, nor a security which 
anxiety never assails ; we rather maintain that believers 
have a perpetual struggle with their own distrust, and are 
thus far from thinking that their consciences possess a placid 
quiet, uninterrupted by perturbation. On the other hand, 
whatever be the mode in which they are assailed, we deny 
that they fall off and abandon that sure confidence which 
they have formed in the mercy of God. Scripture does not 
set before us a brighter or more memorable example of faith 
than in David, especially if regard be had to the constant 
tenor of his life. And yet how far his mind was from being 
always at peace is declared by innumerable complaints, of 
which it will be sufficient to select a few. When he rebukes 
the turbulent movements of his soul, what else is it but a cen- 
sure of his unbelief? " Why art thou cast down, my soul ? and 
why art thou disquieted in me ? hope thou in God," (Psalm 
xlii. 6.) His alarm was undoubtedly a manifest sign of dis- 
trust, as if he thought that the Lord had forsaken him. In 
another passage we have a fuller confession : " I said in my 
haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes," (Psalm xxxi. 22.) 

1 As to the imperfection, strengthening, and increase of faith, see Book 
IV. chap. xiv. sec. 7, 8. 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 117 

In another passage, in anxious and wretched perplexity, he 
debates with himself, nay, raises a question as to the nature 
of God : " Hath God forgotten to be gracious ? hath he in 
anger shut up his tender mercies ?" (Psalm lxxvii. 9.) What 
follows is still harsher : " I said this is my infirmity ; but I 
will remember the years of the right hand of the Most 
High."1 As if desperate, he adjudges himself to destruc- 
tion.2 He not only confesses that he is agitated by doubt, 
but as if he had fallen in the contest, leaves himself nothing 
in reserve, — God having deserted him, and made the hand 
which was wont to help him the instrument of his destruc- 
tion. Wherefore, after having been tossed among tumul- 
tuous waves, it is not without reason he exhorts his soul to 
return to her quiet rest, (Psalm cxvi. 7.) And yet (what is 
strange) amid those commotions, faith sustains the believer's 
heart, and truly acts the part of the palm tree, which supports 
any weights laid upon it, and rises above them ; thus David, 
when he seemed to be overwhelmed, ceased not by urging him- 
self forward to ascend to God. But he who anxiously contend- 
ing with his own infirmity has recourse to faith, is already in 
a great measure victorious. This we may infer from the 
following passage, and others similar to it : " Wait on the 
Lord : be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine 
heart : Avait, I say, on the Lord," (Psalm xxvii. 14.) He 
accuses himself of timidity, and repeating the same thing 
twice, confesses that he is ever and anon exposed to agita- 
tion. Still he is not only dissatisfied with himself for so 
feeling, but earnestly labours to correct it. Were we to 
take a nearer view of his case, and compare it with that of 
Ahaz, we should find a great difference between them. 
Isaiah is sent to relieve the anxiety of an impious and 
hypocritical king, and addresses him in these terms : " Take 
heed, and be quiet ; fear not," &c, (Isaiah vii. 4.) How did 
Ahaz act ? As has already been said, his heart was shaken 
as a tree is shaken by the wind : though he heard the pro- 

1 Calvin's Latin translation of the passage is, " Atque dixi, occidere 
meurn est ; nxutationes dexter® excelsi." — The French is, " J'ay dit, II 
me faut mourir. Voicy un changement de la main de Dieu ;" — I said I 
must die. Behold a change in the hand of God. 

2 See Calv. adv. Pighium, near the commencement. 


118 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

mise, he ceased not to tremble. This, therefore, is the 
proper hire and punishment of unbelief, so to tremble as in 
the day of trial to turn away from God, who gives access 
to himself only by faith. On the other hand, believers, 
though weighed down and almost overwhelmed with the 
burden of temptation, constantly rise up, though not without 
toil and difficulty ; hence, feeling conscious of their own 
weakness, they pray with the Prophet, " Take not the 
word of truth utterly out of my mouth," (Psalm cxix. 43.) 
By these words, we are taught that they at times become 
dumb, as if their faith were overthrown, and yet that they 
do not withdraw or turn their backs, but persevere in the 
contest, and by prayer stimulate their sluggishness, so as not 
to fall into stupor by giving way to it. (See Calv. in Psalm 
lxxxviii. 16.) 

18. To make this intelligible, we must return to the dis- 
tinction between flesh and spirit, to which we have already 
adverted, and which here becomes most apparent. The 
believer finds within himself two principles : the one filling 
him with delight in recognising the divine goodness, the other 
filling him with bitterness under a sense of his fallen state ; 
the one leading him to recline on the promise of the Gospel, 
the other alarming him by the conviction of his iniquity; 
the one making him exult with the anticipation of life, the 
other making him tremble with the fear of death. This 
diversity is owing to imperfection of faith, since we are 
never so well in the course of the present life as to be 
entirely cured of the disease of distrust, and completely 
replenished and engrossed by faith. Hence those conflicts : 
the distrust cleaving to the remains of the flesh rising up to 
assail the faith existing in our hearts. But if in the be- 
liever's mind certainty is mingled with doubt, must we not 
always be carried back to the conclusion, that faith consists 
not of a sure and clear, but only of an obscure and confused, 
understanding of the divine will in regard to us ? By no 
means. Though we are distracted by various thoughts, it 
does not follow that we are immediately divested of faith. 
Though we are agitated and carried to and fro by distrust, 
we are not immediately plunged into the abyss ; though we 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 119 

are shaken, we are not therefore driven from our place. 
The invariable issue of the contest is, that faith in the long- 
run surmounts the difficulties by which it was beset and 
seemed to be endangered. 

19. The whole, then, comes to this : As soon as the 
minutest particle of faith is instilled into our minds, we 
begin to behold the face of God placid, serene, and pro- 
pitious ; far off, indeed, but still so distinctly as to assure us 
that there is no delusion in it. In proportion to the progress 
we afterwards make, (and the progress ought to be uninter- 
rupted,) we obtain a nearer and surer view, the very con- 
tinuance making it more familiar to us. Thus we see that a 
mind illumined with the knowledge of God is at first in- 
volved in much ignorance, — ignorance, however, which is 
gradually removed. Still this partial ignorance or obscure 
discernment does not prevent that clear knowledge of the 
divine favour which holds the first and principal part in 
faith. For as one shut up in a prison, where from a narrow 
opening he receives the rays of the sun indirectly and in a 
manner divided, though deprived of a full view of the sun, 
has no doubt of the source from which the light comes, and is 
benefited by it ; so believers, while bound with the fetters of an 
earthly body, though surrounded on all sides with much ob- 
scurity, are so far illumined by any slender light which beams 
upon them and displays the divine mercy as to feel secure. 

20. The Apostle elegantly adverts to both in different 
passages. . When he says, " We know in part, and we pro- 
phesy in part ;" and " Now we see through a glass darkly," 
(1 Cor. xiii. 9, 12,) he intimates how very minute a portion 
of divine wisdom is given to us in the present life. For 
although those expressions do not simply indicate that faith 
is imperfect so long as we groan under a weight of flesh, but 
that the necessity of being constantly engaged in learning is 
owing to our imperfection, he at the same time reminds us, 
that a subject which is of boundless extent cannot be com- 
prehended by our feeble and narrow capacities. This Paul 
affirms of the whole Church, each individual being retarded 
and impeded by his own ignorance from making so near an 
approach as were to be wished. But that the foretaste 


120 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

which we obtain from any minute portion of faith is certain, 
and by no means fallacious, he elsewhere shows, when he 
affirms that " We all, with open face beholding as in a glass 
the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, 
from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord," 
(2 Cor. iii. 18.) In such degrees of ignorance much doubt 
and trembling is necessarily implied, especially seeing that 
our heart is by its own natural bias prone to unbelief. To this 
we must add the temptations which, various in kind and 
infinite in number, are ever and anon violently assailing us. 
In particular, conscience itself, burdened with an incumbent 
load of sins, at one time complains and groans, at another 
accuses itself; at one time murmurs in secret, at another 
openly rebels. Therefore, whether adverse circumstances 
betoken the wrath of God, or conscience finds the subject 
and matter within itself, unbelief thence draws weapons and 
engines to put faith to flight, the aim of all its efforts being 
to make us think that God is adverse and hostile to us, and 
thus, instead of hoping for any assistance from him, to make 
us di'ead him as a deadly foe. 

21. To withstand these assaults, faith arms and fortifies 
itself with the word of God. When the temptation sug- 
gested is, that God is an enemy because he afflicts, faith 
replies, that while lie afflicts he is merciful, his chastening 
proceeding more from love than anger. To the thought 
that God is the avenger of wickedness, it opposes the pardon 
ready to be bestowed on all offences whenever the sinner 
betakes himself to the divine mercy. Thus the pious mind, 
how much soever it may be agitated and torn, at length 
rises superior to all difficulties, and allows not its confidence 
in the divine mercy to be destroyed. Nay, rather, the dis- 
putes which exercise and disturb it tend to establish this 
confidence. A proof of this is, that the saints, when the 
hand of God lies heaviest upon them, still lodge their com- 
plaints with him, and continue to invoke him, when to all 
appearance he is least disposed to hear. But of what use 
were it to lament before him if they had no hope of solace ? 
They never would invoke him did they not believe that he 
is ready to assist them. Thus the disciples, while repri- 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 121 

manded by their Master for the weakness of their faith in 
crying out that they were perishing, still implored his aid, 
(Matth. viii. 25.) And he, in rebuking them for their want 
of faith, does not disown them or class them with unbelievers, 
but urges them to shake off the vice. Therefore, as we 
have already said, we again maintain, that faith remaining 
fixed in the believer's breast never can be eradicated from it. 
However it may seem shaken and bent in this direction or 
in that, its flame is never so completely quenched as not 
at least to lurk under the embers. In this way, it appears 
that the word, which is an incorruptible seed, produces 
fruit similar to itself. Its germ never withers away 
utterly and perishes. The saints cannot have a stronger 
ground for despair than to feel, that, according to present 
appearances, the hand of God is armed for their destruction ; 
and yet Job thus declares the strength of his confidence : 
"Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him." The truth is, 
that unbelief reigns not in the hearts of believers, but only 
assails them from without ; does not wound them mortally 
with its darts, but annoys them, or, at the utmost, gives 
them a wound which can be healed. Faith, as Paul declares, 
(Eph. vi. 16,) is our shield, which receiving these darts, 
either wards them off entirely, or at least breaks their force, 
and prevents them from reaching the vitals. Hence when faith 
is shaken, it is just as when, by the violent blow of a javelin, 
a soldier standing firm is forced to step back and yield a 
little ; and again, when faith is wounded, it is as if the 
shield were pierced, but not perforated by the blow. The 
pious mind will always rise, and be able to say with David, 
" Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of 
death, I will fear no evil : for thou art with me," (Psalm 
xxiii. 4.) Doubtless it is a terrific thing to walk in the 
darkness of death, and it is impossible for believers, however 
great their strength may be, not to shudder at it ; but since 
the prevailing thought is that God is present and pi-oviding 
for their safety, the feeling of security overcomes that of 
fear. As Augustine says, — whatever be the engines which 
the devil erects against us, as he cannot gain the heart 
where faith dwells, he is cast out. Thus, if we may judge 


122 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

by the event, not only do believers come off safe from every 
contest so as to be ready, after a short repose, to descend 
again into the arena, but the saying of John, in his Epistle, 
is fulfilled, " This is the victory that overcometh the world, 
even our faith," (1 John v. 4.) It is not said that it will be 
victorious in a single fight, or a few, or some one assault, 
but that it will be victorious over the whole world, though 
it should be a thousand times assailed. 

22. There is another species of fear and trembling, which, 
so far from impairing the security of faith, tends rather to 
establish it ; namely, when believers, reflecting that the 
examples of the divine vengeance on the ungodly are a 
kind of beacons warning them not to provoke the wrath 
of God by similar wickedness, keep anxious watch, or, 
taking a view of their own inherent wretchedness, learn 
their entire dependence on God, without whom they feel 
themselves to be fleeting and evanescent as the wind. 
For when the Apostle sets before the Corinthians the 
scourges which the Lord in ancient times inflicted on the 
people of Israel, that they might be afraid of subjecting 
themselves to similar calamities, he does not in any degree 
destroy the ground of their confidence ; he only shakes off 
their carnal torpor which suppresses faith, but does not 
strengthen it. Nor when he takes occasion from the case 
of the Israelites to exhort, " Let him that thinketh he stand- 
eth take heed lest he fall," (1 Cor. x. 12,) he does not bid 
us waver, as if we had no security for our stedfastness : he 
only removes arrogance and rash confidence in our strength, 
telling the Gentiles not to presume because the Jews had 
been cast off, and they had been admitted to their place, 
(Rom. xi. 20.) In that passage, indeed, he is not address- 
ing believers only, but also comprehends hypocrites, who 
gloried merely in external appearance ; nor is he addressing 
individuals, but contrasting the Jews and Gentiles, he first 
shows that the rejection of the former was a just punish- 
ment of their ingratitude and unbelief, and then exhorts the 
latter to beware lest pride and presumption deprive them of 
the grace of adoption which had lately been transferred to 
them. For as in that rejection of the Jews there still 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 123 

remained some who were not excluded from the covenant of 
adoption, so there might be some among the Gentiles who, 
possessing no true faith, were only puffed up with vain 
carnal confidence, and so abused the goodness of God to 
their own destruction. But though you should hold that the 
words were addressed to elect believers, no inconsistency 
will follow. It is one thing, in order to prevent believers 
from indulging vain confidence, to repress the temerity 
which, from the remains of the flesh, sometimes gains upon 
them, and it is another thing to strike terror into their con- 
sciences, and prevent them from feeling secure in the mercy 
of God. 

23. Then, when he bids us work out our salvation with 
fear and trembling, all he requires is, that we accustom our- 
selves to think very meanly of our own strength, and confide 
in the strength of the Lord. For nothing stimulates us so 
strongly to place all our confidence and assurance on the 
Lord as self-diffidence, and the anxiety produced by a con- 
sciousness of our calamitous condition. In this sense are we 
to understand the words of the Psalmist : " I will come into 
thy house in the multitude of thy mercy : and in thy fear 
will I worship toward thy holy temple," (Ps. v. 7.) Here he 
appropriately unites confident faith leaning on the divine 
mercy with religious fear, which of necessity we must feel 
whenever coming into the presence of the divine majesty, 
we are made aware by its splendour of the extent of our own 
impurity. Truly also does Solomon declare : " Happy is the 
man that feareth alway ; but he that hardeneth his heart 
falleth into mischief," (Prov. xxviii. 14.) The fear he speaks 
of is that which renders us more cautious, not that which 
produces despondency ; the fear which is felt when the mind 
confounded in itself resumes its equanimity in God, down- 
cast in itself, takes courage in God, distrusting itself, breathes 
confidence in God. Hence there is nothing inconsistent in 
believers being afraid, and at the same time possessing secure 
consolation as they alternately behold their own vanity, 
and direct their thoughts to the truth of God. How, it 
will be asked, can fear and faith dwell in the same mind ? 
Just in the same way as sluggishness and anxiety can so 


124 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

dwell. The ungodly court a state of lethargy that the fear 
of God may not annoy them ; and yet the judgment of God 
so urges that they cannot gain their desire. In the same way 
God can train his people to humility, and curb them by the 
bridle of modesty, while yet fighting bravely. And it is plain, 
from the context, that this was the Apostle's meaning, since 
he states, as the ground of fear and trembling, that it is God 
who worketh in us to will and to do of his good pleasure. 
In the same sense must we understand the words of the Pro- 
phet, " The children of Israel " " shall fear the Lord and his 
goodness in the latter days," (Hos. iii. 5.) For not only does 
piety beget reverence to God, but the sweet attractiveness 
of grace inspires a man, though desponding of himself, at once 
with fear and admiration, making him feel his dependence on 
God, and submit humbly to his power. 

24. Here, however, we give no countenance to that most 
pestilential philosophy which some semi-papists are at present 
beginning to broach in corners. Unable to defend the gross 
doubt inculcated by the Schoolmen, they have recourse to 
another fiction, that they may compound a mixture of faith 
and unbelief. They admit, that whenever we look to Christ 
we are furnished with full ground for hope ; but as we are ever 
unworthy of all the blessings which are offered us in Christ, 
they will have us to fluctuate and hesitate in the view of our 
unworthiness. In short, they give conscience a position be- 
tween hope and fear, making it alternate, by successive turns, 
to the one and the other. Hope and fear, again, they place 
in complete contrast, — the one falling as the other rises, and 
rising as the other falls. Thus Satan, finding the devices by 
which he was wont to destroy the certainty of faith too mani- 
fest to be now of any avail, is endeavouring, by indirect 
methods, to undermine it.1 But what kind of confidence is 
that which is ever and anon supplanted by despair ? They 
tell you, if you look to Christ salvation is certain ; if you 

1 The French is, " Voila comme Satan, quand il voit que par mensonge 
clair et ouvert il ne peust plus destruire la certitude de la foy, s'efforce en 
cachette et comme par dessous terre la ruiner." — Behold how Satan, when 
he sees that by clear and open falsehood he can no longer destroy the 
certainty of faith, is striving in secret, and as it were below ground, to 
ruin it. 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 125 

return to yourself damnation is certain. Therefore, your 
mind must be alternately ruled by diffidence and hope ; as if 
we were to imagine Christ standing at a distance, and not 
rather dwelling in us. We expect salvation from him — not 
because he stands aloof from us, but because ingrafting us 
into his body he not only makes us partakers of all his bene- 
fits, but also of himself. Therefore, I thus retort the argu- 
ment, If you look to yourself damnation is certain : but since 
Christ has been communicated to you with all his benefits, 
so that all which is his is made yours, you become a mem- 
ber of him, and hence one with him. His righteousness 
covers your sins — his salvation extinguishes your condemna- 
tion ; he interposes with his worthiness, and so prevents your 
unworthiness from coming into the view of God. Thus it 
truly is. It will never do to separate Christ from us, nor us 
from him ; but we must, with both hands, keep firm hold of 
that alliance by which he has rivetted us to himself. This 
the Apostle teaches us : " The body is dead because of sin ; 
but the spirit is life because of righteousness," (Rom. viii. 10.) 
According to the frivolous trifling of these objectors he ought 
to have said, Christ indeed has life in himself, but you, as 
you are sinners, remain liable to death and condemnation. 
Very different is his language. He tells us that the con- 
demnation which we of ourselves deserve is annihilated by 
the salvation of Christ ; and to confirm this he employs the 
argument to which I have referred, viz., that Christ is not 
external to us, but dwells in us ; and not only unites us to 
himself by an undivided bond of fellowship, but by a wondrous 
communion brings us daily into closer connection, until he 
becomes altogether one with us. And yet I deny not, as I 
lately said, that faith occasionally suffers certain interruptions 
when, by violent assault, its weakness is made to bend in this 
direction or in that ; and its light is buried in the thick dark- 
ness of temptation. Still happen what may, faith ceases not 
to long after God. 

25. The same doctrine is taught by Bernard when he treats 
professedly on this subject in his Fifth Homily on the Dedi- 
cation of the Temple : " By the blessing of God, sometimes 
meditating on the soul, methinks I find in it as it were two 


126 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

contraries. When I look at it as it is in itself and of itself, 
the truest thing I can say of it is, that it has been reduced 
to nothing. What need is there to enumerate each of its 
miseries ? how burdened with sin, obscured with darkness, 
ensnared by allurements, teeming with lusts, ruled by passion, 
filled with delusions, ever prone to evil, inclined to every 
vice ; lastly, full of ignominy and confusion. If all its right- 
eousnesses, when examined by the light of truth, are but as 
filthy rags, (Is. lxiv. 6,) what must we suppose its unrighteous- 
ness to be ? ' If, therefore, the light that is in thee be dark- 
ness, how great is that darkness?' (Matth. vi. 23.) What 
then ? man doubtless has been made subject to vanity — man 
has been reduced to nothing — man is nothing. And yet how 
is he whom God exalts utterly nothing ? How is he nothing 
to whom a divine heart has been given ? Let us breathe 
again, brethren. Although we are nothing in our hearts, 
perhaps something of us may lurk in the heart of God. O 
Father of mercies ! O Father of the miserable ! how plantest 
thou thy heart in us ? Where thy heart is, there is thy trea- 
sure also. But how are we thy treasure if we are nothing ? 
All nations before thee are as nothing. Observe, before thee ; 
not within thee. Such are they in the judgment of thy truth, 
but not such in regard to thy affection. Thou callest the 
things which be not as though they were ; and they are not, 
because thou callest them ' things that be not :' and yet 
they are because thou callest them. For though they are 
not as to themselves, yet they are with thee according to the 
declaration of Paul : ' Not of works, but of him that calleth,'" 
(Rom. ix. 11.) He then goes on to say that the connection 
is wonderful in both points of view. Certainly things which 
are connected together do not mutually destroy each other. 
This he explains more clearly in his conclusion in the follow- 
ing terms : " If, in both views, we diligently consider what 
we are, — in the one view our nothingness, in the other our 
greatness, — I presume our glorying will seem restrained ; but 
perhaps it is rather increased and confirmed, because we 
glory not in ourselves, but in the Lord. Our thought is, if he 
determined to save us we shall be delivered ; and here we 
begin again to breathe. But, ascending to a loftier height, 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 127 

let us seek the city of God, let us seek the temple, let us seek 
our home, let us seek our spouse. I have not forgotten myself 
when, with fear and reverence, I say, We are, — are in the heart 
of God. We are, by his dignifying, not by our own dignity." 

26. Moreover, the fear of the Lord, which is uniformly 
attributed to all the saints, and which, in one passage, is 
called " the beginning of wisdom, " in another wisdom itself, 
although it is one, proceeds from a twofold cause. God is en- 
titled to the reverence of a Father and a Lord. Hence he 
who desires duly to worship him, will study to act the part 
both of an obedient son and a faithful servant. The obedience 
paid to God as a Father he by his prophet terms honour ; 
the service performed to him as a master he terms fear. "A 
son honoureth his father, and a servant his master. If then 
I be a father, where is mine honour ? and if I be a master, 
where is my fear ?" l But while he thus distinguishes between 
the two, it is obvious that he at the same time confounds 
them. The fear of the Lord, therefore, may be defined 
reverence mingled with honour and fear. It is not strange 
that the same mind can entertain both feelings ; for he who 
considers with himself what kind of a father God is to us, 
will see sufficient reason, even were there no hell, why the 
thought of offending him should seem more dreadful than 
any death. But so prone is our carnal nature to indulgence 
in sin, that, in order to curb it in every way, we must also 
give place to the thought that all iniquity is abomination to 
the Master under whom we live ; that those who, by wicked 
lives, provoke his anger, will not escape his vengeance. 

27. There is nothing repugnant to this in the observation 
of John : " There is no fear in love ; but perfect love casteth 
out fear : because fear hath torment," (1 John iv. 18.) For 
he is speaking of the fear of unbelief, between which and the 
fear of believers there is a wide difference. The wicked do 
not fear God from any unwillingness to offend him, provided 
they could do so with impunity; but knowing that he is 
armed with power for vengeance, they tremble in dismay on 
hearing of his anger. And they thus dread his anger, because 

1 Ps. cxi. 10 ; Prov. i 7, be. 10, xv. 24 ; Job xxviii. 28 ; Mai. i. 6. 


128 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

they think it is impending over them, and they every moment 
expect it to fall upon their heads. But believers, as has been 
said, dread the offence even more than the punishment. They 
are not alarmed by the fear of punishment, as if it were im- 
pending over them,1 but are rendered the more cautious of 
doing anything to provoke it. Thus the Apostle addressing 
believers says, "Let no man deceive you with vain words ; for 
because of these things, the wrath of God cometh upon the 
children of disobedience," (Eph. v. 6 ; Col. iii. 6.) He does 
not threaten that wrath will descend upon them ; but he ad- 
monishes them, while they think how the wrath of God is 
prepared for the wicked, on account of the crimes which he 
had enumerated, not to run the risk of provoking it. It 
seldom happens that mere threatenings have the effect of 
arousing the reprobate ; nay, becoming more callous and hard- 
ened when God thunders verbally from heaven, they obsti- 
nately persist in their rebellion. It is only when actually 
smitten by his hand that they are forced, whether they will 
or not, to fear. This fear the sacred writers term servile, and 
oppose to the free and voluntary fear which becomes sons. 
Some, by a subtle distinction, have introduced an intermediate 
species, holding that that forced and servile fear sometimes 
subdues the mind, and leads spontaneously to proper fear. 

28. The divine favour to which faith is said to have respect, 
we understand to include in it the possession of salvation and 
eternal life. For if, when God is propitious, no good thing 
can be wanting to us, we have ample security for our salva- 
tion when assured of his love. " Turn us again, O God, and 
cause thy face to shine," says the Prophet, " and we shall be 
saved," (Ps. lxxx. 3.) Hence the Scriptures make the sum 
of our salvation to consist in the removal of all enmity, and 
our admission into favour ; thus intimating, that when God is 
reconciled all danger is past, and every thing good will befall 
us. Wherefore, faith apprehending the love of God has the 
promise both of the present and the future life, and ample 
security for all blessings, (Eph. ii. 14.) The nature of this 

1 Latin, " acsi cervicibus suis impenderet." — French, " comme si l'enfer 
leur etoit desia present pour les englouter ;"— as if hell were already pre- 
sent to engulf them. 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 129 

must be ascertained from the word. Faith does not promise 
us length of days, riches and honours, (the Lord not having 
been pleased that any of these should be appointed us ;) but 
is contented with the assurance, that however poor we may 
be in regard to present comforts, God will never fail us. The 
chief security lies in the expectation of future life, which is 
placed beyond doubt by the word of God. Whatever be the 
miseries and calamities which await the children of God in 
this world, they cannot make his favour cease to be complete 
happiness. Hence, when we were desirous to express the 
sum of blessedness, we designated it by the favour of God, 
from which, as their source, all kinds of blessings flow. And 
we may observe throughout the Scriptures, that they refer us 
to the love of God, not only when they treat of our eternal 
salvation, but of any blessing whatever. For which reason 
David sings, that the loving-kindness of God experienced by 
the pious heart is sweeter and more to be desired than life 
itself, (Ps. lxiii. 3.) In short, if we have every earthly com- 
fort to a wish, but are uncertain whether we have the love or 
the hatred of God, our felicity will be cursed, and therefore 
miserable. But if God lift on us the light of his fatherly 
countenance, our very miseries will be blessed, inasmuch as 
they will become helps to our salvation. Thus Paul, after 
bringing together all kinds of adversity, boasts that they can- 
not separate us from the love of God : and in his prayers he 
uniformly begins with the grace of God as the source of all 
prosperity. In like manner, to all the terrors which assail us 
David opposes merely the favour of God, — " Yea, though I 
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear 
no evil : for thou art with me," (Ps. xxiii. 4.) And we feel 
that our minds always waver until, contented with the grace 
of God, we in it seek peace, and feel thoroughly persuaded 
of what is said in the psalm, " Blessed is the nation whose 
God is the Lord, and the people whom he hath chosen for 
his own inheritance," (Ps. xxxiii. 12.) 

29. Free promise we make the foundation of faith, because 

in it faith properly consists. For though it holds that God 

is always true, whether in ordering or forbidding, promising 

or threatening ; though it obediently receive his commands, 

VOL. II. I 


130 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

observe his prohibitions, and give heed to his threatenings ; 
yet it propei'ly begins with promise, continues with it, and 
ends with it. It seeks life in God, life which is not found in 
commands or the denunciations of punishment, but in the 
promise of mercy. And this promise must be gratuitous ; 
for a conditional promise, which throws us back upon our 
works, promises life only in so far as we find it existing in 
ourselves. Therefore, if we would not have faith to waver 
and tremble, we must support it with the promise of salva- 
tion, which is offered by the Lord spontaneously and freely, 
from a regard to our misery, rather than our worth. Hence 
the Apostle bears this testimony to the Gospel, that it is the 
word of faith, (Rom. x. 8.) This he concedes not either 
to the precepts or the promises of the Law, since there is 
nothing which can establish our faith, but that free embassy 
by which God reconciles the world to himself. Hence he 
often uses faith and the Gospel as correlative terms, as when 
he says, that the ministry of the Gospel was committed to 
him for " obedience to the faith ;" that u it is the power of 
God unto salvation to every one that believeth ;" that 
" therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to 
faith," (Rom. i. 5, 16, 17.) No wonder : for seeing that the 
Gospel is " the ministry of reconciliation," (2 Cor. v. 18,) 
there is no other sufficient evidence of the divine favour, such 
as faith requires to know. Therefore, when we say, that 
faith must rest on a free promise, we deny not that believers 
accept and embrace the word of God in all its parts, but we 
point to the promise of mercy as its special object. Believers, 
indeed, ought to recognise God as the judge and avenger of 
wickedness ; and yet mercy is the object to which they pro- 
perly look, since he is exhibited to their contemplation as 
"■ good and ready to forgive," " plenteous in mercy," " slow 
to anger," " good to all," and shedding " his tender mercies 
over all his works," (Ps. lxxxvi. 5 ; ciii. 8 ; cxlv. 8, 9.) 

30. I stay not to consider the rabid objections of Pighius, 
and others like-minded, who inveigh against this restriction, as 
rending faith, and laying hold of one of its fragments. I admit, 
as I have already said, that the general object of faith (as they 
express it) is the truth of God, whether he threatens or gives 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 131 

hope of his favour. Accordingly, the Apostle attributes it 
to faith in Noah, that he feared the destruction of the world, 
when as yet it was not seen, (Heb. xi. 17.) If fear of im- 
pending punishment was a work of faith, threatenings ought 
not to be excluded in defining it. This is indeed true ; but 
we are unjustly and calumniously charged with denying that 
faith has respect to the whole word of God. We only mean 
to maintain these two points, — that faith is never decided 
until it attain to a free promise ; and that the only way in 
which faith reconciles us to God is by uniting us with Christ. 
Both are deserving of notice. We are inquiring after a 
faith which separates the children of God from the reprobate, 
believers from unbelievers. Shall every man, then, who be- 
lieves that God is just in what he commands, and true in 
what he threatens, be on that account classed with believers ? 
Very far from it. Faith, then, has no firm footing until it 
stand in the mercy of God. Then what end have we in view 
in discoursing of faith ? Is it not that we may understand 
the way of salvation ? But how can faith be saving, unless in 
so far as it ingrafts us into the body of Christ ? There is no 
absurdity, therefore, when, in defining it, we thus press its 
special object, and, by way of distinction, add to the generic 
character the particular mark which distinguishes the believer 
from the unbeliever. In short, the malicious have nothing 
to carp at in this doctrine, unless they are to bring the same 
censure against the Apostle Paul, who specially designates 
the Gospel as " the word of faith," (Rom. x. 8.) 

31. Hence again we infer, as has already been explained, 
that faith has no less need of the word than the frifit of a 
tree has of a living root ; because, as David testifies, none can 
hope in God but those Avho know his name, (Ps. ix. 10.) 
This knowledge, however, is not left to every man's imagi- 
nation, but depends on the testimony which God himself 
gives to his goodness. This the same Psalmist confirms 
in another passage, " Thy salvation according to thy word," 
(Ps. cxix. 41.) Again, " Save me," " I hoped in thy word," 
(Ps. cxix. 146, 147.) Here we must attend to the relation 
of faith to the word, and to salvation as its consequence. 
Still, however, we exclude not the power of God. If faith 


132 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

cannot support itself in the view of this power, it never will 
give Him the honour which is due. Paul seems to relate a 
trivial or very ordinary circumstance with regard to Abraham, 
when he says, that he believed that God, who had given him 
the promise of a blessed seed, was able also to perform it, 
(Rom. iv. 21.) And in like manner, in another passage, he 
says of himself, " I know whom I have believed, and am 
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have com- 
mitted unto him against that day," (2 Tim. i. 12.) But let any 
one consider with himself, how he is ever and anon assailed 
with doubts in regard to the power of God, and he will readily 
perceive, that those who duly magnify it have made no small 
progress in faith. We all acknowledge that God can do 
whatsoever he pleases ; but while every temptation, even the 
most trivial, fills us with fear and dread, it is plain that we 
derogate from the power of God, by attaching less importance 
to his promises than to Satan's threatenings against them.1 

This is the reason why Isaiah, when he would impress 
on the hearts of the people the certainty of faith, dis- 
courses so magnificently of the boundless power of God. 
He often seems, after beginning to speak of the hope of 
pardon and reconciliation, to digress, and unnecessarily take 
a long circuitous course, describing how wonderfully God 
rules the fabric of heaven and earth, with the whole course 
of nature ; and yet he introduces nothing which is not 
appropriate to the occasion ; because, unless the power of 
God, to which all things are possible, is presented to our 
eye, our ears malignantly refuse admission to the word, 
or set ^io just value upon it. We may add, that an effec- 
tual power is here meant ; for piety, as it has elsewhere 
been seen, always makes a practical application of the power 
of God ; in particular, keeps those works in view in which he 
has declared himself to be a Father. Hence the frequent 
mention in Scripture of redemption ; from which the Israelites 
might learn, that he who had once been the author of salva- 
tion would be its perpetual guardian. By his own example, 

1 The French adds, " Combien que nous ayons les promesses de Dieu 
pour nous munir a l'encontre ;" — although we have the promise of God to 
strengthen us for the encounter. 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 133 

also, David reminds us, that the benefits which God has 
bestowed privately on any individual, tend to confirm his faith 
for the time to come ; nay, that when God seems to have 
forsaken us, we ought to extend our view farther, and take 
courage from his former favours, as is said in another psalm, 
" I remember the days of old : I meditate on all thy works," 
(Ps. cxliii. 5.) Again, " I will remember the works of the 
Lord ; surely I will remember thy wonders of old," (Ps. 
lxxvii. 11.) But because all our conceptions of the power 
and works of God are evanescent without the word, we are 
not rash in maintaining, that there is no faith until God pre- 
sent us with clear evidence of his grace. 

Here, however, a question might be raised as to the view to 
be taken of Sarah and Rebekah, both of whom, impelled as it 
would seem by zeal for the faith, went beyond the limits of the 
word. Sarah, in her eager desire for the promised seed, gave 
her maid to her husband. That she sinned in many respects 
is not to be denied ; but the only fault to which I now refer 
is her being carried away by zeal, and not confining herself 
within the limits prescribed by the word. It is certain, 
however, that her desire proceeded from faith. Rebekah, 
again, divinely informed of the election of her son Jacob, 
procures the blessing for him by a wicked stratagem ; de- 
ceives her husband, who was a witness and minister of divine 
grace ; forces her son to lie ; by various frauds and impos- 
tures coiTupts divine truth ; in fine, by exposing his promise 
to scorn, does what in her lies to make it of no effect. And 
yet this conduct, however vicious and reprehensible, was not 
devoid of faith. She must have overcome many obstacles 
before she obtained so strong a desire of that which, without 
any hope of earthly advantage, was full of difficulty and 
danger. In the same way, we cannot say that the holy 
patriarch Isaac was altogether void of faith, in that, after he 
had been similarly informed of the honour transferred to the 
younger son, he still continues his predilection in favour of his 
first-born, Esau. These examples certainly show that error is 
often mingled with faith ; and yet that when faith is real, it 
always obtains the pre-eminence. For as the particular 
error of Rebekah did not render the blessing of no effect, 


134 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

neither did it nullify the faith which generally ruled in her 
mind, and was the principle and cause of that action. In this, 
nevertheless, Rebekah showed how prone the human mind 
is to turn aside whenever it gives itself the least indulgence. 
But though defect and infirmity obscure faith, they do not 
extinguish it. Still they admonish us how carefully we 
ought to cling to the word of God, and at the same time 
confirm what we have taught, viz., that faith gives way 
when not supported by the word, just as the minds of 
Sarah, Isaac, and Rebekah, would have lost themselves in 
devious paths, had not the secret restraint of Providence kept 
them obedient to the word. 

32. On the other hand, we have good ground for compre- 
hending all the promises in Christ, since the Apostle com- 
prehends the whole Gospel under the knowledge of Christ, 
and declares that all the promises of God are in him yea, 
and amen.1 The reason for this is obvious. Every promise 
which God makes is evidence of his good will. This is 
invariably true, and is not inconsistent with the fact, that 
the large benefits which the divine liberality is constantly 
bestowing on the wicked are preparing them for heavier 
judgment. As they neither think that these proceed from 
the hand of the Lord, nor acknowledge them as his, or if 
they do so acknowledge them, never regard them as proofs 
of his favour, they are in no respect more instructed thereby 
in his mercy than brute beasts, which, according to their 
condition, enjoy the same liberality, and yet never look 
beyond it. Still it is true, that by rejecting the promises 
generally offered to them, they subject themselves to severer 
punishment. For though it is only when the promises are 
received in faith that their efficacy is manifested, still their 
reality and power are never extinguished by our infidelity 
or ingratitude. Therefore, when the Lord by his promises 
invites us not only to enjoy the fruits of his kindness, but 
also to meditate upon them, he at the same time declares his 
love. Thus we are brought back to our statement, that 
every promise is a manifestation of the divine favour toward 

1 Rom. i. 3 ; 1 Cor. ii. 2 ; 2 Cor. i. 20. 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 135 

us. Now, without controversy, God loves no man out of 
Christ. He is the beloved Son, in whom the love of the 
Father dwells, and from whom it afterwards extends to us. 
Thus Paul says, " In whom he hath made us accepted in the 
Beloved," (Eph. i. 6.) It is by his intervention, therefore, 
that love is diffused so as to reach us. Accordingly, in 
another passage, the Apostle calls Christ u our peace," (Eph. 
ii. 14,) and also represents him as the bond by which the 
Father is united to us in paternal affection, (Rom. viii. 3.) 
It follows, that whenever any promise is made to us, we 
must turn our eyes toward Christ. Hence, with good reason, 
Paul declares that in him all the promises of God are con- 
firmed and completed, (Rom. xv. 8.) Some examples are 
brought forward as repugnant to this view. When Naaman 
the Syrian made inquiry at the prophet as to the true mode 
of worshipping God, we cannot (it is said) suppose that he 
was informed of the Mediator, and yet he is commended for 
his piety, (2 Kings v. 17-19.) Nor could Cornelius, a 
Roman heathen, be acquainted with what was not known to 
all the Jews, and at best known obscurely. And yet his 
alms and prayers were acceptable to God, (Acts x. 31,) 
while the prophet by his answer approved of the sacrifices 
of Naaman. In both, this must have been the result of 
faith. In like manner, the eunuch to whom Philip was 
sent, had he not been endued with some degree of faith, 
never would have incurred the fatigue and expense of a long 
and difficult journey to obtain an opportunity of worship, 
(Acts viii. 27, 31;) and yet we see how, when interrogated 
by Philip, he betrays his ignorance of the Mediator. I 
admit that, in some respect, their faith was not explicit 
either as to the person of Christ, or the power and office 
assigned him by the Father. Still it is certain that they 
were imbued with principles which might give some, though 
a slender, foretaste of Christ. This should not be thought 
strange ; for the eunuch would not have hastened from a 
distant country to Jerusalem to an unknown God ; nor could 
Cornelius, after having once embraced the Jewish religion, 
have lived so long in Judea without becoming acquainted 
with the rudiments of sound doctrine. In regard to Naaman, 


136 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

it is absurd to suppose that Elisha, while he gave him many- 
minute precepts, said nothing of the principal matter. There- 
fore, although their knowledge of Christ may have been 
obscure, we cannot suppose that they had no such know- 
ledge at all. They used the sacrifices of the Law, and must 
have distinguished them from the spurious sacrifices of the 
Gentiles, by the end to wrhich they referred, viz., Christ. 

33. A simple external manifestation of the word ought to 
be amply sufficient to produce faith, did not our blindness ' 
and perverseness prevent. But such is the proneness of our 
mind to vanity, that it can never adhere to the truth of 
God, and such its dulness, that it is always blind even in 
his light. Hence without the illumination of the Spirit the 
word has no effect ; and hence also it is obvious that faith is 
something higher than human understanding. Nor were it 
sufficient for the mind to be illumined by the Spirit of God 
unless the heart also were strengthened and supported by 
his power. Here the Schoolmen go completely astray, 
dwelling entirely in their consideration of faith, on the bare 
simple assent of the understanding, and altogether overlook- 
ing confidence and security of heart. Faith is the special 
gift of God in both ways, — in purifying the mind so as to 
give it a relish for divine truth, and afterwards in establishing 
it therein. For the Spirit does not merely originate faith, 
but gradually increases it, until by its means he conducts us 
into the heavenly kingdom. " That good thing which was 
committed unto thee," says Paul, " keep by the Holy Ghost 
which dwelleth in us," (2 Tim. i. 14.) In what sense Paul 
says, (Gal. iii. 2,) that the Spirit is given by the hearing of 
faith, may be easily explained. If there were only a single 
gift of the Spirit, he who is the author and cause of faith 
could not without absurdity be said to be its effect; but 
after celebrating the gifts with which God adorns his church, 
and by successive additions of faith leads it to perfection, 
there is nothing strange in his ascribing to faith the very 
gifts which faith prepares us for receiving. It seems to 
some paradoxical, when it is said that none can believe 
Christ save those to whom it is given ; but this is partly 
because they do not observe how recondite and sublime 


CHAP. H. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 137 

heavenly wisdom is, or "how dull the mind of man in discern- 
ing divine mysteries, and partly because they pay no regard 
to that firm and stable constancy of heart Avhich is the chief 
part of faith. 

34.1 But as Paul argues, el What man knoweth the things 
of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him ? even so 
the things of God knoweth no man but the Spirit of God," 
(1 Cor. ii. 11.) If in regard to divine truth we hesitate even 
as to those things which we see with the bodily eye, how can 
we be firm and stedfast in regard to those divine promises 
which neither the eye sees nor the mind comprehends ? 
Here human discernment is so defective and lost, that the 
first step of advancement in the school of Christ is to re- 
nounce it, (Matth. xi. 25 ; Luke x. 21.) Like a veil inter- 
posed, it prevents us from beholding divine mysteries, which 
are revealed only to babes. " Flesh and blood " doth not 
reveal them, (Matth. xvi. 17.) ei The natural man receiveth 
not the things of the Spirit of God : for they are foolishness 
unto him ; neither can he know them, for they are spiritually 
discerned," (1 Cor. ii. 14.) The supplies of the Holy Spirit 
are therefore necessary, or rather his agency is here the 
only strength. " For who hath known the mind of the 
Lord ? or who hath been his counseller ?" (Rom. xi. 34 ;) 
but u The Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of 
God," (1 Cor. ii. 10.) Thus it is that we attain to the mind 
of Christ : " No man can come to me, except the Father 
which hath " sent me draw him : and I will raise him up at 
the last day." " Every man therefore that hath heard, and 
learned of the Father, cometh unto me. Not that any man 
hath seen the Father, save he which is of God, he hath seen 
the Father," (John vi. 44, 45, 46.) Therefore, as we cannot 
possibly come to Christ unless drawn by the Spirit, so when 
we are drawn we are both in mind and spirit exalted far 
above our own understanding. For the soul, when illumined 
by him, receives as it were a new eye, enabling it to contem- 
plate heavenly mysteries, by the splendour of which it was 
previously dazzled. And thus, indeed, it is only when the 

1 The French thus begins the section : " Lequel erreur est. facile a 
convaincre ;" — This error is easily refuted. 


138 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

human intellect is irradiated by the light of the Holy Spirit that 
it begins to have a taste of those things which pertain to the 
kingdom of God ; previously it was too stupid and senseless to 
have any relish for them. Hence our Saviour, when clearly 
declaring the mysteries of the kingdom to the two disciples, 
makes no impression till he opens their minds to understand 
the Scriptures, (Luke xxiv. 27, 45.) Hence also, jthough he 
had taught the Apostles with his own divine lips, it was still 
necessary to send the Spirit of truth to instil into their 
minds the same doctrine which they had heard with their 
ears. The word is, in regard to those to whom it is preached, 
like the sun which shines upon all, but is of no use to the 
blind. In this matter we are all naturally blind ; and hence 
the word cannot penetrate our mind unless the Spirit, that 
internal teacher, by his enlightening power make an entrance 
for it. 

35. Having elsewhere shown more fully, when treating of 
the corruption of our nature, how little able men are to 
believe, (Book II. c. ii. iii.,) I will not fatigue the reader 
by again repeating it. Let it suffice to observe, that the 
spirit of faith is used by Paul as synonymous with the very 
faith which we receive from the Spirit, but which we have 
not naturally, (2 Cor. iv. 13.) Accordingly, he prays for 
the Thessalonians, " that our God would count you worthy 
of this calling, and fulfil all the good pleasure of his good- 
ness, and the work of faith with power," (2 Thess. i. 2.) 
Here, by designating faith the icork of God, and distinguish- 
ing it by way of epithet, appropriately calling it his good 
pleasure, he declares that it is not of man's own nature ; and 
not contented with this, he adds, that it is an illustration 
of divine power. In addressing the Corinthians, when he 
tells them that faith stands not " in the wisdom of man, but 
in the power of God," (1 Cor. ii. 4,) he is no doubt speaking 
of external miracles ; but as the reprobate are blinded when 
they behold them, he also includes that internal seal of which 
he elsewhere makes mention. And the better to display his 
liberality in this most excellent gift, God does not bestow it 
upon all promiscuously, but, by special privilege, imparts it to 
whom he will. To this effect Ave have already quoted pass- 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 139 

ages of Scripture, as to which Augustine, their faithful ex- 
positor, exclaims, (De Verbo Apost. Serm. ii.) rt Our Saviour, 
to teach that faith in him is a gift, not a merit, says, 'No 
man can come to me, except the Father, which hath sent me, 
draw him,' (John vi. 44.) It is strange when two persons 
hear, the one despises, the other ascends. Let him who de- 
spises impute it to himself; let him who ascends not arrogate 
it to himself." In another passage he asks, " Wherefore is 
it given to the one, and not to the other ? I am not ashamed 
to say, This is one of the deep things of the cross. From 
some unknown depth of the judgments of God, which we 
cannot scrutinize, all our ability proceeds. I see that I am 
able ; but how I am able I see not : — this far only I see, that 
it is of God. But why the one, and not the other ? This is 
too great for me : it is an abyss, a depth of the cross. I can 
cry out with wonder ; not discuss and demonstrate." The 
whole comes to this, that Christ, when he produces faith in 
us by the agency of his Spirit, at the same time ingrafts us 
into his body, that we may become partakers of all blessino-s. 
3(3. The next thing necessary is, that what the mind has 
imbibed be transferred into the heart. The word is not 
received in faith when it merely flutters in the brain, but 
when it has taken deep root in the heart, and become an in- 
vincible bulwark to withstand and repel all the assaults of 
temptation. But if the illumination of the Spirit is the true 
source of understanding in the intellect, much more manifest 
is his agency in the confirmation of the heart ; inasmuch as 
there is more distrust in the heart than blindness in the mind ; 
and it is more difficult to inspire the soul with security than 
to imbue it with knowledge. Hence ''the Spirit performs the 
part of a seal, sealing upon our hearts the very promises, the 
certainty of which was previously impressed upon our minds. 
It also serves as an earnest in establishing and confirming 
these promises. Thus the Apostle says, " In whom also, after 
that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of pro- 
mise, which is the earnest of our inheritance," (Eph. i. 13, 14.) 
You see how he teaches that the hearts of believers are 
stamped with the Spirit as with a seal, and calls it the Spirit 
of promise, because it ratifies the gospel to us. In like man- 


140 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

ner he says to the Corinthians, " God hath also sealed us, 
and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts," (2 Cor. i. 22.) 
And again, when speaking of a full and confident hope, he 
founds it on the " earnest of the Spirit," (2 Cor. v. 5.) 

37. I am not forgetting what I formerly said, and experi- 
ence brings daily to remembrance ; viz., that faith is subject 
to various doubts,1 so. that the minds of believers are seldom 
at rest, or at least are not always tranquil. Still, whatever 
be the engines by which they are shaken, they either escape 
from the whirlpool of temptation, or remain stedfast in their 
place. Faith finds security and protection in the words of 
the psalm, " God is our refuge and strength, a very present 
help in trouble ; therefore will not we fear, though the earth 
be removed, and the mountains be carried into the midst of 
the sea," (Ps. xlvi. 1, 2.) This delightful tranquillity is else- 
where described : u I laid me down and slept ; I awaked, for 
the Lord sustained me," (Ps. iii. 5.) Not that David was 
uniformly in this joyful frame ; but in so far as the measure 
of his faith made him sensible of the divine favour, he glories 
in intrepidly despising every thing that could disturb his 
peace of mind. Hence the Scripture, when it exhorts us to 
faith, bids us be at peace. In Isaiah it is said, " In quietness 
and in confidence shall be your strength," (Is. xxx. 15;) and 
in the psalm, " Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for 
him." Corresponding to this is the passage in the Hebrews, 
" Ye have need of patience," &c, (Heb. x. 36.) 

38. Hence we may judge how pernicious is the scholastic 
dogma,2 that wre can have no stronger evidence of the divine 
favour toward us than moral conjecture, according as each 
individual deems himself not unworthy of it. Doubtless, if 
we are to determine by our works in what way the Lord 
stands affected towards us, I admit that we cannot even get 
the length of a feeble conjecture : but since faith should 
accord with the free and simple promise, there is no room 
left for ambiguity. With what kind of confidence, pray, 
shall we be armed if we reason in this way — God is propi- 

1 French, " Doutes, solicitudes, et detresses ;" — doubts, anxieties, and 
distresses. 

2 French, " La doctrine des theologiens sophistes ;" — the doctrine of 
sophistical theologians. 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 141 

tious to us, provided we deserve it by the purity of our lives ? 
But since we have reserved this subject for discussion in its 
proper place, we shall not prosecute it farther at present, 
especially seeing it is already plain that nothing is more ad- 
verse to faith than conjecture, or any other feeling akin to 
doubt. Nothing can be worse than their perversion of the 
passage of Ecclesiastes, which is ever in their mouths : " No 
man knoweth either love or hatred by all that is before them," 
(Eccl. ix. I.1) For without insisting that the passage is 
erroneously rendered in the common version — even a child 
cannot fail to perceive what Solomon's meaning is, — viz., that 
any one who would ascertain, from the present state of things, 
who are in the favour or under the displeasure of God, labours 
in vain, and torments himself to no useful purpose, since " all 
things come alike to all ;" " to him that sacrificeth, and to 
him that sacrificeth not :" and hence God does not always 
declare his love to those on whom he bestows uninterrupted 
prosperity, nor his hatred against those whom he afflicts. 
And it tends to prove the vanity of the human intellect, that 
it is so completely in the dark as to matters which it is of the 
highest importance to know. Thus Solomon had said a little 
before, u That which befalleth the sons of men befalleth 
beasts ; even one thing befalleth them : as the one dieth, so 
dieth the other," (Eccl. iii. 19.) Were any one thence to 
infer that we hold the immortality of the soul by conjecture 
merely, would he not justly be deemed insane ? Are those 
then sane who cannot obtain any certainty of the divine 
favour, because the carnal eye is now unable to discern it 
from the present appearance of the world ? 

39. But, they say, it is rash and presumptuous to pretend 
to an undoubted knowledge of the divine will. I would 
grant this, did we hold that we were able to subject the 
incomprehensible counsel of God to our feeble intellect. But 
when we simply say with Paul, " We have received not 
the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God ; that 
we might know the things that are freely given to us of 
God," (1 Cor. ii. 12,) what can they oppose to this, without 

1 See Bernard, Serin, ii. in Die Ascensionis, and Serin, ii. in Octava 
Paschae. 


142 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

offering insult to the Spirit of God ? But if it is sacrilege to 
charge the revelation which he has given us with falsehood, 
or uncertainty, or ambiguity, how can we be wrong in main- 
taining its certainty ? But they still exclaim, that there is 
great temerity in our presuming to glory in possessing the 
Spirit of God.1 Who could believe that these men, who 
desire to be thought the masters of the world, could be so 
stupid as to err thus grossly in the very first principles of 
religion ? To me, indeed, it would be incredible, did not 
their own writings make it manifest. Paul declares that 
those only are the sons of God who are led by his Spirit, 
(Rom. viii. 14;) these men would have those who are the 
sons of God to be led by their own, and void of the divine 
Spirit. He tells us that we call God our Father in terms 
dictated by the Spirit, who alone bears witness with our 
spirit that we are the sons of God, (Rom. viii. 16;) they, 
though they forbid us not to invoke God, withdraw the 
Spirit, by whose guidance he is duly invoked. He declares 
that those only are the servants of Christ who are led by the 
Spirit of Christ, (Rom. viii. 9 ;) they imagine a Christianity 
which has no need of the Spirit of Christ. He holds out the 
hope of a blessed resurrection to those only who feel His 
Spirit dwelling in them, (Rom. viii. 11 ;) they imagine hope 
when there is no such feeling. But perhaps they will say, 
that they deny not the necessity of being endued with the 
Spirit, but only hold it to be the part of modesty and humility 
not to recognise it. What, then, does Paul mean, when he 
says to the Corinthians, " Examine yourselves whether ye 
be in the faith : prove your own selves. Know ye not your 
own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be repro- 
bates ?" (2 Cor. xiii. 5.) John, moreover, says, " Hereby we 
know that he abideth in us by the Spirit which he hath given 
us," (1 John iii. 24.) And what else is it than to bring the 
promises of Christ into doubt, when we would be deemed 
servants of Christ without having his Spirit, whom he 
declared that he would pour out on all his people ? (Isa. xliv. 


1 The French adds, " En quoy ils demonstrent grandernent leur betise ;" 
— In this they give a great demonstration of their stupidity. 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 143 

3.) What ! do we not insult the Holy Spirit, when we 
separate faith, which is his peculiar work, from himself? 
These being the first rudiments of religion, it is the most 
Avretched blindness to charge Christians with arrogance, for 
presuming to glory in the presence of the Holy Spirit ; a 
glorying without which Christianity itself does not exist. 
The example of these men illustrates the truth of our Savi- 
our's declaration, that his Spirit " the world cannot receive, 
because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him ; but ye know 
him, for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you," (John 
xiv. 17.) 

40. That they may not attempt to undermine the certainty 
of faith in one direction only, they attack it in another, viz., 
that though it be lawful for the believer, from his actual state 
of righteousness, to form a judgment as to the favour of God, 
the knowledge of final perseverance still remains in suspense. 
An admirable security, indeed, is left us, if, for the present 
moment only, we can judge from moral conjecture that we are 
in grace, but know not how we are to be to-morrow ! Very 
different is the language of the Apostle, " I am persuaded 
that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor 
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, 
nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate 
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord," 
(Rom. viii. 38.) They endeavour to evade the force of this 
by frivolously pretending that the Apostle had this assurance 
by special revelation. They are too well caught thus to 
escape ; for in that passage he is treating not of his indivi- 
dual experience, but of the blessings which all believers in 
common derive from faith. But then Paul in another passage 
alarms us by the mention of our weakness and inconstancy, 
" Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall," 
(1 Cor. x. 12.) True ; but this he says not to inspire us 
with terror, but that we may learn to humble ourselves under 
the mighty hand of God, as Peter explains, (1 Pet. v. 6.) 
Then how preposterous is it to limit the certainty of faith to a 
point of time ; seeing it is the property of faith to pass beyond 
the whole course of this life, and stretch forward to a future 
immortality ? Therefore, since believers owe it to the favour 


144 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

of God, that, enlightened by his Spirit, they, through faith, 
enjoy the prospect of heavenly life ; there is so far from 
an approach to arrogance in such glorying, that any one 
ashamed to confess it, instead of testifying modesty or sub- 
mission, rather betrays extreme ingratitude, by maliciously 
suppressing the divine goodness. 

4 1 . Since the nature of faith could not be better or more 
clearly evinced than by the substance of the promise on which 
it leans as its proper foundation, and without which it 
immediately falls or rather vanishes away, we have derived 
our definition from it — a definition, however, not at all at 
variance with that definition, or rather description, which the 
Apostle accommodates to his discourse, when he says that 
faith is " the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of 
things not seen," (Heb. xi. 1.) For by the term substance, 
(umoraoig,) he means a kind of prop on which the pious mind 
rests and leans. As if he had said, that faith is a kind of 
certain and secure possession of those things which are pro- 
mised to us by God; unless we prefer taking vwoaratig for 
confidence. I have no objection to this, though I am more 
inclined to adopt the other interpretation, which is more 
generally received. Again, to intimate that until the last 
day, when the books will be opened, (Dan. vii. 10 ; Rev. 
xx. 12,) the things pertaining to our salvation are too lofty 
to be perceived by our sense, seen by our eyes, or handled 
by our hands, and that in the meantime there is no 
possible way in which these can be possessed by us, unless 
we can transcend the reach of our own intellect, and raise 
our eye above all worldly objects ; in short, surpass our- 
selves, he adds that this certainty of possession relates to 
things which are only hoped for, and therefore not seen. 
For as Paul says, (Rom. viii. 24,) " hope that is seen is not 
hope," that we " hope for that we see not." "When he calls 
it the evidence or proof, or, as Augustine repeatedly renders 
it, (see Horn, in Joann. 79 and 95,) the conviction of things not 
present, the Greek term being 'iXtyyog, it is the same as if he 
had called it the appearance of things not apparent, the sight 
of things not seen, the clearness of things obscure, the pre- 
sence of things absent, the manifestation of things hid. For 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 145 

the mysteries of God (and to this class belong the things 
which pertain to our salvation) cannot be discerned in them- 
selves, or, as it is expressed, in their own nature ; but we 
behold them only in his word, of the truth of which we ought 
to be as firmly persuaded as if we held that every thing which 
it says were done and completed. But how can the mind 
rise to such a perception and foretaste of the divine good- 
ness, without being at the same time wholly inflamed with 
love to God ? The abundance of joy which God has treasured 
up for those who fear him cannot be truly known without 
making a most powerful impression. He who is thus once 
affected is raised and carried entirely towards him. Hence 
it is not strange that no sinister perverse heart ever expe- 
riences this feeling, by which, transported to heaven itself, 
we are admitted to the most hidden treasures of God, and 
the holiest recesses of his kingdom, which must not be pro- 
faned by the entrance of a heart that is impure. For what 
the Schoolmen say as to the priority of love to faith and hope 
is a mere dream, (see Sent. Lib. iii. Dist. 25, &c.,) since it 
is faith alone that first engenders love. How much better is 
Bernard, " The testimony of conscience, which Paul calls 
' the rejoicing' of believers, I believe to consist in three 
things. It is necessary, first of all, to believe that you can- 
not have remission of sins except by the indulgence of God ; 
secondly, that you cannot have any good work at all unless he 
also give it ; lastly, that you cannot by any works merit eternal 
life unless -it also be freely given," (Bernard, Serm. i. in An- 
nuntiatione.) Shortly after he adds, " These things are not 
sufficient, but are a kind of commencement of faith ; for while 
believing that your sins can only be forgiven by God, you 
must also hold that they are not forgiven until persuaded by 
the testimony of the Holy Spirit that salvation is treasured 
up for us ; that as God pardons sins, and gives merits, and 
after merits rewards, you cannot halt at that beginning." But 
these and other topics will be considered in their own place ; 
let it suffice at present to understand what faith is. 

42. Wherever this living faith exists, it must have the 
hope of eternal life as its inseparable companion, or rather 
must of itself beget and manifest it ; where it is wanting, how- 

VOL. II. k 


146 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

ever clearly and elegantly we may discourse of faith, It is cer- 
tain we have it not. For if faith is (as has been said) a firm 
persuasion of the truth of God — a persuasion that it can never 
be false, never deceive, never be in vain, those who have 
received this assurance must at the same time expect that 
God will perform his promises, which in their conviction are 
absolutely true ; so that in one word hope is nothing more 
than the expectation of those things which faith previously 
believes to have been truly promised by God. Thus, faith 
believes that God is true ; hope expects that in due season 
he will manifest his truth. Faith believes that he is our 
Father ; hope expects that he will always act the part of a 
Father towards us. Faith believes that eternal life has 
been given to us ; hope expects that it will one day be re- 
vealed. Faith is the foundation on which hope rests ; hope 
nourishes and sustains faith. For as no man can expect any 
thing from God without previously believing his promises, 
so, on the other hand, the weakness of our faith, which might 
grow weary and fall away, must be supported and cherished 
by patient hope and expectation. For this reason Paul justly 
says, " We are saved by hope," (Rom. viii. 24.) For while 
hope silently waits for the Lord, it restrains faith from hast- 
ening on with too much precipitation, confirms it when it 
might waver in regard to the promises of God or begin to 
doubt of their truth, refreshes it when it might be fatigued, 
extends its view to the final goal, so as not to allow it to give up 
in the middle of the course, or at the very outset. In short, 
by constantly renovating and reviving, it is ever and anon 
furnishing more vigour for perseverance. On the whole, how" 
necessary the reinforcements of hope are to establish faith 
will better appear if we reflect on the numerous forms of 
temptation by which those who have embraced the word of 
God are assailed and shaken. First, the Lord often keeps 
us in suspense, by delaying the fulfilment of his promises 
much longer than we could wish. Here the office of hope 
is to perform what the prophet enjoins, " Though it tarry, 
wait for it," (Hab. ii. 3.) Sometimes he not only permits 
faith to grow languid, but even openly manifests his displea- 
sure. Here there is still greater necessity for the aid of hope, 


CHAP. II. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 147 

that we may be able to say with another prophet, u I will 
wait upon the Lord that hideth his face from the house of 
Jacob, and I will look for him," (Isaiah viii. 17.) Scoffers 
also rise up, as Peter tells us, and ask, " Where is the pro- 
mise of his coming ? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things 
continue as they were from the beginning of the creation," 
(2 Pet. iii. 4.) Nay, the world and the flesh insinuate the 
same thing. Here faith must be supported by the patience 
of hope, and fixed on the contemplation of eternity, consider 
that " one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a 
thousand years as one day," (2 Pet. iii. 8 ; Ps. xc. 4.) 

43. On account of this connection and affinity Scripture 
sometimes confounds the two terms faith and hope. For when 
Peter says that we are " kept by the power of God through 
faith until salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time," 
(1 Pet. i. 5,) he attributes to faith what more properly be- 
longs to hope. And not without cause, since we have already 
shown that hope is nothing else than the food and strength 
of faith. Sometimes the two are joined together, as in the 
same Epistle, " That your faith and hope might be in God," 
(1 Pet. i. 21.) Paul, again, in the Epistle to the Philip- 
pians, from hope deduces expectation, (Phil. i. 20,) because 
in hoping patiently we suspend our wishes until God manifest 
his own time. The whole of this subject may be better under- 
stood from the tenth chapter of the Ejnstle to the Hebrews, 
to which I have already adverted. Paul, in another passage, 
though not in strict propriety of speech, expresses the same 
thing in these words, u For we through the Spirit wait for the 
hope of righteousness by faith," (Gal. v. 5 ;) that is, after em- 
bracing the testimony of the Gospel as to free love, we wait 
till God openly manifest what is now only an object of hope. 
It is now obvious how absurdly Peter Lombard lays down a 
double foundation of hope, viz., the grace of God and the 
merit of works, (Sent. Lib. iii. Dist. 26.) Hope cannot have 
any other object than faith has. But we have already shown 
clearly that the only object of faith is the mercy of God, to 
which, to use the common expression, it must look with both 
eyes. But it is worth while to listen to the strange reason 
which he adduces. If you presume, says he, to hope for any 


148 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK IIT. 

thing without merit, it should be called not hope, but pre- 
sumption. Who, dear reader, does not execrate the gross 
stupidity1 which calls it rashness and presumption to confide 
in the truth of God ? The Lord desires us to expect every- 
thing from his goodness, and yet these men tell us it is pre- 
sumption to rest in it. O teacher, worthy of the pupils whom 
you found in these insane raving schools ! Seeing that, by 
the oracles of God, sinners are enjoined to entertain the hope 
of salvation, let us willingly presume so far on his truth as 
to cast away all confidence in our works, and trusting in his 
mercy, venture to hope. He who hath said, " According to 
your faith be it unto you," (Matth. ix. 29,) will never deceive. 

1 Latin, " Quis non merito, amice lector, tales bestias execretur ?" French, 
" Je vous prie, mes amis, qui se tiendra de maudire telles bestes ?" — I pray 
you, my friends, who can refrain from execrating such beasts ? 


CHAP. HI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 149 


CHAPTER III. 

REGENERATION BY FAITH. Of/ REPENTANCE. 

This chapter is divided into five parts. I. The title of the chapter 
seems to promise a treatise on Faith, but the only subject here considered 
is Kepentance, the inseparable attendant of faith. And, first, various 
opinions on the subject of repentance are stated, sec. 1-4. II. An 
exposition of the orthodox doctrine of Repentance, sec. 5-9. HI. Rea- 
sons why repentance must be prolonged to the last moment of life, sec. 
10-14. IV. Of the fruits of repentance, or its object and tendency, 
sec. 15-20. V. The source whence repentance proceeds, sec. 21-24. 
Of the sin against the Holy Spirit, and the impenitence of the reprobate, 
sec. 25. 

Sections. 

1. Connection of this chapter with the previous one and the subsequent 

chapters. Repentance follows faith, and is produced by it. 
Reason. Error of those who take a contrary view. 

2. Their First Objection. Answer. In what sense the origin of Re- 

pentance ascribed to Faith. Cause of the erroneous idea that 
faith is produced by repentance. Refutation of it. The hypocrisy 
of Monks and Anabaptists in assigning limits to repentance 
exposed. 

3. A second opinion concerning repentance considered. 

4. A third opinion, assigning two forms to repentance, a legal and an 

Evangelical. Examples of each. 

5. The orthodox doctrine of Repentance. 1. Faith and Repentance to 

be distinguished, not confounded or separated. 2. A considera- 
tion of the name. 3. A definition of the thing, or what repentance 
is. Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. 

6. Explanation of the definition. This consists of three parts. 1. Re- 

pentance is a turning of our life unto God. This described and 
enlarged upon. 

7. 2. Repentance produced by fear of God. Hence the mention of 

divine judgment by the Prophets and Apostles. Example. Expo- 


; 


150 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

sition of the second branch of the definition from a passage in 
Paul. Why the fear of God is the first part of Repentance. 
8. 3. Repentance consists hi the mortification of the flesh and the 
quickening of the Spirit. These required by the Prophets. They 
are explained separately. 
How this mortification and quickening are produced. Repentance 
just a renewal of the divine image in us. Not completed in a 
moment, but extends to the last moment of life. 

10. Reasons why repentance must so extend. Augustine's opinion as 

to concupiscence in the regenerate examined. A passage of Paul 
Avhich seems to confirm that opinion. 

11. Answer. Confirmation of the answer by the Apostle himself. 

Another confirmation from a precept of the law. Conclusion. 

12. Exception, that those desires only are condemned which are repug- 

nant to the order of God. Desires not condemned in so far as 
natural, but in so far as inordinate. This held by Augustine. 

13. Passages from Augustine to show that this was his opinion. Objec- 

tion from a passage in James. 

14. Another objection of the Anabaptists and Libertines to the con- 

tinuance of repentance throughout the present life. An answer 
disclosing its impiety. Another answer, founded on the absurdi- 
ties to which it leads. A third answer, contrasting sincere Chris- 
tian repentance with the erroneous view of the objectors. Con- 
firmation from the example and declaration of an Apostle. 

15. Of the fruits of repentance. Carefulness. Excuse. Indignation. 

Fear. Desire. Zeal. Revenge. Moderation to be observed, as 
most sagely counselled by Bernard. 

16. Internal fruits of Repentance. 1. Piety towards God. 2. Charity 

towards man. 3. Purity of life. How carefully these fruits are 
commended by the Prophets. External fruits of repentance. 
Bodily exercises too much commended by ancient writers. Two- 
fold excess in regard to them. 

17. Delusion of some who consider these external exercises as the chief 

part of Repentance. Why received in the Jewish Church. The 
legitimate use of these exercises in the Christian Church. 

18. The principal part of repentance consists in turning to God. Con- 

fession and acknowledgment of sins. What their nature should 
be. Distinction between ordinary and special repentance. Use 
of this distinction. 

19. End of Repentance. Its nature shown by the preaching of John 

Baptist, our Saviour, and his Apostles. The sum of this preach- 
ing. 

20. Christian repentance terminates with our life. 

21. Repentance has its origin in the grace of God, as communicated to 

the elect, whom God is pleased to save from death. The harden- 
ing and final impenitence of the reprobate. A passage of an 


CHAP. III. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 151 

Apostle as to voluntary reprobates, gives no countenance to the 
Novatians. 

22. Of the sin against the Holy Ghost. The true definition of this sin 

as proved and explained by Scripture. Who they are that sin 
against the Holy Spirit. Examples : — 1. The Jews resisting 
Stephen. 2. The Pharisees. Definition confirmed by the example 
of Paul. 

23. Why that sin unpardonable. The paralogism of the Novatians in 

wresting the words of the Apostle examined. Two passages from 
the same Apostle. 

24. First objection to the above doctrine. Answer. Solution of a 

difficulty founded on the example of Esau and the threatening of 
a Prophet. Second objection. 

25. Third objection, founded on the seeming approval of the feigned 

repentance of the ungodly, as Ahab. Answer. Confirmation 
from the example of Esau. Why God bears for a time with the 
ungodly, pretending repentance. Exception. 

1. Although we have already in some measure shown 
how faith possesses Christ, and gives us the enjoyment oi 
his benefits, the subject would still be obscure were we not 
to add an exposition of the effects resulting from it. The 
sum of the Gospel is, not without good reason, made to 
consist in repentance and forgiveness of sins ; and, therefore, 
where these two heads are omitted, any discussion concern- 
ing faith will be meagre and defective, and indeed almost 
useless. Now, since Christ confers upon us, and we obtain 
by faith, both free reconciliation and newness of life, reason 
and order require that I should here begin to treat of both. 
The shortest transition, however, will be from faith to repent- 
ance ; for repentance being properly understood, it will better 
appear how a man is justified freely by faith alone, and yet 
that holiness of life, real holiness, as it is called, is inseparable 
from the free imputation of righteousness.1 That repentance 
not only always follows faith, but is produced by it, ought 
to be without controversy, (see Calvin in Joann. i. 13.) For 
since pardon and forgiveness are offered by the preaching of 
the Gospel, in order that the sinner, delivered from the 

1 The French adds in explanation, " C'est a dire, que cela s'accorde 
bien, que nous ne soyons pas sans bonnes oeuvres, et toutesfois que nous 
soyons reputes justes sans bonnes oeuvres ;" — That is to say, that the two 
propositions are quite consistent, -viz., that we are not without good 
works, and yet that we are accounted righteous without works. 


152 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

tyranny of Satan, the yoke of sin, and the miserable bondage 
of iniquity, may pass into the kingdom of God, it is certain 
that no man can embrace the grace of the Gospel without 
betaking himself from the errors of his former life into the 
right path, and making it his whole study to practise repent- 
ance. Those who think that repentance precedes faith^'1 
instead of flowing from, or being produced by it, as the fruit 
by the tree, have never understood its nature, and are moved 
to adopt that view on very insufficient grounds. 

2. Christ and John, it is said, in their discourses, first 
exhort the people to repentance, and then add, that the 
kingdom of heaven is at hand, (Matth. hi. 2 ; iv. 17.) Such, 
too, is the message which the Apostles received, and such 
the course which Paul followed, as is narrated by Luke, 
(Acts xx. 21.) But clinging superstitiously to the juxta- 
position of the syllables, they attend not to the coherence 
of meaning in the words. For when our Lord and John 
begin their preaching thus, " Repent, for the kingdom of 
heaven is at hand," (Matth. iii. 2,) do they not deduce 
repentance as a consequence of the offer of grace and pro- 
mise of salvation ? The force of the words, therefore, is the 
same as if it were said, As the kingdom of heaven is at 
hand, for that reason repent. For Matthew, after relating 
that John so preached, says that therein was fulfilled the 
prophecy concerning the voice of one crying in the desert, 
" Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the 
desert a highway for our God," (Isaiah xl. 3.) But in the 
Prophet that voice is ordered to commence with consolation 
and glad tidings. Still, when we attribute the origin of 
repentance to faith, we do not dream of some period of time 
in which faith is to give birth to it : we only wish to show 
that a man cannot seriously engage in repentance unless he 
know that he is of God. But no man is truly persuaded 
that he is of God until he have embraced his offered favour. 
These things will be more clearly explained as we proceed. 
Some are perhaps misled by this, that not a few are subdued 
by terror of conscience, or disposed to obedience before they 
have been imbued with a knowledge, nay, before they have 
had any taste of the divine favour, (see Calvin in Acts xx. 


CHAP. III. CHRISTIAN RELIGIOX. 153 

21.) This is that initial fear1 which some writers class 
among the virtues, because they think it approximates to 
true and genuine obedience. But wre are not here consider- 
ing the various modes in which Christ draws us to himself, or 
prepares us for the study of piety : All I say is, that no right- 
eousness can be found where the Spirit, whom Christ received 
in order to communicate it to his members, reigns not. Then, 
according to the passage in the Psalms, " There is forgive- 
ness with thee, that thou mayest be feared," (Psalm cxxx. 4,) 
no man will ever reverence God who does not trust that 
God is propitious to him, no man will ever willingly set 
himself to observe the Law who is not persuaded that his 
services are pleasing to God. The indulgence of God in 
tolerating and pardoning our iniquities is a sign of paternal 
favour. This is also clear from the exhortation in Hosea, 
" Come, and let us return unto the Lord : for he hath torn, 
and he will heal us ; he hath smitten, and he will bind us 
up," (Hos. vi. 1 ;) the hope of pardon is employed as a 
stimulus to prevent us from becoming reckless in sin. But 
there is no semblance of reason in the absurd procedure of 
those who, that they may begin with repentance, prescribe 
to their neophytes certain days during which they are to 
exercise themselves in repentance, and after these are elapsed, 
admit them to communion in Gospel grace. I allude to 
great numbers of Anabaptists, those of them especially who 
plume themselves on being spiritual, and their associates the 
Jesuits, and .others of the same stamp. Such are the fruits 
which their giddy spirit produces, that repentance, which in 
every Christian man lasts as long as life, is with them com- 
pleted in a few short days. 

3. Certain learned men, who lived long before the present 
day, and were desirous to speak simply and sincerely, accord- 
ing to the rule of Scripture, held that repentance consists of 
two parts, nipj^%arion_ajidi,^qjuckejaiag. By mortification 
they mean,/ grief of soul and terror, produced by a conviction 

1 Latin, "Initialis timor," which is thus paraphrased by the French : 
" Et e'est une crainte comme on la voit aux petits enfans, qui ne sont 
point gouvernes par raison ;" — And it is a fear such as we see in little 
children, who are not governed by reason. 


154 INSTITUTES OF THE EOOK III. 

of sin and a sense of the divine judgment. For when a man 
is brought to a true knowledge of sin, he begins truly to hate 
and abominate sin. He also is sincerely dissatisfied with 
himself, confesses that he is lost and undone, and wishes he 
were different from what he is. Moreover, when he is 
touched with some sense of the divine justice, (for the one 
conviction immediately follows the other,) he lies terror- 
struck and amazed, humbled and dejected, desponds and 
despairs. This, which they regarded as the first part of 
repentance, they usually termed \ontntion^ By quickening 
they mean, the comfort which is produced by faith, as when 
a man prostrated by a consciousness of sin, and smitten with 
the fear of God, afterwards beholding his goodness, and 
the mercy, grace, and salvation obtained through Christ, looks 
up, begins to breathe, takes courage, and passes, as it were, 
from death unto life. I admit that these terms, when rightly 
interpreted, aptly enough express the power of repentance ; 
only T cannot assent to their using the term quickening, for 
the joy which the soul feels after being calmed from pertur- 
bation and fear. It more properly means, that desire of 
pious and holy living which springs from the new birth ; as 
if it were said, that the man dies to himself that he may 
begin to live unto God. 

4. Others seeing that the term is used in Scripture in 
different senses, have set down two forms of repentance, and, 
in order to distinguish them, have called the one Legal 
rpppntn.nr.p ; or that by which the sinner, stung with a sense 
of his sin, and overwhelmed with fear of the divine anger, 
remains in that state of perturbation, unable to escape from 
it. The other they term Evangelical repentance ; or that by 
which the sinner, though grievously downcast in himself, yet 
looks up and sees in Christ the cure of his wound, the solace 
of his terror, the haven of rest from his misery. They give 
Cain, Saul, and Judas,1 as examples of legal repentance. 
Scripture, in describing what is called their repentance, 
means that they perceived the heinousness of their sins, and 
dreaded the divine anger ; but, thinking only of God as 

1 Gen. iv. 13 ; 1 Sam. xv. 30 ; Matt, xxvii. 3, 4. 


CHAR. IK. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 155 

a judge and avenger, were overwhelmed by the thought. 
Their repentance, therefore, was nothing better than a kind 
of threshold to hell, into which having entered even in the 
present life, they began to endure the punishment inflicted 
by the presence of an offended God. Examples of evan- 
gelical repentance we see in all those who, first stung with a 
sense of sin, but afterwards raised and revived by confidence 
in the divine mercy, turned unto the Lord.1 Hezekiah was 
frightened on receiving the message of his death, but pray- 
ing with tears, and beholding the divine goodness, regained 
his confidence. The Ninevites were terrified at the fearful 
announcement of their destruction ; but clothing themselves 
in sackcloth and ashes, they prayed, hoping that the Lord 
might relent and avert his anger from them.- David con- 
fessed that he had sinned greatly in numbering the people, 
but added, " Now, I beseech thee, O Lord, take away the 
iniquity of thy servant." When rebuked by Nathan, he 
acknowledged the crime of adultery, and humbled himself 
before the Lord ; but he, at the same time, looked for pardon. 
Similar was the repentance of those who, stung to the heart 
by the preaching of Peter, yet trusted in the divine goodness, 
and added, " Men and brethren, what shall we do ?" Similar 
was the case of Peter himself, who indeed wept bitterly, but 
ceased not to hope. 

5. Though all this is true, yet the term repentance (in so 
far as I can ascertain from Scripture) must be differently 
taken. For. in comprehending faith under repentance, they 
are at variance with what Paul says in the Acts, as to his 
" testifying both to the Jews and also to the Greeks, repent- 
ance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ," 
(Acts xx. 21.) Here he mentions faith and repentance as 
two different things. What then ? Can true repentance 
exist without faith ? By no means. But although they 
cannot be separated, they ought to be distinguished. As 
there is no faith without hope, and yet faith and hope are 
different, so repentance and faith, though constantly linked 
together, are only to be united, not confounded. I am not 

1 2 Kings xx. 2 ; Isa. xxxviii. 2 ; Jonah iii. 5 ; 2 Sam. xxiv. 10 ; xii. 
13, 16 ; Acts ii. 37 ; Matth. xxvi. 75 ; Luke xxii. 62. 


156 INSTITUTES OF TI1E BOOK III. 

unaware that under the term repentance is comprehended the 
whole work of turning to God, of which not the least import- 
ant part is faith ; but in what sense this is done will be 
perfectly obvious, when its nature and power shall have been 
explained. The term repentance is derived in the Hebrew 
from conversion, or turning again ; and in the Greek from a 
change of mind and purpose ; nor is the thing meant inappro- 
priate to both derivations, for it is substantially this, that 
withdrawing from ourselves we turn to God, and laying 
aside the old, put on a new mind. Wherefore, it seems to 
me, that repentance may be not inappropriately defined thus : 
A real conversion of our life unto God, proceeding from 
sincere and serious fear of God ; and consisting in the morti- 
fication of our flesh and the old man, and the quickening of 
!the Spirit. In this sense are to be understood all those 
addresses in which the prophets first, and the apostles after- 
wards, exhorted the people of their time to repentance. The 
great object for which they laboured was, to fill them with 
confusion for their sins and dread of the divine judgment, 
that they might fall down and humble themselves before him 
whom they had offended, and, with true repentance, betake 
themselves to the right path. Accordingly, they use indis- 
criminately in the same sense, the expressions, turning, or 
returning to theLord ; repenting, doing repentance.1 Whence, 
also, the sacred history describes it as repentance towards God, 
when men who disregarded him and wantoned in their lusts 
begin to obey his word, and are prepared to go whithersoever 
he may call them. And John Baptist and Paul, under the 
expression, bringing forth fruits meet for repentance, described 
a course of life exhibiting and bearing testimony, in all its 
actions, to such a repentance. 

6. But before proceeding farther, it will be proper to give 
a clearer exposition of the definition which we have adopted. 
There are three things, then, principally to be considered in 
it. First, in the conversion of the life to God, we require a 
transformation not only in external works, but in the soul 
itself, which is able only after it has put off its old habits to 

1 Matth. iii. 2 ; 1 Sam. vii. 8 ; Luke iii. 8 ; Rom. vi. 4 ; Acts xxvi. 20. 


CHAP. III. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 157 

bring forth fruits conformable to its renovation. The pro- 
phet, intending to express this, enjoins those whom he calls 
to repentance to make them " a new heart and a new spirit," 
(Ezek. xviii. 31.) Hence Moses, on several occasions, when 
he would show how the Israelites were to repent and turn 
to the Lord, tells them that it must be done with the whole 
heart, and the whole soul, (a mode of expression of frequent 
recurrence in the prophets,) and by terming it the circumci- 
sion of the heart, points to the internal affections. But there 
is no passage better fitted to teach us the genuine nature of 
repentance than the following : " If thou wilt return, O Israel, 
saith the Lord, return unto me." " Break up your fallow 
ground, and sow not among thorns. Circumcise yourselves 
to the Lord, and take away the foreskins of your heart," 
(Jer. iv. 1-4.) See how he declares to them that it will be 
of no avail to commence the study of righteousness unless 
impiety shall first have been eradicated from their inmost 
heart. And to make the deeper impression, he reminds them 
that they have to do with God, and can gain nothing by 
deceit, because he hates a double heart. For this reason 
Isaiah derides the preposterous attempts of hypocrites, who 
zealously aimed at an external repentance by the observance 
of ceremonies, but in the meanwhile cared not " to loose the 
bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let 
the oppressed go free," (Isaiah lviii. 6.) In these words he 
admirably shows wherein the acts of unfeigned repentance 
consist. 

7. The second part of our definition is, that repentance 
proceeds from a sincere fear of God. Before the mind of the 
sinner can be inclined to repentance, he must be aroused by 
the thought of divine judgment ; but when once the thought 
that God will one day ascend his tribunal to take an account 
of all words and actions has taken possession of his mind, 
it will not allow him to rest, or have one moment's peace, 
but will perpetually urge him to adopt a different plan of 
life, that he may be able to stand securely at that judg- 
ment-seat. Hence the Scripture, when exhorting to repent- 
ance, often introduces the subject of judgment, as in Jere- 
miah, " Lest my fury come forth like fire, and burn that none 


158 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

can quench it, because of the evil of your doings," (Jer. iv. 
4.) Paul, in his discourse to the Athenians, says, " The 
times of this ignorance God winked at ; but now command- 
eth all men every where to repent : because he hath appointed 
a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness," 
(Acts xvii. 30, 31.) The same thing is repeated in several 
other passages. Sometimes God is declared to be a judge, 
from the punishments already inflicted, thus leading sinners 
to reflect that worse awaits them if they do not quickly 
repent. There is an example of this in the xxixth chapter of 
Deuteronomy. As repentance begins with dread and hatred 
of sin, the Apostle sets down godly sorrow as one of its 
causes, (2 Cor. vii. 1 0.) By godly sorrow he means when we 
not only tremble at the punishment, but hate and abhor the 
sin, because we know it is displeasing to God. It is not 
strange that this should be, for unless we are stung to the 
quick, the sluggishness of our carnal nature cannot be cor- 
rected ; nay, no degree of pungency would suffice for our 
stupor and sloth, did not God lift the rod and strike deeper. 
There is, moreover, a rebellious spirit which must be broken 
as with hammers. The stern threatenings which God em- 
ploys are extorted from him by our depraved dispositions. 
For while we are asleep it were in vain to allure us by sooth- 
ing measures. Passages to this effect are every where to be 
met with, and I need not quote them. But there is another 
reason why the fear of God lies at the root of repentance, 
viz., that though the life of man were possessed of all kinds of 
virtue, still if they do not bear reference to God, how much 
soever they may be lauded in the world, they are mere abomi- 
nation in heaven, inasmuch as it is the principal part of right- 
eousness to render to God that service and honour of which 
he is impiously defrauded, whenever it is not our express pur- 
pose to submit to his authority. 

8. We must now explain the third part of the definition, 
and show what is meant when we say that repentance con- 
sists of two parts, viz., the mortification of the flesh, and the 
quickening of the Spirit. The prophets, in accommodation 
to a carnal people, express this in simple and homely terms, 
but clearly, when they say, " Depart from evil, and do good," 


CITAP. III. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 159 

(Ps. xxxiv. 14.) "Wash you, make you clean, put away the 
evil of your doings from before mine eyes ; cease to do evil ; 
learn to do well ; seek judgment ; relieve the oppressed," &c, 
(Isaiah i. 16, 17.) In dissuading us from wickedness they 
demand the entire destruction of the flesh, which is full of 
perverseness and malice. It is a most difficult and arduous 
achievement to renounce ourselves, and lay aside our natural 
disposition. For the flesh must not be thought to be destroy- 
ed unless every thing that we have of our own is abolished. 
But seeing that all the desires of the flesh are enmity against 
God, (Rom. viii. 7,) the first step to the obedience of his law 
is the renouncement of our own nature. Renovation is after- 
wards manifested by the fruits produced by it, viz., justice, 
judgment, and mercy. Since it were not sufficient duly to 
perform such acts, were not the mind and heart previously 
endued with sentiments of justice, judgment, and mercy, this 
is done when the Holy Spirit, instilling his holiness into our 
souls, so inspires them with new thoughts and affections, that 
they may justly be regarded as new. And, indeed, as we are 
naturally averse to God, unless self-denial precede, we shall 
never tend to that which is right. Hence we are so often 
enjoined to put off the old man, to renounce the world and 
the flesh, to forsake our lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of 
our mind. Moreover, the very name mortification reminds 
us how difficult it is to forget our former nature, because we 
hence infer that we cannot be trained to the fear of God, 
and learn the first principles of piety, unless we are violently 
smitten with the sword of the Spirit and annihilated, as if 
God were declaring, that to be ranked among his sons there 
must be a destruction of our ordinary nature. 

9. Both of these we obtain by union with Christ. For if 
we have true fellowship in his death, our old man is crucified 
by his power, and the body of sin becomes dead, so that the 
corruption of our original nature is never again in full vigour, 
(Rom. vi. 5, 6.) If we are partakers in his resurrection, we 
are raised up by means of it to newness of life, which con- 
forms us to the righteousness of God. In one word, then, by 
repentance I understand regeneration,1 the only aim of which 

1 French, " une regeneration spirituelle ;" — a spiritual Regeneration. 


160 INSTITUTES OP THE BOOK III. 

is to form in us anew the image of God, which was sullied, 
and all but effaced by the transgression of Adam. So the 
Apostle teaches when he says, " We all with open face behold- 
ing as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the 
same image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord." 
Again, " Be renewed in the spirit of your mind," and " put 
ye on the new man, which after God is created in righteous- 
ness and true holiness." Again, " Put ye on the new man, 
which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that 
created him."1 Accordingly, through the blessing of Christ 
we are renewed by that regeneration into the righteousness 
of God from which we had fallen through Adam, the Lord 
being pleased in this manner to restore the integrity of all 
whom he appoints to the inheritance of life. This renewal, 
indeed, is not accomplished in a moment, a day, or a year, 
but by uninterrupted, sometimes even by slow, progress God 
abolishes the remains of carnal corruption in his elect, cleanses 
them from pollution, and consecrates them as his temples, 
restoring all their inclinations to real purity, so that during 
their whole lives they may practise repentance, and know 
that death is the only termination to this warfare. The 
greater is the effrontery of an impure raver and apostate, 
named Staphylus, who pretends that I confound the condition 
of the present life with the celestial glory, when, after Paul, 
I make the image of God to consist in righteousness and true 
holiness ; as if in every definition it were not necessary to 
take the thing defined in its integrity and perfection. It is 
not denied that there is room for improvement ; but what I 
maintain is, that the nearer any one approaches in resemblance 
to God, the more does the image of God appear in him. That 
believers may attain to it, God assigns repentance as the goal 
towards which they must keep running during the whole 
course of their lives. 

1 0. By regeneration the children of God are delivered from 
the bondage of sin, but not as if they had already obtained 
full possession of freedom, and no longer felt any annoyance 
from the flesh. Materials for an unremitting contest remain, 

1 2 Cor. itf. 18; Eph. iv. 23, 24 ; Col. iii. 10; 2 Cor. iv. 16. 


CHAP. III. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 161 

that they may be exercised, and not only exercised, but 
may better understand their weakness. All writers of sound 
judgment agree in this, that, in the regenerate man, there is 
still a spring of evil which is perpetually sending forth desires 
that allure and stimulate him to sin. They also acknowledge 
that the saints are still so liable to the disease of concupiscence, 
that, though opposing it, they cannot avoid being ever and 
anon prompted and incited to lust, avarice, ambition, or other 
vices. It is unnecessary to spend much time in investigat- 
ing the sentiments of ancient writers. Augustine alone may 
suffice, as he has collected all their opinions with great care 
and fidelity.1 Any reader who is desirous to know the sense 
of antiquity may obtain it from him. There is this differ- 
ence apparently between him and us, that while he admits 
that believers, so long as they are in the body, are so liable 
to concupiscence that they cannot but feel it, he does not 
venture to give this disease the name of sin. He is con- 
tented with giving it the name of infirmity, and says, that it 
only becomes sin when either external act or consent is add- 
ed to conception or apprehension; that is, when the will 
yields to the first desire. We again regard it as sin when- 
ever man is influenced in any degree by any desire contrary 
to the law of God ; nay, we maintain that the very pravity 
which begets in us such desires is sin. Accordingly, we 
hold that there is always sin in the saints, until they are freed 
from their mortal frame, because depraved concupiscence 
resides in their flesh, and is at variance with rectitude. 
Augustine himself does not always refrain from using the 
name of sin, as when he says, " Paul gives the name of sin to 
that carnal concupiscence from which all sins arise. This in 
regard to the saints loses its dominion in this world, and is 
destroyed in heaven." In these words he admits that be- 
lievers, in so far as they are liable to carnal concupiscence, 
are chargeable with sin. 

11. When it is said that God purifies his Church, so as to 
be "holy and without blemish," (Eph. v. 26, 27,) that he 

1 See August, ad Bonif. Lib. iv. et cont. Julianum, Lib. i. and ii. See 
also Serin. 6, de Verbis Apost. See also Calv. cont. Pighiuni, and Calv. 
ad Cone. Trident. 

VOL. II. L 


162 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

promises this cleansing by means of baptism, and performs it 
in his elect, I understand that reference is made to the guilt 
rather than to the matter of sin. In regenerating his people 
God indeed accomplishes this much for them ; he destroys the 
•dominion of sin,1 by supplying the agency of the Spirit, 
which enables them to come off victorious from the contest. 
Sin, however, though it ceases to reign, ceases not to dwell in 
them. Accordingly, though we say that the old man is cru- 
cified, and the law of sin is abolished in the children of God, 
(Rom. vi. 6,) the remains of sin survive, not to have domi- 
nion, but to humble them under a consciousness of their in- 
firmity. We admit that these remains, just as if they had no 
existence, are not imputed, but we, at the same time, contend 
that it is owing to the mercy of God that the saints are not 
charged with the guilt which would otherwise make them sin- 
ners before God. It will not be difficult for us to confirm this 
view, seeing we can support it by clear passages of Scripture. 
How can we express our view more plainly than Paul does 
in Rom. vii. 6 ? We have elsewhere shown, and Augustine by 
solid reasons proves, that Paul is there speaking in the person 
of a regenerated man. I say nothing as to his use of the words 
evil and sin. However those who object to our view may 
quibble on these words, can any man deny that aversion to 
the law of God is an evil, and that hinderance to righteous- 
ness is sin ? In short, who will not admit that there is guilt 
where there is spiritual misery ? But all these things Paul 
affirms of this disease. Again, the law furnishes us with a 
clear demonstration by which the whole question may be 
quickly disposed of. We are enjoined to love God with all 
our heart, with all our soul, with all our strength. Since all 
the faculties of our soul ought thus to be engrossed with the 
love of God, it is certain that the commandment is not ful- 
filled by those who receive the smallest desire into their 
heart, or admit into their minds any thought whatever which 
may lead them away from the love of God to vanity. What 
then ? Is it not through the faculties of mind that we are 


1 Latin, " Reatus." — French, " ^Imputation du peche;" — the imputation 
of sin. 


CHAP. III. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 163 

assailed with sudden motions, that we perceive sensual, or 
form conceptions of mental objects ? Since these faculties 
give admission to vain and wicked thoughts, do they not show 
that to that extent they are devoid of the love of God ? He, 
then, who admits not that all the desires of the flesh are sins, 
and that that disease of concupiscence, which they call a 
stimulus, is a fountain of sin, must of necessity deny that the 
transgression of the law is sin. 

12. If any one thinks it absurd thus to condemn all the 
desires by which man is naturally affected, seeing they have 
been implanted by God the author of nature, we answer, that 
we by no means condemn those appetites which God so im- 
planted in the mind of man at his first creation, that they 
cannot be eradicated without destroying human nature itself, 
but only the violent lawless movements which war with the 
order of God. But as, in consequence of the corruption of 
nature, all our faculties are so vitiated and corrupted, that a 
perpetual disorder and excess is apparent in all our actions, 
and as the appetites cannot be separated from this excess, 
we maintain that therefore they are vicious ; or, to give the 
substance in fewer words, we hold that all human desires are 
evil, and we charge them with sin not in as far as they are 
natural, but because they are inordinate, and inordinate because 
nothing pure and upright can proceed from a corrupt and pol- 
luted nature. Nor does Augustine depart from this doctrine 
in reality so much as in appearance. From an excessive 
dread of the invidious charge with which the Pelagians assail- 
ed him, he sometimes refrains from using the term sin in this 
sense ; but when he says (adBonif.) that the law of sin remain- 
ing in the saints, the guilt only is taken away, he shows clearly 
enough that his view is not very different from ours. 

13. We will produce some other passages to make it more 
apparent what his sentiments were. In his second book 
against Julian, he says, " This law of sin is both remitted 
in spiritual regeneration and remains in the mortal flesh ; 
remitted, because the guilt is forgiven in the sacrament by 
which believers are regenerated, and yet remains, inasmuch as 
it produces desires against which believers fight." Again, 
" Therefore the law of sin (which was in the members of this 


164 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

great Apostle also) is forgiven in baptism, not ended." 

Again, " The law of sin, the guilt of which, though remaining, 

is forgiven in baptism, Ambrose called iniquity, for it is 

iniquitous for the flesh to lust against the Spirit." Again, 

" Sin is dead in the guilt by which it bound us ; and until 

it is cured by the perfection of burial, though dead it rebels." 

In the fifth book he says still more plainly, " As blindness of 

heart is the sin by which God is not believed; and the 

punishment of sin, by which a proud heart is justly punished ; 

and the cause of sin, when through the error of a blinded 

heart any evil is committed : so the lust of the flesh, against 

which the good Spirit wars, is also sin, because disobedient 

to the authority of the mind; and the punishment of sin, 

because the recompense rendered for disobedience ; and the 

cause of sin, consenting by revolt or springing up through 

contamination." He here without ambiguity calls it sin, 

because the Pelagian heresy being now refuted, and the sound 

doctrine confirmed, he was less afraid of calumny. Thus, 

also, in his forty-first Homily on John, where he speaks his 

own sentiments without controversy, he says, " If with the 

flesh you serve the law of sin, do what the Apostle himself 

says, * Let not sin, therefore, reign in your mortal body, 

that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof,' (Rom. vi. 12.) He 

does not say, Let it not be, but Let it not reign. As long as 

you live there must be sin in your members ; but at least let 

its dominion be destroyed ; do not what it orders." Those 

who maintain that concupiscence is not sin, are wont to found 

on the passage of James, " Then, when lust hath conceived, 

it bringeth forth sin," (James i. 15.) But this is easily 

refuted : for unless we understand him as speaking only of 

wicked works or actual sins, even a wicked inclination will not 

be accounted sin. But from his calling crimes and wicked 

deeds the fruits of lust, and also giving them the name of 

sins, it does not follow that the lust itself is not an evil, 

and in the sight of God deserving of condemnation. 

14. Some Anabaptists in the present age mistake some 
indescribable sort of frenzied excess for the regeneration of 
the Spirit, holding that the children of God are restored to 
a state of innocence, and, therefore, need give themselves no 


CHAP. III. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 165 

anxiety about curbing the lust of the flesh ; that they have 
the Spirit for their guide, and under his agency never en-.1 
It would be incredible that the human mind could proceed to 
such insanity, did they not openly and exultingly give utter- 
ance to their dogma. It is indeed monstrous, and yet it is 
just, that those who have resolved to turn the word of God 
into a lie, should thus be punished for their blasphemous 
audacity. Is it indeed true, that all distinction between 
base and honourable, just and unjust, good and evil, virtue 
and vice, is abolished ? The distinction, they say, is from 
the curse of the old Adam, and from this we are exempted 
by Christ. There will be no difference, then, between 
whoredom and chastity, sincerity and craft, truth and false- 
hood, justice and robbery. Away with vain fear ! (they say,) 
the Spirit will not bid you do any thing that is wrong, provided 
you sincerely and boldly leave yourself to his agency. Who is 
not amazed at such monstrous doctrines ? And yet this philo- 
sophy is popular with those who, blinded by insane lusts, have 
thrown off common sense. But what kind of Christ, pray, do 
they fabricate ? what kind of Spirit do they belch forth ? We 
acknowledge one Christ, and his one Spirit, whom the 
prophets foretold and the Gospel proclaims as actually mani- 
fested, but we hear nothing of this kind respecting him. 
That Spirit is not the patron of murder, adultery, drunken- 
ness, pride, contention, avarice, and fraud, but the author of 
love, chastity, sobriety, modesty, peace, moderation, and 
truth. He is not a Spirit of giddiness, rushing rashly and 
precipitately, without regard to right and wrong, but full of 
wisdom and understanding, by which he can duly distinguish 
between justice and injustice. He instigates not to lawless 
and unrestrained licentiousness, but, discriminating between 
lawful and unlawful, teaches temperance and moderation. 
But why dwell longer in refuting that brutish frenzy ? To 
Christians the Spirit of the Lord is not a turbulent phantom, 
which they themselves have produced by dreaming, or 
received ready-made by others ; but they religiously seek 
the knowledge of him from Scripture, where two things are 

1 See Calvin, adv. Libertinos, cap. xviii. 


166 INSTITUTES OP THE BOOK IIT. 

taught concerning him ; first, thatJie is givenjti)JisJbr--saa€ti-- 
fication, that he may purge us from all iniquity and defilement, 
and bring us to the obedience of divine righteousness, an 
obedience which cannot exist unless the lusts to which these 
men would give loose reins are tamed and subdued ; secondly, 
that though purged by his sanctification, we are still beset 
by many vices and much weakness, so long as we are enclosed 
in the prison of the body. Thus it is, that placed at a great 
distance from perfection, we must always be endeavouring to 
make some progress, and daily struggling with the evil by 
which we are entangled. Whence, too, it follows, that, shaking 
off sloth and security, we must be intently vigilant, so as not 
to be taken unawares in the snares of our flesh; unless, 
indeed, we presume to think that we have made greater 
progress than the Apostle, who was buffeted by a messenger 
of Satan, in order that his strength might be perfected in 
weakness, and who gives in his own person a true, not a 
fictitious representation, of the strife between the Spirit and 
the flesh, (2 Cor. xii. 7, 9 ; Eom. vii. 6.) 

15. The Apostle, in his description of repentance, (2 Cor. 
vii. 2,) enumerates seven causes, effects, or parts belonging 
to it, and that on the best grounds. These are carefulness, 
excuse, indignation, fear, desire, zeal, revenge. It should not 
excite surprise that I venture not to determine whether they 
ought to be regarded as causes or effects : both views may 
be maintained. They may also be called affections conjoined 
with repentance ; but as Paul's meaning may be ascertained 
without entering into any of these questions, we shall be con- 
tented with a simple exposition. He says then that godly 
sorrow produces carefulness. He who is really dissatisfied 
with himself for sinning against his God, is, at the same time, 
stimulated to care and attention, that he may completely 
disentangle himself from the chains of the devil, and keep a 
better guard against his snares, so as not afterwards to lose 
the guidance of the Holy Spirit, or be overcome by security. 
Next comes excuse, which in this place means not defence, 
in which the sinner to escape the judgment of God either 
denies his fault or extenuates it, but apologising, which trusts 
more to intercession than to the goodness of the cause ; just 


CHAP. III. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 167 

as children not altogether abandoned, while they acknowledge 
and confess their errors, yet employ deprecation ; and to make 
room for it, testify, by every means in their power, that they 
have by no means cast off the reverence which they owe to 
their parents ; in short, endeavour by excuse not to prove 
themselves righteous and innocent, but only to obtain pardon. 
Next follows indignation, under which the sinner inwardly 
murmurs, expostulates, and is offended with himself on recog- 
nising his perverseness and ingratitude to God. By the term 
fear is meant that trepidation which takes possession of our 
minds whenever we consider both what we have deserved, 
and the fearful severity of the divine anger against sinners. 
Accordingly, the exceeding disquietude which we must ne- 
cessarily feel, both trains us to humility and makes us more 
cautious for the future. But if the carefulness or anxiety 
which he first mentioned is the result of fear, the connection 
between the two becomes obvious. Desire seems to me to 
be used as equivalent to diligence in duty, and alacrity in 
doing service, to which the sense of our misdeeds ought to 
be a powerful stimulus. To this also pertains zeal, which 
immediately follows ; for it signifies the ardour with which 
we are inflamed when such goads as these are applied to us. 
" What have I done ? Into what abyss had I fallen had not 
the mercy of God prevented ?" The last of all is revenge* for 
the stricter we are with ourselves, and the severer the cen- 
sure we pass upon our sins, the more ground we have to hope 
for the divine favour and mercy. And certainly when the 
soul is overwhelmed with a dread of divine judgment, it can- 
not but act the part of an avenger in inflicting punishment 
upon itself. Pious men, doubtless, feel that there is punish- 
ment in the shame, confusion, groans, self- displeasure, and 
other feelings produced by a serious review, of their sins. 
Let us remember, however, that moderation must be used, 
so that we may not be overwhelmed with sadness, there being 
nothing to which trembling consciences are more prone than 
to rush into despair. This, too, is one of Satan's artifices. 
Those whom he sees thus overwhelmed with fear he plunges 
deeper and deeper into the abyss of sorrow, that they may 
never again rise. It is true that the fear which ends in 


168 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

humility without relinquishing the hope of pardon cannot be 
in excess. And yet we must always beware, according to 
the apostolic injunction, of giving way to extreme dread, 
as this tends to make us shun God while he is calling us to 
himself by repentance. Wherefore, the advice of Bernard is 
good, " Grief for sins is necessary, but must not be perpetual. 
My advice is to turn back at times from sorrow and the 
anxious remembrance of your ways, and escape to the plain, 
to a calm review of the divine mercies. Let us mingle honey 
with wormwood, that the salubrious bitter may give health 
when we drink it tempered with a mixture of sweetness : 
while you think humbly of yourselves, think also of the good- 
ness of the Lord," (Bernard in Cant. Serm. xi.) 

1 6. We can now understand what are the fruits of repent- 
ance ; viz., offices of piety towards God, and love towards 
men, general holiness and purity of life. In short, the more 
a man studies to conform his life to the standard of the 
divine law, the surer signs he gives of his repentance. Ac- 
cordingly, the Spirit, in exhorting us to repentance, brings 
before us at one time each separate precept of the law ; at 
another the duties of the second table ; although there are 
also passages in which, after condemning impurity in its foun- 
tain in the heart, he afterwards descends to external marks, 
by which repentance is proved to be sincere. A portraiture 
of this I will shortly set before the eye of the reader Avhen I 
come to describe the Christian life, {infra, chapter vi.) I 
will not here collect the passages from the prophets in which 
they deride the frivolous observances of those who labour to 
appease God with ceremonies, and show that they are mere 
mockery ; or those in which they show that outward integrity 
of conduct is not the chief part of repentance, seeing that 
God looks at the heart. Any one moderately versant in 
Scripture will understand by himself, without being reminded 
by others, that when he has to do with God, nothing is 
gained without beginning with the internal affections of the 
heart. There is a passage of Joel which will avail not a little 
for the understanding of others : " Rend your heart, and not 
your garments," (Joel ii. 13.) Both are also briefly expressed 
by James in these words : " Cleanse your hands, ye sinners ; 


CHAP. III. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 169 

and purify your hearts, ye double-minded," (James iv. 8.) 
Here, indeed, the accessory is set down first ; but the source 
and principle is afterwards pointed out,— viz., that hidden 
defilements must be wiped away, and an altar erected to 
God in the very heart. There are, moreover, certain 
external exercises which we employ in private as remedies 
to humble us and tame our flesh, and in public, to testify 
our repentance. These have their origin in that revenge 
of which Paul speaks, (2 Cor. vii. 2,) for when the mind 
is distressed it naturally expresses itself in sackcloth, groans, 
and tears, shuns ornament and every kind of show, and 
abandons all delights. Then he who feels how great an evil 
the rebellion of the flesh is, tries every means of curbing 
it. Besides, he who considers aright how grievous a thing it 
is to have offended the justice of God, cannot rest until, in 
his humility, he have given glory to God. Such exercises 
are often mentioned by ancient writers when they speak of 
the fruits of repentance. But although they by no means 
place the power of repentance in them, yet my readers must 
pardon me for saying what I think — they certainly seem to 
insist on them more than is right. Any one who judiciously 
considers the matter will, I trust, agree with me that they 
have exceeded in two ways ; first, by so strongly urging and 
extravagantly commending that corporal discipline, they in- 
deed succeeded in making the people embrace it with greater 
zeal ; but they in a manner obscured what they should have 
regarded as- of much more serious moment. Secondly, the 
inflictions which they enjoined were considerably more rigor- 
ous than ecclesiastical mildness demands, as will be elsewThere 
shown. 

17. But as there are some who, from the frequent mention 
of sackcloth, fasting, and tears, especially in Joel, (ii. 12,) 
think that these constitute the principal part of repentance, 
we must dispel their delusion. In that passage the proper 
part of repentance is described by the words, " turn ye even 
to me with your whole heart ;" " rend your heart, and not 
your garments." The " fasting," " weeping," and " mourn- 
ing," are introduced not as invariable or necessary effects, but 


170 INSTITUTES OP THE BOOK III. 

as special circumstances.1 Having foretold that most grievous 
disasters were impending over the Jews, he exhorts them to 
turn away the divine anger, not only by repenting, but by 
giving public signs of sorrow. For as a criminal, to excite 
the commiseration of the judge, appears in a supplicating 
posture, with a long beard, uncombed hair, and coarse cloth- 
ing, so should those who are charged at the judgment-seat of 
God deprecate his severity in a garb of wretchedness. But 
although sackcloth and ashes were perhaps more conformable 
to the customs of these times,2 yet it is plain that weeping 
and fasting are very appropriate in our case whenever the 
Lord threatens us with any defeat or calamity. In present- 
ing the appearance of danger, he declares that he is preparing, 
and, in a manner, arming himself for vengeance. Rightly, 
therefore, does the Prophet exhort those, on whose crimes he 
had said a little before that vengeance was to be executed, to 
weeping and fasting, — that is, to the mourning habit of crimi- 
nals. Nor in the present day do ecclesiastical teachers act 
improperly when, seeing ruin hanging over the necks of their 
people,3 they call aloud on them to hasten with weeping and 
fasting : only they must always urge, with greater care and 
earnestness, " rend your hearts, and not your garments." It 
is beyond doubt that fasting is not always a concomitant 
of repentance, but is specially destined for seasons of calamity.4 
Hence our Saviour connects it with mourning, (Matth. ix. 15,) 
and relieves the Apostles of the necessity of it until, by being 
deprived of his presence, they were filled with sorrow. I 
speak of formal fasting. For the life of Christians ought ever 
to be tempered with frugality and sobriety, so that the whole 
course of it should present some appearance of fasting. As 

1 French, " Circonstances qui convenoyent specialement alors ;" — cir- 
cumstances which were then specially suitable. 

2 French, " Fust la eoustume de ce temps-la, et ne nous appartienne 
aujourdhui de rien ;" — was the custom of that time, and we have now- 
a-days nothing to do with it. 

3 The French adds, " Soit de guerre, de famine, ou de pestilence ;" — 
whether of war, famine, or pestilence. 

4 Latin, " Calamitosis temporibus peculiariter destinari." — French, 
" Convient particulierement a ceux qui veulent testifier quils se recog- 
noissant avoir merite l'ire de Dieu, et neantmoins requierent pardon de sa 
clemence ;" — is particularly suitable to those who acknowledge they have 
deserved the wrath of God, and yet seek pardon of his mercy. 


CHAP. III. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 171 

this subject will be fully discussed when the discipline of the 
Church comes to be considered, I now dwell less upon it. 

18. This much, however, I will add : when the name re- 
pentance is applied to the external profession, it is used impro- 
perly, and not in the genuine meaning as I have explained 
it. For that is not so much a turning unto God as the con- 
fession of a fault accompanied with deprecation of the sen- 
tence and punishment. Thus to repent in sackcloth and 
ashes, (Matth. xi. 21 ; Luke x. 13,) is just to testify self- 
dissatisfaction when God is angry with us for having grievous- 
ly offended him. It is, indeed, a kind of public confession by 
which, condemning ourselves ^before angels and the world, 
we prevent the judgment of God. For Paul, rebuking the 
sluggishness of those who indulge in their sins, says, " If we 
would judge ourselves, we should not be judged," (1 Cor. xi. 
31.) It is not always necessary, however, openly to inform 
others, and make them the witnesses of our repentance ; but 
to confess privately to God is a part of true repentance which 
cannot be omitted. Nothing were more incongruous than 
that God should pardon the sins in which we are flattering 
ourselves, and hypocritically cloaking that he may not bring 
them to light. We must not only confess the sins which we 
daily commit, but more grievous lapses ought to carry us 
farther, and bring to our remembrance things which seemed 
to have been long ago buried. Of this David sets an example 
before us in his own person, (Ps. li.) Filled with shame for a 
recent crime he examines himself, going back to the womb, and 
acknowledging that even then he was corrupted and defiled. 
This he does not to extenuate his fault, as many hide them- 
selves in the crowd, and catch at impunity by involving others 
along with them. Very differently does David, who ingenuous- 
ly makes it an aggravation of his sin, that being corrupted from 
his earliest infancy he ceased not to add iniquity to iniquity. 
In another passage, also, he takes a survey of his past life, 
and implores God to pardon the errors of his youth, (Ps. xxv. 
7.) And, indeed, we shall not prove that we have thoroughly 
shaken off our stupor until, groaning under the burden, and 
lamenting our sad condition, we seek relief from God. It is, 
moreover, to be observed, that the repentance which we are 


172 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

enjoined assiduously to cultivate, differs from that which 
raises, as it were, from death those who had fallen more 
shamefully, or given themselves up to sin without restraint, 
or by some kind of open revolt, had thrown off the authority 
of God. For Scripture, in exhorting to repentance, often 
speaks of it as a passage from death unto life, and when relat- 
ing that a people had repented, means that they had aban- 
doned idolatry, and other forms of gross wickedness. For 
which reason Paul denounces woe to sinners, " who have not 
repented of the uncleanness, and fornication, and lascivious- 
ness which they have committed," (2 Cor. xii. 21.) This 
distinction ought to be carefully observed, lest when we hear 
of a few individuals having been summoned to repent we 
indulge in supine security, as if we had nothing to do with 
the mortification of the flesh ; whereas, in consequence of the 
depraved desires which are always enticing us, and the ini- 
quities which are ever and anon springing from them, it must 
engage our unremitting care. The special repentance enjoin- 
ed upon those whom the devil has entangled in deadly snares, 
and withdrawn from the fear of God, does not abolish that 
ordinary repentance which the corruption of nature obliges 
us to cultivate during the whole course of our lives. 

19. Moreover, if it is true, and nothing can be more cer- 
tain, than that a complete summary of the Gospel is includ- 
ed under these two heads, viz., repentance and the remission 
of sins, do we not see that the Lord justifies his people freely, 
and at the same time renews them to true holiness by the 
sanctification of his Spirit ? John, the messenger sent before 
the face of Christ to prepare his ways, proclaimed, " Repent, 
for the kingdom of heaven is at hand," (Matth. xi. 10 ; iii. 2.) 
By inviting them to repentance, he urged them to acknow- 
ledge that they were sinners, and in all respects condemned 
before God, that thus they might be induced earnestly to 
seek the mortification of the flesh, and a new birth in the 
Spirit. By announcing the kingdom of God he called for 
faith, since by the kingdom of God which he declared to be 
at hand, he meant forgiveness of sins, salvation, life, and 
every other blessing which we obtain in Christ ; wherefore 
we read in the other Evangelists, " John did baptize in the 


CHAP. III. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 173 

wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance for the 
remission of sins," (Mark i. 4 ; Luke iii. 3.) What does 
this mean, but that, weary and oppressed with the burden 
of sin, they should turn to the Lord, and entertain hopes of 
forgiveness and salvation ?l Thus, too, Christ began his 
preaching, " The kingdom of God is at hand : repent ye, and 
believe the Gospel," (Mark i. 15.) First, he declares that 
the treasures of the divine mercy were opened in him ; next, 
he enjoins repentance ; and, lastly, he encourages confidence 
in the promises of God. Accordingly, when intending to 
give a brief summary of the whole Gospel, he said that he 
behoved " to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day, 
and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached 
in his name among all nations," (Luke xxiv. 26, 46.) In like 
manner, after his resurrection the Apostles preached, u Him 
hath God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a 
Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of 
sins," (Acts v. 31.) Repentance is preached in the name of 
Christ, when men learn, through the doctrines of the Gos- 
pel, that all their thoughts, affections, and pursuits, are cor- 
rupt and vicious ; and that, therefore, if they would enter the 
kingdom of God they must be born again. Forgiveness of 
sins is preached when men are taught that Christ " is made 
unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and 
redemption," (1 Cor. i. 30,) that on his account they are 
freely deemed righteous and innocent in the sight of God. 
Though both graces are obtained by faith, (as has been shown 
elsewhere,) yet as the goodness of God, by which sins are 
forgiven, is the proper object of faith, it was proper carefully 
to distinguish it from repentance. 

20. Moreover, as hatred of sin, which is the beginning of 
repentance, first gives us access to the knowledge of Christ, 
who manifests himself to none but miserable and afflicted 
sinners, groaning, labouring, burdened, hungry, and thirsty, 
pining away with grief and wretchedness, so if we would 

1 The French adds, " pource qu'il lui est propre, et comme naturel, de 
sauver ce que est perdu ;" — because it is proper, and, as it were, natural 
to him to save that which is lost. 


174 INSTITUTES OP THE BOOK III. 

stand in Christ, we must aim at repentance, cultivate it dur- 
ing our whole lives, and continue it to the last. Christ came 
to call sinners, but to call them to repentance. He was sent 
to bless the unworthy, but by " turning away every one" 
" from his iniquities." The Scripture is full of similar pass- 
ages. Hence, when God offers forgiveness of sins, he in 
return usually stipulates for repentance, intimating that his 
mercy should induce men to repent. " Keep ye judgment," 
saith he, " and do justice : for my salvation is near to come." 
Again, " The Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them 
that turn from transgression in Jacob." Again, " Seek ye 
the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he 
is near. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unright- 
eous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and 
he will have mercy upon him." " Repent ye, therefore, and 
be converted, that your sins may be blotted out."1 Here, 
however, it is to be observed, that repentance is not made a 
condition in such a sense as to be a foundation for meriting 
pardon ; nay, it rather indicates the end at which they must 
aim if they would obtain favour, God having resolved to 
take pity on men for the express purpose of leading them to 
repent. Therefore, so long as we dwell in the prison of the 
body, we must constantly struggle with the vices of our cor- 
rupt nature, and so with our natural disposition. Plato some- 
times says,2 that the life of the philosopher is to meditate on 
death. More truly may we say, that the life of a Christian 
man is constant study and exercise in mortifying the flesh, 
until it is certainly slain, and the Spirit of God obtains domi- 
nion in us. Wherefore, he seems to me to have made most 
progress who has learned to be most dissatisfied with him- 
self. He does not, however, remain in the miry clay with- 
out going forward ; but rather hastens and sighs after God, 
that, ingrafted both into the death and the life of Christ, he 
may constantly meditate on repentance. Unquestionably 
those who have a genuine hatred of sin cannot do otherwise : 

• Isaiah lvi. 1 ; lix. 20 ; lv. 6, 7 ; Acts ii. 38 ; iii. 19. 
2 This is to be found in different passages of his work, and often in the 
Phaido. 


CHAP. III. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 175 

for no man ever hated sin without being previously enamour- 
ed of righteousness. This view, as it is the simplest of all, 
seemed to me also to accord best with Scripture truth. 

21. Moreover, that repentance is a special gift of God, I 
trust is too well understood from the above doctrine to 
require any lengthened discourse. Hence the Cnurch1 extols 
the goodness of God, and looks on in wonder, saying, l( Then 
hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life," 
(Acts xi. 18 ;) and Paul enjoining Timothy to deal meekly 
and patiently with unbelievers, says, u If God peradventure 
will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, 
and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the 
devil," (2 Tim. ii. 25, 26.) God indeed declares, that he 
would have all men to repent, and addresses exhortations in 
common to all; their efficacy, however, depends on the 
Spirit of regeneration. It were easier to create us at first, 
than for us by our own strength to acquire a more excel- 
lent nature. Wherefore, in regard to the whole process 
of regeneration, it is not without cause we are called God's 
" workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, 
which God hath before ordained that we should walk in 
them," (Eph. ii. 10.2) Those whom God is pleased to 
rescue from death, he quickens by the Spirit of regeneration ; 
not that repentance is properly the cause of salvation, 
but because, as already seen, it is inseparable from the 
faith and mercy of God ; for, as Isaiah declares, " The 
Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from 
transgression in Jacob." This, indeed, is a standing truth, 
that wherever the fear of God is in vigour, the Spirit has 
been carrying on his saving work. Hence, in Isaiah, while 
believers complain and lament that they have been forsaken 
of God, they set down the supernatural hardening of the 
heart as a sign of reprobation. The Apostle, also, intending 
to exclude apostates from the hope of salvation, states, as the 
reason, that it is impossible to renew them to repentance, 

1 French, " L'Eglise primitive du temps des Apostres ;" — the primitive 
Church of the Apostles' time. 

2 The French adds, " Et ce non seulement an regard d'un jour, mais de 
tout le cours de notre vocation ;" — and this in regard not only to a single 
day, but to the whole course of our vocation. 


176 INSTITUTES OP THE BOOK III. 

(Heb. vi. 6 ;) that is, God by renewing those whom he wills 
not to perish, gives them a sign of paternal favour, and in a 
manner attracts them to himself, by the beams of a calm and 
reconciled countenance ; on the other hand, by hardening 
the reprobate, whose impiety is not to be forgiven, he thunders 
against them. This kind of vengeance the Apostle denounces 
against voluntary apostates, (Heb. x. 29,) who, in falling 
away from the faith of the gospel, mock God, insultingly 
reject his favour, profane and trample under foot the blood of 
Christ, nay, as far as in them lies, crucify him afresh. Still, 
he does not, as some austere persons preposterously insist, 
leave no hope of pardon to voluntary sins, but shows that 
apostacy being altogether without excuse, it is not strange 
that God is inexorably rigorous in punishing sacrilegious 
contempt thus shown to himself. For, in the same Epistle, he 
says, that " it is impossible for those who were once enlight- 
ened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made 
partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word 
of God, and the powers of the world to come, if they shall 
fall away to renew them again to repentance, seeing they 
crucify the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open 
shame," (Heb. vii. 4-6.) And in another passage, " If we 
sin willingly, after that we have received the knowledge of 
the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but a 
certain fearful looking for of judgment," &c. (Heb. xi. 25, 
26.) There are other passages, from a misinterpretation of 
which the Novatians of old extracted materials for their 
heresy ; so much so, that some good men taking offence at 
their harshness, have deemed the Epistle altogether spurious, 
though it truly savours in every part of it of the apostolic 
spirit. But as our dispute is only with those who receive the 
Epistle, it is easy to show that those passages give no support 
to their error. First, the Apostle must of necessity agree with 
his Master, who declares, that u all manner of sin and blas- 
phemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy against 
the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men," " neither 
in this world, neither in the world to come," (Matth. xii. 31 ; 
Luke xii. 10.) We must hold that this was the only excep- 
tion which the Apostle recognised, unless we would set him 


CHAP. IIL CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 177 

in opposition to the grace of God. Hence it follows, that 
to no sin is pardon denied save to one, which proceeding 
from desperate fury cannot be aseribed to infirmity, and 
plainly shows that the man guilty of it is possessed by the 
devil. 

22. Here, however, it is proper to consider what the 
dreadful iniquity is which is not to be pardoned. The defi- 
nition which /^Augustinej somewhere gives,1 — viz., that it is 
obstinate perverseness, with distrust of pardon, continued till 
death, — scarcely agrees with the word.- of Christ, that it shall 
not be forgiven in this world. For either this is said in vain, 
or it may be committed in this world. But if Augustine's 
definition is correct, the sin is not committed unless persisted 
in till death. ; Others say, that the sin against the Holy 
Spirit consists in^enyj^mgjhe^aceconferrecl upon a brother; 
but I know not on what it is founded. Here, however, let 
us give the true definition, which, when once it is established 
by sound evidence, will easily of itself overturn all the others, 
/say, therefore, that he sins against the Holy Spirit who, 
.while so constrained by the power of divine truth that he 
rnoran.ee, yet deliberately, resists, and that 
for the sake of resisting. For Christ, in explanation 
of what he had said, immediately adds, " Whosoever speaketh 
a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him ; but 
whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be 
forgiven him," (Matth. xii. 31 .) And Matthew uses the term 
spirit of blasphemy2 for blasphemy against the Spirit. How 
can any one insult the Son, without at the same time attack- 
ing the Spirit ? In this way. Those who in ignorance assail 
the unknown truth of God, and yet are so disposed that they 
would be unwilling to extinguish the truth of God when 
manifested to them, or utter one word against him whom 
they knew to be the Lord's Anointed, sin against the Father 
and the Son. Thus there are many in the present day who 
have the greatest abhorrence to the doctrine of the Gospel, and 
yet, if they knew it to be the doctrine of the Gospel, would 

1 August. Lib. de Correp. et Gratia, cap. xii. 

2 The Greek is, " rov vvevftxros (iKxcQYiftioi." This Calvin translates in 
Latin, " Spiritum blasphemiae," and in French, "Esprit de blaspheme." 

VOL. II. M 


178 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

be prepared to venerate it with their whole heart. But those 
who are convinced in conscience that what they repudiate 
and impugn is the word of God, and yet cease not to impugn 
it, are said to blaspheme against the Spirit, inasmuch as 
they struggle against the illumination which is the work of 
the Spirit. Such were some of the Jews, who, when they 
could not resist the Spirit speaking by Stephen, yet were 
bent on resisting, (Acts vi. 10.) There can be no doubt 
that many of them were carried away by zeal for the law ; 
but it appears that there were others who maliciously and 
impiously raged against God himself, that is, against the 
doctrine which they knew to be of God. Such, too, were 
the Pharisees, on whom our Lord denounced woe. To 
depreciate the power of the Holy Spirit, they defamed him 
by the name of Beelzebub, (Matth. ix. 3, 4 ; xii. 24.) The 
spirit of blasphemy, therefore, is, when a man audaciously, 
and of set purpose, rushes forth to insult his divine name. 
This Paul intimates when he says, " but I obtained mercy, 
because I did it ignorantly in unbelief;" otherwise he had 
deservedly been held unworthy of the grace of God.1 If 
ignorance joined with unbelief made him obtain pardon, it 
follows, that there is no room for pardon when knowledge is 
added to unbelief. 

23. If you attend properly, you will perceive that the 
Apostle speaks not of one particular lapse or two, but of the 
universal revolt by which the reprobate renounce salvation. 
It is not strange that God should be implacable to those 
•whom John, in his Epistle, declares not to have been of the 
elect, from whom they went out, (1 John ii. 19.) For he is 
directing his discourse against those who imagined that they 
could return to the Christian religion though they had once 
revolted from it. To divest them of this false and pernicious 
opinion, he says, as is most true, that those who had once 
knowingly and willingly cast off fellowship with Christ, had 
no means of returning to it. It is not, however, so cast off 
by those who merely, by the dissoluteness of their lives, 
transgress the word of the Lord, but by those who avowedly 

1 The omission of this last clause in the French seems to be an improve- 
ment. 


CHAP. III. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 179 

reject his whole doctrine. There is a paralogism in the 
expression casting off and sinning. Casting off, as interpreted 
by the Novatians, is when any one, notwithstanding of being 
taught by the Law of the Lord not to steal or commit 
adultery, refrains not from theft or adultery. On the con- 
trary, I hold that there is a tacit antithesis, in which all the 
things, contrary to those which had been said, must be held to 
be repeated, so that the thing expressed is not some particular 
vice, but universal aversion to God, and (so to speak) the 
apostacy of the whole man. Therefore, when he speaks of 
those falling away " who were once enlightened, and have 
tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the 
Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God, and 
the powers of the world to come," we must understand him 
as referring to those who, with deliberate impiety, have 
quenched the light of the Spirit, tasted of the heavenly word 
and spurned it, alienated themselves from the sanctification 
of the Spirit, and trampled under foot the word of God 
and the powers of a world to come. The better to show 
that this was the species of impiety intended, he afterwards 
expressly adds the term wilfully. For when he says, " If 
we sin wilfully, after that Ave have received the knowledge 
of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins," he 
denies not that Christ is a perpetual victim to expiate the 
transgressions of saints, (this the whole Epistle, in explain- 
ing the priesthood of Christ, distinctly proclaims,) but he 
says that there remains no other sacrifice after this one is 
abandoned. And it is abandoned when the truth of the 
Gospel is professedly abjured. 

24. To some it seems harsh, and at variance with the 
divine mercy, utterly to deny forgiveness to any who be- 
take themselves to it. This is easily disposed of. It is 
not said that pardon will be refused if they turn to the 
Lord, but it is altogether denied that they can turn to 
repentance, inasmuch as for their ingratitude they are struck 
by the just judgment of God with eternal blindness. There 
is nothing contrary to this in the application which is after- 
wards made of the example of Esau, who tried in vain, by 
crying and tears, to recover his lost birthright ; nor in the 


180 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

denunciation of the Prophet, " They cried, and I would not 
hear." Such modes of expression do not denote true con- 
version or calling upon God, but that anxiety with which 
the wicked, when in calamity, are compelled to see what 
they before securely disregarded, viz., that nothing can avail 
but the assistance of the Lord. This, however, they do not 
so much implore as lament the loss of. Hence all that the 
Prophet means by crying, and the Apostle by tears, is the 
dreadful torment which stings and excruciates the wicked in 
despair. It is of consequence carefully to observe this : for 
otherwise God would be inconsistent with himself when he 
proclaims through the Prophet, that " If the wicked will 
turn from all his sins that he hath committed," — " he shall 
surely live, he shall not die," (Ezek. xviii. 21, 22.) And 
(as I have already said) it is certain that the mind of man 
cannot be changed for the better unless by his preventing 
grace. The promise as to those who call upon him will 
never fail ; but the names of conversion and prayer are 
improperly given to that blind torment by which the repro- 
bate are distracted when they see that they must seek God 
if they would find a remedy for their calamities, and yet 
shun to approach him. 

25. But as the Apostle declares that God is not appeased 
by feigned repentance, it is asked how Ahab obtained pardon, 
and averted the punishment denounced against him, (1 Kings 
xxi. 28, 29,) seeing, it appears, he was only amazed on the 
sudden, and afterwards continued his former course of life. 
He, indeed, clothed himself in sackcloth, covered himself 
with ashes, lay on the ground, and (as the testimony given 
to him bears) humbled himself before God. It was a 
small matter to rend his garments while his heart continued 
obstinate and swollen with wickedness, and yet we see that 
God was inclined to mercy. I answer, that though hypo- 
crites are thus occasionally spared for a time, the wrath of 
God still lies upon them, and that they are thus spared not 
so much on their own account as for a public example. For 
what did Ahab gain by the mitigation of his punishment 
except that he did not suifer it alive on the earth ? The 
curse of God, though concealed, was fixed on his house, and 


CHAP. III. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 181 

he himself went to eternal destruction. We may see the 
same thing in Esau, (Gen. xxvii. 38, 39.) For though he 
met with a refusal, a temporal blessing was granted to his 
tears. But as, according to the declaration of God, the 
spiritual inheritance could be possessed only by one of the 
brothers, when Jacob was selected instead of Esau, that 
event excluded him from the divine mercy ; but still there 
was given to him, as a man of a grovelling nature, this con- 
solation, that he should be filled with the fatness of the 
earth and the dew of heaven. And this, as I lately said, 
should be regarded as done for the example of others, that 
we may learn to apply our minds, and exert ourselves with 
greater alacrity, in the way of sincere repentance, as there 
cannot be the least doubt that God will be ready to pardon 
those who turn to him truly and with the heart, seeing his 
mercy extends even to the unworthy, though they bear 
marks of his displeasure. In this way also, we are taught 
how dreadful the judgment is which awaits all the rebellious 
who with audacious brow and iron heart make it their sport 
to despise and disregard the divine threatenings. God in 
this way often stretched forth his hand to deliver the 
Israelites from then- calamities, though their cries were pre- 
tended, and their minds double and perfidious, as he himself 
complains in the Psalms, that they immediately returned to 
their former course, (Psalm lxxviii. 36, 37.) But he designed 
thus by kindness and forbearance to bring them to true 
repentance,- or leave them without excuse. And yet by 
remitting the punishment for a time, he does not lay himself 
under any perpetual obligation. He rather at times rises 
with greater severity against hypocrites, and doubles their 
punishment, that it may thereby appear how much hypocrisy 
displeases him. But, as I have observed, he gives some 
examples of his inclination to pardon, that the pious may 
thereby be stimulated to amend their lives, and the pride of 
those who petulantly kick against the pricks be more severely 
condemned. 


182 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 


CHAPTER IV. 

PENITENCE, AS EXPLAINED IN THE SOPHISTICAL JARGON OP 
THE SCHOOLMEN, WIDELY DIEFERENT FROM THE PURITY 
REQUIRED BY THE GOSPEL. OF CONFESSION AND SATIS- 
FACTION. 

The divisions of this chapter are, — I. The orthodox doctrine of repent- 
ance being already expounded, the false doctrine is refuted in the present 
chapter ; a general summary survey being at the same time taken of the 
doctrine of the Schoolmen, sec. 1, 2. II. Its separate parts are after- 
wards examined. Contrition, sec. 2 and 3. Confession, sec. 4-20. 
Sanctification, from sec. 20 to the end of the chapter. 

Sections. 

1. Errors of the Schoolmen in delivering the doctrine of repentance. 1. 

Errors in defining it. Four different definitions considered. 2. Absurd 
division. 3. Vain and puzzling questions. 4. Mode in which they 
entangle themselves. 

2. The false doctrine of the Schoolmen necessary to be refuted. Of 

contrition. Their view of it examined. 

3. True and genuine contrition. 

4. Auricular confession. Whether or not of divine authority. Argu- 

ments of Canonists and Schoolmen. Allegorical argument founded 
on Judaism. Two answers. Reason why Christ sent the lepers to 
the priests. 

5. Another allegorical argument. Answer. 

G. A third argument from two passages of Scripture. These passages 
expounded. 

7. Confession proved not to be of divine authority. The use of it free 

for almost twelve hundred years after Christ. Its nature. "When 
enacted into a law. Confirmation from the history of the Church. 
A representation of the ancient auricular confession still existing 
among the Papists, to bear judgment against them. Confession 
abolished in the Church of Constantinople. 

8. This mode of confession disapproved by Chrysostom, as shown by 

many passages. 

9. False confession being thus refuted, the confession enjoined by the 

word of God is considered. Mistranslation in the old version. 
Proof from Scripture that confession should be directed to God alone. 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 183 

10. Effect of secret confession thus made to God. Another kind of con- 
fession made to men. 

11. Two forms of the latter confession, viz., public and private. Public 

confession either ordinary or extraordinary. Use of each. Objec- 
tion to confession and public prayer. Answer. 

12. Private confession of two kinds. 1. On our own account. 2. On 
account of our neighbour. Use of the former. Great assistance to 
be obtained from faithful ministers of the Church. Mode of pro- 
cedure. Caution to be used. 

13. The use of the latter recommended by Christ. What comprehended 
under it. Scripture sanctions no other method of confession. 

14. The power of the keys exercised in these three kinds of confession. 
The utility of this power in regard to public confession and absolu- 
tion. Caution to be observed. 

15. Popish errors respecting confession. 1. In enjoining on all the 
necessity of confessing every sin. 2. Fictitious keys. 3. Pretended 
mandate to loose and bind. 4. To whom the office of loosing and 
binding committed. 

16. Refutation of the first error, from the impossibiUty of so confessing, 
as proved by the testimony of David. 

17. Refuted farther from the testimony of conscience. Impossible to 

observe this most rigid obligation. Necessarily leads to despair or 
indifference. Confirmation of the preceding remarks by an appeal 
to conscience. 

18. Another refutation of the first error from analogy. Sum of the whole 
refutation. Third refutation, laying down the surest rule of con- 
fession. Explanation of the rule. Three objections answered. 

19. Fourth objection, viz., that auricular confession does no harm, and is 
even useful. Answer, unfolding the hypocrisy, falsehood, impiety, 
and monstrous abominations of the patrons of this error. 

20. Refutation of the second error. 1. Priests not successors of the 
Apostles.- 2. They have not the Holy Spirit, who alone is arbiter 
of the keys. 

21. Refutation of the third error. 1. They are ignorant of the command 

and promise of Christ. By abandoning the word of God they run 
into innumerable absurdities. 

22. Objection to the refutation of the third error. Answers, reducing the 

Papists to various absurdities. 

23. Refutation of the fourth error. 1. Petitio principii. 2. Inversion 
of ecclesiastical discipline. Three objections answered. 

24. Conclusion of the whole discussion against this fictitious confession. 

25. Of satisfaction, to which the Sophists assign the third place in 
repentance. Errors and falsehoods. These views opposed by the 
terms, — 1. Forgiveness. 2. Free forgiveness. 3. God destroying 
iniquities. 4. By and on account of Christ. No need of our satis- 
faction. 


184 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

26. Objection, confining the grace and efficacy of Christ within narrow 
limits. Answers by both John the Evangelist and John the Baptist. 
Consequence of these answers. 

27. Two points violated by the fiction of satisfaction. First, the honour 
of Christ impaired. Secondly, the conscience cannot find peace. 
Objection, confining the forgiveness of sins to Catechumens, refuted. 

28. Objection, founded on the arbitrary distinction between venial and 
mortal sins. This distinction insulting to God and repugnant to. 
Scripture. Answer, showing the true distinction in regard to venial 
sin. 

29. Objection, founded on a distinction between guilt and the punish- 
ment of it. Answer, illustrated by various passages of Scripture. 
Admirable saying of Augustine. 

30. Answer, founded on a consideration of the efficacy of Christ's death, 
and the sacrifices under the law. Our true satisfaction. 

31. An objection, perverting six passages of Scripture. Preliminary 

observations concerning a twofold judgment on the part of God. 
1. For punishment. 2. For correction. 

32. Two distinctions hence arising. Objection, that God is often angry 
with his elect. Answer, God in afflicting his people does not take 
his mercy from them. This confirmed by his promise, by Scripture, 
and the uniform experience of the Church. Distinction between the 
reprobate and the elect in regard to punishment. 

33. Second distinction. The punishment of the repi'obate a commence- 
ment of the eternal punishment awaiting them ; that of the elect 
designed to bring them to repentance. This confirmed by passages 
of Scripture and of the Fathers. 

34. Two uses of this doctrine to the believer. In affliction he can 
believe that God, though angry, is still favourable to him. In the 
punishment of the reprobate, he sees a prelude to their final doom. 

35. Objection, as to the punishment of David, answered. Why all men 
here subjected to chastisement. 

36. Objections, founded on five other passages, answered. 

37. Answer continued. 

38. Objection, founded on passages in the Fathers. Answer, with pass- 
ages from Chrysostom and Augustine. 

39. These satisfactions had reference to the peace of the Church, and 
not to the throne of God. The Schoolmen have perverted the 
meaning of some absurd statements by obscure monks. 

1. I COME now to an examination of what the scholastic 
sophists teach concerning repentance. This I will do as 
briefly as possible ; for I have no intention to take up every 
point, lest this work, which I am desirous to frame as a com- 
pendium of doctrine, should exceed all bounds. They have 


CHAI\ IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 185 

managed to envelop a matter, otherwise not much involved, 
in so many perplexities, that it will be difficult to find an 
outlet if once you get plunged but a little way into their 
mire. And, first, in giving a definition, they plainly show 
they never understood what repentance means. For they 
fasten on some expressions in the writings of the Fathers 
which are very far from expressing the nature of repentance. 
Forjnstance, that to repent is to deplore past sins and not 
_commit what is to be deplored. Again, that it is to bewail 
past evils, and not again to do what is to be bewailed. 
Again, that it is a kind of grieving revenge, punishing in 
itself what it grieves to have committed. Again, that it is 
sorrow of heart and bitterness of soul for the evils which the 
individual has committed, or to which he has consented.1 
Supposing we grant that these things were well said by 
Fathers, (though, if one were inclined to dispute, it were not 
difficult to deny it,) they were not, however, said with the 
view of describing repentance, but only of exhorting peni- 
tents not again to fall into the same faults from which they 
had been delivered. But if all descriptions of this kind are 
to be converted into definitions, there are others which have 
as good a title to be added. For instance, the following 
sentence of Chrysostom : " llepentance is a medicine for the 
cure of sin, a gift bestowed from above, an admirable virtue, 
a grace surpassing the power of laws." Moreover, the 
doctrine which they2 afterwards deliver is somewhat worse 
than their definition. For they are so keenly bent on 
external exercises, that all you can gather from immense 
volumes3 is, that repentance is a discipline, and austerity, 
which serves partly to subdue the flesh, partly to chasten 
and punish sins : of internal renovation of mind, bringing 


1 The first definition is that of Gregory, and is contained Sentent. Lib. 
iv. Dist. 14, c. 1. The second, which is that of Ambrose, is given same 
place, and also Decret. Dist. 3, de Pcenitentia C. Pcenit. Prior. The 
third is Augustine's, as stated in the same place, and C. Pcenit. Poster. 
The fourth is from Ambrose, and is given Dist. 1, de Pcenit. C. Vera 
Poenitentia. 

2 French, " Ces bons glosateurs ;" — these worthy glossers. 

3 Latin, " Immensis voluminibus." — French, " Lcur gros bobulaire de 
livres ;" — their large lumbering books. 


186 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

with it true amendment of life, there is a strange silence.1 
No doubt, they talk much of contrition and attrition, torment 
the soul with many scruples, and involve it in great trouble 
and anxiety ; but when they seem to have deeply wounded 
the heart, they cure all its bitterness by a slight sprinkling 
of ceremonies. ( Repentance thusjshrewdly defined^they 
divide into contrition of the heart, confession of the month, 
and satisfaction7 of works.2 This is not more logical than 
the definition, though they would be thought to have spent 
their whole lives in framing syllogisms.3 But if any one 
argues from the definition (a mode of argument prevalent 
with dialecticians) that a man may weep over his past sins, 
and not commit things that cause weeping ; may bewail past 
evils, and not commit things that are to be bewailed ; may 
punish what he is grieved for having committed, though he 
does not confess it with the mouth, — how will they defend 
their division ? For if he may be a true penitent and not 
confess, repentance can exist without confession. If they 
answer, that this division refers to repentance regarded as a 
sacrament, or is to be understood of repentance in its most 
perfect form, which they do not comprehend in their defini- 
tions, the mistake does not rest with me : let them blame 
themselves for not defining more purely and clearly. When 
any matter is discussed, I certainly am dull enough to refer 
everything to the definition as the hinge and foundation of 
the whole discussion. But granting that this is a license which 
masters have, let us now survey the different parts in their 
order. In omitting as frivolous several things which they 
vend with solemn brow as mysteries, I do it not from igno- 
rance. It were not very difficult to dispose of all those points 
which they plume themselves on their acuteness and subtilty 
in discussing ; but I consider it a sacred dutv not to trouble 


1 Latin, " Mirum silentium." — French, " H n'en est nulles nouuelles 
en leur quartier ;" — there are no news in their quarter. 

2 Sent. Lib. iv. Dist. 16, cap. 1 ; De Pcenit. Dist. 1 ; C. Perfecta 
Poenit. 

3 French, " Combien qu'ils n'estudient autre chose en toute leur vie 
que la Dialectique, que est l'art de definir et partir ;" — although they 
study nought else during their whole life but Dialectics, which is the art 
of denning and dividing. 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 187 

the reader to no purpose with such absurdities. It is 
certainly easy to see from the questions which they move 
and agitate, and in which they miserably entangle them- 
selves, that they are prating of things they know not. Of 
this nature are the following : Whether repentance of one sin 
is pleasing to God, while there is an obstinate adherence to 
other sins. Again, whether punishments divinely inflicted 
are available for satisfaction. Again, whether repentance 
can be several times repeated for mortal sins, whereas they 
grossly and wickedly define that daily repentance has to do 
with none but venial sins. In like manner, with gross error, 
they greatly torment themselves with a saying of Jerome, 
that repentance is a second plank after shipwreck.1 Herein 
they show that they have never awoke from brutish stupor, so 
as to obtain a distant view of the thousandth part of their sins. 
2. I would have my readers to observe, that the dispute 
here relates not to a matter of no consequence ; 2 but to one 
of the most important of all, viz., the forgiveness of sins. For 
while they require three things in repentance, viz., compunction 
of heart, confession of the mouth, and satisfaction of work,3 
they at the same time teach that these are necessary to obtain 
the pardon of sins. If there is any thing in the whole compass 
of religion which it is of importance to us to know, this certain- 
ly is one of the most important, viz., to perceive and rightly 
hold by what means, what rule, what terms, with what facility 
or difficulty, forgiveness of sins may be obtained. Unless our 
knowledge here is clear and certain, our conscience can have 
no rest at all, no peace with God, no confidence or security, 
but is continually trembling, fluctuating, boiling, and dis- 
tracted ; dreads, hates, and shuns the presence of God. But 
if forgiveness of sins depends on the conditions to which they 
bind it, nothing can be more wretched and deplorable than 

1 Latin, " Secundam tabulam post naufragium." — French, " line se- 
conde planche, sur laquelle celui que estoit pour perir en la mer, nage 
pour venir au port ;" — a second plank on which he who was on the point 
of perishing in the sea swims to gain the harbour. 

2 Latin, " De asini umbra rixam." — French, "En un combat frivole ;" 
— engaged in a frivolous combat. 

3 Luther (adv. Bullam Antichristi, Art. vi.) shows that those who set 
down these three parts of repentance, speak neither according to Scrip- 
ture nor the ancient Fathers. 


188 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

our situation. Contrition they represent as the first step in 
obtaining pardon ; and they exact it as due, that is, full and 
complete : meanwhile, they decide not when one may feel 
secure of having performed this contrition in due measure. 
I admit that we are bound strongly and incessantly to urge 
every man bitterly to lament his sins, and thereby stimulate 
himself more and more to dislike and hate them. For this 
is the " repentance to salvation not to be repented of," 
(2 Cor. vii. 10.) But when such bitterness of sorrow is de- 
manded as may correspond to the magnitude of the offence, 
and be weighed in the balance with confidence of pardon, 
miserable consciences are sadly perplexed and tormented 
when they see that the contrition due for sin is laid upon 
them, and yet that they have no measure of what is due, so 
as to enable them to determine that they have made full 
payment. If they say we are to do what in us lies, we are 
always brought back to the same point ; 1 for when will any 
man venture to promise himself that he has done his utmost 
in bewailing sin ? Therefore, when consciences, after a length- 
ened struggle and long contests with themselves, find no 
haven in which they may rest, as a means of alleviating their 
condition in some degree, they extort sorrow and wring out 
tears, in order to perfect their contrition. 

3. If they say that this is calumny on my part, let them 
come forward and point out a single individual who, by this 
doctrine of contrition, has not either been driven to despair, 
or has not, instead of true, opposed pretended fear to the jus- 
tice of God. We have elsewhere observed, that forgiveness 
of sins never can be obtained without repentance, because 
none but the afflicted, and those wounded by a consciousness 
of sins, can sincerely implore the mercy of God ; but we, at 
the same time, added, that repentance cannot be the cause of 
the forgiveness of sins: and we also did away with that torment 
of souls — the dogma that it must be performed as due. Our 
doctrine was, that the soul looked not to its own compunction 
or its own tears, but fixed both eyes on the mercy of God 
alone. Only we observed, that those who labour and are 

1 French, "Nous tournerons toujours en un meme circuit;" — we shall 
always revolve in the same circle. 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 189 

heavy laden are called by Christ, seeing he was sent "to 
preach good tidings to the meek ;" " to bind up the broken- 
hearted ; to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening 
of the prison to them that are bound ;" " to comfort all that 
mourn."1 Hence the Pharisees were excluded, because, full 
of their own righteousness, they acknowledged not their own 
poverty; and despisers, because, regardless of the divine anger, 
they sought no remedy for their wickedness. Such persons 
neither labour nor are heavy laden, are not broken-hearted, 
bound, nor in prison. But there is a great difference between 
teaching that forgiveness of sins is merited by a full and com- 
plete contrition, (which the sinner never can give,) and in- 
structing him to hunger and thirst after the mercy of God, 
that recognising his wretchedness, his turmoil, weariness, and 
captivity, you may show him where he should seek refresh- 
ment, rest, and liberty ; in fine, teach him in his humility to 
give glory to God. 

4. Confession has ever been a subject of keen contest 
between the Canonists and the Scholastic Theologians ; the 
former contending that confession is of divine authority — the 
latter insisting, on the contrary, that it is merely enjoined by 
ecclesiastical constitution. In this contest great effrontery 
has been displayed by the Theologians, who have corrupted 
and violently wrested every passage of Scripture they have 
quoted in their favour.2 And when they saw that even thus 
they could not gain their object, those who wished to be 
thought particularly acute had recourse to the evasion that 
confession is of divine authority in regard to the substance, but 
that it afterwards received its form from positive enactment. 
Tims the silliest of these quibblers refer the citation to divine 
authority, from its being said, "Adam, where art thou?" 
(Gen. hi. 9, 12 ;) and also the exception from Adam having 
replied as if excepting, " The woman whom thou gavest to be 
with me," &c. ; but say that the form of both was appointed 
by civil law. Let us see by what arguments they prove that 
this confession, formed or unformed, is a divine command- 

1 Matth. xi. 28 ; Is. lxi. 1 ; Luke iv. 18. 

2 Erasmus, in a letter to the Augustine Steuchus in 1531, -while flatter- 
ing, at the same time laughs at him, for thinking that the fifth chapter of 
Numbers sufficiently proves, in opposition to Luther, that auricular confes- 
sion is of God. 


190 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

ment. The Lord, they say, sent the lepers to the priests, 
(Matth. viii. 4.) What ? did he send them to confession ? 
Who ever heard tell that the Levitieal priests were appointed 
to hear confession? Here they resort to allegory. The 
priests were appointed by the Mosaic law to discern between 
leper and leper : sin is spiritual leprosy ; therefore it belongs 
to the priests to decide upon it. Before I answer, I would 
ask, in passing, why, if this passage makes them judges of 
spiritual leprosy, they claim the cognisance of natural and 
carnal leprosy ? This, forsooth, is not to play upon Scripture ! l 
The law gives the cognisance of leprosy to the Levitieal 
priests : let us usurp this to ourselves. Sin is spiritual le- 
prosy : let us also have cognisance of sin. I now give my 
answer : There being a change of the priesthood, there must 
of necessity be a change of the law. All the sacerdotal func- 
tions were transferred to Christ, and in him fulfilled and 
ended, (Heb. vii. 12.) To him alone, therefoi*e, all the rights 
and honours of the priesthood have been transferred. If they 
are so fond then of hunting out allegories, let them set Christ 
before them as the only priest, and place full and universal 
jurisdiction on his tribunal : this we will readily admit. Be- 
sides, there is an incongruity in their allegory : it classes a 
merely civil enactment among ceremonies. Why, then, does 
Christ send the lepers to the priests ? Lest the priests should 
be charged with violating the law, which ordained that the 
person cured of leprosy should present himself before the 
priest, and be purified by the offering of a sacrifice, he orders 
the lepers who had been cleansed to do what the law required. 
" Go and show thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleans- 
ing according as Moses commanded for a testimony unto 
them," (Luke v. 17.) And assuredly this miracle would be 
a testimony to them : they had pronounced them lepers ; 
they now pronounce them cured. Whether they would or 
not, they are forced to become witnesses to the miracles of 
Christ. Christ allows them to examine the miracle, and they 
cannot deny it : yet, as they still quibble, they have need of 
a testimony. So it is elsewhere said, " This gospel of the 

1 French, "N'est ce pas bien se jouer des Escritures, de les tourner en 
ceste facon ?" — is it not indeed to make game of Scripture, to turn it in 
this fashion ? 


CIIAr. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 191 

kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto 
all nations," (Matth. xxiv. 14.) Again, " Ye shall be brought 
before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against 
them and the Gentiles," (Matth. x. 18 ;) that is, in order that, 
in the judgment of God, they might be more fully convicted. 
But if they prefer taking the view of Chrysostom, (Horn. xii. 
de Muliere Canamea,) he shows that this was done by Christ 
for the sake of the Jews also, that he might not be regarded 
as a violator of the law. But we are ashamed to appeal to the 
authority of any man in a matter so clear, when Christ de- 
clares that he left the legal right of the priests entire, as pro- 
fessed enemies of the Gospel, who were always intent on 
making a clamour if their mouths were not stopped. Where- 
fore, let the Popish priests, in order to retain this privilege, 
openly make common cause with those whom it was neces- 
sary to restrain, by forcible means, from speaking evil of 
Christ.1 For there is here no reference to his true ministers. 
5. They draw their second argument from the same foun- 
tain,— I mean allegory ; as if allegories were of much avail in 
confirming any doctrine. But, indeed, let them avail, if those 
which I am able to produce are not more specious than theii's. 
They say, then, that the Lord, after raising Lazarus, com- 
manded his disciples to " loose him and let him go," (John 
xi. 44.) Their first statement is untrue : we no where read 
that the Lord said this to the disciples ; and it is much more 
probable that he spoke to the Jews who were standing by, 
that from there being no suspicion of fraud the miracle might 
be more manifest, and his power might be the more conspi- 
cuous from his raising the dead without touching him, by a 
mere word. In the same way, I understand that our Lord, 
to leave no ground of suspicion to the Jews, wished them to 
roll back the stone, feel the stench, perceive the sure signs 
of death, see him rise by the mere power of a word, and first 
handle him when alive. And this is the view of Chrysostom, 
(Serm. C. Jud. Gent, et Haeret.) But granting that it was 
said to the disciples, what can they gain by it ? That the 

1 The French is, " Car ce que Jesus Christ laisse aux Prestres de la 
loy, n'appartient en rien a ses vrais ministres ;" — for that which Jesus 
Christ leaves to the Priests, belongs not in any respect to his true ministers. 


192 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

Lord gave the apostles the power of loosing ? How much 
more aptly and dexterously might we allegorise and say, that 
by this symbol the Lord designed to teach his followers to 
loose those whom he raises up ; that is, not to bring to remem- 
brance the sins which he himself had forgotten, not to con- 
demn as sinners those whom he had acquitted, not still to 
upbraid those whom he had pardoned, not to be stern and 
severe in punishing, while he himself was merciful and ready 
to forgive. Certainly nothing should more incline us to par- 
don than the example of the Judge who threatens that he 
will be inexorable to the rigid and inhumane. Let them go 
now and vend their allegories.1 

6. They now come to closer quarters, while they support 
their view by passages of Scripture which they think clearly in 
their favour.2 Those who came to John's baptism confessed 
their sins, and James bids us confess our sins one to another, 
(James v. 16.) It is not strange that those who wished 
to be baptized confessed their sins. It has already been 
mentioned, that John preached the baptism of repentance, 
baptized with water unto repentance. Whom then could he 
baptize, but those who confessed that they were sinners ? 
Baptism is a symbol of the forgiveness of sins ; and who could 
be admitted to receive the symbol but sinners acknowledg- 
ing themselves as such ? They therefore confessed their sins 
that they might be baptized. Nor without good reason does 
James enjoin us to confess our sins one to another. But if 
they would attend to what immediately follows, they would 
perceive that this gives them little support. The words are, 
" Confess your sins one to another, and pray one for another." 
He joins together mutual confession and mutual prayer. If, 
then, we are to confess to priests only, we are also to pray 
for them only. What ? It Avould even follow from the words 
of James, that priests alone can confess. In saying that we 
are to confess mutually, he must be addressing those only 
who can hear the confession of others. He says, dXXrjXovg, 
mutually, by turns, or, if they prefer it, reciprocally. But 

1 French, " Qu'ils voisent maintenant, et facent un bouclier de leur alle • 
gories ;" — let them go now and make a buckler of their allegories. 

2 Augustin. Epist. 54. 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 193 

those only can confess reciprocally who are fit to hear confes- 
sion. This being a privilege which they bestow upon priests 
only, we also leave them the office of confessing to each other. 
Have done then with such frivolous absurdities, and let us 
receive the true meaning of the apostle, which is plain and 
simple ; first, That we are to deposit our infirmities in the 
breasts of each other, with the view of receiving mutual 
counsel, sympathy, and comfort ; and, secondly, That mutually 
conscious of the infirmities of our brethren, we are to pray 
to the Lord for them. Why then quote James against us 
who so earnestly insist on acknowledgment of the divine 
mercy ? No man can acknowledge the mercy of God with- 
out previously confessing his own misery. Nay, we pro- 
nounce every man to be anathema who does not confess him- 
self a sinner before God, before his angels, before the Church ; 
in short, before all men. " The Scripture hath concluded all 
under sin," " that every mouth may be stopped, and all the 
world may become guilty before God," that God alone may 
be justified and exalted, (Gal. iii. 22; Rom. iii. 9, 19.) 

7. I wonder at their effrontery in venturing to maintain 
that the confession of which they speak is of divine autho- 
rity. We admit that the use of it is very ancient ; but we 
can easily prove that at one time it was free. It certainly 
appears, from their own records, that no law or constitution 
respecting it was enacted before the days of Innocent III. 
Surely if there had been a more .ancient law they would have 
fastened on it, instead of being satisfied with the decree of 
the Council of Lateran, and so making themselves ridiculous 
even to children. In other matters, they hesitate not to coin 
fictitious decrees, which they ascribe to the most ancient 
Councils, that they may blind the eyes of the simple by vener- 
ation for antiquity. In this instance it has not occurred to 
them to practise this deception, and hence, themselves being 
Avitnesses, three centuries have not yet elapsed since the 
bridle was put, and the necessity of confession imposed by 
Innocent III. And to say nothing of the time, the mere 
barbai'ism of the terms used destroys the authority of the law. 
For when these worthy fathers enjoin that every person of 
both sexes (utriusque sexus) must once a year confess his sins 

VOL. II. N 


194 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

to his own priest, men of wit humorously object that the 
precept binds hermaphrodites only, and has no applica- 
tion to any one who is either a male or a female. A still 
grosser absurdity has been displayed by their disciples, who 
are unable to explain Avhat is meant by one's own priest, (pro- 
prius sacerdos.) Let all the hired ravers of the Pope babble as 
they may,1 we hold that Christ is not the author of this law, 
which compels men to enumerate their sins ; nay, that twelve 
hundred years elapsed after the resurrection of Christ before 
any such law was made, and that, consequently, this tyranny 
was not introduced until piety and doctrine were extinct, and 
pretended pastors had usurped to themselves unbridled license. 
There is clear evidence in historians, and other ancient writers, 
to show that this was a politic discipline introduced by 
bishops, not a law enacted by Christ or the Apostles. Out 
of many I will produce only one passage, which will be no 
obscure proof. Sozomen2 relates,3 that this constitution of 
the bishops was carefully observed in the Western churches, 
but especially at Rome ; thus intimating that it was not the 
universal custom of all churches. He also says, that one of 
the presbyters was specially appointed to take charge of this 
duty. This abundantly confutes their falsehood as to the 
keys being given to the whole priesthood indiscriminately for 
this purpose, since the function was not common to all the 
priests, but specially belonged to the one priest whom the 
bishop had appointed to it.- He it was (the same who at 
present in each of the cathedral churches has the name of 
poenitentiary) who had cognizance of offences which were more 
heinous, and required to be rebuked for the sake of example. 
He afterwards adds, that the same custom existed at Constan- 
tinople, until a certain matron, while pretending to confess, 
was discovered to have used it as a cloak to cover her inter- 
course with a deacon. In consequence of that crime, Nec- 
tarius, the bishop of that church — a man famous for learning 

1 French, " Quoy que tous les advocats et procureurs du Pape, et tous 
les caphars qu'il a a louage gazouillent ;" — whatever all the advocates 
and procurators of the Pope, and all the caphars whom he has in his pay 
may gabble. 

- The French adds, "l'un des auteurs del'HistoireEcclesiastique;" — one 
of the authors of the Ecclesiastical History. 

3 Eccles. Hist. Lib. viii. cap. 17, et Trepont. Hist. Lib. ix. 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 195 

and sanctity — abolished the custom of confessing. Here, 
then, let these asses prick up their ears. If auricular confes - 
sion was a divine law, how could Nectarius have dared to abo- 
lish or remodel it ? Nectarius, a holy man of God, approved 
by the suffrage of all antiquity, will they charge with heresy 
and schism ? With the same vote they will condemn the 
church of Constantinople, in which Sozomen affirms that the 
custom of confessing was not only disguised for a time, but 
even in his own memory abolished. Nay, let them charge 
with defection, not only Constantinople, but all the Eastern 
churches, which (if they say true) disregarded an inviolable 
law enjoined on all Christians. 

8. This abrogation is clearly attested in so many passages 
by Chrysostom, who lived at Constantinople, and was him- 
self prelate of the church, that it is strange they can venture 
to maintain the contrary : " Tell your sins," says he, " that 
you may efface them : if you blush to tell another what sins 
you have committed, tell them daily in your soul. I say not, 
tell them to your fellow-servant who may upbraid you, but 
tell them to God who cures them. Confess your sins upon 
your bed, that your conscience may there daily recognise its 
iniquities." Again, " Now, however, it is not necessary to 
confess before witnesses ; let the examination of your faults 
be made in your own thought : let the judgment be without 
a witness : let God alone see you confessing." Again, " I 
do not lead you publicly into the view of your fellow- 
servants ; I do not force you to disclose your sins to 
men ; review and lay open your conscience before God. 
Show your wounds to the Lord, the best of physicians, and 
seek medicine from him. Show to him who upbraids not, 
but cures most kindly." Again, " Certainly tell it not to man 
lest he upbraid you. Nor must you confess to your fellow- 
servant, who may make it public ; but show your wounds to 
the Lord, who takes care of you, who is kind and can cure." 
He afterwards introduces God speaking thus : " I oblige you 
not to come into the midst of a theatre, and have many wit- 
nesses ; tell your sins to me alone in private, that I may cure 
the ulcer."1 Shall we say that Chrysostom, in writing these 

1 Chrysost. Horn. ii. in Psal. 1. Serm. tie Poenit. et Confess. Horn. v. 
De Incomprehensibili Dei Nat. cont. Anomeos. Item, Hoin. iv. de Lazaro. 


196 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

and similar passages, carried his presumption so far as to free 
the consciences of men from those chains with which they 
are bound by the divine law ? By no means ; but knowing 
that it was not at all prescribed by the word of God, he 
dares not exact it as necessary. 

9. But that the whole matter may be more plainly un- 
folded, we shall first honestly state the nature of confession 
as delivered in the word of God, and thereafter subjoin 
their inventions — not all of them indeed, (who could drink 
up that boundless sea?) but those only which contain a 
summary of their secret confession. Here I am grieved to 
mention how frequently the old interpreter l has rendered the 
word confess instead of praise, a fact notorious to the most 
illiterate, were it not fitting to expose their effrontery in 
transferring to their tyrannical edict what was written con- 
cerning the praises of God. To prove that confession has 
the effect of exhilarating the mind, they obtrude the passage 
in the psalm, " with the voice of joy and praise," (Vulgate, con- 
fessiom's,) (Ps. xlii. 4.) But if such a metamorphosis is valid, 
any thing may be made of any thing. But, as they have 
lost all shame, let pious readers reflect how, by the just ven- 
geance of God, they have been given over to a reprobate 
mind, that their audacity may be the more detestable. If we 
are disposed to acquiesce in the simple doctrine of Scripture, 
there will be no danger of our being misled by such glosses. 
There one method of confessing is prescribed; since it is the 
Lord who forgives, forgets, and wipes away sins, to him let 
us confess them, that we may obtain pardon. He is the 
physician, therefore let us show our wounds to him. He is 
hurt and offended, let us ask peace of him. He is the dis- 
cerner of the heart, and knows all our thoughts ; let us hasten 
to pour out our hearts before him. He it is, in fine, who in- 
vites sinners ; let us delay not to draw near to him. " I 
acknowledge my sin unto thee," says David ; " and mine ini- 
quity have I not hid. I said, I will confess my transgres- 
sions unto the Lord ; and thou forgavest the iniquity of my 
sin," (Ps. xxxii. 5.) Another specimen of David's confession 
is as follows : " Have mercy upon me, O God, according to 

1 Latin, " Vetus interpres." — French, " Le translateur taut Gree qui 
Latin ;" — the Greek as well as Latin translator. 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 197 

thy loving kindness," (Ps. li. 1.) The following is Daniel's 
confession : a We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, 
and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by depart- 
ing from thy precepts and thy judgments," (Dan. ix. 5.) 
Other examples every where occur in Scripture : the quota- 
tion of them would almost fill a volume. " If we confess our 
sins," says John, " he is faithful and just to forgive us our 
sins," (1 John i. 9.) To whom are we to confess? to Him 
surely ; — that is, Ave are to fall down before him with a grieved 
and humbled heart, and sincerely accusing and condemning 
ourselves, seek forgiveness of his goodness and mercy. 

10. He who has adopted this confession from the heart 
and as in the presence of God, will doubtless have a tongue 
ready to confess whenever there is occasion among men to 
publish the mercy of God. He will not be satisfied to whisper 
the secret of his heart for once into the ear of one individual, 
but will often, and openly, and in the hearing of the whole 
world, ingenuously make mention both of his own ignominy, 
and of the greatness and glory of the Lord. In this way 
David, after he was accused by Nathan, being stung in his 
conscience, confesses his sin before God and men. " I have 
sinned unto the Lord," says he, (2 Sam. xii. ] 3 ;) that is, I 
have now no excuse, no evasion ; all must judge me a sin- 
ner ; and that which I wished to be secret with the Lord 
must also be made manifest to men. Hence the secret con- 
fession which is made to God is followed by voluntary con- 
fession to men, whenever that is conducive to the divine 
glory or our humiliation. For this reason the Lord anciently 
enjoined the people of Israel that they should repeat the 
words after the priest, and make public confession of their 
iniquities in the temple ; because he foresaw that this wras a 
necessary help to enable each one to form a just idea of him- 
self. And it is proper that, by confession of our misery, we 
should manifest the mercy of our God both among ourselves 
and before the whole world. 

11. It is proper that this mode of confession should 
both be ordinary in the Church, and also be specially 
employed on extraordinary occasions, when the people in 
common happen to have fallen into any fault. Of this latter 
description we have an example in the solemn confession 


3 98 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

which the whole people made under the authority and guid- 
ance of Ezra and Neheiniah, (Neh. i. 6, 7.) For their long 
captivity, the destruction of the temple, and suppression of 
their religion, having been the common punishment of their 
defection, they could not make meet acknowledgment of the 
blessing of deliverance without previous confession of their 
guilt. And it matters not though in one assembly it may 
sometimes happen that a few are innocent, seeing that the 
members of a languid and sickly body cannot boast of 
soundness. Nay, it is scarcely possible that these few have 
not contracted some taint, and so bear part of the blame. 
Therefore, as often as we are afflicted with pestilence, or 
wTar, or famine, or any other calamity whatsoever, if it is our 
duty to betake ourselves to mourning, fasting, and other 
signs of guiltiness, confession also, on which all the others 
depend, is not to be neglected. That ordinary confession 
which the Lord has moreover expressly commended, no 
sober man, who has reflected on its usefulness, will venture 
to disapprove. Seeing that in every sacred assembly we 
stand in the view of God and angels, in what way should 
our service begin but in acknowledging our own unworthi- 
ness ? But this you will say is done in every prayer ; for as 
often as we pray for pardon, Ave confess our sins. I admit it. 
But if you consider how great is our carelessness, or drowsi- 
ness, or sloth, you will grant me that it would be a salutary 
ordinance if the Christian people were exercised in humilia- 
tion by some formal method of confession. For though the 
ceremony which the Lord enjoined on the Israelites be- 
longed to the tutelage of the Law, yet the thing itself 
belongs in some respect to us also. And, indeed, in all well- 
ordered churches, in observance of an useful custom, the 
minister, each Lord's day, frames a formula of confession 
in his own name and that of the people, in which he makes 
a common confession of iniquity, and supplicates pardon 
from the Lord. In short, by this key a door of prayer is 
opened privately for each, and publicly for all. 

12. Two other forms of private confession are approved 
by Scripture. The one is made on our own account, and to 
it reference is made in the passage in James, " Confess your 
sins one to another," (James v. 16;) for the meaning is, 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 199 

that by disclosing our infirmities to each other, we are to 
obtain the aid of mutual counsel and consolation. The 
other is to be made for the sake of our neighbour, to appease 
and reconcile him if by our fault he has been in any respect 
injured. In the former, although James, by not specifying 
any particular individual into whose bosom we are to disbur- 
den our feelings, leaves us the free choice of confessing to 
any member of the church who may seem fittest ; yet as for 
the most part pastors are to be supposed better qualified 
than others, our choice ought chiefly to fall upon them. 
And the ground of preference is, that the Lord, by calling 
them to the ministry, points them out as the persons by 
whose lips we are to be taught to subdue and correct our 
sins, and derive consolation from the hope of pardon. For 
as the duty of mutual admonition and correction is committed 
to all Christians, but is specially enjoined on ministers, so 
while we ought all to console each other mutually, and con- 
firm each other in confidence in the divine mercy, we see 
that ministers, to assure our consciences of the forgiveness 
of sins, are appointed to be the witnesses and sponsors of it, 
so that they are themselves said to forgive sins and loose 
souls, (Matth. xvi. 19 ; xviii. 18.) When you hear this 
attributed to them, reflect that it is for your use. Let every 
believer, therefore, remember, that if in private he is so 
agonized and afflicted by a sense of his sins that he cannot 
obtain relief without the aid of others, it is his duty not to 
neglect the' remedy which God provides for him, viz., to 
have recourse for relief to a private confession to his own 
pastor, and for consolation privately implore the assistance 
of him whose business it is, both in public and private, to 
solace the people of God with Gospel doctrine. But we are 
always to use moderation, lest in a matter as to which God 
prescribes no certain rule, our consciences be burdened with 
a certain yoke. Hence it follows, first, that confession of 
this nature ought to be free so as not to be exacted of all, 
but only recommended to those who feel that they have 
need of it ; and, secondly, even those who use it according 
to their necessity must neither be compelled by any precept, 
nor artfully induced to enumerate all their sins, but only in 


200 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

so far as they shall deem it for their interest, that they may 
obtain the full benefit of consolation. Faithful pastors, as 
they would both eschew tyranny in their ministry, and 
superstition in the people, must not only leave this liberty to 
churches, but defend and strenuously vindicate it. 

13. Of the second form of confession, our Saviour speaks 
in Matthew. " If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there 
remember that thy brother hath ought against thee ; leave 
there thy gift before the altar; first be reconciled to thy 
brother, and then come and offer thy gift," (Matth. v. 23, 
24.) Thus love, which has been interrupted by our fault, 
must be restored by acknowledging and asking pardon for 
the fault. Under this head is included the confession of 
those who by their sin have given offence to the whole 
Church, (supra, sec. 10.) For if Christ attaches so much 
importance to the offence of one individual, that he forbids 
the sacrifice of all who have sinned in any respect against 
their brethren, until by due satisfaction they have regained 
their favour, how much greater reason is there that he, who 
by some evil example has offended the Church, should be 
reconciled to it by the acknowledgment of his fault ? Thus 
the member of the Church of Corinth was restored to com- 
munion after he had humbly submitted to correction, (2 Cor. 
ii. 6.) This form of confession existed in the ancient Chris- 
tian Church, as Cyprian relates : " They practise repentance," 
says he, " for a proper time, then they come to confession, 
and by the laying on of the hands of the bishop and clergy, 
are admitted to communion." Scripture knows nothing of 
any other form or method of confessing, and it belongs not 
to us to bind new chains upon consciences which Christ most 
strictly prohibits from being brought into bondage. Mean- 
Avhile, that the flock present themselves before the pastor 
whenever they would partake of the Holy Supper, I am 
so far from disapproving, that I am most desirous it should 
be everywhere observed. For both those whose conscience 
is hindered may thence obtain singular benefit, and those 
who require admonition thus afford an opportunity for it ; 
provided always no countenance is given to tyranny and 
superstition. 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 201 

14. The power of the keys has place in the three following 
modes of confession, — either when the whole Church, in a 
formal acknowledgment of its defects,1 supplicates pardon ; 
or when a private individual, who has given public offence 
by some notable delinquency, testifies his repentance ; or 
when he who from disquiet of conscience needs the aid of 
his minister, acquaints him with his infirmity. With regard 
to the reparation of offence, the case is different. For 
though in this also provision is made for peace of conscience, 
yet the principal object is to suppress hatred, and re-unite 
brethren in the bond of peace. But the benefit of which I 
have spoken is by no means to be despised, that we may the 
more willingly confess our sins. For when the whole Church 
stands as it were at the bar of God, confesses her guilt, and 
finds her only refuge in the divine mercy, it is no common 
or light solace to have an ambassador of Christ present, 
invested with the mandate of reconciliation, by whom she 
may hear her absolution pronounced. Here the utility of 
the keys is justly commended when that embassy is duly 
discharged with becoming order and reverence. In like 
manner, when he who has as it were become an alien from 
the Church receives pardon, and is thus restored to brotherly 
unity, how great is the benefit of understanding that he is 
pardoned by those to whom Christ said, " Whose soever 
sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them," (John xx. 23.) 
Nor is private absolution of less benefit or efficacy when 
asked by those who stand in need of a special remedy for 
their infirmity. It not seldom happens, that he who hears 
general promises which are intended for the whole congrega- 
tion of the faithful, nevertheless remains somewhat in doubt, 
and is still disquieted in mind, as if his own remission were 
not yet obtained. Should this individual lay open the secret 
wound of his soul to his pastor, and hear these words of the 
Gospel specially addressed to him, " Son, be of good cheer ; 
thy sins be forgiven thee," (Matth. ix. 2,2) his mind will feel 

1 As to the form of repentance enjoined by the primitive Church for 
more flagrant offences, see Book IV. chap. i. sec. 29. 

2 The French is, " Et que le Pasteur addressant sa parole a ltd, l'asseure 
comme ltd appliquant en particulier la doctrine generale ;" — and when the 
Pastor, addressing his discourse to him, assures him as applying the 
general doctrine to him in particular. 


202 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

secure, and escape from the trepidation with which it was 
previously agitated. But when we treat of the keys, we 
must always beware of dreaming of any power apart from 
the preaching of the Gospel. This subject will be more fully 
explained when we come to treat of the government of the 
Church, (Book IV. chap. xi. xii.) There we shall see, that 
whatever privilege of binding and loosing Christ has bestowed 
on his Church is annexed to the word. This is especially 
true with regard to the ministry of the keys, the whole 
power of which consists in this, that the grace of the Gospel 
is publicly and privately sealed on the minds of believers by 
means of those whom the Lord has appointed ; and the only 
method in which this can be done is by preaching. 

15. What say the Roman theologians ? That all persons 
of both sexes,1 so soon as they shall have reached the years 
of discretion, must, once a year at least, confess all their 
sins to their own priest ; that the sin is not discharged 
unless the resolution to confess has been firmly conceived ; 
that if this resolution is not carried into effect when an 
opportunity offers, there is no entrance into Paradise ; that 
the pi'iest, moreover, has the power of the keys, by which he 
can loose and bind the sinner; because the declaration of 
Christ is not in vain : " Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth 
shall be bound in heaven," (Matth. xviii. 18.) Concerning 
this power, however, they wage a fierce war among them- 
selves. Some say there is only one key essentially, viz., the 
power of binding and loosing ; that knowledge, indeed, is 
requisite for the proper use of it, but only as an accessory, 
not as essentially inherent in it. Others, seeing that this 
gave too unrestrained license, have imagined two keys, viz., 
discernment and power. Others, again, seeing that the 
license of priests was curbed by such restraint, have forged 
other keys, (i?ifra, sec. 21,) the authority of discerning to be 
used in defining, and the power to carry their sentences into 
execution ; and to these they add knowledge as a counsellor. 
This binding and loosing, however, they do not venture to 

1 " C. Omnis utriusque sexus ;" — every one of both sexes. Innocent's 
decree is in the Lateran Council, De Summa Trinitate et Fide Cathol. 
It is also given Sent. Lib. iv. Dist. 14, cap. 2, et Dist. 18, cap. 2. 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 203 

interpret simply, to forgive and wipe away sins, because 
they hear the Lord proclaiming by the prophet, " I, even I, 
am the Lord ; and beside me there is no saviour." " I, even 

I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions," (Isaiah xliii. 

II, 25.) But they say it belongs to the priest to declare 
who are bound or loosed, and whose sins are remitted or 
retained ; to declare, moreover, either by confession, when 
he absolves and retains sins, or by sentence, when he excom- 
municates or admits to communion in the Sacraments. Last- 
ly, perceiving that the knot is not yet untied, because it may 
always be objected that persons are often undeservedly 
bound and loosed, and therefore not bound or loosed in 
heaven ; as their ultimate resource, they answer, that the 
conferring of the keys must be taken with limitation, because 
Christ has promised that the sentence of the priest, properly 
pronounced, will be approved at his judgment-seat according 
as the bound or loosed asked what they merited. They say, 
moreover, that those keys which are conferred by bishops at 
ordination were given by Christ to all priests, but that the 
free use of them is with those only who discharge ecclesiastical 
functions ; that with priests excommunicated or suspended the 
keys themselves indeed remain, but tied and rusty. Those 
who speak thus may justly be deemed modest and sober 
compared with others, who on a new anvil have forged new 
keys, by which they say that the treasury of heaven is 
locked up : these we shall afterwards consider in their own 
place, (chap. v. sec. 2.) 

16. To each of these views I will briefly reply. As to 
their binding the souls of believers by their laws, whether 
justly or unjustly, I say nothing at present, as it will be 
seen at the proper place ; but their enacting it as a law, that 
all sins are to be enumerated ; their denying that sin is dis- 
charged except under the condition that the resolution to 
confess has been firmly conceived ; their pretence that there 
is no admission into Paradise if the opportunity of confession 
has been neglected, are things which it is impossible to bear. 
Are all sins to be enumerated ? But David, who, I pre- 
sume, had honestly pondered with himself as to the confession 
of his sins, exclaimed, " Who can understand his errors ? 


204 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

cleanse thou me from secret faults," (Ps. xix. 12;) and in 
another passage, " Mine iniquities are gone over my head : 
as a heavy burden they are too heavy for me," (Ps. xxxviii. 
4.) He knew how deep was the abyss of our sins, how 
numerous the forms of wickedness, how many heads the 
hydra carried, how long a tail it drew. Therefore, he did 
not sit down to make a catalogue, but from the depth of 
his distress cried unto the Lord, " I am overwhelmed, and 
buried, and sore vexed ; the gates of hell have encucled 
me : let thy right hand deliver me from the abyss into which 
I am plunged, and from the death which T am ready to die." 
Who can now think of a computation of his sins when he 
sees David's inability to number his ? 

17. By this ruinous procedure, the souls of those who 
were aiFected with some sense of God have been most cruelly 
racked. First, they betook themselves to calculation, pro- 
ceeding according to the formula given by the Schoolmen, 
and dividing their sins into boughs, branches, twigs, and 
leaves ; then they weighed the qualities, quantities, and 
circumstances ; and in this way, for some time, matters pro- 
ceeded. But after they had advanced farther, when they 
looked around, nought was seen but sea and sky ; no road, no 
harbour. The longer the space they ran over, a longer still 
met the eye ; nay, lofty mountains began to rise, and there 
seemed no hope of escape ; none at least till after long 
wanderings. They were thus brought to a dead halt, till at 
length the only issue was found in despair. Here, these 
cruel murderers, to ease the wounds which they had made, 
applied certain fomentations. Every one was to do his best. 
But new cares again disturbed, nay, new torments excru- 
ciated their souls. " I have not spent enough of time ; I 
have not exerted myself sufficiently : many things I have 
omitted through negligence : forgetfulness proceeding from 
want of care is not excusable." Then new drugs were 
supplied to alleviate their pains. " Repent of your negli- 
gence ; and provided it is not done supinely, it will be 
pardoned." All these things, however, could not heal the 
wound, being not so much alleviations of the sore as poison 
besmeared with honey, that its bitterness might not at once 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION". 205 

offend the taste, but penetrate to the vitals before it could be 
detected. The dreadful voice, therefore, was always heard 
pealing in their ears, " Confess all your sins," and the dread 
thus occasioned could not be pacified without sure consolation. 
Here let my readers consider whether it be possible to take 
an account of the actions of a whole year, or even to collect 
the sins committed in a single day, seeing every man's 
experience convinces him that at evening, in examining the 
faults of that single day, memory gets confused, so great is 
the number and variety presented. I am not speaking of 
dull and heartless hypocrites, who, after animadverting on 
three or four of their grosser offences, think the work finished ; 
but of the true worshippers of God, who, after they have 
performed their examination, feeling themselves overwhelmed, 
still add the words of John : " If our heart condemn us, God 
is greater than our heart, and knoweth all things," (1 John 
iii. 20 ;) and, therefore, tremble at the thought of that Judge 
whose knowledge far surpasses our comprehension. 

18. Though a good part of the world rested in these soothing 
suggestions, by which this fatal poison was somewhat tem- 
pered, it was not because they thought that God was satisfied, 
or they had quite satisfied themselves ; it wras rather like an 
anchor cast out in the middle of the deep, which for a little 
interrupts the navigation, or a weary, worn-out traveller, 
who lies down by the way.1 I give myself no trouble in 
proving the truth of this fact. Every one can be his own 
witness. I will mention generally what the nature of this 
law is. First, The observance of it is simply impossible ; 
and hence its only result is to destroy, condemn, confound, 
to plunge into ruin and despair. Secondly, By withdrawing 
sinners from a true sense of their sins, it makes them 
hypocritical, and ignorant both of God and themselves. For, 
while they are wholly occupied with the enumeration of their 
sins, they lose sight of that lurking hydra, their secret 

1 The French is, " Mais comme les nautonniers fichans l'anchre an 
milieu cle la mer, se reposent du trauail de leur navigation ; ou comme 
un pelerin lasse ou defaillant se sied au milieu de la voye pour reposer : en 
telle maniere ils prenoyent ce repos, combien qu'il ne leur fust suffisant ;" 
— but as mariners casting anchor in the midst of the sea, repose from the 
toil of navigation ; or as a pilgrim, weary or faint, sits down in the middle 
of the way to rest himself: in this way they took this rest, though it was 
not sufficient for them. 


20G INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

iniquities and internal defilements, the knowledge of which 
would have made them sensible of their misery. But the 
surest rule of confession is, to acknowledge and confess our 
sins to be an abyss so great as to exceed our comprehension. 
On this rule we see the confession of the publican was formed, 
" God be merciful to me, a sinner," (Luke xviii. 13 ;) as if he 
had said, How great, how very great a sinner, how utterly 
sinful I am ! the extent of my sins I can neither conceive nor 
express. Let the depth of thy mercy ingulf the depth of 
sin ! What ! you will say, are we not to confess every single 
sin ? Is no confession acceptable to God but that which 
is contained in the words, " I am a sinner " ? Nay, our 
endeavour must rather be, as much as in us lies, to pour out 
our whole heart before the Lord. Nor are we only in one 
word to confess ourselves sinners, but truly and sincerely 
acknowledge ourselves as such ; to feel with our whole soul 
how great and various the pollutions of our sins are ; con- 
fessing not only that we are impure, but what the nature of 
our impurity is, its magnitude and its extent ; not only that 
we are debtors, but what the debts are which burden us, and 
how they were incurred ; not only that we are wounded, but 
how numerous and deadly are the wounds. When thus 
recognising himself, the sinner shall have poured out his 
whole heart before God, let him seriously and sincerely 
reflect that a greater number of sins still remains, and that 
their recesses are too deep for him thoroughly to pene- 
trate. Accordingly, let him exclaim with David, "Who 
can understand his errors ? cleanse thou me from secret 
faults," (Ps. xix. 12.) But when the Schoolmen affirm 
that sins are not forgiven, unless the resolution to confess 
has been firmly conceived, and that the gate of Paradise is 
closed on him who has neglected the opportunity of confess- 
ing when offered, far be it from us to concede this to them. 
The remission of sins is not different now from Avhat it has 
ever been. In all the passages in which we read that sinners 
obtained forgiveness from God, we read not that they whis- 
pered into the ear of some priest.1 Indeed, they could not 

1 "Tous ceux que nous lisons avoir obtenu tie Christ la remission de leurs 
pechez, ne sont pas dits s'etre confesses a l'aureille de quelque Messire 
Jean ;" — None of whom we read as having obtained the forgiveness of 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 207 

then confess, as priests were not then confessionaries, nor did 
the confessional itself exist. And for many ages afterwards, 
this mode of confession, by which sins were forgiven on this 
condition, was unheard of. But not to enter into a long 
discussion, as if the matter were doubtful, the word of God, 
which abideth for ever, is plain, " When the wicked shall 
turn away from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep 
all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he 
shall surely live, he shall not die," (Ezek. xviii. 21.) He who 
presumes to add to this declaration binds not sins, but the 
mercy of God. When they contend that judgment cannot 
be given unless the case is known, the answer is easy, that 
they usurp the right of judging, being only self-created 
judges. And it is strange, how confidently they lay down 
principles, which no man of sound mind will admit. They 
give out, that the office of binding and loosing has been com- 
mitted to them, as a kind of jurisdiction annexed to the right 
of inquiry. That the jurisdiction was unknown to the 
Apostles their whole doctrine proclaims. Nor does it belong 
to the priest to know for certainty whether or not a sinner 
is loosed, but to Him from whom acquittal is asked ; since he 
who only hears can ever know whether or not the enumera- 
tion is full and complete. Thus there would be no absolution, 
without restricting it to the words of him who is to be judged. 
We may add, that the whole system of loosing depends on 
faith and repentance, two things which no man can know of 
another, so as to pronounce sentence. It follows, therefore, 
that the certainty of binding and loosing is not subjected to 
the will of an earthly judge, because the minister of the 
word, when he duly executes his office, can only acquit con- 
ditionally, when, for the sake of the sinner, he repeats the 
words, " Whose soever sins ye remit ;" lest he should doubt 
of the pardon, which, by the command and voice of God, is 
promised to be ratified in heaven. 

19. It is not strange, therefore, that we condemn that 
auricular confession, as a thing pestilent in its nature, and in 
many ways injurious to the Church, and desire to see it 

their sins from Christ, are said to have confessed in the ear of some Mess 
John. 


208 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

abolished. But if the thing were in itself indifferent, yet, 
seeing it is of no use or benefit, and has given occasion to so 
much impiety, blasphemy, and error, who does not think 
that it ought to be immediately abolished ? They enumerate 
some of its uses, and boast of them as very beneficial, but 
they are either fictitious or of no importance. One thing 
they specially commend, that the blush of shame in the 
penitent is a severe punishment, which makes him more 
cautious for the future, and anticipates divine punishment, 
by his punishing himself. As if a man was not sufficiently 
humbled with shame when brought under the cognisance of 
God at his supreme tribunal. Admirable proficiency — if 
we cease to sin because we are ashamed to make one man 
acquainted with it, and blush not at having God as the 
witness of our evil conscience ! The assertion, however, 
as to the effect of shame, is most unfounded, for we may 
every where see, that there is nothing which gives men 
greater confidence and license in sinning than the idea, 
that after making confession to priests, they can wipe their 
lips and say, I have not done it. And not only do they 
during the whole year become bolder in sin, but, secure 
against confession for the remainder of it, they never sigh 
after God, never examine themselves, but continue heaping 
sins upon sins, until, as they suppose, they get rid of them 
all at once. And when they have got rid of them, they think 
they are disburdened of their load, and imagine they have 
deprived God of the right of judging, by giving it to the 
priest ; have made God forgetful, by making the priest con- 
scious. Moreover, who is glad when he sees the day of con- 
fession approaching ? Who goes with a cheerful mind to 
confess, and does not rather, as if he were dragged to prison 
with a rope about his neck, go unwillingly, and, as it were, 
struggling against it? with the exception, perhaps, of the 
priests themselves, who take a fond delight in the mutual 
narrative of their own misdeeds, as a kind of merry tales. I 
will not pollute my page by retailing the monstrous abomi- 
nations with which auricular confession teems ; I only say, 
that if that holy man (Nectarius, of whom supra, sec. 7) did 
not act unadvisedly, when for one rumour of whoredom he 
banished confession from his church, or rather from the 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 209 

memory of his people, the innumerable acts of prostitution, 
adultery, and incest, which it produces in the present day, 
warn us of the necessity of abolishing it. 

20. As to the pretence of the confessionaries respecting 
the power of the keys, and their placing in it, so to speak, 
the sum and substance of their kingdom, we must see what 
force it ought to have. Were the keys, then, (they ask,) 
given without a cause? Was it said without a cause, 
" Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, 
and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in 
heaven?" (Matth. xviii. 18.) Do we make void the word of 
Christ? I answer, that there was a weightv reason for 
giving the keys, as I lately explained, and will again show 
at greater length when I come to treat of Excommunication, 
(Book IV. cap. 12.) But what if I should cut off the handle 
for all such questions with one sword, viz., that priests are 
neither vicars nor successors of the Apostles ? But that also 
will be elsewhere considered, (Book IV. 6.) Now, at the very 
place where they are most desirous to fortify themselves, they 
erect a battering-ram, by which all their own machinations 
are overthrown. Christ did not give his Apostles the power 
of binding and loosing before he endued them with the Holy 
Spirit. I deny, therefore, that any man, who has not pre- 
viously received the Holy Spirit, is competent to possess the 
power of the keys. I deny that any one can use the keys, 
unless the Holy Spirit precede, teaching and dictating what 
is to be done. They pretend, indeed, that they have the 
Holy Spirit, but by their works deny him ; unless, indeed, 
we are to suppose that the Holy Spirit is some vain thing 
of no value, as they certainly do feign, but we will not believe 
them. With this engine they are completely overthrown ; 
whatever be the door of which they boast of having the key, 
we must always ask, whether they have the Holy Spirit, 
who is arbiter and ruler of the keys ? If they reply, that 
they have, we must again ask, whether the Holy Spirit can 
err ? This they will not venture to say distinctly, although 
by their doctrine they indirectly insinuate it. Therefore, we 
must infer, that no priestlings have the power of the keys, 
because they every where and indiscriminately loose what the 
vol. n. o 


210 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

Lord was pleased should be bound, and bind what he has 
ordered to be loosed. 

21. When they see themselves convicted on the clearest 
evidence, of loosing and binding worthy and unworthy with- 
out distinction, they lay claim to power without knowledge. 
And although they dare not deny that knowledge is requisite 
for the proper use, they still affirm that the power itself has 
been given to bad administrators. This, however, is the 
power, "Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound 
in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be 
loosed in heaven." Either the promise of Christ must be 
false, or those who are endued with this power bind and 
loose properly. There is no room for the evasion, that the 
words of Christ are limited, according to the merits of him 
who is loosed or bound. We admit, that none can be bound 
or loosed but those who are worthy of being bound or loosed. 
But the preachers of the Gospel and the Church have the 
word by which they can measure this worthiness. By this 
word preachers of the Gospel can promise forgiveness of 
sins to all who are in Christ by faith, and can declare a sen- 
tence of condemnation against all, and upon all, who do not 
embrace Christ. In this word the Church declares, that 
" neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers," " nor 
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extor- 
tioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God," (1 Cor. vi. 9, 10.) 
Such it binds in sure fetters. By the same word it looses 
and consoles the penitent. But what kind of power is it 
which knows not what is to be bound or loosed ? You can- 
not bind or loose without knowledge. Why, then, do they say, 
that they absolve by authority given to them, when absolution 
is uncertain ? As regards us, this power is merely imaginary, 
if it cannot be used. Now, I hold, either that there is no 
use, or one so uncertain as to be virtually no use at all. 
For when they confess that a good part of the priests do not 
use the keys duly, and that power without the legitimate use is 
ineffectual, who is to assure me, that the one by whom I am 
loosed is a good dispenser of the keys ? But if he is a bad 
one, what better has he given me than this nugatory dispen- 
sation,— What is to be bound or loosed in you I know not, 


CHAR. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 211 

since I have not the proper use of the keys ; but if you 
deserve it, I absolve you? As much might be done, I say 
not by a laic, (since they would scarcely listen to such a 
statement,) but by the Turk or the devil. For it is just to 
say, I have not the word of God, the sure rule for loosing, but 
authority has been given me to absolve you, if you deserve 
it. We see, therefore, what their object was, when they 
defined (see sec. 16) the keys as authority to discern and 
power to execute ; and said, that knowledge is added as a 
counsellor, and counsels the proper use ; their object was to 
reign libidinously and licentiously, without God and his 
word. 

22. Should any one object, first, that the lawful ministers 
of Christ will be no less perplexed in the discharge of their 
duty, because the absolution, which depends on faith, will 
always be equivocal ; and, secondly, that sinners will receive 
no comfort at all, or cold comfort, because the minister, who 
is not a fit judge of their faith, is not certain of their absolu- 
tion, we are prepared with an answer. They say that no 
sins are remitted by the priest, but such sins as he is cog- 
nizant of; thus, according to them, remission depends on 
the judgment of the priest, and unless he accurately discri- 
minate as to who are worthy of pardon, the whole procedure 
is null and void. In short, the power of which they speak is 
a jurisdiction annexed to examination, to which pardon and 
absolution are restricted. Here no firm footing can be found, 
nay, there is a profound abyss ; because, where confession is 
not complete, the hope of pardon also is defective ; next, the 
priest himself must necessarily remain in suspense, while he 
knows not whether the sinner gives a faithful enumeration of 
his sins ; lastly, such is the rudeness and ignorance of priests, 
that the greater part of them are in no respect fitter to per- 
form this office than a cobbler to cultivate the fields, while 
almost all the others have good reason to suspect their own 
fitness. Hence the perplexity and doubt as to the Popish 
absolution, from then- choosing to found it on the person of 
the priest, and not on his person only, but on his knowledge, 
so that he can only judge of what is laid before him, inves- 
tigated, and ascertained. Now, if any should ask at these 


212 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

good doctors, Whether the sinner is reconciled to God when 
some sins are remitted ? I know not what answer they could 
give, unless that they should be forced to confess, that what- 
ever the priest pronounces with regard to the remission of 
sins which have been enumerated to him will be unavailing, 
so long as others are not exempted from condemnation. On 
the part of the penitent, again, it is hence obvious in what a 
state of pernicious anxiety his conscience will be held ; be- 
cause, while he leans on what they call the discernment of the 
priest, he cannot come to any decision from the word of God. 
From all these absurdities the doctrine which we deliver is 
completely free. For absolution is conditional, allowing the 
sinner to trust that God is propitious to him, provided he 
sincerely seek expiation in the sacrifice of Christ, and accept 
of the grace offered to him. Thus, he cannot err who, in 
the capacity of a herald, promulgates what has been dictated 
to him from the word of God. The sinner, again, can receive 
a clear and sure absolution when, in regard to embracing the 
orace of Christ, the simple condition annexed is in terms of 
the general rule of our Master himself, — a rule impiously 
spurned by the Papacy, — " According to your faith be it un- 
to you," (Matth. ix. 29.) 

23. The absurd jargon which they make of the doctrine of 
Scripture concerning the power of the keys, I have promised 
to expose elsewhere ; the proper place will be in treating of 
the Government of the Church, (Book IV. c. 12.) Mean- 
while, let the reader remember how absurdly they wrest to 
auricular and secret confession what was said by Christ 
partly of the preaching of the Gospel, and partly of excom- 
munication. Wherefore, when they object that the power of 
loosing was given to the Apostles, and that this power priests 
exercise by remitting sins acknowledged to them, it is plain 
that the principle which they assume is false and frivolous : 
for the absolution which is subordinate to faith is nothing 
else than an evidence of pardon, derived from the free pro- 
mise of the Gospel, while the other absolution, which depends 
on the discipline of the Church, has nothing to do with secret 
sins ; but is more a matter of example for the purpose of 
removing the public offence given to the Church. As to 


CIIAr. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 213 

their diligence in searching up and down for passages by 
which they may prove that it is not sufficient to confess sins 
to God alone, or to laymen, unless the priest take cognizance, 
it is vile and disgraceful. For when the ancient fathers advise 
sinners to disburden themselves to their pastor, we cannot 
understand them to refer to a recital which was not then in 
use. Then, so unfair are Lombard and others like-minded, 
that they seem intentionally to have devoted themselves to 
spurious books, that they might use them as a cloak to deceive 
the simple. They, indeed, acknowledge truly, that as forgive- 
ness always accompanies repentance, no obstacle properly 
remains after the individual is truly penitent, though he may 
not have actually confessed ; and, therefore, that the priest 
does not so much remit sins, as pronounce and declare that 
they are remitted ; though in the term declaring, they insi- 
nuate a gross error, surrogating ceremony1 in place of doc- 
trine. But in pretending that he who has already obtained 
pardon before God is acquitted in the face of the Church, they 
unseasonably apply to the special use of every individual, that 
which we have already said was designed for common disci- 
pline when the offence of a more heinous and notorious trans- 
gression was to be removed. Shortly after they pervert and 
destroy their previous moderation, by adding that there is 
another mode of remission, namely, by the infliction of penalty 
and satisfaction, in which they arrogate to their priests the 
right of dividing what God has every where promised to us 
entire. While He simply requires repentance and faith, their 
division or exception is altogether blasphemous. For it is 
just as if the priest, assuming the office of tribune, were to 
interfere with God,2 and try to prevent him from admitting 
to his favour by his mere liberality any one who had not 
previously lain prostrate at the tribunicial bench, and there 
been punished. 

24. The whole comes to this,3 when they wish to make 

1 Latin, simply, " ceremoniara." French, " la ceremonie de faire une 
croix sur le dos ;" — the ceremony of making a cross upon the back. 

2 French, " Car cela vaut autant comme si les prestres se faisoyent con- 
trerolleurs de Dieu ;" — for that is as much as if the priests made themselves 
controllers of God. 

3 See on the subject of this section, Calv. ad Concil. Trident. Also 


214 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

God the author of this fictitious confession their vanity is 
proved, as I have shown their falsehood in expounding the 
few passages which they cite. But while it is plain, that the 
law was imposed by men, I say that it is both tyrannical 
and insulting to God, who, in binding consciences to his 
word, would have them free from human rule. Then when 
confession is prescribed as necessary to obtain pardon, which 
God wished to be free, I say that the sacrilege is altogether 
intolerable, because nothing belongs more peculiarly to God 
than the forgiveness of sins, in which our salvation consists. I 
have, moreover, shoAvn that this tyranny was introduced when 
the world was sunk in shameful barbarism.1 Besides, I have 
proved that the law is pestiferous, inasmuch as when the fear 
of God exists, it plunges men into despair, and when there 
is security soothing itself with vain flattery, it blunts it the 
more. Lastly, I have explained that all the mitigations 
which they employ have no other tendency than to entangle, 
obscure, and corrupt the pure doctrine, and cloak their ini- 
quities with deceitful colours. 

25. In repentance they assign the third place to satisfac- 
tion, all their absurd talk as to which can be refuted in one 
word. They say,2 that it is not sufficient for the penitent to 
abstain from past sins, and change his conduct for the better, 
unless he satisfy God for what he has done ; and that there 
are many helps by which we may redeem sins, such as tears, 
fastings, oblations,3 and offices of charity ; that by them the 
Lord is to be propitiated ; by them the debts due to divine 
justice are to be paid ; by them our faults are to be compen- 
sated ; by them pardon is to be deserved : for though in the 
riches of his mercy he has forgiven the guilt, he yet, as a just 
discipline, retains the penalty, and that this penalty must be 
bought off by satisfaction. The sum of the whole comes to 

Vera Ecclesiae Reforniandaj Ratio, Epist. ad Sadoletum. Epist. adversus 
Theologos Parisienses. De Scandalis. De Necessitate Reformandai Ec- 
clesise, Lib. iv. 

' French, " une barbarie si vileine que rien plus ;" — a barbarism so vile 
that nothing could be more so. 

2 See Lombard, Sent. Lib. iv. Dist. 10, c. 4. C. Non sufficit. de Poenit. 
C. (middle of same Dist.) C. Nullus, (same Dist.) See also on the subject 
of satisfaction, infra, s. 29, and Chap. xvi. 4. 

3 The French adds, " aumosnes ;" — alms. 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 215 

this : that we indeed obtain pardon of our sins from the mercy 
of God, but still by the intervention of the merit of works, 
by which the evil of our sins is compensated, and due satis- 
faction made to divine justice. To such false views I oppose 
the free forgiveness of sins, one of the doctrines most clearly 
taught in Scripture.1 First, what is forgiveness but a gift 
of mere liberality ? A creditor is not said to forgive when 
he declares by granting a discharge, that the money has 
been paid to him ; but when, without any payment, through 
voluntary kindness, he expunges the debt. And why is the 
term gratis (free) afterwards added, but to take away all idea 
of satisfaction ? With what confidence, then, do they still set 
up their satisfactions, which are thus struck down as with a 
thunderbolt ? What ? When the Lord proclaims by Isaiah, 
" I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for 
mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins," does he not 
plainly declare, that the cause and foundation of forgiveness 
is to be sought from his goodness alone ? Besides, when the 
whole of Scripture bears this testimony to Christ, that through 
his name the forgiveness of sins is to be obtained, (Acts x. 
43,) does it not plainly exclude all other names ? How then 
do they teach that it is obtained by the name of satisfaction ? 
Let them not deny that they attribute this to satisfactions, 
though they bring them in as subsidiary aids.2 For when 
Scripture says, by the name of Christy it means, that we are to 
bring nothing, pretend nothing of our own, but lean entirely on 
the recommendation of Christ. Thus Paul, after declaring that 
" God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not 
imputing their trespasses unto them," immediately adds the 
reason and the method, " For he hath made him to be sin 
for us who knew no sin," (2 Cor. v. 19, 20.) 

26. But with their usual perverseness, they maintain that 
both the forgiveness of sins and reconciliation take place at 
once when we are received into the favour of God through 

1 Isa. lii. 3 ; Rom. v. 8 ; Col. ii. 14 ; Tit. iii. 5. 

2 The French is, " Et ne faut pas qu'ils disent, que combien que les 
satisfactions en soyent moyens, neantmoins ce n'est pas en leur nom, mais 
au nom de Jesus Christ ;" — and they must not say that though satisfac- 
tions are the means, nevertheless it is not in their name, but in the name 
of Jesus Christ. 


216 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

Christ in baptism ; that in lapses after baptism we must rise 
again by means of satisfactions ; that the blood of Christ is of 
no avail unless in so far as it is dispensed by the keys of the 
Church. I speak not of a matter as to which there can be any 
doubt ; for this impious dogma is declared in the plainest terms, 
in the writings not of one or two, but of the whole Schoolmen. 
Their master, (Sent. Lib. iii. Dist. 9,) after acknowledging, 
according to the doctrine of Peter, that Christ " bare our 
sins in his own body on the tree," (1 Pet. ii. 24,) immediate- 
ly modifies the doctrine by introducing the exception, that in 
baptism all the temporal penalties of sin are relaxed ; but 
that after baptism they are lessened by means of repentance, 
the cross of Christ and our repentance thus co-operating to- 
gether. St John speaks very differently, "If any man sin, 
we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the right- 
eous ; and he is the propitiation for our sins." " I write 
unto you, little children, because your sins are forgiven you 
for his name's sake," (1 John ii. 1, 2, 12.) He certainly is 
addressing believers, and while setting forth Christ as the 
propitiation for sins, shows them that there is no other satisfac- 
tion by which an offended God can be propitiated or appeased. 
He says not : God was once reconciled to you by Christ ; 
now, seek other methods ; but he makes him a perpetual 
advocate, who always, by his intercession, reinstates us in his 
Father's favour — a perpetual propitiation by which sins are 
expiated. For what was said by another John will ever hold 
true, " Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins 
of the world," (John i. 29.) He, I say, takes them away, 
and no other ; that is, since he alone is the Lamb of God, he 
alone is the offering for our sins ; he alone is expiation ; he 
alone is satisfaction. For though the right and power of 
pardoning properly belongs to the Father, when he is dis- 
tinguished from the Son, as has already been seen, Christ is 
here exhibited in another view, as transferring to himself the 
punishment due to us, and wiping away our guilt in the sight 
of God. Whence it follows, that we could not be partakers 
of the expiation accomplished by Christ, were he not possessed 
of that honour of which those who try to appease God by 
their compensations seek to rob him. 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 217 

27. Here it is necessary to keep two things in view : that 
the honour of Christ be preserved entire and unimpaired, and 
that the conscience, assured of the pardon of sin, may have 
peace with God. Isaiah says that the Father " hath laid on 
him the iniquity of us all ;" that " with his stripes we are 
healed," (Isa. liii. 5, 6.) Peter repeating the same thing, in 
other words says, that he St bare our sins in his own body on 
the tree," (1 Pet. ii. 24.) Paul's words are, " God sending 
his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin con- 
demned sin in the flesh," " being made a curse for us," (Rom. 
viii. 3 ; Gal. iii. 13 ;) in other words, the power and curse of 
sin was destroyed in his flesh when he was offered as a sacri- 
fice, on which the whole weight of our sins was laid, with their 
curse and execration, with the fearful judgment of God, and 
condemnation to death. Here there is no mention of the vain 
dogma, that after the initial cleansing no man experiences 
the efficacy of Christ's passion in any other way than by 
means of satisfying penance : we are directed to the satisfac- 
tion of Christ alone for every fall. Now call to mind their 
pestilential dogma : that the grace of God is effective only 
in the first forgiveness of sins ; but if we afterwards fall, our 
works co-operate in obtaining the second pardon. If these 
things are so, do the properties above attributed to Christ 
remain entire ? How immense the difference between the 
two propositions — that our iniquities were laid upon Christ, 
that in his own person he might expiate them, and that they 
are expiated by our works ; that Christ is the propitiation 
for our sins, and that God is to be propitiated by works. 
Then, in regard to pacifying the conscience, what pacifica- 
tion will it be to be told that sins are redeemed by satisfac- 
tions ? How will it be able to ascertain the measure of satis- 
faction ? It will always doubt whether God is propitious ; 
will always fluctuate, always tremble. Those who rest satis- 
fied with petty satisfactions form too contemptible an esti- 
mate of the justice of God, and little consider the grievous 
heinousness of sin, as shall afterwards be shown. Even were 
we to grant that they can buy off some sins by due satisfac- 
tion, still what will they do while they are overwhelmed with 
so many sins, that not even a hundred lives, though wholly 


218 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

devoted to the purpose, could suffice to satisfy for them ? We 
may add, that all the passages in which the forgiveness of sins 
is declared refer not only to catechumens,1 but to the regene- 
rate children of God ; to those who have long been nursed 
in the bosom of the Church. That embassy which Paul so 
highly extols, " we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled 
to God," (2 Cor. v. 20,) is not directed to strangers, but 
to those who had been regenerated long before. Setting 
satisfactions altogether aside, he directs us to the cross of 
Christ. Thus when he writes to the Colossians that Christ had 
"made peace through the blood of his cross," "to reconcile 
all thingrs unto himself," he does not restrict it to the moment 
at which we are received into the Church, but extends it to 
our whole course. This is plain from the context, where he 
says that in him " we have redemption by his blood, even the 
forgiveness of sins," (Col. i. 14.) It is needless to collect 
more passages, as they are ever occurring. 

28. Here they take refuge in the absurd distinction that 
some sins are venial, and others mortal; that for the latter a 
weighty satisfaction is due, but that the former are purged 
by easier remedies ; by the Lord's Prayer, the sprinkling of 
holy water, and the absolution of the Mass. Thus they in- 
sult and trifle with God.2 And yet, though they have the 
terms venial and mortal sin continually in their mouth, they 
have not yet been able tojlistinguish the one from the other, 
except by making impiety and impurity of heart3 to be venial 
sin. We, on the contrary, taught by the Scripture standard 
of righteousness and unrighteousness, declare that " the wag;es 
of sin is death ;" and that " the soul that sinneth, it shall die," 
(Rom. vi. 23 ; Ezek. xviii. 20.) The sins of believers are 
venial, not because they do not merit death, but because by 
the mercy of God there is " now no condemnation to those 
Avhich are in Christ Jesus," their sin being not imputed, but 
effaced by pardon. I know how unjustly they calumniate 
this our doctrine ; for they say it is the paradox of the Stoics 

1 Latin, " Catechumenos.'' — French, " Ceux qui ne sont point encore 
baptisez ;" — those who are not yet baptized. 

1 See on this Section, Book II. chap. viii. s. 58, 59. 

3 The French adds, (" Qui est le plus horrible peche devant Dieu ;") — 
which is the most heinous sin in the sight of God. 


CHAP. IT. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 219 

concerning the equality of sins : but we shall easily convict 
them out of their own mouths. I ask them whether, among 
those sins which they hold to be mortal, they acknowledge 
a greater and a less ? If so, it cannot follow, as a matter of 
course, that all sins which are mortal are equal. Since Scrip- 
ture declares that the wages of sin is death, — that obedience 
to the law is the way to life, — the transgression of it the way 
to death, — they cannot evade this conclusion. In such a mass 
of sins, therefore, how will they find an end to their satisfac- 
tions ? If the satisfaction for one sin requires one day, while 
preparing it they involve themselves in more sins ; since no 
man, however righteous, passes one day without falling re- 
peatedly. While they prepare themselves for their satisfac- 
tions, number, or rather numbers without number, will be 
added.1 Confidence in satisfaction being thus destroyed, 
what more would they have ? how do they still dare to think 
of satisfying ? 

29. They endeavour, indeed, to disentangle themselves, 
but it is impossible. They pretend a distinction between 
penalty and guilt, holding that the guilt is forgiven by the 
mercy of God ; but that though the guilt is remitted, the 
punishment which divine justice requires to be paid remains. 
Satisfactions then properly relate to the remission of the 
penalty. How ridiculous this levity ! They now confess that 
the remission of guilt is gratuitous; and yet they are ever 
and anon telling us to merit it by prayers and tears, and other 
preparations of every kind. Still the whole doctrine of Scrip- 
ture regarding the remission of sins is diametrically opposed 
to that distinction. But although I think I have already 
done more than enough to establish this, I will subjoin some 
other passages, by which these slippery snakes will be so 
caught as to be afterwards unable to writhe even the tip of 
their tail : " Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I 
will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with 
the house of Judah." " I will forgive their iniquity, and I 

1 French, " Et quand ils voudront satisfaire pour plusieurs, ils en com- 
mettront encore davantage jusques a venir a. un abysme sans fin. Je traite 
encore des plus justes ;" — And when they would satisfy for several sins, 
they will commit still more, until they come at last to a bottomless abyss. 
I am still speaking of the best. 


220 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

will remember their sin no more," (Jer. xxxi. 31, 34.) What 
this means we learn from another Prophet, when the Lord 
says, " When the righteous turneth away from his righteous- 
ness," " all his righteousness that he hath done shall not be 
mentioned." " Again, when the wicked man turneth away 
from his wickedness that he hath committed, and doth that 
which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive," (Ezek. 
xviii. 24, 27.) When he declares that he will not remember 
righteousness, the meaning is, that he will take no account of 
it to reward it. In the same way, not to remember sins is not 
to bring them to punishment. The same thing is denoted in 
other passages,1 by casting them behind his back, blotting 
them out as a cloud, casting them into the depths of the sea, 
not imputing them, hiding them. By such forms of expres- 
sion the Holy Spirit has explained his meaning not obscurely, 
if we would lend a willing ear. Certainly if God punishes 
sins, he imputes them ; if he avenges, he remembers ; if he 
brings them to judgment, he has not hid them ; if he ex- 
amines, he has not cast them behind his back ; if he investi- 
gates, he has not blotted them out like a cloud ; if he exposes 
them, he has not thrown them into the depths of the sea. In 
this way Augustine clearly interprets : " If God has covered 
sins, he willed not to advert to them ; if he willed not to advert, 
he willed not to animadvert ; if he willed not to animadvert, 
he willed not to punish : he willed not to take knowledge of 
them, he rather willed to pardon them. Why then did he 
say that sins were hid ? Just that they might not be seen. 
What is meant by God seeing sins but punishing them ?" 
(August, in Ps. xxxii. 1.) But let us hear from another 
prophetical passage on what terms the Lord forgives sins : 
" Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow ; 
though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool," (Isa. 
i. 18.) In Jeremiah again we read : "In those days, and in 
that time, saith the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought 
for, and there shall be none ; and the sins of Judah, they shall 
not be found : for I will pardon them whom I reserve," (Jer. 1. 
20.) Would you briefly comprehend the meaning of these 

1 Isa. xxxviii. 17 ; xliv. 22 ; Micah vii. 19 ; Ps. xxxii. 1. 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 221 

words ? Consider what, on the contrary, is meant by these 
expressions, " that transgression is sealed up in a bag ;" " that 
the iniquity of Ephraim is bound up ; his sin is hid ;" that 
" the sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the 
point of a diamond." * If they mean, as they certainly do, that 
vengeance will be recompensed, there can be no doubt that, 
by the contrary passages, the Lord declares that he renounces 
all thought of vengeance. Here I must entreat the reader 
not to listen to any glosses of mine, but only to give some 
deference to the word of God. 

30. What, pray, did Christ perform for us if the punish- 
ment of sin is still exacted? For when we say that he 
" bare our sins in his own body on the tree," (1 Pet. ii. 24,) 
all we mean is, that he endured the penalty and punishment 
which was due to our sins. This is more significantly 
declared by Isaiah, when he says that the " chastisement (or 
correction) of our peace was upon him," (Isaiah liii. 5.) But 
what is the correction of our peace, unless it be the punish- 
ment due to our sins, and to be paid by us before we could 
be reconciled to God, had he not become our substitute? 
Thus you clearly see that Christ bore the punishment of sin 
that he might thereby exempt his people from it. And 
whenever Paul makes mention of the redemption procured 
by him,2 he calls it dvoXurPuaig, by which he does not simply 
mean redemption, as it is commonly understood, but the very 
price and satisfaction of redemption.3 For which reason, he 
also says, that Christ gave himself an avriXyr^ov (ransom) for 
us. " What is propitiation with the Lord (says Augustine) 
but sacrifice? And what is sacrifice but that which was 
offered for us in the death of Christ?" But we have our 
strongest argument in the injunctions of the Mosaic Law as 
to expiating the guilt of sin. The Lord does not there 
appoint this or that method of satisfying, but requires the 
whole compensation to be made by sacrifice, though he at 
the same time enumerates all the rites of expiation with the 

1 Job xiv. 17; Hos. xiii. 12 ; Jer. xxii. 1. 

2 Rom. iii. 24 ; 1 Cor. i. 30 ; Eph. i. 7 ; Col. i. 14 ; 1 Tim. ii. 6. 

n The French adds, " Que nous appellons Rancon en Francois ;" — which 
we call Ransom in French. 


222 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

greatest care and exactness. How comes it that he does 
not at all enjoin works as the means of procuring pardon, 
but only requires sacrifices for expiation, unless it were his 
purpose thus to testify that this is the only kind of satisfaction 
by which his justice is appeased ? For the sacrifices which 
the Israelites then offered were not regarded as human works, 
but were estimated by their antitype, that is, the sole sacrifice 
of Christ. The kind of compensation which the Lord re- 
ceives from us is elegantly and briefly expressed by Hosea : 
" Take with you words, and turn to the Lord : say unto him, 
Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously," here is 
remission : " so will we render the calves of our lips," here is 
satisfaction, (Hos. xiv. 2.) I know that they have still a 
more subtile evasion,1 by making a distinction between 
eternal and temporal punishment ; but as they define tem- 
poral punishment to be any kind of infliction with which 
God visits either the body or the soul, eternal death only 
excepted, this restriction avails them little. The passages 
which we have quoted above say expressly that the terms 
on which God receives us into favour are these, viz., he re- 
mits all the punishment which we deserved by pardoning our 
guilt. And whenever David or the other prophets ask 
pardon for their sins, they deprecate punishment. Nay, a 
sense of the divine justice impels them to this. On the 
other hand, when they promise mercy from the Lord, they 
almost always discourse of punishments and the forgiveness 
of them. Assuredly, when the Lord declares in Ezekiel, 
that he will put an end to the Babylonish captivity, not " for 
your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine holy name's 
sake," (Ezek. xxxvi. 22,) he sufficiently demonstrates that 
both are gratuitous. In short, if we are freed from guilt by 
Christ, the punishment consequent upon guilt must cease 
with it. 

31. But since they also arm themselves with passages of 
Scripture, let us see what the arguments are which they em- 
ploy. David, they say, when upbraided by Nathan the Prophet 
for adultery and murder, receives pardon of the sin, and yet 

1 See Calvin, ad Concil. Tridentini, Sess. cap. i. ad xv. 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 223 

by the death of the son born of adultery is afterwards pun- 
ished, (2 Sam. xii. 13, 14.) Such punishments, which were 
to be inflicted after the remission of the guilt, we are taught 
to ransom by satisfactions. For Daniel exhorted Nebuchad- 
nezzar : " Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine 
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor," (Dan. iv. 27.) 
And Solomon says, " By mercy and truth iniquity is purged," 
(Prov. xvi. 6;) and again, "love covereth all sins," (Prov. 
x. 12.) This sentiment is confirmed by Peter, (1 Pet. iv. 
8.) Also in Luke, our Lord says of the woman that was 
a sinner, " Her sins, which are many, are forgiven ; for she 
luved much," (Luke vii. 47.) How perverse and prepos- 
terous the judgment they ever form of the doings of God I1 
Had they observed, what certainly they ought not to have 
overlooked, that there are two kinds of divine judgment, 
they would have seen in the correction of David a very 
different form of punishment from that which must be thought 
designed for vengeance. But since it in no slight degree 
concerns us to understand the purpose of God in the chas- 
tisements by which he animadverts upon our sins, and how 
much they differ from the exemplary punishments which he 
indignantly inflicts on the wicked and reprobate, I think it 
will not be improper briefly to glance at it. For the sake of 
distinction, Ave may call the one kind of judgment punishment, 
the other chastisement. In judicial punishment, God is to be 
understood as taking vengeance on his enemies, by display- 
ing his anger- against them, confounding, scattering, and 
annihilating them. By divine punishment, properly so called, 
let us then understand punishment accompanied with indig- 
nation. In judicial chastisement, he is offended, but not in 
wrath ; he does not punish by destroying or striking down 
as with a thunderbolt. Hence it is not properly punishment 
or vengeance, but correction and admonition. The one is 
the act of a judge, the other of a father. When the judge 
punishes a criminal, he animadverts upon the crime, and 
demands the penalty. When a father corrects his son 
sharply, it is not to mulct or avenge, but rather to teach him, 

1 For a full expositiou of these passages, see infra, sec. 35-37. 


224 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

and make him more cautious for the future. Chrysostom 
in his writings employs a simile which is somewhat different, 
but the same in purport. He says, " A son is whipt, and a 
slave is whipt, but the latter is punished as a slave for his 
offence : the former is chastised as a free-born son, standing 
in need of correction." The correction of the latter is 
designed to prove and amend him ; that of the former is 
scourging and punishment. 

32. To have a short and clear view of the whole matter, 
Ave must make two distinctions. First, whenever the inflic- 
tion is designed to avenge, then the curse and wrath of God 
displays itself. This is never the case with believers. On 
the contrary, the chastening of God carries his blessing with 
it, and is an evidence of love, as Scripture teaches.1 This 
distinction is plainly marked throughout the word of God. 
All the calamities which the wicked suffer in the present life 
are depicted to us as a kind of anticipation of the punish- 
ment of hell. In these they already see, as from a distance, 
their eternal condemnation ; and so far are they from being 
thereby reformed, or deriving any benefit, that by such pre- 
ludes they are rather prepared for the fearful doom which 
finally awaits them. The Lord chastens his servants sore, 
but does not give them over unto death, (Ps. cxviii. 18.) 
When afflicted, they acknowledge it is good for them, that 
they may learn his statutes, (Ps. cxix. 71.) But as we 
everywhere read that the saints received their chastisements 
with placid mind, so inflictions of the latter kind they always 
most earnestly deprecated. " O Lord, correct me," says 
Jeremiah, " but with judgment ; not in thine anger, lest 
thou bring me to nothing. Pour out thy fury upon the 
heathen that know thee not, and upon the families that call 
not on thy name," (Jer. x. 24, 25.) David says, " O Lord, 
rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot 
displeasure," (Ps. vi. 1.) There is nothing inconsistent with 
this in its being repeatedly said, that the Lord is angry with 
his saints when he chastens them for their sins, (Ps. xxxviii. 
7.) In like manner, in Isaiah, " And in that day thou shalt 

1 Job v. 17 ; Prov. iii. 11 ; Heb. xii. 5. 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 225 

say, O Lord, I will praise thee : though thou wast angry 
with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst 
me," (Isa. xii. 1.) Likewise in Habakkuk, " In wrath remem- 
ber mercy," (Hab. iii. 2 ;) and in Micah, " I will bear the 
indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him," 
(Mic. vii. 9.) Here we are reminded not only that those who are 
justly punished gain nothing by murmuring, but that believers 
obtain a mitigation of their pain by reflecting on the divine 
intention. For the same reason, he is said to profane his 
inheritance ; and yet we know that he will never profane it. 
The expression refers not to the counsel or purpose of God 
in punishing, but to the keen sense of pain, endured by those 
who are visited with any measure of divine severity. For 
the Lord not only chastens his people with a slight degree of 
austerity, but sometimes so wounds them, that they seem to 
themselves on the very eve of perdition. He thus declares that 
they have deserved his anger, and it is fitting so to do, that they 
may be dissatisfied with themselves for their sins, may be more 
careful in their desires to appease God, and anxiously hasten 
to seek his pardon ; still, at this very time, he gives clearer 
evidence of his mercy than of his anger. For He who can- 
not deceive has declared, that the covenant made with us in 
our true Solomon l stands fast and will never be broken, " If 
his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments ; 
if they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments ; 
then will I visit their transgressions with the rod, and their 
iniquity with- stripes. Nevertheless, my loving-kindness will 
I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to 
fail," (Ps. lxxxix. 31-34.) To assure us of this mercy, he 
says, that the rod with which he will chastise the posterity 
of Solomon will be the " rod of men," and " the stripes of the 
children of men," (2 Sam. vii. 14.) While by these terms 
he denotes moderation and lenity, he, at the same time, 
intimates, that those who feel the hand of God opposed to 
them cannot but tremble and be confounded. How much 
regard he has to this lenity in chastening his Israel he shows 

1 French, " Car l'alliance qu'il a une fois faite avec Jesus Christ et ses 
membres ;" — For the covenant which he once made with Jesus Christ and 
liis members. 

VOL. II. P 


226 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

by the Prophet, " Behold, I have refined thee, but not with 
silver ; I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction," (Isa. 
xlviii. 10.) Although he tells them that they are chastise- 
ments with a view to purification, he adds, that even these 
are so tempered, that they are not to be too much crushed 
by them. And this is very necessary, for the more a man 
reveres God, and devotes himself to the cultivation of piety, 
the more tender he is in bearing his anger, (Ps. xc. 11 ; and 
ibid. Calv.) The reprobate, though they groan under the 
lash,1 yet, because they weigh not the true cause, but rather 
turn their back, as well upon their sins as upon the divine 
judgment, become hardened in their stupor ; or, because they 
murmur and kick, and so rebel against their judge, their 
infatuated violence fills them with frenzy and madness. 
Believers, again, admonished by the rod of God, immediately 
begin to reflect on their sins, and, struck with fear and dread, 
betake themselves as suppliants to implore mercy. Did not 
God mitigate the pains by which wretched souls are excru- 
ciated, they would give way a hundred times, even at slight 
signs of his anger. 

33. The second distinction is, that when the reprobate are 
brought under the lash of God, they begin in a manner to 
pay the punishment due to his justice ; and though their 
refusal to listen to these proofs of the divine anger will not 
escape with impunity, still they are not punished with the view 
of bringing them to a better mind, but only to teach them by 
dire experience that God is a judge and avenger. The sons of 
God are beaten with rods, not that they may pay the punish- 
ment due to their faults, but that they may thereby be led 
to repent. Accordingly, we perceive that they have more 
respect to the future than to the past. I prefer giving this 
in the words of Chrysostom rather than my own: " His object 
in imposing a penalty upon us, is not to inflict punishment 
on our sins, but to correct us for the future," (Clirysost. 
Serm. de Pcenit. et Confess.) So also Augustine, " The 
suffering at which you cry, is medicine, not punishment ; 

1 French, " Car combien les reprouves souspirent ou grincent les dents 
sous les coups ;" — For though the reprobate sigh or gnash their teeth 
under the strokes. 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 227 

chastisement, not condemnation. Do not drive away the 
rod,, if you would not be driven away from the inheritance. 
Know, brethren, that the whole of that misery of the human 
race, under which the world groans, is a medicinal pain, not 
a penal sentence," (August, in Psal. cii. circa finem.) It 
seemed proper to quote these passages, lest any one should 
think the mode of expression which I have used to be novel 
or uncommon. To the same effect are the indignant terms in 
which the Lord expostulates with his people, for their ingra- 
titude in obstinately despising all his inflictions. In Isaiah 
he says, " Why should ye be stricken any more ? ye will 
revolt more and more. The whole head is sick, and the whole 
heart faint," (Isa. i. 5, 6.) But as such passages abound in 
the Prophets, it is sufficient briefly to have shown, that the 
only purpose of God in punishing his Church is to subdue 
her to repentance. Thus, when he rejected Saul from the 
kingdom, he punished in vengeance, (1 Sam. xv. 23 ;) when 
he deprived David of his child, he chastised for amendment, 
(2 Sam. xii. 18.) In this sense Paul is to be understood 
when he says, " When we are judged, we are chastened of 
the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world," 
(1 Cor. xi. 32 ;) that is, while we as sons of God are afflicted 
by our heavenly Father's hand, it is not punishment to con- 
found, but only chastisement to train us. On this subject 
Augustine is plainly with us, (De Peccator. Mentis ac 
Remiss. Lib. ii. cap. 33, 34.) For he shows that the punish- 
ments with which men are equally chastened by God are to 
be variously considered ; because the saints after the forgive- 
ness of their sins have struggles and exercises, the reprobate 
without forgiveness are punished for their iniquity. Enu- 
merating the punishments inflicted on David and other saints, 
he says, it wras designed, by thus humbling them, to prove 
and exercise their piety. The passage in Isaiah, in which it 
is said, " Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto 
her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is 
pardoned ; for she has received of the Lord's hands double 
for all her sins," (Isa. xl. 2,) proves not that the pardon of sin 
depends on freedom from punishment. It is just as if he had 
said, Sufficient punishment has now been exacted ; as for their 


228 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

number and heinousness, you have long been oppressed with 
sorrow and mourning, it is time to send you a message of 
complete mercy, that your minds may be filled with joy on 
feeling me to be a Father. For God there assumes the 
character of a father who repents even of the just severity 
which he has been compelled to use towards his son. 

34. These are the thoughts with which the believer ought 
to be provided in the bitterness of affliction, " The time is 
come that judgment must begin at the house of God," " the 
city which is called by my name," (1 Pet. iv. 17 ; Jer. xxv. 
29.) What could the sons of God do, if they thought that 
the severity Avhich they feel was vengeance? He who, 
smitten by the hand of God, thinks that God is a judge 
inflicting punishment, cannot conceive of him except as angry 
and at enmity with him ; cannot but detest the rod of God as 
curse and condemnation ; in short, can never persuade him- 
self that he is loved by God, while he feels that he is still 
disposed to inflict punishment upon him. He only profits 
under the divine chastening who considers that God, though 
offended with his sins, is still propitious and favourable to 
him. Otherwise, the feeling must necessarily be what the 
Psalmist complains that he had experienced, " Thy wrath 
lieth hard upon me, and thou hast afflicted me with all thy 
weaves." Also what Moses says, " For we are consumed by 
thine anger, and by thy wrath we are troubled. Thou hast 
set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of 
thy countenance. For all our days are passed away in thy 
wrath ; we spend our years as a tale that is told," (Ps. xc. 
7-9.) On the other hand, David, speaking of fatherly chas- 
tisements, to show how believers are more assisted than 
oppressed by them, thus sings, " Blessed is the man whom 
thou chastenest, O Lord, and teachest him out of thy law ; 
that thou mayest give him rest from the days of adversity, 
until the pit be digged for the wicked," (Ps. xciv. 12, 13.) 
It is certainly a sore temptation, when God, sparing unbe- 
lievers and overlooking their crimes, appears more rigid 
towards his own people. Hence, to solace them, he adds the 
admonition of the law which teaches them, that their salvation 
is consulted when they are brought back to the right path, 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 229 

whereas the wicked are borne headlong in their errors, which 
ultimately lead to the pit. It matters not whether the pun- 
ishment is eternal or temporary. For disease, pestilence, 
famine, and war, are curses from God, as much as even the 
sentence of eternal death, whenever their tendency is to 
operate as instruments of divine wrath and vengeance against 
the reprobate. 

35. All, if I mistake not, now see what view the Lord had 
in chastening David, namely, to prove that umrder and 
adultery are most offensive to God, and to manifest this offen- 
siveness in a beloved and faithful servant, that David himself 
might be taught never again to dare to commit such wicked- 
ness ; still, however, it was not a punishment designed in 
payment of a kind of compensation to God. In the same way 
are we to judge of that other correction, in which the Lord sub- 
jects his people to a grievous pestilence, for the disobedience 
of David in forgetting himself so far as to number the people. 
He indeed freely forgave David the guilt of his sin ; but 
because it was necessary, both as a public example to all 
ages and also to humble David himself, not to allow such 
an offence to go unpunished, he chastened him most sharply 
with his whip. We ought also to keep this in view in the 
universal curse of the human race. For since after obtaining 
grace we still continue to endure the miseries denounced to 
our first parent as the penalty of transgression, we ought 
thereby to be reminded, how offensive to God is the trans- 
gression of his law, that thus humbled and dejected by a 
consciousness of our wretched condition, we may aspire more 
ardently to true happiness. But it were most foolish in any 
one to imagine, that we are subjected to the calamities of the 
present life for the guilt of sin. This seems to me to have 
been Chrysostom's meaning when he said, " If the purpose of 
God in inflicting punishment is to bring those persisting in 
evil to repentance, when repentance is manifested punish- 
ment would be superfluous," (Chrysos. Homil. hi. de Provid.) 
Wherefore, as he knows what the disposition of each recmires, 
he treats one with greater harshness, and another with more 
indulgence. Accordingly, when he wishes to show that he 
is not excessive in exacting punishment, he upbraids a hard- 


2.J0 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

hearted and obstinate people, because, after being smitten, 
they still continued in sin, (Jer. v. 3.) In the same sense 
he complains, that " Ephraim is a cake not turned," (Hos. 
vii. 8,) because chastisement did not make a due impression 
on their minds, and, correcting their vices, make them fit to 
receive pardon. Surely he who thus speaks shows, that as 
soon as any one repents he will be ready to receive him, and 
that the rigour which he exercises in chastising faults is 
wrung from him by our perverseness, since we should prevent 
him by a voluntary correction. Such, however, being the 
hardness and rudeness of all hearts, that they stand univer- 
sally in need of castigation, our infinitely wise Parent hath 
seen it meet to exercise all without exception, during their 
whole lives, with chastisement. It is strange how they fix 
their eyes so intently on the one example of David, and are 
not moved by the many examples in which they might have 
beheld the free forgiveness of sins. The publican is said to 
have gone down from the temple justified, (Luke xviii. 14 ;) 
no punishment follows. Peter obtained the pardon of his 
sin, (Luke xxii. 61.) " We read of his tears," says Ambrose, 
(Serm. 46, De Pcenit. Petri,) "we read not of satisfaction." 
To the paralytic it is said, " Son, be of good cheer ; thy sins 
be forgiven thee," (Matth. ix. 2 ;) no penance is enjoined. All 
the acts of forgiveness mentioned in Scripture are gratuitous. 
The rule ought to be drawn from these numerous examples, 
rather than from one example which contains akind of specialty. 
36. Daniel, in exhorting Nebuchadnezzar to break off his 
sins by righteousness, and his iniquities by showing mercy to 
the poor, (Dan. iv. 27,) meant not to intimate, that righteous- 
ness and mercy are able to propitiate God and redeem from 
punishment, (far be it from us to suppose that there ever was 
any other a<ro\-!jrgucng (ransom) than the blood of Christ ;) but 
the breaking off referred to in that passage has reference toman 
rather than to God : as if he had said, O king, you have exer- 
cised an unjust and violent domination, you have oppressed 
the humble, spoiled the poor, treated your people harshly 
and unjustly ; instead of unjust exaction, instead of violence 
and oppression, now practise mercy and justice. In like 
manner, Solomon says, that love covers a multitude of sins ; 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 231 

not, however, with God, but among men. For the whole 
verse stands thus, " Hatred stirreth up strifes ; but love 
covereth all sins," (Prov. x. 12.) Here, after his manner, he 
contrasts the evils produced by hatred with the fruits of 
charity, in this sense, Those who hate are incessantly biting, 
carping at, upbraiding, lacerating each other, making every 
thing a fault ; but those who love mutually conceal each 
other's faults, wink at many, forgive many : not that the one 
approves the vices of the other, but tolerates and cures by 
admonishing, rather than exasperates by assailing. That the 
passage is quoted by Peter (1 Pet. iv. 8) in the same sense 
we cannot doubt, unless we would charge him with corrupting 
or craftily wresting Scripture. When it is said, that " by 
mercy and truth iniquity is purged," (Prov. xvi. 6,) the mean- 
ing is, not that by them compensation is made to the Lord, 
so that he being thus satisfied remits the punishment which he 
would otherwise have exacted ; but intimation is made after 
the familiar manner of Scripture, that those who, forsaking 
their vices and iniquities, turn to the Lord in truth and piety, 
will find him propitious : as if he had said, that the wrath of 
God is calmed, and his judgment is at rest, whenever we rest 
from our wickedness. But, indeed, it is not the cause of 
pardon that is described, but rather the mode of true con- 
version ; just as the Prophets frequently declare, that it is in 
vain for hypocrites to offer God fictitious rites instead of 
repentance, seeing his delight is in integrity and the duties 
of charity.1 - In like manner, also, the author of the Epistle 
to the Hebrews, commending kindness and humanity, reminds 
us, that " with such sacrifices God is well pleased," (Heb. 
xiii. 16.) And indeed when Christ, rebuking the Pharisees 
because, intent merely on the outside of the cup and platter, 
they neglected purity of heart, enjoins them, in order that 
they may be clean in all respects, to give alms, does he exhort 
them to give satisfaction thereby ? He only tells them what 
the kind of purity is which God requires. Of this mode of 
expression we have treated elsewhere, (Matth. xxiii. 25 ; 
Luke xi. 39-41 ; see Calv. in Harm. Evang.) 

1 French, " Integrite, pitie, droiture, et choses semblables ;" — integrity, 
pity, uprightness, and the like. 


232 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

37. In regard to the passage in Luke, (Luke vii. 36, sq.) 
no man of sober judgment, who reads the parable there em- 
ployed by our Lord, will raise any controversy with us. The 
Pharisee thought that the Lord did not know the character 
of the woman whom he had so easily admitted to his presence. 
For he presumed that he would not have admitted her if he 
had known what kind of a sinner she was ; and from this he 
inferred, that one who could be deceived in this way was not 
a prophet. Our Lord, to show that she was not a sinner, 
inasmuch as she had already been forgiven, spake this parable: 
" There Avas a certain creditor which had two debtors ; the 
one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty. And when 
they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell 
me, therefore, which of them will love him most ? The Phari- 
see answers : " I suppose that he to whom he forgave most." 
Then our Saviour rejoins : " Her sins, which are many, are 
forgiven ; for she loved much." By these words it is plain 
he does not make love the cause of forgiveness, but the proof 
of it. The similitude is borrowed from the case of a debtor, 
to whom a debt of five hundred pence had been forgiven. It 
is not said that the debt is forgiven because he loved much, 
but that he loved much because it was forgiven. The simili- 
tude ought to be applied in this way : You think this woman 
is a sinner ; but you ought to have acknowledged her as not 
a sinner, in respect that her sins have been forgiven her. 
Her love ought to have been to you a proof of her having 
obtained forgiveness, that love being an expression of grati- 
tude for the benefit received. It is an argument a posteriori, 
by which something is demonstrated by the results produced 
by it. Our Lord plainly attests the ground on which she 
had obtained forgiveness, when he says, " Thy faith hath 
saved thee." By faith, therefore, we obtain forgiveness : by 
love we give thanks, and bear testimony to the loving-kind- 
ness of the Lord. 

38. I am little moved by the numerous passages in the 
writings of the Fathers relating to satisfaction. I see in- 
deed that some (I will frankly say almost all whose books are 
extant) have either erred in this matter, or spoken too roughly 
and harshly ; but I cannot admit that they were so rude and 


CHAP. IV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 233 

unskilful as to write these passages in the sense in which they 
are read by our new satisfactionaries. Chrysostom some- 
where says, " When mercy is implored, interrogation ceases ; 
when mercy is asked, judgment rages not ; when mercy is 
sought, there is no room for punishment; where there is 
mercy, no question is asked ; where there is mercy, the an- 
swer gives pardon," (Chrysos. Horn. ii. in Psal. 1.) How 
much soever these words may be twisted, they can never be 
reconciled with the dogmas of the Schoolmen. In the book 
De Dogmatibus Ecclesiasticis, which is attributed to Augus- 
tine, you read, (cap. 54,) " The satisfaction of repentance is 
to cut off the causes of sins, and not to indulge an entrance 
to their suggestions." From this it appears that the doctrine 
of satisfaction, said to be paid for sins committed, was every 
where derided in those ages ; for here the only satisfaction 
referred to is caution, abstinence from sin for the future. I 
am unwilling to quote what Chrysostom says, (Horn. x. in 
Genes.) that God requires nothing more of us than to con- 
fess our faults before him with tears, as similar sentiments 
abound both in his writings and those of others. Augustine 
indeed calls works of mercy remedies for obtaining forgive- 
ness of sins, (Enchir. ad Laur. ;) but lest any one should 
stumble at the expression, he himself, in another passage, 
obviates the difficulty. "The flesh of Christ," says he, "is 
the true and only sacrifice for sins — not only for those which 
are all effaced in baptism, but those into which we are after- 
wards betrayed through infirmity, and because of which the 
whole Church daily cries, ' Forgive us our debts,' (Matth. 
vi. 12.) And they are forgiven by that special sacrifice." 

39. By satisfaction, however, they, for the most part, meant 
not compensation to be paid to God, but the public testi- 
mony, by which those who had been punished with excom- 
munication, and wished again to be received into communion, 
assured the Church of their repentance. For those penitents 
were enjoined certain fasts and other things, by which they 
might prove that they were truly, and from the heart, weary 
of their former life, or rather might obliterate the remem- 
brance of their past deeds : in this way they were said to 
give satisfaction, not to God, but to the Church. The same 


234 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

thing is expressed by Augustine in a passage in his Enchi- 
ridion ad Laurentium, cap. 65.1 From that ancient custom 
the satisfactions and confessions now in use took their rise. 
It is indeed a viperish progeny, not even a vestige of the 
better form now remaining. I know that ancient writers 
sometimes speak harshly ; nor do I deny, as I lately said, that 
they have perhaps erred ; but dogmas, which were tainted with 
a few blemishes, now that they have fallen into the unwashed 
hands of those men, are altogether defiled. And if we were 
to decide the contest by authority of the Fathers, what kind 
of Fathers are those whom they obtrude upon us ? A great 
part of those, from whom Lombard their Coryphasus framed 
his centos, are extracted from the absurd dreams of certain 
monks passing under the names of Ambrose, Jerome, Augus- 
tine, and Chrysostom. On the present subject almost all his 
extracts are from the book of Augustine De Pcenitentia, a 
book absurdly compiled by some rhapsodist, alike from good 
and bad authors — a book which indeed bears the name of 
Augustine, but which no person of the least learning would 
deign to acknowledge as his. Wishing to save my readers 
trouble, they will pardon me for not searching minutely into 
all their absurdities. For myself it were not very laborious, 
and might gain some applause, to give a complete exposure 
of dogmas which have hitherto been vaunted as mysteries ; 
but as my object is to give useful instruction, I desist. 

1 It is quoted in the Decret. c. in Art. de Pcenit. Dist. i. 


CHAr. V. CHRISTIAN RELIGIOX. 235 


CHAPTER V. 

OF THE MODES OF SUPPLEMENTING SATISFACTION, VIZ., 
INDULGENCES AND PURGATORY. 

Divisions of the chapter, — I. A summary description and refutation of 
Popish indulgences, sec. 1, 2. II. Confutation by Leo and Augustine. 
Answer to two objections urged in support of them, sec. 3, 4. A 
profane love of filthy lucre on the part of the Pope. The origin of indul- 
gences unfolded, sec. 5. III. An examination of Popish purgatory. Its 
horrible impiety, sec. 6. An explanation of five passages of Scripture by 
which Sophists endeavour to support that dream, sec. 7, 8. Sentiments 
of the ancient Theologians concerning purgatory, sec. 10. 

Sections. 

1. The dogma of satisfaction the parent of indulgences. Vanity of both. 

The reason of it. Evidence of the avarice of the Pope and the 
Romish clergy : also of the blindness with which the Christian 
world was smitten. 

2. View of indulgences given by the Sophists. Then- true nature. Refu- 

tation of them. Refutation confirmed by seven passages of Scrip- 
ture. 

3. Confirmed also by the testimony of Leo, a Roman Bishop, and by 

Augustine. Attempts of the Popish doctors to establish the mon- 
strous doctrine of indulgences, and even support it by Apostolical 
authority. " First answer. 

4. Second answer to the passage of an Apostle adduced to support the 

dogma of indulgences. Answer confirmed by a comparison with 
other passages, and from a passage in Augustine, explaining the 
Apostle's meaning. Another passage from the same Apostle con- 
firming this view. 

5. The Pope's profane thirst for filthy lucre exposed. The origin of 

indulgences. 

6. Examination of the fictitious purgatory of the Papists. 1. From 

the nature of the thing itself. 2. From the authority of God. 
3. From the consideration of the merit of Christ, which is destroy- 
ed by this fiction. Purgatory, what it is. 4. From the impiety 
teeming from this fountain. 

7. Exposition of the passages of Scripture quoted in support of purga- 

tory. 1. Of the unpardonable sin, from which it is inferred that 


236 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

there are some sins afterwards to be forgiven. 2. Of the passage 
as to paying the last farthing. 

8. 3. The passage concerning the bending of the knee to Christ by 

things under the earth. 4. The example of Judas Maccabseus in 
sending an oblation for the dead to Jerusalem. 

9. 5. Of the fire which shall try every man's work. The sentiment of 

the ancient theologians. Answer, containing a reductio ad absur- 
dum. Confirmation by a passage of Augustine. The meaning of 
the Apostle. What to be understood by fire. A clear exposition of 
the metaphor. The day of the Lord. How those who suffer loss 
are saved by fire. 
10. The doctrine of purgatory ancient, but refuted by a more ancient 
Apostle. Not supported by ancient writers, by Scripture, or solid 
argument. Introduced by custom and a zeal not duly regulated by 
the word of God. Ancient writers, as Augustine, speak doubt- 
fully in commending prayer for the dead. At all events, we must 
hold by the word of God, which rejects this fiction. A vast differ- 
ence between the more ancient and the more modern builders of 
purgatory. This shown by comparing them. 

1. From this dogma of satisfaction that of indulgences 
takes its rise. For the pretence is, that what is wanting to 
our own ability is hereby supplied ; and they go the insane 
length of denning them to be a dispensation of the merits of 
Christ, and the martyrs which the Pope makes by his bulls. 
Though they are fitter for hellebore than for argument, — and 
it is scarcely worth while to refute these frivolous errors, 
which, already battered down, begin of their own accord to 
grow antiquated, and totter to their fall ; — yet, as a brief re- 
futation may be useful to some of the unlearned, I will not 
omit it. Indeed, the fact that indulgences have so long stood 
safe and with impunity, and wantoned with so much fury and 
tyranny, may be regarded as a proof into how deep a night 
of ignorance mankind were for some ages plunged. They 
saw themselves insulted openly, and without disguise, by the 
Pope and his bull-bearers ; they saw the salvation of the soul 
made the subject of a lucrative traffic, salvation taxed at a few 
pieces of money, nothing given gratuitously ; they saw what 
was squeezed from them in the form of oblations basely con- 
sumed on strumpets, pimps, and gluttony, the loudest trum- 
peters of indulgences being the greatest despisers ; they saw 
the monster stalking abroad, and every day luxuriating with 


CHAP. V. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 237 

greater license, and that without end, new bulls being con- 
stantly issued, and new sums extracted. Still indulgences 
were received with the greatest reverence, worshipped, and 
bought. Even those who saw more clearly than others deemed 
them pious frauds, by which, even in deceiving, some good 
was gained. Now, at length, that a considerable portion of 
the world have begun to bethink themselves, indulgences 
grow cool, and gradually even begin to freeze, preparatory to 
their final extinction. 

2. But since very many who see the vile imposture, theft, 
and rapine, (with which the dealers in indulgences have 
hitherto deluded and sported with us,) are not aware of the 
true source of the impiety, it may be proper to show not only 
what indulgences truly are, but also that they are polluted 
in every part.1 They give the name of treasury of the Church 
to the merits of Christ, the holy Apostles and Martyrs. They 
pretend, as I have said, that the radical custody of the granary 
has been delivered to the Roman bishop, to whom the dis- 
pensation of these great blessings belongs in such a sense, 
that he can both exercise it by himself, and delegate the 
power of exercising it to others. Hence we have from the 
Pope at one time plenary indulgences, at another for certain 
years ; from the cardinals for a hundred days, and from the 
bishops for forty. These, to describe them truly, are a pro- 
fanation of the blood of Christ, and a delusion of Satan, by 
which the Christian people are led away from the grace of 
God and the life which is in Christ, and turned aside from 
the true way of salvation. For how could the blood of Christ 
be more shamefully profaned than by denying its sufficiency 
for the remission of sins, for reconciliation and satisfaction, 
unless its defects, as if it were dried up and exhausted, are 
supplemented from some other quarter ? Peter's words are : 
" To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name 
whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins," 

] French, " II est expedient de monstrer ici non seulement quelles sont 
les indulgences, comme ils en usent ; mais du tout que c'est, a les prendre 
en leur propre et meilleure nature, sans quelque qualite ou vice acci- 
dental ;" — it is expedient here to show not only what indulgences are as in 
use, but in themselves, taking them in their proper and best form, without 
any qualification or accidental vice. 


238 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK IN. 

(Acts x. 43 ;) but indulgences bestow the remission of sins 
through Peter, Paul, and the Martyrs. " The blood of Jesus 
Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin," says John, (1 John 
i. 7.) Indulgences make the blood of the martyrs an ablution 
of sins. " He hath made him to be sin (7. ». a satisfaction 
for sin) for us who knew no sin," says Paul, (2 Cor. v. 21,) 
" that we might be made the righteousness of God in him." 
Indulgences make the satisfaction of sin to depend on the 
blood of the martyrs. Paul exclaimed and testified to the 
Corinthians, that Christ alone was crucified, and died for 
them, (1 Cor. i. 13.) Indulgences declare that Paul and 
others died for us. Paul elsewhere says that Christ purchased 
the Church with his own blood, (Acts xx. 28.) Indulgences 
assign another purchase to the blood of martyrs. " By one 
offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified," 
says the Apostle, (Heb. x. 14.) Indulgences, on the other 
hand, insist that sanctification, which would otherwise be 
insufficient, is perfected by martyrs. John says that all the 
saints " have washed their robes, and made them white in 
the blood of the Lamb," (Rev. vii. 14.) Indulgences tell us 
to wash our robes in the blood of saints. 

3. There is an admirable passage in opposition to their 
blasphemies in Leo, a Roman Bishop, (ad PalaBstinos, Ep. 81.) 
" Although the death of many saints was precious in the sight 
of the Lord, (Ps. cxvi. 15,) yet no innocent man's slaughter 
was the propitiation of the world. The just received crowns, 
did not give them ; and the fortitude of believers produced 
examples of patience, not gifts of righteousness : for their 
deaths were for themselves ; and none by his final end paid 
the debt of another, except Christ our Lord, in whom alone 
all are crucified — all dead, buried, and raised up." This 
sentiment, as it was of a memorable nature, he has elsewhere 
repeated, (Epist. 95.) Certainly one could not desire a clearer 
confutation of this impious dogma. Augustine introduces 
the same sentiment not less appositely : " Although brethren 
die for brethren, yet no martyr's blood is shed for the remis- 
sion of sins : this Christ did for us, and in this conferred upon 
us not what we should imitate, but what should make us 
grateful," (August. Tract, in Joann. 84.) Again, in another 


CHAP. V. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 239 

passage : " As he alone became the Son of God and the Son 
of man, that he might make us to be with himself sons of 
God, so he alone, without any ill desert, undertook the pen- 
alty for us, that through him we might, without good desert, 
obtain undeserved favour," (ad Bonif. Lib. iv. cap. 4.) Indeed, 
as their whole doctrine is a patchwork of sacrilege and blas- 
phemy, this is the most blasphemous of the whole. Let them 
acknowledge whether or not they hold the following dogmas : 
That the martyrs, by their death, performed more to God, 
and merited more than was necessary for themselves, and 
that they have a large surplus of merits which may be applied 
to others ; that in order that this great good may not prove 
superfluous, their blood is mingled with the blood of Christ, 
and out of both is formed the treasury of the Church, for the 
forgiveness and satisfaction of sins ; and that in this sense we 
must understand the words of Paul : " Who now rejoice in 
my sufferings, and fill up that which is behind of the afflic- 
tions of Christ in my flesh for his body's sake, which is the 
Church," (Col. i. 24.) What is this but merely to leave the 
name of Christ, and at the same time make him a vulgar 
saintling, who can scarcely be distinguished in the crowd? 
He alone ought to be preached, alone held forth, alone named, 
alone looked to, whenever the subject considered is the ob- 
taining of the forgiveness of sins, expiation, and sanctification. 
But let us hear their propositions. That the blood of martyrs 
may not be shed without fruit, it must be employed for the 
common good -of the Church. Is it so ? Was there no fruit 
in glorifying God by death ? in sealing his truth with their 
blood ? in testifying, by contempt of the present life, that 
they looked for a better ? in confirming the faith of the 
Church, and at the same time disabling the pertinacity of 
the enemy by their constancy ? But thus it is. They ac- 
knowledge no fruit if Christ is the only propitiation, if he 
alone died for our sins, if he alone was offered for our re- 
demption. Nevertheless, they say, Peter and Paul would 
have gained the crown of victory though they had died in 
their beds a natural death. But as they contended to blood, 
it would not accord with the justice of God to leave their 
doing; so barren and unfruitful. As if God were unable to 


240 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

augment the glory of his servants in proportion to the mea- 
sure of his gifts. The advantage derived in common by the 
Church is great enough, when, by their triumphs, she is in- 
flamed with zeal to fight. 

4. How maliciously they wrest the passage in which Paul 
says, that he supplies in his body that which was lacking in 
the sufferings of Christ ! (Col. i. 24.) That defect or supple- 
ment refers not to the work of redemption, satisfaction, or 
expiation, but to those afflictions with which the members 
of Christ, in other words, all believers, behove to be exercised, 
so long as they are in the flesh. He says, therefore, that 
part of the sufferings of Christ still remains, viz., that what 
he suffered in himself he daily suffers in his members. Christ 
so honours us as to regard and count our afflictions as his 
own. By the additional words — for the Church, Paul means 
not for the redemption, or reconciliation, or satisfaction of 
the Church, but for edification and progress. As he else- 
where says, " I endure all things for the elect's sakes, that 
they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus 
with eternal glory," (2 Tim. ii. 10.) He also writes to the 
Corinthians : " Whether we be afflicted, it is for your conso- 
lation and salvation, w7hich is effectual in the enduring of the 
same sufferings which we also suffer," (2 Cor. i. 6.) In the 
same place he immediately explains his meaning by adding, 
that he was made a minister of the Church, not for redemp- 
tion, but according to the dispensation which he received to 
preach the gospel of Christ. But if they still desire another 
interpreter, let them hear Augustine : " The sufferings of 
Christ are in Christ alone, as in the head ; in Christ and the 
Church as in the whole body. Hence Paul, being one member, 
says, ' I fill up in my body that which is behind of the sufferings 
of Christ.' Therefore, O hearer, whoever you be, if you are 
among the members of Christ, whatever you suffer from those 
who are not members of Christ, was lacking to the sufferings 
of Christ," (August, in Ps. xvi.) He elsewhere explains the 
end of the sufferings of the Apostles undertaken for Christ : 
" Christ is my door to you, because ye are the sheep of 
Christ purchased by his blood : acknowledge your price, which 
is not paid by me, but preached by me," (August. Tract, in 


CHAP. V. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 241 

Joann. 47.) He afterwards adds, " As he laid down his life, 
so ought we to lay down our lives for the brethren, to build 
up peace and maintain faith." Thus far Augustine. Far be 
it from us to imagine that Paul thought any thing was want- 
ing to the sufferings of Christ in regard to the complete ful- 
ness of righteousness, salvation, and life, or that he wished to 
make any addition to it, after showing so clearly and eloquently 
that the grace of Christ was poured out in such rich abund- 
ance as far to exceed all the power of sin, (Rom. v. 15.) All 
saints have been saved by it alone, not by the merit of their 
own life or death, as Peter distinctly testifies, (Acts xv. 11 ;) 
so that it is an insult to God and his Anointed to place the 
worthiness of any saint in any thing save the mercy of God 
alone. But why dwell longer on this, as if the matter were 
obscure, when to mention these monstrous dogmas is to 
refute them ? 

5. Moreover, to say nothing of these abominations, who 
taught the Pope to enclose the grace of Jesus Christ in lead 
and parchment, grace which the Lord is pleased to dispense by 
the word of the Gospel? Undoubtedly either the Gospel of 
God or indulgences must be false. That Christ is offered to us 
in the Gospel with all the abundance of heavenly blessings, 
with all his merits, all his righteousness, wisdom, and grace, 
without exception, Paul bears witness when he says, " Now 
then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech 
you by us : we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to 
God. For he hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin ; 
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him," (2 
Cor. v. 20, 21.) And what is meant by the fellowship [xotvuvia) 
of Christ, which according to the same Apostle (1 Cor. i. 9) 
is offered to us in the Gospel, all believers know. On the 
contrary, indulgences, bringing forth some portion of the grace 
of God from the armoury of the Pope, fix it to lead, parchment, 
and a particular place, but dissever it from the word of God. 
When we inquire into the origin of this abuse, it appears to 
have arisen from this, that when in old times the satisfac- 
tions imposed on penitents were too severe to be borne, those 
who felt themselves burdened beyond measure by the pen- 
ance imposed, petitioned the Church for relaxation. The 

VOL. II. Q 


2 12 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

remission so given was called indulgence. But as they trans- 
ferred satisfactions to God, and called them compensations 
by which men redeem themselves from the justice of God, 
they in the same way transferred indulgences, representing 
them as expiatory remedies which free us from merited punish- 
ment. The blasphemies to which we have referred have been 
feigned with so much effrontery that there is not the least 
pretext for them. 

6. Their purgatory cannot now give us much trouble, since 
with this axe we have struck it, thrown it down, and over- 
turned it from its very foundations. I cannot agree with 
some who think that we ought to dissemble in this matter, 
and make no mention of purgatory, from Avhich (as they say) 
fierce contests arise, and very little edification can be obtain- 
ed. I myself would think it right to disregard their follies 
did they not tend to serious consequences. But since pur- 
gatory has been reared on many, and is daily propped up by 
new blasphemies ; since it produces many grievous offences, 
assuredly it is not to be connived at, however it might have 
been disguised for a time, that without any authority from 
the word of God, it was devised by prying audacious rash- 
ness, that credit was procured for it by fictitious revelations, 
the wiles of Satan, and that certain passages of Scripture 
were ignorantly wrested to its support. Although the Lord 
bears not that human presumption should thus force its way 
to the hidden recesses of his judgments ; although he has 
issued a strict prohibition against neglecting his voice, and 
making inquiry at the dead, (Deut. xviii. 11,) and permits 
not his word to be so erroneously contaminated. Let us 
grant, however, that all this might have been tolerated for a 
time as a thing of no great moment ; yet when the expiation 
of sins is sought elsewhere than in the blood of Christ, and 
satisfaction is transferred to others, silence were most peril- 
ous. We are bound, therefore, to raise our voice to its high- 
est pitch, and cry aloud that purgatory is a deadly device of 
Satan ; that it makes void the cross of Christ ; that it offers 
intolerable insult to the divine mercy ; that it undermines 
and overthrows our faith. For what is this purgatory but 
the satisfaction for sin paid after death by the souls of the 
dead ? Hence when this idea of satisfaction is refuted, purga- 


CIIAr. V. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 243 

tory itself is forthwith completely overturned.1 But if it is 
perfectly clear, from Avhat was lately said, that the blood of 
Christ is the only satisfaction, expiation, and cleansing for 
the sins of believers, what remains but to hold that purga- 
tory is mere blasphemy, horrid blasphemy against Christ ? I 
say nothing of the sacrilege by which it is daily defended, 
the offences which it begets in religion, and the other innu- 
merable evils which we see teeming forth from that fountain 
of impiety. 

7. Those passages of Scripture on which it is their Avont 
falsely and iniquitously to fasten, it may be worth while to 
wrench out of their hands.2 When the Lord declares that 
the sin against the Holy Ghost will not be forgiven either in 
this world or the world to come, he thereby intimates (they 
say) that there is a remission of certain sins hereafter. But 
who sees not that the Lord there speaks of the guilt of sin ? 
But if this is so, what has it to do with their purgatory, see- 
ing they deny not that the guilt of those sins, the punish- 
ment of which is there expiated, is forgiven in the present 
life ? Lest, however, they should still object, we shall give a 
plainer solution. Since it was the Lord's intention to cut off 
all hope of pardon from this flagitious wickedness, he did not 
consider it enough to say, that it would never be forgiven, 
but in the way of amplification employed a division by which 
he included both the judgment which every man's conscience 
pronounces in the present life, and the final judgment which 
Avill be publicly pronounced at the resurrection ; as if he had 
said, Beware of this malignant rebellion, as you would of 
instant destruction ; for he who of set purpose endeavours 
to extinguish the offered light of the Spirit, shall not obtain 
pardon either in this life, which has been given to sinners for 
conversion, or on the last day when the angels of God shall 
separate the sheep from the goats, and the heavenly king- 
dom shall be purged of all that offends. The next passage 
they produce is the parable in Matthew : " Agree with thine 

1 French, " Tellement que si on ote la fantasie de satisfaire, leur purga- 
torie s'en va bas ;" — so that if the fancy of satisfying is taken away, down 
goes their purgatory. 

2 Matth. xii. 32 ; Mark iii. 28 ; Luke xii. 10 ; Matth. v. 25. 


244 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him ; lest 
at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the 
judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. 
Verily, I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come out 
thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing," (Matth. v. 
25, 26.) If in this passage the judge means God, the adversary 
the devil, the officer an angel, and the prison purgatory, I give 
in at once. But if every man sees that Christ there intend- 
ed to show to how many perils and evils those expose them- 
selves who obstinately insist on their utmost right, instead of 
being satisfied with what is fair and equitable, that he might 
thereby the more strongly exhort his followers to concord, 
where, I ask, are we to find their purgatory ?l 

8. They seek an argument in the passage in which Paul 
declares, that all things shall bow the knee to Christ, " things 
in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth," 
(Phil. ii. 10.) They take it for granted, that by " things 
under the earth," cannot be meant those who are doomed to 
eternal damnation, and that the only remaining conclusion is, 
that they must be souls suffering in purgatory. They would 
not reason very ill if, by the bending of the knee, the Apostle 
designated true worship ; but since he simply says that Christ 
has received a dominion to which all creatures are subject, 
what prevents us from understanding those " under the earth" 
to mean the devils, who shall certainly be sisted before the 
judgment-seat of God, there to recognise their Judge with 
fear and trembling ? In this way Paul himself elsewhere 
interprets the same prophecy : " We shall all stand before the 
judgment-seat of Christ. For it is written, As I live, saith 
the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue 
shall confess to God," (Rom. xiv. 10, 11.) But we cannot 
in this way interpret what is said in the Apocalypse : "Every 
creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the 
earth, and such as are in the sea, heard I saying, Blessing, 

1 The French adds the following sentence : " Brief, que le passage soit 
regarde et prins en sa simple intelligence, et il n'y sera rien trouve de ce 
qu'ils pretendent ;" — In short, let the passage be looked at and taken in 
its simple meaning, and there will be nothing found in it of what they 
pretend. 


CHAP. V. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 245 

and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth 
upon the throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever," 
(Rev. v. 13.) This I readily admit; but what kinds of crea- 
tures do they suppose are here enumerated ? It is absolutely 
certain, that both irrational and inanimate creatures are com- 
prehended. All, then, which is affirmed is, that every part 
of the universe, from the highest pinnacle of heaven to the 
very centre of the earth, each in its own way proclaims the 
glory of the Creator. 

To the passage which they produce from the history of the 
Maccabees, (I Maccab. xii. 43,) I will not deign to reply, lest 
I should seem to include that work among the canonical books. 
But Augustine1 holds it to be canonical. First, with what 
degree of confidence ? " The Jews," says he, " do not hold 
the book of the Maccabees as they do the Law, the Prophets, 
and the Psalms, to which the Lord bears testimony as to his 
own witnesses, saying, Ought not all things which are written 
in the Law, and the Psalms, and the Prophets, concerning 
me be fulfilled ? (Luke xxiv. 44.) But it has been received 
by the Church not uselessly, if it be read or heard with sober- 
ness." Jerome, however, unhesitatingly affirms, that it is of 
no authority in establishing doctrine ; and from the ancient 
little book, De Exposif.ione Symboli, which bears the name of 
Cyprian, it is plain that it was in no estimation in the ancient 
Church. And why do I here contend in vain ? As if the 
author himself did not sufficiently show what degree of defer- 
ence is to be paid him, when in the end he asks pardon for 
any thing less properly expressed, (2 Maccab. xv. 38.) He 
who confesses that his writings stand in need of pardon, cer- 
tainly proclaims that they are not oracles of the Holy Spirit. 
We may add, that the piety of Judas is commended for no 
other reason than for having a firm hope of the final resurrec- 
tion, in sending his oblation for the dead to Jerusalem. For 
the writer of the history does not represent what he did as fur- 
nishing the price of redemption, but merely that they might be 
partakers of eternal life, with the other saints who had fallen 
for their country and religion. The act, indeed, was not free 

1 See August, contra Secundum Gaudentii Epistolam, cap. 23. 


216 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

from superstition and misguided zeal ; but it is mere fatuity 
to extend the legal sacrifice to us, seeing we are assured that 
the sacrifices then in use ceased on the advent of Christ. 

9. But, it seems, they find in Paul an invincible support, 
which cannot be so easily overthrown. His words are, " Now 
if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious 
stones, wood, hay, stubble ; every man's work shall be made 
manifest : for the day shall declare it, because it shall be 
revealed by fire ; and the fire shall try every man's work of 
what sort it is. If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall 
suffer loss : but he himself shall be saved ; yet so as by fire," 
(1 Cor. iii. 12-15.) What fire (they ask) can that be but 
the fire of purgatory, by which the defilements of sin are 
wiped away, in order that Ave may enter pure into the kingdom 
of God ? But most of the Fathers1 give it a different mean- 
ing, viz., the tribulation or cross by which the Lord tries his 
people, that they may not rest satisfied with the defilements 
of the flesh. This is much more probable than the fiction of 
a purgatory. I do not, however, agree with them, for I think 
I see a much surer and clearer meaning to the passage. But, 
before I produce it, I wish they would answer me, whether 
they think the Apostle and all the saints have to pass through 
this purgatorial fire ? I am aware they will say, no ; for it 
Avere too absurd to hold that purification is required by those 
Avhose superfluous merits they dream of as applicable to all 
the members of the Church. But this the Apostle affirms ; 
for he says, not that the works of certain persons, but the 
Avorks of all will be tried.2 And this is not my argument, 
but that of Augustine, who thus impugns that inter- 
pretation.3 And (Avhat makes the thing more absurd) he 
says, not that they will pass through fire for certain Avorks, 
but that even if they should have edified the Church with the 
greatest fidelity, they will receive their reward after their 


1 Chrysostom, Augustine, and others ; see August. Enchirid. ad Laurent, 
cap. 68. 

* The French adds, " auquel nombre universel sont enclos les Apostres ; " 
— in which universal number the Apostles are included. 

3 French, " Pexposition (pie font aujourdhui nos adversaires ; " — the 
exposition which our opponents give in the present day. 


CHAP. V. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 247 

works shall have been tried by fire. First, we see that the 
Apostle used a metaphor when he gave the names of wood, 
hay, and stubble, to doctrines of man's device. The ground 
of the metaphor is obvious, viz., that as wood when it is put 
into the fire is consumed and destroyed, so neither will those 
doctrines be able to endure when they come to be tried. 
Moreover, every one sees that the trial is made by the Spirit 
of God. Therefore, in following out the thread of the 
metaphor, and adapting its parts properly to each other, he 
gave the name of fire to the examination of the Holy Spirit. 
For, just as silver and gold, the nearer they are brought to 
the fire, give stronger proof of their genuineness and purity, 
so the Lord's truth, the more thoroughly it is submitted to 
spiritual examination, has its authority the better confirmed. 
As hay, wood, and stubble, when the fire is applied to them, 
are suddenly consumed, so the inventions of man, not founded 
on the word of God, cannot stand the trial of the Holy Spirit, 
but forthwith give way and perish. In fine, if spurious 
doctrines are compared to wood, hay, and stubble, because, 
like wood, hay, and stubble, they are burned by fire and 
fitted for destruction, though the actual destruction is only 
completed by the Spirit of the Lord, it follows that the Spirit 
is that fire by which they will be proved. This proof Paul 
calls the day of the Lord; using a term common in Scripture. 
For the day of the Lord is said to take place whenever he in 
some way manifests his presence to men, his face being 
specially said to shine when his truth is manifested. It has 
now been proved, that Paul has no idea of any other fire 
than the trial of the Holy Spirit. But how are those who 
surfer the loss of their works saved by fire ? This it will not 
be difficult to understand, if Ave consider of what kind of 
persons he speaks. For he designates them builders of the 
Church, who, retaining the proper foundation, build different 
materials upon it ; that is, who, not abandoning the principal 
and necessary articles of faith, err in minor and less perilous 
matters, mingling their own fictions with the word of God. 
Such, I say, must suffer the loss of their work by the 
destruction of their fictions. They themselves, however, are 
saved, yet so as by fire ; that is, not that their ignorance and 


24:8 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

delusions are approved by the Lord, but they are purified 
from them by the grace and power of the Holy Spirit. All 
those, accordingly, who have tainted the golden purity of the 
divine word with the pollution of purgatory, must necessarily 
suifer the loss of their work. 

10. But the observance of it in the Church is of the highest 
antiquity. This objection is disposed of by Paul, when, 
including even his own age in the sentence, he declares, that 
all who in building the Church have laid upon it something 
not conformable to the foundation, must suffer the loss of 
their work. When, therefore, my opponents object, that it 
has been the practice for thirteen hundred years to offer 
prayers for the dead, I, in return, ask them, by what word 
of God, by what revelation, by what example it was done ? 
For here not only are passages of Scripture wanting, but in 
the examples of all the saints of whom we read, nothing of 
the kind is seen. We have numerous, and sometimes long 
narratives, of their mourning and sepulchral rites, but not 
one word is said of prayers.1 But the more important the 
matter was, the more they ought to have dwelt upon it. 
Even those who in ancient times offered prayers for the dead, 
saw that they were not supported by the command of God 
and legitimate example. Why then did they presume to do 
it ? I hold that herein they suffered the common lot of man, 
and therefore maintain, that what they did is not to be 
imitated. Believers ought not to engage in any work without 
a firm conviction of its propriety, as Paul enjoins, (Horn. xiv. 
23 ;) and this conviction is expressly requisite in prayer. It 
is to be presumed, however, that they were influenced by 
some reason ; they sought a solace for their sorrow, and it 
seemed cruel not to give some attestation of their love to the 
dead, when in the presence of God. All know by experience 
how natural it is for the human mind thus to feel. 

Received custom too was a kind of torch, by which the 

1 French, " L'Escriture raconte souventesfbis et bien an loDg, comment 
les fideles ont pleure la mort de leurs parens, et comment Us les ont 
ensevelis ; mais qu'ils ayent prie pour eux, il n'en est nouvelles ; " — Scrip- 
ture relates oftentimes and at great length, how the faithful lamented the 
death of their relations, and how they buried them ; but that they prayed 
for them is never hinted at. 


CHAP. V. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 249 

minds of many were inflamed. We know that among all the 
Gentiles, and in all ages, certain rites were paid to the dead, 
and that every year lustrations were performed for their 
manes. Although Satan deluded foolish mortals by these 
impostures, yet the means of deceiving were borrowed from 
a sound principle, viz., that death is not destruction, but a 
passage from this life to another. And there can be no 
doubt that superstition itself always left the Gentiles with- 
out excuse before the judgment-seat of God, because they 
neglected to prepare for that future life which they professed 
to believe. Thus, that Christians might not seem worse than 
heathens, they felt ashamed of paying no office to the dead, 
as if they had been utterly annihilated. Hence their ill- 
advised assiduity ; because they thought they would expose 
themselves to great disgrace, if they were slow in providing 
funeral feasts and oblations. What was thus introduced by 
perverse rivalship, ever and anon received new additions, 
until the highest holiness of the Papacy consisted in giving 
assistance to the suffering dead. But far better and more 
solid comfort is furnished by Scripture when it declares, 
" Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord ;" and adds the 
reason, "for they rest from their labours," (Rev. xiv. 13.) 
We ought not to indulge our love so far as to set up a per- 
verse mode of prayer in the Church. Surely every person 
possessed of the least prudence easily perceives, that whatever 
we meet with on this subject in ancient writers, was in 
deference to public custom and the ignorance of the vulgar. 
I admit they were themselves also carried away into error, 
the usual effect of rash credulity being to destroy the judg- 
ment. Meanwhile the passages themselves show, that when 
they recommended prayer for the dead it was with hesitation. 
Augustine relates in his Confessions, that his mother, Monica, 
earnestly entreated to be remembered when the solemn rites 
at the altar were performed ; doubtless an old woman's wish, 
which her son did not bring to the test of Scripture, but 
from natural affection wished others to approve. His book, 
De Cur a pro Mortuis Agenda, On showing Care for the Dead, 
is so full of doubt, that its coldness may well extinguish the 
heat of a foolish zeal. Should any one, in pretending to be a 


250 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

patron of the dead, deal merely In probabilities, the only effect 
will be to make those indifferent who were formerly solicitous.1 
The only support of this dogma is, that as a custom of 
praying for the dead prevailed, the duty ought not to be 
despised. But granting that ancient ecclesiastical writers 
deemed it a pious thing to assist the dead, the rule which can 
never deceive is always to be observed, viz., that we must 
not introduce anything of our own into our prayers, but must 
keep all our wishes in subordination to the word of God, 
because it belongs to Him to prescribe what he wishes us to 
ask. Now, since the whole Law and Gospel do not contain 
one syllable which countenances the right of praying for the 
dead, it is a profanation of prayer to go one step farther than 
God enjoins. But, lest our opponents boast of sharing their 
error with the ancient Church, I say, that there is a wide 
difference between the two. The latter made a commemora- 
tion of the dead, that they might not seem to have cast off all 
concern for them ; but they, at the same time, acknowledged 
that they were doubtful as to their state ; assuredly they made 
no such assertion concerning purgatory as implied that they 
did not hold it to be uncertain. The former insist, that their 
dream of purgatory shall be received without question as an 
article of faith. The latter sparingly and in a perfunctory 
manner only commended their dead to the Lord, in the 
communion of the holy supper. The former are constantly 
urging the care of the dead, and by their importunate 
preaching of it, make out that it is to be preferred to all the 
offices of charity. But it would not be difficult for us to 
produce some passages from ancient writers,2 which clearly 

1 French, " Le liure qu'il a compose tout expres de cest argument, et 
qu'il a intitule, Du soin pour les morts, est envellopee en tant de doutes, 
qu'il doit suffire pour refroidir ceux qui y auroyent devotion ; pour le 
moins en voyant qu'il ne s'aide que de conjectures bien legeres et foibles, 
on verra qu'on ne se doit point fort empescher d'une chose oil il n'y a nulle 
importance ;" — The book which he has composed expressly on this subject, 
and which he has entitled, Of Care for the Dead, is enveloped in so many 
doubts, that it should be sufficient to cool those who are devoted to it ; 
at least, as he supports his view only by very slight and feeble conjectures, 
it will be seen, that we ought not to trouble ourselves much with a matter 
in which there is no importance. 

2 See August. Homil. in Joann. 49. De Civitate Dei, Lib. xxi. cap. 
xiii. — xxiv. 


CHAP. V. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 251 

overturn all those prayers for the dead which were then in 
use. Such is the passage of Augustine, in which he shows 
that the resurrection of the flesh and eternal glory is expected 
by all, but that rest which follows death is received by every 
one who is Avorthy of it when he dies. Accordingly, he 
declares that all the righteous, not less than the Apostles, 
Prophets, and Martyrs, immediately after death enjoy blessed 
rest. If such is their condition, what, I ask, will our prayers 
contribute to them P1 I say nothing of those grosser super- 
stitions by which they have fascinated the minds of the simple ; 
and yet they are innumerable, and most of them so monstrous, 
that they cannot cover them with any cloak of decency. I 
say nothing, moreover, of those most shameful traffickings, 
which they plied as they listed while the world was stupified. 
For I would never come to an end ; and, without enume- 
rating them, the pious reader will here find enough to estab- 
lish his conscience. 


1 The French of the latter clause of this sentence is, " et toutesfois il y 
aura matiere assez ample tie les pounnener en cette campagne, veu qu'ils 
n'ont nulle couleur pour s'excuser, qu'ils ne soyent conveincus d'etre les 
plus vilains trompeurs qui furent jamais ; " — and yet there is ample space 
to travel them over this field, seeing they have no colour of excuse, but 
must be convicted of being the most villanous deceivers that ever were. 


252 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 


CHAPTER VI. 

THE LIFE OF A CHRISTIAN MAN. SCRIPTURAL ARGUMENTS 
EXHORTING TO IT. 

This and the four following chapters treat of the Life of the Christian, 
and are so arranged as to admit of being classed under two principal 
heads. 

First, it must be held to be an universally acknowledged point, that no 
man is a Christian who does not feel some special love for righteousness, 
chap. vi. Secondly, in regard to the standai'd by which every man ought 
to regulate his life, although it seems to be considered in chap. vii. only, 
yet the three following chapters also refer to it. For it shows that the 
Christian has two duties to perform. First, the observance being so 
arduous, he needs the greatest patience. Hence chap. viii. treats profess- 
edly of the utility of the cross, and chap. ix. invites to meditation on the 
future life. Lastly, chap. x. clearly shows, as in no small degree conducive 
to this end, how we are to use this life and its comforts without abusing 
them. 

This sixth chapter consists of two parts, — I. Connection between this 
treatise on the Christian Life and the doctrine of Regeneration and Re- 
pentance. Arrangement of the treatise, sec. 1-3. II. Extremes to be 
avoided; 1. False Christians denying Christ, by their works condemned, 
sec. 4. 2. Christians should not despair, though they have not attained 
perfection, provided they make daily progress in piety and righteousness. 

Sections. 

1. Connection between this chapter and the doctrine of Regeneration. 

Necessity of the doctrine concerning the Christian Life. The 
brevity of this treatise. The method of it. Plainness and un- 
adorned simplicity of the Scripture system of morals. 

2. Two divisions. First, Personal holiness. 1. Because God is holy. 

2. Because of our communion with his saints. 

3. Second division, relating to our Redemption. Admirable moral system 

of Scripture. Five special inducements or exhortations to a Chris- 
tian Life. 

4. False Christians who are opposed to this life censured. 1. They have 

not truly learned Christ. 2. The Gospel not the guide of their 
words or actions. 3. They do not imitate Christ the Master. 
4. They would separate the Spirit from his word. 


CHAP. VI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION.. 253 

5. Christians ought not to despond : Provided, 1. They take the word 
of God for their guide. 2. Sincerely cultivate righteousness. 

3. Walk, according to their capacity, in the ways of the Lord. 

4. Make some progress. 5. Persevere. 

1. We have said that the object of regeneration is to bring 
the life of believers into concord and larmony with the right- 
eousness of God, and so confirm th adoption by which they 
have been received as sons. But although the law compre- 
hends within it that new life by which the image of God is 
restored in us, yet, as our sluggishness stands greatly in need 
both of helps and incentives, it will be useful to collect out 
of Scripture a true account of this reformation, lest any who 
have a heartfelt desire of repentance should in their zeal go 
astray. Moreover, I am not unaware that, in undertaking to 
describe the life of the Christian, I am entering on a large and 
extensive subject, one which, when fully considered in all its 
parts, is sufficient to fill a large volume. We see the length 
to which the Fathers, in treating of individual virtues, extend 
their exhortations. This they do, not from mere loquacious- 
ness ; for whatever be the virtue which you undertake to 
recommend, your pen is spontaneously led by the copiousness 
of the matter so to amplify, that you seem not to have dis- 
cussed it properly if you have not done it at length. My in- 
tention, however, in the plan of life which I now propose to give, 
is not to extend it so far as to treat of each virtue specially, 
and expatiate in exhortation. This must be sought in the 
writings of others, and particularly in the Homilies of the 
Fathers.1 For me it will be sufficient to point out the method 
by which a pious man may be taught how to frame his life 
aright, and briefly lay down some universal rule by which he 
may not improperly regulate his conduct. I shall one day 
possibly find time for more ample discourse, [or leave others to 
perform an office for which I am not so fit. I have a natural 
love of brevity, and, perhaps, any attempt of mine at copious- 
ness would not succeed. Even if I could gain the highest 
applause by being more prolix, I would scarcely be disposed 

1 The French adds, " C'est a dire, sermons populaires ;" — that is to say, 
popular sermons. 


25 i Institutes of the book in. 

i 

to attempt it,1] while the nature of my present work requires 
me to glance at simple doctrine with as much brevity as pos- 
sible. As philosophers have certain definitions of rectitude and 
honesty, from which they derive particular duties and the 
whole train of virtues ; ;o in this respect Scripture is not with- 
out order, but presents i most beautiful arrangement, one too 
which is every way mucL more certain than that of philoso- 
phers. The only difference is, that they, under the influence 
of ambition, constantly affect an exquisite perspicuity of 
arrangement, which may serve to display their genius, where- 
as the Spirit of God, teaching without affectation, is not so 
perpetually observant of exact method, and yet by observing 
it at times sufficiently intimates that it is not to be neglected. 
2. The Scripture system of which we speak aims chiefly 
at two objects. The former is, that the love of righteous- 
ness, to which we are by no means naturally inclined, may 
be instilled and implanted into our minds. The latter is, 
(see chap, vii.,) to prescribe a rule which will prevent us while 
in the pursuit of righteousness from going astray. It has 
numerous admirable methods of recommending righteous- 
ness.2 Many have been already pointed out in different 
parts of this work ; but we shall here also briefly advert 
to some of them. With what better foundation can it begin 
than by reminding us that we must be holy, because " God 
is holy?" (Lev. xix. 1; 1 Pet. i. 16.) For when we were 
scattered abroad like lost sheep, wandering through the laby- 
rinth of this world, he brought us back again to his own fold. 
When mention is made of our union with God, let us remem- 
ber that holiness must be the bond ; not that by the merit 
of holiness we come into communion with him, (we ought 
rather first to cleave to him, in order that, pervaded with his 
holiness, we may follow whither he calls,) but because it 
greatly concerns his glory not to have any fellowship with 
wickedness and impurity. Wherefore he tells us that this is 
the end of our calling, the end to which we ought ever to 
have respect, if we would answer the call of God. For to 

1 The passage in brackets is omitted in the French. 

2 The French begins the sentence thus, " Quant est du premier poiuct ;" 
— As to the former point. 


CHAP. VI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 255 

what end were we rescued from the iniquity and pollution of 
the world into which we were plunged, if we allow ourselves, 
during our whole lives, to wallow in them ? Besides, we are 
at the same time admonished, that if we would be regarded 
as the Lord's people, we must inhabit the holy city Jerusa- 
lem, (Isaiah xxxv. 8, et alibi,) which, as he hath consecrated 
it to himself, it were impious for its inhabitants to profane by 
impui'ity. Hence the expressions, " Who shall abide in thy 
tabernacle ? who shall dwell in thy holy hill ? He that walk- 
eth uprightly, and worketh righteousness," (Ps. xv. 1, 2 ; xxiv. 
3, 4 ;) for the sanctuary in which he dwells certainly ought 
not to be like an unclean stall. 

3. The better to arouse us, it exhibits God the Father, 
who, as he hath reconciled us to himself in his Anointed, has 
impressed his image upon us, to which he would have us to 
be conformed, (Rom. v. 4.) Come, then, and let them show 
me a more excellent system among philosophers, who think 
that they only have a moral philosophy duly and orderly 
arranged. They, when they would give excellent exhorta- 
tions to virtue, can only tell us to live agreeably to nature. 
Scripture derives its exhortations from the true source,1 when 
it not only enjoins us to regulate our lives with a view to 
God its author to whom it belongs ; but after showing us that 
we have degenerated from our true origin, viz., the law of our 
Creator, adds, that Christ, through whom we have returned 
to favour with God, is set before us as a model, the image of 
which our lives should express. What do you require more 
effectual than this ? Nay, what do you require beyond this ? 
If the Lord adopts us for his sons on the condition that our 
life be a representation of Christ, the bond of our adoption, — 
then, unless we dedicate and devote ourselves to righteous- 
ness, we not only, with the utmost perfidy, revolt from our 
Creator, but also abjure the Saviour himself. Then, from an 
enumeration of all the blessings of God, and each part of our 
salvation, it finds materials for exhortation. Ever since God 
exhibited himself to us as a Father, we must be convicted of 

1 Mai. i. 6 ; Eph. v. 1 ; 1 John iii. 1, 3 ; Eph. v. 26 ; Rom. vi. 1-4 ; 
1 Cor. vi. 11 ; 1 Pet. i. 15, 19 ; 1 Cor. vi. 15 ; John xv. 3 ; Eph. v. 2, 3; 
Col. iii. 1, 2 ; 1 Cor. iii. 16 ; vi. 17 ; 2 Cor. vi. 16; 1 Thess. v. 23. 


256 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

extreme ingratitude if we do not in turn exhibit ourselves as 
his sons. Ever since Christ purified us by the laver of his 
blood, and communicated this purification by baptism, it 
would ill become us to be defiled with new pollution. Ever 
since he ingrafted us into his body, we, who are his members, 
should anxiously beware of contracting any stain or taint. 
Ever since he who is our head ascended to heaven, it is be- 
fitting in us to withdraw our affections from the earth, and 
with our whole soul aspire to heaven. Ever since the Holy 
Spirit dedicated us as temples to the Lord, we should make 
it our endeavour to show forth the glory of God, and guard 
against being profaned by the defilement of sin. Ever since 
our soul and body were destined to heavenly incorruptibility 
and an unfading crown, we should earnestly strive to keep 
them pure and uncorrupted against the day of the Lord. 
These, I say, are the surest foundations of a well-regulated 
life, and you will search in vain for any thing resembling 
them among philosophers, who, in their commendation of vir- 
tue, never rise higher than the natural dignity of man. 

4. This is the place to address those who, having nothing 
of Christ but the name and sign, would yet be called Christ- 
ians. How dare they boast of this sacred name ? None have 
intercourse with Christ but those who have acquired the 
true knowledge of him from the Gospel. The Apostle denies 
that any man truly has learned Christ who has not learned 
to put off " the old man, which is corrupt according to the 
deceitful lusts, and put on Christ," (Eph. iv. 22.) They are 
convicted, therefore, of falsely and unjustly pretending a 
knowledge of Christ, whatever be the volubility and elo- 
quence with which they can talk of the Gospel. Doctrine is 
not an affair of the tongue, but of the life ; is not apprehend- 
ed by the intellect and memory merely, like other branches 
of learning ; but is received only when it possesses the whole 
soul, and finds its seat and habitation in the inmost recesses 
of the heart. Let them, therefore, either cease to insult 
God, by boasting that they are what they are not, or let 
them show themselves not unworthy disciples of their divine 
Master. To doctrine in which our religion is contained we 
have given the first place, since by it our salvation commences ; 


CHAP. VI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 257 

but it must be transfused into the breast, and pass into the 
conduct, and so transform us into itself, as not to prove 
unfruitful. If philosophers are justly offended, and banish from 
their company with disgrace those who, while professing an 
art which ought to be the mistress of their conduct, convert 
it into mere loquacious sophistry, with how much better 
reason shall we detest those flimsy sophists who are con- 
tented to let the Gospel play upon their lips, when, from 
its efficacy, it ought to penetrate the inmost affections of the 
heart, fix its seat in the soul, and pervade the whole man 
a hundred times more than the frigid discourses of philoso- 
phers ? 

5. I insist not that the life of the Christian shall breathe 
nothing but the perfect Gospel, though this is to be desired, 
and ought to be attempted. I insist not so strictly on evan- 
gelical perfection, as to refuse to acknowledge as a Christian 
any man who has not attained it. In this way all Avould 
be excluded from the Church, since there is no man who is 
not far removed from this perfection, while many, who have 
made but little progress, would be undeservedly rejected. 
What then ? Let us set this before our eye as the end at 
which we ought constantly to aim. Let it be regarded as 
the goal towards which we are to run. For you cannot 
divide the matter with God, undertaking part of what his 
word enjoins, and omitting part at pleasure. For, in the 
first place, God uniformly recommends integrity as the prin- 
cipal part of his worship, meaning by integrity real single- 
ness of mind, devoid of gloss and fiction, and to this is op- 
posed a double mind ; as if it had been said, that the spiritual 
commencement of a good life is when the internal affections 
are sincerely devoted to God, in the cultivation of holiness 
and justice. But seeing that, in this earthly prison of the 
body, no man is supplied with strength sufficient to hasten 
in his course with due alacrity, while the greater number are 
so oppressed with weakness, that hesitating, and halting, and 
even crawling on the ground, they make little progress, let 
every one of us go as far as his humble ability enables him, 
and prosecute the journey once begun. No one will travel 
so badly as not daily to make some degree of progress. This, 

VOL. II. R 


258 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

therefore, let us never cease to do, that we may daily advance 
in the way of the Lord ; and let us not despair because of 
the slender measure of success. How little soever the suc- 
cess may correspond with our wish, our labour is not lost 
when to-day is better than yesterday, provided with true 
singleness of mind we keep our aim, and aspire to the goal, 
not speaking flattering things to ourselves, nor indulging our 
vices, but making it our constant endeavour to become bet- 
ter, until we attain to goodness itself. If during the whole 
course of our life we seek and follow, we shall at length 
attain it, when relieved from the infirmity of flesh we are 
admitted to full fellowship with God, 


CUAP. VII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 259 


CHAPTER VII. 

A SUMMARY OF THE CHRISTIAN LIFE. OF SELF-DENIAL.1 

The divisions of the chapter are, — I. The rule which permits lis not to 
go astray in the study of righteousness, requires two things, viz., that 
man, abandoning his own will, devote himself entirely to the service of 
God ; whence it follows, that we must seek not our own things, but the 
things of God, sec. 1, 2. II. A description of this renovation or Chris- 
tian life taken from the Epistle to Titus, and accurately explained under 
certain special heads, sec. 3 to end. 

Sections. 

1. Consideration of the second general division in regard to the Chris- 

tian life. Its beginning and sum. A twofold respect. 1. We 
are not our own. Kespect to both the fruit and the use. Un- 
known to philosophers, who have placed reason on the throne of 
the Holy Spirit. 

2. Since we are not our own, we must seek the glory of God, and obey 

his will. Self-denial recommended to the disciples of Christ. He 
who neglects it, deceived either by pride or hypocrisy, rushes on 
destruction. 
S/ 3. Three things to be followed, and two to be shunned in life. Impiety 
and worldly lusts to be shunned. Sobriety, justice, and piety, to 
be followed. An inducement to right conduct. 
4. Self-denial the sum of Paul's doctrine. Its difficulty. Qualities in 
us which make it difficult. Cures for these qualities. 1. Ambition 
to be suppressed. 2. Humility to be embraced. 3. Candour to 
be esteemed. 4. Mutual charity to be preserved. 5. Modesty to 
be sincerely cultivated. 
/ 5. The advantage of our neighbour to be promoted. Here self-denial 
most necessary, and yet most difficult. Here a double remedy. 
f 1. The benefits bestowed upon us are for the common benefit of the 
Church. 2. We ought to do all we can for our neighbour. This 
illustrated by analogy from the members of the human body. 
This duty of charity founded on the divine command. 


1 On this and the three following chapters, which contain the second 
part of the Treatise on the Christian Life, see Augustin. De Moribus 
Ecclesiae Catholicae, and Calvin de Scandalis. 


260 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

6. Charity ought to have for its attendants patience and kindness. 

We should consider the image of God in our neighbours, and 
especially in those who are of the household of faith. Hence a 
fourfold consideration which refutes all objections. A common 
objection refuted. 

7. Christian life cannot exist without charity. Remedies for the vices 

opposed to charity. 1. Mercy. 2. Humility. 3. Modesty. 
4. Diligence. 5. Perseverance. 

8. Self-denial, in respect of God, should lead to ecpianimity and toler- 

ance. 1. We are always subject to God. 2. We should shun 
avarice and ambition. 3. We should expect all prosperity from 
the blessing of God, and entirely depend on him. 

9. We ought not to desire wealth or honours without the divine bless- 
1/ ing, nor follow the arts of the wicked. We ought to cast all our 

care upon God, and never envy the prosperity of others. 
10. We ought to commit ourselves entirely to God. The necessity of 
this doctrine. Various uses of affliction. Heathen abuse and 
corruption. 

1. Although the Law of God contains a perfect rule of 
conduct admirably arranged, it has seemed proper to our 
divine Master to train his people by a more accurate method, 
to the rule which is enjoined in the Law ; and the leading 
principle in the method is, that it is the duty of believers 
to present their " bodies a living sacrifice, holy and accept- 
able unto God, which is their reasonable service," (Rom. xii. 
1 .) Hence he draws the exhortation : " Be not conformed to 
this world : but be ye transformed by the renewing of your 
mind, that ye may prove yjtjat is that good, and acceptable, 
and perfect will of God/\|rrhe great point, then, is, that we 
are consecrated and dedicated to God, and, therefore, should 
not henceforth think, speak, design, or act, without a view to 
his glory. What he hath made sacred cannot, without signal 
insult to him, be applied to profane use. But if we are not our 
own, but the Lord's, it is plain both what error is to be shunned, 
and to what end the actions of our lives ought to be directed. 
We are not our own ; therefore, neither is our own reason 
or will to rule our acts and counsels. (We are not our own ; 
therefore, let us not make it our end to seek what may be 
agreeable to our carnal nature. We are not our own ; there- 
fore, as far as possible, let us forget ourselves and the things 
that are ours. On the other hand, we are God's; let us, 


CHAP. VII. CHRISTEN RELIGION. 26 L 

therefore, live and die to him, (Rom. xiv. 8.) We are God's ; 
therefore, let his wisdom and will preside over all our actions. 
We are God's ; to him, then, as the only legitimate end, let 
every part of our life be directed. O how great the pro- 
ficiency of him who, taught that he is not his own, has with- 
drawn the dominion and government of himself from his 
own reason that he may give them to GocTjj For as the 
surest source of destruction to men is to obey themselves, so 
the only haven of safety is to have no other will, no other 
wisdom, than to follow the Lord wherever he leads. Let 
this, then, be the first step, to abandon ourselves, and devote 
the whole energy of our minds to the service of God. By 
service, I mean not only that which consists in verbal obe- 
dience, but that by which the mind, divested of its own 
carnal feelings, implicitly obeys the call of the Spirit of God. 
This transformation, (which Paul calls the renewing of the 
mind, Rom. xii. 2 ; Eph. iv. 23,) though it is the first entrance 
to life, was unknown to all the philosophers. They give the 
government of man to reason alone, thinking that she alone is 
to be listened to ; in short, they assign to her the sole direction 
of the conduct. But Christian philosophy bids her give place, 
and yield complete submission to the Holy Spirit, so that 
the man himself no longer lives, but Christ lives and reigns 
in him, (Gal. ii. 20.) 

2. Hence follows the other principle, that we are not to 
seek our own, but the Lord's will, and act with a view to 
promote his glory. Great is our proficiency, when, almost 
forgetting ourselves, certainly postponing our own reason, 
we faithfully make it our study to obey God and his com- 
mandments. For when Scripture enjoins us to lay aside 
private regard to ourselves, it not only divests our minds of 
an excessive longing for wTealth, or power, or human favour, 
but eradicates all ambition and thirst for worldly glory, and 
other more secret pests. The Christian ought, indeed, to be 
so trained and disposed as to consider, that during his Avhole 
life he has to do with God. For this reason, as he will 
bring all things to the disposal and estimate of God, so he 
will religiously direct his whole mind to him. For he who 
has learned to look to God in everything he does, is at the 


262 INSTITUTES Or THE BOOK III. 

same time diverted from all vain thoughts. This is that 
self-denial which Christ so strongly enforces on his disciples 
from the very outset, (Matth. xvi. 24,) which, as soon as it 
takes hold of the mind, leaves no place either, first, for pride, 
show, and ostentation ; or, secondly, for avarice, lust, luxury, 
effeminacy, or other vices which are engendered by self- 
love. On the contrary, wherever it reigns not, the foulest 
vices are indulged in without shame ; or, if there is some 
appearance of virtue, it is vitiated by a depraved longing for 
applause. Show me, if you can, an individual who, unless 
he has renounced himself in obedience to the Lord's com- 
mand, is disposed to do good for its own sake. Those 
who have not so renounced themselves have followed virtue 
at least for the sake of praise. The philosophers who 
have contended most strongly that virtue is to be desired on 
her own account, were so inflated with arrogance as to make 
it apparent that they sought virtue for no other reason than 
as a ground for indulging in pride. So far, therefore, is God 
from being delighted with these hunters after popular ap- 
plause with their swollen breasts, that he declares they have 
received their reward in this world, (Matth. vi. 2,) and that 
harlots and publicans are nearer the kingdom of heaven than 
they, (Matth. xxi. 31.) We have not yet sufficiently 
explained how great and numerous are the obstacles by 
Avhich a man is impeded in the pursuit of rectitude, so long 
as he has not renounced himself. The old saying is true, 
There is a world of iniquity treasured up in the human soul. 
Nor can you find any other remedy for this than to deny 
yourself, renounce your own reason, and direct your whole 
mind to the pursuit of those things which the Lord requires 
of you, and which you are to seek only because they are 
pleasing to HirmJ 

3. In another passage, Paul gives a brief, indeed, but 
more distinct account of each of the parts of a well- 
ordered life : " The grace of God that bringeth salvation 
hath appeared to all men, teaching us that, denying ungod- 
liness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, 
and godly, in this present world ; looking for that blessed 
hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God and our 


CHAP. VII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 263 

Saviour Jesus Christ; who gave himself for us, that he 
might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a 
peculiar people, zealous of good works," (Tit. ii. 11-14.) 
After holding forth the grace of God to animate us, and 
pave the way for His true worship, he removes the two 
greatest obstacles which stand in the way, viz., ungodliness, 
to which we are by nature too prone, and worldly lusts, 
which are of still greater extent. Under ungodliness, he 
includes not merely superstition, but everything at variance 
with the true fear of God. Worldly lusts are equivalent to 
the lusts of the flesh. Thus he enjoins us, in regard to both 
tables of the Law, to lay aside our own mind, and renounce 
whatever our own reason and will dictate. Then he reduces 
all the actions of our lives to three branches, sobriety, right- 
eousness, and godliness. Sobriety undoubtedly denotes as 
well chastity and temperance as the pure and frugal use of 
temporal goods, and patient endurance of want. (Righteous- 
ness comprehends all the duties of equity, in rendering to 
every one his due J Next follows godliness, which separates us 
from the pollutions of the world, and connects us with God 
in true holiness. These, when connected together by an 
indissoluble chain, constitute complete perfection. But as 
nothing is more difficult than to bid adieu to the will of the 
flesh, subdue, nay, abjure our lusts, devote ourselves to God 
and our brethren, and lead an angelic life amid the pollutions 
of the world, Paul, to set our minds free from all entangle- 
ments, recalls us to the hope of a blessed immortality, justly 
urging us to contend, because as Christ has once appeared 
as our Redeemer, so on his final advent he will give full 
effect to the salvation obtained by him. And in this way 
he dispels all the allurements which becloud our path, and 
prevent us from aspiring as we ought to heavenly glory; 
nay, he tells us that we must be pilgrims in the world, that 
we may not fail of obtaining the heavenly inheritance. 

4. Moreover, we see by these words that self-denial has 
respect partly to men and partly (more especially) to God, 
(sec. 8-10.) \£or when Scripture enjoins us, in regard to 
our fellow-men, to prefer them in honour to ourselves, and 
sincerely labour to promote their advantage, (Rom. xii. 10 ; 


264 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK 1IT. 

Phil. ii. 3,) he gives us commands which our mind is utterly 
incapable of obeying until its natural feelings are suppressed. 
For so blindly do we all rush in the direction of self-love, 
that every one thinks he has a good reason for. exalting him- 
self and despising all others in comparison.) If God has 
bestowed on us something not to be repented of, trusting to 
it, we immediately become elated, and not only swell, but 
almost burst with pride. The vices with which we abound 
we both carefully conceal from others, and flatteringly repre- 
sent to ourselves as minute and trivial, nay, sometimes hug 
them as virtues. When the same qualities which we admire in 
ourselves are seen in others, even though they should be 
superior, we, in order that we may not be forced to yield to 
them, maliciously lower and carp at them ; in like manner, in 
the case of vices, not contented with severe and keen animad- 
version, we studiously exaggerate them. Hence the inso- 
lence with which each, as if exempted from the common lot, 
seeks to exalt himself above his neighbour, confidently and 
proudly despising others, or at least looking down upon them 
as his inferiors. The poor man yields to the rich, the plebeian 
to the noble, the servant to the master, the unlearned to the 
learned, and yet every one inwardly cherishes some idea of 
his own superiority. Thus each flattering himself, sets up a 
kind of kingdom in his breast ; the arrogant, to satisfy 
themselves, pass censure on the mindb and manners of other 
men, and when contention arises, the full venom is displayed. 
Many bear about with them some measure of mildness so 
long as all things go smoothly and lovingly with them, but 
how few are there who, when stung and irritated, preserve 
the same tenor of moderation ? {For this there is no other 
remedy than to pluck up by the roots those most noxious 
pests, self-love and love of victory, (piXoveixlu %a/ fiXavna.) 
This the doctrine of Scripture does. For it teaches us to 
remember, that the endowments which God has bestowed 
upon us are not our own, but His free gifts, and that those 
who plume themselves upon them betray their ingratitude. 
" Who maketh thee to differ," saith Paul, " and what hast 
thou that thou didst not receive ? now if thou didst receive 
it, why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received it ?" 


CHAP. VII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 2G5 

(1 Cor. iv. 7.) Then by a diligent examination of our faults, 
let us keep ourselves humble. Thus Avhile nothing will 
remain to swell our pride, there will be much to subdue it. 
Again, we are enjoined, whenever we behold the gifts of God 
in others, so to reverence and respect the gifts, as also to 
honour those in whom they reside. God having been pleased 
to bestow honour upon them, it would ill become us to 
deprive them of it. Then we are told to overlook their 
faults, not, indeed, to encourage by flattering them, but not 
because of them to insult those whom we ought to regard 
with honour and good will.1 In this way, with regard to 
all with whom we have intercourse, our behaviour will be 
not only moderate and modest, but courteous and friendly. 
The only way by which you can ever attain to true meek- 
ness, is to have your heart imbued with a humble opinion of 
yourself and respect for others. 

5. [How difficult it is to perform the duty of seeking the 
good of our neighbour ! Unless you leave off all thought of 
yourself, and in a manner cease to be yourself, you will 
never accomplish iO How can you exhibit those works of 
charity which Paul describes unless you renounce yourself, 
and become wholly devoted to others ? " Charity (says he, 
1 Cor. xiii. 4) suffereth long, and is kind ; charity envieth 
not ; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not 
behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily 
provoked," &c. Were it the only thing required of us to 
seek not our own, nature would not have the least power to 
comply : she so inclines us to love ourselves only, that she will 
not easily allow us carelessly to pass by ourselves and our own 
interests that we may watch over the interests of others, nay, 
spontaneously to yield our own right, and resign it to another. 
But Scripture, to conduct us to this, reminds us, that what- 
ever we obtain from the Lord is granted on the condition of 
our employing it for the common good of the Church, and 
that, therefore, the legitimate use of all our gifts is a kind 
and liberal communication of them with others. There can- 
not be a surer rule, nor a stronger exhortation to the observ- 

1 Calvin, de Sacevdotiis Ecclcs. Papal, in fine. 


2G6 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

ance of it, than when we are taught that all the endowments 
which we possess are divine deposits entrusted to us for the 
very purpose of being distributed for the good of our neigh- 
bour. But Scripture proceeds still farther when it likens 
these endowments to the different members of the body, 
(1 Cor. xii. 12.) No member has its function for itself, or 
applies it for its own private use, but transfers it to its 
fellow-members ; nor does it derive any other advantage 
from it than that which it receives in common with the 
whole body. Thus, (whatever the pious man can do, he is 
bound to do for his brethren, not consulting his own interest 
in any other way than by striving earnestly for the common 
edification of the Church. Let this, then, be our method of 
showing good-will and kindness, considering that, in regard 
to everything which God has bestowed upon us, and by 
which Vy'e* Can aid our nejghj->mir, wp n.rp his ste\vnrflsr n.nd 
are Tjounci to^give account of our stewardship : moreover, 
tT-infj4iPjrinly right, modp. nf administration is that which is 
ypmiWprl l^yjnvp^ Jn tin's wqy; wp, shall not only unite the 
study*'l)iT~ourneighbour,s advantage with a regard to our 
ownTTjut make the latter subordinate to the form£gr-[--And 
lest we shoidd have omitted to perceive that this is the law 
for duly administering every gift which wereceive from 
God, htTot olcLappli&d that law to the minutest expressions 
of his own kindness. He commanded the first-fruits to be 
offered to him as an attestation by the people that it was 
impious to reap any advantage from goods not previously 
consecrated to him, (Exod. xxii. 29 ; xxiii. 19.) But if the 
gifts of God are not sanctified to us until we have with our 
own hand dedicated them to the Giver, it must be a gross 
abuse that does not give signs of such dedication. It is in 
vain to contend that you cannot enrich the Lord by your 
offerings. Though, as the Psalmist says, " Thou art my 
Lord : my goodness extendeth not unto thee," yet you can 
extend it " to the saints that are in the earth," (Ps. xvi. 2, 3 ;) 
and therefore a comparison is drawn between sacred oblations 
and alms as now corresponding to the offerings under the 
Law.1 

1 Heb. xiii. 16 ; 2 Cor. ix. 12. 


CHAP. YII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 267 

6. Moreover, that we may not weary in well-doing, (as 
would otherwise forthwith and infallibly be the case,) we must 
add the other quality in the Apostle's enumeration, " Charity 
suffereth long, and is kind, is not easily provoked," (1 Cor. 
xiii. 4.) H^q Lord enjoins us to do good to all without 
exception, though thp. greatpr pnr^ if uiinmlrrt by their own 
merit, are most unworthy of it. I Bj.it Scripture subjoins a 
mostrexcellent reason, when ittefls us that we are not to look 
to what men in themselves deserve, but to attend to the 
image of God, which exists in all, and to which we owe all 
honour and love. But in those who are of the household of 
faith, the same rule is to be more carefully observed, inasmuch 
as that image is renewed and restored in them by the Spirit 
of Christ. Therefore, whoever be the man that is presented 
to you as needing your assistance, you have no ground for 
declining to give it to him. Say he is a stranger. The Lord 
has given him a mark which ought to be familiar to you : 
for which reason he forbids you to despise your own flesh, 
(Gal. vi. 10.) Say he is mean and of no consideration. The 
Lord points him out as one whom he has distinguished by 
the lustre of his own image, (Isaiah lviii. 7.) Say that you 
are bound to him by no ties of duty. The Lord has substi- 
tuted him as it were into his own place, that in him you 
may recognise the many great obligations under which the 
Lord has laid you to himself. Say that he is unworthy of 
your least exertion on his account ; but the image of God, 
by which lie is recommended to you, is worthy of yourself 
and all your exertions. But if he not only merits no good, 
but has provoked you by injury and mischief, still this is no 
good reason why you should not embrace him in love, and 
visit him with offices of love. He has deserved very differ- 
ently from me, you will say. But what has the Lord de- 
served?1 Whatever injury he has done you, when he enjoins 
you to forgive him, he certainly means that it should be 


1 French, " Car si nous disons qu'il n'a merite que mal de nous ; Dieu 
nous pourra demander quel mal il nous a fait, lui dont nous tenons tout 
notre bien ;" — For if we say that he has deserved nothing of us but evil, 
God may ask us what evil he has done us, he of whom we hold our every 
blessing. 


268 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

imputed to himself. In this way only we attain to what is 
not to say difficult, but altogether against nature,1 to love 
those that hate us, render good for evil, and blessing for 
cursing, remembering that we are not to reflect on the wick- 
edness of men, but look to the image of God in them, an 
image which, covering and obliterating their faults, should by 
its beauty and dignity allure us to love and embrace them. 

7. We shall thus succeed in mortifying ourselves if we ful- 
fil all the duTTes of charity. Those du£ie^74TOTvever7~are not 
fulfilled by the mere dischnrgp of tfifvfiT, llimiuli mniHT>e omit- 
ted, unless it is done from a pure feeling of love. For it may 
happen that one" may perform every one ot these offices, in so 
far asHTe"external act is concerned, and be tar from perform- 
ing them aright. For you see some who would be thought 
very -liberal, and yet accompany every thing they give with 
insult, by the haughtiness of their looks, or the violence of 
their words. And to such a calamitous condition have we 
come in this unhappy age, that the greater part of men never 
almost give alms without contumely. Such conduct ought 
not to have been tolerated even among the heathen ; but 
from Christians something more is required than to carry 
cheerfulness in their looks, and give attractiveness to^the 
discharge of their duties by courteous language. First, they 
should put themselves in the place of him whom they see in 
need of their assistance, and pity his misfortune as if they 
felt and bore it, so that a feeling of pity and humanity should 
incline them to assist him just as they would themselves, lie 
who is thus minded will go and give assistance to his brethren, 
and not only not taint his acts with arrogance or upbraiding, 
but will neither look down upon the brother to whom he does 
a kindness, as one who needed his help, or keep him in sub- 
jection as under obligation to him, just as we do not insult a 
diseased member when the rest of the body labours for its 
recovery, nor think it under special obligation to the other 
members, because it has required more exertion than it has 
returned. A communication of offices between members is 
not regarded as at all gratuitous, but rather as the payment 

1 Matth. v. 44 ; vi. 14 ; xviii. 35 ; Luke xvii. 3. 


CHAP. VII. 


CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 


2G9 


of that which being due by the law of nature it were mon- 
strous to deny. For this reason, he who has performed one 
kind of duty will not think himself thereby discharged, as is 
usually the case when a rich man, after contributing some- 
what of his substance, delegates remaining burdens to others 
as if he had nothing to do with them. fEvery one should 
rather consider, that however great he is, ne owes himself to 
his neighbours, and that the only limH tn his henpfippnep is 
the faUure of his means,_ The extent of these should regu- 
late that of his charity! 

8. The principal partof self-denial, that which as we have said 
has reference to God, let us again consider more fully. Many 
things have already been said with regard to it which it were 
superfluous to repeat ; and, therefore, it will be sufficient to 
view it as forming us to equanimity and endurance. (""First, 
then, in seeking the convenience or tranc|iiillity_of th~e~pre^~ 
sent life, Scripture calls us to resign ourselves, and_all we 
have, to the disposal of the Lord, to__giv£.birn np the affec- 
tions ofimTTieaFt, that he may tame and subdue. themr ~yVe 
have a. frenzied-desire, an infinite eagerness, to pnrsne w^altli 
and honour, intrigue for powei^, tigenmnlgfe, ri^es, npfl col- 

leCt all those frivolities whlVh S,ppm nnnrlnm^P fn, l^-mry flnfl 

splendour. — Or. tViP-^tkp*- ha.nt]} Wf> hnve a remarkable dread, 
a remarkable hatred of poverty, mean birth, and a humble 
confflTionTand feel the strongest desir^t^ rnnrd ngninnt them- — " 
Hence, in regard to those who frame their life after their own 
counsel, we see how restless they are in mind, how many 
plan's they try, to what fatigues they submit, in order that 
they may gain what avarice or ambition 


lesires, or, on the 
other hand, escape poverty and meanness. To avoid similar 
entanglements,^the course which Christian men must follow? 
is this : first, they must not long for, or hope for^iirJluxil^ of 

pfJioxLf-eB-'it 
and confidently 


any kind of prosperity apart from the blessin 
they uiiM cast themselves, and there_safeh 
recline. Fur, however mucr^t"^ ^rrval mind miy^frm suffi- 
cient for itself" when in the pursuit, of honour orwenlth; i-t de- 
pends orbits own industry and zeal, or is aidedJlVJthe-iavour of 
mer^ it. is egrtain that all this is nothing, and thaLneither intel- 
lect nor InlwrrjyyiH fopf fri? I^ct^vi^; nv*>*pf-fn~gn far as the 


270 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

Lord prospers hoj-.h. On the contrary, his blessing alone 
makesa way through all obstacles, and brings every thing to 
a joyful and favourable issue. Secondly, though without 
this blessing we may be able to acquire some degree of fame 
and opulence, (as we daily see wicked men loaded with 
honours and riches,) yet since those on whom the curse of 
God lies do not enjoy the least particle of true happiness, 
whatever we obtain without his blessing must turn out ill. 
But surely men ought not to desire what adds to their misery. 
9. Therefore, if we believe that all prosperous and desirable 
success depends entirely on the blessing of God, and that 
when it is wanting all kinds of misery and calamity await us, 
it follows that we should not eagerly contend for riches and 
honours, trusting to our own dexterity and assiduity, or leaning 
on the favour of men, or confiding in any empty imagination 
of fortune ; but should always have respect to the Lord, that 
under his auspices we may be conducted to whatever lot he 
has provided for us. First, the result will be, that instead of 
rushing on regardless of right and wrong, by wiles and wicked 
arts, and with injury to our neighbours, to catch at wealth 
and seize upon honours, we will only follow such fortune as we 
may enjoy with innocence. Who can hope for the aid of the 
divine blessing amid fraud, rapine, and other iniquitous arts ? 
As this blessing attends him only who thinks purely and acts 
uprightly, so it calls off all who long for it from sinister de- 
signs and evil actions. Secondly, a curb will be laid upon 
us, restraining a too eager desire of becoming rich, or an 
ambitious striving after honour. How can any one have the 
effrontery to expect that God will aid him in accomplishing 
desires at variance with his word ? What God with his own 
lips pronounces cursed, never can be prosecuted with his 
blessing. Lastly, if our success is not equal to our wish and 
hope, we shall, however, be kept from impatience and detesta- 
tion of our condition, whatever it be, knowing that so to feel 
were to murmur against God, at whose pleasure riches and 
poverty, contempt and honours, are dispensed. In shortThe 
wlm Wns on the, divine blessing in the way whl^h hag-h^gw 
described, will not, in the pursuit of those things which men 
are wlmtmosl eagel'ly tu deyil'e1, employ wicked artTwhich he 


CHAP. VII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 271 

knows would avail him nothing; nor when any thing pros- 
perous^befalls him will he impute it to himself and his "own 
diligence, or industry, or fortune, instead ot ascribing it to ~ 
God as itsjmthoj^. If^while the affairs of others flourish, his 
make little progress, or even_ifitrngrndp; hp will hair his 
humble lot_ with greater equanimity and moderation than n,ny 
irreligious man does the moderate success which only falls 
short oT what he wished ; for he has a sola^ff ir> ™l""k 1™ "Tin — 
rest more tranquilly than at the very summit of wealth_or 
power, because he considers that his affairs are ordered by 
the Lord in the manner most conducive to his salvation? 1 
This, we see, is the way in which David was affected, who, 
while he follows God and gives up himself to his guidance, 
declares, " Neither do I exercise myself in great matters, or 
in things too high for me. Surely I have behaved and 
quieted myself as a child that is weaned of his mother," (Ps. 
cxxxi. 1, 2.) 

10. Nor is it in this respj^t. ""ly tW pinna minds niw^t fn 

manifest this_trajiquillity and endurance ; it must be extended 
to all the accidents to which this present life is liable. He 
alone, therefore, has properly denied hims^lf^lio^aTresignecl 
himself entirely to 1Jhe~Lord, placing all~the~cuurse of hisiife 
entirely~at his~3Isposal. Happen what may, he whose mind 
is Jbhus__cpmposprl will ne.it.hpr dppm himself wretched nor 
murmur against Gfd hppfliifln-^f-hf3- lot. How necessary this 
disposition is will appear, if you consider the many accidents to 
Avhich we are liable. Various diseases ever and anon attack 
us : at one time pestilence rages ; at another we are involved 
in all the calamities of war. Frost and hail, destroying the 
promise of the year, cause sterility, which reduces us to penury; 
wife, pai'ents, children, relatives, are carried off by death ; our 
house is destroyed by fire. These are the events which make 
men curse their life, detest the day of their birth, execrate 
the light of heaven, even censure God, and (as they are 
eloquent in blasphemy) charge him with cruelty and injustice. 
The believer must in these things also contemplate the 
mercy and truly paternal indulgence of God. Accordingly, 
should he see his house by the removal of kindred reduced 
to solitude, even then he will not cease to bless the Lord ; 


272 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

his thought will be, Still the grace of the Lord, which dwells 
within my house, will not leave it desolate. If his crops are 
blasted, mildewed, or cut off by frost, or struck down by 
hail,1 and he sees famine before him, he will not however 
despond or murmur against God, but maintain his confidence 
in him ; u We thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, will give 
thee thanks for ever," (Ps. lxxix. 13 ;) he will supply me with 
food, even in the extreme of sterility. If he is afflicted with 
disease, the sharpness of the pain will not so overcome him, 
as to make him break out with impatience, and expostulate 
with God ; but, recognising justice and lenity in the rod, 
will patiently endure. In short, whatever happens, knowing 
that it is ordered by the Lord, he will. receive it with aTplacid 
and grateful mind, and will not contumaciously resist the 
government of him, at whose disposaPhe has placed himself 
and all that" he has] Especially let the Christian breast 
eschew that ioolish and most miserable consolation of the 
heathen, who, to strengthen their mind against adversity, 
imputed it to fortune, at which they deemed it absurd to feel 
indignant, as she was a<r/.oTog (aimless) and rash, and blindly 
wounded the good equally with the bad. On the contrary, 
the rule of piety is, that the hand of God is the ruler and 
arbiter of the fortunes of all, and, instead of rushing on with 
thoughtless violence, dispenses good and evil with perfect 
regularity, j 

1 The French is, " Soit que ses bleds et vignes soyent gastees et des- 
truites par gelee, gresle, ou autre tempeste ; " — whether his corn and 
vines are hurt and destroyed by frost, hail, or other tempest. 


CHAP. VIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 273 


CHAPTER VIII. 


OF BEARING THE CROSS — ONE BRANCH OF SELF-DENIAL. 


The four divisions of this chapter are,— I. The nature of the cross, its 
necessity and dignity, sec. 1, 2. II. The manifold advantages of the 
cross described, sec. 3-6. III. The form of the cross the most excellent 
of all, and yet it by no means removes all sense of pain, sec. 7, 8. IV. 
A description of warfare under the cross, and of true patience, (not that 
of philosophers,) after the example of Christ, sec. 9-11. 

Sections. 

1. What the cross is. By whom, and on whom, and for what cause 

imposed. Its necessity and dignity. 

2. The cross necessary. 1. To humble our pride. 2. To make us apply 

to God for aid. Example of David. 3. To give us experience of 
God's presence. 

3. Manifold uses of the cross. 1. Produces patience, hope, and firm 

confidence in God, gives us victory and perseverance. Faith in- 
vincible. 

4. 2. Frames us to obedience. Example of Abraham. This training 

how useful. 

5. The cross necessary to subdue the wantonness of the flesh. This 

pourtrayed by an apposite simile. Various forms of the cross. 

6. 3. God permits our infirmities, and corrects past faults, that he may 

keep us in obedience. This confirmed by a passage from Solomon 
and an Apostle. 

7. Singular consolation under the cross, when we suffer persecution for 

righteousness. Some parts of this consolation. 

8. This form of the cross most appropriate to believers, and should be 

borne willingly and cheerfully. This cheerfulness is not unfeeling 
hilarity, but, while groaning under the burden, waits patiently for 
the Lord. 

9. A description of this conflict. Opposed to the vanity of the Stoics. 

Illustrated by the authority and example of Christ. 
10. Proved by the testimony and uniform experience of the elect. Also 
by the special example of the Apostle Peter. The nature of the 
patience required of us. 

VOL. II. S 


274 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

11. Distinction between the patience of Christians and philosophers. The 
latter pretend a necessity which cannot be resisted. The former 
hold forth the justice of God and his care of our safety. A full 
exposition of this difference. 

1. The pious mind must ascend still higher, namely, 
whither Christ calls his disciples when he says, that every 
one of them must " take up his cross," (Matth. xvi. 24.) 
Those whom the Lord has chosen and honoured with his 
intercourse must prepare for a hard, laborious, troubled life, 
a life full of many and various kinds of evils ; it being the 
will of our heavenly Father to exercise his people in this 
way while putting them to the proof. Having begun this 
course with Christ the first-born, he continues it towards all 
his children. For though that Son was dear to him above 
others, the Son in whom he was " well pleased," yet we see, 
that far from being treated gently and indulgently, we may 
say, that not only was he subjected to a perpetual cross 
■while he dwelt on earth, but his whole life was nothing else 
than a kind of perpetual cross. The Apostle assigns the 
reason, " Though he was a Son, yet learned he obedience by 
the things which he suffered," (Heb. v. 8.) Why then should 
we exempt ourselves from that condition to which Christ our 
Head behoved to submit ; especially since he submitted on 
our account, that he might in his own person exhibit a model 
of patience? Wherefore, the Apostle declares, that all the 
children of God are destined to be conformed to him. Hence 
it affords us great consolation in hard and difficult circum- 
stances, which men deem evil and adverse, to think that we 
are holding fellowship with the sufferings of Christ ; that as 
he passed to celestial glory through a labyrinth of many woes, 
so we too are conducted thither through various tribulations. 
For, in another passage, Paul himself thus speaks, " we must 
through much tribulation enter the kingdom of God," ( Acts 
xiv. 22 ;) and again, " that I may know him, and the power 
of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being 
made conformable unto his death," (Horn. viii. 29.) How 
powerfully should it soften the bitterness of the cross, to 
think that the more we are afflicted with adversity, the surer 
we are made of our fellowship with Christ ; by communion 


CHAP. VIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 275 

with whom our sufferings are not only blessed to us, but 
tend greatly to the furtherance of our salvation. 

2. We may add, that the only thing which made it 
necessary for our Lord to undertake to bear the cross, was 
to testify and prove his obedience to the Father ; whereas 
there are many reasons which make it necessary for us to 
live constantly under the cross. Feeble as we are by nature, 
and prone to ascribe all perfection to our flesh, unless we 
receive as it were ocular demonstration of our weakness, 
we readily estimate our virtue above its proper worth, and 
doubt not that, whatever happens, it will stand unimpaired 
and invincible against all difficulties. Hence we indulge a 
stupid and empty confidence in the flesh, and then trusting 
to it wax proud against the Lord himself; as if our own 
faculties were sufficient without his grace. This arrogance 
cannot be better repressed than when He proves to us by 
experience, not only how great our weakness, but also our 
frailty is. Therefore, he visits us with disgrace, or poverty, 
or bereavement, or disease, or other afflictions. Feeling 
altogether unable to support them, we forthwith, in so far 
as regards ourselves, give way, and thus humbled learn to 
invoke his strength, which alone can enable us to bear up 
under a weight of affliction. Nay, even the holiest of men, 
however well aware that they stand not in their own strength, 
but by the grace of God, would feel too secure in their own 
fortitude and constancy, were they not brought to a more 
thorough knowledge of themselves by the trial of the cross. 
This feeling gained even upon David, " In my prosperity I 
said, I shall never be moved. Lord, by thy favour thou hast 
made my mountain to stand strong : thou didst hide thy face, 
and I was troubled," (Ps. xxx. 6, 7.) He confesses that in 
prosperity his feelings were dulled and blunted, so that, 
neglecting the grace of God, on which alone he ought to have 
depended, he leant to himself, and promised himself perpe- 
tuity. If it so happened to this great prophet, who of us 
should not fear and study caution ? Though in tranquillity 
they flatter themselves with the idea of greater constancy 
and patience, yet, humbled by adversity, they learn the 
deception. Believers, I say, warned by such proofs of their 


276 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

diseases, make progress in humility, and, divesting themselves 
of a depraved confidence in the flesh, betake themselves to 
the grace of God, and, when they have so betaken them- 
selves, experience the presence of the divine power, in which 
is ample protection. 

3. This Paul teaches, when he says that tribulation worketh 
patience, and patience experience. God having promised 
that he will be with believers in tribulation, they feel the 
truth of the promise ; while supported by his hand, they 
endure patiently. This they could never do by their own 
strength. Patience, therefore, gives the saints an experi- 
mental proof that God in reality furnishes the aid which he 
has promised whenever there is need. Hence also their faith 
is confirmed, for it were very ungrateful not to expect that 
in future the truth of God will be, as they have already found 
it, firm and constant. We now see how many advantages 
are at once produced by the cross. Overturning the over- 
weening opinion we form of our own virtue, and detecting 
the hypocrisy in which we delight, it removes our perni- 
cious carnal confidence, teaching us, when thus humbled, to 
recline on God alone, so that we neither are oppressed nor 
despond. Then victory is followed by hope, inasmuch as the 
Lord, by performing what he has promised, establishes his 
truth in regard to the future. Were these the only reasons, 
it is surely plain how necessary it is for us to bear the cross. 
It is of no little importance to be rid of your self-love, and 
made fully conscious of your weakness ; so impressed with a 
sense of your weakness as to learn to distrust yourself — to 
distrust yourself so as to transfer your confidence to God, 
reclining on him with such heartfelt confidence as to trust in 
his aid, and continue invincible to the end, standing by his 
grace so as to perceive that he is true to his promises, and so 
assured of the certainty of his promises as to be strong in 
hope. 

4. Another end which the Lord has in afflicting his people 
is to try their patience, and train them to obedience — not 
that they can yield obedience to him except in so far as he 
enables them ; but he is pleased thus to attest and display 
striking proofs of the graces which he has conferred upon 


CHAP. VIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 277 

his saints, lest they should remain within unseen and unem- 
ployed. Accordingly, by bringing forward openly the strength 
and constancy of endurance with which he has provided his 
servants, he is said to try their patience. Hence the expres- 
sions that God tempted Abraham, (Gen. xxi. 1, 12,) and 
made proof of his piety by not declining to sacrifice his 
only son. Hence, too, Peter tells us that our faith is proved 
by tribulation, just as gold is tried in a furnace of fire. But 
who will say it is not expedient that the most excellent gift 
of patience which the believer has received from his God 
should be applied to use, by being made sure and manifest ? 
Otherwise men would never value it according to its worth. 
But if God himself, to prevent the virtues which he has con- 
ferred upon believers from lurking in obscurity, nay, lying 
useless and perishing, does aright in supplying materials for 
calling them forth, there is the best reason for the afflictions 
of the saints, since without them their patience could not 
exist. I say, that by the cross they are also trained to obedi- 
ence, because they are thus taught to live not according to 
their own wish, but at the disposal of God. Indeed, did all 
things proceed as they wish, they would not know what it is 
to follow God. Seneca mentions (De Vit. Beata, cap. xv.) 
that there was an old proverb when any one was exhorted to 
endure adversity, "Follow God;" thereby intimating, that 
men truly submitted to the yoke of God only when they gave 
their back and hand to his rod. But if it is most right that 
we should in all things prove our obedience to our heavenly 
Father, certainly we ought not to decline any method by 
which he trains us to obedience. 

5. Still, however, we see not how necessary that obedience 
is, unless we at the same time consider how prone our car- 
nal nature is to shake off the yoke of God whenever it has 
been treated with some degree of gentleness and indulgence. 
It just happens to it as with refractory horses, which, if kept 
idle for a few days at hack and manger, become ungovern- 
able, and no longer recognise the rider, whose command 
before they implicitly obeyed. And we invariably become 
what God complains of in the people of Israel — waxing gross 
and fat, we kick against him who reared and nursed us, 


278 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

(Deut. xxxii. 15.) The kindness of God should allure us to 
ponder and love his goodness ; but since such is our malig- 
nity, that we are invariably corrupted by his indulgence, it 
is more than necessary for us to be restrained by discipline 
from breaking forth into such petulance. Thus, lest we become 
emboldened by an over-abundance of wealth ; lest elated with 
honour, we grow proud ; lest inflated with other advantages 
of body, or mind, or fortune, we grow insolent, the Lord him- 
self interferes as he sees to be expedient by means of the 
cross, subduing and curbing the arrogance of our flesh, and 
that in various ways, as the advantage of each requires. For 
as we do not all equally labour under the same disease, so we do 
not all need the same difficult cure. Hence we see that all are 
not exercised with the same kind of cross. While the heavenly 
Physician treats some more gently, in the case of others he 
employs harsher remedies, his purpose being to provide a 
cure for all. Still none is left free and untouched, because 
he knows that all, without a single exception, are diseased. 

6. We may add, that our most merciful Father requires 
not only to prevent our weakness, but often to correct our 
past faults, that he may keep us in due obedience. There- 
fore, whenever we are afflicted we ought immediately to call 
to mind our past life. In this way we will find that the 
faults which we have committed are deserving of such casti- 
gation. And yet the exhortation to patience is not to be 
founded chiefly on the acknowledgment of sin. For Scrip- 
ture supplies a far better consideration when it says, that in 
adversity " we are chastened of the Lord, that we should 
not be condemned with the world," (1 Cor. xi. 32.) There- 
fore, in the very bitterness of tribulation we ought to recog- 
nise the kindness and mercy of our Father, since even then 
he ceases not to further our salvation. For he afflicts, 
not that he may ruin or destroy, but rather that he may 
deliver us from the condemnation of the world. Let this 
thought lead us to what Scripture elsewhere teaches : "My 
son, despise not the chastening of the Lord ; neither be weary 
of his correction : For whom the Lord loveth he correcteth ; 
even as a father the son in whom he delighteth," (Prov. iii. 
11, 12.) When we perceive our Father's rod, is it not our 


CHAr. VIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 279 

part to behave as obedient docile sons, rather than rebelliously 
imitate desperate men, who are hardened in wickedness ? God 
dooms us to destruction, if he does not, by correction, call us 
back when we have fallen off from him, so that it is truly 
said, " If ye be without chastisement," " then are ye bastards, 
and not sons," (Heb. xii. 8.) We are most perverse then if we 
cannot bear him while he is manifesting his good-will to us, 
and the care which he takes of our salvation. Scripture 
states the difference between believers and unbelievers to be, 
that the latter, as the slaves of inveterate and deep-seated 
iniquity, only become worse and more obstinate under the 
lash ; whereas the former, like free-born sons, turn to repent- 
ance. Now, therefore, choose your class. But as I have 
already spoken of this subject, it is sufficient to have here 
briefly adverted to it. 

7. There is singular consolation, moreover, when we are 
persecuted for righteousness' sake. For our thought should 
then be, How high the honour which God bestows upon us 
in distinguishing us by the special badge of his soldiers. By 
suffering persecution for righteousness' sake, I mean not only 
striving for the defence of the Gospel, but for the defence of 
righteousness in any way. Whether, therefore, in maintain- 
ing the truth of God against the lies of Satan, or defending 
the good and innocent against the injuries of the bad, we are 
obliged to incur the offence and hatred of the world, so as to 
endanger life, fortune, or honour, let us not grieve or decline 
so far to- spend ourselves for God ; let us not think ourselves 
wretched in those things in which he with his own lips has 
pronounced us blessed, (Matth. v. 1 0.) Poverty, indeed, con- 
sidered in itself, is misery ; so are exile, contempt, imprison- 
ment, ignominy : in fine, death itself is the last of all calami- 
ties. But when the favour of God breathes upon is, there is 
none of these things which may not turn out to our happi- 
ness. Let us then be contented with the testimony of Christ 
rather than with the false estimate of the flesh, and then, after 
the example of the Apostles, we will rejoice in being " counted 
worthy to suffer shame for his name," (Acts v. 41.) For why ? 
If, while conscious of our innocence, we are deprived of our 
substance by the wickedness of man, we are, no doubt, 
humanly speaking, reduced to poverty ; but in truth our 


280 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

riches in heaven are increased : if driven from our homes, we 
have a more welcome reception into the family of God ; if 
vexed and despised, we are more firmly rooted in Christ ; if 
stigmatised by disgrace and ignominy, we have a higher place 
in the kingdom of God ; and if we are slain, entrance is 
thereby given us to eternal life. The Lord having set such 
a price upon us, let us be ashamed to estimate ourselves at 
less than the shadowy and evanescent allurements of the pre- 
sent life. 

8. Since by these, and similar considerations, Scripture 
abundantly solaces us for the ignominy or calamities which 
we endure in defence of righteousness, we are very ungrate- 
ful if we do not willingly and cheerfully receive them at the 
hand of the Lord, especially since this form of the cross is 
the most appropriate to believers, being that by which Christ 
desires to be glorified in us, as Peter also declares, (1 Pet. iv. 
11, 14.) But as to ingenuous natures, it is more bitter to 
suffer disgrace than a hundred deaths, Paul expressly reminds 
us that not only persecution, but also disgrace awaits us, " be- 
cause we trust in the living God," (1 Tim. iv. 10.) So in 
another passage he bids us, after his example, walk " by evil 
report and good report," (2 Cor. vi. 8.) The cheerfulness 
required, however, does not imply a total insensibility to 
pain. The saints could show no patience under the cross 
if they were not both tortured with pain and grievously 
molested. Were there no hardship in poverty, no pain in 
disease, no sting in ignominy, no fear in death, where would 
be the fortitude and moderation in enduring them ? But while 
every one of these, by its inherent bitterness, naturally vexes 
the mind, the believer in this displays his fortitude, that though 
fully sensible of the bitterness, and labouring grievously, he 
still withstands and struggles boldly ; in this displays his 
patience, that though sharply stung, he is however curbed by 
the fear of God from breaking forth into any excess ; in this 
displays his alacrity, that though pressed with sorrow and 
sadness, he rests satisfied with spiritual consolation from God. 

9. This conflict which believers maintain against the natural 
feeling of pain, while they study moderation and patience, 
Paul elegantly describes in these words : " We are troubled 
on every side, yet not distressed ; wre are perplexed, but not 


CHAP. VIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 281 

in despair ; persecuted, but not forsaken ; cast down, but not 
destroyed," (2 Cor. iv. 8, 9.) You see that to bear the cross 
patiently is not to have your feelings altogether blunted, and 
to be absolutely insensible to pain, according to the absurd 
description which the Stoics of old gave of their hero as one 
who, divested of humanity, was affected in the same way by 
adversity and prosperity, grief and joy ; or rather, like a stone, 
was not affected by anything. And what did they gain by 
that sublime wisdom ? they exhibited a shadow of patience, 
which never did, and never can, exist among men. Nay, 
rather by aiming at a too exact and rigid patience, they 
banished it altogether from human life. Now also we have 
among Christians a new kind of Stoics, who hold it vicious 
not only to groan and weep, but even to be sad and anxious. 
These paradoxes are usually started by indolent men who, em- 
ploying themselves more in speculation than in action, can do 
nothing else for us than beget such paradoxes. But we have 
nothing to do with that iron philosophy which our Lord and 
Master condemned — not only in word, but also by his own 
example. For he both grieved and shed tears for his own and 
others' woes. Nor did he teach his disciples differently : " Ye 
shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice," (John 
xvi. 20.) And lest any one should regard this as vicious, he 
expressly declares, " Blessed are they that mourn," (Matth. 
v. 4.) And no wonder. If all tears are condemned, what 
shall we think of our Lord himself, whose " sweat was as it 
were great drops of blood falling down to the ground ?" (Luke 
xxii. 44 ; Matth. xxvi. 38.) If every kind of fear is a mark 
of unbelief, what place shall we assign to the dread which, it 
is said, in no slight degree amazed him ; if all sadness is con- 
demned, how shall we justify him when he confesses, " My 
soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death ?" 

10. I wished to make these observations to keep pious minds 
from despair, lest, from feeling it impossible to divest them- 
selves of the natural feeling of grief, they might altogether 
abandon the study of patience. This must necessarily be the 
result with those who convert patience into stupor, and a brave 
and firm man into a block. Scripture gives saints the praise 
of endurance when, though afflicted by the hardships they 


282 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

endure, they are not crushed ; though they feel bitterly, they 
are at the same time filled with spiritual joy ; though pressed 
with anxiety, breathe exhilarated by the consolation of God. 
Still there is a certain degree of repugnance in their hearts, 
because natural sense shuns and dreads what is adverse to it, 
while pious affection, even through these difficulties, tries to 
obey the divine will. This repugnance the Lord expressed 
when he thus addressed Peter: "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, 
When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself and walkedst 
whither thou wouldst ; but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt 
stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry 
thee whither thou wouldest not," (John xxi. 18.) It is not 
probable, indeed, that when it became necessary to glorify 
God by death, he was driven to it unwilling and resisting ; had 
it been so, little praise would have been due to his martyrdom. 
But though he obeyed the divine ordination with the greatest 
alacrity of heart, yet, as he had not divested himself of hu- 
manity, he was distracted by a double will. When lie thought 
of the bloody death which he was to die, struck with horror, 
he would willingly have avoided it : on the other hand, when 
he considered that it was God who called him to it, his fear 
was vanquished and suppressed, and he met death cheerfully. 
It must therefore be our study, if we would be disciples of 
Christ, to imbue our minds with such reverence and obedi- 
ence to God as may tame and subjugate all affections contrary 
to his appointment. In this way, whatever be the kind of 
cross to which we are subjected, we shall in the greatest 
straits firmly maintain our patience. Adversity will have its 
bitterness, and sting us. When afflicted with disease, we shall 
groan and be disquieted, and long for health ; pressed with 
poverty, we shall feel the stings of anxiety and sadness, feel 
the pain of ignominy, contempt, and injury, and pay the tears 
due to nature at the death of our friends : but our conclusion 
will always be, The Lord so willed it, therefore let us follow 
his will. Nay, amid the pungency of grief, among groans 
and tears, this thought will necessarily suggest itself, and 
incline us cheerfully to endure the things for which we are so 
afflicted. 

11. But since the chief reason for enduring the cross has 


CIIAI\ VI n. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 283 

been derived from a consideration of the divine will, we must 
in few words explain wherein lies the difference between 
philosophical and Christian patience. Indeed, very few of 
the philosophers advanced so far as to perceive that the hand 
of God tries us bj means of affliction, and that we ought in 
this matter to obey God. The only reason which they adduce 
is, that so it must be. But is not this just to say, that we 
must yield to God, because it is in vain to contend against 
him ? For if we obey God only because it is necessary, 
provided we can escape, we shall cease to obey him. But 
what Scripture calls us to consider in the will of God is very 
different, namely, first justice and equity, and then a regard 
to our OAvn salvation. Hence Christian exhortations to 
patience are of this nature, Whether poverty, or exile, or 
imprisonment, or contumely, or disease, or bereavement, or 
any such evil affects us, we must think that none of them 
happens except by the will and providence of God ; more- 
over, that every thing he does is in the most perfect order. 
What ! do not our numberless daily faults deserve to be 
chastised, more severely, and with a heavier rod than his 
mercy lays upon us? Is it not most right that our flesh 
should be subdued, and be, as it were, accustomed to the yoke, 
so as not to rage and wanton as it lists ? Are not the justice 
and the truth of God worthy of our suffering on their 
account ? l But if the equity of God is undoubtedly displayed 
in affliction, we cannot murmur or struggle against them 
without iniquity. We no longer hear the frigid cant, Yield, 
because it is necessary ; but a living and energetic precept, 
Obey, because it is unlawful to resist ; bear patiently, 
because impatience is rebellion against the justice of God. 
Then as that only seems to us attractive which we per- 
ceive to be for our own safety and advantage, here also our 
heavenly Father consoles us, by the assurance, that in the 
very cross with Avhich he afflicts us he provides for our 
salvation. But if it is clear that tribulations are salutary to 
us, why should we not receive them with calm and grateful 
minds ? In bearing them patiently we are not submitting to 

1 See end of sec. 4, and sec. 5, 7, 8. 


284 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

necessity, but resting satisfied with our own good. The 
effect of these thoughts is, that to whatever extent our minds 
are contracted by the bitterness which we naturally feel 
under the cross, to the same extent will they be expanded 
with spiritual joy. Hence arises thanksgiving, which cannot 
exist unless joy be felt. But if the praise of the Lord and 
thanksgiving can emanate only from a cheerful and gladdened 
breast, and there is nothing which ought to interrupt these 
feelings in us, it is clear how necessary it is to temper the 
bitterness of the cross with spiritual joy. 


CHAP. IX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 285 


CHAPTER IX. 

OF MEDITATING ON THE FUTURE LIFE. 

The three divisions of this chapter, — I. The principal use of the cross 
is, that it iu various ways accustoms us to despise the present, and excites 
us to aspire to the future life, sec. 1, 2. II. In withdrawing from the 
present life we must neither shun it nor feel hatred for it ; but desiring 
the future life, gladly quit the present at the command of our sovereign 
Master, sec. 3, 4. III. Our infirmity in dreading death described. The 
correction and safe remedy, sec. 6. 

Sections. 

1. The design of God in afflicting his people. 1. To accustom us to de- 

spise the present life. Our infatuated love of it. Afflictions employed 
as the cure. 2. To lead us to aspire to heaven. 

2. Excessive love of the present life prevents us from duly aspiring to 

the other. Hence the disadvantages of prosperity. Blindness of 
the human judgment. Our philosophising on the vanity of life only 
of momentary influence. The necessity of the cross. 

3. The present life an evidence of the divine favour to his people ; and, 

therefore, not to be detested. On the contrary, should call forth 
thanksgiving. The crown of victory in heaven after the contest on 
earth. 

4. Weariuess of the present life how to be tempered. The believer's 

estimate- of life. Comparison of the present and the future life. 
How far the present life should be hated. 

5. Christians should not tremble at the fear of death. Two reasons. 

Objection. Answer. Other reasons. 

6. Reasons continued. Conclusion. 

1. Whatever be the kind of tribulation with which we 
are afflicted, we should always consider the end of it to be, 
that we may be trained to despise the present, and thereby 
stimulated to aspire to the future life. For since God well 
knows how strongly we are inclined by nature to a slavish 
love of this world, in order to prevent us from clinging too 
strongly to it, he employs the fittest reason for calling us 
back, and shaking off our lethargy. Every one of us, indeed, 


286 INSTITUTES OP THE BOOK III. 

would be thought to aspire and aim at heavenly immortality 
during the Avhole course of his life. For we would be 
ashamed in no respect to excel the lower animals ; whose 
condition would not be at all inferior to ours, had we not 
a hope of immortality beyond the grave. But when you 
attend to the plans, wishes, and actions of each, you see 
nothing in them but the earth. Hence our stupidity ; our 
minds being so dazzled with the glare of wealth, power, and 
honours, that they can see no farther. The heart also, 
engrossed with avarice, ambition, and lust, is weighed down 
and cannot rise above them. In short, the whole soul, 
ensnared by the allurements of the flesh, seeks its happiness 
on the earth. To meet this disease, the Lord makes his 
people sensible of the vanity of the present life, by a constant 
proof of its miseries. Thus, that they may not promise 
themselves deep and lasting peace in it, he often allows them 
to be assailed by war, tumult, or rapine, or to be disturbed 
by other injuries. That they may not long with too much 
eagerness after fleeting and fading riches, or rest in those 
which they already possess, he reduces them to want, or, at 
least, restricts them to a moderate allowance, at one time by 
exile, at another by sterility, at another by fire, or by other 
means. That they may not indulge too complacently in the 
advantages of married life, he either vexes them by the 
misconduct of their partners, or humbles them by the wicked- 
ness of their children, or afflicts them by bereavement. But 
if in all these he is indulgent to them, lest they should either 
swell with vain-glory, or be elated with confidence, by diseases 
and dangers he sets palpably before them how unstable and 
evanescent are all the advantages competent to mortals. We 
duly profit by the discipline of the cross, when we learn that 
this life, estimated in itself, is restless, troubled, in numberless 
ways wretched, and plainly in no respect happy ; that what 
are estimated its blessings are uncertain, fleeting, vain, and 
vitiated by a great admixture of evil. From this we con- 
clude, that all we have to seek or hope for here is contest ; 
that when we think of the crown we must raise our eyes to 
heaven. For we must hold, that our mind never rises 
seriously to desire and aspire after the future, until it has 
learned to despise the present life. 


CHAP. IX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 287 

2. For there is no medium between the two things : the 
earth must either be worthless in our estimation, or keep us 
enslaved by an intemperate love of it. Therefore, if we have 
any regard to eternity, we must carefully strive to disen- 
cumber ourselves of these fetters. Moreover, since the 
present life has many enticements to allure us, and great 
semblance of delight, grace, and sweetness to soothe us, it is 
of great consequence to us to be now and then called off from 
its fascinations.1 For what, pray, would happen, if we here 
enjoyed an uninterrupted course of honour and felicity, when 
even the constant stimulus of affliction cannot arouse us to a 
due sense of our misery ? That human life is like smoke or a 
shadow, is not only known to the learned ; there is not a 
more trite proverb among the vulgar. Considering it a fact 
most useful to be known, they have recommended it in many 
well-known expressions. Still there is no fact which we ponder 
less carefully, or less frequently remember. For we form all 
our plans just as if we had fixed our immortality on the 
earth. If we see a funeral, or walk among graves, as the 
image of death is then present to the eye, I admit we 
philosophise admirably on the vanity of life. We do not 
indeed always do so, for those things often have no effect upon 
us at all. But, at the best, our philosophy is momentary. 
It vanishes as soon as we turn our back, and leaves not the 
vestige of remembrance behind ; in short, it passes away, 
just like the applause of a theatre at some pleasant spectacle. 
Forgetful not only of death, but also of mortality itself, as if 
no rumour of it had ever reached us, Ave indulge in supine 
security as expecting a terrestrial immortality. Meanwhile, 
if any one breaks in with the proverb, that man is the crea- 
ture of a day,2 we indeed acknowledge its truth, but, so far 
from giving heed to it, the thought of perpetuity still keeps 

1 French, " Or pource que la vie presente a tousiours force de delices 
pour nous attraire, et a grande apparence d'amenite, de grace et de douceur 
pour nous ainieller, il nous est bien mestier d'estre retire d'heure en d'heure, 
a ce que nous ne soyons point abusez, et comme ensorcelez de telles 
flatteries ;" — Now because the present life has always a host of delights to 
attract us, and has great appearance of amenity, grace, and sweetness to 
entice us, it is of great importance to us to be hourly withdrawn, in order 
that we may not be deceived, and, as it were, bewitched with such flattery. 

2 Latin, u Animal esse e(pi)fcs(>oi/ ;" — is an ephemeral animal. 


288 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III 

hold of our minds. Who then can deny that it is of th( 
highest importance to us all, I say not, to be admonishet 
by words, but convinced by all possible experience of the 
miserable condition of our earthly life ; since even when 
convinced we scarcely cease to gaze upon it with vicious, 
stupid admiration, as if it contained within itself the sum of 
all that is good ? But if God finds it necessary so to train us, 
it must be our duty to listen to him when he calls, and shakes 
us from our torpor, that we may hasten to despise the world, 
and aspire with our whole heart to the future life. 

3. Still the contempt which believers should train them- 
selves to feel for the present life, must not be of a kind to 
beget hatred of it or ingratitude to God. This life, though 
abounding in all kinds of Avretchedness, is justly classed 
among divine blessings which are not to be despised. Where- 
fore, if we do not recognise the kindness of God in it, we 
are chargeable with no little ingratitude towards him. To 
believers, especially, it ought to be a proof of divine benevo- 
lence, since it is Avholly destined to promote their salvation. 
Before openly exhibiting the inheritance of eternal glory, 
God is pleased to manifest himself to us as a Father by 
minor proofs, viz., the blessings which he daily bestows upon 
us. Therefore, while this life serves to acquaint us with the 
goodness of God, shall we disdain it as if it did not contain 
one particle of good? We ought, therefore, to feel and be 
affected towards it in such a manner as to place it among 
those gifts of the divine benignity which are by no means to be 
despised. Were there no proofs in Scripture, (they are most 
numerous and clear,) yet nature herself exhorts us to return 
thanks to God for having brought us forth into light, granted 
us the use of it, and bestowed upon us all the means neces- 
sary for its preservation. And there is a much higher reason 
when we reflect that here we are in a mariner prepared for 
the glory of the heavenly kingdom. For the Lord hath 
ordained, that those who are ultimately to be crowned in 
heaven must maintain a previous warfare on the earth, that 
they may not triumph before they have overcome the diffi- 
culties of war, and obtained the victory. Another reason is, 
that we here begin to experience in various ways a foretaste 


CHAP. IX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 289 

of the divine benignity, in order that our hope and desire 
may be whetted for its full manifestation. When once we 
have concluded that our earthly life is a gift of the divine 
mercy, of which, agreeably to our obligation, it behoves us to 
have a grateful remembrance, we shall then properly descend 
to consider its most wretched condition, and thus escape from 
that excessive fondness for it, to which, as I have said, we 
are naturally prone. 

4. In proportion as this improper love diminishes, our 
desire of a better life should increase. I confess, indeed, 
that a most accurate opinion was formed by those who 
thought, that the best thing was not to be bom, the next 
best to die early. For, being destitute of the light of God and 
of true religion, what could they see in it that was not of 
dire and evil omen ? Nor was it um-easonable for those1 
who felt sorrow and shed tears at the birth of their kindred, 
to keep holiday at their deaths. But this they did without 
profit ; because, devoid of the true doctrine of faith, they saw 
not how that which in itself is neither happy nor desirable 
turns to the advantage of the righteous : and hence their 
opinion issued in despair. Let believers, then, in forming 
an estimate of this mortal life, and perceiving that in itself 
it is nothing but misery, make it their aim to exert them- 
selves with greater alacrity, and less hinderance, in aspiring 
to the future and eternal life. TV hen we contrast the two, 
the former may not only be securely neglected, but, in com- 
parison of the latter, be disdained and contemned. If heaven 
is our country, what can the earth be but a place of exile ? 
If departure from the world is entrance into life, what is the 
world but a sepulchre, and what is residence in it but im- 
mersion in death ? If to be freed from the body is to gain 
full possession of freedom, Avhat is the body but a prison? 
If it is the very summit of happiness to enjoy the presence 
of God, is it not miserable to Avant it ? But " whilst we are 
at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord," (2 Cor. 
v. 6.) Thus when the earthly is compared with the heavenly 
life, it may undoubtedly be despised and trampled under foot. 

1 French, " Le peuple des Scythes ;" — the Scythians. 
VOL. II. T 


290 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

We ought never, indeed, to regard it with hatred, except 
in so far as it keeps us subject to sin ; and even this hatred 
ought not to be directed against life itself. At all events, 
we must stand so affected towards it in regard to weariness 
or hatred as, while longing for its termination, to be ready at 
the Lord's will to continue in it, keeping far from everything 
like murmuring and impatience. For it is as if the Lord had 
assigned us a post, which we must maintain till he recalls us. 
Paul, indeed, laments his condition, in being still bound with 
the fetters of the body, and sighs earnestly for redemption, 
(Horn. vii. 24 ;) nevertheless, he declared that, in obedience 
to the command of God, he was prepared for both courses, 
because he acknowledges it as his duty to God to glorify his 
name whether by life or by death, while it belongs to God 
to determine what is most conducive to His glory, (Phil. i. 
20-24.) Wherefore, if it becomes us to live and die to the 
Lord, let us leave the period of our life and death at his dis- 
posal. Still let us ardently long for death, and constantly 
meditate upon it, and in comparison with future immortality, 
let us despise life, and, on account of the bondage of sin, long 
to renounce it whenever it shall so please the Lord. 

5. But, most strange to say, many who boast of being 
Christians, instead of thus longing for death, are so afraid of 
it that they tremble at the very mention of it as a thing 
ominous and dreadful. We cannot wonder, indeed, that our 
natural feelings should be somewhat shocked at the mention 
of our dissolution. But it is altogether intolerable that the 
light of piety should not be so powerful in a Christian breast 
as with greater consolation to overcome and suppress that 
fear. For if we reflect that this our tabernacle, unstable, 
defective, corruptible, fading, pining, and putrid, is dissolved, 
in order that it may forthwith be renewed in sure, perfect, 
incorruptible, in fine, in heavenly glory, will not faith compel 
us eagerly to desire what nature dreads ? If we reflect that 
by death we are recalled from exile to inhabit our native 
country, a heavenly country, shall this give us no comfort ? 
But everything longs for permanent existence. I admit 
this, and therefore contend that we ought to look to future 
immortality, where we may obtain that fixed condition which 


CHAP* IX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 291 

nowhere appears on the earth. For Paul admirably enjoins 
believers to hasten cheerfully to death, not because they 
" would be unclothed, but clothed upon," (2 Cor. v. 2.) 
Shall the lower animals, and inanimate creatures themselves, 
even wood and stone, as conscious of their present vanity, 
long for the final resurrection, that they may with the sons of 
God be delivered from vanity, (Rom. viii. 19 ;) and shall we, 
endued with the light of intellect, and more than intellect, 
enlightened by the Spirit of God, when our essence is in 
question, rise no higher than the corruption of this earth ? 
But it is not my purpose, nor is this the place, to plead 
against this great perverseness. At the outset, I declared 
that I had no wish to engage in a diffuse discussion of com- 
mon-places. My advice to those Avhose minds are thus 
timid is to read the short treatise of Cyprian De Mortalitate, 
unless it be more accordant with their deserts to send 
them to the philosophers, that by inspecting what they say 
on the contempt of death, they may begin to blush. This, 
however, let us hold as fixed, that no man has made much 
progress in the school of Christ who does not look forward 
with joy to the day of death and final resurrection, (2 Tim. 
iv. 18 ; Tit. ii. 13 :) for Paul distinguishes all believers by 
this mark ; and the usual course of Scripture is to direct us 
thither whenever it would furnish us with an argument for 
substantial joy. " Look up," says our Lord, " and lift up 
your heads : for your redemption draweth nigh," (Luke xxi. 
28.) Is" it reasonable, I ask, that what he intended to have 
a powerful effect in stirring us up to alacrity and exultation 
should produce nothing but sadness and consternation ? If 
it is so, why do we still glory in him as our Master ? There- 
fore, let us come to a sounder mind, and how repugnant so 
ever the blind and stupid longing of the flesh may be, let us 
doubt not to desire the advent of the Lord not in wish only, 
but with earnest sighs, as the most propitious of all events. 
He will come as a Redeemer to deliver us from an immense 
abyss of evil and misery, and lead us to the blessed inherit- 
ance of his life and glory. 

6. Thus, indeed, it is ; the whole body of the faithful, so 
long as they live on the earth, must be like sheep for the 


292 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

slaughter, in order that they may be conformed to Christ 
their head, (Rom. viii. 36.) Most deplorable, therefore, 
would their situation be did they not, by raising their mind 
to heaven, become superior to all that is in the world, and 
rise above the present aspect of affairs, (1 Cor. xv. 19.) On 
the other hand, when once they have raised their head above 
all earthly objects, though they see the wicked flourishing in 
wealth and honour, and enjoying profound peace, indulging 
in luxury and splendour, and revelling in all kinds of delights, 
though they should moreover be wickedly assailed by them, 
suffer insult from their pride, be robbed by their avarice, or 
assailed by any other passion, they will have no difficulty in 
bearing up under these evils. They will turn their eye to that 
day, (Isaiah xxv. 8 ; Rev. vii. 17,) on which the Lord will re- 
ceive his faithful servants, wipe away all tears from their eyes, 
clothe them in a robe of glory and joy, feed them with the 
ineffable sweetness of his pleasures, exalt them to share with 
him in his greatness ; in fine, admit them to a participation 
in his happiness. But the wicked who may have flourished 
on the earth, he will cast forth in extreme ignominy, will 
change their delights into torments, their laughter and joy 
into wailing and gnashing of teeth, their peace into the 
gnawing of conscience, and punish their luxury with un- 
quenchable fire. He will also place their necks under the 
feet of the godly, whose patience they abused. For, as Paul 
declares, " it is a righteous thing with God to recompense 
tribulation to them that trouble you ; and to you who are 
troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed 
from heaven," (2 Thess. i. 6, 7.) This, indeed, is our only 
consolation ; deprived of it, we must either give wray to 
despondency, or resort to our destruction to the vain solace 
of the world. The Psalmist confesses, " My feet were almost 
gone : my steps had wTell nigh slipt : for I was envious at 
the foolish when I saw the prosperity of the wicked," (Psalm 
lxxiii. 3, 4 ;) and he found no resting-place until he entered 
the sanctuary, and considered the latter end of the righteous 
and the wicked. To conclude in one word, the cross of 
Christ then only triumphs in the breasts of believers over 
the devil and the flesh, sin and sinners, when their eyes are 
directed to the power of his resurrection. 


CHAP. X. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 293 


CHAPTER X. 

HOW TO USE THE PRESENT LIFE, AND THE COMFORTS OF IT. 

The divisions of this chapter are, — I. The necessity and usefulness of 
this doctrine. Extremes to be avoided, if we would rightly use the pre- 
sent life and its comforts, sec. 1, 2. II. One of these extremes, viz., the 
intemperance of the flesh, to be carefully avoided. Four methods of 
doing so described in order, sec. 3-6. 

Sections. 

1. Necessity of this doctrine. Use of the goods of the present life. Ex- 

tremes to be avoided. 1. Excessive austerity. 2. Carnal intemper- 
auce and lasciviousness. 

2. God, by creating so many mercies, consulted not only for our necessi- 

ties, but also for our comfort and delight. Confirmation from a 
passage in the Psalms, and from experience. 

3. Excessive austerity, therefore, to be avoided. So also must the wan- 

tonness of the flesh. 1. The creatures invite us to know, love, and 
honour the Creator. 2. This not done by the wicked, who only 
abuse these temporal mercies. 

4. All earthly blessings to be despised in comparison of the heavenly 

life. Aspiration after this life destroyed by an excessive love of 
created objects. First, Intemperance. 

5. Second, Impatience and immoderate desire. Remedy of these evils. 

The creatures assigned to our use. Man still accountable for the 
use he makes of them. 

6. God requires us in all our actions to look to his calling. Use of this 

doctrine. It is full of comfort. 

1. By such rudiments we are at the same time well in- 
structed by Scripture in the proper use of earthly blessings, 
a subject which, in forming a scheme of life, is by no means 
to be neglected. For if we are to live, we must use the neces- 
sary supports of life ; nor can we even shun those things which 
seem more subservient to delight than to necessity. We 
must therefore observe a mean, that we may use them with a 


294 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

pure conscience, whether for necessity or for pleasure. This 
the Lord prescribes by his word, when he tells us that to his 
people the present life is a kind of pilgrimage by which they 
hasten to the heavenly kingdom. If we are only to pass 
through the earth, there can be no doubt that we are to use 
its blessings only in so far as they assist our progress, rather 
than retard it. Accordingly, Paul, not without cause, ad- 
monishes us to use this world without abusing it, and to buy 
possessions as if we were selling them, (1 Cor. vii. 30, 31.) 
But as this is a slippery place, and there is great danger of fall- 
ing on either side, let us fix our feet where we can stand safely. 
There have been some good and holy men who, when they 
saw intemperance and luxury perpetually carried to excess, 
if not strictly curbed, and were desirous to correct so per- 
nicious an evil, imagined that there was no other method 
than to allow man to use corporeal goods only in so far as 
they were necessaries : a counsel pious indeed, but unne- 
cessarily austere ; for it does the very dangerous thing of 
binding consciences in closer fetters than those in which 
they are bound by the word of God. Moreover, necessity, 
according to them,1 was abstinence from every thing which 
could be wanted, so that they held it scarcely lawful to make 
any addition to bread and water. Others were still more 
austere, as is related of Cratetes the Theban, who threw 
his riches into the sea, because he thought, that unless he 
destroyed them they would destroy him. Many also in the 
present day, while they seek a pretext for carnal intemperance 
in the use of external things, and at the same tiine would 
pave the way for licentiousness, assume for granted^ what I 
by no means concede, that this liberty is not to be restrained 
by any modification, but that it is to be left to every man's 
conscience to use them as far as he thinks lawful. I indeed 
confess that here consciences neither can nor ought to be 
bound by fixed and definite laws ; but that Scripture having 
laid down general rules for the legitimate use, we should keep 
within the limits which they prescribe. 


1 See Chrysost. ad Heb. xi. As to Gratetes the Theban, see Plutarch, 
Lib. de Vitand. aere alien, and Philostratus in Vita Apollonii, 


CHAP. X. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 295 

2. Let this be our principle, that we err not in the use of 
the gifts of Providence when we refer them to the end for 
which their author made and destined them, since he created 
them for our good, and not for our destruction. No man 
will keep the true path better than he who shall have this 
end carefully in view. Now then, if we consider for what 
end he created food, we shall find that he consulted not only 
for our necessity, but also for our enjoyment and delight. 
Thus, in clothing, the end was, in addition to necessity, come- 
liness and honour ; and in herbs, fruits, and trees, besides 
their various uses, gracefulness of appearance and sweetness 
of smell. Were it not so, the Prophet would not enumerate 
among the mercies of God w wine that maketh glad the heart 
of man, and oil to make his face to shine," (Ps. civ. 15.) The 
Scriptures would not everywhere mention, in commendation 
of his benignity, that he had given such things to men. The 
natural qualities of things themselves demonstrate to what 
end, and how far, they may be lawfully enjoyed. Has the 
Lord adorned flowers with all the beauty which spontaneously 
presents itself to the eye, and the sweet odour which delights 
the sense of smell, and shall it be unlawful for us to enjoy 
that beauty and this odour ? What ? Has he not so dis- 
tinguished colours as to make some more agreeable than 
others ? Has he not given qualities to gold and silver, ivory 
and marble, thereby rendering them precious above other 
metals or stones ? In short, has he not given many things a 
value without having any necessary use ? 

3. Have done, then, with that inhuman philosophy which, 
in allowing no use of the creatures but for necessity, not only 
maliciously deprives us of the lawful fruit of the divine be- 
neficence, but cannot be realised without depriving man of 
all his senses, and reducing him to a block. But, on the 
other hand, let us with no less care guard against the lusts 
of the flesh, which, if not kept in order, break through all 
bounds, and are, as I have said, advocated by those who, 
under pretence of liberty, allow themselves every sort of 
license. First one restraint is imposed when we hold that 
the object of creating all things was to teach us to know their 
author, and feel grateful for his indulgence. Where is the 


29G INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

gratitude, if you so gorge or stupify yourself with feasting 
and wine as to be unfit for offices of piety, or the duties of 
your calling? Where the recognition of God, if the flesh, 
boiling forth in lust through excessive indulgence, infects the 
mind with its impurity, so as to lose the discernment of 
honour and rectitude ? Where thankfulness to God for cloth- 
ing, if on account of sumptuous raiment we both admire 
ourselves and disdain others ? if, from a love of show and 
sj>lendour, we pave the way for immodesty ? Where our re- 
cognition of God, if the glare of these things captivates our 
minds ? For many are so devoted to luxury in all their senses, 
that their mind lies buried : many are so delighted with 
marble, gold, and pictures, that they become marble-hearted 
— are changed as it were into metal, and made like painted 
figures. The kitchen, with its savoury smells, so engrosses 
them that they have no spiritual savour. The same thing 
may be seen in other matters. Wherefore, it is plain that 
there is here great necessity for curbing licentious abuse, and 
conforming to the rule of Paid, " make not provision for the 
flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof," (Rom. xiii. 14.) Where too 
much liberty is given to them, they break forth without mea- 
sure or restraint. 

4. There is no surer or quicker way of accomplishing this 
than by despising the present life and aspiring to celestial 
immortality. For hence two rules arise : First, " it remaineth, 
that both they that have wives be as though they had none ;" 
" and they that use this world, as not abusing it," (1 Cor. yii. 
29, 31.) Secondly, we must learn to be no less placid and 
patient in enduring penury, than moderate in enjoying abun- 
dance. He who makes it his rule to use this world as if he 
used it not, not only cuts off all gluttony in regard to meat 
and drink, and all effeminacy, ambition, pride, excessive 
show, and austerity, in regard to his table, his house, and his 
clothes, but removes every care and affection which might 
withdraw or hinder him from aspiring to the heavenly life, 
and cultivating the interest of his soul.1 It was well said 


1 French, " Parer notre ame de ses vrais orneir.ens ;" — deck our soul 
with its true ornaments. 


CHAP. X. 


CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 


297 


by Cato : Luxury causes great care, and produces great 
carelessness as to virtue ; and it is an old proverb, — Those 
who are much occupied with the care of the body, usually 
give little care to the soul. Therefore, Avhile the liberty of 
the Christian in external matters is not to be tied down to 
a strict rule, it is, however, subject to this law — he must 
indulge as little as possible ; on the other hand, it must be 
his constant aim, not only to curb luxury, but to cut off all 
show of superfluous abundance, and carefully beware of con- 
verting a help into an hinderance. 

5. lAnother rule is, that those in narrow and slonrW pitpiim- 
stances should learn to bear their wants patiently, that they 
may not become immoderately desirous of things, the mode- 
rate use of which implies no small progress in the school of 
Christ. For in addition to the many other vices which 
accompany a longing for earthly good, he who ia impalieftj; 
under poverty almost always betrays the enntrnry <1igpngp in 
abundancer*] By this I mean, that he who is ashamed o£_a~ 
sord id garment will be vain-glorious of a splendid one ; he 
who not contented with a slender, feels annoyed at the want 

of a mnrp lnxnriouI^Upper^Vvln^m^lNpHi M I >■] y M.lnis<?~hia 

luxury if he obtains it ; he who has a difficulty, and is djs- 
satisfied in submitting to a private and humble condition, 
w ill be unable to refrain from pride, if he attain to_hnn our. 
VLet it be the aim of all who have any unfeigned desire for 
piety to learn^ifter t^e avimplfl nf th^-Ap1"-!!^ " b"th to 
be full^ and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer 
need," (Philip, iv. l^Tj Scripture, moreover, has a, third 
rule for modifying theuse of earthly blessings. jff"e have 
already adverted to it when considering the offices of 
charity. yFor itjdeclares that they have all been given us 
by the kindness of God, and appointed for our use under 
the ~condition~~of being regarded as imsts; nf wliioK. h-p 
must o"p Hn.y g'vp- ac.ooim*. ' »We must, therefore, adminis- 
ter them as if we constantly heard the words sormding in 
our "ears, *"• Give an account, of yonr steward skip." At the 
same time, let us remember by whom the account isto be 
taken, viz., by him who, while he so highly-" commends^ 
abstinence, sobriety, frugality, and moderation, abominates 


208 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

luxury, pride, ostpnt^^'^^y-11"1 "■■'■■'j , "ilin ippvnvpg 0f no 
administration but that__whifh ii fMHnbir"d -with "hnritVj 
who wTith his own lips has already condemned all jthose plea- 
sures which witEHraw the heart from chastity and purity, 
or darken the intellect^/ 

6r\The lastThmg to be observed is, that the Lord enjoins 
every one of us, in all the actions of life, to have respect to our 
own calling. He knows the boiling restlessness of the human 
mind, the fickleness with which it is borne hither and thither, 
its eagerness to hold opposites at one time in its grasp, its 
ambition. Therefore, lest all things should be thrown into 
confusion by our folly and rashness, he has assigned distinct 
duties to each in the different modes of life. And that no 
one may presume to overstep his proper limits, he has dis- 
tinguished the different modes of life by the name of callings. 
Every man's mode of life, therefore, is a kind of station 
assigned him by the Lord, that he may not be always driven 
about at random. So necessary is this distinction, that all 
our actions are thereby estimated in his sight, and often in a 
very different way from that in which human reason or 
philosophy would estimate thenij There is no more illus- 
trious deed even among philosophers than to free one's 
country from tyranny, and yet the private individual who 
stabs the tyrant is openly condemned by the voice of the 
heavenly Judge. But I am unwilling to dwell on particular 
examples ; it is enough to know that (m every thing the 
call of the Lord is the foundation and ^Beginning of right 
action. He who does not act with reference to it will 
never, in the discharge of duty, keep the right path. He 
will sometimes be able, perhaps, to give the semblance of 
something laudable, but whatever it may be in the sight of 
man, it will be rejected before the throne of God; and 
besides, there will be no harmony in the different parts of 
his life. Hence, he only who directs his life to this end 
will have it properly framed ; because, free from the impulse 
of rashness, he will not attempt more than his calling 
justifies, knowing that it is unlawful to overleap the pre- 
scribed boundsT] He who is obscure will not decline to 
cultivate a private life, that he may not desert the post at 


CIIAI\ X. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 29i) 

which God has placed him. Again/in all our cares, toils, 
annoyances, and other burdens, it wiirbe no small alleviation 
to know that all these are under the superintendence of 
God^ The magistrate will more willingly perform his office, 
and the father of a family confine himself to his proper 
sphere. £Every one in his particular mode of life will, with- 
out repining, suffer its inconveniences, cares, uneasiness, and 
anxiety, persuaded that God has laid on the burden. This, 
too, will afford admirable consolation, that in following your 
proper calling, no work will be so mean and sordid as not 
to have a splendour and value in the eye of GodJ 


300 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 


CHAPTER XI. 

OF JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH. BOTH THE NAME AND THE 
REALITY DEFINED. 

In this chapter and the seven which follow, the doctrine of Justification 
by Faith is expounded, and opposite errors refuted. The following may- 
be regarded as the arrangement of these chapters : — Chapter XI. states 
the doctrine, and the four subsequent chapters, by destroying the right- 
eousness of works, confirm the righteousness of faith, each in the order 
which appears in the respective titles of these chapters. In Chapter 
XII. the doctrine of Justification is confirmed by a description of perfect 
righteousness ; in Chapter XIII. by calling attention to two precautions ; 
in Chapter XIV. by a consideration of the commencement and progress 
of regeneration in the regenerate ; and in Chapter XV. by two very 
pernicious effects which constantly accompany the righteousness of works. 
The three other chapters are devoted to refutation ; Chapter XVI. 
disposes of the objections of opponents; Chapter XVII. replies to the 
arguments drawn from the promises of the Law or the Gospel ; Chapter 
XVIII. refutes what is said in support of the righteousness of faith from 
the promise of reward. 

There are three principal divisions in the Eleventh Chapter. I. The 
terms used in this discussion are explained, sec. 1-4. II. Osiander's 
dream as to essential righteousness impugned, sec. 5-13. III. The 
righteousness of faith established in opposition to the righteousness of 
works. 

Sections. 

1. Connection between the doctrine of Justification aud that of Regene- 

ration. The knowledge of this doctrine very necessary for two 
reasons. 

2. For the purpose of facilitating the exposition of it, the terms are 

explained. 1. What it is to be justified in the sight of God. 

2. To be justified by works. 3. To be justified by faith. Defini- 
tion. 

3. Various meanings of the term Justification. 1. To give praise to 

God and truth. 2. To make a vain display of righteousness. 

3. To impute righteousness by faith, by and on account of 
Christ. Confirmation from an expression of Paul, and another of 
our Lord. 


CIiAI\ XI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 301 

4. Another confirmation from a comparison with other expressions, in 

which justification means free righteousness before God through 
faith in Jesus Christ. 1. Acceptance. 2. Imputation of right- 
eousness. 3. Remission of sins. 4. Blessedness. 5. Reconcilia- 
tion with God. 6. Righteousness by the obedience of Christ. 

5. The second part of the chapter. Osiander's dream as to essential 

righteousness refuted. 1. Osiander's argument : Answer. 2. Osian- 
der's second argument : Answer. Third argument : Answer. 

6. Necessity of this refutation. Fourth argument : Answer. Confir- 

mation : Another answer. Fifth and sixth arguments and 
answers. 

7. Seventh and eighth arguments : Answers. 

8. Ninth argument : Answer. 

9. Tenth argument : Answer. 

10. In what sense Christ is said to be our righteousness. Eleventh and 

twelfth arguments and answers. 

11. Thirteenth and fourteenth arguments: Answers. An exception by 

Osiander. Imputed and begun righteousness to be distinguished. 
Osiander confounds them. Fifteenth argument : Answer. 

12. Sixteenth argument, a dream of Osiander : Answer Other four 

arguments and answers. Conclusion of the refutation of Osiander's 
errors. 

13. Last part of the chapter. Refutation of the Sophists pretending a 

righteousness compounded partly of faith and partly of works. 

14. Sophistical evasion by giving the same name to different things : 

Two answers. 

15. Second evasion : Two answers. First answer. Pernicious conse- 

quences resulting from this evasion. 

16. Second answer, showing wherein, according to Scripture, Justification 

consists. 

17. In explanation of this doctrine of Justification, two passages of 

Scripture produced. 

18. Another passage of Scripture. 

19. Third evasion. Papistical objection to the doctrine of Justification 

by Faith alone : Three answers. Fourth evasion : Three answers. 

20. Fifth evasion, founded on the application of the term Righteousness 

to good works, aud also on their reward : Answer, confirmed by 
the invincible argument of Paul. Sixth evasion : Answer. 

21. Osiander and the Sophists being thus refuted, the accuracy of the 

definition of Justification by Faith established. 

22. Definition confirmed. 1. By passages of Scripture. 2. By the 

writings of the ancient Fathers. 

23. Man justified by faith, not because by it he obtains the Spirit, and is 

thus made righteous, but because by faith he lays hold of the 
tlVrigliteousness of Christ. An objection removed. An example of 
the doctrine of Justification by Faith from the works of Ambrose. 


302 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

1. I trust I have now sufficiently shown1 how man's only 
resource for escaping from the curse of the law, and recover- 
ing salvation, lies in faith ; and also what the nature of faith 
is, what the benefits which it confers, and the fruits which it 
produces. The whole may be thus summed up : Christ given 
to us by the kindness of God is apprehended and possessed 
by faith, by means of which we obtain in particular a two- 
fold benefit ; first, being reconciled by the righteousness of 
Christ, God becomes, instead of a judge, an indulgent Father ; 
and, secondly, being sanctified by his Spirit, we aspire to 
integrity and purity of life. This second benefit, viz., rege- 
neration, appears to have been already sufficiently discussed. 
On the other hand, the subject of justification was discussed 
more cursorily, because it seemed of more consequence first 
to explain that the faith by which alone, through the mercy 
of God, we obtain free justification, is not destitute of good 
works ; and also to show the true nature of these good works 
on which this question partly turns. The doctrine of Justi- 
fication is now to be fully discussed, and discussed under the 
conviction, that as it is the principal ground on which reli- 
gion must be supported, so it requires greater care and 
attention. For unless you understand first of all what your 
position is before God, and what the judgment which he 
passes upon you, you have no foundation on which your sal- 
vation can be laid, or on which piety towards God can be 
reared. The necessity of thoroughly understanding this sub- 
ject Avill become more apparent as Ave proceed with it. 

2. Lest we should stumble at the very threshold, (this we 
should do were we to begin the discussion without knowing 
what the subject is,) let us first explain the meaning of the 
expressions, To be justified in the sight of God, To be justified 
by faith or by icorks. A man is said to be justified in the 
sight of God when in the judgment of God he is deemed 
righteous, and is accepted on account of his righteousness ; 
for as iniquity is abominable to God, so neither can the sin- 
ner find grace in his sight, so far as he is and so long as he 


1 See Institutes, Book II. chap. vi. and vii. and Book III. from t\\C". 
mencement to the present chapter. 


CHAP. XI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 303 

is regarded as a sinner. Hence, wherever sin is, there also 
are the wrath and vengeance of God. He, on the other 
hand, is justified who is regarded not as a sinner, but as right- 
eous, and as such stands acquitted at the judgment-seat of 
God, where all sinners are condemned. As an innocent 
maiij when charged before an impartial judge, who decides 
according to his innocence, is said to be justified by the 
judge, so a man is said to be justified by God when, removed 
from the catalogue of sinners, he has God as the witness and 
assertor of his righteousness. In the same manner, a man 
will be said to he justified by tvorks, if in his life there can be 
found a purity and holiness which merits an attestation of 
righteousness at the throne of God, or if by the perfection of 
his works he can answer and satisfy the divine justice. On 
the contrary, a man will he justified by faith when, excluded 
from the righteousness of works, he by faith lays hold of the 
righteousness of Christ, and clothed in it appears in the sight 
of God not as a sinner, but as righteous. Thus we simply 
interpret justification, as the acceptance with which God 
receives us into his favour as if we were righteous ; and Ave 
say that this justification consists in the forgiveness of sins 
and the imputation of the righteousness of Christ, (see sec. 
21 and 23.) 

3. In confirmation of this there are many clear passages of 
Scripture. First, it cannot be denied that this is the proper 
and most usual signification of the term. But as it were 
too tedious -to collect all the passages, and compare them with 
each other, let it suffice to have called the reader's attention 
to the fact : he will easily convince himself of its truth. I 
will only mention a few passages in which the justification of 
which we speak is expressly handled. First, when Luke 
relates that all the people that heard Christ "justified God," 
(Luke vii. 29,) and when Christ declares, that " Wisdom is 
justified of all her children," (Luke vii. 35,) Luke means not 
that they conferred righteousness which always dwells in per- 
fection with God, although the whole world should attempt 
to wrest it from him, nor does Christ mean that the doctrine 
of salvation is made just : this it is in its own nature ; but 
both modes of expression are equivalent to attributing due 


304 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

praise to God and his doctrine. On the other hand, when 
Christ upbraids the Pharisees for justifying themselves, 
(Luke xvi. 15,) he means not that they acquired righteous- 
ness by acting properly, but that they ambitiously courted a 
reputation for righteousness of which they were destitute. 
Those acquainted with Hebrew understand the meaning bet- 
ter : for in that language the name of wicked is given not 
only to those who are conscious of wickedness, but to those 
who receive sentence of condemnation. Thus, when Bath- 
sheba says, " I and my son Solomon shall be counted offend- 
ers," she does not acknowledge a crime, but complains that 
she and her son will be exposed to the disgrace of being num- 
bered among reprobates and criminals, (1 Kings i. 21.) It is, 
indeed, plain from the context, that the term even in Latin1 
must be thus understood, viz., relatively, and does not denote 
any quality. In regard to the use of the term with reference to 
the present subject, when Paul speaks of the Scripture, tl fore- 
seeing that God would justify the heathen through faith," 
(Gal. iii. 8,) what other meaning can you give it than that 
God imputes righteousness by faith ? Again, when he says, 
" that he (God) might be just, and the justifier of him who 
believeth in Jesus," (Rom. iii. 26,) what can the meaning be, 
if not that God, in consideration of their faith, frees them 
from the condemnation which their wickedness deserves? 
This appears still more plainly at the conclusion, Avhen he ex- 
claims, " Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's 
elect ? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth ? 
It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is 
even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession 
for us," (Rom. viii. 33, 34.) For it is just as if he had said, 
Who shall accuse those whom God has acquitted ? Who shall 
condemn those for whom Christ pleads ? To justify, there- 
fore, is nothing else than to acquit from the charge of guilt, 
as if innocence were proved. Hence, when God justifies us 
through the intercession of Christ, he does not acquit us on a 
proof of our own innocence, but by an imputation of right- 


1 Latin, " etiam dum Latine legitur.'1— French, " mesme en Grec et en 
Latin ;" even in Greek and Latin. 


CHAP. XI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 305 

eousness, so that though not righteous in ourselves, we are 
deemed righteous in Christ. Thus it is said, in Paul's discourse 
in the Acts, " Through this man is preached unto you the for- 
giveness of sins ; and by him all that believe are justified from 
all things from which ye could not be justified by the law of 
Moses," (Acts xiii. 38, 39.) You see that after remission of 
sins justification is set down by way of explanation ; you see 
plainly that it is used for acquittal ; you see how it cannot be 
obtained by the works of the law ; you see that it is entirely 
through the interposition of Christ ; you see that it is obtain- 
ed by faith ; you see, in fine, that satisfaction intervenes, 
since it is said that we are justified from our sins by Christ. 
Thus when the publican is said to have gone down to his 
house "justified," (Luke xviii. 14,) it cannot be held that he 
obtained this justification by any merit of works. All that 
is said is, that after obtaining the pardon of sins he was 
regarded in the sight of God as righteous. He was justified, 
therefore, not by any approval of works, but by gratuitous 
acquittal on the part of God. Hence Ambrose elegantly terms 
confession of sins "legal justification," (Ambrose on Psalm 
cxviii. Serm. x.) 

4. Without saying more about the term, we shall have no 
doubt as to the thing meant if we attend to the description 
which is given of it. For Paul certainly designates justification 
by the term acceptance, when he says to the Ephesians, " Hav- 
ing predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus 
Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, 
to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made 
us accepted in the Beloved," (Eph. i. 5, 6.) His meaning is 
the very same as where he elsewhere says, " being justified 
freely by his grace," (Rom. iii. 24.) In the fourth chapter of 
the Epistle to the Romans, he first terms it the imputation of 
righteousness, and hesitates not to place it in forgiveness of 
sins : " Even as David also describeth the blessedness of the 
man unto whom God imputeth righteousness without works, 
saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven," &c, 
(Rom. iv. 6-8.) There, indeed, he is not speaking of a part 
of justification, but of the whole. He declares, moreover, 
that a definition of it was given by David, when he pro- 
VOL. II. u 


306 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

nounced him blessed who has obtained the free pardon of his 
sins. Whence it appears that this righteousness of which he 
speaks is simply opposed to judicial guilt.1 But the most 
satisfactory passage on this subject is that in which he 
declares the sum of the Gospel message to be reconciliation 
to God, who is pleased, through Christ, to receive us into 
favour by not imputing our sins, (2 Cor. v. 18-21.) Let my 
readers carefully weigh the whole context. For Paul shortly 
after adding, by way of explanation, in order to designate the 
mode of reconciliation, that Christ who knew no sin was 
made sin for us, undoubtedly understands by reconciliation 
nothing else than justification. Nor, indeed, could it be said, 
as he elsewhere does, that we are made righteous u by the 
obedience" of Christ, (Rom. v. 19,) were it not that we are 
deemed righteous in the sight of God in him and not in 
ourselves. 

5. But as Osiander has introduced a kind of monstrosity 
termed essential righteousness, by which, although he designed 
not to abolish free righteousness, he involves it in darkness, 
and by that darkness deprives pious minds of a serious sense 
of divine grace ;2 before I pass to other matters, it may be 
proper to refute this delirious dream. And, first, the whole 
„ speculation is mere empty curiosity. He, indeed, heaps together 
many passages of Scripture showing that Christ is one with 
us, and we likewise one with him, a point which needs no 
proof; but he entangles himself by not attending to the bond 
of this unity. The explanation of all difficulties is easy to 
us, who hold that we are united to Christ by the secret 
agency of his Spirit, but he had formed some idea akin to that 
of the Manichees, desiring to transfuse the divine essence into 
men.3 Hence his other notion, that Adam was formed in the 

1 French, " Dont il appert qu'il note ces deux choses comme opposites, 
Estre justifies et Estre tenu coulpable ; a ce que le proces soit fait a l'homme 
qui aura failli ;" — whence it appears that he sets down as opposites the two 
things, To be justified, and To be held guilty, in that the process is 
brought against man who has failed. 

2 French, " Que les poures ames ne sauroyent comprendre en telle ob- 
scurite la grace de Christ ;" — that poor souls cannot in such obscurity com- 
prehend the grace of Christ. 

3 French, "C'est, que Tame est de l'essence de Dieu ;" — that is, that the 
soul is of the essence of God. 


CHAP. XI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 307 

image of God, because even before the fall Christ was destined 
to be the model of human nature. But as I study brevity, I will 
confine myself to the matter in hand. He says, that we are 
one with Christ. This we admit, but still we deny that the 
essence of Christ is confounded with ours. Then we say that 
he absurdly endeavours to support his delusions by iheans of 
this principle : that Christ is our righteousness, because he is 
the eternal God, the fountain of righteousness, the very right- 
eousness of God. My readers will pardon me for now only 
touching on matters which method requires me to defer to 
another place. But although he pretends that, by the term 
essential righteousness, he merely means to oppose the sen- 
timent that we are reputed righteous on account of Christ, 
he however clearly shows, that not contented with that 
righteousness, which was procured for us by the obedience 
and sacrificial death of Christ, he maintains that we are sub- 
stantially righteous in God by an infused essence as well as 
quality. For this is the reason why he so vehemently con- 
tends, that not only Christ but the Father and the Spirit 
dwell in us. The fact I admit to be true, but still I maintain 
it is wrested by him. He ought to have attended to the mode 
of dwelling, viz., that the Father and the Spirit are in Christ ; 
and as in him the fulness of the Godhead dwells, so in him we 
possess God entire. Hence, whatever he says separately 
concerning the Father and the Spirit, has no other tendency 
than to lead away the simple from Christ. Then he intro- 
duces a substantial mixture, by which God, transfusing him- 
self into us, makes us as it were a part of himself. Our 
being made one with Christ by the agency of the Spirit, he 
being the head and we the members, he regards as almost 
nothing unless his essence is mingled with us. But, as I have 
said, in the case of the Father and the Spirit he more clearly 
betrays his views, namely, that we are not justified by the 
mere grace of the Mediator, and that righteousness is not 
simply or entirely offered to us in his person, but that we are 
made partakers of divine righteousness when God is essen- 
tially united to us. 

6. Had he only said, that Christ by justifying us becomes 
ours by an essential union, and that he is our head not only 


308 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

in so far as he is man, but that as the essence of the divine 
nature is diffused into us, he might indulge his dreams with 
less harm, and, perhaps, it were less necessary to contest the 
matter with him ; but since this principle is like a cuttle-fish, 
which, by the ejection of dark and inky blood, conceals its 
many tails,1 if we would not knowingly and willingly allow 
ourselves to be robbed of that righteousness which alone 
gives us full assurance of our salvation, we must strenuously 
resist. For, in the whole of this discussion, the noun righteous- 
ness, and the verb to justify, are extended by Osiander to two 
parts ; to be justified being not only to be reconciled to God 
by a free pardon, butalso to be made just ; and righteousness 
being not a free imputation, but the holiness and integrity 
which the divine essence dwelling in us inspires. And he 
vehemently asserts (see sec. 8) that Christ is himself our 
righteousness, not in so far as he, by expiating sins, appeased 
the Father, but because he is the eternal God and life. To 
prove the first point, viz., that God justifies not only by 
pardoning but by regenerating, he asks, whether he leaves 
those whom he justifies as they were by nature, making no 
change upon their vices ? The answer is very easy : as Christ 
cannot be divided into parts, so the two things, justification 
and sanctification, which we perceive to be united together 
in him, are inseparable. Whomsoever, therefore, God 
receives into his favour, he presents with the Spirit of adop- 
tion, whose agency forms them anew into his image. But if 
the brightness of the sun cannot be separated from its heat, 
are we therefore to say, that the earth is warmed by light 
and illumined by heat ? Nothing can be more apposite to 
the matter in hand than this simile. The sun by its heat 
quickens and fertilizes the earth ; by its rays enlightens and 
illumines it. Here is a mutual and undivided connection, 
and yet reason itself prohibits us from transferring the peculiar 
properties of the one to the other. In the confusion of a 

1 French, "Mais coniine le principe qu'il prend est conime une seche, 
laquelle en jettant son sang qui est noir comme encre, trouble l'eau d'alen- 
tour pour cacher une grande multitude de queues ;" — But as the principle 
which he adopts is like a cuttle-fish, which, casting out its blood, which is 
black as ink, troubles the water all around, to hide a great multitude of 
tails. 


CHAP. XI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 309 

twofold grace, which Osiander obtrudes upon us, there is a 
similar absurdity. Because those whom God freely regards 
as righteous, he in fact renews to the cultivation of righte- 
ousness, Osiander confounds that free acceptance with this 
gift of regeneration, and contends that they are one and the 
same. But Scripture, while combining both, classes them 
separately, that it may the better display the manifold grace 
of God. Nor is Paul's statement superfluous, that Christ is 
made unto us "righteousness and sanctification," (1 Cor. i. 
30.) And whenever he argues from the salvation procured 
for us, from the paternal love of God and the grace of Christ, 
that we are called to purity and holiness, he plainly intimates, 
that to be justified is something else than to be made new 
creatures. Osiander on coming to Scripture corrupts every 
passage which he quotes. Thus when Paul says, " to him 
that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the 
ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness," he expounds 
justifying as making just. With the same rashness he perverts 
the whole of the fourth chapter to the Romans. He hesitates 
not to give a similar gloss to the passage which I lately 
quoted, " Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's 
elect ? It is God that justifieth." Here it is plain that 
guilt and acquittal simply are considered, and that the 
Apostle's meaning depends on the antithesis. Therefore his 
futility is detected both in his argument and his quotations 
for support from Scripture. He is not a whit sounder in 
discussing the term righteousness, when it is said, that faith 
was imputed to Abraham for righteousness after he had 
embraced Christ, (who is the righteousness of God and God 
himself,) and was distinguished by excellent virtues. Hence 
it appears, that two things which are perfect are viciously 
converted by him into one which is corrupt. For the righte- 
ousness which is there mentioned pertains not to the whole 
course of life; or rather, the Spirit testifies, that though 
Abraham greatly excelled in virtue, and by long perseverance 
in it had made so much progress, the only way in which he 
pleased God was by receiving the grace which was offered 
by the promise, in faith. From this it follows, that, as Paul 
justly maintains, there is no room for works in justification. 


310 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

7. When he objects that the power of justifying exists not 
in faith, considered in itself, but only as receiving Christ, I 
willingly admit it. For did faith justify of itself, or (as it is 
expressed) by its own intrinsic virtue, as it is always weak 
and imperfect, its efficacy would be partial, and thus our 
righteousness being maimed, would give us only a portion of 
salvation. We indeed imagine nothing of the kind, but say, 
that, properly speaking, God alone justifies. The same thing 
we likewise transfer to Christ, because he was given to us 

1 for righteousness ; while we compare faith to a kind of vessel, 
because we are incapable of receiving Christ, unless we are 
emptied and come with open mouth to receive his grace. 
Hence it follows, that we do not withdraw the power of 
justifying from Christ, when Ave hold that, previous to his 
righteousness, he himself is received by faith. Still, however, 
I admit not the tortuous figure of the sophist, that faith is 
Christ ; as if a vessel of clay were a treasure, because gold 
is deposited in it.1 And yet this is no reason why faith, 
though in itself of no dignity or value, should not justify us 
by giving Christ ; just as such a vessel filled with coin may 
give wealth. I say, therefore, that faith, which is only the 
instrument for receivingjustificatioiij is ignorantly confounded 
with Christ, who is the material cause, as well as the author 
and minister of this great blessing. This disposes of the 
difficulty, viz., how the term faith is to be understood when 
treating of justification. 

8. Osiander goes still farther in regard to the mode of 
receiving Christ, holding, that by the ministry of the external 
word the internal word is received ; that he may thus lead 
us away from the priesthood of Christ, and his office of 
Mediator, to his eternal divinity.2 We, indeed, do not divide 
Christ, but hold that he who, reconciling us to God in his 

1 French, " Quant a d'autres folies extravagantes d'Osiander, tout 
homme de sain jugeinent les rejettera ; comme quand il dit que la foy est 
Jesus Christ, autant que s'il disoit, qu'un pot de terre est le thresor qui est 
cache dedans ;" — As to the other extravagant follies of Osiander, every man 
of sound judgment will reject them ; for instance, when he says that faith 
is Jesus Christ, as much as if he said, that an earthen pot is the treasure 
which is hidden in it. 

8 French, " Faisant semblant de les rauir a la divinite d'icclui ;" — under 
pretence of leading them to his divinity. 


.CHAP. XI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 311 

flesh, bestowed righteousness upon us, is the eternal Word of 
God ; and that he could not perform the office of Mediator, 
nor acquire righteousness for us, if he were not the eternal 
God. Osiander will have it, that as Christ is God and man, 
he was made our righteousness in respect not of his human 
but of his divine nature. But if this is a peculiar property 
of the Godhead, it will not be peculiar to Christ, but common 
to him with the Father and the Spirit, since their righteous- 
ness is one and the same. Thus it would be incongruous to 
say, that that which existed naturally from eternity was 
made ours. But granting that God was made unto us 
righteousness, what are we to make of Paul's interposed 
statement, that he was so made by God ? This certainly is 
peculiar to the office of Mediator, for although he contains in 
himself the divine nature, yet he receives his own proper 
title, that he may be distinguished from the Father and the 
Spirit. But he makes a ridiculous boast of a single passage 
of Jeremiah, in which it is said, that Jehovah wall be our 
righteousness, (Jer. xxiii. 6 ; xxxiii. 16.) But all he can 
extract from this is, that Christ, who is our righteousness, 
was God manifest in the flesh. We have elsewhere quoted 
from Paul's discourse, that God purchased the Church with 
his own blood, (Acts xx. 28.) Were any one to infer from 
this that the blood by which sins were expiated was divine, 
and of a divine nature, who could endure so foul a heresy ? 
But Osiander, thinking that he has gained the whole cause 
by this childish cavil, swells, exults, and stuffs whole pages with 
his bombast, whereas the solution is simple and obvious, viz., 
that Jehovah, when made of the seed of David, was indeed to 
be the righteousness of believers, but in what sense Isaiah 
declares, " By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify 
many," (Isa. liii. 11.) Let us observe that it is the Father 
who speaks. He attributes the office of justifying to the 
Son, and adds the reason, — because he is ts righteous." He 
places the method, or medium, (as it is called,) in the doctrine 
by which Christ is known. For the word J"l$Tf is more 
properly to be understood in a passive sense. Hence I infer, 
first, that Christ was made righteousness when he assumed 
the form of a servant ; secondly, that he justified us by his 


312 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III.. 

obedience to the Father j and, accordingly, that he does not 
perform this for us in respect of his divine nature, but 
according to the nature of the dispensation laid upon him. 
For though God alone is the fountain of righteousness, and 
the only way in Avhich we are righteous is by participation 
with him, yet, as by our unhappy revolt we are alienated 
from his righteousness, it is necessary to descend to this 
lower remedy, that Christ may justify us by the power of his 
death and resurrection. 

9. If he objects, that this work by its excellence transcends 
human, and therefore can only be ascribed to the divine 
nature ; I concede the former point, but maintain, that on 
the latter he is ignorantly deluded. For although Christ 
could neither purify our souls by his own blood, nor appease 
the Father by his sacrifice, nor acquit us from the charge of 
guilt, nor, in short, perform the office of priest, unless he had 
been very God, because no human ability was equal to such 
a burden, it is however certain, that he performed all these 
things in his human nature. If it is asked, in what way we 
are justified ? Paul answers, by the obedience of Christ. Did 
he obey in any other way than by assuming the form of a 
servant? We infer, therefore, that righteousness was manifested - 
to us in his flesh. In like manner, in another passage, (which 
I greatly wonder that Osiander does not blush repeatedly 
to quote,) he places the fountain of righteousness entirely in 
the incarnation of Christ, " He hath made him to be sin for 
us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness 
of God in him," (2 Cor. v. 21.) Osiander in turgid sentences 
lays hold of the expression, righteousness of God, and shouts 
victory ! as if he had proved it to be his own phantom of 
essential righteousness,1 though the words have a very 
different meaning, viz., that we are justified through the 
expiation made by Christ. That the righteousness of God 
is used for the righteousness which is approved by God, 
should be known to mere tyros, as in John, the praise of 

1 French, " II magnifie la justice de Dieu tant et plus ; mais c'est pour 
triompher comme s'il auoit gagne ce poinct, que la justice de Dieu nous est 
essencielle ;" — He magnifies the righteousness of God above measure ; but 
it is to triumph, as if he had gained this point, that the righteousness of 
God is essential to us. 


CHAP. XI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 313 

God is contrasted with the praise of men,1 (John xii. 43.) 
I know that by the righteousness of God is sometimes meant 
that of which God is the author, and which he bestows upon 
us ; but that here the only thing meant is, that being sup- 
ported by the expiation of Christ, we are able to stand at 
the tribunal of God, sound readers perceive without any 
observation of mine. The word is not of so much importance, 
provided Osiander agrees with us in this, that we are justified 
by Christ in respect he was made an expiatory victim for us. 
This he could not be in his divine nature. For which reason 
also, when Christ would seal the righteousness and salvation 
which he brought to us, he holds forth the sure pledge of it 
in his flesh. He indeed calls himself " living bread," but, in 
explanation of the mode, adds, " my flesh is meat indeed, and 
my blood is drink indeed," (John vi. 55.) The same doctrine 
is clearly seen in the sacraments ; which, though they direct 
our faith to the whole, not to a part of Christ, yet, at the 
same time, declare that the materials of righteousness and 
salvation reside in his flesh ; not that the mere man of him- 
self justifies or quickens, but that God was pleased, by means 
of a Mediator, to manifest his own hidden and incompre- 
hensible nature. Hence I often repeat, that Christ has 
been in a manner set before us as a fountain, whence we may 
draw what would otherwise lie without use in that deep and 
hidden abyss which streams forth to us in the person of the 
Mediator.2 In this way, and in this meaning, I deny not 
that Christ,- as he is God and man, justifies us ; that this work 
is common also to the Father and the Holy Spirit ; in fine, 

1 The French adds, " signifiant, que ceux desquels il parle ont nage 
entre deux eaux ; pource qu'ils aimoyent mieux garder leur bonne reputa- 
tion au monde, que d'etre priser devant Dieu ;" — meaning, that those of 
whom he speaks were swimming between two streams ; that they preferred 
keeping their good reputation in the world, to being prized in the sight 
of God. 

2 French, " Pour ceste cause j'ay accoustume de dire que Christ nous est 
comme une fontaine, dont chacun peut puiser et boire a son aise et a 
souhait ; et que par son moyen les biens celestes sourdent et decoulent a 
nous, lesquels ne nous profiteroyent rien demeurans en la majeste de Dieu, 
qui est comme une source profonde ;" — For this cause I am accustomed 
to say, that Christ is to us like a fountain, of which every man may draw 
and drink at his ease, and to the fill ; and that by his means heavenly 
blessings rise and flow to us, which blessings would profit us nothing, 
remaining in the majesty of God, which is, as it were, a profound abyss. 


314 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

that the righteousness of which God makes us partakers is 
\ the eternal righteousness of the eternal God, provided effect 
is given to the clear and valid reasons to which I have ad- 
verted. 

10. Moreover, lest by his cavils he deceive the unwary, I 
acknowledge that we are devoid of this incomparable gift 
until Christ become ours. Therefore, to that union of the 
head and members, the residence of Christ in our hearts, in 
fine, the mystical union, we assign the highest rank, Christ 
when he becomes ours making us partners with him in the 
gifts with which he was endued. Hence we do not view 
him as at a distance and without us, but as we have put him 
on, and been ingrafted into his body, he deigns to make us 
one with himself, and, therefore, we glory in having a fellow- 
ship of righteousness with him. This disposes of Osiander's 
calumny, that we regard faith as righteousness ; as if we 
were robbing Christ of his rights when we say, that, destitute 
in ourselves, we draw near to him by faith, to make way for 
his grace, that he alone may fill us. But Osiander, spurning 
this spiritual union, insists on a gross mixture of Christ with 
believers ; and, accordingly, to excite prejudice, gives the 
name of Zuinglians1 to all who subscribe not to his fanatical 
heresy of essential righteousness, because they do not hold 
that, in the supper, Christ is eaten substantially. For my 
part, I count it the highest honour to be thus assailed by a 
haughty man, devoted to his own impostures ; though he 
assails not me only, but writers of known reputation through- 
out the world, and whom it became him modestly to venerate. 
This, however, does not concern me, as I plead not my own 
cause, and plead the more sincerely that I am free from 
every sinister feeling. In insisting so vehemently on essential 
righteousness, and an essential inhabitation of Christ within 
us, his meaning is, first, that God by a gross mixture2 trans- 
fuses himself into us, as he pretends that there is a carnal 
eating in the supper ; and, secondly, that by instilling his own 

1 The Latin, ''ideo Zuinglianos odiose nominat;" is in the French 
simply, " condamne furieusement ; " — furiously condemns. 

2 Latin, " crassa mixtura;" — French, " mixtion telle que les viandes que 
nous mangeons ; " — mixture such as the victuals we eat. 


CHAP. XI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 315 

righteousness into us, he makes us really righteous with 
himself, since, according to him, this righteousness is as well 
God himself as the probity, or holiness, or integrity of God. 
I will not spend much time in disposing of the passages of 
Scripture which he adduces, and which, though used in 
reference to the heavenly life, he wrests to our present state. 
Peter says, that through the knowledge of Christ " are given 
unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by them 
ye might be partakers of the divine nature," (2 Pet. i. 4 ;)x 
as if we now were what the gospel promises we shall be at 
the final advent of Christ ; nay, John reminds us, that " when 
he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as 
he is," (1 John iii. 2.) I only wished to give my readers a 
slender specimen of Osiander, it being my intention to decline 
the discussion of his frivolities, not because there is any 
difficulty in disposing of them, but because I am unwilling to 
annoy the reader with superfluous labour. 

11. But more poison lurks in the second branch, when he 
says that we are righteous together with God. I think I 
have already sufficiently proved, that although the dogma 
were not so pestiferous, yet because it is frigid and jejune, 
and falls by its own vanity, it must justly be disrelished by 
all sound and pious readers. But it is impossible to tolerate 
the impiety which, under the pretence of a twofold right- 
eousness, undermines our assurance of salvation, and hurry- 
ing us into the clouds, tries to prevent us from embracing 
the gift of expiation in faith, and invoking God with quiet 
minds. Osiander derides us for teaching, that to be justified 
is a forensic term, because it behoves us to be in reality 
just : there is nothing also to which he is more opposed 
than the idea of our being justified by a free imputation. 
Say, then, if God does not justify us by acquitting and 
pardoning, what does Paul mean when he says, " God was 
in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing 
their trespasses unto them" ? " He made him to be sin for 
us who knew no sin ; that we might be made the right eous- 

1 The French adds, " Osiander tire de la que Dieu a meslee son essence 
avec la nostre ; " — Osiander implies from this that God has mingled his 
essence with ours. 


316 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

ness of God in him," (2 Cor. v, 19, 21.) Here I learn, first, 
that those who are reconciled to God are regarded as right- 
eous : then the method is stated, God justifies by pardoning ; 
and hence, in another place, justification is opposed to accu- 
sation, (Rom. viii. 33 ;) this antithesis clearly demonstrating 
that the mode of expression is derived from forensic use. 
And, indeed, no man, moderately versant in the Hebrew 
tongue, (provided he is also of sedate brain,) is ignorant that 
this phrase thus took its rise, and thereafter derived its 
tendency and force. Now, then, when Paul says that 
David " describeth the blessedness of the man unto whom 
God imputeth righteousness without works, saying, Blessed 
are they whose iniquities are forgiven," (Rom. iv. 6, 7 ; Ps. 
xxxii. 1,) let Osiander say whether this is a complete or only 
a partial definition. He certainly does not adduce the 
Psalmist as a witness that pardon of sins is a part of right- 
eousness, or concurs with something else in justifying, but 
he includes the Avhole of righteousness in gratuitous forgive- 
ness, declaring those to be blessed " whose iniquities are 
forgiven, and whose sins are covered," and " to whom the 
Lord will not impute sin." He estimates and judges of his 
happiness from this, that in this way he is righteous not in 
reality, but by imputation. 

Osiander objects that it would be insulting to God, and 
contrary to his nature, to justify those who still remain 
wicked. But it ought to be remembered, as I already ob- 
served, that the gift of justification is not separated from 
regeneration, though the two things are distinct. But as it 
is too well known by experience, that the remains of sin 
always exist in the righteous, it is necessary that justification 
should be something very different from reformation to new- 
ness of life. This latter God begins in his elect, and carries 
on during the whole course of life, gradually and sometimes 
slowly, so that if placed at his judgment-seat they would 
always deserve sentence of death. He justifies not partially, 
but freely, so that they can appear in the heavens as if 
clothed with the purity of Christ. No portion of righteous- 
ness could pacify the conscience. It must be decided that 
we are pleasing to God, as being without exception righteous 


CHAP. XI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 317 

in his sight. Hence it follows that the doctrine of justifica- 
tion is perverted and completely overthrown whenever doubt 
is instilled into the mind, confidence in salvation is shaken, 
and free and intrepid prayer is retarded ; yea, whenever rest 
and tranquillity with spiritual joy are not established. Hence 
Paul argues against objectors, that " if the inheritance be 
of the law, it is no more of promise," (Gal. iii. 18,) that in 
this way faith would be made vain ; for if respect be had to 
works it fails, the holiest of men in that case finding nothing 
in which they can confide. This distinction between justifi- 
cation and regeneration (Osiander confounding the two, calls 
them a twofold righteousness) is admirably expressed by Paul. 
Speaking of his real righteousness, or the integrity bestowed 
upon him, (which Osiander terms his essential righteousness,) 
he mournfully exclaims, "O wretched man that I am! who shall 
deliver me from the body of this death ?" (Rom. vii. 24 ;) but 
betaking himself to the righteousness which is founded solely 
on the mercy of God, he breaks forth thus magnificently into 
the language of triumph : " Who shall lay any thing to the 
charge of God's elect ? It is God that justifieth." " Who 
shall separate us from the love of Christ ? shall tribulation, 
or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, 
or sword?" (Rom. viii. 33, 35.) He clearly declares that the 
only righteousness for him is that which alone suffices for com- 
plete salvation in the presence of God, so that that miserable 
bondage, the consciousness of which made him a little before 
lament his lot, derogates not from his confidence, and is no 
obstacle in his way. This diversity is well known, and indeed is 
familiar to all the saints who groan under the burden of sin, and 
yet with victorious assurance rise above all fears. Osiander' s 
objection as to its being inconsistent with the nature of God, 
falls back upon himself; for though he clothes the saints 
with a twofold righteousness as with a coat of skins, he is, 
however, forced to admit, that without forgiveness no man 
is pleasing to God. If this be so, let him at least admit, 
that with reference to what is called the proportion of impu- 
tation, those are regarded as righteous who are not so in 
reality. But how far shall the sinner extend this gratuitous 
acceptance, which is substituted in the room of righteousness ? 


318 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

Will it amount to the whole pound, or will it be only an 
ounce ? He will remain in doubt, vibrating to this side and 
to that, because he will be unable to assume to himself as 
much righteousness as will be necessary to give confidence. 
It is well that he who would prescribe a law to God is not 
the judge in this cause. But this saying will ever stand 
true, " That thou mightest be justified when thou speakest, 
and be clear when thou judgest," (Ps. li. 4.) What arrogance 
to condemn the Supreme Judge when he acquits freely, and 
try to prevent the response from taking effect : " I will have 
mercy on whom I will have mercy." And yet the interces- 
sion of Moses, which God calmed by this answer, was not 
for pardon to some individual, but to all alike, by wiping 
away the guilt to which all were liable. And we, indeed, 
say, that the lost are justified before God by the burial of 
their sins ; for (as he hates sin) he can only love those 
whom he justifies. But herein is the wondrous method of 
justification, that, clothed with the righteousness of Christ, 
they dread not the judgment of which they are worthy ; and 
while they justly condemn themselves, are yet deemed right- 
eous out of themselves. 

12. I must admonish the reader carefully to attend to the 
mystery which he boasts he is unwilling to conceal from 
them. For after contending with great prolixity that we do 
not obtain favour with God through the mere imputation of 
the righteousness of Christ, because (to use his own words) 
it were impossible for God to hold those as righteous who 
are not so, he at length concludes that Christ was given to 
us for righteousness, in respect not of his human, but of his 
divine nature ; and though this can only be found in the 
person of the Mediator, it is, however, the righteousness not 
of man, but of God. He does not now twist his rope of 
two righteousnesses, but plainly deprives the human nature 
of Christ of the office of justifying. It is worth while to 
understand what the nature of his argument is. It is said 
in the same passage that Christ is made unto us wisdom, 
(1 Cor. i. 30 ;) but this is true only of the eternal Word, 
and, therefore, it is not the man Christ that is made righteous- 
ness. I answer, that the only begotten Son of God was 


CIIAI\ XI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 319 

indeed his eternal wisdom, but that this title is applied to him 
by Paul in a different way, viz., because " in him are hid all the 
treasures of wisdom and righteousness," (Col. ii. 3.) That, 
therefore, which he had with the Father he manifested to 
us ; and thus Paul's expression refers not to the essence of 
the Son of God, but to our use, and is fitly applied to the 
human nature of Christ ; for although the light shone in 
darkness before he was clothed with flesh, yet he was a 
hidden light until he appeared in human nature as the Sun 
of Righteousness, and hence he calls himself the light of the 
world. It is also foolishly objected by Osiander, that justi- 
fying far transcends the power both of men and angels, since 
it depends not on the dignity of any creature, but on the 
ordination of God. Were angels to attempt to give satis- 
faction to God, they could have no success, because they are 
not appointed for this purpose, it being the peculiar office of 
Christ, who " hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, 
being made a curse for us," (Gal. iii. 13.) Those who deny 
that Christ is our righteousness, in respect of his divine 
nature, are wickedly charged by Osiander with leaving only 
a part of Christ, and (what is worse) with making two Gods ; 
because, while admitting that God dwells in us, they still 
insist that we are not justified by the righteousness of God. 
For though we call Christ the author of life, inasmuch as he 
endured death that he might destroy him who had the power 
of death, (Heb. ii. 14,) we do not thereby rob him of this 
honour, in his whole character as God manifested in the flesh. 
We only make a distinction as to the manner in which the 
righteousness of God comes to us, and is enjoyed by us, — a 
matter as to which Osiander shamefully erred. We deny not 
that that which was openly exhibited to us in Christ flowed from 
the secret grace and power of God ; nor do we dispute that 
the righteousness which Christ confers upon us is the right- 
eousness of God, and proceeds from him. What we con- 
stantly maintain is, that our righteousness and life are in the 
death and resurrection of Christ. I say nothing of that 
absurd accumulation of passages with which, without selec- 
tion or common understanding, he has loaded his readers, in 
endeavouring to show, that whenever mention is made of 


320 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

righteousness, this essential righteousness of his should be 
understood ; as when David implores help from the righteous- 
ness of God. This David does more than a hundred times, 
and as often Osiander hesitates not to pervert his meaning. 
Not a whit more solid is his objection, that the name of 
righteousness is rightly and properly applied to that by 
which we are moved to act aright, but that it is God only 
that worketh in us both to will and to do, (Phil. ii. 13.) For 
we deny not that God by his Spirit forms us anew to holi- 
ness and righteousness of life ; but we must first see whether 
he does this of himself, immediately, or by the hand of his 
Son, with whom he hath deposited all the fulness of the Holy 
Spirit, that out of his own abundance he may supply the 
wants of his members. Then, although righteousness comes 
to us from the secret fountain of the Godhead, it does not 
follow that Christ, who sanctified himself in the flesh on 
our account, is our righteousness in respect of his divine 
nature, (John xvii. 19.) Not less frivolous is his observa- 
tion, that the righteousness with which Christ himself was 
righteous was divine ; for had not the will of the Father 
impelled him, he could not have fulfilled the office assigned 
him. For although it has been elsewhere said that all the 
merits of Christ flow from the mere good pleasure of God, 
this gives no countenance to the phantom by which Osiander 
fascinates both his own eyes and those of the simple. For 
who will allow him to infer, that because God is the source 
and commencement of our righteousness, we are essentially 
righteous, and the essence of the divine righteousness dwells 
in us? In redeeming us, says Isaiah, u he (God) put on 
righteousness as a breastplate, and an helmet of salvation 
upon his head," (Isaiah lix. 17,) was this to deprive Christ 
of the armour which he had given him, and prevent him 
from being a perfect Redeemer ? All that the Prophet 
meant was, that God borrowed nothing from an external 
quarter, that in redeeming us he received no external aid. 
The same thing is briefly expressed by Paul in different 
terms, when he says that God set him forth " to declare his 
righteousness for the remission of sins." This is not the 
least repugnant to his doctrine : in another place, that " by 


CHAP. XL CHRISTIAN RELIGION. $21 

the obedience of one shall many be made righteous," (Rom. 
v. 19.) In short, every one who, by the entanglement of a 
twofold righteousness, prevents miserable souls from resting 
entirely on the mere mercy of God, mocks Christ by putting 
on him a crown of plaited thorns, 

13. But since a great part of mankind imagine a righteous- 
ness compounded of faith and works, let us here show that 
there is so wide a difference between justification by faith 
and by works, that the establishment of the one necessarily 
overthrow's the other. The Apostle says, " Yea doubtless, 
and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the 
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord : for whom I have 
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, 
that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having 
mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which 
is throuoh the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of 
God by faith," (Phil. hi. 8, 9.) You here see a comparison 
of contraries, and an intimation that every one who would 
obtain the righteousness of Christ must renounce his own. 
Hence he elsewhere declares the cause of the rejection of 
the Jews to have been, that " they being ignorant of God's 
righteousness, and going about to establish their own right- 
eousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteous- 
ness of God," (Rom. x. 3.) If we destroy the righteousness 
of God by establishing our own righteousness, then, in order 
to obtain his righteousness, our own must be entirely aban- 
doned. This also he shows, when he declares that boasting- 
is not excluded by the Law, but by faith, (Rom. hi. 27.) 
Hence it follows, that so long as the minutest portion of our 
own righteousness remains, we have still some ground for 
boasting. Now if faith utterly excludes boasting, the right- 
eousness of works cannot in any wray be associated with the 
righteousness of faith. This meaning is so clearly expressed 
in the fourth chapter to the Romans as to leave no room for 
cavil or evasion. " If Abraham were justified by works, he 
hath whereof to glory ;" and then it is added, " but not 
before God," (Rom. iv. 2.) The conclusion, therefore, is, 
that he was not justified by works. He then employs 
another argument from contraries, viz., when reward is paid 
VOL. II. x 


322 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

to works, it is done of debt, not of grace ; but the righteous- 
ness of faith is of grace : therefore it is not of the merit of 
works. Away, then, with the dream of those who invent a 
righteousness compounded of faith and works, (see Calvin, 
ad Concilium Tridentinum.) 

14. The Sophists, who delight in sporting with Scripture 
and in empty eavils, think they have a subtle evasion when 
they expound ivorks to mean, such as unregenerated men 
do literally, and by the effect of free will, without the grace 
of Christ, and deny that these have any reference to spiritual 
works.1 Thus, according to them, man i3 justified by faith 
as well as by Avorks, provided these are not his own works, 
but gifts of Christ and fruits of regeneration ; Paul's only 
object in so expressing himself being to convince the Jews, 
that in trusting to their own strength they foolishly arro- 
gated righteousness to themselves, whereas it is bestowed 
upon us by the Spirit of Christ alone, and not by studied 
efforts of our own nature. But they observe not that in the 
antithesis between Legal and Gospel righteousness, which 
Paul elsewhere introduces, all kinds of works, with whatever 
name adorned, are excluded, (Gal. iii. 11, 12.) For he says 
that the righteousness of the Law consists in obtaining sal- 
vation by doing what the Law requires, but that the right- 
eousness of faith consists in believing that Christ died and 
rose again, (Rom. x. 5-9.) Moreover, we shall afterwards 
see, at the proper place, that the blessings of sanctification 
and justification, which we derive from Christ, are different. 
Hence it follows, that not even spiritual works are taken 
into account when the power of justifying is ascribed to 
faith. And, indeed, the passage above quoted, in which 
Paul declares that Abraham had no ground of glorying 
before God, because he was not justified by works, ought not 
to be confined to a literal and external form of virtue, or to 
the effort of free will. The meaning is, that though the life 
of the Patriarch had been spiritual and almost angelic, yet 

1 French, " Ainsi ils disent que cela n'appartient de rien aux bonnes 
ceuvres des fideles qui se font par la vertu du Sainct Esprit ;" — Thus 
they say that that has no reference at all to the good works of believers, 
which are done by the power of the Holy Spirit. 


CHAP. XI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 323 

he could not by the merit of works have procured justifica- 
tion before God. 

15. The Schoolmen treat the matter somewhat more 
grossly by mingling their preparations with it ; and yet the 
others instil into the simple and unwary a no less pernicious 
dogma, when, under cover of the Spirit and grace, they hide 
the divine mercy, which alone can give peace to the trembling 
soul. We, indeed, hold with Paul, that those who fulfil the 
Law are justified by God ; but because we are all far from 
observing the Law, Ave infer that the works which should be 
most effectual to justification are of no avail to us, because 
we are destitute of them. In regard to vulgar Papists or 
Schoolmen, they are here doubly wrong, both in calling faith 
assurance of conscience while waiting to receive from God 
the reward of merits, and in interpreting divine grace to 
mean not the imputation of gratuitous righteousness, but 
the assistance of the Spirit in the study of holiness. They 
quote from an Apostle : " He that cometh to God must 
believe that he is, and that he is the rewarder of them that 
diligently seek him," (Heb. xi. 6.) But they observe not 
what the method of seeking is. Then in regard to the term 
grace, it is plain from their writings that they labour under a 
delusion. For Lombard holds that justification is given to 
us by Christ in two ways. " First," says he, (Lombard, 
Sent. Lib. iii. Dist. 16, c. 11,) "the death of Christ justifies 
us when by means of it the love by which we are made 
righteous is excited in our hearts ; and, secondly, when by 
means of it sin is extinguished, sin by which the devil held 
us captive, but by which he cannot now procure our con- 
demnation." You see here that the chief office of divine 
grace in our justification he considers to be its directing us 
to good works by the agency of the Holy Spirit. He intend- 
ed, no doubt, to follow the opinion of Augustine, but he fol- 
lows it at a distance, and even wanders far from a true 
imitation of him, both obscuring what was clearly stated by 
Augustine, and making what in him was less pure more cor- 
rupt. The Schools have always gone from worse to worse, 
until at length, in their downward path, they have degenerat- 
ed into a kind of Pelagianism. Even the sentiment of Au- 


324 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

gustine, or at least his mode of expressing it, cannot be en- 
tirely approved of. For although he is admirable in stripping 
man of all merit of righteousness, and transferring the whole 
praise of it to God, yet he classes the grace by which we are 
regenerated to newness of life under the head of sanctification. 

16. Scripture, when it treats of justification by faith, leads 
us in a very different direction. Turning away our view 
from our own works, it bids us look only to the mercy of 
God and the perfection of Christ. The order of justification 
which it sets before us is this : first, God of his mere gratui- 
tous goodness is pleased to embrace the sinner, in whom he 
sees nothing that can move him to mercy but wretchedness, 
because he sees him altogether naked and destitute of good 
works. He, therefore, seeks the cause of kindness in him- 
self, that thus he may affect the sinner by a sense of his 
goodness, and induce him, in distrust of his own works, to 
cast himself entirely upon his mercy for salvation. This is 
the meaning of faith by which the sinner comes into the 
possession of salvation, wrhen, according to the doctrine of 
the Gospel, he perceives that he is reconciled by God ; 
when, by the intercession of Christ, he obtains the pardon of 
his sins, and is justified ; and, though renewed by the Spirit 
of God, considers that, instead of leaning on his own works, 
he must look solely to the righteousness which is treasured 
up for him in Christ. When these things are weighed 
separately, they will clearly explain our view, though they 
may be arranged in a better order than that in which they 
are here presented. But it is of little consequence, provided 
they are so connected with each other as to give us a full 
exposition and solid confirmation of the whole subject. 

17. Here it is proper to remember the relation which we 
previously established between faith and the Gospel ; faith 
being said to justify because it receives and embraces the 
righteousness offered in the Gospel. By the very fact of its 
being said to be offered by the Gospel, all consideration of 
works is excluded. This Paul repeatedly declares, and in 
two passages, in particular, most clearly demonstrates. In 
the Epistle to the Romans, comparing the Law and the 
Gospel, he says, "Moses describeth the righteousness which 


CHAP. XI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 325 

is of the law, That the man which cloeth those things shall 
live by them. But the righteousness which is of faith speak- 
eth on this wise,— If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the 
Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath 
raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved," (Rom. x. 5, 
6, 9.) Do you see how he makes the distinction between 
the Law and the Gospel to be, that the former gives justifica- 
tion to works, whereas the latter bestows it freely without any 
help from works ? This is a notable passage, and may free us 
from many difficulties if we understand that the justification 
which is given us by the Gospel is free from any terms of 
Law. It is for this reason he more than once places the pro^ 
mise in diametrical opposition to the Law. li If the inherit- 
ance be of the law, it is no more of promise," (Gal. iii. 18.) 
Expressions of similar import occur in the same chapter. 
Undoubtedly the Law also has its promises ; and, therefore, 
between them and the Gospel promises there must be some 
distinction and difference, unless we are to hold that the 
comparison is inept. And in what can the difference consist 
unless in this, that the promises of the Gospel are gratuitous, 
and founded on the mere mercy of God, whereas the pro- 
mises of the Law depend on the condition of works ? But 
let no prater here allege that only the righteousness which men 
would obtrude upon God of their own strength and free will 
is repudiated ; since Paul declares, without exception, that 
the Law gained nothing by its commands, being such as 
none, not only of mankind in general, but none even of the 
most perfect, are able to fulfil. Love assuredly is the chief 
commandment in the Law ; and since the Spirit of God trains 
us to love, it cannot but be a cause of righteousness in us, 
though that righteousness even in the saints is defective, and 
therefore of no value as a ground of merit. 

18. The second passage is, " That no man is justified by 
the law in the sight of God, it is evident : for, The just shall 
live by faith. And the law is not of faith : but, The man 
that doeth them shall live in them," (Gal. iii. 11, 12 ; Hab. 
ii. 4.) How could the argument hold unless it be true that 
works are not to be taken into account, but are to be alto- 
gether separated? The Law, he says, is different from faith. 


326 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

"Why ? Because to obtain justification by it, works are 
required ; and hence it follows, that to obtain justification 
by the Gospel they are not required. From this statement, 
it appears that those who are justified by faith are justified 
independent of, nay, in the absence of, the merit of works, 
because faith receives that righteousness which the Gospel 
bestows. But the Gospel differs from the Law in this, that 
it does not confine justification to works, but places it 
entirely in the mercy of God. In like manner, Paul con- 
tends, in the Epistle to the Romans, that Abraham had no 
ground of glorying, because faith was imputed to him for 
righteousness, (Rom. iv. 2 ;) and he adds in confirmation, 
that the proper place for justification by faith is where there 
are no works to which reward is due. " To him that worketh 
is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt." What is 
given to faith is gratuitous, this being the force of the mean- 
ing of the words which he there employs. Shortly after he 
adds, " Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace," 
(Rom. iv. 16;) and hence infers that the inheritance is 
gratuitous because it is procured by faith. How so but 
just because faith, without the aid of works, leans entii-ely 
on the mercy of God ? And in the same sense, doubtless, 
he elsewhere teaches, that the righteousness of God without 
the Law was manifested, being witnessed by the Law and 
the Prophets, (Rom. iii. 21 ;) for excluding the Law, he 
declares that it is not aided by works, that Ave do not obtain 
it by working, but are destitute when we draw near to 
receive it. 

19. The reader now perceives with what fairness the 
Sophists of the present day cavil at our doctrine, when we say 
that a man is justified by faith alone, (Rom. iv. 2.) They 
dare not deny that he is justified hy faith, seeing Scripture so 
often declares it ; but as the word alone is nowhere expressly 
used, they will not tolerate its being added.1 Is it so ? 
What answer, then, will they give to the words of Paul, 

1 French, "Mais pource que ce mot Seule, n'y est point exprhne\ ils 
nous reprochent qu'il est adjouste du notre ;" — but because this -word 
Alone is not expressed, they upbraid us with having added it of our own 
accord. 


CHAP. XI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 327 

when he contends that righteousness is not of faith unless it 
be gratuitous ? How can it be gratuitous, and yet by works ? 
By what cavils, moreover, will they evade his declaration in 
another place, that in the Gospel the righteousness of God 
is manifested? (Rom. i. 17.) If righteousness is manifested 
in the Gospel, it is certainly not a partial or mutilated, but a 
full and perfect righteousness. The Law, therefore, has no 
part in it, and their objection to the exclusive word alone 
is not only unfounded, but is obviously absurd. Does he 
not plainly enough attribute everything to faith alone when 
he disconnects it with works ? What, I would ask, is meant 
by the expressions, " The righteousness of God without the 
law is manifested ;" " Being justified freely by his grace ;" 
" Justified by faith without the deeds of the law ?" (Rom. 
iii. 21, 24, 28.) Here they have an ingenious subterfuge, 
one which, though not of their own devising, but taken from 
Origen and some ancient writers, is most childish. They 
pretend that the works excluded are ceremonial, not moral 
works. Such profit do they make by their constant wrang- 
ling, that they possess not even the first elements of logic. 
Do they think the Apostle was raving when he produced, in 
proof of his doctrine, these passages ? " The man that 
doeth them shall live in them," (Gal. iii. 12.) "Cursed is 
every one that continueth not in all things that are Avritten 
in the book of the law to do them," (Gal. iii. 10.) Unless 
they are themselves raving, they will not say that life was 
promised to the observers of ceremonies, and the curse 
denounced only against the transgressors of them. If these 
passages are to be understood of the Moral Law, there can- 
not be a doubt that moral works also are excluded from the 
power of justifying. To the same effect are the arguments 
which he employs. " By the deeds of the law there shall no 
flesh be justified in his sight : for by the law is the know- 
ledge of sin," (Rom. iii. 20.) " The law worketh wrath," 
(Rom. iv. 15,) and therefore not righteousness. " The law 
cannot pacify the conscience," and therefore cannot confer 
righteousness. " Faith is imputed for righteousness," and 
therefore righteousness is not the reward of works, but is 
given without being due. Because " we are justified by 


328 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

faith," boasting is excluded. " Had there been a law given 
which could have given life, verily righteousness should have 
been by the law. But the Scripture hath concluded all 
under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might 
be given to them that believe," (Gal. iii. 21, 22.) Let them 
maintain, if they dare, that these things apply to ceremonies, 
and not to morals, and the very children will laugh at their 
effrontery. The true conclusion, therefore, is, that the whole 
Law is spoken of when the power of justifying is denied 
to it. 

20. Should any one wonder why the Apostle, not con- 
tented with having named works, employs this addition, the 
explanation is easy. However highly works may be esti- 
mated, they have their whole value more from the approba- 
tion of God than from their own dignity. For who will 
presume to plume himself before God on the righteousness 
of works, unless in so far as He approves of them ? Who 
will presume to demand of Him a reward except in so far as 
He has promised it ? It is owing entirely to the goodness 
of God that works are deemed worthy of the honour and 
reward of righteousness ; and, therefore, their whole value 
consists in this, that by means of them we endeavour to 
manifest obedience to God. Wherefore, in another passage, 
the Apostle, to prove that Abraham could not be justified 
by works, declares, " that the covenant, that was confirmed 
before of God in Christ, the law, which was four hundred 
and thirty years after, cannot disannul, that it should make 
the promise of none effect," (Gal. iii. 17.) The unskilful 
would ridicule the argument that there could be righteous 
works before the promulgation of the Law, but the Apostle, 
knowing that works could derive this value solely from the 
testimony and honour conferred on them by God, takes it 
for granted that, previous to the Law, they had no power of 
justifying. We see why he expressly terms them works of 
Law when he would deny the power of justifying to them, 
viz., because it was only with regard to such works that 
a question could be raised ; although he sometimes, witli- 
out addition, excepts all kinds of works whatever, as when 
on the testimony of David lie speaks of the man to whom 


CHAP. XI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 329 

the Lord imputetli righteousness without works, (Horn. iv. 
5, 6.) No cavils, therefore, can enable them to prove that 
the exclusion of works is not general. In vain do they lay- 
hold of the frivolous subtilty, that the faith alone, by which 
we are justified, " ivorketh hy love" and that love, therefore, 
is the foundation of justification. We, indeed, acknowledge 
with Paul, that the only faith which justifies is that which 
works by love, (Gal. v. 6;) but love does not give it its 
justifying power. Nay, its only means of justifying consists 
in its bringing us into communication with the righteousness 
of Christ. Otherwise the whole argument, on which the 
Apostle insists with so much earnestness, would fall. " To 
him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace, but 
of debt. But to him that worketh not, but believeth on 
him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for right- 
eousness." Could he express more clearly than in this way, 
that there is justification in faith only where there are no 
works to which reward is due, and that faith is imputed for 
righteousness only when righteousness is conferred freely 
without merit ? 

21. Let us now consider the truth of what was said in the 
definition, viz., that justification by faith is reconciliation with 
God, and that this consists solely in the remission of sins. 
We must always return to the axiom, that the wrath of God 
lies upon all men so long as they continue sinners. This is 
elegantly expressed by Isaiah in these words : " Behold, the 
Lord's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save ; neither 
his ear heavy, that it cannot hear : but your iniquities have 
separated between you and your God, and your sins have 
hid his face from you, that he will not hear," (Isaiah lix. 
1, 2.) We are here told that sin is a separation between 
God and man ; that His countenance is turned away from 
the sinner; and that it cannot be otherwise, since to have 
any intercourse with sin is repugnant to his righteousness. 
Hence the Apostle shows that man is at enmity with God 
until he is restored to favour by Christ, (Rom. v. 8-10.) 
When the Lord, therefore, admits him to union, he is said 
to justify him, because he can neither receive him into 
favour, nor unite him to himself, without changing his condi- 


330 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

tion from that of a sinner into that of a righteous man. We 
add, that this is done by remission of sins. For if those 
whom the Lord hath reconciled to himself are estimated by 
works, they will still prove to be in reality sinners, while they 
ought to be pure and free from sin. It is evident, therefore, 
that the only way in which those whom God embraces are 
made righteous, is by having their pollutions wiped away by 
the remission of sins, so that this justification may be termed 
in one word the remission of sins. 

22. Both of these become perfectly clear from the words 
of Paul : " God was in Christ reconciling the world unto 
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them ; and hath 
committed unto us the word of reconciliation." He then 
subjoins the sum of his embassy : " He hath made him to be 
sin for us wrho knew no sin ; that we might be made the 
righteousness of God in him," (2 Cor. v. 19-21.) He here 
uses righteousness and reconciliation indiscriminately, to 
make us understand that the one includes the other. The 
mode of obtaining this righteousness he explains to be, that 
our sins are not imputed to us. Wherefore, you cannot 
henceforth doubt how God justifies us when you hear that 
he reconciles us to himself by not imputing our faults. In 
the same manner, in the Epistle to the Romans, he proves, by 
the testimony of David, that righteousness is imputed without 
works, because he declares the man to be blessed " whose 
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered," and " unto 
whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity," (Rom. iv. 6; Ps. xxxii. 
1, 2.) There he undoubtedly uses blessedness for righteous- 
ness ; and as he declares that it consists in forgiveness of 
sins, there is no reason why we should define it otherwise. 
Accordingly, Zacharias, the father of John the Baptist, sings 
that the knowledge of salvation consists in the forgiveness of 
sins, (Luke i. 77.) The same course was followed by Paul 
when, in addressing the people of Antioch, he gave them a 
summary of salvation. Luke states that he concluded in 
this way : " Through this man is preached unto you the 
forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are justified 
from all things from which ye could not be justified by the 
law of Moses," (Acts xii. 38, 39.) Thus the Apostle con- 


CHAr. XI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 331 

nects forgiveness of sins with justification in such a way as 
to show that they are altogether the same ; and hence he 
properly argues that justification, which we OAve to the indul- 
gence of God, is gratuitous. Nor should it seem an unusual 
mode of expression to say that believers are justified before 
God not by works, but by gratuitous acceptance, seeing it 
is frequently used in Scripture, and sometimes also by 
ancient writers. Thus Augustine says : u The righteousness 
of the saints in this world consists more in the forgiveness 
of sins than the perfection of virtue," (August, de Civitate 
Dei, Lib. xix. cap. 27.) To this corresponds the well-known 
sentiment of Bernard : " Not to sin is the righteousness of 
God, but the righteousness of man is the indulgence of 
God," (Bernard, Serm. xxii. xxiii. in Cant.) He previously 
asserts that Christ is our righteousness in absolution, and, 
therefore, that those only are just who have obtained pardon 
through mercy. 

23. Hence also it is proved, that it is entirely by the inter- 
vention of Christ's righteousness that we obtain justification 
before God. This is equivalent to saying that man is not 
just in himself, but that the righteousness of Christ is com- 
municated to him by imputation, while he is strictly deserving 
of punishment. Thus vanishes the absurd dogma, that man is 
justified by faith, inasmuch as it brings him under the in- 
fluence of the Spirit of God by whom he is rendered righteous. 
This is so repugnant to the above doctrine that it never can 
be reconciled with it. There can be no doubt that he who 
is taught to seek righteousness out of himself does not pre- 
viously possess it in himself.1 This is most clearly declared 
by the Apostle, when he says, that he who knew no sin was 
made an expiatory victim for sin, that we might be made 
the righteousness of God in him, (2 Cor. v. 21.) You see 
that our righteousness is not in ourselves, but in Christ ; 
that the only way in which we become possessed of it is by 
being made partakers with Christ, since with him we possess 

1 French, " Ceci est fort contraire a la doctrine ci dessus mise : car il 
n'y a nulle doute que celui qui doit cercher justice hors de soy-mesme, ne 
soit desnue de la sienne propre ;" — This is quite contrary to the doctrine 
above laid down ; for there is no doubt, that he who is to seek righteous- 
ness out of himself, is devoid of righteousness in himself. 


332 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

all riches. There is nothing repugnant to this in what he else- 
where says : " God sending his own Son in the likeness of 
sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh : that the 
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us," (Rom. viii. 
3, 4.) Here the only fulfilment to which he refers is that 
which we obtain by imputation. Our Lord Jesus Christ 
communicates his righteousness to us, and so by some won- 
drous way, in so far as pertains to the justice of God, trans- 
fuses its power into us. That this was the Apostle's view is 
abundantly clear from another sentiment which he had 
expressed a little before : " As by one man's disobedience 
many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many 
be made righteous," (Rom. v. 19.) To declare that we are 
deemed righteous, solely because the obedience of Christ is 
imputed to us as if it were our own, is just to place our 
righteousness in the obedience of Christ. Wherefore, Am- 
brose appears to me to have most elegantly adverted to the 
blessing of Jacob as an illustration of this righteousness, when 
he says that as he who did not merit the birthright in him- 
self personated his brother, put on his garments which gave 
forth a most pleasant odour, and thus introduced himself to 
his father that he might receive a blessing to his own advan- 
tage, though under the person of another, so we conceal 
ourselves under the precious purity1 of Christ, our first-born 
brother, that we may obtain an attestation of righteousness 
from the presence of God. The words of Ambrose are, — 
" Isaac's smelling the odour of his garments, perhaps means 
that we are justified not by works, but by faith, since carnal 
infirmity is an impediment to works, but errors of conduct 
are covered by the brightness of faith, which merits the 
pardon of faults," (Ambrose de Jacobo et Vita Beata, Lib. 
ii. c. 2.) And so indeed it is ; for in order to appear in the 
presence of God for salvation, Ave must send forth that 
fragrant odour, having our vices covered and buried by his 
perfection. 

1 French, "Sous la robbe;" — under the rube. 


CHAP. XII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 333 


CHAPTER XII. 

NECESSITY OP CONTEMPLATING THE JUDGMENT-SEAT OF 
GOD, IN ORDER TO BE SERIOUSLY CONVINCED OF THE 
DOCTRINE OF GRATUITOUS JUSTIFICATION. 

The divisions of this chapter are, — I. A consideration of the righteous- 
ness of God overturns the righteousness of works, as is plain from pass- 
ages of Scripture, and the confession and example of the saints, sec. 1-3. 
II. The same effect produced by a serious examination of the conscience, 
and a constant citation to the divine tribunal, sec. 4 and 5. III. Hence 
arises, in the hearts of the godly, not hypocrisy, or a vain opinion of 
merit, but true humility. This illustrated by the authority of Scripture 
and the example of the Publican, sec. 6, 7. IV. Conclusion — arrogance 
and security must be discarded, every man throwing an impediment in 
the way of the divine goodness in proportion as he trusts to himself. 

Sections. 

1. Source of error on the subject of Justification. Sophists speak as if 

the question were to be discussed before some human tribunal. 
It relates to the majesty and justice of God. Hence nothing accept- 
ed without absolute perfection. Passages confirming this doctrine. 
If we descend to the righteousness of the Law, the curse imme- 
diately appears. 

2. Source of hypocritical confidence. Illustrated by a simile. Exhor- 

tation. Testimony of Job, David, and Paul. 

3. Confession of Augustine and Bernard. 

4. Another engine overthrowing the righteousness of works, viz., a 

serious examination of the conscience, and a comparison between 
the perfection of God and the imperfection of man. 

5. How it is that we so indulge this imaginary opinion of our own works. 

The proper remedy to be found in a consideration of the majesty of 
God and our own misery. A description of this misery. 

6. Christian humility consists in laying aside the imaginary idea of our 

own righteousness, and trusting entirely to the mercy of God, 
apprehended by faith in Christ. This humility described. Proved 
by passages of Scripture. 

7. The parable of the Publican explained. 

8. Arrogance, security, and self-confidence, must be renounced. General 

rule, or summary of the above doctrine. 


ooi INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

1. Although the perfect truth of the above doctrine is 
proved by clear passages of Scripture, yet we cannot clearly 
see how necessary it is, before we bring distinctly into view 
the foundations on which the whole discussion ought to rest. 
First, then, let us remember that the righteousness which we 
are considei'ing is not that of a human, but of a heavenly tri- 
bunal ; and so beware of employing our own little standard 
to measure the perfection which is to satisfy the justice of 
God. It is strange with what rashness and presumption this 
is commonly defined. Nay, we see that none talk more con- 
fidently, or, so to speak, more blusteringly, of the righteous- 
ness of w^orks, than those whose diseases are most palpable, 
and blemishes most apparent. This they do because they 
reflect not on the righteousness of Christ, which, if they had 
the slightest perception of it, they would never treat with so 
much insult. It is certainly undervalued, if not recognised 
to be so perfect that nothing can be accepted that is not in 
every respect entire and absolute, and tainted by no impu- 
rity ; such indeed as never has been, and never will be, found 
in man. It is easy for any man, within the precincts of the 
schools, to talk of the sufficiency of works for justification ; 
but when we come into the presence of God there must be a 
truce to such talk. The matter is there discussed in earnest, 
and is no longer a theatrical logomachy. Hither must we 
turn our minds if we would inquire to any purpose concern- 
ing true righteousness ; the question must be, How shall we 
answer the heavenly Judge when he calls us to account ? Let 
us contemplate that Judge, not as our own unaided intellect 
conceives of him, but as he is pourtrayed to us in Scripture, 
(see especially the Book of Job,) with a brightness which 
obscures the stars, a strength which melts the mountains, an 
anger which shakes the earth, a wisdom which takes the wise 
in their own craftiness, a purity before which all things become 
impure, a righteousness to which not even angels are equal, 
(so far is it from making the guilty innocent,) a vengeance 
which once kindled burns to the lowest hell, (Exod. xxxiv. 7 ; 
Nahum i. 3 ; Deut. xxxii. 22.) Let Him, I say, sit in judg- 
ment on the actions of men, and who will feel secure in sist- 
ing himself before his throne ? u Who among us," says the 


CHAP. XII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 335 

prophet, et shall dwell with the devouring fire ? who among 
us shall dwell with everlasting burnings ? He that walketh 
righteously, and speaketh uprightly," &c, (Isaiah xxxiii. 14, 
15.) Let whoso will come forth. Nay, the answer shows 
that no man can. For, on the other hand, we hear the dread- 
ful voice : " If thou, Lord, shouldst mark our iniquities, O 
Lord, who shall stand?" (Ps. cxxx. 3.) All must imme- 
diately perish, as Job declares, " Shall mortal man be more 
just than God? shall a man be more pure than his Maker? 
Behold, he put no trust in his servants ; and his angels he 
charged with folly : How much less in them that dwell in 
houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which arc 
crushed before the moth ? They are destroyed from morning 
to evening," (Job iv. 17-20.) Again, " Behold, he putteth 
no trust in his saints ; yea, the heavens are not clean in his 
sight. How much more abominable and filthy is man, which 
drinketh iniquity like water?" (Job xv. 15, 16.) I confess, 
indeed, that in the Book of Job reference is made to a right- 
eousness of a more exalted description than the observance of 
the Law. It is of importance to attend to this distinction ; 
for even could a man satisfy the Law, he could not stand 
the scrutiny of that righteousness which transcends all our 
thoughts. Hence, although Job was not conscious of offend- 
ing, he is still dumb with astonishment, because he sees that 
God could not be appeased even by the sanctity of angels, 
were their works weighed in that supreme balance. But to 
advert no farther to this righteousness, which is incompre- 
hensible, I only say, that if our life is brought to the standard 
of the written law, we are lethargic indeed if we are not filled 
with dread at the many maledictions which God has employ- 
ed for the purpose of arousing us, and among others, the 
following general one : " Cursed be he that confirmeth not all 
the words of this law to do them," (Deut. xxvii. 26.) In 
short, the whole discussion of this subject will be insipid and 
frivolous, unless we sist ourselves before the heavenly Judge, 
and anxious for our acquittal, voluntarily humble ourselves, 
confessing our nothingness. 

2. Thus, then, must we raise our eyes that we may learn 
to tremble instead of vainly exulting. It is easy, indeed, 


336 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

when the comparison is made among men, for every one to 
plume himself on some quality which others ought not to 
despise ; but when we rise to God that confidence instantly 
falls and dies away. The case of the soul with regard to 
God is very analogous to that of the body in regard to 
the visible firmament. The bodily eye, while employed in 
surveying adjacent objects, is pleased with its own perspi- 
cacity; but when directed to the sun, being dazzled and over- 
whelmed by the refulgence, it becomes no less convinced of 
its weakness than it formerly was of its power in viewing 
inferior objects. Therefore, lest we deceive ourselves by vain 
confidence, let us recollect that even though we deem our- 
selves equal or superior to other men, this is nothing to God, 
by whose judgment the decision must be given. But if our 
presumption cannot be tamed by these considerations, he will 
answer us as he did the Pharisees, " Ye are they which justify 
yourselves before men ; but God knoweth your hearts : for 
that which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in 
the sight of God," (Luke xvi. 15.) Go now and make a proud 
boast of your righteousness among men, while God in heaven 
abhors it. But what are the feelings of the servants of God, 
of those who are truly taught by his Spirit ? " Enter not into 
judgment with thy servant ; for in thy sight shall no man 
living be justified," (Ps. cxliii. 2.) Another, though in a 
sense somewhat different, says, " How should man be just 
with God ? If he will contend with him he cannot answer 
him one of a thousand," (Job ix. 2, 3.) Here we are plainly 
told what the righteousness of God is, namely, a righteous- 
ness which no human wrorks can satisfy, which charges us 
with a thousand sins, while not one sin can be excused. Of 
this righteousness Paul, that chosen vessel of God, had form- 
ed a just idea, when he declared, " I know nothing by myself, 
yet am I not hereby justified," (1 Cor. iv. 4.) 

3. Such examples exist not in the sacred volume only ; all 
pious Avriters show that their sentiment was the same. Thus, 
Augustine says, " Of all pious men groaning under this bur- 
den of corruptible flesh, and the infirmities of this life, the 
only hope is, that we have one Mediator Jesus Christ the 
righteous, and that he intercedes for our sins," (August, ad 


CHAI\ XII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 337 

Bonif. Lib. iii. c. 5.) What do we hear ? If this is their 
only hope, where is their confidence in works ? When he says 
only, he leaves no other. Bernard says, " And, indeed, where 
have the infirm firm security and safe rest, but in the wounds 
of the Saviour ? Hold it then the more securely, the more 
powerful he is to save. The world frowns, the body presses, 
the devil lays snares : I fall not, because I am founded on a 
firm rock. I have sinned a grievous sin : conscience is 
troubled, but it shall not be overwhelmed, for I will remem- 
ber the wounds of the Lord." Pie afterwards concludes, 
u My merit, therefore, is the compassion of the Lord ; plain- 
ly I am not devoid of merit so long as he is not devoid of 
commiseration. But if the mercies of the Lord are many, 
equally many are my merits. Shall I sing of my own right- 
eousness ? O Lord, I will make mention of thy righteous- 
ness alone. That righteousness is mine also, being made mine 
by God," (Bernard, Serm. 61, in Cantic.) Again, in an- 
other passage, " Man's whole merit is to place his whole hope in 
him who makes the whole man safe," (in Psal. Qui Habitat. 
Serm. 15.) In like manner, reserving peace to himself, he 
leaves the glory to God : " Let thy glory remain unimpaired : 
it is well with me if I have peace ; I altogether abjure boast- 
ing, lest if I should usurp what is not mine, I lose also 
what is offered," (Serm. 13, in Cantic.) He says still more 
plainly in another place : " Why is the Church solicitous 
about merits ? God purposely supplies her with a firmer and 
more secure ground of boasting. There is no reason for ask- 
ing by what merits may we hope for blessings, especially 
when you hear in the prophet, ' Thus saith the Lord God, 
I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine 
holy name's sake,' (Ezek. xxxvi. 22, 32.) It is sufficient for 
merit to know that merits suffice not ; but as it is sufficient 
for merit not to presume on merit, so to be without merits is 
sufficient for condemnation," (Bernard, Serm. 68.) The free 
use of the term merits for good works must be pardoned to 
custom. Bernard's purpose was to alarm hypocrites, who 
turned the grace of God into licentiousness, as he shortly after 
explains : " Happy the church which neither wants merit 
without presumption, nor presumption without merit. It 
VOL. II. Y 


338 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

has ground to presume, but not merit. It has merit, merit 
to deserve, not presume. Is not the absence of presumption 
itself a merit ? He, therefore, to whom the many mercies of 
the Lord furnish ample grounds of boasting, presumes the 
more securely that he presumes not," (Bernard, Serm. 68.) 

4. Thus, indeed, it is. Aroused consciences, when they 
have to do with God, feel this to be the only asylum in which 
they can breathe safely. For if the stars which shine most 
brightly by night lose their brightness on the appearance of 
the sun, what think we will be the case with the highest 
purity of man when contrasted with the purity of God ? For 
the scrutiny will be most strict, penetrating to the most hid- 
den thoughts of the heart. As Paul says, it "will bring to 
light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest 
the counsels of the heart," (1 Cor. iv. 5 ;) will compel the 
reluctant and dissembling conscience to bring forward every 
thing, even things which have now escaped our memory. The 
devil, aware of all the iniquities which he has induced us to 
perpetrate, will appear as accuser ; the external show of good 
works, the only thing now considered, will then be of no 
avail ; the only thing demanded will be the true intent of the 
will. Hence hypocrisy, not only that by which a man, though 
consciously guilty before God, affects to make an ostentatious 
display before man, but that by which each imposes upon 
himself before God, (so prone are Ave to soothe and flatter 
ourselves,) will fall confounded, how much soever it may now 
swell with pride and presumption. Those who do not turn 
their thoughts to this scene may be able for the moment 
calmly and complacently to rear up a righteousness for them- 
selves ; but this the judgment of God will immediately over- 
throw, just as great wealth amassed in a dream vanishes the 
moment we awake. Those who, as in the presence of God, 
inquire seriously into the true standard of righteousness, will 
certainly find that all the works of men, if estimated by their 
own worth, are nothing but vileness and pollution, that what 
is commonly deemed justice is with God mere iniquity ; 
what is deemed integrity is pollution ; what deemed glory is 
ignominy. 

5. Let us not decline to descend from this contemplation 


CHAP. XII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 339 

of the divine perfection, to look into ourselves without flat- 
tery or blind self-love. It is not strange that we are so 
deluded in this matter, seeing none of us can avoid that pes- 
tilential self-indulgence, which, as Scripture proclaims, is 
naturally inherent in all : " Every way of a man is right in his 
own eyes," says Solomon, (Prov. xxi. 2.) And again, " All 
the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes," (Prov. xvi. 2.) 
What then ? does this hallucination excuse him ? No, indeed, 
as Solomon immediately adds, " The Lord weigheth the 
spirits ;" that is, while man natters himself by wearing an 
external mask of righteousness, the Lord weighs the hidden 
impurity of the heart in his balance. Seeing, therefore, that 
nothing is gained by such flattery, let us not voluntarily delude 
ourselves to our own destruction. To examine ourselves pro- 
perly, our conscience must be called to the judgment-seat of 
God. His light is necessary to disclose the secret recesses of 
wickedness which otherwise lie too deeply hid. Then only 
shall we clearly perceive what the value of our works is ; that 
man, so far from being just before God, is but rottenness and 
a worm, abominable and vain, drinking in " iniquity like 
water." For " who can bring a clean thing out of an un- 
clean? not one," (Job xiv. 5.) Then we shall experience 
the truth of what Job said of himself : " If I justify myself, 
mine own mouth shall condemn me : if I say I am perfect, 
it shall prove me perverse," (Job ix. 20.) Nor does the com- 
plaint which the prophet made concerning Israel apply to 
one age only. It is true of every age, that " all wre like 
sheep have gone astray ; we have turned every one to his 
own way," (Isaiah liii. 6.) Indeed, he there comprehends 
all to wrhom the gift of redemption wras to come. And the 
strictness of the examination ought to be continued until it 
have completely alarmed us, and in that way prepared us for 
receiving the grace of Christ. For he is deceived who thinks 
himself capable of enjoying it, until he have laid aside all 
loftiness of mind. There is a well-known declaration, " God 
resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble," (1 Pet. 
v. 5.) 

6. But what means is there of humbling us if we do not 
make way for the mercy of God by our utter indigence and 


340 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

destitution ? For I call it not humility, so long as we think 
there is any good remaining in us. Those who have joined 
together the two things, to think humbly of ourselves before 
God and yet hold our own righteousness in some estimation, 
have hitherto taught a pernicious hypocrisy. For if we con- 
fess to God contrary to what we feel, we wickedly lie to 
him ; but we cannot feel as we ought without seeing that 
every thing like a ground of boasting is completely crushed. 
Therefore, when you hear from the prophet, "thou wilt save 
the afflicted people ; but wilt bring down high looks," (Ps. 
xviii. 27,) consider, first, that there is no access to salva- 
tion unless all pride is laid aside and true humility embraced ; 
secondly, that that humility is not a kind of moderation by 
which you yield to God some article of your right, (thus men 
are called humble in regard to each other when they neither 
conduct themselves haughtily nor insult over other, though 
they may still entertain some consciousness of their own 
excellence,) but that it is the unfeigned submission of a mind 
overwhelmed by a serious conviction of its want and misery. 
Such is the description every where given by the word of 
God. When in Zephaniah the Lord speaks thus, "I will 
take away out of the midst of thee them that rejoice in thy 
pride, and thou shalt no more be haughty because of my holy 
mountain. I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted 
and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the 
Lord," (Zeph. iii. 11, 12,) does he not plainly show who are 
the humble, viz., those who lie afflicted by a knowledge of 
their poverty ? On the contrary, he describes the proud as 
rejoicing, (exaltantes,) such being the mode in which men 
usually express their delight in prosperity. To the humble, 
whom he designs to save, he leaves nothing but hope in the 
Lord. Thus, also, in Isaiah, " To this man will I look, even to 
him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my 
word," (Isaiah lxvi. 2.) Again, " Thus saith the high and 
lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy ; I 
dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a 
contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, 
and to revive the heart of the contrite ones," (Isaiah lvii. 15.) 
By the term contrition, which you so often hear, understand a 


CHAP. XII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 341 

wounded heart, which, humbling the individual to the earth, 
allows him not to rise. With such contrition must your 
heart be wounded, if you would, according to the declaration 
of God, be exalted with the humble. If this is not your 
case, you shall be humbled by the mighty hand of God to 
your shame and disgrace. 

7. Our divine Master, not confining himself to words, has 
by a parable set before us, as in a picture, a representation 
of true humility. He brings forward a publican, who stand- 
ing afar off, and not daring to lift up his eyes to heaven, 
smites upon his breast, laments aloud, and exclaims, " God 
be merciful to me a sinner," (Luke xviii. 13.) Let us not 
suppose that he gives the signs of a fictitious modesty when 
he dares not come near or lift up his eyes to heaven, but, 
smiting upon his breast, confesses himself a sinner ; let us 
know that these are the evidences of his internal feeling. 
With him our Lord contrasts the Pharisee, who thanks God 
" I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, 
or even as this publican. I fast twice in the week, I give 
tithes of all that I possess." In this public confession he 
admits that the righteousness which he possesses is the gift 
of God ; but because of his confidence that he is righteous, 
he departs from the presence of God unaccepted and abomi- 
nated. The publican acknowledging his iniquity is justified. 
Hence we may see how highly our humility is valued by the 
Lord : our breast cannot receive his mercy until deprived 
completely, of all opinion of its own worth. When such an 
opinion is entertained, the door of mercy is shut. That there 
might be no doubt on this matter, the mission on which 
Christ was sent into the world by his Father was " to preach 
good tidings to the meek," " to bind up the broken-hearted, 
to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the 
prison to them that are bound ; to proclaim the acceptable 
year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God ; to 
comfort all that mourn ; to appoint unto them that mourn in 
Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for 
mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness," 
(Isa. lxi. 1-3.) In fulfilment of that mission, the only per- 
sons whom he invites to share in his beneficence are the 


342 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

" weary and heavy laden." In another passage he says, " I 
am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance," 
(Matth. xi. 28 j ix. 13.) 

8. Therefore, if we would make way for the call of Christ, 
we must put far from us all arrogance and confidence. 
The former is produced by a foolish persuasion of self-right- 
eousness, when a man thinks that he has something in himself 
which deservedly recommends him to God ; the latter may 
exist without any confidence in works.1 For many sinners, 
intoxicated with the pleasures of vice, think not of the judg- 
ment of God. Lying stupified, as it were, by a kind of 
lethargy, they aspire not to the offered mercy. It is not less 
necessary to shake off torpor of this description than every 
kind of confidence in ourselves, in order that we may haste 
to Christ unencumbered, and while hungry and empty be 
filled with his blessings. Never shall we have sufficient con- 
fidence in him unless utterly distrustful of ourselves ; never 
shall we take courage in him until we first despond of our- 
selves ; never shall we have full consolation in him until we 
cease to have any in ourselves. When we have entirely dis- 
carded all self-confidence, and trust solely in the certainty of 
his goodness, we are fit to apprehend and obtain the grace of 
God. "When," (as Augustine says,) "forgetting our own 
merits, we embrace the gifts of Christ, because if he should 
seek for merits in us Ave should not obtain his gifts," 
(August, de Verb. Apost. 8.) With this Bernard admirably 
accords, comparing the proud, who presume in the least on 
their merits, to unfaithful servants, who wickedly take the 
merit of a favour merely passing through them, just as if a 
wall were to boast of producing the ray which it receives 
through the window, (Bernard, Serm. 13, in Cant.) Not 
to dwell longer here, let us lay down this short but sure and 

1 French, " Par an-ogance j'enten l'orgueil qui s'engendre d'une fole 
persuasion de justice, quand l'homuie pense avoir quelque chose, dont 
ll merite d'estre agreable a Dieu ; par presomption j'enten une nonchal- 
ance charnelle, qui pent estre sans aucune fiance des ceuvres ;" — by arro- 
gance I mean the pride which is engendered by a foolish persuasion of 
righteousness, when man thinks he has something for which he deserves 
to be agreeable to God. By presumption I understand a carnal indiffer- 
ence, which may exist without any confidence in works. 


CHAP. XII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 3i3 

general rule, That lie is prepared to reap the fruits of the 
divine mercy who has thoroughly emptied himself, I say not 
of righteousness, (he has none,) but of a vain and blustering 
show of righteousness ; for to whatever extent any man rests 
in himself, to the same extent he impedes the beneficence 
of God. 


344 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 


CHAPTER XIII. 

TWO THINGS TO BE OBSERVED IN GRATUITOUS 
JUSTIFICATION. 

The divisions of this chapter are, — I. The glory of God, and peace of 
conscience, both secured by gratuitous justification. An insult to the 
glory of God to glory in ourselves and seek justification out of Christ, 
whose righteousness, apprehended by faith, is imputed to all the elect for 
reconciliation and eternal salvation, sec. 1, 2. II. Peace of conscience 
cannot be obtained in any other way than by gratuitous justification. 
This fully proved, sec. 3-5. 

Sections. 

1 . The glory of God remains untarnished, when he alone is acknowledged 

to be just. This proved from Scripture. 

2. Those who glory in themselves glory against God. Objection. An- 

swer, confirmed by the authority of Paul and Peter. 

3. Peace of conscience obtained by free justification only. Testimony of 

Solomon, of conscience itself, and the Apostle Paul, who contends 
that faith is made vain if righteousness come by the laAv. 

4 The promise confirmed by faith in the mercy of Christ. This is con- 
firmed by Augustine and Bernard, is in accordance with what has 
been above stated, and is illustrated by clear predictions of the 
prophets. 

5. Farther demonstration by an Apostle. Kefutation of a sophism. 

1. Here two ends must be kept specially in view, namely, 
that the glory of God be maintained unimpaired, and that our 
consciences, in the view of his tribunal, be secured in peaceful 
rest and calm tranquillity. When the question relates to 
righteousness, we see how often and how anxiously Scripture 
exhorts us to give the whole praise of it to God. Accord- 
ingly, the Apostle testifies that the purpose of the Lord in 
conferring righteousness upon us in Christ, was to demon- 
strate his own righteousness. The nature of this demonstra- 
tion he immediately subjoins, viz., " that he might be just, 
and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus," (Rom. iii. 


CHAP. XIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 345 

25.) Observe, that the righteousness of God is not sufficiently- 
displayed, unless He alone is held to be righteous, and freely 
communicates righteousness to the undeserving. For this 
reason it is his will, that " every mouth may be stopped, and 
all the wrorld may become guilty before God," (Rom. iii. 19.) 
For so long as a man has any thing, however small, to say in 
his own defence, so long he deducts somewhat from the glory 
of God. Thus, we are taught in Ezekiel how much we 
glorify his name by acknowledging our iniquity: " Then shall 
ye remember your ways and all your doings, wherein ye have 
been defiled; and ye shall loathe yourselves in your own 
sight, for all your evils that ye have committed. And ye 
shall know that I am the Lord, when I have wrought with 
you for my name's sake, not according to your wicked ways, 
nor according to your corrupt doings," (Ezek. xx. 43, 44.) 
If part of the true knowledge of God consists in being 
oppressed by a consciousness of our own iniquity, and in 
recognising him as doing good to those who are unworthy of 
it, why do we attempt, to our great injury, to steal from the 
Lord even one particle of the praise of unmerited kindness ? 
In like manner, when Jeremiah exclaims, " Let not the wise 
man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory 
in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches : but let 
him that glorieth glory" in the Lord, (Jer. ix. 23, 24,) does 
he not intimate, that the glory of the Lord is infringed Avhen 
man glories in himself? To this purpose, indeed, Paul 
accommodates the words when he says, that all the parts of 
our salvation are treasured up with Christ, that we may glory 
only in the Lord, (1 Cor. i. 29.) For he intimates, that 
whosoever imagines he has any thing of his own, rebels 
against God, and obscures his glory. 

2. Thus, indeed, it is : we never truly glory in him until 
we have utterly discarded our own glory. It must, therefore, 
be regarded as an universal proposition, that whoso glories in 
himself glories against God. Paul indeed considers, that the 
whole world is not made subject to God until every ground 
of glorying has been withdrawn from men, (Eom. iii. 19.) 
Accordingly, Isaiah, when he declares that " in the Lord 
shall all the seed of Israel be justified," adds, " and shall 


346 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

glory," (Isa. xlv. 25 ;) as if he had said, that the elect are 
justified by the Lord, in order that they may glory in him, 
and in none else. The way in which we are to glory in the 
Lord he had explained in the preceding verse, " Unto me 
every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear ;" " Surely, 
shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength, 
even to him shall men come." Observe, that the thing 
required is not simple confession, but confession confirmed 
by an oath, that it might not be imagined that any kind of 
fictitious humility might suffice. And let no man here allege 
that he does not glory, when without arrogance he recog- 
nises his own righteousness ; such a recognition cannot take 
place without generating confidence, nor such confidence 
without begetting boasting. Let us remember, therefore, 
that in the whole discussion concerning justification the great 
thing to be attended to is, that God's glory be maintained 
entire and unimpaired ; since, as the Apostle declares, it was 
in demonstration of his own righteousness that he shed his 
favour upon us ; it was " that he might be just, and the justi- 
fier of him which believeth in Jesus," (Rom. iii. 26.) Hence, 
in another passage, having said that the Lord conferred 
salvation upon us, in order that he might show forth the 
glory of his name, (Eph. i. 6,) he afterwards, as if repeating 
the same thing, adds, " By grace are ye saved through faith ; 
and that not of yourselves : it is the gift of God : not of 
works, lest any man should boast," (Eph. ii. 8.) And Peter, 
when he reminds us that we are called to the hope of salva- 
tion, u that ye should show forth the praises of him who hath 
called you out of darkness into his marvellous light," (1 Pet. ii. 
9,) doubtless intends thus to proclaim in the ears of believers 
only the praises of God, that they may bury in profound silence 
all arrogance of the flesh. The sum is, that man cannot claim 
a single particle of righteousness to himself, without at the same 
time detracting from the glory of the divine righteousness. 

3. If we now inquire in what way the conscience can be 
quieted as in the view of God, we shall find that the only 
way is by having righteousness bestowed upon us freely by 
the gift of God. Let us always remember the words of 
Solomon, " Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am 


CHAP. XIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 347 

free from my sin ?" (Prov. xx. 9.) Undoubtedly, there is 
not one man who is not covered with infinite pollutions. Let 
the most perfect man descend into his own conscience, and 
bring his actions to account, and what will the result be? 
Will he feel calm and quiescent, as if all matters were well 
arranged between himself and God ; or will he not rather be 
stung with dire torment, when he sees that the ground of 
condemnation is within him if he be estimated by his works ? 
Conscience, when it beholds God, must either have sure 
peace with his justice, or be beset by the terrors of hell. 
We gain nothing, therefore, by discoursing of righteousness, 
unless we hold it to be a righteousness stable enough to 
support our souls before the tribunal of God. When the soul 
is able to appear intrepidly in the presence of God, and 
receive his sentence without dismay, then only let us know 
that we have found a righteousness that is not fictitious. 
It is not, therefore, without cause, that the Apostle insists 
on this matter. I prefer giving it in his words rather than 
my own : " If they which are of the law be heirs, faith is 
made void, and the promise made of no effect," (Rom. iv. 14.) 
He first infers that faith is made void if the promise of 
righteousness has respect to the merit of our works, or 
depends on the observance of the law. Never could any one 
rest securely in it, for never could he feel fully assured that 
he had fully satisfied the law ; and it is certain that no man 
ever fully satisfies it by works. Not to go far for proof of 
this, every one who will use his eyes aright may be his own 
witness. Hence it appears how deep and dark the abyss is 
into which hypocrisy plunges the minds of men, when they 
indulge so securely as, without hesitation, to oppose their 
flattery to the judgment of God, as if they were relieving him 
from his office as judge. Very different is the anxiety which 
fills the breasts of believers, who sincerely examine them- 
selves.1 Every mind, therefore, would first begin to hesitate, 
and at length to despair, while each determined for itself 
Avith how great a load of debt it was still oppressed, and how 
far it was from coming up to the enjoined condition. Thus, 

1 The two previous sentences are omitted in the French. 


348 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK II I. 

then, faith would be oppressed and extinguished. To have 
faith is not to fluctuate, to vary, to be carried up and down, 
to hesitate, remain in suspense, vacillate, in fine, to despair ; it 
is to possess sure certainty and complete security of mind, to 
have whereon to rest and fix your foot. 

4. Paul, moreover, adds, that the promise itself would be 
rendered null and void. For if its fulfilment depends on our 
merit, when, pray, will we be able to come the length of 
meriting the favour of God ? Nay, the second clause is a 
consequence of the former, since the promise will not be ful- 
filled unless to those who put faith in it. Faith therefore 
failing, no power will remain in the promise. " Therefore it 
is of faith, that it might be by grace, to the end the promise 
might be sure to all the seed," (Rom. iv. 16.) It was abund- 
antly confirmed when made to rest on the mercy of God 
alone, for mercy and truth are united by an indissoluble tie ; 
that is, whatever God has mercifully promised he faithfully 
performs. Thus David, before he asks salvation according 
to the word of God, first places the source of it in his mercy. 
" Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my comfort, 
according to thy word unto thy servant," (Ps. cxix. 76.) 
And justly, for nothing but mere mercy induces God to 
promise. Here, then, we must place, and, as it were, firmly 
fix our whole hope, paying no respect to our works, and 
asking no assistance from them. And lest you should sup- 
pose that there is any thing novel in what I say, Augustine 
also enjoins us so to act. " Christ," says he, (i will reign for- 
ever among his servants. This God has promised, God has 
spoken ; if this is not enough, God has sworn. Therefore, as 
the promise stands firm, not in respect of our merits, but in 
respect of his mercy, no one ought to tremble in announcing 
that of which he cannot doubt," (August. inPs. lxxxviii. Tract. 
1.) Thus Bernard also, " Who can be saved? ask the dis- 
ciples of Christ. He replies, With men it is impossible, but 
not with God. This is our whole confidence ; this our only 
consolation ; this the whole ground of our hope : but being 
assured of the possibility, what are we to say as to his will- 
ingness ? Who knows Avhether he is deserving of love or 
hatred ? (Eccles. ix. 1.) ' Who hath known the mind of the 


CHAP. XIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 349 

Lord that he may instruct him?' (1 Cor. ii. 16.) Here it is 
plain, faith must come to our aid : here we must have the 
assistance of truth, in order that the secret purpose of the 
Father respecting us may be revealed by the Spirit, and the 
Spirit testifying may persuade our hearts that we are the 
sons of God. But let him persuade by calling and justi- 
fying freely by faith : in these there is a kind of transition 
from eternal predestination to future glory," (Berd. in Dedica. 
Templi, Serm. 5.) Let us thus briefly conclude : Scripture 
indicates that the promises of God are not sure, unless they 
are apprehended with full assurance of conscience ; it declares 
that wherever there is doubt or uncertainty, the promises are 
made void ; on the other hand, that they can only waver 
and fluctuate if they depend on our works. Therefore, either 
our righteousness must perish, or without any consideration of 
our works, place must be given to faith alone, whose nature it is 
to prick up the ear, and shut the eye ; that is, to be intent on 
the promise only, to give up all idea of any dignity or merit 
in man. Thus is fulfilled the celebrated prophecy of Zecha- 
riah : " I will remove the iniquity of that land in one day. 
In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, shall ye call every man 
his neighbour under the vine, and under the fig-tree," (Zech. 
iii. 9, 10.) Here the prophet intimates that the only way 
in which believers can enjoy true peace, is by obtaining the 
remission of their sins. For we must attend to this pecu- 
liarity in the prophets, that when they discourse of the king- 
dom of Christ, they set forth the external mercies of God as 
types of spiritual blessings. Hence Christ is called the Prince 
of Peace, and our peace, (Isaiah ix. 6; Eph. ii. 14,) because 
he calms all the agitations of conscience. If the method is 
asked, we must come to the sacrifice by which God was 
appeased, for no man will ever cease to tremble, until he 
hold that God is propitiated solely by that expiation in 
which Christ endured his anger. In short, peace must be 
sought no where but in the agonies of Christ our Redeemer. 
5. But why employ a more obscure testimony ? Paul uni- 
formly declares that the conscience can have no peace or 
quiet joy until it is held for certain that we are justified by 
faith. And he at the same time declares whence this cer- 


350 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

tainty is derived, viz., when " the love of God is shed abroad 
in our hearts by the Holy Ghost," (Rom. v. 5 ;) as if he had 
said, that our souls cannot have peace until we are fully as- 
sured that we are pleasing to God. Hence he elsewhere 
exclaims in the person of believers in general, " Who shall 
separate us from the love of Christ ?" (Rom. viii. 35.) Until 
we have reached that haven, the slightest breeze will make 
us tremble, but so long as the Lord is our Shepherd, we shall 
walk without fear in the valley of the shadow of death, (Ps. 
xxiii.) Thus those who pretend that justification by faith con- 
sists in being regenerated and made just, by living spiritually, 
have never tasted the sweetness of grace in trusting that 
God will be propitious. Hence also, they know no more 
of praying aright than do the Turks or any other heathen 
people. For, as Paul declares, faith is not true, unless it sug- 
gest and dictate the delightful name of Father ; nay, unless 
it open our mouths and enable us freely to cry, Abba, Father. 
This he expresses more clearly in another passage, " In whom 
we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith 
of him," (Eph. iii. 12.) This, certainly, is not obtained by 
the gift of regeneration, which, as it is always defective in 
the present state, contains within it many grounds of doubt. 
Wherefore, we must have recourse to this remedy ; we must 
hold that the only hope which believers have of the heavenly 
inheritance is, that being ingrafted into the body of Christ, 
they are justified freely. For, in regard to justification, faith 
is merely passive, bringing nothing of our own to procure the 
favour of God, but receiving from Christ every thing that Ave 
want. 


CHAP. XIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 351 


CHAPTER XIV. 

THE BEGINNING OF JUSTIFICATION. IN WHAT SENSE 
PROGRESSIVE. 

To illustrate what has been already said, and show what kind of right- 
eousness man can have during the whole course of his life, mankind are 
divided into four classes. I. First class considered, sec. 1-6. II. Second 
and third classes considered together, sec. 7, 8. III. Fourth class con- 
sidered, sec. 9 to end. 

Sections. 

1. Men either idolatrous, profane, hypocritical, or regenerate. 1. Ido- 

laters void of righteousness, full of unrighteousness, and hence in 
the sight of God altogether wretched and undone. 

2. Still a great difference in the characters of men. This difference 

manifested. 1. In the gifts of God. 2. In the distinction between 
honourable and base. 3. In the blessings of the present life. 

3. All human virtue, how praiseworthy soever it may appear, is cor- 

rupted. 1. By impurity of heart. 2. By the absence of a proper 
nature. - 

4. By the want of Christ, without whom there is no life. 

5. Natural condition of man as described by Scripture. All men dead 

in sins before regeneration. 

6. Passages of. Scripture to this effect. Vulgar error confounding the 

righteousness of works with the redemption purchased by Christ. 

7. The second and third classes of men, comprehending Irypocrites and 

Christians in name only. Every action of theirs deserves condem- 
nation. Passage from Haggai. Objection. Answer. 

8. Other passages. Quotations from Augustine and Gregory. 

9. The fourth class, viz., the regenerate. Though guided by the Spirit, 

corruption adheres to all they do, especially when brought to the 
bar of God. 

10. One fault sufficient to efface all former righteousness. Hence they 

cannot possibly be justified by works. 

11. In addition to the two former arguments, a third adduced against 

the Sophists, to show that whatever be the works of the regenerate, 
they are justified solely by faith and the free imputation of Christ's 
righteousness. 


352 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

12. Sophism of the Schoolmen in opposition to the above doctrine. 

Answer. 

13. Answer explained. Refutation of the fiction of partial righteousness, 

and compensation by Avorks of supererogation. This fiction neces- 
sarily falls with that of satisfaction. 

14. Statement of our Saviour, viz., that after we have done all, we are 

still unprofitable servants. 

15. Objection founded on Paul's boasting. Answer, showing the Apos- 

tle's meaning. Other answers, stating the general doctrine out of 
Chrysostom. Third answer, showing that supererogation is the 
merest vanity. 

16. Fourth answer, showing how Scripture dissuades us froin all confi- 

dence in works. Fifth answer, showing that we have no ground 
of boasting. 

17. Sixth answer, showing, in regard to four different causes, that works 

have no part in procuring our salvation. 1. The efficient cause is 
the free love of the Father. 2. The material cause is Christ 
acquiring righteousness for us. 3. The instrumental cause is faith. 
4. The final cause the display of the divine justice and praise of 
the divine goodness. 

18. A second objection, founded on the glorying of saints. An answer, 

explaining these modes of expression. How the saints feel in 
regard to the certainty of salvation. The opinion they have of 
their own works as in the sight of God. 

19. Another answer, viz., that the elect, by this kind of glorying, refer 

only to their adoption by the Father as proved by the fruits of then* 
calling. The order of this glorying. Its foundation, structure, 
and parts. 

20. Conclusion. The saints neither attribute anything to the merits of 

works, nor derogate in any degree from the righteousness which 
they obtain in Christ. Confirmation from a passage of Augustine, 
in which he gives two reasons why no believer will presume to 
boast before God of his works. 

21. A third objection, viz., that the good works of believers are the 

causes of divine blessings. Answer. There are inferior causes, 
but these depend on free justification, which is the only true caixse 
why God blesses us. These modes of expression designate the 
order of sequence rather than the cause. 

1. In farther illustration of the subject, let us consider 
what kind of righteousness man can have, during the whole 
course of his life, and for this purpose let us make a fourfold 
division. Mankind, either endued with no knowledge of God, 
are sunk in idolatry ; or, initiated in the sacraments, but by 
the impurity of their lives denying him whom they confess 


CHAP. XIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 353 

with their mouths, are Christians in name only ; or they are 
hypocrites, who with empty glosses hide the iniquity of the 
heart ; or they are regenerated by the Spirit of God, and aspire 
to true holiness. In the first place, Avhen men are judged by 
their natural endowments, not an iota of good will be found from 
the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, unless we are to 
charge Scripture with falsehood, when it describes all the sons 
of Adam by such terms as these : " The heart is deceitful above 
all things, and desperately wicked." " The imagination of man's 
heart is evil from his youth." " The Lord knoweth the thoughts 
of man that they are vanity." " They are all gone aside : 
they are altogether become filthy ; there is none that doeth 
good, no, not one." In short, that they arejiesh, under which 
name are comprehended all those works which are enumerated 
by Paul ; adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, 
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, 
seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, 
and all kinds of pollution and abomination which it is pos- 
sible to imagine.1 Such, then, is the worth on which men are 
to plume themselves. But if any among them possess an 
integrity of manners which presents some semblance of sanc- 
tity among men, yet because we know that God regards not 
the outward appearance, we must penetrate to the very source 
of action, if we would see how far works avail for right- 
eousness. We must, I say, look within, and see from what 
affection of the heart these works proceed. This is a very 
wide field of discussion, but as the matter may be explained 
in few words, I will use as much brevity as I can. 

2. First, then, I deny not, that whatever excellent endow- 
ments appear in unbelievers2 are divine gifts. Nor do I set 
myself so much in opposition to common sense, as to contend 
that there was no difference between the justice, moderation, 
and equity of Titus and Trajan, and the rage, intemperance, 
and cruelty of Caligula, Nero, and Domitian ; between the 
continence of Vespasian, and the obscene lusts of Tiberius ; 

1 Jer. xvii. 9 ; Gen. viii. 21 ; Ps. xciv. 11 ; xxxvi. 2 ; xiv. 2, 3; Gen. 
vi. 3; Gal. v. 19. 

2 Latin, " in incredulis." French, " en la vie des infideles etidolatres ;" 
■ — in the life of infidels and idolaters. 

VOL. II. Z 


3.54 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

and (not to dwell on single virtues and vices) between the 
observance of law and justice, and the contempt of them. 
So great is the difference between justice and injustice, that 
it may be seen even where the former is only a lifeless 
image. For what order would remain in the world if we 
were to confound them ? Hence this distinction between 
honourable and base actions God has not only engraven on 
the minds of each, but also often confirms in the administra- 
tion of his providence. For we see how he visits those who 
cultivate virtue with many temporal blessings. Not that 
that external image of virtue in the least degree merits his 
favour, but he is pleased thus to show how much he delights 
in true righteousness, since he does not leave even the out- 
ward semblance of it to go unrewarded. Hence it follows, 
as Ave lately observed, that those virtues, or rather images of 
virtues, of whatever kind, are divine gifts, since there is 
nothing in any degree praiseworthy which proceeds not from 
him. 

3. tStill the observation of Augustine is true, that all who 
are strangers to the true God, however excellent they may 
be deemed on account of their virtues, are more deserving of 
punishment than of reward, because, by the pollution of their 
heart, they contaminate the pure gifts of God, (August, contra 
Julian. Lib. iv.) For though they are instruments of God 
to preserve human society by justice, continence, friendship, 
temperance, fortitude, and prudence, yet they execute these 
good works of God in the worst manner, because they are 
kept from acting ill, not by a sincere love of goodness, but 
merely by ambition or self-love, or some other sinister affec- 
tion. Seeing then that these actions are polluted as in their 
very source, by impurity of heart, they have no better title 
to be classed among virtues than vices, which impose upon 
us by their affinity or resemblance to virtue. In short, when 
we remember that the object at which righteousness always 
aims is the service of God, whatever is of a different tend- 
ency deservedly forfeits the name. Hence, as they have 
no regard to the end which the divine wisdom prescribes, 
although from the performance the act seems good, yet from 
the perverse motive it is sin. Augustine, therefore, concludes 


CHAP. XIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 355 

that all the Fabriciuses, the Scipios, and Catos,1 in their illus- 
trious deeds, sinned in this, that, wanting the light of faith, 
they did not refer them to the proper end, and that, there- 
fore, there was no true righteousness in them, because duties 
are estimated not by acts but by motives. 

4. Besides, if it is true, as John says, that there is no life 
without the Son of God, (1 John v. 12,) those who have no 
part in Christ, whoever they be, whatever they do or devise, 
are hastening on, during their whole career, to destruction 
and the judgment of eternal death. For this reason, Augus- 
tine says, " Our religion distinguishes the righteous from the 
wicked, by the law, not of works but of faith, without which 
works which seem good are converted into sins," (August, 
ad Bonif. Lib. iii. c. v.) He finely expresses the same idea 
in another passage, when he compares the zeal of such men 
to those who in a race mistake the course, (August. Praaf. in 
Ps. xxxi.) He who is off the course, the more swiftly he 
runs is the more distant from the goal ; and, therefore, the 
more unhappy. It is better to limp in the way than run out 
of the way. Lastly, as there is no sanctification without union 
with Christ, it is evident that they are bad trees which are 
beautiful and fair to look upon, and may even produce fruit, 
sweet to the taste, but are still very far from good. Hence 
Ave easily perceive that every thing which man thinks, designs, 
and performs, before he is reconciled to God by faith, is cursed, 
and not only of no avail for justification, but merits certain 
damnation. And why do we talk of this as if it were doubt- 
ful, when it has already been proved by the testimony of an 
apostle, that " without faith it is impossible to please God ?" 
(Heb. xi. 6.) 

5. But the proof will be still clearer if divine grace is set 
in opposition to the natural condition of man. For Scripture 
everywhere proclaims that God finds nothing in man to in- 
duce him to show kindness, but that he prevents him by free 
liberality. What can a dead man do to obtain life ? But 
Avhen he enlightens us with the knowledge of himself, he is 

1 Latin, " omnes Fabricios, Scipiones, Catones." French, " tons ceux 
qui ont este prisez entre les Pagans ;" — all those who have been prized 
anions the Heathen. 


356 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

said to raise us from the dead, and make us new creatures, 
(John v. 25.) On this ground we see that the kindness of 
God toward us is often commended, especially by the apostle : 
" God," says he, " who is rich in mercy, for his great love 
wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath 
quickened us together with Christ," (Eph. ii. 4.) In another 
passage, when treating of the general call of believers under 
the type of Abraham, he says, " God quickeneth the dead, 
and calleth those things which be not as though they were," 
(Rom. iv. 17.) If we are nothing, what, pray, can we do? 
Wherefore, in the Book of Job the Lord sternly represses all 
arrogance in these words, " Who hath prevented me, that I 
should repay him ? whatsoever is under the whole heaven is 
mine," (Job xli. 11.) Paul explaining this sentence applies it 
in this way, — Let us not imagine that we bring to the Lord any 
thing but the mere disgrace of want and destitution, (Rom. xi. 
35.) Wherefore, in the passage above quoted, to prove that we 
attain to the hope of salvation, not by works but only by grace, 
he affirms that " we are his workmanship, created in Christ 
Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that 
we should walk in them," (Eph. ii. 10;) as if he had said, Who 
of us can boast of having challenged God by his righteous- 
ness, seeing our first power to act aright is derived from 
regeneration ? For, as we are formed by nature, sooner shall 
oil be extracted from stone than good works from us. It 
is truly strange how man, convicted of such ignominy, dares 
still to claim any thing as his own. Let us acknowledge, 
therefore, with that chosen vessel, that God " hath called us 
with an holy calling, not according to our works, but accord- 
ing to his own purpose and grace ;" and " that the kindness 
and love of God our Saviour toward men appeared not by 
works of righteousness which we have done, but according to 
his mercy he saved us ;" that being justified by his grace, we 
might become the heirs of everlasting life, (2 Tim. i. 9 ; Tit. 
iii. 4, 5.) By this confession we strip man of every particle 
of righteousness, until by mere mercy he is regenerated unto 
the hope of eternal life, since it is not true to say we are 
justified by grace, if works contribute in any degree to our 
justification. The apostle undoubtedly had not forgotten 


CHAP. XIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 357 

himself in declaring that justification is gratuitous, seeing he 
argues in another place, that if works are of any avail, " grace 
is no more grace," (Rom. xi. 6.) And what else does our 
Lord mean, when he declares, " I am not come to call the 
righteous, but sinners to repentance ?" (Matth. ix. 13.) If 
sinners alone are admitted, why do we seek admission by 
means of fictitious righteousness ? 

6. The thought is ever and anon recurring to me, that I 
am in danger of insulting the mercy of God by labouring 
with so much anxiety to maintain it, as if it were doubtful or 
obscure. Such, however, is our malignity in refusing to con- 
cede to God what belongs to him until most strongly urged, 
that I am obliged to insist at greater length. But as Scrip- 
ture is clear enough on this subject, I shall contend in its 
words rather than my own. Isaiah, after describing the 
universal destruction of the human race, finely subjoins the 
method of restitution. " The Lord saw it, and it displeased 
him that there was no judgment. And he saw that there 
was no man, and wondered that there was no intercessor : 
therefore his arm brought salvation unto him ; and his right- 
eousness, it sustained him," (Isaiah lix. 15, 16.) Where is 
our righteousness, if the prophet says truly, that no man 
in recovering salvation gives any assistance to the Lord ? 
Thus another prophet, introducing the Lord as treating con- 
cerning the reconciliation of sinners, says, " I will betroth 
thee unto me for ever ; yea, I will betroth thee unto me in 
righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving-kindness, and 
in mercies." " I will have mercy upon her that had not 
obtained mercy," (Hosea ii. 19, 23.) If a covenant of this 
kind, evidently forming our first union with God, depends 
on mercy, there is no foundation left for our righteousness. 
And, indeed, I would fain know, from those who pretend that 
man meets God with some righteousness of works, whether 
they imagine there is any kind of righteousness save that 
which is acceptable to Him. If it were insane to think so, 
can any thing agreeable to God proceed from his enemies, 
whom he abominates with all their deeds ? Truth declares 
that we are all the avowed and inveterate enemies of God until 
we are justified and admitted to his friendship, (Rom. v. 6 ; 


358 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

Col. i. 21.) If justification is the beginning of love, how can 
the righteousness of works precede it ? Hence John, to put 
down the arrogant idea, carefully reminds us that God first 
loved us, (1 John iv. 10.) The Lord had formerly taught 
the same thing by his Prophet : " I will love them freely : 
for mine anger is turned away from him," (Hosea xiv. 4.) 
Assuredly he is not influenced by works if his love turns to 
us spontaneously. But the rude and vulgar idea entertained 
is, that we did not merit the interposition of Christ for our 
redemption, but that we are aided by our works in obtaining 
possession of it. On the contrary, though we may be 
redeemed, by Christ, still, until we are ingrafted into union 
with him by the calling of the Father, we are darkness, the 
heirs of death, and the enemies of God. For Paul declares 
that we are not purged and washed from our impurities by 
the blood of Christ until the Spirit accomplishes that cleans- 
ing in us, (1 Cor. vi. 11.) Peter, intending to say the same 
thing, declares that the sanctification of the Spirit avails 
" unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ," 
(1 Pet. i. 2.) If the sprinkling of the blood of Christ by 
the Spirit gives us purification, let us not think that, pre- 
vious to this sprinkling, we are anything but sinners without 
Christ. Let us, therefore, hold it as certain, that the begin- 
ning of our salvation is as it were a resurrection from death 
unto life, because, when it is given us on behalf of Christ to 
believe on him, (Phil. i. 29,) then only do we begin to pass 
from death unto life. 

7. Under this head the second and third class of men 
noted in the above division is comprehended. Impurity of 
conscience proves that as yet neither of these classes is re- 
generated by the Spirit of God. And, again, their not being 
regenerated proves their want of faith. Whence it is clear 
that they are not yet reconciled, not yet justified, since it is 
only by faith that these blessings are obtained. What can 
sinners, alienated from God, produce save that which is abo- 
minable in his sight ? Such, however, is the stupid confidence 
entertained by all the wicked, and especially by hypocrites, 
that however conscious that their whole heart teems with 
impurity, they yet deem any spurious works which they may 


CHAP. XIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 359 

perform as worthy of the approbation of God. Hence the 
pernicious consequence, that though convicted of a wicked and 
impious mind, they cannot be induced to confess that they are 
devoid of righteousness. Even acknowledging themselves to 
be unrighteous, because they cannot deny it, they yet arro- 
gate to themselves some degree of righteousness. This 
vanity the Lord admirably refutes by the prophet: " Ask now 
the priests concerning the law, saying, If one bear holy flesh 
in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do touch bread, 
or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be holy ? 
And the priests answered and said, No. Then said Haggai, 
If one that is unclean by a dead body touch any of these, 
shall it be unclean ? And the priests answered and said, It 
shall be unclean. Then answered Haggai, and said, So is 
this people, and so is this nation before me, saith the Lord ; 
and so is every work of their hands ; and that which they 
offer there is unclean," (Haggai ii. 11-14.) I wish these 
sentiments could obtain full credit with us, and be deeply 
fixed on our memories. For there is no man, however flagi- 
tious the whole tenor of his life may be, who will allow him- 
self to be convinced of what the Lord here so clearly declares. 
As soon as any person, even the most wicked, has performed 
some one duty of the law, he hesitates not to impute it to 
himself for righteousness ; but the Lord declares that no 
degree of holiness is thereby acquired, unless the heart has 
previously been made pure. And not contented with this, 
he declares that all the works performed by sinners are con- 
taminated by impurity of heart. Let us cease then to give 
the name of righteousness to works which the mouth of the 
Lord condemns as polluted. How well is this shown by that 
elegant similitude ? It might be objected, that what the Lord 
has commanded is inviolably holy. But he, on the contrary, 
replies, that it is not strange that those things which are 
sanctified in the law are contaminated by the impurity of the 
wicked, the unclean hand profaning that which is sacred by 
handling it. 

8. The same argument is admirably followed out by Isaiah : 
" Bring no more vain oblations ; incense is an abomination 
unto me ; the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assem- 


360 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

blies, I cannot away with ; it is iniquity, even the solemn 
meeting. Your new moons and your appointed feasts my 
soul hateth : they are a trouble unto me ; I am weary to bear 
them. And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide 
mine eyes from you ; yea, when ye make many prayers, I 
will not hear : your hands are full of blood. Wash you, 
make you clean ; put away the evil of your doings from before 
mine eyes," (Isaiah i. 13-16, compared with lviii.) What is 
meant by the Lord thus nauseating the observance of his 
law ? Nay, indeed, he does not repudiate any thing relating 
to the genuine observance of the law, the beginning of which 
is, as he uniformly declares, the sincere fear of his name. 
When this is wanting, all the services which are offered to 
him are not only nugatory, but vile and abominable. Let 
hypocrites now go, and while keeping depravity wrapt up in 
their heart, study to lay God under obligation by their 
works. In this way they will only offend him more and 
more. " The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the 
Lord ; but the prayer of the upright is his delight," (Prov. 
xv. 8.) We hold it, therefore, as indubitable, indeed it should 
be notorious to all tolerably versant with Scripture, that the 
most splendid works performed by men, who are not yet 
truly sanctified, are so far from being righteousness in the 
sight of the Lord, that he regards them as sins. And, there- 
fore, it is taught with perfect truth, that no man procures 
favour with God by means of works, but that, on the con- 
trary, works are not pleasing to God unless the person has 
previously found favour in his sight.1 Here we should care- 
fully observe the order which Scripture sets before us. Moses 
says, that " the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering," 
(Gen. iv. 4.) Observe how he says that the Lord was pro- 
pitious (had respect) to Abel, before he had respect to his 
works. Wherefore, purification of heart ought to precede, 
in order that the works performed by us may be graciously 
accepted by God : for the saying of Jeremiah is always true, 
uO Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth?" (Jer. v. 3.) 


1 See August. Lib. de Poenit., and Gregory, whose words are quoted, 
Sent. Lib. hi. Qua?st. 7. 


CHAP. XIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 361 

Moreover, the Holy Spirit declared by the mouth of Peter, 
that it is by faith alone the heart is purified, (Acts xv. 9.) 
Hence it is evident, that the primary foundation is in true 
and living faith. 

9. Let us now see what kind of righteousness belongs to 
those persons whom we have placed in the fourth class. We 
admit, that when God reconciles us to himself by the inter- 
vention of the righteousness of Christ, and bestowing upon 
us the free pardon of sins regards us as righteous, his good- 
ness is at the same time conjoined with mercy, so that he 
dwells in us by means of his Holy Spirit, by whose agency 
the lusts of our flesh are every day more and more morti- 
fied, while that we ourselves are sanctified ; that is, conse- 
crated to the Lord for true purity of life, our hearts being 
trained to the obedience of the law. It thus becomes our 
leading desire to obey his will, and in all things advance 
his glory only. Still, however, while we walk in the ways 
of the Lord, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, lest 
we should become unduly elated, and forget ourselves, we 
have still remains of imperfection which serve to keep us 
humble : " There is no man that sinneth not," saith Scrip- 
ture, (1 Kings viii. 46.) What righteousness then can men 
obtain by their works ? First, I say, that the best thing 
which can be produced by them is always tainted and cor- 
rupted by the impurity of the flesh, and has, as it were, 
some mixture of dross in it. Let the holy servant of God, 
I say, select from the whole course of his life the action 
which he deems most excellent, and let him ponder it in all 
its parts ; he will doubtless find in it something that savours 
of the rottenness of the flesh, since our alacrity in well-doing 
is never what it ought to be, but our course is always 
retarded by much weakness. Although we see that the 
stains by which the works of the righteous are blemished 
are by no means unapparent, still, granting that they are the 
minutest possible, will they give no offence to the eye of 
God, before which even the stars are not clean ? We thus 
see, that even saints cannot perform one work which, if judged 
on its own merits, is not deserving of condemnation. 

10. Even were it possible for us to perform works abso- 
lutely pure, yet one sin is sufficient to efface and extinguish 


362 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

all remembrance of former righteousness, as the prophet says, 
(Ezek. xviii. 24.) With this James agrees, " Whosoever 
shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, is 
guilty of all," (James ii. 10.) And since this mortal life is 
never entirely free from the taint of sin, whatever righteous- 
ness we could acquire would ever and anon be corrupted, 
overwhelmed, and destroyed, by subsequent sins, so that it 
could not stand the scrutiny of God, or be imputed to us for 
righteousness. In short, whenever we treat of the righteous- 
ness of works, Ave must look not to the legal work but to the 
command. Therefore, when righteousness is sought by the 
Law, it is in vain to produce one or two single works ; we 
must show an uninterrupted obedience. God does not 
(as many foolishly imagine) impute that forgiveness of sins, 
once for all, as righteousness ; so that having obtained the 
pardon of our past life we may afterwards seek righteous- 
ness in the Law. This were only to mock and delude us by 
the entertainment of false hopes. For since perfection is alto- 
gether unattainable by us, so long as we are clothed with 
flesh, and the Law denounces death and judgment against 
all who have not yielded a perfect righteousness, there will 
always be ground to accuse and convict us unless the mercy of 
God interpose, and ever and anon absolve us by the constant 
remission of sins. Wherefore the statement with which we 
set out is always true, If we are estimated by our own wor- 
thiness, in every thing that we think or devise, with all our 
studies and endeavours we deserve death and destruction. 

11. We must strongly insist on these two things : That 
no believer ever performed one work which, if tested by the 
strict judgment of God, could escape condemnation ; and, 
moreover, that were this granted to be possible, (though it 
is not,) yet the act being vitiated and polluted by the sins of 
which it is certain that the author of it is guilty, it is deprived 
of its merit. This is the cardinal point of the present dis- 
cussion. There is no controversy between us and the sounder 
Schoolmen as to the beginning of justification.1 They admit 

1 The following sentence is added in the French : — " II est bien vray 
que le poure nionde a este seduit jusques la, de penser que l'homme se 
preparast de soy-mesme pour estre Justine de Dieu : et que ce blaspheme 
a regne communement tant en predications qu'aux escoles ; comme encore 
aujourdhui il est soustenue de ceux qui veulent maintenir toutes les 


CHAP. XIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 363 

that the sinner, freely delivered from condemnation, ob- 
tains justification, and that by forgiveness of sins ; but under 
the term justification they comprehend the renovation by 
which the Spirit forms us anew to the obedience of the Law ; 
and in describing the righteousness of the regenerate man, 
maintain that being once reconciled to God by means of 
Christ, he is afterwards deemed righteous by his good works, 
and is accepted in consideration of them. The Lord, on the 
contrary, declares, that he imputed Abraham's faith for right- 
eousness, (Rom. iv. 3,) not at the time when he was still a 
worshipper of idols, but after he had been many years distin- 
guished for holiness. Abraham had long served God with a 
pure heart, and performed that obedience of the Law which 
a mortal man is able to perform : yet his righteousness still 
consisted in faith. Hence we infer, according to the reason- 
ing of Paul, that it was not of icorks. In like manner, when 
the prophet says, " The just shall live by his faith," (Hab. ii. 
4,) he is not speaking of the wicked and profane, whom the 
Lord justifies by converting them to the faith : his discourse 
is directed to believers, and life is promised to them by faith. 
Paul also removes every doubt, when in confirmation of this 
sentiment he quotes the words of David, " Blessed is he whose 
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered," (Ps. xxxii. 1.) 
It is certain that David is not speaking of the ungodly, but 
of believers such as he himself was, because he was giving 
utterance to the feelings of his own mind. Therefore Ave 
must have this blessedness not once only, but must hold it fast 
during; our whole lives. Moreover, the message of free recon- 
ciliation with God is not promulgated for one or two days, 
but is declared to be perpetual in the Church, (2 Cor. v. 18, 
19.) Hence believei"s have not even to the end of life any 
other righteousness than that which is there described. Christ 
ever remains a Mediator to reconcile the Father to us, and 
there is a perpetual efficacy in his death, viz., ablution, satis- 
faction, expiation ; in short, perfect obedience, by which all 

abominations de la Papaute." — It is very true that the poor world has 
been seduced hitherto, to think that man eoidd of himself prepare to be 
justified by God, and that this blasphemy has commonly reigned both in 
sermons and schools, as it is still in the present day asserted by those who 
would maintain all the abominations of the Papacy. 


364 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

our iniquities are covered. In the Epistle to the Ephesians, 
Paul says not that the beginning of salvation is of grace, but 
" by grace are ye saved," " not of works, lest any man should 
boast," (Eph. ii. 8, 9.) 

12. The subterfuges by which the Schoolmen here endea- 
vour to escape will not disentangle them. They say that 
erood works are not of such intrinsic worth as to be sufficient 
to procure justification, but it is owing to accepting grace that 
they have this effect. Then because they are forced to con- 
fess that here the righteousness of works is always imperfect, 
they grant that so long as we are in this life we stand in 
need of the forgiveness of sin in order to supply the de- 
ficiency of works, but that the faults which are committed 
are compensated by works of supererogation. I answer, 
that the grace which they call accepting, is nothing else than 
the free goodness with which the Father embraces us in 
Christ when he clothes us with the innocence of Christ, and 
accepts it as ours, so that in consideration of it he regards 
us as holy, pure, and innocent. For the righteousness of 
Christ (as it alone is perfect, so it alone can stand the scru- 
tiny of God) must be sisted for us, and as a surety represent 
us judicially. Provided with this righteousness, we con- 
stantly obtain the remission of sins through faith. Our 
imperfection and impurity, covered with this purity, are not 
imputed, but are as it were buried, so as not to come under 
judgment until the hour arrive when the old man being 
destroyed, and plainly extinguished in us, the divine good- 
ness shall receive us into beatific peace with the new Adam, 
there to await the day of the Lord, on which, being clothed 
with incorruptible bodies, we shall be translated to the glory 
of the heavenly kingdom. 

13. If these things are so, it is certain that our works 
cannot in themselves make us agreeable and acceptable to 
God, and even cannot please God, except in so far as being 
covered with the righteousness of Christ we thereby please 
him, and obtain forgiveness of sins. God has not promised 
life as the reward of certain works, but only declares, " which 
if a man do, he shall live in them," (Lev. xviii. 5,) denoun- 
cing the well-known curse against all who do not continue in 


CHAP. XIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 3G5 

all things that are written in the book of the Law to do 
them. In this way is completely refuted the fiction of a 
partial righteousness, the only righteousness acknowledged 
in heaven being the perfect observance of the Law. There 
is nothing more solid in their dogma of compensation by 
means of works of supererogation. For must they not 
always return to the proposition which has already been 
disproved, viz., that he who observes the Law in part is so 
far justified by works ? This, which no man of sound judg- 
ment will concede to them, they are not ashamed to take for 
granted. The Lord having so often declared that he recog- 
nises no justification by works unless they be works by 
which the Law is perfectly fulfilled, — how perverse is it, while 
we are devoid of such works, to endeavour to secure some 
ground of glorying to ourselves ; that is, not to yield it 
entirely to God, by boasting of some kind of fragments of 
works, and trying to supply the deficiency by other satisfac- 
tions ? Satisfactions have already been so completely disposed 
of, that we ought never again even to dream of them. Here 
all I say is, that those who thus trifle with sin do not at 
all consider how execrable it is in the sight of God ; if they 
did, they would assuredly understand, that all the righteous- 
ness of men collected into one heap would be inadequate to 
compensate for a single sin. For we see that by one sin 
man was so cast off and forsaken by God, that he at the same 
time lost all power of recovering salvation. He was, there- 
fore, deprived- of the power of giving satisfaction. Those 
who flatter themselves with this idea will never satisfy God, 
who cannot possibly accept or be pleased with anything that 
proceeds from his enemies. But all to wThom he imputes sin 
are enemies, and, therefore, our sins must be covered and 
forgiven before the Lord has respect to any of our works. 
From this it follows, that the forgiveness of sins is gratui- 
tous, and this forgiveness is wickedly insulted by those who 
introduce the idea of satisfaction. Let us, therefore, after 
the example of the Apostle, " forgetting those things which 
are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are 
before," " press toward the mark for the prize of the high 
calling of God in Jesus Christ," (Philip, iii. 13, 14.) 


366 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

14. How can boasting in works of supererogation agree 
with the command given to us : " When ye shall have done 
all those things which are commanded you, say, We are 
unprofitable servants : we have done that which was our 
duty to do ?" (Luke xvii. 10.) To say or speak in the pre- 
sence of God is not to feign or lie, but to declare what we 
hold as certain. Our Lord, therefore, enjoins us sincerely 
to feel and consider with ourselves that we do not perform 
gratuitous duties, but pay him service which is due. And 
truly. For the obligations of service under which we lie 
are so numerous, that we cannot discharge them though all 
our thoughts and members were devoted to the observance 
of the Law ; and, therefore, when he says, " When ye shall 
have done all those things which are commanded you," it is 
just as if he had said, that all the righteousness of men 
would not amount to one of these things. Seeing, then, 
that every one is very far distant from that goal, how can we 
presume to boast of having accumulated more than is due ? 
It cannot be objected that a person, though failing in some 
measure in what is necessary, may yet in intention go beyond 
what is necessary. For it must ever be held, that in what- 
ever pertains to the worship of God, or to charity, nothing 
can ever be thought of that is not comprehended under the 
Law. But if it is part of the Law, let us not boast of 
voluntary liberality in matters of necessary obligation. 

15. On this subject, they causelessly allege the boast of 
Paul, that among the Corinthians he spontaneously renounced 
a right which, if he had otherwise chosen, he might have 
exercised, (1 Cor. ix. 15 ;) thus not only paying what he 
owed them in duty, but gratuitously bestowing upon them 
more than duty required. They ought to have attended to 
the reason there expressed, that his object was to avoid 
giving offence to the weak. For wicked and deceitful work- 
men employed* this pretence of kindness that they might 
procure favour to their pernicious dogmas, and excite hatred 
against the Gospel, so that it was necessary for Paul either 
to peril the doctrine of Christ, or to thwart their schemes. 
Now, if it is a matter of indifference to a Christian man 
whether or not he cause a scandal when it is in his power to 


CHAP. XIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 3G7 

avoid it, then I admit that the Apostle performed a work of 
supererogation to his Master ; but if the thing which he did 
was justly required in a prudent minister of the Gospel, then 
I say he did what he was bound to do. In short, even 
when no such reason appears, yet the saying of Chrysostom 
is always true, that everything which we have is held on the 
same condition as the private property of slaves ; it is always 
due to our Master. Christ does not disguise this in the 
parable ; for he asks in regard to the master who, on return 
from his labour, requires his servant to gird himself and 
serve him, " Does he thank that servant because he did the 
things that were commanded him? I trow not," (Luke 
xvii. 9.) But possibly the servant was more industrious 
than the master would have ventured to exact. Be it so : 
still he did nothing to which his condition as a servant did not 
bind him, because his utmost ability is his master's. I say 
nothing as to the kind of supererogations on which these men 
would plume themselves before God. They are frivolities 
which he never commanded, which he approves not, and will 
not accept when they come to give in their account. The 
only sense in which we admit works of supererogation is that 
expressed by the prophet, when he says, " Who hath required 
this at your hand ?" (Isaiah i. 12.) But let them remember 
what is elsewhere said of .them : " Wherefore do ye spend 
money for that which is not bread ? and your labour for that 
which satisfieth not ?" (Isaiah lv. 2.) It is, indeed, an easy 
matter for these indolent Rabbins to carry on such discussions 
sitting in their soft chairs under the shade ; but when the 
Supreme Judge shall sit on his tribunal, all these blustering 
dogmas will behove to disappear.1 This, this I say, was the 
true question : not what we can fable and talk in schools and 
corners, but what ground of defence we can produce at his 
judgment-seat. 

16. In this matter the minds of men must be specially guard- 
ed against two pestiferous dogmas, viz., against putting any 
confidence in the righteousness of works, or ascribing any 

1 French, " Tout ce qu'ils auront determine ne profitera gueres, ains 
s'evanouisra comme fumee ;" — All their decisions will scarcely avail them, 
but will vanish like smoke. 


3G8 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

glory to them. From all such confidence the Scriptures 
uniformly dissuade us when they declare that our righteous- 
ness is offensive in the sight of God unless it derives a sweet 
odour from the purity of Christ : that it can have no other 
effect than to excite the divine vengeance unless sustained 
by his indulgent mercy. Accordingly, the only thing they 
leave to us is to deprecate our Judge with that confession of 
David : " Enter not into judgment with thy servant : for in 
thy sight shall no living be justified," (Psalm cxliii. 2.) 
And when Job says, " If I be wicked, woe unto me : and if 
I be righteous, yet will I not lift up my head," (Job x. 15.) 
Although he refers to that spotless righteousness of God, 
before which even angels are not clean, he however shows, 
that when brought to the bar of God, all that mortals can 
do is to stand dumb. He does not merely mean that he 
chooses rather to give way spontaneously than to risk a con- 
test with the divine severity, but that he was not conscious of 
possessing any righteousness that would not fall the very first 
moment it was brought into the presence of God. Confi- 
dence being banished, all glorying must necessarily cease. 
For who can attribute any merit of righteousness to works, 
which instead of giving confidence, only make us tremble in 
the presence of God ? We must, therefore, come to what 
Isaiah invites us : " In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel 
be justified, and shall glory," (Isaiah xlv. 25 ;) for it is most 
true, as he elsewhere says, that we are " the planting of the 
Lord, that he might be glorified," (Isaiah lxi. 3.) Our soul, 
therefore, will not be duly purified until it ceases to have 
any confidence, or feel any exultation in works. Foolish 
men are puffed up to this false and lying confidence by the 
erroneous idea that the cause of their salvation is in works. 

17. But if we attend to the four kinds of causes which 
philosophers bring under our view in regard to effects, we 
shall find that not one of them is applicable to works as a 
cause of salvation. The efficient cause of our eternal salva- 
tion the Scripture uniformly proclaims to be the mercy and 
free love of the heavenly Father towards us ; the material 
cause to be Christ, with the obedience by which he purchased 
righteousness for us ; and what can the formal or instru- 


CHAP. XIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 369 

mental cause be but faith ? John includes the three in one 
sentence when he says, " God so loved the world, that he 
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him 
should not perish, but have everlasting life," (John iii. 16.) 
The Apostle, moreover, declares that the final cause is the 
demonstration of the divine righteousness and the praise of 
his goodness. There also he distinctly mentions the other 
three causes ; for he thus speaks to the Romans : " All 
have sinned, and come short of the glory of God ; being 
justified freely by his grace," (Rom. iii. 23, 24.) You have 
here the head and primary source — God has embraced us 
with free mercy. The next words are, " through the redemp- 
tion that is in Christ Jesus ;" this is as it were the material 
cause by which righteousness is procured for us. " Whom 
God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith." 
Faith is thus the instrumental cause by Avhich righteousness 
is applied to us. He lastly subjoins the final cause when he 
says, i{ To declare at this time his righteousness ; that he 
might be just, and the justifier of him that believeth in 
Jesus." And to show by the way that this righteousness 
consists in reconciliation, he says that Christ was " set forth 
to be a propitiation." Thus also, in the Epistle to the 
Ephesians, he tells us that we are received into the favour 
of God by mere mercy ; that this is done by the interven- 
tion of Christ ; that it is apprehended by faith ; the end of 
all being that the glory of the divine goodness may be fully 
displayed.-s/When we see that all the parts of our salvation 
thus exist without us, what ground can we have for glorying 
or confiding in our works ? Neither as to the efficient nor 
the final cause can the most sworn enemies of divine grace 
raise any controve'rsy with us unless they would abjure the 
whole of Scripture. In regard to the material or formal 
cause they make a gloss, as if they held that our Avorks 
divide the merit with faith and the righteousness of Christ. 
But here also Scripture reclaims, simply affirming that Christ 
is both righteousness and life, and that the blessing of justi- 
fication is possessed by faith alone. 

18. When the saints repeatedly confirm and console them- 
selves with the remembrance of their innocence and integrity, 
VOL. II. 2 A 


370 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

and sometimes even abstain not from proclaiming them, it is 
done in two ways : either because by comparing their good 
cause with the bad cause of the ungodly, they thence feel secure 
of victory, not so much from commendation of their own righte- 
ousness, as from the just and merited condemnation of their 
adversaries ; or because, reviewing themselves before God, even 
without any comparison with others, the purity of their con- 
science gives them some comfort and security. The former 
reason will afterwards be considered, (chap. xvii. sec. 14, and 
chap. xx. sec. 10 ;) let us now briefly show, in regard to the 
latter, how it accords with what wTe have above said, that we 
can have no confidence in works before the bar of God, that wTe 
cannot glory in any opinion of their worth. The accordance lies 
here, that when the point considered is the constitution and 
foundation of salvation, believers, without paying any respect 
to works, direct their eyes to the goodness of God alone. 
Nor do they turn to it only in the first instance, as to the 
commencement of blessedness, but rest in it as the completion. 
Conscience being thus founded, built up, and established, is 
farther established by the consideration of works, inasmuch 
as they are proofs of God dwelling and reigning in us. Since, 
then, this confidence in works has no place unless you have 
previously fixed your whole confidence on the mercy of God, 
it should not seem contrary to that on which it depends. 
Wherefore, when we exclude confidence in works, we merely 
mean, that the Christian mind must not turn back to the 
merit of works as an aid to salvation, but must dwell entirely 
on the free promise of justification. But Ave forbid no 
believer to confirm and support this faith by the signs of the 
divine favour towards him. For if when Ave call to mind the 
gifts which God has bestoAved upon us, they are like rays of 
the divine countenance, by which Ave are enabled to behold 
the highest light of his goodness ; much more is this the 
case with the gift of good Avorks, which shows that Ave haAre 
received the Spirit of adoption. 

19. When believers therefore feel their faith strengthened 
by a consciousness of integrity, and entertain sentiments of 
exultation, it is just because the fruits of their calling con- 
vince them that the Lord has admitted them to a place 


CHAP. XIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 371 

among his children. Accordingly, when Solomon says, " In 
the fear of the Lord is strong confidence," (Pro v. xiv. 26,) 
and when the saints sometimes beseech the Lord to hear 
them, because they walked before his face in simplicity and 
integrity, (Gen. xxiv. 10 ; 2 Kings xx. 3,) these expressions 
apply not to laying the foundation of a firm conscience, but 
are of force only when taken a posteriori.1 For there is no 
where such a fear of God as can give full security, and the 
saints are always conscious that any integrity which they 
may possess is mingled with many remains of the flesh. But 
as the fruits of regeneration furnish them with a proof of the 
Holy Spirit dwelling in them, experiencing God to be a 
Father in a matter of so much moment, they are strengthened 
in no slight degree to wait for his assistance in all their 
necessities. Even this they could not do, had they not pre- 
viously perceived that the goodness of God is sealed to them 
by nothing but the certainty of the promise. Should they 
begin to estimate it by their good works, nothing will be 
weaker or more uncertain ; works, Avhen estimated by them- 
selves, no less proving the divine displeasure by their imper- 
fection, than his good-will by their incipient purity. In 
short, while proclaiming the mercies of the Lord, they never 
lose sight of his free favour, with all its " breadth and length, 
and depth and height," testified by Paul, (Eph. iii. 18 ;) as if 
he had said, Whithersoever the believer turns, however loftily 
he climbs, however far and wide his thoughts extend, he 
must not go farther than the love of Christ, but must be 
wholly occupied in meditating upon it, as including in 
itself all dimensions. Accordingly, he declares that it " passeth 
knowledge," that " to know the love of Christ" is to " be 
filled with all the fulness of God," (Eph. iii. 19.) In another 
passage, where he glories that believers are victorious in every 
contest, he adds the reason, u through him that loved us," 
(Rom. viii. 37.) 

20. We now see that believers have no such confidence in 
works as to attribute any merit to them, (since they regard 
them only as divine gifts, in which they recognise his good- 

1 Latin, " a posteriori ; " French, " comme enseignc tie la vocation dc 
Dieu ; " — as a sign of the calling of God. 


372 INSTITUTES OF TIIE BOOK III. 

ness, and signs of calling, in which they discern their election ;) 
nor such confidence as to derogate in any respect from the 
free righteousness of Christ ; since on this it depends, and 
without this cannot subsist. The same thing is briefly but 
elegantly expressed by Augustine when he says, " I do not 
say to the Lord, Despise not the works of my hands ; I have 
sought the Lord with my hands, and have not been deceived. 
But I commend not the works of my hands, for I fear that when 
thou examinest them thou wilt find more faults than merits. 
This only I say, this ask, this desire, Despise not the works 
of thy hands. See in me thy work, not mine. If thou 
seest mine, thou condemnest ; if thou seest thine own, thou 
crownest. Whatever good works I have are of thee," 
(August, in Ps. cxxxvii.) He gives two reasons for not ven- 
turing to boast of his works before God : first, that if he has 
any good works, he does not see in them any thing of his 
own ; and, secondly, that these works are overwhelmed by 
a multitude of sins. Whence it is, that the conscience 
derives from them moi'e fear and alarm than security. 
Therefore, the only Avay in which he desires God to look at 
any work which he may have done aright is, that he may 
therein see the grace of his caUing, and perfect the work 
which he has begun. 

21. Moreover, when Scripture intimates that the good 
Avorks of believers are causes why the Lord does them good, 
we must still understand the meaning so as to hold unshaken 
what has previously been said, viz., that the efficient cause of 
our salvation is placed in the love of God the Father ; the 
material cause in the obedience of the Son ; the instrumental 
cause in the illumination of the Spirit, that is, in faith ; and 
the final cause in the praise of the divine goodness. In this, 
however, there is nothing to prevent the Lord from embracing 
works as inferior causes. But how so ? In this way : Those 
whom in mercy he lias destined for the inheritance of eternal 
life, he, in his ordinary administration, introduces to the 
possession of it by means of good works. What precedes 
in the order of administration is called the cause of what 
follows. For this reason, he sometimes makes eternal life a 
consequent of works ; not because it is to be ascribed to 


CHAP. XIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 373 

them, but because those whom he has elected he justifies, 
that he may at length glorify, (Rom. viii. 30 ;) he makes the 
prior grace to be a kind of cause, because it is a kind of 
step to that which follows. But whenever the true cause is 
to be assigned, he enjoins us not to take refuge in works, but 
to keep our thoughts entirely fixed on the mercy of God ; 
" The wages of sin is death ; but the gift of God is eternal 
life," (Rom. vi. 23.) Why, as he contrasts life with death, 
does he not also contrast righteousness with sin ? Why, 
Avhen setting down sin as the cause of death, does he not 
also set down righteousness as the cause of life ? The anti- 
thesis which would otherwise be complete is somewhat marred 
by this variation ; but the Apostle employed the comparison 
to express the fact, that death is due to the deserts of men, 
but that life was treasured up solely in the mercy of God. 
In short, by these expressions, the order rather than the 
cause is noted.1 The Lord adding grace to grace, takes 
occasion from a former to add a subsequent, so that he may 
omit no means of enriching his servants. Still, in following 
out his liberality, he would have us always look to free 
election as its source and beginning. For although he 
loves the gifts which he daily bestows upon us, inasmuch as 
they proceed from that fountain, still our duty is to hold 
fast by that gratuitous acceptance, which alone can support 
our souls ; and so to connect the gifts of the Spirit, which 
he afterwards bestows, with their primary cause, as in no 
decree to detract from it. 


1 French, " Brief, en toutes ces facons de parler, on il est fait mention 
de bonnes oeuvres, il n'est pas question de la cause pourquoy Dieu fait 
bien aux siens, mais seulenient de l'ordre qu'il y tient ; " — In short, in all 
those forms of expression in which mention is made of good works, there 
is no question as to the cause why God does good to his people, but only 
to the order which he observes in it. 


374 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 


CHAPTER XV. 

THE BOASTED MERIT OF WORKS SUBVERSIVE BOTH OF THE 
GLORY OF GOD, IN BESTOWING RIGHTEOUSNESS, AND OF 
THE CERTAINTY OF SALVATION. 

The divisions of this chapter are, — I. To the doctrine of free justification 
is opposed the question, Whether or not works merit favour with God, 
sec. 1. This question answered, sec. 2 and 3. II. An exposition of cer- 
tain passages of Scripture produced in support of the erroneous doctrine 
of merit, sec. 4 and 5. III. Sophisms of Semipelagian Schoolmen refut- 
ed, sec. 6 and 7. IV. Conclusion, proving the sufficiency of the orthodox 
doctrine, sec. 8. 

Sections. 

1. After a brief recapitulation, the question, Whether or not good works 

merit favour with God, considered. 

2. First answer, fixing the meaning of the term Merit. This term im- 

properly applied to works, but used in a good sense, as by Augus- 
tine, Chrysostom, Bernard. 

3. A second answer to the question. First by a negative, then by a 

concession. In the rewarding of works what to be attributed to 
God, and what to man. Why good works please God, and ai-e 
advantageous to those who do them. The ingratitude of seeking 
righteousness by works. This shown by a double similitude. 

4. First objection taken from Ecclesiasticus. Second objection from the 

Epistle to the Hebrews. Two answers to both objections. A weak 
distinction refuted. 

5. A third and most complete answer, calling us back to Christ as the 

only foundation of salvation. How Christ is our righteousness. 
Whence it is manifest that we have all things in Christ and he no- 
thing in us. 

6. We must abhor the sophistry which destroys the merit of Christ, in 

order to establish that of man. This impiety refuted by clear pass- 
ages of Scripture. 

7. Errors of the younger Sophists extracted from Lombard. Eefuted 

by Augustine. Also by Scripture. 

8. Conclusion, showing that the foundation which has been laid is suffi- 

cient for doctrine, exhortation, and comfort. Summary of the 
orthodox doctrine of Justification. 


CHAP. XV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 375 

1. The principal point in this subject has been now explain- 
ed : as justification, if dependant upon works, cannot possibly 
stand in the sight of God, it must depend solely on the mercy 
of God and communion with Christ, and therefore on faith 
alone. But let us carefully attend to the point on which the 
whole subject hinges, lest we get entangled in the common 
delusion, not only of the vulgar, but of the learned. For the 
moment the question is raised as to the justification by faith 
or works, they run off to those passages which seem to ascribe 
some merit to works in the sight of God, just as if justifica- 
tion by works were proved whenever it is proved that works 
have any value with God. Above we have clearly shown 
that justification by works consists only in a perfect and 
absolute fulfilment of the law ; and that, therefore, no man 
is justified by works unless he has reached the summit of 
perfection, and cannot be convicted of even the smallest 
transgression. But there is another and a separate question, 
Though works by no means suffice to justify, do they not 
merit favour with God ? 

2. First, I must premise with regard to the term Merit, 
that he, whoever he was, that first applied it to human works, 
viewed in reference to the divine tribunal, consulted very 
ill for the purity of the faith. I willingly abstain from dis- 
putes about words, but I could wish that Christian writers 
had always observed this soberness — that when there was 
no occasion for it, they had never thought of using terms 
foreign to the Scriptures — terms which might produce much 
offence, but very little fruit. I ask, what need was there to 
introduce the word Merit, when the value of works might 
have been fully expressed by another term, and without 
offence ? The quantity of offence contained in it the world 
shows to its great loss. It is certain that, being a high 
sounding term, it can only obscure the grace of God, and 
inspire men Avith pernicious pride. I admit it was used by 
ancient ecclesiastical writers, and I wish they had not by 
the abuse of one term furnished posterity with matter of 
heresy, although in some passages they themselves show that 
they had no wish to injure the truth. For Augustine says, 
" Let human merits, which perished by Adam, here be silent, 


376 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

and let the grace of God reign by Jesus Christ," (August, 
de Prasdest. Sanct.) Again, " The saints ascribe nothing to 
their merits ; every thing will they ascribe solely to thy 
mercy, O God," (August, in Psal. exxxix.) Again, "And 
when a man sees that whatever good he has he has not of 
himself, but of his God, he sees that every thing in him which 
is praised is not of his own merits, but of the divine mercy," 
(August, in Psal. lxxxviii.) You see how he denies man the 
power of acting aright, and thus lays merit prostrate. Chry- 
sostom says, " If any works of ours follow the free calling of 
God, they are return and debt ; but the gifts of God are grace, 
and beneficence, and great liberality." But to say nothing 
more of the name, let us attend to the thing. I formerly quot- 
ed a passage from Bernard : " As it is sufficient for merit not 
to presume on merit, so to be without merit is sufficient for 
condemnation," (Bernard in Cantic. Serm. 98.) He imme- 
diately adds an explanation which softens the harshness of the 
expression, when he says, " Hence be careful to have merits ; 
when you have them, know that they were given ; hope for 
fruit from the divine mercy, and you have escaped all the perils 
of poverty, ingratitude, and presumption. Happy the Church 
which neither wants merit without presumption, nor presump- 
tion without merit." A little before he had abundantly shown 
that he used the words in a sound sense, saying, " Why is the 
Church anxious about merits ? God has furnished her with a 
firmer and surer ground of boasting. God cannot deny himself ; 
he will do what he has promised. Thus there is no reason for 
asking by what merits may we hope for blessings ; especially 
when you hear, ' Thus saith the Lord God ; I do not this 
for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine holy name's 
sake,' (Ezek. xxxvi. 22.) It suffices for merit to know that 
merits suffice not." 

3. What all our works can merit Scripture shows when it 
declares that they cannot stand the view of God, because 
they are full of impurity ; it next shows what the perfect 
observance of the law (if it can any where be found) will 
merit when it enjoins, " So likewise ye, when ye shall have 
done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are 
unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty 


CHAP. XV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 377 

to do," (Luke xvii. 10 ;) because we make no free-offering to 
God, but only perform due service by which no favour is 
deserved. And yet those good works which the Lord has 
bestowed upon us he counts ours also, and declares, that they 
are not only acceptable to him, but that he will recompense 
them. It is ours in return to be animated by this great pro- 
mise, and to keep up our courage, that we may not weary in 
well-doing, but feel duly grateful for the great kindness of 
God. There cannot be a doubt, that every thing in our 
works which deserves praise is owing to divine grace, and 
that there is not a particle of it which we can properly ascribe 
to ourselves. If Ave truly and seriously acknowledge this, not 
only confidence, but every idea of merit vanishes. I say we 
do not, like the Sophists, share the praise of works between 
God and man, but we keep it entire and unimpaired for the 
Lord. All we assign to man is, that, by his impurity, he 
pollutes and contaminates the very works which were good. 
The most perfect thing which proceeds from man is always 
polluted by some stain. Should the Lord, therefore, bring 
to judgment the best of human works, he would indeed be- 
hold his own righteousness in them ; but he would also behold 
man's dishonour and disgrace. Thus good works please 
God, and are not without fruit to their authors, since, by 
way of recompense, they obtain more ample blessings from 
God, not because they so deserve, but because the divine 
benignity is pleased of itself to set this value upon them. 
Such, however, is our malignity, that, not contented with this 
liberality on the part of God, which bestows rewards on works 
that do not at all deserve them, we with profane ambition 
maintain that that which is entirely due to the divine muni- 
ficence is paid to the merit of works. Here I appeal to every 
man's common sense. If one who by another's liberality 
possesses the usufruct of a field, rear up a claim to the pro- 
perty of it, does he not by his ingratitude deserve to lose the 
possession formerly granted ? In like manner, if a slave, who 
has been manumitted, conceals his humble condition of freed- 
man, and gives out that he Avas free-born, does he not deserve 
to be reduced to his original slavery ? A benefit can only be 
legitimately enjoyed when we neither arrogate more to our- 


378 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

selves than has been given, nor defraud the author of it of 
his due praise ; nay, rather when we so conduct ourselves as 
to make it appear that the benefit conferred still in a manner 
resides with him who conferred it. But if this is the modera- 
tion to be observed towards men, let every one reflect and 
consider for himself what is due to God. 

4. I know that the Sophists abuse some passages in order 
to prove that the Scriptures use the term merit with refer- 
ence to God. They quote a passage from Ecclesiasticus : 
" Mercy will give place to every man according to the merit 
of his works," (Ecclesiasticus xvi. 14 ;) and from the Epistle to 
the Hebrews : " To do good and communicate forget not ; for 
with such sacrifices God is well pleased," (Heb. xiii. 16.) I 
now renounce my right to repudiate the authority of Eccle- 
siasticus ; but I deny that the words of Ecclesiasticus, who- 
ever the writer may have been, are faithfully quoted. The 
Greek is as follows : Yldff^ k\zri/J,offvvri toitjgh roftov" 'ixaarog ydg 
xara tol egya avrov supers/. u He will make room for all 
mercy : for each shall find according to his works." That 
this is the genuine reading, and has been corrupted in the 
Latin version, is plain, both from the very structure of the 
sentence, and from the previous context. In the Epistle to 
the Hebrews there is no room for their quibbling on one little 
word, for in the Greek the Apostle simply says, that such 
sacrifices are pleasing and acceptable to God. This alone 
should amply suffice to quell and beat down the insolence of 
our pride, and prevent us from attaching value to works 
beyond the rule of Scripture. It is the doctrine of Scripture, 
moreover, that our good works are constantly covered with 
numerous stains by which God is justly offended and made 
angry against us, so far are they from being able to conciliate 
him, and call forth his favour towards us ; and yet because 
of his indulgence, he does not examine them with the utmost 
strictness, he accepts them just as if they were most pure ; 
and therefore rewards them, though undeserving, with innu- 
merable blessings, both present and future. For I admit not 
the distinction laid down by otherwise learned and pious 
men, that good works merit the favours which are conferred 
upon us in this life, whereas eternal life is the reward of faith 


CHAP. XV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 379 

only. The recompense of our toils, and crown of our contest, 
our Lord almost uniformly places in heaven. On the other 
hand, to attribute to the merit of works, so as to deny it to 
grace, that we are loaded with other gifts from the Lord, is 
contrary to the doctrine of Scripture. For though Christ says, 
" Unto every one that hath shall be given ;" u thou hast been 
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many 
things," (Matth. xxv. 29, 21,) he, at the same time, shows 
that all additional gifts to believers are of his free benignity : 
" Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he 
that hath no money, come ye, buy, and eat : yea, come, buy 
wine and milk, without money and without price," (Isaiah 
lv. 1.) Therefore, every help to salvation bestowed upon 
believers, and blessedness itself, are entirely the gift of God, 
and yet in both the Lord testifies that he takes account of 
works, since to manifest the greatness of his love toward us, 
he thus highly honours not ourselves only, but the gifts which 
he has bestowed upon us. 

5. Had these points been duly handled and digested in 
past ages, never could so many tumults and dissensions have 
arisen. Paul says, that in the architecture of Christian doc- 
trine, it is necessaiy to retain the foundation which he had 
laid with the Corinthians, " Other foundation can no man 
lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ," (1 Cor. 
iii. 11.) What then is our foundation in Christ? Is it that 
he begins salvation and leaves us to complete it ? Is it that he 
only opened up the way, and left us to follow it in our own 
strength ? By no means, but as Paul had a little before de- 
clared, it is to acknowledge that he has been given us for 
righteousness. No man, therefore, is well founded in Christ 
who has not entire righteousness in him, since the Apostle 
says not that he was sent to assist us in procuring, but was 
himself to be our righteousness. Thus it is said that God 
" hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world," 
not according to our merit, but " according to the good plea- 
sure of his will ;" that in him " we have redemption through 
his blood, even the forgiveness of sins ;" that peace has 
been made " through the blood of his cross ;" that we are 
reconciled by his blood ; that, placed under his protection, we 


380 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

are delivered from the danger of finally perishing ; that thus 
ingrafted into him we are made partakers of eternal life, and 
hope for admission into the kingdom of God.1 Nor is this 
all. Being admitted to participation in him, though we are 
still foolish, he is our wisdom ; though we are still sinners, he 
is our righteousness ; though we are unclean, he is our purity ; 
though we are weak, unarmed, and exposed to Satan, yet oui*s 
is the power which has been given him in heaven and in 
earth, to bruise Satan under our feet, and burst the gates of 
hell, (Matth. xxviii. 18 ;) though we still bear about with us 
a body of death, he is our life ; in short, all things of his are 
ours, we have all things in him, he nothing in us. On this 
foundation, I say, we must be built, if we would grow up into 
a holy temple in the Lord. 

6. For a long time the world has been taught very differ- 
ently. A kind of good works called moral has been found 
out, by which men are rendered agreeable to God before they 
are ingrafted into Christ ; as if Scripture spoke falsely when 
it says, " He that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath 
not the Son of God hath not life," (1 John v. 12.) How 
can they produce the materials of life if they are dead ? Is 
there no meaning in its being said, that " whatsoever is not 
of faith is sin ?" (Rom. xiv. 23 ;) or can good fruit be produced 
from a bad tree? What have these most pestilential Sophists 
left to Christ on which to exert his virtue ? They say that he 
merited for us the first grace, that is, the occasion of meriting, 
and that it is our part not to let slip the occasion thus offered. 
O the daring effrontery of impiety ! Who would have thought 
that men professing the name of Christ would thus strip him 
of his power, and all but trample him under foot ? The testi- 
mony uniformly borne to him in Scripture is, that whoso 
believeth in him is justified ; the doctrine of these men is, 
that the only benefit which proceeds from him is to open up 
a way for each to justify himself. I wish they could get a 
taste of what is meant by these passages : *' He that hath 
the Son hath life." " He that heareth my word, and believeth 
on him that sent me," "is passed from death unto life." 

1 1 Cor. i. 30 ; Eph. i. 3-5 ; Col. i. 14, 20 ; John i. 12; x. 28. 


CHAP. XV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 381 

Whoso believeth in him " is passed from death unto life." 
"Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption 
that is in Christ Jesus." " He that keepeth his command- 
ments dwelleth in him, and he in him." God " hath raised 
us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places 
in Christ." " Who hath delivered us from the power of 
darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear 
Son."1 There are similar passages without number. Their 
meaning is not, that by faith in Christ an opportunity is given 
us of procuring justification, or acquiring salvation, but that 
both are given us. Hence, so soon as you are ingrafted into 
Christ by faith, you are made a son of God, an heir of heaven, 
a partaker of righteousness, a possessor of life, and (the better 
to manifest the false tenets of these men) youhave not obtained 
an opportunity of meriting, but all the merits of Christ, since 
they are communicated to you. 

7. In this way the schools of Sorbonne, the parents of all 
heresies, have deprived us of justification by faith, which 
lies at the root of all godliness. They confess, indeed, in 
word, that men are justified by a formed faith, but they after- 
wards explain this to mean that of faith they have good 
works, which avail to justification, so that they almost seem 
to use the term faith in mockery, because they were unable, 
without incurring great obloquy, to pass it in silence, seeing 
it is so often repeated by Scripture. And yet not con- 
tented with this, they by the praise of good works transfer 
to man what they steal from God. And seeing that good 
Avorks give little ground for exultation, and are not even pro- 
perly called merits, if they are regarded as the fruits of divine 
grace, they derive them from the power of free-will ; in other 
words, extract oil out of stone. They deny not that the 
principal cause is in grace ; but they contend that there is 
no exclusion of free-will through which all merit comes. This 
is the doctrine, not only of the later Sophists, but of Lom- 
bard their Pythagoras, (Sent. Lib. ii. Dist. 28,) who, in 
comparison of them, may be called sound and sober. It was 

1 1 John v. 12 ; John v. 24 ; Rom. hi. 24 ; 1 John hi. 24 ; Eph. ii. 6 ; 
Col. i. 13. 


382 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

surely strange blindness, while he had Augustine so often in 
his mouth, not to see how cautiously he guarded against ascrib- 
ing a single particle of praise to man because of good works. 
Above, when treating of free-will, Ave quoted some passages 
from him to this effect, and similar passages frequently 
occur in his writings, (see in Psal. civ. ; Ep. cv.,) as when he 
forbids us ever to boast of our merits, because they them- 
selves also are the gifts of God, and when he says that all 
our merits are only of grace, are not provided by our suffi- 
ciency, but are entirely the production of grace, &c. It is 
less strange that Lombard was blind to the light of Scripture, 
in which it is obvious that he had not been a very suc- 
cessful student.1 Still there cannot be a stronger declaration 
against him and his disciples than the words of the Apostle, 
who, after interdicting all Christians from glorying, subjoins 
the reason why glorying is unlawful : " For we are his work- 
manship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which 
God hath before ordained that we should walk in them," (Eph. 
ii. 10.) Seeing, then, that no good proceeds from us unless 
in so far as we are regenerated — and our regeneration is with- 
out exception wholly of God — there is no ground for claim- 
ing to ourselves one iota in good works. Lastly, while these 
men constantly inculcate good works, they, at the same time, 
train the conscience in such a way as to prevent it from 
venturing to confide that works will render God favour- 
able and propitious. We, on the contrary, without any 
mention of merit, give singular comfort to believers when we 
teach them that in their works they please, and doubtless are 
accepted of God. Nay, here we even insist that no man 
shall attempt or enter upon any work without faith, that is, 
unless he previously have a firm conviction that it will please 
God. 

8. Wherefore, let us never on any account allow ourselves 
to be drawn away one nail's breadth2 from that only founda- 
tion. After it is laid, wise architects build upon it rightly 

1 French, " d'autant qu'il n'y estoit gueres exercite ;" — inasmuch as he 
was little versant in it. 

2 French, " ne fust ce que de la pointe d'une espingle ;" — were it only 
a pin's point. 


CHAP. XV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 383 

and in order. For whether there is need of doctrine or 
exhortation, they remind us that " for this purpose the Son 
of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of 
the devil ;" that " whosoever is born of God doth not commit 
sin ;" that " the time past of our life may suffice us to have 
Avrought the will of the Gentiles;" that the elect of God are 
vessels of mercy, appointed " to honour," purged, " sanctified, 
and meet for the Master's use, and prepared unto every good 
work." The whole is expressed at once, when Christ thus 
describes his disciples, " If any man will come after me, let him 
deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me."1 
He who has denied himself has cut off the root of all evil, so 
as no longer to seek his own ; he who has taken up his 
cross has prepared himself for all meekness and endurance. 
The example of Christ includes this and all offices of piety 
and holiness. He obeyed his Father even unto death ; his 
whole life was spent in doing the works of God ; his whole 
soul was intent on the glory of his Father ; he laid down his 
life for the brethren ; he did good to his enemies, and prayed 
for them. And when there is need of comfort, it is admirably 
afforded in these words : " We are troubled on every side, 
yet not distressed ; we are perplexed, but not in despair ; 
persecuted, but not forsaken ; cast down, but not destroyed ; 
always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord 
Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our 
body." " For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with 
him ; if we suffer, we shall also reign with him ;" by means 
of " the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable 
unto his death ;" the Father having predestinated us " to be 
conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the 
first-born among many brethren." Hence it is, that " neither 
death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor 
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, 
nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the 
love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord;"2 nay, 
rather all things will work together for our good. See how 


1 1 John iii. 8 ; 1 Pet. iv. 3 ; 2 Tim. Ii. 20, 21 ; Luke ix. 23. 

2 2 Cor. iv. 8 ; 2 Tim. ii. 11 ; Phil. iii. 10 ; Kom. viii. 29, 39. 


384 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

it is that we do not justify men before God by works, but 
say, that all who are of God are regenerated and made new 
creatures, so that they pass from the kingdom of sin into 
the kingdom of righteousness. In this way they make their 
calling sure, and, like trees, are judged by their fruits. 


CHAP. XVI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 385 


CHAPTER XVI. 

REFUTATION OF THE CALUMNIES BY WHICH IT IS ATTEMPTED 
TO THROW ODIUM ON THIS DOCTRINE. 

The divisions of this chapter are, — I. The calumnies of the Papists 
against the orthodox doctrine of Justification by Faith are reduced to two 
classes. The first class, with its consequences, refuted, sec. 1-3. II. 
The second class, which is dependant on the first, refuted in the last 
section. 

Sections. 

1. Calumnies of the Papists. 1. That we destroy good works, and give 

encouragement to sin. Refutation of the first calumny. 1. Character 
of those who censure us. 2. Justification by faith establishes the 
necessity of good works. 

2. Refutation of a consequent of the former calumny, viz., that men are 

dissuaded from well-doing when we destroy merit. Two modes 
of refutation. First mode confirmed by many invincible arguments. 

3. The Apostles make no mention of merit, when they exhort us to good 

works. On the contrary, excluding merit, they refer us entirely 
to the mercy of God. Another mode of refutation. 

4. Refutation of the second calumny and of an inference from it, viz., 

that the obtaining righteousness is made too easy, when it is made 
to consist in the free remission of sins. 

1. Our last sentence may refute the impudent calumny of 
certain ungodly men, who charge us, first, with destroying 
good works, and leading men away from the study of them, 
when we say, that men are not justified, and do not merit 
salvation by works ; and, secondly, with making the means of 
justification too easy, when we say that it consists in the free 
remission of sins, and thus alluring men to sin to which they 
are already too much inclined. These calumnies, I say, are 
sufficiently refuted by that one sentence ; however, I will 
briefly reply to both. The allegation is, that justification by 
faith destroys good works. I will not describe what kind of 
zealots for good works the persons are who thus charge us. 
VOL. II. 2 B 


386 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK. III. 

We leave them as much liberty to bring the charge, as they 
take license to taint the whole world with the pollution of their 
lives.1 They pretend to lament2 that when faith is so highly 
extolled, works are deprived of their proper place. But what if 
they are rather ennobled and established ? We dream not of 
a faith which is devoid of good works, nor of a justification 
which can exist without them : the only difference is, that while 
we acknowledge that faith and works are necessarily connected, 
we, however, place justification in faith, not in wrorks. How 
this is done is easily explained, if wTe turn to Christ only, to 
whom our faith is directed, and from whom it derives all its 
power. Why, then, are we justified by faith ? Because by 
faith Ave apprehend the righteousness of Christ, which alone 
reconciles us to God. This faith, however, you cannot appre- 
hend Avithout at the same time apprehending sanctification ; 
for Christ " is made unto us Avisdom, and righteousness, 
and sanctification, and redemption," (L Cor. i. 30.) Christ, 
therefore, justifies no man Avithout also sanctifying him. 
These blessings are conjoined by a perpetual and inseparable 
tie. Those Avhom he enlightens by his Avisdom he redeems ; 
AA'hom he redeems he justifies ; Avhom he justifies he sancti- 
fies. But as the question relates only to justification and 
sanctification, to them let us confine ourselves. Though we 
distinguish between them, they are both inseparably com- 
prehended in Christ. Would ye then obtain justification in 
Christ ? You must previously possess Christ. But you 
cannot possess him without being made a partaker of his 
sanctification : for Christ cannot be divided. Since the 
Lord, therefore, does not grant us the enjoyment of these 
blessings without bestowing himself, he bestoAvs both at 
once, but never the one Avithout the other. Thus it appears 
how true it is that Ave are justified not Avithout, and yet 
not by Avorks, since in the participation of Christ, by which 
Ave are justified, is contained not less sanctification than 
justification. 

2. It is also most untrue that men's minds are with- 

1 This sentence is wholly omitted in the French. 

2 Latin, " Dolere sibi simulant." — French, " lis alleguent ;" — they 
allege. 


CHAP. XVI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 387 

drawn from the desire of well-doing when we deprive them of 
the idea of merit. Here, by the way, the reader must be told 
that those men absurdly infer merit from reward, as I will 
afterwards more clearly explain. They thus infer, because 
ignorant of the principle that God gives no less a display of 
his liberality when he assigns reward to works, than when 
he bestows the faculty of well-doing. This topic it will be 
better to defer to its own place. At present, let it be suffi- 
cient merely to advert to the weakness of their objection. 
This may be done in two ways.1 For, first, they are al- 
together in error when they say that, unless a hope of reward 
is held forth, no regard will be had to the right conduct of 
life. For if all that men do when they serve God is to look 
to the reward, and hire out or sell their labour to him, little 
is gained : he desires to be freely worshipped, freely loved : 
I say he approves the worshipper who, even if all hope of 
reward were cut off, would cease not to worship him. More- 
over, when men are to be urged, there cannot be a stronger 
stimulus than that derived from the end of our redemption 
and calling, such as the word of God employs when it says, 
that it were the height of impiety and ingratitude not to 
" love him who first loved us ;" that by " the blood of Christ" 
our conscience is purged " from dead works to serve the 
living God ;" that it were impious sacrilege in any one to 
count " the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sancti- 
fied, an unholy thing ;" that Ave have been " delivered out 
of the hands of our enemies," that we " might serve him 
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him, all 
the days of our life ;" that being " made free from sin," Ave 
" become the servants of righteousness ;" " that our old man is 
crucified Avith him," in order that Ave might rise to neAvness of 
life. Again, " if ye then be risen with Christ, (as becomes his 
members,) seek those things Avhich are above," living as pil- 
grims in the Avorld, and aspiring to heaven, where our trea- 
sure is. " The grace of God hath appeared to all men, 
bringing salvation, teaching us that, denying ungodliness 
and worldly lusts, Ave should live soberly, righteously, and 

1 All the previous sentences of this section, except the first, are omitted 
in the French. 


388 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

godly, in this present world ; looking for that blessed hope, 
and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour 
Jesus Christ." " For God hath not appointed us to wrath, 
but to obtain salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ." 
" Know ye not that ye are the temples of the Holy Spirit," 
which it were impious to profane ? " Ye were sometimes 
darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord : walk as the 
children of light." " God hath not called us unto uncleanness, 
but unto holiness." " For this is the will of God, even your 
sanctification, that ye should abstain " from all illicit desires : 
ours is a " holy calling," and we respond not to it except by 
purity of life. " Being then made free from sin, ye became 
the servants of righteousness." Can there be a stronger 
argument in exciting us to charity than that of John ? " If God 
so loved us, we ought also to love one another." " In this the 
children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil : 
whosoever doeth not righteousness is not of God, neither he 
that loveth not his brother." Similar is the argument of 
Paul, " Know ye not that your bodies are the members of 
Christ ?" " For as the body is one, and hath many members, 
and all the members of that one body being many, are one 
body, so also is Christ." Can there be a stronger incentive to 
holiness than when we are told by John, " Every man that 
hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure ?" 
and by Paul, " Having, therefore, these promises, dearly be- 
loved, cleanse yourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and 
spirit ;" or when we hear our Saviour hold forth himself as an 
example to us that we should follow his steps ?' 

3. I have given these few passages merely as a specimen ; 
for were I to go over them all, I should form a large volume. 
All the Apostles abound in exhortations, admonitions, and 
rebukes, for the purpose of training the man of God to every 
good work, and that without any mention of merit. Nay, 
rather their chief exhortations are founded on the fact, that 
without any merit of ours, our salvation depends entirely on 

1 1 John iv. 10, 19 ; Heb. ix. 14 ; x. 29 ; Luke i. 74, 75 ; Rom. vi. 
18 ; Col. iii. 1 ; Tit. ii. 11 ; 1 Thess. v. 9 ; 1 Cor. iii. 16 ; Eph. ii. 21 ; v. 
8 ; 2 Cor. vi. 16 ; 1 Thess. iv. 3, 7 ; 2 Tim. i. 9 ; Rom. vi. 18 ; 1 John 
iv. 10 ; iii. 11 ; 1 Cor. vi. 15, 17 ; xii. 12 ; 1 John iii. 3 ; 2 Cor. vii. 1 j 
John xv. 10. 


CHAP. XVI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 389 

the mercy of God. Thus Paul, who during a whole Epistle 
had maintained that there was no hope of life for us save in 
the righteousness of Christ, when he comes to exhorta- 
tion, beseeches us by the mercy which God has bestowed 
upon us, (Rom. xii. 1.) And, indeed, this one reason ought 
to have been sufficient, that God may be glorified in us. 
But if any are not so ardently desirous to promote the glory 
of God, still the remembrance of his kindness is most suffi- 
cient to incite them to do good, (see Chrysost. Homil. in 
Genes.) But those men,1 because, by introducing the idea 
of merit, they perhaps extract some forced and servile 
obedience of the Law, falsely allege, that as we do not adopt 
the same course, we have no means of exhorting to good 
works. As if God were well pleased with such services 
when he declares that he loves a cheerful giver, and forbids 
any thing to be given him grudgingly or of necessity, (2 Cor. 
ix. 7.) I say not that I would reject that or omit any kind 
of exhortation which Scripture employs, its object being 
not to leave any method of animating us untried. For 
it states, that the recompense which God will render to 
every one is according to his deeds; but, first, I deny that 
that is the only, or, in many instances, the principal motive ; 
and, secondly, I admit not that it is the motive with which 
we are to begin. Moreover, I maintain that it gives not the 
least countenance to those merits which these men are always 
preaching. This will afterwards be seen. Lastly, there is no 
use in this recompense, unless we have previously embraced 
the doctrine that we are justified solely by the merits of 
Christ as apprehended by faith, and not by any merit of 
works ; because the study of piety can be fitly prosecuted only 
by those by whom this doctrine has been previously imbibed. 
This is beautifully intimated by the Psalmist when he thus 
addresses God, " There is forgiveness with thee, that thou 
mayest be feared," (Ps. cxxx. 4.) For he shows that the 
worship of God cannot exist without acknowledging his 
mercy, on which it is founded and established. This is spe- 
cially deserving of notice, as showing us not only that the 
beginning of the due worship of God is confidence in his 

1 French, " ces Pharisiens ;" — those Pharisees. 


390 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

mercy ; but that the fear of God (which Papists will have to be 
meritorious) cannot be entitled to the name of merit, for this 
reason, that it is founded on the pardon and remission of sins. 
4. But the most futile calumny of all is, that men are in- 
vited to sin when we affirm that the pardon in which we hold 
that justification consists is gratuitous. Our doctrine is, that 
justification is a thing of such value, that it cannot be put 
into the balance with any good quality of ours ; and, there- 
fore, could never be obtained unless it were gratuitous : more- 
over, that it is gratuitous to us, but not also to Christ, Avho 
paid so dearly for it ; namely, his own most sacred blood, out 
of Avhich there wTas no price of sufficient value to pay what was 
due to the justice of God. When men are thus taught, they 
are reminded that it is owing to no merit of theirs that the 
shedding of that most sacred blood is not repeated every time 
they sin. Moreover, we say that our pollution is so great, that 
it can never be washed away save in the fountain of his pure 
blood. Must not those who are thus addressed conceive a 
greater horror of sin than if it were said to be wiped off by a 
sprinkling of good works ? If they have any reverence for 
God, how can they, after being once purified, avoid shudder- 
ing at the thought of again wallowing in the mire, and as 
much as in them lies troubling and polluting the purity of 
this fountain ? " I have washed my feet," (says the believing 
soul in the Song of Solomon, v. 3,) "how shall I defile them?" It 
is now plain which of the two makes the forgiveness of sins of 
less value, and derogates from the dignity of justification. 
They pretend that God is appeased by their frivolous satis- 
factions ; in other wrords, by mei*e dross. We maintain that 
the guilt of sin is too heinous to be so frivolously expiated ; 
that the offence is too grave to be forgiven to such valueless 
satisfactions ; and, therefore, that forgiveness is the preroga- 
tive of Christ's blood alone. They say that righteousness, 
wherever it is defective, is renewed and repaired by works of 
satisfaction. We think it too precious to be balanced by 
any compensation of works, and, therefore, in order to restore 
it, recourse must be had solely to the mercy of God. For 
the other points relating to the forgiveness of sins, see the 
following chapter. 


CHAP. XVII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 391 


CHAPTER XVII. 

THE PROMISES OF THE LAW AND THE GOSPEL RECONCILED. 

In the following chapter, the arguments of Sophists, who would 
destroy or impair the doctrine of Justification by Faith, are reduced to two 
classes. The former is general, the latter special, and contains some 
arguments peculiar to itself. I. The first class, which is general, and in 
a manner contains the foundation of all the arguments, draws an argu- 
ment from the promises of the law. This is considered from sec. 1-3. 
II. The second class following from the former, and containing special 
proofs. An argument drawn from the history of Cornelius explained, 
sec. 4, 5. III. A full exposition of those passages of Scripture which 
represent God as showing mercy and favour to the cultivators of right- 
eousness, sec. 6. IV. A third argument from the passages which distin- 
guish good works by the name of righteousness, and declare that men are 
justified by them, sec. 7, 8. V. The adversaries of justification by faith 
placed in a dilemma. Their partial righteousness refuted, sec. 9, 10. 
VI. A fourth argument, setting the Apostle James in opposition to Paul, 
considered, sec. 11, 12. VII. Answer to a fifth argument, that, accord- 
ing to Paul, not the hearers but the doers of the law are justified, sec. 
13. VIII. Consideration of a sixth argument, drawn from those passages 
in which believers boldly submit their righteousness to the judgment of 
God, and ask him to decide according to it, sec. 14. IX. Examination of 
the last argument, drawn from passages which ascribe righteousness and 
life to the ways of believers, sec. 15. 

Sections. 

1. Brief summary of Chapters xv. andxvi. Why justification is denied 

to works. Argument of opponeuts founded on the promises of the 
law. The substance of this argument. Answer. Those who would 
be justified before God must be exempted from the power of the 
law. How this is done. 

2. Confirmation of the answer ab impossibiU, and from the testimony 

of an Apostle and of David. 

3. Answer to the objection, by showing why these promises were given. 

Refutation of the sophistical distinction between the intrinsic value 
of works, and their value ex pacto. 

4. Argument from the history of Cornelius. Answer, by distinguishing 

between two kinds of acceptance. Former kind. Sophistical ob- 
jection refuted. 


392 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

5. Latter kind. Plain from this distinction that Cornelius was accept- 

ed freely before his good works could be accepted. Similar expla- 
nations to be given of the passage in which God is represented as 
merciful and propitious to the cultivators of righteousness. 

6. Exposition of these passages. Necessary to observe whether the pro- 

mise is legal or evangelical. The legal promise always made under 
the condition that we " do," the evangelical under the condition 
that we " believe." 

7. Argument from the passages which distinguish good works by the 

name of righteousness, and declare that man is justified by them. 
Answer to the former part of the argument respecting the name. 
Why the works of the saints called works of righteousness. Distinc- 
tion to be observed. 

8. Answer to the second part of the argument, viz., that man is justi- 

fied by works. Works of no avail by themselves ; we are justified 
by faith only. This kind of righteousness defined. Whence the 
value set on good works. 

9. Answer confirmed and fortified by a dilemma. 

10. In what sense the partial imperfect righteousness of believers accept- 

ed. Conclusion of the refutation. 

11. Argument founded on the Epistle of James. First answer. One 

Apostle cannot be opposed to another. Second answer. Third 
answer, froni the scope of James. A double paralogism in the term 
Faith. In James the faith said not to justify is a mere empty opi- 
nion ; in Paid it is the instrument by which we apprehend Christ 
our righteousness. 

12. Another paralogism on the -word justify. Paul speaks of the cause, 

James of the effects, of justification. Sum of the discussion. 

13. Argument founded on Kom. ii. ] 3 Answer, explaining the Apostle's 

meaning. Another argument, containing a reductio ad impossibili. 
Why Paul used the argument. 

14. An argument founded on the passages in which believers confidently 

appeal to their righteousness. Answer, founded on a consideration 
of two circumstances. 1. They refer only to a special cause. 2. They 
claim righteousness in comparison with the wicked. 

15. Last argument from those passages which ascribe righteousness and 

life to the ways of believers. Answer. This proceeds from the 
paternal kindness of God. What meant by the perfection of saints. 

1. Let us now consider the other arguments which Satan 
by his satellites invents to destroy or impair the doctrine of 
Justification by Faith. I think we have already put it out of 
the power of our calumniators to treat us as if we were the 
enemies of good works — justification being denied to works, 
not in order that no good works may be done, or that those 


CHAP. XVII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 393 

which are clone may be denied to be good ; but only that 
we may not trust or glory in them, or ascribe salvation to 
them. Our only confidence and boasting, our only anchor 
of salvation is, that Christ the Son of God is ours, and that 
we are in him sons of God and heirs of the heavenly king- 
dom, being called, not by our worth, but the kindness of 
God, to the hope of eternal blessedness. But since, as has 
been said, they assail us with other engines, let us now pro- 
ceed to demolish them also. First, they recur to the legal 
promises which the Lord proclaimed to the observers of the 
law, and they ask us whether we hold them to be null or 
effectual. Since it were absurd and ridiculous to say they 
are null, they take it for granted that they have some effi- 
cacy. Hence they infer that we are not justified by faith 
only. For the Lord thus speaks : " Wherefore it shall come 
to pass, if ye hearken to these judgments, and keep and do 
them, that the Lord thy God shall keep unto thee the cove- 
nant and the mercy which he sware unto thy fathers ; and 
he will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee," (Deut. 
vii. 12, 13.) Again, " If ye thoroughly amend your ways 
and your doings ; if ye thoroughly execute judgment between 
a man and his neighbour ; if ye oppress not the stranger, the 
fatherless, and the widow, and shed not innocent blood in 
this place, neither walk after other gods to your hurt : then 
will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I 
gave to your fathers, for ever and ever," (Jer. vii. 5-7.) It 
were to no -purpose to quote a thousand similar passages, 
which, as they are not different in meaning, are to be ex- 
plained on the same principle. In substance, Moses declares 
that in the law is set down " a blessing and a curse," life 
and death, (Deut. xi. 26 ;) and hence they argue, either that 
that blessing is become inactive and unfruitful, or that justi- 
fication is not by faith only. We have already shown,1 that 
if we cleave to the law we are devoid of every blessing, and 
have nothing but the curse denounced on all transgressors. 
The Lord does not promise any thing except to the perfect 
observers of the law ; and none such are any where to be 

1 See Book II. chap. vii. sec. 2-8, 15 ; chap. viii. sec. 3 ; chap. xi. sec. 
8 ; Book III. chap. xix. sec. 2. 


394 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

found. The result, therefore, is, that the whole human race 
is convicted by the law, and exposed to the wrath and curse 
of God : to be saved from this they must escape from the 
power of the law, and be as it were brought out of bondage 
into freedom, — not that carnal freedom which indisposes us for 
the observance of the law, tends to licentiousness, and allows 
our passions to wanton unrestrained with loosened reins ; but 
that spiritual freedom which consoles and raises up the alarm- 
ed aud smitten conscience, proclaiming its freedom from the 
curse and condemnation under which it was formerly held 
bound. This freedom from subjection to the law, this manu- 
mission, if I may so express it, we obtain when by faith we 
apprehend the mercy of God in Christ, and are thereby 
assured of the pardon of sins, with a consciousness of which 
the law stung and tortured us. 

2. For this reason, the promises offered in the law would 
all be null and ineffectual, did not God in his goodness send 
the gospel to our aid, since the condition on which they 
depend, and under which only they are to be performed, viz., 
the fulfilment of the law, wTill never be accomplished. Still, 
however, the aid which the Lord gives consists not in leav- 
ing part of justification to be obtained by works, and in sup- 
plying part out of his indulgence, but in giving us Christ as 
in himself alone the fulfilment of righteousness. For the 
Apostle, after premising that he and the other Jews, aware 
that " a man is not justified by the works of the law," had 
" believed in Jesus Christ," adds as the reason, not that they 
might be assisted to make up the sum of righteousness, by 
faith in Christ, but that they " might be justified by the faith 
of Christ, and not by the works of the law," (Gal. ii. 16.) If 
believers withdraw from the law to faith, that in the latter 
they may find the justification which they see is not in the for- 
mer, they certainly disclaim justification by the law. There- 
fore, whoso will, let him amplify the rewards which are said 
to await the observer of the law, provided he at the same 
time understand, that, owing to our depravity, we derive no 
benefit from them until we have obtained another righteousness 
by faith. Thus David, after making mention of the reward 
which the Lord has prepared for his servants, (Ps. xxv. 


CHAP. XVII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 395 

almost throughout,) immediately descends to an acknowledg- 
ment of sins, by which the reward is made void. In Psalm 
xix., also, he loudly extols the benefits of the law ; but imme- 
diately exclaims, " Who can understand his errors ? cleanse 
thou me from secret faults," (Ps. xix. 12.) This passage per- 
fectly accords with the former, when, after saying, "All the 
paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his 
covenant and his testimonies," he adds, u For thy name's 
sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity : for it is great," (Ps. xxv. 
10, 11.) Thus, too, we ought to acknowledge that the favour 
of God is offered to us in the law, provided by our works we 
can deserve it ; but that it never actually reaches us through 
any such desert. 

3. What then ? Were the promises given that they might 
vanish away without fruit ? I lately declared that this is not 
my opinion. I say, indeed, that their efficacy does not extend 
to us so long as they have respect to the merit of works, and, 
therefore, that, considered in themselves, they are in some 
sense abolished. Hence the Apostle shows, that the cele- 
brated promise, " Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and 
my judgments : which if a man do, he shall live in them," 
(Levit. xviii. 5 ; Ezek. xx. 10,) will, if we stop at it, be of 
no avail, and will profit us not a whit more than if it were 
not given, being inaccessible even to the holiest servants of 
God, who are all far from fulfilling the law, being encom- 
passed with many infirmities. But when the gospel promises 
are substituted, promises which announce the free pardon of 
sins, the result is not only that our persons are accepted of 
God, but his favour also is shown to our works, and that not 
only in respect that the Lord is pleased with them, but also 
because he visits them with the blessings which were due by 
agreement to the observance of his law. I admit, therefore, 
that the works of the faithful are rewarded with the promises 
which God gave in his law to the cultivators of righteous- 
ness and holiness; but in this reward we should always 
attend to the cause which procures favour to works. This 
cause, then, appears to be threefold. First, God turning his 
eye away from the works of his servants which merit re- 
proach more than praise, embraces them in Christ, and by 


396 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

the intervention of faith alone reconciles them to himself 
without the aid of works. Secondly, the works not being 
estimated by their own worth, he, by his fatherly kindness 
and indulgence, honours so far as to give them some degree 
of value. Thirdly, he extends his pardon to them, not im- 
puting the imperfection by which they are all polluted, and 
would deserve to be regarded as vices rather than virtues. 
Hence it appears how much Sophists1 were deluded in think- 
ing they admirably escaped all absurdities when they said, 
that works are able to merit salvation, not from their intrinsic 
worth, but according to agreement, the Lord having, in his 
liberality, set this high value upon them. But, meanwhile, 
they observed not how far the works which they insisted on 
regarding as meritorious must be from fulfilling the condition 
of the promises, were they not preceded by a justification 
founded on faith alone, and on forgiveness of sins — a for- 
giveness necessary to cleanse even good works from their 
stains. Accordingly, of the three causes of divine liberality 
to which it is owing that good works are accepted, they 
attended only to one : the other two, though the principal 
causes, they suppressed. 

4. They quote the saying of Peter as given by Luke in 
the Acts, " Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter 
of persons : but in every nation he that feareth him, and 
worketh righteousness, is accepted with him," (Acts x. 34, 
35.) And hence they infer, as a thing which seems to them 
beyond a doubt, that if man by right conduct procures the 
favour of God, his obtaining salvation is not entirely the 
gift of God. Nay, that Avhen God in his mercy assists the 
sinner, he is inclined to mercy by works. There is no way 
of reconciling the passages of Scripture, unless you observe 
that man's acceptance with God is twofold. As man is by 
nature, God finds nothing in him which can incline him to 
mercy, except merely his wretchedness. If it is clear then 
that man, when God first interposes for him, is naked and 
destitute of all good, and, on the other hand, loaded and filled 
with all kinds of evil, — for what quality, pray, shall we say 

1 French, M Les Sopliistes de Sorbonne ;" — the Sophists of Sorbonne. 


CHAR. XVII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 397 

that lie is worthy of the heavenly kingdom? Where God 
thus clearly displays free mercy, have done with that empty 
imagination of merit. Another passage in the same book, 
viz., where Cornelius hears from the lips of an angel, " Thy 
prayer and thine alms are come up for a memorial before 
God," (Acts x. 4,) is miserably wrested to prove that man 
is prepared by the study of good works to receive the favour 
of God. Cornelius being endued with true wisdom, in 
other words, with the fear of God, must have been en- 
lightened by the Spirit of wisdom, and being an observer 
of righteousness, must have been sanctified by the same 
Spirit ; righteousness being, as the Apostle testifies, one of 
the most certain fruits of the Spirit, (Gal. v. 5.) Therefore, 
all those qualities by which he is said to have pleased God 
he owed to divine grace : so far was he from preparing him- 
self by his own strength to receive it. Indeed, not a syl- 
lable of Scripture can be produced which does not accord 
with the doctrine, that the only reason why God receives 
man into his favour is, because he sees that he is in every 
respect lost when left to himself; lost, if he does not dis- 
play his mercy in delivering him. We now see that in thus 
accepting, God looks not to the righteousness of the indi- 
vidual, but merely manifests the divine goodness towards 
miserable sinners, who are altogether undeserving of this 
great mercy. 

5. But after the Lord has withdrawn the sinner from the 
abyss of perdition, and set him apart for himself by means 
of adoption, having begotten him again and formed him to 
newness of life, he embraces him as a new creature, and bestows 
the gifts of his Spirit. This is the acceptance to which Peter 
refers, and by which believers after their calling are approved 
by God even in respect of works ; for the Lord cannot but 
love and delight in the good qualities which he produces in 
them by means of his Spirit. But we must always bear in 
mind, that the only way in which men are accepted of God 
in respect of works is, that whatever good works he has 
conferred upon those whom he admits to favour, he by an 
increase of liberality honours with his acceptance. For 
whence their good works, but just that the Lord having 


398 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

chosen them as vessels of honour, is pleased to adorn them 
with true purity ? And how are their actions deemed good 
as if there was no deficiency in them, but just that their 
merciful Father indulgently pardons the spots and blemishes 
which adhere to them ? In one word, the only meaning 
of acceptance in this passage is, that God accepts and 
takes pleasure in his children, in whom he sees the traces 
and lineaments of his own countenance. We have else- 
where said, that regeneration is a renewal of the divine image 
in us. Since God, therefore, whenever he beholds his own 
face, justly loves it and holds it in honour, the life of be- 
lievers, when formed to holiness and justice, is said, not with- 
out cause, to be pleasing to him. But because believers, 
while encompassed with mortal flesh, are still sinners, and 
their good works only begun savour of the corruption of the 
flesh, God cannot be propitious either to their persons or 
their works, unless he embraces them more in Christ than 
in themselves. In this way are we to understand the pass- 
ages in which God declares that he is clement and merciful 
to the cultivators of righteousness. Moses said to the Israel- 
ites, " Know, therefore, that the Lord thy God, he is God, 
the faithful God, which keepeth covenant and mercy with 
them that love him and keep his commandments, to a thou- 
sand generations." These words afterwards became a com- 
mon form of expression among the people. Thus Solomon 
in his prayer at the dedication says, " Lord God of Israel, 
there is no God like thee, in heaven above, or on earth be- 
neath, who keepest covenant and mercy with thy servants 
that walk before thee with all their heart," (1 Kings viii. 23.) 
The same Avords are repeated by Nehemiah, (Neh. i. 5.) As 
the Lord in all covenants of mercy stipulates on his part for 
integrity and holiness of life in his servants, (Deut. xxix. 18,) 
lest his goodness might be held in derision, or any one, puffed 
up with exultation in it, might speak flatteringly to his soul 
while walking in the depravity of his heart, so he is pleased 
that in this way those whom he admits to communion in the 
covenant should be kept to their duty. Still, however, the 
covenant was gratuitous at first, and such it ever remains. 
Accordingly, while David declares, " according to the clean- 


CHAP. XVIL CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 399 

ness of my hands hath he recompensed me," yet does he not 
omit the fountain to which I have referred ; " he delivered 
me, because he delighted in me," (2 Sam. xxii. 20, 21.) In 
commending the goodness of his cause, he derogates in no 
respect from the free mercy which takes precedence of all the 
gifts of which it is the origin. 

G. Here, by the way, it is of importance to observe how 
those forms of expression differ from legal promises. By 
legal promises, I mean not those which lie scattered in the 
books of Moses, (for there many Evangelical promises occur,) 
but those which properly belong to the legal dispensation. 
All such promises, by whatever name they may be called, 
are made under the condition that the reward is to be paid 
on the things commanded being done. But when it is said 
that the Lord keeps a covenant of mercy with those who 
love him, the words rather demonstrate what kind of servants 
those are who have sincerely entered into the covenant, than 
express the reason why the Lord blesses them. The nature 
of the demonstration is this : As the end for which God be- 
stows upon us the gift of eternal life is, that he may be loved, 
feared, and Avorshipped by us, so the end of all the promises 
of mercy contained in Scripture justly is, that we may 
reverence and serve their author. Therefore, Avhenever we 
hear that he does good to those that observe his law, let us 
remember that the sons of God are designated by the duty 
which they ought perpetually to observe, that his reason 
for adopting us is, that we may reverence him as a father. 
Hence, if we would not deprive ourselves of the privilege 
of adoption, we must always strive in the direction of our 
calling. On the other hand, however, let us remember, that 
the completion of the Divine mercy depends not on the works 
of believers, but that God himself fulfils the promise of salva- 
tion to those who by right conduct correspond to their call- 
ing, because he recognises the true badges of sons in those 
only who are directed to good by his Spirit. To this we 
may refer what is said of the members of the Church, " Lord, 
who shall abide in thy tabernacle ? wrho shall dwell in thy 
holy hill ? He that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteous- 
ness, and speaketh the truth in his heart," &c, (Ps. xv. 1, 2.) 


400 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

Again, in Isaiah, " Who among us shall dwell with the 
devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting 
burnings ? He that walketh righteously," &c, (Isa. xxxiii. 14, 
15.) For the thing described is not the strength with which 
believers can stand before the Lord, but the manner in which 
our most merciful Father introduces them into his fellow- 
ship, and defends and confirms them therein. For as he 
detests sin and loves righteousness, so those whom he unites 
to himself he purifies by his Spirit, that he may render them 
conformable to himself and to his kingdom. Therefore, if it 
be asked, What is the first cause which gives the saints free 
access to the kingdom of God, and a firm and permanent 
footing in it ? the answer is easy. The Lord in his mercy 
once adopted and ever defends them. But if the question 
relates to the manner, we must descend to regeneration, and 
the fruits of it, as enumerated in the fifteenth Psalm. 

7. There seems much more difficulty in those passages 
which distinguish good works by the name of righteousness, 
and declare that man is justified by them. The passages of the 
former class are very numerous, as when the observance of the 
commandments is termed justification or righteousness. Of 
the other classes Ave have a description in the words of Moses, 
" It shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these 
commandments," (Deut. vi. 25.) But if you object, that it is a 
legal promise, which, having an impossible condition annexed 
to it, proves nothing, there are other passages to which the 
same answer cannot be made ; for instance, "If the man be 
poor," " thou shalt deliver him the pledge again when the sun 
goeth down :" " and it shall be righteousness unto thee before 
the Lord thy God," (Deut. xxiv. 13.) Likewise the words 
of the prophet, " Then stood up Phinehas, and executed 
judgment : and so the plague was stayed. And that was 
counted unto him for righteousness unto all generations for 
evermore," (Psal. cvi. 30, 31.) Accordingly, the Pharisees 
of our day think they have here full scope for exultation.1 
For, as we say, that when justification by faith is established, 
justification by works falls ; they argue on the same principle, 

1 French, " de crier contre nous en cest endroit;" — here to raise an 
outcry against us. 


CHAP. XVII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 401 

If there is a justification by works, it is false to say that we 
are justified by faith only. When I grant that the precepts 
of the law are termed righteousness, I do nothing strange : for 
they are so in reality. I must, however, inform the reader, 
that the Hebrew word Q^pH has been rendered by the 
Septuagint, not very appropriately, dixuiwjuara, justifications, 
instead of edicts.1 But I readily give up any dispute as to 
the Avord. Nor do I deny that the Law of God contains a 
perfect righteousness. For although we are debtors to do 
all the things which it enjoins, and, therefore, even after a full 
obedience, are unprofitable servants ; yet, as the Lord has 
deigned to give it the name of righteousness, it is not ours to 
take from it what he has given. "We readily admit, there- 
fore, that the perfect obedience of the law is righteousness, 
and the observance of any precept a part of righteousness, 
the whole substance of righteousness being contained in the 
remaining parts. But we deny that any such righteousness 
ever exists. Hence we discard the righteousness of the law, 
not as being in itself maimed and defective, but because of the 
weakness of our flesh it nowhere appears. But then Scripture 
does not merely call the precepts of the law righteousness, it 
also gives this name to the works of the saints : as when it 
states that Zacharias and his wife " were both righteous be- 
fore God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances 
of the Lord blameless," (Luke i. 6.) Surely when it thus 
speaks, it estimates works more according to the nature of the 
law than their own proper character. And here, again, I 
must repeat the observation which I lately made, that the 
law is not to be ascertained from a careless translation of the 
Greek interpreter. Still, as Luke chose not to make any 
change on the received version, I will not contend for this. 
The things contained in the law God enjoined upon man for 
righteousness, but that righteousness we attain not unless 
by observing the whole law : every transgression whatever 
destroys it. While, therefore, the law commands nothing 
but righteousness, if we look to itself, every one of its pre- 
cepts is righteousness : if we look to the men by whom they 

1 French, " Edits ou Statuts ;" — Edicts or Statutes. 
VOL. II. 2 c 


402 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

are performed, being transgressors in many things, they by 
no means merit the praise of righteousness for one work, and 
that a work which, through the imperfection adhering to it, 
is always in some respect vicious.1 

8. I come to the second class, (sec. 1, 7, ad init.,) in 
which the chief difficulty lies. Paul finds nothing stronger 
to prove justification by faith than that which is written of 
Abraham, he " believed God, and it was counted unto him 
for righteousness," (Rom. iv. 3 ; Gal. iii. 6.) Therefore, 
when it is said that the achievement of Phinehas "was counted 
unto him for righteousness," (Psal. cvi. 30, 31,) we may 
argue that what Paul contends for respecting faith applies 
also to works. Our opponents, accordingly, as if the point 
were proved, set it down that though we are not justified 
without faith, it is not by faith only ; that our justification is 
completed by works. Here I beseech believers, as they 
know that the true standard of righteousness must be derived 
from Scripture alone, to consider with me seriously and re- 
ligiously, how Scripture can be fairly reconciled with that 
view. Paul, knowing that justification by faith was the re- 
fuge of those who wanted righteousness of their own, confi- 
dently infers, that all who are justified by faith are excluded 
from the righteousness of works. But as it is clear that this 
justification is common to all believers, he with equal confi- 
dence infers that no man is justified by works ; nay, more, 
that justification is without any help from works. But it is 
one thing to determine what power works have in themselves, 
and another to determine what place they are to hold after 
justification by faith has been established. If a price is to be 
put upon works according to their own worth, we hold that 

1 The French here adds the two following sentences : — " Nostre response 
done est, que quand les ceuvres des saincts sont nominees justice, cela ne 
vient point de leurs merites : mais entant qu'elles tendent k la justice que 
Dieu nous a commandee, laquelle est nulle, si elle n'est parfaite. Or elle 
ne se trouve parfaite en nul homme de monde ; pourtant faut conclure, 
q'une bonne oeuvre de soy ne merite pas le nom de justice." — Our reply 
then is, that when the works of the saints are called righteousness, it is 
not owing to their merits, but is in so far as they tend to the righteous- 
ness which God has commanded, and which is null if it be not perfect. 
Now it is not found perfect in any man in the world. Hence we must 
conclude, that no good work merits in itself the name of righteousness. 


CHAP. XVII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 403 

they are unfit to appear in the presence of God : that man, 
accordingly, has no works in which he can glory before God, 
and that hence, deprived of all aid from works, he is justified 
by faith alone. Justification, moreover, Ave thus define : The 
sinner being admitted into communion with Christ is, for his 
sake, reconciled to God ; when purged by his blood he ob- 
tains the remission of sins, and clothed with righteousness, just 
as if it were his own, stands secure before the judgment-seat 
of heaven. Forgiveness of sins being previously given, the 
good works which follow have a value different from their 
merit, because whatever is imperfect in them is covered by the 
perfection of Christ, and all their blemishes and pollutions are 
wiped away by his purity, so as never to come under the cog- 
nisance of the divine tribunal. The guilt of all transgressions, 
by which men are prevented from offering God an accept- 
able service, being thus effaced, and the imperfection which 
is wont to sully even good works being buried, the good 
works which are done by believers are deemed righteous, or, 
which is the same thing, are imputed for righteousness. 

9. Now, should any one state this to me as an objection 
to justification by faith, I would first ask him, Whether a man 
is deemed righteous for one holy work or two, while in all 
the other acts of his life he is a transgressor of the law ? 
This were, indeed, more than absurd. I would next ask, 
Whether he is deemed righteous on account of many good 
works if he is guilty of transgression in some one part ? 
Even this he will not venture to maintain in opposition to 
the authority of the law, which pronounces, " Cursed be he 
that confirmeth not all the words of this law to do them," 
(Deut. xxvii. 26.) I would go still farther and ask, Whether 
there be any work which may not justly be convicted of im- 
purity or imperfection ? How, then, will it appear to that 
eye before which even the heavens are not clean, and angels 
are chargeable with folly? (Job iv. 18.) Thus he will be 
forced to confess that no good work exists that is not defiled, 
both by contrary transgression and also by its own corrup- 
tion, so that it cannot be honoured as righteousness. But if 
it is certainly owing to justification by faith that works, other- 
wise impure, unclean, defective, unworthy of the sight, not 


404 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

to say of the love of God, are imputed for righteousness, 
why do they by boasting of this imputation aim at the de- 
struction of that justification, but for which the boast were 
vain ? Are they desirous of having a viper's birth ?x To 
this their ungodly language tends. They cannot deny that 
justification by faith is the beginning, the foundation, the cause, 
the subject, the substance, of works of righteousness, and yet 
they conclude that justification is not by faith, because good 
works are counted for righteousness. Let us have done then 
with this frivolity, and confess the fact as it stands ; if any 
righteousness which works are supposed to possess depends 
on justification by faith, this doctrine is not only not im- 
paired, but on the contrary confirmed, its power being there- 
by more brightly displayed. Nor let us suppose, that after 
free justification works are commended, as if they afterwards 
succeeded to the office of justifying, or shared the office with 
faith. For did not justification by faith always remain entire, 
the impurity of works would be disclosed. There is nothing 
absurd in the doctrine, that though man is justified by faith, 
he is himself not only not righteous, but the righteousness 
attributed to his works is beyond their own deserts. 

10. In this way we can admit not only that there is a par- 
tial righteousness in works, (as our adversaries maintain,) 
but that they are approved by God as if they were absolutely 
perfect. If we remember on what foundation this is rested, 
every difficulty will be solved. The first time when a work 
begins to be acceptable is when it is received with pardon. 
And whence pardon, but just because God looks upon us and 
all that belongs to us as in Christ ? Therefore, as we ourselves 
when ingrafted into Christ appear righteous before God, be- 
cause our iniquities are covered with his innocence ; so our 
works are, and are deemed righteous, because every thing 
otherwise defective in them being buried by the purity of 
Christ is not imputed. Thus we may justly say, that not only 
ourselves, but our works also, are justified by faith alone. Now, 
if that righteousness of works, whatever it be, depends on faith 

1 French, " Voudrions nous faire une lignee serpentine, que les enfans 
meurtrissent leur mere ?" — Would we have a viperish progeny, where the 
children murder the parent ? 


CHAP. XVII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 405 

and free justification, and is produced by it, it ought to be 
included under it and, so to speak, made subordinate to it, as 
the effect to its cause ; so far is it from being entitled to be 
set up to impair or destroy the doctrine of justification.1 
Thus Paul, to prove that our blessedness depends not on our 
works, but on the mercy of God, makes special use of the 
words of David, " Blessed is he whose transgression is for- 
given, whose sin is covered ;" " Blessed is the man unto whom 
the Lord imputeth not iniquity." Should any one here ob- 
trude the numberless passages in which blessedness seems to 
be attributed to works, as, " Blessed is the man that feareth 
the Lord ;" " He that hath mercy on the poor, happy is he ;" 
" Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the 
ungodly," and " that endureth temptation;" " Blessed are they 
that keep judgment," that are " pure in heart," " meek," 
" merciful," &c.,2 they cannot make out that Paul's doctrine 
is not true. For seeing that the qualities thus extolled never 
all so exist in man as to obtain for him the approbation of 
God, it follows, that man is always miserable until he is ex- 
empted from misery by the pardon of his sins. Since, then, 
all the kinds of blessedness extolled in the Scripture are 
vain, so that man derives no benefit from them until he ob- 
tains blessedness by the forgiveness of sins, a forgiveness 
which makes way for them, it follows that this is not only the 
chief and highest, but the only blessedness, unless you are pre- 
pared to maintain that it is impaired by things which owe 
their entire existence to it. There is much less to trouble us 
in the name of righteous which is usually given to believers. 
I admit that they are so called from the holiness of their 
lives, but as they rather exert themselves in the study of 
righteousness than fulfil righteousness itself, any degree of it 

1 The whole sentence in French stands thus : — " Or si cette justice des 
ceuvres telle quelle precede de la foy et de la justification gratuite, 
il ne faut pas qu'on la prenne pour destruire ou obscurcir la grace dont 
elle depend ; mais plustost doit estre enclose en icelle, comme le fruict a 
l'arbre." — Now, if this righteousness of works, such as it is, proceeds from 
faith and free justification, it must not be employed to destroy or obscure 
the grace on which it. depends, but should rather be included in it, like 
the fruit in the tree. 

2 Rom. iv. 7 ; Ps. xxxii. 1, 2 ; cxii. 1 ; Prov. xiv. 21 ; Ps. i. 1 ; cvi. 3 ; 
cxix. 11 y Matth. v. 3. 


406 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

which they possess must yield to justification by faith, to 
which it is owing that it is what it is. 

11. But they say that we have a still more serious busi- 
ness with James, who in express terms opposes us. For he 
asks, "Was not Abraham our father justified by works?" 
and adds, " You see then how that by works a man is justi- 
fied, and not by faith only," (James ii. 21, 24.) What then ? 
Will they engage Paul in a quarrel with James ? If they hold 
James to be a servant of Christ, his sentiments must be 
understood as not dissenting from Christ speaking by the 
mouth of Paul. By the mouth of Paul the Spirit declares that 
Abraham obtained justification by faith, not by works ; we also 
teach that all are justified by faith without the works of the 
law. By James the same Spirit declares that both Abraham's 
justification and ours consists of works, and not of faith only. 
It is certain that the Spirit cannot be at variance with him- 
self. Where, then, will be the agreement ? It is enough for 
our opponents, provided they can tear up that justification by 
faith which we regard as fixed by the deepest roots r1 to 
restore peace to the conscience is to them a matter of no 
great concern. Hence you may see, that though they indeed 
carp at the doctrine of justification by faith, they meanwhile 
point out no goal of righteousness at which the conscience 
may rest. Let them triumph then as they will, so long as 
the only victory they can boast of is, that they have deprived 
righteousness of all its certainty. This miserable victory they 
will indeed obtain when the light of truth is extinguished, 
and the Lord permits them to darken it with their lies. But 
wherever the truth of God stands they cannot prevail. I 
deny, then, that the passage of James which they are con- 
stantly holding up before us as if it were the shield of Achilles, 
gives them the slightest, countenance. To make this plain, 
let us first attend to the scope of the Apostle, and then show 
wherein their hallucination consists. As at that time (and 
the evil has existed in the Church ever since) there were 
many who, while they gave manifest proof of their infidelity, 

1 French, " II suffit a nos adversaires s'ils peuvent deraciner la justice 
de foy, laquelle nous voulons estre plant ee au profond du coeur." — It is 
enough for our opponents if they can root up justification by faith, which 
we desire to be planted at the bottom of the heart. 


CHAP. XVII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 407 

by neglecting and omitting all the works peculiar to believers, 
ceased not falsely to glory in the name of faith. James here 
dissipates their vain confidence. His intention therefore is, 
not to derogate in any degree from the power of true faith, 
but to show how absurdly these triflers laid claim only to the 
empty name, and resting satisfied with it, felt secure in unre- 
strained indulgence in vice. This state of matters being 
understood, it will be easy to see where the error of our 
opponents lies. They fall into a double paralogism, the one 
in the term faith, the other in the term justifying. The 
Apostle, in giving the name of faith to an empty opinion alto- 
gether differing from true faith, makes a concession which 
derogates in no respect from his case. This he demonstrates 
at the outset by the words, " What doth it profit, my breth- 
ren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works ?" 
(James ii. 14.) He says not, " If a man have faith without 
works," but Ct if he say that he has." This becomes still 
clearer when a little after he derides this faith as worse than 
that of devils, and at last when he calls it " dead." You may 
easily ascertain his meaning by the explanation, u Thou be- 
lievest that there is one God." Surely if all which is con- 
tained hi that faith is a belief in the existence of God, there 
is no wonder that it does not justify. The denial of such a 
power to it cannot be supposed to derogate in any degree 
from Christian faith, which is of a very different description. 
For how does true faith justify unless by uniting us to Christ, 
so that being made one with him, we may be admitted to a 
participation in his righteousness ? It does not justify because 
it forms an idea of the divine existence, but because it reclines 
with confidence on the divine mercy. 

12. We have not made good our point until we dispose of 
the other paralogism : since James places a part of justifica- 
tion in works. If you would make James consistent with 
the other Scriptures and with himself, you must give the 
word justify, as used by him, a different meaning from what 
it has with Paul. In the sense of Paul we are said to be 
justified when the remembrance of our unrighteousness is 
obliterated, and we are counted righteous. Had James had 
the same meaning it would have been absurd for him to quote 


408 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

the words of Moses, "Abraham believed God," &c. The 
context runs thus : " Was not Abraham our father justified 
by works when he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar ? 
Seest thou how faith wrought with his works, and by works 
was faith made perfect ? And the Scripture was fulfilled 
which saith, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed 
unto him for righteousness." If it is absurd to say that the 
effect was prior to its cause, either Moses falsely declares in 
that passage that Abraham's faith was imputed for righteous- 
ness, or Abraham, by his obedience in offering up Isaac, did 
not merit righteousness. Before the existence of Ishmael, 
who was a grown youth at the birth of Isaac, Abraham was 
justified by his faith. How then can we say that he obtained 
justification by an obedience which followed long after ? 
Wherefore, either James erroneously inverts the proper order, 
(this it were impious to suppose,) or he meant not to say that 
he was justified, as if he deserved to be deemed just. What 
then ? It appears certain that he is speaking of the manifes- 
tation, not of the imputation of righteousness, as if he had 
said, Those who are justified by true faith prove their justifica- 
tion by obedience and good works, not by a bare and imagi- 
nary semblance of faith. In one word, he is not discussing 
the mode of justification, but requiring that the justification 
of believers shall be operative. And as Paul contends that 
men are justified without the aid of works, so James will 
not allow any to be regarded as justified who are destitute of 
good works. Due attention to the scope will thus disentangle 
every doubt ; for the error of our opponents lies chiefly in 
this, that they think James is defining the mode of justifica- 
tion, whereas his only object is to destroy the depraved secu- 
rity of those who vainly pretended faith as an excuse for 
their contempt of good works. Therefore, let them twist the 
words of James as they may, they will never extract out of 
them more than the two propositions : That an empty phan- 
tom of faith does not justify, and that the believer, not con- 
tented with such an imagination, manifests his justification 
by good works. 

13. They gain nothing by quoting from Paul to the same 
effect, that "not the hearers of the law are just before God, 


CHAP. XVII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 409 

but the doers of the law shall be justified," (Rom. ii. 13.) I 
am unwilling to evade the difficulty by the solution of Am- 
brose, that Paul spoke thus because faith in Christ is the 
fulfilment of the law. This I regard as a mere subterfuge, 
and one too for which there is no occasion, as the explanation 
is perfectly obvious. The Apostle's object is to suppress the 
absurd confidence of the Jews, who gave out that they alone 
had a knowledge of the law, though at the very time they 
were its greatest despisers. That they might not plume 
themselves so much on a bare acquaintance with the law, he 
reminds them that when justification is sought by the law, 
the thing required is not the knowledge but the observance 
of it. We certainly mean not to dispute that the righteous- 
ness of the law consists in works, and not only so, but that 
justification consists in the dignity and merits of works. 
But this proves not that we are justified by works unless 
they can produce some one who has fulfilled the law. That 
Paul had no other meaning is abundantly obvious from the 
context. After charging Jews and Gentiles in common with 
unrighteousness, he descends to particulars, and says, that 
" as many as have sinned without law shall also perish with- 
out law," referring to the Gentiles, and that "as many as 
have sinned in the law shall be judged by the law," referring to 
the Jews. Moreover, as they, winking at their transgressions, 
boasted merely of the law, he adds most appropriately, that 
the law was passed with the view of justifying not those who 
only heard it, but those only who obeyed it ; as if he had said, 
Do you seek righteousness in the law ? do not bring forward 
the mere hearing of it, which is in itself of little weight, but 
bring works by which you may show that the law has not 
been given to you in vain. Since in these they were all defi- 
cient, it followed that they had no ground of boasting in the 
law. Paul's meaning, therefore, rather leads to an opposite 
argument. The righteousness of the law consists in the per- 
fection of works ; but no man can boast of fulfilling the law 
by works, and, therefore, there is no righteousness by the law. 
14. They now betake themselves to those passages in 
which believers boldly submit their righteousness to the 
judgment of God, and wish to be judged accordingly; as in 


410 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

the following passages : " Judge me, O Lord, according to 
my righteousness, and according to mine integrity that is 
in me." Again, " Hear the right, O Lord ;" " Thou hast 
proved mine heart ; thou hast visited me in the night ; thou 
hast tried me, and shalt find nothing." Again, " The Lord 
rewarded me according to my righteousness ; according to 
the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me. For 
I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly 
departed from my God." " I was also upright before him, 
and I kept myself from mine iniquity." Again, " Judge 
me, O Lord ; for I have walked in mine integrity ;" " I have 
not sat with vain persons ; neither will I go in with dissem- 
blers ;" " Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with 
bloody men ; in whose hands is mischief, and their right 
hand is full of bribes. But as for me, I will walk in mine 
integrity."1 I have already spoken of the confidence which 
the saints seem to derive simply from works. The passages 
now quoted will not occasion much difficulty, if we attend 
to their veglgragig, their connection, or (as it is commonly 
called) special circumstances. These are of two kinds ; for 
those who use them have no wish that their whole life should 
be brought to trial, so that they may be acquitted or con- 
demned according to its tenor ; all they wish is, that a deci- 
sion should be given on the particular case ; and even here 
the righteousness which they claim is not with reference to the 
divine perfection, but only by comparison with the wicked 
and profane. When the question relates to justification, the 
thing required is not that the individual have a good ground 
of acquittal in regard to some particular matter, but that 
his whole life be in accordance with righteousness. But 
when the saints implore the divine justice in vindication 
of their innocence, they do not present themselves as free 
from fault, and in every respect blameless, but while placing 
their confidence of salvation in the divine goodness only, and 
trusting that he will vindicate his poor when they are afflicted 
contrary to justice and equity, they truly commit to him the 
cause in which the innocent are oppressed. And when they 

1 Ps. vii. 9 ; xvii. 1 ; xviii. 20; xxvi. 1, 9, 10. Farther on, see Chap, 
xiv. s. 18 ; Chap. xx. s. 10. 


CHAP. XVII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 411 

sist themselves with their adversaries at the tribunal of God, 
they pretend not to an innocence corresponding to the divine 
purity were inquiry strictly made, but knowing that in com- 
parison of the malice, dishonesty, craft, and iniquity of their 
enemies, their sincerity, justice, simplicity, and purity, are as- 
certained and approved by God, they dread not to call upon 
him to judge between them. Thus when David said to Saul, 
<l The Lord render to every man his righteousness and his 
faithfulness," (1 Sam. xxvi. 23,) he meant not that the Lord 
should examine and reward every one according to his de- 
serts, but he took the Lord to witness how great his inno- 
cence was in comparison of Saul's injustice. Paul, too, when 
he indulges in the boast, " Our rejoicing is this, the testi- 
mony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sin- 
cerity, not Avith fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we 
have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly 
to you-ward," (2 Cor. i. 12,) means not to call for the 
scrutiny of God, but compelled by the calumnies of the 
wicked he appeals, in contradiction of all their slanders, to 
his faith and probity, which he knew that God had indul- 
gently accepted. For we see how he elsewhere says, " I 
know nothing by myself; yet am I not hereby justified," 
(1 Cor. iv. 4;) in other words, he was aware that the divine 
judgment far transcended the blind estimate of man. There- 
fore, however believers may, in defending their integrity 
against the hypocrisy of the ungodly, appeal to God as their 
witness and judge, still when the question is with God alone, 
they all with one mouth exclaim, " If thou, Lord, should 
mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?" Again, " Enter 
not into judgment with thy servant ; for in thy sight shall 
no man living be justified." Distrusting their own works, 
they gladly exclaim, " Thy loving-kindness is better than 
life," (Ps. cxxx. 3 ; cxliii. 2 ; lxiii. 3.) 

15. There are other passages not unlike those quoted 
above, at which some may still demur. Solomon says, 
" The just man walketh in his integrity," (Prov. xx. 7.) 
Again, " In the way of righteousness is life ; and in the path- 
way thereof there is no death," (Prov. xii. 28.) For this 
reason Ezekiel says, He that " hath walked in my statutes, 


412 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

and hath kept my judgments, to deal truly; he is just, he 
shall surely live," (Ezek. xviii. 9, 21; xxxiii. 15.) None of 
these declarations do we deny or obscure. But let one of 
the sons of Adam come forward with such integrity. If 
there is none, they must perish from the presence of God, or 
betake themselves to the asylum of mercy. Still we deny 
not that the integrity of believers, though partial and im- 
perfect, is a step to immortality. How so, but just that the 
works of those whom the Lord has assumed into the cove- 
nant of grace, he tries not by their merit, but embraces with 
paternal indulgence. By this we understand not with the 
Schoolmen, that works derive their value from accepting 
grace. For their meaning is, that works otherwise unfit to 
obtain salvation in terms of law, are made fit for such a 
purpose by the divine acceptance. On the other hand, I 
maintain that these works being sullied both by other trans- 
gressions and by their own deficiencies, have no other value 
than this, that the Lord indulgently pardons them ; in other 
words, that the righteousness which he bestows on man is 
gratuitous. Here they unseasonably obtrude those passages 
in which the Apostle prays for all perfection to believers, 
" To the end he may establish your hearts unblameable in 
holiness before God, even our Father," (1 Thess. iii. 13, and 
elsewhere.) These words were strongly urged by the Celes- 
tines of old, in maintaining the perfection of holiness in the 
present life. To this we deem it sufficient briefly to reply 
with Augustine, that the goal to which all the pious ought 
to aspire is, to appear in the presence of God without spot 
and blemish ; but as the course of the present life is at best 
nothing more than progress, we shall never reach the goal 
until we have laid aside the body of sin, and been com- 
pletely united to the Lord. If any one choose to give the 
name of perfection to the saints, I shall not obstinately 
quarrel with him, provided he defines this perfection in the 
words of Augustine, " When we speak of the perfect virtue 
of the saints, part of this perfection consists in the recog- 
nition of our imperfection both in truth and in humility," 
(August, ad Bonif. Lib. iii. c. 7.) 


CHAI\ XVIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 413 


CHAPTER XVIII. 

THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF WORKS IMPROPERLY INFERRED 
FROM REWARDS. 

There are three divisions in this chapter, — I. A solution of two general 
objections which are urged in support of justification by works. First, 
That God will render to every one according to his works, sec. 1. 
Second, That the reward of works is called eternal, sec. 2-6. II. An- 
swer to other special objections derived from the former, and a perver- 
sion of passages of Scripture, sec. 6-9. III. Refutation of the sophism 
that faith itself is called a work, and, therefore, justification by it is by 
works, sec. 10. 

Sections. 

1. Two general objections. The former solved and explained. What 

meant by the term working. 

2. Solution of the second general objection. 1. Works not the cause of 

salvation. This shown from the name and nature of inheritance. 
2. A striking example that the Lord rewards the works of believers 
with blessings which he had promised before the works were 
thought of. 

3. First reason why eternal life said to be the reward of works. This 

confirmed by passages of Scripture. The concurrence of Ambrose. 
A rule to be observed. Declarations of Christ and an Apostle. 

4. Other four reasons. Holiness the way to the kingdom, not the 

cause of obtaining it. Proposition of the Sophists. 

5. Objection that God crowns the works of his people. Three answers 

from Augustine. A fourth from Scripture. 

6. First special objection, viz., that we are ordered to lay up treasure 

in heaven. Answer, showing in what way this can be done. 

7. Second objection, viz., that the righteous enduring affliction are said 

to be worthy of the kingdom of heaven. Answer. What meant 
by righteousness. 

8. A third objection founded on three passages of Paul. Answer. 

9. Fourth objection founded on our Saviour's words, " If ye would 

enter into life, keep the commandments." Answer, giving an ex- 
position of the passage. 
10. Last objection, viz., that faith itself is called a work. Answer— it 
is not as a work that faith justifies. 


414 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

1. Let us now proceed to those passages which affirm 
that God will render to every one according to his deeds. 
Of this description are the following : " We must all 
appear before the judgment-seat of Christ ; that every one 
may receive the things done in his body, according to that 
he hath done, whether it be good or bad ;" " Who will render 
to every man according to his deeds : to them who by 
patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory, and honour, 
and immortality, eternal life ; " but " tribulation and anguish 
upon every soul of man that doeth evil;" "They that have 
done good, unto the resurrection of life ; and they that have 
done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation ;" " Come, ye 
blessed of my Father ;" "For I was an hungered, and ye 
gave me meat ; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink," &c. 
To these we may add the passages which describe eternal 
life as the reward of works, such as the following : " The 
recompense of a man's hands shall be rendered unto him ;" 
" He that feareth the commandment shall be rewarded ;" 
" Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in 
heaven ;" " Every man shall receive his own reward, accord- 
ing to his own labour."1 The passages in which it is said 
that God will reward every man according to his works are 
easily disposed of. For that mode of expression indicates 
not the cause but the order of sequence. Now, it is beyond 
a doubt that the steps by which the Lord in his mercy con- 
summates our salvation are these, " Whom he did predestinate, 
them he also called; and whom he called, them he also 
justified ; and whom he justified, them he also glorified," 
(Rom. viii. 30.) But though it is by mercy alone that God 
admits his people to life, yet as he leads them into possession 
of it by the course of good works, that he may complete 
his work in them in the order which he has destined, it is 
not strange that they are said to be crowned according to 
their works, since by these doubtless they are prepared for 
receiving the crown of immortality. Nay, for this reason they 
are aptly said to work out their own salvation, (Phil. ii. 12,) 
while by exerting themselves in good works they aspire to 

1 Matth. xvi. 27 ; 2 Cor. v. 10 ; Eom. ii. 6 ; John v. 29 ; Matth. xxv. 
34 ; Prov. xii. 14 ; xiii. 13 ; Matth. v. 12 ; Luke vi. 23 ; 1 Cor. iii. 8. 


CHAP. XVIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 415 

eternal life, just as they are elsewhere told to labour for the 
meat which perisheth not, (John vi. 27,) while they acquire 
life for themselves by believing in Christ ; and yet it is 
immediately added, that this meat " the Son of man shall 
give unto you." Hence it appears, that working is not at all 
opposed to grace, but refers to pursuit,1 and, therefore, it 
follows not that believers are the authors of their own salva- 
tion, or that it is the result of their works. What then ? 
The moment they are admitted to fellowship with Christ, by 
the knowledge of the gospel, and the illumination of the 
Holy Spirit, their eternal life is begun, and then He which 
hath begun a good work in them " will perform it until the 
day of Jesus Christ," (Phil. i. 6.) And it is performed when 
in righteousness and holiness they bear a resemblance to their 
heavenly Father, and prove that they are not degenerate 
sons. 

2. There is nothing in the term reward to justify the 
inference that our works are the cause of salvation. First, 
let it be a fixed principle in our hearts, that the kingdom of 
heaven is not the hire of servants, but the inheritance of 
sons, (Eph. i. 18 ;) an inheritance obtained by those only 
whom the Lord has adopted as sons, and obtained for no 
other cause than this adoption, " The son of the bond-woman 
shall not be heir with the son of the free-woman," (Gal. 
iv. 30.) And hence in those very passages in which 
the Holy Spirit promises eternal glory as the reward of 
works, by expressly calling it an inheritance, he demon- 
strates that it comes to us from some other quarter. 
Thus Christ enumerates the works for which he bestows 
heaven as a recompense, while he is calling his elect to 
the possession of it, but he at the same time adds, that it 
is to be possessed by right of inheritance, (Matth. xxv. 34.) 
Paul, too, encourages servants, while faithfully doing their 
duty, to hope for reward from the Lord, but adds, " of the 
inheritance," (Col. iii. 24.) You see hoAv, as it were, in 
formal terms they carefully caution us to attribute eternal 
blessedness not to works, but to the adoption of God. Why, 

1 French, " mais seulement emporte zele et estude ; " — but only imports 
zeal and study. 


416 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

then, do they at the same time make mention of works ? 
This question will be elucidated by an example from 
Scripture, (Gen. xv. 5 ; xvii. 1.) Before the birth of Isaac, 
Abraham had received promise of a seed in whom all the 
families of the earth should be blessed ; the propagation of 
a seed that for number should equal the siars of heaven, and 
the sand of the sea, &c. Many years after he prepares, in 
obedience to a divine message, to sacrifice his son. Having 
done this act of obedience, he receives the promise, " By 
myself have I sworn, saith the Lord, for because thou hast 
done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son ; 
that in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will 
multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand 
which is upon the sea-shore, and thy seed shall possess the 
gate of his enemies ; and in thy seed shall all the nations of 
the earth be blessed, because thou hast obeyed my voice," 
(Gen. xxii. 16-18.) What is it we hear? Did Abraham 
by his obedience merit the blessing which had been promised 
him before the precept was given ? Here assuredly we see 
without ambiguity that God rewards the works of believers 
with blessings which he had given them before the works 
were thought of, there still being no cause for the blessings 
which he bestows but his own mercy. 

3. And yet the Lord does not act in vain, or delude us 
when he says, that he renders to works what he had freely 
given previous to works. As he would have us to be exercised 
in good works, while aspiring to the manifestation, or, if I may 
so speak, the fruition of the things which he has promised, and 
by means of them to hasten on to the blessed hope set before 
us in heaven, the fruit of the promises is justly ascribed to 
those things by which it is brought to maturity. Both 
things were elegantly expressed by the Apostle, when he 
told the Colossians to study the offices of charity, " for the 
hope which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye heard 
before in the word of the truth of the gospel," (Col. i. 5.) 
For when he says that the gospel informed them of the 
hope which was treasured up for them in heaven, he declares 
that it depends on Christ alone, and not at all upon works. 
With this accords the saying of Peter, that believers " are 


CHAP. XVIII. CHRISTIAN KELIGIOX. 417 

kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready 
to be revealed in the last time," (1 Pet. i. 5.) When he says 
that they strive on account of it, he intimates that believers 
must continue running during the whole course of their lives, 
in order that they may attain it. But to prevent us from 
supposing that the reward which is promised becomes a kind 
of merit, our Lord introduced a parable, in which he repre- 
sented himself as a householder, who sent all the labourers 
whom he met to work in his vineyard, some at the first hour 
of the day, others at the second, others at the third, some 
even at the eleventh ; at evening he paid them all alike. 
The interpretation of this parable is briefly and truly given 
by that ancient writer (whoever he was) who wrote the book 
De Vocatione Gentium, Avhich goes under the name of 
Ambrose. I will give it in his words rather than my own : l 
" By means of this comparison, our Lord represented the many 
various modes of calling as pertaining to grace alone, where 
those who were introduced into the vineyard at the eleventh 
hour and made equal to those who. had toiled the whole day, 
doubtless represent the case of those whom the indulgence 
of God, to commend the excellence of grace, has rewarded 
in the decline of the day and the conclusion of life ; not 
paying the price of labour, but shedding the riches of his 
goodness on those whom he chose without works ; in order 
that even those who bore the heat of the day, and yet received 
no more than those who came last, may understand that 
they received a gift of grace, not the hire of works," (Lib. 
i. cap. 5.) Lastly, it is also worthy of remark, that in those 
passages in which eternal life is called the reward of works, 
it is not taken simply for that communion which Ave have with 
God preparatory to a blessed immortality, when with paternal 
benevolence he embraces us in Christ, but for the possession, 
or, as it is called, the fruition of blessedness, as the very 
words of Christ express it, " in the world to come eternal 
life," (Mark x. 30 ;) and elsewhere, " Come, ye blessed of 
my Father, inherit the kingdom," &c, (Matth. xxv. 34.) 

1 French, " Pource que c'est un Docteur ancien, j'aimc mieux user de 
ses paroles que des rniennes ;" — Because he is an ancient Doctor, I prefer 
making use of his words rather than my own. 

VOL. II. • 2d 


418 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

For this reason also, Paul gives the name of adoption to that 
revelation of adoption which shall be made at the resurrec- 
tion ; and which adoption he afterwards interprets to mean, 
the redemption of our body, (Rom. viii. 23.) But, other- 
wise, as alienation from God is eternal death, — so when man 
is received into favour by God that he may enjoy communion 
with him and become one with him, he passes from death 
unto life. This is owing to adoption alone. Although after 
their manner they pertinaciously urge the term reward, we 
can always carry them back to the declaration of Peter, that 
eternal life is the reward of faith, (1 Pet. i. 9.) 

4. Let us not suppose, then, that the Holy Spirit, by this 
promise, commends the dignity of our works, as if they were 
deserving of such a reward. For Scripture leaves us nothing 
of which we may glory in the sight of God. Nay, rather its 
whole object is to repress, humble, cast down, and completely 
crush our pride. But in this way help is given to our weak- 
ness, which would immediately give way were it not sus- 
tained by this expectation, and soothed by this comfort. 
First, let every man reflect for himself how hard it is not 
only to leave all things, but to leave and abjure one's self. And 
yet this is the training by which Christ initiates his disciples, 
that is, all the godly. Secondly, he thus keeps them all their 
lifetime under the discipline of the cross, lest they should 
allow their heart to long for or confide in present good. In 
short, his treatment is usually such, that wherever they turn 
their eyes, as far as this world extends, they see nothing be- 
fore them but despair ; and hence Paul says, " If in this life 
only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miser- 
able," (1 Cor. xv. 19.) That they may not fail in these great 
straits, the Lord is present reminding them to lift their head 
higher and extend their view farther, that in him they may 
find a happiness which they see not in the world : to this 
happiness he gives the name of reward, hire, recompense, not 
as estimating the merit of works, but intimating that it is a 
compensation for their straits, sufferings, and affronts, &c. 
Wherefore, there is nothing to prevent us from calling eternal 
life a recompense after the example of Scripture, because in 
it the Lord brings his people from labour to quiet, from 


CHAP. XVIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 419 

affliction to a prosperous and desirable condition, from sor- 
row to joy, from poverty to affluence, from ignominy to glory ; 
in short, exchanges all the evils which they endured for bless- 
ings. Thus there will be no impropriety in considering 
holiness of life as the way, not indeed the way which gives 
access to the glory of the heavenly kingdom ; but a way by 
which God conducts his elect to the manifestation of that 
kingdom, since his good pleasure is to glorify those whom he 
has sanctified, (Rom. viii. 30.) Only let us not imagine that 
merit and hire are correlative terms, a point on which the 
Sophists absurdly insist, from not attending to the end to 
which we have adverted. How preposterous is it when the 
Lord calls us to one end to look to another ? Nothing is 
clearer than that a reward is promised to good works, in 
order to support the weakness of our flesh by some degree 
of comfort ; but not to inflate our minds with vain glory. He, 
therefore, who from merit infers reward, or weighs works 
and reward in the same balance, errs very widely from the 
end which God has in view. 

5. Accordingly, when the Scripture speaks of "a crown of 
righteousness which God the righteous Judge shall give" " at 
that day," (2 Tim. iv. 8,) I not only say with Augustine, 
" To whom could the righteous Judge give the crown if the 
merciful Father had not given grace, and how could there 
have been righteousness but for the precedence of grace which 
justifies the ungodly ? how could these be paid as things 
due were not things not due previously given ?" (August, ad 
Valent. de Grat. et Lib. Art. ;) but I also add, how could he 
impute righteousness to our works, did not his indulgence hide 
the unrighteousness that is in them ? How coidd he deem 
them worthy of reward, did he not with boundless goodness 
destroy what is unworthy in them ? Augustine is Avont to 
give the name of grace to eternal life, because, while it is the 
recompense of works, it is bestowed by the gratuitous gifts 
of God. But Scripture humbles us more, and at the same 
time elevates us. For besides forbidding us to glory in works, 
because they are the gratuitous gifts of God, it tells us that 
they are always defiled by some degrees of impurity, so that 
they cannot satisfy God when they are tested by the standard 


420 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

of his justice ; but that, lest our activity should be destroyed, 
they please merely by pardon. But though Augustine speaks 
somewhat differently from us, it is plain from his words that 
the difference is more apparent than real. After drawing a 
contrast between two individuals, the one with a life holy and 
perfect almost to a miracle ; the other honest indeed, and of 
pure morals, yet not so perfect as not to leave much room for 
desiring better, he at length infers, " He who seems inferior 
in conduct, yet on account of the true faith in God by which 
he lives, (Hab. ii. 4,) and in conformity to w7hich he accuses 
himself in all his faults, praises God in all his good wrorks, 
takes shame to himself, and ascribes glory to God, from 
whom he receives both forgiveness for his sins, and the love 
of well-doing, the moment he is set free from this life is 
translated into the society of Christ. Why, but just on 
account of his faith ? For though it saves no man without 
works, (such faith being reprobate and not working by love,) 
yet by means of it sins are forgiven ; for the just lives by 
faith : without it works which seem good are converted into 
sins," (August, ad Bonifac, Lib. iii. c. 5.) Here he not ob- 
scurely acknowledges what we so strongly maintain, that the 
righteousness of good works depends on their being approved 
by God in the way of pardon.1 

6. In a sense similar to the above passages our opponents 
quote the following : " Make to yourselves friends of the 
mammon of unrighteousness ; that when ye fail, they may 
receive you into everlasting habitations," (Luke xvi. 9.) 
" Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not 
high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living 
God, who giveth us richly all things to enjoy : that they do 
good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, 
willing to communicate ; laying up in store for themselves a 
good foundation against the time to come, that they may 
lay hold on eternal life," (1 Tim. vi. 17-19.) For the good 
works which we enjoy in eternal blessedness are compared 
to riches. I answer, that we shall never attain to the true 
knowledge of these passages unless we attend to the scope of 

1 The French adds, " C'est a dire, en misericorde, et non pas en ju<*e- 
nient ;" — that is to say, in mercy, and not in judgment. 


CHAI\ XVIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 421 

the Spirit in uttering them. If it is true, as Christ says, 
" Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also," 
(Matth. vi. 21,) then, as the children of the world are intent 
on providing those things which form the delight of the pre- 
sent life, so it is the duty of believers, after they have learned 
that this life will shortly pass away like a dream, to take care 
that those things which they would truly enjoy be transmitted 
thither where their entire life is to be spent. We must, 
therefore, do like those who begin to remove to any place 
where they mean to fix their abode. As they send forward 
their effects, and grudge not to want them for a season, be- 
cause they think the more they have in their future resi- 
dence the happier they are ; so, if we think that heaven is 
our country, we should send our wealth thither rather than 
retain it here, where on our sudden departure it will be lost 
to us. But how shall we transmit it ? By contributing to the 
necessities of the poor, the Lord imputing to himself what- 
ever is given to them. Hence that excellent promise, " He 
that hath pity on the poor lendeth to the Lord," (Pro v. xix. 
17 ; Matth. xxv. 40 ;) and again, " He which soweth bounti- 
fully shall reap also bountifully," (2 Cor. ix. 6.) What we 
give to our brethren in the exercise of charity is a deposit 
with the Lord, who, as a faithful depositary, will ultimately 
restore it with abundant interest. Are our duties, then, of 
such value with God that they are as a kind of treasure 
placed in his hand ? Who can hesitate to say so when Scrip- 
ture so often and so plainly attests it ? But if any one would 
leap from the mere kindness of God to the merit of works,1 
his error will receive no support from these passages. For 
all you can properly infer from them is the inclination on the 
part of God to treat us with indulgence. For, in order to 
animate us in well-doing, he allows no act of obedience, how- 
ever unworthy of his eye, to pass unrewarded, 

7. But they insist more strongly on the words of the 
apostle when, in consoling the Thessalonians under their tri- 
bulations, he tells them that these were sent, " that ye may 

1 French, "Mais si quelcun pour obscurcir la benignite de Dieu veut 
establir la (lignite des ceuvres ;" — but if any one to obscure the benignity of 
God would establish the dignity of works. 


422 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also 
suffer; seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recom- 
pense tribulation to them that trouble you ; and to you who 
are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be re- 
vealed from heaven with his mighty angels," (2 Thess. i. 5-7.) 
The author of the Epistle to the Hebrews says, " God is not 
unrighteous to forget your work and labour of love, which ye 
have showed towards his name, in that ye have ministered to 
the saints, and do minister," (Heb. vi. 10.) To the former 
passage I answer, that the worthiness spoken of is not that of 
merit, but as God the Father would have those whom he has 
chosen for sons to be conformed to Christ the first born, and 
as it behoved him first to suffer, and then to enter into his 
glory, so we also, through much tribulation, enter the king- 
dom of heaven. Therefore, while we suffer tribulation for 
the name of Christ, we in a manner receive the marks with 
which God is wont to stamp the sheep of his flock, (Gal. vi. 
17.) Hence we are counted worthy of the kingdom of God, 
because we bear in our body the marks of our Lord and 
Master, these being the insignia of the children of God. In 
this sense are we to understand the passages : " Always bear- 
ing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the 
life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body," (2 
Cor. iv. 10.) " That I may know him and the power of his 
resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made 
conformable unto his death," (Phil. iii. 10.) The reason 
which is subjoined is intended not to prove any merit, but 
to confirm our hope of the kingdom of God ; as if he had 
said, As it is befitting the just judgment of God to take ven- 
geance on your enemies for the tribulation which they have 
brought upon you, so it is also befitting to give you release 
and rest from these tribulations. The other passage, which 
speaks as if it were becoming the justice of God not to overlook 
the services of his people, and almost insinuates that it were 
unjust to forget them, is to be thus explained : God, to arouse 
us from sloth, assures us that every labour which we under- 
take for the glory of his name shall not be in vain. Let us 
always remember that this" promise, like all other promises, 
will be of no avail unless it is preceded by the free covenant 


CHAP. XVIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 423 

of mercy, on which the whole certainty of our salvation de- 
pends. Trusting to it, however, we ought to feel secure that 
however unworthy our services, the liberality of God will not 
allow them to pass unrewarded. To confirm us in this expec- 
tation, the Apostle declares that God is not unrighteous ; 
but will act consistently with the promise once given. Right- 
eousness, therefore, refers rather to the truth of the divine 
promise than to the equity of paying what is due. In this 
sense there is a celebrated saying of Augustine, which, as con- 
taining a memorable sentiment, that holy man declined not 
repeatedly to employ, and which I think not unworthy of 
being constantly remembered : " Faithful is the Lord, who 
hath made himself our debtor, not by receiving any thing 
from us, but by promising us all things," (August, in Ps. 
xxxii., cix., et alibi.) 

8. Our opponents also adduce the following passages from 
Paul : " Though I have all faith, so that I could remove moun- 
tains, and have not charity, I am nothing," (1 Cor. xiii. 2.) 
Again, " Now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three ; but 
the greatest of these is charity," (1 Cor. xiii. 13.) " Above 
all these things put on charity, which is the bond of perfect- 
ness," (Col. hi. 14.) From the two first passages our 
Pharisees1 contend that we are justified by charity rather 
than by faith, charity being, as they say, the better virtue. 
This mode of arguing is easily disposed of. I have elsewhere 
shown that what is said in the first passage refers not to true 
faith. In. the second passage we admit that charity is said 
to be greater than true faith, but not because charity is more 
meritorious, but because it is more fruitful, because it is of 
wider extent, of more general service, and always flourishes, 
whereas the use of faith is only for a time. If we look to 
excellence, the love of God undoubtedly holds the first place. 
Of it, however, Paul does not here speak ; for the only thing- 
he insists on is, that we should by mutual charity edify one 
another in the Lord. But let us suppose that charity is in 
every respect superior to faith, what man of sound judgment, 
nay, what man with any soundness in his brain, would argue 

1 See Calvin's Answer to Sadolet, who had said that charity is the first 
and principal cause of our salvation. 


424 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

that it therefore does more to justify ? The power of justify- 
ing which belongs to faith consists not in its worth as a Avork. 
Our justification depends entirely on the mercy of God and 
the merits of Christ: when faith apprehends these, it is said to 
justify. Now, if you ask our opponents in what sense they 
ascribe justification to charity, they will answer, Being a duty 
acceptable to God, righteousness is in respect of its merit im- 
puted to us by the acceptance of the divine goodness. Here 
you see how beautifully the argument proceeds. We say 
that faith justifies not because it merits justification for us by 
its own worth, but because it is an instrument by which we 
freely obtain the righteousness of Christ. They overlooking 
the mercy of God, and passing by Christ, the sum of right- 
eousness, maintain that we are justified by charity as being 
superior to faith ; just as if one were to maintain that a king 
is fitter to make a shoe than a shoemaker, because the king is 
infinitely the superior of the two. This one syllogism is 
ample proof that all the schools of Sorbonne have never had 
the slightest apprehension of what is meant by justification 
by faith. Should any disputant here interpose, and ask why 
we give different meanings to the term faith as used by Paul 
in passages so near each other, I can easily show that I have 
not slight grounds for so doing. For while those gifts which 
Paul enumerates are in some degree subordinate to faith and 
hope, because they relate to the knowledge of God, he by 
Avay of summary comprehends them all under the name of 
faith and hope ; as if he had said, Prophecy and tongues, and 
the gift of interpreting, and knowledge, are all designed to 
lead us to the knowledge of God. But in this life it is only 
by faith and hope that we acknowledge God. Therefore, 
when I name faith and hope, I at the same time comprehend 
the whole. " Now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three ;" 
that is, how great soever the number of the gifts, they are all 
to be referred to them ; but " the greatest of these is charity." 
From the third passage they infer, If charity is the bond of 
perfection, it must be the bond of righteousness, which is 
nothing else than perfection. First, without objecting that 
the name of perfection is here given by Paul to proper union 
among the members of a rightly consti.uted church, and ad- 


CHAP. XVIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 425 

mitting that by charity we are perfected before God, what 
new result do they gain by it? I will always object in reply, 
that we never attain to that perfection unless we fulfil all the 
parts of charity ; and will thence infer, that as all are most re- 
mote from such fulfilment, the hope of perfection is excluded. 
9. I am unwilling to discuss all the things which the fool- 
ish Sorbonnists have rashly laid hold of in Scripture as it 
chanced to come in their way, and throw out against us. 
Some of them are so ridiculous, that I cannot mention them 
without laying myself open to a charge of trifling. I will, 
therefore, conclude with an exposition of one of our Saviour's 
expressions with which they are wondrously pleased. When 
the lawyer asked him, " Good Master, what good thing shall 
I do, that I may have eternal life?" he answers, "If thou 
wilt enter into life, keep the commandments," (Matth. xix. 16, 
17.) What more (they ask) would we have, when the very 
author of grace bids us acquire the kingdom of heaven by the 
observance of the commandments ? As if it were not plain that 
Christ adapted his answers to the characters of those whom 
he addressed. Here he is questioned by a Doctor of the Law 
as to the means of obtaining eternal life ; and the question is 
not put simply, but is, What can men do to attain it ? Both 
the character of the speaker and his question induced our 
Lord to give this answer. Imbued with a persuasion of legal 
righteousness, the lawyer had a blind confidence in works. 
Then all he asked was, what are the works of righteousness 
by Avhich salvation is obtained ? Justly, therefore, is he re- 
ferred to the law, in which there is a perfect mirror of right- 
eousness. We also distinctly declare, that if life is sought in 
works, the commandments are to be observed. And the 
knowledge of this doctrine is necessary to Christians ; for how 
should they betake themselves to Christ, unless they per- 
ceived that they had fallen from the path of life over the pre- 
cipice of death ? Or how could they understand how far 
they have wandered from the way of life unless they pre- 
viously understand Avhat that way is ? Then only do they feel 
that the asylum of safety is in Christ when they see how 
much their conduct is at variance with the divine righteous- 
ness, which consists in the observance of the law. The sum 


426 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

of the whole is this, If salvation is sought in works, we must 
keep the commandments, by which Ave are instructed in per- 
fect righteousness. But we cannot remain here unless we 
would stop short in the middle of our course ; for none of us 
is able to keep the commandments. Being thus excluded 
from the righteousness of the law, we must betake ourselves 
to another remedy, viz., to the faith of Christ. Wherefore, 
as a teacher of the law, whom our Lord knew to be puffed 
up with a vain confidence in works, was here directed by 
him to the law, that he might learn he was a sinner exposed 
to the fearful sentence of eternal death ; so others, who were 
already humbled with this knowledge, he elsewhere solaces 
with the promise of grace, without making any mention of 
the law. " Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest." " Take my yoke upon you, 
and learn of me ; for I am meek and lowly in heart : and ye 
shall find rest unto your souls," (Matth. xi. 28, 29.) 

10. At length, after they have wearied themselves with 
perverting Scripture, they have recourse to subtleties and 
sophisms. One cavil is, that faith is somewhere called a work, 
(John vi. 29 ;) hence they infer that we are in error in oppos- 
ing faith to works ; as if faith, regarded as obedience to the 
divine will, could by its own merit procure our justification, 
and did not rather, by embracing the mercy of God, thereby 
seal upon our hearts the righteousness of Christ, which is 
offered to us in the preaching of the Gospel. My readers 
will pardon me if I stay not to dispose of such absurdities ; 
their own weakness, without external assault, is sufficient to 
destroy them. One objection, however, which has some sem- 
blance of reason, it will be proper to dispose of in passing, 
lest it give any trouble to those less experienced. As com- 
mon sense dictates that contraries must be tried by the same 
rule, and as each sin is charged against us as unrighteousness, 
so it is right (say our opponents) that each good work should 
receive the praise of righteousness. The answer which some 
give, that the condemnation of men proceeds on unbelief 
alone, and not on particular sins, does not satisfy me. I agree 
with them, indeed, that infidelity is the fountain and root 
of all evil; for it is the first act of revolt from God, and is 


CHAP. XVIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 427 

afterwards followed by particular transgressions of the law. 
But as they seem to hold, that in estimating righteousness 
and unrighteousness, the same rule is to be applied to good 
and bad works, in this I dissent from them.1 The righteous- 
ness of works consists in perfect obedience to the law. Hence 
you cannot be justified by works unless you follow this straight 
line (if I may so call it) during the whole course of your 
life. The moment you decline from it you have fallen into 
unrighteousness. Hence it appears, that righteousness is not 
obtained by a few works, but by an indefatigable and inflex- 
ible observance of the divine will. But the rule with regard to 
unrighteousness is very different. The adulterer or the thief 
is by one act guilty of death, because he offends against the 
majesty of God. The blunder of these arguers of ours lies 
here : they attend not to the words of James, " Whosoever 
shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is 
guilty of all. For he that said, Do not commit adultery, 
said also, Do not kill," &c, (James ii. 10, 11.) Therefore, 
it should not seem absurd when we say that death is the just 
recompense of every sin, because each sin merits the just in- 
dignation and vengeance of God. But you reason absurdly 
if you infer the converse, that one good work will reconcile a 
man to God notwithstanding of his meriting wrath by many 
sins. 


1 French, " Mais touchant ce qu'ils seinblent advis contrepoiser en une 
racsme balance les bonnes ceuvres et les mauvaises, pour estimer la justice 
ou l'injustice de l'hommc, en cela je suis contreint de leur repugner." — 
But as they seem disposed to put good and bad works into the opposite 
scales of the same balance, in order to estimate the righteousness or un- 
righteousness of man, in this I am forced to dissent from them. 


428 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III 


CHAPTER XIX. 

OF CHRISTIAN LIBERTY. 

The three divisions of this chapter are, — I. Necessity of the doctrine 
of Christian Liberty, sec. 1. The principal parts of this liberty ex- 
plained, sec. 2-8. II. The nature and efficacy of this liberty against 
the Epicureans and others who take no account whatever of the weak, 
sec. 9 and 10. III. Of offence given and received. A lengthened and 
not unnecessary discussion of this subject, sec. 11-16. 

Sections. 
. Connection of this chapter with the previous ones on Justification. 
A true knowledge of Christian liberty useful aud necessary. 1. It 
purifies the conscience. 2. It checks licentiousness. 3. It main- 
tains the merits of Christ, the truth of the Gospel, and the peace 
of the soul. 

2. This liberty consists of three parts. First, Believers renouncing the 

righteousness of the law, look only to Christ. Objection. An- 
swer, distinguishing between Legal and Evangelical righteous- 
ness. 

3. This first part clearly established by the whole Epistle to the Gala- 

tians. 

4. The second part of Christian liberty, viz., that the conscience, freed 

from the yoke of the law, voluntarily obeys the will of God. This 
cannot be done so long as we are under the law. Reason. 

5. AVhen freed from the rigorous exactions of the law, we can cheer- 

fully and with much alacrity answer the call of God. 

6. Proof of this second part from an Apostle. The end of this liberty. 

7. Third part of liberty, viz., the free use of things indifferent. The 

knowledge of this part necessary to remove despair and supersti- 
tion. Superstition described. 

8. Proof of this third part from the Epistle to the Romans. Those 

who observe it not only use evasion. 1. Despisers of God. 
2. The desperate. 3. The ungrateful. The end and scope of this 
third part. 

9. Second part of the chapter, showing the nature and efficacy of Christian 

liberty, in opposition to the Epicureans. Their character described. 
Pretext and allegation Use of things indifferent. Abuse detected. 
Mode of correcting it. 


CHAP. XIX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 429 

10. This liberty maintained in opposition to those who pay no regard to 

the weak. Error of this class of men refuted. A most pernicious 
error. Objection. Reply. 

11. Application of the doctrine of Christian liberty to the subject of 

offences. These of two kinds. Offence given. Offence received. 
Of offence given, a subject comprehended by few. Of Pharisaical 
offence, or offence received. 

12. Who are to be regarded as weak and Pharisaical. Proved by ex- 

amples and the doctrine of Paul. The just moderation of Christian 
liberty. Necessity of vindicating it. No regard to be paid to 
hypocrites. Duty of edifying our weak neighbours. 

13. Application of the doctrine to things indifferent. Things necessary 

not to be omitted from any fear of offence. 

14. Refutation of errors in regard to Christian liberty. The consciences 

of the godly not to be fettered by human traditions in matters of 
indifference. 

15. Distinction to be made between Spiritual and Civil government. 

These must not be confounded. How far conscience can be bound 
by human constitutions. Definition of conscience. Definition ex- 
plained by passages from the Apostolic writings. 

16. The relation which conscience bears to external obedience ; first, in 

things good and evil ; secondly, in things indifferent. 


1. We are now to treat of Christian Liberty, the explana- 
tion of which certainly ought not to be omitted by any one 
proposing to give a compendious summary of Gospel doctrine. 
For it is a matter of primary necessity, one without the 
knowledge of which the conscience can scarcely attempt any 
thing without hesitation, in many mnst demur and fluctuate, 
and in all proceed with fickleness and trepidation. In parti- 
cular, it forms a proper appendix to Justification, and is of 
no little service in understanding its force. Nay, those who 
seriously fear God will hence perceive the incomparable 
advantages of a doctrine which wicked scoffers are constantly 
assailing with their jibes ; the intoxication of mind under 
which they labour leaving their petulance without restraint. 
This, therefore, seems the proper place for considering the 
subject. Moreover, though it has already been occasionally 
adverted to, there was an advantage in deferring the fuller 
consideration of it till now, for the moment any mention is 
made of Christian liberty lust begins to boil, or insane commo- 
tions arise, if a speedy restraint is not laid on those licentious 


430 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

spirits by whom the best things are perverted into the worst. 
For they either, under pretext of this liberty, shake off all 
obedience to God, and break out into unbridled licentious- 
ness, or they feel indignant, thinking that all choice, order, 
and restraint, are abolished. What can Ave do when thus 
encompassed with straits ? Are we to bid adieu to Christian 
liberty, in order that we may cut off all opportunity for such 
perilous consequences ? But, as we have said, if the subject 
be not understood, neither Christ, nor the truth of the 
Gospel, nor the inward peace of the soul, is properly known. 
Our endeavour must rather be, while not suppressing this 
very necessary part of doctrine, to obviate the absurd objec- 
tions to which it usually gives rise. 

2. Christian liberty seems to me to consist of three parts. 
First, the consciences of believers, while seeking the assur- 
ance of their justification before God, must rise above the 
law, and think no more of obtaining justification by it. For 
while the law, as has already been demonstrated, {supra, 
chap. xvii. sec. 1,) leaves not one man righteous, Ave are either 
excluded from all hope of justification, or we must be loosed 
from the laAV, and so loosed as that no account at all shall 
be taken of Avorks. For he Avho imagines that in order to 
obtain justification he must bring any degree of Avorks Avhat- 
ever, cannot fix any mode or limit, but makes himself debtor 
to the Avhole law. Therefore, laying aside all mention of 
the law, and all idea of Avorks, we must in the matter of 
justification have recourse to the mercy of God only ; 
turning away our regard from ourselves, we must look only 
to Christ. For the question is, not Iioav Ave may be right- 
eous, but how, though umvorthy and unrighteous, we may 
be regarded as righteous. If consciences Avould obtain 
any assurance of this, they must give no place to the law. 
Still it cannot be rightly inferred from this that believers have 
no need of the law. It ceases not to teach, exhort, and urge 
them to good, although it is not recognised by their con- 
sciences before the judgment-seat of God. The tAvo things 
are very different, and should be Avell and carefully 
distinguished. The whole lives of Christians ought to be 
a kind of aspiration after piety, seeing they are called unto 


CHAP. XIX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. ' 431 

holiness, (Eph. i. 4 ; 1 Thess. iv. 5.) The office of the law 
is to excite them to the study of purity and holiness, by 
reminding them of their duty. For "when the conscience 
feels anxious as to how it may have the favour of God, 
as to the answer it could give, and the confidence it would 
feel, if brought to his judgment-seat, in such a case the 
requirements of the law are not to be brought forward, but 
Christ, who surpasses all the perfection of the law, is alone 
to be held forth for righteousness. 

3. On this almost the whole subject of the Epistle to the 
Galatians hinges ; for it can be proved from express passages 
that those are absurd interpreters who teach that Paid there 
contends only for freedom from ceremonies. Of such passages 
are the following : " Christ hath redeemed us from the curse 
of the law, being made a curse for us." " Stand fast, there- 
fore, in the liberty Avherewith Christ has made us free, and 
be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. Behold, 
I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall 
profit you nothing. For I testify again to every man that is 
circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole law. Christ 
is become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are 
justified by the law ; ye are fallen from grace," (Gal. iii. 13 ; 
v. 1-4.) These words certainly refer to something of a 
higher order than freedom from ceremonies. I confess, 
indeed, that Paul there treats of ceremonies, because he was 
contending with false apostles, who were plotting to bring- 
back into the Christian Church those ancient shadows of the 
law which were abolished by the advent of Christ. But, 
in discussing this question, it was necessary to introduce 
higher matters, on which the whole controversy turns. 
First, because the brightness of the Gospel was obscured by 
those Jewish shadows, he shows that in Christ we have a full 
manifestation of all tbose things which were typified by Mosaic 
ceremonies. Secondly, as those imposters instilled into the 
people the most pernicious opinion, that this obedience was 
sufficient to merit the grace of God, he insists very strongly 
that believers shall not imagine that they can obtain justifi- 
cation before God by any works, far less by those paltry 
observances. At the same time, he shows that by the cross 


432 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

of Christ they are free from the condemnation of the law, 
to which otherwise all men are exposed, so that in Christ 
alone they can rest in full security. This argument is 
pertinent to the present subject, (Gal. iv. 5, 21, &c.) Lastly, 
he asserts the right of believers to liberty of conscience, a 
liberty which may not be restrained without necessity. 

4. Another point which depends on the former is, that 
consciences obey the law, not as if compelled by legal 
necessity ; but being free from the yoke of the law itself, 
voluntarily obey the will of God. Being constantly in terror 
so long as they are under the dominion of the law, they are 
never disposed promptly to obey God, unless they have 
previously obtained this liberty. Our meaning shall be 
explained more briefly and clearly by an example. The 
command of the law is, " Thou shalt love the Lord thy 
God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and w7ith 
all thy might," (Deut. vi. 5.) To accomplish this, the soul 
must previously be divested of every other thought and 
feeling, the heart purified from all its desires, all its powers 
collected and united on this one object. Those who, in 
comparison of others, have made much progress in the way 
of the Lord, are still very far from this goal. For although 
they love God in their mind, and with a sincere affection of 
heart, yet both are still in a great measure occupied with 
the lusts of the flesh, by which they are retarded and pre- 
vented from proceeding with quickened pace towards God. 
They indeed make many efforts, but the flesh partly enfeebles 
their strength, and partly binds them to itself. What can 
they do while they thus feel that there is nothing of which 
they are less capable than to fulfil the law ? They wish, aspire, 
endeavour ; but do nothing with the requisite perfection. 
If they look to the law, they see that every wTork which 
they attempt or design is accursed. Nor can any one 
deceive himself by inferring that the work is not altogether 
bad, merely because it is imperfect, and, therefore, that any 
good which is in it is still accepted of God. For the law 
demanding perfect love condemns all imperfection, unless its 
rigour is mitigated. Let any man therefore consider his wrork 
which he wishes to be thought partly good, and he will find 


CHAP. XIX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 433 

that it is a transgression of the law by the very circum- 
stance of its being imperfect. 

5. See how our works lie under the curse of the law if they 
are tested by the standard of the law. But how can unhappy 
souls set themselves with alacrity to a work from which they 
cannot, hope to gain any thing in return but cursing? On 
the other hand, if freed from this severe exaction, or rather 
from the whole rigour of the law, they hear themselves 
invited by God with paternal lenity, they will cheerfully and 
alertly obey the call, and follow his guidance. In one word, 
those who are bound by the yoke of the law are like 
servants who have certain tasks daily assigned them by their 
masters. Such servants think that nought has been done ; 
and they dare not come into the presence of their masters 
until the exact amount of labour has been performed. But 
sons who are treated in a more candid and liberal manner 
by their parents, hesitate not to offer them works that are 
only begun or half finished, or even with something faulty 
in them, trusting that their obedience and readiness of mind 
will be accepted, although the performance be less exact 
than was wished. Such should be our feelings, as we cer- 
tainly trust that our most indulgent Parent will approve our 
services, however small they may be, and however rude and 
imperfect. Thus He declares to us by the prophet, " I will 
spare them as a man spareth his own son that serveth him," 
(Mai. iii. 17 ;) where the word spare evidently means indul- 
gence, or connivance at faults, while at the same time service 
is remembered. This confidence is necessary in no slight 
degree, since without it every thing should be attempted in 
vain ; for God does not regard any work of ours as done to 
himself, unless truly done from a desire to serve him. But 
how can this be amidst these terrors, while we doubt whether 
God is offended or served by our work ? 

G. This is the reason why the author of the Epistle to the 
Hebrews ascribes to faith all the good works which the holy 
patriarchs are said to have performed, and estimates them 
merely by faith, (Heb. xi. 2.) In regard to this liberty there 
is a remarkable passage in the Epistle to the Romans, where 
Paul argues, " Sin shall not have dominion over you ; for ye 
VOL. II. 2 E 


434 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

are not under the law, but under grace," (Rom. vi. 14.) 
For after he had exhorted believers, " Let not sin therefore 
reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts 
thereof: Neither yield ye your members as instruments of 
unrighteousness unto sin ; but yield yourselves unto God, as 
those that are alive from the dead, and your members as 
instruments of righteousness unto God ;" they might have 
objected that they still bore about with them a body full of 
lust, that sin still dwelt in them. He therefore comforts 
them by adding, that they are freed from the law : as if he 
had said, Although you feel that sin is not yet extinguished, 
and that righteousness does not plainly live in you, you have 
no cause for fear and dejection, as if God were always 
offended because of the remains of sin, since by grace you 
are freed from the law, and your works are not tried by its 
standard. Let those, however, who infer that they may sin 
because they are not under the law, understand that they 
have no right to this liberty, the end of which is to encour- 
age us in well-doing. 

7. The third part of this liberty is, that we are not bound 
before God to any observance of external things which are 
in themselves indifferent, (udiapoea,) but that we are now at 
full liberty either to use or omit them. The knowledge of 
this liberty is very necessary to us ; where it is wanting our 
consciences will have no rest, there will be no end of super- 
stition. In the present day many think us absurd in raising 
a question as to the free eating of flesh, the free use of dress 
and holidays, and similar frivolous trifles, as they think them ; 
but they are of more importance than is commonly supposed. 
For when once the conscience is entangled in the net, it 
enters a long and inextricable labyrinth, from which it is 
afterwards most difficult to escape. When a man begins to 
doubt whether it is lawful for him to use linen for sheets, 
shirts, napkins, and handkerchiefs, he will not long be secure 
as to hemp, and w.ill at last have doubts as to tow ; for he 
will revolve in his mind whether he cannot sup without 
napkins, or dispense with handkerchiefs. Should he deem 
a daintier food unlawful, he will afterwards feel uneasy for 
using loaf-bread and common eatables, because he will think 


CHAP. XIX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 435 

that his body might possibly be supported on a still meaner 
food. If he hesitates as to a more genial wine, he will 
scarcely drink the worst with a good conscience ; at last he 
will not dare to touch water if more than usually sweet and 
pure. In fine, he will come to this, that he will deem 
it criminal to trample on a straw lying in his way. For it 
is no trivial dispute that is here commenced, the point in 
debate being, whether the use of this thing or that is in 
accordance with the divine will, which ought to take prece- 
dence of all our acts and counsels. Here some must by 
despair be hurried into an abyss, while others, despising 
God and casting off his fear, will not be able to make a way 
for themselves without ruin. When men are involved in 
such doubts, whatever be the direction in which they turn, 
every thing they see must offend their conscience. 

8. " I know," says Paul, " that there is nothing unclean of 
itself," (by unclean meaning unholy ;) "but to him that 
esteemeth any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean," 
(Rom. xiv. 14.) By these words he makes all external 
things subject to our liberty, provided the nature of that 
liberty approves itself to our minds as before God. But if 
any superstitious idea suggests scruples, those things which 
in their own nature were pure are to us contaminated. 
Wherefore the apostle adds, " Happy is he that condemn- 
eth not himself in that which he alloweth. And he that 
doubteth is damned if he eat, because he eateth not of 
faith : for whatsoever is not of faith is sin," (Rom. xiv. 
22, 23.) When men, amid such difficulties, proceed with 
greater confidence, securely doing whatever pleases them, 
do they not in so far revolt from God ? Those who are 
thoroughly impressed with some fear of God, if forced to do 
many things repugnant to their conscience, are discouraged 
and filled with dread. All such persons receive none of 
the gifts of God with thanksgiving, by which alone Paul 
declares that all things are sanctified for our use, (1 Tim. 
iv. 5.) By thanksgiving I understand that which proceeds 
from a mind recognising the kindness and goodness of 
God in his gifts. For many, indeed, understand that the 
blessings which they enjoy are the gifts of God, and praise 
God in their works ; but not being persuaded that these have 


436 INSTITUTES OF THE 


BOOK III. 


been given to them, how can they give thanks to God as 
the giver? In one word, Ave see whither this liberty tends, 
viz., that Ave are to use the gifts of God without any scruple 
of conscience, without any perturbation of mind, for the pur- 
pose for which he gave them : in this way our souls may 
both have peace with him, and recognise his liberality to- 
Avards us. For here are comprehended all ceremonies of free 
observance, so that while our consciences are not to be laid 
under the necessity of observing them, we are also to remem- 
ber that, by the kindness of God, the use of them is made 
subservient to edification. 

9. It is, however, to be carefully observed, that Christian 
liberty is in all its parts a spiritual matter, the whole force of 
which consists in giving peace to trembling consciences, 
whether they are anxious and disquieted as to the forgive- 
ness of sins, or as to whether their imperfect works, polluted 
by the infirmities of the flesh, are pleasing to God, or are per- 
plexed as to the use of things indifferent. It is, therefore, 
perversely interpreted by those Avho use it as a cloak for 
their lusts, that they may licentiously abuse the good gifts of 
God, or avIio think there is no liberty unless it is used in the 
presence of men, and, accordingly, in using it pay no regard 
to their Aveak brethren. Under this head, the sins of the 
present age are more numerous. For there is scarcely any 
one whose means allow him to live sumptuously, who does 
not delight in feasting, and dress, and the luxurious grandeur 
of his house, Avho wishes not to surpass his neighbour in 
every kind of delicacy, and does not plume himself amazingly 
on his splendour. And all these things are defended under 
the pretext of Christian liberty. They say they are things 
indifferent : I admit it, provided they are used indifferently. 
But when they are too eagerly longed for, when they are 
proudly boasted of, when they are indulged in luxurious pro- 
fusion, things Avhich otherwise Avere in themselves laAvful are 
certainly defiled by these vices. Paul makes an admirable 
distinction in regard to things indifferent : " Unto the pure 
all things are pure : but unto them that are defiled and un- 
believing is nothing pure ; but even their mind and con- 
science is defiled," (Tit. i. 15.) For why is a Avoe pronounced 


CHAP. XIX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 437 

upon the rich who have received their consolation ? (Luke vi. 
24,) who are full, who laugh now, who " lie upon beds of ivory, 
and stretch themselves upon their couches ;" " join house 
to house," and " lay field to field ;" " and the harp and the 
viol, the tabret and pipe, and wine, are in their feasts," 
(Amos vi. 6 ; Is. v. 8, 10.) Certainly ivory and gold, and 
riches, are the good creatures of God, permitted, nay des- 
tined, by divine providence for the use of man ; nor was it 
ever forbidden to laugh, or to be full, or to add new to old 
and hereditary possessions, or to be delighted with music, or 
to drink wine. This is true, but when the means are sup- 
plied, to roll and wallow in luxury, to intoxicate the mind 
and soul with present and be always hunting after new 
pleasures, is very far from a legitimate use of the gifts 
of God. Let them, therefore, suppress immoderate desire, 
immoderate profusion, vanity, and arrogance, that they may 
use the gifts of God purely with a pure conscience. When 
their mind is brought to this state of soberness, they will be 
able to regulate the legitimate use. On the other hand, 
when this moderation is wanting, even plebeian and ordinary 
delicacies are excessive. For it is a true saying, that a 
haughty mind often dwells in a coarse and homely garb, 
while true humility lurks under fine linen and purple. Let 
every one then live in his own station, poorly or moderately, 
or in splendour; but let all remember that the nourishment 
which God gives is for life, not luxury, and let them regard 
it as the law of Christian liberty, to learn witlTPaul in whatT" 
ever state they are, " therewith to be content," to know "both 
Tiow to be abased," and " how to abound," " to be full and to 
be~Eungry715oth to abound and to suffer need," (Phil. iv. 11.) 
10. Very many also err in this : as if their liberty were 
not safe and entire, without having men to witness it, they 
use it indiscriminately and imprudently, and in this way 
often give offence to weak brethren. You may see some 
in the present day who cannot think they possess their 
liberty unless they come into possession of it by eating flesh 
on Friday. Their eating I blame not, but this false notion 
must be driven from their minds : for they ought to think 
that their liberty gains nothing new by the sight of men, but 


438 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

is to be enjoyed before God, and consists as much in abstain- 
ing as in using. If they understand that it is of no conse- 
quence in the sight of God whether they eat flesh or eggs, 
whether they are clothed in red or in black, this is amply 
sufficient. The conscience to which the benefit of this liberty 
was due is loosed. Therefore, though they should afterwards, 
during their whole life, abstain from flesh, and constantly 
wear one colour, they are not less free. Nay, just because 
they are free, they abstain with a free conscience. But they 
err most egregiously in paying no regard to the infirmity of 
their brethren, with which it becomes us to bear, so as not 
rashly to give them offence. But 1 it is sometimes also of 
consequence that we should assert our liberty before men. 
This I admit : yet must we use great caution in the mode, 
lest we should cast off the care of the weak whom God has 
specially committed to us. 

11. I will here make some observations on offences, what 
distinctions are to be made between them, what kind are to 
be avoided and what disregarded. This will afterwards en- 
able us to determine what scope there is for our liberty 
among men. We are pleased with the common division into 
offence given and offence taken, since it has the plain sanction 
of Scripture, and not improperly expresses what is meant. If 
from unseasonable levity or wantonness, or rashness, you do 
any thing out of order or not in its own place, by which the 
weak or unskilful are offended, it may be said that offence 
has been given by you, since the ground of offence is owing to 
your fault. And in general, offence is said to be given in any 
matter where the person from wrhom it has proceeded is in 
fault. Offence is said to be taken when a thing otherwise 
done, not wickedly or unseasonably, is made an occasion of 
offence from malevolence or some sinister feeling. For here 
offence was not given, but sinister interpreters causelessly take 
offence. By the former kind, the weak only, by the latter, 
the ill-tempered and Pharisaical are offended. Wherefore, 
we shall call the one the offence of the weak, the other the 
offence of Pharisees, and we will so temper the use of 

1 French, " Mais quelcun dira ;" — But some one will say. 


CHAP. XIX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 439 

our liberty as to make it yield to the ignorance of weak 
brethren, but not to the austerity of Pharisees. What is 
due to infirmity is fully shown by Paul in many passages. 
" Him that is weak in the faith receive ye." Again, " Let 
us not judge one another any more : but judge this rather, 
that no man put a stumbling-block, or an occasion to fall, in 
his brother's way ;" and many others to the same effect in the 
same place, to which, instead of quoting them here, we refer 
the reader. The sum is, u We then that are strong ought to 
bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves. 
Let every one of us please his neighbour for his good to edi- 
fication." Elsewhere he says, " Take heed lest by any means 
this liberty of yours become a stumbling-block to them that 
are weak." Again, " Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, 
that eat, asking no question for conscience sake." " Con- 
science, I say, not thine own, but of the other." Finally, 
" Give none offence, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, 
nor to the Church of God." Also in another passage, 
" Brethren, ye have been called into liberty, only use not 
liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one 
another." * Thus, indeed, it is : our liberty wTas not given us 
against our weak neighbours, whom charity enjoins us to 
serve in all things, but rather that, having peace with God 
in our minds, wre should live peaceably among men. What 
value is to be set upon the offence of the Pharisees we learn 
from the words of our Lord, in which he says, " Let them 
alone : they be blind leaders of the blind," (Matth. xv. 14.) 
The disciples had intimated that the Pharisees were offended 
at his words. He answers, that they are to be let alone, that 
their offence is not to be regarded. 

12. The matter still remains uncertain, unless we under- 
stand who are the weak and who the Pharisees : for if this 
distinction is destroyed, I see not how, in regard to offences, 
any liberty at all wTould remain without being constantly in 
the greatest danger. But Paul seems to me to have marked 
out most clearly, as well by example as by doctrine, how far 
our liberty, in the case of offence, is to be modified or main- 

1 Rom. xiv. 1, 13 ; xv. 1 ; 1 Cor. viii. 9 ; x. 25, 20, 32 ; Gal. v. 13. 


440 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

tained. When he adopts Timothy as his companion, he 
circumcises him : nothing can induce him to circumcise 
Titus, (Acts xvi. 3 ; Gal. ii. 3.) The acts are different, but 
there is no difference in the purpose or intention ; in circum- 
cising Timothy, as he was free from all men, he made him- 
self the servant of all : " Unto the Jews I became as a Jew, 
that I might gain the Jews ; to them that are under the law, 
as under the law, that I might gain them that are under the 
law; to them that are without law, as without law, (being 
not without law to God, but under the law to Christ,) that 
I might gain them that are without law. To the weak be- 
came I as weak, that I might gain the weak : I am made all 
things to all men, that I might by all means save some," (1 
Cor. ix. 20-22.) We have here the proper modification of 
liberty, when in things indifferent it can be restrained with 
some advantage. What he had in view in firmly resisting 
the circumcision of Titus, he himself testifies when he thus 
Avrites : " But neither Titus, who was with me, being a Greek, 
was compelled to be circumcised : and that because of false 
brethren unawares brought in, who came in privily to spy out 
our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might 
bring us into bondage : to whom we gave place by subjec- 
tion, no, not for an hour, that the truth of the gospel might 
continue with you," (Gal. ii. 3-5.) We here see the neces- 
sity of vindicating our liberty when, by the unjust exactions 
of false apostles, it is brought into danger with weak con- 
sciences. In all cases we must study charity, and look to 
the edification of our neighbour. " All things are lawful for 
me," says he, " but all things are not expedient ; all things 
are lawful for me, but all things edify not. Let no man seek 
his own, but every man another's wealth," (1 Cor. x. 23, 24.) 
There is nothing plainer than this rule, that we are to use 
our liberty if it tends to the edification of our neighbour, but 
if inexpedient for our neighbour, we are to abstain from it. 
There are some who pretend to imitate this prudence of Paul 
by abstinence from liberty, while there is nothing for which 
they less employ it than for purposes of charity. Consult- 
ing their own ease, they Avould have all mention of liberty 
buried, though it is not less for the interest of our neighbour 


CHAP. XIX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 44.1 

to vise liberty for their good and edification, than to modify it 
occasionally for their advantage. It is the part of a pious 
man to think, that the free power conceded to him in exter- 
nal things is to make him the readier in all offices of charity. 
13. Whatever I have said abont avoiding offences, I wish 
to be referred to things indifferent.1 Things which are neces- 
sary to be done cannot be omitted from any fear of offence. 
For as our liberty is to be made subservient to charity, so 
charity must in its turn be subordinate to purity of faith. 
Here, too, regard must be had to charity, but it must go as 
far as the altar ; that is, we must not offend God for the sake 
of our neighbour. We approve not of the intemperance of 
those who do every thing tumultuously, and would rather 
burst through every restraint at once than proceed step by 
step. But neither are those to be listened to who, while 
they take the lead in a thousand forms of impiety, pretend 
that they act thus to avoid giving offence to their neighbour, 
as if in the meantime they did not train the consciences of 
their neighbours to evil, especially when they always stick 
in the same mire without any hope of escape. "When a neigh- 
bour is to be instructed, whether by doctrine or by example, 
then smooth-tongued men say that he is to be fed with 
milk, while they are instilling into him the worst and most 
pernicious opinions. Paul says to the Corinthians, " I have 
fed you with milk, and not with meat," (1 Cor. iii. 2 ;) but 
had there then been a Popish mass among them, would he 
have sacrificed as one of the modes of giving them milk ? By 
no means : milk is not poison. It is false then to say they 
nourish those whom, under a semblance of soothing, they 
cruelly murder. But granting that such dissimulation may 
be Used for a time, how long are they to make their pupils 
drink that kind of milk ? If they never grow up so as to be 
able to bear at least some gentle food, it is certain that they 
have never been reared on milk.2 Two reasons prevent me 
from now entering farther into contest with these people ; 
first, their follies are scarcely worthy of refutation, seeing all 

1 The French adds, " Lesquelles ne sont de soy ne bonnes ne mau- 
vais ;" — which in themselves are neither good nor bad. 
- French, " de bon laict ;" — good milk. 


442 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

men of sense must nauseate them ; and, secondly, having 
already amply refuted them in special treatises, I am unwill- 
ing to do it over again.1 Let my readers only bear in mind, 
first, that whatever be the offences by which Satan and the 
world attempt to lead us away from the law of God, we must, 
nevertheless, strenuously proceed in the course which he pre- 
scribes ; and, secondly, that whatever dangers impend}- we 
are not at liberty to deviate one nail's breadth from the com- 
mand of God, that on no pretext is it lawful to attempt any 
thing but what he permits. 

14. Since by means of this privilege of liberty which we 
have described, believers have derived authority from Christ 
not to entangle themselves by the observance of things in which 
he wished them to be free, we conclude that their consciences 
are exempted from all human authority. For it were unbe- 
coming that the gratitude due to Christ for his liberal gift 
should perish, or that the consciences of believers should de- 
rive no benefit from it. We must not regard it as a trivial 
matter when we see how much it cost our Saviour, being 
purchased not with silver or gold, but with his own blood, 
(1 Pet. i. 18, 19 ;) so that Paul hesitates not to say that 
Christ has died in vain, if we place our souls under subjec- 
tion to men, (Gal. v. 1, 4 ; 1 Cor. vii. 23.) Several chapters 
of the Epistle to the Galatians are wholly occupied with 
showing that Christ is obscured, or rather extinguished to 
us, unless our consciences maintain their liberty ; from which 
they have certainly fallen, if they can be bound with the 
chains of laws and constitutions at the pleasure of men. But 
as the knowledge of this subject is of the greatest im- 
portance, so it demands a longer and clearer exposition. For 
the moment the abolition of human constitutions is mention- 
ed, the greatest disturbances are excited, partly by the sedi- 
tious, and partly by calumniators, as if obedience of every 
kind were at the same time abolished and overthrown. 

15. Therefore, lest this prove a stumbling-block to anv, 
let us observe that in man government is twofold : the one 

1 See Epist. de Fugiendis Impiorum Illicitis Sacris. Also Epist. de 
Abjiciendis vel Administrandis Sacerdotiis. Also the short treatise, De 
Vitandis Superstitionibus. 


CHAP. XIX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 443 

spiritual, by which the conscience is trained to piety and 
divine worship ; the other civil, by Avhich the individual is 
instructed in those duties which, as men and citizens, Ave 
are bound to perform, (see Book IV. chap. x. sec. 3-6.) To 
these two forms are commonly given the not inappropriate 
names of spiritual and temporal jurisdiction, intimating that 
the former species has reference to the life of the soul, 
while the latter relates to matters of the present life, not only 
to food and clothing, but to the enacting of laws which re- 
quire a man to live among his fellows purely, honourably, 
and modestly. The former has its seat within the soul, the 
latter only regulates the external conduct. We may call the 
one the spiritual, the other the civil kingdom. Now, these 
two, as we have divided them, are always to be viewed apart 
from each other. When the one is considered, Ave should 
call off our minds, and not allow them to think of the other. 
For there exists in man a kind of two Avorlds, over which dif- 
ferent kings and different laAvs can preside. By attending 
to this distinction, we will not erroneously transfer the doc- 
trine of the gospel concerning spiritual liberty to civil order, 
as if in regard to external government Christians were less 
subject to human laws, because their consciences are unbound 
before God, as if they were exempted from all carnal service, 
because in regard to the Spirit they are free. Again, be- 
cause even in those constitutions Avhich seem to relate to the 
spiritual kingdom, there may be some delusion, it is neces- 
sary to distinguish between those which are to be held legiti- 
mate as being agreeable to the Avord of God, and those, on 
the other hand, which ought to have no place among the 
pious. We shall elsewhere have an opportunity of speaking 
of civil government, (see Book IV. chap, xx.) For the pre- 
sent, also, I defer speaking of ecclesiastical laAvs, because that 
subject will be more fully discussed in the Fourth Book 
Avhen Ave come to treat of the Power of the Church. We 
Avould thus conclude the present discussion. The question, 
as I have said, though not very obscure, or perplexing in 
itself, occasions difficulty to many, because they do not dis- 
tinguish with sufficient accuracy between Avhat is called the 
external forum, and the forum of conscience. What increases 


444 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

the difficulty is, that Paul commands us to obey the magi- 
strate, " not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake," 
(Rom. xiii. 1, 5.) Whence it follows that civil laws also 
bind the conscience. Were this so, then what Ave said a little 
ago, and are still to say of spiritual government, would fall. 
To solve this difficulty, the first thing of importance is to 
understand what is meant by conscience. The definition must 
be sought in the etymology of the word. For as men, when 
they -apprehend the knowledge of things by the mind and 
intellect, are said to know, and hence arises the term know- 
ledge or science, so when they have a sense of the divine justice 
added as a witness which allows them not to conceal their 
sins, but drags them forward as culprits to the bar of God, 
that sense is called conscience. For it stands as it were be- 
tween God and man, not suffering man to suppress what he 
knows in himself; but following him on even to conviction. 
It is this that Paul means when he says, " Their conscience 
also bearing witness, and their thoughts the meanwhile 
accusing, or else excusing one another," (Rom. ii. 15.) 
Simple knowledge may exist in man, as it were shut up ; 
therefore this sense, which sists man before the bar of God, is 
set over him as a kind of sentinel to observe and spy out all his 
secrets, that nothing may remain buried in darkness. Hence 
the ancient proverb, Conscience is a thousand witnesses. 
For the same reason Peter also employs the expression, " the 
answer of a good conscience," (1 Pet. iii. 21,) for tranquillity 
of mind ; when persuaded of the grace of Christ, we boldly 
present ourselves before God. And the author of the Epistle 
to the Hebrews says, that we have " no more conscience of 
sins," (Heb. x. 2,) that we are held as freed or acquitted, so 
that sin no longer accuses us. 

16. Wherefore, as works have respect to men, so conscience 
bears reference to God, a good conscience being nothing else 
than inward integrity of heart. In this sense Paul says, that 
" the end of the commandment is charity, out of a pure heart, 
and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned," (1 Tim. i. 
5.) He afterwards, in the same chapter, shows how much 
it differs from intellect when he speaks of " holding faith, and 
a good conscience ; which some having put away, have made 


CIIAI\ XIX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 445 

shipwreck," (1 Tim. i. 19.) For by these words he intimates, 
that it is a lively inclination to serve God, a sincere desire 
to live in piety and holiness. Sometimes, indeed, it is even 
extended to men, as when Paul testifies, " Herein do I exer- 
cise myself, to have always a conscience void of offence to- 
ward God, and toward men," (Acts xxiv. 16.) He speaks 
thus, because the fruits of a good conscience go forth and 
reach even to men. But, as I have said, properly speaking, 
it refers to God only. Hence a law is said to bind the con- 
science, because it simply binds the individual, without look- 
ing at men, or taking any account of them. For example, God 
not only commands us to keep our mind chaste and pure 
from lust, but prohibits all external lasciviousness or obsce- 
nity of language. My conscience is subjected to the obser- 
vance of this law, though there were not another man in the 
world, and he who violates it sins not only by setting a bad 
example to his brethren, but stands convicted in his con- 
science before God. The same rule does not hold in things 
indifferent. We ought to abstain from every thing that pro- 
duces offence, but with a free conscience. Thus Paul, speak- 
ing of meat consecrated to idols, says, " If any man say unto 
you, This is offered in sacrifice unto idols, eat not for his sake 
that showed it, and for conscience sake :" " Conscience, I 
say, not thine own, but of the other," (1 Cor. x. 28, 29.) A 
believer, after being previously admonished, would sin were 
he still to eat meat so offered. But though abstinence, on 
his part, is necessary, in respect of a brother, as it is prescrib- 
ed by God, still he ceases not to retain liberty of conscience. 
We see how the law, while binding the external act, leaves 
the conscience unbound. 


446 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 


CHAPTER XX. 

OF PRAYER A PERPETUAL EXERCISE OF FAITH. THE 

DAILY BENEFITS DERIVED FROM IT. 

The principal divisions of this chapter are, — I. Connection of the 
subject of prayer with the previous chapters. The nature of prayer, and 
its necessity as a Christian exercise, sec. 1, 2. II. To whom prayer is 
to be offered. Refutation of an objection which is too apt to present 
itself to the mind, sec. 3. III. Rules to be observed in prayer, sec. 4- 
16. IV. Through whom prayer is to be made, sec. 17-19. V. Refutation 
of an error as to the doctrine of our Mediator and Intercessor, with 
answers to the leading arguments urged in support of the intercession of 
saints, sec. 20-27. VI. The nature of prayer, and some of its accidents, 
sec. 28-33. VII. A perfect form of invocation, or an exposition of the 
Lord's Prayer, sec. 34-50. VIII. Some rules to be observed with regard 
to prayer, as time, perseverance, the feeling of the mind, and the assur- 
ance of faith, sec. 50-52. 

Sections. 

1. A general summary of what is contained in the previous part of the 

work. A transition to the doctrine of prayer. Its connection 
with the subject of faith. 

2. Prayer defined. Its necessity and use. 

3. Objection, that prayer seems useless, because God already knows 

our wants. Answer, from the institution and end of prayer. 
Confirmation by example. Its necessity and propriety. Perpetu- 
ally reminds us of our duty, and leads to meditation on divine 
providence. Conclusion. Prayer a most useful exercise. This 
proved by three passages of Scripture. 

4. Rules to be observed in prayer. First, reverence to God. How the 

mind ought to be composed. 

5. All giddiness of mind must be excluded, and all our feelings seriously 

engaged. This confirmed by the form of lifting the hand in prayer. 
We must ask only in so far as God permits. To help our weak- 
ness, God gives the Spirit to be our guide in prayer. What the 
office of the Spirit in this respect. We must still pray both with 
the heart and the lips. 

6. Second rule of prayer, a sense of our want. This rule violated, 1. 

By perfunctory and formal prayer. 2. By hypocrites, who have no 
sense of their sius. 3. By giddiness in prayer. Remedies. 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN" RELIGION. 447 

7. Objection, that we are not always under the same necessity of 

praying. Answer, we must pray always. This answer confirmed 
by an examination of the dangers by which both our life and our 
salvation are every moment threatened. Confirmed farther by the 
command and permission of God, by the nature of true repentance, 
and a consideration of impenitence. Conclusion. 

8. Third rule, the suppression of all pride. Examples. Daniel, David, 

Isaiah, Jeremiah, Baruch. 

9. Advantage of thus suppressing pride. It leads to earnest entreaty 

for pardon, accompanied with humble confession and sure confi- 
dence in the Divine mercy. This may not always be expressed 
in words. It is peculiar to pious penitents. A general introduc- 
tion to procure favour to our prayers never to be omitted. 

10. Objection to the third rule of prayer. Of the glorying of the saints. 

Answer. Confirmation of the answer. 

11. Fourth rule of prayer, — a sure confidence of being heard animating 

us to prayer. The kind of confidence required, viz., a serious 
conviction of our misery, joined with sure hope. From these true 
prayer springs. How difiidence impairs prayer. In general, faith 
is required. 

12. This faith and sure hope regarded by our opponents as most absurd. 

Their error described and refuted by various passages of Scripture, 
which show that acceptable prayer is accompanied with these 
qualities. No repugnance between this certainty and an acknow- 
ledgment of our destitution. 

13. To our unworthiness we oppose, 1. The command of God. 2. The 

promise. Rebels and hypocrites completely condemned. Passages 
of Scripture confirming the command to pray. 

14. Other passages respecting the promises which belong to the pious 

when they invoke God. These realised though we are not possessed 
of the same holiness as other distinguished servants of God, pro- 
vided we. indulge no vain confidence, and sincerely betake ourselves 
to the mercy of God. Those who do not invoke God under urgent 
necessity are no better than idolaters. This concurrence of fear 
and confidence reconciles the different passages of Scripture, as to 
humbling ourselves in prayer, and causing our prayers to ascend. 

15. Objection founded on some examples, viz., that prayers have proved 

effectual, though not according to the form prescribed. Answer. 
Such examples, though not given for our imitation, are of the 
greatest use. 2. Objection, the prayers of the faithful sometimes 
not effectual. Answer confirmed by a noble passage of Augustine. 
Rule for right prayer. 

16. The above four rules of prayer not so rigidly exacted, as that every 

prayer deficient in them in any respect is rejected by God. This 
shown by examples. Conclusion, or summary of this section. 

17. Through whom God is to be invoked, viz., Jesus Christ. This 


448 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

founded on a consideration of the divine majesty, and the precept 
and promise of God himself. God therefore to be invoked only in 
the name of Christ. 

18. From the first all believers were heard through him only: yet this 

specially restricted to the period subsequent to his ascension. The 
ground of this restriction. 

19. The wrath of God lies on those who reject Christ as a Mediator. 

This excludes not the mutual intercession of saints on the earth. 

20. Refutation of errors interfering with the intercession of Christ. 1. 

Christ the Mediator of redemption ; the saints mediators of inter- 
cession. Answer confirmed by the clear testimony of Scripture, 
and by a passage from Augustine. The nature of Christ's inter- 
cession. 

21. Of the intercession of saints living with Christ in heaven. Fiction 

of the Papists in regard to it. Refuted. 1. Its absurdity. 2. It 
is no where mentioned by Scripture. 3. Appeal to the conscience 
of the superstitious. 4. Its blasphemy. Exception. Answers. 

22. Monstrous errors resulting from this fiction. Refutation. Exception 

by the advocates of this fiction. Answer. 

23. Arguments of the Papists for the intercession of saints. 1. From 

the duty and office of angels. Answer. 2. From an expression of 
Jeremiah respecting Moses and Samuel. Answer, retorting the 
argument. 3. The meaning of the prophet confirmed by a similar 
passage in Ezekiel, and the testimony of an apostle. 
2-1. 4. Fourth papistical argument from the nature of charity, which is 
more perfect in the saints in glory. Answer. 

25. Argument founded on a passage in Moses. Answer. 

26. Argument from its being said that the prayers of saints are heard. 

Answer, confirmed by Scripture, and illustrated by examples. 

27. Conclusion, that the saints cannot be invoked without impiety. 1. 

It robs God of his glory. 2. Destroys the intercession of Christ. 
3. Is repugnant to the word of God. 4. Is opposed to the due 
method of prayer. 5. Is without approved example. 6. Springs 
from distrust. Last objection. Answer. 

28. Kinds of prayer. Vows. Supplications. Petitions. Thanksgiving. 

Connection of these, their constant use and necessity. Particular 
explanation confirmed by reason, Scripture, and example. Rule 
as to supplication and thanksgiving. 

29. The accidents of prayer, viz., private and public, constant, at stated 

seasons, &c. Exception in time of necessity. Prayer without 
ceasing. Its nature. Garrulity of Papists and hypocrites refuted. 
The scope and parts of prayer. Secret prayer. Prayer at all 
places. Private and public prayer. 

30. Of public places or churches in which common prayers are offered 

up. Right use of churches. Abuse. 

31. Of utterance and singing. These of no avail if not from the heart. 

The use of the voice refers more to public than private prayer. 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 449 

32. Singing of the greatest antiquity, but not universal. How to be 

performed. 

33. Public prayers should be in the vulgar, not in a foreign tongue. 

Reason, 1. The nature of the Church. 2. Authority of an apostle. 
Sincere affection always necessary. The tongue not always 
necessary. Bending of the knee, and uncovering of the head. 

34. The form of prayer delivered by Christ displays the boundless good- 

ness of our heavenly Father. The great comfort thereby afforded. 

35. Lord's Prayer divided into six petitions. Subdivision into two 

principal parts, the former referring to the glory of God, the latter 
to our salvation. 
3G. The use of the term Father implies, 1. That we pray to God in the 
name of Christ alone. 2. That we lay aside all distrust, 3. That 
we expect every thing that is for our good. 

37. Objection, that our sins exclude us from the presence of him whom 

we have made a Judge, not a Father. Answer, from the nature of 
God, as described by an apostle, the parable of the prodigal son, 
and from the expression, Our Father. Christ the earnest, the 
Holy Spirit the witness, of our adoption. 

38. Why God is called generally, Our Father. 

39. AVe may pray specially for ourselves and certain others, provided 

we have in our mind a general reference to all. 

40. In what sense God is said to be in heaven. A tln-eefold use of this 

doctrine for our consolation. Three cautions. Summary of the 
preface to the Lord's Prayer. 

41. The necessity of the first petition a proof of our unrighteousness. 

What meant by the name of God. How it is hallowed. Parts of 
this hallowing. A deprecation of the sins by which the name of 
God is profaned. 

42. Distinction between the first and second petitions. The kingdom 
of God, what. How said to come. Special exposition of this 
petition. It reminds us of three things. Advent of the kingdom 
of God in the world. 

43. Distinction between the second and third petitions. The will here 

meant not the secret will or good pleasure of God, but that mani- 
fested in the word. Conclusion of the three first petitions. 

44. A summary of the second part of the Lord's Prayer. Three petitions. 

What contained in the first. Declares the exceeding kindness of 
God, and our distrust. What meant by bread. Why the petition 
for bread precedes that for the forgiveness of sins. Why it is 
called ours. Why to be sought this day, or daily. The doctrine 
resulting from this petition, illustrated by an example. Two 
classes of men sin in regard to this petition. In what sense it is 
called, our bread. Why we ask God to give it to us. 

45. Close connection between this and the subsequent petition. Why 

our sins are called debts. This petition violated, 1. By those who 
VOL. II. 2 F 


4j0 institutes of the BOOK III. 

think tliey can satisfy God by their own merits, or those of others. 
2. By those who dream of a perfection which makes pardon 
unnecessary. Why the elect cannot attain perfection in this life. 
Refutation of the libertine dreamers of perfection. Objection 
refuted. In what sense we are said to forgive those who have 
sinned against us. How the condition is to be understood. 

46. The sixth petition reduced to three heads. 1. The various forms 

of temptation. The depraved conceptions of our minds. The wiles 
of Satan, on the right hand and on the left. 2. What it is to be 
led into temptation. We do not ask not to be tempted of God. 
What meant by evil, or the evil one. Summary of this petition. 
How necessary it is. Condemns the pride of the superstitious. 
Includes many excellent properties. In what sense God may be 
said to lead us into temptation. 

47. The three last petitions show that the prayers of Christians ought to 

be public. The conclusion of the Lord's Prayer. Why the word 
Amen is added. 

48. The Lord's Prayer contains every thing that we can or ought to ask 

of God. Those who go beyond it sin in three ways. 

49. We may, after the example of the saints, frame our prayers in 

different words, provided there is no difference in meaning. 

50. Some circumstances to be observed. Of appointing special hours of 

prayer. What to be aimed at, what avoided. The will of God, 
the rule of our prayers. 

51. Perseverance in prayer especially recommended, both by precept and 

example. Condemnatory of those who assign to God a time and 
mode of hearing. 

52. Of the dignity of faith, through which we always obtain, in answer 

to prayer, whatever is most expedient for us. The knowledge of 
this most necessary. 


1. From the previous part of the work we clearly see how 
completely destitute man is of all good, how devoid of every 
means of procuring his own salvation. Hence, if he would 
obtain succour in his necessity, he must go beyond himself, 
and procure it in some other quarter. It has farther been 
shown that the Lord kindly and spontaneously manifests 
himself in Christ, in whom he offers all happiness for our 
misery, all abundance for our want, opening up the treasures 
of heaven to us, so that we may turn with full faith to his 
beloved Son, depend upon him with full expectation, rest in 
him, and cleave to him with full hope. This, indeed, is that 
secret and hidden philosophy which cannot be learned by 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 451 

syllogisms, a philosophy thoroughly understood by those 
whose eyes God has so opened as to see light in his light. 
But after we have learned by faith to know that whatever 
is necessary for us or defective in us is supplied in God 
and in our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom it hath pleased the 
Father that all fulness should dwell, that we may thence 
draw as from an inexhaustible fountain, it remains for us to 
seek and in prayer implore of him what we have learned to 
be in him. To know God as the sovereign disposer of all 
good, inviting us to present our requests, and yet not to ap- 
proach or ask of him, were so far from availing us, that it 
were just as if one told of a treasure were to allow it to 
remain buried in the ground. Hence the Apostle, to show 
that a faith unaccompanied with prayer to God cannot be 
genuine, states this to be the order : As faith springs from 
the Gospel, so by faith our hearts are framed to call upon 
the name of God, (Rom. x. 14.) And this is the very thing 
which he had expressed some time before, viz., that the 
Spirit of adoption, which seals the testimony of the Gospel 
on our hearts, gives us courage to make our requests known 
unto God, calls forth groanings which cannot be uttered, 
and enables us to cry, Abba, Father, (Rom. viii. 2(5.) This 
last point, as we have hitherto only touched upon it slightly 
in passing, must now be treated more fully. 

2. To prayer, then, are we indebted for penetrating to 
those riches which are treasured up for us with our heavenly 
Father. For there is a kind of intercourse between God 
and men, by which, having entered the upper sanctuary, they 
appear before Him and appeal to his promises, that when 
necessity requires, they may learn by experience, that what 
they believed merely on the authority of his word Avas not 
in vain. Accordingly, we see that nothing is set before us 
as an object of expectation from the Lord which we are 
not enjoined to ask of Him in prayer, so true it is that prayer 
digs up those treasures which the Gospel of our Lord dis- 
covers to the eye of faith. The necessity and utility of 
this exercise of prayer no words can sufficiently express. 
Assuredly it is not without cause our heavenly Father de- 
clares that our only safety is in calling upon his name, since 


452 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

by it we invoke the presence of his providence to watch 
over our interests, of his power to sustain us when weak 
and almost fainting, of his goodness to receive us into favour, 
though miserably loaded with sin ; in fine, call upon him to 
manifest himself to us in all his perfections. Hence, admir- 
able peace and tranquillity are given to our consciences ; for 
the straits by which we were pressed being laid before the 
Lord, we rest fully satisfied with the assurance that none of 
our evils are unknown to him, and that he is both able and 
willing to make the best provision for us. 

3. But some one will say, Does he not know without a 
monitor both what our difficulties are, and what is meet for 
our interest, so that it seems in some measure superfluous 
to solicit him by our prayers, as if he were winking, or even 
sleeping, until aroused by the sound of our voice P1 Those 
who argue thus attend not to the end for which the Lord 
taught us to pray. It was not so much for his sake as for 
ours. He wills indeed, as is just, that due honour be paid 
him by acknowledging that all which men desire or feel to 
be useful, and pray to obtain, is derived from him. But even 
the benefit of the homage which we thus pay him redounds to 
ourselves. Hence the holy patriarchs, the more confidently 
they proclaimed the mercies of God to themselves and others, 
felt the stronger incitement to prayer. It will be sufficient to 
refer to the example of Elijah, who being assured of the pur- 
pose of God, had good ground for the promise of rain which he 
gives to Ahab, and yet prays anxiously upon his knees, and 
sends his servant seven times to inquire, (1 Kings xviii. 42 ;) 
not that he discredits the oracle, but because he knows it to 
be his duty to lay his desires before God, lest his faith should 
become drowsy or torpid. Wherefore, although it is true 
that while we are listless or insensible to our wretchedness, 
he wakes and Avatches for us, and sometimes even assists us 


1 French, " Dont il sembleroit que ce fust chose superflue de le solici- 
ter par prieres ; veu que nous avons accoustume' de solicitor ceux qui ne 
pensent a nostre affaire, et qui sont endormis." — Whence it would seem 
that it was a superfluous matter to solicit him by prayer ; seeing we are 
accustomed to solicit those who think not of our business, and who are 
slumbering. 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 453 

unasked ; it is very much for our interest to be constantly 
supplicating him; first, that our heart may always be inflamed 
with a serious and ardent desire of seeking, loving, and 
serving him, while we accustom ourselves to have recourse 
to him as a sacred anchor in every necessity ; secondly, that 
no desire, no longing whatever, of which we are ashamed to 
make him the witness, may enter our minds, while we learn to 
place all our wishes in his sight, and thus pour out our heart 
before him ; and, lastly, that we may be prepared to receive 
all his benefits with true gratitude and thanksgiving, while 
our prayers remind us that they proceed from his hand. 
Moreover, having obtained what we asked, being persuaded 
that he has answered our prayers, we are led to long more 
earnestly for his favour, and at the same time have greater 
pleasure in welcoming the blessings which we perceive to 
have been obtained by our prayers. Lastly, use and experi- 
ence confirm the thought of his providence in our minds in 
a manner adapted to our weakness, when we understand that 
he not only promises that he will never fail us, and spon- 
taneously gives us access to approach him in every time of 
need, but has his hand always stretched out to assist his 
people, not amusing them with words, but proving himself 
to be a present aid. For these reasons, though our most 
merciful Father never slumbers nor sleeps, he very often 
seems to do so, that thus he may exercise us, when we might 
otherwise be listless and slothful, in asking, entreating, and 
earnestly -beseeching him to our great good. It is very ab- 
surd, therefore, to dissuade men from prayer, by pretending 
that Divine Providence, which is always watching over the 
government of the universe, is in vain importuned by our 
supplications, when, on the contrary, the Lord himself de- 
clares, that he is " nigh unto all that call upon him, to all 
that call upon him in truth," (Ps. cxlv. 18.) No better is the 
frivolous allegation of others, that it is superfluous to pray for 
things which the Lord is ready of his own accord to bestow ; 
since it is his pleasure that those very things which flow from 
his spontaneous liberality should be acknowledged as con- 
ceded to our prayers. This is testified by that memorable 
sentence in the psalm, to which many others correspond, " The 


454 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are 
open unto their cry," (Ps. xxxiv. 15.) This passage, while 
extolling the care which Divine Providence spontaneously 
exercises over the safety of believers, omits not the exercise 
of faith by which the mind is aroused from sloth. The eyes 
of God are awake to assist the blind in their necessity, but 
he is likewise pleased to listen to our groans, that he may 
give us the better proof of his love. And thus both things 
are true, " He that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor 
sleep," (Ps. cxxi. 4 ;) and yet whenever he sees us dumb and 
torpid, he withdraws as if he had forgotten us. 

4. Let the first rule of right prayer then be, to have our 
heart and mind framed as becomes those who are entering- 
into converse with God. This Ave shall accomplish in regard 
to the mind, if, laying aside carnal thoughts and cares which 
might interfere with the direct and pure contemplation of 
God, it not only be wholly intent on prayer, but also, as far as 
possible, be borne and raised above itself. I do not here 
insist on a mind so disengaged as to feel none of the gnaw- 
ings of anxiety ; on the contrary, it is by much anxiety 
that the fervour of prayer is inflamed. Thus Ave see that 
the holy servants of God betray great anguish, not to say 
solicitude, when they cause the voice of complaint to ascend 
to the Lord from the deep abyss and the jaAvs of death. 
What I say is, that all foreign and extraneous cares must 
be dispelled by which the mind might be driAren to and 
fro in Arague suspense, be draAvn down from heaA'en, and kept 
grovelling on the earth. When I say it must be raised above 
itself, I mean that it must not bring into the presence of 
God any of those things which our blind and stupid reason 
is wont to devise, nor keep itself confined Avithin the little 
measure of its own vanity, but rise to a purity AAorthy of 
God. 

5. Both things are specially Avorthy of notice. First, let 
every one in professing to pray turn thither all his thoughts 
and feelings, and be not (as is usual) distracted by Avander- 
ing thoughts ; because nothing is more contrary to the re\7e- 
rence due to God than that levity which bespeaks a mind too 
much given to license and devoid of fear. In this matter we 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 455 

ought to labour the more earnestly the more difficult we ex- 
perience it to be ; for no man is so intent on prayer as not 
to feel many thoughts creeping in, and either breaking off the 
tenor of his prayer, or retarding it by some turning or digres- 
sion. Here let us consider how unbecoming it is when God 
admits us to familiar intercourse, to abuse his great conde- 
scension by mingling things sacred and profane, reverence for 
him not keeping our minds under restraint ; but just as if in 
. prayer we were conversing with one like ourselves, forgetting 
' him, and allowing our thoughts to run to and fro. Let us 
know, then, that none duly prepare themselves for prayer but 
those who are so impressed with the majesty of God that 
they engage in it free from all earthly cares and affections. 
The ceremony of lifting up our hands in prayer is designed 
to remind us that we are far removed from God, unless our 
thoughts rise upward : as it is said in the psalm, " Unto 
thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul," (Psalm xxv. 1.) And 
Scripture repeatedly uses the expression to raise our prayer, 
meaning, that those who would be heard by God must not 
grovel in the mire. The sum is, that the more liberally God 
deals with us, condescendingly inviting us to disburden our 
cares into his bosom, the less excusable we are if this admir- 
able and incomparable blessing does not in our estimation 
outweigh all other things, and win our affection, that prayer 
may seriously engage our every thought and feeling. This 
cannot be unless our mind, strenuously exerting itself 
against all impediments, rise upward. 

Our second proposition was, that we are to ask only in so 
far as God permits. For though he bids us pour out our 
hearts, (Ps. lxii. 9,) he does not indiscriminately give loose 
reins to foolish and depraved affections ; and when he pro- 
mises that he will grant believers their wish, his indulgence 
does not proceed so far as to submit to their caprice. In 
both matters grievous delinquencies are everywhere com- 
mitted. For not only do many without modesty, without 
reverence, presume to invoke God concerning their frivoli- 
ties, but impudently bring forward their dreams, whatever 
they may be, before the tribunal of God. Such is the folly 
or stupidity under which they labour, that they have the 


456 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

hardihood to obtrude upon God desires so vile, that they 
would blush exceedingly to impart them to their fellow men. 
Profane writers have derided and even expressed their detes- 
tation of this presumption, and yet the vice has always pre- 
vailed. Hence, as the ambitions adopted Jupiter as their 
patron; the avaricious, Mercury; the literary aspirants, Apollo 
and Minerva ; the warlike, Mars ; the licentious, Venus : so in 
the present day, as I lately observed, men in prayer give 
greater license to their unlawful desires than if they were 
telling jocular tales among their equals. God does not 
suffer his condescension to be thus mocked, but vindicating 
his own right, places our wishes under the restraint of his 
authority. We must, therefore, attend to the observation of 
John, " This is the confidence that we have in him, that if 
we ask any thing according to his will, he heareth us," (1 John 
v. 14.) 

But as our faculties are far from being able to attain to 
such high perfection, we must seek for some means to assist 
them. As the eye of our mind should be intent upon God, 
so the affection of our heart ought to follow in the same 
course. But both fall far beneath this, or rather, they faint 
and fail, and are carried in a contrary direction. To assist 
this weakness, God gives us the guidance of the Spirit in our 
prayers to dictate what is right, and regulate our affections. 
For seeing u we know not what we should pray for as we 
ought," " the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with 
groanings which cannot be uttered," (Rom. viii. 26 ;) not that 
he actually prays or groans, but he excites in us sighs, and 
wishes, and confidence, which our natural powers are not at 
all able to conceive. Nor is it without cause Paul gives the 
name of groanings which cannot be uttered to the prayers 
which believers send forth under the guidance of the Spirit. 
For those who are truly exercised in prayer are not unaware 
that blind anxieties so restrain and perplex them, that they 
can scarcely find what it becomes them to utter; nay, in 
attempting to lisp they halt and hesitate. Hence it appears 
that to pray aright is a special gift. We do not speak thus 
in indulgence to our sloth, as if we were to leave the office of 
prayer to the Holy Spirit, and give way to that carelessness 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 457 

to which we are too prone. Thus we sometimes hear the im- 
pious expression, that we are to wait in suspense until he 
take possession of our minds while otherwise occupied. Our 
meaning is, that, weary of our own heartlessness and sloth, we 
are to long for the aid of the Spirit. Nor, indeed, does Paul, 
when he enjoins us to pray in the Spirit, (1 Cor. xiv. 15,) 
cease to exhort us to vigilance, intimating, that while the 
inspiration of the Spirit is effectual to the formation of prayer, 
it by no means impedes or retards our own endeavours ; 
since in this matter God is pleased to try how efficiently 
faith influences our hearts. 

6. Another rule of prayer is, that in asking we must always 
truly feel our wants, and seriously considering that we need 
all the things which we ask, accompany the prayer with 
a sincere, nay, ardent desire of obtaining them. Many 
repeat prayers in a perfunctory manner from a set form, as 
if they were performing a task to God ; and though they 
confess that this is a necessary remedy for the evils of their 
condition, because it were fatal to be left without the divine 
aid which they implore, it still appears that they perform the 
duty from custom, because their minds are meanwhile cold, 
and they ponder not what they ask. A general and confused 
feeling of their necessity leads them to pray, but it does not 
make them solicitous as in a matter of present consequence, 
that they may obtain the supply of their need. Moreover, 
can we suppose anything more hateful or even more execrable 
to God than this fiction of asking the pardon of sins, Avhile 
he who asks at the very time either thinks that he is not a 
sinner, or, at least, is not thinking that he is a sinner ; in 
other words, a fiction by which God is plainly held in deri- 
sion ? But mankind, as I have lately said, are full of depra- 
vity, so that in the way of perfunctory service they often ask 
many things of God which they think come to them without 
his beneficence, or from some other quarter, or are already 
certainly in their possession. There is another fault which 
seems less heinous, but is not to be tolerated. Some murmur 
out prayers without meditation, their only principle being that 
God is to be propitiated by prayer. Believers ought to be 
specially on their guard never to appear in the presence of 


458 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

God with the intention of presenting a request unless they 
are under some serious impression, and are, at the same time, 
desirous to obtain it. Nay, although in these things which 
we ask only for the glory of God, we seem not at first sight 
to consult for our necessity, yet we ought not to ask with 
less fervour and vehemency of desire. For instance, when 
we pray that his name be hallowed, that hallowing must, so 
to speak, be earnestly hungered and thirsted after. 

7. If it is objected, that the necessity which urges us to pray 
is not always equal, I admit it, and this distinction is pro- 
fitably taught us by James : " Is any among you afflicted ? 
let him pray. Is any merry ? let him sing psalms," (James 
v. 13.) Therefore, common sense itself dictates, that as we are 
too sluggish, we must be stimulated by God to pray earnest- 
ly whenever the occasion requires. This David calls a time 
when God " may be found," (a seasonable time ;) because, as 
he declares in several other passages, that the more hardly 
grievances, annoyances, fears, and other kinds of trial press 
us, the freer is our access to God, as if he were inviting us 
to himself. Still not less true is the injunction of Paid to 
pray " always," (Eph. vi. 18 ;) because, however prosperously, 
according to our view, things proceed, and however Ave may 
be surrounded on all sides with grounds of joy, there is not an 
instant of time during which our want does not exhort us to 
prayer A maim bounds in wheat and wine); but as he can- 
not enjoy a morsel of bread, unless by the continual bounty 
of God, his granaries or cellars will not prevent him from 
asking for daily bread. Then, if we consider how many 
dangers impend every moment, fear itself will teach us that 
no time ought to be without prayer. This, however, may be 
better known in spiritual matters. For when will the many 
sins of which we are conscious allow us to sit secure without 
suppliantly entreating freedom from guilt and punishment ? 
When will temptation give us a truce, making it unnecessary 
to hasten for help ? Moreover, zeal for the kingdom and glory 
of God ought not to seize us by starts, but urge us without 
intermission, so that every time should appear seasonable. 
It is not without cause, therefore, that assiduity in prayer is 
so often enjoined. I am not now speaking of perseverance, 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 459 

which shall afterwards be considered ; but Scripture, by 
reminding us of the necessity of constant prayer, charges us 
with sloth, because we feel not how much we stand in need 
of this care and assiduity. By this rule hypocrisy and the 
device of lying to God are restrained, nay, altogether banish- 
ed from prayer. God promises that he will be near to those 
who call upon him in truth, and declares that those who seek 
him with their whole heart will find him : those, therefore, 
who delight in their own pollution cannot surely aspire to 
him. 

One of the/ requisites) of legitimate prayer is repentance. 
Hence the common declaration of Scripture, that God does 
not listen to the wicked ; that their prayers, as well as their 
sacrifices, are an abomination to him. For it is right that those 
who seal up their hearts should find the ears of God closed 
against them, that those who, by their hard-heartedness, pro- 
voke his severity should find him inflexible. In Isaiah he 
thus threatens : " When ye make many prayers, I will not 
hear: your hands are full of blood," (Isaiah i. 15.) In like 
manner, in Jeremiah, " Though they shall cry unto me, I will 
not hearken unto them," (Jer. xi. 7, 8, 11;) because he re- 
gards it as the highest insult for the wicked to boast of his 
covenant while profaning his sacred name by their whole 
lives. Hence he complains in Isaiah : " This people draw 
near to me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour 
me ; but have removed their heart far from me," (Isaiah 
xxix. 13.) Indeed, he does not confine this to prayers alone, 
but declares that he abominates pretence in every part of his 
service. Hence the words of James, " Ye ask and receive 
not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your 
lusts," (James iv. 3.) It is true, indeed, (as we shall again 
see in a little,) that the pious, in the prayers which they 
utter, trust not to their own worth ; still the admonition of 
John is not superfluous : " Whatsoever we ask, we receive 
of him, because Ave keep his commandments," (1 John iii. 22 ;) 
an evil conscience shuts the door against us. Hence it fol- 
lows, that none but the sincere worshippers of God pray 
aright, or are listened to. Let every one, therefore, who 
prepares to pray feel dissatisfied with what is wrong in his con- 


460 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

dition, and assume, which he cannot do without repentance, 
the character and feelings of a poor suppliant. 

8. The third rule to be added is, that he who comes into 
the presence of God to pray must divest himself of all vain- 
glorious thoughts, lay aside all idea of worth ; in short, dis- 
card all self-confidence, humbly giving God the whole glory, 
lest by arrogating any thing, however little, to himself, vain 
pride cause him to turn away his face. Of this submission, 
which casts down all haughtiness, we have numerous examples 
in the servants of God. The holier they are, the more humbly 
they prostrate themselves when they come into the presence 
of the Lord. Thus Daniel, on whom the Lord himself be- 
stowed such high commendation, says, " We do not present 
our supplications before thee for our righteousnesses, but for 
thy great mercies. O Lord, hear ; O Lord, forgive ; O Lord, 
hearken and do ; defer not, for thine own sake, O my God : 
for thy city and thy people are called by thy name." This 
he does not indirectly in the usual manner, as if he were one 
of the individuals in a crowd : he rather confesses his guilt 
apart, and as a suppliant betaking himself to the asylum of 
pardon, he distinctly declares that he was confessing his own 
sin, and the sin of his people Israel, (Dan. ix. 18-20.) David 
also sets us an example of this humility : " Enter not into 
judgment with thy servant : for in thy sight shall no man 
living be justified," (Psalm cxliii. 2.) In like manner, Isaiah 
prays, " Behold, thou art wroth ; for we have sinned : in those 
is continuance, and we shall be saved. But we are all as an 
unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags ; 
and we all do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, 
have taken us away. And there is none that calleth upon 
thy name, that stirreth up himself to take hold of thee : for 
thou hast hid thy face from us, and hast consumed us, because 
of our iniquities. But now, O Lord, thou art our Father ; Ave 
are the clay, and thou our potter ; and we all are the work of 
thy hand. Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember 
iniquity for ever : Behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy 
people," (Isa. lxiv. 5-9.) You see how they put no confidence 
in any thing but this : considering that they are the Lord's, 
they despair not of being the objects of his care. In the 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 4G1 

same way, Jeremiah says, " O Lord, though our iniquities 
testify against us, do thou it for thy name's sake," (Jer. xiv. 
7.) For it was most truly and piously written by the uncer- 
tain author (whoever he may have been) that wrote the 
book which is attributed to the prophet Baruch,1 " But the 
soul that is greatly vexed, which goeth stooping and feeble, 
and the eyes that fail, and the hungry soul, will give thee 
praise and righteousness, O Lord. Therefore, we do not 
make our humble supplication before thee, O Lord our God, 
for the righteousness of our fathers, and of our kings." 
" Hear, O Lord, and have mercy ; for thou rart merciful : 
and have pity upon us, because we have sinned before thee," 
(Baruch ii. 18, 19 ; iii. 2.) 

9. InJine. supplication for pardon, with, humble andinge- 
nuous_^cjonfessjojuo£^giiilt, forms both the preparation and 
commencement of right prayer. For the holiest of men can- 
not hope to obtain any thing from God until he has been 
freely reconciled to him. God cannot be propitious to any 
but those whom he pardons. Hence it is not strange that 
this is the key by which believers open the door of prayer, as 
wre learn from several passages in The Psalms. David, when 
presenting a request on a different subject, says, "Remember 
not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions ; according 
to thy mercy remember me, for thy goodness sake, O Lord," 
(Psalm xxv. 7.) Again, "Look upon my affliction and my 
pain, and forgive my sins," (Psalm xxv. 18.) Here also we 
see that it is. not sufficient to call ourselves to account for the 
sins of each passing day ; we must also call to mind those 
which might seem to have been long before buried in oblivion. 
For in another passage the same prophet, confessing one 
grievous crime, takes occasion to go back to his very birth, 
" I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother con- 
ceive me," (Psalm li. 5 ;) not to extenuate the fault by the 
corruption of his nature, but as it were to accumulate the 
sins of his whole life, that the stricter he was in condemning 
himself, the more placable God might be. But although the 

1 French, " Pourtant ce qui est escrit en la prophetie qu'on attribue 
a Baruch, combien que l'autheur soit in certain, est tres sainctement dit;" — 
However, what is written in the prophecy which is attributed to Baruch, 
though the author is uncertain, is very holily said. 


462 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

saints do not always in express terms ask forgiveness of sins, 
yet if we carefully ponder those prayers as given in Scripture, 
the truth of what I say will readily appear; namely, that their 
courage to pray was derived solely from the mercy of God, 
and that they always began with appeasing him. For when 
a man interrogates his conscience, so far is he from presuming 
to lay his cares familiarly before God, that if he did not trust 
to mercy and pardon, he would tremble at the very thought 
of approaching him. There is, indeed, another special confes- 
sion. When believers long for deliverance from punishment, 
they at the same time pray that their sins may be pardoned;1 
for it were absurd to wish that the effect should be taken 
away while the cause remains. For we must beware of 
imitating foolish patients, who, anxious only about curing 
accidental symptoms, neglect the root of the disease.2 Nay, 
our endeavour must be to have God propitious even before 
he attests his favour by external signs, both because this is 
the order which he himself chooses, and it were of little avail 
to experience his kindness, did not conscience feel that he is 
appeased, and thus enable us to regard him as altogether 
lovely. Of this we are even reminded by our Saviour's re- 
ply. Having determined to cure the paralytic, he says, 
" Thy sins are forgiven thee ;" in other words, he raises our 
thoughts to the object which is especially to be desired, viz., 
admission into the favour of God, and then gives the fruit of 
reconciliation by bringing assistance to us. But besides 
that special confession of present guilt which believers em- 
ploy, in supplicating for pardon of every fault and punish- 
ment, that general introduction which procures favour for our 
prayers must never be omitted, because prayers will never 
reach God unless they are founded on free mercy. To this we 
may refer the words of John, " If we confess our sins, he is 
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from 
all unrighteousness," (1 John i. 5.) Hence, under the law 

1 French, " il recognoissent le chastienient qu'ils ont nierite';" — they 
acknowledge the punishment which they have deserved. 

2 The French adds, " lis voudront qu'on leur oste le mal de teste et 
des reins, et seront contens qu'on ne touche point a la fievre ;" — They 
would wish to get quit of the pain in the head and the loins, and would 
be contented to leave the fever untouched. 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 463 

it was necessary to consecrate prayers by the expiation of 
blood, both that they might be accepted, and that the people 
might be warned that they were unworthy of the high privi- 
lege, until being purged from their defilements, they founded 
their confidence in prayer entirely on the mercy of God. 

10. Sometimes, however, the saints, in supplicating God, 
seem to appeal to their own righteousness, as when David 
says, " Preserve my soul ; for I am holy," (Ps. lxxxvi. 2.) 
Also Hezekiah, " Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, 
how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect 
heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight," (Is. 
xxxviii. 2.) All they mean by such expressions is, that re- 
generation declares them to be among the servants and 
children to whom God eno-ages that he will show favour. 
We have already seen how he declares by the Psalmist that 
his eyes " are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto 
their cry," (Ps. xxxiv. 16 :) and again by the apostle, that 
" whatsoever we ask of him we obtain, because we keep his 
commandments," (John iii. 22.) In these passages he 
does not fix a value on prayer as a meritorious work, but de- 
signs to establish the confidence of those who are conscious 
of an unfeigned integrity and innocence, such as all believers 
should possess. For the saying of the blind man who had 
received his sight is in perfect accordance with divine truth, 
" God heareth not sinners," (John ix. 31,) provided we 
take the term sinners in the sense commonly used by Scrip- 
ture to mean those who, without any desire for righteous- 
ness, are sleeping secure in their sins ; since no heart will 
ever rise to genuine prayer that does not at the same time 
long for holiness. Those supplications in which the saints 
allude to their purity and integrity correspond to such 
promises, that they may thus have, in their own experience, 
a manifestation of that which all the servants of God are 
made to expect. Thus they almost always use this mode of 
prayer when before God they compare themselves with their 
enemies, from Avhose injustice they long to be delivered by 
his hand. When making such comparisons, there is no 
wonder that they bring forward their integrity and simplicity 
of heart, that thus, by the justice of their cause, the Lord 


464 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

may be the more disposed to give them succour. We rob 
not the pious breast of the privilege of enjoying a conscious- 
ness of purity before the Lord, and thus feeling assured of 
the promises with which he comforts and supports his true 
worshippers, but we would have them to lay aside all thought 
of their own merit, and found their confidence of success in 
prayer solely on the divine mercy. 

11. The fourth rule of prayer is, that notwithstanding of 
our being thus abased and truly humbled, we should be ani- 
mated to pray with the sure hope of succeeding. There is, 
indeed, an appearance of contradiction between the two things, 
between a sense of the just vengeance of God and firm con- 
fidence in his favour, and yet they are perfectly accordant, if 
it is the mere goodness of God that raises up those avIio are 
overwhelmed by their own sins. For, as we have formerly 
shown (chap. iii. sec. 1, 2) that repentance and faith go hand 
in hand, being united by an indissoluble tie, the one causing 
terror, the other joy, so in prayer they must both be present. 
This concurrence David expresses in a few words : " But as 
for me, I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy 
mercy ; and in thy fear will 1 worship toward thy holy 
temple," (Ps. v. 7.) Under the goodness of God he compre- 
hends faith, at the same time not excluding fear ; for not only 
does his majesty compel our reverence, but our own un wor- 
thiness also divests us of all pride and confidence, and keeps 
us in fear. The confidence of which I speak is not one 
which frees the mind from all anxiety, and soothes it with 
sweet and perfect rest ; such rest is peculiar to those who, 
while all their affairs are flowing to a wish, are annoyed 
by no care, stung with no regret, agitated by no fear. But 
the best stimulus which the saints have to prayer is when, in 
consequence of their own necessities, they feel the greatest dis- 
quietude, and are all but driven to despair, until faith season- 
ably comes to their aid ; because in such straits the goodness 
of God so shines upon them, that while they groan, burdened 
by the weight of present calamities, and tormented with the 
fear of greater, they yet trust to this goodness, and in this 
way both lighten the difficulty of endurance, and take comfort 
in the hope of final deliverance. It is necessary, therefore, 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 465 

that the prayer of the believer should be the result of both 
feelings, and exhibit the influence of both ; namely, that while 
he groans under present and anxiously dreads new evils, he 
should, at the same time, have recourse to God, not at all 
doubting that God is ready to stretch out a helping hand to 
him. For it is not easy to say how much God is irritated by 
our distrust, when we ask what we expect not of his goodness. 
Hence, nothing is more accordant to the nature of prayer 
than to lay it down as a fixed rule, that it is not to come 
forth at random, but is to follow in the footsteps ofjfaith. [ To 
this principle Christ directs all of us in these words, " There- 
fore, I say unto you, What things soever ye desire, when ye 
pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them," 
(Mark xi. 24.) The same thing he declares in another 
passage, " All things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, be- 
lieving, ye shall receive," (Matth. xxi. 22.) In accordance 
with this are the words of James, " If any of you lack wisdom, 
let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and up- 
braideth not, and it shall be given him. But let him ask in 
faith, nothing wTavering," (James i. 5.) He most aptly ex- 
presses the power of faith by opposing it to wavering. No 
less worthy of notice is his additional statement, that those 
who approach God with a doubting, hesitating mind, without 
feeling assured whether they are to be heard or not, gain 
nothing by their prayers. Such persons he compares to a 
wave of the sea, driven with the wind and tossed. Hence, 
in another passage he terms genuine prayer " the prayer of 
faith," (James v. 15.) Again, since God so often declares 
that he will give to every man according to his faith, he inti- 
mates that we cannot obtain any thing without faith. In 
short, it is faith which obtains every thing that is granted to 
prayer. This is the meaning of Paul in the Avell known 
passage to which dull men give too little heed, " How then 
shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed ? 
and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not 
heard ?" " So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by 
the word of God," (Rorn. x. 14, 17.) Gradually deducing 
the origin of prayer frcm faith, he distinctly maintains that 
God cannot be invoked sincerely except by these to whero, 
VOL. II. 2 G 


4G6 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

by the preaching of the Gospel, his mercy and willingness 
have been made known, nay, familiarly explained. 

12. This necessity our opponents do not at all consider. 
Therefore, when we say that believers ought to feel firmly 
assured, they think we are saying the absurdest thing in the 
world. But if they had any experience in true prayer, they 
would assuredly understand that God cannot be duly in- 
voked without this firm sense of the Divine benevolence. But 
as no man can well perceive the power of faith, without at the 
same time feeling it in his heart, what profit is there in dis- 
puting with men of this character, who plainly show that they 
have never had more than a vain imagination ? The value and 
necessity of that assurance for which we contend is learned 
chiefly from prayer. Every one who does not see this gives 
proof of a very stupid conscience. Therefore, leaving those 
who are thus blinded, let us fix our thoughts on the words 
of Paul, that God can only be invoked by such as have 
obtained a knowledge of his mercy from the Gospel, and feel 
firmly assured that that mercy is ready to be bestowed upon 
them. What kind of prayer would this be ? aO Lord, I am 
indeed doubtful whether or not thou art inclined to hear me ; 
but being oppressed with anxiety, I fly to thee, that if I am 
worthy, thou may est assist me." None of the saints whose 
prayers are given in Scripture thus supplicated. Nor are 
we thus taught by the Holy Spirit, who tells us to " come 
boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, 
and find grace to help in time of need," (Heb. iv. 16;) 
and elsewhere teaches us to u have boldness and access 
with confidence by the faith of Christ," (Eph. iii. 12.) This 
confidence of obtaining what we ask, a confidence which 
the Lord commands, and all the saints teach by their ex- 
ample, we must therefore hold fast with both hands, if we 
would pray to any advantage. The only prayer acceptable 
to God is that which springs (if I may so express it) from 
this presumption of faith, and is founded on the full assur- 
ance of hope. He might have been contented to use the 
simple name of faith, but he adds not only confidence, 
but liberty or boldness, that by this mark he might distin- 
guish us from unbelievers, who indeed like us pray to God, 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGIOX. 4G7 

but pray at random. Hence, the whole Church thus prays, 
" Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, according as we hope 
in thee," (Ps. xxxiii. 22.) The same condition is set down 
by the Psalmist in another passage, " When I cry unto thee, 
then shall mine enemies turn back : this I know, for God is 
for me," (Ps. lvi. 9.) Again, " In the morning will I direct my 
prayer unto thee, and will look up," (Ps. v. 3.) From these 
words we gather, that prayers are vainly poured out into the 
air unless accompanied with faith, in which, as from a watch- 
tower, we may quietly wait for God. With this agrees the 
order of Paul's exhortation. For before urging believers to 
pray in the Spirit always, with vigilance and assiduity, he 
enjoins them to take " the shield of faith," " the helmet of 
salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of 
God," (Eph. vi. 16-18.) 

Let the reader here call to mind what I formerly observed, 
that faith by no means fails, though accompanied with a re- 
cognition of our wretchedness, poverty, and pollution. How 
much soever believers may feel that they are oppressed 
by a heavy load of iniquity, and are not only devoid of 
every thing which can procure the favour of God for them, 
but justly burdened with many sins which make him an 
object of dread, yet they cease not to present themselves, 
this feeling not deterring them from appearing in his presence, 
because there is no other access to him. Genuine prayer is 
not that by which we arrogantly extol ourselves before God, 
or set a great value on any thing of our own, but that by 
which, while confessing our guilt, we utter our sorrows before 
God, just as children familiarly lay their complaints before 
their parents. Nay, the immense accumulation of our sins 
should rather spur us on and incite us to prayer. Of this 
the Psalmist gives us an example, " Heal my soul : for I have 
sinned against thee," (Ps. xli. 4.) I confess, indeed, that 
these stings would prove mortal darts, did not God give 
succour; but our heavenly Father has, in ineffable kindness, 
added a remedy, by which, calming all perturbation, soothing 
our cares, and dispelling our fears, he condescendingly allures 
us to himself; nay, removing all doubts, not to say obstacles, 
makes the way smooth before us. 

13. And first, indeed, in enjoining us to pray, he by the 


4G8 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

very injunction convicts us of impious contumacy if we 
obey not. He could not give a more precise command than 
that which is contained in the psalm, " Call upon me in the 
day of trouble," (Ps. 1. 15.) But as there is no office of 
piety more frequently enjoined by Scripture, there is no occa- 
sion for here dwelling longer upon it. tl Ask," says our 
Divine Master, " and it shall be given you ; seek, and ye 
shall find ; knock, and it shall be opened unto you," (Matth. 
vii. 7.) Here, indeed, a promise is added to the precept, 
and this is necessary. For though all confess that we must 
obey the precept, yet the greater part would shun the in- 
vitation of God, did he not promise that he would listen 
and be ready to answer. These two positions being laid 
down, it is certain that all who cavillingly allege that they 
are not to come to God directly, are not only rebellious and 
disobedient, but are also convicted of unbelief, inasmuch as 
they distrust the promises. There is the more occasion to 
attend to this, because hypocrites, under a pretence of humi- 
lity and modesty, proudly contemn the precept, as well as 
deny all credit to the gracious invitation of God ; nay, rob 
him of a principal part of his worship. For when he re- 
jected sacrifices, in which all holiness seemed then to con- 
sist, he declared that the chief thing, that which above all 
others is precious in his sight, is to be invoked in the day of 
necessity. Therefore, when he demands that which is his 
own, and urges us to alacrity in obeying, no pretexts for 
doubt, how specious soever they may be, can excuse us. 
Hence, all the passages throughout Scripture in which we 
are commanded to pray, are set up before our eyes as so 
many banners, to inspire us with confidence. It were pre- 
sumption to go forward into the presence of God, did he not 
anticipate us by his invitation. Accordingly, he opens up the 
way for us by his own voice, " I will say, It is my people : 
and they shall say, The Lord is my God," (Zech. xiii. 9.) 
We see how he anticipates his worshippers, and desires them 
to follow, and therefore we cannot fear that the melody 
which he himself dictates will prove unpleasing. Espe- 
cially let us call to mind that noble description of the divine 
character, by trusting to which we shall easily overcome 
every obstacle : " O thou that hearest prayer, unto thee 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 409 

shall all flesh come," (Ps. lxv. 2.) What can be more lovely 
or soothing than to see God invested with a title which as- 
sures us that nothing is more proper to his nature than to 
listen to the prayers of suppliants ? Hence the Psalmist 
infers, that free access is given not to a few individuals, 
but to all men, since God addresses all in these terms, " Call 
upon me in the day of trouble : I will deliver thee, and thou 
shalt glorify me," (Ps. 1. 15.) David, accordingly, appeals 
to the promise thus given, in order to obtain what he asks : 
" Thou, O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, hast revealed to 
thy servant, saying, I will build thee an house : therefore 
hath thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto 
thee," (2 Sam. vii. 27.) Here we infer, that he would have 
been afraid but for the promise which emboldened him. So 
in another passage he fortifies himself with the general 
doctrine, " He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him," 
(Ps. cxlv. 19.) Nay, we may observe in The Psalms, how 
the continuity of prayer is broken, and a transition is made 
at one time to the power of God, at another to his good- 
ness, at another to the faithfulness of his promises. It 
might seem that David, by introducing these sentiments, 
unseasonably mutilates his prayers ; but believers well know 
by experience, that their ardour grows languid unless new 
fuel be added, and, therefore, that meditation as well on the 
nature as the word of God during prayer, is by no means 
superfluous. Let us not decline to imitate the example of 
David, and introduce thoughts which may reanimate our 
languid minds with new vigour. 

14. It is strange that these delightful promises affect us 
coldly, or scarcely at all, so that the generality of men pre- 
fer to wander up and down, forsaking the fountain of living 
waters, and hewing out to themselves broken cisterns, rather 
than embrace the divine liberality voluntarily offered to 
them. " The name of the Lord," says Solomon, " is a strong 
tower ; the righteous runneth into it, and is safe." Joel, 
after predicting the fearful disaster which was at hand, sub- 
joins the following memorable sentence : " And it shall come 
to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord 
shall be delivered." This we know properly refers to the 
course of the Gospel. Scarcely one in a hundred is moved to 


470 institutes or THE BOOK III. 

come into the presence of God, though he himself exclaims 
by Isaiah, " And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I 
will answer ; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear." 
This honour he elsewhere bestows upon the whole Church 
in general, as belonging to all the members of Christ : " He 
shall call upon me, and I will answer him : I will be with him in 
trouble ; I will deliver him, and honour him."1 My intention, 
however, as I already observed, is not to enumerate all, 
but only select some admirable passages as a specimen how 
kindly God allures us to himself, and how extreme our ingra- 
titude must be when with such powerful motives our slug- 
gishness still retards us. Wherefore, let these words always 
resound in our ears : " The Lord is nigh unto all them that 
call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth," (Ps. 
cxlv. 18.) Likewise those passages which we have quoted 
from Isaiah and Joel, in which God declares that his ear is 
open to our prayers, and that he is delighted as with a sacri- 
fice of sweet savour Avhen we cast our cares upon him. The 
special benefit of these promises we receive when we frame 
our prayer, not timorously or doubtingly, but when trusting 
to his word whose majesty might otherwise deter us, we are 
bold to call him Father, he himself deigning to suggest this 
most delightful name. Fortified by such invitations, it re- 
mains for us to know that we have therein sufficient materials 
for prayer, since our prayers depend on no merit of our own, 
but all their worth and hope of success are founded and 
depend on the promises of God, so that they need no other 
support, and require not to look up and down on this hand 
and on that. It must therefore be fixed in our minds, that 
though we equal not the lauded sanctity of patriarchs, pro- 
phets, and apostles, yet as the command to pray is common 
to us as well as them, and faith is common, so if Ave lean 
on the word of God, we are in respect of this privilege their 
associates. For God declaring, as has already been seen, 
that he will listen and be favourable to all, encourages the 
most wretched to hope that they shall obtain what they 
ask ; and, accordingly, we should attend to the general 
forms of expression, which, as it is commonly expressed, 

1 Jer. ii. 13 ; Prov. xvili. 10 ; Joel ii. 32 ; Is. Ixv. 24 ; Ps. xci. 15 ; 
cxlv. 18. 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 471 

exclude none from first to last ; only let there be sincerity 
of heart, self-dissatisfaction, humility, and faith, that we 
may not, by the hypocrisy of a deceitful prayer, profane 
the name of God. Our most merciful Father will not reject 
those whom he not only encourages to come, but urges in 
every possible way. Hence David's method of prayer to 
which I lately referred : " And now, O Lord God, thou art 
that God, and thy words be true, and thou hast promised 
this goodness unto thy servant, that it may continue for ever 
before thee," (2 Sam. vii. 28.) So also, in another passage, 
" Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my comfort, 
according to thy Avord unto thy servant," (Psalm cxix. 76.) 
And the whole body of the Israelites, whenever they fortify 
themselves with the remembrance of the covenant, plainly 
declare, that since God thus prescribes they are not to pray 
timorously, (Gen. xxxii. 10.) In this they imitated the 
example of the patriarchs, particularly Jacob, who, after con- 
fessing that he was unworthy of the many mercies which he 
had received of the Lord's hand, says, that he is encouraged 
to make still larger requests, because God had promised 
that he Avould grant them. But whatever be the pretexts 
Avhich unbelievers employ, when they do not flee to God as 
often as necessity urges, nor seek after him, nor implore his 
aid, they defraud him of his due honour just as much as if 
they were fabricating to themselves new gods and idols, since 
in this way they deny that God is the author of all their 
blessings. . On the contrary, nothing more effectually frees 
pious minds from every doubt, than to be armed AA'ith the 
thought that no obstacle should impede them Avhile they are 
obeying the command of God, who declares that nothing is 
more grateful to him than obedience. Hence, again, what I 
have previously said becomes still more clear, namely, that a 
bold spirit in prayer Avell accords with fear, reverence, and 
anxiety, and that there is no inconsistency when God raises 
up those who had fallen prostrate. In this way forms of 
expression apparently inconsistent admirably harmonize. Je- 
remiah and David speak of humbly laying their supplications1 

1 Latin, " prosternere pieces." French, " rr.ettent bas lems pr'cics ;" 
— lay low their prayers. 


472 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

before God. In another passage Jeremiah says, " Let, we 
beseech thee, our supplication be accepted before thee, and 
pray for us unto the Lord thy God, even for all this rem- 
nant." On the other hand, believers are often said to lift 
up prayer. Thus Hezekiah speaks, when asking the prophet 
to undertake the office of interceding. And David says, 
" Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense ; and the 
lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice."1 The expla- 
nation is, that though believers, persuaded of the paternal 
love of God, cheerfully rely on his faithfulness, and have no 
hesitation in imploring the aid which he voluntarily offers, 
they are not elated with supine or presumptuous security ; 
but climbing up by the ladder of the promises, still remain 
humble and abased suppliants. 

15. Here, by way of objection, several questions are raised. 
Scripture relates that God sometimes complied with certain 
prayers which had been dictated by minds not duly calmed or 
regulated. It is true, that the cause for which Jotham impre- 
cated on the inhabitants of Shechem the disaster which after- 
wards befell them was well founded ; but still he was inflamed 
with anger and revenge, (Judges ix. 20 ;) and hence God, by 
complying with the execration, seems to approve of passion- 
ate impulses. Similar fervour also seized Samson when he 
prayed, " Strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O 
God, that I may be at once avenged of the Philistines for 
my two eyes," (Judges xvi. 28.) For although there was 
some mixture of good zeal, yet his ruling feeling was a fer- 
vid, and therefore vicious longing for vengeance. God assents, 
and hence apparently it might be inferred that prayers are 
effectual, though not framed in conformity to the rule of the 
word. But I answer, first, that a perpetual law is not abro- 
gated by singular examples ; and, secondly, that special sug- 
gestions have sometimes been made to a few individuals, 
whose case thus becomes different from that of the generality 
of men. For we should attend to the answer which our Sa- 
viour gave to his disciples when they inconsiderately wished 
to imitate the example of Elias, " Ye know not what manner 

1 Jer. xlii. 9 ; Dan. ix." 18 ; Jer. xlii. 2 ; 2 Kings xix. 4 ; Ps. cxliv. 2. 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 473 

of spirit ye are of," (Luke ix. 55.) We must, however, go 
farther and say, that the wishes to which God assents are 
not always pleasing to him ; but he assents, because it is ne- 
cessary, by way of example, to give clear evidence of the 
doctrine of Scripture, viz., that he assists the miserable, and 
hears the groans of those who unjustly afflicted implore his 
aid : and, accordingly, he executes his judgments when the 
complaints of the needy, though in themselves unworthy of 
attention, ascend to him. For how often, in inflicting punish- 
ment on the ungodly for cruelty, rapine, violence, Inst, and 
other crimes, in curbing audacity and fury, and also in over- 
throwing tyrannical power, has he declared that he gives 
assistance to those who are unworthily oppressed, though they 
by addressing an unknown deity only beat the air ? There 
is one psalm which clearly teaches that prayers are not with- 
out effect, though they do not penetrate to heaven by faith, 
(Ps. cvii.) For it enumerates the prayers which, by natural 
instinct, necessity extorts from unbelievers not less than 
from believers, and to which it shows by the event, that 
God is, notwithstanding, propitious. Is it to testify by such 
readiness to hear that their prayers are agreeable to him ? 
Nay ; it is, first, to magnify or display his mercy by the cir- 
cumstance, that even the wishes of unbelievers are not 
denied ; and, secondly, to stimulate his true worshippers to 
more urgent prayer, when they see that sometimes even 
the wailings of the ungodly are not without avail. This, 
however, is no reason why believers should deviate from the 
law divinely imposed upon them, or envy unbelievers, as if 
they gained much in obtaining what they wished. We have 
observed, (chap. iii. sec. 25,) that in this way God yielded 
to the feigned repentance of Ahab, that he might show how 
ready he is to listen to his elect when, with true contrition, 
they seek his favour. Accordingly, he upbraids the Jews, 
that shortly after experiencing his readiness to listen to their 
prayers, they returned to their own perverse inclinations. 
It is also plain from the Book of Judges that, whenever 
they wept, though their tears were deceitful, they were deli- 
vered from the hands of their enemies. Therefore, as God 
sends his sun indiscriminately on the evil and on the good, 


474 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

so he despises not the tears of those who have a good cause, 
and whose sorrows are deserving of relief. Meanwhile, 
though he hears them, it has no more to do with salvation 
than the supply of food which he gives to other despisers of 
his goodness. 

There seems to be a more difficult question concerning 
Abraham and Samuel, the one of whom, without any instruc- 
tion from the word of God, prayed in behalf of the people 
of Sodom, and the other, contrary to an express prohibition, 
prayed in behalf of Saul, (Gen. xviii. 23; 1 Sam. xv. 11.) 
Similar is the case of Jeremiah, who prayed that the city 
might not be destroyed, (Jer. xxxii. 16.) It is true their 
prayers were refused, but it seems harsh to affirm that they 
prayed without faith. Modest readers will, I hope, be 
satisfied with this solution, viz., that leaning to the general 
principle on which God enjoins us to be mercifid even to the 
umvorthy, they were not altogether devoid of faith, though 
in this particular instance their wish was disappointed. Au- 
gustine shrewdly remarks, " How do the saints pray in faith 
when they ask from God contrary to what he has decreed? 
Namely, because they pray according to his will, not his 
hidden and immutable will, but that which he suggests to 
them, that he may hear them in another manner ; as he wisely 
distinguishes," (August, de Civit. Dei, Lib. xxii. c. 2.) This 
is truly said : for, in his incomprehensible counsel, he so re- 
gulates events, that the prayers of the saints, though involv- 
ing a mixture of faith and error, are not in vain. And yet 
this no more sanctions imitation than it excuses the saints 
themselves, who I deny not exceeded due bounds. Where- 
fore, whenever no certain promise exists, our request to 
God must have a condition annexed to it. Here we may 
refer to the prayer of David, " AwTake for me to the judg- 
ment that thou hast commanded," (Ps. vii. 6;) for he reminds 
us that he had received special instruction to pray for a 
temporal blessing.1 

16. It is also of importance to observe, that the four laws of 
prayer of which I have treated are not so rigorously enforced, 

1 The French adds, " duquel il n'eust pas autrement este asseure ;" — 
of which he would not otherwise have felt assured. 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 475 

as that God rejects the prayers in which he does not find 
perfect faith or repentance, accompanied with fervent zeal 
and wishes duly framed. We have said, (sec. 4,) that though 
prayer is the familiar intercourse of believers with God, yet 
reverence and modesty must be observed : we must not give 
loose reins to our wishes, nor long for any thing farther than 
God permits ; and, moreover, lest the majesty of God should 
be despised, our minds must be elevated to pure and chaste 
veneration. This no man ever performed with due perfec- 
tion. For, not to speak of the generality of men, how often 
do David's complaints savour of intemperance ? Not that he 
actually means to expostulate with God, or murmur at his 
judgments, but failing, through infirmity, he finds no better 
solace than to pour his griefs into the bosom of his heavenly 
Father. Nay, even our stammering is tolerated by God, 
and pardon is granted to our ignorance as often as any thing 
rashly escapes us : indeed, without this indulgence, we 
should have no freedom to pray. But although it was 
David's intention to submit himself entirely to the will of 
God, and he prayed with no less patience than fervour, yet 
irregular emotions appear, nay, sometimes burst forth, — emo- 
tions not a little at variance with the first law which we 
laid down. In particular, we may see in a clause of the 
thirty-ninth Psalm, how this saint was carried away by the 
vehemence of his grief, and unable to keep within bounds. 
" O spare me,1 that I may recover strength, before I go 
hence, and be no more," (Ps. xxxix. 13.) You would call this 
the language of a desperate man, who had no other desire 
than that God should withdraw and leave him to perish in his 
distresses. Not that his devout mind rushes into such intem- 
perance, or that, as the reprobate are wont, he wishes to have 
done with God ; he only complains that the divine anger is 
more than he can bear. During those trials, wishes often 
escape which are not in accordance with the rule of the word, 
and in which the saints do not duly consider what is lawful 
and expedient. Prayers contaminated by such faults, indeed, 
deserve to be rejected ; yet provided the saints lament, admi- 
nister self-correction, and return to themselves, God pardons. 
I Latin, " Desine a me." French, " Retire-toy ;"— Withdraw from n.e. 


476 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

Similar faults are committed in regard to the second law, 
(as to which, see sec. 6,) for the saints have often to struggle 
j with their own coldness, their want and misery not urging 
them sufficiently to serious prayer. It often happens, also, 
that their minds wander, and are almost lost ; hence in this 
matter also there is need of pardon, lest their prayers, from 
being languid or mutilated, or interrupted and Avandering, 
should meet with a refusal. One of the natural feelings 
which God has imprinted on our mind is, that prayer is not 
genuine unless the thoughts are turned upward. Hence the 
ceremony of raising the hands, to which we have adverted, 
a ceremony known to all ages and nations, and still in com- 
mon use. But who, in lifting up his hands, is not conscious 
of sluggishness, the heart cleaving to the earth ? In regard 
to the petition for remission of sins, (sec. 8,) though no be- 
liever omits it, yet all who are truly exercised in prayer feel 
that they bring scarcely a tenth of the sacrifice of which 
David speaks, " The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit : a 
broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise," 
(Ps. li. 17.) Thus a twofold pardon is always to be asked ; 
first, because they are conscious of many faults, the sense of 
which, however, does not touch them so as to make them feel 
dissatisfied with themselves as they ought; and, secondly, in 
so far as they have been enabled to profit in repentance and 
the fear of God, they are humbled with just sorrow for their 
offences, and pray for the remission of punishment by the 
judge. The thing which most of all vitiates prayer, did not 
God indulgently interpose, is weakness or imperfection of 
faith ; but it is not wonderful that this defect is pardoned by 
God, who often exercises his people with severe trials, as if 
he actually wished to extinguish their faith. The hardest of 
such trials is when believers are forced to exclaim, " O Lord 
God of hosts, how long wilt thou be angry against the prayer 
of thy people?" (Ps. lxxx. 4,) as if their very prayers offended 
him. In like manner, when Jeremiah says, " Also when I 
cry and shout, he shutteth out my prayer," (Lam. iii. 8,) 
there cannot be a doubt that he was in the greatest perturba- 
tion. Innumerable examples of the same kind occur in the 
Scriptures, from which it is manifest that the faith of the saints 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 477 

was often mingled with doubts and fears, so that while believ- 
ing and hoping, they, however, betrayed some degree of 
unbelief. But because they do not come so far as were to be 
wished} that is only an additional reason for their exerting 
themselves to correct their faults, that they may daily ap- 
proach nearer to the perfect law of prayer, and at the same 
time feel into what an abyss of evils those are plunged, who, 
in the very cures they use, bring new diseases upon them- 
selves : since there is no prayer which God would not deser- 
vedly disdain, did he not overlook the blemishes with which 
all of them are polluted. I do not mention these things that 
believers may securely pardon themselves in any faults which 
they commit, but that they may call themselves to strict 
account, and thereby endeavour to surmount these obstacles ; 
and though Satan endeavours to block up all the paths in 
order to prevent them from praying, they may, nevertheless, 
break through, being firmly persuaded that though not disen- 
cumbered of all hinderances, their attempts are pleasing to 
God, and their wishes are approved, provided they hasten on 
and keep their aim, though without immediately reaching it. 
17. But since no man is worthy to come forward in his 
own name, and appear in the presence of God, our heavenly 
Father, to relieve us at once from fear and shame, with which 
all must feel oppressed,1 has given us his Son, Jesus Christ 
our Lord, to be our Advocate and Mediator, that under his 
guidance we may approach securely, confiding that with him 
for our Intercessor nothing which we ask in his name will be 
denied to us, as there is nothing which the Father can deny 
to him, (1 Tim. ii. 5 ; 1 John ii. 1 ; see sec. 36, 37.) To 
this it is necessary to refer all that we have previously taught 
concerning faith ; because, as the promise gives us Christ as 
our Mediator, so, unless our hope of obtaining what Ave ask 
is founded on him, it deprives us of the privilege of prayer. 
For it is impossible to think of the dread majesty of God 
without being filled with alarm ; and hence the sense of our 
own unworthiness must keep us far away, until Christ inter- 
pose, and convert a throne of dreadful glory into a throne of 

1 French, " Confusion que nous avons, ou devons avoir en nous- 
mesmes ;" — confusion which we have, or ought to have, in ourselves. 


478 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

grace ; as the Apostle teaches that thus we can " come 
boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, 
and find grace to help in time of need," (Heb. iv. 16.) And 
as a rule has been laid down as to prayer, as a promise has 
been given that those who pray will be heard, so we are 
specially enjoined to pray in the name of Christ, the promise 
being that we shall obtain what we ask in his name. 
" Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name," says our Saviour, 
" that will I do ; that the Father may be glorified in the 
Son;" "Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name ; ask, 
and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full," (John xiv. 
13 ; xvi. 24.) Hence it is incontrovertibly clear that those 
who pray to God in any other name than that of Christ 
contumaciously falsify his orders, and regard his will as 
nothing, while they have no promise that they shall obtain. 
For, as Paul says, " All the promises of God in him are yea, 
and in him amen ;" that is, are confirmed and fulfilled in 
him. 

18. And we must carefully attend to the circumstance of 
time. Christ enjoins his disciples to have recourse to his 
intercession after he shall have ascended to heaven : " At 
that day ye shall ask in my name," (John xvi. 26.) It is 
certain, indeed, that from the very first all who ever prayed 
were heard only for the sake of the Mediator. For this 
reason God had commanded in the Law, that the priest 
alone should enter the sanctuary, bearing the names of the 
twelve tribes of Israel on his shoulders, and as many 
precious stones on his breast, while the people were to stand 
at a distance in the outer court, and thereafter unite their 
prayers with the priest. Nay, the sacrifice had even the 
effect of ratifying and confirming their prayers. That 
shadowy ceremony of the Law therefore taught, first, that 
we are all excluded from the face of God, and, therefore, 
that there is need of a Mediator to appear in our name, 
and carry us on his shoulders, and keep us bound upon his 
breast, that we may be heard in his person ; and, secondly, 
that our prayers, which, as has been said, would otherwise 
never be free from impurity, are cleansed by the sprinkling 
of his blood. And we see that the saints, when they desired 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 479 

to obtain any tiling, founded their hopes on sacrifices, 
because they knew that by sacrifice all prayers were ratified : 
" Remember all thy offerings," says David, " and accept thy 
burnt sacrifice," (Ps. xx. 3.) Hence we infer, that in receiv- 
ing the prayers of his people, God was from the very first 
appeased by the intercession of Christ. Why then does 
Christ speak of a new period ("at that day") when the 
disciples were to begin to pray in his name, unless it be that 
this grace, being now more brightly displayed, ought also to be 
in higher estimation with us ? In this sense he had said a little 
before, " Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name ; ask." 
Not that they were altogether ignorant of the office of 
Mediator, (all the Jews were instructed in these first rudi- 
ments,) but they did not clearly understand that Christ by 
his ascent to heaven would be more the advocate of the 
Church than before. Therefore, to solace their grief for his 
absence by some more than ordinary result, he asserts his 
office of advocate, and says, that hitherto they had been 
without the special benefit which it would be their privilege 
to enjoy, when aided by his intercession they should invoke 
God with greater freedom. In this sense the Apostle says, 
that we have " boldness to enter into the holiest by the 
blood of Jesus, by a new and living Avay, which he hath 
consecrated for us," (Heb. x. 19, 20.) Therefore, the more 
inexcusable we are, if we do not with both hands (as it is 
said) embrace the inestimable gift which is properly destined 
for us. 

19. Moreover, since he himself is the only way and the 
only access by which we can draw near to God, those who 
deviate from this way, and decline this access, have no other 
remaining ; his throne presents nothing but wrath, judgment, 
and terror. In short, as the Father has consecrated him our 
guide and head, those who abandon or turn aside from him 
in any way endeavour, as much as in them lies, to sully and 
efface the stamp which God has impressed. Christ, there- 
fore, is the only Mediator by whose intercession the Father 
is rendered propitious and exorable, (1 Tim. ii. 5.) For 
though the saints are still permitted to use intercessions, by 
which they mutually beseech God in behalf of each others' 


480 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

salvation, and of which the Apostle makes mention, (Eph. 
vi. 18, 19 ; 1 Tim. ii. 1 ;) still these depend on that one 
intercession, so far are they from derogating from it. For 
as the intercessions which as members of one body we offer 
up for each other, spring from the feeling of love, so they 
have reference to this one head. Being thus also made in 
the name of Christ, what more do they than declare that no 
man can derive the least benefit from any prayers without 
the intercession of Christ ? As there is nothing in the inter- 
cession of Christ to prevent the different members of the 
Church from offering up prayers for each other, so let it be 
held as a fixed principle, that all the intercessions thus used 
in the Church must have reference to that one intercession. 
Nay, we must be specially careful to show our gratitude on 
this very account, that God pardoning our unworthiness, not 
only allows each individual to pray for himself, but allows all 
to intercede mutually for each other. God having given a 
place in his Church to intercessors who would deserve to be 
rejected when praying privately on their own account, how 
presumptuous were it to abuse this kindness by employing it 
to obscure t? ie honour of Christ ? 

20. Moreover, the Sophists are guilty of the merest trifling 
when they allege that Christ is the Mediator of redemption, 
but that believers are mediators of intercession ; as if Christ 
had only performed a temporary mediation, and left an 
eternal and imperishable mediation to his servants. Such, 
forsooth, is the treatment which he receives from those who 
pretend only to take from him a minute portion of honour. 
Very different is the language of Scripture, with whose 
simplicity every pious man will be satisfied, without paying 
any regard to those imposters. For when John says, " If 
any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus 
Christ the righteous," (1 John ii. 1,) does he mean merely 
that we once had an advocate ; does he not rather ascribe to 
him a perpetual intercession ? What does Paul mean when 
he declares that he " is even at the right hand of God, who 
also maketh intercession for us" ? (Rom. viii. 32.) But when 
in another passage he declares that he is the only Mediator 
between God and man, (1 Tim. ii. 5,) is he not referring to 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 481 

the supplications which he had mentioned a little before ? 
Having previously said that prayers were to be offered up 
for all men, he immediately adds, in confirmation of that 
statement, that there is one God, and one Mediator between 
God and man. Nor does Augustine give a different inter- 
pretation when he says, " Christian men mutually recommend 
each other in their prayers. But he for whom none inter- 
cedes, while he himself intercedes for all, is the only tiaie 
Mediator. Though the Apostle Paul was under the head a 
principal member, yet because he was a member of the body 
of Christ, and knew that the most true and High Priest of the 
Church had entered not by figure into the inner veil to the 
holy of holies, but by firm and express truth into the inner 
sanctuary of heaven to holiness, holiness not imaginary, but 
eternal, he also commends himself to the prayers of the 
faithful. He does not make himself a mediator between 
God and the people, but asks that all the members of the 
body of Christ should pray mutually for each other, since 
the members are mutually sympathetic : if one member 
suffers, the others suffer with it. And thus the mutual 
prayers of all the members still labouring on tlib earth ascend 
to the Head, who has gone before into heaven, and in whom 
there is propitiation for our sins. For if Paul were a media- 
tor, so would also the other apostles, and thus there would 
be many mediators, and Paul's statement could not stand, 
' There is one God, and one Mediator between God and 
men, the man Christ Jesus;' in whom we also are one if we 
keep the unity of the faith in the bond of peace," * (August. 
Contra Parmenian, Lib. ii. cap. 8.) Likewise in another 
passage Augustine says, " If thou requirest a priest, he is 
above the heavens, where he intercedes for those who on earth 
died for thee," (August, in Ps. xciv.) We imagine not that 
he throws himself before his Father's knees, and suppliantly 
intercedes for us ; but we understand with the Apostle, that 
he appears in the presence of God, and that the power of 
his death has the effect of a perpetual intercession for us ; 
that having entered into the upper sanctuary, he alone con- 

1 Heb. ix. 11, 24 ; Rom. xv. 30 ; Eph. vi. 19 ; Col. iv. 3 ; 1 Cor. xii. 
25 ; 1 Tim. ii. 5 ; Eph. iv. 3. 

VOL. II. 2 H 


482 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

tinues to the end of the world to present the prayers of his 
people, who are standing far off in the outer court. 

21. In regard to the saints who having died in the body- 
live in Christ, if we attribute prayer to them, let us not ima- 
gine that they have any other way of supplicating God than 
through Christ who alone is the way, or that their prayers 
are accepted by God in any other name. Wherefore, since 
the Scripture calls us away from all others to Christ alone, 
since our heavenly Father is pleased to gather together all 
things in him, it were the extreme of stupidity, not to say 
madness, to attempt to obtain access by means of others, so as 
to be drawn away from him without whom access cannot be 
obtained. But who can deny that this was the practice for 
several ages, and is still the practice, wherever Popery prevails? 
To procure the favour of God, human merits are ever and anon 
obtruded, and very frequently while Christ is passed by, God 
is supplicated in their name. I ask if this is not to transfer to 
them that office of sole intercession which we have above 
claimed for Christ ? Then what angel or devil ever announced 
one syllable to any human being concerning that fancied in- 
tercession of theirs ? There is not a word on the subject in 
Scripture. What ground then was there for the fiction ? 
Certainly, while the human mind thus seeks help for itself 
in which it is not sanctioned by the word of God, it plainly 
manifests its distrust, (see s. 27.) But if we appeal to the con- 
sciences of all who take pleasure in the intercession of saints, 
we shall find that their only reason for it is, that they are 
filled with anxiety, as if they supposed that Christ were insuf- 
ficient or too rigorous. By this anxiety they dishonour 
Christ, and rob him of his title of sole Mediator, a title which 
being given him by the Father as his special privilege, ought 
not to be transferred to any other. By so doing they obscure 
the glory of his nativity and make void his cross ; in short, 
divest and defraud of due praise everything which he did or 
suffered, since all which he did and suffered goes to show that 
he is and ought to be deemed sole Mediator. At the same 
time, they reject the kindness of God in manifesting himself 
to them as a Father, for he is not their Father if they do not 
recognise Christ as their brother. This they plainly refuse 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 483 

to do if they think not that he feels for them a brother's 
affection ; affection than which none can be more gentle or 
tender. Wherefore Scripture offers him alone, sends us to 
him, and establishes us in him. " He," says Ambrose, " is 
our mouth by which we speak to the Father ; our eye by 
which we see the Father ; our right hand by which we offer 
ourselves to the Father. Save by his intercession neither we 
nor any saints have any intercourse with God," (Ambros. 
Lib. de Isaac et Anima.) If they object that the public 
prayers which are offered up in churches conclude with the 
words, through Jesus Christ our Lord, it is a frivolous evasion ; 
because no less insult is offered to the intercession of Christ 
by confounding it with the prayers and merits of the dead, 
than by omitting it altogether, and making mention only of 
the dead. Then, in all their litanies, hymns, and proses, Avhere 
every kind of honour is paid to dead saints, there is no men- 
tion of Christ. 

22. But here stupidity has proceeded to such a length as 
to give a manifestation of the genius of superstition, which, 
when once it has shaken off the rein, is wont to wanton with- 
out limit. After men began to look to the intercession of 
saints, a peculiar administration was gradually assigned to 
each, so that, according to diversity of business, now one, now 
another, intercessor was invoked. Then individuals adopted 
particular saints, and put their faith in them, just as if they 
had been tutelar deities. And thus not only were gods set 
up according to the number of the cities, (the charge which 
the prophet brought against Israel of old, Jer. ii. 28 ; xi. 13,) 
but according to the number of individuals. But while the 
saints in all their desires refer to the will of God alone, look to 
it, and acquiesce in it, yet to assign to them any other prayer 
than that of longing for the arrival of the kingdom of God, 
is to think of them stupidly, carnally, and even insultingly. 
Nothing can be farther from such a view than to imagine 
that each, under the influence of private feeling, is disposed to 
be most favourable to his own worshippers. At length vast 
numbers have fallen into the horrid blasphemy of invoking 
them not merely as helping but presiding over their salvation. 
See the depth to which miserable men fall when they forsake 


484 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

their proper station, that is, the word of God. I say no- 
thing of the more monstrous specimens of impiety in which, 
though detestable to God, angels, and men, they themselves 
feel no pain or shame. Prostrated at a statue or picture of 
Barbara or Catherine, and the like, they mutter a Pater 
Noster ;l and so far are their pastors2 from curing or curbing 
this frantic course, that, allured by the scent of gain, they 
approve and applaud it. But while seeking to relieve them- 
selves of the odium of this vile and criminal procedure, with 
what pretext can they defend the practice of calling upon 
Eloy or Medard to look upon their servants, and send them 
help from heaven ? or the Holy Virgin to order her Son to 
do what they ask ?3 The Council of Carthage forbade direct 
prayer to be made at the altar to saints. It is probable 
that these holy men, unable entirely to suppress the force of 
depraved custom, had recourse to this check, that public 
prayers might not be vitiated with such forms of expression 
as Sancti Petre, ora pro nobis — St Peter, pray for us. But how 
much farther has this devilish extravagance proceeded when 
men hesitate not to transfer to the dead the peculiar attri- 
butes of Christ and God ? 

1 Erasmus, though stumbling and -walking blindfold in clear light, ven- 
tures to write thus in a letter to Sadolet, 1530 : " Primum, constat nullum 
esse locum in divinis voluminibus, qui permittat invocare divos, nisi fortasse 
detorquere hue placet, quod dives in Evangelica parabola implorat opem 
Abrahse. Quanquam autem in re tanta novare quicquam prater auctori- 
tatem Seriptura?, merito periculosum videri possit, tamen invocationem 
divorum nusquam improbo," &c. — First, it is clear that there is no passage 
in the Sacred Volume which permits the invocation of saints, unless we are 
pleased to wrest to this purpose what is said in the parable as to the rich 
man imploring the help of Abraham. But though in so weighty a matter 
it may justly seem dangerous to introduce anything without the authority 
of Scripture, I by no means condemn the invocation of saints, &c. 

2 Latin, " Pastores ;" — French, " ceux qui se disent prelats, cures, ou 
precheurs ;" — those who call themselves prelates, curates, or preachers. 

3 French, " Mais encore qu'ils taschent de laver leur mains d'un si 
vilain sacrilege, d'autant qu'il ne se commet point en leurs messes ni en 
leurs vespres ; sous quelle couleur defendront ils ces blasphemes qu'il lisent 
a pleine gorge, ou ils prient St Eloy ou St Medard, de regarder du ciel 
leurs serviteurs pour les aider ? mesmes ou ils supplient la vierge Marie 
de commander a son fils qu'il leur ottroye leur requestes ?" — But although 
they endeavour to wash their hands of the vile sacrilege, inasmuch as it is 
not committed in their masses or vespers, under what pretext will they 
defend those blasphemies which they repeat with full throat, in which they 
pray St Eloy or St Medard to look from heaven upon their servants and 
assist them ; even supplicate the Virgin Mary to command her Son to 
grant their requests ? 


CIIAr. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 485 

23. In endeavouring to prove that such intercession derives 
some support from Scripture they labour in vain. We fre- 
quently read (they say) of the prayers of angels ; and not 
only so, but the prayers of believers are said to be carried 
into the presence of God by their hands. But if they would 
compare saints who have departed this life with angels, it 
will be necessary to prove that saints are ministering spirits, to 
whom has been delegated the office of superintending our 
salvation, to whom has been assigned the province of guiding 
us in all our ways, of encompassing, admonishing, and com- 
forting us, of keeping watch over us. All these are assigned 
to angels, but none of them to saints. How preposterously 
they confound departed saints with angels is sufficiently ap- 
parent from the many different offices by which Scripture 
distinguishes the one from the other. No one unless ad- 
mitted will presume to perform the office of pleader before 
an earthly judge ; whence then have worms such license as 
to obtrude themselves on God as intercessors, while no such 
office has been assigned them ? God has been pleased to give 
angels the charge of our safety. Hence they attend our sacred 
meetings, and the Church is to them a theatre in which they 
behold the manifold wisdom of God, (Eph. iii. 10.) Those 
who transfer to others this office which is peculiar to them, 
certainly pervert and confound the order which has been 
established by God and ought to be inviolable. With simi- 
lar dexterity they proceed to quote other passages. God 
said to Jeremiah, " Though Moses and Samuel stood before 
me, yet my mind could not be toward this people," (Jer. 
xv. 1.) How (they ask) could he have spoken thus of the 
dead but because he knew that they interceded for the living? 
My inference, on the contrary, is this : since it thus appears 
that neither Moses nor Samuel interceded for the people of 
Israel, there was then no intercession for the dead. For who 
of the saints can be supposed to labour for the salvation of 
the people, while Moses who, when in life, far surpassed all 
others in this matter, does nothing ? Therefore, if they persist 
in the paltry quibble, that the dead intercede for the living, 
because the Lord said, " If they stood before me" (interces- 
serint,) I will argue far more specious!}' in this way : Moses, 


486 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

of whom it is said, if he interceded, did not intercede for the 
people in their extreme necessity : it is probable, therefore, 
that no other saint intercedes, all being far behind Moses in 
humanity, goodness, and paternal solicitude. Thus all they 
gain by their cavilling is to be wounded by the very arms 
with which they deem themselves admirably protected. But 
it is very ridiculous to wrest this simple sentence in this 
manner ; for the Lord only declares that he would not spare 
the iniquities of the people, though some Moses or Samuel, 
to whose prayers he had shown himself so indulgent, should 
intercede for them. This meaning is most clearly elicited 
from a similar passage in Ezekiel : " Though these three 
men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, they should deliver 
but their own souls by their righteousness, saith the Lord 
God," (Ezck. xiv. 14.) Here there can be no doubt that we 
are to understand the words as if it had been said, If two of 
the persons named were again to come alive ; for the third 
was still living, namely, Daniel, who it is well known had 
then in the bloom of youth given an incomparable display of 
piety. Let us therefore leave out those whom Scripture de- 
clares to have completed their course. Accordingly, when 
Paul speaks of David, he says not that by his prayers he 
assisted posterity, but only that he " served his own genera- 
tion," (Acts xiii. 36.) 

24. They again object, Are those, then, to be deprived of 
every pious wish, who, during the whole course of their 
lives, breathed nothing but piety and mercy? I have no 
wish curiously to pry into what they do or meditate ; but the 
probability is, that instead of being subject to the impulse of 
various and particular desires, they, with one fixed and im- 
moveable will, long for the kingdom of God, which consists 
not less in the destruction of the ungodly than in the salva- 
tion of believers. If this be so, there cannot be a doubt that 
their charity is confined to the communion of Christ's body, 
and extends no farther than is compatible with the nature 
of that communion. But though I grant that in this way 
they pray for us, they do not, however, lose their quiescence 
so as to be distracted with earthly cares : far less are they, 
therefore, to be invoked by us. Nor does it follow that 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 487 

such invocation is to be used, because, while men are alive 
upon the earth, they can mutually commend themselves to 
each other's prayers. It serves to keep alive a feeling of 
charity when they, as it were, share each other's wants, and 
bear each other's burdens. This they do by the command of 
the Lord, and not without a promise, the two things of primary 
importance in prayer. But all such reasons are inapplicable 
to the dead, with whom the Lord, in withdrawing them from 
our society, has left us no means of intercourse, (Eccles. ix. 
5, 6,) and to whom, so far as we can conjecture, he has left 
no means of intercourse with us. But if any one allege that 
they certainly must retain the same charity for us, as they 
are united with us in one faith, who has revealed to us that 
they have ears capable of listening to the sounds of our 
voice, or eyes clear enough to discern our necessities. Our 
opponents, indeed, talk in the shade of their schools of some 
kind of light which beams upon departed saints from the 
divine countenance, and in which, as in a mirror, they, from 
their lofty abode, behold the affairs of men ; but to affirm this 
with the confidence which these men presume to use, is just 
to desire, by means of the extravagant dreams of our own 
brain, and without any authority, to pry and penetrate into 
the hidden judgments of God, and trample upon Scripture, 
which so often declares that the wisdom of our flesh is at 
enmity with the wisdom of God, utterly condemns the vanity 
of our mind, and humbling our reason, bids us look only to 
the will of God. 

25. The other passages of Scripture which they employ to 
defend their error are miserably wrested. Jacob (they say) 
asks for the sons of Joseph, " Let my name be named on 
them, and the name of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac," 
(Gen. xlviii. 16.) First, let us see what the nature of this 
invocation was among the Israelites. They do not implore 
their fathers to bring succour to them, but they beseech God 
to remember his servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Their 
example, therefore, gives no countenance to those who use 
addresses to the saints themselves. But such being the 
dulness of these blocks, that they comprehend not what it is 
to invoke the name of Jacob, nor why it is to be invoked, it 


488 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

is not strange that they blunder thus childishly as to the 
mode of doing it. The expression repeatedly occurs in 
Scripture. Isaiah speaks of women being called by the name 
of men, when they have them for husbands and live under 
their protection, (Isa. iv. 1.) The calling of the name of 
Abraham over the Israelites consists in referring the origin of 
their race to him, and holding him in distinguished remem- 
brance as their author and parent. Jacob does not do 
so from any anxiety to extend the celebrity of his name, but 
because he knows that all the happiness of his posterity con- 
sisted in the inheritance of the covenant which God had 
made with them. Seeing that this would give them the sum 
of all blessings, he prays that they may be regarded as of his 
race, this being nothing else than to transmit the succession 
of the covenant to them. They again, when they make 
mention of this subject in their prayers, do not betake them- 
selves to the intercession of the dead, but call to remem- 
brance that covenant in which their most merciful Father 
undertakes to be kind and propitious to them for the sake of 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. How little, in other respects, 
the saints trusted to the merits of their fathers, the public 
voice of the Church declares in the prophet, " Doubtless thou 
art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and 
Israel acknowledge us not ; thou, O Lord, art our Father, 
our Redeemer," (Isa. lxiii. 16.) And while the Church thus 
speaks, she at the same time adds, " Return for thy servants' 
sake," not thinking of any thing like intercession, but ad- 
verting only to the benefit of the covenant. Now, indeed, 
when we have the Lord Jesus, in whose hand the eternal 
covenant of mercy was not only made but confirmed, what 
better name can we bear before us in our prayers ? And 
since those good Doctors would make out by these words 
that the Patriarchs are intercessors, I should like them to tell 
me why, in so great a multitude,1 no place whatever is given 
to Abraham, the father of the Church ? We know well from 
what a crew they select their intercessors.2 Let them then 

1 The French adds, " et quasi en une fourmiliere de saincts ;" — and as it 
were a swarm of saints. 

t a " C'est chose trop notoire de quel bourbieu ou de quelle racaille ils 
tirent leur saincts." — It is too notorious out of what mire or rubbish they 
draw their saints. 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 489 

tell me what consistency there is in neglecting and rejecting 
Abraham, whom God preferred to all others, and raised to the 
highest degree of honour. The only reason is, that as it 
was plain there was no such practice in the ancient Church, 
they thought proper to conceal the novelty of the practice by 
saying nothing of the Patriarchs : as if by a mere diversity 
of names they could excuse a practice at once novel and 
impure. They sometimes, also, object that God is entreated 
to have mercy on his people " for David's sake," (Ps. cxxxii. 
1, 10 ; see Calv. Com.) This is so far from supporting their 
error, that it is the strongest refutation of it. We must con- 
sider the character which David bore. He is set apart from 
the whole body of the faithful to establish the covenant 
which God made in his hand. Thus regard is had to the 
covenant rather than to the individual. Under him as a 
type the sole intercession of Christ is asserted. But what 
Avas peculiar to David as a type of Christ is certainly inap- 
plicable to others. 

26. But some seem to be moved by the fact, that the 
prayers of saints are often said to have been heard. Why ? 
Because they prayed. "They cried unto thee," (says the 
Psalmist,) " and were delivered : they trusted in thee, and 
were not confounded," (Ps. xxii. 5.) Let us also pray after 
their example, that like them we too may be heard. Those 
men, on the contrary, absurdly argue that none will be heard 
but those who have been heard already. How much better 
does James argue, " Elias was a man subject to like passions 
as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain : 
and it rained not on the earth by the space of three years 
and six months. And he prayed again, and the heaven 
gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit," (James v. 
17, 18.) What? Does he infer that Elias possessed some 
peculiar privilege, and that Ave must have recourse to him 
for the use of it ? By no means. He shows the perpetual 
efficacy of a pure and pious prayer, that Ave may be induced 
in like manner to pray. For the kindness and readiness of 
God to hear others is malignantly interpreted, if their ex- 
ample does not inspire us with stronger confidence in his pro- 
mise, since his declaration is not that he will incline his ear 
to one or two, or a few individuals, but to all Avho call upon 


490 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

his name. In this ignorance they are the less excusable, 
because they seem as it were avowedly to contemn the 
many admonitions of Scripture. David was repeatedly deli- 
vered by the power of God. Was this to give that power to 
him that we might be delivered on his application ? Very dif- 
ferent is his affirmation : " The righteous shall compass me 
about ; for thou shalt deal bountifully with me," (Ps. cxlii. 
7.) Again, " The righteous also shall see, and fear, and shall 
laugh at him," (Ps. Hi. 6.) " This poor man cried, and the 
Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles," (Ps. 
xxxiv. 6.) In The Psalms are many similar prayers, in which 
David calls upon God to give him what he asks, for this 
reason, viz., that the righteous may not be put to shame, but 
by his example encouraged to hope. Here let one passage 
suffice, "For this shall every one that is godly pray unto 
thee in a time when thou mayest be found," (Ps. xxxii. 6, 
Calv. Com.) This passage I have quoted the more readily, 
because those ravers who employ their hireling tongues in 
defence of the Papacy, are not ashamed to adduce it in proof 
of the intercession of the dead. As if David intended any 
thing more than to show the benefit which he shall obtain from 
the divine clemency and condescension when he shaU have 
been heard. In general, we must hold that the experience of 
the grace of God, as well towards ourselves as towards others, 
tends in no slight degree to confirm our faith in his promises. 
I do not quote the many passages in which David sets forth 
the loving-kindness of God to him as a ground of confidence, 
as they will readily occur to every reader of The Psalms. 
Jacob had previously taught the same thing by his own ex- 
ample, "I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, and of 
all the truth which thou hast showed unto thy servant : for 
with my staff I passed over this Jordan ; and now I am become 
two bands," (Gen. xxxii. 10.) He, indeed, alleges the pro- 
mise, but not the promise only ; for he at the same time adds 
the effect, to animate him with greater confidence in the 
future kindness of God. God is not like men who grow 
weary of their liberality, or whose means of exercising it 
become exhausted ; but he is to be estimated by his own 
nature, as David properly does when he says, " Thou hast 
redeemed me, O Lord God of truth," (Ps. xxxi. 5.) After 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 491 

ascribing the praise of his salvation to God, he adds that he 
is true : for were he not ever like himself, his past favour 
would not be an infallible ground for confidence and prayer. 
But when we know that as often as he assists us, he gives 
us a specimen and proof of his goodness and faithfulness, 
there is no reason to fear that our hope will be ashamed or 
frustrated. 

27. On the whole, since Scripture places the principal part 
of worship in the invocation of God, (this being the office of 
piety which he requires of us in preference to all sacrifices,) 
it is manifest sacrilege to offer prayer to others. Hence it 
is said in the psalm : u If we have forgotten the name of 
our God, or stretched, out our hands to a strange god, shall 
not God search this out?" (Ps. xliv. 20, 21.) Again, 
since it is only in faith that God desires to be invoked, and 
he distinctly enjoins us to frame our prayers according to the 
rule of his word : in fine, since faith is founded on the word, 
and is the parent of right prayer, the moment we decline 
from the word, our prayers are impure. But Ave have already 
shown, that if we consult the w7hole volume of Scripture, we 
shall find that God. claims this honour to himself alone. In 
regard to the office of intercession, we have also seen that it 
is peculiar to Christ, and that no prayer is agreeable to God. 
which he as Mediator does not sanctify. And though 
believers mutually offer up prayers to God. in behalf of their 
brethren, we have shown that this derogates in no respect 
from the sole intercession of Christ, because all trust to that 
intercession in commending themselves as w7ell as others to 
God. Moreover, wTe have shown that this is ignorantly 
transferred to the dead, of whom we no where read that they 
were commanded to pray for us. The Scripture often ex- 
horts us to offer up mutual prayers ; but says not one syllable 
concerning the dead ; nay, James tacitly excludes the dead 
when he combines the two things, to "confess our sins one 
to another, and to pray one for another," (James v. 16.) 
Hence it is sufficient to condemn this error, that the begin- 
ning of right prayer springs from faith, and that faith comes 
by the hearing of the word of God, in which there is no 
mention of fictitious intercession, superstition having rashly 


492 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

adopted intercessors who have not been divinely appointed. 
While the Scripture abounds in various forms of prayer, we 
find no example of this intercession, without which Papists 
think there is no prayer. Moreover, it is evident that this 
superstition is the result of distrust, because they are either 
not contented with Christ as an intercessor, or have alto- 
gether robbed him of this honour. This last is easily proved 
by their effrontery in maintaining, as the strongest of all their 
arguments for the intercession of the saints, that we are un- 
worthy of familiar access to God. This, indeed, we acknow- 
ledge to be most true, but we thence infer that they leave 
nothing to Christ, because they consider his intercession 
as nothing, unless it is supplemented by that of George and 
Hypolyte, and similar phantoms. 

28. But though prayer is properly confined to vows and 
supplications, yet so strong is the affinity between petition 
and thanksgiving, that both may be conveniently compre- 
hended under one name. For the forms Avhich Paul enu- 
merates (1 Tim. ii. 1) fall under the first member of this 
division. By prayer and supplication we pour out our desires 
before God, asking as well those things which tend to pro- 
mote his glory and display his name, as the benefits which 
contribute to our advantage. By thanksgiving we duly cele- 
brate his kindnesses toward us, ascribing to his liberality 
every blessing which enters into our lot. David accordingly 
includes both in one sentence, " Call upon me in the day of 
trouble : I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me," (Ps. 
1. 15.) Scripture, not without reason, commands us to use 
both continually. We have already described the greatness 
of our want, while experience itself proclaims the straits 
which press us on every side to be so numerous and so great, 
that all have sufficient ground to send forth sighs and groans 
to God without intermission, and suppliantly implore him. 
For even should they be exempt from adversity, still the 
holiest ought to be stimulated first by their sins, and, secondly, 
by the innumerable assaults of temptation, to long for a re- 
medy. The sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving can never 
be interrupted without guilt, since God never ceases to load 
us with favour upon favour, so as to force us to gratitude, 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 493 

however slow and sluggish we may be. In short, so great 
and widely diffused are the riches of his liberality towards 
us, so marvellous and wondrous the miracles which we behold 
on every side, that we never can want a subject and mate- 
rials for praise and thanksgiving. 

To make this somewhat clearer : since all our hopes and 
resources are placed in God, (this has already been fully 
proved,) so that neither our persons nor our interests can 
prosper without his blessing, we must constantly submit our- 
selves and our all to him. Then whatever we deliberate, 
speak, or do, should be deliberated, spoken, and done under 
his hand and will ; in fine, under the hope of his assistance. 
God has pronounced a curse upon all who, confiding in them- 
selves or others, form plans and resolutions, who, with- 
out regarding his will, or invoking his aid, either plan or 
attempt to execute, (James iv. 14 ; Isaiah xxx. 1 ; xxxi. 1.) 
And since, as has already been observed, he receives the 
honour which is due when he is acknowledged to be the 
author of all good, it follows that, in deriving all good from 
his hand, we ought continually to express our thankfulness, 
and that Ave have no right to use the benefits which proceed 
from his liberality, if we do not assiduously proclaim his 
praise, and give him thanks, these being the ends for which 
they are given. When Paul declares that every creature of 
God "is sanctified by the word of God and prayer," (1 Tim. 
iv. 5,) he intimates that without the word and prayer, none 
of them are holy and pure, word being used metonymically 
for faith. Hence David, on experiencing the loving-kind- 
ness of the Lord, elegantly declares, " He hath put a new 
song in my mouth," (Ps. xl. 3 ;) intimating, that our silence is 
malignant when we leave his blessings unpraised, seeing every 
blessing he bestows is a new ground of thanksgiving. Thus 
Isaiah, proclaiming the singular mercies of God, says, " Sing 
unto the Lord a new song." In the same sense David says 
in another passage, " O Lord, open thou my lips ; and my 
mouth shall show forth thy praise," (Ps. li. 15.) In like 
manner, Hezekiah and Jonah declare that they will regard it 
as the end of their deliverance " to celebrate the goodness of 
God wkh songs in his temple," (Is. xxxviii. 20 ; Jonah ii. 10.) 


494 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

David lays down a general rule for all believers in these 
words, " What shall I render unto the Lord for all his bene- 
fits toward me ? I will take the cup of salvation, and call 
upon the name of the Lord," (Ps. cxvi. 12, 13.) This rule 
the Church follows in another psalm, " Save us, O Lord our 
God, and gather us from among the heathen, to give thanks 
unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise," (Ps. cvi. 
47.) Again, "He will regard the prayer of the destitute, 
and not despise their prayer. This shall be written for the 
generation to come : and the people which shall be created 
shall pi^aise the Lord." " To declare the name of the Lord in 
Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem," (Ps. cii. 18, 21.) Nay, 
whenever believers beseech the Lord to do anything for his 
own Jiame's sake, as they declare themselves unworthy of ob- 
taining it in their own name, so they oblige themselves to 
give thanks, and promise to make the right use of his loving- 
kindness by being the heralds of it. Thus Hosea, speaking of 
the future redemption of the Church, says, "Take away all 
iniquity, and receive us graciously ; so will we render the 
calves of our lips," (Hos. xiv. 2.) Not only do our tongues 
proclaim the kindness of God, but they naturally inspire us 
with love to him. " I love the Lord, because he hath heard 
my voice and my supplications," (Ps. cxvi. 1.) In another 
passage, speaking of the help which he had experienced, he 
says, " I will love thee, O Lord, my strength," (Ps. xviii. 1.) 
No praise will ever please God that does not flow from this 
feeling of love. Nay, we must attend to the declaration of 
Paul, that all wishes are vicious and perverse which are not 
accompanied with thanksgiving. His words are, " In every- 
thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your 
requests be made known unto God," (Phil. iv. 6.) Because 
many, under the influence of moroseness, weariness, impa- 
tience, bitter grief and fear, use murmuring in their prayers, 
he enjoins us so to regulate our feelings as cheerfully to bless 
God even before obtaining Avhat we ask. But if this con- 
nection ought always to subsist in full vigour between things 
that are almost contrary, the more sacred is the tie which 
binds us to celebrate the praises of God whenever he grants 
our requests. And as we have already shown that our prayers, 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 495 

which otherwise would be polluted, are sanctified by the inter- 
cession of Christ, so the Apostle, by enjoining us " to offer 
the sacrifice of praise to God continually" by Christ, (Heb. 
xiii. 15,) reminds us, that without the intervention of his 
priesthood our lips are not pure enough to celebrate the name 
of God. Hence we infer that a monstrous delusion prevails 
among Papists, the great majority of whom wonder when 
Christ is called an intercessor. The reason why Paul enjoins, 
"Pray without ceasing ; in every thing give thanks," (1 Thess. 
v. 17, 18,) is, because he would have us with the utmost assi- 
duity, at all times, in every place, in all things, and under all 
circumstances, direct our prayers to God, to expect all the 
things which we desire from him, and when obtained ascribe 
them to him ; thus furnishing perpetual grounds for prayer 
and praise. 

29. This assiduity in prayer, though it specially refers to 
the peculiar private prayers of individuals, extends also in 
some measure to the public prayers of the Church. These, 
it may be said, cannot be continual, and ought not to be made, 
except in the manner which, for the sake of order, has been 
established by public consent. This 1 admit, and hence cer- 
tain hours are fixed beforehand, hours which, though indifferent 
in regard to God, are necessary for the use of man, that the 
general convenience may be consulted, and all things be done 
in the Church, as Paul enjoins, " decently and in order," (1 
Cor. xiv. 40.) But there is nothing in this to prevent each 
church from being now and then stirred up to a more fre- 
quent use of prayer, and being more zealously affected under 
the impulse of some greater necessity. Of perseverance in 
prayer, which is much akin to assiduity, we shall speak 
towards the close of the chapter, (sec. 51, 52.) This assi- 
duity, moreover, is very different from the BarroAoy/a, vain 
speaking, which our Saviour has prohibited, (Matth. vi. 7.) 
For he does not there forbid us to pray long or frequently, 
or with great fervour, but warns us against supposing that 
we can extort anything from God by importuning him with 
garrulous loquacity, as if he were to be persuaded after the 
manner of men. We know that hypocrites, because they 
consider not that they have to do with God, offer up their 


496 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

prayers as pompously as If it were part of a triumphal show. 
The Pharisee, who thanked God that he was not as other 
men, no doubt proclaimed his praises before men, as if he 
had wished to gain a reputation for sanctity by his prayers. 
Hence that vain speaking, which for a similar reason prevails so 
much in the Papacy in the present day, some vainly spinning 
out the time by a reiteration of the same frivolous prayers, 
and others employing a long series of verbiage for vulgar 
display.1 This childish garrulity being a mockery of God, it 
is not strange that it is prohibited in the Church, in order 
that every feeling there expressed may be sincere, proceeding 
from the inmost heart. Akin to this abuse is another which 
our Saviour also condemns, namely, when hypocrites for the 
sake of ostentation court the presence of many witnesses, 
and would sooner pray in the market-place than pray without 
applause. The true object of prayer being, as we have 
already said, (sec. 4, 5,) to carry our thoughts directly to 
God, whether to celebrate his praise or implore his aid, we 
can easily see that its primary seat is in the mind and heart, 
or rather that prayer itself is properly an effusion and mani- 
festation of internal feeling before Him who is the searcher of 
hearts. Hence, (as has been said,) when our divine Master 
was pleased to lay down the best rule for prayer, his injunc- 
tion was, " Enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut 
thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father 
which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly," (Matth. vi. 
6.) Dissuading us from the example of hypocrites, who 
sought the applause of men by an ambitious ostentation in 
prayer, he adds the better course — enter thy chamber, shut 
thy door, and there pray. By these words (as I understand 
them) he taught us to seek a place of retirement which might 
enable us to turn all our thoughts inwards, and enter deeply 

1 French, " Cette longueur de priere a aujourd'Iiui sa vogue en la 
Papaute, et proeede de cette mesme source ; c'est que les uns barbotant 
force Ave Maria, et reiterant cent fois un chapelet, perdent une partie 
du temps ; les autres, comme les chanoines et caphars, en abayant le 
parchemin jour et nuict, et barbotant leur breviaire vendent leur coquilles 
au peuple." — This long prayer is at present in vogue among the Papists, 
and pioceeds from the same cause : some muttering a host of Ave Marias, 
and going over their beads a hundred times, lose part of their time ; 
others, as the canons and monks, grumbling over their parchment night 
and day, and muttering their breviary, sell their cockksheiis to the people. 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 497 

into our hearts, promising that God would hold converse with 
the feelings of our mind, of which the body ought to be the 
temple. He meant not to deny that it may be expedient to 
pray in other places also, but he shows that prayer is some- 
what of a secret nature, having its chief seat in the mind, 
and requiring a tranquillity far removed from the turmoil of 
ordinary cares. And hence it was not without cause that 
our Lord himself, when he would engage more earnestly in 
prayer, withdrew into a retired spot beyond the bustle of the 
world, thus reminding us by his example that Ave are not to 
neglect those helps which enable the mind, in itself too much 
disposed to wander, to become sincerely intent on prayer. 
Meanwhile, as he abstained not from prayer when the occa- 
sion required it, though he were in the midst of a crowd, so 
must we, whenever there is need, lift up " pure hands" (1 Tim. 
ii. 8) at all places. And hence we must hold that he who 
declines to pray in the public meeting of the saints, knows 
not what it is to pray apart, in retirement, or at home. On 
the other hand, he who neglects to pray alone and in private, 
however sedulously he frequents public meetings, there gives 
his prayers to the wind, because he defers more to the opinion 
of man than to the secret judgment of God. Still, lest the 
public prayers of the Church should be held in contempt, the 
Lord anciently bestowed upon them the most honourable 
appellation, especially when he called the temple the " house 
of prayer" (Isa. lvi. 7.) For by this expression he both 
showed that the duty of prayer is a principal part of his wor- 
ship, and that to enable believers to engage in it with one 
consent his temple is set up before them as a kind of banner. 
A noble promise was also added, " Praise walteth for thee, O 
God, in Sion : and unto thee shall the vow be performed," l 
(Ps. lxv. 1.) By these words the Psalmist reminds us that 
the prayers of the Church are never in vain ; because God 
always furnishes his people with materials for a song of joy. 
But although the shadows of the law have ceased, yet be- 
cause God was pleased by this ordinance to foster the unity 
of the faith among us also, there can be no doubt that the 

1 Calvin translates, " Te expeetat Deus, laus in Sion ;" — God, the 
praise in Sion waiteth for thee. 

VOL. II. 2 I 


498 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

same promise belongs to us — a promise which Christ sanc- 
tioned with his own lips, and which Paid declares to be per- 
petually in force. 

30. As God in his word enjoins common prayer, so public 
temples are the places destined for the performance of them, 
and hence those who refuse to join with the people of God 
in this observance have no ground for the pretext, that they 
enter their chamber in order that they may obey the com- 
mand of the Lord. For he who promises to grant whatso- 
ever two or three assembled in his name shall ask, (Matth. 
xviii. 20,) declares, that he by no means despises the prayers 
which are publicly offered up, provided there be no ostenta- 
tion, or catching at human applause, and provided there be 
a true and sincere affection in the secret recesses of the 
heart.1 If this is the legitimate use of churches, (and it 
certainly is,) we must, on the other hand, beware of imitating 
the practice which commenced some centuries ago, of 
imagining that churches are the proper dwellings of God, 
where he is more ready to listen to us, or of attaching to 
them some kind of secret sanctity, which makes prayer there 
more holy. For seeing we are the true temples of God, we 
must pray in ourselves if we would invoke God in his holy 
temple. Let us leave such gross ideas to the Jews or the 
heathen, knowing that we have a command to pray without 
distinction of place, " in spirit and in truth," (John iv. 23.) 
It is true that by the order of God the temple was anciently 
dedicated for the offering of prayers and sacrifices, but this 
was at a time when the truth (which being now fully mani- 
fested, we are not permitted to confine to any material temple) 
lay hid under the figure of shadows. Even the temple was 
not represented to the Jews as confining the presence of 
God within its walls, but was meant to train them to con- 
template the image of the true temple. Accordingly, a 
severe rebuke is administered both by Isaiah and Stephen, 
to those who thought that God could in any way dwell in 
temples made with hands, (Isa. lxvi. 2 ; Acts vii. 48.) 

1 See Book I. chap. xi. sec. 7, 13, on the subject of images in churches. 
Also Book IV. chap. iv. sec. 8, and chap. v. sec. 18, as to the ornaments 
of churches. 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 499 

31. Hence it is perfectly clear that neither words nor 
singing (if used in prayer) are of the least consequence, or 
avail one iota with God, unless they proceed from deep 
feeling in the heart. Nay, rather they provoke his anger 
against us, if they come from the lips and throat only, since 
this is to abuse his sacred name, and hold his majesty in deri- 
sion. This Ave infer from the words of Isaiah, which, though 
their meaning is of wider extent, go to rebuke this vice also : 
" Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, 
and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their 
heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the 
precept of men : therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a mar- 
vellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a 
wronder : for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the 
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid," (Isa. xxix. 
13.) Still we do not condemn words or singing, but rather 
greatly commend them, provided the feeling of the mind 
goes along with them. For in this way the thought of God 
is kept alive on our minds, which, from their fickle and ver- 
satile nature, soon relax, and are distracted by various objects, 
unless various means are used to support them. Besides, 
since the glory of God ought in a manner to be displayed in 
each part of our body, the special service to which the tongue 
should be devoted is that of singing and speaking, inasmuch as 
it has been expressly created to declare and proclaim the 
praise of God. This employment of the tongue is chiefly in 
the public services which are performed in the meeting of the 
saints. In this way the God whom we serve in one spirit 
and one faith, we glorify together as it were with one voice 
and one mouth ; and that openly, so that each may in turn 
receive the confession of his brother's faith, and be invited 
and incited to imitate it. 

32. It is certain that the use of singing in churches (which 
I may mention in passing) is not only very ancient, but was 
also used by the Apostles, as we may gather from the words 
of Paul, " I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the 
understanding also," (1 Cor. xiv. 15.) In like manner he 
says to the Colossians, " Teaching and admonishing one 
another in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing 


500 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

with grace in your hearts to the Lord," (Col. iii. 16.) In the 
former passage, he enjoins us to sing with the voice and the 
heart ; in the latter, he commends spiritual songs, by which 
the pious mutually edify each other. That it was not an 
universal practice, however, is attested by Augustine, (Con- 
fess. Lib. ix. cap. 7,) who states that the church of Milan 
first began to use singing in the time of Ambrose, when the 
orthodox faith being persecuted by Justina, the mother of 
Valentinian, the vigils of the people were more frequent 
than usual ; ] and that the practice was afterwards followed 
by the other Westei'n churches. He had said a little before 
that the custom came from the East.2 He also intimates 
(Retract. Lib. ii.) that it was received in Africa in his own 
time. His words are, " Hilarius, a man of tribunitial rank, 
assailed with the bitterest invectives he could use the custom 
which then began to exist at Carthage, of singing hymns 
from the book of Psalms at the altar, either before the 
oblation, or when it was distributed to the people; I an- 
swered him, at the request of my brethren."3 And certainly 
if singing is tempered to a gravity befitting the presence of 
God and angels, it both gives dignity and grace to sacred 
actions, and has a very powerful tendency to stir up the 
mind to true zeal and ardour in prayer. We must, however, 
carefully beware, lest our ears be more intent on the music 
than our minds on the spiritual meaning of the words. 
Augustine confesses (Confess. Lib. x. cap. 33) that the fear 
of this danger sometimes made him wish for the introduction 
of a practice observed by Athanasius, wrho ordered the 
reader to use only a gentle inflection of the voice, more 
akin to recitation than singing. But on again considering 
how many advantages were derived from singing, he inclined 
to the other side.4 If this moderation is used, there cannot 

1 This clause of the sentence is omitted in the French. 

2 The French adds, " oil on en avoit tousjours use ;" — where it had 
always been used. 

3 The whole of this quotation is omitted in the French. 

4 French, " Mais il adjouste d'autre part, que quand il se souvenoit du 
fruict et de l'edification qu'il avoit recue en oyant chanter a l'Eglise il 
enclinoit plus a Tautre partie, c'est, approuver le chant ;" — but he adds on 
the other hand, that when he called to mind the fruit and edification which 
he had received from hearing singing in the church, he inclined more to 
the other side ; that is, to approve singing. 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 501 

be a doubt that the practice is most sacred and salutary. On 
the other hand, songs composed merely to tickle and delight 
the ear are unbecoming the majesty of the Church, and 
cannot but be most displeasing to God. 

33. It is also plain that the public prayers are not to be 
couched in Greek among the Latins, nor in Latin among the 
French or English, (as hitherto has been every where prac- 
tised,) but in the vulgar tongue, so that all present may 
understand them, since they ought to be used for the edifi- 
cation of the whole Church, which cannot be in the least 
degree benefited by a sound not understood. Those who 
are not moved by any reason of humanity or charity, ought 
at least to be somewhat moved by the authority of Paul, 
whose words are by no means ambiguous : " When thou shalt 
bless with the spirit, how shall he that occupieth the room 
of the unlearned say, Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing 
he understandeth not what thou sayest ? For thou verily 
givest thanks, but the other is not edified," (1 Cor. xiv. 16, 
17.) How then can one sufficiently admire the unbridled 
license of the Papists, who, while the Apostle publicly pro- 
tests against it, hesitate not to bawl out the most verbose 
prayers in a foreign tongue, prayers of which they them- 
selves sometimes do not understand one syllable, and which 
they have no wish that others should understand ? l Different 
is the course which Paul prescribes, " What is it then ? I 
Avill pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the under- 
standing also ; I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing 
with the understanding also :" meaning by the spirit the 
special gift of tongues, which some who had received it 
abused when they dissevered it from the mind, that is, the 
understanding. The principle we must always hold is, that 
in all prayer, public and private, the tongue without the 

1 French, " Qui est-ce done qui se pourra assez esmerveiller d'une 
audace tant effrenee qu'ont eu les Papistes et ont encore, qui contre la 
defense de l'Apostre, chantent et brayent de langue estrange et inconnue, 
en laquelle le plus souvent lis n'entendent pas eux mesmes une syllabe, et 
ne veulent que les autres y entendent?" — Who then can sufficiently admire 
the unbridled audacity which the Papists have had, and still have, who, 
contrary to the prohibition of the Apostle, chant and bray in a foreign 
and unknown tongue, in which, for the most part, they do not understand 
one syllable, and which they have no wish that others understand? 


502 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

mind must be displeasing to God. Moreover, the mind must 
be so incited, as in ardour of thought far to surpass what the 
tongue is able to express. Lastly, the tongue is not even 
necessary to private prayer, unless in so far as the internal 
feeling is insufficient for incitement, or the vehemence of the 
incitement carries the utterance of the tongue along with it. 
For although the best prayers are sometimes without utterance, 
yet when the feeling of the mind is overpowering, the tongue 
spontaneously breaks forth into utterance, and our other 
members into gesture. Hence that dubious muttering of 
Hannah, (1 Sam. i. 13,) something similar to which is expe- 
rienced by all the saints when concise and abrupt expressions 
escape from them. The bodily gestures usually observed in 
prayer, such as kneeling and uncovering of the head, (Calv. 
in Acts xx. 36,) are exercises by which we attempt to rise 
to higher veneration of God. 

34. We must now attend not only to a surer method, but 
also form of prayer, that, namely, which our heavenly Father 
has delivered to us by his beloved Son, and in which we may 
recognise his boundless goodness and condescension, (Matth. 
vi. 9 ; Luke xi. 2.) Besides admonishing and exhorting us 
to seek him in our every necessity, (as children are wont to 
betake themselves to the protection of their parents when 
oppressed with any anxiety,) seeing that we were not fully 
aware how great our poverty was, or what was right or for 
our interest to ask, he has provided for this ignorance ; that 
wherein our capacity failed he has sufficiently supplied. For 
he has given us a form in which is set before us as in a pic- 
ture every thing which it is lawful to wish, every thing which 
is conducive to our interest, every thing which it is necessary 
to demand. From his goodness in this respect we derive the 
great comfort of knowing, that as we ask almost in his words, 
we ask nothing that is absurd, or foreign, or unseasonable ; 
nothing, in short, that is not agreeable to him. Plato, seeing 
the ignorance of men in presenting their desires to God, 
desires which if granted would often be most injurious to 
them, declares the best form of prayer to be that which 
an ancient poet has furnished : " O king Jupiter, give what 
is best, whether we wish it or wish it not ; but avert from us 


/ •• 


1 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 503 

what is evil even though we ask it," (Plato, Alcibid. i.) This 
heathen shows his wisdom in discerning how dangerous it is 
to ask of God what our own passion dictates ; while, at the 
same time, he reminds us of our unhappy condition in not 
being able to open our lips before God without danger, unless 
his Spirit instruct us how to pray aright, (Rom. viii. 26.) 
The higher value, therefore, ought wre to set on the privilege, 
when the only begotten Son of God puts words into our lips, 
and thus relieves our minds of all hesitation. 

35. This form or rule of prayer is. composed of six petitions. 
For I am prevented from agreeing with those who divide it 
into seven by the adversative mode of diction used by the 
Evangelist, who appears to have intended to unite the two 
members together ; as if he had said, Do not allow us to be 
overcome by temptation, but rather bring assistance to our 
frailty, and deliver us that we may not fall. Ancient writers1 
also agree with us, that what is added by Matthew as a 
seventh head is to be considered as explanatory of the sixth 
petition.2 But though in every part of the prayer the first 
place is assigned to the glory of God, still this is more 
especially the object of the three first petitions, in which we 
are to look to the glory of God alone, without any reference 
to what is called our own advantage. The three remaining; 
petitions are devoted to our interest, and properly relate to 
things which it is useful for us to ask. When we ask that 
the name of God may be hallowed, as God wishes to prove 
whether we love and serve him freely, or from the hope of 
reward, we'are not to think at all of our own interest; we 
must set his glory before our eyes, and keep them intent 
upon it alone. In the other similar petitions, this is the only 
manner in which we ought to be affected. It is true, that 
in this way our own interest is greatly promoted, because, 
when the name of God is hallowed in the way we ask, our 

1 August, in Enchirid. ad Laurent, cap. 116. Chrysost. in an imper- 
fect work. See end of sec. 53. 

2 " Dont il est facile de juger que ce qui est adjouste en S. Mafthieu, et 
qu'aucun.s out pris pour une septieme requeste, n'est qu'un explication de 
la sixienie, et se doit a icelle rapporter ;"- — "Whence it is easy to perceive 
that what is added in St Matthew, and which some have taken for ti 
seventh petition, is only an explanation of the sixth, and ought to be refer- 
red to it. 


504 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

own sanctification also is thereby promoted. But in regard 
to this advantage, we must, as I have said, shut our eyes, 
and be in a manner blind, so as not even to see it ; and 
hence were all hope of our private advantage cut off, we still 
should never cease to wish and pray for this hallowing, 
and every thing else which pertains to the glory of God. 
"We have examples in Moses and Paul, who did not count 
it grievous to turn away their eyes and minds from them- 
selves, and with intense and fervent zeal long for death, if 
by their loss the kingdom and glory of God might be pro- 
moted, (Exod. xxxii. 32 ; Kom. ix. 3.) On the other hand, 
when we ask for daily bread, although we desire what is 
advantageous for ourselves, we ought also especially to seek 
the glory of God, so much so that we would not ask at all 
unless it were to turn to his glory. Let us now proceed to 
an exposition of the Prayer. 


OUR FATHER WHICH ART IN HEAVEN. 

36. The first thing suggested at the very outset is, as 
we have already said, (sec. 17-19,) that all our prayers to 
God ought only to be presented in the name of Christ, as 
there is no other name which can recommend them. In call- 
ing God our Father, we certainly plead the name of Christ. 
For with what confidence could any man call God his Father ? 
Who would have the presumption to arrogate to himself the 
honour of a son of God were we not gratuitously adopted as 
his sons in Christ ? He being the true Son, has been given to 
us as a brother, so that that which he possesses as his own 
by nature becomes ours by adoption, if Ave embrace this 
great mercy with firm faith. As John says, " As many as 
received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of 
God, even to them that believe in his name," (John i. 12.) 
Hence he both calls himself our Father, and is pleased to be 
so called by us, by this delightful name relieving us of all 
distrust, since no where can a stronger affection be found 
than in a father. Hence, too, he could not have given us a 
stronger testimony of his boundless love than in calling us his 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 505 

sons. But his love towards us is so much the greater and 
more excellent than that of earthly parents, the farther he 
surpasses all men in goodness and mercy, (Isaiah lxiii. 18.) 
Earthly parents, laying aside all paternal affection, might 
abandon their offspring ; he will never abandon us, (Ps. 
xxvii. 10,) seeing he cannot deny himself. For we have his 
promise, " If ye then, being evil, know how to give good 
gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father 
which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him ?" 
(Matth. vii. 11.) In like manner in the prophet, "Can a 
woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have 
compassion on the son of her womb ? Yea, they may for- 
get, yet will not I forget thee," (Isaiah xlix. 15.) But if 
we are his sons, then as a son cannot betake himself to the 
protection of a stranger and a foreigner without at the same 
time complaining of his father's cruelty or poverty, so we 
cannot ask assistance from any other quarter than from him, 
unless we would upbraid him with poverty, or want of means, 
or cruelty and excessive austerity. 

37. Nor let us allege that we are justly rendered timid 
by a consciousness of sin, by which our Father, though mild 
and merciful, is daily offended. For if among men a son can- 
not have a better advocate to plead his cause with his father, 
and cannot employ a better intercessor to regain his lost 
favour, than if he come himself suppliant and downcast, 
acknowledging his fault, to implore the mercy of his father, 
whose paternal feelings cannot but be moved by such entrea- 
ties, what will that " Father of all mercies, and God of all 
comfort," do ? (2 Cor. i. 3.) Will he not rather listen to the 
tears and groans of his children, Avhen supplicating for 
themselves, (especially seeing he invites and exhorts us to 
do so,) than to any advocacy of others to whom the timid 
have recourse, not without some semblance of despair, be- 
cause they are distrustful of their father's mildness and 
clemency ? The exuberance of his paternal kindness he sets 
before us in the parable, (Luke xv. 20; see Calv. Comm.) 
when the father with open arms receives the son who had 
gone away from him, wasted his substance in riotous liv- 
ing, and in all ways grievously sinned against him. He 
waits not till pardon is asked in words, but, anticipating 


50G INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

the request, recognises him afar off, runs to meet him, con- 
soles him, and restores him to favour. By setting before us 
this admirable example of mildness in a man, he designed to 
show in how much greater abundance we may expect it from 
him who is not only a Father, but the best and most merciful 
of all fathers, however ungrateful, rebellious, and wicked 
sons we may be, provided only we throw ourselves upon his 
mercy. And the better to assure us that he is such a Father 
if we are Christians, he has been pleased to be called not 
only a Father, but OUR Father, as if we were pleading with 
him after this manner, O Father, who art possessed of so 
much affection for thy children, and art so ready to forgive, 
we thy children approach thee and present our requests, 
fully persuaded that thou hast no other feelings towards us 
than those of a father, though we are unworthy of such a 
parent.1 But as our narrow hearts are incapable of compre- 
hending such boundless favour, Christ is not only the earnest 
and pledge of our adoption, but also gives us the Spirit as a 
witness of this adoption, that through him we may freely 
cry aloud, Abba, Father. Whenever, therefore, we are re- 
strained by any feeling of hesitation, let us remember to ask 
of him that he may correct our timidity, and placing us under 
the magnanimous guidance of the Spirit, enable us to pray 
boldly. 

38. The instruction given us, however, is not that every 
individual in particular is to call him Father, but rather that 
we are all in common to call him Our Father. By this we are 
reminded how strong the feeling of brotherly love between 
us ought to be, since we are all alike, by the same mercy 
and free kindness, the children of such a Father. For if He 
from whom we all obtain whatever is good is our common 
Father, (Matth. xxiii. 9,) every thing which has been distri- 
buted to us we should be prepared to communicate to each 
other, as far as occasion demands. But if we are thus 
desirous, as we ought, to stretch out our hand, and give 
assistance to each other, there is nothing by which we can 
more benefit our brethren than by committing them to the 

1 French, " Quelque mauvaistie qu'ayons eue, ou quelque imperfection 
on pourete qui soit en nous ;" — whatever wickedness we may have done, 
or whatever imperfection or poverty there may be in us. 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 507 

care and protection of the best of parents, since if He is 
propitious and favourable nothing more can be desired. 
And, indeed, we owe this also to our Father. For as he 
who truly and from the heart loves the father of a family, 
extends the same love and good-will to all his household, so 
the zeal and affection which we feel for our heavenly Parent 
it becomes us to extend towards his people, his family, and, 
in fine, his heritage, which he has honoured so highly as to 
give them the appellation of the " fulness" of his only begotten 
Son, (Eph. i. 23.) Let the Christian, then, so regulate his 
prayers as to make them common, and embrace all who are his 
brethren in Christ ; not only those whom at present he sees and 
knows to be such, but all men who are alive upon the earth. 
What God has determined with regard to them is beyond 
our knowledge, but to wish and hope the best concerning 
them is both pious and humane. Still it becomes us to 
regard with special affection those who are of the household 
of faith, and whom the Apostle has in express terms recom- 
mended to our care in every thing, (Gal. vi. 10.) In short, 
all our prayers ought to bear reference to that community 
which our Lord has established in his kingdom and family. 

39. This, however, does not prevent us from praying 
specially for ourselves, and certain others, provided our mind 
is not withdrawn from the view of this community, does not 
deviate from it, but constantly refers to it. For prayers, 
though couched in special terms, keeping that object still in 
view, cease not to be common. All this may easily be 
understood by analogy. There is a general command from 
God to relieve the necessities of all the poor, and yet this 
command is obeyed by those who with that view give 
succour to all whom they see or know to be in distress, 
although they pass by many whose wants are not less urgent, 
either because they cannot know or are unable to give 
supply to all. In this way there is nothing repugnant to 
the will of God in those who, giving heed to this common 
society of the Church, yet offer up particular prayers, in 
which, with a public mind, though in special terms, they 
commend to God themselves or others, with whose necessity 
he has been pleased to make them more familiarly acquainted. 


508 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

It is true that prayer and the giving of our substance are 
not in all respects alike. We can only bestow the kindness 
of our liberality on those of whose wants we are aware, 
whereas in prayer we can assist the greatest strangers, how 
wide soever the space which may separate them from us. 
This is done by that general form of prayer which, including 
all the sons of God, includes them also. To this we may 
refer the exhortation which Paul gave to the believers of his 
age, to lift up " holy hands, without wrath and doubting," 
(1 Tim. ii. 8.) By reminding them that dissension is a bar 
to prayer, he shows it to be his wish that they should with 
one accord present their prayers in common. 

40. The next words are, which art in heaven. 
From this we are not to infer that he is enclosed and con- 
fined within the circumference of heaven, as by a kind of 
boundaries. Hence Solomon confesses, " The heaven of 
heavens cannot contain thee," (1 Kings viii. 27 ;) and he 
himself says by the Prophet, " The heaven is my throne, 
and the earth is my footstool," (Isa. lxvi. 1 ;) thereby inti- 
mating, that his presence, not confined to any region, is 
diffused over all space. But as our gross minds are unable 
to conceive of his ineffable glory, it is designated to us by 
heaven, nothing which our eyes can behold being so full of 
splendour and majesty. While, then, we are accustomed to 
regard every object as confined to the place where our senses 
discern it, no place can be assigned to God ; and hence, if 
we would seek him, we must rise higher than all corporeal 
or mental discernment. Again, this form of expression 
reminds us that he is far beyond the reach of change or corrup- 
tion, that he holds the whole universe in his grasp, and rules 
it by his power. The effect of the expression, therefore, is 
the same as if it had been said, that he is of infinite majesty, 
incomprehensible essence, boundless power, and eternal 
duration. When we thus speak of God, our thoughts must 
be raised to their highest pitch ; we must not ascribe to him 
any thing of a terrestrial or carnal nature, must not measure 
him by our little standards, or suppose his will to be like 
ours. At the same time, we must put our confidence in him, 
understanding that heaven and earth are governed by his 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 509 

providence and power. In short, under the name of Father 
is set before us that God, who hath appeared to us in his own 
image, that we may invoke him with sure faith ; the familiar 
name of Father being given not only to inspire confidence, 
but also to curb our minds, and prevent them from going 
astray after doubtful or fictitious gods. We thus ascend 
from the only begotten Son to the supreme Father of angels 
and of the Church. Then when his throne is fixed in heaven, 
we are reminded that he governs the world, and, therefore, 
that it is not in vain to approach him whose present care we 
actually experience. " He that cometh to God," says the 
Apostle, " must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder 
of them that diligently seek him," (Heb. xi. 6.) Here Christ 
makes both claims for his Father, Jirst, that we place our faith 
in him ; and, secondly, that we feel assured that our salva- 
tion is not neglected by him, inasmuch as he condescends to 
extend his providence to us. By these elementary principles 
Paul prepares us to pray aright ; for before enjoining us to 
make our requests known unto God, he premises in this way, 
" The Lord is at hand. Be careful for nothing," (Phil. iv. 5, 
6.) Whence it appears that doubt and perplexity hang 
over the prayers of those in Avhose minds the belief is not 
firmly seated, that " the eyes of the Lord are upon the 
righteous," (Ps. xxxiv. 15.) 

41. The first petition is, hallowed be thy name. 
The necessity of presenting it bespeaks our great disgrace. 
For what can be more unbecoming than that our ingratitude 
and malice should impair, our audacity and petulance should 
as much as in them lies destroy, the glory of God ? But 
though all the ungodly should burst with sacrilegious rage, 
the holiness of God's name still shines forth. Justly does 
the Psalmist exclaim, "According to thy name, O God, so 
is thy praise unto the ends of the earth," (Ps. xlviii. 10.) 
For wherever God hath made himself known, his perfections 
must be displayed, his power, goodness, wisdom, justice, 
mercy, and truth, which fill us with admiration, and incite 
us to show forth his praise. Therefore, as the name of God 
is not duly hallowed on the earth, and we are otherwise 
unable to assert it, it is at least our duty to make it the 


510 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

subject of our prayers. The sum of the whole is, It must be 
our desire that God may receive the honour whtcE is his 
due : that men may never think or speak of him without the 
greatest reverence. The opposite of this reverence is pro- 
fanity, which has always been too common in the world, and 
is very prevalent in the present day. Hence the necessity 
of the petition, which, if piety had any proper existence among 
us, would be superfluous. But if the name of God is duly 
hallowed only when separated from all other names it alone is 
glorified, we are in the petition enjoined to ask not only that 
God would vindicate his sacred name from all contempt and 
insult, but also that he would compel the whole human race 
to reverence it. Then since God manifests himself to us 
partly by his word, and partly by his works, he is not sanc- 
tified unless in regard to both of these we ascribe to him 
what is due, and thus embrace whatever has proceeded from 
him, giving no less praise to his justice than to his mercy. 
On the manifold diversity of his works he has inscribed the 
marks of his glory, and these ought to call forth from every 
tongue an ascription of praise. Thus Scripture will obtain its 
due authority with us, and no event will hinder us from 
celebrating the praises of God, in regard to every part of his 
government. On the other hand, the petition implies a 
wish that all impiety which pollutes this sacred name may 
perish and be extinguished, that every thing which obscures 
or impairs his glory, all detraction and insult, may cease ; 
that all blasphemy being suppressed, the divine majesty may 
be more and more signally displayed. 

42. The second petition is, thy kingdom come. This 
contains nothing new, and yet there is good reason for dis- 
tinguishing it from the first. For if we consider our lethargy 
in the greatest of all matters, we shall see how necessary it 
is that what ought to be in itself perfectly known should be 
inculcated at greater length. Therefore, after the injunction 
to pray that God would reduce to order, and at length com- 
pletely efface every stain which is thrown on his sacred name, 
another petition, containing almost the same wish, is added, 
viz., Thy kingdom come. Although a definition of this king- 
dom has already been given, I now briefly repeat that God 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 511 


>/ 


reigns when men, in denial of themselves, and contempt of 
the world and this earthly life, devote themselves to right- 
eousness and aspire to heaven, (see Calvin, Harm. Matth. vi.) 
Thus this kingdom consists of two parts ; the first is, when 
God by the agency of his Spirit corrects all the depraved 
lusts of the flesh, which in bands war against Him ; and the 
second, when he brings all our thoughts into obedience to his 
authority. This petition, therefore, is duly presented only 
by those who begin with themselves ; in other words, who 
pray that they may be purified from all the corruptions which 
disturb the tranquillity and impair the purity of God's king- 
dom. Then as the word of God is like his royal sceptre, 
we are here enjoined to pray that he would subdue all minds 
and hearts to voluntary obedience. This is done when by 
the secret inspiration of his Spirit he displays the efficacy 
of his word, and raises it to the place of honour which it 
deserves. We must next descend to the wicked, who per- 
versely and with desperate madness resist his authority. God, 
therefore, sets up his kingdom, by humbling the whole world, 
though in different ways, taming the wantonness of some, and 
breaking the ungovernable pride of others. We should desire 
this to be done every day, in order that God may gather 
churches to himself from all quarters of the world, may extend 
and increase their numbers, enrich them with his gifts, estab- 
lish due order among them ; on the other hand, beat down 
all the enemies of pure doctrine and religion, dissipate their 
counsels, defeat their attempts. Hence it appears that there 
is good ground for the precept which enjoins daily progress, 
for human affairs are never so prosperous as when the im- 
purities of vice are purged away, and integrity flourishes in 
full vigour. The completion, however, is deferred to the 
final advent of Christ, when, as Paul declares, " God will 
be all in all," (1 Cor. xv. 28.) This prayer, therefore, ought 
to withdraw us from the corruptions of the world which sepa- 
rate us from God, and prevent his kingdom from flourishing 
within us ; secondly, it ought to inflame us with an ardent 
desire for the mortification of the flesh ; and, lastly, it ought 
to train us to the endurance of the cross ; since this is the 
way in which God would have his kingdom to be advanced. 


512 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOR III. 

It ought not to grieve us that the outward man decays, pro- 
vided the inner man is renewed. For such is the nature of 
the kingdom of God, that while wTe submit to his righteous- 
ness he makes us partakers of his glory. This is the case 
•when continually adding to his light and truth, by which the 
lies and the darkness of Satan and his kingdom are dissipated, 
extinguished, and destroyed, he protects his people, guides 
them aright by the agency of his Spirit, and confirms them 
in perseverance ; while, on the other hand, he frustrates the 
impious conspiracies of his enemies, dissipates their wiles and 
frauds, prevents their malice and curbs their petulance, until 
at length he consume Antichrist " with the spirit of his 
mouth," and destroy all impiety " with the brightness of his 
coming," (2 Thess. ii. 8, Calv. Com.) 

43. The third petition is, thy "will be done on earth 
AS it is in heaven. Though this depends on his kingdom, 
and cannot be disjoined from it, yet a separate place is not 
improperly given to it on account of our ignorance, which does 
not at once or easily apprehend what is meant by God reign- 
ing in the world. This, therefore, may not improperly be 
taken as the explanation, that God will be King in the world 
when all shall subject themselves to his will. We are not here 
treating of that secret will by which he governs all things, 
and destines them to their end, (see chap. xxiv. s. 17.) For 
although devils and men rise in tumult against him, he 
is able by his incomprehensible counsel not only to turn aside 
their violence, but make it subservient to the execution of 
his decrees. What we here speak of is another will of God, 
namely, that of which voluntary obedience is the counterpart ; 
and, therefore, heaven is expressly contrasted with earth, be- 
cause, as is said in The Psalms, the angels " do his command- 
ments, hearkening unto the voice of his word," (Ps. ciii. 20.) 
We are, therefore, enjoined to pray that as everything done in 
heaven is at the command of God, and the angels are calmly 
disposed to do all that is right, so the earth may be brought 
under his authority, all rebellion and depravity having been 
extinguished. In presenting this request we renounce the 
desires of the flesh, because he who does not entirely resign 
his aiFections to God, does as much as in him lies to oppose 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 513 

the divine will, since everything which proceeds from us is 
vicious. Again, by this prayer we are taught to deny our- 
selves, that God may rule us according to his pleasure ; and not 
only so, but also having annihilated our own may create new 
thoughts and new minds, so that we shall have no desire save 
that of entire agreement with his will ; in short, wish nothing 
of ourselves, but have our hearts governed by his Spirit, under 
whose inward teaching we may learn to love those things 
which please and hate those things which displease him. 
Hence also we must desire that he would nullify and suppress 
all affections which are repugnant to his will. 

Such are the three first heads of the prayer, in presenting 
which we should have the glory of God only in view, taking 
no account of ourselves, and paying no respect to our own 
advantage, which, though it is thereby greatly promoted, is 
not here to be the subject of request. And though all the 
events prayed for must happen in their own time, without being 
either thought of, wished, or asked by us, it is still our 
duty to wish and ask for them. And it is of no slight im- 
portance to do so, that we may testify and profess that we are 
the servants and children of God, desirous by every means in 
our power to promote the honour due to him as our Loi'd and 
Father, and truly and thoroughly devoted to his service. Hence 
if men, in praying that the name of God may be hallowed, 
that his kingdom may come, and his will be done, are not 
influenced by this zeal for the promotion of his glory, they are 
not to be accounted among the servants and children of God ; 
and as all these things will take place against their will, so 
they will turn out to their confusion and destruction. 

44. Now comes the second part of the prayer, in which we 
descend to our own interests, not, indeed, that we are to lose 
sight of the glory of God, (to which, as Paul declares, Ave 
must have respect even in meat and drink, 1 Cor. x. 31,) and 
ask only what is expedient for ourselves ; but the distinction, 
as we have already observed, is this : God claiming the three 
first petitions as specially his own, carries us entirely to 
himself, that in this way he may prove our piety. Next he 
permits vis to look to our own advantage, but still on the con- 
VOL. II. 2 K 


514 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

dition, that when we ask anything for ourselves it must be 
in order that all the benefits which he confers may show forth 
his glory, there being nothing more incumbent on us than to 
live and die to him. 

By the first petition of the second part, give us this day 
our daily bread, we pray in general that God would give 
us all things which the body recmires in this sublunary state, 
not only food and clothing, but everything which he knows 
will assist us to eat our bread in peace. In this way we 
briefly cast our care upon him, and commit ourselves to his 
providence, that he may feed, foster, and preserve us. For 
our heavenly Father disdains not to take our body under his 
charge and protection, that he may exercise our faith in those 
minute matters, while we look to him for everything, even to 
a morsel of bread and a drop of water. For since, owing to 
some strange inecmality, we feel more concern for the body 
than for the soul, many who can trust the latter to God still 
continue anxious about the former, still hesitate as to what 
they are to eat, as to how they are to be clothed, and are in 
trepidation whenever their hands are not filled with corn, and 
wine, and oil, (Ps. iv. 8 :) so much more value do we set 
on this shadowy, fleeting life, than on a blessed immortality. 
But those who, trusting to God, have once cast away that 
anxiety about the flesh, immediately look to him for greater 
gifts, even salvation and eternal life. It is no slight exercise of 
faith, therefore, to hope in God for things which would other- 
wise give us so much concern ; nor have we made little 
progress when we get quit of this unbelief, which cleaves, as 
it were, to our very bones. 

The speculations of some concerning supersubstantial bread 
seem to be very little accordant with our Saviour's meaning ; 
for our prayer would be defective were we not to ascribe to 
God the nourishment even of this fading life. The reason 
which they give is heathenish, viz., that it is inconsistent 
with the character of sons of God, who ought to be spiritual, 
not only to occupy their mind with earthly cares, but to sup- 
pose God also occupied with them. As if his blessing and 
paternal favour were not eminently displayed in giving us 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 515 

food, or as if there were nothing in the declaration that god- 
liness hath " the promise of the life that now is, and of that 
which is to come," (1 Tim. iv. 8.) But although the for- 
giveness of sins is of far more importance than the nourish- 
ment of the body, yet Christ has set down the inferior in the 
prior place, in order that he might gradually raise us to the 
other two petitions, which properly belong to the heavenly 
life, — in this providing for our sluggishness. We are enjoined 
to ask our bread, that we may be contented with the measure 
which our heavenly Father is pleased to dispense, and not 
strive to make gain by illicit arts. Meanwhile, Ave must hold 
that the title by which it is ours is donation, because, as 
Moses says, (Levit. xxvi. 20 ; Deut. viii. 17,) neither our 
industry, nor labour, nor hands, acquire any thing for us, 
unless the blessing of God be present ; nay, not even would 
abundance of bread be of the least avail were it not divinely 
converted into nourishment. And hence this liberality of 
God is not less necessary to the rich than the poor, because, 
though their cellars and barns were full, they would be 
parched and pine with want did they not enjoy his favour 
along with their bread. The terms this day, or, as it is in 
another Evangelist, daily, and also the epithet daily, lay a 
restraint on our immoderate desire of fleeting good — a de- 
sire which we are extremely apt to indulge to excess, and 
from which other evils ensue : for when our supply is in 
richer abundance we ambitiously squander it in pleasure, 
luxury, ostentation, or other kinds of extravagance. Where- 
fore, we are only enjoined to ask as much as our necessity 
requires, and as it were for each day, confiding that our 
heavenly Father, who gives us the supply of to-day, will 
not fail us on the morrow. How great soever our abun- 
dance may be, however well filled our cellars and granaries, 
we must still always ask for daily bread, for we must feel 
assured that all substance is nothing, unless in so far as the 
Lord, by pouring out his blessing, make it fruitful during its 
whole progress ; for even that which is in our hand is not 
ours except in so far as he every hour portions it out, and 
permits us to use it. As nothing is more difficult to 
human pride than the admission of this truth, the Lord 


516 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

declares that he gave a special proof for all ages, when he 
fed his people with manna in the desert, (Deut. viii. 3,) that 
he might remind us that " man shall not live by bread alone, 
but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of 
God," (Matth. iv. 4.) It is thus intimated, that by his 
power alone our life and strength are sustained, though he 
ministers supply to us by bodily instruments. In like man- 
ner, whenever it so pleases, he gives us a proof of an opposite 
description, by breaking the strength, or, as he himself calls 
it, the staff of bread, (Levit. xxvi. 26,) and leaving us even 
while eating to pine with hunger, and while drinking to be 
parched with thirst. Those who, not contented with daily 
bread, indulge an unrestrained insatiable cupidity, or those 
who are full of their own abundance, and trust in their own 
riches, only mock God by offering up this prayer. For the 
former ask what they would be unwilling to obtain, nay, 
what they most of all abominate, namely, daily bread only, 
and as much as in them lies disguise their avarice from God, 
whereas true prayer should pour out the whole soul and every 
inward feeling before him. The latter, again, ask what they 
do not at all expect to obtain, namely, what they imagine that 
they in themselves already possess. In its being called ours, 
God, as we have already said, gives a striking display of his 
kindness, making that to be ours to which we have no just 
claim. Nor must we reject the view to which I have already 
adverted, viz., that this name is given to what is obtained by 
just and honest labour, as contrasted with what is obtained 
by fraud and rapine, nothing being our own which we obtain 
with injury to others. When we ask God to give us, the 
meaning is, that the thing asked is simply and freely the 
gift of God, whatever be the quarter from which it comes to 
us, even when it seems to have been specially prepared by 
our own art and industry, and procured by our hands, 
since it is to his blessing alone that all our labours owe their 
success. 

45. The next petition is, forgive us our debts. In 
this and the following petition our Saviour has briefly com- 
prehended whatever is conducive to the heavenly life, as 
these two members contain the spiritual covenant which God 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 517 

made for the salvation of his Church, " I will put my law in 
their inward parts, and write it on their hearts." " I will 
pardon all their iniquities," (Jer. xxxi. 33 ; xxxiii. 8.) Here 
our Saviour begins with the forgiveness of sins, and then 
adds the subsequent blessing, viz., that God would protect us 
by the power, and support us by the aid of his Spirit, so 
that we may stand invincible against all temptations. To 
sins he gives the name of debts, because we owe the punish- 
ment due to them, a debt which we could not possibly pay 
were we not discharged by this remission, the result of his 
free mercy, when he freely expunges the debt, accepting 
nothing in return ; but of his own mercy receiving satisfac- 
tion in Christ, who gave himself a ransom for us, (Rom. iii. 
24.) Hence, those Avho expect to satisfy God by merits of 
their own or of others, or to compensate and purchase for- 
giveness by means of satisfactions, have no share in this free 
pardon, and while they address God in this petition, do no- 
thing more than subscribe their own accusation, and seal 
their condemnation by their own testimony. For they con- 
fess that they are debtors, unless they are discharged by 
means of forgiveness. This forgiveness, however, they do 
not receive, but rather reject, when they obtrude their merits 
and satisfactions upon God, since by so doing they do not 
implore his mercy, but appeal to his justice. Let those, 
again, who dream of a perfection which makes it unnecessary 
to seek pardon, find their disciples among those whose itch- 
ing ears incline them to imposture,1 (see Calv. on Dan. ix. 
20 ;) only let them understand that those whom they thus 
acquire have been carried away from Christ, since he, by 
instructing all to confess their guilt, receives none but sin- 
ners, not that he may soothe, and so encourage them in 
their sins, but because he knows that believers are never so 
divested of the sins of the flesh as not to remain obnoxious 
to the justice of God. It is, indeed, to be wished, it ought 
even to be our strenuous endeavour, to perform all the parts 
of our duty, so as truly to congratulate ourselves before God 


1 French, " Telles disciples qu'ils voudront ;" — such disciples as they 

rill. 


518 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

as being pure from every stain ; but as God is pleased to 
renew his image in us by degrees, so that to some extent 
there is always a residue of corruption in our flesh, Ave ought 
by no means to neglect the remedy. But if Christ, accord- 
ing to the authority given him by his Father, enjoins us, 
during the whole course of our lives, to implore pardon, who 
can tolerate those new teachers who, by the phantom of per- 
fect innocence, endeavour to dazzle the simple, and make 
them believe that they can render themselves completely 
free from guilt ? This, as John declares, is nothing else than 
to make God a liar, (1 John i. 10.) In like manner, those 
foolish men mutilate the covenant in which we have seen that 
our salvation is contained by concealing one head of it, and 
so destroying it entirely ; being guilty not only of profanity 
in that they separate things which ought to be indissolubly 
connected ; but also of wickedness and cruelty in overwhelm- 
ing wretched souls with despair — of treachery also to them- 
selves and their followers, in that they encourage themselves 
in a carelessness diametrically opposed to the mercy of God. 
It is excessively childish to object, that when they long for the 
advent of the kingdom of God, they at the same time pray 
for the abolition of sin. In the former division of the prayer 
absolute perfection is set before us ; but in the latter our 
own weakness. Thus the two fitly correspond to each other — 
we strive for the goal, and at the same time neglect not the 
remedies which our necessities require. 

In the next part of the petition we pray to be forgiven, 
" as we forgive our debtors ;" that is, as we spare and pardon 
all by whom we are in any way offended, either in deed by 
unjust, or in word by contumelious treatment. Not that we 
can forgive the guilt of a fault or offence ; this belongs to 
God only ; but we can forgive to this extent : we can volun- 
tarily divest our minds of wrath, hatred, and revenge, and 
efface the remembrance of injuries by a voluntary oblivion. 
Wherefore, we are not to ask the forgiveness of our sins 
from God, unless we forgive the offences of all who are or 
have been injurious to us. If we retain any hatred in our 
minds, if we meditate revenge, and devise the means of 
hurting ; nay, if we do not return to a good understanding 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 519 

with our enemies, perform every kind of friendly office, and 
endeavour to effect a reconciliation with them, we by this 
petition beseech God not to grant us forgiveness. For we 
ask him to do to us as we do to others. This is the same as 
asking him not to do unless we do also. What, then, do 
such persons obtain by this petition but a heavier judg- 
ment ? Lastly, it is to be observed that the condition of 
being forgiven as we forgive our debtors, is not added 
because by forgiving others we deserve forgiveness, as if the 
cause of forgiveness were expressed ; but by the use of this 
expression the Lord has been pleased partly to solace the 
weakness of our faith, using; it as a sign to assure us that our 
sins are as certainly forgiven as we are certainly conscious of 
having forgiven others, when our mind is completely purged 
from all envy, hatred, and malice ; and partly using as a badge 
by which he excludes from the number of his children all 
who, prone to revenge and reluctant to forgive, obstinately 
keep up their enmity, cherishing against others that indigna- 
tion which they deprecate from themselves; so that they 
should not venture to invoke him as a Father. In the 
Gospel of Luke, we have this distinctly stated in the words 
of Christ. 

46. The sixth petition corresponds (as we have observed) 
to the promise1 of writing the law upon our hearts ; but be- 
cause we do not obey God without a continual warfare, 
without sharp and arduous contests, we here pray that he 
would furnish us with armour, and defend us by his protec- 
tion, that we may be able to obtain the victory. By this we 
are reminded that we not only have need of the gift of the 
Spirit inwardly to soften our hearts, and turn and direct them 
to the obedience of God, but also of his assistance, to render 
us invincible by all the wiles and violent assaults of Satan. 
The forms of temptation are many and various. The de- 
praved conceptions of our minds provoking us to transgress 
the law — conceptions which our concupiscence suggests or 
the devil excites, are temptations ; and things which in their 
own nature are not evil, become temptations by the wiles of 

1 The French adds, "que Dieu nous a donnee et faite ;"— which Gcd 
has given and performed to us. 


520 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

the devil, when they are presented to our eyes in such a way 
that the view of them makes us withdraw or decline from 
God.1 These temptations are both on the right hand and 
on the left. On the right, when riches, power, and honours, 
which by their glare, and the semblance of good which they 
present, generally dazzle the eyes of men, and so entice by 
their blandishments, that, caught by their snares, and in- 
toxicated by their sweetness, they forget their God : on 
the left, when offended by the hardship and bitterness of 
poverty, disgrace, contempt, afflictions, and other things of 
that description, they despond, cast away their confidence 
and hope, and are at length totally estranged from God. 
In regard to both kinds of temptation, which either enkindled 
in us by concupiscence, or presented by the craft of Satan, 
war against us, we pray God the Father not to allow us to 
be overcome, but rather to raise and support us by his hand, 
that strengthened by his mighty power we may stand firm 
against all the assaults of our malignant enemy, whatever be 
the thoughts which he sends into our minds ; next we pray 
that whatever of either description is allotted us, we may 
turn to good, that is, may neither be inflated with prosperity, 
nor cast down by adversity. Here, however, we do not ask 
to be altogether exempted from temptation, which is very 
necessary to excite, stimulate, and urge us on, that we may not 
become too lethargic. It was not without reason that David 
wished to be tried, nor is it without cause that the Lord daily 
tries his elect, chastising them by disgrace, poverty, tribulation, 
and other kinds of cross.2 But the temptations of God and 
Satan are very different : Satan tempts, that he may destroy, 
condemn, confound, throw headlong ; God, that by proving his 
people he may make trial of their sincerity, and by exercising 
their strength confirm it ; may mortify, tame, and cauterise 
their flesh, which, if not curbed in this manner, would wanton 
and exult above measure. Besides, Satan attacks those who 
are unarmed and unprepared, that he may destroy them 

» James i. 2, 14 ; Matth. iv. 1, 3 ; 1 Thess. iii. 5 ; 2 Cor. vi. 7, 8. 

2 Ps. xxvi. 2 ; Gen. xxii. 1 ; Deut. viii. 2 ; xiii. 3 ; 1 Cor. x. 13 ; 2 Pet. 
ii. 9 ; 1 Pet. v. 8. For the sense in which God is said to lead us into 
temptation, see the end of this section. 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 521 

unawares ; whereas, whatever God sends, he " will with the 
temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able 
to bear it." Whether by the term evil we understand the 
devil or sin, is not of the least consequence. Satan is indeed 
the very enemy who lays snares for our life, but it is by sin 
that he is armed for our destruction. 

Our petition, therefore, is, that we may not be overcome 
or overwhelmed with temptation, but in the strength of the 
Lord may stand firm against all the powers by which we are 
assailed ; in other words, may not fall under temptation : 
that being thus taken under his charge and protection, we 
may remain invincible by sin, death, the gates of hell, and the 
whole power of the devil ; in other words, be delivered from 
evil. Here it is carefully to be observed, that we have no 
strength to contend with such a combatant as the devil, or 
to sustain the violence of his assault. Were it otherwise, it 
would be mockery of God to ask of him what we already 
possess in ourselves. Assuredly those who in self-confidence 
prepare for such a fight, do not understand how bold and 
well-equipped the enemy is with whom they have to do. 
Now we ask to be delivered from his power, as from the 
mouth of some furious raging lion, who would instantly tear 
us with his teeth and claws, and swallow us up, did not the 
Lord rescue us from the midst of death ; at the same time 
knowing that if the Lord is present and will fight for us 
while we stand by, through him " we shall do valiantly," (Ps. 
lx. 12.) L.et others if they will confide in the powers and 
resources of their free will which they think they possess ; 
enough for us that we stand and are strong in the power of 
God alone. But the prayer comprehends more than at first 
sight it seems to do. For if the Spirit of God is our strength 
in waging the contest with Satan, we cannot gain the victory 
unless we are filled with him, and thereby freed from all 
infirmity of the flesh. Therefore, when we pray to be de- 
livered from sin and Satan, we at the same time desire to be 
enriched with new supplies of divine grace, until completely 
replenished with them, we triumph over every evil. To some 
it seems rude and harsh to ask God not to lead us into 
temptation, since, as James declares, (James i. lo,) it is 


522 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

contrary to his nature to do so. This difficulty has already 
been partly solved by the fact that our concupiscence is the 
cause, and therefore properly bears the blame of all the 
temptations by which we are overcome. All that James 
means is, that it is vain and unjust to ascribe to God vices 
which our own consciousness compels us to impute to our- 
selves. But this is no reason why God may not when he 
sees it meet bring us into bondage to Satan, give us up to a 
reprobate mind and shameful lusts, and so by a just, indeed, 
but often hidden judgment, lead us into temptation. Though 
the cause is often concealed from men, it is well known to 
him. Hence we may see that the expression is not impro- 
per, if we are persuaded that it is not without cause he so 
often threatens to give sure signs of his vengeance, by blind- 
ing the reprobate, and hardening their hearts. 

47. These three petitions, in which we specially commend 
ourselves and all that we have to God, clearly show what 
we formerly observed, (sec. 38, 39,) that the prayers of 
Christians should be public, and have respect to the public 
edification of the Church and the advancement of believers 
in spiritual communion. For no one requests that anything 
should be given to him as an individual, but we all ask in 
common for daily bread and the forgiveness of sins, not to 
be led into temptation, but delivered from evil. Moreover, 
there is subjoined the reason for our great boldness in asking 
and confidence of obtaining, (sec. 11, 36.) Although this 
does not exist in the Latin copies, yet as it accords so well 
with the whole, we cannot think of omitting it. 

The words are, thine is the kingdom, and the powee, 
and the glory, for ever. Here is the calm and firm 
assurance of our faith. For were our prayers to be com- 
mended to God by our own worth, who would venture even 
to whisper before him ? Now, however wretched we may be, 
however unworthy, however devoid of commendation, we 
shall never want a reason for prayer, nor a ground of confi- 
dence, since the kingdom, power, and glory, can never be 
wrested from our Father. The last word is amen, by which 
is expressed the eagerness of our desire to obtain the things 
which we ask, while our hope is confirmed, that all things 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 523 

have already been obtained, and will assuredly be granted to 
us, seeing they have been promised by God, who cannot de- 
ceive. This accords with the form of expression to which 
we have already adverted : " Grant, O Lord, for thy name's 
sake, not on account of us or of our righteousness." By 
this the saints not only express the end of their prayers, but 
confess that they are unworthy of obtaining did not God find 
the cause in himself, and were not their confidence founded 
entirely on His nature. 

48. All things that wc ought, indeed all that we are able, to 
ask of God, are contained in this formula, and as it were rule, 
of prayer delivered by Christ, our divine Master, whom the 
Father has appointed to be our teacher, and to whom alone 
he would have us to listen, (Matth. xvii. 5.) For he ever 
was the eternal wisdom of the Father, and being made man, 
was manifested as the Wonderful, the Counsellor, (Isa. xi. 2.) 
Accordingly, this prayer is complete in all its parts, so com- 
plete, that whatever is extraneous and foreign to it, whatever 
cannot be referred to it, is impious and unworthy of the 
•approbation of God. For he has here summarily prescribed 
what is worthy of him, what is acceptable to him, and what is 
necessary for us ; in short, whatever he is pleased to grant. 
Those, therefore, who presume to go further and ask some- 
thing more from God, first seek to add of their own to the 
wisdom of God, (this it is insane blasphemy to do ;) secondly, 
refusing to confine themselves Avithin the will of God, and 
despising it, they wander as their cupidity directs ; lastly, 
they will never obtain anything, seeing they pray without 
faith. For there cannot be a doubt that all such prayers are 
made without faith, because at variance with the word of 
God, on which if faith do not always lean it cannot possibly 
stand. Those who, disregarding the Master's rule, indulge 
their own wishes, not only have not the word of God, but as 
much as in them lies oppose it. Hence Tertullian (De Fuga 
in Persequutione) has not less truly than elegantly termed it 
Lawful Prayer, tacitly intimating that all other prayers are 
lawless and illicit. 

49. By this, however, we would not have it understood 
that we are so astricted to this form of prayer as to make it 


524 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK IIT. 

unlawful to change a word or syllable of it. For in Scripture 
we meet with many prayers differing greatly from it in word, 
yet written by the same Spirit, and capable of being used by 
us with the greatest advantage. Many prayers also are con- 
tinually suggested to believers by the same Spirit, though in 
expression they bear no great resemblance to it. All we 
mean to say is, that no man should wish, expect, or ask any- 
thing which is not summarily comprehended in this prayer. 
Though the words may be very different, there must be no 
difference in the sense. In this way, all prayers, both those 
which are contained in the Scripture, and those which come 
forth from pious breasts, must be referred to it, certainly none 
can ever equal it, far less surpass it in perfection. It omits 
nothing which we can conceive in praise of God, nothing 
which we can imagine advantageous to man, and the whole 
is so exact that all hope of improving it may well be re- 
nounced. In short, let us remember that we have here the 
doctrine of heavenly wisdom. God has taught what he willed ; 
he willed what was necessary. 

50. But although it has been said above, (sec. 7, 27, &c.,) 
that we ought always to raise our minds upwards towards 
God, and pray without ceasing, yet such is our weakness, which 
requires to be supported, such our torpor, which requires to be 
stimulated, that it is requisite for us to appoint special hours 
for this exercise, hours which are not to pass away without 
prayer, and during which the whole affections of our minds 
are to be completely occupied ; namely, when we rise in the 
morning, before we commence our daily work, when we sit 
down to food, when by the blessing of God we have taken it, 
and when we retire to rest. This, however, must not be 
a superstitious observance of hours, by which, as it were, 
performing a task to God, we think we are discharged 
as to other hours; it should rather be considered as a 
discipline by which our weakness is exercised, and ever 
and anon stimulated. In particular, it must be our anxious 
care, whenever Ave are ourselves pressed, or see others pressed 
by any strait, instantly to have recourse to him not only with 
quickened pace, but with quickened minds ; and again, Ave 
must not in any prosperity of ourselves or others omit to 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 525 

testify our recognition of his hand by praise and thanksgiving. 
Lastly, Ave must in all our prayers carefully avoid wishing to 
confine God to certain circumstances, or prescribe to him the 
time, place, or mode of action. In like manner, Ave are taught 
by this prayer not to fix any law or impose any condition 
upon him, but leave it entirely to him to adopt whatever 
course of procedure seems to him best, in respect of method, 
time, and place. For before we offer up any petition for our- 
selves, Ave ask that his Avill may be done, and by so doing place 
our will in subordination to his, just as if we had laid a curb 
upon it, that, instead of presuming to give law to God, it 
may regard him as the ruler and disposer of all its Avishes. 

51. If, with minds thus framed to obedience, we allow our- 
selves to be governed by the laws of Divine Providence, we 
shall easily learn to persevere in prayer, and suspending our 
own desires Avait patiently for the Lord, certain, however 
little the appearance of it may be, that he is always present 
with us, and will in his own time show Iioav very far he was 
from turning a deaf ear to prayers, though to the eyes of men 
they may seem to be disregarded. This will be a very present 
consolation, if at any time God does not grant an immediate 
answer to our prayers, preventing us from fainting or giving 
way to despondency, as those are wont to do Avho, in invok- 
ing God, are so borne aAvay by their OAvn fervour, that unless 
he yield on their first importunity and give present help, they 
immediately imagine that he is angry and offended Avith them, 
and abandoning all hope of success cease from prayer. On 
the contrary, deferring our hope Avith Avell tempered equani- 
mity, let us insist with that perseverance which is so strongly 
recommended to us in Scripture. We may often see in The 
Psalms how David and other believers, after they are almost 
Aveary of praying, and seem to have been beating the air by 
addressing a God Avho would not hear, yet cease not to pray 
because due authority is not given to the word of God, unless 
the faith placed in it is superior to all events. Again, let us 
not tempt God, and by wearying him with our importunity, 
provoke his anger against us. Many have a practice of for- 
mally bargaining with God on certain conditions, and, as if he 
were the servant of their lusts, binding him to certain stipu- 


526 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

lations ; with which if he do not immediately comply, they 
are indignant and fretful, murmur, complain, and make a 
noise. Thus offended, he often in his anger grants to such 
persons what in mercy he kindly denies to others. Of this 
we have a proof in the children of Israel, for whom it had 
been better not to have been heard by the Lord, than to 
swallow his indignation with their flesh, (Num. xi. 18, 33.) 

52. But if our sense is not able till after long expectation 
to perceive what the result of prayer is, or experience any 
benefit from it, still our faith will assure us of that which can- 
not be perceived by sense, viz., that we have obtained what 
was fit for us, the Lord having so often and so surely engaged 
to take an interest in all our troubles from the moment they 
have been deposited in his bosom. In this way we shall 
possess abundance in poverty, and comfort in affliction. For 
though all things fail, God will never abandon us, and he can- 
not frustrate the expectation and patience of his people. He 
alone will suffice for all, since in himself he comprehends all 
good, and will at last reveal it to us on the day of judgment, 
when his kingdom shall be plainly manifested. We may add, 
that although God complies with our request, he does not 
always give an answer in the very terms of our prayer, 
but while apparently holding us in suspense, yet in an 
unknown way, shows that our prayers have not been in vain. 
This is the meaning of the words of John, " If we know that 
he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the 
petitions that we desired of him," (1 John v. 15.) It might 
seem that there is here a great superfluity of words, but the 
declaration is most useful, namely, that God, even when he 
does not comply with our requests, yet listens and is favour- 
able to our prayers, so that our hope founded on his word is 
never disappointed. But believers have always need of being 
supported by this patience, as they could not stand long if 
they did not lean upon it. For the trials by which the Lord 
proves and exercises us are severe, nay, he often drives us to 
extremes, and when driven allows us long to stick fast in the 
mire before he gives us any taste of his sweetness. As 
Hannah says, " The Lord killeth, and maketh alive ; he 
bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth up," (1 Sam. ii. 6.) 


CHAP. XX. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 52 

What could they here do but become dispirited and rush on 
despair, were they not, when afflicted, desolate, and half dead, 
comforted with the thought that they are regarded by God, 
and that there will be an end to their present evils. But how- 
ever secure their hopes may stand, they in the meantime 
cease not to pray, since prayer unaccompanied by persever- 
ance leads to no result. 


528 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 


CHAPTER XXI. 

OF THE ETERNAL ELECTION, BY WHICH GOD HAS PREDES- 
TINATED SOME TO SALVATION, AND OTHERS TO DESTRUC- 
TION. 

The divisions of this chapter are, — I. The necessity and utility of the 
doctrine of eternal Election explained. Excessive curiosity restrained, 
sec. 1, 2. II. Explanation to those who through false modesty shun 
the doctrine of Predestination, sec. 3, 4. III. The orthodox doctrine 
expounded. 

Sections. 

1. The doctrine of Election and Predestination. It is useful, necessary, 

and most sweet. Ignorance of it impairs the glory of God, plucks 
up humility by the roots, begets and fosters pride. The doctrine 
establishes the certainty of salvation, peace of conscience, and the 
true origin of the Church. Answer to two classes of men : 1. The 
curious. 

2. A sentiment of Augustine confirmed by an admonition of our Saviour 

and a passage of Solomon. 

3. An answer to a second class, viz., those who are unwilling that the 

doctrine should be adverted to. An objection founded on a pass- 
age of Solomon, solved by the words of Moses. 

4. A second objection, viz., That this doctrine is a stumbling-block to 

the profane. Answer 1. The same may be said of many other 
heads of doctrine. 2. The truth of God will always defend itself. 
Third objection, viz., That this doctrine is dangerous even to 
believers. Answer 1. The same objection made to Augustine. 2. 
We must not despise anything that God has revealed. Arrogance 
and blasphemy of such objections. 

5. Certain cavils against the doctrine. 1. Prescience regarded as the 

cause of predestination. Prescience and predestination explained. 
Not prescience, but the good pleasure of God the cause of predesti- 
nation. This apparent from the gratuitous election of the posterity 
of Abraham and the rejection of all others. 

6. Even of the posterity of Abraham some elected and others rejected 

by special grace. 

7. The Apostle shows that the same thing has been done in regard to 

individuals under the Christian dispensation. 


CHAP. XXI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 529 

1. The covenant of life is not preached equally to all, and 
among those to whom it is preached, does not always meet 
with the same reception. This diversity displays the un- 
searchable depth of the divine judgment, and is without doubt 
subordinate to God's purpose of eternal election. But if it 
is plainly owing to the mere pleasure of God that salvation is 
spontaneously offered to some, while others have no access to 
it, great and difficult questions immediately arise, questions 
which are inexplicable, when just views are not entertained 
concerning election and predestination. To many this seems 
a perplexing subject, because they deem it most incongruous 
that of the great body of mankind some should be predestin- 
ated to salvation, and others to destruction. How causelessly 
they entangle themselves will appear as we proceed. We 
may add, that in the very obscurity which deters them, we 
may see not only the utility of this doctrine, but also its 
most pleasant fruits. We shall never feel persuaded as we 
ought that our salvation flows from the free mercy of God as 
its fountain, until we are made acquainted with his eternal 
election, the grace of God being illustrated by the contrast, 
viz., that he does not adopt all promiscuously to the hope of 
salvation, but gives to some what he denies to others. It is 
plain how greatly ignorance of this principle detracts from 
the glory of God, and impairs true humility. But though 
thus necessary to be known, Paul declares that it cannot be 
known unless God, throwing works entirely out of view, elect 
those whom he has predestined. His words are, "Even so 
then at this present time also, there is a remnant according 
to the election of grace. And if by grace, then it is no more 
of works : otherwise grace is no more grace. But if it be of 
works, then it is no more grace : otherwise work is no more 
work," (Rom. xi. 6.) If to make it appear that our salvation 
flows entirely from the good mercy of God, we must be car- 
ried back to the origin of election, then those who would 
extinguish it, wickedly do as much as in them lies to ob- 
scure what they ought most loudly to extol, and pluck up 
humility by the very roots. Paul clearly declares that it is 
only when the salvation of a remnant is ascribed to gTatuitous 
election, we arrive at the knowledge that God saves whom he 
VOL. II. 2 L 


530 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

Avills of his mere good pleasure, and does not pay a debt, a 
debt which never can be due. Those who preclude access, 
and would not have any one to obtain a taste of this doc- 
trine, are equally unjust to God and men, there being no 
other means of humbling us as we ought, or making us feel 
how much we are bound to him. Nor, indeed, have we else- 
where any sure ground of confidence. This we say on the 
authority of Christ, who, to deliver us from all fear, and ren- 
der us invincible amid our many dangers, snares, and mortal 
conflicts, promises safety to all that the Father hath taken 
under his protection, (John x. 26.) From this we infer, that 
all who know not that they are the peculiar people of God, 
must be wretched from perpetual trepidation, and that those, 
therefore, who, by overlooking the three advantages which 
we have noted, "would destroy the very foundation of our 
safety, consult ill for themselves and for all the faithful. 
What ? Do we not here find the very origin of the Church, 
which, as Bernard rightly teaches, (Serm. in Cantic.) could 
not be found or recognised anions: the creatures, because it 
lies hid (in both cases wondrously) within the lap of blessed 
predestination, and the mass of wretched condemnation ? 

But before I enter on the subject, I have some remarks to 
address to two classes of men. The subject of predestination, 
which in itself is attended with considerable difficulty, is ren- 
/ dered very perplexed, and hence perilous by human curiosity^ 
which cannot be restrained from wanderim? into forbidden 
paths, and climbing to the clouds, determined if it can that 
none of the secret things of God shall remain unexplored. 
When Ave see many, some of them in other respects not bad 
men, every where rushing into this audacity and wickedness, 
it is necessary to remind them of the course of duty in this 
matter. First, then, when they inquire into predestination, 
let them remember that they arejpenetrating into the recesses 
of the divine wisdom, where he who rushes forward securely 
and confidently, instead of satisfying his curiosity will enter 
an inextricable labyrinth.1 For it is not right that man 

1 Thus Eck boasts that he had written of predestination to exercise his 
youthful spirits. 


CHAP. XXI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 531 

should with impunity pry into things which the Lord has 
been pleased to conceal within himself, and scan that sub- 
lime eternal Avisdom which it is his pleasure that Ave should 
not apprehend but adore, that therein also his perfections may 
appear. Those secrets of his will, which he has seen it meet 
to manifest, are revealed in his word — revealed in so far as 
he knew to be conducive to our interest and welfare. 

2. " We have come into the way of faith," says Augustine : 
" let us constantly adhere to it. It leads to the chambers of 
the king, in which are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and 
knowledge. For our Lord Jesus Christ did not speak invi- 
diously to his great and most select disciples when he said, 
' I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear 
them now,' (John xvi. 12.) We must walk, advance, in- 
crease, that our hearts may be able to comprehend those 
things which they cannot now comprehend. But if the last 
day shall find us making progress, we shall there learn what 
here we could not," (August. Horn, in Joann.) If we give 
due weight to the consideration, that the word of the Lord 
is the only way which can conduct us to the investigation 
of whatever it is lawful for us to hold with regard to him — is 
the only light which can enable us to discern what we ought 
to see with regard to him, it will curb and restrain all pre- 
sumption. For it will show us that the moment we go 
beyond the bounds of the word we are out of the course, in 
darkness, and must every now and then stumble, go astray, 
and falL Let it, therefore, be our first principle that to 
desire any other knowledge of predestination than that which 
is expounded by the word of God, is no less infatuated than 
to walk where there is no path, or to seek light in darkness. 
Let us not be ashamed to be ignorant in a matter in which 
ignorance is learning. Rather let us Avillingly abstain from 
the search after knoAvledge, to which it is both foolish as well 
as perilous, and even fatal to aspire. If an unrestrained ima- 
gination urges us, our proper course is to oppose it Avith these 
Avords, " It is not good to eat much honey : so for men to 
search their OAvn glory is not glory," (Prov. xxv. 27.) There 
is good reason to dread a presumption which can only plunge 
us headlong into ruin. 


532 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

3. There are others who, when they would cure this disease, 
recommend that the subject of predestination should scarcely 
/ if ever be mentioned, and tell us to shun every question con- 
cerning it as we would a rock. Although their moderation 
is justly commendable in thinking that such mysteries should 
be treated with moderation, yet because they keep too far 
within the proper measure, they have little influence over the 
human mind, which does not readily allow itself to be curbed. 
Therefore, in order to keep the legitimate course in this 
matter, we must return to the word of God, in which we are 
furnished with the right rule of understanding. For Scrip- 
ture is the school of the Holy Spirit, in which as nothing 
useful and necessary to be known has been omitted, so no- 
thing is taught but what it is of importance to know. Every 
thing, therefore, delivered in Scripture on the subject of pre- 
destination, we must beware of keeping from the faithful, 
lest we seem either maliciously to deprive them of the bless- 
ing of God, or to accuse and scoff at the Spirit, as having 
divulged what ought on any account to be suppressed. Let 
us, I say, allow the Christian to unlock his mind and ears 
to all the w.ords of God which are addressed to him, provided 
he do it with this moderation, viz., that whenever the Lord 
shuts his sacred mouth, he also desists from inquiry. The 
best rule of sobriety is, not only in learning to follow where- 
ever God leads, but also when he makes an end of teaching, 
to cease also from wishing to be wise. The danger which 
they dread is not so great that we ought on account of it to 
turn away our minds from the oracles of God. There is a 
celebrated saying of Solomon, " It is the glory of God to 
conceal a thing," (Prov. xxv. 2.) But since both piety and 
common sense dictate that this is not to be understood of 
every thing, we must look for a distinction, lest under the 
pretence of modesty and sobriety we be satisfied with a 
brutish ignorance. This is clearly expressed by Moses in a few 
words, " The secret things belong unto the Lord our God : 
but those things which are revealed belong unto us, and to 
our children for ever," (Deut. xxix. 29.) We see how he 
exhorts the people to study the doctrine of the law in accord- 
ance with a heavenly decree, because God has been pleased 


CHAP. XXI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 533 

to promulgate it, while he at the same time confines them 
within these boundaries, for the simple reason that it is not 
lawful for men to pry into the secret things of God. 

4. I admit that profane men lay hold of the subject of 
predestination to carp, or cavil, or snarl, or scoff. But if 
their petulance frightens us, it will be necessary to conceal all 
the principal articles of faith, because they and their fellows 
leave scarcely one of them unassailed with blasphemy. A 
rebellious spirit will display itself no less insolently when it 
hears that there are three persons in the divine essence, than 
when it hears that God when he created man foresaw every 
thing that was to happen to him. Nor will they abstain 
from their jeers when told that little more than five thousand 
years have elapsed since the creation of the world. For they 
will ask, Why did the power of God slumber so long in idle- 
ness ? In short, nothing can be stated that they will not 
assail with derision. To quell their blasphemies, must we 
say nothing concerning the divinity of the Son and Spirit ? 
Must the creation of the world be passed over in silence ? 
No ! The truth of God is too powerful, both here and every- 
where, to dread the slanders of the ungodly, as Augustine 
powerfully maintains in his treatise, De Bono PerseverantiaB, 
(cap. xiv.-xx.) For we see that the false apostles were 
unable, by defaming and accusing the true doctrine of Paul, 
to make him ashamed of it. There is nothing in the allega- 
tion that the whole subject is fraught with danger to pious 
minds, as tending to destroy exhortation, shake faith, dis- 
turb and dispirit the heart. Augustine disguises not that 
on these grounds he was often charged with preaching the 
doctrine of predestination too freely, but, as it was easy 
for him to do, he abundantly refutes the charge. As a great 
variety of absurd objections are here stated, we have thought 
it best to dispose of each of them in its proper place, (see 
I chap, xxiii.) Only I wish it to be received as a general rule, 
| that the secret things of God are not to be scrutinized, and 
j that those which he has revealed are not to be overlooked, 
! lest we may, on the one hand, be chargeable with curiosity, 
1 and, on the other, with ingratitude. For it has been 
shrewdly observed by Augustine, (de Genesi ad Literam, 


534 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

Lib. v.,) that we can safely follow Scripture, which walks 
softly, as with a mothers step, in accommodation to our 
weakness. Those, however, Avho are so cautious and timid, 
that they would bury all mention of predestination in order 
that it may not trouble weak minds, with what colour, pray, 
will they cloak their arrogance, when they indirectly charge 
God with a want of due consideration, in not having foreseen 
a danger for which they imagine that they prudently provide ? 
Whoever, therefore, throws obloquy on the doctrine of pre- 
destination, openly brings a charge against God, as having 
inconsiderately allowed something to escape from him which 
is injurious to the Church. 

5. The predestination by which God adopts some to the 
hope of life, and adjudges others to eternal death, no man who 
would be thought pious ventures simply to deny ; but it is 
greatly cavilled at, especially by those wjiojnake prescience 
its cause. We, indeed, ascribe both prescience and predes- 
tination to God ; but we say, that it is absurd to make the 
latter subordinate to the former, (see chap. xxii. sec. 1.) 

\;When we attribute prescience to God, we mean that all 
things always were, and ever continue, under his eye ; that 
to his knowledge there is no past or future, but all things 
are present, and indeed so present, that it is not merely the 
idea of them that is before him, (as those objects are which 
we retain in our memory,) but that he truly sees and con- 
templates them as actually under his immediate inspection. 
This prescience extends to the whole circuit of the world, 

J and to all creatures. ,/By predestination we mean the eternal 
decree of God, by which he determined with himself what- 
ever he wished to happen with regard to every man. All 
are not created on equal terms, but some are preordained to 
eternal life, others to eternal damnation ; and, accordingly, 
as each has been created for one or other of these ends, we 
say that he has been predestinated to life or to death. This 
God has testified, not only in the case of single individuals ; 
he has also given a specimen of it in the whole posterity of 
Abraham, to make it plain that the future condition of each 
nation was entirely at his disposal : " When the Most High 
divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated 


CHAP. XXI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 535 

the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according 
to the number of the children of Israel. For the Lord's 
portion is his people ; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance," 
(Deut. xxxii. 8, 9.) The separation is before the eyes of all ; 
in the person of Abraham, as in a withered stock, one people 
is specially chosen, while the others are rejected; but the 
cause does not appear, except that Moses, to deprive posterity 
of any handle for glorying, tells them that their superiority 
was owing entirely to the free love of God. The cause 
which he assigns for their deliverance is, " Because he loved 
thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them," (Deut. 
iv. 37 ;) or more explicitly in another chapter, " The Lord 
did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because you 
were more in number than any people : for ye were the 
fewest of all people : but because the Lord loved you," (Deut. 
vii. 7, 8.) He repeatedly makes the same intimation, 
"Behold, the heaven, and the heaven of heavens, is the 
Lord's thy God, the earth also, with all that therein is. 
Only the Lord had a delight in thy fathers to love them, 
and he chose their seed after them," (Deut. x. 14, 15.) 
Again, in another passage, holiness is enjoined upon them, 
because they have been chosen to be a peculiar people ; 
while in another, love is declared to be the cause of their 
protection, (Deut. xxiii. 5.) This, too, believers with one 
voice proclaim, " He shall choose our inheritance for us, the 
excellency of Jacob, whom he loved," (Ps. xlvii. 4.) The 
endowments with which God had adorned them, they all 
ascribe to gratuitous love, not only because they knew that 
they had not obtained them by any merit, but that not even 
was the holy patriarch endued with a virtue that could pro- 
cure such distinguished honour for himself and his posterity. 
And the more completely to crush all pride, he upbraids 
them with having merited nothing of the kind, seeing they 
were a rebellious and stiff-necked people, (Deut. ix. 6.) 
Often, also, do the prophets remind the Jews of this election 
by way of disparagement and opprobrium, because they had 
shamefully revolted from it. Be this as it may, let those 
who would ascribe the election of God to human worth or 
merit come forward. When they see that one nation is 


536 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK HI. 

preferred to all others, when they hear that it was no feeling 
of respect that induced God to show more favour to a small 
and ignoble body, nay, even to the wicked and rebellious, 
will they plead against him for having chosen to give such 
a manifestation of mercy ? But neither will their obstreper- 
ous words hinder his work, nor will their invectives, like 
stones thrown against heaven, strike or hurt his righteous- 
ness ; nay, rather they will fall back on their own heads. 
To this principle of a free covenant, moreover, the Israelites 
are recalled whenever thanks are to be returned to God, or 
their hopes of the future to be animated. " The Lord he 
is God," says the Psalmist ; " it is he that hath made us, 
and not we ourselves : we are his people, and the sheep of 
his pasture," (Ps. c. 3 ; xcv. 7.) The negation which is 
added, " not we ourselves," is not superfluous, to teach us 
that God is not only the author of all the good qualities in 
which men excel, but that they originate in himself, there 
being nothing in them worthy of so much honour. In the 
following words also they are enjoined to rest satisfied with the 
mere good pleasure of God : " O ye seed of Abraham, his 
servant; ye children of Jacob, his chosen," (Ps. cv. 6.) And 
after an enumeration of the continual mercies of God as 
fruits of election, the conclusion is, that he acted thus kindly 
because he remembered his covenant. With this doctrine 
accords the song of the whole Church, " They got not the 
land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own 
arm save them ; but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the 
light of thy countenance, because thou hadst a favour unto 
them," (Ps. xliv. 3.) It is to be observed, that when the 
land is mentioned, it is a visible symbol of the secret election 
in which adoption is comprehended. To like gratitude 
David elsewhere exhorts the people, " Blessed is the nation 
whose God is the Lord, and the people whom he hath chosen 
for his own inheritance," (Ps. xxxiii. 12.) Samuel thus 
animates their hopes, " The Lord will not forsake his people 
for his great name's sake : because it hath pleased the Lord 
to make you his people," (1 Sam. xii. 22.) And when 
David's faith is assailed, how does he arm himself for the 
battle ? " Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and 


CriAF. XXI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 537 

causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy 
courts," (Ps. lxv. 4.) But as the hidden election of God was 
confirmed both by a first and second election, and by other 
intermediate mercies, Isaiah thus applies the term, "The 
Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel," 
(Isa. xiv. 1.) Referring to a future period, the gathering 
together of the dispersion, who seemed to have been aban- 
doned, he says, that it will be a sign of a firm and stable 
election, notwithstanding of the apparent abandonment. 
When it is elsewhere said, " I have chosen thee, and not cast 
thee away," (Isa. xli. 9,) the continual course of his great 
liberality is ascribed to paternal kindness. This is stated 
more explicitly in Zechariah by the angel, the Lord " shall 
choose Jerusalem again," as if the severity of his chastise- 
ments had amounted to reprobation, or the captivity had 
been an interruption of election, which, however, remains 
inviolable, though the signs of it do not always appear. 

6. We must add a second step of a more limited nature, 
or one in which the grace of God was displayed in a more 
special form, when of the same family of Abraham God re- 
jected some, and by keeping others within his Church showed 
that he retained them among his sons. At first Ishmael had 
obtained the same rank with his brother Isaac, because the 
spiritual covenant was equally sealed in him by the symbol 
of circumcision. He is first cut off, then Esau, at last an 
innumerable multitude, almost the whole of Israel. In Isaac 
was the seed called. The same calling held good in the case 
of Jacob. God gave a similar example in the rejection of 
Said. This is also celebrated in the psalm, " Moreover, he 
refused the tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the tribe of 
Ephraim : but chose the tribe of Judah," (Ps. lxxviii. 67, 68.) 
This the sacred history sometimes repeats, that the secret 
grace of God may be more admirably displayed in that 
change. I admit that it was by their own fault Ishmael, Esau, 
and others, fell from their adoption ; for the condition an- 
nexed was, that they should faithfully keep the covenant of 
God, whereas they perfidiously violated it. The singular 
kindness of God consisted in this, that he had been pleased 
to prefer them to other nations ; as it is said in the psalm, 


538 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

" He hath not dealt so with any nation : and as for his judg- 
ments, they have not known them," (Ps. cxlvii. 20.) But I 
had good reason for saying that two steps are here to be 
observed ; for in the election of the whole nation, God had 
already shown that in the exercise of his mere liberality he 
was under no law but was free, so that he was by no means 
to be restricted to an equal division of grace, its very inequa- 
lity proving it to be gratuitous. Accordingly, Malachi en- 
larges on the ingratitude of Israel, in that being not only 
selected from the whole human race, but set peculiarly apart 
from a sacred household, they perfidiously and impiously 
spurn God their beneficent parent. " Was not Esau Jacob's 
brother? saith the Lord : yet I loved Jacob, and I hated 
Esau," (Mai. i. 2, 3.) For God takes it for granted, that as 
both were the sons of a holy father, and successors of the 
covenant, in short, branches from a sacred root, the sons of 
Jacob were under no ordinary obligation for having been 
admitted to that dignity ; but when by the rejection of Esau 
the first born, their progenitor though inferior in birth was 
made heir, he charges them with double ingratitude, in not 
being restrained by a double tie. 

7. Although it is now sufficiently plain that God by his 
secret counsel chooses whom he will while he rejects others, 
his gratuitous election has only been partially explained until 
we come to the case of single individuals, to Avhom God not 
only offers salvation, but so assigns it, that the certainty of 
the result remains not dubious or suspended.1 These are 
considered as belonging to that one seed of w7hich Paul 
makes mention, (Rom. ix. 8 ; Gal. iii. 16, &c.) For although 
adoption was deposited in the hand of Abraham, yet as many 
of his posterity wrere cut off as rotten members, in order that 
election may stand and be effectual, it is necessary to ascend 
to the head in whom the heavenly Father hath connected 
his elect with each other, and bound them to himself by an in- 
dissoluble tie. Thus in the adoption of the family of Abra- 

1 On predestination, see the pious and very learned observations of 
Luther, torn. i. p. 86, fin., and p. 87, fin. Tom. iii. ad Psal. xxii. 8. 
Tom. v. in Joann, cxvii. Also his Prefatio in Epist. ad Rom. and Adv. 
Erasmum de Servo Arbitrio, p. 429, sqq. 452, 463. Also in Psal. cxxxix. 


CHAP. XXI. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 539 

ham, God gave them a liberal display of favour which he has 
denied to others ; but in the members of Christ there is a far 
more excellent display of grace, because those ingrafted into 
him as their head never fail to obtain salvation. Hence Paul 
skilfully argues from the passage of Malachi which I quoted, 
(Rom. ix. 13; Mai. i. 2,) that when God, after making a 
covenant of eternal life, invites any people to himself, a spe- 
cial mode of election is in part understood, so that he does 
not with promiscuous grace effectually elect all of them. The 
words, " Jacob have I loved," refer to the whole progeny of 
the patriarch, which the prophet there opposes to the posterity 
of Esau. But there is nothing in this repugnant to the fact, 
that in the person of one man is set before us a specimen of 
election, which cannot fail of accomplishing its object. It is 
not without cause Paul observes, that these are called a 
remnant, (Rom. ix. 27 ; xi. 5 ;) because experience shows that 
of the general body many fall away and are lost, so that often 
a small portion only remains. The reason why the general 
election of the people is not always firmly ratified, readily 
presents itself, viz., that on those with whom God makes the 
covenant, he does not immediately bestow the Spirit of 
regeneration, by whose power they persevere in the covenant 
even to the end. The external invitation, without the internal 
efficacy of grace which would have the effect of retaining them, 
holds a kind of middle place between the rejection of the human 
race and the election of a small number of believers. The 
whole people of Israel are called the Lord's inheritance, and 
yet there were many foreigners among them. Still, because 
the covenant which God had made to be their Father and 
Redeemer was not altogether null, he has respect to that free 
favour rather than to the perfidious defection of many ; even 
by them his truth was not abolished, since by preserving some 
residue to himself, it appeared that his calling was without 
repentance. When God ever and anon gathered his Church 
from among the sons of Abraham rather than from profane 
nations, he had respect to his covenant, which, when violated 
by the great body, he restricted to a few, that it might not 
entirely fail. In short, that common adoption of the seed of 
Abraham was a kind of visible image of a greater benefit 


540 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

which God deigned to bestow on some out of many. This 
is the reason why Paul so carefully distinguishes between the 
sons of Abraham according to the flesh and the spiritual sons, 
Avho are called after the example of Isaac. Not that simply to 
be a son of Abraham was a vain or useless privilege, (this 
could not be said without insult to the covenant,) but that 
the immutable counsel of God, by which he predestinated to 
himself whomsoever he would, was alone effectual for their 
salvation. But until the proper view is made clear by the 
production of passages of Scripture, I advise my readers not 
to prejudge the question \/We say, then, that Scripture clearly 
proves this much, that God by his eternal and immutable coun- 
sel determined once for all those whom it was his pleasure one 
day to admit to salvation, and those whom, on the other hand, 
it was his pleasure to doom to destruction. We maintain that 
this counsel, as regards the elect, is founded on his free mercy, 
without any respect to human worth, Avhile those whom he 
dooms to destruction are excluded from access to life by a 
just and blameless, but at the same time incomprehensible 
judgment. In regard to the elect, we regard calling as the 
evidence of election, and justification as another symbol of its 
manifestation, until it is fully accomplished by the attainment 
of glory. But as the Lord seals his elect by calling and 
justification, so by excluding the reprobate either from the 
knowledge of his name or the sanctification of his Spirit, 
he by these marks in a manner discloses the judgment which 
awaits them. I will here omit many of the fictions which 
foolish men have devised to overthrow predestination. There 
is no need of refuting objections which the moment they are 
produced abundantly betray their hollowness. I will dwell 
only on those points which either form the subject of dispute 
among the learned, or may occasion any difficulty to the 
simple, or may be employed by impiety as specious pretexts 
for assailing the justice of God. 


cn.\r. xxii. christian religion. 541 


CHAPTEE XXII. 
this doctrine confirmed by proofs from scripture. 

The divisions of this chapter are, — I. A confirmation of the orthodox 
doctrine in opposition to two classes of individuals. This confirmation 
founded on a careful exposition of our Saviour's words, and passages in 
the writings of Paul, sec. 1-7. II. A refutation of some objections 
taken from ancient writers, Thomas Aquinas, and more modern writers, 
sec. 8-10. III. Of reprobation, which is founded entirely on the right- 
eous will of God, sec. 11. 

Sections. 

1. Some imagine that God elects or reprobates according to a fore- 

knowledge of Jjujrit. Others make it a charge against God that he 
elects some and passes by others. Both refuted, 1. By invincible 
arguments ; 2. By the testimony of Augustine. 

2. Who are elected, when, in whom, to what, for what reason. 

3. The reason is the good pleasure of God, which so reigns in election 
"that no works, either past or future, are taken into consideration. 

This proved by notable declarations of our Saviour and passages 
of Paul. 

4. Proved by a striking discussion in the Epistle to the Romans. Its 

scope and method explained. The advocates of foreknowledge 
refuted by the Apostle, when he maintains that election is spe- 
cial and wholly of grace. 

5. Evasion 'refuted. A summary and analysis of the Apostle's dis- 

cussion. 

6. An exception, with three answers to it. The eificacy of gratui- 

tous election extends only to believers, who are said to be elected 
according to foreknowledge. This foreknowledge or prescience is 
not specvdative but active. 

7. This proved from the words of Christ. Conclusion of the answer, 

and solution of the objection with regard to Judas. 

8. An objection taken from the ancient fathers. Answer from Augus- 

tine, from Ambrose, as quoted by Augustine, and an invincible 
argument by an Apostle. Summary of this argument. 

9. Objection from Thomas Aquinas. Answer. 

10. Objection of more modern writers. Answers. Passages in which 
there is a semblance of contradiction reconciled. AVhy many 
called and few chosen. An objection founded on mutual con- 


542 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

sent between the word and faith. Solution confirmed by the 
words of Paul, Augustine, and Bernard. A clear declaration by 
^ our Saviour. 

11. The view to be taken of reprobation. It is founded on the right- 
eous will of God. 

1. Many controvert all the positions which we have laid 
down, especially the gratuitous election of believers, which, 
however, cannot be overthrown. For they commonly ima- 
gine that God distinguishes between men according to the 
merits which he foresees that each individual is to have, 
giving the adoption of sons to those whom he foreknows will 
not be unworthy of his grace, and dooming those to destruc- 
tion whose dispositions he perceives will be prone to mischief 
and wickedness. Thus by interposing foreknowledge as a 
veil, they not only obscure election, but pretend to give it a 
different origin. Nor is this the commonly received opinion 
of the vulgar merely, for it has in all ages had great support- 
ers, (see sec. 8.) This I candidly confess, lest any one 
should expect greatly to prejudice our cause by opposing it 
with their names. The truth of God is here too certain to 
be shaken, too clear to be overborne by human authority. 
Others, who are neither versed in Scripture, nor entitled to 
any weight, assail sound doctrine with a petulance and im- 
probity which it is impossible to tolerate.1 Because God of 
his mere good pleasure electing some passes by others, they 
raise a plea against him. But if the fact is certain, what 
can they gain by quarrelling with God ? We teach nothing 
but what experience proves to be true, viz., that God has 
always been at liberty to bestow his grace on whom he 
would. Not to ask in what respect the posterity of Abraham 
excelled others, if it be not in a worth, the cause of which has 
no existence out of God, let them tell why men are better 
than oxen or asses. God might have made them dogs when 

1 French, " II y en a d'aucuns, lesquels n'estans exerces en l'Ecriture ne 
sont dignes d'aucun credit ne reputation ; et toutes fois sont plus hardis 
et temeraires a diffamer la doctrine qui leur est incognue ; et ainsi ce 
n'est pas raison que leur arrogance soit snpportee." — There are some who, 
not being exercised in Scripture, are not worthy of any credit or reputa- 
tion, and yet are more bold and presumptuous in defaming the doctrine 
which is unknown to them, and hence their arrogance is insupportable. 


CHAP. XXII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 543 

he formed them in his own image. Will they allow the lower 
animals to expostulate with God, as if the inferiority of their 
condition were unjust ? It is certainly not more equitable that 
men should enjoy the privilege which they have not acquired 
by any merit, than that he should variously distribute favours 
as seems to him meet. If they pass to the case of individuals 
where inequality is more offensive to them, they ought at least, 
in regard to the example of our Saviour, to be restrained by 
feelings of awe from talking so confidently of this sublime 
mystery. He is conceived a mortal man of the seed of 
David ; what, I would ask them, are the virtues by which he 
deserved to become in the very womb, the head of angels, the 
only begotten Son of God, the image and glory of the 
Father, the light, righteousness, and salvation of the world ? 
It is wisely observed by Augustine,1 that in the very head of 
the Church we have a bright mirror of free election, lest it 
should give any trouble to us the members, viz., that he did 
not become the Son of God by living righteously, but was 
freely presented with this great honour, that he might after- 
wards make others partakers of his gifts. Should any one 
here ask, why others are not what he was, or why we are all 
at so great a distance from him, why we are all corrupt while 
he is purity, he would not only betray his madness, but his 
effrontery also. But if they are bent on depriving God of 
the free right of electing and reprobating, let them at the 
same time take away what has been given to Christ. It will 
now be proper to attend to what Scripture declares con- 
cerning each. When Paul declares that we were chosen in 
Christ before the foundation of the world, (Eph. i. 4,) he 
certainly shows that no regard is had to our own worth ; for 
it is just as if he had said, Since in the whole seed of Adam 
our heavenly Father found nothing worthy of his election, he 
turned his eye upon his own Anointed, that he might select 
as members of his body those whom he was to assume into 
the fellowship of life. Let believers, then, give full effect to 
this reason, viz., that we were in Christ adopted unto the 


1 August, de Corrept. et Gratia ad Valent. c. 15. Horn, de Bono Per- 
severan. c. 8. Item, de Verbis Apost. Serm. viii. 


544 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

heavenly inheritance, because in ourselves we were incapable 
of such excellence. This he elsewhere observes in another 
passage, in which he exhorts the Colossians to give thanks 
that they had been made meet to be partakers of the inherit- 
ance of the saints, (Col. i. 12.) If election precedes that 
divine grace by which we are made fit to obtain immortal 
life, what can God find in us to induce him to elect us ? 
What I mean is still more clearly explained in another pass- 
age : God, says he, " hath chosen us in him before the founda- 
tion of the world, that we might be holy and without blame 
before him in love : having predestinated us unto the adoption 
of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good 
pleasure of his will," (Eph. i. 4, 5.) Here he opposes the 
good pleasure of God to our merits of every description. 

2. That the proof may be more complete, it is of import- 
ance to attend to the serjarate clauses of that passage. When 
they are connected together they leave no doubt. From 
giving them the name of elect, it is clear that he is address- 
ing believers, as indeed he shortly after declares. It is, 
therefore, a complete perversion of the name to confine it 
to the age in which the gospel was published. By saying 
they were elected before the foundation of the world, he 
takes away all reference to worth. For what ground of 
distinction was there between persons who as yet existed 
not, and persons who were afterwards like them to exist in 
Adam? But if they were elected in Christ, it follows not 
only that each was elected on some extrinsic ground, but 
that some were placed on a different footing from others, 
since we see that all are not members of Christ. In the addi- 
tional statement that they were elected that they might be 
holy, the apostle openly refutes the error of those who de- 
duce election from prescience, since he declares that what- 
ever virtue appears in men is the result of election. Then, 
if a higher cause is asked, Paul answers that God so predes- 
tined, and predestined according to the good pleasure of his 
will. By these words, he overturns all the grounds of election 
which men imagine to exist in themselves. For he shows that 
whatever favours God bestows in reference to the spiritual 
life flow from this one fountain, because God chose whom he 


CHAP. XXII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 545 

would, and before they were born had the grace which he 
designed to bestow upon them set apart for their use. 

3. Wherever this good pleasure of God reigns, no good 
works are taken into account. The Apostle, indeed, does 
not follow out the antithesis, but it is to be understood, as 
he himself explains it in another passage, " Who hath called 
us with a holy calling, not according to our works, but 
according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us 
in Christ Jesus before the world began," (1 Tim. ii. 9.) We 
have already shown that the additional words, " that we might 
be holy," remove every doubt. If you say that he foresaw 
they would be holy, and therefore elected them, you invert 
the order of Paul. You may, therefore, safely infer, If he 
elected us that we might be holy, he did not elect us because 
he foresaw that we would be holy. The two things are 
evidently inconsistent, viz., that the pious owe it to election 
that they are holy, and yet attain to election by means of 
works. There is no force in the cavil to which they are ever 
recurring, that the Lord does not bestow election in recom- 
pense of preceding, but bestows it in consideration of future 
merits. For when it is said that believers were elected that 
they might be holy, it is at the same time intimated that the 
holiness which was to be in them has its origin in election. 
And how can it be consistently said, that things derived 
from election are the cause of election ? The very thing which 
the Apostle had said, he seems afterwards to confirm by add- 
ing, " According to his good pleasure which he hath pur- 
posed in himself," (Eph. i. 9 ;) for the expression that God 
" purposed in himself," is the same as if it had been said, 
that in forming his decree he considered nothing external to 
himself; and, accordingly, it is immediately subjoined, that 
the whole object contemplated in our election is, that " we 
should be to the praise of his glory." Assuredly divine grace 
would not deserve all the praise of election, were not election 
gratuitous ; and it would not be gratuitous, did God in elect- 
ing any individual pay regard to his future works. Hence, 
what Christ said to his disciples is found to be universally 
applicable to all believers, " Ye have not chosen me, but I 
have chosen you," (John xv. 16.) Here he not only excludes 

VOL. II. 2 M 


546 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

past merits, but declares that they had nothing in themselves 
for which they could be chosen, except in so far as his mercy 
anticipated. And how are we to understand the words of 
Paul, " Who hath first given to him, and it shall be recom- 
pensed unto him again ?" (Rom. xi. 35.) His meaning 
obviously is, that men are altogether indebted to the pre- 
venting goodness of God, there being nothing in them, either 
past or future, to conciliate his favour. 

4. In the Epistle to the Romans, (Rom. ix. 6,) in which 
he again treats this subject more reconditely and at greater 
length, he declares that " they are not all Israel which are of 
Israel ;" for though all were blessed in respect of hereditary 
right, yet all did not equally obtain the succession. The 
whole discussion was occasioned by the pride and vain-glory- 
ing of the Jews, who, by claiming the name of the Church for 
themselves, would have made the faith of the Gospel depend- 
ent on their pleasure ; just as in the present day the Papists 
would fain under this pretext substitute themselves in place 
of God. Paul, while he concedes that in respect of the 
covenant they were the holy offspring of Abraham, yet con- 
tends that the greater part of them were strangers to it, and 
that not only because they were degenerate, and so had 
become bastards instead of sons, but because the principal 
point to be considered was the special election of God, by 
which alone his adoption was ratified. If the piety of some 
established them in the hope of salvation, and the revolt of 
others was the sole cause of their being rejected, it would 
have been foolish and absurd in Paul to carry his readers 
back to a secret election. But if the will of God (no cause 
of which external to him either appears or is to be looked 
for) distinguishes some from others, so that all the sons of 
Israel are not true Israelites, it is vain for any one to seek 
the origin of his condition in himself. He afterwards prose- 
cutes the subject at greater length, by contrasting the cases 
of Jacob and Esau. Both being sons of Abraham, both 
having been at the same time in the womb of their mother, 
there was something very strange in the change by which 
the honour of the birthright was transferred to Jacob, and 
yet Paul declares that the change was an attestation to the 
election of the one and the reprobation of the other. 


CHAP. XXII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 547 

The question considered is the origin and cause of election. 
The advocates of foreknowledge insist that it is to be found 
in the virtues and vices of men. For they take the short 
and easy method of asserting, that God showed in the person 
of Jacob, that he elects those who are worthy of his grace ; 
and in the person of Esau, that he rejects those whom he 
foresees to be unworthy. Such is their confident assertion ; 
but what does Paul say ? " For the children being not yet 
born, neither having done any good or evil, that the pur- 
pose of God according to election might stand, not of works, 
but of him that calleth ; it was said unto her, [Rebecca,] The 
elder shall serve the younger. As it is written, Jacob have I 
loved, but Esau have I hated," (Rom. ix. 11-13.) If fore- 
knowledge had anything to do with this distinction of the 
brothers, the mention of time would have been out of place. 
Granting that Jacob was elected for a worth to be obtained 
by future virtues, to what end did Paul say that he was not 
yet born ? Nor would there have been any occasion for 
adding, that as yet he had done no good, because the answer 
was always ready, that nothing is hid from God, and that 
therefore the piety of Jacob was present before him. If 
works procure favour, a value ought to have been put upon 
them before Jacob was born, just as if he had been of full 
age. But in explaining the difficulty, the Apostle goes on 
to show, that the adoption of Jacob proceeded not on works 
but on the calling of God. In works he makes no mention 
of past or. future, but distinctly opposes them to the calling 
of God, intimating, that when place is given to the one the 
other is overthrown ; as if he had said, The only thing to be 
considered is what pleased God, not what men furnished of 
themselves. Lastly, it is certain that all the causes which 
men are wont to devise as external to the secret counsel of 
God, are excluded by the use of the terms purpose and 
election. 

5. Why should men attempt to darken these statements 
by assigning some place in election to past or future works ? 
This is altogether to evade what the Apostle contends for, 
viz., that the distinction between the brothers is not founded 
on any ground of works, but on the mere calling of God, 


548 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

inasmuch as it was fixed before the children were born. Had 
there been any solidity in this subtlety, it would not have 
escaped the notice of the Apostle, but being perfectly aware 
that God foresaw no good in man, save that which he had 
already previously determined to bestow by means of his 
election, he does not employ a preposterous arrangement 
which would make good works antecedent to their cause. 
We learn from the Apostle's words, that the salvation of 
believers is founded entirely on the decree of divine election, 
that the privilege is procured not by works but free calling. 
We have also a specimen of the thing itself set before us. 
Esau and Jacob are brothers, begotten of the same parents, 
within the same womb, not yet born. In them all things are 
equal, and yet the judgment of God with regard to them is 
different. %/He adopts the one and rejects the other. The only 
right of precedence was that of primogeniture ; but that is 
disregarded, and the younger is preferred to the elder. Nay, 
in the case of others, God seems to have disregarded primo- 
geniture for the express purpose of excluding the flesh from 
all ground of boasting. Rejecting Ishmael he gives his 
favour to Isaac, postponing Manasseh he honours Ephraim. 

6. Should any one object that these minute and inferior 
favours do not enable us to decide with regard to the future life, 
that it is not to be supposed that he who received the honour 
of primogeniture was thereby adopted to the inheritance 
of heaven ; (many objectors do not even spare Paul, but 
accuse him of having in the quotation of these passages 
wrested Scripture from its proper meaning;) I answer as 
before, that the Apostle has not erred through inconsidera- 
tion, or spontaneously misapplied the passages of Scripture ; 
but he saw (what these men cannot be brought to consider) 
that God purposed under an earthly sign to declare the spiri- 
tual election of Jacob, which otherwise lay hidden at his in- 
accessible tribunal. For unless we refer the primogeniture 
bestowed upon him to the future world, the form of blessing- 
would be altogether vain and ridiculous, inasmuch as he 
gained nothing by it but a multitude of toils and annoyances, 
exile, sharp sorrows, and bitter cares. Therefore, when Paul 
knew beyond a doubt that by the external, God manifested the 


CHAP. XXII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 549 

spiritual and unfading blessings, which he had prepared for his 
servant in his kingdom, he hesitated not in proving the latter 
to draw an argument from the former. For we must remem- 
ber that the land of Canaan was given in pledge of the heaven- 
ly inheritance ; and that therefore there cannot be a doubt 
that Jacob was like the angels ingrafted into the body of 
Christ, that he might be a partaker of the same life. Jacob, 
therefore, is chosen, while Esau is rejected ; the predestina- 
tion of God makes a distinction where none existed in respect 
of merit. If you ask the reason the Apostle gives it, " For 
he saith to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have 
mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have com- 
passion," (Rom. ix. 15.) And what, pray, does this mean? 
It is just a clear declaration by the Lord that he finds nothing 
in men themselves to induce him to show kindness, that it is 
owing entirely to his own mercy, and, accordingly, that their 
salvation is his own work. Since God places your salvation 
in himself alone, why should you descend to yourself? Since 
he assigns you his own mercy alone, why will you recur 
to your own merits ? Since he confines your thoughts to his 
own mercy, why do you turn partly to the view of your own 
works ? 

We must therefore come to that smaller number whom 
Paul elsewhere describes as foreknown of God, (Rom. xi. 2 ;) 
not foreknown, as these men imagine, by idle, inactive contem- 
plation, but in the sense which it often bears. For surely when 
Peter says that Christ was " delivered by the determinate 
counsel and foreknowledge of God," (Acts ii. 23,) he does not 
represent God as contemplating merely, but as actually ac- 
complishing our salvation. Thus also Peter, in saying that 
the believers to whom he writes are elect " according to the 
foreknowledge of God," (1 Pet. i. 2,) properly expresses 
that secret predestination by which God has sealed those 
whom he has been pleased to adopt as sons. In using the 
term purpose as synonymous with a term which uniformly 
denotes what is called a fixed determination, he undoubt- 
edly shows that God, in being the author of our salvation, 
does not go beyond himself. In this sense he says in the 
same chapter, that Christ as " a lamb" " was foreordained 


550 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

before the creation of the world," (1 Pet. i. 19, 20.) What 
could have been more frigid or absurd than to have repre- 
sented God as looking- from the height of heaven to see 
whence the salvation of the human race was to come ? By a 
people foreknown, Peter means the same thing as Paul does 
by a remnant selected from a multitude falsely assuming the 
name of God. In another passage, to suppress the vain 
boasting of those who, while only covered with a mask, claim 
for themselves in the view of the world a first place among 
the godly, Paul says, " The Lord knoweth them that are his," 
(2 Tim. ii. 19.) In short, by that term he designates two 
classes of people, the one consisting of the whole race of 
Abraham, the other a people separated from that race, and 
though hidden from human view, yet open to the eye of God. 
And there is no doubt that he took the passage from Moses, 
who declares that God would be merciful to whomsoever he 
pleased, (although he Avas speaking of an elect people whose 
condition was apparently equal ;) just as if he had said, that 
in a common adoption was included a special grace which he 
bestows on some as a holier treasure, and that there is nothing 
in the common covenant to prevent this number from being 
exempted from the common order. God being pleased in 
this matter to act as a free dispenser and disposer, distinctly 
declares, that the only ground on which he will show mercy 
to one rather than to another is his sovereign pleasure ; for 
when mercy is bestowed on him who asks it, though he indeed 
does not suffer a refusal, he, however, either anticipates or 
partly acquires a favour, the whole merit of which God claims 
for himself. 

7. Now, let the supreme Judge and Master decide on the 
whole case. Seeing such obduracy in his hearers, that his 
words fell upon the multitude almost without fruit, he to 
remove this stumbling-block exclaims, " All that the Father 
giveth me shall come to me." " And this is the Father's 
will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me 
I should lose nothing," (John vi. 37, 39.) Observe that the 
donation of the Father is the first step in our delivery into 
the charge and protection of Christ. Some one, perhaps, 
will here turn round and object, that those only peculiarly 


CHAP. XXII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 551 

belong to the Father who make a voluntary surrender by- 
faith. But the only thing which Christ maintains is, that 
though the defections of vast multitudes should shake the 
world, yet the counsel of God would stand firm, more stable 
than heaven itself, that his election would never fail. The 
elect are said to have belonged to the Father before he 
bestowed them on his only begotten Son. It is asked if 
they were his by nature? Nay, they were aliens, but he 
makes them his by delivering them. The words of Christ 
are too clear to be rendered obscure by any of the mists of 
cavilling. " No man can come to me except the Father 
which hath sent me draw him." " Every man, therefore, 
that hath heard and learned of the Father cometh unto me," 
(John vi. 44, 45.) Did all promiscuously bend the knee to 
Christ, election would be common ; whereas now in the small 
number of believers a manifest diversity appears. Accord- 
ingly our Saviour, shortly after declaring that the disciples 
who were given to him were the common property of the 
Father, adds, " I pray not for the world, but for them which 
thou hast given me ; for they are thine," (John xvii. 9.) 
Hence it is that the whole world no longer belongs to its 
Creator, except in so far as grace rescues from malediction, 
divine wrath, and eternal death, some, not many, who would 
otherwise perish, while he leaves the world to the destruc- 
tion to which it is doomed. Meanwhile, though Christ 
interpose as a Mediator, yet he claims the right of electing 
in common with the Father, "I speak not of you all: I know 
whom I have chosen," (John xiii. 18.) If it is asked whence 
he hath chosen them, he answers in another passage, " Out 
of the world ;" which he excludes from his prayers when he 
commits his disciples to the Father, (John xv. 19.) We 
must, indeed, hold, when he affirms that he knows whom he 
has chosen, first, that some individuals of the human race are 
denoted ; and, secondly, that they are not distinguished by the 
quality of their virtues, but by a heavenly decree. Hence it 
follows, that since Christ makes himself the author of elec- 
tion, none excel by their own strength or industry. In 
elsewhere numbering Judas among the elect, though he was 
a devil, (John vi. 70,) he refers only to the apostolical office, 


552 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

winch, though a bright manifestation of divine favour, (as Paul 
so often acknowledges it to be in his own person,) does not, 
however, contain within itself the hope of eternal salvation. 
Judas, therefore, Avhen he discharged the office of Apostle 
perfidiously, might have been worse than a devil ; but not 
one of those whom Christ has once ingrafted into his body- 
will he ever permit to perish, for in securing their salvation, 
he will perform what he has promised ; that is, exert a divine 
power greater than all, (John x. 28.) For when he says, 
"Those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of 
them is lost but the son of perdition," (John xvii. 12,) the 
expression, though there is a catachresis in it, is not at all 
ambiguous. The sum is, that God by gratuitous adoption 
forms those whom he wishes to have for sons ; but that the 
intrinsic cause is in himself, because he is contented with his 
secret pleasure. 

8. But Ambrose, Origen, and Jerome, were of opinion, that 
God dispenses his grace among men according to the use which 
he foresees that each will make of it. It may be added, that 
Augustine also was for some time of this opinion ; but after he 
had made greater progress in the knowledge of Scripture, he 
not only retracted it as evidently false, but powerfully confut- 
ed it, (August. Retract. Lib. i. c. 13.) Nay, even after the re- 
tractation, glancing at the Pelagians who still persisted in 
that error, he says, " Who does not wonder that the Apostle 
failed to make this most acute observation ? For after stating 
a most startling proposition concerning those who were not yet 
born, and afterwards putting the question to himself by way 
of objection, 'What then ? Is there unrighteousness with God?' 
he had an opportunity of answering, that God foresaw the 
merits of both, he does not say so, but has recourse to the 
justice and mercy of God," (August. Epist. 106, ad Sixtum.) 
And in another passage, after excluding all merit before elec- 
tion, he says, " Here, certainly, there is no place for the vain 
argument of those who defend the foreknowledge of God 
against the grace of God, and accordingly maintain that we 
were elected before the foundation^ of the world, because 
God foreknew that we would be good, not that he himself 
would make us good. This is not the language of him who 


CHAP. XXII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 553 

says, ' Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you/ 
(John xv. 16.) For had he chosen us because he foreknew 
that we would be good, he would at the same time also have 
foreknown that we were to choose him," (August, in Joann. 
viii. ; see also what follows to the same effect.) Let the 
testimony of Augustine prevail with those who willingly 
acquiesce in the authority of the Fathers : although Augus- 
tine allows not that he differs from the others,1 but shows by 
clear evidence that the difference which the Pelagians invi- 
diously objected to him is unfounded. For he quotes from 
Ambrose, (Lib. de Prasdest. Sanct. cap. 19,) " Christ calls 
whom he pities." Again, " Had he pleased he could have 
made them devout instead of undevout ; but God calls whom 
he deigns to call, and makes religious whom he will." Were 
we disposed to frame an entire volume out of Augustine, it 
were easy to show the reader that I have no occasion to use 
any other words than his : but I am unwilling to burden 
him with a prolix statement. But assuming that the 
fathers did not speak thus, let us attend to the thing itself. 
A difficult question had been raised, viz., Did God do justly 
in bestowing his grace on certain individuals ? Paul might 
have disencumbered himself of this question at once by saying, 
that God had respect to works. Why does he not do so ? Why 
does he rather continue to use a language which leaves him 
exposed to the same difficulty? Why, but just because it 
would not have been right to say it ? There was no oblivious- 
ness on the part of the Holy Spirit, who was speaking by 
his mouth. He, therefore, answers without ambiguity, that 
God favours his elect, because he is pleased to do so, and 
shows mercy because he is pleased to do so. For the words, 
" I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and show 
mercy on whom I will show mercy," (Exod. xxxiii. 19,) are 
the same in effect as if it had been said, God is moved to 
mercy by no other reason than that he is pleased to show 
mercy. Augustine's declaration, therefore, remains true. 
The grace of God does not find, but makes persons fit to be 
chosen. 

1 Latin, " a reliquis ;" French, " les autre Docteurs anciens ;" — the other 
ancient Doctors. 


554 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

9. Nor let us be detained by the subtlety of Thomas, that 
the foreknowledge of merit is the cause of predestination, 
not, indeed, in respect of the predestinating act, but that on 
our part it may in some sense be so called, namely, in respect 
of a particular estimate of predestination ; as when it is said, 
that God predestinates man to glory according to his merit, 
inasmuch as he decreed to bestow upon him the grace by 
which he merits glory. For while the Lord would have us to 
see nothing more in election than his mere goodness, for any 
one to desire to see more is preposterous affectation. But 
were we to make a trial of subtlety, it would not be diffi- 
cult to refute the sophistry of Thomas. He maintains that 
the elect are in a manner predestinated to glory on account 
of their merits, because God predestines to give them the 
grace by which they merit glory. What if I should, on the 
contrary, object that predestination to grace is subservient 
to election unto life, and follows as its handmaid ; that grace 
is predestined to those to whom the possession of glory was 
previously assigned, the Lord being pleased to bring his 
sons by election to justification ? For it will hence follow 
that the predestination to glory is the cause of the predestin- 
ation to grace, and not the converse. But let us have done 
with these disputes as superfluous among those who think 
that there is enough of wisdom for them in the word of God. 
For it has been truly said by an old ecclesiastical writer, 
Those who ascribe the election of God to merits, are wise 
above what they ought to be, (Ambros. de Vocat. Gentium, 
Lib. i. c. 2.) 

10. Some object that God would be inconsistent with 
himself, in inviting all without distinction while he elects 
only a few. Thus, according to them, the universality of 
the promise destroys the distinction of special grace. Some 
moderate men speak in this way, not so much for the pur- 
pose of suppressing the truth, as to get quit of puzzling 
questions, and curb excessive curiosity. The intention is 
laudable, but the design is by no means to be approved, 
dissimulation being at no time excusable. In those again 
who display their petulance, we see only a vile cavil or a 
disgi-aceful error. The mode in which Scripture reconciles 


CHAP. XXII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 555 

the two things, viz., that by external preaching all are 
called to faith and repentance, and that yet the Spirit of 
faith and repentance is not given to all, I have already 
explained, and will again shortly repeat. But the point 
which they assume I deny as false in two respects : 
for he who threatens that when it shall rain on one city 
there will be drought in another, (Amos iv. 7 ;) and declares 
in another passage, that there will be a famine of the word, 
(Amos viii. 11,) does not lay himself under a fixed obligation 
to call all equally. And he who, forbidding Paul to preach 
in Asia, and leading him away from Bithynia, carries him 
over to Macedonia, (Acts xvi. 6,) shows that it belongs to 
him to distribute the treasure in what way he pleases. But 
it is by Isaiah he more clearly demonstrates how he destines 
the promises of salvation specially to the elect, (Isa. viii. 16 ;) 
for he declares that his disciples Avould consist of them only, 
and not indiscriminately of the whole human race. Whence 
it is evident that the doctrine of salvation, which is said to 
be set apart for the sons of the Church only, is abused when 
it is represented as effectually available to all. For the 
present let it suffice to observe, that though the word of the 
gospel is addressed generally to all, yet the gift of faith is 
rare. Isaiah assigns the cause when he says, that the arm of 
the Lord is not revealed to all, (Isa. liii. 1.) Had he said, 
that the gospel is malignantly and perversely contemned, 
because many obstinately refuse to hear, there might perhaps 
be some colour for this universal call. It is not the purpose 
of the Prophet, however, to extenuate the guilt of men, when 
he states the source of their blindness to be, that God 
deigns not to reveal his arm to them ; he only reminds us 
that since faith is a special gift, it is in vain that external 
doctrine sounds in the ear. But I would fain know from 
those doctors whether it is mere preaching or faith that makes 
men sons of God. Certainly when it is said, " As many as 
received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of 
God, even to them that believe on his name," (John i. 12,) 
a confused mass is not set before us, but a special order is 
assigned to believers, who are "born not of blood, nor of the 
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God." 


556 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

But it is said, there is a mutual agreement between faith 
and the word. That must be wherever there is faith. But 
it is no new thins; for the seed to fall among- thorns or in 
stony places ; not only because the majority appear in fact 
to be rebellious against God, but because all are not gifted 
with eyes and ears. How, then, can it consistently be said, 
that God calls while he knows that the called will not come ? 
Let Augustine answer for me : " Would you dispute with me ? 
Wonder with me, and exclaim, O the depth ! Let us both 
agree in dread, lest we perish in error," (August, de Verb. 
Apost. Serm. xi.) Moreover, if election is, as Paul declares, 
the parent of faith, I retort the argument, and maintain 
that faith is not general, since election is special. For 
it is easily inferred from the series of causes and effects, 
when Paul says, that the Father "hath blessed us with all 
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ, according as 
he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world," 
(Eph. i. 3, 4,) that these riches are not common to all, be- 
cause God has chosen only whom he would. And the 
reason why in another passage he commends the faith of the 
elect is, to prevent any one from supposing that he acquires 
faith of his own nature ; since to God alone belongs the glory of 
freely illuminating those whom he had previously chosen, 
(Tit. i. 1.) For it is well said by Bernard, " His friends 
hear apart when he says to them, Fear not, little flock : to 
you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom. Who 
are these ? Those whom he foreknew and predestinated to 
be conformed to the image of his Son. He has made known 
his great and secret counsel. The Lord knoweth them that 
are his, but that which was known to God was manifested 
to men ; nor, indeed, does he deign to give a participation 
in this great mystery to any but those whom he foreknew 
and predestinated to be his own," (Bernard, ad Thomam 
Prrepos. Benerlae. Epist. 107.) Shortly after he concludes, 
" The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting 
upon them that fear him ; from everlasting through predesti- 
nation, to everlasting through glorification : the one knows no 
beginning, the other no end." But why cite Bernard as a 
witness, when we hear from the lips of our Master, " Not 


CHAP. XXII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 557 

that any man hath seen the Father, save he which is of 
God"? (John vi. 46.) By these words he intimates that all 
who are not regenerated by God are amazed at the bright- 
ness of his countenance. And, indeed, faith is aptly con- 
joined with election, provided it hold the second place. This 
order is clearly expressed by our Saviour in these words, 
" This is the Fathers will which hath sent me, that of all 
which he hath given me I should lose nothing ;" " And this 
is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth 
the Son, and believeth on him, may have ever-lasting life," 
(John vi. 39, 40.) If he would have all to be saved, he 
would appoint his Son their guai'dian, and would ingraft 
them all into his body by the sacred bond of faith. It is 
now clear that faith is a singular pledge of paternal love, 
treasured up for the sons whom he has adopted. Hence 
Christ elsewhere says, that the sheep follow the shepherd 
because they know his voice, but that they will not follow a 
stranger, because they know not the voice of strangers, 
(John x. 4.) But whence that distinction, unless that their 
ears have been divinely bored ? For no man makes himself 
a sheep, but is formed by heavenly grace. And why does 
the Lord declare that our salvation will always be sure and 
certain, but just because it is guarded by the invincible 
power of God? (John x. 29.) Accordingly, he concludes 
that unbelievers are not of his sheep, (John x. 16.) The 
reason is, because they are not of the number of those who, 
as the Lord promised by Isaiah, were to be his disciples. 
Moreover, as the passages which I have quoted imply per- 
severance, they are also attestations to the inflexible con- 
stancy of election. 

11. We come now to the reprobate, to whom the Apostle 
at the same time refers, (Rom. ix. 13.) For as Jacob, who 
as yet had merited nothing by good works, is assumed into 
favour ; so Esau, while as yet unpolluted by any crime, is 
hated. If we turn our view to works, we do injustice to the 
Apostle, as if he had failed to see the very thing which is 
clear to us. Moreover, there is complete proof of his not 
having seen it, since he expressly insists that when as yet 
they had done neither good nor evil, the one was elected, 


558 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

the other rejected, in order to prove that the foundation of 
divine predestination is not in works. Then after starting 
the objection, Is God unjust ? instead of employing what 
would have been the surest and plainest defence of his justice, 
viz., that God had recompensed Esau according to his 
wickedness, he is contented with a different solution, viz., 
that the reprobate are expressly raised up, in order that the 
glory of God may thereby be displayed. At last, he con- 
cludes that God hath mercy on whom he will have mercy, 
and whom he will he hardeneth, (Rom. ix. 18.) You see 
how he refers both to the mere pleasure of God. There- 
fore, if we cannot assign any reason for his bestowing mercy 
on his people, but just that it so pleases him, neither can we 
have any reason for his reprobating others but his will. When 
God is said to visit in mercy or harden whom he will, men 
are reminded that they are not to seek for any cause beyond 
his will. 


CHAP. XXIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 559 


CHAPTER XXIII. 

REFUTATION OF THE CALUMNIES BY WHICH THIS DOCTRINE 
IS ALWAYS UNJUSTLY ASSAILED. 

This chapter consists of four parts, which refute the principal objec- 
tions to this doctrine, and the various pleas and exceptions founded on 
these objections. These are preceded by a refutation of those who hold 
election but deny reprobation, sec. 1. Then follows, I. A refutation of 
the first objection to the doctrine of reprobation and election, sec. 2-5. 
II. An answer to the second objection, sec. 6-9. III. A refutation of 
the third objection. IV. A refutation of the fourth objection ; to which 
is added a useful and necessary caution, sec. 12-14. 

Sections. 

1. Error of those who deny reprobation. 1. Election opposed to repro- 

bation. 2. Those who deny reprobation presumptuously plead 
with God, whose counsels even angels adore. 3. They murmur 
against God when disclosing his counsels by the Apostle. Excep- 
tion and answer. Passage of Augustine. 

2. First objection, viz., that God is unjustly offended with those whom 

he dooms to destruction without their own desert. First answer, 
from the consideration of the divine will. The nature of this will, 
and how to be considered. 

3. Second answer. God owes nothing to man. His hatred against 

those who are corrupted by sin is most just. The reprobate con- 
vinced in their own consciences of the just judgment of God. 

4. Exception, viz., that the reprobate seem to have been preordained 

to sin. Answer. Passage of the Apostle vindicated from calumny. 

5. Answer, confirmed by the authority of Augustine. Illustration. 

Passage of Augustine. 

6. Objection, that God ought not to impute the sins rendered necessary 

by his predestination. First answer, by ancient writers. This 
not valid. Second answer also defective. Third answer, pro- 
posed by Valla, well founded. 

7. Objection, that God did not decree that Adam should perish by his 

fall, refuted by a variety of reasons. A noble passage of Augus- 
tine. 

8. Objection, that the wicked perish by the permission, not by the will 

of God. Answer. A pious exhortation. 


5G0 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

9. Objection and answer. 

10. Objection, that, according to the doctrine of predestination, God is a 

respecter of persons. Answer. 

11. Objection, that sinners are to be punished equally, or the justice of 

God is unequal. Answer. Confirmed by passages of Augustine. 

12. Objection, that the doctrine of predestination produces overweening 

confidence and impiety. Different answers. 

13. Another objection, depending on the former. Answer. The doctrine 

of predestination to be preached, not passed over in silence. 

14. How it is to be preached and delivered to the people. Summary of 

the orthodox doctrine of predestination, from Augustine. 

1. The human mind, when it hears this doctrine, cannot 
restrain its petulance, but boils and rages as if aroused by 
the sound of a trumpet. Many professing a desire to defend 
the Deity from an invidious charge admit the doctrine of 
election, but deny that any one is reprobated, (Bernard, in 
Die Ascensionis, Serm. 2.) This they do ignorantly and 
childishly, since there could be no election without its opposite 
reprobation. God is said to set apart those whom he adopts 
for salvation. It were most absurd to say, that he admits 
others fortuitously, or that they by their industry acquire 
what election alone confers on a few. Those, therefore, 
whom God passes by he reprobates, and that for no other 
cause but because he is pleased to exclude them from the 
inheritance which he predestines to his children. Nor is it 
possible to tolerate the petulance of men, in refusing to be 
restrained by the word of God, in regard to his incompre- 
hensible counsel, which even angels adore. We have already 
been told that hardening is not less under the immediate 
hand of God than mercy. Paul does not, after the example 
of those whom I have mentioned, labour anxiously to defend 
God, by calling in the aid of falsehood ; he only reminds us 
that it is unlawful for the creature to quarrel with its 
Creator. Then how will those who refuse to admit that any 
are reprobated by God explain the following words of 
Christ ? " Every plant which my heavenly Father hath not 
planted shall be rooted up," (Matth. xv. 13.) They are 
plainly told that all whom the heavenly Father has not been 
pleased to plant as sacred trees in his garden, are doomed 
and devoted to destruction. If they deny that this is a sign 


CHAP. XXIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 561 

of reprobation, there is nothing, however clear, that can be 
proved to them. But if they will still murmur, let us in 
the soberness of faith rest contented with the admonition 
of Paul, that it can be no ground of complaint that God, 
" willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, 
endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath 
fitted for destruction : and that he might make known the 
riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had 
afore prepared unto glory," (Kom. ix. 22, 23.) Let my read- 
ers observe that Paul, to cut off all handle for murmuring and 
detraction, attributes supreme sovereignty to the wrath and 
power of God ; for it were unjust that those profound judg- 
ments, which transcend all our powers of discernment, should 
be subjected to our calculation. It is frivolous in our oppo- 
nents to reply, that God does not altogether reject those 
whom in lenity he tolerates, but remains in suspense with 
regard to them, if peradventure they may repent ; as if Paul 
were representing God as patiently waiting for the conver- 
sion of those whom he describes as fitted for destruction. 
For Augustine, rightly expounding this passage, says, that 
where power is united to endurance, God does not permit, 
but rules, (August. Cont. Julian., Lib. v. c. 5.) They add 
also, that it is not without cause the vessels of wrath are said 
to be fitted for destruction, and that God is said to have pre- 
pared the vessels of mercy, because in this way the praise of 
salvation is claimed for God, whereas the blame of perdition 
is thrown upon those who of their own accord bring it upon 
themselves. But were I to concede that by the different 
forms of expression Paul softens the harshness of the former 
clause, it by no means follows, that he transfers the prepara- 
tion for destruction to any other cause than the secret counsel 
of God. This, indeed, is asserted in the preceding context, 
where God is said to have raised up Pharaoh, and to harden 
whom he will. Hence it follows, that the hidden counsel of 
God is the cause of hardening. I at least hold with Augustine, 
that when God makes sheep out of wolves, he forms them 
again by the powerful influence of grace, that their hardness 
may thus be subdued, and that he does not convert the obsti- 
nate, because he does not exert that more powerful grace, a 
VOL. II. 2 N 


562 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

grace which he has at command, if he were disposed to use 
it, (August, de Prsedest. Sanct., Lib. i. c. 2.) 

2. These observations would be amply sufficient for the 
pious and modest, and such as remember that they are men. 
But because many are the species of blasphemy Avhich these 
virulent dogs utter against God, we shall, as far as the case 
admits, give an answer to each. Foolish men raise many 
grounds of quarrel with God, as if they held him subject to 
their accusations. First, they ask why God is offended with 
his creatures, who have not provoked him by any pre- 
vious offence ; for to devote to destruction whomsoever he 
pleases, more resembles the caprice of a tyrant than the legal 
sentence of a judge ; and, therefore, there is reason to expostu- 
late with God, if at his mere pleasure men are, without any 
desert of their own, predestinated to eternal death. If at any 
time thoughts of this kind come into the minds of the pious, 
they will be sufficiently armed to repress them, by consider- 
ing how sinful it is to insist on knowing the causes of the 
divine will, since it is itself, and justly ought to be, the cause of 
all that exists. For if his will has any cause, there must be 
something antecedent to it, and to which it is annexed ; this 
it were impious to imagine. The will of God is the supreme 
rule of righteousness,1 so that everything which he wills 
must be held to be righteous by the mere fact of his willing 
it. Therefore, when it is asked why the Lord did so, we must 
answer, Because he pleased. But if you proceed farther to 
ask why he pleased, you ask for something greater and more 
sublime than the will of God, and nothing such can be found. 
Let human temerity then be quiet, and cease to inquire after 
what exists not, lest perhaps it fails to find what does exist. 
This, I say, will be sufficient to restrain any one who would 
reverently contemplate the secret things of God. Against 
the audacity of the wicked, who hesitate not openly to 
blaspheme, God will sufficiently defend himself by his own 
righteousness, without our assistance, when depriving their 
consciences of all means of evasion, he shall hold them under 
conviction, and make them feel their guilt. We, however, 

1 This is taken from Au^uste Dein Gen. cont. Manich., Lib. i. c. 3. 


CHAP. XXIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. - 563 

give no countenance to the fiction of absolute power,1 which, 
as it is heathenish, so it ought justly to be held in destesta- 
tion by us. We do not imagine God to be lawless. He is a 
law to himself; because, as Plato says, men labouring under 
tKe Influence of concupiscence need law ; but the will of God 
is not only free from all vice, but is the supreme standard of 
perfection, the law of all laws. But we deny that he is bound 
to give an account of his procedure ; and we moreover deny 
that we are fit of our own ability to give judgment in such a 
case. Wherefore, when we are tempted to go farther than we 
ought, let this consideration deter us, Thou shalt be "justified 
when thou speakest, and be clear when thou judgest," (Ps. 
li. 4.) 

3. God may thus quell his enemies by silence. But lest 
we should allow them with impunity to hold his sacred name 
in derision, he supplies us with weapons against them from 
his word. Accordingly, when we are accosted in such terms 
as these, Why did God from the first predestine some to 
death, when, as they were not yet in existence, they could 
not have merited sentence of death ? let us by way of reply 
ask in our turn, What do you imagine that God owes to 
man, if he is pleased to estimate him by his own nature ? As 
we are all vitiated by sin, we cannot but be hateful to God, 
and that not from tyrannical cruelty, but the strictest justice. 
But if all whom the Lord predestines to death are natu- 
rally liable to sentence of death, of what injustice, pray, do 
they complain ? Should all the sons of Adam come to dispute 
and contend with their Creator, because by his eternal pro- 
vidence they were before their birth doomed to perpetual 
destruction, when God comes to reckon with them, what 
will they be able to mutter against this defence ? If all are 
taken from a corrupt mass, it is not strange that all are sub- 
ject to condemnation. Let them not, therefore, charge God 
with injustice, if by his eternal judgment they are doomed to 
a death to which they themselves feel that whether they will 

1 French, " Toutesfois en parlant ainsi, nous n'approuvons pas la reverie 
des theologiens Papistes touchant la puissance absolue de Dieu ;" — still in 
speaking thus, we approve not of the reverie of the Popish theologians 
touching the absolute power of God. 


564 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

or not they are drawn spontaneously by their own nature. 
Hence it appears how perverse is this affectation of murmur- 
ing, when of set purpose they suppress the cause of condem- 
nation which they are compelled to recognise in themselves, 
that they may lay the blame upon God. But though I 
should confess a hundred times that God is the author, (and 
it is most certain that he is,) they do not, however, thereby 
efface their own guilt, which, engraven on their own con- 
sciences, is ever and anon presenting itself to their view. 

4. They again object, Were not men predestinated by the 
ordination of God to that corruption which is now held forth 
as the cause of condemnation ? If so, when the}7 perish in 
their corruption, they do nothing else than suffer punish- 
ment for that calamity, into which, by the predestination of 
God, Adam fell, and dragged all his posterity headlong with 
him. Is not he, therefore, unjust in thus cruelly mocking his 
creatures ? I admit that by the will of God all the sons of 
Adam fell into that state of wretchedness in which they are 
now involved ; and this is just what I said at the first, that 
we must always return to the mere pleasure of the divine 
will, the cause of wdiich is hidden in himself. But it does 
not forthwith follow that God lies open to this charge. For 
we will answer with Paul in these words, " Nay but, O man, 
who art thou that repliest against God ? Shall the thing 
formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me 
thus ? Hath not the potter power over the clay, of the same 
lump to make one vessel unto honour, and another unto dis- 
honour ?" (Rom. ix. 20, 21.) They will deny that the justice 
of God is thus truly defended, and will allege that Ave seek 
an evasion, such as those are wont to employ who have no 
good excuse. For what more seems to be said here than 
just that the power of God is such as cannot be hindered, so 
that he can do whatsoever he pleases ? But it is far other- 
wise. For what stronger reason can be given than when we 
are ordered to reflect who God is? How could he who is 
the Judge of the world commit any unrighteousness ? If it 
properly belongs to the nature of God to do judgment, he 
must naturally love justice and abhor injustice. Wherefore, 
the Apostle did not, as if he had been caught in a difficulty, 


CHAP. XXIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 565 

have recourse to evasion ; he only intimated that the pro- 
cedure of divine justice is too high to be scanned by human 
measure, or comprehended by the feebleness of human intel- 
lect. The Apostle, indeed, confesses that in the divine judg- 
ments there is a depth in which all the minds of men must 
be engulfed if they attempt to penetrate into it. But he also 
shows how unbecoming it is to reduce the works of God to 
such a law as that we can presume to condemn them the 
moment they accord not with our reason. There is a well- 
known saying of Solomon, (which, however, few properly 
understand,) " The great God that formed all things both 
rewardeth the fool and rewardeth transgressors," (Prov. xxvi. 
10.) For he is speaking of the greatness of God, whose 
pleasure it is to inflict punishment on fools and transgressors, 
though he is not pleased to bestow his Spirit upon them. 
It is a monstrous infatuation in men to seek to subject that 
which has no bounds to the little measure of their reason. 
Paul gives the name of elect to the angels who maintained 
their integrity. If their stedfastness was owing to the good 
pleasure of God, the revolt of the others proves that they were 
abandoned.1 Of this no other cause can be adduced than 
reprobation, which is hidden in the secret counsel of God. 

5. Now, should some Manes or Coelestinus2 come forward 
to arraign Divine Providence, (see sec. 8,) I say with Paul, 
that no account of it can be given, because by its magnitude 
it far surpasses our understanding. Is there any thing 
strange or absurd in this? Would we have the power of 
God so limited as to be unable to do more than our mind 
can comprehend ? I say with Augustine, that the Lord has 
created those who, as he certainly foreknew, were to go to 
destruction, and he did so because he so Avilled. Why he 
willed it is not ours to ask, as we cannot comprehend, nor 
can it become us even to raise a controversy as to the justice 
of the divine will. Whenever we speak of it, we are speak- 
ing of the supreme standard of justice. (See August. Ep. 

1 French, " Si leur Constance et fermete a etc fondee au bon plaisir 
de Dieu, la revolte des diables monstre qu'ils n'ont pas ete retenus, uaais 
plustost delaissez ;" — if their constancy and firmness was founded on 
the good pleasure of God, the revolt of the devils shows that they were 
not restrained, but rather abandoned. 

2 The French adds, " ou autre heretique ;" — or other heretic. 


566 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

106.) But when justice clearly appears, why should we 
raise any question of injustice? Let us not, therefore, be 
ashamed to stop their mouths after the example of Paul. 
Whenever they presume to carp, let us begin to repeat : 
Who are ye, miserable men, that bring an accusation against 
God, and bring it because he does not adapt the great- 
ness of his works to your meagre capacity ? As if every 
thing must be perverse that is hidden from the flesh. The 
immensity of the divine judgments is known to you by 
clear experience. You know that they are called " a great 
deep," (Ps. xxxvi. 6.) Now, look at the narrowness of your 
own mind, and say whether it can comprehend the decrees 
of God. Why then should you, by infatuated inquisitive- 
ness, plunge yourselves into an abyss which reason itself tells 
you wTill prove your destruction ? Why are you not deterred, 
in some degree at least, by what the Book of Job, as well 
as the Prophetical books, declare concerning the incompre- 
hensible wisdom and dreadful power of God ? If your mind is 
troubled, decline not to embrace the counsel of Augustine, 
lt You a man expect an answer from me : I also am a man. 
Wherefore, let us both listen to him who says, ' O man, who 
art thou ?' Believing ignorance is better than presumptuous 
knowledge. Seek merits ; you will find nought but punish- 
ment. O the height ! Peter denies, a thief believes. O the 
height ! Do you ask the reason ? I will tremble at the height. 
Keason you, I will wonder ; dispute you, I will believe. I see 
the height ; I cannot sound the depth. Paul found rest, 
because he found wonder. He calls the judgments of God 
1 unsearchable ;' and have you come to search them ? He 
says that his ways are * past finding out,' and do you seek to 
find them out?" (August, de Verb. Apost. Serm. 20.) We 
shall gain nothing by proceeding farther. For neither will 
the Lord satisfy the petulance of these men, nor does he 
need any other defence than that which he used by his Spirit, 
who spoke by the mouth of Paul. We unlearn the art of 
speaking well when we cease to speak with God. 

6. Impiety starts another objection, which, however, seeks 
not so much to criminate God as to excuse the sinner ; 
though he who is condemned by God as a sinner cannot 
ultimately be acquitted without impugning the judge. This, 


CHAP. XXIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 567 

then, is the scoffing language which profane tongues employ. 
Why should God blame men for things the necessity of which 
he has imposed by his own predestination ? What could 
they do ? Could they struggle Avith his decrees ? It were 
in vain for them to do it, since they could not possibly suc- 
ceed. It is not just, therefore, to punish them for things 
the principal cause of which is in the predestination of God. 
Here I will abstain from a defence to which ecclesiastical 
writers usually recur, that there is nothing in the prescience 
of God to prevent him from regarding man as a sinner, since 
the evils which he foresees are man's, not his. This would 
not stop the caviller, who would still insist that God might, 
if he had pleased, have prevented the evils which he foresaw, 
and not having done so, must with determinate counsel have 
created man for the very purpose of so acting on the earth. 
But if by the providence of God man was created, on the con- 
dition of afterwards doing whatever he does, then that which 
he cannot escape, and which he is constrained by the will of 
God to do, cannot be charged upon him as a crime. Let us, 
therefore, see what is the proper method of solving the diffi- 
culty. First, all must admit what Solomon says, " The 
Lord hath made all things for himself; yea, even the wicked 
for the day of evil," (Prov. xvi. 4.) Now, since the arrange- 
ment of all things is in the hand of God, since to him belongs 
the disposal of life and death, he arranges all things by his 
sovereign counsel, in such a way that individuals are born, 
who are doomed from the womb to certain death, and are to 
glorify him by their destruction. If any one alleges that no 
necessity is laid upon them by the providence of God, but 
rather that they are created by him in that condition, because 
he foresaw their future depravity, he says something, but 
does not say enough. Ancient writers, indeed, occasionally 
employ this solution, though with some degree of hesitation. 
The Schoolmen, again, rest in it as if it could not be gain- 
sayed. I, for my part, am willing to admit, that mere pre- 
science lays no necessity on the creatures; though some do not 
assent to this, but hold that it is itself the cause of things. 
But Valla, though otherwise not greatly skilled in sacred 
matters, seems to me to have taken a shrewder and more 


5(38 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

acute view, when lie shows that the dispute is superfluous, 
since life and death are acts of the divine will rather than of 
prescience. If God merely foresaw human events, and did 
not also arrange and dispose of them at his pleasure, there 
might be room for agitating the question, how far his fore- 
knowledge amounts to necessity; but since he foresees the 
things which are to happen, simply because he has decreed 
that they are so to happen, it is vain to debate about pre- 
science, while it is clear that all events take place by his 
sovereign appointment. 

7. They deny that it is ever said in distinct terms, God 
decreed that Adam should perish by his revolt.1 As if the 
same God, who is declared in Scripture to do whatsoever he 
pleases, could have made the noblest of his creatures without 
any special purpose. They say that, in accordance with 
free-will, he was to be the architect of his own fortune, that 
God had decreed nothing but to treat him according to his 
desert. If this frigid fiction is received, -where will be the 
omnipotence of God, by which, according to his secret coun- 
sel on which every thing depends, he rules over all ? But 
whether they will allow it or not, predestination is manifest 
in Adam's posterity. It was not owing to nature that they 
all lost salvation by the fault of one parent. Why should 
they refuse to admit with regard to one man that which 
against then will they admit with regard to the whole human 
race ? Why should they in cavilling lose their labour ? Scrip- 
ture proclaims that all were, in the person of one, made liable 
to eternal death. As this cannot be ascribed to nature, it is 
plain that it is owing to the wonderful counsel of God. It 
is very absurd in these worthy defenders of the justice of 
God to strain at a gnat and swallow a camel. I again ask 
how it is that the fall of Adam involves so many nations with 
their infant children in eternal death without remedy, unless 
that it so seemed meet to God ? Here the most loquacious 
tongues must be dumb. The decree, I admit, is dreadful ; 
and yet it is impossible to deny that God foreknew what 
the end of man was to be before he made him, and foreknew, 

1 See Calvin, De Praxlestinatione. 


CHAP. XXIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 569 

because he had so ordained by his decree. Should any . 
one here inveigh against the prescience of God, he does it 
rashly and unadvisedly. For why, pray, should it be made 
a charge against the heavenly Judge, that he was not igno- 
rant of what was to happen ? Thus, if there is any just or 
plausible complaint, it must be directed against predestina- 
tion. Nor ought it to seem absurd when I say, that God 
not only foresaw the fall of the first man, and in him the 
ruin of his posterity ; but also at his own pleasure arranged 
it. For as it belongs to his wisdom to foreknow all future 
events, so it belongs to his power to rule and govern them by 
his hand. This question, like others, is skilfully explained 
by Augustine : u Let us confess with the greatest benefit, 
what we believe with the greatest truth, that the God and 
Lord of all things, who made all things very good, both fore- 
knew that evil was to arise out of good, and knew that it 
belonged to his most omnipotent goodness to bring good out 
of evil, rather than not permit evil to be, and so ordained the 
life of angels and men as to show in it, first, what free-will 
could do ; and, secondly, what the benefit of his grace and his 
righteous judgment could do," (August. Enchir. ad Laurent.) 
8. Here they recur to the distinction between will and 
permission, the object being to prove that the wicked perish 
only by the permission, but not by the will of God. But 
why do we say that he permits, but just because he wills ? 
Nor, indeed, is there any probability in the thing itself, viz., 
that man brought death upon himself, merely by the per- 
mission, and not by the ordination of God ; as if God had 
not determined what he wished the condition of the chief 
of his creatures to be. I will not hesitate, therefore, 
simply to confess with Augustine that the will of God is 
necessity, and that every thing is necessary which he has 
willed ; just as those things will certainly happen which he 
has foreseen, (August, de Gen. ad Lit., Lib. vi. cap. 15.) 
Now, if in excuse of themselves and the ungodly, either the 
Pelagians, or Manichees, or Anabaptists, or Epicureans, (for 
it is with these four sects we have to discuss this matter,) 
should object the necessity by which they are constrained, 
in consequence of the divine predestination, they do nothing 


570 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

that is relevant to the cause. For if predestination is 
nothing else than a dispensation of divine justice, secret 
indeed, but unblameable, because it is certain that those pre- 
destinated to that condition Avere not unworthy of it, it is 
equally certain, that the destruction consequent upon pre- 
destination is also most just. Moreover, though their 
perdition depends on the predestination of God, the cause 
and matter of it is in themselves. The first man fell because 
the Lord deemed it meet that he should : why he deemed it 
meet, we know not. It is certain, however, that it was just, 
because he saw that his own glory would thereby be dis- 
played. When you hear the glory of God mentioned, 
understand that his justice is included. For that which 
deserves praise must be just. Man therefore falls, divine 
providence so ordaining, but he falls by his own fault. The 
Lord had a little before declared that all the things which 
he had made were very good, (Gen. i. 31.) Whence then 
the depravity of man, which made him revolt from God? 
Lest it should be supposed that it was from his creation, 
God had expressly approved what proceeded from himself. 
Therefore, man's own wickedness corrupted the pure nature 
which he had received from God, and his ruin brought with 
it the destruction of all his posterity. Wherefore, let us in 
the corruption of human nature contemplate the evident 
cause of condemnation, (a cause which comes more closely 
home to us,) rather than inquire into a cause hidden and 
almost incomprehensible in the predestination of God. Nor 
let us decline to submit our judgment to the boundless wisdom 
of God, so far as to confess its insufficiency to comprehend 
many of his secrets. Ignorance of things which we are not 
able, or which it is not lawful to know, is learning, while the 
desire to know them is a species of madness. 

9. Some one, perhaps, will say, that I have not yet stated 
enough to refute this blasphemous excuse. I confess that it 
is impossible to prevent impiety from murmuring and object- 
ing ; but I think I have said enough, not only to remove the 
ground, but also the pretext for throwing blame upon God. 
The reprobate would excuse their sins by alleging that they 
are unable to escape the necessity of sinning, especially 


CHAP. XXIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 571 

because a necessity of this nature is laid upon them by the 
ordination of God. We deny that they can thus be validly 
excused, since the ordination of God, by which they com- 
plain that they are doomed to destruction, is consistent with 
equity, — an equity, indeed, unknown to us, but most certain. 
Hence Ave conclude, that every evil which they bear is 
inflicted by the most just judgment of God. Next we have 
shown that they act preposterously when, in seeking the origin 
of their condemnation, they turn their view to the hidden 
recesses of the divine counsel, and wink at the corruption of 
nature, which is the true source. They cannot impute this 
corruption to God, because he bears testimony to the good- 
ness of his creation. For though, by the eternal providence 
of God, man was formed for the calamity under which he 
lies, he took the matter of it from himself, not from God, 
since the only cause of his destruction was his degenerating 
from the purity of his creation into a state of vice and 
impurity. 

10. There is a third absurdity by which the adversaries 
of predestination defame it. As we ascribe it entirely to the 
counsel of the divine will, that those whom God adopts as 
the heirs of his kingdom are exempted from universal 
destruction, they infer that he is an accepter of persons ; but 
this Scripture uniformly denies : and, therefore, Scripture 
is either at variance with itself, or respect is had to merit in 
election. First, the sense in which Scripture declares that 
God is not an accepter of persons, is different from that 
which they suppose : since the term person means not man, 
but those things which, when conspicuous in a man, either 
procure favour, grace, and dignity, or, on the contrary, pro- 
duce hatred, contempt, and disgrace. Among these are, 
on the one hand, riches, wealth, power, rank, office, country, 
beauty, &c. ; and, on the other hand, poverty, want, mean 
birth, sordidness, contempt, and the like. Thus Peter and 
Paul say, that the Lord is no accepter of persons, because 
he makes no distinction between the Jew and the Greek; 
does not make the mere circumstance of country the ground 
for rejecting one or embracing the other, (Acts x. 34 ; Rom. 
ii. 10 ; Gal. iii. 28.) Thus James also uses the same words, 


572 INSTITUTES OP THE BOOK III. 

when he would declare that God has no respect to riches in 
his judgment, (James ii. 5.) Paul also says in another pass- 
age, that in judging God has no respect to slavery or free- 
dom, (Eph. vi. 9 ; Col. iii. 25.) There is nothing inconsistent 
with this when we say, that God, according to the good 
pleasure of his will, without any regard to merit, elects those 
whom he chooses for sons, while he rejects and reprobates 
others. For fuller satisfaction the matter may be thus 
explained, (see August. Epist. 115, et ad Bonif., Lib. ii. cap. 
7.) It is asked, how it happens that of two, between whom 
there is no difference of merit, God in his election adopts 
the one, and passes by the other? I, in my turn, ask, Is 
there any thing in him who is adopted to incline God 
towards him ? If it must be confessed that there is nothing, 
it will follow, that God looks not to the man, but is influ- 
enced entirely by his own goodness to do him good. There- 
fore, when God elects one and rejects another, it is owing 
not to any respect to the individual, but entirely to his own 
mercy, which is free to display and exert itself when and 
where he pleases. For we have elsewhere seen, that in 
order to humble the pride of the flesh, " not many wise men 
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called," 
(1 Cor. i. 26;) so far is God in the exercise of his favour 
from showing any respect to persons. 

11. Wherefore, it is false and most wicked to charge 
God with dispensing justice unequally, because in this pre- 
destination he does not observe the same course towards all. 
If (say they) he finds all guilty, let him punish all alike : if 
he finds them innocent, let him relieve all from the severity 
of judgment. But they plead with God as if he were either 
interdicted from showing mercy, or were obliged, if he show 
mercy, entirely to renounce judgment. What is it that 
they demand ? That if all are guilty, all shall receive the 
same punishment. We admit that the guilt is common, but 
we say, that God in mercy succours some. Let him (they 
say) succour all. Wre object, that it is right for him to show 
by punishing that he is a just judge. When they cannot 
tolerate this, what else are they attempting than to deprive 
God of the power of showing mercy ; or, at least, to allow it 


CHAP. XXIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 573 

to him only on the condition of altogether renouncing judg- 
ment ? Here the words of Augustine most admirably apply : 
u Since in the first man the whole human race fell under 
condemnation, those vessels which are made of it unto 
honour, are not vessels of self-righteousness, but of divine 
mercy. When other vessels are made unto dishonour, it 
must be imputed not to injustice, but to judgment," (August. 
Epist. 106, De Prredest. et Gratia ; De Bono Persever., cap. 
12.) Since God inflicts due punishment on those whom he 
reprobates, and bestows unmerited favour on those whom he 
calls, he is free from every accusation ; just as it belongs to 
the creditor to forgive the debt to one, and exact it of 
another. The Lord therefore may show favour to whom he 
will, because he is merciful ; not show it to all, because he is 
a just judge. In giving to some what they do not merit, 
he shows his free favour ; in not giving to all, he declares 
what all deserve. For when Paul says, " God hath con- 
cluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon 
all," it ought also to be added, that he is debtor to none ; 
for " who hath first given to him, and it shall be recompensed 
unto him again?" (Rom. xi. 32, 35.) 

12. Another argument which they employ to overthrow 
predestination is, that if it stand, all care and study of well- 
doing must cease. For what man can hear (say they) that 
life and death are fixed by an eternal and immutable decree 
of God, without immediately concluding that it is of no con- 
sequence how he acts, since no work of his can either hinder 
or further the predestination of God ? Thus all will rush on, 
and like desperate men plunge headlong wherever lust in- 
clines. And it is true that this is not altogether a fiction ; 
for there are multitudes of a swinish nature who defile the 
doctrine of predestination by their profane blasphemies, and 
employ them as a cloak to evade all admonition and censure. 
" God knows what he has determined to do with regard to 
us : if he has decreed our salvation, he will bring us to it in 
his own time ; if he has doomed us to death, it is vain for 
us to fight against it." But Scripture, while it enjoins us 
to think of this high mystery with much greater reverence 
and religion, gives very different instruction to the pious, 


574 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

and justly condemns the accursed license of the ungodly. 
For it does not remind us of predestination to increase our 
audacity, and tempt us to pry with impious presumption 
into the inscrutable counsels of God, but rather to humble 
and abase us, that we may tremble at his judgment, and 
learn to look up to his mercy. This is the mark at which 
believers will aim. The grunt of these filthy swine is duly 
silenced by Paul. They say that they feel secure in vice, 
because, if they are of the number of the elect, their vices 
will be no obstacle to the ultimate attainment of life. But 
Paul reminds us that the end for which we are elected is, 
" that we should be holy, and without blame before him," 
(Eph. i. 4.) If the end of election is holiness of life, it 
ought to arouse and stimulate us strenuously to aspire to it, 
instead of serving as a pretext for sloth. How wide the dif- 
ference between the two things, between ceasing from well- 
doing because election is sufficient for salvation, and its being 
the very end of election, that we should devote ourselves to 
the study of good works. Have done, then, with blasphemies 
which wickedly invert the whole order of election. When 
they extend their blasphemies farther, and say that he who 
is reprobated by God will lose his pains if he studies to 
approve himself to him by innocence and probity of life, they 
are convicted of the most impudent falsehood. For whence 
can any such study arise but from election ? As all who are 
of the number of the reprobate are vessels formed unto dis- 
honour, so they cease not by their perpetual crimes to pro- 
voke the anger of God against them, and give evident signs 
of the judgment which God has already passed upon them; so 
far is it from being true that they vainly contend against it. 
13. Another impudent and malicious calumny against this 
doctrine is, that it destroys all exhortations to a pious life. 
The great odium to which Augustine was at one time sub- 
jected on this head he wiped away in his treatise De Correp- 
tione et Gratia, to Valentinus, a perusal of which will easily 
satisfy the vpious and docile. Here, however, I may touch 
on a few points, which will, I hope, be sufficient for those 
who are honest and not contentious. We have already seen 
how plainly and audibly Paul preaches the doctrine of free 


CHAP. XXIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 575 

election : is he, therefore, cold in admonishing and exhorting ? 
Let those good zealots compare his vehemence with theirs, and 
they will find that they are ice, while he is all fervour. And 
surely every doubt on this subject should be removed by the 
principles which he lays down, that God hath not called us 
to uncleanness ; that every one should possess his vessel in 
honour ; that we are the workmanship of God, " created in 
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before 
ordained that we should walk in them," (1 Thess. iv. 4, 7 ; 
Eph. ii. 10.) In one word, those who have any tolerable 
acquaintance with the writings of Paul will understand, 
without a long demonstration, how well he reconciles the 
two things which those men pretend to be contradictory to 
each other. Christ commands us to believe in him, and yet 
there is nothing false or contrary to this command in the state- 
ment which he afterwards makes : " No man can come unto 
me, except it were given him of my Father," (John vi. 65.) 
Let preaching then have its free course, that it may lead 
men to faith, and dispose them to persevere with unin- 
terrupted progress. Nor, at the same time, let there be any 
obstacle to the knowledge of predestination, so that those who 
obey may not plume themselves on anything of their own, 
but glory only in the Lord. It is not without cause our 
Saviour says, " Who hath ears to hear, let him hear," (Matth. 
xiii. 9.) Therefore, while we exhort and preach, those who 
have ears willingly obey : in those, again, who have no ears 
is fulfilled what is written : u Hear ye indeed, but understand 
not," (Isaiah vi. 9.) " But why (says Augustine) have some 
ears, and others not? Who hath known the mind of the 
Lord ? Are we, therefore, to deny Avhat is plain because 
we cannot comprehend what is hid ?" This is a faithful 
quotation from Augustine ; but because his words will per- 
haps have more authority than mine, let us adduce the fol- 
lowing passage from his treatise, De Bono Perse ver., cap. 15. 
" Should some on hearing this turn to indolence and sloth, 
and leaving off all exertion, rush headlong into lust, are we, 
therefore, to suppose that what has been said of the fore- 
knowledge of God is not true ? If God foreknew that they 
would be good, will they not be good, however great their 


57 G INSTITUTES OP THE BOOK III. 

present wickedness ? and if God foreknew that they would 
be wicked, will they not be wicked, how great soever the 
goodness now seen in them ? For reasons of this description, 
must the truth which has been stated on the subject of 
divine foreknowledge be denied or not mentioned ? and more 
especially when, if it is not stated, other errors will arise ?" 
In the sixteenth chapter he says, " The reason for not men- 
tioning the truth is one thing, the necessity for telling the 
truth is another. It were tedious to inquire into all the 
reasons for silence. One, however, is, lest those who under- 
stand not become worse, while we are desirous to make those 
who understand better informed. Now, such persons, when 
we say anything of this kind, do not indeed become better 
informed, but neither do they become worse. But when 
the truth is of such a nature, that he who cannot compre- 
hend it becomes worse by our telling it, and he who can 
comprehend it becomes worse by our not telling it, what 
think ye ought we to do ? Are we not to tell the truth, that 
he who can comprehend may comprehend, rather than not 
tell it, and thereby not only prevent both from comprehend- 
ing, but also make the more intelligent of the two to become 
worse, whereas if he heard and comprehended others might 
learn through him ? And we are unwilling to say what, on 
the testimony of Scripture, it is lawful to say. For we 
fear lest, when we speak, he who cannot comprehend may 
be offended ; but we have no fear lest, while we are silent, he 
who can comprehend the truth be involved in falsehood." 
In chapter twentieth, glancing again at the same view, he 
more clearly confirms it. " Wherefore, if the apostles and 
teachers of the Church who came after them did both ; if 
they discoursed piously of the eternal election of God, and 
at the same time kept believers under the discipline of a 
pious life, how can those men of our day, when shut up by 
the invincible force of truth, think they are right in saying, 
that what is said of predestination, though it is true, must 
not be preached to the people ? Nay, it ought indeed to be 
preached, that whoso hath ears to hear may hear. And who 
hath ears if he hath not received them from him who has 
promised to give them ? Certainly, let him who receives not, 


CHAP. XXIII. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 577 

reject. Let him who receives, take and drink, drink and 
live. For as piety is to be preached, that God may be duly 
worshipped ; so predestination also is to be preached, that he 
who hath ears to hear may, in regard to divine grace, glory 
not in himself, but in God." 

14. And yet as that holy man had a singular desire to 
edify, he so regulates his method of teaching as carefully, and 
as far as in him lay, to avoid giving offence. For he reminds 
us, that those things which are truly should also be fitly 
spoken. Were any one to address the people thus : If yOu 
do not believe, the reason is, because God has already doomed 
you to destruction : he would not only encourage sloth, but 
also give countenance to wickedness. Were any one to give 
utterance to the sentiment in the future tense, and say, that 
those who hear will not believe because they are reprobates, it 
were imprecation rather than doctrine. Wherefore, Augus- 
tine not undeservedly orders such, as senseless teachers or 
sinister and ill-omened prophets, to retire from the Church. 
He, indeed, elsewhere truly contends that " a man profits by 
correction only when He who causes those whom He pleases 
to profit without correction, pities and assists. But why 
is it thus with some, and differently with others ? Far be it 
from us to say that it belongs to the clay and not to the 
potter to decide." He afterwards says, " When men by 
correction either come or return to the Avay of righteousness, 
who is it that works salvation in their hearts but he who 
gives the . increase, whoever it be that plants and waters ? 
When he is pleased to save, there is no free-will in man to 
resist. Wherefore, it cannot be doubted that the will of 
God (who hath done whatever he hath pleased in heaven 
and in earth, and who has even done things which are to 
be) cannot be resisted by the human will, or prevented from 
doing what he pleases, since with the very wills of men he 
does so." Again, " When he would bring men to himself, 
does he bind them with corporeal fetters ? He acts inwardly, 
inwardly holds, inwardly moves their hearts, and draws them 
by the wills Avhich he has wrought in them." What he im- 
mediately adds must not be omitted : " Because we know not 
who belongs to the number of the predestinated, or does not 
AOL. II. 2 o 


578 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

belong, our desire ought to be that all may be saved ; and 
hence every person we meet, we will desire to be with us a 
partaker of peace. But o ur peace will rest upon the sons of 
peace. Wherefore, on our part, let correction be used as a 
harsh yet salutary medicine for all, that they may neither 
perish, nor destroy others. To God it will belong to make it 
available to those whom he has foreknown and predes- 
tinated." 


CHAP. XXIV. CHRISTIAN' RELIGION. 579 


CHAPTER XXIV. 

ELECTION CONFIRMED BY THE CALLING OF GOD. THE RE- 
PROBATE BRING UPON THEMSELVES THE RIGHTEOUS DE- 
STRUCTION TO WHICH THEY ARE DOOMED. 

The title of this chapter shows that it consists of two parts, — I. The 
case of the Elect, from sec. 1-11. II. The case of the Reprobate, from 
sec. 12-17. 

Sections. 

1. The election of God is secret, but is manifested by effectual calling. 

The nature of this effectual calling. How election and effectual 
calling are founded on the free mercy of God. A cavil of certain 
expositors refuted by the words of Augustine. An exception dis- 
posed of. 

2. Calling proved to be free, 1. By its nature and the mode in which 

it is dispensed. 2. By the word of God. 3. By the calling of 
Abraham, the father of the faithful. 4. By the testimony of John. 
5. By the example of those who have been called. 

3. The pure doctrine of the calling of the elect misunderstood, 1. By 

those who attribute too much to the human will. 2. By those who 
make election dependent on faith. This error amply refuted. 

4. In this and the five following sections the certainty of election vin- 

dicated from the assaults of Satan. The leading arguments are : 
1. Effectual calling. 2. Christ apprehended by faith. 3. The protec- 
tion of Christ, the guardian of the elect. We must not attempt to 
penetrate to the hidden recesses of the divine wisdom, in order to 
learn what is decreed with regard to us at the judgment-seat. We 
must begin and end with the call of God. This confirmed by an 
apposite saying of Bernard. 

5. Christ the foundation of this calling and election. He who does not 

lean on him alone cannot be certain of his election. He is the 
faithful interpreter of the eternal counsel in regard to our salvation. 

6. Another security of our election is the protection of Christ our Shep- 

herd. How it is manifested to us. Objection 1. As to the future 
state. 2. As to perseverance. Both objections refuted. 

7. Objection, that those who seem elected sometimes fall away. An- 

swer. A passage of Paul dissuading us from security explained. 
The kind of fear required in the elect. 


580 INSTITUTES OP THE BOOK III. 

8. Explanation of the saying, that many are called, but few chosen. A 

twofold call. 

9. Explanation of the passage, that none is lost but the son of perdi- 

tion. Kefutation of an objection to the certainty of election. 

10. Explanation of the passages urged against the certainty of election. 

Examples by which some attempt to prove that the seed of election 
is sown in the hearts of the elect from their very birth. Answer. 
1. One or two examples do not make the rule. 2. This view 
opposed to Scripture. 3. Is expressly opposed by an apostle. 

11. An explanation and confirmation of the third answer. 

12. Second part of the chapter, which treats of the reprobate. Some of 

them God deprives of the opportunity of hearing his word. Others 
he blinds and stupifies the more by the preaching of it. 

13. Of this no other account can be given than that the reprobate are 

vessels fitted for destruction. This confirmed by the case of the 
elect ; of Pharaoh and of the Jewish people both before and after 
the manifestation of Christ. 

14. Question, Why does God blind the reprobate? Two answers. These 

confirmed by different passages of Scripture. Objection of the 
reprobate. Answer. 

15. Objection to this doctrine of the righteous rejection of the reprobate. 

The first founded on a passage in Ezekiel. The passage explained. 

16. A second objection founded on a passage in Paid. The apostle's mean- 

ing explained. A third objection and fourth objection answered. 

17. A fifth objection, viz., that there seems to be a twofold will in God. 

Answer. Other objections and answers. Conclusion. 

1. But that the subject may be more fully illustrated, we 
must treat both of the calling of the elect, and of the blind- 
ing and hardening of the ungodly. The former I have already 
in some measure discussed, (chap. xxii. sec. 10, 11,) when 
refuting the error of those who think that the general terms 
in which the promises are made place the whole human race 
on a level. The special election which otherwise would 
remain hidden in God, he at length manifests by his calling. 
" For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be 
conformed to the image of his Son." Moreover, " whom he 
did predestinate, them he also called ; and whom he called, 
them he also justified," that he may one day glorify, (Rom. 
viii. 29, 30.) Though the Lord, by electing his people, 
adopted them as his sons, we, however, see that they do not 
come into possession of this great good until they are called ; 
but when called, the enjoyment of their election is in some 


CHAP. XXIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 581 

measure communicated to tliem. For which reason the Spirit 
which they receive is termed by Paul both the " Spirit of adop- 
tion," and the " seal" and " earnest" of the future inheritance; 
because by his testimony he confirms and seals the certainty 
of future adoption on their hearts. For although the preach- 
ing of the gospel springs from the fountain of election, yet 
being common to them with the reprobate, it would not be 
in itself a solid proof. God, however, teaches his elect effec- 
tually when he brings them to faith, as we formerly quoted 
from the words of our Saviour, "Not that any man hath 
seen the Father, save he which is of God, he hath seen the 
Father," (John vi. 46.) Again, " I have manifested thy name 
unto the men which thou gavest me out of the world," (John 
xvii. 6.) He says in another passage, " No man can come 
to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him," 
(John vi. 44.) This passage Augustine ably expounds in 
these words : " If (as Truth says) every one who has learned 
cometh, then every one who does not come has not learned. 
It does not therefore follow, that he who can come does come, 
unless he have willed and done it; but every one who hath 
learned of the Father, not only can come, but also comes ; the 
antecedence of possibility,1 the affection of will, and the effect 
of action being now present," (August, de Grat. Chr. Cont. 
Pelag., Lib. i. c. 14, 31.) In another passage, he says still 
more clearly, u What means, Every one that hath heard and 
learned of the Father cometh unto me, but just that there is 
no one who hears and learns of the Father that does not come 
to me ? For if every one who has heard and learned, conies ; 
assuredly every one who does not come, has neither heard 
nor learned of the Father : for if he had heard and learned, 
lie would come. Far removed from carnal sense is this school 
in which the Father is heard and teaches us to come to the 
Son," (August, de Prajdes. Sanct. c. 8.) Shortly after, he 
says, " This grace, which is secretly imparted to the hearts of 
men, is not received by any hard heart ; for the reason for 
which it is given is, that the hardness of the heart may first 
be taken away. Hence, Avhen the Father is heard within, 

1 Latin, " possibilitatis profeetus." — French, " l'avancement de possi- 

bilite." 


582 INSTITUTES OF TI1E BOOK III. 

he takes away the stony heart, and gives a heart of flesh. 

Thus he makes them sons of promise and vessels of mercy, 

■which he has prepared for glory. Why then does he not 

teach all to come to Christ, but just because all whom he 

teaches he teaches in mercy, while those whom he teaches not 

he teaches not in judgment ? for he pities whom he will, and 

hardens whom he will." Those, therefore, whom God has 

chosen he adopts as sons, while he becomes to them a Father. 

By calling, moreover, he admits them to his famity, and 

unites them to himself, that they may be one with him. 

"When calling is thus added to election, the Scripture 

plainly intimates that nothing is to be looked for in it but 

the free mercy of God. For if we ask whom it is he calls, 

and for what reason, he answers, it is those whom he had 

chosen. When we come to election, mercy alone every 

where appears ; and, accordingly, in this the saying of Paul 

is truly realised, " So then, it is not of him that willeth, nor 

of him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy," (Rom. 

ix. 16 ;) and that not as is commonly understood by those who 

share the result between the grace of God and the will and 

agency of man. For their exposition is, that the desire and 

endeavour of sinners are of no avail by themselves, unless 

accompanied by the grace of God, but that when aided by 

his blessing, they also do their part in procuring salvation. 

This cavil I prefer refuting in the words of Augustine rather 

than my own : " If all that the apostle meant is, that it is 

not alone of him that willeth, or of him that runneth, unless 

the Lord be present in mercy, we may retort and hold the 

converse, that it is not of mercy alone, unless willing and 

running be present," (August. Enchir. ad Laurent., c. 31.) 

But if this is manifestly impious, let us have no doubt that 

the apostle attributes all to the mercy of the Lord, and leaves 

nothing to our wills or exertions. Such were the sentiments 

of that holy man. I set not the value of a straw on the 

subtlety to which they have recourse, viz., that Paul would 

not have spoken thus had there not been some will and effort 

on our part. For he considered not what might be in man ; 

but seeing that certain persons ascribed a part of salvation to 

the industry of man, he simply condemned their error in the 


CHAP. XXIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 583 

former clause, and then claimed the whole substance of salva- 
tion for the divine mercy. And what else do the prophets 
than perpetually proclaim the free calling of God ? 

2. Moreover, this is clearly demonstrated by the nature 
and dispensation of calling, which consists not merely of the 
preaching of the word, but also of the illumination of the 
Spirit. Who those are to whom God offers his word is 
explained by the prophet, " I am sought of them that asked 
not for me : I am found of them that sought me not : I said, 
Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that was not called by 
my name," (Isaiah lxv. 1.) And lest the Jews should think 
that that mercy applied only to the Gentiles, he calls to 
their remembrance whence it was he took their father Abra- 
ham when he condescended to be his friend, (Isaiah xxiv. 3 ;) 
namely, from the midst of idolatry, in which he was plunged 
with all his people. When he first shines with the light of 
his word on the undeserving, he gives a sufficiently clear 
proof of his free goodness. Here, therefore, boundless good- 
ness is displayed, but not so as to bring all to salvation, since 
a heavier judgment awaits the reprobate for rejecting the 
evidence of his love. God also, to display his own glory, with- 
holds from them the effectual agency of his Spirit. There- 
fore, this inward calling is an infallible pledge of salvation. 
Hence the words of John, " Hereby we know that he abid- 
eth in us by the Spirit which he hath given us," (1 John iii. 
24.) And lest the flesh should glory, in at least responding 
to him, when he calls and spontaneously offers himself, he 
affirms that there would be no ears to hear, no eyes to 
see, did not he give them. And he acts not according to the 
gratitude of each, but according to his election. Of this you 
have a striking example in Luke, when the Jews and Gen- 
tiles in common heard the discourse of Paul and Barnabas. 
Though they were all instructed in the same word, it is 
said, that " as many as were ordained to eternal life believ- 
ed," (Acts xiii. 48.) How can we deny that calling is 
gratuitous, when election alone reigns in it even to its con- 
clusion ? 

3. Two errors are here to be avoided. Some make man a 
fellow-worker with God in such a sense, that man's suffrage 


584 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

ratifies election, so that, according to them, the will of man 
is superior to the counsel of God. As if Scripture taught 
that only the power of being able to believe is given us, and 
not rather faith itself. Others, although they do not so 
much impair the grace of the Holy Spirit, yet, induced by 
what means I know not, make election dependent on faith, as 
if it were doubtful and ineffectual till confirmed by faith. 
There can be no doubt, indeed, that in regard to us it is so 
confirmed. Moreover, we have already seen, that the secret 
counsel of God, which lay concealed, is thus brought to light, 
by this nothing more being understood than that that which 
was unknown is proved, and as it were sealed. But it is false 
to say that election is then only effectual after we have em- 
braced the gospel, and that it thence derives its vigour. It 
is true that we must there look for its certainty, because, if 
Ave attempt to penetrate to the secret ordination of God, we 
shall be engulfed in that profound abyss. But when the 
Lord hath manifested it to us, we must ascend higher in 
order that the effect may not bury the cause. For what can 
be more absurd and unbecoming, than while Scripture teaches 
that we are illuminated as God has chosen us, our eyes should 
be so dazzled with the brightness of this light, as to refuse 
to attend to election ? Meanwhile, I deny not that, in order 
to be assured of our salvation, we must begin with the word, 
and that our confidence ought to go no farther than the 
word when we invoke God the Father. For some, to obtain 
more certainty of the counsel of God, (which is nigh us in 
our mouth, and in our heart, Deut. xxx. 14,) absurdly desire 
to fly above the clouds. We must, therefore, curb that 
temerity by the soberness of faith, and be satisfied to have 
God as the witness of his hidden grace in the external word ; 
provided always that the channel in which the water flows, 
and out of which we may freely drink, does not prevent us 
from paying due honour to the fountain. 

4. Therefore, as those are in error who make the power of 
election dependent on the faith by which we perceive that 
we are elected, so we shall follow the best order, if, in seeking 
the certainty of our election, we cleave to those posterior 
signs which are sure attestations to it. Among the tempta- 


OIIAP. XXIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 585 

tions with which Satan assaults believers, none is greater 
or more perilous, than when disquieting them with doubts as 
to their election, he at the same time stimulates them with a 
depraved desire of inquiring after it out of the proper way. 
(See Luther in Genes, cap. xxvi.) By inquiring out of the 
proper way, I mean when puny man endeavours to penetrate 
to the hidden recesses of the divine wisdom, and goes back 
even to the remotest eternity, in order that he may under- 
stand what final determination God has made with regard to 
him. In this way he plunges headlong into an immense 
abyss, involves himself in numberless inextricable snares, and 
buries himself in the thickest darkness. For it is right that 
the stupidity of the human mind should be punished with 
fearful destruction, whenever it attempts to rise in its own 
strength to the height of divine wisdom. And this tempta- 
tion is the more fatal, that it is the temptation to which of all 
others almost all of us are most prone. For there is scarcely a 
mind in which the thought does not sometimes rise, Whence 
your salvation but from the election of God ? But what 
proof have you of your election ? When once this thought 
has taken possession of any individual, it keeps him perpe- 
tually miserable, subjects him to dire torment, or throws him 
into a state of complete stupor. I cannot wish a stronger 
proof of the depraved ideas, which men of this description 
form of predestination, than experience itself furnishes, since 
the mind cannot be infected by a more pestilential error than 
that which disturbs the conscience, and deprives it of peace 
and tranquillity in regard to God. Therefore, as we dread 
shipwreck, we must avoid this rock, which is fatal to every 
one who strikes upon it. And though the discussion of pre- 
destination is regarded as a perilous sea, yet in sailing over 
it the navigation is calm and safe, nay pleasant, provided we 
do not voluntarily court danger. For as a fatal abyss en- 
gulfs those who, to be assured of their election, pry into 
the eternal counsel of God without the word, yet those who 
investigate it rightly, and in the order in which it is exhi- 
bited in the word, reap from it rich fruits of consolation. 

Let our method of inquiry then be, to begin with the 
calling of God and to end with it. Although there is nothing 


\/ 


586 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

in this to prevent believers from feeling that the blessings 
which they daily receive from the hand of God originate in 
that secret adoption, as they themselves express it in Isaiah, 
" Thou hast done wonderful things ; thy counsels of old are 
faithfulness and truth," (Isa. xxv. 1.) For with this as a 
pledge, God is pleased to assure us of as much of his counsel 
as can be lawfully known. But lest any should think that 
testimony weak, let us consider what clearness and certainty 
it gives us. On this subject there is an apposite passage in 
Bernard. After speaking of the reprobate, he says, " The 
purpose of God stands, the sentence of peace on those that 
fear him also stands, a sentence concealing their bad and 
recompensing their good qualities ; so that, in a wondrous 
manner, not only their good but their bad qualities work 
together for good. Who will lay any thing to the charge of 
God's elect ? It is completely sufficient for my justification 
to have him propitious against whom only I have sinned. 
Eveiw thing which he has decreed not to impute to me, is as 
if it had never been." A little after he says, " O the place 
of true rest, a place which I consider not unworthy of the 
name of inner-chamber, where God is seen, not as if disturbed 
with anger, or distracted by care, but where his will is proved 
to be good, and acceptable, and perfect. That vision does not 
terrify but soothe, does not excite restless curiosity but calms 
it, does not fatigue but tranquillises the senses. Here is true 
rest. A tranquil God tranquillises all things ; and to see him 
at rest, is to be at rest," (Bernard, super Cantic. Serai, xiv.) 
v' 5. First, if we seek for the paternal mercy and favour of 
God, we must turn our eyes to Christ, in whom alone the 
Father is well pleased, (Matth. iii. 17.) When we seek for 
salvation, life, and a blessed immortality, to him also must 
we betake ourselves, since he alone is the fountain of life, 
and the anchor of salvation, and the heir of the kingdom of 
heaven. Then what is the end of election, but just that, 
being adopted as sons by the heavenly Father, we may by 
his favour obtain salvation and immortality ? How much 
soever you may speculate and discuss, you will perceive that 
in its ultimate object it goes no farther. Hence, those whom 
God has adopted as sons, he is said to have elected, not in 


CHAP. XXIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 587 

themselves, but in Christ Jesus, (Eph. i. 4 ;) because he 
could love them only in him, and only as being previously 
made partakers with him, honour them with the inheritance 
of his kingdom. But if we are elected in him, we cannot 
find the certainty of our election in ourselves ; and not even 
in God the Father, if we look at him apart from the Son. 
J Christ, then, is the mirror in which we ought, and in which, 
^without deception, we may contemplate our election. For 
since it is into his body that the Father has decreed to in- 
graft those whom from eternity he wished to be his, that lie 
may regard as sons all whom he acknowledges to be his 
members, if we are in communion with Christ, we have proof 
sufficiently clear and strong that we are written in the Book 
of Life. Moreover, he admitted us to sure communion with 
himself, when, by the preaching of the gospel, he declared 
that he Avas given us by the Father, to be ours with all his 
blessings, (Rom. viii. 32.) We are said to be clothed with 
him, to be one with him, that Ave may live, because he him- 
self lives. The doctrine is often repeated, " God so loved 
the Avorld, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whoso- 
ever believcth in him should not perish, but have everlasting 
life," (John iii. 16.) He Avho believes in him is said to have 
passed from death unto life, (John v. 24.) In this sense he 
calls himself the bread of life, of which if a man eat, he shall 
never die, (John vi. 35.) He, I say, Avas our AA7itness, that 
all by Avhom he is received in faith Avill be regarded by our 
heavenly Father as sons. If Ave long for more than to be 
regarded as sons of God and heirs, Ave must ascend above 
Christ. But if this is our final goal, hoAV infatuated is it 
to seek out of him Avhat we have already obtained in him, 
and can only find in him ? Besides, as he is the Eternal 
Wisdom, the Immutable Truth, the Determinate Counsel of 
the Father, there is no room for fear that any thing Avhich he 
tells us Avill vary in the minutest degree from that will of the 
Father after Avhich Ave inquire. Nay, rather he faithfully 
discloses it to us as it was from the beginning, and always 
will be. The practical influence of this doctrine ought also 
to be exhibited in our prayers. For though a belief of our 
election animates us to invoke God, yet Avhcn Ave frame our 


588 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

prayers, it were preposterous to obtrude it upon God, or to 
stipulate in this way, " O Lord, if I am elected, hear me." 
He would have us to rest satisfied with his promises, and 
not to inquire elsewhere whether or not he is disposed to 
hear us. We shall thus be disentangled from many snares, if 
we know how to make a right use of what is rightly written ; 
but let us not inconsiderately wrest it to purposes different 
from that to which it ought to be confined. 

6. Another confirmation tending to establish our confi- 
dence is, that our election is connected with our calling. For 
those whom Christ enlightens with the knowledge of his 
name, and admits into the bosom of his Church, he is said 
to take under his guardianship and protection. All whom 
he thus receives are said to be committed and entrusted to 
him by the Father, that they may be kept unto life eternal. 
What would we have ? Christ proclaims aloud that all whom 
the Father is pleased to save he hath delivered into his pro- 
tection, (John vi. 37-39 ; xvii. 6, 12.) Therefore, if we 
would know whether God cares for our salvation, let us ask 
whether he has committed us to Christ, whom he has appoint- 
ed to be the only Saviour of all his people. Then, if Ave 
doubt whether we are received into the protection of Christ, 
he obviates the doubt when he spontaneously offers himself 
as our Shepherd, and declares that we are of the number of 
his sheep if we hear his voice, (John x. 3, 16.) Let us, 
therefore, embrace Christ, who is kindly offered to us, and 
comes forth to meet us : he will number us among his flock, 
and keep us within his fold. But anxiety arises as to our 
future state.1 For as Paul teaches, that those are called who 
wrere previously elected, so our Saviour shows that many are 
called, but few chosen, (Matth. xxii. 14.) Nay, even Paul 
himself dissuades us from security, when he says, " Let him 
that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall," (1 Cor. x. 
12.) And again, "Well, because of unbelief they were 
broken off, and thou standest by faith. Be not high-minded, 

'French, " Mais quelcun dira qu'il nous faut soucier de ce qui pent 
nous advenir : et quand nous pensons au temps futur que nostre imbeei- 
lite nous admoneste d'etre en solicitude ;" — But some one will say, that 
we must feel anxious as to what may happen to us , and that when we 
think on the future, our weakness warns us to be solicitous. 


CHAP. XXIY. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 589 

but fear : for if God spared not the natural branches, take 
heed lest lie also spare not thee," (Rom. xl. 20, 21.) In fine, 
we are sufficiently taught by experience itself, that calling and 
faith are of little value without perseverance, which, however, 
is not the gift of all. But Christ has freed us from anxiety 
on this head ; for the following promises undoubtedly have 
respect to the future : " All that the Father giveth me shall 
come to me, and him that cometh to me I will in no wise 
cast out." Again, " This is the will of him that sent me, 
that of all which he hath given me I should lose nothing : 
but should raise it up at the last day," (John vi. 37, 39.) 
Again, "My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and 
they follow me : and I give unto them eternal life, and they 
shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of 
my hand. My Father which gave them me is greater than 
all : and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father's 
hand," (John x. 27, 28.) Again, when he declares, " Every 
plant which my heavenly Father hath not planted shall be 
rooted up," (Matth. xv. 13,) he intimates conversely that 
those who have their root in God can never be deprived of 
their salvation. Agreeable to this are the words of John, 
" If they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued 
with us," (1 John ii. 19.) Hence, also, the magnificent 
triumph of Paul over life and death, things present, and 
things to come, (Rom. viii. 38.) This must be founded on 
the gift of perseverance. There is no doubt that he employs 
the sentiment as applicable to all the elect. Paul elsewhere 
says, " Being confident of this very thing, that he who hath 
begun a good work in you will perform it until the day of 
Jesus Christ," (Phil. i. 6.) David, also, when his faith 
threatened to fail, leant on this support, " Forsake not the 
works of thy hands." Moreover, it cannot be doubted, that 
since Christ prays for all the elect, he asks the same thing for 
them as he asked for Peter, viz., that their faith fail not, 
(Luke xxii. 32.) Hence we infer, that there is no danger of 
their falling away, since the Son of God, who asks that their 
piety may prove constant, never meets with a refusal. What 
then did our Saviour intend to teach us by this prayer, but 


590 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK HI. 

just to confide, that whenever we are his our eternal salva- 
tion is secure ? 

7. But it daily happens that those who seemed to belong 
to Christ revolt from him and fall away : Nay, in the very 
passage where he declares that none of those whom the 
Father hath given to him have perished, he excepts the son 
of perdition. This, indeed, is true ; but it is equally true that 
such persons never adhered to Christ with that heartfelt con- 
fidence by which I say that the certainty of our election is 
established : " They went out from us," says John, " but 
they were not of us ; for if they had been of us, they would, 
no doubt, have continued with us," (1 John ii. 19.) I deny 
not that they have signs of calling similar to those given to 
the elect ; but I do not at all admit that they have that sure 
confirmation of election which I desire believers to seek from 
the word of the gospel. Wherefore, let not examples of this 
kind move us away from tranquil confidence in the promise of 
the Lord, when he declares that all by whom he is received 
in true faith have been given him by the Father, and that 
none of them, while he is their Guardian and Shepherd, will 
perish, (John iii. 16 ; vi. 39.) Of Judas we shall shortly 
speak, (sec. 9.) Paul does not dissuade Christians from 
security simply, but from careless, carnal security, which 
is accompanied with pride, arrogance, and contempt of 
others, which extinguishes humility and reverence for God, 
and produces a forgetfulness of grace received, (Rom. xi. 20.) 
For he is addressing the Gentiles, and showing them that 
they ought not to exult proudly and cruelly over the Jews, 
in consequence of whose rejection they had been substituted 
in their stead. He also enjoins fear, not a fear under which 
they may waver in alarm, but a fear which, teaching us to 
receive the grace of God in humility, does not impair our 
confidence in it, as has elsewhere been said. We may add, 
that he is not speaking to individuals, but to sects in general, 
(see 1 Cor. x. 12.) The Church having been divided into 
two parties, and rivalship producing dissension, Paul reminds 
the Gentiles that their having been substituted in the place of 
a peculiar and holy people was a reason for modesty and 


CHAP. XXIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 591 

fear. For there were many vain-glorious persons among them, 
whose empty boasting it was expedient to repress. But we 
have elsewhere seen, that our hope extends into the future, 
even beyond death, and that nothing is more contrary to its 
nature than to be in doubt as to our future destiny. 

8. The expression of our Saviour, " Many are called, but 
few are chosen," (Matth. xxii. 14,) is also very improperly 
interpreted, (see Book III. chap. ii. sec. 11, 12.) There 
will be no ambiguity in it if we attend to what our former J 
remarks ought to have made clear, viz., that there are 
two species of calling : for there is an universal call, by 
Avhich God, through the external preaching of the word, 
invites all men alike, even those for whom he designs the 
call to be a savour of death, and the ground of a severer con- 
demnation. Besides this there is a special call which, for ^ 
the most part, God bestows on believers only, when by the 
internal illumination of the Spirit he causes the word preach- 
ed to take deep root in their hearts. Sometimes, however, 
he communicates it also to those whom he enlightens only 
for a time, and whom afterwards, in just punishment for their 
ingratitude, he abandons and smites with greater blindness. 
Now, our Lord seeing that the gospel was published far and 
wide, was despised by multitudes, and justly valued by few, 
describes God under the character of a King, who, preparing 
a great feast, sends his servants all around to invite a great 
multitude, but can only obtain the presence of a very few, 
because almost all allege causes of excuse ; at length, in 
consequence of their refusal, he is obliged to send his ser- 
vants out into the highways to invite every one they meet. 
It is perfectly clear, that thus far the parable is to be under- 
stood of external calling. He afterwards adds, that God 
acts the part of a kind entertainer, who goes round his table 
and affably receives his guests ; but still if he finds any 
one not adorned with the nuptial garment, he will by no 
means allow him to insult the festivity by his sordid dress. I 
admit that this branch of the parable is to be understood of 
those who, by a profession of faith, enter the Church, but 
are not at all invested with the sanctification of Christ. 
Such disgraces to his Church, such cankers God will not 


592 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

always tolerate, but will cast them forth as their turpitude 
deserves. Few, then, out of the great number of called are 
chosen ; the calling, however, not being of that kind which 
enables believers to judge of their election. The former call 
is common to the wicked, the latter brings with it the spirit 
of regeneration, which is the earnest and seal of the future 
inheritance by which our hearts are sealed unto the day of 
the Lord, (Eph. i. 13, 14.) In one word, while hypocrites 
pretend to piety, just as if they were true worshippers of God, 
Christ declares that they will ultimately be ejected from the 
place which they improperly occupy, as it is said in the 
psalm, " Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle ? who shall 
dwell in thy holy hill ? He that walketh uprightly, and work- 
etlr righteousness, and speaketh the truth in his heart," 
(Psalm xv. 1, 2.) Again, in another passage, " This is the 
generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face, O 
Jacob," (Psalm xxiv. 6.) And thus the Spirit exhorts 
believers to patience, and not to murmur because Ishmael- 
ites are mingled with them in the Church, since the mask 
will at length be torn off, and they will be ejected with dis- 
grace. 

9. The same account is to be given of the passage lately 
quoted, in which Christ says, that none is lost but the son of 
perdition, (John xvii. 12.) The expression is not strictly 
proper ; but it is by no means obscure : for Judas was not 
numbered among the sheep of Christ, because he was one 
truly, but because he held a place among them. Then, in 
another passage, where the Lord says, that he was elected 
with the apostles, reference is made only to the office, " Have 
I not chosen you twelve," says he, "and one of you is a 
devil ?" (John vi. 70.) That is, he had chosen him to the 
office of apostle. But when he speaks of election to salva- 
tion, he altogether excludes him from the number of the elect, 
" I speak not of you all : I know whom I have chosen," 
(John xiii. 18.) Should any one confound the term election 
in the two passages, he will miserably entangle himself; 
whereas if he distinguish between them, nothing can be 
plainer. Gregory, therefore, is most grievously and perni- 
ciously in error, when he says that we are conscious only of 


CHAP. XXIV, CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 50.3 

our calling, but are uncertain of our election ; and hence he 
exhorts all to fear and trembling, giving this as the reason, that 
though Ave know what we are to-day, yet we know not what 
we are to be, (Gregor. Horn. 38.) But in that passage he 
clearly shows how he stumbled on that stone. By suspending 
election on the merit of works, he had too good a reason for 
dispiriting the minds of his readers, while, at the same time, 
as he did not lead them away from themselves to confidence in 
the divine goodness, he was unable to confirm them. Hence 
believers may in some measure perceive the truth of what we 
said at the outset, viz., predestination duly considered does 
not shake faith, but rather affords the best confirmation of 
it. I deny not, however, that the Spirit sometimes accom- 
modates his language to our feeble capacity ; as when he 
says, " They shall not be in the assembly of my people, 
neither shall they be written in the writing of the house of 
Israel," (Ezek. xiii. 9.) As if God were beginning to write 
the names of those whom he counts among his people in the 
Book of Life ; whereas we know, even on the testimony of 
Christ, that the names of the children of God were written 
in the Book of Life from the beginning, (Luke x. 20.) The 
words simply indicate the abandonment of those who seemed 
to have a chief place among the elect, as is said in the psalm, 
" Let them be blotted out of the Book of the Living, and 
not be written with the righteous," (Psalm lxix. 28.) 

10. For the elect are brought by calling into the fold of 
Christ, not from the very womb, nor all at the same time, but 
according as God sees it meet to dispense his grace. Before 
they are gathered to the supreme Shepherd they wander dis- 
persed in a common desert, and in no respect differ from 
others, except that by the special mercy of God they are 
kept from rushing to final destruction. Therefore, if you 
look to themselves, you will see the offspring of Adam giving 
token of the common corruption of the mass. That they 
proceed not to extreme and desperate impiety is not owing 
to any innate goodness in them, but because the eye of God 
watches for their safety, and his hand is stretched over them. 
Those who dream of some seed of election implanted in their 
hearts from their birth, by the agency of which they are ever 
VOL. II. 2 P 


594 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

inclined to piety and the fear of God, are not supported by 
the authority of Scripture, but refuted by experience. They, 
indeed, produce a few examples to prove that the elect before 
they were enlightened were not aliens from religion ; for in- 
stance, that Paul led an unblemished life during his Pharisa- 
ism, that Cornelius was accepted for his prayers and alms, 
and so forth, (Phil. iii. 5 ; Acts x. 2.) The case of Paul we 
admit, but we hold that they are in error as to Cornelius ; for 
it appears that he was already enlightened and regenerated, so 
that all which he wanted was a clear revelation of the Gospel. 
But what are they to extract from these few examples ? Is it 
that all the elect were always endued with the spirit of 
piety ? Just as well might any one, after pointing to the 
integrity of Aristides, Socrates, Xenocrates, Scipio, Curius, 
Camillus, and others, (see Book II. c. iv. sec. 4,) infer that 
all who are left in the blindness of idolatry are studious of 
virtue and holiness. Nay, even Scripture is plainly opposed 
to them in more passages than one. The description which 
Paul gives of the state of the Ephesians before regeneration 
shows not one grain of this seed. His words are, " You 
hath he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins ; 
Avherein in time past ye walked according to the course of 
this world, according to the prince of the power of the air, 
the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience : 
among whom also we all had our conversation in times past 
in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and 
of the mind ; and were by nature the children of wrath, even 
as others," (Eph. ii. 1-3.) And again, " At that time ye 
were without Christ," " having no hope, and without God 
in the world," (Eph. ii. 12.) Again, " Ye were sometimes 
darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord : walk as children 
of light," (Eph. v. 8.) But perhaps they will insist that in 
this last passage reference is made to that ignorance of the 
true God, in which they deny not that the elect lived before 
they were called. Though this is grossly inconsistent with 
the Apostle's inference, that they were no longer to lie or 
steal, (Eph. iv. 28.) What answer will they give to other 
passages ; such as that in which, after declaring to the Corin- 
thians that " neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, 


CHAI\ XXIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 595 

nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor 
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extor- 
tioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God," he immediately 
adds, " Such were some of you : but ye are washed, but ye are 
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, 
and by the Spirit of our God "? (1 Cor. vi. 9-11.) Again, 
he says to the Romans, "As ye have yielded your members 
servants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity ; even 
so now yield your members servants to righteousness unto 
holiness. For when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free 
from righteousness. What fruit had ye then in those things 
whereof ye are now ashamed?" (Rom. vi. 19-21.) 

11. Say, then, what seed of election germinated in those 
avIio, contaminated in various ways during their whole lives, in- 
dulged as with desperate wickedness in every kind of abomina- 
tion ? Had Paul meant to express this view, he ought to have 
shown how much they then owed to the kindness of God, by 
which they had been preserved from falling into such pollu- 
tion. Thus, too, Peter ought to have exhorted his countrymen 
to gratitude for a perpetual seed of election. On the contrary, 
his admonition is, " The time past of our life may suffice us 
to have wrought the will of the Gentiles," (1 Pet. iv. 3.) 
What if we come to examples ? Was there any germ of 
righteousness in Rahab the harlot before she believed ? (Josh, 
ii. 4 ;) in Manasseh when Jerusalem was dyed and almost 
deluged with the blood of the prophets ? (2 Kings xxiii. 10 ;) 
in the thief who only with his last breath thought of repent- 
ance? (Luke xxiii. 42.) Have done, then, with those argu- 
ments which curious men of themselves rashly devise without 
any authority from Scripture. But let us hold fast what 
Scripture states, viz., that " All we like sheep have gone 
astray, we have turned every one to his own way," (Isa. liii. 
6 ;) that is, to perdition. In this gulf of perdition God leaves 
those whom he has determined one day to deliver until his 
own time arrive ; he only preserves them from plunging into 
irremediable blasphemy. 

12. As the Lord by the efficacy of his calling accomplishes 
towards his elect the salvation to which he had by his eternal 
counsel destined them, so he has judgments against the re- 


596 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

probate, by which he executes his counsel concerning them. 
Those, therefore, whom he has created for dishonour during 
life and destruction at death, that they may be vessels of 
wrath and examples of severity, in bringing to their doom, he 
at one time deprives of the means of hearing his word, at 
another by the preaching of it blinds and stupifies them the 
more. The examples of the former case are innumerable, 
but let us select one of the most remarkable of all. Before 
the advent of Christ, about four thousand years passed away, 
during which he hid the light of saving doctrine from all 
nations. If any one answer, that he did not put them in 
possession of the great blessing, because he judged them un- 
worthy, then their posterity will be in no respect more 
worthy. Of this in addition to experience, Malachi is a suffi- 
cient witness ; for while charging them with mixed unbelief 
and blasphemy, he yet declares that the Redeemer will come. 
Why then is he given to the latter rather than to the former ? 
They will in vain torment themselves in seeking for a deeper 
cause than the secret and inscrutable counsel of God. And 
there is no occasion to fear lest some disciple of Porphyry 
with impunity arraign the justice of God, while we say 
nothing in its defence. For while we maintain that none 
perish without deserving it, and that it is owing to the free 
goodness of God that some are delivered, enough has been 
said for the display of his glory ; there is not the least occa- 
sion for our cavilling. The supreme Disposer then makes 
way for his own predestination, when depriving those whom 
he has reprobated of the communication of his light, he leaves 
them in blindness. Every day furnishes instances of the 
latter case, and many of them are set before us in Scripture. 
Among a hundred to whom the same discourse is delivered, 
twenty, perhaps, receive it with the prompt obedience of 
faith ; the others set no value upon it, or deride, or spurn, 
or abominate it. If it is said that this diversity is owing 
to the malice and perversity of the latter, the answer is not 
satisfactory : for the same wickedness would possess the minds 
of the former, did not God in his goodness correct it. And 
hence we will always be entangled until we call in the aid of 
Paul's question, "Who maketh thee to differ?" (1 Cor. iv. 


CHAP. XXIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 597 

7,) intimating that some excel others, not by their own vir- 
tue, but by the mere favour of God. 

13. Why, then, while bestowing grace on the one, does he 
pass by the other ? In regard to the former, Luke gives 
the reason, Because they " were ordained to eternal life," 
(Acts xiii. 48.) What, then, shall we think of the latter, 
but that they are vessels of wrath unto dishonour ? Where- 
fore, let us not decline to say with Augustine, " God could 
change the will of the wicked into good, because he is 
omnipotent. Clearly he could. Why, then, does he not do 
it ? Because he is unwilling. Why he is unwilling remains 
with himself," (August, de Genes, ad Lit. Lib. ii.) We 
should not attempt to be wise above what is meet, and it is 
much better to take Augustine's explanation, than to quibble 
with Chrysosiom, " that he draws him who is willing, and 
stretching forth his hand," (Chrysost. Horn, de Convers. 
Pauli,)lest the difference should seem to lie in the judgment 
of God, and not in the mere will of man. So far is it, indeed, 
from being placed in the mere will of man, that we may 
add, that even the pious, and those who fear God, need this 
special inspiration of the Spirit. Lydia, a seller of purple, 
feared God, and yet it was necessary that her heart should 
be opened, that she might attend to the doctrine of Paul, 
and profit in it, (Acts xvi. 14.) This was not said of one 
woman only, but to teach us that all progress in piety is 
the secret work of the Spirit. Nor can it be questioned, 
that God" sends his word to many whose blindness he is 
pleased to aggravate. For why does he order so many 
messages to be taken to Pharaoh ? Was it because he 
hoped that he might be softened by the repetition ? Nay, 
before he began he both knew and had foretold the result : 
" The Lord said unto Moses, When thou goest to return into 
Egypt, see that thou do all those wonders before Pharaoh, 
which I have put in thine hand : but I will harden his heart, 
that he will not let the people go," (Exod. iv. 21.) So when 
he raises up Ezekiel, he forewarns him, li I send thee to the 
children of Israel, to a rebellious nation that hath rebelled 
against me." " Be not afraid of their words." l( Thou dwellest 
in the midst of a rebellious house, which hath eyes to see, 


598 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

and see not ; they have ears to hear, and hear not," (Ezek. 
ii. 3, 6 ; xii. 2.) Thus he foretels to Jeremiah that the 
effect of his doctrine would be, " to root out, and pull down, 
and to destroy," (Jer. i. 10.) But the prophecy of Isaiah 
presses still more closely ; for he is thus commissioned by 
the Lord, " Go and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, 
but understand not, and see ye indeed, but perceive not. 
Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears 
heavy, and shut their eyes ; lest they see with their eyes, 
and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, 
and convert and be healed," (Isa. vi. 9, 10.) Here he directs 
his voice to them, but it is that they may turn a deafer ear ; 
he kindles a light, but it is that they may become more blind ; 
he produces a doctrine, but it is that they may be more 
stupid ; he employs a remedy, but it is that they may not be 
cured. And John, referring to this prophecy, declares that 
the Jews could not believe the doctrine of Christ, because 
this curse from God lay upon them. It is also incontrover- 
tible, that to those whom God is not pleased to illumine, he 
delivers his doctrine wrapt up in enigmas, so that they may 
not profit by it, but be given over to greater blindness. Hence 
our Saviour declares that the parables in which he had 
spoken to the multitude he expounded to the Apostles only, 
" because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the 
kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given," (Matth. 
xiii. 11.) What, you will ask, does our Lord mean, by 
teaching those by whom he is careful not to be understood ? 
Consider where the fault lies, and then cease to ask. How 
obscure soever the word may be, there is always sufficient 
light in it to convince the consciences of the ungodly. 

14. It now remains to see why the Lord acts in the 
manner in which it is plain that he does. If the answer be 
given, that it is because men deserve this by their impiety, 
wickedness, and ingratitude, it is indeed Avell and truly said ; 
but still, because it does not yet appear what the cause of the 
difference is, why some are turned to obedience, and others 
remain obdurate, we must, in discussing it, pass to the passage 
from Moses, on which Paul has commented, namely, " Even 
for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show 


CHAP. XXIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 599 

my power in thee, and that my name might be declared 
throughout all the earth," (Kom. ix. 17.) The refusal of the 
reprobate to obey the Avord of God when manifested to them, 
will be properly ascribed to the malice and depravity of their 
hearts, provided it be at the same time added, that they 
were adjudged to this depravity, because they were raised 
up by the just but inscrutable judgment of God, to show 
forth his glory by their condemnation. In like manner, when 
it is said of the sons of Eli, that they would not listen to 
salutary admonitions, " because the Lord would slay them," 
(1 Sam. ii. 25,) it is not denied that their stubbornness was 
the result of their own iniquity ; but it is at the same time 
stated why they were left to their stubbornness, when the 
Lord might have softened their hearts : namely, because his 
immutable decree had once for all doomed them to destruc- 
tion. Hence the words of John, " Though he had done so 
many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him ; 
that the saying of Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled 
which he spake, Lord, who hath believed our report?" 
(John xii. 37, 38 ;) for though he does not exculpate their 
perverseness, he is satisfied with the reason that the grace of 
God is insipid to men, until the Holy Spirit gives it its 
savour. And Christ, in quoting the prophecy of Isaiah, 
" They shall be all taught of God," (John vi. 45,) designs 
only to show that the Jews were reprobates and aliens from 
the Church, because they would not be taught : and gives 
no other- reason than that the promise of God does not 
belong to them. Confirmatory of this are the words of 
Paul, " Christ crucified" was " unto the Jews a stumbling- 
block, and unto the Greeks foolishness ; but unto them 
which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power 
of God, and the wisdom of God," (1 Cor. i. 23.) For after 
mentioning the usual result wherever the gospel is preached, 
that it exasperates some, and is despised by others, he says, 
that it is precious to them only who are called. A little 
before he had given them the name of believers, but he was 
unwilling to refuse the proper rank to divine grace, which 
precedes faith ; or rather, he added the second term by way 
of correction, that those who had embraced the gospel might 


GOO INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

ascribe the merit of their faith to the calling of God. Thus, 

o 7 

also, he shortly after shows that they were elected by God. 
When the wicked hear these things, they complain that God 
abuses his inordinate power, to make cruel sport with the 
miseries of his creatures. But let us, who know that all 
men are liable on so many grounds to the judgment of God, 
that they cannot answer for one in a thousand of their trans- 
gressions, (Job ix. 3,) confess that the reprobate suffer 
nothing which is not accordant with the most perfect justice. 
When unable clearly to ascertain the reason, let us not 
decline to be somewhat in ignorance in regard to the depths 
of the divine wisdom. 

15. But since an objection is often founded on a few 
passages of Scripture, in which God seems to deny that the 
wicked perish through his ordination, except in so far as 
they spontaneously bring death upon themselves in opposi- 
tion to his warning, let us briefly explain these passages, and 
demonstrate that they are not adverse to the above view. 
One of the passages adduced is, " Have I any pleasure at all 
that the wicked should die? saith the Lord God; and not 
that he should return from his ways and live ?" (Ezek.xviii.23.) 
If we are to extend this to the whole human race, why are not 
the very many whose minds might be more easily bent to obey 
urged to repentance, rather than those who by his invitations 
become daily more and more hardened ? Our Lord declares 
that the preaching of the gospel and miracles would have pro- 
duced more fruit among the people of Nineveh and Sodom 
than in Judea, (Matth. xiii. 23.) How comes it, then, that 
if God would have all to be saved, he does not open a door 
of repentance for the wretched, who would more readily 
have received grace ? Hence we may see that the passage 
is violently wrested, if the will of God, which the prophet 
mentions, is opposed to his eternal counsel, by which he 
separated the elect from the reprobate.1 Now, if the 
genuine meaning of the prophet is inquired into, it will be 
found that he only means to give the hope of pardon to 
them who repent. The sum is, that God is undoubtedly 

1 Bernard, in his Sermon on the Nativity, on 2 Cor. i. 3, quoting the 
two passages, Roni.ix. 18, and Ezek. xviii. 32, admirably reconciles them. 


CHAP. XXIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 601 

ready to pardon whenever the sinner turns. Therefore, he 
does not will his death, in so far as he -wills repentance. But 
experience shows that this will, for the repentance of those 
whom he invites to himself, is not such as to make him touch 
all their hearts. Still, it cannot be said that he acts deceit- 
fully ; for though the external word only renders those who 
hear it, and do not obey it, inexcusable, it is still truly 
regarded as an evidence of the grace by which he reconciles 
men to himself. Let us therefore hold the doctrine of the 
prophet, that God has no pleasure in the death of the sinner ; 
that the godly may feel confident that whenever they repent. 
God is ready to pardon them ; and that the wicked may feel 
that their guilt is doubled, when they respond not to the 
great mercy and condescension of God. The mercy of God, 
therefore, will ever be ready to meet the penitent ; but all 
the prophets, and apostles, and Ezekiel himself, clearly tell 
us who they are to whom repentance is given. 

16. The second passage adduced is that in which Paul 
says that " God will have all men to be saved," (1 Tim. ii. 
4.) Though the reason here differs from the former, they 
have somewhat in common. I answer, first, That the mode 
in which God thus wills is plain from the context ; for 
Paul connects two things, a will to be saved, and to come to 
the knowledge of the truth. If by this they will have it 
to be fixed by the eternal counsel of God that they are to 
receive the doctrine of salvation, what is meant by Moses in 
these words; " What nation is there so great, who hath God 
so nigh unto them?" (Deut. iv. 7.) How comes it that 
many nations are deprived of that light of the Gospel which 
others enjoy? How comes it that the pure knowledge of 
the doctrine of godliness has never reached some, and others 
have scarcely tasted some obscure rudiments of it ? It will 
now be easy to extract the purport of Paul's statement. He 
had commanded Timothy that prayers should be regularly 
offered up in the church for kings and princes; but as it 
seemed somewhat absurd that prayer should be offered up 
for a class of men who were almost hopeless, (all of them 
being not only aliens from the body of Christ, but doing their 
utmost to overthrow his kingdom,) he adds, that it was 


602 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

acceptable to God, who will have all men to be saved. By 
this he assuredly means nothing more than that the way 
of salvation was not shut against any order of men ; that, 
on the contrary, he had manifested his mercy in such a way, 
that he would have none debarred from it. Other passages 
do not declare what God has, in his secret judgment, deter- 
mined with regard to all, but declare that pardon is prepared 
for all sinners who only turn to seek after it. For if they 
persist in urging the words, " God hath concluded all in 
unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all," (Rom. xi. 32,) 
I will, on the contrary, urge what is elsewhere written, 
" Our God is in the heavens : he hath done whatsoever he 
hath pleased," (Ps. cxv. 3.) We must, therefore, expound 
the passage so as to reconcile it with another, I " will be 
gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy 
on whom I will show mercy," (Exod. xxxiii. 19.) He who 
selects those whom he is to visit in mercy does not impart 
it to all. But since it clearly appears that he is there 
speaking not of individuals, but of orders of men, let us 
have done with a longer discussion. At the same time, 
we ought to observe, that Paul does not assert what God 
does always, everywhere, and in all circumstances, but 
leaves it free to him to make kings and magistrates partakers 
of heavenly doctrine, though in their blindness they rage 
against it. A stronger objection seems to be founded on the 
passage in Peter ; the Lord is " not willing that any should 
perish, but that all should come to repentance," (2 Pet. iii. 
9.) But the solution of the difficulty is to be found in the 
second branch of the sentence, for his will that they should 
come to repentance cannot be used in any other sense than 
that which is uniformly employed. Conversion is undoubt- 
edly in the hand of God, Avhether he designs to convert all 
can be learned from himself, when he promises that he will 
give some a heart of flesh, and leave to others a heart of 
stone, (Ezek. xxxvi. 26.) It is true, that if he were not dis- 
posed to receive those who implore his mercy, it could not 
have been said, " Turn ye unto me, saith the Lord of Hosts, 
and I will turn unto you, saith the Lord of Hosts," (Zech. 
i. 3 ;) but I hold that no man approaches God unless previ- 


CHAP. XXIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 603 

ously influenced from above. And if repentance were placed 
at the will of man, Paul would not say, " If God peradven- 
ture will give them repentance," (2 Tim. ii. 25.) Nay, did 
not God at the very time when he is verbally exhorting all 
to repentance, influence the elect by the secret movement of 
his Spirit, Jeremiah would not say, " Turn thou me, and I 
shall be turned ; for thou art the Lord my God. Surely after 
that I Avas turned, I repented," (Jer. xxxi. 18.) 

17. But if it is so, (you will say,) little faith can be put in 
the Gospel promises, which, in testifying concerning the 
Avill of God, declare that he wills what is contrary to his in- 
violable decree. Not at all ; for however universal the pro- 
mises of salvation may be, there is no discrepancy between 
them and the predestination of the reprobate, provided we 
attend to their effect. We know that the promises are 
effectual only when we receive them in faith, hut, on the con- 
trary, when faith is made void, the promise is of no effect. 
If this is the nature of the promises, let us now see whether 
there be any inconsistency between the two things, viz., that 
God, by an eternal decree, fixed the number of those whom 
he is pleased to embrace in love, and on whom he is pleased 
to display his wrath, and that he offers salvation indiscri- 
minately to all. I hold that they are perfectly consistent, 
for all that is meant by the promise is, just that his mercy is 
offered to all who desire and implore it, and this none do, 
save those whom he has enlightened. Moreover, he en- 
lightens those whom he has predestinated to salvation. Thus 
the truth of the promises remains firm and unshaken, so that it 
cannot be said there is any disagreement between the eternal 
election of God and the testimony of his grace which he offers 
to believers. But why does he mention all men ? Namely, 
that the consciences of the righteous may rest the more secure 
when they understand that there is no difference between 
sinners, provided they have faith, and that the ungodly may 
not be able to allege that they have not an asylum to which 
they may betake themselves from the bondage of sin, while 
they ungratefully reject the offer which is made to them. 
Therefore, since by the Gospel the mercy of God is offered 
to both, it is faith, in other words, the illumination of God, 


604 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

■which distinguishes between the righteous and the wicked, 
the former feeling the efficacy of the Gospel, the latter ob- 
taining no benefit from it.\/ Illumination itself has eternal 
election for its rule. 

Another passage quoted is the lamentation of our Saviour, 
" O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered 
thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens 
under her wings, and ye would not !" (Matth. xxiii. 37 ;) but 
it gives them no support. I admit that here Christ speaks 
not only in the character of man, but upbraids them with 
having, in every age, rejected his grace. But this will of 
God, of which we speak, must be defined. For it is well 
known what exertions the Lord made to retain that people, 
and how perversely, from the highest to the lowest, they 
followed their own wayward desires, and refused to be 
gathered together. But it does not follow that by the 
wickedness of men the counsel of God was frustrated. They 
object that nothing is less accordant with the nature of God 
than that he should have a double will. This I concede, 
provided they are sound interpreters. But why do they not 
attend to the many passages in which God clothes himself 
with human affections, and descends beneath his proper 
majesty P1 He says, " I have spread out my hands all the 
day unto a rebellious people," (Isa. lxv. 1,) exerting himself 
early and late to bring them back. Were they to apply 
these qualities without regarding the figure, many unneces- 
sary disputes would arise which are quashed by the simple 
solution, that what is human is here transferred to God. 
Indeed, the solution which we have given elsewhere (see 
Book I. c. xviii. sec. 3 ; and Book III. c. xx. sec. 43) is 
amply sufficient, viz., that though to our apprehension the 
will of God is manifold, yet he does not in himself will 
opposites, but, according to his manifold wisdom, (so Paul 
styles it, Eph. iii. 10,) transcends our senses, until such 
time as it shall be given us to know how he mysteriously 
wills what now seems to be adverse to his will. They also 
amuse themselves with the cavil, that since God is the 

1 The French adds, " pour sc conformer a notre rudessc ;" — in accom- 
modation to our weakness. 


CHAP. XXIV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. G05 

Father of all, it is unjust to discard any one before he has by 
his misconduct merited such a punishment. As if the kind- 
ness of God did not extend even to dogs and swine. But if 
we confine our view to the human race, let them tell why 
God selected one people for himself and became their father, 
and why, from that one people, he plucked only a small 
number as if they were the flower. But those who thus charge 
God are so blinded by their love of evil speaking, that they 
consider not that as God " maketh his sun to rise on the evil 
and on the good," (Matth. v. 45,) so the inheritance is trea- 
sured up for a few to whom it shall one day be said, " Come, 
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom," &c, (Matth. 
xxv. 34.) They object, moreover, that God does not hate any 
of the things which he has made. This I concede, but it 
does not affect the doctrine which I maintain, that the repro- 
bate are hateful to God, and that with perfect justice, since 
those destitute of his Spirit cannot produce any thing that 
does not deserve cursing. They add, that there is no dis- 
tinction of Jew and Gentile, and that, therefore, the grace 
of God is held forth to all indiscriminately : true, provided 
they admit (as Paul declares) that God calls as wrell Jews 
as Gentiles, according to his good pleasure, without being 
astricted to any. This disposes of their gloss upon another 
passage, " God hath concluded all in unbelief, that he might 
have mercy upon all," (Rom. xi. 32 ;) in other words, he wills 
that all who are saved should ascribe their salvation to his 
mercy, although the blessing of salvation is not common to 
all. Finally, after all that has been adduced on this side and 
on that, let it be our conclusion to feel overawed with Paul 
at the great depth, and if petulant tongues will still murmur, 
let us not be ashamed to join in his exclamation, " Nay, but, 
O man, who art thou that repliest against God?" (Rom. ix. 
20.) Truly does Augustine maintain that it is perverse to 
measure divine by the standard of human justice, (De Pra> 
dest. et Gra. c. ii.) 


606 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 


CHAPTER XXV. 

OF THE LAST RESURRECTION. 

There are four principal heads in this chapter, — I. The utility, neces- 
sity, truth, and irrefragable evidence of the orthodox doctrine of a final 
resurrection — a doctrine unknown to philosophers, sec. 1-4. II. Refu- 
tation of the objections to this doctrine by Atheists, Sadducees, Chiliasts, 
and other fanatics, sec. 5-7. III. The nature of the final resurrection 
explained, sec. 8, 9. IV. Of the eternal felicity of the elect, and the 
everlasting misery of the reprobate. 

Sections. 

1. For invincible perseverance in our calling, it is necessary to be ani- 

mated with the blessed hope of our Saviour's final advent. 

2. The perfect happiness reserved for the elect at the final resurrection 

unknown to philosophers. 

3. The truth and necessity of this doctrine of a final resurrection. To 

confirm our belief in it we have, 1. The example of Christ ; and, 
2. The omnipotence of God. There is an inseparable connection 
between us and our risen Saviour. The bodies of the elect must 
be conformed to the body of their Head. It is now in heaven. 
Therefore, our bodies also must rise, and, reanimated by their souls, 
reign with Christ in heaven. The resurrection of Christ a pledge 
of ours. 

4. As God is omnipotent, he can raise the dead. Resurrection explained 

by a natural process. The vision of dry bones. 

5. Second part of the chapter, refuting objections to the doctrine of 

resurrection. 1. Atheists. 2. Sadducees. 3. Chiliasts. Their eva- 
sion. Various answers. 4. Universalists. Answer. 
C. Objections continued. 5. Some speculators who imagine that death 
destroys the whole man. Refutatiom^JIie condition and abode of 
souls from death till the last day. What meant by the bosom of 
Abraham. 

7. Refutation of some weak men and Manichees, pretending that new 

bodies are to be given. Refutation confirmed by various arguments 
and passages of Scripture. 

8. Refutation of the fiction of new bodies continued. 

9. Shall the wicked rise again ? Answer in the affirmative. Why the 

wicked shall rise again.. Why resurrection promised to the elect 
only. * 


CHAP. XXV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. G07 

10. The last part of the chapter, treating of eternal felicity ; 1. Its excel- 

lence transcends our capacity. Rules to be observed. The glory 
of all the saints will not be equal. 

11. Without regarding questions which merely puzzle, an answer given 

to some which are not without use. 

12. As the happiness of the elect, so the misery of the reprobate, will be 

without measure, and without eud. 

1. Although Christ, the Sun of righteousness, shining 
upon us through the gospel, hath, as Paul declares, after 
conquering death, given us the light of life ; and hence on 
believing we are said to have passed from " death unto life," 
being no longer strangers and pilgrims, but fellow citizens 
with the saints, and of the household of God, who has made 
us sit with his only begotten Son in heavenly places, so that 
nothing is wanting to our complete felicity ; yet, lest we 
should feel it grievous to be exercised under a hard warfare, 
as if the victory obtained by Christ had produced no fruit, 
we must attend to what is elsewhere taught concerning; the 
nature of hope. For since we hope for Avhat we see not, 
and faith, as is said in another passage, is " the evidence of 
things not seen," so long as we are imprisoned in the body 
we are absent from the Lord. For which reason Paul says, 
" Ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. 
When Christ, Avho is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also 
appear with him in glory." Our present condition, therefore, 
requires us to " live soberly, righteously, and godly ;" " look- 
ing for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the 
great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ." Here there is 
need of no ordinary patience, lest, worn out with fatigue, 
we either turn backwards or abandon our post. Wherefore, 
all that has hitherto been said of our salvation calls upon us 
to raise our minds towards heaven, that, as Peter exhorts, 
though we now see not Christ, " yet believing," Ave may 
" rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory," receiving 
the end of our faith, even the salvation of our souls.1 For 
this reason Paul says, that the faith and charity of the saints 
have respect to the faith and hope which is laid up for them 

' 2 Tim. i. 10 ; John v. 24; Eph. ii. 6, 19'; Rom. viii. 16-18 ; Heb. 
xi. 1 ; 2 Cor. v. 6 ; Col. iii. 3 ; Titus ii. 12. 


608 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

in heaven, (Col. i. 5.) When we thus keep our eyes fixed 
upon Christ in heaven, and nothing on earth prevents us 
from directing them to the promised blessedness, there is a 
true fulfilment of the saying, " where your treasure is, there 
will your heart be also," (Matth. vi. 21.) Hence the reason 
why faith is so rare in the world ; nothing being more diffi- 
cult for our sluggishness than to surmount innumerable 
obstacles in striving for the prize of our high calling. To 
the immense load of miseries Avhich almost overwhelm us, 
are added the jeers of profane men, who assail us for our 
simplicity, when spontaneously renouncing the allurements 
of the present life we seem, in seeking a happiness which 
lies hid from us, to catch at a fleeting shadow. In short, 
wre are beset above and below, behind and before, with 
violent temptations, which our minds would be altogether 
unable to withstand, were they not set free from earthly 
objects, and devoted to the heavenly life, though apparently 
remote from us. Wherefore, he alone has made solid pro- 
gress in the Gospel who has acquired the habit of meditating 
continually on a blessed resurrection. 

2. In ancient times philosophers discoursed, and even 
debated with each other, concerning the chief good : none, 
however, except Plato acknowledged that it consisted in 
union with God. He could not, however, form even an 
imperfect idea of its true nature ; nor is this strange, as he 
had learned nothing of the sacred bond of that union. We 
even in this our earthly pilgrimage know wherein our perfect 
and only felicity consists, — a felicity which, while we long 
for it, daily inflames our hearts more and more, until we 
attain to full fruition. Therefore I said, that none partici- 
pate in the benefits of Christ save those who raise their 
minds to the resurrection. This, accordingly, is the mark 
which Paul sets before believers, and at Avhich he says they 
are to aim, forgetting every thing until they reach it, (Phil, 
iii. 8.) The more strenuously, therefore, must we contend 
for it, lest if the world engross us we be severely punished 
for our sloth.1 Accordingly, he in another passage distin- 

1 French, " nous recevions un povre salaire tie nostre laschete et par- 
esse ;" — we receive a poor salary for our carelessness and sloth. 


CHAT. XXV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. G09 

guishes believers by this mark, that their conversation is 
in heaven, from whence they look for the Saviour, (Phil. iii. 
20.) And that they may not faint in their course, he asso- 
ciates all the other creatures with them. As shapeless ruins 
are every where seen, he says, that all things in heaven and 
earth struggle for renovation. For since Adam by his fall 
destroyed the proper order of nature, the creatures groan 
under the servitude to which they have been subjected 
through his sin ; not that they are at all endued with sense, 
but that they naturally long for the state of perfection from 
which they have fallen. Paul therefore describes them as 
groaning and travailing in pain, (Bom. viii. 19 ;) so that we 
who have received the first-fruits of the Spirit may be 
ashamed to grovel in our corruption, instead of at least imi- 
tating the inanimate elements which are bearing the punish- 
ment of another's sin. And in order that he may stimulate 
us the more powerfully, he terms the final advent of Christ 
our redemption. It is true, indeed, that all the parts of our 
redemption are already accomplished ; but as Christ was 
once offered for sins, (Heb. ix. 28,) so he shall again appear 
without sin unto salvation. Whatever, then, be the afflic- 
tions by which we are pressed, let this redemption sustain us 
until its final accomplishment. 

3. The very importance of the subject ought to increase 
our ardour. Paul justly contends, that if Christ rise not 
the whole gospel is delusive and vain, (1 Cor. xv. 13-17 ;) 
for our condition would be more miserable than that of other 
mortals, because we are exposed to much hatred and insult, 
and incur danger every hour ; nay, are like sheep destined 
for slaughter ; and hence the authority of the gospel would 
fail, not in one part merely, but in its very essence, includ- 
ing both our adoption and the accomplishment of our salva- 
tion. Let us, therefore, give heed to a matter of all others 
the most serious, so that no length of time may produce 
weariness. I have deferred the brief consideration to be 
given of it to this place, that my readers may learn, when 
they have received Christ, the author of perfect salvation, 
to rise higher, and know that he is clothed with heavenly 
immortality and glory, in order that the whole body may be 
VOL. II. 2 Q 


610 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

rendered conformable to the Head. For thus the Holy 
Spirit is ever setting before us in his pefioiran example of 
the resurrection. It is difficult to believe that after our bodies 
have been consumed with rottenness, they will rise again at 
their appointed time. And hence, while many of the philo- 
sophers maintained the immortality of the soul, few of them 
assented to the resurrection of the body. Although in this 
they were inexcusable, we are thereby reminded that the 
subject is too difficult for human apprehension to reach it. 
To enable faith to surmount the great difficulty, Scripture 
y furnishes two auxiliary proofs, the one the likeness of Christ's 
resurrection, and the other the omnipotence of God. There- 
fore, whenever the subject of the resurrection is considered, 
let us think of the case of our Saviour, who, having com- 
pleted his mortal course in our nature which he had assumed, 
obtained immortality, and is now the pledge of our future 
resurrection. For in the miseries by which we are beset, 
we always bear " about in the body the dying of the Lord 
Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest 
in our mortal flesh," (2 Cor. iv. 10.) It is not lawful, it 
is not even possible, to separate him from us, without divid- 
ing him. Hence Paul's argument, " If there be no resur- 
rection of the dead, then is Christ not risen," (1 Cor. xv. 
13;) for he assumes it as an acknowledged principle, that 
when Christ was subjected to death, and by rising gained a 
victory over death, it was not on his own account, but in the 
Head was begun what must necessarily be fulfilled in all the 
members, according to the degree and order of each. For it 
would not be proper to be made equal to him in all respects. 
It is said in the psalm, " Neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy 
One to see corruption," (Ps. xvi. 10.) Although a portion of 
this confidence appertain to us according to the measure be- 
stowed on us, yet the full effect appeared only in Christ, who, 
free from all corruption, resumed a spotless body. Then, that 
there may be no doubt as to our fellowship with Christ in a 
blessed resurrection, and that we may be contented with this 
pledge, Paul distinctly affirms that he sits in the heavens, 
and will come as a judge on the last day for the express 
purpose of changing our vile body, " that it may be fashioned 


CHAP. XXV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. Gil 

like unto his glorious body," (Phil. iii. 21.) For he elsewhere 
says that God did not raise up his Son from death to give 
an isolated specimen of his mighty power, but that the Spirit 
exerts the same efficacy in regard to them that believe ; and 
accordingly he says, that the Spirit when he dwells in us is 
life, because the end for Avhich he was given is to quicken 
our mortal body, (Rom. viii. 10, 11 ; Col. iii. 4.) I briefly 
glance at subjects which might be treated more copiously, 
and deserve to be adorned more splendidly, and yet in 
the little I have said I trust pious readers will find sufficient 
materials for building up their faith. Christ rose again, that 
he might have us as partakers with him of future life. 
He was raised up by the Father, inasmuch as he was the 
Head of the Church, from which he cannot possibly be dis- 
severed. He was raised up by the power of the Spirit, who 
also in us performs the office of quickening. In fine, he was 
raised up to be the resurrection and the life. But as we have 
said, that in this mirror we behold a living image of the resur- 
rection, so it furnishes a sure evidence to support our minds, 
provided we faint not, nor grow weary at the long delay, 
because it is not ours to measure the periods of time at our 
own pleasure ; but to rest patiently till God in his own time 
renew his kingdom. To this Paul refers when he says, " But 
every man in his own order : Christ the first-fruits ; after- 
ward they that are Christ's at his coining," (1 Cor. xv. 23.) 
But lest any question should be raised as to the resurrec- 
tion of Christ on which ours is founded, we see how often and 
in what various ways he has borne testimony to it. Scoffing 
men will deride the narrative which is given by the Evangelist 
as a childish fable. For what importance will they attach 
to a message which timid women bring, and the disciples, 
almost dead with fear, afterwards confirm? Why does not 
Christ rather place the illustrious trophies of his victory in 
the midst of the temple and the forum ? Why does he not 
come forth, and in the presence of Pilate strike terror ? Why 
does he not show himself alive again to the priests and all 
Jerusalem? Profane men will scarcely admit that the wit- 
nesses whom he selects are well qualified. I answer, that 
though at the commencement their infirmity was contemptible, 


G12 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

yet the whole was directed by the admirable providence of 
God, so that partly from love to Christ and religious zeal, 
partly from incredulity, those who were lately overcome with 
fear now hurry to the sepidchre, not only that they might be 
eye-witnesses of the fact, but that they might hear angels 
announce what they actually saw. How can we question the 
veracity of those who regarded what the Avomen told them as 
a fable, until they saw the reality ? It is not strange that the 
Avhole people and also the governor, after they were furnished 
with sufficient evidence for conviction, were not allowed to 
see Christ or the other signs, (Matth. xxvii. 66 ; xxviii. 11.) 
The sepulchre is sealed, sentinels keep watch, on the third 
day the body is not found. The soldiers are bribed to 
spread the report that his disciples had stolen the body. As 
if they had had the means of deforcing a band of* soldiers, or 
been supplied with weapons, or been trained so as to make 
such a daring attempt. But if the soldiers had not courage 
enough to repel them, why did they not follow and appre- 
hend some of them by the aid of the populace ? Pilate, 
therefore, in fact, put his signet to the resurrection of Christ, 
and the guards who were placed at the sepulchre by their 
silence or falsehood also became heralds of his resurrection. 
Meanwhile, the voice of angels was heard, " He is not here, 
but is risen," (Luke xxiv. 6.) The celestial splendour 
plainly shows that they were not men but angels. After- 
wards, if any doubt still remained, Christ himself removed it. 
The disciples saw him frequently; they even touched his hands 
and his feet, and their unbelief is of no little avail in confirm- 
ing our faith. He discoursed to them of the mysteries 
of the kingdom of God, and at length, while they beheld, 
ascended to heaven. This spectacle was exhibited not to 
eleven apostles only, but was seen by more than five hundred 
brethren at once, (1 Cor. xv. G.) Then by sending the Holy 
Spirit he gave a proof not only of life but also of supreme 
power, as he had foretold, " It is expedient for you that I go 
away : for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto 
you," (John xvi. 7.) Paul was not thrown down on the way 
by the power of a dead man, but felt that he whom he was 
opposing was possessed of sovereign authority. To Stephen 


CHAP. XXV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 613 

he appeared for another purpose, viz., that he might over- 
come the fear of death by the certainty of life. To refuse 
assent to these numerous and authentic proofs is not diffi- 
dence, but depraved and therefore infatuated obstinacy. 

4. We have said that in proving the resurrection our 
thoughts must be directed to the immense power of God. 
This Paul briefly teaches, when he says that the Lord Jesus 
Christ "shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned 
like unto his glorious body, according to the working of that 
mighty power whereby he is able even to subdue all things 
unto himself," (Phil. iii. 21.) Wherefore, nothing can be more 
incongruous than to look here at what can be done naturally 
when the subject presented to us is an inestimable miracle, 
which by its magnitude absorbs our senses. Paul, however, 
by producing a proof from nature, confutes the senselessness 
of those who deny the resurrection. u Thou fool, that which 
thou sowest is not quickened except it die," &c, (1 Cor. xv. 
30.) He says that in seed there is a species of resurrec- 
tion, because the ci'op is produced from corruption. Nor 
would the thing be so difficult of belief were we as attentive 
as we ought to be to the wonders which meet our eye in 
every quarter of the world. But let us remember that none 
is truly persuaded of the future resurrection save he who, 
carried away with admiration, gives God the glory. 

Elated with this conviction, Isaiah exclaims, "Thy dead 
men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise. 
Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust," (Isaiah xxvi. 19.) 
In desperate circumstances he rises to God, the author of 
life, in whose hand are " the issues from death," (Psalm lxviii. 
20.) Job also, when liker a dead body than a living being, 
trusting to the power of God, hesitates not as if in full vigour 
to rise to that day : " 1 know that my Redeemer liveth, and 
that he will stand at the latter day upon the earth ;" (that is, 
that he will there exert his power :) " and though after my 
skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see 
God ; whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall 
behold, and not another," (Job xix. 25-27.) For though 
some have recourse to a more subtle interpretation, by which 
they wrest these passages, as if they were not to be under- 


614 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

stood of the resurrection, they only confirm what they are 
desirous to overthrow ; for holy men, in seeking consolation 
in their misfortunes, have recourse for alleviation merely to 
the similitude of a resurrection. This is better learned from 
a passage in Ezekiel. When the Jews scouted the promise 
of return, and objected that the probability of it Avas not 
greater than that of the dead coming forth from the tomb, 
there is presented to the prophet in vision a field covered 
with dry bones, which at the command of God recover sinews 
and flesh. Though under that figure he encourages the 
people to hope for return, yet the ground of hope is taken 
from the resurrection, as it is the special type of all the de- 
liverances which believers experience in this world. Thus 
Christ declares that the voice of the Gospel gives life ; but 
because the Jews did not receive it, he immediately adds, 
"Marvel not at this ; for the hour is coining in which all that 
are in the grave shall hear his voice, and shall come forth," 
(John v. 28, 29.) Wherefore, amid all our conflicts let us 
exult after the example of Paul, that he who has promised us 
future life " is able to keep that" which i( is committed unto 
him," and thus glory that there is laid up for us " a crown of 
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous j udge, shall give," 
(2 Tim. i. 12 ; iv. 8.) Thus all the hardships which we may 
endure will be a demonstration of our future life, " seeing it is 
a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to 
them that trouble you ; and to you who are troubled rest 
with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven 
with his mighty angels, in flaming fire," (2 Thess. i. 6-8.) But 
we must attend to what he shortly after adds, viz., that he 
" shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in 
all them that believe," by receiving the Gospel. 

5. Although the minds of men ought to be perpetually 
occupied with this pursuit, yet as if they actually resolved to 
banish all remembrance of the resurrection, they have called 
death the end of all things, the extinction of man. For 
Solomon certainly expresses the commonly received opinion 
Avhen he says, "A living dog is better than a dead lion," 
(Eccl. ix. 4.) And again, "Who knoweth the spirit of man 
that goeth upward, and the spirit of the beast that goeth 


CHAP. XXV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 615 

downward to the earth ?" l In all ages a brutish stupor has 
prevailed, and, accordingly, it has made its way into the very 
Church ; for the Sadducees had the hardihood openly to 
profess that there was no resurrection, nay, that the soul was 
mortal, (Mark xii. 18 ; Lukexx. 27.) But that this gross ig- 
norance might be no excuse, unbelievers have always by natural 
instinct had an image of the resurrection before their eyes. 
For why the sacred and inviolable custom of burying, but 
that it might be the earnest of a new life ? Nor can it be said 
that it had its origin in error, for the solemnity of sepulture 
always prevailed among the holy patriarchs, and God was 
pleased that the same custom should continue among the 
Gentiles, in order that the image of the resurrection thus 
presented might shake off their torpor. But although that 
ceremony was Avithout profit, yet it is useful to us if we pru- 
dently consider its end ; because it is no feeble refutation of 
infidelity that all men agreed in professing what none of them 
believed. But not only did Satan stupify the senses of man- 
kind, so that with their bodies they buried the remembrance 
of the resurrection ; but he also managed by various fictions so 
to corrupt this branch of doctrine that it at length was lost. 
Not to mention that even in the days of Paul he began to 
assail it, (1 Cor. xv.,) shortly after the Chiliasts arose, who 
limited the reign of Christ to a thousand years. This fiction 
is too puerile to need or to deserve refutation. Nor do they 
receive any countenance from the Apocalypse, from which it 
is known that they extracted a gloss for their error, (Rev. 
xx. 4,) since the thousand years there mentioned refer not to 
the eternal blessedness of the Church, but only to the various 
troubles which await the Church militant in this world. The 
whole Scripture proclaims that there will be no end either to 
the happiness of the elect, or the punishment of the reprobate. 
Moreover, in regard to all things which lie beyond our sight, 
and far transcend the reach of our intellect, belief must 
either be founded on the sure oracles of God, or altogether 
renounced. Those who assign only a thousand years to the 


1 Calvin translates, " Quis scit an hominis anima asccndit sursum ?" &c. 
— Who knows whether the soul of man goes upward ? &c. 


G16 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

children of God to enjoy the inheritance of future life, observe 
not how great an insult they offer to Christ and his kingdom. 
If they are not to be clothed with immortality, then Christ 
himself, into whose glory they shall be transformed, has not 
been received into immortal glory ; if their blessedness is to 
have an end, the kingdom of Christ, on whose solid structure 
it rests, is temporary. In short, they are either most igno- 
rant of all divine things, or they maliciously aim at subverting 
the whole grace of God and power of Christ, which cannot 
have their full effect, unless sin is obliterated, death swallow- 
ed up, and eternal life fully renewed. How stupid and frivo- 
lous their fear that too much severity will be ascribed to 
God, if the reprobate are doomed to eternal punishment, even 
the blind may see. The Lord, forsooth, will be unjust if 
he exclude from his kingdom those who, by their ingratitude, 
shall have rendered themselves unworthy of it. But their 
sins are temporary, (see Bernard, Epist. 254.) I admit it ; 
but then the majesty of God, and also the justice which they 
have violated by their sins, are eternal. Justly, therefore, the 
memory of their iniquity does not perish. But in this way 
the punishment will exceed the measure of the fault. It is 
intolerable blasphemy to hold the majesty of God in so little 
estimation, as not to regard the contempt of it as of greater 
consequence than the destruction of a single soul. But let 
us have done with these triflers, that we may not seem (con- 
trary to what we first observed) to think their dreams 
deserving of refutation. 

6. Besides these, other two dreams have been invented by 
men who indulge a wicked curiosity. Some, under the idea 
that the whole man perishes, have thought that the soul will 
rise again with the body ; while others, admitting that spirits 
are immortal, hold that they will be clothed with new bodies, 
and thus deny the resurrection of the flesh. Having already 
adverted to the former point Avhen speaking of the creation of 
man, it will be sufficient again to remind the reader how 
grovelling an error it is to convert a spirit, formed after the 
image of God, into an evanescent breath, which animates the 
body only during this fading life, and to reduce the temple 
of the Holy Spirit to nothing ; in short, to rob of the badge 


CHAP. XXV". CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 617 

of immortality that part of ourselves in which the divinity 
is most refulgent, and the marks of immortality conspicuous, 
so as to make the condition of the body better and more 
excellent than that of the soul. Very different is the course 
taken by Scripture, which compares the body to a tabernacle, 
from which it describes us as migrating when we die, because 
it estimates us by that part which distinguishes us from the 
lower animals. Thus Peter, in reference to his approaching 
death, says, " Knowing that shortly I must put oft" this my 
tabernacle," (2 Pet. i. 14.) Paul, again, speaking of believers, 
after saying, " If our earthly house of this tabernacle were dis- 
solved, we have a building of God," adds, " Whilst we are at 
home in the body, we are absent from the Lord," (2 Cor. v. 1, 
6.) Did not the soul survive the body, how could it be present 
with the Lord on being separated from the body ? But an 
Apostle removes all doubt when he says that we go " to the 
spirits of just men made perfect," (Heb. xii. 23 ;) by these 
words meaning, that we are associated with the holy patri- 
archs, who, even when dead, cultivate the same piety, so that 
we cannot be the members of Christ unless we unite with 
them. And did not the soul, when unclothed from the 
body, retain its essence, and be capable of beatific glory, our 
Saviour would not have said to the thief, " To-day shalt 
thou be with me in paradise," (Luke xxiii. 43.) Trusting to 
these clear proofs, let us doubt not, after the example of our 
Saviour, to commend our spirits to God when we come to die, 
or after the example of Stephen, to commit ourselves to the 
protection of Christ, who, with good reason, is called " The 
Shepherd and Bishop" of our souls, (Acts vii. 59; 1 Pet. ii. 
25.) Moreover, to pry curiously into their intermediate 
state is neither lawful nor expedient, (see Calv. Psychopan- 
nychia.) Many greatly torment themselves with discussing 
what place they occupy, and whether or not they already 
enjoy celestial glory. It is foolish and rash to inquire into 
hidden things, farther than God permits us to know. Scrip- 
ture, after telling that Christ is present with them, and 
receives them into paradise, (John xii. 32,) and that they are 
comforted, while the souls of the reprobate suffer the torments 
which they have merited, goes no farther. What teacher or 


618 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

doctor will reveal to us what God has concealed ? As to the 
place of abode, the question is not less futile and inept, since 
we know that the dimension of the soul is not the same as 
that of the body.1 When the abode of blessed spirits is de- 
signated as the bosom of Abraham, it is plain that, on quitting 
this pilgrimage, they are received by the common father of 
the faithful, who imparts to them the fruit of his faith. Still, 
since Scripture uniformly enjoins us to look with expectation 
to the advent of Christ, and delays the crown of glory till 
that period, let us be contented with the limits divinely pre- 
scribed to us, viz., that the souls of the righteous, after their 
warfare is ended, obtain blessed rest where in joy they wait 
for the fruition of promised glory, and that thus the final 
result is suspended till Christ the Redeemer appear. There 
can be no doubt that the reprobate have the same doom as 
that which Jude assigns to the devils, they are " reserved 
in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of 
the great day," (Jude, ver. 6.) 

7. Equally monstrous is the error of those who imagine 
that the soul, instead of resuming the body with which it is 
now clothed, will obtain a new and different body. Nothing- 
can be more futile than the reason given by the Manichees, 
viz., that it wTere incongruous for impure flesh to rise again : as 
if there were no impurity in the soul ; and yet this does not 
exclude it from the hope of heavenly life. It is just as if 
they were to say, that what is infected by the taint of sin 
cannot be divinely purified ; for I now say nothing to the 
delirious dream that flesh is naturally impure as having been 
created by the devil. I only maintain, that nothing in us at 
present, which is umvorthy of heaven, is any obstacle to the 
resurrection. But, first, Paul enjoins believers to purify 
themselves from " all filthiness of the flesh and spirit," (2 Cor. 
vii. 1 ;) and then denounces the judgment which is to fol- 
low7, that every one shall "receive the things done in his 
body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or 

1 French, " La question quant au lieu est bien frivole et sotte : veu 
que nous savons que l'anie n'a pas ses mesures de long et de large, comme 
le corps ;" — the question as to place is very frivolous and foolish, seeing 
we know that the soul has no measures of length and breadth like the 
body 


CHAP. XXV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 619 

bad," (2 Cor. v. LO.) With this accords what he says to the 
Corinthians, "That the life also of Jesus might be made 
manifest in our body," (2 Cor. iv. 10.) For which reason 
he elsewhere says, " I pray God your whole spirit and soul 
and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our 
Lord Jesus Christ," (1 Thess. v. 23.) He says "body" as 
well as "spirit and soul," and no wonder; for it were most 
absurd that bodies which God has dedicated to himself as 
temples should fall into corruption without hope of resur- 
rection. What ? are they not also the members of Christ ? 
Does he not pray that God would sanctify every part of 
them, and enjoin them to celebrate his name with their 
tongues, lift up pure hands, and offer sacrifices ? That part 
of man, therefore, which the heavenly Judge so highly 
honours, what madness is it for any mortal man to reduce 
to dust without hope of revival ? In like manner, when Paul 
exhorts, "glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, 
which are God's," he certainly does not allow that that 
which he claims for God as sacred is to be adjudged to eter- 
nal corruption. Nor, indeed, on any subject does Scripture 
furnish clearer explanation than on the resurrection of our 
flesh. " This corruptible (says Paul) must put on incor- 
ruption, and this mortal must put on immortality," (1 Cor. 
xv. 53.) If God formed new bodies, where would be this 
change of quality ? If it were said that we must be renewed, 
the ambiguity of the expression might, perhaps, afford room 
for cavil; but here pointing with the finger to the bodies 
with which we are clothed, and promising that they shall 
be incorruptible, he very plainly affirms that no new bodies 
are to be fabricated. " Nay," as Tertullian says, " he could 
not have spoken more expressly, if he had held his skin in 
his hands," (Tertull. de Kesurrect. Carnis.) Nor can any 
cavil enable them to evade the force of another passage, in 
which saying that Christ will be the Judge of the world, he 
quotes from Isaiah, ic As I live, saith the Lord, every knee 
shall bow to me," (Rom. xiv. 11 ; Isa. xix. 18 ;) since he 
openly declares that those whom he was addressing will have 
to give an account of their lives. This could not be true if 
new bodies were to be sisted to the tribunal. Moreover, 


620 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

there is no ambiguity in the words of Daniel, " Many of them 
that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to ever- 
lasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt," 
(Dan. xii. 2 ;) since he does not bring new matter from the 
four elements to compose men, but calls forth the dead from 
their graves. And the reason which dictates this is plain. 
For if death, which originated in the fall of man, is adventi- 
tious, the renewal produced by Christ must be in the same 
body which began to be mortal. And, certainly, since the 
Athenians mocked Paul for asserting the resurrection, (Acts 
xvii. 32,) we may infer what his preaching was : their derision 
is of no small force to confirm our faith. The saying of our 
Saviour also is worthy of observation, " Fear not them which 
kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul : but rather 
fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell," 
(Matth. x. 28.) Here there would be no ground for fear, were 
not the body which we now have liable to punishment. Nor 
is another saying of our Saviour less obscure, " The hour is 
coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his 
voice, and shall come forth ; they that have done good, unto 
the resurrection of life ; and they that have done evil, unto 
the resurrection of damnation," (John v. 28, 29.) Shall we 
say that the soul rests in the grave, that it may there hear 
the voice of Christ, and not rather that the body shall at his 
command resume the vigour which it had lost ? Moreover, 
if we are to receive new bodies, where will be the conformity 
of the Head and the members ? Christ rose again. Was it by 
forming for himself a new body ? Nay, he had foretold, 
" Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up," 
(John ii. 19.) The mortal body which he had formerly 
carried he again received ; for it would not have availed us 
much if a new body had been substituted, and that which 
had been offered in expiatory sacrifice been destroyed. "We 
must, therefore, attend to that connection which the Apostle 
celebrates, that we rise because Christ rose, (1 Cor. xv. 12 ;) 
nothing being less probable than that the flesh in which we 
bear about the dying of Christ, shall have no share in the 
resurrection of Christ. This was even manifested by a strik- 
ing example, when, at the resurrection of Christ, many 


CHAP. XXV. CIIEISTIAN RELIGION'. G21 

bodies of the saints came forth from their graves. For it 
cannot be denied that this was a prelude, or rather earnest, of 
the final resurrection for which we hope, such as already 
existed in Enoch and Elijah, whom Tertullian calls candidates 
fur resurrection, because, exempted from corruption, both in 
body and soul, they were received into the custody of God. 

8. I am ashamed to waste so many words on so clear a 
matter ; but my readers will kindly submit to the annoyance, 
in order that perverse and presumptuous minds may not be 
able to avail themselves of any flaw to deceive the simple. The 
volatile spirits with whom I now dispute adduce the fiction 
of their own brain, that in the resurrection there will be a 
creation of new bodies. Their only reason for thinking so is, 
that it seems to them incredible that a dead body, long 
wasted by corruption, should return to its former state. There- 
fore, mere unbelief is the parent of their opinion. The Spirit 
of God, on the contrary, uniformly exhorts us in Scripture 
U to hope for the resurrection of our flesh. For this reason 
Baptism is, according to Paul, a seal of our future resurrection; 
and in like manner the holy Supper invites us confidently 
to expect it, when with our mouths we receive the sym- 
bols of spiritual grace. And certainly the whole exhortation 
of Paul, " Yield ye your members as instruments of righteous- 
ness unto God," (Rom. vi. 13,) would be frigid, did he not add, 
as he does in another passage, " He that raised up Christ from 
the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies," (Rom. viii. 
11.) For what would it avail to apply feet, hands, eyes, and 
tongues, to the service of God, did not these afterwards par- 
ticipate in the benefit and reward? This Paul expressly 
confirms when he says, " The body is not for fornication, 
but for the Lord ; and the Lord for the body. And God 
hath both raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us by 
his own power," (1 Cor. vi. 13, 14.) The words which 
follow are still clearer, " Know ye not that your bodies are 
the members of Christ ?" " Know ye not that your body is 
the temple of the Holy Ghost?" (1 Cor. vi. 15, 19.) Mean- 
while, we see how he connects the resurrection with chastity 
and holiness, as he shortly after includes our bodies in the 
purchase of redemption. It would be inconsistent with rea- 


G22 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

son, that the body, in which Paul bore the marks of his 
Saviour, and in which he magnificently extolled him, (Gal. 
vi. 17,) should lose the reward of the crown. Hence he 
glories thus, " Our conversation is in heaven ; from whence 
also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ : Who 
shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like 
unto his glorious body," (Phil. iii. 20, 21.) As it is true, "That 
we must through much tribulation enter into the kinodom of 
God," (Acts xiv. 22 ;) so it were unreasonable that this 
entrance should be denied to the bodies which God exercises 
under the banner of the cross, and adorns with the palm of 
victory. 

Accordingly, the saints never entertained any doubt that 
they would one day be the companions of Christ, who trans- 
fers to his own person all the afflictions by which we are 
tried, that he may show their quickening power.1 Nay, 
under the law, God trained the holy patriarch in this belief, 
by means of an external ceremony. For to what end was the 
rite of burial, as we have already seen, unless to teach that 
new life was prepared for the bodies thus deposited ? Hence, 
also, the spices and other symbols of immortality, by which 
under the law the obscurity of the doctrine was illustrated 
in the same way as by sacrifices. That custom was not the 
offspring of superstition, since we see that the Spirit is not 
less careful in narrating burials than in stating the principal 
mysteries of the faith. Christ commends these last offices as 
of no trivial importance, (Matth. xvi. 10,) and that, certainly, 
for no other reason than just that they raise our eyes from the 
view of the tomb, which corrupts and destroys all things, to 
the prospect of renovation. Besides, that careful observance 
of the ceremony for which the patriarchs are praised, suffi- 
ciently proves that they found in it a special and valuable 
help to their faith. Nor would Abraham have been so 
anxious about the burial of his wife, (Gen. xxiii. 4, 10,) 
had not the religious view, and something superior to 
any worldly advantage, been present to his mind ; in other 
words, by adorning her dead body with the insignia of 

1 Latin, " ut vivificas esse doceat." — French, " pour monstrer quelles 
nous meinent a vie ;" — to show that they conduct us to life. 


CHAP. XXV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 623 

the resurrection, lie confirmed his own faith, and that of his 
family. A clearer proof of this appears in the example of 
Jacob, who, to testify to his posterity that even death did 
not destroy the hope of the promised land, orders his bones 
to be carried thither. Had he been to be clothed with a 
new body, would it not have been ridiculous in him to give 
commands concerning a dust which was to be reduced to 
nothing ? Wherefore, if Scripture has any authority with us, 
we cannot desire a clearer or stronger proof of any doctrine. 
Even tyros understand this to be the meaning of the words, 
resurrection, and raising up. A thing which is created for 
the first time cannot be said to rise again ; nor could our 
Saviour have said, " This is the Father's will which hath 
sent me, that of all which he hath given me I should lose 
nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day," (John 
vi. 39.) The same is implied in the word sleeping, which is 
applicable only to the body. Hence, too, the name of 
cemetery, applied to burying-grounds. 

It remains to make a passing remark on the mode of 
resurrection. I speak thus because Paul, by styling it a 
mystery, exhorts us to soberness, in order that he may curb ,.-• 
a licentious indulgence in free and subtle speculation. First,^i- 
we must hold, as has already been observed, that the body 
in which we shall rise will be the same as at present in 
respect of substance, but that the quality will be different ; just 
as the body of Christ which wTas raised up was the same as 
that which had been offered in sacrifice, and yet excelled in 
other qualities, as if it had been altogether different. This 
Paul declares by familiar examples, (1 Cor. xv. 39.) For as 
the flesh of man and of beasts is the same in substance, but 
not in quality : as all the stars are made of the same matter, 
but have different degrees of brightness : so he shows, that 
though we shall retain the substance of the body, there will 
be a change, by which its condition wTill become much more 
excellent. The corruptible body, therefore, in order that we 
may be raised, will not perish or vanish away, but, divested of 
corruption, will be clothed with incorruption. Since God has 
all the elements at his disposal, no difficulty can prevent him 
from commanding the earth, the fire, and the water, to give 


624 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

up what they seem to have destroyed. This, also, though not 
without figure, Isaiah testifies, "Behold, the Lord cometh 
out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for 
their iniquity : the earth also shall disclose her blood, and 
shall no more cover her slain," (Isa. xxvi. 21.) But a 
distinction must be made between those who died long ago, 
and those who on that day shall be found alive. For as 
Paul declares, " We shall not all sleep, but Ave shall all be 
changed," (1 Cor. xv. 51 ;) that is, it will not be necessary 
that a period should elapse between death and the beginning 
of the second life, for in a moment of time, in the twinkling 
of an eye, the trumpet shall sound, raising up the dead 
incorruptible, and, by a sudden change, fitting those who are 
alive for the same glory. So, in another passage, he comforts 
believers who were to undergo death, telling them that those 
who are then alive shall not take precedence of the dead, 
because those who have fallen asleep in Christ shall rise first, 
(1 Thess. iv. 15.) Should any one urge the Apostle's decla- 
ration, " It is appointed unto all men once to die," (Heb. ix. 
27,) the solution is easy, that when the natural state is 
changed there is an appearance of death, which is fitly so 
denominated, and, therefore, there is no inconsistency in the 
two things, viz., that all when divested of their mortal body 
shall be renewed by deatli ; and yet that where the change 
is sudden, there will be no necessary separation between the 
soul and the body. 

9. But a more difficult question here arises, How can. the 
resurrection, which is a special benefit of Christ, be common 
to the ungodly, who are lying under the curse of God ? We 
know that in Adam all died. Christ has come to be the resur- 
rection and the life, (John xi. 25.) Is it to revive the whole 
human race indiscriminately ? But what more incongruous 
than that the ungodly in their obstinate blindness should 
obtain what the pious worshippers of God receive by faith 
only ? It is certain, therefore, that there will be one resur- 
rection to judgment, and another to life, and that Christ will 
come to separate the kids from the goats, (Matth. xxv. 32.) 
I observe, that this ought not to seem very strange, seeing 
something resembling it occurs every day. We know that 


CHAP. XXV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. {}25 

in Adam we were deprived of the inheritance of the whole 
world, and that the same reason which excludes ns from 
eating of the tree of life excludes us also from common food. 
How comes it, then, that God not only makes his sun to rise 
on the evil and on the good, but that, in regard to the uses 
of the present life, his inestimable liberality is constantly flow- 
ing forth in rich abundance ? Hence we certainly perceive, 
that things which are proper to Christ and his members, 
abound to the wicked also ; not that their possession is legi- 
timate, but that they may thus be rendered more inexcusable. 
Thus the wicked often experience the beneficence of God, 
not in ordinary measures, but such as sometimes throw 
all the blessings of the godly into the shade, though they 
eventually lead, to greater damnation. Should it be objected, 
that the resurrection is not properly compared to fading and. 
earthly blessings, I again answer, that when the devils 
were first alienated from God, the fountain of life, they 
deserved to be utterly destroyed ; yet, by the admirable 
counsel of God, an intermediate state was prepared, where 
without life they might live in death. It ought not to seem in 
any respect more absurd that there is to be an adventitious 
resurrection of the ungodly which will drag them against their 
will before the tribunal of Christ, whom they now refuse to re- 
ceive as their master and teacher. To be consumed by death 
would be a light punishment were they not, in order to the 
punishment of their rebellion, to be sisted before the Judge 
whom they have provoked to a vengeance without measure 
and without end. But although we are to hold, as already 
observed and as is contained in the celebrated confession of 
Paul to Felix, " That there shall be a resurrection of the dead, 
both of the just and unjust," (Acts xxiv. 15;) yet Scripture 
more frequently sets forth the resurrection as intended, along 
with celestial glory, for the children of God only : because, 
properly speaking, Christ comes not for the destruction, but 
for the salvation of the world : and, therefore, in the Creed 
the life of blessedness only is mentioned. 

10. But since the prophecy, that death shall be swallowed 
up in victory, (Hosea xiii. 14,) will then only be completed, 
VOL. II. 2 R 


626 INSTITUTES OP THE BOOK ifl. 

let us always remember that the end of the resurrection 
is eternal happiness, of whose excellence scarcely the minutest 
part can be described by all that human tongues can say. 
For though we are truly told that the kingdom of God 
will be full of light, and gladness, and felicity, and glory, yet 
the things meant by these words remain most remote from 
sense, and as it were involved in enigma, until the day arrive 
on which he will manifest his glory to us face to face, (1 Cor. 
xv. 54.) " Now," says John, " are we the sons of God ; and it 
doth not yet appear what we shall be : but we know that, when 
he shall appear, we shall be like him ; for we shall see him as 
he is," (1 John iii. 2.) Hence, as the prophets were unable 
to give a verbal description of that spiritual blessedness, they 
usually delineated it by corporeal objects. On the other 
hand, because the fervour of desire must be kindled in us 
by some taste of its sweetness, let us specially dwell upon 
this thought, If God contains in himself as an inexhaustible 
fountain all fulness of blessing, those who aspire to the su- 
preme good and perfect happiness must not long for any 
thing beyond him. This we are taught in several passages, 
" Fear not, Abraham ; I am thy shield, and thy exceeding- 
great reward," (Gen. xv. 1.) With this accords David's 
sentiment, "The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, 
and of my cup : thou maintainest my lot. The lines are 
fallen unto me in pleasant places," (Ps. xvi. 5, 6.) Again, 
" I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness," (Ps. 
xvii. 15.) Peter declares that the purpose for which believers 
are called is, that they may be "partakers of the divine 
nature," (2 Pet. i. 4.) How so ? Because " he shall come to 
be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that 
believe," (2 Thess. i. 10.) If our Lord will share his glory, 
power, and righteousness, with the elect, nay, will give him- 
self to be enjoyed by them ; and what is better still, will, in a 
manner, become one with them, let us remember that every 
kind of happiness is herein included. But when we have 
made great progress in thus meditating, let us understand 
that if the conceptions of our minds be contrasted with the 
sublimity of the mystery, we are still halting at the very en- 


CHAP. XXV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 627 

trance.1 The more necessary is it for us to cultivate sobriety 
in this matter, lest, unmindful of our feeble capacity, we pre- 
sume to take too lofty a flight, and be overwhelmed by the 
brightness of the celestial glory. We feel how much we are 
stimulated by an excessive desire of knowing more than is 
given us to know, and hence frivolous and noxious questions 
are ever and anon springing forth : by frivolous, I mean 
questions from which no advantage can be extracted. But 
there is a second class which is worse than frivolous ; because 
those who indulge in them involve themselves in hurtful specu- 
lations. Hence I call them noxious. The doctrine of Scrip- 
ture on the subject ought not to be made the ground of any 
controversy, and it is that as God, in the varied distribution of 
gifts to his saints in this world, gives them unequal degrees of 
light, so when he shall crown his gifts, their degrees of glory 
in heaven will also be unequal. When Paul says, " Ye are our 
glory and our joy," (2 Thess. ii. 19,) his words do not apply 
indiscriminately to all ; nor do those of our Saviour to his 
apostles, " Ye also shall sit on twelve thrones judging the 
twelve tribes of Israel," (Matth. xix. 28.) But Paul, who 
knew that as God enriches the saints with spiritual gifts in 
this world, he will in like manner adorn them with glory in 
heaven, hesitates not to say, that a special crown is laid up 
for him in proportion to his labours. Our Saviour, also, to 
commend the dignity of the office which he had conferred on 
the apostles, reminds them that the fruit of it is laid up in 
heaven. This, too, Daniel says, " They that be wise shall 
shine as the brightness of the firmament ; and they that turn 
many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever," (Dan. 
xii. 3.) Any one who attentively considers the Scriptures 
will see not only that they promise eternal life to believers, 
but a special reward to each. Hence the expression of Paul, 
(( The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the 

* French, " Et encore quand nous aurons bien profite en cette medita- 
tion, si nous faut il entendre que nous sommes encore tout an has et a la 
premiere entree, et que jamais nous n'approcherons durant cette vie a la 
hautesse de ce mystere."— And still, when we shall have profited much by 
thus meditating, we must understand that we are still far beneath it, and 
at the very threshold, and that never during this life shall we approach 
the height of this mystery. 


628 INSTITUTES OF THE BOOK III. 

Lord in that day," (2 Tim. i. 18 ; iv. 14.) This is confirmed 
by our Saviour's promise, that they " shall receive an hundred- 
fold, and shall inherit everlasting life," (Matth. xix. 29.) In 
short, as Christ, by the manifold variety of his gifts, begins 
the glory of his body in this world, and gradually increases it, 
so he will complete it in heaven. 

11. While all the godly with one consent will admit this, be- 
cause it is sufficiently attested by the word of God, they will, 
on the other hand, avoid perplexing questions which they 
feel to be a hinderance in their way, and thus keep within 
the prescribed limits. In regard to myself, I not only indi- 
vidually refrain from a superfluous investigation of useless 
matters, but also think myself bound to take care that 1 do 
not encourage the levity of others by answering them. 
Men puffed up with vain science are often inquiring how 
great the difference will be between prophets and apostles, 
and again, between apostles and martyrs; by how many de- 
grees virgins will surpass those who are married ; in short, 
they leave not a corner of heaven untouched by their specu- 
lations. Next it occurs to them to inquire to what end the 
world is to be repaired, since the children of God will not be 
in want of any part of this great and incomparable abun- 
dance, but will be like the angels, whose abstinence from food 
is a symbol of eternal blessedness. I answer, that independent 
of use, there will be so much pleasantness in the very sight, so 
much delight in the very knowledge, that this happiness will 
far surpass all the means of enjoyment which are now afforded. 
Let us suppose ourselves placed in the richest quarter of the 
globe, where no kind of pleasure is wanting, who is there that 
is not ever and anon hindered and excluded by disease from 
enjoying the gifts of God? who does not oftentimes interrupt 
the course of enjoyment by intemperance ? Hence it follows, 
that fruition, pure and free from all defect, though it be of no 
use to a corruptible life, is the summit of happiness. Others 
go further, and ask whether dross and other impurities in 
metals will have no existence at the restitution, and are in- 
eonsistent with it. Though I should go so far as concede 
this to them, yet I expect with Paul a reparation of those 
delects which first began with sin, and on account of which 


CHAP. XXV. CHRISTIAN RELIGION. 629 

the whole creation groaneth and travaileth with pain, (Rom. 
viii. 22.) Others go a step further, and ask, What better 
condition can await the human race, since the blessing of 
offspring shall then have an end ? The solution of this 
difficulty also is easy. When Scripture so highly extols the 
blessing of offspring, it refers to the progress by which God 
is constantly urging nature forward to its goal ; in perfec- 
tion itself we know that the case is different. But as such 
alluring speculations instantly captivate the unwary, who are 
afterwards led farther into the labyrinth, until at length, every 
one becoming pleased with his own view, there is no limit to 
disputation, the best and shortest course for us will be to 
rest contented with seeing through a glass darkly until we 
shall see face to face. Few out of the vast multitude of man- 
kind feel concerned how they are to get to heaven ; all would 
fain know before the time what is done in heaven. Almost 
all, while slow and sluggish in entering upon the contest, are 
already depicting to themselves imaginary triumphs. 

12. Moreover, as language cannot describe the severity of 
the divine vengeance on the reprobate, their pains and tor- 
ments are figured to us by corporeal things, such as dark- 
ness, Availing and gnashing of teeth, unextinguishable fire, the 
ever-gnawing worm, (Matth. viii. 12 ; xxii. 13 ; Mark ix. 
43 ; Isa. lxvi. 24.) It is certain that by such modes of ex- 
pression the Holy Spirit designed to impress all our senses 
with dread, as when it is said, " Tophet is ordained of old ; 
yea, for the king it is prepared : he hath made it deep and 
large ; the pile thereof is fire and much wood ; the breath of 
the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it," (Isa. 
xxx. 33.) As Ave thus require to be assisted to conceive the 
miserable doom of the reprobate, so the consideration on Avhich 
Ave ought chiefly to dwell is the fearful consequence of being 
estranged from all fellowship with God, and not only so, but 
of feeling that his majesty is adverse to us, Avhile avc cannot 
possibly escape from it. For, first, his indignation is like a 
raging fire, by whose touch all things are devoured and anni- 
hilated. Next, all the creatures are the instruments of his 
judgment, so that those to whom the Lord will thus publicly 
manifest his anger will feel that heaven, and earth, and sea, all 


630 INSTITUTES OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. BOOK III. 

beings, animate and inanimate, are, as it were, inflamed with 
dire indignation against them, and armed for their destruc- 
tion. Wherefore, the Apostle made no trivial declaration, 
when he said that unbelievers shall be " punished with 
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and 
from the glory of his power," (2 Thess. i. 9.) And whenever 
the prophets strike terror by means of corporeal figures, 
although in respect of our dull understanding there is no extra- 
vagance in their language, yet they give preludes of the future 
judgment in the sun and the moon, and the whole fabric of 
the world. Hence unhappy consciences find no rest, but 
are vexed and driven about by a dire whirlwind, feeling 
as if torn by an angry God, pierced through with deadly 
darts, terrified by his thunderbolt, and crushed by the 
Aveight of his hand; so that it were easier to plunge into 
abysses and whirlpools than endure these terrors for a mo- 
ment. How fearful, then, must it be to be thus beset through- 
out eternity ! On this subject there is a memorable passage 
in the ninetieth Psalm : Although God by a mere look 
scatters all mortals, and brings them to nought, yet as his 
worshippers are more timid in this world, he urges them the 
more, that he may stimulate them, while burdened with the 
cross, to press onward until he himself shall be all in all. 


END OF VOLUME SECOND. 


THE EDINBURGH PRINTING COMPANY, 
1-2, South St O.ivid Street. 


Just Published, price Two Shillings, in extra cloth board s, 

THE 

MERITS OF CALVIN 

AS AN INTERPRETER OF 

THE HOLY SCRIPTURES. 

TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN OF 

PROFESSOR THOLUCK OF HALLE, 

BY 

PROFESSOR WOODS OF ANDOVER. 

TO WHICH ARE ADDED, 

OPINIONS AND TESTIMONIES 

OF FOREIGN AND BRITISH DIVINES AND SCHOLARS AS TO THE VALUE 
AND IMPORTANCE OF THE WRITINGS OF JOHN CALVIN. 

WITH A PREFACE, 

BY THE REV. WILLIAM PRINGLE. 


EXTRACTS FROM CRITIQUES: 

I. 

" This is a tract from the pen of the eloquent and learned Professor 
Tholuck of Halle, which appeared in the 'Literary Advertiser for 
Christian Theology and General Intelligence for 1831,' has been trans- 
lated from the original German by Professor Woods of Audover, and 
is in this edition introduced to the English reader by a well-written 
preface by the Rev. William Pringle of Auchterarder, so favourably 
known to the public by his excellent translations of Calvin and Witsius. 
It will be read with very much pleasure and advantage by all who take 


an interest in Bible studies, and more especially by students of Theology 
and Biblical Interpretation, none of whom ought to be satisfied with 
themselves until they have obtained and perused it. Of the distinguished 
man whose 'merits as an interpreter of the Holy Scriptures' are so 
acutely and impartially discussed in this performance of Professor 
Tholuck, it is enough to say, in opposition to the misrepresentations 
of so much ignorance and prejudice on the part of many, that no one has 
ever united so much the voices of the most learned and pious of all 
Churches and countries in his praise as he has done. A numerous list 
of opinions and testimonies in favour of Calvin is appended to the pre- 
sent edition of this Tract." 

II. 

" It is one of the favourable signs of the times that the merits of Calvin, 
as a theologian and an expositor, are appreciated with so much fairr~oo, 
and in so much a better spirit, than was long the fashion anion i too 
many writers of almost all denominations. Dr Tholuck shoves his 
characteristic acuteness in this pamphlet of observations — pointing out 
striking examples of the enlarged and liberal spirit, the soundness \J 
mind, and the critical acumen which distinguish the exegetical writings 
of this great Reformer. As was to be apprehended from Dr Tholuck's 
doctrinal sentiments, his remarks, in a few instances, require to be quali- 
fied. This Mr Pringle has attended to in the preface with candour and 
discrimination. The editor has our best thanks for the treat he has 
furnished us, to the value of which he has added by appending the testi- 
monies of divines and scholars, both British and Foreign, to the import- 
ance of Calvin's writings : in the list will be found some of the most 
illustrious names in Christendom, from the Reformer's days to the pre- 
sent." 

III. 

"This neat little volume is intended to direct attention to Calvin in the 
character described above, [as an Interpreter of Scripture;] and to bring 
his works within the reach and understanding of the public in general, 
a Society has lately been established under the title of ' The Calvin 
Translation Society.' A member of this Society secures, from a 
moderate yearly subscription, four volumes of Calvin's theological works, 
newly and accurately translated for that undertaking. Mr Priugle's re- 
commendatory introduction is well calculated to advance this object ; and 
his own translation of 'Witsius on the Lord's Prayer ' points him out 
as one admirably qualified to assist in that office." 


LONDON: SMITH, ELDER, & CO., 65, CORNHILL ; 

Seeley, Burnside, & Seeley, 169, Fleet Street ; 
Nisbet & Co., Berners Street. 

Edinburgh : The Edinburgh Printing Company. 

Dublin: W. Curry, Junior, & Co. 


**r 


■K: 


