Title: Commentaries on the First Book of Moses, Called Genesis, Vol. II
Creator: John Calvin (Rev. John King, M.A., Translator)
Publisher: Edinburgh: Printed for the Calvin Translation Society, 1847
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: 1847 publication date places this well out of US copyright (179
  years before this session, 2026); independently confirmed by archive.org's
  own copyright-status field ("possible-copyright-status": "NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT").
Source: Internet Archive item commentariesonfi02calvuoft
  (archive.org/details/commentariesonfi02calvuoft), fetched directly (curl,
  raw bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text file, 2026-09-25, this
  session.
Provenance note: Raw, uncorrected djvu OCR of a mid-19th-century volume. Runs
  of 2+ spaces (a scan-layout artifact) collapsed to one throughout; no
  wording changed. A small number of illustration/plate leaves at the very
  head and tail OCR as near-total garbage (the scanner reading decorative
  engraving/binding, not text) - left as-is per this corpus's standing
  practice for archive.org scans, since it is not part of Calvin's own text.
  The commentary body itself was directly sampled at multiple points
  (opening, middle, and several points through the volume) this session and
  reads cleanly.
Content note: This is Volume II of a 2-volume work (Genesis, complete, split
  across two physical volumes by the original 1847 publisher), completing the
  set begun in calvin_commentaries-genesis-vol1_king1847.txt. See that file's
  own Content note for the same partial-acquisition disclosure against the
  ~22-volume CTS Commentaries series.














* 
pel eek SPIE Te aren awh Ade « For 

: abe wun A Mitel. 0 a wa nkeis of nd ek eee 
Knoed ee era rier aes Lp Peta ed ON aii OOF 
Fae Gok pean vid rhe PF 




















nisl et ATE 
ee Se 

P haad 

See 

Satta trne? 6's 

Pot 















hone 





Le hee 
OF Ded OES 
SEA bah Se EW 
bee 








parece 


Perey 
e at Tle 








vas ‘Vea 
Set ENG EERE DENY 
Saat ‘" ” Ya! 


ates Rae 




















OY es 
SA ae sale 


ete 






























lig 


SS i 
th 
«. 








+d rs - 
oe 

7 

> 





sat 


http://www.archive.org/details/commentariesonfi y 








a 





THE CALVIN TRANSLATION SOCIETY, 


INSTITUTED IN MAY M.DCCC.XEIII, 





FOR THE PUBLICATION OF TRANSLATIONS OF THE WORKS OF 
JOHN CALVIN, 


Acting and Editorial Secretarp, Robert Piteatrn, F.S.A,Seot, 
Calvin Office, 9, Northumberland Street, Edinburgh, 


OIG 





‘COMMENTARIES | 


ON 


THE FIRST BOOK OF MOSES 


CALLED 


"GENESIS. 


BY JOHN ‘CALVIN. 


TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL LATIN, AND COMPARED 
WITH THE FRENCH EDITION. , 


BY THE REV. JOHN KING, M.A, 


OF QUEEN’S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE, INCUMBENT OF CHRIST’S CHURCH, HULL, 


a 


qe 
a weerseere 


VOLUME SECOND. we S 
WA wy 


be 


EDINBURGH: 


PRINTED FOR THE CALVIN TRANSLATION SOCIETY. 


M.DCCC.L. 





TE - - 4 +‘ oe. * “ i 
> * 4 , 7 - 4 4 
tei geal aie te eS 


EDINBURGH: PRINTRD BY 'T, CONSTABLE, PRINTER TO HER 


i 





COMMENTARY 


ON 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


1. And Abraham was old, and 


_ well stricken in age: and the Lord. 


had blessed Abraham in all things. 
2. And Abraham said unto his 


eldest servant of his house, that ruled 


over all that he had, Put, I pray thee, 


_ thy hand under my thigh; 


3. And I will make thee swear by 


| the Lord, the God of heaven, and 


the God of the earth, that thou shalt 
not take a wife unto my son of the 
daughters of the Canaanites, among 
whom I dwell: 

4. But thou shalt go unto my 
country, and to my kindred, and 
take a wife unto my son Isaac. 

5. And the servant said unto him, 
Peradventure the woman will not be 
willing to follow me unto this land: 
must I needs bring thy son again 
unto the land from whence thou 
camest ? 

6. And Abraham said unto him, 
Beware thou that thou bring not my 
son thither again. 

7. The Lord God of heaven, which 
took me from my father’s house, and 
from the land of my kindred, and 
which spake unto me, and that sware 
unto me, saying, Unto thy seed wil 


1. ABRAHAM autem senex venit 
in dies, et Iehova benedixerat Abra- 
ham in omnibus. 

2. Et dixit Abraham ad servum 
suum seniorem domus suze, qui pree- 
erat omnibus qui erant ei, Pone 
nune manum tuam sub femore meo: 

3. Et adjurabo te per Iehovam 
Deum ceeli, et Deum terre, quod 
non capies uxorem filio meo de filia- 
bus Chenaanzi, in cujus medio ego 
habito : 


4. Sed ad terram meam, et ad 
cognationem meam perges, et capies 
uxorem filio meo Ishae. 

5. Et dixit ad eum servus, Si for- 
sitan noluerit mulier venire post me 
ad terram hance, numquid reducendo 
reducam filium tuum ad terram 
unde egressus es? 


6. Et dixit ad eum Abraham 
Cave tibi ne forte reducas filium 
meum illue. 

7. Iehova Deus cceli, qui tulit 
me e domo patris mel, et e terra 
cognationis mez, et qui loquutus 
est mihi, et qui juravit mihi, di- 
cendo, Semini tuo dabo terram 


6 COMMENTARY UPON 


I give this land; he shall send his 
angel before thee, and thou shalt 
take a wife unto my son from 
thence. 

8. And if the woman will not be 
willing to follow thee, then thou shalt 
be clear from this my oath: only 
bring not my son thither again. 

9. And the servant put his hand 
under the thigh of Abraham his 
master, and sware to him concerning 
that matter. 

10. And the servant took ten ca- 
mels, of the camels of his master, and 
departed; for all the goods of his 
master were in his hand; and he 
arose, and went to Mesopotamia, 
unto the city of Nahor. 

11. And he made his camels to 
kneel down without the city by a 
well of water at the time of the 
evening, even at the time that women 
go out to draw water. 

12. And he said, O Lord God of 
my master Abraham, I pray thee, 
send me good speed this day, and 
shew kindness unto my master Abra- 
ham. 

13. Behold, I stand here by the 
well of water; and the daughters of 
the men of the city come out to draw 
water: 

14. And let it come to pass, that 
the damsel to whom I shall say, Let 
down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that 
I may drink; and she shall say, 
Drink; and I will give thy camels 
drink also: let the same be she that 
thou hast appointed for thy servant 
Isaac ; and eecby shall I know that 
thou hast shewed kindness unto my 
master. 

15. And it came to pass, before he 
had done speaking, that, behold, Re- 
bekah came out, who was born to 
Bethuel, son of Milcah, the wife of 
Nahor, Abraham’s brother, with her 
pitcher upon her shoulder. 

16. And the damsel was very fair 
to look upon, a virgin; neither had 
any man known her: and she went 
down to the well, and filled her pit- 
cher, and came up. 

17. And the servant ran to meet 





CHAP. XXIV. 


hane: ipse mittet Angelum suum q 
ante te, et capies uxorem filio meo — 
inde. 


8. Quodsi noluerit mulier pergere — 
post te, mundus eris ab adjuratione — 
mea ista: duntaxat fillum meum ne © 
reducas illue. . 

9. Et posuit servus manum suam 
sub femore Abraham domini sui, et — 
juravit ei super re hac. ) 


10. Et accepit servus decem ca- 
melos e camelis domini sui, et per- 
rexit: quia omne bonum domini sui 
erat in manu ejus: et surrexit, et 
profectus est in Aram-naharaim, ad 
civitatem Nachor. 

11. Et genu flectere fecit camelos 
extra civitatem ad puteum aque, 
tempore vespertino, tempore quo 
egrediuntur mulieres, que hauriunt. 


12. Et dixit, Iehova Deus domini 
mei Abraham, occurrere fae nune 
coram me hodie, et fac misericordiam 
cum domino meo Abraham. 


13. Ecce, ego sto juxta fontem 
aque, et filie virorum civitatis egre- 
diuntur ad hauriendam aquam. 


14. Sit ergo, puella ad quam dix- 
ero, Inclina nune hydriam tuam, et 
bibam: et dixerit, Bibe, et etiam 
camelis tuis potum dabo: ipsam 
preeparaveris servo tuo Ishac: et per 
hoe sciam quod feceris misericordiam 
cum domino meo, 


15. Et fuit, antequam ipse com- 
plevisset loqui, ecce, Ribea egredie- 
batur, que nata erat Bethuel filio 
Milchah uxoris Nachor fratris Abra- 
ham, et hydria ejus erat super hu- 
merum ejus. 

16. Puella autem erat pulchra 
aspectu valde, virgo, et vir non cog- 
noverat eam: que descendit ad fon- 
tem, et implevit hydriam suam, et 
ascendit. 

17. Itaque cucurrit servus in oc- 






OHAP. XXIV. 


her, and said, Let me, I pray thee, 
drink a little water of thy pitcher. 
18. And she said, Drink, my lord: 
‘and she hasted, and let down her 
_ pitcher upon her hand, and gave him 
drink 


19, And when she had done giving 
him drink, she said, I will draw water 
_ for thy camels also, until they have 
_ done drinking. 

. 20. And she hasted, and emptied 
her pitcher into the trough, and ran 
again into the well to draw water, 
and drew for all his camels. 

21. And the man, wondering at 
her, held his peace, to wit whether 
the Lord had made his journey pros- 
perous or not. 

22. And it came to pass, as the 
camels had done drinking, that the 
man took a golden ear-ring of half a 
shekel weight, and two bracelets for 
her hands of ten shekels weight of 
gold, 

23. And said, Whose daughter art 

thou? tell me,I pray thee. Is there 

room in thy father’s house for us to 
lodge in? 

24. And she said unto him, I am 
the daughter of Bethuel the son of 
Mileah, which she bare unto Nahor. 

25. She said, moreover, unto him, 
We have both straw and provender 
enough, and room to lodge in. 

26. And the man bowed down his 
head, and worshipped the Lord. 

27. And he said, Blessed be the 
Lord God of my master Abraham, 
who hath not left destitute my master 
of his mercy and his truth: I being 
in the way, the Lord led me to the 
house of my master’s brethren. 

28: And the damsel ran, and told 
them of her mother’s house these 
things. 

29. And Rebekah had a brother, 
and his name was Laban: and La- 
ban ran out unto the man unto the 
well. 

30. And it came to pass, when he 
saw the ear-ring, and bracelets upon 
his sister’s hands, and when he heard 
the words of Rebekah his sister, say- 
ing, Thus spake the man unto me, 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


7 


cursum ejus, et dixit, Potum da mihi 
nune parum aque ex hydria tua. 
18. Et dixit, Bibe, domine mi: et 
festinavit, et demisit hydriam suam 
super manum suam, et potum dedit 
el. 
19. Ubi complevit potum dare ei: 
tune dixit, Etiam camelis tuis hau- 
riam, donec compleverint bibere. 


20. Et festinavit, et effudit hy- 
driam suam in canale, et cucurrit 
adhue ad puteum ut hauriret: et 
hausit omnibus camelis ejus. 

21. Porro vir stupebat super ea 
tacens, ut sciret utrum secundasset 
Iehova viam suam, an non. 


22. Et fuit, quum complevissent 
cameli bibere, protulit vir inaurem 
auream, semissis pondus ejus: et 
duas armillas, et poswit super manus 
ejus: decem aurei pondus earum. 


23. Et jam dixerat, Filia, cujus 
es? indica nune mihi, numquid est 
in domo patris tui locus nobis ad 
pernoctandum ? 

24. Et dixerat ad eum, Filia Be- 
thuel sum, filii Milchah, quem pe- 
perit ipsa Nachor. 

25. Et dixit ad eum, Etiam palea, 
etiam pabulum multum est apud 
nos, etiam locus ad pernoctandum. 

26. Et inelinavit se vir, et incur- 
vavit se Iehovee. 

27. Et dixit, Benedictus Iehova 
Deus domini mei Abraham, qui non 
dereliquit misericordiam suam et 
veritatem suam a domino meo. Ego 
in via, duxit me Iehova ad domum 
fratrum domini mei. 

28. Et cucurrit puella, et nuntia- 
vit domui matris suee secundum ver- 
ba heec. 

29. Et ipsi Ribea erat frater, et 
nomen ejus Laban: et cucurrit La- 
ban ad virum foras ad fontem. 


30. Fuit autem, quum vidisset in- 
aurem et armillas in manibus so- 
roris sue, et quum audisset ipse 
verba Ribca sororis suze, dicendo, 
Sic loquutus est ad me vir: venit a 


7 


8 COMMENTARY UPON 


that he came unto the man; and, 
behold, he stood by the camels at 
the well. 

31. And he said, Come in, thou 
blessed of the Lord; wherefore 
standest thou without? for I have 
prepared the house, and room for 
the camels. 

32. And the man came into the 
house: and he ungirded his camels, 
and gave straw and provender for 
the camels, and water to wash his 
feet, and the men’s feet that were 
with him. 

33. And there was set meat before 
him to eat: but he said, I will not 
eat, until I have told mine errand. 
And he said, Speak on. 

34. And he said, I am Abraham’s 
servant. 

35. And the Lord hath blessed my 
master greatly, and he is become 
great; and he hath given him flocks, 
and herds, and silver, and gold, and 
men-servants, and wmaid-servants, 
and camels, and asses. 

36. And Sarah, my master’s wife, 
bare a son to my master when she 
was old ; and unto him hath he given 
all that he hath. 

37. And my master made me 
swear, saying, Thou shalt not take 
a wife to my son of the daughters 
of the Canaanites, in whose land I 
dwell : 

38. But thou shalt go unto m 
father’s house, and to my kindred, 
and take a wife unto my son. 

39. And I said unto my master, 
Peradventure the woman will not 
follow me. 

40. And he said unto me, The 
Lord, before whom I walk, will send 
his angel with thee, and prosper thy 
way; and thou shalt take a wife for 
my son of my kindred, and of my 
father’s house. 

41. Then shalt thou be clear from 
this my oath, when thou comest to 
my kindred; and if they give not 
thee one, thou shalt be clear from 
my oath. 

42. And I came this day unto the 
well, and said, O Lord God of my 


virum, et ecce, stabat juxta camelos, 
juxta fontem. i 


31. Et dixit, Ingredere benedicte ~ 
Tehovee, ut quid manes foris? et ego _ 


paravi domum, et locum camelis. 


32. Et venit vir ad domum, et 
solvit camelos, et dedit paleam et 
pabulum camelis, et aquam ad la- 


yandum pedes ejus, et pedes virorum 


qui erant cum eo. 


33. Et positum est coram eo, ut 
comederet: et dixit, Non comedam, 
donec loquutus fuero verba mea, Et 
dixit, Loquere. 

34. Dixit igitur, Servus Abraham 
sum. 

35. Iehova autem benedixit do- 
mino meo valde, et magnificatus est, 
et dedit ei pecudes et boves, et ar- 
gentum, et aurum, et servos, et an- 
cillas, et camelos, et asinos. 


36. Et peperit Sarah uxor domini 
mei filium domino meo post sénec- 
tutem suam, et dedit ei omnia que 
sunt ei. 

37. Et jurare fecit me dominus 
meus, dicendo, Non capies uxorem 
filio meo de filiabus Chenaanzi, in 
cujus terra ego habito: 


38. Sed ad domum patris mei 
perges, et ad familiam meam, et 
capies uxorem filio meo. 

39. Et dixi domino meo, Forsitan 
non perget mulier post me. 


40. Et dixit ad me, Iehoya, in 
cujus conspectu ambulavi, mittet 
Angelum suum tecum, et secundabit 
viam tuam: et capies uxorem filio 
meo de familia mea, et de domo pa- 
tris mei. 

41. Tune mundus eris ab adjura- 
tione mea, si veneris ad familiam 
meam: et si non dederint tibi, eris 
mundus ab adjuratione mea. 


42. Veni igitur hodie ad fontem, 
et dixi, Iehova Deus domini mei 


CHAP, XXIV. 











a re 


CHAP, XXIV, 


master Abraham, if now thou do 
prosper my way which I go: 

43. Behold, I stand by the well of 
water; and it shall come to pass, 
that when the virgin cometh forth 
to draw water, and I say to her, 
Give me, I pray thee, a little water 
of thy pitcher to drink ; 

44, And she say to me, Both drink 
thou, and I will also draw for thy 
camels: Jet the same be the woman 
whom the Lord hath appointed out 
for my master’s son. 

45. And before I had done speak- 
ing in mine heart, behold, Rebekah 
came forth with her pitcher on her 
shoulder; and she went down unto 
the well, and drew water: and I said 
unto her, Let me drink, I pray thee. 

46. And she made haste, and let 
down her pitcher from her shoulder, 
and said, Drink ; and I will give thy 
eamels drink also: so I drank, and 
she made the camels drink also. 

47. And I asked her, and said, 
Whose daughter art thou? And 
she said, The daughter of Bethuel, 
Nahor’s son, whom Mileah bare unto 
him: and I put the ear-ring upon 
her face, and the bracelets upon her 
hands. 

48. And I bowed down my head, 
and worshipped the Lord, and blessed 
the Lord God of my master Abra- 
ham, which had led me in the right 
way, to take my master’s brother’s 
daughter unto his son. 

49. And now, if ye will deal kindly 
and ‘truly with my master, tell me: 
and if not, tell me; that I may turn 
to the right hand, or to the left. 


- 

50. Then Laban and Bethuel an- 
swered and said, The thing proceed- 
eth from the Lord: we cannot speak 
unto thee bad or good. 

51. Behold, Rebekah is before 
thee, take her, and go, and let her 
be thy master’s son’s wife, as the 
Lord hath spoken. 

52. And it came to pass, that, 
when Abraham’s servant heard their 
words, he worshipped the Lord, bow- 
ing himself to the earth. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS.” 9 


Abraham, si tu nune secundas viam 
meam, per quam ego ambulo: 

43. Eece, ego sto juxta fontem 
aque : itaque sit, virgo que egredie- 
tur ad hauriendum, et dixero ei, Da 
mihi. potum nunc parum aque ex 
hydria tua: 


44. Et dixerit mihi, Etiam tu bibe, 
et etiam camelis tuis hauriam: ipsa 
sit uxor, quam preparayit Iehova 
filio domini mei. 


45. Ego antequam complerem lo- 
qui in corde meo, ecce, Ribca egre- 
diebatur, et hydria ejus erat super 
humerum ejus, et descendit ad fon- 
tem, et hausit: et dixi ad eam, Da 
mihi potum nunc. 

46. Et festinavit, et demisit hy- 
driam suam desuper se, et dixit, 
Bibe, et etiam camelis tuis potum 
dabo. Et bibi, et etiam camelis de- 
dit potum. 

47. Et interrogavi eam, et dixi, 
Filia cujus es? Et dixit, Filia Be- 
thuel filti Nachor, quem peperit ei 
Milchah. Et posui inaurem super 
nares ejus, et armillas super manus 
ejus. 


48. Et inclinavi me, incurvavique 
me Iehovee, et benedixi Iehovee Deo 
domini mei Abraham, qui duxit me 
per viam veritatis, (vel certam fidem,) 
ut acciperem filiam fratris domini 
mei filio ejus. 

49. Et nunc si facitis misericor- 
diam et veritatem cum domino meo, 
indicate mihi: et si non, indicate 
mihi, et vertam me ad dexteram vel 
ad sinistram. 

50. Et responderunt Laban et Be- 
thuel, et dixerunt, A Iehova egressa 
est res: non possumus loqui ad te 
malum vel bonum. 

51. Eece, Ribea coram te, accipe, 
et vade: et sit uxor filio domini tu, 
quemadmodum loquutus est Iehova. 


52. Et fuit, quando audivit servus 
Abraham verba eorum, incurvavit 
se super terram Jehove. 


10 


53. And the servant brought forth 
jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, 
and raiment, and gave them to Re- 
bekah: he gave also to her brother 
and to her mother precious things. 

54. And they did eat and drink, 
he and the men that were with him, 
and tarried all night: and they rose 
up in the morning; and he said, Send 
me away unto my master. 

55. And her brother and her mo- 
ther said, Let the damsel abide with 
us a few days, at the least ten; after 
that she shall go. 

56. And he said unto them, Hinder 
me not, seeing the Lord hath pros- 
pered my way; send me away, that 
I may go to my master. 

57. And they said, We will call the 
damsel, and enquire at her mouth. 

58. And they called Rebekah, and 
said unto her, Wilt thou go with this 
man? And she said, I will go. 

59. And they sent away Rebekah 
their sister, and her nurse, and Abra- 
ham’s servant, and his men. 

60. And they blessed Rebekah, 
and said unto her, Thou art our sis- 
ter, be thou the mother of thousands 
of millions, and let thy seed possess 
the gate of those which hate them. 

61. And Rebekah arose, and her 
damsels, and they rode upon the 
camels, and followed the man; and 
the servant took Rebekah, and went 
his way. 

62. And Isaac came from the way 
of the well Lahai-roi: for he dwelt in 
the south country. 

63. And Isaac went out to medi- 
tate in the field at the even-tide; and 
he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, 
behold, the camels were coming. 

64. And Rebekah lifted up her 
eyes; and when she saw Isaac, she 
lighted off the camel. 

65. For she had said’ unto the ser- 
vant, What man is this that walketh 
in the field to meet us? And the 
servant had said, It is my master: 
therefore she took a vail, and covered 
herself. 

66. And the servant told Isaac all 
things that he had done. 


COMMENTARY UPON 





CHAP, XXIV. 


53. Et protulit servus vasa yd 
tea, et vasa aurea, et vestes, et dedit 
ipsi Ribes, et pretiosa dedit fratri 
ejus, et matri ejus. sd 


54. Et comederunt, et biberunt, 
ipse et viri qui erant cum eo, et per- 
noctaverunt: et surrexerunt mane: 
et dixit, Dimitte me, wt vadam ad 
dominum meum. j 

55. Et dixit frater ejus et mater 
ejus, Maneat puella nobiseum per 
dies, vel decem: postea ibis, (vel 
ibit. 

#4 Et dixit ad eos, Ne retardetis 
me, quando Iehova secundavit viam 
meam: dimittite me, et ibo ad do- 
minum meum. 

57. Et dixerunt, Vocemus puel- 
lam, et interrogemus os ejus. 

58. Et vocaverunt Ribeam, et dix- 
erunt ad eam, Numquid ibis cum 
viro isto? Et dixit, Ibo. 

59. Et dimiserunt Ribcam soro- 
rem suam, et nutricem ejus, et ser- 
vum Abraham, et viros ejus. 

60. Et benedixerunt Ribee, et dix- 
erunt ei, Soror nostra es, sis in mil- 
lia decem millium, et hereditet se- 
men tuum portam odio habentium 
illud. 

61. Et surrexit Ribea et puelle 
ejus, et ascenderunt super camelos, 
et perrexerunt post virum: et tulit 
servus Ribcah, et abiit. 


62. Ishac autem veniebat, qua ve- 
nitur a Puteo viventis videntis me: 
et ipse habitabat in terra Meridiana. 

63. Et egressus erat Ishac ad oran- 
dum in agro, dum declinaret vespera : 
et elevavit oculos suos, et vidit, et 
ecce, cameli veniebant. 

64. Tune elevavit Ribeah oculos 
suos, et vidit Ishac, et projecit se de 
camelo. 

65. Iam autem dixerat ad servum, 
Quis est vir iste, qui ambulat per 
agrum in occursum nostrum? Et 
dixit servus, Ipse est dominus meus: 
et accepit velum, et operuit se. 


66. Et narravit servus ipsi Ishac 
omnia quee fecerat. 





CHAP. XXIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. ; 11 


67. And Isaac brought her into 67. Et imtroduxit eam Ishac in 
his mother Sarah’s tent, and took tabernaculum Sarah matris sus, et 
Rebekah, and she became his wife; accepit Ribcah, fuitque ei in uxorem, 
and he loved her: and Isaac was et dilexit eam: et consolatus est se 
comforted after his mother’s death. Ishae post matrem suam. 


1. And Abraham was old.’ Moses passes onward to the 
_ relation of Isaac’s marriage, because indeed Abraham, per- 
ceiving himself to be worn down by old age, would take 
eare that his son should not marry a wife in the land of 
Canaan. In this place Moses expressly describes Abraham 
as an old man, in order that we may learn that he had been 
admonished, by his very age, to seek a wife for his son: 
for old age itself, which, at the most, is not far distant from 
death, ought to induce us so to order the affairs of our family, 
that when we die, peace may be preserved among our poster- 
ity, the fear of the Lord may flourish, and rightly-con- 
stituted order may prevail. The old age of Abraham was 
indeed yet green, as we shall see hereafter ; but when he 
reckoned up his own years he deemed it time to consult 
for the welfare of his son. Irreligious men, partly because 
they do not hold marriage sufficiently in honour, partly be- 
_ cause they do not consider the importance attached especially 
to the marriage of Isaac, wonder that Moses, or rather the 
Spirit of God, should be employed in affairs so minute ; but 
if we have that reverence which is due in reading the 
Sacred Scriptures, we shall easily understand that here is 
nothing superfluous: for inasmuch as men can scarcely per- 
suade themselves that the Providence of God extends to 
marriages, so much the more does Moses insist on this point. 
He chiefly, however, wishes to teach that God honoured the 
family of Abraham with especial regard, because the Church 
was to spring from it. But it will be better to treat of every- 
thing in its proper order. 

2. And Abraham said unto his eldest servant. Abraham 
here fulfils the common duty of parents, in labouring for 
and being solicitous about the choice of a wife for his son : 
but he looks somewhat further ; for since God had separated 

* Abraham was a hundred years old when Isaac was born, (xxi. 5,) and 


Isaac was forty years old when he was married, (xxv. 20.) This makes 
Abraham’s age a hundred and forty years.— Ed. 





12 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. 7a 


him from the Canaanites by a sacred covenant, he joa ms 
fears lest Isaac, by joining himself in affinity with them, 
should shake off the yoke of God. Some suppose that the 
depraved morals of those nations were so displeasing to him, 
that he conceived the marriage of his son must prove un- 
happy if he should take a wife from among them. But the 
special reason was, as I have stated, that he would not allow 
his own race to be mingled with that of the Canaanites, whom 
he knew to be already divinely appointed to destruction ; yea, — 
since upon their overthrow he was to be put into possession 
of the land, he was commanded to treat them with distrust 
as perpetual enemies, And although he had dwelt in tran- 
quillity among them for a time, yet he could not have a com- 
munity of offspring with them without confounding things 
which, by the command of God, were to be kept distinct. 
Hence he wished both himself and his family to maintain 
this separation entire. 

Put, I pray thee, thy hand. It is sufficiently obvious that 
this was a solemn form of swearing ; but whether Abraham 
had first introduced it, or whether he had received it from 
his fathers, is unknown. The greater part of Jewish writers 
declare that Abraham was the author of it ; because, in their 
opinion, this ceremony is of the same force as if his servant 
had sworn by the sanctity of the divine covenant, since cir- 
cumcision was in that part of his person. But Christian 
writers conceive that the hand was placed under the thigh 
in honour of the blessed seed. Yet it may be that these 
earliest fathers had something different in yiew; and there 
are those among the Jews who assert that it was a token of 
subjection, when the servant was sworn on the thigh of his 
master. The more plausible opinion is, that the ancients in 
this manner swore by Christ ; but because I do not willingly 
follow uncertain conjectures, I leave the question undecided. 
Nevertheless the latter supposition appears to me the more 
simple; namely, that servants, when they swore fidelity to 


1 Under my thigh. “ A sign which Jacob also required of his son Jo- 
seph, (Gen. xlvii, 29,) either to signify subjection, or for a further mystery 
of the covenant of circumcision, or rather of Christ the promised ss» who 
was to come out of Abraham’s loins or thigh.”——Ainsworth. 





y 


r 


CHAP. XXIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. ka 


their lords, were accustomed to testify their subjection by 
this ceremony, especially since they say that this practice is 
still observed in certain parts of the East. That it was no 
profane rite, which would detract anything from the glory of 
God, we infer from the fact that the name of God is inter- 
posed. It is true that the servant placed his hand under 
the thigh of Abraham, but he is adjured by God, the Creator 
of heaven and earth ; and this is the sacred method of ad- 
juration, whereby God is invoked as the witness and the 
judge ; for this honour cannot be transferred to another with- 
out casting a reproach upon God. Moreover, we are taught, 
by the example of Abraham, that they do not sin who de- 
mand an oath for a lawful cause; for this is not recited 
among the faults of Abraham, but is recorded to his peculiar 
praise. It has already been shown that the affair was of the 
utmost importance, since it was undertaken in order that 
the covenant of God might be ratified among his posterity. 
He was therefore impelled, by just reasons, most anxiously 
to provide for the accomplishment of his object, by taking 
an oath of his servant: and beyond doubt, the disposition, 
and even ‘the virtue of Isaac, were so conspicuous, that in 
addition to his riches, he had such endowments of mind and 
person, that many would earnestly desire affinity with him. 
His father, therefore, fears lest, after his own death, the in- 
habitants of the land should captivate Isaac by their allure- 
ments. Now, though Isaac has hitherto steadfastly resisted 
those allurements, the snares of which few young men escape, 
Abraham still fears lest, by shame and the dread of giving 
offence, he may be overcome. The holy man wished to anti- 
cipate these and similar dangers, when he bound his servant 
to fidelity, by interposing an oath; and it may be that some 


- secret necessity also impelled him to take this course. 


3. That thou. shalt not take a wife. The kind of discipline 
which prevailed in Abraham’s house is here apparent. Al- 
though this man was but a servant, yet, because he was put 
in authority by the master of the family, his servile condi- 
tion did not prevent him from being next in authority to 
his lord; so that Isaac himself, the heir and successor of 
Abraham, submitted to his direction. To such an extent 


14 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXIV. 


did the authority of Abraham and reverence for him prevail, 
thiat when he substituted a servant in his place, he caused this 
servant, by his mere will or word, to exercise a power which 
other masters of families find it difficult to retain for them- 
selves. The modesty also of Isaac, who suffered himself to 
be governed by a servant, is obvious ; for it would have been 
in vain for Abraham to enter into engagements with his ser- __ 
vant, had he not been persuaded that his son would prove 
submissive and tractable. It here appears what great vene- 
ration he cherished towards his father ; because Abraham, 
relying on Isaac’s obedience, confidently calls his servant to 
him. Now this example should be taken by us as a common 
rule, to show that it is not lawful for the children of a family 
to contract marriage, except with the consent of parents; and. 
certainly natural equity dictates that, in a matter of such 
importance, children should depend upon the will of their 
parents. How detestable, therefore, is the barbarity of the 
Pope, who has dared to burst this sacred bond asunder! 
Wherefore the wantonness of youths is to be restrained, that 
they may not rashly contract nuptials without consulting 
their fathers. 

4. But thou shalt go unto my country and to my kindred. 
It seems that, in the choice of the place, Abraham was in- 
fluenced by the thought, that a wife would more willingly 
come from thence to be married to his son, when she knew 
that she was to marry one of her own race and country. But 
because it afterwards follows that the servant came to Padan 
Aram, some hence infer that Mesopotamia was Abraham’s 
country. The solution, however, of this difficulty is easy. 
We know that Mesopotamia was not only the region con- 
tained between the Tigris and the Euphrates, but that a 
part also of Chaldea was comprehended in it; for Baby- 
lon is often placed there by profane writers. The Hebrew 
name simply means, “Syria of the rivers.” They give the 
name “Aram” to that part of Syria which, beginning near 
Judea, embraces Armenia and other extensive regions, and 
reaches almost to the Euxine Sea. But when they espe- 
cially designate those lands which are washed or traversed 
by the Tigris and Euphrates, they add the name “ Padan:” 





CHAP. XXIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 15 


for we know that Moses did not speak scientifically, but in 
a popular style. Since, however, he afterwards relates that 
Laban, the son of Nahor, dwelt at Charran, (chap. xxix. 4,) it 
seems to me probable that Nahor, who had remained in 
Chaldea, because it would be troublesome to leave his native 
soil, in process of time changed his mind; either because 
filial piety constrained him to attend to his decrepit and 
declining father, or because he had learned that he might 
have there a home as commodious as in his own country. 
it certainly appears from the eleventh chapter that he had 
not migrated at the same time with his father.’ 

5. And the servant said unto him. Since he raises no ob- 
jection respecting Isaac, we may conjecture that he was so 
fully persuaded of his integrity as to have no doubt of his 
acquiescence in his father’s will. We must also admire the 
religious scrupulosity of the man, seeing he does not rashly 
take an oath. What pertained to the faithful and diligent 
discharge of his own duty he might lawfully promise, under 
the sanction of an oath; but since the completion of the affair 
depended on the will of others, he properly and wisely ad- 
duces this exception, “ Peradventure the woman will not be 
willing to follow me.” 

6. Beware that thou bring not my son thither again. If 
the woman should not be found willing, Abraham, com- 
mending the event to God, firmly adheres to the principal 
point, that his son Isaac should not return to his country, 
because in this manner he would have deprived himself of 
the promised inheritance. He therefore chooses rather to 
live by hope, as a stranger, in the land of Canaan, than to 
rest among his relatives in his native soil: and thus we see 
that, in perplexed and confused affairs, the mind of the holy 
man was not drawn aside from the command of God by any 
agitating cares; and we are taught, by his example, to fol- 
low God through every obstacle. However,, he afterwards 
declares that he looks for better things. By such words he 
confirms the confidence of his servant, so that he, anticipat- 
ing with greater alacrity a prosperous issue, might prepare 
for the journey. 


1 See Gen. xi. 31. 


ae 
j < ie ; 
i 


16 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXIV. 


7. The Lord God of heaven. By a twofold argument Abra- 
ham infers, that what he is deliberating respecting the mar- 
riage of his son will, by the grace of God, have a prosperous 
issue. First, because God had not led him forth in vain 
from his own country into a foreign land; and secondly, 
because God had not falsely promised to give the land, in 
which he was dwelling as a stranger, to his seed. He might 
also with propriety be confident that his design should sue- 
ceed, because he had undertaken it only by the authority, 
and, as it were, under the auspices of God; for it was his ex- 
clusive regard for God which turned away his mind from the 
daughters of Canaan. He may, however, be thought to have 
inferred without reason that God would give his son a wife 
from that country and kindred to which he himself had bid- 
den farewell. But whereas he had left his relatives only at 
the divine command, he hopes that God will incline their 
minds to be propitious and favourable to him. Meanwhile he 
concludes, from the past kindnesses of God, that his hand 
would not fail him in the present business; as if he would say, 
“T, who at the command of God left my country, and have 
experienced his continued help in my pilgrimage, do not doubt 
that he will also be the guide of thy journey, because it is in 
reliance on his promise that I lay upon thee this injunction.” 
He then describes the mode in which assistance would be 
granted; namely, that God would send his angel, for he knew 
that God helps his servants by the ministration of angels, 
of which he had already received many proofs. By calling 
God “the God of heaven,” he celebrates that divine power 
which was the ground of his confidence. 

10. And the servant took ten camels. He takes the camels 
with him, to prove that Abraham is a man of great wealth, 
in order that he may the more easily obtain what he desires. 
For even an open-hearted girl would not easily suffer herself 
to be drawn away to a distant region, unless on the proposed 
condition of being supplied with the conveniences of life. 
Exile itself is sad enough, without poverty as its attendant. 
Therefore, that the maid might not be deterred by the ap- 
prehension of want, but rather invited by the prospect of 
affluence, he ladens ten camels with presents, to give suffi- 


CHAP. XXIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 17 


cient proof to the inhabitants of Chaldea of the domestic 
opulence of Abraham. What follows, namely, “ that all the 
substance of Abraham was in the hand of his servant,” some 
of the Hebrews improperly explain as meaning that the 
servant took with him an account of all Abraham’s wealth, 
described and attested in written documents. It is rather 
the assigning of the reason of the fact, which might appear 
improbable, that the servant assumed so much power to 
himself. Therefore Moses, having said that a man who 
was but a servant set out on a journey with such a sumptu- 
ous and splendid equipage, immediately adds, that he did 
this of his own accord, because he had all the substance of 
Abraham in his hand. In saying that he came to the city 
of Nahor, he neither. mentions the name of the city nor the 
part of Chaldea, or of any other region, where he dwelt, but 
only says, in general terms, that he came to “Syria of the 
rivers,” concerning which term I have said something above. 
12. O Lord God of my master Abraham. The servant, 
being destitute of counsel, betakes himself to prayers. Yet 
he does not simply ask counsel of the Lord ; but he also 
prays that the maid appointed to be the wife of Isaac 
should be brought to him with a certain sign, from which 
he might gather that she was divinely presented to him. 
It is an evidence of his piety and faith, that in a matter 
of such perplexity he is not bewildered, as one astonished ; 
but breaks forth into prayer with a collected mind. But 
the method which he uses’ seems scarcely consistent with 
the true rule of prayer. For, first, we know that no one 
prays aright unless he subjects his own wishes to God. 
Wherefore there is nothing more unsuitable than to pre- 
scribe anything, at our own will, to God. Where, then, it 


1 « Divinatio qua utitur.” The word divinatio seems to be too strong 
for the occasion. The servant certainly sought a sign from heaven; and 
may seem improperly to have prescribed to God in what way his prayer 
should be answered. He might, however, be acting under a divine im- 

pulse, and the context would lead to such an inference. But if it was a 
weakness in this good man to be thus minute in his stipulations, it was 
one which God neither reproved nor condemned; and therefore it seems 

harsh to give it the name of divination. Calvin’s object, however, is, in 
thus strongly stating the case, to meet it as an objection, by a conclusive 
answer. A method which, the reader will have observed, he frequently 

_ adopts.—d. 

VOL. II. B 


18 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXIV. 


may. be asked, is the religion of the servant, who, according 





to his own pleasure, imposes a law upon God? Secondly, 
there ought to be nothing ambiguous in our prayers; and — 
absolute certainty is to be sought for only in the Word of © 
God. Now, since the servant prescribes to God what answer _ 
shall be given, he appears culpably to depart from the suit- — 


able modesty of prayer; for although no promise had been 
given him, he nevertheless desires to be made fully certain 
respecting the whole affair. God, however,’ in hearkening 
to his wish, proves, by the event, that it was acceptable to 
himself. Therefore we must know, that although a special 
promise had not been made at the moment, yet the servant 
was not praying rashly, nor according to the lust of the 
flesh, but by the secret impulse of the Spirit. Moreover, 
the general law, by which all the pious are bound, does not 


prevent the Lord, when he determines to give something ex- 


traordinary, from directing the minds of his servants towards 
it ; not that he would lead them away from his word, but 
only that he makes some peculiar concession to them in 
their mode of praying. The sum of the prayer before us is 
this: “ O Lord, if a damsel shall present herself who, being 
asked to give me drink, shall also kindly and courteously 
offer it to my camels, I will seek after her as a wife for my 
master Isaac, just as if she were delivered into my hand by 
thee.” He seems, indeed, to be laying hold on some dubi- 
ous conjecture ; but since he reposes on the Providence of 
God, he is certainly persuaded that this token shall be to 
him equivalent to an oracle ; because God, who is the guar- 
dian of his enterprise, will not suffer him to err. Meanwhile 


this is worthy of remark, that he does not fetch the sign of — 


recognition from afar, but takes it from something present ; 
for she who shall be thus humane to an unknown guest, 
will, by that very act, give proof of an excellent disposition. 
This observation may be of use to prevent inquisitive men 
from adducing this example as a precedent for vain prognos- 
tications. In the words themselves the following particulars 
are to be noticed: first, that he addresses himself to the 
God of his master Abraham ; not as being himself a stranger 
' Calvin’s answer to the objection above stated begins here.— Kd. 





’ CHAP. XXIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 19 


_ to the worship of God, but because the affair in question de- 
pends upon the promise given to Abraham. And truly he 
had no confidence in prayer, from any other source than 
from the covenant into which God had entered with the 
house of Abraham. The expression “ cause to meet me this 
day,”* Jerome renders, “ meet me, I pray, this day.” But 
the verb is transitive, and the servant of Abraham intimates 
by the use of it, that the affairs of men were so ordered by 
the counsel and the hand of God, that the issue of them was 
not fortuitous; as if he would say, “ O Lord, in vain shall 
I look on this side and on that; in vain shall I catch at suc- 
cess by my own labour, industry and various contrivances, 
- unless thou direct the work.’ And when he immediately 
afterwards subjoins, “ show kindness to my master,” he im- 
plies that in this undertaking he rests upon nothing but the 
grace which God had promised to Abraham. : 
15. Before he had done speaking. The sequel sufticiently 
demonstrates that his wish had not been foolishly conceived. 
_ For the quickness of the answer manifests the extraordinary 
indulgence of God, who does not suffer the man to be long 
harassed with anxiety. Rebekah had, indeed, left her house 
before he began to pray; but it must be maintained that 
the Lord, at whose disposal are both the moments of time 
and the ways of men, had so ordered it on both sides as to 
give clear manifestation of his Providence. For sometimes 
he keeps us the longer in suspense, till, wearied with pray- 
ing, we may seem to have lost our labour ; but in this affair, 
in order that his blessing might not seem doubtful, he sud 
denly interposed. The same thing also happened to Daniel, 
unto whom the angel appeared, before the conclusion of his 
prayer. (Dan. ix. 21.) Now, although it frequently happens 


1 « Et dixit Iehova Deus domini mei Abraham, occurrere fac nunc coram 
me hodie, et fac misericordiam cum domino meo Abraham.” Dathe seems 
to have taken the same view of the passage with Calvin. “ O Iova Deus 
domini mei Abrahami, fac pro tuo erga dominum meum Abrahamum 
amore, ut mihi jam quam quero, oceurrat.” “O Lord God of my master 
Abraham, cause, according to thy love towards my master Abraham, that 
she whom I seek may meet me.” The English version is simply, “I pray 
thee, send me good speed this day.” But probably the more specific mean- 
ing attached by Calvin and Dathe to the passage is the true one. Calvin 
properly objects against the translation of the Vulgate as being intransi- 
tive, whereas MPN (hakreh) is transitive. —Ed. 


* 





20 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXIV. — 


that, on account of our sloth, the Lord delays to grant our 
requests, it is, at such times, expedient for us, that what we — 
ask should be delayed. In the meantime, he has openly | 
and conspicuously proved, by unquestionable examples, that 
although the event may not immediately respond to our 
wishes, the prayers of his people are never in vain: yea, his 
own declaration, that before they cry he is mindful of their 
wants, is invariably fulfilled. (Is. lxv. 24.) 

21. And the man, wondering at her, held his peace, This 
wondering of Abraham’s servant, shows that he had some 
doubt in his mind. He is silently inquiring within himself, 
whether God would render his journey prosperous. Has he, 
then, no confidence concerning that divine direction, of 
which he had received the sign or pledge? I answer, that 
faith is never so absolutely perfect in the saints as to pre- 
vent the occurrence of many doubts. There is, therefore, no 
absurdity in supposing that the servant of Abraham, though 
committing himself generally to the providence of God, yet 
wavers, and is agitated, amidst a multiplicity of conflicting 
thoughts. Again, faith, although it pacifies and calms the 
minds of the pious, so that they patiently wait for God, still 
does not exonerate them from all care; because it is neces- 
sary that patience itself should be exercised, by anxious 
expectation, until the Lord fulfil what he has promised. 
But though this hesitation of Abraham’s servant was not 
free from fault, inasmuch as it flowed from infirmity of faith ; 
it is yet, on this account, excusable, because he did not turn 
his eyes in another direction, but only sought from the event 
a confirmation of his faith, that he might perceive God to be 
present with him. 

22. The man took a golden ear-ring. His adorning the 
damsel with precious ornaments is a token of his confidence. 
For since it is evident by many proofs that he was an honest 
and careful servant, he would not throw away without dis- 
cretion the treasures of his master. He knows, therefore, 
that these gifts will not be ill-bestowed; or, at least, relying 
on the goodness of God, he gives them, in faith, as an ear- 
nest of future marriage. But it may be asked, Whether 
God approves ornaments of this kind, which pertain not so 





: OHAP. XXIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 21 


_ much to neatness as to pomp? I answer, that the things 
related in Scripture are not always proper to be imitated. 
Whatever the Lord commands in general terms is to be 
_ accounted as an inflexible rule of conduct; but to rely on 
_ particular examples is not only dangerous, but even foolish 
and absurd. Now we know how highly displeasing to God 
_ is not only pomp and ambition in adorning the body, but all 
kind of luxury. In order to free the heart from inward cupi- 
_ dity, he condemns that immoderate and superfluous splen- 
- dour, which contains within itself many allurements to vice. 
Where, indeed, is pure sincerity of heart found under splen- 
did ornaments? Certainly all acknowledge this virtue to be 
rare. It is not, however, for us expressly to forbid every 
_ kind of ornament ; yet because whatever exceeds the frugal 
use of such things is tarnished with some degree of vanity ; 
and more especially, because the cupidity of women is, on 
this point, insatiable; not only must moderation, but even 
abstinence, be cultivated as far as possible. Further, ambi- 
_ tion silently creeps in, so that the somewhat excessive adorn- 
ing of the person soon breaks out into disorder. With 
respect to the ear-rings and bracelets of Rebekah, as I do 
not doubt that they were those in use among the rich, so 
_ the uprightness of the age allowed them to be sparingly and 
frugally used; and yet I do not excuse the fault. This 
example, however, neither helps us, nor alleviates our guilt, 
if, by such means, we excite and continually inflame those 
depraved lusts which, even when all incentives are removed, 
it is excessively difficult to restrain. The women who de- 
sire to shine in gold, seek in Rebekah a pretext for their 
corruption. Why, therefore, do they not, in like manner, 
conform to the same austere kind of life and rustic labour 
to which she applied herself? But, as 1 have just said, 
they are deceived who imagine that the examples of the 
saints can sanction them in opposition to the common law 
of God. Should any one object that it is abhorrent to the 
modesty of a virtuous and chaste maiden to receive ear-rings 
and bracelets from a man who was a stranger, and whom 
she had never before seen. In the first place, it may be, 
that Moses passes over much conversation held on both 


22 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXIV. 


sides, by which it is probable she was induced to venture on 
the reception of them. It may also be, that he relates first 


what was last in order. For it follows soon afterwards in 


the context, that the servant of Abraham inquired whose — 
daughter she was. We must also take into account the — 
simplicity of that age. Whence does it arise that it was not — 
disreputable for a maid to go alone out of the city, unless — 
that then the morals of mankind did not require so severe a — 


guard for the preservation of modesty? Indeed, it appears 


from the context, that the ornaments were not given her for — 


a dishonourable purpose ;' but a portion is offered to the 
parents to facilitate the contract for marriage. Interpreters 
are not agreed respecting the value of the presents. Moses 
estimates the ear-rings at half a shekel, and the bracelets at 
ten shekels. Jerome, instead of half a shekel, reads two 
shekels. I conceive the genuine sense to be, that the brace- 
lets were worth ten shekels, and the frontal ornament or 


ear-rings worth half that sum, or five shekels. For since 


nothing is added after the word YP, (bekah,) it has reference 
to the greater number.” Otherwiset here is no suitable pro- 
portion between the bracelets and the ornaments for the 
head. Moreover, if we take the shekel for four Attic 
drachms, the value is trifling ; therefore I think the weight 
of gold is indicated, which makes the sum much greater 
than the piece of money called a shekel. 

26. And the man bowed down his head. When the servant 
of Abraham hears that he had alighted upon the daughter 
of Bethuel, he is more and more elated with hope. Yet he 


1 “© Non turpis lenocinii caus4 datum esse.” 

* Some suppose that by the ear-rings is meant an ornament for the face 
or forehead, as appears in the margin of our version, and as Calvin here 
seems to intimate. But the increased knowledge of Eastern customs which 
recent times have furnished, has given weight to the opinion of older 
commentators, that a nose-jewel is here intended. This ornament was 
not suspended from the central cartilaginous substance of the nose, but 
from one side, which was bored for the purpose. Calvin’s interpretation, 
that the weight of this ornament was the half of ten shekels, instead of 
half a shekel, cannot be admitted. Though, according to its weight, it 
might not be worth more than ten or twelve shillings ; yet its workman- 
ship might be costly ; and if it contained some precious stone, which is not 
improbable, it might be of very great value. There can be no doubt that 
the presents generally were exceedingly valuable.— Ed. 








Dia Se 


= 2 _ . ~ 
ee ae. ee ae ee ee 


ee ee eee 





CHAP. XXIV. - THE BOOK OF GENESIS, 23 


_ does not exult, as profane men are wont to do, as if the oc- 
‘eurrence were fortuitous ; but he gives thanks to God, regard- 
_ ing it, as the result of Providence, that he had been thus 
 opportunely led straight to the place he had wished. He 
does not, therefore, boast of his good fortune ; but he de- 
clares that God had dealt kindly and faithfully with Abra- 
ham; or, in other words, that, for his own mercy’s sake, God 
_had been faithful in fulfilling his promises. It is true that 
the same form of speech is applied to the persons present ; 
just as it follows soon after in the same chapter, (ver. 49,) 
“Tf ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me.” 
The language is, however, peculiarly suitable to the charac- 
ter of God, both because he gratuitously confers favours upon 
men, and is specially inclined to beneficence: and also, by 
_ never frustrating their hope, he proves himself to be faith- 
ful and true. ‘This thanksgiving, therefore, teaches us 
always toehave the providence of God before our eyes, in 
order that we may ascribe to him whatever happens pros- 
perously to us. 
28. And the damsel ran and told them of her mother’s 
house. It is possible, that the mother of Rebekah oceupied 
a separate house ; not that she had a family divided from 
that of her husband, but for the purpose of keeping her 
daughters and maidens under her own custody. The ex- 
pression may, however, be more simply explained to mean, 
that she came directly to her mother’s chamber ; because 
she could more easily relate the matter to her than to her 
father. It is also probable, that when Bethuel was informed 
of the fact, by the relation of his wife, their son Laban was 
sent by both of them to introduce the stranger. Other ex- 
planations are needless. 
33. I will not eat wntil I have told my errand.’ Moses 
begins to show by what means the parents of Rebekah were 


+ Tt was the custom of the ancients on occasions of this kind first to 
take their meal together, and when the wants of nature had been supplied, 
and the spirit had been exhilarated, to open the subject of communication ; 
but Abraham’s servant purposely reverses this order, to show his earnest- 
ness in attending to his master’s business ; and perhaps also his confidence 
of success, in consequence of the favourable indications which God had 
given in answer to his prayers. See Dathe and Le Clere.—Kd. 


24 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXIV. 


induced to give her in marriage to their nephew. That the 


- servant, when food was set before him, should refuse to eat 4 


till he had completed his work is a proof of his diligence and 
fidelity ; and it may with propriety be regarded as one of 
the benefits which God had vouchsafed to Abraham, that he 


should have a servant so faithful, and so intent upon his — 


duty. Since, however, this was the reward of the holy dis- 
cipline which Abraham maintained, we cannot wonder that 


very few such servants are to be found, seeing that peri c 


where they are so ill-governed. 
Moreover, although the servant seems to weave a super- 


fluous story, yet there is nothing in it which is not available — 


to his immediate purpose. He knew that it was a feeling 
naturally inherent in parents, not willingly to send away their 
childrento a distance. He therefore first commemorates A bra- 
ham’s riches, that they might not hesitate to connect their 
daughter with a husband so wealthy. He secondhy explains 
that Isaac was born of his mother in her old age ; not merely 
for the purpose of informing them that he had been miracu- 
lously given to his father, whence they might infer that he 
had been divinely appointed to this greatness and eminence ; 
but that an additional commendation might be given on 
account of Isaac’s age. In the third place, he affirms that 
Isaac would be the sole heir of his father. ~ Fourthly, he re- 
lates that he had been bound by an oath to seek a wife for 
his master Isaac, from among, his own kindred ; which 
special choice on the part of Abraham was very effectual in 
moving them to compliance. Fifthly, he states that Abra- 
ham, in full confidence that God would be the leader of his 
journey, had committed the whole business to him. Sixthly, 
he declares, that whatever he had asked in prayer he had 
obtained from the Lord; whence it appeared that the mar- 
riage of which he was about to treat was according to the 
will of God. We now see the design of his narration: First, 
to persuade the parents of Rebekah that he had not been 
sent for the purpose of deceiving them, that he had not in any- 
thing acted craftily, or by oblique methods, but in the fear 
of the Lord, as the religious obligation of marriage requires. 
Secondly, that he was desiring nothing which would not be 








ee et ee 





CHAP. XXIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 25 


profitable and honourable for them. And lastly, that God 
had been the director of the whole affair. 

Moreover, since the servant of Abraham, though bcignided 
that the angel of God would be the guide of his journey, yet 
neither directs his prayers nor his thanksgivings to him, we 
may hence learn that angels are not, in such a sense, consti- 
tuted the ministers of God to us, as that they should be in- 
voked by us, or should transfer to themselves the worship 
due to God ; a superstition which prevails nearly over the 
whole world to such a degree, that men turn aside a portion 
of their faith from the only fountain of all good to the rivu- 
lets which flow from it. The clause, the Lord, before whom 
I walk, (ver. 40,) which some refer to the probity and good 
conscience of Abraham, I rather explain as applying to the 
faith, by which he set God before him, as the governor of 
his life, being confident that he was the object of God’s care, 
and dependent upon his grace. 

If ye will deal kindly.’ I have lately related the force of 
this expression ; namely, to act with humanity and good faith. 
He thus modestly and suppliantly asks them to consent to the 
marriage of Isaac and Rebekah: should he meet with a re- 
pulse from them, he says, he will go either to the right hand 
or to the left ; that is, he will look around elsewhere. ‘or 
he places the right hand and the left in contrast with the 
straight way in which he had been led to them. It is, however, 
with fertile ingenuity that some of the Hebrews explain the 
words as meaning, that he would go to Lot, or to Ishmael. 

50. The thing proceedeth from the Lord. Whereas they 
are convinced by the discourse of the man, that God was the 
Author of this marriage, they avow that it would be unlaw- 
ful for them to offer anything in the way of contradiction. 
They declare that the thing proceedeth from the Lord ; be- 
cause he had, by the clearest signs, made his will manifest. 
Hence we perceive, that although the true religion was 
in part observed among them, and in part infected with 
vicious errors, yet the fear of God was never so utterly ex- 
tinguished, but this axiom remained firmly fixed in all their 
minds, that God must be obeyed. If, then, wretched idola- 


1 « Si facitis misericordiam.” 


26 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXIV. 


ters, who had almost fallen away from religion, nevertheless — 
so subjected themselves to God, as to acknowledge it to be 
unlawful for them to swerve from his will, how much more 
prompt ought our obedience to be? Therefore, as soon as 
the will of God is made known to us, not only let our 
tongues be silent, but let all our senses be still; because it 
is an audacious profanation to admit any thought which is 
opposed to that will. 

52. He worshipped. Moses again repeats that Abraham’s 
servant gave thanks to God; and it is not without reason | 
that he so often inculcates this religious duty ; because, since 
God requires nothing greater from us, the neglect of it be- 
trays the most shameful indolence. The acknowledgment 
of God’s kindness is a sacrifice of sweet-smelling savour; — 
yea, it is a more acceptable service than all sacrifices. God 
is continually heaping innumerable benefits upon men. Their 
ingratitude, therefore, is intolerable, if they fail to exercise 
themselves in celebrating those benefits. 

54. And they rose wp im the morning. On this point 
Moses insists the more particularly ; partly, for the purpose 
of commending the faithful industry of the servant in fulfil- 
ling his master’s commands ; partly, for that of teaching, 
that his mind was inflamed by the Spirit of God, for he is so 


ardent as to allow no truce to others, and no relaxation to 


himself. Thus, although he conducted himself as became 
an honest and prudent servant, it is still not to be doubted 
that the Lord impelled him, for Isaac’s sake, to act as he did. 
So the Lord watches over his own people while they sleep, 
expedites and accomplishes their affairs in their absence, 
and influences the dispositions of all, so far as is expedient, 
to render them assistance. It is by a forced interpretation, 
that some would explain the ten days, during which Laban 
and his mother desire the departure of Rebekah to be de- 
ferred, as meaning years or months. For it was merely the 
tender wish of the mother, who could ill bear that her 
daughter should thus suddenly be torn away from her bosom. 

57. We will call the damsel. Bethuel, who had before 
unreservedly given his daughter in marriage, now seems to 
adhere, with but little constaney, to his purpose. When, how- 





| 
bey 


CHAP. XXIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 21 


ever, he had previously offered his daughter, without making 
any exception, he is to be understood as having done it, only 
so far as he was able. But now, Moses declares that he did 
not exercise tyranny over his daughter, so as to thrust her 
out reluctantly, or to compel her to marry against her will, 
but left her to her own free choice. Truly, in this matter, the 
authority of parents ought to be sacred : but a middle course 
is to be pursued, so that the parties concerned may make 
their contract spontaneously, and with mutual consent. It 
is not right to understand that Rebekah in answering so ex- 
plicitly, showed contempt for the paternal roof, or too anxi- 
ously desired a husband ;’ but since she saw that the affair 
was transacted by the authority of her father, and with the 
consent of her mother, she also herself acquiesced in it. 

59. And they sent away Rebekah. Moses first relates, that 
Rebekah was honourably dismissed ; because her nurse was 
given unto her. Moreover, I doubt not that they had domes- 
tic nurses, who were their handmaidens; not that mothers 

entirely neglected that duty, but that they committed the care 
of education to one particular maid. They therefore who 
assisted mothers with subsidiary service were called nurses. 
Moses afterwards adds, that Rebekah’s relatives “ blessed 
her,” (verse 60,) by which expression he means, that they 
prayed that her condition might be a happy one. We know 
that it was a solemn custom, im all ages, and among all 
people, to accompany marriages with all good wishes. And 
although posterity has greatly degenerated from the pure 
and genuine method of celebrating marriages used by the 
fathers; yet it is God’s will that some public testimony 
should stand forth, by which men may be admonished, that 
no nuptials are lawful, except those which are rightly conse- 
erated. Now, the particular form of benediction which is 
here related, was probably in common use, because nature 
dictates that the propagation of offspring is the special end 
of marriage. Under the notion of victory (ver. 60) is com- 
prehended a prosperous state of life. The Lord, however, 
directed their tongues to utter a prophecy of which they 
themselves were ignorant. “To possess the gates of ene- 


1 Vel procax juvencula maritum nimis cupide appeteret.” 


28 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXIV- 


mies,” means to obtain dominion over them ; because judg- 
ment was administered in the gates, and the bulwarks of the 
city were placed there. : : 

63. And Isaac went out. It appears that Isaac dwelt 
apart from his father; either because the family was too 
large, or because such was the custom. And perhaps Abra- 
ham had already married another wife ; so that, for the sake 
of avoiding contentions, it would seem more convenient for . 
him to have a house of his own. Thus great wealth has its 

( 
d 





——— 





attendant troubles. Doubtless, of all earthly blessings grant-— 
ed by God, none would have been sweeter to Abraham than 
that of living with his son. However, I by no means think 
that he was deprived of his society and assistance. For such _ 
was the piety of Isaac, that he undoubtedly studied to dis- 
charge every duty towards his father: this alone was want- 
ing, that they did not live in the same house. Moses also 
relates how it happened that Isaac met with his wife before 
she reached his home. For he says, that Isaac went out in 
the evening to meditate or to pray. For the Hebrew word ~ 
Mi’ (soach) may mean either. It is probable that he did 
this according to his custom, and that he sought a place of 
retirement for prayer, in order that his mind, being released 
from all avocations, might be the more at liberty to serve 
God. Whether, however, he was giving his mind to medita- 
tion or to prayer, the Lord:granted him a token of his own 
presence in that joyful meeting. 

64, And Rebekah lifted up her eyes. We may easily con- 
jecture that Isaac, when he saw the camels, turned his steps 
towards them, from the desire of seeing his bride; this gave 
occasion to the inquiry of Rebekah: Having received the 
answer, she immediately, for the sake of doing honour to 
her husband, dismounted her camel to salute him. For that 
she fell, struck with’ fear, as some suppose, in no way agrees 
with the narrative. She had performed too long a journey, 
under the protection of many attendants, to be so greatly 
afraid at the sight of one man. But these interpreters are 
deceived, because they do not perceive, that in the words of 
Moses, the reason is afterwards given to this effect, that 
when Rebekah saw Isaac, she alighted from her camel ; 





CHAP, XXIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. — 99 


because she had inquired of the servant who he was, and 
had been told that he was the son of his master Abraham. 
It would not have entered into her mind to make such in- 
quiry respecting any person whom she might accidentally 
’ meet: but seeing she had been informed that Abraham’s 
house was not far distant, she supposes him at least to be 
one of the domestics. Moses also says that she took a veil: 
which was a token of shame and modesty. For hence also, 
the Latin word which signifies “to marry,’ is derived, be- 
cause it was the custom to give brides veiled to their hus- 
bands. That the same rite was also observed by the fathers, 
I have no doubt.” So much the more shameful, and the 
less capable of excuse, is the licentiousness of our own age; 
in which the apparel of brides seems to be purposely con- 
trived for the subversion of all modesty. 

67. And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah’s tent. 
He first brought her into the tent, then took her as his wife. 
- By the very arrangement of his words, Moses distinguishes 


* between the legitimate mode of marriage and barbarism. 


And certainly the sanctity of marriage demands that man and 
woman should not live together like cattle ; but that, having 
pledged their mutual faith, and invoked the name of God, 
they might dwell with each other. Besides, it is to be 
observed, that Isaac was not compelled, by the tyrannical 
command of his father, to marry ; but after he had given 
his mind to her he took her freely, and cordially gave her 
the assurance of conjugal fidelity. 

And Isaac was comforted after his mother’s death. Since 
his grief for the death of his mother was now first assuaged, 
we infer how great had been its vehemence; for a period 
sufficiently long had already elapsed.* We may also hence 
infer, that the affection of Isaac was tender and gentle: and 
that his love to his mother was of no common kind, seeing 


1 Verbum nubendi.” The original meaning of the word nubere is to 
weil, or cover. 

2 Tsaac was walking, and it would therefore have been the highest 
breach of Oriental good manners, to have remained on the camel when 
presented to him. No doubt they all alighted and walked to meet him, 
conducting Rebekah as a bride to meet the bridegroom.” —Bush.—Ed. 

® The time from the death of Sarah to Isaac’s marriage was three years. 
—Ed. 


30 OHAP. XXV. 


COMMENTARY UPON 
he had so long lamented her death. And the knowledge of 
this fact is useful to prevent us from imagining that the 
holy patriarchs were men of savage manners and of iron hard- 
ness of heart, and from becoming like those who conceive for- 
titude to consist in brutality. Only care must be taken that 
grief should be duly mitigated ; lest it burst forth in impi- 
ous murmurings, or subvert the hope of a future resurrec- 
tion. I do not however entirely excuse the sorrow of Isaac ; 


I only advise, that what belongs to humanity, ought not to 


be altogether condemned. And although it was culpable 
not to be able to efface grief from the mind, until the oppo- 
site joy of marriage prevailed over it ; Moses still reckons it 
among the benefits conferred by God, that he applies a re- 
medy of any kind to his servant. 


CHAPTER XXvV. 





1. TEN again Abraham took a 
wife, and her name was Keturah. 

2. And she bare him Zimran, and 
Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, 
and Ishbak, and Shuah. 

3. And Jokshan begat Sheba and 
Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were 
Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leum- 
mim. 

4, And the sons of Midian; Ephah, 
and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abidah, 
and Eldaah. All these were the chil- 
dren of Keturah. 

5. And Abraham gave all that he 
had unto Isaac. 

6. But unto the sons of the con- 
cubines, which Abraham had, Abra- 
ham gave gifts, and sent them away 
from Isaac his son, (while he yet 
lived,) eastward, unto the east coun- 
try. 
7. And these are the days of the 
years of Abraham’s life which he 
ived, an hundred threescore and 
fifteen years. 

8. Then Abraham gave up the 
ghost, and died in a good old age, 
an old man, and full of years; and 
was gathered to his people. 

9. And his sons Isaae and Ishmael 


1. Et addidit Abraham, et accepit 
uxorem, cujus nomen erat Cetura. 

2. Et peperit ei Zimram, et Loc- 
san, et Medan, et Midian, et Isbah, 
et Suah. 

3. Et Iocsan genuit Seba, et De- 
dan. Filii autem Dedan fuerunt 
Assurim, et Letusim, et Leummin. 


4. Filii vero Midian, Hephah, et 
Hepher, et Hanoch, et Abidah, et 
Eldaah: omnes isti, filii Ceturee. 


5. Porro dedit Abraham omnia, 
quee sua erant, ipsi Ishac. 

6. Et filiis coneubinmarum quas 
habebat Abraham, dedit Abraham 
dona; et emisit eos ab Ishace filio suo, 
quum adhuc viveret, ad Orientem, 
ad terram Orientalem. 


7. Porro isti sunt dies annorum 
vite Abraham quos vixit, centum 
anni et septuaginta anni et quinque 
anni. 

8. Et obiit, et mortuus est Abra- 
ham in senectute bona, senex et sa- 
tur: et congregatus est ad populos 
suos, 


9. Kt sepelierunt eum Ishae et 


Ne a a 





i 


CHAP, XXV. 


buried him in the cave of Machpe- 
lah, in the field of Ephron the son of 
Zohar the Hittite, which is before 
Mamre; 

10. The field which Abraham pur- 
chased of the sons of Heth: there 
was Abraham buried, and Sarah his 
wife. 

11. And it came to pass after the 
death of Abraham, that God blessed 
his son Isaac: and Isaac dwelt by 
the well Lahai-roi. 

12. Now these are the generations 
of Ishmael, Abraham’s son, whom 
Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah’s hand- 
maid, bare unto Abraham. 

13. And these are the names of 
the sons of Ishmael, by their names, 
according to their generations: The 
first-born of Ishmael, Nebajoth ; and 
Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam, 


14. And Mishma, and Dumah, and » 


Maasa, 

15. Hadar, and Tema, Jetur, Na- 
phish, and Kedemah. 

16. These are the sons of Ishmael, 

and these are their names, by their 
towns, and by their castles; twelve 
princes according to their nations. 
_ 17. And these are the years of the 
life of Ishmael, an hundred and thirty 
and seven years: and he gave up the 
ghost, and died, and was gathered 
unto his people. 

18. And they dwelt from Havilah 
unto Shur, that is before Egypt, as 
thou goest toward Assyria: and he 
died in the presence of all his bre- 
thren. 

19. And these wre the generations 
of Isaac, Abraham’s son: Abraham 
begat Isaac. 

20. And Isaac was forty years old 
when he took Rebekah to wife, the 
daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of 
Padan-aram, the sister to Laban the 
Syrian. 

21. And Isaac entreated the Lord 
for his wife, because she was barren: 
and the Lord was entreated of him, 
and Rebekah his wife conceived. 

22. And the children struggled 
together within her: and she said, 
If it be so, why am I thus? And she 
went to enquire of the Lord. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


ol 


Ismael filii ejus in spelunca duplici, 
in agro Ephron filii Sohar Hittei, 
que est ante Mamre, © 


10. In agro quem emit Abraham 
a filiis Heth: ibi sepultus est Abra- 
ham et Sarah uxor ejus. 


11. Et fuit, postquam mortuus est 
Abraham, benedixit Deus Ishac filio 
ejus; et habitavit Ishacapud Puteum 
viventis videntis me. 

12. Istee autem generationes Is- 
mael filii Abraham, quem peperit 
Hagar Aigyptia ancilla Sarah ipsi 
Abraham. 

13. Et hee nomina filiorum Is- 
mael per nomina sua, per genera- 
tiones suas: primogenitus Ismael, 
Nebajoth, et Cedar, et Abdeel, et 
Mibsam, 

14. Et Mismah, et Dumah, et 
Masa, 

15. Hadar, et Thema, Jetur, Na- 
phis, et Cedmah. 

16. Isti sunt filii Ismael, et ista 
nomina eorum per villas suas, et per 
castella sua, duodecim principes per 
familias suas. 

17. Et isti sunt anni vite Ismael, 
centum anni, et triginta anni, et sep- 
tem anni: et obiit, et mortuus est, 
et congregatus est ad populos suos. 


18. Et habitaverunt ab Havilah 
usque ad Sur, que est ante Aigyp- 
tum, dum pergis in Assur: coram 
omnibus fratribus suis habitavit. 


19. Istee vero sunt generationes 
Ishac filii Abraham: Abraham ge- 
nuit Ishac. 

20. Et erat Ishac quadragenarius, 
quando accepit Ribcam filiam Be- 
thuel Aramei de Padan Aram, so- 
rorem Laban Aramei, sibi in uxo- 
rem. 

21. Et oravit Ishac Iehovam re- 
spectu uxoris sue, quia sterilis erat: 
et exoratus est ab ipso Iehova, et 
concepit Ribea uxor ejus. 

22. Et collidebant se filii in utero 
ejus, et dixit, Si ita, ut quid ego? 
et ivit ad interrogandum Iehovam. 


32 


23. And the Lord said unto her, 

Two nations are in thy womb, and 
two manner of people shall be sepa- 
rated from thy bowels; and the one 
people shall be stronger than the 
other people; and the elder shall 
serve the younger. 

24. And when her days to be de- 
livered were fulfilled, behold, there 
were twins in her womb. 

25. And the first came out red, all 
over like an hairy garment; and they 
called his name Esau. 

26. And after that came his bro- 
ther out, and his hand took hold on 
Esau’s heel; and his name was called 
Jacob: and Isaac was threescore 
years old when she bare them. 

27. And the boys grew: and Esau 
was a cunning hunter, a man of the 
field; and Jacob was a plain man, 
dwelling in tents. 

28. And Isaac loved Esau, because 
he did eat of his venison; but Re- 
bekah loved Jacob. 


29. And Jacob sod pottage: and | 


Esau came from the field, and he was 
faint. 

30. And Esau said to Jacob, Feed 
me, I pray thee, with that same red 
pottage; for I am faint: therefore 
was his name called Edom. 

31. And Jacob said, Sell me this 
day thy birthright. 

32. And Esau said, Behold, I am 
at the point to die; and what profit 
shall this birthright do to me? 

33. And Jacob said, Swear to me 
this day; and he sware unto him: 
and he sold his birthright unto Jacob. 


34. Then Jacob gave Esau bread 
and pottage of lentiles: and he did 
eat and drink, and rose up, and.went 
his way. Thus Esau despised his 
birthright. 


1. Then again Abraham took a wife. 


COMMENTARY UPON 


23. Tune dixit Iehova ad eam, 


Due gentes sunt in utero tuo, et — 


duo populi a visceribus tuis separa- 


bunt se: et populus populo robus- 


tior erit, et major serviet minori. 


24. Et impleti sunt dies ejus ut 
pareret, et ecce gemini evant in utero 
ejus. | 
totus ipse sicut pallium pilosum: et 
vocaverunt nomen ejus Esau. 


26. Et postea egressus est frater. 


ejus, et manus ejus tenebat calea- 
neum Esau, et voearunt nomen Ia- 
hacob. Ishac autem erat sexagena~ 
rius, quando peperit eos. 

27. Et creverunt pueri: et fuit 
Esau vir peritus venationis, vir agri- 


cola: sed Iahacob erat vir integer, 


manens in tabernaculis. 

28. Et dilexit Ishac Esau, quia 
venatio erat in ore ejus, et Ribca 
diligebat Iahacob. 

29. Coxit autem Iahacob coctio- 
nem: et venit Esau ex agro, et erat 
lassus. . 

30. Et dixit Esau ad Iahacob, Fae 
me comedere nunc de rufo, rufo isto: 
quia lassus sum: idcirco vocarunt 
nomen ejus Edom. 

31. Tunc dixit Iahacob, Vende hoe 
tempore primogenituram tuam mihi. 

32. Et dixit Esau, Ecce ego vado 
ut moriar, et utquid mihi primoge- 
nitura ? 

33. Dixit itaque Iahacob, Tura 
mihi hoe tempore. Et juravit ei: 
et vendidit primogenituram suam 
ipsi Iahacob. 

34. Et Iahacob dedit Esau panem 
et coctionem lenticularum, et come- 
dit, atque bibit: et surrexit, et abiit, 
eontempsitque Esau primogenitu- 
ram. 


It seems very ab- 


1 « Et addidit Abraham et accepit uxorem.” The Geneva version of our 
own Bible has it: “ Now Abraham had taken him another wife called Ke- 
turah ;” and addsin the margin, “ while Sarah was yet alive,” which agrees, 
as will appear in what follows, with the opinion of Calvin, expressed in 


this Commentary.— Ed. 





CHAP. XXV._ 


25, Egressus est autem prior rufus, — 


ee ee ee es, CCU 





HAP. XXV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 33 





_ surd that Abraham, who is said to have been dead in his own 
_ body thirty-eight years before the decease of Sarah, should, 
after her death, marry another wife. Such an act was, cer- 
tainly, unworthy of his gravity. Besides, when Paul com- 
mends his faith, (Rom. iv. 19,) he not only asserts that the 
womb of Sarah was dead, when Isaac was about to be born, 
but also that the body of the father himself was dead. 
Therefore Abraham acted most foolishly, if, after the loss of 
his wife, he, in the decrepitude of old age, contracted an- 
other marriage. Further, it is at variance with the language 
of Paul, that he, who in his hundredth year was cold and 
impotent,’ should, forty years afterwards, have many sons. 
Many commentators, to avoid this absurdity, suppose Ke- 
_turah to have been the same person as Hagar. But their 
conjecture is immediately refuted in the context; where 
Moses says, Abraham gave gifts to the sons of his concu- 
bines. The same point is clearly established from 1 Chron. 
i. 32. Others conjecture that, while Sarah was yet living, 
he took another wife. This, although worthy of grave cen- 
sure, is however not altogether incredible. We know it to 
be not uncommon for men to be rendered bold by excessive 
license. Thus Abraham having once transgressed the law of 
“matriage, perhaps, after the dispute respecting Hagar, did 
“not desist from the practice of polygamy. It is also proba- 
ble that his mind had been wounded, by the divorce which 
‘Sarah had compelled him to make with Hagar. Such con- 
duct indeed was disgraceful, or, at least, unbecoming in the 
holy patriarch. Nevertheless no other, of all the conjectures 
which have been made, seems to me more probable. If it 
be admitted, the narrative belongs to another place; but 
Moses is frequently accustomed to place those things which 
have precedence in time, in a different order. And though 
this reason should not be deemed conclusive, yet the fact itself 
shows an inverted order in the history.” Sarah had passed 


1“ Frigidus, et ad generandum impotens.” 

2 Atque ut hee ratio non urgeat, res tamen ipsa ostendit esse in hac his- 
toria, doregoy xesregov.”’ “ Kt encore que ceste raison ne presse point, toute- 
fois le faict monstre, qu’en ceste histoire il y a des choses mises devant 

derriere.”—French Tr. The old English translator has it: “ And though 
this reason serve not; yet nevertheless the matter itself declareth, that 


VOL. II. C 










34 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXV. 


her ninetieth year, when she brought forth her son Isaac ; 
she died in the hundred and twenty-seventh year of her 
age ; and Isaac married when he was forty years old. There- 
fore, nearly four years intervened between the death of his 
mother and his nuptials. If Abraham took a wife after this 
what was he thinking of, seeing that he had been during so 
many years accustomed toa single life? It is therefore law- 
ful to conjecture that Moses, in writing the life of Abraham, 
when he approached the closing scene, inserted what he had 
before omitted. The difficulty, however, is not yet solved. 
For whence proceeded Abraham’s renovated vigour,’ since 
Paul testifies that his body had long ago been withered by 
age? Augustine supposes not only that strength was im- 
parted to him for a short space of time, which might suffice 
for Isaac’s birth ; but that by a divine restoration, it flourish-. 
ed again during the remaining term of his life. Which 
opinion, both because it amplifies the glory of the miracle, 
and for other reasons, I willingly embrace.” And what I 
have before said, namely, that Isaac was miraculously born, 
as being a spiritual seed, is not opposed to this view ; for it — 
was especially on his account that the failing body of Abra-— 
ham was restored to vigour. That others were afterwards 
born was, so to speak, adventitious. Thus the blessing of 

4 


there is in this history a Hysteron proteron, that is, a setting of the cart — 
before the horse,”— Ld. ; : 

1“ Unde enim novus illi ad muliebrem concubitum vigor.” 

2 On the question, whether Abraham married Keturah during Sarah’s 
life, or not till after her death, authorities are much divided. Whichever — 
side is taken the difficulties are great, yet perhaps on neither side insuper- — 
able. So far as merely human probabilities are concerned, the evidence — 
would turn in favour of Calvin’s hypothesis, which is supported by Dr. A. — 
Clarke and Professor Bush; the arguments of the latter writer, which 
seem to be mainly drawn from Calvin, are very forcibly put. On the — 
other hand, great consideration is due to the authority of such men as — 
Patrick, Le Clere, Kidder, and Scott, who would preserve the present — 
order of the sacred narrative; and would account for the events related on — 
the ground of a miraculous renewal and continuance of strength, which, 
Calvin himself allows to have taken place. It is in favour of this latter — 
mode of interpretation, that it certainly better accords with the general — 
character of Abraham, and is more consistent with the testimony which — 
the Scriptures bear to his faith, than the other hypothesis; besides which — 
the order of the narrative remains undisturbed. See this question treated — 
at length in Ewercitationes Andree Riveti in Genesin, p. 548. Lugd. — 
1633.—Ed., , 


§ 
‘ 


Ee 






CHAP. XXV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 35 


God pronounced in the words, “ Increase and multiply,” 
which was annexed expressly to marriage, is also extended 
to unlawful connexions. Certainly, if Abraham married a 
wife while Sarah was yet alive, (as I think most probable,) 
his adulterous connexion was unworthy of the divine bene- 
diction. But although we know not why this addition was 
“made to the just measure of favour granted to Abraham, 
‘yet the wonderful providence of God appears in this, that 
while many nations of considerable importance descended 
. from his other sons, the spiritual covenant, of which the rest 
also bore the sign in their flesh, remained in the exclusive 
possession of Isaac. 
_ 6. But unto the sons of the concubines. Moses relates, that 
when Abraham was about to die, he formed the design of 
removing all cause of strife among his sons after his 
death, by constituting Isaac his sole heir, and dismissing 
the rest with suitable gifts. This dismissal was, indeed, 
apparently harsh and cruel ; but it was agreeable to the ap- 
-pointment and decree of God, in order that the entire pos- 
session of the land might remain for the posterity of Isaac. 
For it was not lawful for Abraham to divide, at his own 
pleasure, that inheritance which had been granted entire to 
Isaac. Wherefore, no course was left to him but to provide 
for the rest of his sons in the manner here described. If 
any person should now select one of his sons as his heir, to 
the exclusion of the others, he would do them an injury ; 
-and, by applying the torch of injustice, in disinheriting a 
part of his children, he would light up the flame of perni- 
cious strifes in his family. Wherefore, we must note the 
special reason by which Abraham was not only induced, but 
compelléd, to deprive his sons of the inheritance, and to re- 
move them to a distance ; namely, lest. by their intervention, 
the grant which had been divinely made to Isaac should, of 
necessity, be disturbed. We have elsewhere said that, among 
the Hebrews, she who is a partaker of the bed, but not of 
all the goods, is styled a concubine. The same distinction 
has been adopted into the customs, and sanctioned by the 
laws of all nations. So, we shall afterwards see, that Leah 
and Rachel were principal wives, but that Bilhah and Zil- 






36 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXV. 


pah were in the second rank; so that their condition re- 
mained servile, although they were admitted to the conjugal 
bed. Since Abraham had made Hagar and Keturah his 
wives on this condition, it seems that he might lawfully 
bestow on their sons, only a small portion of his goods; to 
have transferred, however, from his only heir to them, equal - 
portions of his property, would have been neither just nor : 
right. It is probable that no subsequent strife or contention 
took place respecting the succession ; but by sending the sons - 
of the concubines far away, he provides against the danger — 
of which I have spoken, lest they should occupy a part of the © 
land which God had assigned to the posterity of Isaac alone. j 

7. And these are the days. Moses now brings us down to — 
the death of Abraham; and the first thing to be noticed — 
concerning his age is the number of years during which he © . 
lived as a pilgrim ; for he deserves the praise of wonderful 
and incomparable patience, for having wandered through — 
the space of a hundred years, while God led him about in ~ 
various directions, contented, both in life and death, with 
the bare promise of God. Let those be ashamed who find it — 
difficult to bear the disquietude of one, or of a few years, — 
since Abraham, the father of the faithful, was not merely 
a stranger during a hundred years, but was also often cast 
forth into exile. Meanwhile, however, Moses expressly shows 
that the Lord had fulfilled his promise, “Thou shalt die in 
a good old age:” for although he fought a hard and severe 
battle, yet his consolation was neither light nor small; be- 
cause he knew that, amidst so many sufferings, his life was — 
the object of Divine care. But if this sole looking unto God — 
sustained him through his whole life, amidst the most bois- — 
terous waves, amidst many bitter griefs, amidst tormenting 
cares, and in short an accumulated mass of evils; let us also 
learn—that we may not become weary in our course—to — 
rely on this support, that the Lord has promised us a happy 
issue of life, and one truly far more glorious than that of — 
our father Abraham. 

8. Then Abraham gave up the ghost.. They are mistaken 





*« Et obiit Abraham.” And Abraham died. The expression “ gave up 
the ghost” is not a literal rendering of the original.—Zd, 





| CHAP. XXV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 37 


_who suppose that this expression denotes sudden death, as 


 intimating that he had not been worn out by long disease, 
_ but expired without pain. Moses rather means to say that 

the father of the faithful was not exempt from the common 
_ lot of men, in order that our minds may not languish when 
the outward man is perishing ; but that, by meditating on 
_ that renovation which is laid up as the object of our hope, 
_ we may, with tranquil minds, suffer this frail tabernacle to be 
_ dissolved. There is therefore no reason why a feeble, emaciat- 


ed body, failing eyes, tremulous hands, and the lost use of all 


our members, should so dishearten us, that we should not 


hasten, after the example of our father, with joy and alacrity 
to our death. But although Abraham had this in common 


_ with the human race, that he grew old and died ; yet Moses, 
_ shortly afterwards, puts a difference between him and the pro- 


miscuous multitude of men as to manner of dying; namely, 
that he should “ die in a good old age, and satisfied with life.” 


_Unbelievers, indeed, often seem to participate in the same 
blessing; yea, David complains that they excelled in this kind 


of privilege; and a similar complaint occurs in the book of Job, 
namely, that they fill up their time happily, till in a moment 


they descend into the grave.’ But what I said before must 


be remembered, that the chief part of a good old age con- 
sists in a good conscience and in a serene and tranquil mind. 
Whence it follows, that what God promises to Abraham, can 
only apply to those who truly cultivate righteousness: for 


Plato says, with equal truth and wisdom, that a good hope 


is the nutriment of old age ; and therefore old men who have 
a guilty conscience are miserably tormented, and are inwardly 
racked as by a perpetual torture. But to this we must add, 
what Plato knew not, that it is godliness which causes a 
good old age to attend us even to the grave, because faith is 
the preserver of a tranquil mind. To the same point belongs 
what is immediately added, “he was full of days,” so that 
he did not desire a prolongation of life. We see how many 
are in bondage to the desire of life; yea, nearly the whole 


' See Psalm lxxiii. 4. “There are no bands in their death; but their 
strength is firm;” and Job xxi. 13, “They spend their days in wealth, 
and in a moment go down to the grave.”—Ed. 







38 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXV. 


world languishes between a weariness of the present life and 
an inexplicable desire for its continuance. That satiety of 
life, therefore, which shall cause us to be ready to leave it, 
is a singular favour from God. di eo 

And was gathered to his people. I gladly embrace the 
opinion of those who believe the state of our future life to 
be pointed out in this form of expression ; provided we do 
not restrict it, as these expositors do, to the faithful only; 
but understand by it that mankind are associated together 
in death as well as in life. It may seem absurd to pro- 
fane men, for David to say, that the reprobate are gather- 
ed together like sheep into the grave; but if we examine 
the expression more closely, this gathering together will 
have no existence if their souls are annihilated.? The men- 
tion of Abraham’s burial will presently follow. Now he is 
said to be gathered to his fathers, which would be inconsis- 
tent with fact if human life vanished, and men were reduced 
to annihilation: wherefore the Scripture, in speaking thus, 
shows that another state of life remains after death, so that 
a departure out of the world is not the destruction of the 
whole man. 

9. And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him. Hence 
it appears, that although Ishmael had long ago been dis- 
missed, he was not utterly alienated from his father, because 
he performed the office of a son in celebrating the obsequies © 
of his deceased parent. Ishmael, rather than the other sons, | 
did this, as being nearer. J 

12. Now these are the generations of Ishmael. This nar- 
ration is not superfluous. In the commencement of the 
chapter, Moses alludes to what was done for the sons of 
Keturah. Here he speaks designedly more at large, for the - 
purpose of showing that the promise of God, given in the - 
seventeenth chapter, was confirmed by its manifest accom-— 





1 Rivetus speaks in similar language on this clause. This is never 
said concerning beasts when they die; and, therefore, from this form of © 
speech, it is to be observed, that men by death are not reduced to nothing, — 
nor does the whole of man die... . . The Scripture, in speaking thus, — 
points out some other state; so that departure out of the world is not the 
destruction of the whole man.”—Lvercitatio exiii. p. 553. ; 

* See Psalm xlix. ; 





CHAP. XXvV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 39 


plishment. In the first place, it was no common gift of God 
that Ishmael should have twelve sons who should possess 
_ rank and authority over as many tribes ; but inasmuch as the 
event corresponded with the promise, we must chiefly con- 
_ sider the veracity of God, as well as the singular benevolence 
_and honour which he manifested towards his servant Abra- 
ham, when, even in those benefits which were merely adven- 
_ titious, he dealt so kindly and liberally with him; for that 
may rightly be regarded as adventitious which was super- 
added to the spiritual covenant: therefore Moses, after he 
_ has enumerated the towns in which the posterity of Ishmael 
was distributed, buries that whole race in oblivion, that sub- 
stantial perpetuity may remain only in the Church, accord- 
ing to the declaration in Psalm exxii. 28, “The sons of sons 
shall inhabit.”! Further, Moses, as with his finger, shows 
_the wonderful counsel of God, because, in assigning a region 
distinct from the land of Canaan to the sons of Ishmael, he 
has both provided for them in future, and kept the inherit- 
ance vacant for the sons of Isaac. 
18. He died in the presence of all his brethren.” The 
major part of commentators understand this of his death ; 
as if Moses had said that the life of Ishmael was shorter 
than that of his,brethren, who long survived him: but be- 
cause the word Sp) (naphal) is applied to a violent death, 
and Moses testifies that Ishmael died a natural death, this 
exposition cannot be approved. The Chaldean Paraphrast 
supposes the word “lot” to be understood, and elicits this 
sense, that the Jot fell to him, so as to assign him a habita- 
tion not far from his brethren. Although I do not greatly 
differ in this matter, I yet think, that the words are not to 
be thus distorted.* The word bp) sometimes signifies to 


1 « Filii filiorum habitabunt.” In the English it is, “ The children of thy 
servants shall continue.”—/d. 

2 « Coram omnibus fratribus suis habitavit.” He dwelt in the presence 
of all his brethren. 
_ # Thisis the interpretation of Vatablus, favoured by Professor Bush, who 
says, “ As Ishmael’s death has already been mentioned, and as the term 
‘fall’ is seldom used in the Scriptures in reference to ‘ dying,’ except in cases 
of sudden and violent death, as when one ‘ falls’ in battle, the probability is, 
that it here signifies that his territory or possessions ‘ fell’ to him in the pre- 
sence of his brethren, or immediately contiguous to their borders.” — Bush. 





40 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXV. 


lie down; or to rest, and also to dwell. The simple assertion 
therefore of Moses is, that a habitation was given to Ishmael 
opposite his brethren, so that he should indeed be a neigh- 
bour to them, and yet should have his distinct boundaries :* 
for I do not doubt that he referred to the oracle contained 
in the sixteenth chapter, where, among other things, the 
angel said to his mother Hagar, “ He shall remain, or pitch 
his tents in the presence of his brethren.” Why does he rather 
speak thus of Ishmael than of the others, except for this 
reason, that whereas they migrated towards the eastern 
region, Ishmael, although the head of a nation, separated 
from the sons of Abraham, yet retained his dwelling in 
their neighbourhood? Meanwhile the intention of God is 
also to be observed, namely, that Ishmael, though living 
near his brethren, was yet placed apart in an abode of his 
own, that he might not become mingled with them, but 
might dwell in their presence, or opposite to them. More- 
over, it is sufficiently obvious that the prediction is not to be 
restricted personally to Ishmael. 

19. These are the generations of Isaac. Because what 
Moses has said concerning the Ishmaelites was incidental, 
he now returns to the principal subject of the history, for — 
the purpose of describing the progress of the Church. And 
in the first place, he repeats that Isaac’s wife was taken — 
from Mesopotamia. He expressly calls her the sister of 
Laban the Syrian, who was hereafter to become the father-in- — 
law of Jacob, and concerning whom he had many things to © 
relate. But it is chiefly worthy of observation that he de- 
clares Rebekah to have been barren during the early years 
of her marriage. And we shall afterwards see that her bar- — 
renness continued, not for three or four, but for twenty — 
years, in order that her very despair of offspring might give — 
greater lustre to the sudden granting of the blessing. But — 
nothing seems less accordant with reason, than that the 
propagation of the Church should be thus small and slow. — 
Abraham, in his extreme old age, received (as it seems) a — 








' Calvin’s interpretation, though opposed to the Vulgate and to our own 5 
version, is supported by the Septuagint, the Targum Onkelos, the Syriac, 
and the Arabic versions. See Walton’s Polyglott.—Ed. 





P alipe 


~. 
ae 
t 
oe 
‘a 


CHAP, XXV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 4] 


slender solace for his long privation of offspring, in having 
all his hope centred in one individual. Isaac also, already 
advanced in years, and bordering on old age, was not yet a 


_ father. Where, then, was the seed which should equal the 


stars of heaven in number? Who would not suppose that 
God was dealing deceitfully in leaving those houses empty 
and solitary, which, according to his own word, ought to be 


_ replenished with teeming population? But that which is 


recorded in the psalm must be accomplished in reference to 
the Church, that “ he maketh her who had been barren to 
keep house, and to be a joyful mother of many children.” 
(Psalm cxiii. 9.) For this small and contemptible origin, 
these slow and feeble advances, render more illustrious that 
increase, which afterwards follows, beyond all hope and ex- 
pectation, to teach us that the Church was produced and 
increased by divine power and grace, and not by merely 
natural means. It is indeed possible, that God designed to 
correct or moderate any excess of attachment in Isaac. But 
this is to be observed as the chief reason for God’s conduct, 
that as the holy seed was given from heaven, it must not be 


produced according to the common order of nature, to the 


end, that we learn that the Church did not originate in the 
industry of man, but flowed from the grace of God alone. 

21. And Isaac entreated the Lord for his wife. Some 
translate the passage, “ Isaac entreated the Lord in the pre- 
sence of his wife ;’ and understand this to have been done, 
that she also might add her prayers, and they might jointly 
supplicate God. But the version here given is more simple. 
Moreover, this resort to prayer testifies that Isaac knew that 
he was deprived of children, because God had not blessed 
him. He also knew that fruitfulness was a special gift of 
God. For although the favour of obtaining offspring was 
widely diffused over the whole human race, when God 
uttered the words “increase and multiply ;’ yet to show 
that men are not born fortuitously, he distributes this power 
of production in various degrees. Isaac, therefore, acknow- 
ledges, that the blessing, which was not at man’s disposal, 
must be sought for by prayer from God. It now truly ap- 
pears, that he was endued with no ordinary constancy of 


42 . COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXV. _ 


faith. Forasmuch as the covenant of God was known to — 
him, he earnestly (if ever any did) desired seed. It, there- 
fore, had not now, for the first time, entered into his mind to 
pray, seeing that for more than twenty years he had been 


disappointed of his hope. Hence, although Moses, only in 
a single word, says that he had obtained offspring by his 


prayers to God; yet reason dictates that these prayers had — 


continued through many years. The patience of the holy 
man is herein conspicuous, that while he seems in vain to 


pour forth his wishes into the air, he still does-not remit the 


ardour of his devotion. And as Isaac teaches us, by his ex- 
ample, to persevere in prayer; so God also shows that he 
never turns a deaf ear to the wishes of his faithful people, 
although he may long defer the answer. vas 
22. And the children struggled together. Here a new 
temptation suddenly arises, namely, that the infants struggle 
together in their mother’s womb. This conflict occasions 
the mother such grief that she wishes for death. And no 
wonder ; for she thinks that it would be a hundred times 
better for her to die, than that she have within her the hor- 


rible prodigy of twin-brothers, shut.up in her womb, carrying 


on intestine war. They, therefore, are mistaken, who attri- 
bute this complaint to female impatience, since it was not 
so much extorted by pain or torture, as by abhorrence of the 
prodigy. For she doubtless perceived that this conflict did 
not arise from natural causes, but was a prodigy portending 
some dreadful and tragic end. She also necessarily felt 
some fear of the divine anger stealing over her: as it is 
usual with the faithful not to confine their thoughts to the 
evil immediately present with them, but to trace it to its 
cause ; and hence they tremble through the apprehension of 
divine judgment. But though in the beginning she was 
more grievously disturbed than she ought to have been, and, 
breaking out into murmurings, preserved neither moderation 
nor temper; yet she soon afterwards receives a remedy and 
solace to her grief. We are thus taught by her example to 
take care that we do not give excessive indulgence to sorrow 
in affairs of perplexity, nor inflame our minds by inwardly 
cherishing secret causes of distress. It is, indeed, difficult 











| 


| 


CHAP. XXV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 43 


to restrain the first emotions of our minds ; but before they 
become ungovernable, we must bridle them, and bring them 
into subjection. And chiefly we must pray to the Lord for 


moderation ; as Moses here relates that Rebekah went to 


ask counsel from the Lord ; because, indeed, she perceived 
that nothing would be more effectual in tranquillizing her 
mind, than to aim at obedience to the will of God, under the 
conviction that she was directed by him. For although the 


_ response given might be adverse, or, at least, not such as 


she would desire, she yet hoped for some alleviation from a 
gracious God, with which she might be satisfied. A ques- 
tion here arises respecting the way in which Rebekah asked 
counsel of God. It is the commonly received opinion that 
she inquired of some prophet what was the nature of 
this prodigy: and Moses seems to intimate that she had 
gone to some place to hear the oracle. But since that 
conjecture has no probability, I rather incline to a_differ- 
ent interpretation ; namely, that she, having sought retire- 
ment, prayed more earnestly that she might receive a 
revelation from heaven. For, at that time, what prophets, 
except her husband and her father-in-law, could she have 
found in the world, still less in that neighbourhood ? More- 
over, I perceive that God then commonly made known his 
will by oracles. Once more, if we consider the magnitude 
of the affair, it was more fitting that the secret should be 
revealed by the mouth of God, than manifested by the testi- 
mony of man. In our times a different method prevails. 
For God does not, at this day, reveal things future by such 
miracles; and the teaching of the Law, the Prophets, and 
the Gospel, which comprises the perfection of wisdom, is 
abundantly sufficient for the regulation of our course of life. 

23. Two nations. In the first place, God answers that 
the contention between the twin-brothers had reference to 
something far beyond their own persons ; for in this way he 
shows that there would be discord between their posterities. 
When he says, “ there are two nations,” the expression is 
emphatical; for since they were brothers and twins, and 
therefore of one blood, the mother did not suppose that they 
would be so far disjoined as to become the heads of distinct 


44 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXV._ 


nations; yet God declares that dissension should take place 
between those who were by nature joined together. Secondly, 


he describes their different conditions, namely, that victory — 


would belong to one of these nations, forasmuch as this was 
the cause of the contest, that they could not be equal, but 
one was chosen and the other rejected. For since the re- 
probate give way reluctantly, it follows of necessity that the 


children of God have to undergo many troubles and contests — 


on account of their adoption. Thirdly, the Lord affirms that 
the order of nature being inverted, the younger, who was 
inferior, should be the victor. 

We must now see what this victory implies. They who 
restrict it to earthly riches and wealth coldly trifle. Un- 


doubtedly by this oracle Isaac and Rebekah were taught. 


that the covenant of salvation would not be common to the 
two people, but would be reserved only for the posterity of 
Jacob. In the beginning, the promise was apparently gene- 
ral, as comprehending the whole seed: now, it is restricted 


to one part of the seed. This is the reason of the conflict, — 


that God divides the seed of Jacob (of which the condition 
appeared to be one and the same) in such a manner that he 
adopts one part and rejects the other: that one part obtains 
the name and privilege of the Church, the rest are reckoned 
strangers ; with one part resides the blessing of which the 
other is deprived ; as it afterwards actually occurred: for 
we know that the Idumeans were-cut off from the body of 
the Church ; but the covenant of grace was deposited in the 
family of Jacob. If we seek the cause of this distinction, it 
will not be found in nature ; for the origin of both nations 
was the same. It will not be found in merit; because the 
heads of both nations were yet enclosed in their mother’s 
womb when the contention began. Moreover God, in order 
to humble the pride of the flesh, determined to take away 
from men all occasion of confidence and of boasting. He 
might have brought forth Jacob first from the womb ; but 
he made the other the first-born, who, at length, was to be- 
come the inferior. Why does he thus, designedly, invert the 
order appointed by himself, except to teach us that, without 
regard to dignity, Jacob, who was to be the heir of the pro- 





a co, 





* 
a 


CHAP. XXV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 45 
. 


mised benediction, was gratuitously elected? The sum of 


_ the whole, then, is, that the preference which God gave to 


Jacob over his brother Esau, by making him the father of 
the Church, was not granted as a reward for his merits, 


neither was obtained by his own industry, but proceeded 
_ from the mere grace of God himself. But when an entire 
_ people is the subject of discourse, reference is made not to 
_ the secret election, which is confirmed to few, but the com- 


mon adoption, which spreads as widely as the external 


preaching of the word. Since this subject, thus briefly 
_ stated, may be somewhat obscure, the readers may recall to 
- memory what I have said above in expounding the seven- 


teenth chapter, namely, that God embraced, by the grace of 
his adoption, all the sons of Abraham, because he made a 
covenant with all; and that it was not in vain that he ap- 


_ pointed the promise of salvation to be offered promiscuously 


to all, and to be attested by the sign of circumcision in their 
flesh ; but that there was a special chosen seed from the 


_ whole people, and these should at length be accounted the 


legitimate sons of Abraham, who by the secret counsel of 
God are ordained unto salvation. Fatth, indeed, is that 
which distinguishes the spiritual from the carnal seed; but 


_ the question now under consideration is the principle on 


which the distinction is made, not the symbol or mark by 
which it is attested. God, therefore, chose the whole seed 
of Jacob without exception, as the Scripture in many places 
testifies ; because he has conferred on all alike the same 
testimonies of his grace, namely, in the word and sacraments. 
But another and peculiar election has always flourished, 
which comprehended a certain definite number of men, in 
order that, in the common destruction, God might save 
those whom he would. 

A question is here suggested for our consideration. Where- 


‘as Moses here treats of the former kind of election,’ Paul 


turns his words to the latter? For while he attempts to 
prove, that not all who are Jews by natural descent are 
heirs of life; and not all who are descended from Jacob 


' Namely, that which is general or national.—Ed. 
_ 2 Namely, that which is partieular or individual.—Ed. 


46 COMMENTARY UPON OHAP. XXV. 


according to the flesh are to be accounted true Israelites ; but 


that God chooses whom he will, according to his own good - 
pleasure, he adduces this testimony, “ the elder shall serve 


the younger.” (Rom. ix. 7,8, 12.) They who endeavour to 
extinguish the doctrine of gratuitous election, desire to per- 
suade their readers that the words of Paul also are to be 
understood only of external vocation ; but his whole dis- 
course is manifestly repugnant to their interpretation ; and 
they prove themselves to be not only infatuated, but impu- 


dent in their attempt to bring darkness or smoke over this — 


light which shines so clearly. They allege that the dignity 
of Esau is transferred to his younger brother, lest he should 


glory in the flesh ; inasmuch as a new promise is here given 


to the latter. I confess there is some force in what they 
say; but I contend that they omit the principal point in the 
case, by explaining the difference here stated, of the exter- 
nal vocation. But unless they intend to make the covenant 
of God of,none effect, they must concede that Esau and 


Jacob were alike partakers of the external calling ; whence — 


it appears, that they to whom a common vocation had been 
granted, were separated by the secret counsel of God. The 
nature and object of Paul’s argument is well known. For 
when the Jews, inflated with the title of the Church, re- 
jected the Gospel, the faith of the simple was shaken, by the 
consideration that it was improbable that Christ, and the 
salvation promised through him, could possibly be rejected 
by an elect people, a holy nation, and the genuine sons of 
God. Here, therefore, Paul contends that not all who de- 
scend from Jacob, according to the flesh, are true Israelites, 
because God, of his own good pleasure, may choose whom he 
will, as heirs of eternal salvation. Who does not see that 
Paul descends from a general to a particular adoption, in 
order to teach us, that not all who occupy a place in the 
Church are to be accounted as true members of the Church ? 
It is certain that he openly excludes from the rank of chil- 
dren those to whom (he elsewhere says) “ pertaineth the adop- 
tion ;’ whence it is assuredly gathered, that in proof of this 
position, he adduces the testimony of Moses, who declares 
that God chose certain from among the sons of Abraham to 








' c 
~) Oe ea Rl 


ae % 


4 
) 
. 


OHAP. XXV- THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 47 


himself, in whom he might render the grace of adoption firm 


_and efficacious. How, therefore, shall we reconcile Paul with 


Moses? I answer, although the Lord separates the whole 


_ seed of Jacob from the race of Esau, it was done with a view 


to the Church, which was included in the posterity of Jacob. 


_ And, doubtless, the general election of the people had refer- 
ence to this end, that God might have a Church separated 
_ from the rest of the world. What absurdity, then, is there 


~ rs 


in supposing that Paul applies to special election the words 


of Moses, by which it is predicted that the Church shall 
_ spring from the seed of Jacob? And an instance in point 
_ was exhibited in the condition of the heads themselves of 


these two nations. For Jacob was not only called by the 
external voice of the Lord, but, while his brother was passed 


_ by, he was chosen an heir of life. That good pleasure of 


God, which Moses commends in the person of Jacob alone, 
Paul properly extends further: and lest any one should sup- 


_ pose, that after the two nations had been rendered distinct 
_ by this oracle, the election should pertain indiscriminately 


to all the sons of Jacob, Paul brings, on the opposite side, 


another oracle, “I will have mercy on whom I will have 


mercy ;’ where we see a certain number severed from the 
promiscuous race of Jacob’s sons, in the salvation of whom 
the special election of God might triumph. Whence it ap- 


_ pears that Paul wisely considered the counsel of God, which 


was, in truth, that he had transferred the honour of primo- 
geniture from the elder to the younger, in order that he 
might choose to himself a Church, according to his own will, 
out of the seed of Jacob; not on account of the merits of 
men, but as a matter of mere grace. And although God de- 
signed that the means by which the Church was to be col- 


_ lected should be common to the whole people, yet the end 


which Paul had in view is chiefly to be regarded ; namely, 
that there might always be a body of men in the world 
which should call upon God with a pure faith, and should 


_be kept even to the end. Let it therefore remain as a settled 


point of doctrine, that among men some perish, some obtain 


salvation ; but the cause of this depends on the secret will 


of God. For whence does it arise that they who are born of 


48 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXV. 


Abraham are not all possessed of the same privilege? The 
disparity of condition certainly cannot be ascribed either to 
the virtue of the one, or to the vice of the other, seeing they 
were not yet born. Since the common feeling of mankind 
rejects this doctrine, there have been found, in all ages, acute 
men, who have fiercely disputed against the election of God. 
It is not my present purpose to refute or to weaken their 


calumnies: let it suffice us to hold fast what we gather from . 


Paul’s interpretation ; that whereas the whole human race 


deserves the same destruction, and is bound under the same 


sentence of condemnation, some are delivered by gratuitous 
mercy, others are justly left in their own destruction: and 
that those whom God has chosen are not preferred to others, 


because God foresaw they would be holy, but in order that — 


they might be holy. But if the first origin of holiness is the 
election of God, we seek in vain for that difference in men, 
which rests solely in the will of God. If any one desires a 
mystical interpretation of the subject, we may give the fol- 
lowing :*> whereas many hypocrites, who are for a time en- 
closed in the womb of the Church, pride themselves upon 
an empty title, and, with insolent boastings, exult over the 
true sons of God; internal conflicts will hence arise, which 
will grievously torment the mother herself. 

24, And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled. 
Moses shows that the intestine strife in her womb continued 
to the time of bringing forth ; for it was not by mere acci- 
dent that Jacob seized his brother by the heel and attempted 
to get out before him. The Lord testified by this sign that 
the effect of his election does not immediately appear ; but 
rather that the intervening path was strewed with troubles 
and conflicts. Therefore Esau’s name was allotted to him on 
account of his asperity ; which even from earliest infancy as- 
sumed a manly form ; but the name Jacob signifies that this 
giant, vainly striving in his boasted strength, had still been 
vanquished.* 

1 Si quis anagogen desideret. 

* Nous pourrons dire.—French Tr. The original has no corresponding 


expression ; but one to the same effect is obviously understood.—/d. 
* The names of the two brothers was significant of their character. 


Esau is called Edom, which signifies ved, because he was of sanguinary - 








Se, = 
a ee 


















CHAP. XXvV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 49. 


27. And the boys grew. Moses now briefly describes the 
- manners of them both. He does not, indeed, commend Jacob 
on account of those rare and excellent qualities, which are 
_ especially worthy of praise and of remembrance, but only says 
_ that he was simple. The word ON, (tam,) although generally 
aken for upright and sincere, is here put antithetically, 
After the sacred writer has stated that Esau was robust, and 
addicted to hunting, he places on the opposite side the mild 
» disposition of Jacob, who loved the quiet of home so much, 
eh he might seem to be indolent ; just as the Greeks call 
those persons oixdattous, who, dwelling at home, give no 
_ evidence of their industry. In short, the comparison implies 
_ that Moses praises Esau on account of his vigour, but speaks 
_ of Jacob as being addicted to domestic leisure ; and that he 
describes the disposition of the former as giving promise 
| that he would be a courageous man, while the disposition of 
the latter had nothing worthy of commendation. Seeing that, 
P by a decree of heaven, the honour of primogeniture would be 
_ transferred to Jacob, why did God suffer him to lie down in his 
_ tent, and to slumber among ashes; unless it be, that he some- 
_ times intends his election to be concealed for a time, lest men 
should attribute something to their own preparatory acts ? 
_ 28. And Isaac loved Esau. That God might more clearly 
show his own election to be sufficiently firm, to need no as- 
_ sistance elsewhere, and even powerful enough to overcome 
any obstacle whatever, he permitted Esau to be so preferred 
to his brother, in the affection and good opinion of his 
father, that Jacob appeared in the light of a rejected person. 
Since, therefore, Moses clearly demonstrates, by so many cir- 
cumstances, that the adoption of Jacob was founded on the 
sole good pleasure of God, it is an intolerable presumption 
to suppose it to depend upon the will of man; or to ascribe 
it, in part, to means, (as they are called,) and to human pre- 
parations." But how was it possible for the father, who was 


4 
. 


temperament. He is said to have been hairy or shaggy, IY, from which 
_ word the mountainous country he inhabited was called Seir. The name 
_ Jacob, 3), means to supplant, or trip up the heels.— Ed. 
_ ! Cest une outrecuidance insupportable de la vouloir faire dependre de 
~ la volonté de ’homme, ou transporter une partie dicelle aux moyens et 
_ preparatifs humain.—French Tr. 

VOL. II. D 



































50 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXV, 


not ignorant of the oracle, to be thus pre-disposed in favour 
of the first-born, whom he knew to be divinely rejected? It 
would rather have been the part of piety and of modesty te 
subdue his own private affection, that he might yield obed o 
ence to God. The first-born prefers a natural claim to the 
chief place in the parent’s affection ; but the father was not 
at liberty to exalt him above his brother, who had been 
placed in subjection by the oracle of God. That also is stil 
more shameful and more unworthy of the holy patriarch, 
which Moses adds; namely, that he had been induced to 
give this proférence to Esau, by ‘the taste of his venison 
Was he so enslaved to the indulgence of the palate, that, 
forgetting the oracle, he despised the grace of God in Jacob, 
while he preposterously set his affection on him whom God 
had rejected? Let the Jews now go and glory in the flesh | 
since Isaac, preferring food to the inheritance destined for 
his son, would pervert (as far as he had the power) the gre 
tuitous covenant of God! For there is no room here for 
excuse ; since with a blind, or, at least, a most inconsiderate 
love to his first-born, he undervalued the younger. It is un- 
certain whether the mother was chargeable with a fault of 
the opposite kind. For we commonly find the affections of 
parents so divided, that if the wife sees any one of the sons 
preferred by her husband, she inclines, by a contrary spirit: 
of emulation, more towards another. Rebekah loved her 
son Jacob more than Esau. If, in so doing, she was obeying 
the oracle, she acted rightly ; but it is possible that her love 
was ill regulated. And on this point the corruption of na- 
ture too much betrays itself. There is no bond of mutual: 
concord more sacred than that of marriage: children form 
still further links of connection ; and yet they often prove: 
the occasion of dissension. But since we soon after see Re- 
bekah chiefly in earnest respecting.the blessing of God, the 
conjecture is probable, that she had been induced, by divine 
authority, to prefer the younger to the first-born. Mean~ 
while, the foolish affection of the father only the more full 
illustrates the grace of the divine adoption. 
29. And Jacob sod pottage. This narration differs littl , 
from the sport of children. Jacob is cooking pottage; his” 





CHAP. XXV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 51 


_ brother returns from hunting weary and famishing, and bar- 
_ ters his birthright for food. What kind of bargain, I pray, 
was this? Jacob ought of his own accord to have satisfied 
_ the hunger of his brother. When being asked, he refuses to 
do so: who would not condemn him for his inhumanity ? 
_ In compelling Esau to surrender his right of primogeniture, 


he seems to make an illicit and frivolous compact. God, 


_ however, put the disposition of Esau to the proof in a mat- 
_ ter of small moment; and still farther, designed to present 
_ an instance of Jacob’s piety, or, (to speak more properly,) he 
_ brought to light what lay hid in both. Many indeed are 
_ mistaken in suspending the cause of Jacob's election on the 
fact, that God foresaw some worthiness in him; and in 
thinking that Esau was reprobated, because his future im- 
i piety had rendered him unworthy of the divine adoption 
before he was born. Paul, however, having declared elec- 
_ tion to be gratuitous, denies that the distinction is to be 
, looked for in the persons of men; and, indeed, first assumes 
it as an axiom, that since mankind is ruined from its origin, 
_ and devoted to destruction, whosoever are saved are in no 
_ other way freed from destruction than by the mere grace of 
God. And, therefore, that some are preferred to others, is 
not on account of their. own merits ; but seeing that all are 


alike unworthy of grace, they are saved whom God, of his 


own good pleasure, has chosen. He then ascends still higher, 
and reasons thus: “ Since God is the Creator of the world, 
he is, by his own right, in such a sense, the arbiter of life 
_and death, that he cannot be called to account ; but his own 
_ will is (so to speak) the cause of causes. And yet Paul does 


not, by thus reasoning, impute tyranny to God, as the so- 
phists triflingly allege in speaking of his absolute power. 
But whereas He dwells in inaccessible light, and his judg- 
ments are deeper than the lowest abyss, Paul prudently 
enjoins acquiescence in God’s sole purpose; lest, if men seek 
to be too inquisitive, this immense chaos should absorb all 
their senses. It is therefore foolishly inferred by some, from 
this place, that whereas God chose one of the two brothers, 


and passed by the other, the merits of both had been fore- 


Seen. For it was necessary that God should have decreed 


























52 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXV. 


that Jacob should differ from Esau, otherwise he would not 
have been unlike his brother. And we must always remem- 
ber the doctrine of Paul, that no one excels another by means 
of his own industry or virtue, but by the grace of God alone. 
Although, however, both the brothers were by nature equal, 
yet Moses represents to us, in the person of Esau, as in a mirror, 
what kind of men all the reprobate are, who, being left to their 
own disposition, are not governed by the Spirit of God. While, 
in the person of Jacob, he shows that the grace of adoption 
is not idle in the elect, because the Lord effectually attests 
it by his vocation. Whence then does it arise that Esau 
sets his birthright to sale, but from this cause, that he, being 
deprived of the Spirit of God, relishes only the things of the 
earth? And whence does it happen that his brother Jacob, 
denying himself his own food, patiently endures hunger, ex- 
cept that under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, he raises” 
himself above the world and aspires to a heavenly life? 
Hence, let us learn, that they to whom God does not vouch- 
safe the grace of his Spirit, are carnal and brutal; and are so 
addicted to this fading life, that they think not of the spi-— 
ritual kingdom of God; but they whom God has undertaken’ 
to govern, are not so far entangled in the snares of the flesh 
as to prevent them from being intent upon their high voca- 
tion. Whence it follows, that all the reprobate remain im-— 
mersed in the corruptions of the flesh; but that the elect are 
renewed by the Holy Spirit, that they may be the workman- 
ship of God, created unto good works. If any one should 
raise the objection, that part of the blame may be ascribed 
to God, because he does not correct the stupor and the de~ 
praved desires inherent in the reprobate, the solution is 
ready, that God is exonerated by the testimony of their own 
conscience, which compels them to condemn themselves, 
Wherefore, nothing remains but that all flesh should keep 
silence before God, and that the whole world, confessing it-_ 
self to be obnoxious to his judgment, should rather be~ 
humbled than proudly contend. | 
30. Feed me, I pray thee, with that same red pottage. 


' Literally the passage would run, “ Feed me, I pray thee, with tha y 
red, that red,” the word pottage being understood. “ The repetition of 











CHAP. XXV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 53 
f 
_ Although Esau declares in these words that he by no means 
_ desires delicacies, but is content with food of any kind, (seeing 
_ that he contemptuously designates the pottage from its colour 
only, without regard to its taste.) we may yet lawfully con- 
_ jecture that the affair was viewed in a serious light by his 
parents; for his own name had not been given him on ac- 
i count of any ludicrous matter. In desiring and asking food 
he commits nothing worthy of reprehension ; but when he 
says, “ Behold I am at the point to die, and what profit 
shall this birthright do to me?’ he betrays a profane desire 
_ entirely addicted to the earth and to the flesh. It is not, 
indeed, to be doubted that he spake sincerely, when he de- 
 clared that he was impelled by a sense of the approach of 
death. For they are under a misapprehension who under- 
_ stand him to use the words, “ Behold I die,” as if he meant 
_ merely to say, that his life would not be long, because, by 
_ hunting daily among wild beasts, his life was in constant 
danger. Therefore, in order to escape immediate death, he 
_ exchanges his birthright for food; notwithstanding, he griev- 
ously sins in so doing, because he regards his birthright as 
_ of no value, unless it may be made profitable in the present 
life. For, hence it happens, that he barters a spiritual for 
an earthly and fading good. On this account the Apostle 
calls him a “ profane person,” (Heb. xii. 16,) as one who 
settles in the present life, and will not aspire higher. But 
it would have been his true wisdom rather to undergo a 
thousand deaths than to renounce his birthright ; which, so 
far from being confined within the narrow limits of one age 
alone, was capable of transmitting the perpetuity of a hea- 
venly life to his posterity also." Now, let each of us look 
well to himself; for since the disposition of us all is earthly, 


the epithet, and the omission of the substantive, indicated the extreme haste 
and eagerness of the asker. His eye was caught by the colour of the dish ; 
and being faint with hunger and fatigue, he gave way to the solicitations 
of appetite, regardless of consequences.” —Bush. 

1 It is to be remembered that the birthright included not merely earthly 
advantages, but those also which were spiritual. Till the tribe of Levi 
was accepted by God, in lieu of all the first-born of Israel, the eldest 
son was the priest of the family as well as its natural head. And this was 
probably the part of the birthright which Esau treated with peculiar con- 
ene’ and for which the Apostle Paul styles him a “ profane person,”— 








































54. COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXV 


if we follow nature as our leader, we shall easily renounce 
the celestial inheritance. Therefore, we should frequently _ 
recall to mind the Apostle’s oxhoniaiaety “Let us not be | 
profane persons as Esau was.’ i 
33. And Jacob said, Swear to me. ; acob did not act 
cruelly towards his brother, for he took nothing from him, ~ 
but only desired a confirmation of that right which had been. 
divinely granted to him; and he does this with a pious in- © 
tention, that he may hereby the more fully establish the — 
eertainty of his own election, Meanwhile the infatuation 
of Esau is to be observed, who, in the name and presence of 
God, does not hesitate to set his birthright to sale. Although 
he had before rushed inconsiderately upon the food under 
. the maddening impulse of hunger; now, at least, when an 
oath is exacted from him, some sense of religion should have 
stolen over him to correct his brutal cupidity. But he is 
so addicted to gluttony that he makes God himself a witness 
of his ingratitude. ‘q 
34, Then Jacob gave. Although, at first sight, this state- 
ment seems to be cold and superfluous, it is nevertheless of 
great weight. For, in the first place, Moses commends the — 
piety of holy Jacob, who in aspiring to a heavenly life, was — 
able to bridle the appetite for food. Certainly he was not a — 
log of wood; in preparing the food for the satisfying of his 
hunger, he would the more sharpen his appetite. Where- 
fore he must of necessity do violence to himself in order to 
bear his hunger. But he would never have been able in this 
manner to subdue his flesh, unless a spiritual desire of a 
better life had flourished within him.. On the other side, the 
remarkable indifference of his brother Esau is emphatically 
described in few words, “ he did eat and drink, and rose up 
and went his way.” For what reason are these four things — 
stated? Truly, that we may know what is declared imme- 
diately after, that he accounted the incomparable benefit of 
which he was deprived as nothing. The complaint of the © 
Lacedemonian captive is celebrated by the historians. The 
army, which had long sustained a siege, surrendered to the — 
enemy for want of water. After they had drunk out of the — 
river, O comrades, (he exclaimed,) for what a little pleasure 





THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 55 






have we lost an incomparable good! He, miserable man, 
“having quenched his thirst, returned to his _ senses, and 
3 _ mourned over his lost liberty. But Esau having’ satisfied 
% “his appetite, did not consider that he had sacrificed a bless- 
¥ ing far more valuable than a hundred lives, to purchase a re- 


_ past which would be ended in half an hour. 


Thus are all 


é profane persons accustomed to act: alienated from the celes- 
_ tial life, they do not perceive that they have lost anything, 


_ till God thunders upon them out of heaven. 


As long as 


_ they enjoy their carnal wishes, they cast the anger of God 
_ behind them ; and hence it happens that they go stupidly 


- forward to their own destruction. 


Wherefore let us learn, 


st if, at any time, we, being deceived by the allurements of the 
_ world, swerve from the right way, quickly to rouse ourselves 


_ from our slumber. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


1. AnD there was a famine in the 
land, besides the first famine that 
was in the days of Abraham. And 
_ Isaac went unto Abimelech king of 
_ the Philistines unto Gerar. 

_ 2, And the Lord appeared unto 

_ him, and said, Go not down into 
Egypt; dwell in the land which I 
shall tell thee of. 

8. Sojourn in this land, and I will 
be with thee, and will bless thee : 
for unto thee, and unto thy seed, I 
will give all these countries ; and I 
will perform the oath which I sware 
unto Abraham thy father: 

4. And I will make thy seed to 

-multiply as the stars of heaven, and 
will give unto thy seed all these coun- 
tries: and in thy seed shall all the 
nations of the earth be blessed ; 

5. Because that Abraham obeyed 
my voice, and kept my charge, my 
commandments, my statutes, and my 
laws. 

6. And Isaac dwelt in Gerar. 

7. And the men of the place asked 
him of his wife; and he said, She is 
my sister: for he feared to say, She 
is my wife; lest, said he, the men of 


1. Deinde fuit fames in terra pre- 
ter famem superiorem, quee fuerat in 
diebus Abraham: et profectus est 
Ishac ad Abimelech regem Pelisthim 
in Gerar. 

2. Nam visus est ei Iehova, et 
dixit, Ne descendas in Aigyptum: 
habita in terra quam dicam tibi. 


3. Inhabita terram hane, et ero 
tecum, et benedicam tibi: quia tibi 
et semini tuo dabo omnes terras 
istas: et statuam juramentum quod 
jurayvi ad Abraham patrem tuum. 


4. Et multiplicare faciam semen 
tuum sicut stellas cceli, et dabo 
semini tuo omnes terras istas: bene- 
dicenturque in semine tuo omnes 
gentes terre : 

5. Eo quod obedierit Abraham 
yoci mez, et custodierit custodiam 
meam, precepta mea, statuta mea, 
et leges meas. 

6. Et habitavit Ishac in Gerar. 

7. Et interrogaverunt incole re- 
gionis de uxore ejus; et dixit, Soror 
mea est: quia timuit dicere, uxor 
mea est: ne forte occiderent me in- 


56 COMMENTARY UPON 

the should kill me for Re- cole regionis propter Ribeam, quis 
; because she was fair to look pulchra aspectu erat. — 

upon. sii 


8. And it came to pass, when he 
had been there a long time, that 
Abimelech king of the Philistines 
looked out at a window, and saw, 
and, behold, Isaac was sporting with 
Rebekah his wife. 

9. And Abimelech called Isaac, 
and said, Behold, of a surety she és 
thy wife ; and how saidst thou, She 
is my sister? And Isaac said unto 
him, Because I said, Lest I die for 
her. axa} 

10. And Abimelech said, What is 
this thou hast done unto us? one of 
the people might lightly have lien 
with thy wife, and thou shouldest 
have brought guiltiness upon us. 

11. And Abimelech charged all 
his people, saying, He that toucheth 
this man, or his wife, shall surely be 
put to death. 

12. Then Isaac sowed in that 
land, and received in the same year 
an hundred-fold; and the Lord 
blessed him. 

13. And the man waxed great, 
and went forward, and grew, until 
he became very great: 

14. For he had possession of flocks, 
and possession of herds, and great 
store of servants: and the Philis- 
tines envied him. 

15. For all the wells which his 
father’s servants had digged in the 
days of Abraham his father, the 
Philistines had stopped them, and 
filled them with earth. 

16. And Abimelech said unto 
Isaac, Go from us; for thou art 
much mightier than we. 

17. And Isaac departed thence, 
and pitched his tent in the valley of 
Gerar, and dwelt there. 

18. And Isaac digged again the 
wells of water which they had digged 
in the days of Abraham his father ; 
for the Philistines had stopped them 
after the death of Abraham: and he 
called their names after the names 
by which his father had called them. 

19. And Isaac’s servants digged 













CHAP. XXVI. 


8. Verum fuit, quum protracti 
essent ei ibi dies, aspexit Abimelech 
rex Pelisthim per fenestram, et vidit, 
et ecce Ishac ludebat cum Ribca 
uxore sua. ue 


9. Tune vocavit Abimelech Ishae, 
et dixit, Vere ecce uxor tua est; et 
quomodo dixisti, Soror mea est? 
Et dixit ad eum Ishac, Quia dixi, 
Ne forte moriar propteream. = 


10. Et dixit Abimelech, Quid hoe 
fecisti nobis? paulum abfuit quin 
dormierit unus e populo cum uxore 
tua, et venire fecisses super nos de- 
lictum. r 

11. Precepit itaque Abimelech 
omni populo, dicendo, Qui tetigerit 
virum hune, et uxorem ejus, mori- 
endo morietur. 

12. Et sevit Ishac in terra ipsa, 
et reperit in anno ipso centum mo- 
dios: et benedixit ei Iehova. 


| 
| 
| 
| 


13. Et crevit vir, et perrexit per-— 
gendo et crescendo, donec cresceret 
valde. "7 

14. Et fuit ei possessio pecudum, 
et possessio boum, et proventus mul- 
tus: et inviderunt ei Pelisthim. 


15. Itaque omnes puteos, quos 
foderant servi patris sui in diebus 
Abraham patris sui, obturaverunt 
Pelisthim, et impleverunt eos terra. 


16. Et dixit Abimelech ad Ishac, — 
Abi a nobis: quia longe fortior es — 
nobis. 

17. Abiit ergo inde Ishae, et man- 
sit in valle Gerar, et habitavit ibi. 


18. Postquam reversus est Ishae, 
fodit puteos aque, quos foderant in 
diebus Abraham patris sui: quia — 
obturaverant eos Pelisthim mortuo — 
Abraham: et vocavit eos nominibus 
secundum nomina, quibus vocayerat 
eos pater suus. | 

t9. Et foderunt servi Ishae in 






CHAP, XXVI. 


in the valley, and found there a well 
_ of springing water. 
a 20. And the herdmen of —— 
did strive with Isaac’s herdmen, sa 

ing, The water zs ours: and he ¢ 
ed the name of the well Ksek ; be- 
~ eause they strove with him. 
: 21. And they digged another well, 
2 and strove for that also: and he 
called the name of it Sitnah. 
22. And he removed from thence, 
and digged another well; and for 
that they strove not: and he called 
_ the name of it Rehoboth; and he 
said, For now the Lord hath made 
~ room for us, and we shall be fruitful 
in the land. 
_ 23. And he went up from thence 
_ to Beer-sheba. 
_. 24, And the Lord appeared unto 
him the same night, and said, I am 
the God of Abraham thy father : 
fear not, for I am with thee, and will 
bless thee, and multiply thy seed, for 
my servant Abraham’s sake. 
- 25. And he builded an altar there, 
and called upon the name of the 
Lord, and pitched his tent there : and 
there Isaac’s servants digged a well. 

26. Then Abimelech went to him 
from Gerar, and Ahuzzath one of his 
friends, and Phichol the chief cap- 
tain of his army. 
: 27. And Isaac said unto them, 
_ Wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye 
hate me, and have sent me away 

from you? 

28. And they said, We saw cer- 
tainly that the Lord was with thee: 
and we said, Let there be now an oath 
betwixt us, even betwixt us and thee, 
and let us make acovenant with thee; 

29. That thou wilt do us no hurt, 
as we have not touched thee, and as 
we have done unto thee nothing but 
good, and have sent thee away in 
peace: thou art now the blessed of 
the Lord. 

30. And he made them a feast, 

and they did eat and drink. 

31. And they rose up betimes in 
the morning, and sware one to an- 
other: and Isaac sent them away, 
and they departed from him in peace. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


57 


valle, et invenerunt ibi puteum aque 
vivee. 

20. Sed litigaverunt pastores Ge- 
rar cum pastoribus Ishae, dicendo, 
Nostra est aqua: et vocavit nomen 
putei Hesech, quia litigaverunt cum 
eo. 

21. Et foderunt puteum alium, 
et litigaverunt etiam super eo: et 
vocavit nomen ejus Sitnah. 

22. Et transtulit se inde, et fodit 
puteum alium, et non litigaverunt 
super eo: ideo vocavit nomen ejus 
Rehoboth: et dixit, Quia nune dila- 
tationem fecit Iehova nobis, et crevi- 
mus in terra. 


23. Et ascendit inde in Beer- 
sebah. 

24. Et visus est ei Jehova nocte 
ipsa, et dixit, Ego sum Deus Abra- 
ham patris tui: ne timeas, quia 
tecum sum, et benedicam tibi, et 
multiplicare faciam semen tuum 
propter Abraham servum meum. 

25. Tune edificavit ibi altare, et 
invocavit nomen Iehove, et tetendit 
ibi tabernaculum suum: et foderunt 
ibi servi Ishac puteum. 

26. Porro Abimelech profectus est 
ad eum ex Gerar, et Ahuzath qui 
erat ex amicis ejus, et Phichol prin- 
ceps exercitus ejus. 

27. Et dixit ad eos Ishac, Cur 
venistis ad me, et vos odio habuistis 
me, et emisistis me ne essem vobis- 
cum ? 

28. Et dixerunt, Videndo vidimus 
quod esset Iehova tecum, et dixi- 
mus, Sit nunc juramentum inter 
nos, inter nos et inter te, et percu- 
tiamus foedus tecum. 

29. Si feceris nobiscum malum : 
quemadmodum non tetigimus te, et 
quemadmodum fecimus tecum dun- 
taxat bonum, et dimisimus te in 
pace: tu nune es benedictus Ie- 
hove. 

30. Instruxit autem’ eis convi- 
vium, et ederunt, atque biberunt. 

31. Et surrexerunt mane: et ju- 
raverunt alter alteri: et deduxit eos 
Ishac, et abierunt ab eo in pace. 


58 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXVI. 


=e And it came to pass thesame 32. Adhee fuit, in die ipsa vene- 
that Isaac’s servants came, and runt servi Ishac, et nuntiaverunt ei 
tall him concerning the well which de puteo quem foderant, et dixerunt 
they had digged, and said unto him, ei, Invenimus aquam. am 
We have found water. yak 
33. And he called it Shebah: 33. Et vocavit eum Sibhah: id- 
therefore the name of the city is circo nomen urbis est Beer-sebah 
Beer-sheba unto this day. usque ad diem hane. 
34. And Esau was forty years old 34. Erat autem Esau quadra- 
wien he took to wife Judith the genarius, et accepit uxorem Iehu- 
hter of Beeri the Hittite, and dith filiam Beeri Hittzi, et Bosm2% oe 
ashemath the daughter of Elon the _ filiam Elon Hittzei. 


in . 
35. Which were a grief of mind 35. Et‘irritabant spiritum Ishae 
unto Isaac and to Rebekah. et Ribee. | 


1. And there was a famine. Moses relates that Isaac was 
tried by nearly the same kind of temptation as that through | 
which his father Abraham had twice passed. I have before 
explained how severe and violent was this assault. The 
condition in which it was the will of God to place his ser- 
vants, as strangers and pilgrims in the land which he had 
promised to give them, seemed sufficiently troublesome and — 
hard ; but it appears still more intolerable, that he scarcely — 
suffered them to exist (if we may so speak) in this wander- 
ing, uncertain, and changeable kind of life, but almost con- — 
sumed them with hunger. Who would not say that God had — 
forgotten himself, when he did not even supply his own — 
children,—whom he had received into his especial care and — 
trust,—however sparingly and scantily, with food? But God — 
thus tried the holy fathers, that we might be taught, by their : 
example, not to be effeminate and cowardly under tempta-— 
tions. Respecting the terms here used, we may observe, 
that though there were two seasons of dearth in the time of 
Abraham, Moses alludes only to the one, of which the re- 
membrance was most recent.’ 

2. And the Lord appeared unto him. I do not doubt but 
a reason is here given why Isaac rather went to the country 
of Gerar than to Egypt, which perhaps would have been — 







1 Abimelech, king of the Philistines, mentioned in this verse, was not he 
who is spoken of in Gen. xxi., but perhaps his descendant. “It is pro- 
bable the name was common to the kings of Gerar, as Pharaoh was to the — 
kings of Egypt. The meaning of the w ord POI i is, My father the king. 
Kings ought to be the fathers of their country.”—Menochius in Poli Syn. 












‘CHAP. XXVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 59 


more convenient for him; but Moses teaches that he was 
_ withheld by a heavenly oracle, so that a free choice was not 
left him. It may here be asked, why does the Lord prohibit 
Isaac from going to Egypt, whidite te had suffered his father 
to go? Although Moses does not give the reason, yet we 
may be allowed to conjecture that the journey would have 
_ been more dangerous to the son. The Lord could indeed 
have endued the son also with the power of his Spirit, as he 
had done his father Abraham, so that the abundance and 
- delicacies of Egypt should not have corrupted him by their 
 allurements; but since he governs his faithful people with 
_ such moderation, that he does not correct all their faults at 
_ once, and render them entirely pure, he assists their infir- 
_ mities, and anticipates, with suitable remedies, those evils by 
_ which they might be ensnared. Because, therefore, he knew 
_ that there was more infirmity in Isaac than there had been 
in Abraham, he was unwilling to expose him to danger ; 
for he is faithful, and will not suffer his own people to be 
tempted beyond what they are able to bear. (1 Cor. x. 13.) 
Now, as we must be persuaded, that however arduous and 
burdensome may be the temptations which alight upon us, 
_ the Divine help will never fail to renew our strength ; so, on 
the other hand, we must beware lest we rashly rush into 
dangers ; but each should be admonished by his own infir- 
mity to proceed cautiously and with fear. 

Dwell in the land. God commands him to settle in the 
promised land, vet with the understanding that he should 
dwell there as a stranger. The intimation was thus given, 
that the time had not yet arrived in which he should exer- 
cise dominion over it. God sustains indeed his mind with 
the hope of the promised inheritance, but requires this honour 
to be given to his word, that Isaac should remain inwardly 
at rest, in the midst of outward agitations; and truly we 

never lean upon a better support than when, disregarding 
the appearance of things present, we depend entirely upon 
the word of the Lord, and apprehend by faith that blessing 
which is not yet apparent. Moreover, he again inculcates 
the promise previously made, in order to render Isaac more 
prompt to obey; for so is the Lord wont to awaken his ser- 










60: COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXVI. 


vants from their indolence, that they may fight valiantly for 
him, while he constantly affirms that their labour shall not 
be in vain; for although he requires from us a free and un- 
reserved bbadidhve, as a father does from his children, he 
yet so condescends to the weakness of our capacity, that he 
invites and encourages us by the prospect of reward. 4 
5. Because that Abraham obeyed my voice. Moses does 
not mean that Abraham’s obedience was the reason why the 
promise of God was confirmed and ratified to him ; but from 
what has been said before, (chap. xxii. 18,) where 6 have a 
similar expression, we learn, that what God freely bestows 
upon the faithful is sometimes, beyond their desert, ascribed 
to themselves; that they, knowing their intention to be ap- 
proved by the Lord, may the more ardently addict and de- 
vote themselves entirely to his service: so he now commends ~ 
the obedience of Abraham, in order that Isaac may be sti- 
mulated to an imitation of his example. And although laws, 
statutes, rites, precepts, and ceremonies, had not yet been 
written, Moses used these terms, that he might the more 
clearly show how sedulously Abraham regulated his life ac- 
cording to the will of God alone—how carefully he abstained 
from all the impurities of the heathen—and how exactly he ~ 
pursued the straight course of holiness, without turning aside — 
to the right hand or to the left: for the Lord often honours” 
his own law with these titles for the sake of restraining our 
excesses ; as if he should say that it wanted nothing to con- — 
stitute it a perfect rule, but embraced everything pertaining 
to absolute holiness. The meaning therefore is, that Abra- 
ham, having formed his life in entire accordance with the 
will of God, walked in his pure service. 
7. And the men of the place asked him. Moses relates — 
that Isaac was tempted in the same manner as his father 
Abraham, in having his wife taken from him; and without 
doubt he was so led by the example of his father, that he, — 
being instructed by the similarity of the circumstances, 
might become associated with him in his faith. Never- 
theless, on this point he ought rather to have avoided 
than imitated his father’s fault; for no doubt he well 
remembered that the chastity of his mother had twice been 





CHAP. XXVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 61 


- put in great danger; and although she had been wonder- 
fully rescued by the hand of God, yet both she and her hus- 
_ band paid the penalty of their distrust: therefore the negli- 
_ gence of Isaac is inexcusable, in that he now strikes against 
_ the same stone. He does not in express terms deny his wife; 
_ but he is to be blamed, first, because, for the sake of presery- 
ing his life, he resorts to an evasion not far removed from a 
_ lie; and secondly, because, in absolving his wife from con- 
_ jugal fidelity, he exposes her to prostitution: but he ag- 
_ gravates his fault, principally (as I have said) in not taking 

warning from domestic examples, but voluntarily casting his 

wife into manifest danger. Whence it appears how great is 
_ the propensity of our nature to distrust, and how easy it is 
_ to be devoid of wisdom in affairs of perplexity. Since, 
_ therefore, we are surrounded on all sides with so many dan- 
gers, we must ask the Lord to confirm us by his Spirit, lest 
our minds should faint, and be dissolved in fear and trem- 
bling ; otherwise we shall be frequently engaged in vain en- 
terprises, of which we shall repent soon, and yet too late to 
remedy the evil. 

8. Abimelech, king of the Philistines, looked out at a window. 
Truly admirable is the kind forbearance of God, in not only 
condescending to pardon the twofold fault of his servant, 
but in stretching forth his hand, and in wonderfully avert- 
ing, by the application of a speedy remedy, the evil which 
he would have brought upon himself. God did not suffer— 
what twice had occurred to Abraham—that his wife should 
be torn from his bosom; but stirred up a heathen king, 
mildly, and without occasioning him any trouble, to correct 
his folly. But although God sets before us such an example 
of his kindness, that the faithful, if at any time they may 
have fallen, may confidently hope to find him gentle and 
propitious ; yet we must beware of self-security, when we 
observe, that the holy woman who was, at that time, the only: 
mother of the Church on earth, was exempted from dishon- 
our, by a special privilege. Meanwhile, we may conjecture, 
from the judgment of Abimelech, how holy and pure had 
been the conduct of Isaac, on whom not even a suspicion of 
evil could fall; and further, how much greater integrity 





62 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXVI. 


flourished in that age than in our own. For why does he 
not condemn Isaac as one guilty of fornication, since it was 


probable that some crime was concealed, when he disingenu- 


ously obtruded the name of sister, and tacitly denied her to’ 
be his wife? and therefore I have no doubt that his religion, 
and the integrity of his life, availed to defend his character. - 
By this example we are taught so to cultivate righteousness | 
in our whole life, that men may not be able to suspect any-— 
thing wicked or dishonourable respecting us; for there is 


nothing which will more completely vindicate us from every 
mark of infamy than a life passed in modesty and temper- 
ance. We must, however, add, what I have also before 
alluded to, that lusts were not, at that time, so commonly 
and so profusely indulged, as to cause an unfavourable sus- 
picion to enter into the mind of the king concerning a 


sojourner of honest character. Wherefore, he easily per-— 


suades himself that Rebekah was a wife and not a harlot. 
The chastity of that age is further proved from this, that 
Abimelech takes the familiar sporting of Isaac with Rebekah 
as an evidence of their marriage. But now licentiousness 
has so broken through all bounds, that husbands are com- 


pelled to hear in silence of the dissolute conduct of their — 


wives with strangers. 
10. What ts this thou hast done unto us? The Lord does 
not chastise Isaac as he deserved, perhaps because he was 








not so fully endued with patience as his father was; and, — 


therefore, lest the seizing of his wife should dishearten him, 
God mercifully prevents it. Yet, that the censure may pro- 
duce the deeper shame, God constitutes a heathen his master 
and his reprover. We may add, that Abimelech chides his 
folly, not so much with the design of injuring him, as of up- 
braiding him. It ought, however, deeply to have wounded 
the mind of the holy man, when he perceived that his offence 
was obnoxious to the judgment even of the blind. Where- 
fore, let us remember that we must walk in the light which 
God has kindled for us, lest even unbelievers, who are 


* The following passage is here omitted in the translation :—“ Non enim 
de coitu loquitur Moses, sed de aliquo liberiore gestu, qui vel dissolute 
lascivie, vel conjugalis amoris testis esset.” 


ee 


= XXVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 63 








And certainly when we neglect to obey the voice of 
God, we deserve to be sent to oxen and asses for instruction! 
MiAbinelech, truly, does not investigate nor prosecute the 
’ _ whole offence of Isaac, but only aibaded to one part of it. 
n Yet Isaac, when thus gently admonished by a single word, 
ought to have condemned himself, seeing that, instead of 
- eommitting himself and his wife to God, who had promised 
é to be the guardian of them both, he had resorted, through 
_ his own unbelief, to an illicit remedy. For faith has this 
; ‘property, that it confines us within divinely prescribed 
_ bounds, so that we attempt nothing except with God’s 
_ authority or permission. Whence it follows that Isaac’s 
(4 faith wavered when he swerved from his duty as a husband. 
_ We gather, besides, from the words of Abimelech, that all 
nations have the séntiment impressed upon their minds, 
_ that the violation of holy wedlock is a crime worthy of 
_ divine vengeance, and have consequently a dread of the 
_ judgment ofGod. Foralthough the minds of men are dark- 
_ ened with dense clouds, so that they are frequently deceived; 
yet God has caused some power of discrimination between 
right and wrong to remain, so that each should bear about 
_ with him his own condemnation, and that all should be 
. without excuse. If, then, God cites even unbelievers to his 
_ tribunal, and does not suffer them to escape just condemna- 
tion, how horrible is that punishment which awaits us, if we 
endeavour to obliterate, by our own wickedness, that know- 
ledge which God has engraven on our consciences ? 

11. And Abimelech charged all his people. In denouncing 
capital punishment against any who should do injury to 
this stranger, we may suppose him to have issued this edict 
as a special privilege; for it is not customary thus rigidly 
to avenge every kind of injury. Whence, then, arose this 
disposition on the part of the king to prefer Isaac to all the 
native inhabitants of the country, and almost to treat him 

_ as an equal, except that some portion of the divine majesty 


1 The allusion is obviously to Isaiah i. 3: “ The ox knoweth his owner, 
_ and the ass his master’s crib; but Israel doth not know, my people doth 
not consider.” — Fd. 









64 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXVI. 
shone forth in him, which secured to him this degree of 
reverence? God, also, to assist the infirmity of his servant 
inclined the mind of the heathen king, in every: way, to- 
show him favour. And there is no doubt that his general 
modesty induced the king thus carefully to protect him ; 
for he, perceiving him to be a timid man, who had been on 
the point of purchasing his own life by the ruin of his wife, 
was the more disposed to assist him in his dangers, in | 
order that he might live in security under his own govern- 
ment. UR Sie 
12. Then Isaac sowed. Here Moses proceeds to relate in 
what manner Isaac reaped the manifest fruit of the blessing 
promised to him by God; for he says, that when he had 
sowed, the increase was a hundredfold : which was an extra- 
ordinary fertility, even in that land. He also adds, that he © 
was rich in cattle, and had a very great household. More- 
over, he ascribes the praise of all these things to the blessing 
of God ; as it is also declared in the psalm, that the Lord — 
abundantly supplies what will satisfy his people while they 
sleep. (Ps. cxxvii. 2.) It may, however, be asked, how 
could Isaac sow when God had commanded him to be a 
stranger all his life? Some suppose that he had bought a 
field, and so translate the word MJ) (kanah) a possession ; 
but the context corrects their error: for we find soon after- — 
wards, that the holy man was not delayed, by having land to — 
sell, from removing his effects elsewhere: besides, since — 
the purchasing of land was contrary to his peculiar vocation | 
and to the command of God, Moses undoubtedly would not — 
have passed over such a notable offence. To this may be 
added, that since express mention is immediately made of a — 
tent, we may hence infer, that wherever he might come, he 
would have to dwell in the precarious condition of a stranger. 
We must, therefore, maintain, that he sowed in a hired field. 
For although he had not a foot of land in his own possession, — 
yet, that he might discharge the duty of a good householder, 
it behoved him to prepare food for his family ; and perhaps 
hunger quickened his care and industry, that he might with — 
the greater diligence make provision for himself against the 
future. Nevertheless, it is right to keep in mind, what I 



















MAP. XXVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 65 


have lately alluded to, that he received as a divine favour 
he abundance which he had acquired by his own labour. 
_ 14, And the Philistines envied him. We are taught by 
this history that the blessings of God which pertain to 
the present earthly life are never pure and perfect, but 
‘are mixed with some troubles, lest quiet and indulgence 
should render us negligent. Wherefore, let us all learn 
not too ardently to desire great wealth. If the rich are 
harassed by any cause of disquietude, let them know that 
they are roused by the Lord, lest they should fall fast 
asleep in the midst of their pleasures; and let the poor 
enjoy this consolation, that their poverty is not without its 
advantages. For it is no light good to live free from envy, 
tumults, and strifes. Should any one raise the objection, 
that it can by no means be regarded as a favour, that. God, 
in causing Isaac to abound in wealth, exposed him to envy, 
to contentions, and to many troubles; there is a ready 
answer, that not all the troubles with fell God exercises 
“his people, in any degree prevent the benefits which he be- 
_ upon them from retaining the taste of his paternal 
love. Finally, he so attempers the favour which he mani- 
fests towards his children in this world, that he stirs them 
“up, as with sharp goads, to the consideration of a celestial 
life. It was not, however, a slight trial, that the simple 
element of water, which is the common property of all 
animals, was denied to the holy patriarch; with how much 
greater patience ought we to bear our less grievous suffer- 
ings! If, however, at any time we are angry at being un- 
-worthily injured; let us remember that, at least, we are not 
so cruelly treated as holy Isaac was, when he had to contend 
for water. Besides, not only was he deprived of the element 
of water, but the wells which his father Abraham had dug 
for himself and his posterity were filled up. This, therefore, 
_ was the extreme of cruelty, not only to defraud a stranger 
of every service due to him, but even to take from him what 
had been obtained by the houb of his own father, and what 
he possessed without inconvenience to any one. 
_ 16. And Abimelech said wnto Isaac. It is uncertain 
whether the king of Gerar expelled Isaac of his own accord 
VOL. II. E 


we 


6o COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXVI, 


from his kingdom, or whether he commanded him to settk 
elsewhere, because he perceived him to be envied by the 
people. He possibly might, in this manner, advise him as a 
friend; although it is more probable that his mind had become 
alienated from Isaac; for at the close of the chapter Moses 
relates, that the holy man complains strongly of the king as 
well as of others. But since we can assert nothing with 
certainty respecting the real feelings of the king, let it suf: 
fice to maintain, what is of more importance, that in con 
sequence of the common wickedness of mankind, they whe 
are the most eminent fall under the suspicion of the commor 
people. Satiety, indeed, produces ferocity. Wherefore there 
is nothing to which the rich are more prone than proudly t¢ 
boast, to carry themselves more insolently than they ought, 
and to stretch every nerve of their power to oppress others. 
No such suspicion, indeed, could fall upon Isaac; but he 
had to bear that envy which was the attendant on a common 
vice. Whence we infer, how much more useful and desir- 
able it often is, for us to be placed in a moderate con- 
dition ; which is, at least, more peaceful, and which is 
neither exposed to the storms of envy, nor obnoxious to un- 
just suspicions. Moreover, how rare and unwonted was the- 
blessing of God in rendering Isaac prosperous, may be in- 
ferred from the fact, that his wealth had become formidable 
both to the king and to the people. A large inheritance 
truly had descended to him from his father; but Moses 
shows, that from his first entrance into the land, he had so 
greatly prospered in a very short time, that it seemed no 
longer possible for the inhabitants to endure him. 

18. And Isaac digged again the wells of water. First, we 
see that the holy man was so hated by his neighbours, as t¢ 
be under the necessity of seeking a retreat for himself which 
was destitute of water; and no habitation is so troublesome 
and inconvenient for the ordinary purposes of life as that 
which suffers from scarcity of water. Besides, the abundance 
of his cattle and the multitude of his servants—who were like 
a little army—rendered a supply of water very necessary ; 
whence we learn that he was brought into severe straits, 
But that this last necessity did not instigate him to seek 






















_ revenge, is a proof of singular forbearance ; for we know that 
lighter injuries will often rack the patience even of humane 
and moderate men. If any one should object to this view, 
that he was deficient in strength; I grant, indeed, that 
he was not able to undertake a regular war; but as his 
father Abraham had armed four Hindle deviate: he also 
certainly had a large troop of domestics, who could easily 
have repelled any force brought against him by his neigh- 
pours. But the hope which he had entertained when Re 
settled in the valley of Gerar, was again suddenly cut off. 
He knew that his father Abraham had there used wells 
which were his own, and which he had himself discovered ; 
and although they had been stopped up, yet they were 
well known to have sufficient springs of water to prevent 
the labour of digging them again from being mispent. More- 
over, the fact that the wells had been obstructed ever 
since the departure of Abraham, shows how little respect 
the inhabitants had for their guest ; for although their own 
country would have been benefited by these wells, they chose 
rather to deprive themselves of this advantage than to have 
Abraham for a neighbour ; for, in order that such a conve- 
nience might not attract him to the place, they, by stopping 
‘up the wells, did, in a certain sense, intercept his way. It 
was a custom among the ancients, if they wished to involve 
amy one in ruin, and to cut him off from the society of men, 
to interdict him from water, and from fire: thus the Philis- 
tines, for the purpose of removing Abraham from their vici- 
nity, deprive him of the element of water. 

He called their names. He did not give new names to 
the wells, but restored those which had been assigned them 
by his father Abraham, that, by this memorial, the ancient 
possession of them might be renewed. But subsequent vio- 
lence compelled him to change their names, that at least he 
might, by some monument, make manifest the injury which 
had been done by the Philistines, and reprove them on ac- 
count of it: for whereas he calls one well ‘strife, or conten- 
tion, another hostility, he denies that the inhabitants pos- 
sessed that by right, or by any honest title, which they had 
Seized upon as enemies or robbers. Meanwhile, it is right to 


' 
| HAP. XXVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 67 
( 
} 
































68 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXVI 


consider, that in the midst of these strifes he had a contest 
not less severe with thirst and deficiency of water, where- 
by the Philistines attempted to destroy him; such is the 
scope of the history. First, Moses, according to his man 
ner, briefly runs through the summary of the affair: name- 
ly, that Isaac intended to apply again to his own purpose 
the wells which his father had previously found, and to ae 
quire, in the way of recovery, the lost possession of them. 
He then prosecutes the subject more diffusely, stating that 
when he attempted the work, he was unjustly defrauded of 
his labour ; and whereas, in digging the third well, he civil 
thanks to God, and ealls it Room,’ because, by the favour of 
God, a more copious supply is now afforded him, he furnishes: 
an example of invincible patience. Therefore, however se- 
verely he may have been harassed, yet when, after he had 
been freed from these troubles, he so placidly returns thanks 
to God, and celebrates his goodness, he shows that in the 
midst of trials he has retained a composed and tranquil mind. 

23. And he went up fiom thence to Beer-sheba. Next fol- 
lows a more abundant consolation, and one affording effectual 
refreshment to the mind of the holy man. In the tranquil 
enjoyment of the well, he acknowledges the favour which - 
God had showed him: but forasmuch as one word of God 
weighs more with the faithful than the accumulated mass of 
all good things, we cannot doubt that Isaac received this 
oracle more joyfully than if a thousand rivers of nectar had 
flowed unto him : and truly Moses designedly commemorates 
in lofty terms this act of favour, that the Lord encouraged | 
him by his own word, (verse 24;) whence we may learn, in 
ascribing proper honour to each of the other gifts of God, 
still always to give the palm to that proof of his paternal 
love which he grants us in his word. Food, clothing, health, 
peace, and other advantages, afford us a taste of the Divine 
goodness ; but when he addresses us familiarly, and expressly 
declares himself to be our Father, then indeed it is that 
thoroughly refreshes us to satiety. Moses does not explain 


* Latitudines, a literal Latin translation of the Hebrew word nam, 


(Rehoboth,) a plural form, expressing the notion of abundant enlargement 
and room.— Kd. 


















 OHAP. XXVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 69 


what had been the cause of Isaac’s removal to Beer-sheba, 
the ancient dwelling-place of his fathers. It might be that 
the Philistines ceased not occasionally to annoy him; and 
thus the holy man, worn out with their implacable malice, 
‘removed to a greater distance. It is indeed probable, taking 
the circumstance of the time into account, that he was sor- 
- rowful and anxious ; for as soon as he had arrived at that 
place, God appeared unto him on the very first night. Here, 
then, something very opportune is noticed. Moreover, as 
often as Moses before related that God had appeared unto ~ 
_ Abraham, he, at the same time, showed that the holy man 
was either tormented with grievous cares, or was held in 
_ Suspense under some apprehension, or was plunged in sad- 
ness, or, after many distresses, was nearly borne down by 
fatigue, so as to render it apparent that the hand of God 
2 was seasonably stretched out to him as his necessity required, 
; lest he should sink under the evils which surrounded him. 
_ So now, as I explain it, he came to Isaac, for the purpose of 
: ene him, already wearied and broken down by various 
miseries. 
_ 24, And the Lord appeared unto him. This vision (as I 
_ have elsewhere said) was to prepare him to listen more at- 
tentively to God, and to convince him that it was God with 
~ whom he had to deal; for a voice alone would have had less 
energy. Therefore God appears, in order to produce confi- 
_ dence in and reverence towards his word. In short, visions 
_ were a kind of symbols of the Divine presence, designed to 
remove all doubt from the minds of the holy fathers respect- 
ing him who was about to speak. Should it be objected, 
that such evidence was not sufficiently sure, since Satan 
often deceives men by similar manifestations, being, as it 
were, the ape of God ;—we must keep in mind what has been 
_ said before, that a clear and unambiguous mark was engraven 
- on the visions of God, by which the faithful might certainly 
distinguish them from those which were fallacious, so that 
their faith should not be kept in suspense: and certainly, 
_ since Satan can only delude us in the dark, God exempts his 
_ children from this danger, by illuminating their eyes with 
the brightness of his countenance. Yet God did not fully 


—earmae 


Lae ~ 











70 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXVI. 


manifest his glory to the holy fathers, but assumed a form 
by means of which they might apprehend him according to 
the measure of their capacities; for, as the majesty of God 
is infinite, it cannot be comprehended by the human mind, 
and by its magnitude it absorbs the whole world. Besides, 
it follows of necessity that men, on account of their infirmity, 
must not only faint, but be altogether annihilated in the 
presence of God. Wherefore, Moses does not mean that God 
was seen in his true nature and greatness, but in such a_ 
manner as Isaac was able to bear the sight. But what we 
have said, namely, that the vision was a testimony of Deity, 
for the purpose of giving credibility to the oracle, will more — 
fully appear from the context; for this appearance was not — 
a mute spectre ; but the word immediately followed, which — 
confirmed, in the mind of Isaac, faith in gratuitous adoption 
and salvation. | 

I am the God of Abraham. This preface is intended to 
renew the memory of all the promises before given, and to — 
direct the mind of Isaac to the perpetual covenant which had — 
been made with Abraham, and which was to be transmitted, 
as by tradition, to his posterity. The Lord therefore begins 
by declaring himself to be the God who had spoken at the 
first to Abraham, in order that Isaac might not sever the 
present from the former oracles: for as often as he repeated 
the testimony of his grace to the faithful, he sustained their 
faith with fresh supports. Yet he would have that very faith 
to remain based upon the first covenant by which he had 
adopted them to himself: and we must always keep this 
method in mind, in order that we may learn to gather to- 
gether the promises of God, as they are combined in an in- 
separable bond. Let this also ever occur to us, as a first 
principle, that God thus kindly promises us his grace because 
he has freely adopted us. 

Fear not. Since these words are elsewhere expounded, I 
shall yow be the more brief. In the first place, we must ob- 
serve, that God thus addresses the faithful for the purpose 
of tranquillizing their minds; for, if his word be withdrawn, 
they necessarily become torpid through stupidity, or are 
tormented with disquietude. Whence it follows, that we can 


OE ee se 


>, XXVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 71 















receive peace from no other source than from the mouth of 
‘the Lord, when he declares himself the author of our salva- 
tion ; not that we are then free from all fear, but because the 
confidence of faith is sufficiently efficacious to assuage our 
perturbations. Afterwards the Lord gives proofs of his love, 
tb by its effect, when he promises that he will bless Isaac. 
_ 25, And he builded an altar there. From other passages 
4 are well aware that Moses here speaks of public worship ; 
for inward invocation of God neither requires an altar, nor 
1as any special choice of place; and it is certain that the 
‘saints, wherever they lived, worshipped. But because reli- 
‘gion ought to maintain a testimony before men, Isaac, hav- 
ing erected and consecrated an altar, professes himself a 
‘worshipper of the true and only God, and by this method 
‘separates himself from the polluted rites of heathens. He 
also built the altar, not for himself alone, but for his whole 
family ; that there, with all his household, he might offer 
‘sacrifices. Moreover, since the altar was built for the exter- 
nal exercises of faith, the expression, he called upon God, 
‘implies as much as if Moses had said that Isaac celebrated 
the name of God, and gave testimony of his own faith. The 
visible worship of God had also another use ; namely, that 
E men, according to their infirmity, may stimulate and exercise 
themselves in the fear of God. Besides, since we know that 
sacrifices were then commanded, we must observe that Isaac 
did not rashly trifle in worshipping God, but adhered to the 
‘Yule of faith, that he might undertake nothing without the 
word of God. Whence also we infer how preposterous and 
erroneous a thing it is to imitate the fathers, unless the Lord 
join us with them by means of a similar command. Mean- 
while, the words of Moses clearly signify, that whatever ex- 
ercises of piety the faithful undertake are to be directed to 
this end, namely, that God may be worshipped and invoked. 
To this point, therefore, all rites and ceremonies ought to 
have reference. But although it was the custom of the holy 
fathers to build an altar in whatever place they pitched their 
tent, we yet gather, from the connexion of the words, that 
after God appeared to his servant Isaac, this altar was built 
by him in token of his gratitude. 


— 
































72°. COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXV 

And there Isaac's servants digged a well. It is remark 
able that whereas this place had already received its nan 
from the well which had been dug in it, Isaac should ther 
again have to seek water, especially since Abraham had pw 
chased, for himself and his posterity, the right to the we 
from the king. Moreover, the digging itself was difficul 
and laborious; for Moses had a design in saying, that after 
wards the servants came and said to him, “ We have fount 
water.” Ihave, therefore, no doubt, that throughout the whol 
of that region a conspiracy had been entered into by. the in 
habitants, for the purpose of expelling the holy man, through 
want of water; so that this well of Sheba also had been frau 
dulently stopped up. The context also shows, that the firs 
care of the holy patriarch concerned the worship of God, be 
cause Moses relates that an altar was erected, before he speak 
of the well. Now it is of importance to observe with wha 
great troubles these holy fathers continually had to contend 
which they never would have been able to overcome or t¢ 
endure, unless they had been far removed from our delicate 
course of living. For how severely should we feel the los 
of water, seeing that we often rage against God if we have 
not abundance of wine? Therefore, by such examples, let 
the faithful learn to accustom themselves to patient endur 
ance: and if at any time food and other necessaries of life 
fail them, let them turn their eyes to Isaac, who wandered, 
parched with thirst, in the inheritance which had beet 
divinely promised him.’ 

26. Then Abimelech went to him. We have had an exactlh 
similar narrative in the twenty-first chapter and the twenty 
second verse. The Lord, therefore, followed Isaac with the 
same favour which he had before shown to his father Abra- 
ham. For it was no common blessing, that Abimelech 
should voluntarily seek his friendship, Besides, he would be 
relieved from no little care and anxiety, when his neigh 
bours, who had harassed him in so many ways, being no 
themselves afraid of him, desire to secure his friendship. 


1 Qui siticulosus in hereditate sibi divinitus promissa erravit. Qui est 
errant en Vheritage qui Dien lui avoit promis, et tarrissant de soif. 
Fr. Tr. 






‘CHAP. XXVL THE BOOK OF GENESIs. 73 


‘Therefore the Lord both confers signal honour upon his ser- 
vant, and provides at the same time for his tranquillity. 
i There is not the least doubt that the king was led to this 
- measure, by a secret divine impulse. For, if he was afraid, 
F why did he not resort to some other remedy? why did he hum 
_ble himself to supplicate a private man? why, at least, did 
he not rather send for him, or command him with authority 
, to do what he wished ? But God had so forcibly impressed 
i his mind, that he, forgetting his regal pride, sought for peace 
and alliance with a man who was neither covetous, nor war- 
like, nor furnished with a great army. Thus we may learn, 
_ that the minds of men are in the hand of God, so that he 
not only can incline those to gentleness who before were 
_ swelling with fury, but can humble them by terror, as often 
as he pleases. 
27. And Isaac said unto them, Wherefore come ye to me ? 
Isaac not only expostulates concerning injuries received, but 
_ protests that in future he can have no confidence in them, 
_ since he had found in them a disposition so hostile to him- 
self. This passage teaches us, that-it is lawful for the faith- 
_ ful to complain of their enemies, in order, if possible, to 
- recall them from their purpose of doing injury, and to re- 
strain their force, frauds, and acts of injustice. For liberty 
is not inconsistent with patience: nor does God require of 
his own people, that they should silently digest every injury 
which may be inflicted upon them, but only that they should 
restrain their minds and hands from revenge.’ Now, if their 
minds are pure and well regulated, their tongues will not 
be virulent in reproaching the faults of others; but their 
sole purpose will be to restrain the wicked by a sense of 
shame from iniquity. For where there is no hope of profiting 
by complaints, it is better to cherish peace by silence ; unless, 
perhaps, for the purpose of rendering those who delight 
themselves in wickedness inexcusable. We must, indeed, 
always beware, lest, from a desire of vengeance, our tongues 


wy. 


_ 1 Neque hoe a suis requirit Deus, ut quicquid noxe illatum fuerit, taciti 
devorent ; sed tantum ut animos et manus contineant a vindicta. 

Dieu ne requiert point des siens, quils avallent sans mot dire toutes les 
nuisances qu’on leur fera, mais seulement quils gardent leurs cceurs et 
leur mains de vengence.—/r. T’r. 


{a 
rE! COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXVL 


break out in reproaches; and, as Solomon says, “ hatred 
stirreth up strifes.” (Proy. x. 12.) } 

28. We saw certainly that the Lord was with thee. By 
this argument they prove that they desired a compact with 
Isaac, not insidiously, but in good faith, because they ac- 
knowledge the favour of God towards him. For it was— 
necessary to purge themselves from this suspicion, seeing 
that they now presented themselves so courteously to one 
against whom they had before been unreasonably opposed. | 
This confession of theirs, however, contains very useful in- — 
struction. Profane men in calling one, whose affairs all suc- — 
ceed well and prosperously, the blessed of the Lord, bear 
testimony that God is the author of all good things, and that 
from him alone flows all prosperity. Exceedingly base, 
therefore, is our ingratitude, if, when God acts kindly to- — 
wards us, we pass by his benefits with closed eyes. Again, 
profane men regard the friendship of one whom God favours, 
as desirable for themselves; considering that there is no — 
better or holier commendation than the love of God. Per-— 
versely blind, therefore, are they, who not only neglect those — 
whom God declares to be dear unto him, but also iniqui- 
tously vex them. The Lord proclaims himself ready to exe- — 
cute vengeance on any one who may injure those whom he 
takes under his protection ; but the greater part, unmoved 
by this most terrible denunciation, still wickedly afflict the 
good and the simple. We here, however, see that the sense 
of nature dictated to unbelievers, what we scarcely credit — 
when spoken by the mouth of God himself. Still it is sur-— 
prising that they should be afraid of an inoffensive man; 
and should require from him an oath that he would do them 
no injury. They ought to have concluded, from the favour — 
which God had showed him, that he was a just man, and — 
therefore there could be no danger from him ; yet because 
they form their estimate of him from their own disposition — 
and conduct, they also distrust his probity. Such perturba- 
tion commonly agitates unbelievers, so that they are incon- 
sistent with themselves; or at least waver and are tossed 
between conflicting sentiments, and have nothing fixed 
and equable. For those principles of right judgment, which 





AP, XXVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS, 75 





_ spring up in their breasts, are soon smothered by depraved 
affections. Hence it happens, that what is justly conceived 
y them vanishes; or is at least corrupted, and does not 
"bring forth good frait 
; 29. As we have not touched thee. An accusing conscience 
urges them to desire to hold him closely bound unto them ; 
_and therefore they require an oath from him that he will not 
hurt them. For they knew that he might rightfully avenge 
himself on them for the sufferings he had endured: but they 
-dissemble on this point, and even make a wonderful boast 
_ of their own acts of kindness. At first, indeed, the humanity 
of the king was remarkable, for he not only entertained 
Isaac with hospitality, but treated him with peculiar honour ; 
yet he by no means continued to act thus to the end. It 
‘accords, however, with the common custom of men, to dis- 
guise their own faults’ by whatever artifice or colour they 
can invent. But if we have committed any offence, it rather 
becomes us ingenuously to confess our fault, than by denying 
“it, to wound still more deeply the minds of those whom we 
have injured. Nevertheless Isaac, since he had already suf- 
ficiently pierced their consciences, does not press them any 
further. For strangers are not to be treated by us as domes- 
tics; but if they do not receive profit, they are to be left to 
the judgment of God. Therefore, although Isaac does not 
extort from them a just confession ; yet, that he may not be 
thought inwardly to cherish any hostility towards them, he 
does not refuse to strike a covenant with them. Thus we 
learn from his example, that if any have estranged them- 
selves from us, they are not to be repelled when they again 
offer themselves to us. For if we are commanded to follow 
_ after peace, even when it seems to fly from us, it behoves us 
far less to be repulsive, when our enemies voluntarily seek 
reconciliation ; espécially if there be any hope of amendment 
in future, although true repentance may not yet appear. 
And he receives them to a feast, not only for the sake of 
promoting peace, but also for the sake of showing that he, 
having laid aside all offence, has become their friend. 
Thou art now the blessed of the Lord. This is commonly 
explained to mean that they court his favour by flatteries, 





























f 
76 QOMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXVI, 


just as persons are accustomed to flatter when they ask a 
favour; but I rather think this expression to have been add od 
in a different sense. Isaac had complained of their injurie 
in having expelled him through envy: they answer, that there 
was no reason why any particle of grief should remain in his 
mind, since the Lord had treated him so kindly and so exactly 
according to his own wish; as if they had said, What dost thou 
want? Art thou not content with thy present success? Let 
us grant that we have not discharged the duty of hospitality 
towards thee; yet the blessing of God abundantly suffices 
obliterate the memory of that time. Perhaps, however, by 
these words, they again assert that they are acting towards 
him with good faith, because he is under the guardianship 
of God. : | 
31. And sware one to another. Isaac does not hesitate t¢ 
swear; partly, that the Philistines may be the more easily 
appeased ; partly, that he may not be suspected by them. 
And this is the legitimate method of swearing, when men 
mutually bind themselves to the cultivation of peace. 
simple promise, indeed, ought to have sufficed; but since 
dissimulation or inconstancy causes men to be distredtfal of 
-each other, the Lord grants them the use of his name, that 
this more holy confirmation may be added to our covenants; 
and he does not only permit, he even commands us to swear 
as often as necessity requires it. (Deut. vi. 13.) Mean 
while we must beware, lest his name be profaned by rashly 
swearing. 
32. And it came to pass the same day. Hence it appears, 
(as I have said a little before,) that the waters were not found 
ina moment of time. If it be asked, whence a supply of 
water had been obtained for his cattle and his household 
during the intervening days, I doubt not, indeed, that he 
either bought it, or was compelled to go toa distance to see 
if any one would be found from whom he might obtain it by 
entreaty. With respect to the name, [Sheba,]| they are mis-_ 
taken, in my judgment, who deem it to be any other than 
that which Abraham had first given to the well. For sinee 
the Hebrew word is ambiguous, Abraham alluded to the 
covenant which he had struck with the king of Gerar; but 


@HAP. XXVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 77 






10w Isaac recalling this ancient memorial to mind, joins with 
it the covenant in which he had himself engaged. 
of 34, And Hsaw was forty years old. For many reasons 
Moses relates the marriages of Esau. Inasmuch as he 
‘mingled himself with the abst iene of the land, from whom 
‘the holy race of Abraham was separated, and contracted 
affinities by which he became entangled; this was a kind of 
prelude of his rejection. It happened also, by the wonderful 
counsel of God, that these daughters-in-law were grievous 
and troublesome to the holy pavianch (Isaac) and his wife, 
in order that they might not by degrees become favourable 
‘to that reprobate people. Ifthe manners of the people had 
been pleasing, and they had had good and obedient daugh- 
ters, perhaps also, with their consent, Isaac might have taken 
a wife from among them. But it was not lawful for those to 
be bound together in marriage, whom God designed to be 
perpetual enemies. For how would the inheritance of the 
land be secured to the posterity of Abraham, but by the de- 
struction of those among whom he sojourned for a time? 
Therefore God cuts off all inducements to these inauspi- 
cious marriages, that the disunion which he had established 
might remain. It appears hence, with what perpetual affec- 
tion Esau was loved by Isaac; for although the holy man 
justly regarded his son’s wives with aversion, and his mind 
‘was exasperated against them, he never failed to act with 
the greatest kindness towards his son, as we shall after- 
: wards see. We have elsewhere spoken concerning poly- 
gamy. ‘This corruption had so far prevailed in every direc- 


See pr - 
re 2. = _ 
ae 


“— 





tion among many people, that the custom, though vicious, 
had acquired the force of law. It is not, therefore, surpris- 
ing that a man addicted to the flesh indulged his appetite 
by taking two wives. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


1. AND it came to pass, that when 1.-Fuit autem quum_ senuisset 
_ Isaac was old, and his eyes were Ishac, et caligassent oculi ejus ita 
dim, so that he could not see, he ut non videret, vocavit Esau filium 
_ called Esau his eldest son, and said suum majorem, et dixit ad eum, 


78 COMMENTARY UPON 


unto him, My son. And he said 
unto him, Behold, here am I. 

2. And he said, Behold now, I am 
old, I know not the day of my death. 

3. Now therefore take, I pray 
thee, thy weapons, thy quiver and 
thy bow, and go out to the field, 
and take me some venison ; 

4. And make me savoury meat, 
such as I love, and bring i¢ to me, 
that I may eat; that my soul may 
bless thee before I die. 

5. And Rebekah heard when Isaac 
spake to Esau his son. And Esau 
went to the field to hunt for venison, 

and to bring it. 
- 6. And Rebekah spake unto Jacob 
her son, saying, Behold, I heard thy 
father speak unto Esau thy brother, 
saying, 

7. Bring me venison, and make me 
savoury meat, that I may eat, and 
bless thee before the Lord before 
my death. 

8. Now therefore, my son, obey 
my voice, according to that which [ 
command thee. 

9. Go now to the flock, and fetch 
me from thence two good kids of the 
goats; and I will make them sa- 
voury meat for thy father, such as 
he loveth. 

10. And thou shalt bring it to thy 
father, that he may eat, and that he 
may bless thee before his death. 

11. And Jacob said to Rebekah 
his mother, Behold, Esau my brother 
is a hairy man, and I am a smooth 
man: 

12. My father peradventure will 
feel me, and I shall seem to him as 
a deceiver ; and I shall bring a curse 
upon me, and not a blessing. 

13. And his mother said unto him, 
Upon me be thy curse, my son; only 
obey my voice, and go fetch me 
them. 

14. And he went, and fetched, and 
brought them to his mother : and his 
mother made savoury meat, such as 
his father loved. 

15. And Rebekah took goodly 
raiment of her eldest son Esau, 
which were with her in the house, 































CHAP. XXVII 


Fili mi. Et dixit ad eum, Ece 
adsum. 

2. Et dixit, Ecce nune senui 
non novi diem quo moriar. 

3. Nunc igitur cape queeso instru- 
menta tua, pharetram tuam, et ar- 
cum tuum, et egredere in agrum, eé' 
venare mihi venationem. 

4. Et fac mihi cibos sapidos, quem 
admodum diligo, et affer mihi, et 
comedam: ut benedicat tibi anime 
mea antequam moriar. : 

5. Ribea autem audiebat, dum 
loqueretur Ishac ad Esau _filium 
suum: et perrexit Esau in agrum 
ut venaretur venationem, ut afferret 

6. Tune Ribea dixit ad Iahacob 
filium suum, dicendo, Eece, audiyi 
patrem tuum loquentem ad Esa 
fratrem tuum, dicendo, 

7. Affer mihi venationem, et fae 
mihi cibos, et comedam, et benedi- 
cam tibi coram Domino antequam 
moriar. 

8. Nunc igitur, fili mi, obedi voci- 
meze in eo quod precipio tibi. 


9. Vade nunc ad pecudes, et cape 
mihi inde duos hedos caprarum 
bonos, et faciam ex eis escas sapidas” 
patri tuo, quemadmodum diligit. 


10. Et afferes patri tuo, et come-— 
det, ut benedicat tibi antequam 
moriatur. a 

11. Et dixit Tahacob ad Ribeam 
matrem suam, Ecce Esau _frater 
meus est vir pilosus, et ego vir levis: 

12. Si forte palpaverit me pater 
meus, ero in oculis ejus tanquam 
illusor: et venire faciam super me 
maledictionem et non benedictionem. 


13. Tune dixit ei mater ejus, 
Super me sit maledictio tua, fili mi: 
veruntamen obedi voci mee et yade, 
cape mihi. 4 

14. Profectus est itaque, et ac- 
cepit, et attulit matri sue, et fecit 
mater ejus cibos sapidos, quemad-— 
modum diligebat pater ejus. 

15. Et accepit Ribea vestes Esau 
filii sui majoris delectabiles, que 
erant apud se in domo, et induit 







_ CHAP. XXVIII. 


and said, My father. 





he did eat: 


~andput them upon Jacob her younger 
son. 


16. And she put the skins of the 


i kids of the goats upon his hands, 
_ and upon the smooth of his neck. 


17. And she gave the savoury 


~ meat and the bread, which she had 
_ prepared, into the hand of her son 
_ Jacob. 


18. And he came unto his father, 
And he said, 
_ Here am 1; who art thou, my son: 2 

19. And J acob said unto his father, 
I am Esau thy first-born; I have 


done according as thou badest me: 
arise, I pray thee, sit and eat of my 
_ venison, that thy soul may bless me. 


20. And Isaac said unto his son, 


id How is it that thou hast found i¢ so 


- quickly, my son? And he said, Be- 
_ eause the Lord thy God brought it 


to me. 


21. And Isaac said unto Jacob, 
Come near, I pray thee, that I may 


_ feel thee, my son, whether thou be 


my very son Esau or not. 

22. And Jacob went near unto 
Isaac his father; and he felt him, 
and said, The voice is Jacob’s voice, 


but the hands are the hands of Esau. 


23. And he discerned him not, be- 


- eause his hands were hairy, as his 
_ brother Esau’s hands. 


So he blessed 


24. And he said, Art thou my very 
son Esau? And he said, I am. 

25. And he said, Bring 7 near to 
me, and I will eat of my son’s veni- 
son, that my soul may bless thee. 
And he brought #¢ near to him, and 
and he brought him 
wine, and he drank. 

26. And his father Isaac said unto 
him, Come near now, and kiss me, 
my son. 

27. And he came near, and kissed 
him: and he smelled the smell of his 
raiment, and blessed him, and said, 
See, the smell of my son is as the 
smell of a field which the Lord hath 
blessed : 

28. Therefore God give thee of 
the dew of heaven, and the fatness 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 79 


Tahacob filium suum minorem. 


16. Et pelles heedorum caprarum 
circumdedit manibus ejus, et levi- 
tati colli ejus. 

17. Deditque cibos sapidos et 
panem, quos paraverat, in manu 
Tahacob filii sui. 


18. Venit ergo ad patrem suum, 
et dixit, Pater mi. Ille autem re- 
spondit, Ecce adsum: qui es, fili mi? 

19. Et dixit Iahacob ad patrem 
suum, Ego sum Esau primogenitus 
tuus, feci quemadmodum loquutus 
es ad me: surge nune, sede, et 
comede de venatione mea, ut bene- 
dicat mihi anima tua. 

20. Et dixit Ishae ad filium suum, 
Quid hoe quod festinasti ad inveni- 
endum, fili mi? Cui respondit, Quia 
oceurrere fecit Iehova Deus tuus 
coram me. 

21. Tune dixit Ishac ad Iacob, 
Appropinqua nunc, et palpabo te, 
fili mi, utrum sis ipse filius meus 
Esau, an non. 

22. Et appropinquavit Iahacob 
Ishac patri suo: qui palpavit eum, 
et dixit, Vox vox Iahacob est: at 
manus, manus Esau. 

23. Et non agnovit eum: quia 
erant manus ejus sicut manus Esau 
fratris sui pilose: et benedixit ei: 


24. Et dixit, Tu es ipse filius meus 
Esau? Respondit, Sum. 

25. Tune dixit, Admove mihi, et 
comedam de venatione filii mei, ut 
benedicat tibi anima mea. Et ad- 
movit ei, et comedit: attulitque ei 
vinum, et bibit. 


26. Et dixit ad eum Ishac pater 
ejus, Appropinqua nunc, et osculare 
me, fili mi. 

27. Et appropinquavit, et oscula- 
tus est eum: et odoratus est odorem 
vestimentorum ejus: et benedixit ei, 
et dixit, Vide, odorem filii mei sicut 
odorem agri, cui benedixit Iehova. 


28. Et det tibi Deus de rore 
eceli, et de pinguedinibus terre, et 


80 


of the earth, and plenty of corn and 
wine : 

29. Let people serve thee, and 
nations bow down to thee: be lord 
over thy brethren, and let thy 
mother’s sons bow down to thee: 
cursed be every one that curseth 
thee, and blessed de he that blesseth 
thee. 

30. And it came to pass, as soon 
as Isaac had made an end of bless- 
ing Jacob, and Jacob was yet scarce 
gone out from the presence of Isaac 
his father, that Esau his brother 
came in from his hunting. 

31. And he also had made savoury 
meat, and brought it unto his father, 
‘and said unto his father, Let my 
father arise, and eat of his son’s 
venison, that thy soul may bless me. 

32. And Isaac his father said unto 
him, Who art thou? And he said, I 
am thy son, thy first-born, Esau. 

33. And Isaae trembled very ex- 
ceedingly, and said, Who? where is 
he that hath taken venison, and 
brought it me, and I have eaten of 
all before thou camest, and have 
blessed him? yea, and he shall be 
blessed. 

34. And when Esau heard the 

~words of his father, he cried with a 
great and exceeding bitter cry, and 
said unto his father, Bless me, even 
me also, O my father ! 

35. And he said, Thy brother came 
with subtilty, and hath taken away 
thy blessing. 

36. And he said, Is not he rightly 
named Jacob? for he hath supplant- 
ed me these two times: he took 
away my birthright; and, behold, 
now he hath taken away my bless- 
ing. And he said, Hast thou not 
reserved a blessing for me? 

37. And Isaac answered and said 
unto Esau, Behold, I have made him 
thy lord, and all his brethren have I 
given to him for servants; and with 
corn and wine have I sustained him : 
and what shall I do now unto thee, 
my son? 

38. And Esau said unto his father, 
Hast thou but one blessing, my 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. XXVII. 


multitudinem frumenti et musti 
novi. 


29. Serviant tibi populi, et incur- 


vent se tibi populi: esto dominus 


fratribus tuis,. et incurvent se tibi 
filii matris tue: maledicentes tibi, 
maledicti erunt, et benedicentes tibi, 
benedicti. 


30. Et fuit, quando complevit 
Ishae benedicere [ahacob: fuit, in- 
quam, tantum egrediendo egressus 
erat Iahacob a facie Ishac patris sui, 
tune Esau frater ejus venit a vena- 
tione sua. 

31. Et fecit etiam ipse cibos sapi- 
dos, et attulit patri suo: dixitque 
patri suo, Surgat pater meus, et 





comedat de venatione filii sui, ut — 


benedicat mihi anima tua. 
32. Et dixit ei Ishac pater ejus, 


Quis es? Ile respondit, Ego sum — 


filius tuus, primogenitus tuus Esau, 

33. Et expavit Ishac pavore mag- 
no vehementissime, et dixit, Quis 
est, et ubi est qui venatus est vena- 
tionem, et attulit mihi, et comedi ex 
omnibus antequam venires? et bene- 
dixi ei, etiam benedictus erit. 


34. Quum audisset Esau verba 


patris sui, clamavit clamore magno, 
et amaro valde valde, dixitque patri 
suo, Benedic mihi: etiam ego filius 
twus sum, pater mi. 


35. Et dixit, Venit frater tuus 


dolose et accepit benedictionem 
tuam. 

36. Dixit ergo, Vere vocatum est, 
nomen ejus Iahacob, quia supplanta- 
vit me jam duabus vicibus: primo- 
genituram meam accepit, et ecce 
nune accepit benedictionem meam. 
Et dixit, Annon reservasti mihi apud 
te benedictionem ? 


37. Et respondit Ishac, et dixitad — 
Ksau, Eece, dominum posui eum — 


tibi, et omnes fratres ejus dedi ei in 
servos, frumentumque et vinum ad- 


dixi ei: et tibi nune quid faciam, 


fili mi ? 


38. Tune dixit Esau ad patrem — 


suum, Numquid benedictio una est — 


nll 

































HAP, XXVII. 


ther? bless me, even me also, O 

yy father! And Esau lifted up his 
vice, and wept. 

39, And Isaac his father answered 
nd said unto him, Behold, thy dwell- 
| f phall be the fatness of the earth, 
nd f the dew of heaven from above 
40. And by thy sword shalt thou 
: and shalt serve thy brother : 

d it shall come to pass, when thou 
— the dominion, that thou 
it break his yoke from off thy 


a And Esau hated Jacob, be- 
use of the blessing wherewith his 
: Ber blessed him: and Esau said 
n his heart, The days of mourning 
for my father are at hand ; then will 
slay my brother Jacob. 
42. And these words of Esau her 
der son were told to Rebekah. 
ind she sent and called Jacob her 
younger son, and said unto him, 
old, thy brother Esau, as touch- 
: Shae, oth comfort himself, puz- 
posing to kill thee. 
43. Now therefore, my son, obey 
ly voice; and arise, flee thou to 
aban my brother, to Haran; 
44. And tarry with him a few days, 
ntil thy brother’s fury turn away ; 
545. Until thy brother’s anger turn 
way from thee, and he forget that 
hich thou hast done to him: then 
will send and fetch thee from 
thence: why should I be deprived 
also of you both in one day? 
46. And Rebekah said to Isaac, I 
m weary of my life because of the 
daughters of Heth: if Jacob take a 
vife of the daughters of Heth, such 
as these which are of the daughters 
| of the land, what good shall my life 
do me? 


VOL. IT. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


81 


tibi, pater mi? benedic mihi, et 
etiam ego filius twus, pater mi: et 
elevavit Esau vocem suam et flevit. 

39. Tune respondit Ishac pater 
ejus, et dixit ad eum, Ecce, de pin- 
guedinibus terre erit habitatio tua 
et de rore cceli desuper. 

40. Et in gladio tuo vives, et fratri 
tuo servies: et erit, quando domina- 
beris, franges jugum ejus a collo tuo. 


41. Itaque odio habuit Esau Iaha- 
cob propter benedictionem, qua 
benedixerat ei pater ejus: et cogi- 
tavit Esau in corde suo, Appropin- 
quabunt dies luctus patris mei, et 
occidam Jahacob fratrem meum. 

42. Et nuntiata sunt Ribee verba 
Esau filii sui majoris: et misit, et 
yocavit Iahacob filium suum mino- 
rem, et dixit ad eum, Ecce, Esau 
frater tuus consolatur se super te, 
ut oecidat te. 


43. Et nunc fili mi, obedi voci 
mee, et surge, et fuge ad Laban 
fratrem meum in Charan. 

44. Et habita cum eo dies aliquot, 
5 3 avertatur furor fratris tui a te. 

Donee avertatur ira fratris 
tui a pie et obliviscatur eorum que 
fecisti ei: et mittam, et accipiam te 
inde: utquid orbabor etiam ambo- 
bus vobis die una? 


46. Et dixit Ribea ad Ishac, An- 
gustiis affecta sum in vita mea prop- 
ter filias Heth: si acceperit Iahacob 
uxorem de filiabus Heth, sicut istas 
de filiabus terre, utquid est mihi 
vita ? 


1. And it came to pass that when Isaac was old. In this 
‘chapter Mosés prosecutes, in many words, a history which 
does not appear to be of great utility. It amounts to this ; 

Es Au having gone out, at his father’s command, to hunt ; 

Jacob, in his brother’s clothing, was, by the artifice of his 
mother, induced to obtain by stealth the blessing due by the 
tight of nature to the first-born. 


It seems even like child’s 
F 




























82 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXVI 


play to present to his father a kid instead of venison, to feig ig 
himself to be hairy by putting on skins, and, under the nam 
of his brother, to get the blessing by a lie. But in oneal 
learn that Moses does not in vain pause over this narratiy 
as a most serious matter, we must first observe, that whe 
Jacob received the blessing from his father, this token con 
firmed to him the oracle by which the Lord had preferre 
him to his brother. For the benediction here spoken of w 
not a mere prayer but a legitimate sanction, divinely inter= 
posed, to make manifest the grace of election. God had pre 
mised to the holy fathers that he would be a God to their) 
seed for ever. They, when at the point of death, in order’ 
that the succession might be secured to their posterity, put | 
them in possession, as if they would deliver, from hand to) 
hand, the favour which they had received from God. So 
Abraham, in blessing his son Isaac, constituted him the heir | 
of spiritual life with a solemn rite. With the same desigr 
Isaac now, being worn down with age, imagines himself t 
be shortly about to depart this life, and wishes to bless hi 
first-born son, in order that the everlasting covenant of God) 
may remain in his own family. The Patriarchs did not take 
this upon themselves rashly, or on their own private account, 
but were public and divinely ordained witnesses. To this’ 
point belongs the declaration of the Apostle, “ the less is) 
blessed of the better.” (Heb. vii. 7.) For even the faithful 
were accustomed to bless each other by mutual offices o 
charity ; but the Lord enjoined this peculiar service upo 
the patriarchs, that they should transmit, as a deposit t 

posterity, the covenant which he had struck with them, an 
which they kept during the whole course of their life. ne | 
same command was afterwards given to the priests, as ap 
pears in Num. vi. 24, and other similar places. Therefor 
Isaac, in blessing his son, sustained another character tha 
that of a father or of a private person, for he was a ee ti 
and an interpreter of God, who constituted his son an hei 
of the same grace which he had received. Hence appears 
what I have already said, that Moses, in treating of this) 
matter, is not without reason thus prolix. But let us weigh’ 
each of the circumstances of the case in its proper order; of 






















(AP, XXVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 85 


hich this is the first, that God transferred the blessing of 
au to Jacob, by a mistake on the part of the father; whose 
s, Moses tellsus, were dim. The vision also of J oh was 
Boshion he blaavod his grandchildren Ephraim and Ma- 
seh ; yet his want of sight did not prevent him from 
tious placing his hands in a transverse direction. But 
rod suffered Isaac to be deceived, in order to show that it 
s not by the will of man that Jacob was raised, contrary 
Tithe course of nature, to the right and honour of primo- 
eer iture. 

_ 2. Behold, now I am old, I know not the day of my death. 
Phere is not the least doubt that Isaac implored daily bless- 
‘ings on his sons all his life: this, therefore, appears to have 
_ an extraordinary kind of benediction. Moreover, the 
eclaration that he knew not the day of his death, is as much 
as Sif he had said, that death was every moment pressing so 
< aosly upon him, a decrepid and failing man, that he dared 
10f promise himself any longer life. Just as a woman with 
¢ child when the time of parturition draws near, might say, 
hat she had now no day certain. Every one, even in the 
vigour of age, carries with him a thousand deaths. 
eath claims as its own the feetus in the mother’s womb, 
r Sd accompanies it through every stage of life. But as it 
urges the old more closely, so they ought to place it more 
‘constantly before their eyes, and should pass as pilgrims 
through the world, or as those who have already one foot 
in the grave. In short, Isaac, as one near death, wishes 
to leave the Church surviving him in the person of his son. 
4, That my soul may base thee. Wonderfully was the 
faith of the holy man blended with a foolish and inconsi- 
derate carnal affection. The general principle of faith flou- 
Yishes in his mind, when, in blessing his son, he consigns 
‘to him, under the direction of the Holy Spirit, the right 
of the inheritance which had been divinely promised to 
himself. Meanwhile, he is blindly carried away by the love 
of his first-born son, to prefer him to the other; and in 
this’ way he Siptonde against the oracle of God. For he 
could not be ignorant of that which God had pronounced 
before the children were born. If any one would excuse 








84 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXVI 


























him, inasmuch as he had received no command from God t 
change the accustomed order of nature by preferring t 
younger to the elder; this is easily refuted :- because w 
he knew that the frst: born was rejected, he still verdana 
his excessive attachment. - Again, in neglecting to inquir 
respecting his duty, when he had been informed of the a i 
venly oracle by his wife, his indolence was by no means e 
cusable. For he was not altogether ignorant of his ceiling . 
therefore, his obstinate attachment to his son was a kind ¢ i 
blindness, which proved a greater obstacle to him than th 
external dimness of his eyes. Yet this fault, although de 
serving of reprehension, did not deprive the holy man of th 
right of pronouncing a blessing ; but plenary authority re 
mained with him, and the force and efficacy of his testimon 
stood entire, just as if God himself had spoken from hea= 
ven ; to which subject I shall soon again allude. 
5. And Rebekah heard. Moses now explains more fully” 
the artifice by which Jacob attained the blessing. It trul 
appears ridiculous, that an old man, deceived by the cunning” 
of his wife, should, through ignorance and error, have given” 
utterance to what was contrary to his wish. And surely the” 
stratagem of Rebekah was not without fault; for although | 
she could not guide her husband by salutary counsel, yet it | 
was not a legitimate method of acting, to cireumvent him by | 
such deceit. For, as a lie is in itself culpable, she sinnec 
more grievously still in this, that she desired to sport in 
sacred matter with such wiles. She knew that the decree 
by which Jacob had been elected and adopted was immut- 
able; why then does she not patiently wait till God shall 
confirm it in fact, and shall show that what he had once 
pronounced from heaven is certain? Therefore, she darkens” 
the celestial oracle by her lie, and abolishes, as far a 
she was able, the grace promised to her son. Now, if we 
consider farther, whence arose this great desire to bestit 
herself ; her extraordinary faith will on the other hand ap- 
pear. For, as she did not hesitate to provoke her husbané 
against herself, to light up implacable enmity between the 
brothers, to expose her beloved son Jacob to the danger of 
immediate death, and to disturb the whole family ; this cer 


HAP. XXVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 85 


















ainly flowed from no other source than her faith." The in- 

eritance promised by God was firmly fixed in her mind; 
she knew that it was decreed to her son Jacob. And there- 
fore, relying upon the covenant of God, and keeping in mind 

the oracle received, she forgets the world. Thus, we see, 

that her faith was mixed with an unjust and immoderate 
zeal. ‘This is to be carefully observed, in order that we may 
understand that a pure and distinct knowledge does not al- 
ways so illuminate the minds of the pious as to cause them 
to be governed, in all their actions, by the Holy Spirit, but 
that the little light which shows them their path is enve- 
loped in various clouds of ignorance and error; so that while 
they hold a right course, and are tending towards the goal, 
they yet occasionally slide. Finally, both in Isaac and in 
his wife the principle of faith was pre-eminent. But each, by 
ignorance in certain particulars, and by other faults, either 
diverged a little from the way, or, at least, stumbled in the 
way. But seeing that, nevertheless, the election of God 
stood firm ; nay, that he even executed his design through the 
deceit of a woman, he vindicates, in this manner, the whole 
praise of his benediction to his own gratuitous goodness. 
Il. And Jacob said to Rebekah. That Jacob does not 
voluntarily present himself to his father, but rather fears 
lest, his imposture being detected, he should bring a curse 
upon himself, is very contrary to faith.” For when the 
Apostle teaches, that ‘“ whatsoever is not of faith is sin,” 
(Rom. xiv. 23,) he trains the sons of God to this sobriety, 
that they may not permit themselves to undertake anything 
_ 1 This is a dangerous position, however it may be modified or explained. 
True faith never leads to sin. It was the mixture, not to say the predo- 
minance of unbelief, which caused Rebekah, instead of waiting for the ful- 
filment of God’s promises in his own way, to plot and to execute a schenie 
of imposture, which involved herself and her family in perpetual disquie- 
tude. What Calvin calls zeal, he ought to have called rashness and some- 
thing worse.— Fd. 

2 There is a great want of Calvin’s accustomed caution and soundness in 
all this reasoning. It certainly was right that Jacob should feel and ex- 
press the fear, lest the deception which his mother required him to prac- 
tise should be detected, and should bring a curse upon him and not a bless- 
ing. It would indeed have been a still higher proof of integrity, and a 


still stronger exercise of faith, had he repelled the importunities of his 
mother, saying, “ How shall I do this wickedness, and sin against God ?” 































a 
86 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXVI 


with a doubtful and perplexed conscience. This firm p 
suasion is the only rule of right conduct, when we, relyin 
on the command of God, go intrepidly wheresoever he eal 
us. Jacob, therefore, by debating with himself, shows th 
he was deficient in faith ; and certainly, although he 
not entirely without it, yet, in this point, he is convicted 
failure. But by this example we are again taught, tha 
faith is not always extinguished by a given fault; yet, 
God sometimes bears with his servants thus far, that h 
turns, what they have done perversely, to their salvation, y 
must not hence take a license to sin. It happened by tl 
wonderful mercy of God, that Jacob was not cut off from th 
grace of adoption. Who would not rather fear than becom 
presumptuous? And whereas we see that his faith was ol 
scured by doubting, let us learn to ask of the Lord the spir 
of prudence to govern all our steps. There was added a 
other error of no light kind: for why does he not rathe 
reverence God than dread his father’s anger? why does if) 
not rather occur to his mind, that a foul blot would stain) 
the hallowed adoption of God, when it seemed to owe its acs) 
complishment to a lie? For although it tended to a right) 
end, it was not lawful to attain that end, through this’ 
oblique course. Meanwhile, there is no doubt that fait! | 
prevailed over these impediments. For what was the cause) 
why he preferred the bare and apparently empty benedictio 
of his father," to the quiet which he then enjoyed, to th 
conveniences of home, and finally to life itself? Accordin; 
to the flesh, the father’s benediction, of which he was so de 
sirous, that he knowingly and willingly plunged himself int 
great difficulties, was but an imaginary thing. Why did h 
act thus, but because in the exercise of simple faith in th 

' Quid enim fuit cause cur nuda et in speciem inania patris vota . . 
preferret? Tymme translates vota “ wishes,” and either for the sake. 
making sense of the passage, or because the edition from which he ma 
his version had a different reading, he puts the word “mother” in the) 
place of “father.” But as the Amsterdam and Berlin editions both he ve 
the word patris and not matris, the translation above given seems to 
required. It agrees substantially with the French version, which is 


follows: Car quia este cause qu'il a preferé la benediction de son per 


laquelle sembloit nue et vaine en apparence, au repos duquel il jouiss¢ 
lors, &e.— Fd, 








-OHAP. XXVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS, 87 


word of God, he more highly valued the hope which was 
hidden from him, than the desirable condition which he ac- 
tually enjoyed? Besides, his fear of his father’s anger had 
its origin in the true fear of God. He says that he feared 
lest he should bring upon himself a curse. But he would 
‘not so greatly have dreaded a verbal censure, if he had not 
deemed the grace deposited in the hands of his father worth 
Bor than a thousand lives. It was therefore under an im- 
pulse of God that he feared his father, who was really God’s 
“minister. For when the Lord sees us creeping on the earth, 
he draws us to himself by the hand of man." 
_ 13. Upon me be thy curse, my son. Here Rebekah sins 
again, because she burns with such hasty zeal that she 
does not consider how highly God disapproves of her evil 
course. She presumptuously subjects herself to the curse. 
But whence this unheeding confidence? Being unfurnished 
with any divine command, she took her own counsel. Yet 
‘no one will deny that this zeal, although preposterous, 
proceeds from special reverence for the word of God. For 
since she was informed by the oracle of God, that Jacob was 
_preferred in the sight of God, she disregarded whatever was 
visible in the world, and whatever the sense of nature dic- 
tated, in comparison with God’s secret election. Therefore 
we are taught by this example, that every one should walk 
modestly and cautiously according to the rule of his voca- 
tion; and should not dare to proceed beyond what the Lord 
allows in his word. 

14. And he went and fetched. Although it is probable 
that Jacob was not only influenced by a desire to yield obe- 
dience to the authority of his mother, but was also persuaded 
by her reasonings, he yet sinned by overstepping the bounds 
of his vocation. When Rebekah had taken the blame upon 
herself, she told him, doubtless, that injury was done to no 
one: because Jacob was not stealing away another’s right, 





1 It is much more probable that Jacob was influenced by a precipitate 
and ambitious desire to snatch the blessing from the hand of his brother; 
and though he paused for a moment at the apprehension of consequences, 
should his mother’s scheme fail, yet he too readily acquiesced, and exposed 
himself to subsequent dangers, not from a supreme regard to the will of 
God, but from that self-love which so often overshoots its mark.—Ed. 


































88 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXVJ 


but only seeking the blessing which was decreed to him b 
the celestial oracle. It seemed a fair and probable excuse 
the fraud, that Isaac, unless he should be imposed upon, wa 
prepared to invalidate the election of God; Therefore Jaco 
instead of simply declining from what was right in submi 
sion to his mother, was rather obeying the word of God. I 
the meantime (as I have said) this particular error was no 
free from blame: because the truth of God was not to k 
aided by such falsehoods. The paternal benediction was | 
seal of God’s grace, I confess it; but she ought rather t 
have waited till God should bring relief from heaven, b 
changing the mind and guiding the tongue of Isaac, thai 
have attempted what was unlawful. For if Balaam, wh 
prostituted his venal tongue, was constrained by the Spiri 
contrary to his own wish, to bless the elect people, whom 
would rather have devoted to destruction, (Num. xxii. 12, 
how much more powerfully would the same spirit have in 
fluenced the tongue of holy Isaac, who was not a mercenar 
man, but one who desired faithfully to obey God, and wa 
only hurried by an error in a contrary direction? Therefore 
although in the main, faith shone pre-eminently in hol: 
Jacob, yet in this respect he bears the blame of rashness, it 
that he was distrustful of the providence of God, and fraudu 
lently gained possession of his father’s blessing. | 

19. And Jacob said unto his father, I am Esau.’ At firs 
Jacob was timid and anxious; now, haying dismissed hi 
fear, he confidently and audaciously lies. By which exam 
ple we are taught, that when any one has transgressed thi 
proper bounds of duty, he soon allows himself unmeasure¢ 
license. Wherefore there is nothing better than for each t 
keep himself within the limits divinely prescribed to him 
lest by attempting more than is lawful, he should open th 
door to Satan. I have before shown how far his seeking th 
blessing by fraud, and insinuating himself into the posses= 
sion of it by falsehood, was contrary to faith. Yet this par 


. 


| 
| 


' « In this speech of Jacob’s there are three direct falsehoods. Ist, © 
am Esau; 2d, ‘I have done according as thou badest me; 3d, * Ha 
of my venison.’ We ought not to be extremely solicitous to find exeuse 
for all the actions of holy men.”—Cornelius a Lapide in Poli Syn. 












| OHAP. XXVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 89 
ticular fault and divergence from the right path, did not 
prevent the faith which had been produced by the oracle 
from holding on, in some way, its course. In excusing the 
quickness of his return by saying that the venison was 

brought to him by God, he speaks in accordance with the 
rule of piety: he sins, however, in mixing the sacred name 
of God with his own falsehoods. Thus, when there is a de- 
yarture from truth, the reverence which is apparently shown 
bc God is nothing else than a profanation of his glory. It 
as right that the prosperous issue of his hunting should be 
scribed to the providence of God, lest we should imagine 
hat any good thing was the result of chance; but when 
Jacob pretended that God was the author of a bariofit which 
ed not been granted to himself, and that, too, as a cloak for 

is deception, his fault was not free from perjury. 

21. Come near, I pray thee, that I may feel thee. It 
. ce appears that the holy man was suspicious of fraud, 
and therefore hesitated. Whence it may seem that the be- 

1ediction was vain, seeing it had no support of faith. But it 
thus pleased God so to perform his work by the hand of Isaac, 
as not to make him, who was the instrument, a willing fur- 
_therer of his design. Nor is it absurd that Isaac, like a blind 
“man, should ignorantly transfer the blessing to a different per- 
son from him whom he intended. The ordinary function of 
pastors has something of a similar kind; for since by the 
command of God, they reconcile men to en yet they do 
not discern to whom this reconciliation comes; thus they 
east abroad the seed, but are uncertain respecting the fruit. 
Wherefore God does not place the office and power with 
which he has invested them, under the control of their own 
judgment. In this way the ignorance of Isaac does not nul- 
lify the heavenly oracles; and God himself, although the 

senses of his servant fail, does not desist from the accom- 
plishment of his purpose. Here we have a clear refutation 
| of the figment of the Papists, that the whole force of the 
sacrament depends upon the intention of the man who con- 
secrates ; as if, truly, it were left to the will of man to frus- 
trate the design of God. Nevertheless, what I have already 
so often said must be remembered, that however Isaac 


= BE on erry ere - 
. 


ny, 





7 
























90 | COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXVII 


might be deceived in the person of his son, he yet did ne 
pronounce the blessing in vain: because a general faith r 
mained in his mind, and in part governed his conduct. I 
forming his judgment from the touch, disregarding the voice 
he did not act according to the nature of faith. And, ther 
fore, with respect to the person, he was plainly in errot 
This, however, did not happen in consequence of negligence 
since he diligently and even anxiously turned every way 
that he might not deprive the first-born of his night. Bu 
it pleased the Lord thus to render his senses dull, partly fo 
the purpose of showing how vain it is for men to strive t¢ 
change what he has once decreed, (because it is impossibl 
but that his counsel should remain firm and stable though 
the whole world should oppose it,) and partly, for the pur 
pose of correcting, by this kind of chastisement, the absurd _ 
attachment by which Isaac was too closely bound to hi 
first-born. For whence arose this minute investigation, ex 
cept from the fact that an inordinate love of Esau, whiel 
had taken entire possession of his mind, turned him aside | 
from the divine oracle? Therefore, since he yielded an ex-_ 
cessive indulgence to natural feeling, he deserved in every | 
way to be blinded. So much the greater care ought we to | 
take that, in carrying on God’s work, we should not give th 
reins to our human affections. . 
26. Come near now, and kiss.me. We know that tk 

practice of kissing was then in use, which many nations 
tain to this day. Profane men, however, may say, that it is 
ludicrous for an old man, whose mind was already obtuse, 
and who moreover had eaten and drunk heartily, should pow 
forth his benedictions upon a person who was only acting 
part." But whereas Moses has previously recorded the oracle 
of God, by which the adoption was destined for the younge 
son, it behoves us reverently to contemplate the secret pre 
vidence of God, towards which profane men pay no respee 
Truly Isaac was not so in bondage to the attractions of 
meat and drink as to be unable, with sobriety of mind, te 


_' Vota sua in comicam personam effundit. Espande ses veeus et beni 
dictions sur une personne disguisee et masquee. Should bestow his vo 


and benedictions upon a person masked and disguised.—-Fr. Tr. = 


CHAP. XXVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 91 







& reflect upon the divine command given unto him, and to un- 
_ dertake in seriousness, and with a certain faith in his own 
_-yoeation, the very work in which, on account of the infirmity 
of his flesh, he vacillated and halted. Therefore, we must 
7 form our estimate of this blessing from the external ap- 
"pearance, but from the celestial decree ; even as it appeared 
at length, by the issue, that God neither vainly sported, nor 
= man rashly proceeded in this affair: and, truly, if the 
same religion dwells in us which flourished in the patriarch’s 
= nothin g will hinder the divine power from shining forth 
i the more clearly in the weakness of man. 
27. See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field. The 
_ allegory of Ambrose on this passage is not displeasing to 
me. Jacob, the younger brother, is. blessed under the person 
_ of the elder; the garments which were borrowed from his 
_ brother breathe an ‘odour grateful and pleasant to his father. 
_ In the same manner we are blessed, as Ambrose teaches, 
_ when, in the name of Christ, we enter the presence of our 
_ Heavenly Father: we receive from him the robe of righteous- 
“ness, which, by its odour, procures his favour; in short, we 
are thus blessed when we are put in his place. But Isaac 
seems here to desire and implore nothing for his son but 
_ what is earthly ; for this is the substance of his words, that it 
_ might be well with his son in the world, that he might gather 
together the abundant produce of the earth, that he might 
enjoy great peace, and shine in honour above others. There 
is no mention of the heavenly kingdom; and hence it has 
arisen, that men without learning, and but little exercised 
in true piety, have imagined that these holy fathers were 
blessed by the Lord only in respect to this frail and tran- 
sitory life. But it appears from many passages to have been 
far otherwise: and as to the fact that Isaac here confines 
himself to the earthly favours of God, the explanation is 
easy ; for the Lord did not formerly set the hope of the future 
inheritance plainly before the eyes of the fathers, (as he 
now calls and raises us directly towards heaven,) but he led 
them as by a circuitous course. Thus he appointed the land 
of Canaan as a mirror and pledge to them of the celestial 
inheritance. In all his acts of kindness he gave them tokens 


Ai 

































92 - COMMENTARY UPON " OHAP, XXVIT 


of his paternal favour, not indeed for the purpose of making 
them content with present good, so that they should neglect 
heaven, or should follow a merely empty shadow, as some fool- 
ishly suppose ; but that, being aided by such helps, according 
to the time in which they lived, they might by degrees rise 
towards heaven; for since Christ, the first-fruits of those 
who rise again, and the author of the eternal and incor- | 
ruptible life, had not yet been manifested, his spiritual — 
kingdom was, in this way, shadowed forth under figures ae . 
until the fulness of the time should come ; and as all the 
promises of God were involved, and in a sense clothed in 
these symbols, so the faith of the holy fathers observed the 
same measure, and made its advances heavenward by means 
of these earthly rudiments. Therefore, although Isaac mi 28, 
the temporal favours of God prominent, nothing is further — 
from his mind than to confine the hope of his son to this 
world; he would raise him to the same elevation to which 
he himself aspired. Some proof of this may be drawn from ~ 
his own words; for this is the principal point, that he assigns — 
him the dominion over the nations. But whence the hope | 
of such a dignity, unless he had been persuaded that his | 
race had been elected by the Lord, and, indeed, with this sti- 
pulation, that the right of the kingdom should remain with — 
one son only? Meanwhile, let it suffice to adhere to this ) 
principle, that the holy man, when he implores a prosperous 
course of life for his son, wishes that God, in whose paternal 
favour stands our solid and eternal happiness, may-be pra 
pitious to him. 
29. Cursed be every one that curseth thee. What I have © 
before said must be remembered, namely, that these are not _ 
bare wishes, such as fathers are wont to utter on behalf of — 
their children, but that promises of God are included in” 
them ; for Isaac is the authorized interpreter of God, and 
the instrument employed by the Holy Spirit ; and therefore, 
as in the person of God, he efficaciously pronounces those — 
accursed who shall oppose the welfare of his son. This then — 
is the confirmation of the promise, by which God, when he 
receives the faithful under his protection, declares that he 
will be an enemy to their enemies. The whole force of the — 






















CHAP. XXVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 93 


benediction turns to this point, that God will prove himself 
© be a kind father to his servant Jacob in all things, so 
he will constitute him the chief and the head of a holy 
d elect people, will preserve and defend him by his power, 
ind will secure his salvation in the face of enemies of every 
80. Jacob was yet scarce gone out. Here is added the 
manner in which Esau was repulsed, which circumstance 
wailed not a little to confirm the benediction to Jacob: for 
if Esau had not been rejected, it might seem that he was not 
d leprived of that honour which nature had given him: but now 
Tsaac declares, that what he had done, in virtue of his patri- 
a Sia office, could not but be ratified. Here, truly, it again 
appears, that the primogeniture which Jacob obtained, at the 
expense of his brother, was made his by a free gift; for if we 
compare the works of both together, Esau obeys his father, 
pes him the produce of his hunting, prepares for his father 
e food obtained by his own labour, and speaks nothing but 
the truth: in short, we find nothing in him which is not 
worthy of praise. Jacob never leaves his home, substitutes 
a kid for venison, insinuates himself by many lies, brings 
“nothing which would properly commend him, but in many 
things deserves reprehension. Hence it must be acknow- 
“edged that the cause of this event is not to be traced to 
works, but that it lies hid in the eternal counsel of God. 
a et Esau is not unjustly reprobated, because they who are 
_ not governed by the Spirit of God can receive nothing with 
a right mind; only let it be firmly maintained, that since 
the condition wee all is equal, if any one is proferred to an- 
other, it is not because of his own merit, but because the 

Lord hath gratuitously elected him. 

83. And Isaac trembled very exceedingly.’ Here now again 
the faith which had been smothered in the breast of the 
holy man shines forth and emits fresh sparks; for there is 
no doubt that his fear springs from faith. Besides, it is no 
common fear which Moses describes, but that which utterly 


— ee 
- 2 


Rengnba ty eamte 


regis aed pers ON PM a Sy le: A eae ay 


1 The original is very forcible, and cannot be fully expressed i in a trans- 
lation. Isaac trembled with a great trembling exceedingly.” The Sep- 
tuagint represents him as in an eestasy of astonishment. —kd. 


































94 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXVII. 


confounds the holy man: for, whereas he was perfectly con- 
scious of his own vocation, and therefore was persuaded that © 
the duty of naming the heir with whom he should deposit the | 
covenant of eternal life was divinely enjoined upon him, he ~ 
no sooner discovered his error than he was filled with flax 4 
that in an affair so great and so serious God had suffered him | 
to err; for unless he had thought that God was the director 4 
of this act, what should have hindered him from alleging his 
ignorance as an excuse, and from becoming enraged against | 
Ji acob, who had stolen in upon him by fraud and by unjus-_ 
tifiable arts? But although covered with shame on account y 
of the error he had committed, he nevertheless, with a col- — 
lected mind, ratifies the benediction which he had pro- | 
nounced ; and I do not doubt that he then, as one awaking, — 
began to recall to memory the oracle to whieh he had not been | 
sufficiently attentive. Wherefore, the holy man was not im- — 
pelled by ambition to be thus tenacious of his purpose, as | 
obstinate men are wont to be, who prosecute to the last what 
they have once, though foolishly, begun ; but the declara-— 
tion, “ I have blessed him, yea, and he shall be blessed,” was — 
the effect of a rare and precious faith ; for he, renouncing — 
the affections of the flesh, now yields hinsgolf entirely to God, — 
and, acknowledging God as the Author of the benediction 
ahich he had uttered, ascribes due glory to him in not 
daring to retract it. The benefit of this doctrine pertains to — 
the whole Church, in order that we may certainly know, © 
that whatever the heralds of the gospel promise to us by the — 
command of God, will be efficacious and stable, because they — 
do not speak as private men, but as by the command of God — 
himself; and the infirmity of the minister does not destroy — 
the faithfulness, power, and efficacy of God’s word. He who — 
presents himself to us charged with the offer of eternal hap-_ 
piness and life, is subject to our common miseries and t 
death ; yet, notwithstanding, the promise is efficacious. He 
who absolves us from sins is himself a sinner; but because 
his office is divinely assigned him, the stability of this grace, — 
having its foundation in God, shall never fail. 4 

34. ‘H e cried with a great and exceeding bitter ry. Though | 
Ksau persists in imploring the blessing, he yet gives a sign” 4 





























CHAP. XXVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 95 


apa which is the reason why he obtains no benefit, 
use he enters not by the gate of faith. True piety, indeed, 
aws forth tears and great cries from the children of God; 
_ but Esau, trembling and full of fears, breaks out in wailings ; 
bs fte erwards he casts, at a venture, his wish into the air, that 
he also may receive a blessing. But his blind incredulity is 
_ reproved by his own words ; for whereas one blessing only had 
been deposited with his father, he asks that another should 
e given to him, as if it were in his father’s power indiscri- 
ninately to breathe out blessings, independently of the com- 
mand of God. Here the admonition of the Apostle may 
suggest itself to our minds, “ that Esau, when he sought 
again the forfeited blessing with tears and loud lamentations, 
found no place for repentance,” (Heb. xii. 17;) for they 
who neglect to follow God when he calls on them, afterwards 
eall upon him in vain, when he has turned his back. So 
long as God addresses and invites us, the gate of the king- 
dom of heaven is in a certain sense open: this opportunity 
we must use, if we desire to enter, according to the instruc- 
tion of the Prophet, “Seek ye the Lord while he may be 
found ; call ye upon him while he is near.” (Isa. ly. 6.) Of 
which passage Paul is the interpreter, in defining that to 
: be the acceptable time of the day of salvation in minich grace 
_is brought unto us by the gospel. (2 Cor. v. 17.) They who 
iffer that time to pass by, may, at length, knock too late, 
nd without profit, because God avenges himself of their 
Balenees We must therefore fear lest if, with deafened ears, 
owe suffer the voice of God now to pass unheeded by, he 
ould, in turn, become deaf to our cry. But it may be 
asked, how is thin repulse consistent with the promise, “ If 
“the aicked will turn from all his sins that he hath commit- 
ted, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful 
‘and right, he shall surely live?” (Ezekiel xxiii. 21.) More- 
Over, it may seem at variance with the clemency of God to 
reject the sighings of those who, being crushed by misery, 
fly for refuge to his mercy. I answer, that repentance, if it 
be true and sincere, will never be too late; and the sinner 
who, from his soul, is displeased with himself, will obtain 
pardon: but God in this manner punishes the contempt of 


———— 


ee 


ra. on oom Nine ZS ae 





96 . COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXVII. 


his grace, because they who obstinately reject it, do not seri 

ously purpose in their mind to return to him. Thus it i 

that they who are given up to a reprobate mind are never 
touched with genuine penitence. Hypocrites truly break 
out into tears, like Esau, but their heart within them will 
remain closed as with iron bars. Therefore, since Esau 
rushes forward, destitute of faith and repentance, to ask a 
blessing, there is no wonder that he should be rejected. 

36. Is he not rightly named Jacob? That the mind of — 
Esau was affected with no sense of penitence appears hence ;_ 
he accused his brother and took no blame to himself. But 
the very beginning of repentance is grief felt on account of | 
sin, together with self-eondemnation. Esau ought to have 
descended into himself, and to have become his own judge. — 
Having sold his birthright, he had darted, like a famished 
dog, upon the meat and the pottage; and now, as if he had 
done no wrong, he vents all his anger on his brother. Fur- 
ther, if the blessing is deemed of any value, why does he | 
not consider that he had been repelled from it, not simply — 
by the fraud of man, but by the providence of God? We © 
see, therefore, that like a blind man feeling in the dark, he 
cannot find his way. 

37. Behold, I have made him thy Lord. Isaac now more 
openly confirms what I have before said, that since God was — 
the author of the blessing, it could neither be vain nor 
evanescent. For he does not here magnificently boast of his — 
dignity, but keeps himself within the bounds and measure — 
of a servant, and denies that he is at liberty to alter any- — 
thing. For he always considers, (which is the truth,) that — 
when he sustains the character of God’s representative, it is 
not lawful for him to proceed further than the command will © 
bear him. Hence, indeed, Esau ought to have learned from 
whence he had fallen by his own fault, in order that he 
might have humbled himself, and might rather have joined 
himself with his brother, in order to become a partaker of his | 
blessing, as his inferior, than have desired anything separ- — 
ately for himself. But a depraved cupidity carries him — 
away, so that he, forgetful of the kingdom of God, pursues — 
and cares for nothing except his own private advantage. — 








P, XXVII- THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 97 





























yain, we must notice Isaac’s manner of speaking, by which 
Slain a certain force and efficacy for his benediction, 
f his word carried with it dominion, abundance of corn 
| wine, and whatever else God had promised to Abraham. 
God, in requiring the faithful to depend on himself 
, would nevertheless have them to rest securely upon 
‘ nt which, at his command, is declared to them by 
ie tongue of men. In this way they are said to remit 
ns, who are only the messengers and interpreters of free 
yrgiveness. 
38. Hast thou but one blessing? Esau seems to take courage ; 
ut he neglects the care of his soul, and turns, like a swine, 
9 the pampering of his flesh. He had heard that his father 
ad nothing left to grant; because, truly, the full and 
atire grace of God so rested upon Jacob, that out of his 
mily there was no happiness. WhHferefore, if Esau sought 
his own welfare, he ought to have drawn from that fountain, 
nd rather to have subjected himself to his brother, than to 
ive cut himself off from a happy connexion with him. He 
ose, however, rather to be deprived of spiritual grace, pro- 
ided he might but possess something of his own, and apart 
om his brother, than to be his inferior at home. He could 
; be ignorant, that there was one sole benediction by 
wl hich his brother Jacob had been constituted the heir of the 
ivine covenant : for Isaac would be daily discoursing with 
hem concerning the singular privilege which God had 
rouchsafed to Abraham and his seed. Esau would not pre- 
. i ously have complained so bitterly, unless he had felt that 
> had been deprived of an incomparable benefit. Therefore, 
by departing from this one source of blessing, he indirectly 
Tenounces God, and cuts himself off from the body of the 
Church, caring for nothing but this transitory life. But it 
would have been better for him, miserably to perish through 
ie want of all things in this world, and with difficulty to 
w his languishing breath, than to slumber amidst tem- 
poral delights. What afterwards follows ;—namely, that he 
pt with loud lamentations,—is a sign of fierce and proud 
Biiconticn rather than of penitence; for he remitted 
nothing of his ferocity, but raged like a cruel beast of prey. 
VOL, II. a 
































98 COMMENTARY UPON OHAP. XXVIU 


So the wicked, when punishment overtakes them, bewail th 
salyation they have lost ; but, meanwhile, do not cease to) 
delight themselves in their vices; and instead of heartily 
seeking after the righteousness of God, they rather desir 
that his deity should be extinct. Of a similar character is) 
that gnashing of teeth and weeping in hell which, instea 
of stimulating the reprobate to seek after God, only con= 
sumes them with unknown torments. . 
39. Behold, thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, 
At length Esau obtains what he had asked. For, perceiving) 
himself to be cast down from the rank and honour of primo 
geniture, he chooses rather to have prosperity in the worl 
separated from the holy people, than to submit to the yok 
of his younger brother. But it may be thought that Isaa 
contradicts himself, in offering a new benediction, when he had} 
before declared, that he had given to his son Jacob all that 
was placed at his disposal. I answer, that what has been: 
before said concerning Ishmael must be noted in this place, 
For God, though he héeavkenot to Abraham’s prayer for Ish 
mael, so far as concerned the present life, yet immediatel 
restricts his promise, by adding the exception implied in th 
declaration, that in Isaac only should the seed be called. 
do not, however, doubt, that the holy man, when he per 
ceived that his younger son Jacob was the divinely ordaine 
heir of a happy life, would endeavour to retain his first-bon 
Ksau, in the bond of fraternal connection, in order that h 
might not depart from the holy and elect flock of the Chure 
But now, when he sees him obstinately tending in anothe 
direction, he declares what will be his future conditio: 
Meanwhile the spiritual blessing remains in its integrit 
with Jacob alone, to whom Esau refusing to attach himsel 
voluntarily becomes an exile from the kingdom of God. TI 
prophecy uttered by Malachi, (i. 3,) may seem to be contra 
dictory to this statement. For, comparing the two brothers, 
Esau and Jacob, with each other, he teaches that Esau was) 
hated, inasmuch as a possession was given to him in the 
deserts ; and yet Isaac promises him a fertile land. There) 
is a twofold solution: either that the Prophet, speaking 
comparatively, may with truth call Idumea a desert in conte: 

























CHAP. XXVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 99 


parison with the land of Canaan, which was far more fruit- 
ful; or else that he was referring to his own times. For 
although the devastation of both lands had been terrible, 
-yet the land of Canaan in a short time flourished again, | 
while the territory of Edom was condemned to perpetual 
sterility, and given up to dragons. Therefore, although God, 
_with respect to his own people, banished Esau to desert 
‘mountains, he yet gave to him a land sufticiently fertile in 
itself to render the promise by no means nugatory. For 
that mountainous region both had its own natural fruitful- 
/mess, and was so watered by the dew of heaven, that it 
| would yield sustenance to its inhabitants. 
_ 40. By thy sword shalt thow live, and shalt serve thy 
brother. It is to be observed that events are here predicted 
-which were never fulfilled in the person of Esau; and there- 
fore, that the prophecy is concerning things at that time far 
‘distant. For Jacob was so far from having obtained domi- 
-nion over his brother, that on his return from Padan-aram, he 
‘suppliantly tendered him his obedience; and the breaking 
off of the yoke which Isaac here mentions, is referred to a 
very remote period. He is therefore relating the future con- 
dition of Esau’s posterity. And he says first, that they shall 
live by their sword: which words admit a twofold sense, 
either that, being surrounded by enemies, they shall pass a 
warlike and unquiet life; or that they shall be free, and their 
‘own masters. For there is no power to use the sword where 
there is no liberty. The former meaning seems the more 
suitable; namely, that God would limit his promise, lest 
Esau should be too much exalted: for nothing is more de- 
sirable than peace. The holy people also are warned that 
there will always be some enemies to infest them. This, 
however, is a very different thing from living by his own 
sword ; which is as if he had said, that the sons of Esau, like 
robbers, should maintain their security by arms and violence, 
rather than by legitimate authority. A second limitation of 
the promise is, that though armed with the sword, he should 
still not escape subjection to his brother. For the Idumeans 
were, at length, made tributary to the chosen people ;’ but 
' That is, under King David.— Ld. 





























100 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XX) I 


the servitude was not long continued; because when t 
kingdoms were divided, the power by which they had h 
all their neighbours in subjection and fear, was cut off ; 
~ the Lord would have the _Idumeans brought into ee 
for a short time, that he might furnish a visible demonst 
tion of this prophecy. As to the rest of the time, the 
less and unbridled liberty of Esau was more wretched the 
any state of subjection. 

41. And Esau hated Jacob. It hence appears more ad 
ly, that the tears of Esau were so far from being the effe 
of true repentance, that they were rather evidences of furio 
anger. For he is not content with secretly cherishing enmil 
against his brother, but openly breaks out in wicked threat 
And it is evident how deeply malice had struck its roo 
when he could indulge himself in the desperate purpose 
murdering his brother. Even a profane and sacrilegiot 
contumacy betrays itself in him, seeing that he prepat 
himself to abolish the decree of God by the sword. I w 
take care, he says, that Jacob shall not enjoy the inheritan 
promised to him. What is this but to annihilate the for 
of the benediction, of which he knew that his father was th 
herald and the minister? Moreover, a lively picture of 
hypocrite is here set before us. He pretends that the dea 
of his father would be to him a mournful event: and dout 
less it is a religious duty to mourn over a deceased father. 
it was a mere pretence on his part, to speak of the day 
mourning, when in his haste to execute the impious murd 
of his brother, the death of his father seemed to come t 
slowly, and he rejoiced at the prospect of its approac¢ 
With what face could he ever pretend to any human affe 
tion, when he gasps for his brother’s death, and at the sar 
time attempts to subvert all the laws of nature? It is eve 
possible, that an impulse of nature itself, extorted from h 
the avowal, by which he would the more grievously ec 
demn himself; as God often censures the wicked out of their! 


ye? 


ro 
Bb) 


'« The Greek translateth, ‘ Let the days of my father’s mourning] 
nigh, that I may kill Jacob my brother; so making it a wish for 
father’s speedy death ; and the Hebrew also will bear that translation.” 
Ainsworth, 


























‘CHAP. XXVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 101 


own mouth, and renders them more inexcusable. But if a 
sense of shame alone restrains a cruel mind, this is not to 
be deemed worthy of great praise; nay, it even betrays a 
stupid and brutal contempt of God. Sometimes, indeed, 
the fear of man influences even the pious, as we have seen, 
‘in the preceding chapter, respecting Jacob: but they soon 
rise above it, so that with them the fear of God predo- 
‘minates ; while forgetfulness of God so pervades the hearts 
‘of the wicked, that they rest their hopes in men alone. 
Therefore, he who abstains from wickedness merely through 
the fear of man, and from a sense of shame, has hitherto 
made but little progress. Yet the confession of the Papists 
is chiefly honoured by them with this praise, that it deters 
many from sin, through the fear lest they should be com- 
pelled to proclaim their own disgrace. But the rule of piety 
is altogether different, since it teaches our conscience to set 
God before us as our witness and our judge. : 

| 42. And these words of Esau ... . were told to Rebekah. 
_ now makes a transition to a new subject of history, 
showing how Jacob, as a wanderer from his father’s house, 
went into Mesopotamia. Without doubt, it was an exceed- 
ingly troublesome and severe temptation to the holy matron, 
to see that, by her own deed, her son was placed in imminent 
danger of death. But by faith she wrestled to retain the 
possession of the grace once received. For, if she had been 
impelled by a merely womanly attachment to her younger 
son, it certainly would have been her best and shortest 
method, to cause the birthright to be restored to Esau: for 
thus the cause of emulation would have been removed ; and 
he who was burning with grief at the loss of his right, 
would have had his fury appeased. It is therefore an evi- 
dence of extraordinary faith, that Rebekah does not come to 
any agreement, but persuades her son to become a voluntary 
exile, and chooses rather to be deprived of his presence, than 
)that he should give up the blessing he had once received. The 
| benediction of the father might now seem illusory ; so as to 
make it appear wonderful that so much should be made of 
lit by Rebekah and Jacob: nevertheless, they were so far 
\from repenting of what they had done, that they do not re- 






























102 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXVIL. 


fuse the bitter punishment of exile, if only Jacob may carr, 
with him the benediction uttered by his father. Moreover 
we are taught by this example, that we must bear it patiently, 
if the cross attends the hope of a better life, as its companion ; 
or even if the Lord adopts us into his family, with this con-. 
dition, that we should wander as pilgrims without any certain 
dwelling-place i in the world. For, on this account, Jacob is 
thrust out from his paternal home, where he might wsieth 
have passed his life, and is compelled to migrate toa strange 
land ; because the blessing of God is promised unto him. ; 
And: as he did not attempt to purchase temporal peace wit i 
his brother by the loss of the grace received ; so must we 
beware lest any carnal advantage or any allurements of the. 
world should draw us aside from the course of our beni 
let us rather bear with magnanimity losses of all kinds, 
that the anchor of our hope may remain fixed in heal : 
When Rebekah says that Esau consoled himself with the 
thought, that he would slay his brother; the meaning is, | 
that he could not be pacified by any other means, than by 
this wicked murder. a 

44, And tarry with him a few days. This circumstance , 
mitigates the severity of banishment. For the shortness of, 
the time of suffering avails not a little to support us in ad- 
versity. And it was probable that the enmity of Esau would) 
not prove so obstinate as to be unassuaged by his brother's 
absence. In the Hebrew expression which is translated “a 
few days,” the word few is literally “one” put in the plural 
number.’ Rebekah means, that as soon as Jacob should have 
gone away of his own accord, the memory of the offence: 
would be obliterated from the mind of Esau; as if she hat 
said, Only depart hence for a little while, and we shall soon 
assuage his anger. 4 

45, Why should I be deprived of you both in oneday? Wh 
does Rebekah fear a double privation? for there was no aang 
that Jacob, endued with a disposition so mild and placid, 
should rise up against his brother. We see, therefore, that 


* Hebraice ad verbum habetur, Unis diebus. DIM D%* (yamim ach ; 


dim). There is no mode of giving a literal rendering of the expression n 
the English language.— Fd, : 





















CHAP. XXVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 103 


Rebekah concluded that God would be the avenger of the 
1iguitous murder. Moreover, although God, for a time, 
might seem to overlook the deed, and to suspend his judg- 
ment, it would yet be necessary for him to withdraw from 
the parricide. Therefore, by this law of nature, Rebekah 
declares that she should be entirely bereaved ; because she 
_ would be compelled to dread and to detest him who earvived 
But if Rebekah anticipated in her mind what the judgment 
of God would be, and devoted the murderer to destruction, 
because she was persuaded that wickedness so great Poul 
_not be unpunished ; much less ought we to close our eyes 
against the manifest chastisements of God." 

_ 46. And Rebekah said to Isaac. When Jacob might have 
fled secretly, his mother, nevertheless, obtains leave for his 
departure from his father; for so a well-ordered domestic 
government and discipline required. In giving another 


| “the whole truth nor left ae whole unsaid. No doubt, she 
te affirms that she was tormented, even to weariness of 
life, on account of her Hittite daughters-in-law: but she 

prudently conceals the more inward at lest she should in- 

ict a mortal wound on her husband: and also, lest she 
| Bhould the more influence the rage of Esau; for the wicked, 
often, when their crime is detected, ate the more pated 
away with desperation. Now, although in consequence of 
the evil manners of her Aiterhters-inlaw, affinity with the 
| whole race became hateful to ‘Rebekah, yet in this again the 
wonderful providence of God is conspicuous, that Jacob 
‘neither blended, nor entangled himself, with the future ene- 
mies of the Church. 

1 The French is more diffuse: “Tant plus nous faut-il appercevoir les 
fleaux de Dieu qui sont manifestes, et ne faut point ciller les yeux en ne 
faisant semblant de les voir.” So much the more ought we to perceive 


the scourges of God, which are manifest; and we ought not to wink as 
pretending not to see them.—F'r. Tyr. 


104 


CHAPTER XXVIIL. 


1. Anp Isaac called Jacob, and 
blessed him, and chatees him, and 
said unto him, Thou shalt not take 
a wife of the daughters of Canaan. 

2. Arise, go to Padan-aram, to 
the house of Bethuel thy mother’s 
father, and take thee a wife from 
thence of the daughters of Laban 
thy mother’s brother. 

3. And God Almighty bless thee, 
and make thee fruitful, and multiply 
thee, that thou mayest be a multi- 
tude of people ; 

4. And give thee the blessing of 
Abraham, to thee, and to thy seed 
with thee; that thou mayest inherit 
the land wherein thou art a stranger, 
which God gave unto Abraham. 

5. And Isaac sent away Jacob: 
and he went to Padan-aram unto 
Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian, 
the brother of Rebekah, Jacob’s and 
Esau’s mother. 

6. When Esau saw that Isaac had 
blessed Jacob, and sent him away to 
Padan-aram, to take him a wife from 
thence; and that, as he blessed him, 
he te him a charge, saying, Thou 
shalt not take a wife of the daughters 
of Canaan ; ! 

7. And that Jacob obeyed his 
father and his mother, and was gone 
to Padan-aram; 

8. And Esau seeing that the 
daughters of Canaan pleased not 
Isaac his father ; 

9. Then went Esau unto Ishmael, 
and took unto the wives which he 
had Mahalath the daughter of Ish- 
mael, Abraham’s son, the sister of 
Nebajoth, to be his wife. 

10, And Jacob went out from Beer- 
sheba, and went toward Haran. 

11. And he lighted upon a certain 
place, and tarried there all night, 
because the sun was set ; and he took 
of the stones of that place, and put 
them for his pillows, and lay down 
in that place to sleep. 

12. And he dreamed, and behold 


COMMENTARY UPON 




























CHAP. XXVIII 


iw 
1. Voeavit ergo Ishac Iahacob, e 
benedixit ei: preecepitque, et dixi 
ei, Non capies uxorem de filiak 
Chenaan. 7% 
2. Surge, vade in Padan Aram, a 
domum Bethuel patris matris tuz 
et cape tibi inde uxorem de filiabu: 
Laban fratris matris tue. r 


3. Deus autem omnipotens bene- 
dicat tibi, et ecrescere faciat te, e 
multiplicare faciat te, et sis in co- 
tum populorum. ‘ 

4. Et det tibi benedictionem Abra- 
ham, tibi et semini tuo tecum, u 
hereditate accipias terram peregri. 
nationum tuarum, quam dedit Deu: 
ipsi Abraham. 

5. Et misit Ishae Iahacob, et pro- 
fectus est in Padan Aram ad Labai 
filium Bethuel Arameei fratris Ribceae. 
matris Iahacob et Esau. «¥ 


6. Et vidit Esau quod benedixis- 
set Ishac Iahacob, et misisset eur 
in Padan Aram, ut caperet sibi inde 
uxorem: et benedicendo ei, preece- 
pisset ei, dicendo, Non accipies ux 
orem de filiabus Chenaan: 


7. Et obedivisset Iahacob patri 
suo et matri suze, et ivisset in Padan 
Aram. 3 

8. Videns preterea Esau quoé 
male filises Chenaan in oculis Ishae 
patris sul: 

9. Tune abiit Esau ad Ismael, e 
accepit Mahalath filiam Ismael fili 
Abraham sororem Nebajoth, super 
wxores suas, sibi in uxorem. 


10. Iahacob vero egressus est e 
Beer-sebah, et perrexit in Aram: 
11. Et occurrit in locum, et per- 
noctavit ibi, quia occubuerat sol: eb 

tulit de lapidibus loci, et posuit 
sub capite suo, et dormivit in loco 
eodem. 


12. Et somniavit, et ecce scala 













CHAP, XXVIII. 


pe top of it reached to heaven; and 
* old the angels of God ascending 
and descending on it, 

13. And, behold, the Lord stood 
_ above it, and said, I am the Lord 
God of Abraham thy father, and the 
_ God of Isaac: the land whereon thou 
_liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy 


seed ; 
_ 14. And thy seed shall be as the 
dust of the earth: and thou shalt 
_ spread abroad to the west, and to 
_ the east, and to the north, and to the 
_ south: and in thee, and in thy seed, 
shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed. 
_ 15. And, behold, I am with thee, 
and will keep thee in all places whi- 
_ ther thou goest, and will bring thee 
- again into this land; for I will not 
- Jeave thee, until I have done that 
which I have spoken to thee of. 
16, And Jacob awaked out of his 
sleep, and he said, Surely the Lord 
is in this place, and I knew it not. 

17. And he was afraid, and said, 
How dreadful is this place! this is 
none other but the house of God, 

_and this is the gate of heaven. 

18. And Jacob rose up early in the 
morning, and took the stone that he 
had put in his pillows, and set it up 
for a pillar, and poured oil upon the 
top of it. 

19. And he called the name of 
that place Beth-el: but the name of 
that city was called Luz at the first. 


ing, If God will be with me, and will 
keep me in this way that I go, and 
will give me bread to eat, and rai- 
ment to put on, 


21. So that I come again to my 
father’s house in peace, then shall 
the Lord be my God: 

' 22, And this stone, which I have 
set for a pillar, shall be God’s house : 
and of all that thou shalt give me, I 
will surely give the tenth unto thee. 


1. And Isaac called Jacob, 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


a ladder set up on the earth, and 


20. And Jacob vowed a vow, say-. 


105 


erecta erat super terram, et caput 
ejus tangebat ccelum ; et ecce, Angeli 
Dei ascendebant et descendebant per 
eam. 

13. Et ecce, Iehova stabat super 
eam, et dixit, Ego Iehova Deus 
Abraham patris tui, et Deus Ishac: 
terram, super quam tu dormis, tibi 
dabo et semini tuo. 


14. Et erit semen tuum sicut 
pulvis terrae, et multiplicaberis ad 
Occidentem, et ad Orientem, et ad 
Aquilonem, et ad Meridiem: et be- 
nedicentur in te omnes familize ter- 
ree, et in semine tuo. 


15. Et ecce sum tecum, et custo- 
diam te quocunque profectus fueris, 
et redire faciam te ad terram hance: 
quia non derelinquam te, donec 
faciam quod loquutus sum tibi. 


16. Deinde expergefactus est Iaha- 
cob a somno suo, et dixit, Vere est 
Iehova in loco isto, et ego nesciebam. 

17. Timuit ergo, et dixit, Quam 
terribilis est locus iste! non est hic 
nisi domus Dei, et hic est porta ceeli, 


18. Surrexit autem Iahacob mane, 
et tulit lapidem, quem posuerat sub 
capite suo, et posuit eum in statuam, 
et effudit oleum supra summitatem 
ejus. 

19. Et vocavit nomen loci ipsius 
Beth-el, et quidem Luz erat nomen 
urbis prius. 

20. Adheee vovit Iahacob votum, 
dicendo, Si fuerit Iehova Deus me- 
cum, et custodierit me in via ista, 
quam ego ingredior, et dederit mihi 
panem ad vescendum, et vestimen- 
tum ad operiendum : 

21. Et reversus fuero in pace ad 
domum patris mei, erit lehova mihi 
in Deum. 

22. Et lapis iste, quem posui in 
statuam, erit domus Dei: et omne 
quod dederis mihi, decimando deci- 
mabo illud tibi. 


and blessed him. It may be 


asked, whether the reason why Isaac repeats anew the bene- 






























q f 


106 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXV IL 


diction which he had before pronounced, was that the fe met 
one had been of no force ; whereas, if he was a prophet an 
interpreter of the will of God, what had once proceeded fro: 
his mouth ought to have been firm and perpetual. I answer 
although the benediction was in itself efficacious, yet the faith 
of Jacob required support of this kind: just as the Lord, in 
reiterating frequently the same promises, derogates nothin, 
either from himself or from his word, but rather. confirms the 
certainty of that word to his servants, lest, at any time, the ir 
confidence should be shaken through the infirmity of the 
flesh. What I have said must also be kept in mind, that 
Isaac prayed, not as a private person, but as one furnished 
with a special command of God, to transmit the covenant 
deposited with himself to his son Jacob. It was also of ee 
greatest importance that now, at length, Jacob should b 
blessed by his father, knowingly and willingly ; lest at a future 
time a doubt, arising from the recollection of his father’s 
mistake and of his own fraud, might steal over his mind 
Therefore Isaac, now purposely directing his words to his 
son Jacob, pronounces the blessing to be due to him by right, 
lest it should be thought that, having been before deceived, 
he had uttered words in vain, under a false character. , 
2. Arise, go to Raden: In the first place, he com- 
mands him to take a wife from his maternal race. He might 
have sent for her by some one of his servants, as Rebekah 
had been brought to him; but perhaps he took this course to 
avoid the envy of Esau, who might regard it as a reproach 
if more solicitude were manifested about his brother’s mar. 
riage than about his own. ) 
3. And God Almighty bless thee. Here follows the form 
of benediction, which slightly differs in words from the for- 
mer, but nevertheless tends to the same end. First, he de- 
sires that Jacob should be blessed by God ; that is, that he 
should be so increased and amplified in his own offspring, — 
as to grow into a multitude of nations; or, in other words, 
that he should produce many people who might combine | 
into one body under the same head ; as if he had said, “Let 
there arise from thee many tribes, who shall constitute one 
people.” And this truly was, in some measure, fulfilled when 


_ CHAP. XXVIII. ' THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 107 
: 
_ Moses distributed the people into thirteen divisions. Never- 
- theless, Isaac looked-for a further result, namely, that many 
were at length to be gathered together out of various nations, 
to the family of his son, that, in this manner, from a vast and 
previously scattered multitude, might be formed one assembly. 
For it is not to be doubted, that he wished to hand down 
what he had received ; seeing that he immediately afterwards 
celebrates the iethory of jbo original covenant, deriving his 
_ present benediction from thence as its source: as if he had 
said, that he transferred whatever right he had from his 
father, to his son Jacob, in order that the inheritance of life 
might remain with him, according to the covenant of God 
/ made with Abraham. They who expound this as being 
_ said in the way of comparison, as if Isaac’ wished those bene- 
- fits which God had before conferred on Abraham to be in 
the same manner granted to his son, attenuate the mean- 
‘ing of the words. For since God, in making his covenant 
with Abraham, had annexed this condition, that it should 
descend to his posterity, it was necessary to trace its com- 
mencement to his person as its root. Therefore, Isaac con- 
stitutes his son Jacob the heir of Abraham, as successor to 
the benediction deposited with him, and promised to his 
seed. This also appears more clearly from the context fol- 
lowing, where he assigns to him the dominion over the land, 
because it had been given to Abraham. Moreover, we per- 
ceive, in this member of the sentence, with what consistency 
of faith the holy fathers rested on the word of the Lord ; for 
otherwise, they would have found it no small temptation to 
be driven about as strangers and pilgrims in the very land, 
the possession of which had been divinely assigned them a 
hundred years before. But we see, that in their wanderings 
and their unsettled mode of life, they no less highly esti- 
mated what God had promised them, than if they had already 
been in the full enjoyment of it. And this is the true trial 
of faith; when relying on the word of God alone, although 
tossed on the waves of the world, we stand as firmly as if 





' In the editions of Amsterdam and Berlin, the name Jacob is here in- 
serted; and the old English version has it too. The mistake is obvious, 
and stands correeted in the French translation.— /d. 






























108 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXVII 


our abode were already fixed in heaven. Isaac expressl. 
fortifies his son against this temptation, when he calls th 
land of which he constitutes him lord, “the land of hi 
wanderings.” For by these words he inadlinad him hit a 
was possible he might be a wanderer all the days of his life 
but this did not hinder the promise of God from being s 0 
ratified, that he, contented with that alone, might patiently 
wait for the time of revelation. Even the plural number 
seems to express something significant, namely, that Jacol 
would be a wanderer not once only, but in various ways and 
perpetually. Since, however, the Hebrew plural has not alway 
such emphasis, I do not insist on this interpretation. It is 
more worthy of notice, that the faith of Jacob was proved by 
a severe and rigid trial, seeing, that for this very reason, th 
land is promised to him in word only, while in fact, he i 
cast far away from it. For he seems to be the object o 
ridicule, when he is commanded to possess the dominion 0 
the land, and yet to leave it and to bid it farewell, and t 
depart into distant exile. | 
6. When Esau saw. A brief narration concerning Esau 
is here inserted, which it is useful to know; because we 
learn from it that the wicked, though they exalt themselves 
against God, and though, in contempt of his grace, they please 
themselves in obtaining their desires, are yet not able t 
despise that grace altogether. So now, Esau is penetrated 
with a desire of the blessing; not that he aspires to it sincerely 
and from his heart ; but perceiving it to be something valu 
able, he is impelled to seek after it, though with reluctanee, 
A further fault is, that he does not seek it as he ought: fot 
he devises a new and strange method of reconciling God an 
his father to himself ; and therefore all his diligence is with 
out profit. At the same time he does not seem to be careful 
about pleasing God, so that he may but propitiate his father 
Before all things, it was his duty to cast aside his profan 
disposition, his perverse manners, and his corrupt affections of 
the flesh, and then to bear with meekness the chastisement 
inflicted upon him: for genuine repentance would have die 
tated to him this sentiment, “Seeing I have hitherto ren 
* Terram peregrinationum—the land of wanderings. 











= XXVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 109 — 


_ dered myself unworthy of the birthright, my brother is de- 
_servedly preferred before me. Nothing, therefore, remains 
for me but to humble myself; and since I am deprived of 
the honour of being the head, let it suffice me to be at least 
one of the members of the Church.” And, certainly, it 
_ would have been more desirable for him to remain in some 
_ obscure corner of the Church, than, as one cut off and torn 
away from the elect people, to shine with a proud pre-emi- 
-nence on earth. He aims, however, at nothing of this kind, 
“et attempts, by I know not what prevarications, to appease 
his father in whatever way he may be able. Moses, in this 
example, depicts all hypocrites to the life. For as often as 
the judgment of God urges them, though they are wounded 
with the pain of their punishment, they yet do not seek a true 
remedy; for having aimed at offering one kind of satisfaction 
only, they entirely neglect a simple and real conversion: and 
even in the satisfaction offered, they only make a pretence. 
_ Whereas Esau ought thoroughly to have repented, he only 
_ tried to correct the single fault of his marriage ; and this too 
‘ina most absurd manner. Yet another defect follows: for 
while he retains the wives who were so hateful to his parents, 
he supposes he has discharged his duty by marrying a third. 
But by this method, neither was the trouble of his parents 
alleviated, nor his house cleansed from guilt. And now truly, 
whence does he marry his third wife? From the race of 
Ishmael, whom we know to have been himself degenerate, 
and whose posterity had departed from the pure worship of 
God. A remarkable proof of this is discernible at the pre- 
sent day, in the pretended and perfidious intermeddlers, who 
imagine they can admirably adjust religious differences by 
simply adorning their too gross corruptions with attractive 
colours." The actual state of things compels them to confess 
‘that the vile errors and abuses of Popery have so far pre- 


1 The Council of Trent is here obviously referred to, which held its sés- 
sions from the year 1545 to the year 1563. This council was the Romanist 
reaction upon the Protestant reformation. Father Paul gives a singular 
and graphic description of the persons, the characters, and the arguments, 
by which this last council of the Church of Rome was distinguished. It 
will be remembered that Calvin’s Commentary on Genesis was published 
‘about the middle of this protracted period.— Ed. 

























110 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXVIII 


vailed as to render a Reformation absolutely necessary: bu 
they are unwilling that the filth of this Camarine marsh b 
stirred ;! they only desire to conceal its impurities, and eve 
that they do by compulsion. For they had previously callec 
their abominations the sacred worship of God; but sine 
these are now dragged to light by the word of God, the; 
therefore descend to novel artifices. They flatter themselves, 
however, in vain, seeing they are here condemned by Moses, 
in the person of Esau. Away, then, with their impure pre- 
tended reformation, which has nothing simple nor sincere 
Moreover, since it is a disease inherent in the human race, 
willingly to attempt to deceive God by some fictitious pre- 
text, let us know that we do nothing effectually, until we 
tear up our sins by the roots, and thoroughly devote ourselve; 
to God. ¥ 

10. And Jacob went owt. In the course of this history 
we must especially observe, how the Lord preserved his ow1 
Church in the person of one man. For Isaac, on account 0; 
his age, lay like a dry trunk; and although the living root” 
of piety was concealed within his breast, yet no hope of © 
further offspring remained in his exhausted and barren ol¢ 
age. Esau, like a green and flourishing branch, had much 
of show and splendour, but his vigour was only momentary. 
Jacob, as a severed twig, was removed into a far distan 
land; not that, being ingrafted or planted there, he shoule 
acquire strength and greatness, but that, being moistened 
with the dew of heaven, he might put forth his shoots as 
into the air itself. For the Lord wonderfully nourishes 
him, and supplies him with strength, until he shall bring 
him back again to his father’s house. Meanwhile, let the 
reader diligently observe, that while he who was blessed 
by God is cast into exile; occasion of glorying was given 
to the reprobate Esau, who was left in the possession 0 


1 Camarina was a city on the south of Sicily, placed near the mouths 6 
two rivers, close to which was a marsh or lake, called the Camarine lakey” 
injurious to health, and often producing pestilence. It is reported that 
the inhabitants consulted Apollo whether or not they should drain i 
The answer was, that it would be better undrained. This answer the 
disregarded, and in consequence the enemy found it easy to attack am 
plunder the city. Hence the proverb, “ Ne moveas Camarinam ;” thi 
is, “ Do not get rid of one evil to bring on you a greater.” —Ed. 


| 
| 
| 


CHAP, XXVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 111 














everything, so that he might securely reign without a rival, 
Let us not, then, be disturbed, if at any time the wicked 
sound their triumphs, as having gained their wishes, while 
_ we are oppressed. Moses mentions the name of Beersheba, 
because, as it formed one of the boundaries of the land of 
Canaan, and lay towards the great desert and the south, it 
_ was the more remote from the eastern region towards which 
_ Jacob was going. He afterwards adds Charran, (chap. xxix.,) 
where Abraham, when he left his own country, dwelt for 
some time. Now, it appears that not only the pious old man 
plerah, when he followed his son, or accompanied him on his 
_ journey, came to Charran where he died ; but that his other 
son Nahor, with his family, also came to the same place. 
i For we read in the eleventh chapter, that Terah took his son 
_ Abraham, and Lot his grandson, and Sarai his daughter-in- 
i law. Whence we infer that Nahor, at that time, remained 
_ in Chaldea, his native country. But now, since Moses says, 
that Laban dwelt at Charran, we may hence conjecture, that 

_ Nahor, in order that he might not appear guilty of the in- 
humanity of deserting his father; afterwards gathered together 
his goods and came to him. 

Moses here, in a few words, declares what a severe and 

_ arduous journey the holy man (Jacob) had, on account of its 
great length: to which also another circumstance is added ; 
namely, that he lay on the ground, under the open sky, 
‘without a companion, and without a habitation. But as 
Moses only briefly alludes to these facts, so will I also avoid 
prolixity, as the thing speaks for itself. Wherefore, if, at 
any time, we think ourselves to be roughly treated, let us 
remember the example of the holy man, as a reproof to our 
fastidiousness. 

12. And he dreamed. Moses here teaches how oppor- 
tunely, and (as we may say) in the critical moment, the 
Lord succoured his servant. For who would not have said 
that holy Jacob was neglected by God, since he was ex- 
posed to the incursion of wild beasts, and obnoxious to 
every kind of injury from earth and heaven, and found no- 
where any help or solace? But when he was thus reduced 
to the last necessity, the Lord suddenly stretches out his 


112 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXVIII. 


rance had before shone forth, so now the Lord gives a 
memorable example of his paternal care towards the faithful. — 
Three things are here to be noticed in their order ; first, , 
that the Lord appeared unto Jacob in a dream; secondly, — 
the nature of the vision as described by Moses; thirdly, the 
words of the oracle. When mention is made of a dream, no | 
doubt that mode of revelation is signified, which the Lord — 
formerly was wont to adopt towards his servants. (Numb. | 
xii. 6.) Jacob, therefore, knew that this dream was divinely 
sent to him, as one differing from common dreams ; and this ; 
is intimated in the words of Moses, when he says that God | 
appeared to him ina dream. For Jacob could not see God, — 
nor perceive him present, unless his majesty had been dis-_ 
tinguishable by certain marks. : 

And behold a ladder. Here the form of the vision is— 
related, which is very pertinent to the subject of it ; namely, © 








earth. The interpretation of some of the Hebrews, that | 
the ladder is a figure of the Divine Providence, cannot be 
admitted: for the Lord has given another sign more suit-— 
able.’ But to us, who hold to this principle, that the cove- | 
nant of God was founded in Christ, and that Christ himself 
was the eternal image of the Father, in which he manifested — 
himself to the holy patriarchs, there is nothing in this vision | 
intricate or ambiguous. For since men are alienated from — 
God by sin, though he fills and sustains all things by his — 


1 Whatever force and truth, as well as beauty, there may be in the ex- 
position of Calvin which follows, he appears to have dismissed too hastily — 
the opinion of the Jews, that the vision was symbolical of Divine Provi- 
dence. The circumstances of Jacob seemed to require some such intima- — 
tions of Divine protection and care during his journey, as this interpretation 
of the vision presents. And in every way the passage thus understood is | 
both useful and encouraging. There is, however, no need to question, 
that the higher mystical interpretation, on which Calvin exclusively in- 
sists, is legitimately applicable, as conveying the ultimate and, in short, © 
the most important meaning of the vision. ‘The reader may consult the — 
123d Exercitation of Rivetus on this subject.—Rivetus in Gen., p. 602. \ 

; 


4 


























‘ Pp, XXVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 113 


wer, yet that communication by which he would draw us 
» himself i is not perceived by us; but, on the other hand, 
» greatly are we at variance with “hiun that, regarding him 
3 adverse to us, we, in our turn, floc from his presence. 
loreover the angels, to whom is committed the guardian- 
hip of the human race, while strenuously applying them- 
elves to their office, yet do not communicate with us in 
uch a way that we become conscious of their presence. It 
Christ alone, therefore, who connects heaven and earth: 
ie is the only Mediator who reaches from heaven down to 
arth : he is the medium through which the fulness of all 
elestial blessings flows down to us, and through which we, 
p turn, ascend to God. He it is who, being the head over 
ngels, causes them to minister to his earthly members. 
Therefore, (as we read in John i. 51,) he properly claims for 
imself this honour, that after he shall have been manifested 
1 the world, angels shall ascend and descend. If, then, we 
ay that the ladder is a figure of Christ, the exposition will 
not be forced. For the similitude of a ladder well suits the 
Mediator, through whom ministering angels, righteousness 
nd life, with all the graces of the Holy Spirit, descend to 
is step by step. We also, who were not only fixed to the 
arth, but plunged into the depths of the curse, and into 
hell itself, ascend even unto God. Also, the Ged of hosts 
is seated on the ladder; because the fulness of the Deity 
wells in Christ ; and hence also it is, that it reaches unto 
heaven. For although all power is committed even to his 
human nature by the Father, he still would not truly sus- 
tain our faith, unless he were God manifested in the flesh. 
And the fact that the body of Christ is finite, does not pre- 
vent him from filling heaven and earth, because his grace 
and power are everywhere diffused. Whence also, Paul being 
“witness, he ascended into heaven that he might fill all things. 
They who translate the particle by by the word “near,’ 
| entirely destroy the sense of the passage. For Moses wishes 
| to state that the fulness of the Godhead dwelt in the per- 
son of the Mediator. Christ not only approached unto us, 
| but clothed himself in our nature, that he might make us 
; one with himself. That the ladder was a symbol of Christ, 
} VOL. II. H 


eel A a 


en ere 

































114 COMMENTARY UPON OHAP. XXVI 


is also confirmed by this consideration, that nothing 
more suitable than that God should ratify his covena: 
eternal salvation in his Son to his servant Jacob. And hed 2 
we feel unspeakable Joy, when we hear that Christ, who 
far excels all creatures, is nevertheless joined with us. 
majesty, indeed, of God, which here presents itself consp) 
ously to view, ought to inspire terror; so that every k 
should bow to Christ, that all creatures should look up 
him and adore him, and that all flesh should keep silence 
his presence. But his friendly and lovely image is at t t 
same time depicted ; that we may know by his descent, th 
heaven is opened to us, and the angels of God are render 
familiar to us. For hence we have fraternal society wi 
them, since the common Head both of them and us has ] 
station on earth. 

13. IT am the Lord God of Abraham. This is the th 
point which, I said, was to be noticed: for mute visions 
cold ; therefore the word of the Lord is as the soul whi 
quickéui them. The figure, therefore, of the ladder was t 
inferior appendage of this promise ; just as God illustra 
and adorns his word by external symbols, that both grea 
clearness and authority may be added to it. Whence a 
we prove that sacraments in the Papacy are frivolous, | 
cause no voice is heard in them which may edify the so 
We may therefore observe, that whenever God manifesi 
himself to the fathers, he also spoke, lest a mute vision shor 
have held them in suspense. Under the name M1" (Jehou 
God teaches that he is the only Creator of the world, 
Jacob might not seek after other gods. But since 
majesty is in itself incomprehensible, he accommodates hi 
self to the capacity of his servant, by immediately addi 
that he is the God of Abraham and Isaac. For though i 
necessary to maintain that the God whom we worship is 
only God ; yet because when our senses would aspire to 
comprehension of his greatness, they fail at the first attem 
we must diligently cultivate that sobriety which teaches 
not to desire to know more concerning him than he reve 
unto us; and then he, accommodating himself to our w 
ness, according to his infinite goodness, will omit nothing 































| OHAP. XXVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 115 


which tends to promote our salvation. And whereas he made 
a special covenant with Abraham and Isaac, proclaiming 
himself their God, he recalls his servant Jacob to the true 
source of faith, and retains him also in his perpetual covenant. 
This is the sacred bond of religion, by which all the sons of 
E 4 od are united among themselves, when from the first to 
the last they hear the same promise of salvation, and agree 
0g vether in one common hope. And this is the effect of 
that benediction which Jacob had lately received from his 
b. ther ; because God with his own mouth pronounces him to 
be the diate of the covenant, lest the mere testimony of man 
‘should be thought illusive. . 

ae The land whereon thou lest. We read that the land was 
given to his posterity ; yet he himself was not only a stranger 
in it to the last, but was not permitted even to die there. 
Whence we infer, that under the pledge or earnest of the 
ind, something better and more excellent was given, seeing 
at Abraham was a spiritual possessor of the land, and 
Ritented with the mere beholding of it, fixed his chief re- 
gard on heaven. We may observe, horever, that the seed 
of sf Jacob is here placed in opposition to the other sons of 
a braham, who, according to the flesh, traced their origin to 
him, but were cut off from the holy people: yet, from the 
fiv0 when the sons of Jacob entered the land of Canaan, 
they had the perpetual inheritance unto the coming of 
Jhrist, by whose advent the world was renewed. 

14. And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth. The 
sum of the whole is this, Whatever the Lord had promised 
9 Abraham, Jacob transmitted to his sons. Meanwhile it 
9ehoved the holy man, in reliance on this divine testimony, 
0 hope against hope ; for though the promise was vast and 
magnificent, yet, wherever Jacob turned himself, no ray of 
rood hope shone upon him. He saw himself a solitary man ; 
10 condition better than that of exile presented itself; his 
veturn was uncertain and full of danger; but it was profit- 
ble for him to be thus left destitute of all means of help, 
that he might- learn to depend on the word of God alone. 
thus, at the present time, if God freely promises to give us all 
hhings, and yet seems to approach us empty-handed, it is still 


: 
1 


































116 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXVIII. 


proper that we should pay such honour and reverence to his 
word, that we may be enriched and filled with faith. At 
length, indeed, after the death of Jacob, the event declare 
how efficacious had been this promise: by which examp % 
we are taught that the Lord by no means disappoints his 
people, even when he defers the granting of those good things 
which he has promised, till after their death. . 
And in thee, and in thy seed, shall all the families fe 
earth be blessed. This clause has the greater weight, hb 
cause in Jacob and in his seed the blessing is to be restos e 
from which the whole human race had been cut off in their 
first parent. But what this.expression means, I have explainec 
above ; namely, that Jacob will not only be an exemplar, or 
formula of blessing, but its fountain, cause, or foundation ; fo. 
though a certain exquisite degree of happiness i is often sig- 
nified by an expression of this kind ; yet, in many passages 
of Scripture, it means the same as to ‘Aesire from any one his 
blessing, and to acknowledge it as his gift. Thus men a 
said to bless themselves in God, when they acknowledge him 
as the author of all good. So here God promises that ir 
Jacob and his seed all nations shall bless themselves, be- 
cause no happiness will ever be found except what proceeds 
from this source. That, however, which is peculiar to Christ 
is without impropriety transferred to Jacob, in whose loins — 
Christ then was. Therefore, inasmuch as Jacob, at thai 
time, represented the person of Christ, it is said that al 
nations are to be blessed in him; but, seeing that the ma nian 
festation of a benefit so great depended on another, th 
expression in thy seed is immediately added in the way o 
explanation. That the word seed is a collective noun, form 
no objection to this interpretation, (as I have elsewher 
said,) for since all unbelievers deprive themselves of honov 
and of grace, and are thus accounted strangers ; it is neces= 
sary to refer to the Head, in order that the unity of the see 
may appear. Whoever will reverently ponder this, will easil % 


ro 


1 Et benedicent se in te omnes fines terre. “And all the ends of t 
earth shall bless themselves in thee.” The reader will perceive that Oal 4 
vin’s remarks turn chiefly on the expression “bless themselves,” whieh 
does not appear in our version. —Ed. 


CHAP. XXVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 117 


see that, in this interpretation, which is that of Paul, there 
is nothing tortuous or constrained. 
_ 15. LT am with thee, and will keep thee. God now promptly 
_ anticipates the temptation which might steal over the mind 
_ of holy Jacob ; for thougl he is, for a time, thrust out into a 
foreign land, God declares, that he will be his keeper until 
he shall have brought him back again. He then extends 
his promise still further ; saying, that he will never desert 
him till all things are fulfilled. There was a twofold use of 
_ this promise: first, it retained his mind in the faith of the 
_ divine covenant ; and, secondly, it taught him that it could 
' not be well with him unless he were a partaker of the pro- 
_ mised inheritance. 
| 16. And Jacob awaked. Moses again affirms that this was 
no common dream; for when any one awakes he imme- 
_ diately perceives that he had been under a delusion in dream- 
ing. But God impressed a sign on the mind of his servant, 
' by which, when he awoke, he might recognise the heavenly 
_ oracle which he had heard in his sleep. Moreover, Jacob, in 
_ express terms, accuses himself, and extols the goodness of 
_ God, who deigned to present himself to one who sought him 
f not; for Jacob thought that he was there alone: but now, 
Baxfter the Lord appeared, he wonders, and exclaims that he 
_ had obtained more than he could have dared to hope for. 
_ It is not, however, to be doubted that Jacob had called upon 
_ God, and had trusted that he would be the guide of his 
_ journey ; but, because his faith had not availed to persuade 
him that God was thus near unto him, he justly extols this 
act of grace. So, whenever God anticipates our wishes, and 
grants us more than our minds have conceived ; let us learn, 
after the example of this patriarch, to wonder that God 
should have been present with us. Now, if each of us would 
reflect how feeble his faith is, this mode of speaking would 
appear always proper for us all ; for who can comprehend, in 
his scanty measure, the immense multitude of gifts which 
God is perpetually heaping upon us? 
17. And he was afraid, and said. It seems surprising that _ 
Jacob should fear, when God spoke so graciously to him; or 
that he should call that place “ dreadful,” where he had been 






















= 



























118 COMMENTARY UPON HAP. XXVIII 


filled with incredible joy. I answer, although God e 
larates his servants, he at the same time inspires thesia 
fear, in order that they may learn, with true ae : 
self-denial, to embrace his mercy. We are not therefaneil t 
understand that Jacob was struck with terror, as reprobate 
are, as soon as God shows himself; but he was inspirec 
with a fear which produces pious submission. . He also pro- 
perly calls that place the gate of heaven, on account of t 
manifestation of God: for, because God is placed in hea 
as on his royal throne, Jacob truly declares that, in see 
God, he had penetrated into heaven. In this sense th 
preaching of the gospel is called the kingdom of ‘Keane ATC 
the sacraments may be called the gate of heaven, bece 
they admit us into the presence of God. ‘The Papists, how- 
ever, foolishly misapply this passage to their temples, a 
if God dwelt in filthy places. But if we concede, that the 
places which they designate by this title, are not polluted with 
impious superstitions, yet this honour belongs to no peculia 
place, since Christ has filled the whole world with the pre- | 
sence of his Deity. Those helps to faith only, (as I hay 
before taught,) by which God raises us to himself, can be | 
ealled the gates of heaven. a 
18, And Jacob rose wp early. Moses relates that the holy — 
father was not satisfied with merely giving thanks at the 
time, but would also transmit a memorial of his srehinca ( 
posterity. Therefore he raised a monument, and gave a na 
to the place, which implied that he thought such a signs 
benefit of God worthy to be celebrated in all ages. For this 
reason, the Scripture not only commands the faithful to sin 
the praises of God among their brethren; but also enjoin 
them to train their children to religious duties, and to pro 
pagate the worship of God among their descendants. 
And set it wp for a pillar. Moses does not mean thi 
the stone was made an idol, but that it should be a specia 
memorial. God indeed uses this word M3¥9, (matsbah,) | 
when he forbids statues to be erected to himself, (Ley 
xxvi. 1,) because almost all statues were objects of vene 
tion, as if they were likenesses of God. But the lesign 0 


In feetidis lupanaribus. 






















JHAP. XXVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 119 


acob was different ; namely, that he might leave a testimony 
f the vision which had appeared unto him, not that he 
night represent God by that symbol or figure. Therefore 
e stone was not there placed by him, for the purpose of 
depressing the minds of men into any gross superstition, but 
rather of raising them upward. He used oil as a sign of 
on mnsecration, and not without reason ; for as, in the world, 
erything is profane which is destitute of the Spirit of God, 
b there is no pure religion except that which the heavenly 
iction sanctifies. And to this point the solemn right of con- 
ation, which God commanded in his law, tends, in order 
iat the faithful may learn to bring in nothing of their own, 
est they should pollute the temple and worship of God. 
A ad though, in the times of Jacob, no teaching had yet been 
Bemitied to writing ; it is, nevertheless, certain that he had 
en imbued with that principle of piety which God from 
the ea ttsinr had infused into the hearts of the devout : 
wherefore, it is not to be ascribed to superstition that he 
poured oil upon the stone ; but he rather testified, as I have 
| ane that no worship can be acceptable to God, or pure, 
pero the sanctification of the Spirit. Other commenta- 
s argue, with more subtlety, that the stone was a symbol 
f Christ, on whom all the graces of the Spirit were poured 
e. that all might draw out of his fulness; but I do not 
know that any such thing entered the mind of Moses or of 
me I am satisfied with what I have before stated, that 
a stone was erected to be a witness or a memorial (so to 
speak) of a vision, the benefit of which reaches to all ages. 
Tt may be asked, Whence did the holy man obtain oil in the 
desert? They who answer that it had been brought from a 
neighbouring city are, in my opinion, greatly deceived ; for 
this place was then void of inhabitants, as I shall soon show. 
I therefore rather conjecture, that on account of the neces- 
sity of the times, seeing that suitable accommodations could 
| not always be had, he had taken some portion of food for his 
| journey along with him ; and as we know that great use was 
made of oil in those partis it is no wonder if he carried a 
| flaggon of oil with his bread. 

19. And he called the name of that place Beth-el. It may 


; es he es REE rE Ser" 
oO = | a 

































120 COMMENTARY UPON ira XXVI 


appear absurd that Moses should speak of that place : as 
eity, respecting which he had a little while before said #] 
Jacob had slept there in the open air ; for why did not | 
seek an abode, or hide himself in some corner of a hous 
But the difficulty is easily solved, because the city was 1 
yet built ; neither did the place immediately take a 
which J acob had assigned, but lay long concealed. 
when a town was afterwards built on the spot, no menti 
is made of Beth-el, as if Jacob had never passed that 1 
for the inhabitants did not know what had been done the el 
and therefore they called the city Luz,* according to th 
own imagination ; which name it retained until the Israelite 
having taken possession of the land, recalled into comm 
use, as by an act of restoration, the former name which ha 
been abolished. And it is to be observed, that when post 
ity, by a foolish emulation, worshipped God in Beth-el, seei 
that it was done without a divine command, the propht 
severely inveighed against that worship, calling the name 
the place Bethaven, that is, the house of iniquity: when 
we infer how unsafe it is to rely upon the examples of t 
fathers without the word of God. The greatest care, thet 
fore, must be taken, in treating of the worship of God, th 
what has been once done by men, should not be drawn into 
precedent ; but that what God himself has prescribed in I 
word should remain an inflexible rule. 4 

20. And Jacob vowed a vow. The design of this ¥ 
was, that Jacob would manifest his gratitude, if God sho 
prove favourable unto him. Thus they offered peace-off 
ings under the law, to testify their gratitude ; ‘and sit 
thanksgiving is a sacrifice of a sweet odour, the Lord ¢ 
clares vows of this nature to be acceptable to him; a 
therefore we must also have respect to this point, w 
we are asked what and how it is lawful to vow to Ge 


1 ‘The word nd (Luz) signifies an almond-tree, and the town may 
derived this name from the fact that almond-trees abounded in the nei 
bourhood. Yet the verb from which it is taken means to turn ay 
to depart, to go back ;” also “ to be perverse, or wicked ;” and it is not 
possible that this name may have been assigned to it on account of 


bag of its inhabitants. See the Lexicons of Schindler, Gese 
¢.— Ex 7 




















CHAP. XXVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 121 


| for some are too fastidious, who would utterly condemn all 
‘yows rather than open the door to superstitions. But if 


‘minately pour forth their vows, we must also beware lest 
'we become like those on the opposite side, who disallow 
all vows without exception. Now, in order that a vow may 
be lawful and pleasing to God, it is first necessary that 
it should tend to a right end; and next, that men should 
‘devote nothing by a vow but what is in itself approved by 
God, and what he has placed within their own power. When 
‘the separate parts of this vow are examined, we shall see 
holy Jacob so regulating his conduct as to omit none of these 
‘things which I have mentioned. In the first place, he has 
‘nothing else in his mind than to testify his gratitude. Se- 
condly, he confines whatever he is about to do, to the lawful 
worship of God. In the third place, he does not proudly 
promise what he had not the power to perform, but devotes 
‘the tithe of his goods as a sacred oblation. Wherefore, the 
folly of the Papists is easily refuted ; who, in order to justify 
‘their own confused farrago of vows, catch at one or another 
yow, soberly conceived, as a precedent, when in the meantime 
their own license exceeds all bounds. Whatever comes up- 
permost they are not ashamed to obtrude upon God. One 
man makes his worship to consist in abstinence from flesh, 
another in pilgrimages, a third in sanctifying certain days 
by the use of sackcloth, or by other things of the same kind ; 
‘and not to God only do they make their vows, but also admit 
any dead person they please into a participation of this 
honour. They arrogate to themselves the choice of perpetual 
¢elibacy. What do they find in the example of Jacob which 

has any similitude or affinity to such rashness, that they 

should hence catch at such a covering for themselves? But, 

for the purpose of bringing all these things clearly to light, 
| we must first enter upon an explanation of the words. It 
} may seem absurd that Jacob here makes a covenant with 
| God, to be his worshipper, if he will give him what he 
; desires; as if truly he did not intend to worship God for 
| nothing. I answer, that, by interposing this condition, Jacob 
did not by any means act from distrust, as if he doubted of 


























122 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXVIII. | 


God’s continual protection ; but that in this manner he made 
provision against his own infirmity, in preparing himself to © 
celebrate the divine goodness by a vow previously made." 
The superstitious deal with God just as they do with mortal — 
man ; they try to soothe him with their allurements. The 
design of Jacob was far different ; namely, that he might the | 
more effectually stimulate himself to the duties of religion. — 
He had often heard from the mouth of God, “I will be al-_ 
ways with thee ;’ and he annexes his vow as an appendage 
to that promise. He seems indeed, at first sight, like a mer- 
cenary, acting in a servile manner; but since he depends | 
entirely upon the promises given unto him, and forms both 
his language and his affections in accordance with them, he | 
aims at nothing but the confirmation of his faith, and gathers © 
together those aids which he knows to be suitable to his in- 
firmity. When, therefore, he speaks of food and clothing, 
we must not, on that account, accuse him of solicitude respect- 
ing this earthly life alone ; whereas he rather contends, like 
a valiant champion, against violent temptations. He found 
himself in want of all things; hunger and nakedness were 
continually threatening him with death, not to mention his 
other innumerable dangers: therefore he arms himself with 
confidence, that he might proceed through all difficulties 
and obstacles, being fully assured that every kind of assist-_ 
ance was laid up for him in the grace of God: for he con-— 
fesses himself to be in extreme destitution, when he says, 
“Tf the Lord will supply me with food and raiment.” I 
may nevertheless be asked, since his grandfather Abraha 
had sent his servant with a splendid retinue, with camel 
and precious ornaments ; why does Isaac now send away hi 
son without a single companion, and almost without provi 
sions? It is possible that he was thus dismissed, that th 
mind of cruel Esau might be moved to tenderness by a spee 
tacle so miserable. Yet, in my judgment, another reason was — 
of greater weight ; for Abraham, fearing lest his son Isaae — 
should remain with his relatives, took an oath from his 


pecauie Se. 


no Ps SE 


en 


‘ Se desposant a celebrer la bonté de Dieu, en se vouant expressement — 
a luy. Preparing himself to celebrate the goodness of God, in devoting — 
himself expressly to him.—Fr. 7'r. ‘ a 

























HAP. XXVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 123 


vant that he would not suffer his son to go into Mesopo- 
amia. But now, since necessity compels holy Isaac to de- 
rmine differently for his son Jacob ; he, at least, takes care 
not to do anything which might retard his return. He 
therefore supplies him with no wealth, and with no delicacies 
‘which might ensnare his mind, but purposely sends him 
away poor and empty, that he might be the more ready to 
return. Thus we sce that Jacob preferred his father’s house 
o all kingdoms, and had no desire of settled repose elsewhere. 
| 21. Then shall the Lord be my God. In these words Jacob 
binds himself never to apostatize from the pure worship of 
ae he One God; for there is no doubt that he here comprises 
the sum of piety. But he may seem to promise what far 
exceeds his strength ; for newness of life, spiritual righteous- 
1ess, integrity of heart, and a holy regulation of the whole 
life, were not in his own power. I answer, when holy men 
-yow those things which God requires of them, and which are 
ad Sitvextheni a8 acts of piety ; they, at the same time, 
embrace what God promises concerning the remission of 
‘sins by the help of his Holy Spirit. Hence it follows that 
hey ascribe nothing to their own strength ; and also, that 
Bi tever falls short of entire perfection does not vitiate their 
“worship because God, mercifully and with paternal indul- 
ence, pardons them. 
é 22. And this stone which I have set for a pillar. This 
ceremony was an appendage to divine worship ; for external 
| do not make men true worshippers of God, but are only 
aids to piety. But because the holy fathers were then at 
: liberty to erect altars wherever they pleased, Jacob poured 
a libation upon the stone, because he had then no other 
sacrifice to offer ; not that he worshipped God according to 
his own will, fon the direction of the Spirit was ~eatoad of 
the written law.) but he erected in that place a stone—as he 
Was permitted to do by the kindness and permission of God— 
_ which should be a testimony of the vision. Moreover, this 
form of speech, that “the stone shall be Beth-el,” is metony- 
macal ; as we are sanctioned, by common usage, to transfer to 
external signs what properly belongs to the things repre- 
sented. I have lately shown how ignorantly posterity has 





124 


abused this holy exercise of piety. 
specting the offering of tithes, is not a simple ceremo: 
but has a duty of charity annexed ; for Jacob enumerate 
in a threefold order, first, the spiritual worship of God ; the 
the external rite, by which he both assists his own pie O 
and makes profession of it before men; in the third plae 
an oblation, by which he exercises himself in giving friendl. 
aid to his brethren ; for there is no doubt that tithes wer 


applied to that use. 


CHAPTER XXIX, 


1. Ten Jacob went on his jour- 
ney, and came into the land of the 
people of the east. 

2. And he looked, and behold a 
well in the field, and, lo, there were 
three flocks of sheep lying by it; for 
out of that well they watered the 
flocks: and a great stone was upon 
the well’s mouth. 

3. And thither were all the flocks 
gathered: and they rolled the stone 
from the well’s mouth, and watered 
the sheep, and put the stone again 
upon the well’s mouth in his place. 

4. And Jacob said unto them, My 
brethren, whence be ye? And they 
said, Of Haran are we. 

5. And he said unto them, Know 
ye Laban the son of Nahor? And 
they said, We know him. 

6. And he said unto them, Ts he 
well? And they said, He is well; 
and, behold, Rachel his daughter 
cometh with the sheep. 

7. And he said, Lo, it is yet high 
day, neither is it time that the cattle 
should be gathered together: water 
ye the sheep, and go and feed them. 

8. And they said, We cannot, un- 
til all the flocks be gathered together, 
and till they roll the stone from the 
well’s mouth; then we water the 
sheep. 

9. And while he yet spake with 
them, Rachel came with her father’s 
sheep; for she kept them. 

10. And it came to 
Jacob saw Rachel, the 


ass, when 
aughter of 


COMMENTARY UPON 


nostis Laban filium Nachor? — 































CHAP, XXIX, | 


What next follows x 


iJ 


1. Et levavit Iahacob pedes s 
et perrexit ad terram filiorum Orit 
talium. 

2. Et vidit, et ecce puteus erat i 
une ecce quoque ibi tres greg 
pecudum, qui cubabant juxta illur r 
quia e puteo ipso potum dabant g 
gibus, et lapis magnus erat super | 
putei. 
3. Et congregabant se illue omne 
greges, et revolvebant lapidem ¢ 
ore putei potumque dabant pecuc 
bus: et restituebant lapidem sup 
os putei in locum suum. 

4. Dixit ergo ad eos Iahacob, Fr 
tres mei unde estis? Et dixerur 
De Charan sumus. 

5. Tune dixit ad eos, Nusa 


dixerunt, Novimus. 
6. it dixit ad e0s, Numquid 6 
pax ei? Et dixerunt, Pax: et ec 
Rachel filia ejus veniens cum pee 
dibus. 
7. Tune dixit, Eece, adhue di 
magnus: non est tempus ut congr 
getur pecus: potum date peeudibu 
et ite, pascite. 
8. Qui dixerunt, Non possum 
donee congregentur omnes greges 
revolvant lapidem ab ore putei, | 
potum demus pecudibus. 


9. Adhue eo loquente cum 
Rachel venit cum pecudibus q 
erant patris sui: quia ipsa 

10. Fuit autem quando vidit Tah 
cob Rachel filiam Laban frat ! 


isCe D 



















‘OHAP. XXIX. 


Laban his mother’s brother, and the 
sheep of Laban his mother’s brother, 
that Jacob went near, and rolled the 
stone from the well’s mouth, and 
atered the flock of Laban his mo- 
er’s brother. 

11. And Jacob kissed Rachel, and 
up his voice, and wept. 


_ 12. And Jacob told Rachel that 
he was her father’s brother, and that 
he was Rebekah’s son: and she ran 
an d told her father. 

13. And it came to pass, when 
| Laban heard the tidings of Jacob 
sister’s son, that he ran to meet 
im, and embraced him, and kissed 
| ee, and brought him to his house. 
And he told Laban all these things. 


A 14. And Laban said to him, Sure- 
thou art my bone and my flesh. 
And he abode with him the space of 
a month. 

15. And Laban said unto Jacob, 
‘Because thou art my brother, should- 
est thou therefore serve me for 
nought ? tell me, what shall thy 
wages be? 

16. And Laban had two daugh- 
ters: the name of the elder was 
Leah, and the name of the younger 
was Rachel. 

17. Leah was tender-eyed; but 
Rachel was beautiful and well-fa- 
' youred. 

18. And Jacob loved Rachel; and 
said, I will serve thee seven years 
_ for Rachel thy younger daughter. 

19. And Laban said, J¢ is better 
that I give her to thee, than that I 
‘should give her to another man: 
abide with me. 

20. And Jacob served seven years 
for Rachel; and they seemed unto 
him but a few days, for the love he 
had to her. 

21. And Jacob said unto Laban, 
Give me my wife, for my days are 
fulfilled, that I may go in unto her. 

22. And Laban gathered together 
all the men of the place, and made 
a feast. 

23. And it came to pass in the 





THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


125 


matris sue, et pecudes Laban fratris 
matris suze, accessit Iahacob, et re- 
volvit lapidem ab ore putei, et po- 
tum dedit pecudibus Laban fratris 
matris sue. 


11. Et osculatus est Iahacob Ra- 
chel, qui elevavit vocem suam, et 
flevit. 

12. Et nuntiavit Iahacob ipsi Ra- 
chel quod frater patris sui esset, et 
quod filius Ribee esset: cucurrit 
itaque, et nuntiavit patri suo. 

13. Et fuit, quum audisset Laban 
sermonem (vel, nuntiwm) Iahacob 
filii sororis suse, cucurrit in occur- 
sum ejus, et amplexatus est eum, 
osculatusque est eum, et deduxit 
eum ad domum suam, et narravit 
ipsi Laban omnia hee. 

14. Tune dixit ei Laban, Profecto 
os meum et caro mea es. Et habi- 


“tavit cum eo mensem integrum. 


15. Dixit autem Laban ad Iaha- 
cob, Num quoniam frater meus es, 
servies mihi gratis? indica mihi que 
sit merces tua. 


16. Et Laban erant due filie: 
nomen majoris, Leah, et nomen mi- 
noris Rachel. 


17. Oculi autem Leah erant te- 
neri: at Rachel erat-pulchra forma, 
et pulchra aspectu. 

18. Dilexit itaque Iahacob Ra- 
chel: et dixit, Serviam tibi septem 
annos pro Rachel filia tua minore. 

19. Tune dixit Laban, Melius est 
ut dem eam tibi, quam dem eam viro 
alteri: mane mecum. 


20. Servivit itaque Iahacob pro 
Rachel septem annos; et fuerunt in 
oculis ejus sicut dies pauci, eo quod 
diligeret eam. 

21. Postea dixit Iahacob ad Laban, 
Da uxorem meam: quia completi 
sunt dies mei, ut ingrediar ad eam. 

22. Et congregavit Laban omnes 
viros loci, et fecit convivium. 


23. Fuit autem vesperi, in vespera 


126 


evening, that he took Leah his 
daughter, and brought her to him; 
and he went in unto her. 

24. And Laban gave unto his 
daughter Leah Zilpah his maid for 
an handmaid. 

25. And it came to pass, that, in 
the morning, behold, it was Leah : 
and he said to Laban, What is this 
thou hast done unto me? did not I 
serve with thee for Rachel? where- 
fore then hast thou beguiled me? 

26. And Laban said, It must not 
be so done in our country, to give 
the younger before the first-born. 

27. Fulfil her week, and we will 
give thee this also, for the service 
which thou shalt serve with me yet 
seven other years. 

28. And Jacob did so, and fulfilled 
her week; and he gave him Rachel 
his daughter to wife also. 

29. And Laban gave to Rachel 
his daughter Bilhah his handmaid to 
be her maid. 

30. And he went in also unto 
Rachel, and he loved also Rachel 
more than Leah, and served with him 
yet seven other years. 

31. And when the Lord saw that 
Leah was hated, he opened her 
womb; but Rachel was barren. 

32. And Leah conceived, and bare 
a son; and she called his name Reu- 
ben: for she said, Surely the Lord 
hath looked upon my affliction ; now 
therefore my husband will love me. 

33. And she conceived again, and 
bare a son; and said, Because the 
Lord hath heard that I was hated, 
he hath therefore given me this son 
also: and she called his name Si- 
meon. 

34. And she conceived again, and 
bare a son; and said, Now this time 
will my husband be joined unto me, 
because I have born him three sons: 
therefore was his name called Levi. 

35. And she conceived again, and 
bare a son; and she said, Now will 
I praise the Lord: therefore she 
called his name Judah; and left 
bearing. 


COMMENTARY UPON 































OHAP. XXT} 


accepit Leah filiam suam, et adduxi 
eam ad illum, et ingressus est | 


eam. ; 
24. Et dedit Laban ei Zilpah ar 
cillam suam, Leah filie suze anei 
lam. . - | 
25. Et fuit mane, et ecce era 
Leah, et dixit ad Laban, Quid ho 
fecisti mihi? numquid non pro Ra- | 
a servivi tibi? et utquid decepisti 
me 4 


26. Tune dixit Laban, Non fit ita 
in loco nostro, ut detur minor ante | 
primogenitam. . | 

27. Comple hebdomadem huju 
et dabimus tibi etiam hance pro ser 
vitute, quam servies mihi adhuc se; 
tem annos alios. 

28. Fecit ergo Iahacob sic, et com: 
plevit hebdomadem illius, et dedit ei | 
Rachel filiam suam in uxorem. 

29. Et dedit Laban Rachel filia 
sue Bilhah ancillam suam in ancil 
lam. 

30. Et ingressus est etiam ad R: 
chel: et dilexit etiam Rachel magi 
quam Leah: servivitque ei adhue | 
septem annos alios. / 

31. Vidit autem Iehova quod exosa _ 
esset Leah, et aperuit vulvam ejus, — 
et Rachel erat sterilis. 

32. Et concepit Leah, et peper? 
filium, vocavitque nomen ejus Re 
ben: quia dixit, Nempe vidit Iehe 
afflictionem meam: nune enim dili 
get me vir meus. 

33. Et concepit adhue, et peperit — 
filium, et dixit, Quia audivit Iehova — 
quod exosa essem, dedit mihi etiam 
hune. Et vocavit nomen ejus Si- 
meon. 

34, Et concepit adhue, et peperit — 
filium, et dixit, Nune vice hae copu- 
labitur vir meus mihi, quia pepe 
ei tres filios. Idcireo vocavit nome 
ejus Levi. pS 

35. Et concepit adhue, et peperit — 
filium, et dixit, Vice hae confitebor 
Iehovee. Ideirco vocavit nomen ejus 
Iehudah ; et destitit a pariendo. 
















‘CHAP. XXIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 127 


1. Then Jacob went on his jowrney.' Moses now relates 
_ the arrival of Jacob in Mesopotamia, and the manner in 
which he was received by his uncle; and although the nar- 
‘ration may seem superfluous, it yet contains nothing but 
what is useful to be known; for he commends the extraor- - 
_dinary strength of Jacob’s faith, when he says, that “he lifted 
up his feet” to come into an unknown land. Again, he 
would have us to consider the providence of God, which 
- caused Jacob to fall in with the shepherds, by whom he was 
_ conducted to the home he sought ; for this did not happen 
_ accidentally, but he was guided by the hidden hand of God 
_ to that place ; and the shepherds, who were to instruct and 
confirm him respecting all things, were brought thither at 
the same time. Therefore, Whenever we may wander in un- 
certainty through intricate windings, we must contemplate, 
with eyes of faith, the secret providence of God which go- 
_verns us and our affairs, and leads us to unexpected results. 
_ 4, My brethren, whence be ye? The great frankness of 
that age appears in this manner of meeting together ; for, 
though the fraternal name is often abused by dishonest and 
i men, it is yet not to be doubted that friendly inter- 
course was then more faithfully cultivated than it is now. 
‘This was the reason why Jacob salutes unknown men as 
“brethren, undoubtedly according to received custom. Fru- 
| gality also is apparent, in that Rachel sometimes pays at- 
tention to the flock ; for, since Laban abounds with servants, 
how does it happen that he employs his own daughter in a 
vile and sordid service, except that it was deemed disgraceful 
to educate children in idleness, softness, and indulgence ? 
Whereas, on the contrary, at this day, since ambition, pride, 
and refinement, have rendered manners effeminate, the care 
of domestic concerns is held in such contempt, that women, for 
the most part, are ashamed of their proper office. It followed, 
from the same purity of manners which has been mentioned, 


_* Et levavit Iahacob pedes suos. And Jacob lifted up his feet. See 

margin of English Bible. This is a correct translation of the Hebrew 
I NW”, (yissa reglav.) “The phrase is emphatic, and implies that he 

travelled on briskly and cheerfully, notwithstanding his age, ist lek re- 

oti in his spirit by the recent manifestation of the Divine favour.” 
ush.—Ed. 





) 
128 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXIX. 


that Jacob ventured so unceremoniously to kiss his cousin ; 

for much greater liberty was allowed in their chaste and 
modest mode of living." In our times, impurity and ungo- 
vernable lusts are the cause why not only kisses are suspected, 

but even looks are dreaded ; and not unjustly, since the world 

is filled with every kind of corruption, and such perfidy pre- 

vails, that the intercourse between men and women is seldom 

conducted with modesty: *wherefore, that ancient simplicity 

ought to cause us deeply to mourn ; so that this vile corrup- 

tion into which the world has fallen may be distasteful to us, 

and that the contagion of it may not affect us and our families. 

The order of events, however, is inverted in the narration of 
Moses ; for Jacob did not kiss Rachel till he had informed 

her that he was her relative. Hence also his weeping; for, 

partly through joy, partly through the memory of his father’s 

house, and through natural affection, he burst into tears. 

13. And he told Laban all these things. Since Laban had 
previously seen one of Abraham’s servants replenished with 
great wealth, an unfavourable opinion of his nephew might 
instantly enter into his mind: it was therefore necessary for 
holy Jacob to-explain the causes of his own departure, and 
the reason why he had been sent away so contemptibly 
clothed. It is also probable that he had been instructed by 
his mother respecting the signs and marks by which he 
might convince them of his relationship: therefore Laban 
exclaims, “ Surely thou art my bone and my flesh ;” intimat- 
ing that he was fully satisfied, and that he was induced by — 
indubitable tokens to acknowledge Jacob as his nephew. 
This knowledge inclines him to humanity; for the sense of | 
nature dictates that they who are united by ties of blood | 
should endeavour to assist each other; but though the bond | 
between relatives is closer, yet our kindness ought to ex- | 
tend more widely, so that it may diffuse itself through the © 


1 Nam in vita casta et modesta multo major erat libertas. Car la 
liberté estoit beaucoup plus grande en leur facon de vivre, chaste et mo- 
deste.—Fr. Tr. | 

* It is scarcely to be doubted that, notwithstanding Calvin’s sweeping 
charge, there were many exceptions to this general dissoluteness of man- 
ners in his days, as we must thankfully acknowledge there are in our own | 
times, however extensively the evil he reprobates may have prevailed.— Ed. — 




































JHAP. XXIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 129 


hole human race. If, however, all the sons of Adam are thus 
ined together, that spiritual relationship which God produces 
etween the faithful, and than which there is no holier bond 
f mutual benevolence, ought to be much more effectual. 
| 14, And he abode with him the space of a month. Though 
| Laban did not doubt that Jacob was his nephew by his sister, 
3 » nevertheless puts his character to trial during a month, 
-and then treats with him respecting wages. Hence may be 
ferred the uprightness of the holy man; because he was 
ot idle while with his uncle, but employed himself in honest 
ybours, that he might not in idleness eat another’s bread 
C : ; hence Laban is compelled to acknowledge that 
me reward beyond his mere food was due to him. When 
1 pays, “ Because thou art my brother, shouldest thou 
| efore serve me for nought?’ his meaning may be two- 
| ) 1d; either that it would be excessively absurd and unjust 
| tc b defraud a relation of his due reward, for whom he ought 
| have greater consideration than for any stranger ; or that 
} he was unwilling to exact gratuitous service under the colour 
f relationship. This second exposition is the more suitable, 
ud is received nearly by the consent of all. For they read 
one connected sentence, “ Because thou art my brother, 
1alt thou therefore serve me for nought?’ Moreover, we 
ust note the end for which Moses relates these things. In 
e first place, a great principle of equity is set before us in 
jl aban; inasmuch as this sentiment is inherent in almost all 
‘minds, “ that justice ought to be mutually cultivated,” till 
} blind cupidity draws them away in another direction. And 
| @ fod has engraven in man’s nature a law of equity; so that 
hoever declines from that rule, through an immoderate de- 
e of private advantage, is left utterly without excuse. But 
| a while after, when it came to a matter of practice, 
j |L: ban, forgetful of this equity, thinks only of what may be 
rofitable to himself. Such an example is certainly worthy of 
n otice, for men seldom err in general principles, and there- 
‘fore, with one mouth, confess that every man ought to re- 
¢eive what is his due; but as soon as they dexéend to their 
| own affairs, perverse gele ton blinds them, or at least enve- 
} topes them in such clouds that they are carried in an oppo- 
} VoL. 11. I 


4 





ely 


130 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. } 


























site course. Wherefore, let us learn to restrain ourselves, 
that a desire of our own advantage may not prevail to the 
sacrifice of justice. And hence has arisen the proverb, that 
no one isa fit judge in his own cause, because each, being 
unduly favourable to himself, becomes forgetful of what is : 
right. Wherefore, we must ask God to govern and restrain our | 
affections by a spirit of sound judgment. Laban, in wishing 
to enter into a covenant, does what tends to avoid conten- 
tions and complaints. The ancient saying is known, “ We | 
should deal lawfully with our friends, that we may not after- | 
wards be obliged to go to law with them.” For, whence 
arise so many legal broils, except that every one is more 
liberal towards himself, and more niggardly towards others 
than he ought to be? Therefore, for the purpose of cherish-_ 
ing concord, firm compacts are necessary, which may prevent — 
injustice on one side or the other. 7 
_ 18. I will serve thee seven years. The iniquity of Laban 
betrays itself in a moment; for it is a shameful barbarity to _ 
give his daughter, by way of reward, in exchange for Jacob’s 
services, making her the subject of a kind of barter. He 
ought, on the other hand, not only to have assigned a portior 
to his daughter, but also to have acted more liberally towards 
his future son-in-law. But under the pretext of affinity, he / 
defrauds him of the reward of his labour, the very thing’ 
which he had before acknowledged to be unjust.' We there=_ 
fore perceive still more clearly what I have previously alluded } 
to, that although from their mother’s womb men have al 
general notion of justice, yet as soon as their own advantage © 
presents itself to view, they become actually unjust, un" 
less the Lord reforms them by his Spirit. Moses does not! 


' Perhaps undue severity of language is here used respecting Laban; for 
we find it not unusual for the father to demand something for his daughter, 
instead of giving a dowry with her. See the history of Shechem, who | 
says concerning Dinah, “ Ask me never so much dowry and gift, and L 
will give it.” Chap. xxxiy. 12. David also had to purchase Saul’s daugh- | 
ter by the slaughter of the Philistines. The Prophet Hosea bought his } 
wife “for fifteen pieces of silver and a homer and a half of barley.” Still | 
it was by no means generous on the part of Laban to make such terms with | 
a near relative; and, at all events, he ought to have given to his daughters | 
and their children any profit that he might have obtained by his hard bar- | 
gain with Jacob.—Ed. i | a 


























HAP, XXIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 131 


ere relate something rare or unusual, but what is of most 
pmmon occurrence. For though men do not set their daugh- 
rs to sale, yet the desire of gain hurries the greater part 
) far away, that they prostitute their honour and sell their 
ls. Further, it is not altogether to be deemed a fault 
at Jacob was rather inclined to love Rachel; whether it 
us that Leah, on account of her tender eyes, was less beau- 
ful, or that she was pleasing only by the comeliness of her 
yes,’ while Rachel excelled her altogether in elegance of form. 
or we see how naturally a secret kind of affection produces 
utual love. Only excess is to be guarded against, and so 
uch the more diligently, because it is difficult so to restrain 
ections of this kind, that they do not prevail to the stifling 
reason. Therefore he who shall be induced to choose a 
ife, because of the elegance of her form, will not necessarily. 
m, provided reason always maintains the ascendency, and 
olds the wantonness of passion in subjection. Yet perhaps 
cob sinned in being too self-indulgent, when he desired 
achel the younger sister to be given to him, to the injury of 
ie elder ; and also, while yielding to the desire of his own 
es, he undervalued the virtues of Leah: for this is a very 
‘culpable want of self-government, when any one chooses a wife 
ly for the sake of her beauty, whereas excellence of disposi- 
i on ought to be deemed of the first importance. But the 
Strength and ardour of his attachment manifests itself in this, 
that he felt no weariness in the labour of seven years: but 
‘thastity was also joined with it, so that he persevered, during 
this long period, with a patient and quiet mind in the midst of 
: 0 many labours. And here again the integrity and continence 
f that age is apparent, because, though dwelling under the 
same roof, and accustomed to familiar intercourse, Jacob yet 
conducted himself with modesty, and abstained from all im- 
propriety. Therefore, at the close of the appointed time he 
said, “Give me my wife, that I may go in unto her,” by which 
he implies that she had been hitherto a pure virgin. 

} This latter opinion is adopted by Dr. A. Clarke, who says, “ The 
chief recommendation of Leah was her soft and beautiful eyes; but Rachel 
was beautiful in her shape, person, mien, and gait, and beautiful in her 


countenance.” The greater part of commentators, however, take the same 
sw of the case as our translators.— Kd. 


| 
} 
| 




























132 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXI 
22. And Laban gathered together. Moses does not me: 
that a supper was prepared for the whole people, but the 
many guests were invited, as is customary in pie nu] 
tials; and there is no doubt that, he applied himself y 
the greater earnestness to adorn that feast, for the purpos 
holding Jacob bound by a sense of shame, so that he heal 
not dare to depreciate the marriage into which he had bee 
deceived. Wehence gather what, at that time, wasthe valigiel 
observance wonedtok with the marriage bed. For this wastl 
oceasion of Jacob’s deception, that, out of regard forthe modest; 
of brides, they were led veiled into the chamber; but now, th 
ancient discipline being rejected, men become almost bruta 
25. And he said to Laban. Jacob rightly expostulates” 
respecting the fraud practised upon him. And the answer 
of Laban, though jt is not without a pretext, yet forms n 
excuse for the fraud. It was not the custom to give the) 
younger daughters in marriage before the elder: and in 
justice would have been done to the first-born by disturbin 
this accustomed order. But he ought not, on that accoun 
ceraftily to have betrothed Rachel to i acob, and then to hay 
substituted Leah in her place. He should rather have cai 
tioned Jacob himself, in time, to turn his thoughts to Leahy 
or else to refrain from marriage with either of them. Bub! 
we may learn from this, that wicked and deceitful men, when) 
once they have turned aside from truth, make no end of) 
transgressing: meanwhile, they always put forward some 
pretext for the purpose of freeing themselves from blame) 
He had before acted unjustly toward his nephew in deman¢ 
ing seven years’ labour for his daughter; he had also un= 
justly set his daughter to sale, without dowry, for the sak 
of gain; but the most unworthy deed of all was perfidiously, 
to deprive his nephew of his betrothed wife, to pervert the. 
sacred laws of marriage, and to leave nothing safe or sound, 
Yet we see him pretending that he has an honourable de=! 
fence for his conduct, because it was not the custom of the 
country to prefer the younger to the elder. 
27. Fulfil her week. Laban now is become callous i 
wickedness, for he extorts other seven years from his nephe' 
to allow him to marry his other daughter. If he had 
































JHAP. XXIX, THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 133 


ad ten more daughters, he would have been ready thus 
‘to dispose of them all: yea, of his own accord, he obtrudes 
is daughter as an object of merchandise, thinking nothing 
of the disgrace of this illicit sale, if only he may make it a 
source of gain. In this truly he grievously sins, that he not 
only involves his nephew in polygamy, but pollutes both him 
ind his own daughters by incestuous nuptials. If by any 
means a wife is not loved by her husband, it is better to re- 
‘pudiate her than that she should be retained as a captive, 
‘and consumed with grief by the introduction of a second 
wife. Therefore the Lord, by Malachi, pronounces divorce 
‘to be more tolerable than polygamy. (Mal. ii. 14.) Laban, 
blinded by avarice, so sets his daughters together, that they 
| spend their whole lives in mutual hostility. He also per- 
verts all the laws of nature by casting two sisters into one 
Mmatriage-bed.' Since Moses sets these crimes before the Is- 
" ‘aelites in the very commencement of their history, it is not 
for them to be inflated by the sense of their nobility, so that 
‘they should boast of their descent from holy fathers. For, 
however excellent Jacob might be, he had no other offspring 
than that which sprung from an impure source; since, con- 
trary to nature, two sisters are mixed together in one bed ;? 
nd two concubines are afterwards added to the mass. We 
‘have seen indeed, above, that this license was too common 
among oriental nations; but it was not allowable for men, 
at their own pleasure, to subvert, by a depraved custom, the 
law of marriage divinely sanctioned from the beginning. 
‘Therefore, Laban is, in every way, inexcusable. And although 
necessity may, in some degree, excuse the fault of Jacob, it 
eannot altogether absolve him from blame. For he might 
have dismissed Leah, because she had not been his lawful 
wife: because the mutual consent of the man and the woman, 
respecting which mistake is impossible, constitutes marriage. 
But Jacob reluctantly retains her as his wife, from ee 
he was released and free, and thus doubles his fault by poly- 
_gamy, and trebles it by an incestuous marriage. Thus we 
see that the inordinate love of Rachel, which had been once 


1 It is here added, “ ut altera sit alterius pellex.” 
* Quasi belluino more. 












































134 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XX] 


excited in his mind, was inflamed to such a degree, that | 
possessed neither moderation nor judgment. With respe 
to the words made use of, interpreters ascribe to them d 
ferent meanings. Some refer the demonstrative pronoun 
‘the week: others to Leah, as if it had been said, that I 
should not have Rachel until he had lived with her sist 
one week.. But I rather explain it of Rachel, that he shoul 
purchase a marriage with her by another seven years’ se 
vice; not that Laban deferred the nuptials to the end of thé 
time, but that Jacob was compelled to engage himself in 
new servitude. = 
30. And he loved also Rachel more than Leah. No doul 
Moses intended to exhibit the sins of Jacob, that we mig] 
learn to fear, and to conform all our actions to the sole ru 
of God’s word. For if the holy patriarch fell so grievous 
who among us is secure from a similar fall, unless kept k 
the guardian care of God? At the same time, it appears) 
how dangerous it is to imitate the fathers while we negle 
the law of the Lord. And yet the foolish Papists so great. 
delight themselves in this imitation, that they do not scrupleé| 
to observe, as a law, whatever they find to have been pra 
tised by the fathers. Besides which, they own as fath 
those who are worthy of such sons, so that any raving mor 
is of more account with them than all the patriarchs. . 
was not without fault on Leah’s part that she was despis 
by her husband; and the Lord justly chastised her, becaw 
she, being aware of her father’s fraud, dishonourably obtain 
possession of her sister’s husband; but her fault forms. 
excuse for Jacob’s lust. ; . 
31. And when the Lord saw. Moses here shows thi 
Jacob’s extravagant love was corrected by the Lord ; as 
affections of the faithful, when they become inordinate, a 
wont to be tamed by the rod. Rachel is loved, not without 
wrong to her sister, to whom due honour is not given. The 


- 


' PN? pow xdn, (Malai shebuah zot.) The demonstrative pronow 
MNt, if applied to week, would require the translation to be, “ Fulfil 
week ;” that is, the week of Leah; meaning the festive week in whi 
the marriage was commemorated, and, as soon as that week was over, 1 
would also give Jacob his remaining daughter to wife. This opinion 
supported by eminent critics. —Zd. ; 





| OHAP. XXIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 135 


_ Lord, therefore, interposes as her vindicator, and, by a suit- 
_ able remedy, turns the mind of Jacob into that direction, to 
_ which it had been most averse. This passage teaches us, 
_ that offspring is a special gift of God; since the power of 
_ rendering one fertile, and of cursing the womb of the other 
_ with barrenness, is expressly ascribed to him. We must ob- 
_ serve further, that the bringing forth of offspring tends to 
 conciliate husbands to their wives. Whence also the an- 
_ cients have called children by the name of pledges ; because 
_ they avail, in no slight degree, to increase and to cherish 
_ mutual love. When Moses asserts that Leah was hated, his 
_ meaning is, that she was not loved so much as she ought to 
have been. For she was not intolerable to Jacob, neither 
did he pursue her with hatred ; but Moses, by the use of 
_ this word, amplifies his fault, in not having discharged the 
_ duty of a husband, and in not having treated her who was 
his first wife with adequate kindness and honour. It is of 
importance carefully to notice this, because many think they 
fulfil their duty if they do not break out into mortal hatred. 
_ But we see that the Holy Spirit pronounces those as hated 
_ who are not sufficiently loved ; and we know, that men were 
-ereated for this end, that they should love one another. 
_ Therefore, none will be counted guiltless of the crime of 
hatred before God, but he who embraces his neighbours 
with love. For not only will a secret displeasure be accounted 
as hatred, but even that neglect of brethren, and that cold 
charity which ever reigns in the world. But in proportion 
as any one is more closely connected with another, must be 
_ the endeavour to adhere to each other in a more sacred 
_ bond of affection. Moreover, with respect to married per- 
sons, though they may not openly disagree, yet if they are 
cold in their affection towards each other, this disgust is not 
far removed from hatred. 

32. She called his name Reuben. Moses relates that Leah 
was not ungrateful to God. And truly, I do not doubt, that 
the benefits of God were then commonly more appreciated 
than they are now. For a profane stupor so occupies the 
mind of nearly all men, that, like cattle, they swallow up 
whatever benefits God, in his kindness, bestows upon them, 


i heh a ee 
& 










































-e. 

136 COMMENTARY UPON © CHAP. XXIX. 
Further, Leah not only acknowledges God as the author of 7 
her fruitfulness ; but also assigns as a reason, that her afflic- 
tion had been looked upon by the Lord, and a son had been 
given her who should draw the affection of her husband 
to herself. Whence it appears probable, that when she saw 
herself despised, she had recourse to prayer, in order that 
she might receive more succour from heaven. For thanks- 
giving is a proof that persons have previously exercised them- 
selves in prayer; since they who hope for nothing from God 
do, by their indolence, bury in oblivion all the favours he 
has conferred upon them. Therefore, Leah inscribed on the 
person of her son’ a memorial whereby she might stir herself 
up to offer praise to God. This passage also teaches, that 
they who are unjustly despised by men are regarded, by the 
Lord. Hence it affords a singularly profitable consolation 
to the faithful ; who, as experience shows, are for the most 
part despised in the world. Whenever, therefore, they are 
treated harshly and contumeliously by men, let them take 
refuge in this thought, that God will be the more propitious 
to them. Leah followed the same course in reference to her 7 
second son ; for she gave him a name which is derived from 
“hearing,”” to recall to her memory that her sighs had been 
heard by the Lord. Whence we conjecture (as I have just be- 
fore said) that when affliction was pressing upon her, she 
cast her griefs into the bosom of God. Her third son she 
names from “ joining ;’* as if she would say, now a new 
link is interposed, so that she should be more loved by her 
husband. In her fourth son, she again declares her piety 
towards God, for she gives to him the name of “ praise,”* as 
having been granted to her-by the special kindness of God. 
She had, indeed, previously given thanks to the Lord ; but 


io 


* 7385. “ See a son.” 

* Nynw, from Yow, (shamah,) to hear. . # 

* ‘Y>, from M1, (lavah,) to join. S| 

* 717, from 7), (yadah,) to praise. There is something, as Calvin 
intimates, in the series of names given by Leah to her children, which 
seems to show the pious feelings of her heart. In her first-born, Reuben, 
she acknowledged that God had looked upon her affliction; in Simeon, 
that he had heard her prayer; in Levi, that he had joined her husbaul 
to ler; and in Judah, she commemorates all these mercies with gratitude 
and praise,— Ed. 


> 
J 


r. 


4 





pe 


CHAP, XXX. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


137 


_ whereas more abundant material for praise is supplied, she 


acknowledges not once only, nor by one single method, but 
frequently, that she has been assisted by the favour of God. 


CHAPTER XXX. 


1. Anp when Rachel saw that she 
bare Jacob no children, Rachel en- 


_ vied her sister : and said unto Jacob, 


Give me children, or else I die. 


2. And Jacob’s anger was kindled 
against Rachel; and he said, Am I 
in God’s stead, who hath withheld 
from thee the fruit of the womb? 

3. And she said, Behold my maid 
Bilhah, go in unto her; and she 
shall bear upon my knees, that Imay 
also have children by her. 

4. And she gave him Bilhah her 
handmaid to wife; and Jacob went 
in unto her. 

5. And Bilhah conceived, and bare 
Jacob a son. 

6. And Rachel said, God hath 


¢ judged me, and hath also heard my 


voice, and hath given me a son: 
therefore called she his name Dan. 

7. And Bilhah, Rachel’s maid, con- 
ceived again, and bare Jacob a se- 
cond son. 

8. And Rachel said, With great 
wrestlings have I wrestled with my 
sister, and I have prevailed: and 
she called his name Naphtali. 

9. When Leah saw that she had 
left bearing, she took Zilpah her 
maid, and gave her Jacob to wife. 


10. And Zilpah, Leah’s maid, bare 
Jacob a son. 

11. And Leah said, A troop com- 
eth: and she called his name Gad. 

12. And Zilpah, Leah’s maid, bare 
Jacob a second son. 

13. And Leah said, Happy am I, 
for the daughters will call me blessed: 
and she called his name Asher. 

14. And Reuben went, in the days 
of wheat-harvest, and found man- 


1. Porro vidit Rachel, quod non 

pareret ipsi Iahacob: et invidit Ra- 
chel sorori suze, et dixit ad Iahacob, 
Da mihi filios: sin minus, mortua 
sum. . 
2. Et iratus est furor Iahacob in 
Rachel, et dixit, Numquid pro Deo 
sum, qui prohibuit a te fructum ven- 
tris? 

3. Et dixit, Ecce ancilla mea Bil- 
hah, ingredere ad eam, et pariet 
super genua mea: et erit etiam 
mihi filius ex ea. 

4. Dedit ergo ei Bilhah ancillam 
suam in uxorem, et ingressus est ad 
eam Iahacob. 

5. Et econcepit Bilhah, et peperit 
ipsi Iahacob filium. 

6. Et dixit Rachel, Iudicavit me 
Deus, et etiam audivit vocem meam, 
et dedit mihi filium. Idcirco voca- 
vit nomen ejus Dan. 

7. Et concepit adhuc, et peperit 
Bilhah ancilla Rachel filium secun- 
dum ipsi Iahacob. 

8. Tune dixit Rachel, Luctationi- 
bus divinis luctata sum cum sorore 
mea, etiam prevalui. Et vocavit 
nomen ejus Nephthali. 

9. Vidit autem Leah, quod ces- 
sasset parere, et accepit Zilpah an- 
cillam suam, et dedit eam Iahacob 
in uxorem. 

10. Et peperit Zilpah ancilla Leah 
ipsi Iahacob filium. 

11. Et dixit Leah, Venit turba: 
et vocavit nomen ejus Gad. 

12. Et peperit Zilpah ancilla 
Leah filium secundum ipsi Iahacob. 

13. Et dixit Leah, Ut beata dicar, 
quia beatam me dicent filiz. Et 
vocavit nomen illius Aser. 

14. Ivit autem Reuben in diebus 
messis triticeee, et reperit mandra- 


138 


drakes in the field, and brought them 
unto his mother Leah. Then Rachel 
said to Leah, Give me, I pray thee, 
of thy son’s mandrakes. 

15. And she said unto her, Js it a 
small matter that thou hast taken 
my husband? and wouldest thou take 
away my son’s mandrakes also? And 
Rachel said, Therefore he shall lie 
with thee to-night for thy son’s man- 
drakes. 


16. And Jacob came out of the 
field in the evening, and Leah went 
out to meet him, and said, Thou 
must come in unto me; for surely 
I have hired thee with my son’s 
mandrakes. And he lay with her 
that night. 

17. And God hearkened unto 
Leah, and she conceived, and bare 
Jacob the fifth son. 

18. And Leah said, God hath 
given me my hire, because I have 
given my maiden to my husband: 
and she called his name Issachar. 

19. And* Leah conceived again, 
and bare Jacob the sixth son. 

20. And Leah said, God hath en- 
dued me with a good dowry; now 
will my husband dwell with me, be- 
cause I have born him six sons: and 
she called his name Zebulun. 

21. And afterwards she bare a 
ee and called her name Di- 
nah. 

22. And God remembered Rachel, 
and God hearkened to her, and 
opened her womb. 

23. And she conceived, and bare 
a son; and said, God hath taken 
away my reproach: 

24. And she called his name Jo- 
seph; and said, The Lord shall add 
to me another son. 

25. And it came to pass, when 
Rachel had born Joseph, that Jacob 
said unto Laban, Send me away, that 
I may go unto mine own place, and 
to my country, 

26. Give me my wives and my 
children, for whom I have served 
thee, and let me go: for thou know- 
= my service which I haye done 
thee 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. XXX. 


oras in , et attulit eas Leah 
aoe ee dixit Rachel ad Leah, 
Da queso mihi de mandragoris fili_ 
tui. ari" 
15. Et dixit ei, Numquid parum 
est quod abstuleris virum meum, ut 
auferas etiam mandragoras filii mei? 
Et dixit Rachel, Idcirco dormiat te- 
cum hac nocte pro mandragoris filii 
tui. 




















- 


16. Venit autem Iahacob ex agro 
vesperi, et egressa est Leah in oc- 
cursum ejus, et dixit, Ad me ingre- 
dieris: quia mercando mercata sum 
te mandragoris filii mei. Et dormi-— 
vit cum ea nocte illa. 


_ 17. Exaudivit Deus Leah, et con- 
cepit, et peperit ipsi Iahacob filium | 
quintum. 
18. Tune dixit Leah, Dedit Deus 
mercedem meam: quia dedi ancillam 
meum viro meo. Ht vocavit nomen 
ejus Issachar. 
19. Et concepit adhue Leah, et 
peperit filium sextum ipsi Iahacob. — 
20. Dixit ergo Leah, Dotavit me 
Deus dote bona: vice hac habitavit 
mecum vir meus: quia peperi ei sex 
filios. Et vocavit nomen ejus Ze-— 
bulon. 
21. Et postea peperit filiam: et 
vocavit nomen ejus Dinah. : 


22. Porro recordatus est Deus 
Rachel, et exaudivit eam Deus, et 
aperuit vulvam illius. 

23. Et concepit, et peperit filium, 
et dixit, Amovit Deus probrum 
meum. 

24. Et vocavit nomen ejus Joseph, 
dicendo, Addat Ichova mihi filinm 
alium. . 

25. Fuit autem quum peperisset 
Rachel Toseph, dixit Iahacob ab La- 
ban, Dimitte me, et ibo ad locum 
meum, et ad terram meam. 


26. Da uxores meas, et liberos — 
meos, propter quas servivi tibi, et 
ibo: tu enim nosti servitium meum, 
quo servivi tibi. . 


CHAP, XXX. 


27. And Laban said unto him, I 
pray thee, if I have found favour in 
thine eyes, tarry : for I have learned 
by experience that the Lord hath 
a me for thy sake. 

28. And he said, Appoint me thy 
wages, and I will give 7. 


29. And he said unto him, Thou ~ 


knowest how I have served thee, and 
how thy cattle was with me. 

30. For it was little which thou 
hadst before I came, and it is now 
increased unto a multitude; and the 
Lord hath blessed thee since my 
coming: and now, when shall I pro- 
vide for mine own house also ? 

31. And he said, What shall I 
give thee? And Jacob said, Thou 
shalt not give me any thing. If thou 
wilt do this thing for me, I will again 
feed and keep thy flock. 

32. I will pass through all thy 
flock to-day, removing from thence 
all the speckled and spotted cattle, 
and all the brown cattle among the 
sheep, and the spotted and speckled 
among the goats; and of such shall 
be my hire. 


33. So shall my righteousness an- 
swer for me in time to come, when 
it shall come for my hire before thy 
face: every one that is not speckled 
and spotted among the goats, and 
brown among the sheep, that shall 
be counted stolen with me. 

_ 84, And Laban said, Behold, I 
would it might be according to thy 
word. 

35. And he removed that day the 
he-goats that were ring-straked and 
spotted, and all the she-goats that 
were speckled and spotted, and every 
one that had some white in it, and 
all the brown among the sheep, and 
gave them into the hand of his sons. 

36. And he set three days’ journey 
betwixt himself and Jacob: and Ja- 
cob fed the rest of Laban’s flocks. 

37. And Jacob took him rods 
of green poplar, and of the hazel 
and chestnut-tree, and pilled white 
strakes in them, and made the white 
appear which was in the rods. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


139 


27. Et dixit ad eum Laban, Si, 
queeso, inveni gratiam in oculis tui, 
(expertus sum quod benedixit mihi 
Iehova propter te.) 


28. Dixit ergo, Indica mercedem 
tuam mihi, et dabo. 

29. Et dixit ad eum, Tu nosti 
qualiter servierim tibi, et quale fuit 
pecus tuum mecum: 

30. Quia pusillum, quod fuit tibi 
ante me, crevit in multitudinem, et 
benedixit Dominus tibi ad ingressum 
pedis mei: et nune quando faciam 
etiam ego domui mez ? 


31. Et dixit, Quid dabo tibi? Re- 
spondit Iahacob, Non dabis mihi 
quicquam, si feceris mihi hoe, rever- 
tar, pascam, pecudes tuas custodiam. 


32. Transibo per omnes pecudes 
tuas hodie, removendo inde omne 
pecus parvum punctis parvis resper- 
sum, et respersum maculis latis: et 
omnem agnum rufum in ovibus et 
respersum maculis latis, et resper- 
sum punctis parvis in capris: et erit 
merces mea. 

33. Et testificabitur mihi justitia 
mea die crastino, quum venerit ad 
mercedem meam coram te: quicquid 
non erit punctis parvis respersum, et 
maculis latis respersum in capris, et 
rufum in ovibus, furto ablatum erat 
a me, 

34. Tune dixit Laban, Ecce uti- 
nam sit secundum verbum tuum. 


35. Removit itaque in die illa 
hircos minores variegatos, et macu- 
lis latis respersos, et omnes capras 
punctis parvis respersas, et maculis 
latis respersas, omne in quo erat 
candor, et omne rufum in ovibus, et 
dedit in manus filiorum suorum. 

36. Et posuit viam trium dierum 
inter se et inter Iahacob: et Iahacob 
pascebat pecudes Laban residuas. 

37. Tulit autem sibi lahacob vir- 
gam populeam viridem, et amygda- 
linam, et castaneam, et decorticavit 
in eis cortices albos, denudationem 
candoris, qui erat in virgis. 


140 
38. 


And he set the rods which he 
had pilled before the flocks in the 
gutters in the watering-troughs, 
when the flocks came to drink, that 
they should conceive when they 
came to drink. 

39. And the flocks conceived be- 
fore the rods, and brought forth 
cattle ring-straked, speckled, and 
spotted. 

40. And Jacob did separate the 
lambs, and set the faces of the flocks 
toward the ring-straked and all the 
brown in the flock of Laban; and he 
put his own flocks by themselves, 
and put them not unto Laban’s 
cattle. 

41. And it came to pass, whenso- 
ever the stronger cattle did conceive, 
that Jacob laid the rods before the 
eyes of the cattle in the gutters, that 
they might conceive among the rods. 

42. But when the cattle were 
feeble, he put them not in: so the 
feebler were Laban’s, and thestronger 
Jacob’s. 

43. And the man increased ex- 
ceedingly, and had much cattle, and 
maid-servants, and men-servants, 
and camels, and asses. 


1. And when Rachel saw. 


that Jacob was distracted with domestic strifes. 


COMMENTARY UPON 





CHAP. XXX. 


38. Et statuit virgas, quas decor- 
ticavit, in fluentis, in canalibis aqua- 
rum (ad quos veniebant pecudes ad 
bibendum) e regione pecudum, ut 
coirent dum yenirent ad bibendum. 


39. Et coibant peeudes prope vir- 
gas, et pariebant pecudes fetus lineis 
distinctos, et punctis parvis resper- 
sos, et maculis latis respersos. 

40. Et oves separavit Iahacob, et — 
posuit facies pecudum ad fetus lineis 
distinctos: et omne rufum in pecu- 
dibus erat Laban: et posuit sibi 
greges seorsum, et non posuit eos 
juxta pecudes Laban. 


41. Fuit autem, in omni coitu pe- 
cudum primitivarum, ponebat tae 
cob virgas in oculis pecudum in ca-_ 
nalibus, ut coirent ad virgas. 


42. Ad serotinos vero coitus pe- 
cudum non ponebat: et erant sero- 
tina ipsius Laban: primitiva autem 
ipsius Iahacob. 

43. Crevit vir ergo supra modum: 
fueruntque ei pecudes multee, et an- 
cillee, et servi, et cameli, et asini. — 


Here Moses begins to relate 
But al- 


though the Lord was punishing him, because he had been 
guilty of no light sin in marrying two wives, and especially 
sisters ; yet the chastisement was paternal; and God him- 
self, seeing that he is wont mercifully to pardon his own 
people, restrained in some degree his hand. Whence also it 
happened, that Jacob did not immediately repent, but added 
new offences to the former. But first we must speak of 
Rachel. Whereas she rejoiced to see her sister subjected to 
contempt and grief, the Lord represses this sinful joy, by 
giving his blessing to Leah, in order to make the condition 
of both of them equal. She hears the grateful acknowledg- 
ment of her sister, and learns from the names given to the 
four sons, that God had pitied, and had sustained by his 
favour, her who had been unjustly despised by man. Never- 
theless envy inflames her, and will not suffer anything of the 








CHAP. XXX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 141 


dignity becoming a wife to appear in her. We see what 
~ ambition can do. For Rachel, in seeking pre-eminence, 
does not spare even her own sister; and scarcely refrains 
from venting her anger against God, for having honoured 
that sister with the gift of fruitfulness) Her emulation did 
not proceed from any injuries that she had received, but be- 
cause she could not bear to have a partner and an equal, 
though she herself was really the younger. What would 
she have done had she been provoked, seeing that she envies 
her sister who was contented with her lot? Now Moses, by 
exhibiting this evil in Rachel, would teach us that it is in- 
herent in all; in order that each of us, tearing it up by the 
roots, may vigilantly purify himself from it. That we may 
be cured of envy, it behoves us to put away pride and self- 
_ love ; as Paul prescribes this single remedy against conten- 
tions, “‘ Let nothing be done through vain-glory.” (Phil. ii. 3.) 

2. And Jacob’s anger was kindled. The tenderness of 
Jacob’s affection rendered him unwilling to offend his wife ; 
yet her unworthy conduct compelled him to do so, when he 
saw her petulantly exalt herself, not only against her sister, 
who piously, holily, and thankfully was enjoying the gifts of 
God ; but even against God himself, of whom it is said that 
“ the fruit of the womb is his reward.” (Ps. exxvii. 3.) On 
this account, therefore, Jacob is angry, because his wife 
ascribes nothing to the providence of God, and, by imagining 
that children are the offspring of chance, would deprive God 
of the care and government of mankind. It is probable 
that Jacob had been already sorrowful on account of his 
wife’s barrenness. He now, therefore, fears lest her folly 
should still farther provoke God’s anger to inflict more 
severe strokes. This was a holy indignation, by which 
Jacob maintained the honour due to God, while he corrected 
his wife, and taught her that it was not without sufficient 
cause that she had been hitherto barren. For when he 
affirms that the Lord had shut her womb, he obliquely inti- 
mates that she ought the more deeply to humble herself. 

3. Behold my maid Bilhah. Uere the vanity of the female 
disposition appears. For Rachel is not induced to flee unto 
the Lord, but strives to gain a triumph by illicit arts. 


iad) ae 4 


142 | COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXX. 


Therefore she hurries Jacob into a third marriage. Whence 
we infer, that there is no end of sinning, when once the 
Divine institution is treated with neglect. And this is what 
I have said, that Jacob was not immediately brought back 
to a right state of mind by Divine chastisements. He acts, 
indeed, in this instance, at the instigation of his wife: but 
is his wife in the place of God, from whom alone the law of 
marriage proceeds? But to please his wife, or to yield to 


her importunity, he does not scruple to depart from the 


command of God. To bear upon the knees, is nothing more 
than to commit the child when born to another to be brought 
up. Bilhah was a maid-servant ; and therefore did not bear 
_ for herself but for her mistress, who, claiming the child as 


her own, thus procured the honour of a mother. Therefore 


it is added, in the way of explanation, J shall have children, 
or I shall be built up by her. For the word which Moses 
here uses, is derived from [1, a son : beeause children are as 
the support and stay of a house. But Rachel acted sinfully, 
because she attempted, by an unlawful.method, and in 
opposition to the will of God, to become a mother. | 

5. And Bilhah conceived. It is wonderful that God should 
have deigned to honour an adulterous connexion with off- 
spring: but he does sometimes thus strive to overcome by 
kindness the wickedness of men, and pursues the unworthy 
with his favour. Moreover, he does not always make the 
punishment equal to the offences of his people, nor does he 
always rouse them, alike quickly, from their torpor, but waits 
for the matured season of correction. Therefore it was his 
will that they who were born from this faulty connexion, 
should yet be reckoned among the legitimate children ; just 


as Moses shortly before called Bilhah a wife, who yet might — 


more properly have been called a harlot. And the common 
rule does not hold, that what had no force from the beginning 
can never acquire validity by succession of time; for al- 
though the compact, into which the husband and wife sinfully 
entered against the Divine command and the sacred order 
of nature, was void; it came to pass nevertheless, by special 
privilege, that the conjunction, which in itself was adulterous, 
obtained the honour of wedlock. At length Rachel begins 


CHAP. XXX, THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 143 


to ascribe to God what is his own; but this confession of 
_hers is so mixed up with ambition, that it breathes nothing 
of sincerity or rectitude. She pompously announces, that 
her cause has been undertaken by the Lord. As if truly, 
she had been so injured by her sister, that she deserved to 
be raised by the favour of God; and as if she had not at- 
tempted to deprive herself of his help. We see, then, that 
under the pretext of praising God, she rather does him 
wrong, by rendering him subservient to her desires. Add 
to this, that she imitates hypocrites, who, while in adver- 
sity, rush against God with closed eyes; yet when more 
prosperous fortune favours them, indulge in vain boastings, 
as if God smiled upon all their deeds and sayings. Rachel, 
therefore, does not so much celebrate the goodness of God, 
as she applauds herself. Wherefore let the faithful, in- 
structed by her example, abstain from polluting the sacred 
name of God by hypocrisy. 

8. With great wrestlings.. Others translate it, “I am 
joined with the joinings of God ;”? as if she exulted in hav- 
ing recovered what she had lost; or, certainly, in having 
obtained.an equal degree of honour with her sister. Others 
render it, “ I am doubled with the duplications of God.” But 
both derive the noun and the verb from the root bmp, (patal,) 
which signifies a twisted thread. The former of these senses 
comes to this; that since Rachel has attained a condition 
equal to that of her sister, there is no reason why her sister 
should claim any superiority over her. But the latter sense 
expresses more confident boasting, since she proclaims her- 
self a conqueror, and doubly superior. But a more simple 
meaning is (in my opinion) adduced by others, namely, that 
she “wrestled with divine or excellent wrestlings.”” For 
the Hebrews indicate all excellence by adding the name of 
God; because the more excellent anything is, the more 
does the glory of God shine in it. But perverse is that 
boasting with which she glories over her sister, when she 
ought rather suppliantly to have implored forgiveness. In 


1 Luctationibus divinis. Margin of English Bible, “ with wrestlings of 
God.” | 
2 Conjunctionibus Dei econjuncta sum. 





144 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXX, 


Rachel the pride of the human mind is depicted ; because 
they whom God has endowed with his benefits, for the most. 
part are so elated, that they rage contumeliously against 
theirneighbours. Besides, she foolishly prefers herself to her 
sister in fruitfulness, in which she is still manifestly inferior. 
But they who are puffed up with pride have also the habit 
of malignantly depreciating those gifts which the Lord has 
bestowed on others, in comparison with their own smaller 
gifts. Perhaps, also, she expected a numerous progeny, as if 
God were under obligation to her. She did not, as pious 
persons are wont to do, conceive hope from benefits re- 
ceived; but, by a confident presumption of the flesh, made 
herself sure of everything she wished. Hitherto, then, she 
gave no sign of pious modesty. Whence is this, but because 
her temporary barrenness had not yet thoroughly subdued 
her? Therefore we ought the more to beware, lest if God 
relaxes our punishments, we, being inflated by his kindness, 
should perish. 

9. When Leah saw that she had left bearing. Moses re- 
turns to Leah, who, not content with four sons, devised a 
method whereby she might always retain her superior rank : 
and therefore she also, in turn, substitutes her maid in her 
place. And truly Rachel deserved such a reward of her 
perverse design; since she, desiring to snatch the palm from 
her sister, does not consider that the same contrivance to 
which she had resorted, might speedily be employed against 
herself. Yet Leah sins still more grievously, by using 
wicked and unjust arts in the contest. Within a short period, 
she had experienced the wonderful blessing of God; and 
now, because she ceased from bearing, for a little while, she 
despairs concerning the future, as if she had never partici- 
pated in the Divine favour. What, if her desire was strong ; 
why did she not resort to the fountain of blessing? In ob- 
truding, therefore, her maid, she gave proof not only of im- 
patience, but also of distrust ; because with the remembrance 
of Divine mercy, faith also is extinguished in her heart. 
And we know that all who rely upon the Lord are so tran- 
quil and sedate in their mind, that they patiently wait for 
what he is about to give. And it is the just punishment of 


CHAP. XXX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 145 






unbelief when any one stumbles through excessive haste. 
So much the more ought we to beware of the assaults of the 
flesh, if we desire to maintain a right course. - 
_ As to the name Gad, this passage is variously expounded 
by commentators. In this point they agree, that 42 (Ba- 
means the same as if Leah had said “the time’ of 
bearing is come.”*- But some suppose 74 (Gad) to be the 
eros star of Jupiter; others, Mercury ; others, good 
fortune. They adduce Isaiah lxv. 11, where it is written, 
“they offer a libation to Gad.”? But the-cantext, of thé 
Prophet shows that this ought rather to be understood of the 
ost of heaven, or of the number of false gods ; because it 
immediately follows that they. offer sacrifices to the stars, 
‘and furnish tables for a multitude of gods: the punishment 
As then added, that as they had fabricated an immense num- 
berof deities, so God will “number” them “to the sword.” As 
it respects the present passage, nothing is less probable than 
that Leah should extol the planet Jupiter instead of God, 
_seeing that she, at least, maintained the principle that the 
propagation of the human race flows from God alone. I wonder 
also that interpreters understand this of prosperous fortune, 
when Moses afterwards, chap. xlix. 19, leads us to an opposite 
meaning. © For the allusion he there makes would be inap- 
propriate, “ Gad, a troop shall overcome him,” &c., unless it 
had been the design of Leah to congratulate herself on the 
troop of her children. For since she had so far surpassed 
her sister,* she declares that she has children in great abun- 
dance. When she proclaims herself happy* in her sixth son, 


1 Venit felicitas: In the French translation, “ Mon heur est venu.” 
My hour is come. The word 733 is explamed in the margin of the He- 
brew Bible by 11 82. Venit turma, ceu exercitus—a troop or army cometh, 
See Schindler.—Ed. 

2 «Ye are they that forsake the Lord, that forget my holy mountain, 
that prepare a table for that troop (margin, Gad), and that furnish a 
drink-offering to that number” (margin, Meni).—English Translation. 
Calvin has quoted from memory; and not accurately; having put libation 
instead of table.—Ed. 

* Nam quum sesquialtera parte superior esset, preedicat se habere it 

a copia liberos. 

* « And Leah said, Happy am I, for the daughters shall call me bleséed ; 
and she called his name Asher.’ ’—English Translation. 

It may be observed that the nanies given to these children of the hand- 

VOL; It. Kk 

































146 COMMENTARY UPON | CHAP, XXX 
it again appears in what great esteem fecundity was ther 
held. And certainly it is a great honour, when God confers 
on mortals the sacred title of parents, and through them pro 
pagates the human race formed after his own image. a 
14. And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest. Thi 
narration of the fact that a boy brought home I know not 
what kind of fruit out of the fields, and presented it to his 
mother, by which she purchased of her sister one night witl 
her husband, has the appearance of being light and puerile. 
Yet it contains a useful instruction. For we know how 
foolishly the Jews glory in extolling the origin of their own 
nation: for they scarcely deign to acknowledge that they 
have sprung from Adam and Noah, with the rest of man. 
kind. And certainly they do excel in the dignity of thei 
ancestors, as Paul testifies, (Rom. ix. 5,) but they do not 
acknowledge this as coming from God. Wherefore the Spirii 
purposely aimed at beating down this arrogance, when he 
described their race as sprung from a beginning so mean anc 
abject. For he does not here erect a splendid stage on whiel 
they may exhibit themselves; but he humbles them ane 
exalts the grace of God, seeing that he had brought forth his 
Church out of nothing. Respecting the kind of fruit men- 
tioned, I have nothing certain to adduce." That it was 
fragrant is gathered from Canticles vii. 13.7 And whereas 
all translate it mandrakes, I do not contend on that point. | 
15. Ls it a small matter that thow hast taken my husband : 
Moses leaves more for his readers to reflect upon than he ex 
maidens were far less indicative of a pious state of mind, than those which 
Leah had previously given to her own sons. A fact which confirms the 
remarks of Calvin on the impiety of the course pursued by the rival wives. 
Rachel seems to make no reference to God in the names of the children 
of her handmaid; Leah, in imitating the example of her sister, seems te 
lose her own previous devotional feeling ; and both sink in our esteem, as 
they proceed in their unseemly contentions. —Ed. 4 
' Mandrakes—Heb. D°S715, Sapa from 1), (dud,) beloved; sup- 
posed to be a species of melon with purple flowers. It grows abundantly 
in Palestine, and is held in high respect for its prolific virtues. Gesenius 
describes mandrakes as “ Love apples (Liebes apfel), the apples of the Man- 
dragora, an herb resembling the belladonna, with a root like a carrot, having” 
white and reddish blossoms of a sweet smell, and with yellow odoriferous” 
apples,”— Ed. i} 


*“ The mandrakes give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of 
pleasant fruits.” 9 


- THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 147 





























presses in words; namely, that Jacob’s house had been filled 
with contentions and strifes. For Leah speaks haughtily, be- 

cause her mind had been long so exasperated that she could 
‘not address herself mildly and courteously to her sister. Per- 
haps the sisters were not thus contentious by nature ; but God 
suffered them to contend with each other, that the punish- 

/ment of polygamy might be exhibited to posterity. And 
‘it is not to be doubted that this domestic private quarrel, 

‘yea, hostile dissension, brought great grief and torment to 
the holy man. But the reason why he found himself thus 
distracted by opposite parties was, that against all right, = 
had broken the unity of the conjugal boind: 

17. And God hearkened unto Leah. Moses expressly de- 
elares this, in order that we may know how indulgently God 
dealt with that family. For who would have thought, that, 

“while Leah was hatefully denying to her sister the fruits 
Beathered by her boy, and was purchasing, by the price of 
those fruits, a night with her husband, there would be any 
place for prayers? Moses, therefore, teaches us, that pardon 
“was granted for these faults, to prove that the Lord would 
‘not fail to complete his work notwithstanding such great 
infirmity. But Leah ignorantly boasts that her son was 
‘given to her as a reward of her sin; for she had violated the 
fidelity of holy wedlock, when she introduced a fresh concu- 
bine to oppose her sister. Truly, she is so far from the con- 
fession of her fault, that she proclaims her own merit. I 
grant there was some excuse for her conduct; for she inti- 
mates that she was not so much excited by lust, as by modest 
love, because she desired to increase her family and to fulfil 
the duty of an honourable mother of a family. But though 
this pretext is specious in the eyes of men, yet the profana- 
tion of holy marriage cannot be pleasing to God. She errs, 
therefore, in taking what was no cause for the cause. And 
this is the more to be observed ; because it is a fault which 
too much prevails in the world, for men to reckon the free 
gifts of God as their own reward ; yea, even to boast of their 
deserts, when they are condemned by the word of God. In | 
| her sixth son, she more purely and rightly estimates the divine 
goodness, when she gives thanks to God, that, by his kind- 






















148 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXX. 


ness, her husband would hereafter be more closely united 
her, (ver. 20). For although he had lived with her before, 
yet, being too much attached to Rachel, he was almost 
entirely alienated from Leah. It has before been said, that 
children born in lawful wedlock are bonds to unite the minds 
of their parents. . | 
21. And afterward she bare a daughter. It is not knowr 
whether Jacob had any other daughter ; for it is not uncom- 
mon in Scripture, when genealogies are recorded, to omit the 
women, since they do not bear their own name, but lie con- 
cealed under the shadow of their husbands. Meanwhile, i 
anything worthy of commemoration occurs to any women, 
especial mention is then made of them. This was the casewith 
Dinah, on account of the violence done to her ; of which more 
will be said hereafter. But whereas the sons of Jacob sub- 
sequently regarded it-as an indignity that their sister should 
marry one of another nation ; and as Moses records nothing 
of any other daughters, either as being settled in the land o 
Canaan, or married in Egypt, it is probable that Dinah was 
the only one born to him. 
22. And God remembered Rachel. Since with God nothing’ 
is either before or after, but all things are present, he is suk 
ject to no forgetfulness, so that, in the lapse of time, he should 
need to be reminded of what is past. But the Scripture 
describes the presence and memory of God from the effect pro= 
duced upon ourselves, because we conceive him to be such as he: 
appears to be by his acts. Moreover, whether Rachel’s child’ 
was born the last of all, cannot with certainty be gathered from 
the words of Moses. They who, in this place, affirm that the 
figure hysteron proteron, which puts the last first; is used | 
are moved by the consideration, that if Joseph had been born 
after the last of his brethren, the age which Moses records) 
in chapter xli. 46, would not accord with the fact. But 
they are deceived in this, that they reckon the nuptials of 
Rachel from the end of the second seven years; whereas it is) 
certainly proved from the context, that although Jacob agreed | 
to give his service for Rachel, yet he obtained her imme= 
diately ; because from the beginning, the strife between the 
two sisters broke forth. Moses clearly intimates, in this 





CHAP. XXX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 149 


place, that the blessing of God was bestowed late, when 
Rachel had despaired of issue, and had long been subject to 
reproach because of her barrenness. On account of this 
prosperous omen she gave the name Joseph? to her son, de- 
riving the hope of two sons from the prospect of one.” 

25. Send me away, that I may go. Seeing that Jacob had 
been retained by a proposed reward for his services, it might 
appear that he was acting craftily in desiring his dismissal 
from his father-in-law. I cannot, however, doubt that the 
desire to return had already entered his mind, and that he 
ingenuously avowed his intention. First; having experienced, 
in many ways, how unjust, how perfidious, and even cruel, 
Laban had been, there is no wonder that he should wish to 
depart from him, as soon as ever the opportunity was afforded. 
Secondly ; since, from the long space of time which had 
elapsed, he hoped that his brother’s mind would be appeased, 
he could not but earnestly wish to return to his parents ; 
especially as he had been oppressed by so many troubles, 
that he could scarcely fear a worse condition in any other 
place. But the promise of God was the most powerful sti- 
mulant of all to excite his desire toreturn. For he had not 
rejected the benediction which was dearer to him than his 
own life. To this point his declaration refers, “I will go to~ 
my own place and to my country ;” for he does not use this 
language concerning Canaan, only because he was born there, 
but because he knew that it had been divinely granted to 
him. For if he had said that he desired to return, merely 
because it was his native soil, he might have been exposed 
to ridicule ; since his father had passed a wandering and un- 


settled life, continually changing his abode. I therefore 


conclude, that although he might have dwelt commodiously 
elsewhere, the oracle of God, by which the land of Canaan had. 
been destined for him, was ever fresh in his memory. And al- 
though, for a time, he submits to detention, this does not alter 
his purpose to depart: for necessity, in part, extorted it from 


? DY, (Yoseph,) he will add. 
“The Lord shall add to me another son.” This may be regarded 
either as a prophecy respecting Benjamin, or as a prayer which was ful- 
filled when Benjamin was born.— Ed. 


@ “Sire 
"| 














150 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXX, 


him, since he was unable to extricate himself from the snare 5 
of his uncle; in part also, he voluntarily gave way, in order 
that he might acquire something for himself and his family, 
lest he should return poor and naked to his own country. 
But here the insane wickedness of Laban is discovered. 
After he had almost worn out his nephew and son-in-law, by 
hard and constant toil for fourteen years, he yet offers him 
no wages for the future. The equity, of which at first he 
had made such pretensions, had already vanished. For the — 
greater had been the forbearance of Jacob, the more tyran-— 
nical license did he usurp over him. So the world abuses 
the gentleness of the pious ; and the more meekly they con- — 
duct themselves, the more ferociously does the world assail — 
them. But though, like sheep, we are exposed, in this world, — 
to the violence and injuries of wolves ; we must not fear lest _ 
they should hurt or devour us, since the Heavenly Shepherd — 
keeps us under his protection. 2 

27. I pray thee, if I have found Aue im thine eyes. We 
perceive hence, that Jacob had not been a burdensome guest, — 
seeing that Laban soothes him with bland address, in order — 
to procure from him a longer continuance in his service. — 
For, sordid and grasping as he was, he would not have suf- — 
fered Jacob to remain a moment in his house, unless he had — 
found his presence to be a certain source of gain. Inasmuch 
therefore, as he not only did not thrust him out, but anxiously - 1 
sought to retain him, we hence infer that the holy man had ; 
undergone incredible labours, which had not only sufficed for | 
the sustenance of a large family, but had also brought great i 
profit to his father-in-law. Wherefore, he complains after- — 
wards, not unjustly, that he had endured the heat of the | 
day, and the cold of the night. Nevertheless, there is no ; 
doubt, that the blessing of God availed more than any labours — 
whatever, so that Laban perceived Jacob to be a kind of © 
horn of plenty, as he himself confesses, For he not only — 
commends his fidelity and diligence, but expressly declares — 
that he himself had been blessed by the Lord, for Jacob's — 
sake. It appears, then, that the wealth of Laban had so 
increased, from the time of Jacob’s coming, that it was as if — 
his gains had visibly distilled from heayen. Moreover, as — 







Fy 






ae 


= 
1 OU 


= 


Pn SN 8 





2G a Sr ee gee 
te 7 -~ 


PLT IS ET CT A 


_ CHAP. XXX, THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 151 


i the word YM) (nachash), among the Hebrews, means to know 
_ by auguries or by divination, some interpreters imagine that 


Laban, having been instructed in magic arts, found that the 
presence of Jacob was useful and profitable to him. Others, 
however, expound the words more simply, as meaning that 
he had proved it to be so by experiment. To me the true 
‘interpretation seems to be, as if he had said, that the bless- 
ing of God was as perceptible to him, as if it had been attested 
_by prophecy, or found out by augury. 

29. Thou knowest how I have served theee This answer of 


y 


_ Jacob is not intended to increase the amount of his wages ; 


but he would expostulate with Laban, and would charge him 
with acting unjustly and unkindly in requiring a prolonga- 
_ tion of the time of service. There is also no doubt that he 


_ is carried forth, with every desire of his mind, towards the 
land of Canaan. Therefore a return thither was, in his view, 
_ preferable to any kind of riches whatever. Yet, in the mean- 
_ time, he indifectly accuses his father-in-law, both of cunning 
_and of inhumanity, in order that he may extort something 


from him, if he must remain longer. For he could not hope 
_ that the perfidious old fox would, of himself, perform an act 
of justice ; neither does Jacob simply commend his own in- 
dustry, but shows that he had to deal with an unjust and — 
cruel man. Meanwhile, it is to be observed, that although he 


_ had laboured strenuously, he yet ascribes nothing to his own 


labour, but imputes it entirely to the blessing of God that 
Laban had been enriched. For though when men faithfully 
devote themselves to their duty, they do not lose their labour; 
yet their success depends entirely upon the favour of God. 
What Paul asserts concerning the efficacy of teaching, ex- 


_ tends still further, “that he who plants and he who waters 


is nothing,” (1 Cor. iii. 7,) for the similitude is taken from 
general experience. The use of this doctrine is twofold. 
First, whatever I attempt, or to whatever work I apply my 
hands, it is my duty to desire God to bless my labour, that 
it may not be vain and fruitless. Then, if I have obtained 
anything, my second duty is to ascribe the praise to God ; 
without whose blessing, men in vain rise up early, fatigue 
themselves the whole day, late take rest, eat the bread of 












162 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXX. 


carefulness, and taste even a little water with sorrow. With 
respect to the meaning of the words, when Jacob says, “It was 
little that thou hadst in my sight,”* J jerome has well and 
skilfully translated them “before came.” For Moses puts the 
face of Jacob for his actual coming and dwelling with Laban.. 
30. And now, when shall I provide for mine own house 
also? He reasons, that when he had so long expended his 
labours for another, it would be unjust that his own family 
should be neglected. For nature prescribes this order, that 
every one should-take care of the family committed to him. — 
To which point the saying of Solomon is applicable, “ Drink © 
water from thy own fountains, and let rivers flow to thy 
neighbours.”* Had Jacob been alone, he might have devoted © 
himself more freely to the interests of another; but now, 
since he is the husband of four wives, and the father of a 
numerous offspring, he ought not to be forgetful of those 
whom he has received at the hand of God to bring up. 
31. Thou shalt not give me anything. The antithesis be- . 
tween this and the preceding clause is to be noticed. For | 
Jacob does not demand for himself certain and definite wages; 
but he treats with Laban, on this condition, that he shall 
receive whatever offspring may be brought forth by the sheep 
and goats of a pure and uniform colour, which shall prove to 
be party- -coloured and spotted. There is indeed some obseu- 
rity in the words. For, at first, Jacob seems to require for 
himself the spotted sheep as a present reward. But from the 
thirty-third verse another sense may be gathered: namely, 
that Jacob would suffer whatever was variegated in the flock 
to be separated and delivered to the sons of Laban to be fed ; 
but that he himself would retain the unspotted sheep and 
goats, And certainly it would be absurd that Jacob should 
now claim part of the flock for himself, when he had just 
confessed, that hitherto he had made no gain. Moreover, the 
gain thus acquired would have been more than was just ; and 
there was no hope that this could be obtained from Laban. 








Se 


‘In conspectu meo. spd. Ver. 30. 
* Et defluant rivi ad vicinos. The English version is different: “* Drink 


w ae out of thine own cistern; and running waters out of gr own — 
we | 





OHAP. XXX, THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 153 


A question however arises, by what hope, or by what counsel 
had Jacob been induced to propose this condition? A little 
afterwards, Moses will relate that he had used cunning, in 
order that party-coloured and spotted lambs might be brought 
forth by the pure flock ; but in the following chapter he more 
fully declares that Jacob had been divinely instructed thus 
to act. Therefore, although it was improbable in itself that 
this agreement should prove useful to the holy man, he yet 
obeys the celestial oracle, and wishes to be enriched in no 
other manner than according to the will of God. But Laban 
was dealt with according to his own disposition; for he 
eagerly caught at what seemed advantageous to himself, but 
God disappointed his shameful cupidity. 

33. So shall my righteousness answer for me. Literally it 
is, ‘‘ My righteousness shall answer in me.” But the particle 
‘2 (62) signifies to me or for me." The sense, however, is 
clear, that Jacob does not expect success, except through 
his faith and integrity.?, Respecting the next clause, inter- 
preters differ. For some read, “ When thou shalt come to 
my reward.”* But others, translating in the third person, 
explain it of righteousness, which shall come to the reward, 
or to the remunerating of Jacob. Although either sense will 
suit the passage, I rather refer it to righteousness ; because 
it is immediately added, “before thee.’* For it would be an 
improper form of expression, “Thou wilt come before thine 
own eyes to my reward.” It now sufficiently appears what 
Jacob meant. For he declares that he hoped for a testimony 
of his faith and uprightness from the Lord, in the happy re- 
sult of his labours, as if he had said, ‘‘ The Lord who is the 
_ best judge and vindicator of my righteousness, will indeed 


1 In the Amsterdam edition the particle ,is "5, evidently the printer’s 
mistake. In Hengstenberg’s edition, it is 12, which looks as if the editor, 
instead of turning to the original, had, at a venture, translated Calvin’s 
Latin words mihi, or pro me, into Hebrew.—Ed. 

* Vide Vatablus in Poli Syn. , 

8 That is, to see that I receive my reward or wages, at the time when 
the flock is divided according to our compact.—Ld. 

* This seems to be the sense in which the English translators understood 
the passage. “So shall my righteousness answer for me in time to come, 
_ when it (my righteousness) shall come for my hire (or reward) before thy 
face.” Coram te.—Ed. | 


154 COMMENTARY UPON _ OHAP, Sax) 


show with what sincerity and faithfulness I have hitherto 
conducted myself.” And though the Lord often permits sin- 
ners to be enriched by wicked arts, and suffers them to 
acquire abundant gain by seizing the goods of others as their 


own: this proves no exception to the rule, that his blessing. 


is the ordinary attendant on good faith and equity. Where- 
fore, Jacob justly gave this token of his fidelity, that he com- 


mitted the success of his labours to the Lord, in order that — 
his integrity might hence be made manifest. The sense of — 


the words is now clear, “ My righteousness shall openly 
testify for me, because it will voluntarily come to remunerate 
me; and that so obviously, that it shall not be hidden even 
from thee.” A tacit reproof is couched in this language, in- 
timating that Laban should feel how unjustly he had with- 
held the wages of the holy man, and that God would shortly 
show, by the result, how wickedly he had dissembled respect- 
ing his own obligation to him. For there is an antithesis to 
be understood between the future and the past time, when 
he says, “ Z’o-morrow [or in time to come] it will answer for 
me,” since indeed, yesterday and the day before, he could 
extort no justice from Laban. 

Every one that is not speckled and spotted. Jacob binds 
himself to the crime and punishment of theft, if he should 
take away any unspotted sheep from the flock: as if he 
would say, “ Shouldst thou find with me anything unspotted, 
I am willing to be charged as a thief; because I require no- 








thing to be given to me but the spotted lambs.” Some expound 


the words otherwise, “ Whatsoever thou shalt find deficient in 
thy flock, require of me, as if I had stolen it ;” but this appears 
to me a forced interpretation. 

35. And he removed that day. From this verse the form 


of the compact is more certainly known. Laban separates. 


the sheep and goats marked with spots from the pure flock, 
that is, from the white or black, and commits these to his 
sons to be fed; interposing a three days’ journey between 
them and the rest ; lest, by promiscuous intercourse, a party- 
coloured offspring should be produced. It follows, therefore, 


that, in the flock which Jacob fed, nothing remained but ~ 


cattle of one colour: thus but faint hope of gain remained — 








CHAP. XXX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 155 


to the holy man, while every provision was made for Laban’s 
advantage. It also appears, from the distance of the places, 
in which Laban kept his flocks apart, that he was not less 
suspicious than covetous ; for dishonest men are wont to 
measure others by their own standard ; whence it happens 
that they are always distrustful and alarmed. 

37. And Jacob took him rods of green poplar. The narra- 
tion of Moses, at first sight, may seem absurd: for he either 
intends to censure holy Jacob as guilty of fraud, or to praise 
his industry. But from the context it will appear that this 
adroitness was not culpable. Let us then see how it is to be 
excused. Should any one contend that he was impelled to act 
as he did, by the numerous injuries of his father-in-law, and 
that he sought nothing but the reparation of former losses; the 
defence would perhaps be plausible: yet in the sight of God it 
is neither firm nor probable ; for although we may be unjustly 
treated, we must not enter the contest with equal injustice. 
And were it permitted to avenge our own injuries, or to re- 
pair our own wrongs, there would be no place for legal judg- 
ments, and thence would arise horrible confusion. Therefore 
Jacob ought not to have resorted to this stratagem, for the 
purpose of producing degenerate cattle, but rather to have 
followed the rule which the Lord delivers by the mouth of 
Paul, that the faithful should study to overcome evil with 


_ good, (Rom. xii. 21.) This simplicity, I confess, ought to 


have been cultivated by Jacob, unless the Lord from heaven 


had commanded otherwise. But in this narrative there is a 


hysteron proteron, (a putting of the last first,) for Moses first 
relates the fact, and then subjoins that Jacob had attempted 
nothing but by the command of God. Wherefore, it is not for 
those persons to claim him as their advocate, who oppose 
malignant and fraudulent men with fallacies like their own; 
because Jacob did not, of his own will, take license craftily 
to circumvent his father-in-law, by whom he had been un- 
worthily deceived; but, pursuing the course prescribed to 
him by the Lord, kept himself within due bounds. In vain, 
also, according to my judgment, do some dispute whence 
Jacob learnt this; whether by long practice or by the teaching 
of his fathers; for it is possible, that he had been suddenly 


- 


156 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXX. — 


instructed respecting a matter previously unknown. If any — 


one object, the absurdity of supposing, that this act of de- 
ceit was suggested by God; the answer is easy, that God 
is the author of no fraud, when he stretches out his hand to 
protect his servant. Nothing is more appropriate to him, 
and more in accordance with his justice, than that he should 
interpose as an avenger, when any injury is inflicted. But it is 


not our part to prescribe to him his method of acting. He — 


suffered Laban to retain what he unjustly possessed ; but in 
six years he withdrew his blessing from Laban, and transferred 


it to his servant Jacob. If an earthly judge condemns a thief 


to restore twofold or fourfold, no one complains: and why 
should we concede less to God, than to a mortal and perishing 
man? He had other methods in his power ; but he purposed 
to connect his grace with the labour and diligence of Jacob, 
that he might openly repay to him those wages of which he 
had been long defrauded. For Laban was constrained to 


open his eyes, which being before shut, he had been accus- — 


tomed to consume the sweat and even the blood of another. 
Moreover, as it respects physical causes, it is well known, 
that the sight of objects by the female has great effect on 
the form of the foetus." Now Jacob did three things. For 
first, he stripped the bark from twigs that he might make 
bare some white places by the incisions in the bark, and thus 
a varying and manifold colour was produced. Secondly, he 
chose the times when the males and females were assembled. 
Thirdly, he put the twigs in the waters.” By the stronger 


cattle Moses may be understood to speak of those who bore — 


in spring—by the feeble, those who bore in autumn. 
43. And the man increased exceedingly. Moses added this 
for the purpose of showing that he was not made thus sud- 


* The whole passage is this:—Porro quantum ad physicam rationem 
spectat, satis notum est, aspectum in coitu ad formam foetus multum valere. 


virgas in canalibus, ut sibi vernos foetus acquireret, qui meliores erant: 
in serotina vero admissura circa autumnum, tali artificio usum non esse. 











CHAP. XXXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 157 
denly rich without a miracle. We shall see hereafter how 
great his wealth was. For being entirely destitute, he yet 
gathered out of nothing, greater riches than any man of mo- 
derate wealth could do in twenty or thirty years. And that 
no one may deem this fabulous, as not being in accordance 
with the usual method, Moses meets the objection by say- 
ing, that the holy man was enriched in an extraordinary 


manner. 


CHAPTER XXXI. 





1. Anp he heard the words of La- 
ban’s sons, saying, Jacob hath taken 
away all that was our father’s; and 
of that which was our father’s hath 
he gotten all this glory. 

2. And Jacob beheld the counte- 
nance of Laban, and, behold, it was 
not toward him as before. 

3. And the Lord said unto Jacob, 
Return unto the land of thy fathers, 
and to thy kindred; and I will be 
with thee. 

4. And Jacob sent and called 
Rachel and Leah to the field unto 
his flock, 

5. And said unto them, I see your 
father’s countenance, that it is not 
toward mé as before; but the God 
of my father hath been with me. 

6. And ye know, that with all my 
power I have served your father. 

7. And your father hath deceived 
me, and changed my wages ten times: 
but God suffered him not to hurt 


me. 

8. If he said thus, The speckled 
shall be thy wages; then all the cattle 
bare speckled: and if he said thus, 
The ring-straked shall be thy hire; 
then bare all the cattle ring-straked. 


9. Thus God hath taken away the 
cattle of your father, and given them 
to me. 

10. And it came to pass at the 
time that the cattle conceived, that 
I lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a 
dream, and, behold, the rams which 


1. Postea audivit verba filiorum 
Laban dicentium, Tulit Iahacob om- 
nia que erant patris nostri: et de 
his quee erant patris nostri, acquisi- 
vit omnem gloriam hance. 

2. Et vidit lahacob faciem Laban, 
et ecce non erat cum eo sicut heri 
et nudiustertius. 

3. Dixit autem Iehova ad Iahacob, 
Revertere ad terram patrum tuorum, 
et ad cognationem tuam, et ero 
tecum. 

4. Et misit Iahacob, et vocavit 
Rachel et Leah in agrum ad pecudes 
suas. 

5. Qui dixit ad eas, Video faciem 
patris vestri, quod non sit erga me 
sicut heri et nudiustertius: Deus 
autem patris mei fuit mecum. 

6. Et vos nostis, quod omnibus vi- 
ribus meis servierim patri vestro: 

7. At pater vester mentitus est 
mihi, et mutavit mercedem meam 
decem vicibus: sed non permisit ei 
Deus, ut malefaceret mihi. 

8. Siita dicebat, Punctis parvis re- 
spersa erunt merces tua: pariebant 
omnes pecudes punctis parvis resper- 
sa: et si ita dicebat, Lineis distincta 
erunt merces tua: tune pariebant 
omnes pecudes lineis distincta. 

9. Et abstulit Deus pecus: patris 
vestri, et dedit mihi. 


10. Et fuit, in tempore quo coi- 
bant pecudes, levavi oculos meos, et 
vidi in somnio, et ecce hirci majores 
ascendebant super capras variegatas, 


158 


leaped upon the cattle were ring- 
straked, speckled, and grisled. 

11. And the angel of God spake 
unto me in a dream, saying, Jacob. 
And I said, Here am IL. . 

12. And he said, Lift up now thine 
eyes and see, all the rams which leap 
upon the cattle are ring-straked, 
s ed, and grisled ; for I have seen 

that Laban doeth unto thee. 


13. I am the God of Beth-el, 
where thou anointedst the pillar, and 
where thou vowedst a vow unto me: 
now arise, get thee out from this 
Jand, and return unto the land of thy 
kindred. 

14. And Rachel and Leah an- 
swered and said unto, him, Js there 
yet any portion or inheritance for us 
in our father’s house ? 

15. Are we not counted of him 
strangers? for he hath sold us, and 
hath quite devoured also our money. 


16. For all the riches which God 
hath taken from our father, that zs 
ours, and our children’s: now then, 
whatsoever God hath said unto thee, 
do. 

17. Then Jacob rose up, and set 
his sons and his wives upon camels: 

18. And he carried away all his 
cattle, and all his goods which he 
had gotten, the cattle of his getting, 
which he had gotten in Padan-aram, 
for to go to Isaac his father in the 
land of Canaan. 

19. And Laban went to shear his 
sheep: and Rachel had stolen the 
images that were her father’s. 

20. And Jacob stole away una- 
wares to Laban the Syrian, in that 
he told him not that he fled. 

21. So he fled with all that he 
had; and he rose up, and passed over 
the river, and set his face toward the 
mount Gilead. 

22. And it was told Laban on the 
third day, that Jacob was fled. 

23. And he took his brethren with 
him, and pursued after him seven 
days’ journey; and they overtook 
him in the mount Gilead. 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. XXXI. 


unetis parvis respersas, et maculis 
tis respersas. ) 
11. Et dixit.ad me Angelus Dei 
in somnio, Iahacob. Et dixi, Eece 
adsum. . 
12. Et dixit, Leva nune oculos 
tuos, et vide omnes hireos majores 
ascendentes super capras lineis dis- 
tinctas, punctis parvis respersas, et 
maculis latis respersas: vidi enim 
omnia, que Laban facit tibi. 
13. Ego Deus Bethel, ubi unxisti 
statuam, ubi vovisti mihi votum: 
nune surge, egredere de terra hac, - 
et revertere ad terram cognationis 
tue. | 


- 


14. Et respondit Rachel et Leah, 
et dixerunt ei, Numquid adhuc est 
nobis pars et hereditas in domo pa- 
tris nostri? 

15. Nonne extraner reputate su- 
mus ab eo, quod vendidit nos, et con- 
sumpsit etiam consumendo argentum 
nostrum ? 

16. Quia omnes divitize, quas ab- 
stulit Deus a patre nostro, nostree 
sunt, ac filiorum nostrorum: nune 
igitur omnia, que dixit Deus ad te, 
fac. 

17. Et surrexit Iahacob, et sustulit 
filios suos et uxores suassuper camelos. 

18. Et abduxit omnes pecudes 
suas, et omnem substantiam suam, 
quam acquisierat, pecudes acquisi- 
tionis sue, quas acquisierat in Padan 
Aram, ut veniret ad Ishac patrem 
suum in terram Chenaan. 

19. Laban autem profectus erat 
ad tondendum oves suas, et furata 
est Rachel idola, que erant patri suo. 

20. Furatus itaque est Iahacob 
cor Laban Aramei, quia non indi- 
cavit ei quod fugeret. 

21. Et fugit ipse, et omnia que 
erant ei: et surrexit, et transivit 
flumen, posuitque faciem suam ad 
montem Gilhad. 

22. Et nuntiatum fuit ipsi Laban 
die tertia, quod fugeret Iahacob. 

23. Tune sumpsit fratres suos 
secum, secutusque est eum itinere 
septem dierum, et assecutus est eum 
in monte Gilhad. 








CHAP, XXXTI. 


24. And God came to Laban the 
Syrian in a dream by night, and said 
unto him, Take heed that thou speak 
not to Jacob either good or bad. 

25. Then Laban overtook Jacob. 
Now Jacob had pitched. his tent in 
the mount: and Laban with his bre- 
thren pitched in the mount of Gilead. 


26. And Laban said to Jacob, 
What hast thou done, that thou hast 
stelen away unawares to me, and 
carried away my daughters, as cap- 
tives taken with the sword? 

27. Wherefore didst thou flee away 
secretly, and steal away from me, and 
didst not tell me, that I might have 
sent thee away with mirth, and with 
songs, with tabret, and with harp? 

-28. And hast not suffered me to kiss 
my sons and my daughters? Thou 
hast now done foolishly in so doing. 

29. It is in the power of my hand 


~ todo you hurt: but the God of your 


father spake unto me yesternight, 
saying, Take thou heed that thou 
speak not to Jacob either good or 
bad. 

30. And now, though thou wouldest 


needs be gone, because thou sore 


longedst after thy father’s house, yet 
wherefore hast thou stolen my gods? 

31. And Jacob answered and said 
to Laban. Because I was afraid: for 
I said, Peradventure thou wouldest 
take by force thy daughters from me. 

32. With whomsoever thou findest 
thy gods, let him not live: before our 
brethren discern thou what 7s thine 
with me, and take it to thee. For 
Jacob knew not that Rachel had 
stolen them. 

33. And Laban went into Jacob’s 
tent, and into Leah’s tent, and into 
the two maid-servants’ tents; but he 
found them not. Then went he out 
of Leah’s tent, and entered into 
Rachel’s tent. 

34. Now Rachel had taken the 


_ images, and put them in the camel’s 


= 


furniture, and sat upon them. And 
Laban searched all the tent, but 
found them not. 

35. And she said to her father, 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


159 


24. Porro venit Deus ad Laban 
Aramzeum in somnio noctis, et dixit 
ei, Cave tibi ne forte loquaris cum 
Iahacob a bono usque ad malum. 

25. Assecutus autem est Laban 
ipsum Iahacob: et Iahacob fixerat 
tabernaculum suum in monte, et 
Laban fixit cum fratribus suis in 
monte Gilhad. 

26. Et dixit Laban ad Iahacob, 
Quid fecisti, et furatus es cor meum, 
et abduxisti filias meas sicut capti- 
vas gladio? 


27. Utquid abscondisti te ut fu- 
geres? et furatus es me, et non in- 
dicasti mihi, et dimisissem te cum 
letitia et canticis, cum tympano et 
cithara. 

28. Et non permisisti mihi, ut os- 
cularer filios meos et filias meas: 
nunc stulte egisti sic faciendo. 

29. Est fortitudo in manu mea ad 
inferendum vobis malum: sed Deus 
patris vestri nocte preeterita dixit ad 
me, dicendo, Cave tibi ne loquaris 
cum Iahacob a bono usque ad ma- 
lum. 

30. Et nunc eundo ivisti: si desi- 
derando desirabas ire ad domum 
patris tui, utquid furatus es deos 
meos ? 

31. Et respondit lahacob, et dixit 
ad Laban, Quia timui, si dixissem, 
ne forte raperes filias tuas a me. 


32. Is, cum quo inveneris deos 
tuos non vivat. coram fratribus nos- 
tris, agnosce si quid est apud me de 
two, et cape tibi: nesciebat autem 
Iahacob, quod Rachel furata esset 
e0s. 

33. Et venit Laban in tabérna- 
culum Iahacob, et in tabernaculum 
Leah, et in tabernaculum ambarum 
ancillarum, et non invenit: et egres- 
sus de tabernaculo Lea, venit in ta- 
bernaculum Rachel. 

34. Rachel autem acceperat idola, 
et posuerat ea in clitellis cameli, et 
sedebat super ea: et contrectavit 
Laban totum tabernaculum, et non 
invenit. 

35. Et dixit ad patrem suum, Ne 


160 


Let it not displease my lord that I 
cannot rise up before thee; for the 
custom of women is upon me. And 
he searched, but found not the 


es. 

36. And Jacob was wroth, and 
chode with Laban: and Jacob an- 
swered and said to Laban, What és 
my trespass? what is my sin, that 
thou hast so hotly pursued after me? 

37. Whereas thou hast searched 
all my stuff, what hast thou found of 
all thy household stuff? set it here 
before my brethren and thy brethren, 
that they may judge betwixt us both. 

38. This twenty years have I been 
with thee; thy ewes and thy she- 
goats have not cast their young, and 
the rams of thy flock haveI not eaten. 

39. That which was torn of beasts 
I brought not unto thee; I bare the 
loss of it: of my hand didst thou re- 
quire it, whether stolen by day, or 
stolen by night. 

40. Thus I was; in the day the 
drought consumed me, and the frost 
by night; and my sleep departed 
from mine eyes. 

41. Thus have I been twenty years 
in thy house: I served thee fourteen 
years for thy two daughters, and six 
years for thy cattle; and thou hast 
changed my wages ten times. 

42. Except the God of my father, 
the God of Abraham, and the Fear 
of Isaac, had been with me, surely 
thou hadst sent me away now empty. 
God hath seen mine affliction, and 
the labour of my hands, and rebuked 
thee yesternight. 

43. And Laban answered and said 
unto Jacob; These daughters are my 
daughters, and these children are my 
children, and these cattle are my cat- 
tle, and all that thou seest is mine: 
and what can I do this day unto these 
my daughters, or unto their children 
which they have born? 

44. Now therefore come thou, let 
us make a covenant, I and thou; and 
let it be for a witness between me 
and thee, 

45. And Jacob took a stone; and 
set it up-for a pillar. 


COMMENTARY UPON 


sit ira in oculis domini mei, quod 
non possim surgere a facie tua: quia 
consuetudo mulierum est mihi: et 
scrutatus est, et non invenit idola. 


36. Tune iratus est Iahacob, et 

jurgatus est cum Laban: et respon- 
dit Iahacob, et dixit ad Laban, Quee 
est preevaricatio mea, quod peccatum 
meum, quod persecutus es me ? 
- 87. Quando contrectasti omnem 
supellectilem meam, quid invenistiex 
omni supellectili domus tus? pone 
hie coram fratribus meis et fratribus 
tuis, et declarent inter nos ambos. 

38. Iam viginti annos fui tecum ; 
oves tus et capree non abortiverunt : 
et arietes pecudum tuarum non co- 
medi. _ 

39. Raptum non attuli tibi, ego 
penas luebam pro eo: de manu mea 
requirebas illud, quod furto ablatum 
erat tam die quam nocte. 


40. Ita fui ut interdiu consumeret 
me eestus, et gelu in nocte, et rece- 
debat somnus meus ab oculis meis. 


41. Iam mihi swnt viginti anni in 
domo tua: servivi tibi quatuordecim 
annos pro duabus filiabus tuis, et sex 
annos pro pecudibus tuis, et mutasti 
mercedem meam decem vicibus. 

42. Nisi Deus patris mei, Deus 
Abraham, et pavor Ishac fuisset pro 
me, certe nune vacuum dimisisses 
me: afilictionem meam et laborem 
manuum mearum vidit Deus, et in- 
crepavit te nocte preeterita. 


43. Tune respondit Laban, et 
dixit ad Iahacob, Filie, filie mez 
sunt: et filii, filii mei sunt: et pe- 
cudes mes sunt: et quicquid vides, 
meum est: et filiabus meis quid fa- 
ciam istis hodie, vel filiis earum quos 
pepererunt ? 


44. Et nunc, veni, pereutiamus 
foedus ego et tu, et erit in testimo- 
nium inter me et inter te. 


45. Tulit itaque Iahacob lapidem, 
et erexit lum in statuam. 





OHAP. XXXI. 
































CHAP. XXXI. 


_ 46. And Jacob said unto his bre- 
thren, Gather stones; and they took 
_ stones, and made an heap: and they 

did eat there upon the heap. 
_ 47. And Laban called it Jegar- 
yaaaiel but Jacob called it Ga- 


__ 48. And Laban said, This heap is 
a witness between me and thee this 
day. ‘Therefore was the name of it 
- ealled Galeed; 

if 49, And Mizpah: for he said, The 
_ Lord watch between me and thee, 
_ when weare absent one from another. 
50. If thou shalt afflict my daugh- 
ters, or if thou shalt take other wives 
besides my daughters, no man is with 
us; see, God is witness betwixt me 
and thee. 

_ 41. And Laban said to Jacob, Be- 
hold this heap, and behold this pillar, 
which I have cast betwixt me and 
_ thee ; 
___ 52. This heap be witness, and this 
_ pillar be witness, that I will not pass 
_ over this heap to thee, and that thou 
_ shalt not pass over this heap and this 
pillar unto me, for harm. 

| 53. The God of Abraham, and the 
| God of Nahor, the God of their father, 
Judge betwixt us. And Jacob sware 
_ by the fear of his father Isaac. 

_ 54. Then Jacob offered sacrifice 
upon the mount, and called his bre- 
thren to eat bread: and they did eat 
bread, and tarried all night in the 
mount. 

__ 55. And early in the morning La- 
ban rose up, and kissed his sons and 
is daughters, and blessed them: 
and Laban departed, and returned 
unto his place. 


> 
Ye 
; 


& 






THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


- 1. And he heard the words. 
esired his own country, and was continually thinking of 


161 


46. Et dixit Iahacob fratribus suis,. 
Colligite lapides : et tulerunt lapides, 
et fecerunt cumulum, et comederunt 
ibi super cumulum. 

47. Et vocavit eum Laban Jegar 
Sahadutha: Iahacob autem: vocavit 


- eum Galhed. 


48. Et dixit Laban, Cumulus iste 
sit testis inter me et te hodie. Id- 
circo vocavit nomen ejus Galhed, 


49, Et Mispah: quia dixit, Spe- 
culetur Iehova inter me et te, quando 
latebimus alter alterum. 

50. Si afflixeris filias meas, et si 
acceperis uxores super filias meas, 
non est quisquam nobiscum, vide, 
Deus est testis inter me et te. 


51. Dixit ergo Laban ad Iahacob, 
Ecee, cumulus iste, et ecce statua, 
quam jeci inter me et te. 


52. Testis cumulus iste, et testis 
statua, quod ego non transibo veniens 
ad te cumulum istum, et quod tu non 
transibis veniens ad me cumulum 
istum, et statuam istam, ad malum. 

53. Deus Abraham et Deus Na- 
chor judicet inter nos, Deus patris 
eorum: et juravit Iahacob per pa- 
vorem patris sui Ishac. ~ 

54. Et mactavit Iahacob victimam 
in monte, et vocavit fratres suos, ut 
comederent panem: et comederunt 
panem, et pernoctaverunt in monte. 


55. Et surrexit Laban mane, et 
osculatus est filios suos ac filias suas, 
benedixitque eis, et abiif: et rever- 
sus est Laban ad locum suum. 


Although: Jacob ardently 


d 

ci. return to it; yet his admirable patience appears in this, 
‘that he suspends his purpose till a new occasion presents 
itself. I do not, however, deny, that some imperfection was 
mixed with this virtue, in that he did not make more haste 
to return ; but that the promise of God was always retained 
‘in his mind will shortly appear. In this respect, however, he 
y VOL, II. L 










162 COMMENTARY UPON OHAP, XXXI. 


showed something of human nature, that for the sake of ob- — 
taining wealth he postponed his return for six years: for when — 
Laban was perpetually changing his terms, he might justly 
have bidden him farewell. But that he was detained by force © 
and fear together, we infer from his clandestine flight. Now, — 
at least, he had a sufficient cause for asking his dismissal ; be-_ 
cause his riches had become grievous and hateful to the sons — 
of Laban: nevertheless he does not dare openly to withdraw — 
himself from their enmity, but is compelled to flee secretly. 
Yet though his tardiness is in some degree excusable, it was — 
probably connected with indolence ; even as the faithful, when — 
they direct their course towards God, often do not pursue it 
with becoming fervour. Wherefore, whenever the indolence — 
of the flesh retards us, let us learn to fan the ardour of our 
spirits into a flame. There is no doubt that the Lord cor- 
rected the infirmity of his servant, and gently spurred him 
on as he proceeded in his course. For if Laban had treated 
him kindly and pleasantly, his mind would have been lulled 
to sleep; but now he is driven away by adverse looks. So 
the Lord often better secures the salvation of his people, by 
subjecting them to the hatred, the envy, and the malevolence 
of the wicked, than by suffering them to be soothed with 
bland address. It was far more useful-to holy Jacob to have” 
his father-in-law and his sons opposed, than to have them 
courteously obsequious to his wishes; because their favour. 
might have deprived him of the blessing of God. We also 
have more than sufficient experience of the power of earthly 
attractions, and of the ease with which, when they abound 
the oblivion of celestial blessings steals over us. Wherefore 
let us not think it hard to be awakened by the Lord, when 
we fall into adversity, or receive but little favour from 
the world ; for hatred, threats, disgrace, and slanders, are 
often more advantageous to us than the applause of all men 
on every side. Moreover, we must notice the inhumanity of 
Laban’s sons, who complain throughout as if they had been) 
plundered by Jacob. But sordid and avaricious men labour 
under the disease of thinking that they are robbed of 
everything with which they do not gorge themselves. For 
since their avarice is insatiable, it follows of necessity that 




























i 






































CHAP, XXXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 168 


the prosperity of others torments them, as if they themselves 
would be thereby reduced to want. They do not consider 
whether Jacob acquired this great wealth justly or unjustly; 
but they are enraged and envious, because they conccive 
that so much has been abstracted from them. Laban had 
before confessed, that he had been enriched by the coming 
of Jacob, and even that he had been blessed by the Lord for 
_Jacob’s sake ; but now his sons murmur, and he himself is 
tortured with grief, to find that Jacob also is made a par- 
taker of the same blessing. Hence we perceive the blind- 
ness of avarice which can never be satisfied. Whence also 
it is called by Paul “the root of all evil ;’ because they who 
desire to swallow up everything must be perfidious, and 
_eruel, and ungrateful, and in every way unjust. Besides, it is 
to be observed that the sons of Laban, in the impetuosity of 
their younger years, give vent to their vexation; but the 
father, like a cunning old fox, is silent, yet betrays his 
wickedness by his countenance. 
_ 8. And the Lord said unto Jacob. The timidity of the 
holy man is here more plainly seen ; for he, perceiving that 
evil was designed against him by his father-in-law, still 
dared not to move a foot, unless encouraged by a new oracle. 
But the Lord, who, by facts; had shown him already that 
-no‘longer delay was to be made, now also urges him by 
words. Let us learn from this example, that although 
the Lord may incite us to duty by adversity, yet we shall 
thereby profit little, unless the stimulus of the word be 
added. And we see what will happen to the reprobate; for 
either they become stupified in their wickedness, or they 
break out into fury. Wherefore, that the instruction con- 
veyed by outward things may profit us, we must ask the 
Lord to shine upon us in his own word. The design, how- 
ever, of Moses chiefly refers to this point, that we may know 
that Jacob returned to his own country, under the special 
"guidance of God. Now the land of Canaan is called the land 
of Abraham and Isaac, not because they had sprung from it; 
“put because it had Béen divinely promised to thor as éHelr 
“inheritance. Wherefore, by this voice the holy man was 
“admonished, that although Isaac had been a stranger, yet, 





164 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXI. . 
q 


in the sight of God, he was the heir and lord of that land, in : 


which he possessed nothing but a sepulchre. 


4. And Jacob sent. Bia: sends for his wives, in order to 
explain to them his intention, and to exhort them to accom- 
pany him in his flight ; for it was his duty as a good hus-— 
band to take them away with him; and therefore it was — 


necessary to inform them of his design. And he was not so 


blind as to be unmindful of the many dangers of his plan. — 
It was difficult to convey women, who had never left their — 


father’s house, to a remote region, by an unknown journey. 
Moreover, there was ground to fear lest they, in seeking 
protection for themselves, might betray their husband to 


his enemies. The courage of many would so far have failed — 


them, in such a state of perturbation, that they would have 


disregarded conjugal fidelity, to provide for their own safety. — 


Jacob, therefore, acted with great constancy in choosing 
rather to expose himself to danger than to fail in the duty 
of a good husband and master of a family. If his wives had 
refused to accompany him, the call of God would have com- 
pelled him to depart. But God granted him what was far 
more desirable, that his whole family, with one consent, 
were prepared to follow him: moreover, his wives, with 
whose mutual strifes his house before had rung, now freely 
consent to go with him into exile. So the Lord, when in 


good faith we discharge our duty, and shun nothing which ~ 
he commands, enables us to succeed, even in the most doubt- — 
ful affairs. Further, from the fact that Jacob calls his — 


wives to him into the field, we infer what an anxious life he 
led. Certainly it would have been a primary convenience — 
of his life, to dwell at home with his wives. He was already — 
advanced in age, and worn down with many toils; and — 
therefore he had the greater need of their service. Yet 
satisfied with a cottage in which he might watch over his © 
flock, he lived apart from them. If, then, there had been a 


particle of equity in Laban and his sons, they would have © 
found no cause for envy. 


5. I see your father’s countenance, This address consists 
of two parts. For first, he speaks of his own integrity, and — 
expostulates concerning the perfidy of his father-in-law. He — 








CHAP. XXXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 165 


_ next testifies that God is the author of his prosperity, in 
_ order that Rachel and Leah may the more willingly accom- 
_ pany him. And whereas he had become very rich in a 
_ short space of time, he purges himself from all suspicion : 

_ and even appeals to them as witnesses of his diligence. 
_ And though Moses does not minutely relate everything ; yet 
_ there is no doubt that the honesty of their husband had 
_ been made clear to them by many proofs, and that, on the 
_ other hand, the injuries, frauds, and rapacity of their father, 
were well known. When he complains that his wages had 
_ been changed ten times, it is probable that the number ten 
is simply put for many times. Nevertheless it may be, that 
| within six years Laban might thus frequently have broken 
| his agreements ; since there would be twice as many seasons 
_ of breeding lambs, namely, at spring and autumn, as we have 
said. But this narration of the dream, although it follows 
in a subsequent part of the history, shows that holy Jacob 
_ had undertaken nothing but by the Divine command. Moses 
had before related the transaction simply, saying nothing re- 
_ specting the counsel from which it had proceeded ; but now, 
in the person of Jacob himself, he removes all doubt respect- 
ing it; for he does not intimate that Jacob was lying, in 
_ order, by this artifice, to deceive his wives; but he intro- 
duces the holy servant of God, avowing truly, and without 
pretence, the case as it really was. For otherwise he would 
have abused the name of God, not without abominable im- 
‘piety, by connecting this vision with that former one, in 
which we see that the gate of heaven was opened unto him. 

13. I am the God of Beth-el. It is not wonderful that the 
angel should assume the person of God: either because God 
the Father appeared to the holy patriarchs in his own Word, 
as ina lively mirror, and that under the form of an angel ; or 
because angels, speaking by the command of God, rightly 
utter their words, as from his mouth. For the prophets are 
accustomed to this form of speaking; not that they may 
exalt themselves into the place of God; but only that the 
majesty of God, whose ministers they are, may shine forth 
in his message. Now, it is proper that we should more care- 
fnlly consider the force of this form of expression. He does 


































166 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXXI. 


not call himself the God of Beth-el, because he is confined 
within the limits of a given place, but forthe purpose of re- 
newing to his servant the remembrance of his own promise ; 
for holy Jacob had not yet attained to that degree of perfec- 
tion which rendered the more simple rudiments unnecessary 
for him. But little light of true doctrine at that time pre- 
vailed; and even that was wrapped in many shadows. 
Nearly the whole world had apostatized to false gods; and 
that region, nay, even the house of his father-in-law, was 
filled with unholy superstitions. Therefore, amid so many 
hinderances, nothing was more difficult for him than to hold 
his faith in the one true God firm and invincible. Where- 
fore, in the first place, pure religion is commended to him, 
in order that, among the various errors of the world, he may 
adhere to the obedience and worship of that God whom he 
had once known. Secondly; the promise which he had be- 
fore received is anew confirmed to him, in order that he may 
always keep his mind fixed on the special covenant which 
God had made with Abraham and his posterity. Thus he is 
directed to the land of Canaan, which was his own inherit-— 
ance ; lest the temporal blessing of God, which he was soon — 
to enjoy, should detain his heart in Mesopotamia. For since 
this oracle was only an appendix of the previous one, what- 
ever benefits God afterwards bestowed ought to be referred 
to that first design. We may also conjecture from this pas- 
sage, that Jacob had before preached to his household con- 
cerning the true God and the true religion, as became a 
pious father of his family. For he would have acted absurdly 
in uttering this discourse, unless his wives had been pré- 
viously instructed respecting that wonderful vision. To” 
the same point belongs what he had said before, “that the 
God of his father had brought him assistance.” For it is” 
just as if he would openly distinguish. the God whom he 
worshipped from the god of Laban. And now, because he” 
holds familiar discourse with his wives, as on subjects which” 
they know, the conjecture is probable, that it was not Jacob’s” 
fault if they were not imbued with the knowledge of the one 
God, and with sincere piety. Further, by this oracle the” 
Lord declared that he is always mindful of the godly, even” 








CHAP. XXXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 167 


when they.seem to be cast down and deserted. For who 


would not have said that the outcast Jacob was now deprived 
of all celestial: help? And truly the Lord appears to him 
late; but beyond all expectation shows, that he had never 
_ been forgetful of him. Let the faithful, also, at this day, 
_ feel that he is the same towards them ; and if, in any way, 
_ the wicked tyrannically oppress them by unjust violence, let 
_ them bear it patiently, until at length, in due time, he shall 
- avenge them. 


14. And Rachel and Leah answered. Here we perceive 


. that to be fulfilled which Paul teaches, that all things work 
_ together for good to the children of God. (Rom. viii. 28.) 


For since the wives of Jacob had been unjustly treated by 


_ their father, they so far act in opposition to the natural ten- 
_ derness of their sex, that at the desire of their husband, 
_ they become willing to follow him into a distant and un- 
_ known region. Therefore, if Jacob is compelled to take 
many and very bitter draughts of grief, he is now cheered 
_ by the most satisfying compensation, that his wives are not 
separated from him by their attachment to their father’s 
house: but rather, being overcome by the irksome nature of 
_ their sufferings, they earnestly undertake to join him in his 
flight. “ There is nothing,” they say, “ which should cause 


us to remain with our father ; for daughters adhere to their 
fathers, because they are esteemed members of his family ; 
but what a cruel rejection is this, not only that he has passed 
us off’ without dowry, but that he has set us to sale, and 
has devoured the price for which he sold us?” By the word 
money (ver. 15), I understand the price of sale. For they 
complain that, at least, they had not received, instead of 
dowry, the profit which had been unjustly extorted from 
their husband, but this gain also had been unjustly sup- 


‘pressed by their covetous father. Therefore the particle D4 


(gam) is inserted, which is used for the purpose of amplifica- 
tion among the Hebrews. For this increased not a little the 
meanness of Laban, that, as an insatiable whirlpool, he had 


' absorbed the gain acquired by this most dishonourable traffic. 


_ And it is to be noted, that they were then devoted to their 


ae 


1 The word in the original is harsh, “ prostituit.” 


168 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXI. 


husband, and were therefore free to depart from their father ; 
especially since they knew that the hand of God was stretch- 
ed out to them. There is also no doubt, seeing they were 
persuaded that Jacob was a faithful prophet of God, but 
that they freely embraced the heavenly oracle from his 
mouth ; for at the close of their reply, they show that they 
did not so much yield to his wish as to the command of God. 
16. For all the riches which God hath taken from our 
father. Rachel and Leah confirm the speech of Jacob ; but 
yet in a profane and common manner, not with a lively and 
pure sense of religion. For they only make a passing allusion 
to the fact, that God, in pity to his servant, had deigned to 
honour him with peculiar favour ; and in the meantime, in- 
sist upon a reason of little solidity, that what they were 
carrying away was justly their due, because a part of the 
inheritance pertained to them. They do not argue that the 
riches ‘they possessed were theirs, because they had been » 
justly acquired by the labour of their husband; but because 
they themselves ought not to have been defrauded of their | 
dowry, and now deprived of their lawful inheritance. For 
this reason they mention also their children with themselves, 
as having sprung from the blood of Laban. By this method 
they not only obscure the blessing of God, but indulge them- 
selves in greater license than is right. They also form a 
mean estimate of their husband’s labours, in boasting that 
the fruit of those labours proceeded from themselves. Where- 
fore we are, by no means, to seek hence a precedent for the way 
in which each is to defend his own right, or to attempt the 
recovery of it, when it has been unjustly wrested from him. 
17. Then Jacob rose wp. The departure of Jacob Moses 
afterwards more fully relates, he now only briefly says that 
“ he rose up ;” by which he means, that as soon as he could 
obtain the consent of his wives to go with him, he yielded to 
no other obstacles. Herein appears the manly strength and 
constancy of his mind. For Moses leaves many things to be 
reflected upon by his readers; and especially that intermediate 
period, during which the holy man was doubtless agitated 
with a multiplicity of cares. He had believed that his exile 
from home would be only for a short time: but, deprived of 





CHAP. XXXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 169 


_ the sight of his parents and of his native soil during twenty 
_ years, he suffered many things so severe and bitter, that the 
endurance of them might have rendered him callous, or, at 
least, might have so oppressed him as to have consumed the 
remnant of his life. He was now verging towards old age, 
and the coldness of old age produces tardiness. Yet the 
flight for which he was preparing was not free from danger. 
_ Therefore it was necessary that he should be armed with the 
spirit of fortitude, in order that the vigour and alacrity of 
which Moses speaks, might cause him to hasten his steps. 
And since we read that the departure of the holy man was 
effected by stealth, and was attended with discredit ; let us 
_ learn, whenever God abases us, to turn our minds to such 
examples as this. 

19. And Rachel had stolen. Although the Hebrews some- 
times call those images D'S", (teraphim,) which are not 
set forth as objects of worship: yet since this term is com- 
monly used in an ill sense, I do not doubt that they were. 
the household gods of Laban.’ Even he himself, shortly 
afterwards, expressly calls them his gods. It appears hence 
how great is the propensity of the human mind to idolatry : 
since in all ages this evil has prevailed ; namely, that men 
seek out for themselves visible representations of God. From 
the death of Noah not yet two hundred years had elapsed ; 
Shem had departed but a little while before ; his teaching, 
handed down by tradition, ought most of all to have flourish- 
ed among the posterity of Terah; because the Lord had 
chosen this family to himself, as the only sanctuary on earth 
in which he was to be worshipped in purity. The voice of 
Shem himself was sounding in their ears until the death of 
Abraham ; yet now, from Terah himself, the common filth 
of superstition inundated this place, while the patriarch 
Shem was still living and speaking. And though there is 
no doubt that he endeavoured, with all his power, to bring 
back his descendants to a right mind, we see what was his © 
success. It is not indeed to be believed, that Bethuel had 


1 See the subject of Teraphim discussed at length in Rivetus, who con- 
firms the opinion of Calvin by arguments and illustrations drawn from 
learned writers. Exercitatio exxxn.—Ed. 


170 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXI. 


been entirely ignorant of the call of Abraham ; yet neither 
he, with his family, was, on that account, withdrawn from 
this vanity. Holy Jacob also had not been silent during 
twenty years, but had endeavoured, by counsel and:admoni-— 
tion, to correct these gross vices, but in vain ; because super- 
stition, in its violent course, prevailed. Therefore, that idola- 
try is almost innate in the human mind, the very antiquity 
of its origin bears witness. And that it is so firmly fixed 
there as scarcely to be capable of being uprooted, shows its — 
obstinacy. But it is still more absurd, that not even Rachel 
could be healed of this contagion, in so great a length of 
time. She had often heard her husband speaking of the — 
true and genuine worship of God: yet she is so addicted to — 
the corruptions which she had imbibed from her childhood, — 
that she is ready to infect the land chosen by God with 
them. She imagines that, with her husband, she is follow- | 
ing God as her leader, and at the same time takes with her 
the idols by which she would subvert his worship. It is even 
possible that by the excessive indulgence of his beloved wife, 
Jacob might give too much encouragement to such supersti- 
tions. Wherefore, let pious fathers of families learn to use 
their utmost diligence that no stain of evil may remain in 
their wives or children. Some inconsiderately excuse Rachel, 
on the ground that, by a pious theft, she wished to purge her — 
father’s house from idols. But if this had been her design, — 
why, in crossing the Euphrates, did she not cast away these — 
abominations? why did she not, after her departure, explain ~ 
to her husband what she had done? But there is no need 
of conjecture, since, from the sequel of the history, it is 
manifest that the house of Jacob was polluted with idols, 
even to the time of the violation of Dinah. It was not, then, 
the piety of Rachel, but her insane hankering after supersti- ~ 
tion which impelled her to the theft: because she thought © 
that God could not be worshipped but through idols; for 
this is the source of the disease, that since men are carnal, © 
they imagine God to be carnal too. , 

20. And Jacob stole away unawares to Laban.’ By the 


' Et furatus est Jahacob cor Laban. The margin of the English trans-_ . 
lation renders the passage in the same way, “ And Jacob stole away the — 





OHAP. XXXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 171 


Hebrew form of expression, “stole away the heart of Laban,” 
Moses shows that Jacob departed privately, or by Stealth, 
unknown to his father-in-law. Meanwhile, he wishes to 
point out to what straits Jacob was reduced, so that he had 
no hope of deliverance but in flight. For Laban had deter- 
mined to hold him all his life as a captive, as if he had been 
a slave bound to the soil, or sentenced to the mines. There- 
fore let us also learn, by his example, when the Lord calls 
us, courageously to strive against every kind of obstacle, 
and not to be surprised if many arduous difficulties oppose 
themselves against us. 

22. And it was told Laban. The Lord gave to his servant 
the interval of a three days’ journey, so that having passed 
the Euphrates, he might enter the boundaries of the pro- 
mised land. And perhaps, in the mean time, he cooled the 
rage of Laban, the assault of which, in its first heat, might 
have been intolerably severe.' By afterwards permitting 
Jacob to be intercepted in the midst of his journey, God in- 
tended to render his own interposition the more illustrious. 
It seemed desirable that Jacob’s course should not be inter- 
rupted, and that he should not be filled with alarm by the 
hostile approach of his father-in-law ; but when Laban, like 
a savage wild beast, breathing nothing but slaughter, is sud- 
denly restrained by the Lord, this was far more likely to con- 
firm the faith of the holy man, and therefore far more useful 
to him. For, as in the very act of giving assistance, the 
power of God shone forth more clearly ; so, relying on Divine 
help, he passed more courageously through remaining trials. 
Whence we learn, that those perturbations which, at the time, 
are troublesome to us, yet tend to our salvation, if only we 
obediently submit to the will of God; who purposely thus 
-tries us, that he may indeed show more fully the care which 
he takes of us. It was a sad and miserable sight, that 


heart of Laban.” To this translation the remarks of Calvin apply. He 
understands the passage, however, in the sense which the English version 
of the text gives.—Ed. 

1 « Doubtless this pursuit, undertaken with such vehemence by Laban, 
_ was for the purpose of bringing back Jacob with all his family and all his 
wealth, and under the pretext that he had taken flight and had been guilty 
of theft, to retain him henceforth as a captive, and to subject him to per- 
petual slavery.” —Rwetus in Gen., p. 655. 





172 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXXI. 


Jacob, taking so large a family with him, should flee as if his _ 
conscience had accused him of evil: but it was far more bitter — 


and more formidable, that Laban, intent on his destruction, 
should threaten his life. Yet the method of his deliverance, 


which is described by Moses, was more illustrious than any — 
victory. For God, descending from heaven to bring assist- 


ance to his servant, places himself between the parties, and 


in a moment assuages the indomitable fury with which La- | 


ban was inflamed. 

23. And pursued him seven days journey. Since the 
cruelty of Laban was now appeased, or at least bridled, he 
did not dare severely to threaten ; but laying aside his fero- 
city, he descended to feigned and hypocritical blandishments 
He complains that injury had been done him, because he 
had been kept in ignorance of Jacob’s departure, whom he 
would rather have sent forth with customary tokens of joy, 
in token of his paternal affection. Thus hypocrites, when the 
power of inflicting injury is taken away from them, heap false 
complaints upon the good and simple, as if the blame rested 
with them. Wherefore, if at any time wicked and perfidious 
men, when they have unjustly harassed us, put forward some 
pretext of equity on their own part, we must bear with the 
iniquity ; not because a just defence is to be entirely omit- 
ted; but because we find it inevitable that perverse men, 
ever ready to speak evil, will shamelessly cast upon us 
the blame of crimes of which we are innocent. Meanwhile, 
we must prudently guard against giving them the occasion 
against us which they seek. 

29. It is in the power of my hand. The Hebrew phrase 


is different, “‘ my hand is to power;’ yet the meaning is 


clear, that Laban declares he is ready to take vengeance. 
Some expound the words thus: “ my hand,is to God;” but 
from other places it appears that the word ON is taken for 






ae ee ee ee ee ee 





i ed ee 


power. But Laban, inflated with foolish boasting, contra~ ~ 


dicts himself; for whereas he had been forbidden by God to 
attempt anything against Jacob, where was the power of 
which he boasted? We see, therefore, he precipitates him- 
sclf by a blind impulse, as if, at his own pleasure, he could 
do anything against the purpose of God. For when he per- 








 CHAY. XXXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 173 


ceives that God is opposed to him, he yet does not hesitate 
to glory in his own strength ; and why is this, unless he 


- aimed at being superior to God? Finally; pride is always 

_ the companion of unbelief; so that unbelievers, although 

_ vanquished, yet cease not impetuously to rise up against 

' God. To this they add another sin, that they complain of 
_ being unjustly oppressed by God. 


But the God of your father. Why does he not also ac- 


iI knowledge God as his own God, unless because Satan had 


so fascinated his mind already, that he chose rather to wander 


in darkness than to turn to the light presented before him ? 
_ Willingly or unwillingly, he is compelled to yield to the God 

of Abraham ; and yet he defrauds him of the glory which is 
- due, by retaining those fictitious deities by which he had 
_ been deceived. We see then that the ungodly, even when 
_ they have had proof of the power of God, yet do not entirely 
- submit themselves to his authority. Wherefore, when God 
_ manifests himself to us, we must also seek from heaven the 
| spirit of meekness, which shall bend and subdue us to obe- 
| dience unto himself. 


30. Wherefore hast thou stolen my gods?! The second 


head of accusation which is alleged against Jacob is, that he 
had not departed through love to his country, nor for any 
_ just and probable cause ; but that, in fact, he-was impli- 
| eated in an act of robbery. Heavy and disgraceful charge, 
_ of which Jacob was far from being guilty! But we learn 
hence, that no one can live so innocently in the world, but 
_ he must sometimes bear undeserved reproach and marks of 
§ infamy. Whenever this may happen to us, let that precious 
_ promise sustain us, that the Lord, in his own time, will 
bring forth our innocence as the morning light. (Ps. xxxvii. 6.) 
_ For by this artifice Satan attempts to seduce us from the 
__ practice of well-doing, when, without any fault of ours, we 
are traduced by false calumnies. And since the world is 
ungrateful, it often makes the very worst return for acts of 


1 « Wonderful is the madness of idolatry. He confesses that those whom 
“he calls his gods, might yet be carried off by theft. It was the part of 
impiety that he worshipped idols; but it was the part of folly that he 
declared those to be gods, who were unable to preserve themselves from 


being stolen.”—Rivetus in Gien., p. 656. 


174 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXI. 





kindness. Some, indeed, are found, who, with heroic mag- — 
nanimity, despise unfavourable reports, because they esteem — 
the testimony of a good conscience more highly than de- 
praved popular opinion. But it behoves the faithful to look 
to God, that their conscience may never fail them. We see 
that Laban calls his gods DSW, (teraphim,) not because he — 
thought the Deity was enclosed within them ; but because — 
he worshipped these images in honour of the gods. Or 
rather, because, when he was about to pay homage to God, 
he turned himself to those images. At this day, by the sole © 
difference of a word, the Papists think they skilfully effect 
their escape, because they do not attribute to idols the — 
name of gods. But the subterfuge is frivolous, since in — 
reality they are altogether alike ; for they pour forth before — 
pictures or statues whatever honour they acknowledge to be — 
due to the one God. ‘To the ancient idolaters the pretext 
was not wanting, that by a metonymy they styled those — 
images gods, which were formed for the sake of representing — 
God. | 
31. And Jacob answered. He briefiy refutes each head 
of the accusation: with respect to his secret departure, he 
modestly excuses himself, as having been afraid that he 
might be deprived of his wives. And in this way he takes — 
part of the blame to himself, deeming it sufficient to exone- 
rate himself from the malice of which he was thought to be ~ 
guilty. He does not dispute, as a casuist, whether it was — 
lawful to depart by stealth; but leaves it undetermined 
whether or not his fear was culpable. Let all the children 
of God learn to imitate this modesty, lest through an immo- — 
derate desire to vindicate their own reputation, they should — 
rush into contentions: just as we have seen many raise — 
tragic scenes out of nothing, because they will not endure — 
that any censure, however trifling, should be cast upon — 
them. Jacob, therefore, was content with this excuse, that — 
he had done nothing wickedly. His defence on the other — 
charge follows, in which Jacob shows his confidence, by — 
adjudicating the person to death, with whom the things — 
stolen should be found.” He speaks, indeed, from his heart ; 


' “Jacob might cover himself with the shield of his own innocence ; but 


a 





CHAP: XXXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 175 


but if the truth had then been discovered, he must, of neces- 
sity, have been ashamed of his rashness. Therefore, though 
he was not conscious of guilt, he yet sinned through exces- 
sive haste, in not having diligently inquired before he pro- 
~ nounced concerning a doubtful matter. He ought to have 
-ealled both his wives and his children, and to have inquired 
of each how the affair stood. He was, indeed, persuaded, 
- that his family was so well conducted, that no suspicion of 
_ the theft had ever entered into his mind ; but he ought not 
_ so to have relied upon his own discipline, as to be free from 
_ fear when a crime is alleged against his family. Wherefore, 
let us learn to suspend our judgment in matters of which we 
_ are ignorant, lest we should repent too late of our temerity. 
We may add, that hence it happened, that the pollution 
- which he might have exterminated immediately, continued 
_ still longer in the family of Jacob. 
32. That Rachel had stolen them. Moses relates the man- 
' ner in which Rachel -had concealed her theft ; namely, by 
sitting on the idols, and pretending the custom of women as 
| her excuse. It is a question, whether she did this through 
' shame or pertinacity. It was disgraceful to be caught in 
the act of theft ; she also dreaded the severe sentence of her 
husband. Yet to me it appears probable, that fear did not 
_ so much influence her as the obstinate love of idolatry. For 
we know how greatly superstition infatuates the mind. 
_ Therefore, as if she had obtained an incomparable treasure, 
she thinks that she must attempt anything rather than 
- allow herself to be deprived of it. Moreover, she chooses 
_ rather to incur the displeasure of her father and her hus- 
- band, than to relinquish the object of her superstition. 
- To her stratagem she also adds lying words, so that she 
_ deserves manifold censure. 
86. And Jacob was wroth, and chode with Laban. Jacob 
_ again acts amiss, in contending with Laban about a matter 
- not sufficiently known, and in wrongfully fastening on him 
_ the charge of calumny. For although he supposed all his 


_ it was not large enough to cover all others, not even his most beloved wife, 


_ whom he, in ignorance, adjudicates to death, and incautoyply. gives sen- 


tence against her.” —Rivetus in Gen., p. 657. 





176 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXXI. 


family to be free from blame, yet he was deceived by his 


own negligence. He acts, indeed, with moderation, because — 
in expostulating with Laban he does not use reproaches; 
but in this he is not to be excused, that he undertakes the — 


cause of his whole family, when they were not exempt from 





blame. If any one should make the objection to this state- — 


ment, that Jacob was constrained by fear, because Laban 


had brought with him a great band of companions: the cireum- 


stances themselves show, that his mind was thus influenced 
by moderation rather than by fear. For he boldly resists, 
and shows no sign of fear ; only he abstains from the inso- 
lence of evil speaking. He then adds that he had just cause 
of accusation against Laban ; not because he wished to rise 
in a spirit of recrimination against his father-in-law ; but be- 
cause it was right that the kindred and associates of Laban 
should be made witnesses of all that had passed, in order 
that, by the protracted patient endurance of Jacob, his in- 


tegrity might be the more manifest: Jacob also calls to | 


mind, not only that he had been a faithful keeper of the 
flock, but also that his labour had been rendered prosperous 
by the blessing of God; he adds, besides, that he had been 
held accountable for all losses. In this he insinuates against 
Laban the charge of great injustice: for it was not the duty 
of Jacob voluntarily to inflame the avarice and rapacity of 


his father-in-law, by attempting to soothe him; but he yielded, - 


by constraint, to his injuries. When he says that “sleep 
departed from his eyes,” he not only intimates that he passed 
sleepless nights, but that he had so contended against nature 
itself, as to defraud himself of necessary repose. 

42. Hacept the God of my father. Jacob here ascribes it 
to the favour of God, that he was not about to return home 
entirely empty ; whereby he not only aggravates the sin of 
Laban, but meets an objection which might seem at variance 
with his complaints. He therefore denies that he has been 
made rich by the kindness of his father-in-law ; but testifies 
that he has been favourably regarded by the Lord :-as if he 
had said, “ I owe it not to thee, that thou hast not further 
injured me ; but God, who is propitious to me, has withstood 
thee.” Now, since God is not the defender of unfaithfulness, 



























CHAP. XXXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 177 


or is wont to help the wicked, the integrity of Jacob may 
be ascertained from the fact that God interposed as his 
indicator. It is also to be observed, that by expressly dis- 
_tinguishing the God of Abraham from all fictitious gods, he 
declares that there is no other true God: by which he, at 
the same time, proves himself to be a truly pious worshipper. 
The expression “ the fear of Isaac,” is to be taken passively 
for the God whom Isaac revered ; just as, on account of the 
everence due to him, he is called “ the fear and the dread” 
of his people." A similar expression occurs immediately 
fter, in the same chapter. Now the pious, while they fear 
God, are by no means horror-struck at his presence, like the 
reprobates ; but trembling at his judgment, they walk circum- 
_ spectly before him. 

— God hath seen my affliction, and the labour of my hands. 
This was spoken from a pious feeling that God would bring 
help to him when afflicted, if he should conduct himself with 
fidelity and honesty. Therefore, in order that the Lord may 
sustain us with his favour, let us learn to discharge our duty 
rightly ; let us not flee from our proper work ; and let us not 
refuse to purchase peace by submitting to many inconveni- 
ances. Further, if they from whom we have deserved well 
treat us severely and unjustly, let us bear our cross in hope 
\ and in silence, until the Lord shall succour us: for he will 
never forsake us, as the whole Scripture testifies. But Jacob 
7 istinctly presses his father-in-law with his own confession. 
For why had God rebuked him, unless because he was per- 
secuting an innocent man in defiance of justice and equity ; 
| for as I have lately intimated, it is abhorrent to the nature 
of God to favour evil and unjust causes. 

_ 43, These daughters are my daughters. Laban begins 
‘now to speak in a manner very different from before: he 
‘sees that he has no farther ground of contention. Therefore, 
being convinced, he buries all strife, and glides into placid 
and amicable discourse. “ Why,” he asks, “ should I be 
hostile to thee, when all things between us are common ? 
Shall I rage against my own bowels? for both thy wives 


. ; * Isaiah viii. 13. “ Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself; and let him be 
your fear, and let him be your dread.’ 


me VOL. IT. M 


{! 


























178 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXI. 


and thy children are my own blood ; wherefore I ought to 
be affected towards you, as if you all were part of myself.” 

He now answers like an honourable man. Whence, then, 
has this humanity so suddenly sprung up in the breast of 
him who lately had been hurried onward, without any respect 
to right or wrong, to ruin Jacob; unless it were, that he 
knew Jacob to have acted towards him with fidelity, and 
to have been at length compelled by necessity to adopt the 
design of departing by stealth? And this was an indication 
that he was not absolutely desperate: for we may find many 
persons of such abandoned impudence, that though overcome 
and silenced by arguments, they yet do not cease to rush 
headlong in insane rebellion. From this passage we infer 
that although avarice and other sinful affections take away 
judgment and soundness of mind ; there yet remains a know 
ledge of truth engraven on the souls of men, which being 
stirred up emits scintillations, to prevent the universal 
triumph of depravity. If any one before had said, “ What 
doest thou, Laban? what brutality is this to rage against 
thine own bowels?” the remonstrance would not have been 
heard, for he burned with headstrong fury. But now he 
voluntarily suggests this to himself, and proclaims what he_ 
would have been unwilling to hear from another. It appears, 
then, that the light of justice which now breaks forth, had 
been smothered in his mind. In short, it is self-love alone” 
which blinds us; because we all judge aright where personal” 
interests are not concerned. If, however, it should so happen > 
that we are for a time in perplexity, we must still seek to” 
obey the dictates of reason and justice. Butif any one har- 
dens himself in wickedness, the interior and hidden know- 
ledge, of which I have spoken, will yet remain engraven in” 
his mind, and will suffice for his condemnation. | 

44, Let us make a covenant, I and thou. Laban here acts 

as men conscious of guilt are wont to do, when they wish to” 
guard themselves against revenge: and this kind of trepida-_ 


* Acsi gererem omnium personam, “ As if I bore the person or che 
acter of all,” perhaps, “ as your representative—the one who personates. 
you.” Yet, in the translation, the sense is given which will, perhaps, on) 
the whole, be most intelligible to the reader, —Ed. a 


_ CHAP. XXXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 179 


tion and anxiety is the just reward of evil deeds. Besides, 
_ wicked men always judge of others from their own dispo- - 
_ sition: whence it happens that they have fears on all sides. 
Moses before relates 2 somewhat similar example, when Abi- 
_melech made a covenant with Isaac. Wherefore we must 
_ take the greater care, if we desire to possess tranquil minds, 
that we act sincerely and without injury towards our neigh- 
_bours. Meanwhile Moses shows how placable Jacob was, 
and how easily he permitted himself to be conciliated. He 
; had endured very many and grievous wrongs; but now, for- 
pectting all, he freely stretches out the hand of kindness: and 
_ so far is he from being pertinacious in defending his own right, 
- that he, in a manner, anticipates Laban himself, being the first 
| to take a stone, and set it up fora pillar. And truly it becomes 
- the children of God, not only with alacrity to embrace peace, 
but even ardently to search for it, as we are commanded in 
Psalm xxxiv. 14! As to the heap of stones, it was always 
the practice to use some ceremony which might confirm the 
- compact on both sides ; on this occasion a heap of stones is 
raised, in order that the memory of the covenant might be 
transmitted to posterity. That Jacob took part in this was 
_ a proof, as we have said, of a mind disposed to peace. He 
i freely complained, indeed, when it was right to do so; but 
when the season of pacification arrived, he showed that he 
cherished no rancour. Moses, in relating afterwards that 
“they did eat there, upon the heap,” does not observe the 
order of the history. For, on both sides, the conditions of the 
covenant were agreed upon and declared, before the feast 
was celebrated: but this figure of speech (as we have before 
seen) was sufficiently in use. 

47. And Laban called it. Each, in his own language, 
gives a name, of the same signification, to the heap. Whence 
it appears, that Laban used the Syrian tongue, though born 
of the race of Heber. But it is not wonderful that he, dwell- 
ing among Syrians, should have accustomed himself to the 
language as well as to the manners of the Syrians. -And a 
little before, he is twice called a Syrian; as if Moses would 

describe him as degenerate, and alienated from the Hebrews, 
; « Depart from evil and do good; seek peace and pursue it.” 







































180 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXI. 


But this seems by no means accordant with the previous 
history, where we read that the daughters of Laban gave 
Hebrew names to their sons. Yet the solution is not diffi- 
cult; for since the affinity between these languages was 
great, the inflection of one word into another was easy: be- 
sides, if the wives of Jacob were tractable, it is not surpris- | 
ing that they should have learned his language. And be- 
yond doubt, he would himself make a point of this matter: 
seeing he knew that his family was separated from the rest 
of the nations. Moses, in using the name of Galeed, does it 
proleptically ; for since he was writing for his own times, he 
does not scruple to give it the generally received name. 
Moreover we hence infer, that ceremonies and rites ought to 
refer to that which those who use them mutually agree upon. 
Which rule also ought to be applied to the sacraments ; be- 
cause if the word by which God enters into covenant with 
us be taken away, useless and dead figures will alone re- 
main. 

49. The Lord watch between me and thee. Laban commits 
to the judgment of God, for vengeance, whatever offence 
either of them should be guilty of against the other in his 
absence ; as if he would say, “ Though the knowledge of the 
injury should not reach me, because I shall be far distant, 
yet the Lord, who is everywhere present, will behold it.” 
Which sentiment he more clearly expresses afterwards, when 
he says, “ No one is with us ; God will be witness between 
me and thee.” By which words he means, that God will be 
a severe avenger of every wickedness, though there shoulc 
be no judge upon earth to decide the cause. And certainly 
if there were any religion flourishing within us, the presence 
of God would influence us far more than the observation of 
men. But it arises from the brutal stupidity of our flesh, 
that we reverence men only; as if we might mock God with 
impunity, when we are not convicted by the testimony of” 
men. If, then, this common feeling of nature dictated to 
Laban, that the frauds which were hidden from men would 
come into judgment before God ; we who enjoy the light of the 
gospel should indeed be ashamed to seek a covert for our fal 
lacies. Hence also, we gather the legitimate use of an oath, 


: CHAP. XXXI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 18l 


: which the Apostle declares in his epistle to the Hebrews ; 
namely, that men, in order to put an end to their contro- 
_ yersies, resort to the judgment of God. 
50. If thou shalt take other wives besides my daughters. 
Laban declares that it would be a species of perfidy, if Jacob 
should take to himself any other wives. But he had himself 
compelled Jacob to the act of polygamy: for whence was it 
that the holy man had more wives than one, except that 
_ Leah had been eraftily substituted in the place of Rachel? 
But he now, from a pure sentiment of nature, condemns the 
fault, of which, blinded by avarice, he had wickedly been 
the author. And certainly, when the bond of marriage is 
_ broken, than which none among men is more sacred, the 
whole of human society sinks into decay. Wherefore, those 
_ fanatical men, who, at this day, delight to defend polygamy, 
_have no need of any other judge than Laban. 
53. The God of Abraham. It is indeed rightly and pro- 
_ perly done, that Laban should adjure Jacob by the name of 
God. For this is the confirmation of covenants ; to appeal to 
' God on both sides, that he may not suffer perfidy to pass 
unpunished. But he sinfully blends idols with the true 
God, between whom there is nothing incommon. Thus, truly, 
' men involved in superstitions, are accustomed to confound 
promiscuously sacred things with profane, and the figments 
of men with the true God. He is compelled to give some 
honour to the God of Abraham, yet he lies plunged in his own 
idolatrous pollution ; and, that his religion may not appear 
the worse, he gives it the colour of antiquity. or in calling 
him the God of his father, he boasts that this God was hand- 
ed down to him from his ancestors. Meanwhile Jacob does 
not swear superstitiously. For Moses expressly declares, 
that he sware only by the “ fear of Isaac ;’ whence we learn 
that he did not assent to the preposterous form of oath dic- 
tated by his father-in-law ; as too many do, who, in order to 
gain the favour of the wicked, pretend to be of the same re- 
ligion with them. But when once the only God is made 
known to us, we wickedly suppress his truth, unless by its 
light all the clouds of error are dispersed. 

54. And called his brethren to eat bread. In courteously 



















182 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXII. 
receiving his kindred, by whom he had been ill-treated, as 
his guests, Jacob showed his kindness. Moses also intimates 
that it was by the special favour of God that, after the most 
dreadful storm which threatened the holy man with destruc- 
tion, a placid serenity suddenly shone forth. To the same 
cause is to be assigned what immediately follows, that Laban 
departed in a friendly manner: for by this method the Lord 
openly manifested himself as the guardian of his servant, 

‘seeing that he wonderfully delivered him as a lost sheep out 
of the jaws of the wolf. And truly, not only was the fury of 
Laban appeased ; but he put on paternal affection, as if he 
had been changed into a new man. 

55. And blessed them. The character of the person is 
here to be noticed, because Laban, who had lapsed from true 
piety, and was a man of unholy and wicked manners, yet 
retained the habit of giving his blessing. For we are hereby 
taught, that certain principles of divine knowledge remain 
in the hearts of the wicked, so that no excuse may be left to 
them on the ground of ignorance ; for the custom of pro- 
nouncing a blessing arises hence, that men are certainly per- 
suaded that God alone is the author of all good things. For 
although they may proudly arrogate what they please to 
themselves ; yet when they return to their right mind, they 
are compelled, whether they will or no, to acknowledge that — 
all good proceeds from God alone. j 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


1. Anv Jacob went on his way, and 
the angels of God met him. 

2. And when Jacob saw them, he 
said, This is God’s host: and he 
called the name of that place Maha- 
naim, 

3. And Jacob sent messengers be- 
fore him to Esau his brother, unto the 
land of Seir, the country of Edom. 

_ 4. And he commanded them, say- 
ing, Thus shall ye speak unto m 
lord Esau; Thy servant Jacob sait 
thus, I have sojourned with Laban, 
and stayed there until now: 










1. Postea Iahacob abiit in viam — 
suam, et occurrerunt ei Angeli Dei. ~ 
2. Et dixit Iahacob, quando vidit © 
eos, Castra Dei sunt hee: et vocavit — 
nomen loci illius Mahanaim. | 


3. Misit autem Iahacob nuntios 
ante se ad Esau fratrem suum ¢ 
terram Sehir in regionem Edom. 

4. Et precepit eis dicendo, Sic — 
dicetis domino meo Esau, Sic dixit 
servus tuus Iahacob, Cum Laban 
habitavi et moratus sum hue usque. — 













‘CHAP. XXXII. 


5. And I have oxen, and asses, 
flocks, and men-servants, and women- 
- servants: and I have sent to tell my 
4 ond that I may find grace in thy 


6. And the messengers returned 
_ to Jacob, saying, We came to thy 
brother Esau, and also he cometh to 
meet thee, and four hundred men 
_ with him. 

| 7. Then Jacob was greatly afraid 


Breople that was with him, and the 
ocks, and herds, and the camels, into 
¥ _ two bands ; 
8. And said, If Esau come to the 
_ one company, and smite it, then the 
_ other company which is ‘left shall 
escape. 
_ 9. And Jacob said, O God of my 
- father Abraham, and God of my fa- 
ther Isaac, the Lord which saidst 
unto me, Return unto thy country, 
and to thy kindred, and I will deal 
_ well with thee: 
10. I am not worthy of the least 
of all the mercies, and of all the 
truth, which thou hast showed unto 
thy servant; for with my staff I 
_ passed over this J ordan, and now I 
_ am become two bands. 
11. Deliver me, I pray thee, from 
‘the hand of my brother, from the 
hand of Esau: for I fear him, lest he 
will come and smite me, and the 
‘mother with the children. 


do thee good, and make thy seed as 
the sand of the sea, which cannot be 
numbered for multitude. 

13. And he lodged there that same 
“night; and took of that which came 
to his hand a present for Esau his 
brother ; 

14. Two hundred she-goats and 
twenty he-goats, two hundred ewes 
and twenty rams, 

_ 15. Thirty milch camels with their 
colts, forty kine and ten bulls, 
twenty she-asses and ten foals. 


16. And he delivered them into the 
hand of his servants, every drove by 
themselves; and said unto his ser- 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


and distressed: and he divided the’ 


12. And thou saidst, I will surely’ 


183 


5. Et sunt mihi boves et asini, 
pecudes et servi, et ancille, et misi 
ut nuntiarem domino meo, ut inve- 
nirem gratiam in oculis tuis. 


6. Reversi autem sunt nuntii ad 
Iahacob, dicendo, Venimus ad fra- 
trem tuum, ad Esau, et etiam pergit 
in occursum tuum, et quadringenti 
viri cum eo. 

Et timuit Iahacob valde, et 
Bilger affectus est; et divisit po- 
pulum, qui erat secum, et pecudes, 
et boves, et camelos in duas turmas. 


8. Dixit enim, Si veniret Esau ad 
turmam unam, et percusserit eam, 
turma, quee remanserit, evadet. 


9. Et dixit Iahacob, Deus patris 
mei Abraham, et Deus patris mei 
Ishac, Domine, qui dixisti ad me, 
Revertere ad terram tuam et cogna- 
tionem tuam, et benefaciam tibi. 


10. Minor sum eunctis misericor- 


diis, et omni veritate, quam fecisti 


cum servo tuo: quia in baculo meo 
transivi Tordanem hune, et nunc fac- 
tus sum in duas turmas. 


11. Erue me nune de manu fra- 
tris mei, de manu Esau : timeo enim 
eum, ne forte veniat, et percutiat me, 
matremque cum filiis. 


12. Et tu dixisti, Benefaciendo 
benefaciam tibi, et ponam semen 
tuum sicut arenam maris, que non 
numeratur pre multitudine. 

13, Et pernoctavit ibi nocte ipsa, 
et accepit ex iis, que occurrebant ad 
manum suam, munus mittendum ve: 
Ksau fratrem suum. 

14. Capras ducentas et hircos vi- 
ginti, oves ducentas et arietes viginti: 


15. Camelos lactantes, et pullos 
earum triginta: vaccas quadraginta, 
et juvencos decem : asinas viginti, et 
pullos decem. 

16. Et dedit in manum servorum 
suorum, singulos greges seorsum : 
dixitque ad servos suos, Transite 


184 


yants, Pass over before me, and put 
a space betwixt drove and drove. 

17. And he commanded the fore- 
most, saying, When Esau my brother 
meeteth thee, and asketh thee, say- 
ing, Whose art thou? and whither 
goest thou? and whose are these 
before thee ? 

18. Then thou shalt say, They be 
thy servant Jacob’s ; it is a present 
sent unto my lord Esau: and, be- 
hold, also he ts behind us, 

19. And so commanded he the 
second, and the third, and all that 
followed the droves, saying, On this 
manner shall ye speak unto Esau, 
when ye find him. 

20. And say ye moreover, Behold, 
thy servant Jacob is behind us. For 
he said, I will appease him with the 
present that goeth before me, and 
afterward I will see his face ; perad- 
venture he will accept of me. 

21. So went the present over be- 
fore him; and himself lodged that 
night in the company. 

22. And he rose up that night, 
and took his two wives, and his two 
women-servants, and his eleven sons, 
and passed over the ford Jabbok. 

23. And he took them, and sent 
them over the brook, and sent over 
that he had. 

24. And Jacob was left alone; and 
there wrestled a man with him until 
the breaking of the day. 

25. And when he saw that he pre- 
vailed not against him, he touched 
the hollow of his thigh; and the 
hollow of Jacob’s thigh was out of 
joint as he wrestled with him. 

26. And he said, Let me go, for 
the day breaketh. And he said, I 
will not let thee go, except thou 
bless me. 

27. And he said unto him, What 
is thy name? And he said, Jacob. 

28. And he said, Thy name shall 
be called no more Jacob, but Israel : 
for as a prince hast thou power with 
God and with men, and hast pre- 
vailed. 

29. And Jacob asked him, and 
said, Tell me, I pray thee, thy name. 


OOMMENTARY UPON 
























CHAP, XXXII 


ante me. et interstitium ponetis 
gregem et gregem, vt 

aT Et preecepit primo, dicendo, 
Si occurrerit tibi Esau frater meus, 
et interrogavérit te, dicendo, Cujus 


es, et quo pergis, et cujus sunt ista 
ante te ? hi ee 


18. Dices, Servi tui Iahacob mu-. 
nus est, missum ad dominum meun 
Esau: et ecce etiam ipse est post 
nos. tr fem 

19. Preecepit etiam secundo, etiam 
tertio, etiam cunctis pergentibus 
post greges, dicendo, Secundum ver- 
bum hoe loquemini ad Esau, ¢ 
invenietis eum. . 

20. Et dicetis etiam, Ecce servus 
tuus Iahacob est post nos: dixit 
enim, Placabo faciem ejus munere, 
quod vadit ante me, et postea videbo 
faciem ejus, si forte suscipiat 
meam. | 

21. Transivit itaque munus an 
eum: et ipse pernoctavit nocte ipsa 
cum turma. At a 

22. Kt surrexit nocte ipsa, et ac- 
cepit duas uxores suas, et duas an 
cillas suas, et undecim liberos suos 
et transivit vadum Jaboe. 

23. Et accepit eos, et transire fe- 
cit eos torrentem, transire, inquam 
fecit omnia quee erant sibi. . 

24. Porro remansit Iahacob solus 
ipse: et luctatus est vir cum ec 
donec ascendit aurora. | 

25. Et vidit quod non prevaleret 
ei, et tetigit palam femoris ejus, et 
movit se pala femoris Iahacob, lue 
tante illo cum eo. 


nter 


ADGC 


. a 
acieli 
~ . 


’ 
* 


26. Tune dixit, Dimitte me, qui 
ascendit aurora. Cui respondit, No 
dimittam te, nisi benedixeris mihi. 


27. Et dixit ad eum, Quod est 
nomen tuum? Et ait, Iahacob. | 
28. Tune dixit, Non Iahacob di- 
cetur ultra nomen tuum, sed Israel 
quia princeps fuisti cum Deo, et ho: 
minibus preevalebis. 2 


29. Et interrogavit Iahacob, et 
dixit, Indica, queso, nomen tuum. 


OHAP, XXXII 


And he said. Wherefore is it that 
thou dost ask aftermy name? And 
he blessed him there. 

30. And Jacob called the name of 
the place Peniel: for I have seen 
God face to face, and my life is pre- 
served. 

31. And as he passed over Penuel, 
the sun rose upon him, and he halt- 
ed upon his thigh. 

32. Therefore the children of Is- 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


185 


Et dixit, Utquid interrogas de no- 
mine meo? et benedixit ei illic. 


30. Vocavit ergo Iahacob nomen 
loci, Peniel: quia vidi Deum facie 
ad faciem, et evasit anima mea. 


31. Et ortus est ei sol, quando 
transivit Penuel, et claudicabat in 
femore suo. 

32. Idcireo non comedunt filii Is- 





rael eat not of the sinew which 
shrank, which is upon the hollow of 
the thigh, unto this day : because he 
touched the hollow of Jacob’s thigh 
in the sinew that shrank. 


rael nervum contractionis, qui est in 
pala femoris, usque ad diem hanc: 
quia tetigit palam femoris Iahacob 
in nervo contractionis. 


1. And Jacob went on his way. After Jacob has escaped 
from the hands of his father-in-law, that is, from present 
death, he meets with his brother, whose cruelty was as much, 
or still more, to be dreaded; for by the threats of this 
brother he had been driven from his country; and now no 
better prospect lies before him. He therefore proceeds with 
trepidation, as one who goes to the slaughter. Seeing, how- 
ever, it was scarcely possible but that he should sink op- 
pressed by grief, the Lord affords him timely succour ; and 
prepares him for this conflict, as well as for others, in such a 
manner that he should stand forth a brave and invincible 
champion in them all. Therefore, that: he may know himself 
to be defended by the guardianship of God, angels go forth 
to meet him, arranged in ranks on both sides. Hebrew in- 
terpreters think that the camp of the enemy had been 
placed on one side; and that the angels, or rather God, 
stood on the other. But it is much more probable, that 
angels were distributed in two camps on different sides of 
Jacob, that he might perceive himself to be everywhere sur- 
rounded and fortified by celestial troops; as in Psalm xxxiv. 
7, it is declared that angels, to preserve the worshippers of 
God, pitch their tents around them. Yet I am not dissatis- 
fied with the opinion of those who take the dual number 
simply for the plural; understanding that Jacob was en- 
tirely surrounded with an army of angels. Now the use 
of this vision was twofold ; for, first, since the holy man was 
very anxious about the future, the Lord designed early to 








186 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXII. 


remove this cause of terror from him; or, at least, to afford him — 
some alleviation, lest he should sink under-temptation. Se- — 
condly, God designed, when Jacob should have been delivered 
from his brother, so to fix the memory of the past benefit in 
his mind, that it should never be lost. We know how prone 
men are to forget the benefits of God. Even while God is 
stretching out his hand to help them, scarcely one out of a 
hundred raises his eyes towards heaven. Therefore it was — 
necessary that the visible protection of God should be placed — 
before the eyes of the holy man; so that, as in a splendid — 
theatre, he might perceive that he had been lately delivered, — 
not by chance, out of the hand of Laban; but that he had 
the angels of God fighting for him; and might certainly 
hope, that their help would be ready for him against the at- 
tempts of his brother; and finally, that, when the danger was 
surmounted, he might remember the protection he had re- 
ceived from them. ‘This doctrine is of use to us all, that we 
may learn to mark the invisible presence of God in his 
manifested favours. Chiefly, however, it was necessary that 
the holy man should be furnished with new weapons to en- 
dure the approaching contest. He did not know whether 
his brother Esau had been changed for the better or the 
worse. But he would rather incline to the suspicion that 
the sanguinary man would devise nothing but what was hos- 
tile. Therefore the angels appear for the purpose of con- 
firming his faith in future, not less than for that of calling 
past favours to his remembrance. The number of these 
angels also encourages him not a little: for although a single 
angel would suffice as a guardian for us, yet the Lord acts 
more liberally towards us. Therefore they who think that 
each of us is defended by one angel only, wickedly depre- 
ciate the kindness of God. And there is no doubt that the 
devil, by this crafty device, has endeavoured, in some mea- 
sure, to diminish our faith. The gratitude of the holy man 
is noted by Moses, in the fact that he assigns to the place a 
name, (Galeed,) as a token of perpetual remembrance. 

3. And Jacob sent messengers. It now happened, by the 
providence of God, that Esau, having left his father, had 
gone to Mount Seir of his own accord ; and had thus de- 











CHAP, XXXII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 187 


parted from the land of promise, by which means the posses- 
sion of it would remain void for the posterity of Jacob, 
_ without slaughter among brethren. For it was not to be 
_ believed that he had changed his habitation, either because 
_ he was compelled by his father’s command, or because he 
was willing to be accounted inferior to his brother. I rather 
conjecture that he had become greatly enriched, and that 
this induced him to leave his father’s house. For we know 
that profane persons and men of this world so vehemently 
pant for present advantages, that when anything offers itself 
in accordance with their desire, they are hurried towards it 
with a brutish impetuosity. Esau was imperious and fero- 
cious ; he was incensed against his mother ; had shaken off all 
reverence for his father, and knew that he was himself also 
obnoxious to them both: his wives were engaged in incessant 
contentions; it seemed to him hard and troublesome, to be in 
_ the condition of a child in the family, when he was now ad- 
_ yancing to old age; for proud men do not regard themselves 
as free, so long as any one has the pre-eminence over them. 
Therefore, in order to pass his life free from the authority of 
others, he chose to live in a state of separation from his 
father ; and, allured by this attraction, he disregarded the 
promised inheritance, and left the place for his brother. I 
have said that this was done by the divine will: for God 
himself declares by Malachi, that it was by a species of 
banishment that Esau was led to Mount Seir. (Mal. i. 8.)' For 
although he departed voluntarily ; yet, by the secret counsel 
of God was he deprived of that land which he had earnestly 
desired. But, attracted by the present lust of dominion, he 
was blinded in his choice ; since the land of Seir was moun- 
tainous and rugged, destitute of fertility and pleasantness. 
Moreover, he would appear to himself a great man, in giving 
his own name to the country. Nevertheless, it is probable 
_that Moses called that country the land of Edom by the 
figure prolepsis, because it afterwards began to be so called. 
The question now occurs, Whence did Jacob know that his 
brother dwelt in that region? Though I assert nothing as 


1 « J hated Esau, and laid his mountains and his heritage waste for the 
dragons of the wilderness.” — English Translation. 






188 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXII. — 


certain ; yet the conjecture is probable, that he had been in- — 
formed of it by his mother ; for, in the great number of her 
servants, a faithful messenger would not be wanting. And 
it is easily gathered from the words of Moses, that Jacob, 
before he had entered the land, knew the fact respecting the — 
new residence of his brother. And we know that many 

things of this kind were omitted by Moses, which may oagiy 

suggest themselves to the mind of the reader. | 

4. Thus shall ye speak unto my lord Esau. Moses here — 
relates the anxiety of Jacob to appease his brother. For this — 
suppliant deprecation was extorted only by great and severe — 
torture of mind. It seems, however, to be an absurd sub- 
mission, whereby he cedes to his brother that dominion for 
which he had contended at the hazard of his life. For if 
Esau has the primogeniture, what does Jacob reserve for — 
himself? For what end did he bring upon himself such 
hatred, expose himself to such dangers, and at length endure 
twenty years of banishment, if he does not refuse to be in 
subjection to his brother? I answer, that though he gives — 
up the temporal dominion, he yields nothing of his right to 
the secret benediction. He knows that the effect of the 
divine promise is still suspended: and therefore, being content 
with the hope of the future inheritance, he does not hesi- 
tate, at present, to prefer his brother in honour to himself, 
and to profess himself his brother’s servant. Nor was there 
anything feigned in these words; because he was willing to 
bear his brother on his shoulders; so that he might not lose 
his own future right, which was as yet concealed. 

5. I have oxen. Jacob does not proclaim his riches for 
the sake of boasting, but that by this method Esau might 
be inclined to humanity. For it would have been exceed- 
ingly disgraceful, cruelly to drive away one who had been 
enriched, by the favour of God, in a distant land. Besides, he 
cuts off occasion of future emulation: for if he had come — 
empty and famishing, Esau might conceive fresh indigna- 
tion against him, through fear of the expense which might 
be entailed on himself. Therefore Jacob declares, that he 
does not come for the purpose of consuming his father’s 
substance, nor of being made rich by his brother’s ruin: as 





a 





CHAP, XXXII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 189 


_ if he had said, “ Let thy earthly inheritance be secure ; thy 
- claim shall not be injured by me; only suffer me to live.” 
By this example we are taught in what way we are to cul- 
tivate peace with the wicked. The Lord does not indeed 
forbid us to defend our own right, so far as our adversaries 
allow; but we must rather recede from that right, than 
originate contention by our own fault. 

6. And the messengers returned. Esau advances to meet 
his brother with a feeling of benevolence: but Jacob, reflect- 
ing on his cruel ferocity, inflated spirits, and savage threats, 
expects no humanity from him. And the Lord willed that the 
mind of his servant should be oppressed by this anxiety for a 
time, although without any real cause, in order the more to 
excite the fervour of his prayer. For we know what cold- 
ness, on this point, security engenders. Therefore, lest our 
faith, being stirred up by no stimulants, should become tor- 
pid, God often suffers us to fear things which are not terrible 
in themselves. For although he anticipates our wishes, and 
opposes our evils, he yet conceals his remedies until he has 
exercised our faith. Meanwhile it is to be noted, that the 
sons of God are never endued with a constancy so steadfast, 
that the infirmity of the flesh does not betray itself in them. 
For they who fancy that faith is exempt from all fear, have 
had no experience of the true nature of faith. For God 
does not promise that he will be present with us, for the 
purpose of removing the sense of our dangers, but in order 
that fear may not prevail, and overwhelm us in despair. 
Moreover our faith is never so firm at every point, as to re- 
pel wicked doubts and sinful fears, in the way that might 
be wished. | 

7. And he divided the people. Moses relates that Jacob 
formed his plans according to the existing state of af- 
fairs. He divides his family into two parts,’ and puts his 
maids in the foremost place, that they may bear the first 
assault, if necessary; but he places his free wives further 


1 « Into two bands,” more literally, “ into two camps or encampments ;” 
MIND °3W?, (leshenai machanoth). The word here used is the same in 
which the host of God is described in the second verse, and from which the 
hame of the city Mahanaim is derived.— Ed. 


ee 
‘ q 
i 


190 » COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXXII. — 


from the danger. Hence indeed we gather, that Jacob was 


not so overcome with fear as to be unable to arrange his — 


plans. We know that when a panic seizes the mind, it is 
deprived of discretion ; and they who ought to look after their 
own concerns, become stupid and inanimate. Therefore it 


proceeded from the spirit of faith that J acob interposed a 


certain space between the two parts of his family, in order 
that if any destruction approached, the whole seed of the 
Church might not perish. For by this scheme, he offered 


the half of his family to the slaughter, that, at length, the~ 


promised inheritance might come to the remainder who sur- 
vived. 

9. O God of my father Abraham. Taving arranged his 
affairs as the necessity of the occasion suggested, he now be- 
takes himself to prayer. And this prayer is evidence that 
the holy man was not so oppressed with fear as to prevent 


faith from proving victorious. For he does not, in a hesi- © 


tating manner, commend himself and his family to God; 
but trusting both to God’s promises and to the benefits 
already received, he casts his cares and his troubles into his 
heavenly Father’s bosom. We have declared before, what is 
the point aimed at in assigning these titles to God; in eall- 
ing God the God of his fathers Abraham and Isaac, and 
what the terms mean; namely, that since men are so far re- 
moved from God, that they cannot, by their own power, 
ascend to his throne, he himself comes down to the faithful. 
God in thus calling himself the God of Abraham and Isaae, 
graciously invites their son Jacob to himself: for, access to 


the God of his fathers was not difficult to the holy man, — 


Again, since the whole world had sunk under superstition, 
God would have himself to be distinguished from all idols, 





ft 


h 
r 


in order that he might retain an elect people in his own — 


covenant. Jacob, therefore, in expressly addressing God as 
the God of his fathers, places fully before himself the pro- 
mises given to him in their person, that he may not pray 
with a doubtful mind, but may securely rely on this stay, 
that the heir of the promised blessing will have God propi- 


tious towards him. And indeed we must seek the true rule | 


of prayer in the word of God, that we may not rashly break — 


CHAP. XXXII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 191 


through to Him, but may approach him in the manner in 
which he has revealed himself to us. This appears more 
clearly from the adjoining context, where Jacob, recalling 


_ the command and promise of God to memory, is supported 


i as by two pillars. Certainly the legitimate method of pray- 
ing is, that the faithful should answer to God who calls 
_ them; and thus there is such a mutual agreement between 


his word and their vows, that no sweeter and more harmonious 
' symphony can be imagined. “ O Lord,” he says, “ I return 


a at thy command: thou also didst promise protection to me 
returning ; it is therefore right that thou shouldest become 


4 the guide of my journey.” This isa holy boldness, when, 
| having discharged our duty according to God’s calling, we 
_ familiarly ask of him whatsoever he has promised; since 


J he, by binding himself gratuitously to us, becomes in a sense 
_ voluntarily our debtor. But whoever, relying on no com- 
mand or promise of God, offers his prayers, does nothing but 


cast vain and empty words into the air. This passage gives 


f ; stronger confirmation to what has been said before, that 
Jacob did not falsely pretend to his wives, that God had 


. commanded him to return. For if he had then spoken false- 





ly, no ground of hope would now be left to him. But he 
_ does not scruple to approach the heavenly tribunal with this 
- confidence, that he shall be protected by the hand of God, 
_ under whose auspices he had ventured to return to the land 
_ of Canaan. 

10. I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies.’ Al- 
though this expression sounds harsh to Latin ears, the sense 
isnot obscure. Jacob confesses, that greater mercies of God 
_ had been heaped upon him than he had dared to hope for: 
_ and therefore, far be it from him that he should plead any- 
thing of dignity or merit, for the purpose of obtaining what 
he asks. He therefore says, that he is less than God’s 
favours ; because he felt himself to be unworthy of those 
excellent gifts which the Lord had so’ liberally bestowed 
upon him. Moreover, that the design of the holy patriarch 
may more clearly appear, the craft of Satan is to be observed: 


1 Minor sum ecunctis misericordiis : “ I am less than all the mercies.” — 
Margin of English Translation. 





192 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXXII. 


for, in order to deter us from praying, through a sense of our 
unworthiness, he would suggest to us this thought, “ Who art 
thou that thou shouldst dare to enter into the presence of 
God?’ Jacob early anticipates this objection, in declaring 
beforehand that he is unworthy of God’s former gifts, and 
at the same time acknowledges that God is not like men, in 
ever becoming weary to continue and increase his acts of 
kindness. Meanwhile, Jacob collects materials for confidence 
from the fact, that he has so often found God benignant to- 
wards him. Therefore, he had a double end in view ; first, 
because he wished to counteract the distrust which might 
steal upon him in consequence of the magnitude of God’s 
gifts ; and then, he turns those gifts to a different purpose, 
to assure himself that God would be the same to him that 
he had hitherto been. He’ uses two words, mercies and 
truth, to show that God is inclined by his mere goodness to 
benefit us; and in this way proves his own faithfulness. 
This combination of merey with truth frequently occurs in 
the Scriptures, to teach us that all good things flow to -us 
through the gratuitous favour of God; but that we are 
made capable of receiving them, when by faith we embrace 
his promises. | 

For with my staff’ Jacob does not enumerate separately 
the mercies of God, but under one species comprises the 
rest; namely, that whereas he had passed over Jordan, a 
poor and solitary traveller, he now returns rich, and re- 
plenished with abundance. The antithesis between a staff 
and two troops is to be noticed ; in which he compares his 
former solitude and poverty with his present affluence. 

11. Deliver me. After he has declared himself to be 
bound by so many of God’s benefits that he cannot boast of 
his own merits, and thus raised his mind to higher expecta- - 
tion, he now mentions his own necessity, as if he would 
say, “O Lord, unless thou choosest to reduce so many ex- 
cellent gifts to nothing, now is the time for thee to succour 
me, and to avert the destruction which, through my brother, 
is suspended over'me.” But having thus expressed his fear, 
he adds a clause concerning the blessing promised him, 

' That is, “ poor, naked, and weak.”—Rivet. in Gen., p. 676. 


7 aa 

































CHAP. XXXII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 193 


that he may confirm himself in the promises made to him. 
lo slay the mother with the children, I suppose to have been 
a proverbial saying among the Jews, which means to leave 
othing remaining. It is a metaphor taken from birds, 
tien hawks seize the young with their dams, and empty 
the whole nest." 
13. And took of that which came to his hand. 3 endea- 
youring to appease his brother by presents, he does not act 
i es as if he doubted whether he should be safe 
Baier the protection of God. This, indeed, is a fault too 
ommon among men, that when they have prayed to God, 
they turn themselves hither and thither, and contrive vain 
subterfuges for themselves: whereas the principal advantage 
of prayer is, to wait for the Lord in silence and quietness. 
But the design of the holy man was not to busy and to vex 
himself, as one discontented with the sole help of God. For 
ulthough he was certainly persuaded that to have God pro- 
pitious to him would alone be sufficient, yet he did not omit 
_ the use of the means which were in his power, while leaving 
' success in the hand of God. For though by prayer we cast 
our cares upon God, that we may have peaceful and tranquil 
minds; yet this security ought not to render us indolent. 
For the Lord will have all the aids which he affords us 
| applied to use. But the diligence of the pious differs greatly 
rom the restless activity of the world; because the world, 


i 


relying on its own industry, independently of the blessing of 
God, does not consider what is right or lawful; moreover it 
‘and more its own disquietude. The pious, however, hoping 
for the success of their labour, only from the mercy of God, 
i eat they may not bury the arid of God by their own torpor. 
Fhe same grace of God; and when nothing remains which 
1 Perhaps Calvin’s interpretation would appear more striking, had the 
Ps original been more literally rendered, “ the mother wpon the children,” 
by bird when seated on her young, or protecting them beneath her feathers. 
Ed. 
4 


is always in trepidation, and by its bustling, cidpacien more 
bes their minds in seeking out means, for this sole reason, 
When they have discharged their duty, they still depend on 
- they can attempt, they nevertheless are at’ rest. 
(0°32 by,) which would represent the hawk as pouncing upon the parent 
VOL. I. N 


— 


u 
4 



































194 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXXII, 


14. Two hundred she-goats. Hence we perceive the value 
which Jacob set upon the promise given to him, seeing he 
does not: refuse to make so great a sacrifice of his property. 
We know that those things which are obtained with great 
toil and trouble are the more highly esteemed. So that 
generally. they who are enriched by their own labour are 
proportionably sparing and tenacious. It was, however, no 
trivial diminution even of great wealth, to give forty cows, 
thirty camels with their young, twenty bulls, and as many 
asses with their foals, two hundred she-goats, and as many 
sheep, with twenty rams, and the same number of he-goats. 
But Jacob freely lays upon himself this tax, that he may 
obtain a safe return to his own country. Certainly it would 
not have been difficult to find some nook where he might 
live with his property entire: and an equally commodious 
habitation might have been found elsewhere. But, that he 
might not lose the benefit of the promise, he purchases, at 
so great a price, from his brother, a peaceable abode in the 
land of Canaan. Therefore should we be ashamed of our 
effeminacy and tardiness, who wickedly turn aside from 
the duty of our calling, as soon as any loss is to be sus- 
tained. With a clear and loud voice the Lord commands 
us to do what he pleases; but some, because they find it 
troublesome to take up their burdens, lie in idleness ; plea- 
sures also keep back some; riches or honours impede others ; 
finally, few follow God, because scarcely one in a hundred 
will bear to be losers. In putting a space between the mes- 
sengers, and in sending them at different times from each 
other, he does it to mitigate by degrees the ferocity of his 
brother: whence we infer again, that he was not so seized 
with fear, as to be unable prudently to order his affairs. 

22. And he rose up that night. After he has prayed to 
the Lord, and arranged his plans, he now takes confidence 
and meets the danger. By which example the faithful are” 
_ taught, that whenever any danger approaches, this order o 
proceeding is to be observed ; first, to resort directly to the 
Lord ; secondly, to apply to immediate use whatever means 
of help may offer themselves ; and thirdly, as persons pre- 
pared for any event, to proceed with intrepidity whitherso- 





 OHAP. XXXII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 195 


_ ever the Lord commands. So Jacob, that he might not fail 
_ in this particular, does not dread the passage which he per- 
 ceives to be full of hazard, but, as with closed eyes, pursues 
his course. Therefore, after his example, we must overcome 
anxiety in intricate affairs, lest we should be hindered or 
retarded in our duty. He remains alone,—having sent for- 
ward his wives and children,'’—not that he might himself 
escape if he heard of their destruction, but because solitude 
was more suitable for prayer. And there is no doubt that, 
fearing the extremity of his peril, he was completely carried 
away with the ardour of supplication to God. 

24. There wrestled a man with him.? Although this vision 
_ was particularly useful to Jacob himself, to teach him before- 
hand that many conflicts awaited him, and that he might 
_ certainly conclude that he should be the conqueror in them 
all ; there is yet not the least doubt that the Lord exhibited, 
in his person, a specimen of the temptations—common to all 
_ his people—which await them, and must be constantly sub- 
mitted to, in this transitory life. Wherefore it is right to 
keep in view this design of the vision, which is to represent 
all the servants of God in this world as wrestlers ; because 
the Lord exercises them with various kinds of conflicts. 
Moreover, it is not said that Satan, or any mortal man, 
wrestled with Jacob, but God himself: to teach us that our 
faith is tried by him; and whenever we are tempted, our 
business is truly with him, not only because we fight under 
his auspices, but because he, as an antagonist, descends into 
the arena to try our strength. This, though at first sight it 
seems absurd, experience and reason teaches us to be true. 
For as all prosperity flows from his goodness, so adversity is 
either the rod with which he corrects our sins, or the test of 
our faith and patience. And since there is no kind of 
temptation by which God: does not try his faithful people, 


1“ Over the brook Jabbok.” p32‘ is the proper name of a stream near 
Mount Gilead, on the northern border of the Ammonites, flowing into 
Jordan on the east, now called Wady Zurka, i.e., blue river. The name 
is alluded to in verse 25, as if it were from the root PAN, (Abak,) which 
in Niphal means to wrestle.—See Giesenius’ Lexicon. ‘The name is, 
therefore, here given proleptically.—£d. 

2 DIN’, yebek, from PAS, dust, because in wrestling the dust is raised.— 
Gesenius. 





196 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXII. 
the similitude is very suitable, which represents him as_ 
coming, hand to hand, to combat with them. Therefore, 
what was once exhibited under a visible form to our father — 
Jacob, is daily fulfilled in the individual members of the 
Church ; namely, that, in their temptations, it is necessary 
for them to wrestle with God. He is said, indeed, to tempt us — 
ina different manner from Satan; but because he alone is the ~ 
Author of our crosses and afflictions, and he alone creates 
light and darkness, (as is declared in Isaiah,) he is said to 
tempt us when he makes a trial of our faith. But the ques- 
tion now occurs, Who is able to stand against an Antagonist, 
at whose breath alone all flesh perishes and vanishes away, 
at whose look the mountains melt, at whose word or beck 
the whole world is shaken to pieces, and therefore to attempt 
the least contest with him would be insane temerity? But it 
is easy to untie the knot. For we do not fight against him, — 
except by his own power, and with his own weapons ; for hep 
having challenged us to this contest, at the same time fur-— 
nishes ug Sivith: means of resistance, so that he both fights 
against us and for us. In short, such is his apportioning of this — 
conflict, that, while he assails us with one hand, he defends 
us with the other; yea, inasmuch as he supplies us with 
more strength to resist than he employs in opposing us, we 
may truly and properly say, that he fights against us with 
his left hand, and for us with his right hand. For while he 
lightly opposes us, he supplies invincible strength whereby 
we overcome. It is true he remains at perfect unity with him-_ 
self: but the double method in which he deals with us cannot 
be otherwise expressed, than that in striking us with a 
human rod, he does not put forth his full strength in the 
temptation ; but that in granting the victory to our faith, he 
becomes in us stronger than the power by which he opposes us, 
And although these forms of expression are harsh, yet their 
harshness will be easily mitigated in practice. For if tempta-_ 
tions are contests, (and we know that they are not accidental, _ 
but are divinely appointed for us,) it follows hence, that_ 
God acts in the character of an antagonist, and on this the 
rest depends; namely, that in the temptation itself he ap- 
pears to be weak against us, that he may conquer in us, 





CHAP. XXXII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 197 


Some restrict this to one kind of temptation only, where 
- God openly and avowedly manifests himself as our adver- 
sary, as if armed for our destruction. And truly, I confess, 
that this differs from common conflicts, and requires, beyond 
all others, a rare, and even heroic strength. Yet I include 
_ willingly every kind of conflict in which God exercises the 
faithful: since in all they have God for an antagonist, al- 
though he may not openly proclaim himself hostile unto 
them. That Moses here calls him a man whom a little after 
he declares to have been God, is a sufficiently usual form of 
' speech. For since God appeared under the form of a man, 
the name is thence assumed ; just as, because of the visible 
' symbol, the Spirit is called a dove ; and, in turn, the name of 
the Spirit is transferred to the dove. That this disclosure 
was not sooner made to the holy man, I understand to be 
for this reason, because God had resolved to call him, as a 
‘soldier, robust and skilful in war, to more severe contests. 
For as raw recruits are spared, and young oxen are not im- 
mediately yoked to the plough ; so the Lord more gently 
exercises his own people, until, having gathered strength, 
‘they become more inured to toil. Jacob, therefore, hay- 
‘ing been accustomed to bear sufferings, is now led forth 
‘to real war. Perhaps also, the Lord had reference to the 
‘eonflict which was then approaching. But I think Jacob 
‘was admonished, at his very entrance on the promised land, 
that he was not there to expect a tranquil life for himself. 
For his return to his own country might seem to be a kind 
‘of release ; and thus Jacob, like a soldier who had kept his 
‘term of service, would have given himself up to repose. 
‘Wherefore it was highly necessary for him to be taught 
what his future condition should be. We, also, are to learn 
from him, that we must fight during the whole course of our 
life; lest any one, promising himself rest, should wilfully 
‘deceive himself. And this admonition is very needful for us ; 
for we see how prone we are to sloth. Whence it arises, that we 
‘Shall not only be thinking of a truce in perpetual war ; but also 
“of peace in the heat of the conflict, unless the Lord rouse us. 
_ 25. And when he saw that he prevailed not against -him. 
Here is described to us the victory of Jacob, which, however, 





























/ et Te or 























198 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXI. 


was not gained without a wound. In saying that the wrest- 
ling angel, or God, wished to retire from the contest, because 
he saw he should not prevail, Moses speaks after the manne 
of men. For we know that God, when he descends fro 
his majesty to us, is wont to transfer the properties of humar 
nature to himself. The Lord knew with certainty the even 
of the contest, before he came down to engage in it; he hac 
even already determined what he would do: but his know 
ledge is here put for the experience of the thing itself. 

He touched the hollow of his thigh. Though Jacob gain 
the victory ; yet the angel strikes him on the thigh, from 
which cause he was lame even to the end of his life. Ané 
although the vision was by night, yet the Lord designed 
this mark of it to continue through all his days, that i 
might thence appear not to have been a vain dream. More 
over, by this sign it is made manifest to all the faithful 
that they can come forth conquerors in their temptations 
only by being injured and wounded in the conflict. For we 
know that the strength of God is made perfect in our weak 
ness, in order that our exaltation may be joined with humi 
lity; for if our own strength remained entire, and there wer 
no injury or dislocation produced, immediately the flesh woul 
become haughty, and we should forget that we had conquere 
by the help of God. But the wound received, and the weak 
ness which follows it, compel us to be modest. 

26. Let me go. God concedes the praise of victory to hi 
servant, and is ready to depart, as if unequal to him i 
strength: not because a truce was needed by him, to whor 
it belongs to grant a truce or peace whenever he pleases 
but that Jacob might rejoice over the grace afforded to hin 
A wonderful method of triumphing; where the Lord, t 
whose power all praise is entirely due, yet chooses tha 
feeble man shall excel as a conqueror, and thus raises hi 
on high with special eulogy. At the same time he commend 
the invincible perseverance of Jacob, who, having endured 
long and severe conflict, still strenuously maintains his grount 
And certainly we adopt a proper mode of contending, when ¥ 
never grow weary, till the Lord recedes of his own accor 
We are, indeed, permitted to ask him to consider our infi 





CHAP. XXXII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 199 


mity, and, according to his paternal indulgence, to spare the 
tender and the weak: we may even groan under our bur- 
den, and desire the termination of our contests ; nevertheless, 
in the meantime, we must beware lest our minds should be- 
come relaxed or faint ; and rather endeavour, with collected 
mind and strength, to persist unwearied in the conflict. 
The reason which the angel assigns, namely, that the day 
breaketh, is to this effect, that Jacob may know that he has 
been divinely taught by the nocturnal vision." 

I will not let thee go, except. Hence it appears, that at 
length the holy man knew his antagonist ; for this prayer, 
in which he asks to be blessed, is no common prayer. The 
inferior is blessed by the greater ; and therefore it is the pro- 
perty of God alone to bless us. Truly the father of Jacob did 
not otherwise bless him, than by divine command, as one who 
represented the person of God. A similar office also was im- 
posed on the priests under the law, that, as ministers and 
expositors of divine grace, they might bless the people. 
Jacob knew, then, that the combatant with whom he had 
wrestled was God ; because he desires a blessing from him, 
which it was not lawful simply to ask from mortal man. So, 
in my judgment, ought the place in Hosea (chap. xii. 3) to 
be understood, “ Jacob prevailed over the angel, and was 
strengthened ; he wept, and made supplication to him.” For 
the Prophet means, that after Jacob had come off conqueror, 
he was yet a suppliant before God, and prayed with tears. 
Moreover, this passage teaches us always to expect the bless- 
ing of God, although we may have experienced his presence 
to be harsh and grievous, even to the disjointing of our mem- 
bers. For it is far better for the sons of God to be blessed, 
though mutilated and half destroyed, than to desire that 
peace in which they shall fall asleep, or than they should 
withdraw themselves from the presence of God, so as to 





1 There might be other reasons why the angel should say, “ Let me go, 
for the day breaketh.” The vision was intended for Jacob alone; had the 
struggle been continued till daylight, others would have witnessed it, and 
a vain curiosity would have been excited, which God did not design to 
gratify. The break of day, also, would be the time when Jacob himself 
must set about the work of conducting his family; and, therefore, on his 
account, it was important that no farther delay should take place.—£d. 





- 


200 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXII. _ 


turn away from his command, that they may riot with the 
wicked. ao Te 
28. Thy name shall be called no more Jacob. Jacob, as z 
we have seen, received his name from his mother’s womb, 
because he had seized the heel of his brother’s foot, and 
had attempted to hold him back. God now gives him a new 
and more honourable name ; not that he may entirely abolish 
the other, which was a token of memorable grace, but that 
he may testify a still higher progress of his grace. There- — 
fore, of the two names the second is preferred to the former, 
as being more honourable, The name is derived from 71, 
or WW, which signifies to rule, as if he were called a Prince 
of God: for I have said, alittle before, that God had transfer- 
red the praise of his own strength to Jacob, for the purpose 
of triumphing in his person, The explanation of the name ~ 
which is immediately annexed, is thus given literally by Moses, — 
‘‘ Because thou hast ruled with, or, towards God and towards 
man, and shalt prevail.” Yet the sense seenis to be faithfully 
rendered by Jerome :* but if Jacob acted thus heroically with — 
God, much more should he prove superior to men; for cer- _ 
tainly it was the purpose of God to send forth his servant to — 
various combats, inspired with the confidence resulting from ! 
so great a victory, lest he should afterwards become vacillat- _ 
ing. For he does not merely impose a name, as men are ac- | 
. 
| 





customed to do, but with the name he gives the thing itself 
which the name implies, that the event may correspond with it. 
_ 29. Tell me, I pray thee, thy name. This seems opposed 
to what is declared above ; for I have lately said, that when 
Jacob sought a blessing, it was a token of his submission. 
Why, therefore, as if he were of doubtful mind, does he now 
inquire the name of him whom he had before acknowledged 
to be God? But the solution of the question is easy; for, — 
though Jacob does acknowledge God, yet, not content with , 
an obscure and slight knowledge, he wishes to ascend higher. — 
And it is not to be wondered at, that the holy man, to whom | 
God had manifested himself under so many veils and cover- 

ings, that he had not yet obtained any clear knowledge 


' Quoniam si contra Deum fortis fuisti, quanto magis contra homines 
prevalebis? If thou hast been so strong against God, how much more 
shalt thou prevail against men ?—Vudgate. 








CHAP, XXXII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 201 


of him, should break forth in this wish; nay, it is certain 
that all the saints, under the law, were inflamed with this 
_ desire. Such a prayer: also of Manoah, is read in the book 
_ of Judges, (xiii. 18,) to which the answer from God is added, 
except that there, the Lord pronounces his name to be won- 
derful and secret, in order that Manoah may not proceed 
further. The sum therefore is this, that though Jacob’s wish 
was pious, the Lord does not grant it, because the time of 
full revelation was not yet completed: for the fathers, in 
the beginning, were required to walk in the twilight of 
morning ; and the Lord manifested himself to them, by de- 
grees, until, at length, Christ the Sun of Righteousness arose, in 
_ whom perfect brightness shines forth. This is the reason why 
_ he rendered himself more conspicuous to Moses, who never- 
theless was only permitted to behold his glory from behind : 
yet because he occupied an intermediate place between pa- 
triarchs and apostles, he is said, in comparison with them, 
to have seen, face to face, the God who had been hidden from 
the fathers. But now, since God has approached more nearly 
unto us, our ingratitude is most impious and detestable, if 
we do not run to meet him with ardent desire to obtain such 
great grace; as also Peter admonishes us in the first chapter 
of his first epistle. (Ver. 12, 13.) It is to be observed, that 
although Jacob piously desires to know God more fully, yet, 
because he is carried beyond the bounds prescribed to the 
age in which he lived, he suffers a repulse: for the Lord, cut- 
ting short his wish, commands him to rest contented with 
his own blessing. But if that measure of illumination which 
we have received, was denied to the holy man, how intolerable 
_ will be our curiosity, if it breaks forth beyond the extended 
limit now prescribed by God. 

30. And Jacob called the name of the place* The grati- 
tude of our father Jacob is again commended, because he 


- took diligent care that the memory of God’s grace should 





never perish. He therefore leaves a monument to posterity, 

from which they might know that God had appeared there ; 

for this was not a private vision, but had reference to the 

whole Church. Moreover, Jacob not only declares that he 
, Syr9p, (Peniel,) the face of God. 


202 COMMENTARY UPON OHAP. XXXII. 


has seen the face of God, but also gives thanks that he has 
been snatched from death. This language-frequently occurs — 
in the Scriptures, and was common among the ancient people; 
and not without reason; for, if the earth trembles at the © 
presence of God, if the mountains melt, if darkness over- 
spreads the heavens, what must happen to miserable men ! 
Nay, since the immense majesty of God cannot be compre- 
hended even by angels, but rather absorbs them ; were his 
glory to shine on us it would destroy us, and reduce us 
to nothing, unless he sustained and protected us. So 
long as we do not perceive God to be present, we proudly — 
please ourselves ; and this is the imaginary life which the 
flesh foolishly arrogates to itself when it inclines towards the 
earth. But the faithful, when God reveals himself to them, 
feel themselves to be more evanescent than any smoke. 
Finally ; would we bring down the pride of the flesh, we 
must draw near to God. So Jacob confesses that, by the spe- 
cial indulgence of God, he had been rescued from destruction 
when he saw God. It may however be asked, “ Why, when 
he had obtained so slight a taste only of God’s glory, he 
should boast that he had seen him, face to face?” I answer, 
it is in no way absurd that Jacob highly celebrates this vision 
above all others, in which the Lord had not so plainly ap- 
peared unto him ; and yet, if it be compared with the splen- — 
dour of the gospel, or even of the law, it will appear like 
sparks, or obscure rays. The simple meaning then is, that 
he saw God in an unwonted and extraordinary manner. 
Now, if Jacob so greatly exults and congratulates himself in 
that slender measure of knowledge ; what ought we to do at 
this day, to whom Christ, the living image of God, is evi- 
dently set before our eyes in the mirror of the gospel! Let 
us therefore learn to open our eyes, lest we be blind at noon- 
day, as Paul exhorts us in the second epistle to the-Corinth- 
ians, the third and fourth chapters. 

31. And he halted upon his thigh. It is probable, and it 
may be gathered even from the words of Moses, that this 
halting was without the sense of pain, in order that the 
miracle might be the more evident. For God, in the flesh 
of his servant, has exhibited a spectacle to all ages, from 








CHAP. XXXIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 203 
which the faithful may perceive that no one is such a power- 
ful combatant as not to carry away some wound after a 
spiritual conflict, for infirmity ever cleaves to all, that no 
one may be pleased with himself above measure. Whereas 
Moses relates that the Jews abstained from the shrunken 
sinew, or that part of the thigh in which it was placed: this 
was not done out of superstition.’ For that age, as we know, 
was the infancy of the Church; wherefore the Lord retained 
the faithful, who then lived, under the teaching of the school- 
master. And now, though, since the coming of Christ, our 
condition is more free; the memory of the fact ought to be 
retained among us, that God disciplined his people of old 
by external ceremonies. 


CHAPTER XXXIITI. 


1. AnD Jacob lifted up his eyes, 
and looked, and, behold, Esau came, 
and with him four hundred men. 
And he divided the children unto 
Leah, and unto Rachel, and unto the 
two handmaids. 

2. And he put the handmaids and 
their children foremost, and Leah 
and her children after, and Rachel 
and Joseph hindermost. 

3. And he passed over before them, 
and bowed himself to the ground 
seven times, until he came near to 
his brother. 

4. And Esau ran to meet him, and 
embraced him, and fell on his neck, 
and kissed him: and they wept. 


5. And he lifted up his eyes, and 
saw the women and the children, and 
said, Who are those with thee? And 
he said, The children which God hath 
graciously given thy servant. 


1. Levavit autem Iahacob oculos 
suos, et vidit, et ecce Esau veniebat, 
et cum eo erant, quadringenti viri: 
et divisit liberos cum Leah et cum 
Rachel, et cum ambabus ancillis. 


2. Tune posuit ancillas et liberos 
earum prius, et Leah et liberos ejus 
posteriores, Rachel autem et Ioseph 
postremos. 

3. Et ipse transivit ante eos, et 
incurvavit se super terram septem 
vicibus, donee appropinquaret fratri 
suo. 

4, Cucurrit vero Esau in occursum 
ejus, et complexus est eum, et jacta- 
vit se super collum ejus, et osculatus 
est eum ; et fleverunt. 

5. Postea levavit oculos suos, et 
vidit uxores et liberos, et dixit, Qui 
isti tibi? Et dixit, Liberi swnt, quos 
donavit Deus servo tuo. 


! The sinew which shrank; “that sinew or tendon which fastens the 
hip-bone in its socket, which comprehends the flesh of that muscle which 


is connected to it. 


masters tell us.”—Patrick. See also Ainsworth on this passage. 


He that ate of this was to be beaten, as the Jewish 


Pro- 


fessor Bush says, “ At present the Jews do not know what sinew this was, 
nor even which thigh it was in; and the effect of this uncertainty is, that 
they judge it necessary to abstain from both the hind quarters, lest they 
should inadvertently eat the interdicted sinew. ‘They sell those parts to 
Christians.” — Ed. . 


204 


6. Then the handmaidens came 
near, they and their children, and 
they bowed themselves : 

7. And Leah also with her chil- 
dren came near, and bowed them- 
selves: and after came Joseph near 
and Rachel, and they bowed them- 
selves. 

8. And he said, What meanest thou 
by all this drove which I met? And 
he said, These are to find grace in the 
sight of my lord. 

9. And Esau said, I have enough, 
my brother; keep that thou hast unto 
thyself. 

10. And Jacob said, Nay, I pray 
thee, if now I have found grace in 
thy sight, then receive my present at 
my hand; for therefore I have seen 
thy face, as though I had seen the 


face of God, and thou wast pleased — 


with me. 

11. Take, I pray thee, my blessing 
that is brought to thee; because God 
hath dealt graciously with me, and 
because I have enough. And he 
urged him, and he took i¢. 

12. And he said, Let us take our 
journey, and let us go, and [ will go 
before thee. 

13. And he said unto him, My lord 
knoweth that the children are tender, 
and the flocks and herds with young 
are with me; and if men should over- 
— them one day, all the flock will 

ie. 

14. Let my lord, I pray thee, pass 
over before his servant; and I will 
lead on softly, according as the cattle 
that goeth before me and the chil- 
dren be able to endure, until I come 
unto my lord unto Seir. 

15. And Esau said, Let me now 
leave with thee some of the folk that 
are with me. And he said, What 
needeth it? let me find grace in the 
sight of my lord. 

_ 16. So Esau returned that day on 
his way unto Seir. 

17. And Jacob journeyed to Suc- 
coth, and built him an house, and 
made booths for his cattle: therefore 
thename ofthe placeis called Suceoth. 

18. And Jacob came to Shalem, a 


COMMENTARY UPON 





CHAP. XXXIII. 


6. Et appropinquaverunt ancillee 
ipsee, et liberi earum, et incurvaye-_ 
runt se. ; 

7. Et appropinquavit etiam Leah, © 
et liberi ejus, et incurvaverunt se: 
et subinde appropinquavit Ioseph et 
Rachel, et incurvaverunt se. 


8. Et dixit, Qui isti? tuane omnis 
turma illa, quam obviam habui? Et _ 
dixit, Ut invenirem gratiam in oculis 
domini mei. 

9. Et dixit Esau, Est mihi mul- 
tum, frater mi, sit tuum quod tuum 
est. 

10. Ait autem Iahacob, Ne queeso: 
si nune inveni gratiam in oculis tuis, 
accipe munus meum e manu méa: 
quia idcirco vidi faciem tuam, acsi 
viderem faciem Angeli: et propitius 
eris erga me. 


11. Cape queso benedictionem 
meam, quee allata est tibi: quia do- 
navit mihi Deus, et quia sunt mihi 
omnia. Et coegit eum, et accepit. 


12. Tune dixit, Proficiscamur, et 
ambulemus, et ambulabo ante te. 


13. Sed dixit ad eum, Dominus 


meus scit, quod pueri teneri sunt: et 


pecudes, et boves foetze sunt mihi: 
et si pulsaverint eas die una, mori- 
entur omnes pecudes, 


14. Transeat queeso dominus meus 
ante servum suum, et ego ducam me 
pedetentim ad pedem gregis, qui est 
ante me, et ad pedem puerorum, 
donee veniam ad dominum meum in 
Sehir. ‘ 

15. Et dixit Esau, Stare faciam 
nune tecum de populo, qui est me- 
cum. Et dixit, Utquid hoc? inve- 
niam gratiam in oculis domini mei. 


16. Reversus est itaque in die ipsa 
Esau per viam suam in Sehir. 

17. Iahacob autem profectus est 
in Suchoth, et edificavit sibi domum, 
et pecudibus suis fecit tabernacula : 
ideireo vocavit nomen loci Suchoth. 

{8. Et venit Iahacob incolumis in 








CHAP, XXXIII, THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 205 


city of Shechem, which is in the land civitatem Sechem, qui erat in terra 


_ of Canaan, when he came from Pa- Chenaan, quando yenit ipse de Padan 
_ dan-aram, and pitched his tent before Aram, et mansit ante urbem. 


the city. 

19. And he bought a parcel of a 19. Et emit partem agri, in quo 
field, where he had spread his tent, tetendit tabernaculum suum, de 
at the hand of the childrenof Hamor; manu filioram Hamor patris Sechem, 
Shechem’s father, for an hundred eentum nummis. 
pieces of money. 

20. And he erected there an altar, 20. Et statuit ibi altare: et voca- 


and called it El-elohe-Israel. vit illud, Fortis Deus Israel. 


1. And Jacob lifted up his eyes. We have said how greatly 
Jacob feared for himself from his brother; but now when 
Esau himself approaches, his terror is not only renewed, but 
increased. For although he goes forth like a courageous 
and spirited combatant to this coutest, he is still not exempt 
from a sense of danger; whence it follows, that he is not 
free, either from anxiety or fear. For his cruel brother had 
still the same cause of hatred against him as before. And 
it was not probable, that, after he had left his father’s house, 
and had been living as he pleased, he had become more mild. 
Therefore, as in a doubtful affair, and one of great danger, 
Jacob placed his wives and children in the order described ; 
that, if Esau should attempt anything hostile, the whole seed 
might not perish, but part might have time for flight. The 
only thing which appears to be done by him out of order is, 
that he prefers Rachel and her son Joseph to all the rest ; 
whereas the substance of the benediction is really in Judah. 


But his excuse in reference to Judah is, that the oracle had 


not yet been revealed; nor, in fact, was made known till 
shortly before his death, in order that he might become at 
once its witness and its herald. Meanwhile, it is not to be 
denied, that he was excessively indulgent to Rachel. It is, 
indeed, a proof of distinguished courage, that, from a desire 
to preserve a part of his seed, he precedes his companies, and 
offers himself as a victim, if necessity demanded it. For there 
is no doubt that the promise of God was his authority and his 
guide in this design ; nor would he have been able, unless sus- 
tained by the confident expectation of celestial life, thus brave- 
ly to meet death. It happens, indeed, sometimes, that a father, 
regardless of himself, will expose his life to danger for his 


BSc. 


206 * COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXTIIT. 


children: but holy Jacob’s reason was different ; for the pro- 
mise of God was so deeply fixed in his mind, that he, dis- 
regarding the earth, looked up towards heaven. But while 
he follows the word of God, yet by the affection of the flesh, 
he is slightly drawn aside from the right way. For the faith of 
the holy fathers was not so pure, in all respects, but that they 
were liable to swerve to one side or the other. Nevertheless, 
the Spirit always so far prevailed, that the infirmity of the 
flesh might not divert them from their aim, but that they 
might hold on their course. So much the more ought every 
one of us to be suspicious of himself, lest he should deem 
himself perfectly pure, because he intends to act rightly ; 
for the flesh ever mingles itself with our holy purpose, and 
many faults and corruptions steal in upon us. But God 
deals kindly with us, and does not impute faults of this kind 
to us. ‘ 
3. And bowed himself to the ground seven tumes. This, in- 
deed, he might do for the sake of giving honour: for we 
know that the people of the east are addicted to far more 
ceremonies than are in use with us. To me, however, it 
seems more probable, that Jacob did not pay this honour 
simply to his brother, but that he worshipped God, partly to 
give him thanks, and partly to implore him to render his bro- 
ther propitious ; for he is said to have bowed down seven times 
before he approached his brother. Therefore, before he came 
in sight of his brother, he had already given the token of 
reverence or worship. Hence we may conjecture, as I have 
said, that this homage was paid to God and not to man: yet 
_ this is not at variance with the fact, that he also approached 
as a suppliant, for the purpose of assuaging his brother's 
ferocity by his humiliation.’ If any one object, that in this 


' Rivetus judiciously observes on this passage: “ There are those who 
think that by this ceremony Jacob worshipped God ; but by what argu- 
ment they prove this I do not see; for whatever precedes or follows indi- 
cates that he wished to show reverence to his brother; and for this reason, 
he went before his family; so also the handmaidens and their sons bowed 
themselves; likewise Leah and her sons, and lastly, Rachel with Joseph ; 
in each case the same word is used, which the Vulgate renders ‘ adored.’ 
This verse also proves the same thing; for after he saw his brother ap- 
proaching, he bowed seven times, till his brother drew near.... . This, 
therefore, was civil reverence, (reverentia civilis,) which did not derogate 


. 
| 


CHAP. XXXIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 207 


manner he depreciated his right of primogeniture ; the an- 


_ swer is easy, that the holy man, by the eyes of faith, was 


looking higher; for he knew that the effect. of the benedic- 


_ tion was deferred to its proper season, and was, therefore, now 
_ like the decaying seed under the earth. Therefore, although 


he was despoiled of his patrimony, and lay contemptible at 
his brother’s feet ; yet since he knew that his birthright was 


_ secured to him, he was contented with this latent right, count- 
_ ed honours and riches as nothing, and did not shrink from 
_ being regarded as an inferior in the presence of his brother. 


4. And Hsau ran to meet him. That Esau meets his bro- 
ther with unexpected benevolence and kindness, is the effect 
of the special favour of God. Therefore, by this method, 
God proved that he has the hearts of men in his hand, to 
soften their hardness, and to mitigate their cruelty as often 
as he pleases: in short, that he tames them as wild beasts 
are wont to be tamed; and then, that he hearkened to the 
prayers of his servant Jacob. Wherefore, if at any time the 


_ threats of enemies alarm us, let us learn to resort to this 


ee eer 


sacred anchor. God, indeed, works in various ways, and 
does not always incline cruel minds to humanity; but, while 
they rage, he restrains them from doing harm by his own 
power: but if it is right, he can as easily render them pla- 
cable towards us; and we here see that Esau became so to- 
wards his brother Jacob. It is also possible, that even while 


. cruelty was pent up within, the feeling of humanity may 


have had a temporary ascendency. And as we see that the 
Egyptians were constrained, for a moment, to the exercise of 
humanity, although they were rendered nothing better than 
before, as their madness, which soon afterwards broke out, 
bears witness: so it is credible that the malice of Esau was 
now under constraint ; and not only so, but that his mind 
was divinely moved to put on fraternal affection. For 
even in the reprobate, God’s established order of nature 


’ prevails, not indeed in an even tenor, but as far as he re- 


strains them, to the end that they may not mingle all 


from the spiritual right and prerogative of the covenant entered into with 
Jehovah.” This account seems much more probable than that given by 
Calvini— Fd. 





208 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXIIT. 


things in one common slaughter. And this is most neces-_ 
sary for the preservation of the human race. For few are so 
governed by the spirit of adoption, as sincerely to cultivate 
mutual charity among themselves, as brethren. Therefore, 
that men spare each other, and do not furiously rush on each 
other’s destruction, arises from no other cause than the secret 
providence of God, which watches for the protection of man- 
kind. But to God the life of his own faithful people is still 
more precious, so that he vouchsafes to them peculiar care. 
Wherefore it is no wonder, that for the sake of his servant 
Jacob, he should have composed the fierce mind of Esau to 
gentleness. 

5. And he lifted up his eyes. Moses relates the conversa- 
tion held between the brothers. And as Esau had testified his 
fraternal affection by tears and embraces, there is no doubt 
that he inquires after the children in a spirit of congratula- 
tion. The answer of Jacob breathes piety as well as modesty ; 
for when he replies, that his numerous seed had been given 
him by God, he acknowledges and confesses that children 
are not so produced by nature as to subvert the truth of the 
declaration, that “the fruit of the womb is a reward and gift 
of God.” And truly, since the fecundity of brute animals is 
the gift of God, how much more is this the case with men, 
who are created after his own image. Let parents then 
learn to consider, and to celebrate the singular kindness of 
God, in their offspring. It is the language of modesty, when 
Jacob calls himself the servant of his brother. Here again 
it is proper to recall to memory what I have lately touched 
upon, that the holy man caught at nothing either of earthly 
advantage or honour in the birthright; because the hidden 
grace of God was abundantly sufficient for him, until the 
appointed time of manifestation. And it becomes us also, 
according to his example, while we sojourn in this world, to 
depend upon the word of the Lord ; that we may not deem it 
wearisome, to be held wrapped in the shadow of death, until 
our real life be manifested. For although apparently our 
condition is miserable and accursed, yet the Lord blesses us 
with his word; and, on this account only, pronounces us 
happy, because he owns us as sons. 
























CHAP. XXXIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 209 


6. Then the handmaidens came near. The wives of Jacob, 
having left their country, had come as exiles into a distant 
land. Now, at their first entrance, the terror of death meets 
them ; and when they prostrate themselves in the presence 
of Esau, they do not know whether they are not doing homage 
to their executioner. This trial was very severe to them, 
and grievously tormented the mind of the holy man: but 
it was right that his obedience should be thus tried, that he 
might become an example to us all. Moreover, the Holy 
Spirit here places a mirror before us, in which we may con- 
template the state of the Church as it appears in the world. 
For though many tokens of the divine favour are manifest 
in the family of Jacob; nevertheless we perceive no dignity 
in him while lying with unmerited contempt in the presence 
of a profane man. Jacob also himself thinks that he is well 
treated, if he may be permitted by his brother, as a matter 
of favour, to dwell in the land of which he was the heir and 
lord. Therefore let us bear it patiently, if, at this day also, 
the glory of the Church, being covered with a sordid veil, is 
an object of derision to the wicked. 
8. What meanest thow by all this drove ? ' He does not in- 
quire as if he were altogether ignorant ; seeing he had heard 
from the servants, that oxen and camels and asses and other 
‘cattle were sent him as a present; but for the purpose of 
refusing the gift offered to him: for when anything does not 
please us, we are wont to make inquiry as concerning a thing 
unknown to us. Jacob, however, is urgent ; nor does he cease 
to ask, till he induces his brother to receive the gift : for this 
"was asa pledge of reconciliation. Besides, for the purpose of 
persuading his brother, he declares, that it would be taken asa 
great kindness not to refuse what was given. For we do not 
willingly receive anything but what we certainly know to be 
offered to us freely and with a ready mind. And because it 
is not possible that we should willingly honour any but those 
we love, Jacob says that he rejoiced in the sight of his 
i brother as if he had seen God or an angel: by which words 
he means, not only that he truly loved his brother, but also 
that he held him in esteem. But it may seem, that he does 
_ wrong to God, in comparing Him with a reprobate man; and 
VOL. IT. 0 





210 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXIiL, 


that he speaks falsely, because had the choice been given 
him, he would have desired nothing more earnestly than to 
avoid this meeting with his brother. Both these knots are 
easily untied. It is an accustomed form of speaking among | 
the Hebrews, to call whatever is excellent, divine. And cer- 
tainly Esau being thus changed, was no obscure figure of the 
favour of God: so that Jacob might properly say, that he 
had been exhilarated by that friendly and fraternal reception, 
as if he had seen God or an angel; that is, as if God had 
given some sign of his presence. And, indeed, he does not 
speak feignedly, nor pretend something different from what 
he has in his mind. For, being himself perfectly free from 
all hatred, it was his chief wish, to discharge whatever duty 
he could towards his brother ; provided that Esau, in return, 
would show himself a brother to him. 

10. Receive my present at my hand. This noun may be 
taken passively as well as actively. If understood actively, 
the sense will be, “ Accept the present by which I desire to 
testify my goodwill towards thee.” If understood passively, 
it may be referred to God, as if Jacob had said, “Those 
things which the Lord has bestowed upon me by his grace, 
I liberally impart to thee, that thou mayest be, in some mea- 
sure, a par taker with me of that divine blessing which I have 
received.” But not to insist upona word, J acob immediately 
afterwards clearly avows that whatever he possesses, is not 
the fruit of his labour or industry, but has been received by 
him through the grace of God, and by this reasoning he at- 
tempts to induce his brother to accept the gift; as if he had 
said, “'The-Lord has poured upon me an abundance, of which 
some part, without any loss to me, may overflow to thee.” 
And though Jacob thus speaks under the impulse of present 
circumstances, he yet makes an ingenuous confession by which 
he celebrates the grace of God. Nearly the same words are 
on the tongues of all; but there are few who truly ascribe 
to God what they possess: the greater part sacrifice to their 
own industry. Scarcely one in a hundred is convinced, that 
whatever is good flows from-the gratuitous favour of God ; 
and yet by nature this sense is engraven upon our minds, 
but we obliterate it by our ingratitude. It has appeared 





























SHAP. XXXIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 211 


already, how laborious was the life of Jacob: nevertheless, 
though he had suffered the greatest annoyances, he celebrates 
only the mercy of God. . 

12. Let us take our journey. Although Esau was inclined 
to benevolence, Jacob still distrusts him: not that he fears 
to be ensnared, or that he suspects perfidy to lie hidden under 
the garb of friendship ; but that he cautiously avoids new oc- 
easions of offence: for a proud and ferocious man might easily 
be exasperated again by light causes. Now, though just reason 
for fear was not wanting to the holy man, yet I dare not deny 
that his anxiety was excessive. He suspected the liberality 
of Esau ; but did he not know that a God was standing be- 
tween them, who, as he was convinced by clear and undoubted 
experience, watched for his salvation? For, whence such an 
incredible change of mind in Esau, unless he had been divinely 
transformed from a wolf intoa lamb? Let us then learn, from 
this example, to restrain our anxieties, lest when God has 
provided for us, we tremble, as in an affair of doubt. 

13. My lord knoweth. The things which Jacob alleges, as 
srounds of excuse, are true ; nevertheless he introduces them 
under false pretexts; except, perhaps, as regards the state- 
ment, that he was unwilling to be burdensome and trouble- 
some to his brother. But since he afterwards turns his 
journey in another direction, it appears that he feigned 
“something foreign to what was really in his mind. He says 
that he brings with him many encumbrances, and -therefore 
requests his brother to precede him. “J will follow (he says) 
‘at the feet of the children ; that is, I will proceed gently as 
‘the pace of the children will bear ; and thus I will follow at 
/my leisure, until I come to thee in Mount Seir.” In these 
) words he promises what he was not intending to do; for, 
‘leaving his brother, he journeyed to a different place.’ But 


i 
j 
i 
} 
; 
7 
4 


vg 

2 Peter Martyr inclines to the opinion of Calvin, though he expresses 
| himself with greater caution. There appears no reason to doubt that 
Jacob said what he meant. It is true he might have other reasons be- 
Sides those he gave, for not accompanying his brother; reasons sufficient 
j to deter a pious mind from too close and frequent intercourse with persons 
| uninfluenced by true religion. But it is by no means certain that Jacob 
| did not go to Seir; though he would probably go unaccompanied by his 
' Wives and children, his flocks and herds. ‘The omission of the sacred 
‘Writers to mention it, affords no proof that he did not take the journey. 








212 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXIII. 
truth is so precious to God, that he will not allow us to lie 
or deceive, even when no injury follows. Wherefore, we must 
take care, when any fear of danger oceupies our minds, that 
we do not turn aside to these subterfuges. ar 

17. And Jacob jowrneyed to Succoth. In the word Succoth, 
as Moses shortly afterwards shows, there is a prolepsis. It 
is probable that Jacob rested there for some days, that he 
might refresh his family and his flock after the toil of a long 
journey ; for he had found no quiet resting-place till he came 
thither. And therefore he gave to that place the name of 
Succoth, or “ Tents,” because he had not dared firmly to plant 
his foot elsewhere. For though he had pitched tents in many 
other places; yet on this alone he fixes the memorial of divine 
grace, because now at length it was granted to him that he 
might remain in some abode. But since it was not commo- 
dious as a dwelling-place, Jacob proceeded farther till he 
came to Sichem. Now, whereas the city has its recent name 
from the son of Hamor, its former name is also mentioned, 
(ver. 18 ;) for I agree with the interpreters who think Salem 
to be a proper name. Although I do not contend, if any one 
prefers a different interpretation ; namely, that Jacob came 
in safety to Sichem.* But though this city may have been 
called Salem, we must nevertheless observe, that it was di 
ferent from the city afterwards called Jerusalem; as there were 
also two cities which bore the name of Succoth. As respects 
the subject in hand, the purchase of land which Moses records 
in the nineteenth verse, may seem to have been absurd. Fo 
Abraham would buy nothing all his life but a sepulchre ; an¢ 
Isaac his son, waiving all immediate possession of lands, wa 
contented with that paternal inheritance ; for God had con 
stituted them lords and heirs of the land, with this condition 
that they should be strangers in it unto death. Jacob therefore 
Still less, is there any proof that he did not intend to take it; which is all) 
that a regard to truth and sincerity required of him.—Ed. 

* To understand the above ,passage the English reader will require t 
be informed that the word nb, (Shalem,) which our translators, wit 
Calvin, regarded as a proper name, means also “ peace,” or “ safety ;” ant 
therefore the 18th verse may be read “ Jacob came in safety to the city 0 
Sichem.” And this is the translation given in Calvin’s own version, # 


venit Iahacob incolumis in eivitatem Sechem. Thus his own text is, singue 
larly enough, at variance with his Commentary.—Zd. 






























CHAP. XXXIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 218 


“may seem to have done wrong in buying a field for himself 
with money, instead of waiting the proper time. I answer, 
that Moses has not expressed all that ought to come freely 
into the mind of the reader. Certainly from the price we may 
readily gather that the holy man was not covetous. He pays 
-a hundred pieces of money ; could he acquire for himself large 
estates at so small a price, or anything more than some nook 
‘in which he might live without molestation ? Besides, Moses 
expressly relates that he bought that part on which he had 
“pitched his tent opposite the city. Therefore he possessed 
“neither meadows, nor vineyards, nor arable land. But since 
the inhabitants did not grant him an abode near the city, 
he made an agreement with them, and purchased peace at a 
small price. This necessity was his excuse; so that no one 
/ might say, that he had bought from man what he ought to 
have expected as the free gift of God: or that, when he 
ought to have embraced, by hope, the dominion of the pro- 
“mised land, he had been in too great haste to enjoy it. 

20. And he erected there an altar. Jacob having obtained 
‘a place in which he might provide for his family, set up the 
t solemn service of God; as Moses before testified concerning 
' Abraham and Isaac. For although, in every place, they gave 
themselves up to the pure atship of God in prayers and 

_ other acts of devotion ; nevertheless they did not neglect the 
external confession of piety, whenever the Lord granted 
them any fixed place in which they might remain. For (as 
I have elsewhere stated) whenever we read that an altar was 
built by them, we must consider its design and use: name- 
ly, that they might offer victims, and might invoke the 

name of God with a pure rite; so that, by this method, their 
religion and faith might be made known. I say this, lest any 
one should think that they rashly trifled with the worship 
of God ; for it was their care to pee their actions accord- 


1 «For a hundred pieces of money.” The word rendered pieces of 

_ money, MDP, (Kisitah,) means also lambs; and the price given might 

have been one hundred lambs; the probability, however, is, that the coin 

itself was called a lamb, as we have a coin called a sovereign. . It is sup- 

_ posed that the coin bore the i image of a lamb, perhaps because it was the 

conventional price at which lambs were generally valued. The testimony 
of St. Stephen (Acts vii. 16) is decisive as to the fact that money was in 
use.— Ed. 


214 COMMENTARY UPON 






























ing to the divinely prescribed rule which was handed down 
to them from Noah and Shem. Wherefore, under the word 
“ altar,” let the reader understand, by synecdoche, the exter- . 
nal testimony of piety. Moreover, it may hence be clearly — 
perceived how greatly the love of divine worship prevailed 
in the holy man; because though broken down by various 
troubles, he nevertheless was not forgetful of the altar. And 
not only does he privately worship God in the secret feeling 
of his mind; but he exercises himself in ceremonies which 
are useful and commanded by God. For he knew that men 
want helps, as long as they are in the flesh, and that sacri- 
fiees were not instituted without reason. He had also an- — 
other purpose ; namely, that his whole family should worship 
God with the same sense of piety. For it behoves a pious 
father of a family diligently to take care that he has no pro- | 
fane house, but rather that God should reign there as ina 
sanctuary. Besides, since the inhabitants of that region 
had fallen into many superstitions, and had corrupted the 
true worship of God, Jacob wished to make a distinction be- 
tween himself and them. The Shechemites and other neigh-— 
bouring nations had certainly altars of their own. Therefore 
Jacob, by establishing a different method of worship for his 
household, thus declares that he has a God peculiar to him- 
self, and has not degenerated from the holy fathers, from ~ 
whom the perfect and genuine religion had proceeded. This 
course could not but subject him to reproach, because the 
Shechemites and other inhabitants would feel that they were 
despised: but the holy man deemed anything preferable to” 
mixing himself with idolaters, 

21. And he called it El-elohe-Israel.". This name ap- 
pears little suitable to the altar; for it sounds as if a heap” 
of stones or turf formed a visible statue of God. But the 
meaning of the holy man was different. For, because the — 
altar was a memorial and pledge of all the visions and pro- 
mises of God, he honours it with this title, to the end that, 
as often as he beheld the altar, he should call God to 7 


‘Et vocavit illud, Fortis Deus Israel; “ the strong God of Israel.” 
The margin of the English translation is more literal, “ God, the God of — 
Israel.” — Kd. i 

























THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 215 


CHAP. XXXIV. 
remembrance. That inscription of Moses, “The Lord is my 
help,” has the same signification ; and also that which Eze- 
kiel inscribes on the New Jerusalem, “ the Lord is there.” 
And truly in these forms of speaking there is a want of 
strict propriety of metaphor ; yet this is not without reason. 

4 por as superstitious men foolishly and wickedly attach God 
to symbols, and, as it were, draw him down from his heavenly 
throne to render him subject to their gross inventions: so 
the faithful, piously and rightly, ascend from earthly signs 
‘to heaven. The conclusion is this: Jacob wished to testify 
that he worshipped no other God than him who had been 
manifested by certain oracles, in order that he might distin- 
guish Him from all idols. And we must observe it as a rule 
of modesty, not to speak carelessly concerning the mysteries 
and the glory of the Lord, but from a sense of faith, so far, 

indeed, as he is made known to us in his word. Morsdver 
Jacob had respect to his posterity ; for since the Lord had ap- 
peared to him, on the express condition, that he would make 
with him the covenant of salvation, Jacob leaves this monu- 
ment, from which, after his death, his descendants might 
- ascertain that his religion had not flowed from a dark or ob- 
" scure well, or from a turbid pool, but from a clear and pure 
" fountain ; as if he had engraved the oracles and visions, by 
» which he had been taught, upon the altar. 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


1. AnD Dinah the daughter of 
“Leah, which she bare unto Jacob, 


1. Et egressa est Dinah filia Leah, 
quam pepererat ipsi Iahacob, ut 














~ went out tosee the daughters of the 
land. 


___ 2. And when Shechem the son of 
_ Hamor the Hivite, prince of the 
country, saw her, he took her, and 
~ lay with her, and defiled her. 
4 2 3. And his soul clave unto Dinah 
he daughter of Jacob; and he loved 
- the damsel, and spake kindly unto 
the damsel. 
__ 4. And Shechem spake unto his 
father Hamor, saying, Get me this 
ame lamsel to wife. 


: 


viderat filias regionis. 


2. Et vidit eam Sechem filius Ha- 
mor Hivvzi principis terre, et tulit 
eam, et concubuit cum ea, et humi- 
liavit eam. 

3. Et adhesit anima ejus ipsi Di- 
nah filize Iahacob, et dilexit puellam : 
et loquutus est ad cor puellee. 


4. Et dixit Sechem ad Hamor 
patrem suum, dicendo, Cape mihi 
puellam hance in uxorem. 


‘Det te te ry ee 3 — bt . — u 


216 


5. And Jacob heard that he had 
defiled Dinah his daughter ; (now his 
sons were with his cattle in the field ;) 
and Jacob held his peace until they 
were come. 

6. And Hamor the father of She- 
chem went out unto Jacob to com- 
mune with him. 

7. And the sons of Jacob came 
out of the field when they heard 7t ; 
and the men were grieved ; and they 
were very wroth, because he had 
wrought folly in Israel, in lying with 
Jacob’s daughter ; which thing ought 
not to be done. 

8. And Hamor communed with 
them, saying, The soul of my son 
Shechem longeth for your daughter : 
I pray you give her him to wife. 

9. And make ye marriages with 
us, and give your daughters unto us, 
and take our daughters unto you. 

10. And ye shall dwell with us: 
and the land shall be before you; 
dwell and trade ye therein, and get 
you possessions therein. 

11. And Shechem said unto her 
father, and unto her brethren, Let 
me find grace in your eyés, and what 
ye shall say unto me I will give. 

12. Ask me never so much dowry 
and gift, and'l will give according as 
ye shall say unto me: but give me 
the damsel to wife. 

13. And the sons of Jacob answer- 
ed Shechem and Hamor his father 
deceitfully, and said, (because he had 
defiled Dinah their sister :) 

14. And they said unto them, We 
cannot do this thing, to give our sis- 
ter to one that is uncircumcised; for 
that were a reproach unto us: 

15. But in this will we consent 
unto you: If ye will be as we be, that 
every male of you be circumcised ; 

16. Then will we give our daugh- 
ters unto you, and we will take your 
daughters to us, and we will dwell 
with you, and we will become one 
people. 

17. But if ye will not hearken unto 
us, to be circumcised; then will we 


take our daughter, and we will be 
gone. 


COMMENTARY UPON 



































CHAP, XXXIV 


5. Audivit autem Iahacob, quo 
violasset Dinah filiam suam: ‘a il 
ejus erant cum pecudibus ejusin agro 
et siluit Iahacob, donee venirent ipsi. 


6. Egressus est autem Hamor p 7 
ter Sechem ad Iahacob, ut loquers 
tur cum eo. : 


7. Porro filii Iahacob venerunt. 1 


agro: gui quum audierunt ipsi, do 
lore affecti sunt viri, iratique sun’ 


valde: quia flagitium designasset it 
Israel, ut coiret cum filia Iahacob 
et sie non fiet. 7 


8. Et loquutus est Hamor eur 
eis, dicendo, Sechem filii mei com 
placuit anima in filia vestra: dat 
queso eam illi in uxorem. _ 

9. Et affinitatem contrahite n 
biscum: filias vestras dabitis nobis 
et filias nostras accipietis vobis. 

10. Et nobiscum habitabitis, e 
terra erit coram vobis, habitate, é 


1. Adheee dixit Sechem ad pa 
trem ejus, et ad fratres ejus, In 
niam gratiam in oculis vestris: 
quod dixeritis mihi, dabo. 

12. Augete mihi valde dotem, e 
donum : et dabo quemadmodum di 
eritis mihi, et date mihi puellam i 
wxorem. 

13. Et responderunt filii Iahaco 
ad Sechem et Hamor patrem ejusi 
dolo, et loquuti sunt, (quia violay 
rat Dinah sororem suam,) 

14. Et dixerunt ad eos, Non po 
sumus facere hoe, ut demus sororel 
nostram viro, cui est preputium 
quia opprobrium esset nobis, 

15. Veruntamen in hoe acquieset 
mus vobis, si fueritis sicut nos, ut ef 
cumcidatur in vobis omnis maseulu: 

16. Et dabimus filias nostras vi 
bis, et filias vestras capiemus nobis 
et habitabimus vobiscum, et erinmt 
in populum unum, 


17. Quodsi non obedieritis nobi 
ut cireumcidamini: capiemus filiar 
nostram et recedemus. 






CHAP. XXXIV. 


18. And their words pleased Ha- 
mor, and Shechem, Hamor’s son. 


19. And the young man deferred 
not to do the thing, because he had 
delight in Jacob’s daughter ; and he 
was more honourable than all the 
house of his father. 

20. And Hamor and Shechem his 
son came unto the gate of their city, 


~ and communed with the men of their 


city, saying, 

21. These men are peaceable with 
us; therefore let them dwell in the 
land, and trade therein ; for the land, 
behold, 7 is large enough for them ; 
let us take their daughters to us for 
wives, and let us give them our 
daughters. 

22. Only herein will the men con- 
sent unto us for to dwell with us, to 
be one people, if every male among 
us ~ circumcised, as they are circum- 
cised. 


23. Shali not their cattle, and 
their substance, and every beast of 
theirs, be ours? only let us consent 
unto them, and they will dwell with 
us. 
24. And unto Hamor, and unto 
Shechem his son, hearkened all that 
went out of the gate of his city ; and 
every male was circumcised, all that 
went out of the gate of his city. 


25. And it came to pass on the 
third day, when they were sore, that 
two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and 
Levi, Dinah’s brethren, took each 
man his sword, and came upon the 
city beldly, and slew all the males. 


26. And they slew Hamor and 
Shechem his son with the edge of the 
sword, and took Dinah out of She- 
chem’s house, and went out. 

27. The sons of Jacob came upon 
the slain, and spoiled the city, be- 
cause they had defiled their sister. 

28. They took their sheep, and 
their oxen, and their asses, and that 
which was in the city, and that which 
was in the field, 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


217 


18. Et placuerunt verba eorum in 
oculis Hamor, et in oculis Sechem 
filii Hamor. 

19. Nec tardavit juvenis ad perfi- 
ciendum negotium, quia complacue- 
rat ei in filia Iahacob : et ipse erat 
honorabilis pree tota domo patris sui. 


20. Et venit Hamor et Sechem 
filius ejus ad portam civitatis suze, et 
loquuti sunt ad viros civitatis sus, 
dicendo, 

21. Viri isti pacati sunt nobiscum, 
et habitabunt in terra, et negotia- 
buntur in ea (et terra ecce, lata est 
spatiis ante eos) filias eorum accipie- 
mus nobis in uxores, et filias nostras 
dabimus eis. 


22. Veruntamen in hoe acquies- 
cent nobis viri, ut habitent nobis- 
cum, ut sint populus unus, quando 
circumcisus erit in nobis omnis mas- 
culus, quemadmodum ipsi sunt cir- 
cumcisi. 

23. Greges eorum, et substantia 
eorum et omnia jumenta eorum, 
nonne nostra erunt? tantum acqui- 
escamus eis, et habitabunt nobiscum. 


24. Et assensi sunt Hamor et 
Sechem filio ejus, omnes qui egredie- 
bantur per portam civitatis ejus: et 
circumciderunt se omnis masculus, 
omnes egredientes per portam civi- 
tatis ejus. 

25. Et fuit in die tertia, quum 
essent ipsi dolore affecti, acceperunt 
duo fili Iahacob Simhon et Levi 
fratres Dinah, quisque gladium 
suum, et venerunt ad civitatem con- 
fidenter, et occiderunt omnem mas- 
culum. 

26. Et Hamor et Sechem filtum 
ejus occiderunt acie gladii, et tule- 
runt Dinah e domo Sechem et egressi 
sunt. 

27. Filii Iahacob progressi sunt 
super occisos, et preedati sunt urbem, 
quia violaverant sororem suam. 

28. Pecudes eorum, et boves eo- 
rum, et asinos eorum, et que erant 
in urbe, et que in agro, acceperunt. 


218 


29. And all their wealth, and all 
their little ones, and their wives took 
they captive, and spoiled even all that 
was in the house. 

30. And Jacob said to Simeon and 
Levi, Ye have troubled me, to make 
me to stink among the inhabitants 
of the land, among the Canaanites 
and the Perizzites: and I being few 
in number, they shall gather them- 
selves together against me, and slay 
me; and I shall be destroyed, I and 
my house. 

31. And they said, Should he deal 
with our sister as with an harlot? 


1. And Dinah.... went out. This chapter records a severe 
contest, with which God again exercised his servant.. How — : 
precious the chastity of his daughter would be to him, we 
may readily conjecture from the probity of his whole life. 
When therefore he heard that she was violated, this disgrace 
would inflict the deepest wound of grief upon his mind: yet 
soon his grief is trebled, when he hears that his sons, from 
the desire of revenge, have committed a most dreadful crime. 
But let us examine everything in order. 
because, having left her father’s house, she wandered about 


more freely than was proper. 


quietly at home, as both the Apostle teaches and nature 
itself dictates ; for to girls the virtue is suitable, which the 
proverb applies to women, that they should be ot«ovpoi, or 
Therefore fathers of families are 
taught to keep their daughters under strict discipline, if - 
they desire to preserve them free from all dishonour ; for if 
a vain curiosity was so heavily punished in the daughter of 
holy Jacob, not less danger hangs over weak virgins at this 
day, if they go too boldly and eagerly into public assemblies, 
and excite the passions of youth towards themselves. For 
it is not to be doubted that Moses in part casts the blame 
of the offence upon Dinah herself, when he says, “ she went 
out to see the daughters of the land ;” whereas she ought to 
have remained under her mother’s eyes in the tent. 

3. And his soul clave unto Dinah. Moses intimates that 
she was not so forcibly violated, that Shechem having once 


keepers of the house. 


«COMMENTARY UPON 





29, Et omnem substantiam eorum, ' 
et omnes parvulos eorum, et uxores — 
eorum captivas duxerunt, et preedati — 
sunt omnia, que erantindomo. =_— 

30. Et dixit Iahacob ad Simhon — 
et ad Levi, Turbastis me, ut feetere — 
feceritis me habitatoribus terre, 
Chenanzeo, et Perizeeo: et ego pau- — 
cos mecum habeo, et. congregabunt 
se adversum me, et percutient me, 
et disperdar ego, et domus mea. 






ator 
31. Atdixerunt, Numquid utcum 
meretrice aget cum sorore nostra ? . 


Dinah is ravished, 


She ought to have remained 





j 









| 


ee a eee oe ee ee 


; CHAP. XXXIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 219 


abused her, treated her with contempt, as is usual with har- 
lots; for he loved her as a wife; and did not even object to 
be circumcised that he might have her; but the fervour of 
lust had so prevailed, that he first subjected her to disgrace. 
And therefore although he embraced Dinah with real and 
sincere attachment, yet, in this want of self-government, he 
grievously sinned. Shechem “ spoke to the heart” of the 
maid, that is, he addressed her courteously, to allure her to 
himself by his bland speeches: whence it follows, that when 
she was unwilling and resisted, he used violence towards her. 

4. And Shechem said to his father Hamor. In this place 
it is more clearly expressed, that Shechem desired to have 
Dinah for his wife; for his lust was not so unbridled, that 
when he had defiled, he despised her. Besides, a laudable 


“modesty is shown, since he pays deference to the will of his 


father ; for he does not attempt to form a contract of mar- 
riage of his own mind, but leaves this to his father’s author- 
ity. For though he had basely fallen through the precipi- 
tate ardour of lust ; yet now returning to himself, he follows 
the guidance of nature. So much the more ought young 
men to take heed to themselves, lest in the slippery period 
of their age, the lusts of the flesh should impel them to many 
crimes. For, at this day, greater, license everywhere pre- 


_vails, so that no moderation restrains youths from shameful 


conduct. Since, however, Shechem, under the rule and 
direction of nature, desired his father to be the procurer of 
his marriage, we hence infer that the right which parents 
have over their children is inviolable ; so that they who at- 


3 tempt to overthrow it, confound heaven and earth. Where- 
_ fore, since the Pope, in honour of marriage, has dared to 


break this sacred bond of nature; this fornicator Shechem 
alone, will prove a judge sufficient, and more than sufficient, 
to condemn that barbarous conduct. 

5. And Jacob heard. Moses inserts a single verse con- 
cerning the silent sorrow of Jacob. We know that they who 


have not been accustomed to reproaches, are the more griev- 


_ ously affected when any dishonour happens to them. 'There- 


fore the more this prudent man had endeavoured to keep his 
family pure from every stain, chaste and well-ordered, the 





. ee 
220 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXIV. _ 


more deeply is he wounded. But since he is at home alone, 
he dissembles, and keeps his grief to himself, till his sons 
return from the field. Moreover, by this word, Moses does 
not mean that Jacob deferred vengeance till their return ; but 
that, being alone and devoid of counsel and of consolation, 
he lay prostrate as one disheartened. The sense then is, 
that he was so oppressed with insupportable grief, that he 
held his peace.’ By using the word “ defiled,” Moses teaches 
us what is the true purity of man ; namely, when chastity is 
religiously cultivated, and every one possesses his vessel in 
honour. But whoever prostitutes his body to fornication, 
filthily defiles himself. If then Dinah is said to have been 
polluted, whom Shechem had forcibly violated, what must be 
said of voluntary adulterers and fornicators ? 

7. And the sons of Jacob came out of the field. Moses be- 
gins to relate the tragic issue of this history. Shechem, in- 
deed, had acted wickedly and impiously; but it was far more 
atrocious and wicked that the sons of Jacob should murder 
a whole people, to avenge themselves of the private fault of 
one man. It was by no means fitting to seek a cruel com- 
pensation for the levity and rashness of one youth, by the 
slaughter of so many men. Again, who had constituted — 
them judges, that they should dare, with their own hands, to — 
execute vengeance for an injury inflicted upon them? Per- 
fidy was also superadded, because they proceeded, under the 
pretext of a covenant, to perpetrate this enormous crime. In 
Jacob, moreover, we have an admirable example of patient 
endurance ; who, though afflicted with so many evils, yet 
did not faint under them. But chiefly we must consider the 
merey of God, by which it came to pass, that the covenant 
of grace remained with the posterity of Jacob. For what 
seemed less suitable, than that a few men in whom such 
furious rage and such implacable malice reigned, should be 
réckoned among the people and the sons of God, to the ex- 


—a lll ee ee 









' Or, he might be restrained by prudence from imparting his feelings to — 
others, lest by making them public, he should expose himself to danger, 
before he was prepared to meet it.. At all events, it was wise to restrain 
the expression of his indignation, till he was surrounded by those who 
might help him with their counsel, or attempt the reseue of his daughter 
from the hands of her violator.—Zd. 






OHAP. XXXIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 22] 


clusion of all the world besides? We see certainly that it 
was not through any power of their own that they had not 
altogether declined from the kingdom of God. Whence it ap- 
pears that the favour which God had vouchsafed unto them 
was gratuitous, and not founded upon their merits. We also 
require to be treated by Him with the same indulgence, see- 
ing that we should utterly fall away, if God did not pardon our 
sins. The sons of Jacob have, indeed, a just cause of offence, 
because not only are they affected with their own private 
ignominy, but they are tormented with the indignity of the 
erime, because their sister had been dragged forth from the 
house of Jacob, as from a sanctuary, to be violated. For 
this they chiefly urge, that it would have been wickedness 
to allow such disgrace in the elect and holy people:' but 
they themselves, through the hatred of one sin, rush furi- 
ously forward to greater and more intolerable crimes. There- 
fore we must beware, lest, after we have become severe judges 
in condemning the faults of others, we hasten inconsiderately 
into evil. But chiefly we must abstain from violent reme- 


‘dies which surpass the evil we desire to correct. 


Which thing ought not to be done.” Interpreters commonly 
explain the passage as meaning, “ it is not becoming that 
such a thing should be done;” but, in my judgment, it ap- 
plies more properly to the sons of Jacob, who had determined 
with themselves that the injury was not to be borne. Yet 
they wrongfully appropriate to themselves the right of tak- 
ing revenge: why do they not rather reflect thus; ‘“ God, 
who has received us under his care and protection, will not 
suffer this injury to pass unavenged ; in the meantime, it is 
our part to be silent, and to leave the act of punishing, which 


1 « He had wrought folly in Israel.” Ainsworth says, “ Or against Is- 
rael.” “Israel being put for the posterity of Israel.” Professor Bush 
says, “ Rather, ‘ Because folly had been wrought in Israel,’ (the active 
for the passive).” But perhaps Ainsworth’s translation is to be preferred. 
«‘ This is the first instance on record where the family of Jacob is desig- 
nated by the distinguished patronymic title of ‘Israel,’ which afterwards 
became the dominant appellation of his posterity.” —Bush in loc.—Ed. 

2 Et sie non fiet. “ And so it may not, or shall not be done.” The 
sense given in the English translation is that which Calvin rejects, though 
he allows it to be the common’ meaning attached by commentators to the 
expression.— Ed. 


222 COMMENTARY UPON 


is not placed in our hands, entirely to his sovereign will.” 


Hence we may learn, when we are angry at the sins of other — 
men, not to attempt anything which is beyond our own duty. _ 


8. And Hamor communed with them. Though the sons 
of Jacob were justly incensed, yet their indignation ought 
to have been appeased, or at least somewhat mitigated, by 


the great courteousness of Hamor. And if the humanity of — 
Hamor could not reconcile the sons of Jacob to Shechem, — 


the old man himself was indeed worthy of a benignant re- 
ception. We see what equitable conditions he offers; he 
himself was the prince of the city, the sons of Jacob were 
strangers. Therefore their minds must have been savage 
beyond measure, not to be inclined to lenity. Besides, the 
suppliant entreaty of Shechem himself deserved this, that 


- te ! : 
CHAP. XXXIV. | 


1) 99 Bi 






they should have granted forgiveness to his fervent love. — 


Therefore, that they remained implacable, is a sign of most 
cruel pride. What would they have done to enemies who 
had purposely injured them, when they are not moved by 
the prayers of him, who, being deceived by blind love, and 
by the error of incontinency, has injured them without any 
malicious intention ? 

13. And the sons of Jacob answered. The commencement 
of their perfidious course is here related: for they, being out- 
rageous rather than simply angry, wish to overthrow the whole 
city, and not being sufficiently strong to contend against so 
great anumber of people, they contrive a new fraud, in order 
that they may suddenly rise upon the inhabitants weakened 
by wounds. ‘Therefore, since the Shechemites had no strength 
to resist, it became a cruel butchery rather than a conquest, 
which increased the atrocity of wickedness in Jacob’s sons, 
who eared for nothing so that they might but gratify their 
rage. They allege in excuse, that, whereas they were sepa- 
rated from other nations, it was not lawful for them to give 
wives of their own family to the uncireumcised. Which in- 
deed was true if they said it sincerely; but they falsely use 
the sacred name of God as a pretext; yea, their double pro- 
fanation of that name proves them to be doubly sacrilegious; 


for they cared nothing about circumcision, but were intent — 
on this one thing, how they might crush the miserable men — 


_ Seen — 








_ OHAP. XXXIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 923 


in a state of weakness. Besides, they wickedly sever the 
sign from the truth which it represents ; as if any one, by 
_Jaying aside his uncircumcision, might suddenly pass over 
into the Church of God. And in this mode they pollute the 
spiritual symbol of life, by admitting foreigners, promiscu- 
ously and without discrimination, into its society. But since 
their pretence has some colour of probability, we must ob- 
serve what they say, that it would be disgraceful to them to 
give their sister to a man uncircumcised. This also is true, 
_ if they who used the words were sincere ; for since they bore 
the mark of God in their flesh, it was wicked in them to 
contract marriages with unbelievers. So also, at the present 
_ time, our baptism separates us from the profane, so that 
_ whoever mixes himself with them, fixes a mark of infamy 
- upon himself. 

18. And their words pleased Hamor. Moses prosecutes 
the history until he comes to the slaughter of the Shechem- 
ites. Hamor had, no doubt, been induced by the entreaties 
_ of his son, to show himself thus tractable. Whence appears 
the excessive indulgence of the kind old man. He ought, 
in the beginning, severely to have corrected the fault of his 
' son; but he not only covers it as much as possible, but yields 
to all his wishes. This moderation and equity would have 
' been commendable, if what his son had required was just ; 
. but that the old man, for the sake of his son, should adopt a 
new religion, and suffer a wound to be inflicted on his own 
flesh, cannot be deemed free from folly. The youth is said 
not to have delayed, because he vehemently loved the maid, 
f and excelled in dignity among his own citizens; and on 
é account of the honour of his scone he easily shetauedk what 

he wished: for the fervour of his love would have availed 
Re nothing, unless he had possessed the power of accomplishing 
| his object. 
+221. These men are peaceable. Moses describes the mode 
_ of acting, whereby they persuaded the Shechemites to ac- 
cept the conditions which the sons of Jacob had imposed. 
It was difficult to induce a whole people to submit in an 
affair of such magnitude to a few foreigners. For we know 
_ what displeasure a change of religion produces: but Hamor 





924 COMMENTARY UPON 





























and Shechem reason from utility ; and this is natural rhe- 

toric. For although honour has a more plausible appear- 
ance, it is yet for the most part cold in persuasion, But 
among the vulgar, utility carries almost every point ; because 
the major part eagerly pursues what it deems expedient for 
itself With this design, Hamor and Shechem extol the 
family of Jacob for heir honesty and tranquil habits, in order 
that the Shechemites may deem it useful to themselves. to 
receive such guests. They add that the land is sufficiently 
large, so that no loss is to be feared on the part of the original 
inhabitants. They then enumerate other advantages ; mean- 
while, they cunningly conceal the private and real cause of 
their request. Whence it follows that all these pretexts 
were fallacious. But it is a very common disease, that men 
of rank who have great authority, while making all things 
subservient to their own private ends, feign themselves to be 
considerate for the common good, and pretend to a desire 
for the public advantage. And, truly, it may be believed, 
that the persons here spoken of were the best among all the 
people, and were endowed with singular superiority ; for the 
Shechemites had chosen Hamor for their prince, as one who 
was pre-eminent in excellent gifts. Yet we see how he and 
his son lie and deceive, under the appearance of rectitude. 
Whence also we perceive hypocrisy to be so deeply rooted in 
human minds, that it is a miracle to find any one entirely 
free from it; especially where private advantage is concerned. 
From this example let all who govern, learn to cultivate sin- 
cerity in public designs, without any sinister regard to their 
own interests. On the other hand ; let the people exercise 
self-government, lest they too earnestly seek their own ad- 
vantage ; because it will often happen that they are caught 
by a specious appearance of good, as fishes by the hook. For 
as self-love is blind, we are drawn without judgment to 
the hope of gain. And the Lord also justly chastises this 

cupidity, to which he sees us to be unduly prone, when he 
suffers us to be deceived by it. Moses says that this di is 
course took place in the gate of the city, where public as 


semblies were then wont to be held and judgment admi 
nistered. | 


CHAP. XXXIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 225 


24. And unto Hamor and unto Shechem his son hearkened, 
&e. Apparently this consent may be ascribed to modesty 
and humanity; for, by readily obeying their princes, and 
kindly admitting the strangers to an equality of rights in 
the city, they show themselves, in both respects, modest and 
humane. But if we reflect on the true import of circumcision, 
it will easily appear that they were too much addicted to their 
own selfish interests. They knew that, by a new sacrament, 
they would be committed to a different worship of God. They 
had not yet been taught that the ablutions and sacrifices, to 
which they had been all their life accustomed, were unpro- 
fitable trifles. Therefore, to change their religion so care- 
lessly betrays, on their part, a gross contempt of God; for never 
do they who seriously worship God, so suddenly cast aside 
their superstitions, unless they are convinced by sound doc- 
trine and arguments. But the Shechemites, blinded by an 
evil conscience, and by the hope of gain, pass over, like men 
half brutalized, to an unknown God. “ Search the isles, 
(saith. the Prophet,) is there any nation which deserts its 
gods, who yet are not gods?”’ Yet this was done at Shechem, _ 
when no defect had been shown to exist in the received su- 
perstitions ; wherefore none ought to wonder that a sad result 
followed this levity of mind. Nevertheless, Simeon and Levi 
were not, on that account, excusable for the indulgence of 
their own cruelty: yea, their impiety appears the more de- 
testable, because they not only rush impetuously upon men, 
but, in a sense, trample upon the sacred covenant of God, of 
which alone they make their boast. Certainly, if they had 
no feeling for the men themselves, yet reverence for God ought 
to have restrained their ferocity, when they reflected from 


. what cause the weakness of the Shechemites proceeded. 


25. Simeon and Levi, Dinah’s brethren. Because Moses 
says that the slaughter took place on the third day, the He- 
brews think that, at that time, the pain of the wound was 
most severe. The proof, however, is not valid; nor is it of 
much moment. Although Moses names only two authors of 
the slaughter, it does not appear to me probable that they 


- came alone, but that they were the leaders of the troop: for 


1 Jer. ii. 10, 11. 
VOL. II. Ve 


926 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXXIV. 


Jacob had a large family, and it might be that they called 
some of their brothers to join them; yet, because the affair 
was conducted by their counsel and direction, it is ascribed 
to them, as Carthage is said to have been destroyed by Scipio. 
Moses also calls them the brothers of Dinah, because they 
were by the same mother. We have seen that Dinah was 
the daughter of Leah ; for which reason Simeon and Levi, 
whose own sister she was by both parents, were the more 
enraged at the violation of her chastity: they were therefore 
impelled, not: so much by the common reproach brought upon 
the holy and elect race, (according to their recent boast,) as 
by a sense of the infamy brought upon themselves. How- 
ever, there is no reader who does not readily perceive how 
dreadful and execrable was this crime. One man only had 
sinned, and he endeavoured to compensate for the injury, 
by many acts of kindness; but the cruelty of Simeon and 
Levi could only be satiated by the destruction of the whole 
city ; and, under the pretext of a covenant, they form a 
design against friends and hospitable persons, in a time of 
peace, which would have been deemed intolerable against ene- 
mies in open war. Hence we perceive how mercifully God 
dealt with that people; seeing that, from the posterity of a 
sanguinary man, and even of a wicked robber, he raised up a 
priesthood for himself. Let the Jews now go and be proud 
of their noble origin. But the Lord declared his gratuitous 
mercy by too many proofs for the ingratitude of man to be 
able to obscure it. Moreover, we hence learn that Moses did 
not speak from carnal sense; but was the instrument of the 
Holy Spirit, and the herald of the celestial Judge ; for though 
he was a Levite, he yet is so far from sparing his own race, 
that he does not hesitate to brand the father of his tribe 
with perpetual infamy. And it is not to be doubted that 
the Lord purposely intended to stop the mouths of impure 
and profane men, such as the Lucianists, who confess that 
Moses was a very great man, and of rare excellence ; but 
that he procured for himself, by craft and subtlety, authority 
over a great people, as if, indeed, an acute and intelligent man 
would not have known that, by this single act of wickedness, 


the honour of his race would be greatly tarnished. He had, ~ 


ae PH Ay, 










 OHAP. XXXIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 227 


however, no other design than to extol the goodness of God 
towards his people; and truly there was nothing which 
_he less desired than to exercise dominion, as appears clearly 
from the fact, that he transferred the office of priesthood 
_to another family, and commanded his sons to be only min- 
isters. With respect to the Shechemites, although in the 
sight of God they were not innocent; seeing they prefer- 
red their own advantage to a religion which they thought 
lawful, yet it was not the Lord’s will that they should be so 
grievously punished for their fault; but he suffered this 
signal punishment to follow the violation of one maid, 
that he might testify to all ages his great abhorrence of 
lust. Besides, seeing that the iniquity had arisen from 
a prince of the city, the punishment is rightly extended 
to the whole body of the people: for since God never 
commits the government to evil and vicious princes, ex- 
cept in righteous judgment, there is no wonder that, when 
they sin, they involve their subjects with them in the same 
condemnation. Moreover, from this example let us learn, 
that if, at any time, fornications prevail with impunity, 
God will, at length, exact punishments so much the more 
‘severe: for if the violation of one maid was avenged by the 
horrible massacre of a whole city; he will not sleep nor be 
quiet, if a whole people indulge in a common license of for- 
nication, and, on all sides, connive at each other’s iniquity. 
The sons of Jacob acted indeed wickedly; but we must 
_ observe that fornication was, in this manner, divinely con- 
: demned. 

_ 27. The sons of Jacob came. Moses shows that, not con- 
_ tent with simple revenge, they fly together to the spoil. As 
it respects the words, they are said to have “ come upon the 
erain,” either because they made themselves a way over the 
slaughtered bodies; or because, in addition to the slaughter, 
_ they rushed to the plunder. In whichever way it is taken, 
_ Moses teaches that, not satisfied with their former wicked- 
ness, they made this addition to it. Be it, that they were 
blinded with anger in shedding blood; yet by what right 
do they sack the city? This certainly cannot be ascribed 
_toanger. But these are the ordinary fruits of human in- 


a 























228 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXXIV. 


temperance, that he who gives himself the rein in perpe- 
trating one wickedness, soon breaks out into another. Thus — 
the sons of Jacob, from being murderers, become also robbers, — 
and the guilt of avarice is added to that of cruelty. The 
more anxious then should be our endeavours to bridle our > 
desires; lest they should mutually fan each other, so that at 
length, by their combined action, a dreadful conflagration 
should arise; but especially, we must beware of using force 
of arms, which brings with it many perverse and brutal as- 
saults. Moses says that the sons of Jacob did this, because 
the Shechemites had defiled their sister ; but the whole city 
was not guilty. Moses, however, only states in what way 
the authors of the slaughter are affected: for although they 
wish to appear just avengers of the injury, yet they pay no 
respect to what it was lawful for them to do, and make no 
attempt to control their depraved affections, and consequently 
set no bounds to their wickedness. Should any one prefer 
taking the expression in a higher sense, it may be referred 
to the judgment of God, by which the whole city was in- 
volved in guilt, because no one had opposed the lust of the 
prince: perhaps many had consented to it, as not being very 
much concerned about the unjust dishonour done to their 
guests; but the former sense is what I most approve. 

30. And Jacob said. Moses declares that the crime was 
condemned by the holy man, lest any one should think that 
he had participated in their counsel. He also expostulates 
with his sons, because they had caused him to stink among 
the inhabitants of the land; that is, they had rendered him 
so odious, that no one would be able to bear him. If ther 
the neighbouring nations should conspire among themselves 
he would be unable to resist them, seeing he had so small : 
band, in comparison with their great number. He also ex 
pressly names the Canaanites and Perizzites, who, though 
they had received no wrong, were yet by nature exceedingly 
prone to inflict injury. But Jacob may seem to act prepos 
terously, in overlooking the offence committed against God 
and in considering only his own danger. Why is he not rather 
angry at their cruelty ? why is he not offended at their per= 
fidy? why does he not reprove their rapaciousness? It is how= 





THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


i CHAP. XXXY. 229 


ever probable, that when he saw them terror-stricken at their 
recent crime, he suited his words to their state of mind. For he 
_acts as if he were complaining that he, rather than the She- 
_chemites, was slain by them. We know that men are seldom 
_if ever drawn to repentance, except by the fear of punishment: 
especially when they have any specious pretext as a covering 
for their fault. Besides, we know not whether Moses may 
not have selected this as a part out of a long expostulation, 
to cause his readers to understand that the fury of Simeon 
and Levi was so outrageous, that they were more insensible 
than brute beasts to their own destruction and that of their 
whole family. This is clear from their own answer, which 
not only breathes a barbarous ferocity, but shows that they 
had no feeling. It was barbarous, first, because they excuse 
themselves for having destroyed a whole people and plun- 
dered their city, on account of the injury done by one man ; 
secondly, because they answer their father so shortly and 
-contumaciously ; thirdly, because they obstinately defend 
the revenge which they had rashly taken. Moreover, their 
-insensibility was prodigious, because they were not affected 
_by the thought of their own death, and that of their parents, 
wives, and children, which seemed just at hand. Thus we 
are taught, how intemperate anger deprives men of their 
senses. We are also admonished, that it is not enough for 
us to be able to lay blame on our opponents; but we must 
always see how far it is lawful for us to proceed. 


CHAPTER XXXV. 


1. Anp God said unto Jacob, 
Arise, go up to Beth-el, and dwell 
there; and make there an altar unto 
God, that appeared unto thee when 

_ thou fieddest from the face of Esau 
thy brother. 

2. Then Jacob said unto his house- 

hold, and to all that were with him, 
Put away the strange gods that are 
among you, and be clean, and change 
your garments: 

3. And let us arise, and go up to 
Beth-el; and I will make there an 


1. Dixit autem Deus ad Iahacob, 
Surge, ascende in Beth-el, et mane 
ibi: et fac ibi altare Deo, qui visus 
est tibi, dum fugeres a facie Esau 
fratris tui. 


2. Et dixit Iahacob familie sue, 
et omnibus qui erant secum, Remo- 
vete deos alienos, qui sunt in medio 
vestri, et mundate vos, vestimentaque 
vestra mundate. 

3. Et surgamus, et ascendamus in 
Beth-el, et faciam illic aitare Deo, 


230 


altar unto God, who answered me in 
the day of my distress, and was with 
me in the way which I went. 

4. And they gave unto Jacob all 
the s e gods which were in their 
hand, and ail their ear-rings which 
were in their ears; and Jacob hid 
them under the oak which was by 
Shechem. 

5. And they journeyed: and the 
terror of God was upon the cities 
that were round about them, and 
they did not pursue after the sons of 
Jacob. 

6. So Jacob came to Luz, which 
is in the land of Canaan, that is, 
Beth-el, he, and all the people that 
were with him. 

7. And he built there an altar, and 
called the place El-beth-el ; because 
there God appeared unto him, when 
he fled from the face of his brother. 

8. But Deborah, Rebekah’s nurse, 
died, and she was buried beneath 
Beth-el under an oak ; and the name 
of it was called Allon-bachuth. 

9. And God appeared unto Jacob 
again, when he came out of Padan- 
aram, and blessed him. 

10. And God said unto him, Thy 
name is Jacob: thy name shall not 
be called any more Jacob, but Israel 
shall be thy name; and he called his 
name Israel. 

11. And God said unto him, I am 
God Almighty ; be fruitful and mul- 
tiply: a nation, and a company of 
nations, shall be of thee, and kings 
shall come out of thy loins; 

12, And the land which I gave 
Abraham and Isaac, to thee I will 
give it, and to thy seed after thee 
will I give the land. 

13. And God went up from him 
in the place where he talked with 
him. 

14. And Jacob set up a pillar in 
the place where he talked with him, 
even a pillar of stone; and he poured 
a drink-offering thereon, and he 
poured oil thereon. 

15. And Jacob called the name of 
the place where God spake with him, 
Beth.el, 


COMMENTARY UPON 





CHAP. XXXV. 


qui exaudivit me in die angustiz 
mez, et fuit mecum in via, qua am- 
bulavi. ; 

4. Dederunt ergo ipsi Iahacob 
omnes deos alienos, qui erant in 


manu sua, et inaures que erant in 


auribus suis, et abscondit eos Iaha- 
cob subter quercum, que erat apud 
Sechem. 

5. Tune profecti sunt, et fuit terror 


Dei super urbes, que erant in cir- 


cuitibus eorum, et non persequuti 
sunt filios Iahacob. 


6. Et venit Iahacob in Luz, que 


‘ 


est in terra Chenaan, hee est Beth- — 


el, ipse et omnis populus 
cum eo. | 

7. Et edificavit ibi altare, et voca- 
vit locum El Beth-el: quia apparue- 
rant ei Angeli, dum fugeret a facie 
fratris sui. 

8. Mortua est autem Deborah nu- 
trix Ribeah, et sepulta est subter 


qui erat 


Beth-el sub quercu: et, vocavit no-. 


men ejus Allon Bachuth, 

9. Porro visus fuerat Deus ipsi 
Iahacob adhuc, dum veniret de Padan 
Aram, et benedixerat ei. — 

10. Atque dixerat ei ipse Deus, 


Nomen tuum est Iahacob: non yoca- _ 


bitur nomen tuum ultra Iahacob, sed 
Israel erit nomen tuum, et vocavit 
nomen ejus Israel. 

11. Et dixit ei Deus, Ego sum 
Deus omnipotens, cresce, et multi- 
plicare: gens, et ccetus Gentium 
erit ex te, et reges e lumbis tuis 
egredientur, 

12. Et terram, quam dedi Abra- 
ham et Isaac, tibi dabo, et semini 
tuo post te dabo terram istam. 


13. Et ascendit ab eo Deus e loco, 
in quo loquutus est cum eo. 


14. Tune statuit Iahacob statuam 
in loco, in quo loquutus est cum eo, 
statuam lapideam: et libavit super 
illam libamen, et effudit super illam 
oleum. 

15. Et vocavit Iahacob nomen 
loci, in quo loquutus est eum ipso 
Deus, Beth-el. , 


_— . - . 
SO SS a ee ee eee 


-.. 


[P-ayt Sae 


} 
¥ 












-OHAP. XXXV. 


16. And they journeyed from 
Beth-el; and there was but a little 
way to come to Ephrath: and Rachel 
travailed, and she had hard labour. 


17. And it came to pass, when she 
was in hard labour, that the midwife 
said unto her, Fear not; thou shalt 
have this son also. 

18. And it came to pass, as her 
soul was in departing, (for she died,) 
that she called his name Ben-oni: 
but his father called him Benjamin. 

19. And Rachel died, and was 
buried in the way to Ephrath, which 
is Beth-lehem. 

20. And Jacob set a pillar upon 
her grave: that is the pillar of 
Rachel’s grave unto this day. 

21. And Israel journeyed, and 
‘spread his tent beyond the tower of 


22. And it came to pass, when 
Asrael dwelt in that land, that Reu- 
ben went and lay with Bilhah his 
father’s concubine: and Israel heard 
it. Now the sons of Jacob were 
twelve. 

__ 23. The sons of Leah; Reuben, 
Jacob’s first-born, and Simeon, and 
Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and 
Zebulun. 

_ 24. The sons of Rachel; Joseph 
and Benjamin. 

_ 25, And the sons of Bilhah, Ra- 
chel’s handmaid ; Dan and Naphtali. 
_. 26. And the sons of Zilpah, Leah’s 
-handmaid; Gad and Asher. These 
are the sons of Jacob, which were 
born to him in Padan-aram. 

_ 27. And Jacob came unto Isaac 
his father unto Mamre, unto the city 
of Arbah, which is Hebron, where 
Abraham and Isaac sojourned. 

_ 28. And the days of Isaac were 
an hundred and fourscore years. 

_ 29. And Isaac gave up the ghost, 
and died, and was gathered unto his 
people, being old and full of days: 
i his sons Esau and Jacob buried 





THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


231 


16. Profecti vero sunt de Beth-el : 
erat autem adhuc ferme milliare 
terree ad veniendum in Ephrath, et 
peperit Rachel, et difficultatem passa 
est, dum pareret. 

17. Fuit autem, ea difficultatem 
patiente dum pareret, dixit ei ob- 
stetrix, Ne timeas, quia etiam iste 
tibi filius. 

18. Et fuit, egrediente anima ejus 
dum moreretur, vocavit nomen ejus 
Benoni: at pater ejus vocavit eum 
Benjamin. 

19. Mortua est itaque Rachel, et 
sepulta est in via Ephrath, hee est 
Bethlehem. 

20. Et statuit Iahacob titulum 
super sepulcrum ejus: hic est titulus 
sepulcri Rachel usque ad diem hance. 

21. Et profectus est Israel, et te- 
tendit tabernaculum suum trans tur- 
rim Eder. 

22. Et fuit quum habitaret Israel 
in terra ipsa, profectus est Reuben, 
et concubuit cum Bilhah concubina 
patris sui: et audivit Israel. Fue- 
runt autem filii Iahacob duodecim. 


23. Filii Leah, primogenitus Iaha- 
cob, Reuben, et Simhon, et Levi, et 
Iehudah, et Issachar, et Zebulun. 


24. Filii Rachel, Ioseph et Benja- 


min. 

25. Et filii Bilhah ancille Rachel, 
Dan et Nephthali. 

26. Et filii Zilpah ancille Leah, 
Gad et Aser. Isti sunt filii Iahacob, 
qui nati sunt in Padan Aram. 


27. Et venit Iahacob ad Ishac 
patrem suum in Mamre civitatem 
Arbah: hee est Hebron, in qua 
habitavit Abraham et Ishac. 

28. Et fuerunt dies Ishac, centum 
anni et octoginta anni. 

29. Et obiit Ishac, et mortuus est, 
et collectus est ad populos suos, senex 
et satur dierum : et sepelierunt eum 
Esau et Iahacob filii ejus. 


1. And God said unto Jacob. Moses relates that when 
Jacob had been reduced to the last extremity, God came to 
























- oe a: 
ce a“ 
=* an! 
<n 


232 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXV. 
his help in the right time, and as at the critical juncture. 
And thus he shows, in the person of one man, that God 
never deserts his Church which he has once embraced, 
but will procure its salvation. We must, however, observe 
the order of his procedure; for God did not immediately 
appear to his servant, but suffered him first to be tormented 
by grief and excessive cares, that he might learn patience, 
deferring his consolation to the time of extreme necessity. 
Certainly the condition of Jacob was then most miserable. 
For all, on every side, might be so incensed against him 
that he would be surrounded with as many deaths 2 
there were neighbouring nations: and he was not so stupid 
as to be insensible of his danger. God suffered the holy 
man to be thus tossed with cares and tormented with 
troubles, until, by a kind of resurrection, he restored him, 
as one half-dead. Whenever we read this and similar 
passages, let us reflect that the providence of God watches 
for our salvation, even when it most seems to sleep. Moses 
does not say how long Jacob was kept in anxiety, but we 
may infer from the context, that he had been very greatly 
perplexed, when the Lord thus revived him. Moreover, we 
. must observe that the principal medicine by which he was 
restored, was contained in the expression, ‘‘ The Lord spake.” 
Why did not God by a miracle translate him to some other 
place, and thus immediately remove him from all danger‘ 
Why did he not even, without a word, stretch out the hand 
over him, and repress the ferocity of all, so that no one should 
attempt to hurt him? But Moses does not insist upon this 
point in vain. For hereby we are taught whence our great- 
est consolation in our afflictions is to be sought ; and also, 
that it is the principal business of our life, to depend upon 
the word of God, as those who are certainly persuaded that 
when he has promised salvation, he will deal well with us, 
so that we need not hesitate to walk through the midst of 
deaths. Another reason for the vision was, that Jacok 
might not only truly perceive that God was his deliverer 
but, being forewarned by his word, might learn to ascribe t 
God whatever afterwards followed. For seeing that we are 
slow and dull, bare experience by no means suffices to attes 


4 


i 


——_ 


CHAP. XXXV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 233 


the favour of God towards us, unless faith arising from the 
word be added. 

Go up to Beth-el. Though it is God’s design to raise his 
servant from death to life, he may yet have appeared to hold 
him up to derision ; for the objection was ready, “ Thou in- 
deed, O Lord, commandest me to go up, but all the ways are 
closed ; for my sons have raised such a flame against me, 
that I cannot remain safe in any hiding-place. I dare 
scarcely move a finger: what therefore will become of me, if 
with a great multitude, I now begin to move my camp ? shall 
I not provoke new enmities against me by my movements ?” 
But by this mode the faith of Jacob was most fully proved ; 
because, knowing God to be the leader and guardian of his 
journey, he girded himself to it, relying on the divine 
favour. Moreover, the Lord does not simply command what 
it is his will to have done, but he encourages his servant, by 


adding the promise. For, in reminding him that he is the 


same God who had before appeared unto him as he was 
fleeing in alarm from his brother, a promise is included in 


these words. The altar also refers to the same point ; for 
_ since it is the divinely appointed token of thanksgiving, it 
follows that Jacob would come thither in safety, in order that 


he might duly celebrate the grace of God. God chooses and 
assigns Beth-el, rather than any other place, for his sanctu- 
ary ; because the very sight of it would greatly avail to take 
away terror, when he should remember that there the glory 
of the Lord had been seen by him. Further, since God ex- 
horts his servant to gratitude, he shows that he is kind to 
the faithful, in order that they, in return, may own them- 
selves to be indebted for everything to his grace, and may 
exercise themselves in the celebration of it. 

2. Then Jacob said unto his household. The prompt obe- 
dience of Jacob is here described. For when he heard the 
voice of God, he neither doubted nor disputed with himself 
respecting what was necessary to be done: but, as he was 
commanded, he quickly prepared himself for his journey. 
But to show that he obeyed God, he not only collected his 
goods, but also purified his house from idols. For if we de- 
sire that God should be propitious to us, all hinderances are 


- —a | 
ue 
i A 


234 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXXV. 


to be removed, which in any way separate him. from us. 
Hence also we perceive to what point the theft of Rachel 
tended. For, (as we have said,) she neither wished to draw 
her father away from superstition, but rather followed him 
in his fault; nor did she keep this poison to herself, but 
spread it through the whole family. Thus was that sacred 
house infected with the worst contagion. Whence also it ap- 
pears, how great is the propensity of mankind to impious and. 
vicious worship; since the domestics of Jacob, to whom the 
pure religion had been handed down, thus eagerly laid hold 
on the idols offered to them. And Jacob was not entirely 
ignorant of the evil: but it is probable that he was so far 
under the influence of his wife, that, by connivance, he 
silently cherished this plague of his family. And truly, 
in one word, he convicts and condemns both himself and the 
rest, by calling idols “ strange gods.” For whence arose 
the distinction here made, unless from his knowing that he 
ought to be devoted to one God only? For there is a tacit 
comparison between the God of Abraham and all other gods 
which the world had wickedly invented for itself: not because 
it was in the power of Abraham to determine who should be 
the true God: but because God had manifested himself to 
Abraham, he also wished to assume His name. Jacob there- 
fore confesses his own negligence, in haying admitted to his 
house idols, against which the door had been closed by God. 
For wherever the knowledge of the true God shines, it is ne- 
cessary to drive far away whatever men fabricate to themselves 
which is contrary to the true knowledge of him. But whereas 
Jacob had been lulled to sleep either by the blandishments 
of his wife, or had neglected to do his duty, through the 
carelessness of the flesh, he is now aroused by the fear of 
danger, to become more earnest in the pure worship of God. 
If this happened to the holy patriarch, how much more 
ought carnal security to be dreaded by us, in the season of 
prosperity ? If, however, at any time such torpor and neglect 
shall have stolen upon us, may the paternal chastisement of 
God excite and stimulate us diligently to purge ourselves 
from whatever faults we, by our negligence, may have con- 
tracted. The infinite goodness of God is here conspicuous; 


a 


- CHAP. XXXV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 235 


I il a itl 


seeing that he still deigned to regard the house of Jacob, 
though polluted with idols, as his sanctuary. For although 


_ Jacob mingled with idolaters, and even his wife,—a patroness 


of idolatry,—slept in his bosom, his sacrifices were always ac- 


ceptable to God. Yet this great benignity of God in grant- 
_ ing pardon, neither lessens the fault of the holy man, nor 
_ ought to be used by us as an occasion for negligence. For 
though Jacob did not approve of these superstitions, yet it 
_ was not owing to him that the pure worship of God was not 
_ gradually subverted. For the corruption which originated 





1 


“ 
i 


with Rachel was now beginning to spread more widely. And 
the example of all ages teaches the same thing. For scarcely 
ever does the truth of God so prevail among men, however 
strenuously pious teachers may labour in maintaining it, but 


that some superstitions will remain among the common 
people. If dissimulation be added to them, the mischief 


soon creeps onward, until it takes possession of the whole 


body. By being thus cherished, the mass of superstitions 


which at this day pervades the Papacy, has gained its in- 


fluence. Wherefore we must boldly resist those beginnings 


_ of evil, lest the true religion should be injured by the sloth 


and silence of the pastors. 
And be clean, and change your garments. This is an ex- 
hortation to the external profession of penitence. For Jacob 


_ wishes that his domestics, who before had polluted them- 
_ selves, should testify their renewed purification by a change 


of garments. With the same design and end, the people, 


_ after they had made the golden calves, were commanded by 


Moses to put off their ornaments. Only in that instance a 


different method was observed ; namely, that the people having 


laid aside their ornaments, simply confessed their guilt by 
mournful and mean apparel: but in the house of Jacob the 
garments were changed, in order that they who had been 
defiled might come forth as new men: yet the end (as I 
have said) was the same, that by this external rite, idolaters 
might learn how great was the atrocity of their wickedness. 
For although repentance is an inward virtue, and has its seat 
in the heart, yet this ceremony was by no means superfluous ; 
for we know how little disposed men are to be displeased 





236 COMMENTARY UPON ' CHAP, XXXV. 


with themselves on account of their sins, unless they are 
pierced with many goads. Again, the glory of God is also 
concerned in this, that men should not only inwardly reflect 
upon their guilt, but at the same time openly declare it. 
This then is the sum; although God had given no express 
command concerning the purifying of his house, yet because 
he had commanded an altar to be raised, Jacob, in order that 
he might yield pure obedience to God, took care that all 
impediments should be removed; and he did this when ne- 
cessity compelled him to seek help from God. 

4. And they gave unto Jacob. Though the holy man had 
his house in suitable subordination ; yet as all yielded such 
prompt obedience to his command by casting away their 
idols, I doubt not that they were influenced by the fear of 
danger. Whence also we infer how important it is for us to 
be aroused from slumber by suffering. For we know how per- 
tinacious and rebellious is superstition. If, in a peaceful and 
joyous state of affairs, Jacob had given any such command, 
the greater part of his family would have fraudulently con- 
cealed their idols: some, perhaps, would have obstinately 
refused to surrender them; but now the hand of God urges 
them, and with ready minds they quickly repent. It is also 
probable, that, according to the circumstances of the time, 
Jacob preached to them concerning the righteous judgment 
of God, to inspire them with fear. When he commands them 
to “cleanse themselves,” it is as if he had said, “ Hitherto 
"ye have been defiled before the Lord ; now, seeing that he 
has regarded us so mercifully, wash out this filth, lest he 
should again avert his face from us.” It seems, however, | 
absurd, that Jacob should have buried the idols under an 
oak, and not rather have broken them in pieces and con- 
sumed them in the fire, as we read that Moses did with the 
golden calves, (Exod. xxxii. 20,) and Hezekiah with the 
brazen serpent, (2 Kings xviii. 4.) The fact is not thus re- 
lated without reason: but the infirmity of Jacob is touched: 
upon, because he had not been sufficiently provident against 
the future. And perhaps the Lord punished his previous 
excessive connivance and want of firmness, by depriving him 
of prudence or courage. Yet God accepted his obedience, 













] 


_ CHAP. XXXV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 237 


although it had some remainder of defect, knowing that it 
was the design of the holy man to remove idols from his 
family, and, in token of his detestation, to bury them in the 
earth. The ear-rings were doubtless badges of superstition ; 
as at this day innumerable trifles are seen in the Papacy, by 
which impiety displays itself. 

5. And the terror of God was upon the cities. It now 
manifestly appears that deliverance was not in vain promised 
to the holy man by God; since, amidst so many hostile swords, 
he goes forth not only in safety but undisturbed. By the 
destruction of the Shechemites all the neighbouring people 
were inflamed with enmity against a single family ; yet no 
one moves to take vengeance. The reason is explained by 
Moses, that the terror of God had fallen upon them, which re- 
pressed their violent assaults. Hence we may learn that the 
hearts of men are in the hands of God; that he can inspire 
those with fortitude who in themselves are weak ; and, on the 
other hand, soften their iron-hardness whenever he pleases. 
Sometimes, indeed, he suffers many to cast up the foam of 
their pride, against whom he afterwards opposes his power : 
but he often weakens those with fear who were naturally 
bold as lions: thus we find these giants, who were able to 
devour Jacob a hundred times, so struck with terror that 
they faint away. Wherefore, whenever we see the wicked 
furiously bent on our destruction, lest our hearts should fail 
with fear and be broken by desperation, let us call to mind 
this terror of God, by which the rage, however furious, of the 
whole world may be easily subdued. 

7. And he built there an altar. It has been already stated 
why it behoved the holy fathers, wherever they came, to have 
an altar of their own, distinct from those of other nations ; 
namely, to make it manifest that they did not worship gods of 
various kinds, a practice to which the world was then every- 
where addicted, but that they had a God peculiar to themselves. 
For although God is worshipped with the mind, yet an ex- 
ternal confession is the inseparable companion of faith. Be- 
sides, all acknowledge how very useful it is to us to be stirred 
up by outward helps to the worship of God. If any one ob- 
ect that these altars differed nothing from other altars in 





238 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXXV, 


appearance ; I answer, that whereas others rashly, and with — 
inconsiderate zeal, built altars to unknown gods, Jacob al- 
ways adhered to the word of God. And there is no law- 
ful altar but that which is consecrated by the word; nor 
indeed did the worship of Jacob excel by any other mark — 
than this, that he attempted nothing beyond the command 
of God. In calling the name of the place “ The God of 
Beth-el,”” he is thought to be too familiar; and yet this very 
title commends the faith of the holy man, and that rightly, 
since he confines himself within the divinely prescribed 
bounds. The Papists act foolishly in affecting the praise of 
humility by a modesty which is most degrading. But the 
humility of faith is praiseworthy, seeing it does not desire 
to know more than God permits. And as when God de-— 
scends to us, he, in a certain sense, abases himself, and stam- — 
mers with us, so he allows us to stammer with him. And — 
this is to be truly wise, when we embrace God in the man- | 
ner in which he accommodates himself to our capacity. For 
in this way, Jacob does not keenly dispute concerning the 
essence of God, but renders God familiar to himself by the 
oracle which he has received. And because he applies his 
senses to the revelation, this stammering and simplicity (as I _ 
have said) is acceptable to God. Now, though at this day, © 
the knowledge of God has shined more clearly, yet since — 
God, in the gospel, takes upon him the character of a nursing — 
father, let us learn to subject our minds to him; only let us © 
remember that he descends to us in order to raise us up to | 
himself. For he does not speak to us in this earthly man- 
ner, to keep us at a distance from heaven, but rather by this — 
vehicle, to draw us up thither. Meanwhile this rule must be 
observed, that since the name of the altar was given by a 
celestial oracle, the building of it was a proof of faith. For 
where the living voice of God does not sound, whatever pomps 
may be introduced will be like shadowy spectres; as in the — 
Papacy nothing can be seen except bladders filled with 
wind. It may be added that Jacob shows the constant tenor ; 


_' As the word Beth-el means the House of God, the farther addition of ~ 
El, the name of God, seems to be a tautology; and this is made by Calvin — 
the basis of an objection which he proceeds to answer.—Ed. 




















- OHAP. XXXV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. ‘ 3B9 


of his faith, from the time that God began to manifest him- 
self to him; because he keeps in view the fact, that the angels 
had appeared unto him.’ For since the word is in the plural 
_ number, I willingly interpret it of angels ; and this is not con- 
trary to the former doctrine; for although the majesty of God 
_ was then conspicuous, so far as he could comprehend it, yet 
_ Moses does not without reason mention the angels whom 
_ Jacob saw ascending and descending on the steps of the 
ladder. For he then beheld the glory of God in the angels, 
as we see the splendour of the sun flowing to us through 
his rays. 
_ 8. But Deborah, Rebekah’s nurse, died. UHere is inserted 
a short narration of the death of Deborah, whom we may 
conclude to have been a holy matron, and whom the family 
_ of Jacob venerated as a mother ; for the name given in per- 
-petuity to the place, testifies that she was buried with pecu- 
liar honour, and with no common mourning. Shortly after- 
wards the death and burial of Rachel are to be recorded: 
yet Moses does not say that any sign of mourning for Debo- 
‘Tah was transmitted to posterity ;* therefore it is probable 
_ that she was held by all in the place of a grandmother. But 
it may be asked, how she then happened to be in Jacob’s 
company, seeing that he had not yet come to his father; 
_and the age of a decrepid old woman rendered her unfit for 
80 long a journey.* Some interpreters imagine that she had 


1 Quia apparuerunt ei Angeli dum fugeret a facie fratris sui. In the 
_ English translation the name of God is ‘put instead of angels, and no 
doubt rightly. The reason given for Calvin’s translation of the word 
ponds, (Elohim,) by angels is, that, contrary to the usual custom, when 
the word means God, it is accompanied by a verb in the plural number, 
‘But this is not conclusive. See note 2, vol. i., p. 531, on chap. xx. ver. 13. 
_ Yet there is some difficulty in the passage, arising from the apparent 
harshness of the repetition of E/, the name of God, in this title. Bush 
thinks that the first E] does not belong to the name of the place. Rivetus 
reads the first H/ as the genitive, supposing the word place to be under- 
‘stood. “And he called the place, ‘ the place of the God of Beth-el.’ 
‘This Dathé thinks harsh, and he follows Michaelis in connecting pipnd 
with the first 5x. And he called the place of God, Beth-el.”—£d. 
__ # The meaning, perhaps, is, that no monumental pillar was raised to 
Deborah, as was done to Rachel; the probable reason given for the fact, 
‘Namely, that she was regarded as a grandmother, does not seem very in- 


telligible.— Ed. 


8 It appears, from a calculation of the ages of Rebekah, of Jacob, and 





240 COMMENTARY UPON - GHAP. XXXV. — 
; 4 


been sent by Rebekah to meet her son Jacob ; but I do not : 
see what probability there is in the conjecture ; nor yet have 
I anything certain to affirm, except that, perhaps, she had 
loved Jacob from a boy, because she had nursed him ; and 
when she knew the cause of his exile, she followed him from — 
her regard for religion. Certainly Moses does not in vain 
celebrate her death with an eulogy so remarkable. 

9. And God appeared untoJacob. Moses, having introduced 
a few words on the death of Deborah, recites a second vision, 
by which Jacob was confirmed, after his return to Beth-el. 
Once, in this place, God had appeared unto him, when he was - 
on his way into Mesopotamia. In the meantime God had 
testified in various methods, as need required, that he would 
be present with him everywhere through his whole journey ; 
but now he is brought back again to that very place where 
a more illustrious and memorable oracle had been given 
him, in order that he may receive again a new confirmation 
of his faith. The blessing of God here means nothing else 
than his promise; for though men pray for blessings on 
each other; God declares himself to be the sole Dispenser 
of perfect happiness. Now Jacob heard at this time no- 
thing new; but the same promise is repeated to him, that 
he, as one who had returned from captivity to his own 
country, and had gathered new strength to his faith, might 
accomplish with greater courage the remaining course of 
his life. 7 

10. Thy name shall not be called any more Jacob. We 
have before given the meaning of these words. The former 
name is not abolished, but the dignity of the other, which 
was afterwards put upon him, is preferred: for he was callec 
Jacob from the womb, because he had strongly wrestled with 
















of Rachel, that Deborah must, at this time, have lived far beyond the com- 
mon term of human life. “ Jacob was then about one hundred and seven 
years of age. Isaac had been sixty years old when Jacob was born; he 
married Rebekah when he was at the age of forty, and she could not be 
less than twenty at the time of her marriage; it will follow that she bore 
twins in, or after, the fortieth year of her age. If these forty years be ad 
ded to the one hundred and seven of Jacob’s life, this will make oné 
hundred and forty-seven. Supposing Deborah to have been twenty-five 
when she was given as a nurse to Rebekah, she could not now be less than 
one hundred and seventy years old.” —See Rivetus, p. 701.—Ed. 


re _ 


. OHAP, XXXV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 241 


his brother; but he was afterwards called Israel, because he 
entered into contest with God, and obtained the victory ; 
not that he had prevailed by his own power, (for he had 
borrowed courage and strength and arms from God alone,) 
but because it was the Lord’s will freely to confer upon 
him this honour. He therefore speaks comparatively, show- 
ing that the name Jacob is obscure and ignoble when com- 
pared with the name Israel. Some understand it thus, 
“Not only shalt thou be called Jacob, but the surname of 
Israel shall be added ;” yet the former exposition seems to 
me the more simple ; namely, that the old name, having in 
it less of splendour, should give place to the second. What 
_ Augustine adduces is specious rather than solid; namely, 
_ that he was called Jacob in reference to his present life, but 
Israel in reference to his future life. Let this, however, be 
_ regarded as settled, that a double name was given to the holy 
man, of which one was by far the most excellent; for we see 
that the prophets often combine them both, thus marking the 
constancy of God’s grace from the beginning to the end. 
li. L am God Almighty. God here, as elsewhere, pro- 
claims his own might, in order that Jacob may the more cer- 
tainly rely on his faithfulness. He then promises that he 
will cause Jacob to increase and multiply, not only into one 
: pation, but into a multitude of nations. When he speaks of 
‘a nation,” he no doubt means that the offspring of Jacob 
should become sufficiently numerous to acquire the body 
and the name of-one great people. But what follows concern- 
‘ing “nations” may appear absurd ; for if we wish it to.refer 
‘to the nations which; by gratuitous adoption, are inserted 
into the race of Abraham, the form of expression is improper : 
but if it be understood of sons by natural descent, then it 
would be a curse rather than a blessing, that the Church, 
the safety of which depends on its unity, should be divided 
into many distinct nations. But to me it appears that the 
Lord, in these words, comprehended both these benefits ; for 
“when, under Joshua, the people was apportioned into tribes, 
as if the seed of Abraham was propagated into so many dis- 
tinct nations; yet the body was not thereby divided ; it 
is called an assembly of nations, for this reason, because in 
VOL. II. Q 











242 COMMENTARY UPON OHAP, XXXy. 


connection with that distinction a sacred unity yet flourished. 
The language also is not improperly extended to the Gentiles, 
who, having been before dispersed, are collected into one 
congregation by the bond of faith ; and although they were 
not born of Jacob according to the flesh ; yet, because faith 
was to them the commencement of a new birth, and the 
covenant of salvation, which is the seed of spiritual birth, 
flowed from Jacob, all believers are rightly reckoned among 
his sons, according to the declaration, “ I have constituted 
thee a father of many nations.” 

And kings shall come out of thy los. This, in my judg- 
ment, ought properly to be referred to David and his pos- 
terity ; for God did not approve of the kingdom of Saul, and 
therefore it was not established ; and the kingdom of Israel 
was but a corruption of the legitimate kingdom. I acknow- 
ledge truly that, sometimes, those things which have sprung 
from evil sources are numbered among God’s benefits; but 
because here the simple and pure benediction of God is 
spoken of, I willingly understand it of David’s successors 
only. Finally ; Jacob is constituted the lord of the land, as 
the sole heir of his grandfather Abraham, and of his father 
Isaac ; for the Lord manifestly excludes Esau from the holy 
family, when he transfers the dominion of the land, by he- 
reditary right, to the posterity of Jacob alone. ; 

13. And God went up from him, This ascent of God is 
analogous to his descent ; for God, who fills heaven and earth, 
is yet said to descend to us, though he changes not his place, 
whenever he gives us any token of his presence; a mode 
of expression adopted in accommodation to our littleness. 
He went up, therefore, from Jacob, when he disappeared” 
from his sight, or when the vision ended. By the use of 
such language, God shows us the value of his word, because, 
indeed, he is near to us in the testimony of his grace ; for, ° 
seeing that there is a great distance between us and his 
heavenly glory, he descends to us by his word. This, at 
length, was fully accomplished in the person of Christ ; who 
while, by his own ascension to heayen, he raised our faith 
thither ; nevertheless dwells always with us by the power of 
his Spirit. | 











« 
ad 



























CHAP. XXXV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 243 


14. And Jacob set up a pillar. Though it is possible that 

he may again have erected a sacred monument, in memory 
of the second vision ; yet I readily subscribe to the opinion of 
those who think that reference is made to what had been . 
done before ; as if Moses should say, that was the ancient 
temple of God, in which Jacob had poured forth his libation : 
for he had not been commanded to come thither for the sake 
of dwelling there ; but in order that a fresh view of the place 
might renew his faith in the ancient oracle, and more fully 
confirm it. We read elsewhere that altars were built by the 
holy fathers, where they intended to remain longer; but 
their reason for,doing so was different: for whereas Jacob 
had made a solemn vow in Beth-el, on condition that he 
should be brought back by the Lord in safety ; thanksgiving 
is now required of him, after he has become bound by his 
vow,’ that, being strengthened, he may pass onward on his 
journey. | 
16. And they journeyed from Beth-el. We have seen how 
‘severe a wound the defilement of his daughter inflicted on 
holy Jacob, and with what terror the cruel deed of his two 
sons had inspired him. Various trials are now blended to- 
gether, by which he is heavily afflicted throughout his old 
_ age; until, on his departure into Egypt, he receives new joy 
| at the sight of his son Joseph. But even this was a most 
_ grievous temptation, to be exiled from the promised land even 
to his death. The death of his beloved wife is next related ; 
and soon after follows the incestuous intercourse of his first- 
born with his wife Bilhah. A little later, Isaac his father 
“dies ; then his son Joseph is snatched away, whom he sup- 
_ poses to have been torn in pieces by wild beasts. While he 
is almost consumed with perpetual mourning, a famine arises, 
80 that he is compelled to seek food from Egypt. There 
another of his sons is kept in chains; and, at length, he is 
deprived of his own most beloved Benjamin, whom he sends 


7 = Nune gratiarum actio ab eo exigitur, postquam reus voti factus est, 
ut confirmatus alio transeat. The French translation of “ postquam reus 
" Yoti factus est” is, “apres qu’il a eu jouissance de son souhait,” “ after 
he had obtained the enjoyment of his wish;” and this would read more 
_ smoothly than the translation given above; but is “reus voti” capable of 


such a version ?— Vide Lexicon Facciolati, sub voce reus.—Ed. 
ry 





244 COMMENTARY UPON 





away as if his own bowels were torn from him. We see, 
’ therefore, by what a severe conflict, and by what a continued 
succession of evils, he was trained to the hope of a better 
life. And whereas Rachel died in childbirth, through the 
fatigue of the journey, before they reached a resting-place ; 
this would prove no small accession to his grief. - But, as to 
his being bereaved of his most beloved wife, this was pro- 
bably the cause, that the Lord intended to correct the ex- 
orbitance of his affection for her. The Holy Spirit fixes 
no mark of infamy upon Leah; seeing that she was a holy 
woman, and endowed with greater virtue; but Jacob more 
highly appreciated Rachel’s beauty. This fault in the holy 
man was cured by a bitter medicine, when his wife was 
taken away from him: and the Lord often deprives the 
faithful of his own gifts, to correct their perverse abuse of 
them. The wicked, indeed, more audaciously profane the 
gifts of God ; but if God connives longer at their miscon- 
duct, a more severe condemnation remains to them on ac- 
count of his forbearance. But in taking away from his ae 
people the occasion of sinning, he promotes their salvation. 
Whoever, therefore, desires the continued use of God's gifts 
let him learn not to abuse them, but to enjoy them with 
purity and sobriety. 

17. The midwife said unto her. We know that the ancient 
were very desirous of offspring, especially of male offspring. 
Since Rachel therefore does not accept this kind of consola 
tion when offered, we infer that she was completely oppresse 
with pain. She therefore died in agonies, thinking of nothin 
but her sad childbirth and her own sorrows: from the feel 
ing of which she gave a name to her son; but Jacob after 
wards corrected the error. For the change of the name 
sufficiently shows, that, in his judgment, the excess of sor 
row in his wife was wrong; seeing that she had brand 
his son with a sinister and opprobrious name ;* for tha 
sadness is not free from ingratitude, which so occupies ot 















* Rachel, in the act of dying, called her son Benoni, the son of my 
row ; Jacob called him Benjamin, the son of my right hand. It is wo 


of remark that Benjamin was the only son of Jacob born in the land 
Canaan,— Ed. 





CHAP. XXXV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. B45 


minds in adversity that the kindness of God does not exhi- 
larate them ; or, at least, does not infuse some portion of 


_ sweetness to mitigate our grief. Then her burial is men- 


tioned ; to which the holy fathers could not have attended 


with such religious care, except on account of their hope 


of the future resurrection. Whenever, therefore, we read con- 
cerning their burying the dead, as if they were anxious about 


the performance of some extraordinary duty, let us think 


of that end of which I have spoken ; for it was no foolish 
ceremony, but a lively symbol of the future resurrection. 
I acknowledge, indeed, that profane and degenerate men at 


_ that time, in various places, vainly incurred much expense 
and toil in burying their dead, only as an empty solace of 
their grief. But although they had declined from the origi- 


nal institution into gross errors, yet the Lord caused that 


_ this rite should remain entire among his own people. More- 


over, he designed that a testimony should exist among un- 
believers, by which they might be rendered inexcusable. 
For since, independently of instruction, this sentiment was 


innate in all men, that to bury the dead was one of the 
_ offices of piety, nature has clearly dictated to them that the 


_ human body is formed for immortality ; and, therefore, that, 
by sinking into death, it does not utterly perish. The sta- 
tue or monument, erected by him, signifies the same thing. 


He reared no citadel which might stand as a token of his 


| glory among his posterity: but he took care to raise the 
memorial of a sepulchre, which might be a witness to all 


ages that he was more devoted to the life to come; and, by 
the providence of God, this memorial remained standing, 


- till the people returned out of Egypt. 


22. Reuben went and lay with Bilhah. A sad and even 


_ tragic history is now related concerning the incestuous in- 


tercourse of Reuben with his mother-in-law. Moses, indeed, 
calls Bilhah Jacob’s concubine: but thongh she had not 


come into the hands of her husband, as the mistress of the 
family and a partaker of his goods ; yet, as it respected the 


bed, she was his lawful wife, as we have before seen. If even 


a stranger had defiled the wife of the holy man, 1t would 
have been a great disgrace ; it was, however, far more atrocious 


i 6 2 aod buy ae = & 
. i . Y Bie 
7 . 


pee 
4 


246 COMMENTARY UPON _ CHAP, XXXV. 


that he should suffer such an indignity from his own son. 
But how great and how detestable was the dishonour, that 
the mother of two tribes should not only contaminate herself 
with adultery, but even with incest ; which crime is so ab- 
horrent to nature, that, not even among the Gentiles, has it 
ever been held tolerable? And truly, by the wonderful arti- 
fice of Satan, this great obscenity penetrated into the holy 
house, ‘in order that the election of God might seem to be of 
no effect. Satan endeavours, by whatever means he can, to 
pervert the grace of God in the elect ; and since he cannot 
effect that, he either covers it with infamy, or at least obscures 
it. Hence it happens that disgraceful examples often steal 
into the Church. And the Lord, in this manner, suffers his 
own people to be humbled, that they may be more attentively 
careful of themselves, that they may more earnestly watch 
unto prayer, and may learn entirely to depend on his merey. 
Moses only relates that Jacob was informed of this crime ; 
but he conceals his grief, not because he was unfeeling, (for 
he was not so stupid as to be insensible to sorrow,) but 
because his grief was too great to be expressed. For here 
Moses seems to have acted as the painter did who, in repre- 
senting the sacrifice of Iphigenia, put a yeil over her father’s 
face, because he could not sufficiently express the grief of 
his countenance. In addition to this eternal disgrace of the 
family, there were other causes of anxiety which transfixed 
the breast of the holy man. The sum of his happiness was 
in his offspring, from which the salvation of the whole world 
was to proceed. Whereas, already, two of his sons had been - 
perfidious and sanguinary robbers; the first-born, now, exceeds 
them both in wickedness. But here the gratuitous election of | 
God has appeared the more illustrious, because it was not on — 
account of their worthiness that he preferred the sons of Jacob ~ 
to all the world; and also because, when they had fallen so- 
basely, thiselection nevertheless remained firm and efficacious. 
Warned by such examples, let us learn to fortify ourselves 
against those dreadful scandals by which Satan strives to ; 
disturb us. Let every one also privately apply this to the 
strengthening of his own faith. For sometimes even good 
men slide, as if they had fallen from grace. Desperation 










- OHAP. XXXV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 247 


would necessarily be the consequence of such ruin, unless the 
Lord, on the other hand, held out the hope of pardon. A 
remarkable instance of this is set before us in Reuben ; who, 
after this extreme act of iniquity, yet retained his rank of a 
patriarch in the Church. We must, however, remain under 
the custody of fear and watchfulness, lest temptation should 
seize upon us unawares, and thus the snares of Satan should 
envelop us. For the Holy Spirit did not design to set before 
“us an example of vile lust, in order that every one might rush 
into incestuous connexions; but would rather expose to in- 


_ famy the baseness of this crime, in an honourable person, that 


all, on that account, might more vehemently abhor it. This 
passage also refutes the error of Novatus. Reuben had been 
properly instructed ; he bore in his flesh, from early infancy, 
the symbol of the ee covenant ; he was even born again 
by the Spirit of God ; we see, Khacntons what was the deep 
abyss from which he was raised by the incredible mercy of 
God. The Novatians, therefore, and similar fanatics, have 
‘no right to cut off the hope of pardon from the lapsed: for 
it is no slight injury to Christ, if we suppose the grace of 
God to be more restricted by his advent. 

_ Now the sons of Jacob were twelve. Moses again recounts 
‘the sons of Jacob in a regular series. Reuben is put the 


- first among them, not for the sake of honour, but that he 


tay be loaded malt the greater opprobrium : for the greater 
the honour which any one receives from the Lord, the more 
severely is he to be blamed, if he afterwards makes himself 


1 the slave of Satan, and deserts his post. Moses seems to 
‘insert this catalogue before the account of the death of Isaac, 
for the purpose of discriminating between the progeny of 
_ Jacob and the Idumeans, of whom he is about to make 
“mention in the following chapter. For on the death of Isaac 


the fountain of the holy race became divided, as into two 


streams; but since the adoption of God restrained itself to 
_ one branch only, it was necessary to distinguish it from the 
— other. 


28. And the days of Isaac. The death of Isaac is not 


Yelated in its proper order, as will soon appear from the 


connection of the history: but, as we have elsewhere seen, the 


a a. | 


ae 
ie 
























248 COMMENTARY UPON 


figure hysteron proteron was familiar to | Manes When it 
is said, that he died old, and full of days, the meaning is, 
that, having fulfilled the course of his life, he departed by a 
mature death ; this, therefore, is ascribed to the blessing of 
God. Nevertheless; I refer these words not merely to the 
duration of his life, but also to the state of his feelings ; | 
implying that Isaac, being satisfied with life, willingly and 
placidly departed out of the world. For we may see certain 
decrepid old men, who are not less desirous of life than they 
were in the flower of their age; and with one foot in the 
grave, they still have a horror of death. Therefore, though 
long life is reckoned among the blessings of God; yet it 
is not enough for men to be able to count up a great number 
of years ; unless they feel that they have lived long, and, beindl 
satisfied with the favour of God and with their own age, 
prepare themselves for their departure. Now, in order that 
old men may have their minds formed to this kind of mode- 
ration, it behoves them to have a good conscience, to the 
end, that they may not flee from the presence of God ; fo1 
an evil conscience pursues and agitates the wicked witk 
terror. Moses adds, that Isaac was buried by his two sons 
For since, at that time, the resurrection was not clearly re. 
vealed, and its first fruits had not yet appeared, it behovec 
the holy fathers to be so much the more diligently trained in 
significant ceremonies, in order that they might correct the 
impression produced by the semblance of destruction whieh 
is presented in death: By the fact that Esau is put first 
we are taught again, that the fruit of the paternal benedie: 
tion was not received by Jacob in this life ; for he who wa 
the first-born by right, is still subjected to the other, alt 
his father’s death. 





A he 


' The death of Isaac is mentioned here, out of place, to prevent th 
subsequent interruption of the history. The events of the thirty-sevent 
and thirty-eighth chapters preceded it; for Isaac lived about fifteen year 
after the removal of Joseph into Egypt. — Ed. : 





ie eA 


CHAP. XXXVI. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


249 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 


1. Now these are the generations 
of Esau, who is Edom. 

2. Esau took his wives of the 
daughters of Canaan; Adah the 
daughter of Elon the Hittite, and 
Aholibamah the daughter of Anah, 
the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite; 

3. And Bashemath, Ishmael’s 
daughter, sister of Nebajoth. 

4. And Adah bare to Esau Eli- 


phaz; and Bashemath bare Reuel; 


5. And Aholibamah bare Jeush, 
and Jaalam, and Korah. These are 
the sons of Esau, which were born 
unto him in the land of Canaan. 

6. And Esau took his wives, and 
his sons, and his daughters, and all 
the persons of his house, and his cat- 


- tle, and all his beasts, and all his 


substance, which he had got in the 
land of Canaan, and went into the 
country from the face of his brother 


Jacob. 


7. For their riches were more 
than that they might dwell together ; 
and the land wherein they were 
strangers could not bear them be- 
cause of their cattle. 

8. Thus dwelt Esau in Mount 
Seir. Esau is Edom. 

9. And these are the generations 
of Esau, the father of the Edomites, 
in Mount Seir. 

10. These are the names of Esau’s 
sons; Eliphaz the son of Adah the 
wife of Esau; Reuel the son of Bas- 
hemath the wife of Esau. 

11. And the sons of Eliphaz were 
Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, 


— and Kenaz. 


12. And Timna was concubine to 


_ Eliphaz, Esau’s son: and she bare 
to Eliphaz Amalek: these were the 


sons of Adah, Esau’s wife. 

13. And these are the sons of 
Reuel; Nahath, and Zerah, Sham- 
mah, and Mizzah: these were the 
sons of Bashemath, Esau’s wife. 

14, And these were the sons of 


1. Istze vero sunt generationes 
Esau, hie est Edom. 

2. Esau accepit uxores suas e 
filiabus Chenaan, Hadah filiam Elon 
Hittei, et Aholibamah filiam Anah, 
filiam Sibhon Hivveei, 


3. Et Bosmath filiam Ismael soro- 
rem Nebajoth. 

4. Et peperit Adah ipsi Esau Eli- 
phaz: et Bosmath peperit Rehuel. 

5. Et Aholibamah peperit Jehus, 
et Jahalam, et Corah : isti filii Esau, 
qui nati sunt ei in terra Chenaan. 


6. Et accepit Esau uxores suas, 
et filios suos, et filias suas, et omnes 
animas domus sus, et pecudes suas, 
et omnia jumenta sua, et omnem 
acquisitionem suam, quam acquisi- 
erat in terra Chenaan: et profectus 
est ad aliam terram a facie Iahacob 
fratris sul. 

7. Erat enim substantia eorum 
multa, ita ut nequirent habitare 
pariter: nec poterat terra peregri- 
nationum eorum ferre eos propter 
substantiam eorum. 

8. Habitavit itaque Esau in monte 
Sehir: Esau est Edom. 

9. Ac iste sunt generationes Esau 
patris Edom in monte Sehir. 


10. Ista sunt nomina filiorum 
Esau: Eliphaz filius Hadah uxoris 
Esau, Rehuel filius Bosmath uxoris 
Esau. 

11. Et fuerunt filii Eliphaz, The- 
man, Omar, Sepho, et Gahatham, 
et Cenaz. 

12. Timnah autem fuit concu- 
bina Eliphaz filii Esau, et peperit 
ipsi Eliphaz Hamalec. Isti sunt 
filii Hadah uxoris Esau. 

13. Isti vero sunt filii Rehuel: 
Nahath, et Zerach, Sammah, et 
Mizza: isti sunt filii Bosmath uxoris 
Esau. 

14. Et isti fuerunt filii Aholiba- 





250 


Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah, 
the daughter of Zibeon, Esau’s wife ; 
and she bare to Esau Jeush, and 
Jaalam, and Korah. 

15. These were dukes of the sons 
of Esau: the sons of Eliphaz, the 
first-born son of Esau ; duke Teman, 
duke Omar, duke Zepho, duke 
Kenaz, 

16. Duke Korah, duke Gatam, 
and duke Amalek. These are the 
dukes that came of Eliphaz in the 
land of Edom: these were the sons 
of Adah. 

17. And these are the sons of 
Reuel, Esau’s son; duke Nahath, 
duke Zerah, duke Shammah, duke 
Mizzah. ‘These are the dukes that 
came of Reuel in the land of Edom ; 
these are the sons of Bashemath, 
Esau’s wife. 

18. And these are the sons of 
Aholibamah, Esau’s wife; duke Je- 
ush, duke Jaalam, duke Korah: 
these were the dukes that came of 
Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah, 
Esau’s wife. 

19. These are the sons of Esau, 
who is Edom, and these are their 
dukes. 

20. These are the sons of Seir the 
Horite, who inhabited the land; Lo- 
tan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and 
Anah, 

21. And Dishon, and Ezer, and 
Dishan. These are the dukes of the 
Horites, the children of Seir in the 
land of Edom. 

22. And the children of Lotan 


were Hori, and Heman : and Lotan’s" 


sister was Timna, 

23. And the children of Shobal 
were these; Alvan, and Manahath, 
and Ebal, Shepho, and Onam. 

24. And these are the children of 
Zibeon; both Ajah and Anah: this 
was that Anah that found the mules 
in the wilderness, as he fed the asses 
of Zibeon his father. 

25. And the children of Anah 
were these; Dishon, and Aholiba- 
mah the daughter of Anah. 

26. And these are the children of 
Dishon; Hemdan, and Eshban, and 
Ithran, and Cheran. 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. XXXVI. 


mah filie Hanah filie Sibhon uxoris 
Esau, quos peperit ipsi Esau: Jehu, 
et Jahalam, et Corah. = 


15. Isti duces filiorum Esau. Fi- 
lii Eliphaz primogeniti Esau, dux 
Theman, dux Omar, dux Sepho, 
dux Chenaz, 


16. Dux Corah, dux Gahatham, 
dux Hamalee: isti sunt duces Eli- 
phaz in terra Edom: isti sunt filii 
Hadah. 


17. Et isti sunt filii Rehuel filii 
Esau: dux Nahath, dux Zerach, 


dux Sammah, dux Mizzah: istisunt _ 


duces Rehuel in terra Edom: isti 
sunt filii Bosmath uxoris Esau. 


18. Isti autem sunt filii Aholi- 
bamah uxoris Esau, dux Jehus, dux 
Jahalam, dux Corah: isti sunt duces 
prelpaae filie Hanah uxoris 

saul. 


19. Isti sunt filii Esau, et isti 
duces eorum: ipse est Edom. 


20. Isti sunt filii Sehir Horei, 
habitatores terree: Lotan, et Sobal, 
et Sibhon, et Hanah, 


21. Et Dison, et Eser, et Disan. 
Isti duces Horzeorum filiorum Sehir 
in terra Edom. 


22. Et fuerunt filii, Lotan, Hori, 
et Heman: et soror Lotan, Thim- 
nah. 

23. Isti sunt filii Sobal: Halvan, 
et Manahath, et Hebal, Sepho, et 
Onam. 

24. Et isti sunt filii Sibhon: 
Ajah et Hanah: hic est Hanah, qui 
invenit mulos in deserto, quum pas- 
ceret asinos Sibhon patris sui. 


25. Et isti sunt filii Hanah: 
Disan, et Aholibamah filia Hanah. 


26. Et isti sunt filii Dison: Hem- 
dan, et Esban, et Ithran, et Cheran. 











CHAP. XXXVI. THE BOOK 


_ 27. The children of Ezer are 
_ these; Bilhan, and Zaavan,and Akan. 
28. The children of Dishan are 
these; Uz, and Aran. 

29. These are the dukes that came 
of the Horites; duke Lotan, duke 
Shobal, duke Zibeon, duke Anah, 

30. Duke Dishon, duke LEzer, 
duke Dishan. These are the dukes 
that came of Hori, among their 
_ dukes in the land of Seir. 

31. And these are the kings that 
reigned in the land of Edom, before 
there reigned any king over the 
children of Israel. 

32. And Bela the son of Beor 
reigned in Edom: and the name of 
his city was Dinhabah. 

_ 83. And Bela died; and Jobab 
_ the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned 
in his stead. 

34. And Jobab died ; and Husham 
of the land of Temani reigned in 
his stead. 

35. And Husham died; and Hadad 
the son of Bedad, who smote Mi- 
dian in the field of Moab, reigned 
in his stead: and the name of his 
city was Avith. 

36. And Hadad died; and Samlah 
of Masrekah reigned in his stead. 

37. And Samlah died; and Saul 
_ of Rehoboth by the river reigned in 
his stead. 

88. And Saul died; and Baal- 
hanan the son of Achbor reigned in 
his stead. 
| 39. And Baal-hanan the son of 
Achbor died; and Hadar reigned in 

his stead: and the name of his city 
_ was Pau; and his wife’s name was 
| Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, 
__ the daughter of Mezahab. 

- 40. And these ave the names of 
the dukes that came of Esau, accord- 
“ing to their families, after their 
_ Places, by their names; duke Tim- 
nah, duke Alvah, duke Jetheth, 
_ 41. Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, 
duke Pinon, 
42. Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, 
- duke Mibzar, 
43. Duke Magdiel, duke Iram. 

These be the dukes of Edom, accord- 

ing to their habitations in the land 





OF GENESIS. yy 

27. Isti sunt filii Eser: Bilhan, 
et Zaavan, et Acan. 

28. Isti sunt filii Disan: Us et 
Aran. 

29. Isti sunt duces Horeorum: 
dux Lotan, dux Sobal, dux Sibhon, 
dux Hanah. 

30. Dux Dison, dux Eser, dux 
Disan: isti sunt duces Horsorum, 
in ducibus eorum, in terra Sehir. 


31. Et isti sunt reges, qui regna- 
verunt in terra Edom, antequam 
regnaret rex super filios Israel. 


32. Nempe regnavit in Edom, 
Belah filius Behor: et nomen urbis 
ejus Dinhabah. 

33. Et mortuus est Belah, et reg- 
navit pro eo Jobab, filius Zerah de 
Bosrah. 

34. Et mortuus est Jobab, et reg- 
navit pro eo Hussam e terra Aus- 
trali. 

35. Et mortuus est Hussam, et 
regnavit pro eo Hadad filius Bedad, 
qui percussit Midian in agro Moab: 
et nomen urbis ejus Avith. 


36. Et mortuus est Hadad, et 
regnavit pro eo Samlah de Masrecah. 

37. Et mortuus est Samlah, et 
regnavit pro eo Saul de Rehoboth 
fluminis. 

38. Et mortuus est Saul et regna- 
vit pro eo Bahal-hanan filius Hach- 
bor. 

39. Et mortuus est Bahal-hanan 
filius Hachbor, et regnavit pro eo 
Hadar: et nomen civitatis ejus Pa- 
hu: nomen autem uxoris ejus Mehe- 
tabel filia Matred filize Me-zahab. 


40. Ista ergo sunt nomina ducum 
Esau, per familias suas, per loca 
sua, secundum nomina sua: dux 
Thimnah, dux Haluah, dux Jetheth, 


41. Dux Aholibamah, dux Elah, 
dux Pinon, 7 

42. Dux Cenaz, dux Theman, 
dux Mibsar, 

43. Dux Magdiel, dux Hiram: 
isti sunt duces Edom per habita- 
tiones suas, in terra heereditatis 


ae es so RR 





252 COMMENTARY UPON , CHAP. XXXVI. 


of their possession: he is Esau, the ipsorum: ipse est Esau pater E-— 
father of the Edomites. dom. : verte 


1. Now these are the generations of Esau. Though Esau 
was an alien from the Church in the sight of God; yet since 
he also, as a son of Isaac, was favoured with a temporal 
blessing, Moses celebrates his race, and inscribes a sufi-— 
ciently lengthened catalogue of the people born from him. 
This commemoration, bowers resembles an honourable - 
sepulture. For although Esau, with his posterity, took the 
precedence ; yet this dignity was like a bubble, which is— 
comprised under the figure of the world, and which quickly 
perishes. As, therefore, it has been before said of other 
profane nations, so now Esau is exalted as on a lofty theatre. 
But since there is no permanent condition out of the king- 
dom of God, the splendour attributed to him is evanescent, 
and the whole of his pomp departs like the passing scene of 
the stage. The Holy Spirit designed, indeed, to testify that | 
the prophecy which Isaac uttered concerning Esau was not 
vain ; but he has no sooner shown its effect, than he turns - 
away our eyes, as if he had cast a veil over it, that we 
may confine our attention to the race of Jacob. Now, 
though Esau had children by three wives, in whom after- 
wards the blessing of God shone forth, yet polygamy is not, 
on that account, approved, nor the impure lust of man ex- 
cused: but in this the goodness of God is rather to be 
admired, which, contrary to the order of nature, gave a good 
issue to evil beginnings. 

6. And went into the country from the face of his brother 
Jacob. Moses does not mean that Esau departed purposely 
to give place to his brother ; for he was so proud and fero- 
cious, that he never would have allowed himself to seem his 
brother’s inferior. But Moses, without regard to Esau’s de- 
sign, commends the secret providence of God, by which he 
was driven into exile, that the possession of the land might 
remain free for Jacob alone. Esau removed to Mount Seir, 
through the desire of present advantage, as is elsewhe 
stated. Nothing was less in his mind than to provide fo 
his brother’s welfare ; but God directed the blind man by 
his own hand, that he might not occupy that place in th 

























D 





| CHAP. XXXVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 253 


_ land which he had appointed for his own servant. Thus it 
often happens that the wicked do good to the elect children 


of God, contrary to their own intention; and while their 
hasty cupidity pants for present advantages, they promote 
the eternal salvation of those whose destruction they have 
sometimes desired, Let us, then, learn from the passage 
before us, to see, by the eyes of faith, both in accidental 
circumstances (as they are called) and in the evil designs of 
men, that secret providence of God, which directs all events 
to a result predetermined by himself. For when Esau went 
forth, that he might live more commodiously apart from his 
father’s family, he is said to have departed from the face of 
his brother, because the Lord had so determined it. It is 
stated indefinitely, that he departed “ into the country ;” 
because, being in uncertainty respecting his plan, he sought 
a home in various places, until Mount Seir presented itself; 
and as we say, he went out at a venture.’ 

9. And these are the generations of Esau, the father of the 
Edomites.” Though Esau had two names, yet in this place 
the second name refers to his posterity, who are called 
Idumeans. For, to make it appear what God had bestowed 
upon him for the sake of his father Isaac, Moses expressly 
calls him the father of a celebrated and famous people. 
And certainly, it served this purpose not a little, to trace the 
effect and fulfilment of the prophecy in the progeny of Esau. 
For if the promise of God so mightily flourished towards a 
stranger, how much more powerfully would it put itself forth 
towards the children, to whom pertaineth the adoption, and 
consequently the inheritance of grace? Esau was an ob- 
scure man, and a sojourner in that country : whence there- 
fore is it, that suddenly rulers should spring from him, and 
a great body of people should flourish, unless because the 
benediction which proceeded from the mouth of Isaac, was 
confirmed by the result? For Esau did not reign in this 
desert without opposition; since a people of no ignoble 
name previously inhabited Mount Seir. On this account 
Moses relates that the men who had before inhabited that 


1 Quemadmodum Gallice dicitur, JJ s’en est allé a son aventure. 
2 Patris Edom. 


254 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXVI. 


land were mighty: so that it would not have been easy for 
a stranger to acquire such power as Esau possessed, if he had 
not been divinely assisted. 

24. This was that Anah that found the mules. Mules are 
the adulterous offspring of the horse and the ass. Moses 
says that Anah was the author of this connection." But I 
do not consider this as said in praise of his industry ; for the 





Lord has not in vain distinguished the different kinds of — 


animals from the beginning. But since the vanity of the 


flesh often solicits the children of this world, so that they 
apply their minds to superfluous matters, Moses marks this 
unnatural pursuit in Anah, who did not think it sufficient 
to have a great number of animals; but he must add to 
them a degenerate race produced by unnatural intercourse. 


Moreover, we learn hence, that there is more moderation — 
among brute animals in following the law of nature, than in — 


men, who invent vicious admixtures. ¢ 


31. These are the kings that reigned, &c. We must keep in — 
memory what we have said: a little before, that reprobates — 
are suddenly exalted, that they may immediately fall, like — 
the herb upon the roofs, which is destitute of root, and has — 
a hasty growth, but withers the more quickly. To the two — 


sons of Isaac had been promised the honour that kings | 


should spring from them. The Idumeans first began to 
reign, and thus the condition of Israel seemed to be inferior. 


But at length, lapse of time taught how much better it is, — 
by creeping on the ground, to strike the roots deep, than to — 


acquire an extravagant pre-eminence for a moment, which 
speedily vanishes away. There is, therefore, no reason why the 
faithful, who slowly pursue their way, should envy the quick 


children of this world, their rapid succession of delights ;_ 
since the felicity which the Lord promises them is far more ~ 
stable, as it is expressed in the psalm, “ The children’s : 
children shall dwell there, and their inheritance shall be 


perpetual.” (Psalm cii. 28.) 


' The word 0%’, rendered mules by our translators, and by Calvin, is of 


doubtful signification ; it occurs in this place only. It is by many com- — 
mentators translated « waters,” or “warm springs;” and probably this q 
interpretation is to be preferred. The reader may see the question dis- — 


cussed in Professor Bush’s note on this verse. —Zd. 


: 
| 


\ 















_ OHAP, XXXVII. 


1. Anp Jacob dwelt in the land 
wherein his father was a stranger, 
in the land of Canaan. 
2. These are the generations of 
Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen 
iach old, was feeding the flock with 
his brethren; and the lad was with 
the sons of Bilhah, and with the 
sons of Zilpah, his father’s wives: 
and Joseph brought unto his father 
_ their evil report. 
__ 3. Now Israel loved Joseph more 
than all his children, because he was 
_ the son of his old age: and he made 
him a coat of many colours. 
4. And when his brethren saw 
that their father loved him more 
than all his brethren, they hated 
him, and could not speak peaceably 
unto him. 




























_ §. And Joseph dreamed a dream, 
and he told i¢ his brethren: and they 
hated him yet the more. 
__ 6. And he said unto them, Hear, 
I pray you, this dream which I have 
dreamed: 
7. For, behold, we were binding 
_ sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf 
arose, and also stood upright; and, 
behold, your sheaves stood round 
about, and mate obeisance to my 
sheaf. 
_ 8. And his brethren said to him, 
_ Shalt thou indeed reign over us? or 
shalt thou indeed have dominion over 
us? And they hated him yet the 
more for his dreams, and for his 
words. 
_ Q. And he dreamed yet another 
_ dream, and told it his brethren, and 
_ said, Behold, Ihave dreamed a dream 
- more; and, behold, the sun, and the 
moon, and the eleven stars, made 
 Obeisance to me. 
- 10. And he told i to his father, 
_and to his brethren: and his father 
_ rebuked him, and said unto him, 
_ What is this dream that thou hast 
_ dreamed? Shall I, and thy mother, 


3 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. . 


255 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


1. Habitavit itaque Iahacob in 
terra peregrinationum patris sui, in 
terra Chenaan. 

2. Istee sunt generationes Iaha- 
cob. Joseph filius septendecim an- 
norum pascebat cum fratribus suis 
pecudes, et erat puer cum filiis Bilhah 
et cum filiis Zilpah uxorum patris 
sui: et retulit Ioseph obloquutionem 
eorum malam patri eorum. 


3. Porro Israel diligebat Joseph 
pre cunctis filiis suis, quia filius se- 
nectutis erat ei: et fecerat ei tuni- 
cam multicolorem. 

4. Kt viderunt fratres ejus, quod 
eum diligeret pater eorum prez cunc- 
tis fratribus ejus, et odio habebant 
eum, et non poterant alloqui eum 
pacifice. 

5. Somniavit autem Joseph som- 
nium, et nuntiavit fratribus suis: et 
addiderunt amplius odio habere eum. 

6. Dixit enim ad eos, Audite 
queso somnium hoe quod somniavi. 


7. Eece enim ligabamus mani- 
pulos in medio agri: et ecce surrexit 
manipulus meus, ac etiam stabat : 
et ecce circumdabant manipuli ves- 
tri, et incurvabant se manipulo 
meo. 

8. Et dixerunt ei fratres ejus, 
Num regnando regnabis super nos? 
num dominando dominaberis nobis ? 
Addiderunt ergo adhuc odio habere 
eum propter somnium ejus, et prop- 
ter verba ejus. 

9. Et somniavit adhue somnium 
alterum, et narravit illud fratribus 
suis, et dixit, Ecce, somniavi som- 
nium adhuc: et ecce, sol et luna et 
undecim stelle incurvabant se mihi. 


10. Et narravit patri suo et fra- 
tribus suis: et increpavit eum pater 
ejus, et dixit ei, Quid est hoc som- 
nium quod somniasti? num veniendo 
veniemus ego et mater tua, et fra- 


256 


and thy brethren, indeed come to 

bow down ourselves to thee to the 

earth? 

* 11. And his brethren envied him; 3 

but his father observed the saying. 
12. And his brethren went to feed 

their father’s flock in Shechem. 


13. And Israel said unto Joseph, 
Do not thy brethren feed the flock 
in Shechem? come, and I will send 
thee unto them. And he said to 
him, Here am J. 

14. And he said to him, Go, I 
pray thee, see whether it be well 
with thy brethren, and well with the 
flocks; and bring me word again. 
So he sent him out of the vale of 
Hebron, and he came to Shechem. 

15. And a certain man found him, 
and, behold, he was wandering in the 
field: and the man asked him, say- 
ing, What seekest thou ? 

16. And he said, I seek my bre- 
thren: tell me, I pray thee, where 
they feed their flocks. 

17. And the man said, They are 
departed hence; for I heard them 
say, Let us go to Dothan. And 
Joseph went after his brethren, and 
found them in Dothan. 

18. And when they saw him afar 
off, even before he came near unto 
them, they conspired against him to 
slay him. 

19. And they said one to another, 
Behold, this dreamer cometh. 

20. Come now therefore, and let 
us slay him, and cast him into some 
pit; and we will say, Some evil 
beast hath devoured him: and we 
shall see what will become of his 
dreams, 

21. And Reuben heard 7t, and he 
delivered him out of their hands; 
and said, Let us not kill him. 

22. And Reuben said unto them, 
Shed no blood, but cast him into this 
pit that is in the wilderness, and lay 
no hand upon him; that he might 
rid him out of their hands, to deliver 
him to his father again. 

23. And it came to pass, when 
Joseph was come unto his brethren, 


COMMENTARY UPON 





CHAP, XXXVII. 


tres tui, ut incurvemus nos tibi ad 
terram ? | 

11. Et inviderunt ei fratres ejus: 
bas pe ejus observabat rem. 

Profecti autem sunt fratres 
gos ut pascerent pecudes patris sui 
in Sechem. 

13. Et dixit Israel ad Jose a 
Nonne fratres tui pascunt in 
chem? veni, et mittam te ad eos, 
Et dixit ei, Eece adsum. 


14. Et ait ei, Vade nune, vide in- 
columitatem fratrum tuorum, et in-— 
columitatem pecorum, et refer mihi 
rem: et misit eum ex valle Hebron: 
et venit in Sechem. 


15. Porro invenit eum vir, et ecce | 
errabat in agro: interrogavit autem 
eum vir ille,-dicendo, Quid queeris 7 


16. Et dixit, Fratres meos ego- 
quero, nuntia, obsecro, mihi, ubi 
ipsi pascant. 

17. Et dixit vir ille, Profecti sunt _ 
hinec: audivi enim eos dicentes, 
EKamus in Dothan. Et perrexit 
Joseph post fratres suos, et invenit 
eos in Dothan. | 

18. Et viderunt eum e longinquo: 
et antequam appropinquaret eis, 
machinati sunt contra eum ut inte-— 
rimerent eum. 

19. Ac dicebat alter alteri, Bece, 
magister ille somniorum venit. 

20. Nune igitur venite, et occi- 
damus illum, et projiciamus eum in | 
unam e cisternis: et dicemus, Bestia 
mala devoravit eum: et videbimus 
quid erunt somnia ejus. — 

21. Et audivit Reuben, et eripuit | 
eum e manu eorum, et dixit, Ne 
pereutiamus eum 7m anima, 

22. Dixit ergo ad eos Reuben, Ne 
effundatis sanguinem: projicite eum 
in cisternam hane, que est in de- 
serto, ef manum ne mittatis in eum: ° 
ut erueret eum e manu eorum, ut 
reduceret eum ad patrem suum. 

23. Et fuit, ut venit Joseph ad 
fratres suos, exuerunt Joseph tunica 


d 


> 



































CHAP. XXXVILI. 


that they stripped Joseph out of his 
_ coat, his coat of many colours, that 
as on him; : 

_ 24. And they took him, and cast 
him into a pit: and the pit was 
empty, there was no water in it. 

_ 25. And they sat down to eat 
bread : and they lifted up their eyes, 
and looked, and, behold, a company 
of Ishmeelites came from Gilead, 
with their camels bearing spicery, 
and balm, and myrrh, going to carry 
4a down to Egypt. 

_ 26. And Judah said unto his 
brethren, What profit is i¢ if we 
slay our brother, and conceal his 
blood? 

27. Come, and let us sell him to 
the Ishmeelites, and let not our hand 
be upon him; for he is our brother, 
and our flesh: and his brethren 
were content. 

_ 28. Then there passed by Midian- 
ites, merchant-men; and they drew 
and lifted up Joseph out of the pit, 
and sold Joseph to the Ishmeelites 
for twenty pieces of silver : and they 
brought Joseph into Egypt. 

_ 29. And Reuben returned unto the 
pit; and, behold, Joseph was not in 
the pit: and he rent his clothes. 


_ 30. And he returned unto his 
orethren, and said, The child és not; 
and I, whither shall I go? 

81. And they took Joseph’s coat, 
and killed a kid of the goats, and 
dipped the coat in the blood: 

32. And they sent the coat of 
many colours, and they brought it 
to their father; and said, This have 
we found: know now whether it be 
thy son’s coat or no. 

_ 83. And he knew it, and said, Jt 
#s my son’s coat; an evil beast hath 
devoured him: Joseph is without 
loubt rent in pieces. 

_ 34. And Jacob rent his clothes, 
and put sackcloth upon his loins, 
and mourned for his son many days. 


: 35. And all his sons, and all his 
_ daughters, rose up to comfort him ; 
} but he refused to be comforted: and 


VOL. II. 





THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


257 


sua, tunica multicolore, que erat 
super eum. 


24. Et tulerunt eum, et projece- 
runt eum in cisternam: et cisterna 
erat vacua, non erat in ea aqua. 

25. Postea sederunt ut comede- 
rent panem, et levaverunt oculos 
suos, et viderunt, et ecce turba 
Ismaelitarum veniebat de Gilhad, et 
cameli eorum portabant aromata, et 
resinam, et stacten, iter facientes ut 
deferrent in Hgyptum. 

26. Et dixit Jehudah fratribus 
suis, Que utilitas si oeciderimus fra- 
trem nostrum, et celaverimus san- 
guinem ejus ? 

27. Venite, et vendamus eum 
Ismaelitis, et manus nostra ne sit 
in eum, quia frater noster, caro 
nostra est: et paruerunt ei fratres 
ejus, 

28. Et transierunt viri Madianitee 
mercatores, et extraxerunt et sus- 
tulerunt Joseph e cisterna: et ven- 
diderunt Joseph Ismaelitis viginti 
argenteis, qui abduxerunt Ioseph in 
Aigyptum. - 

29. Deinde reversus est Reuben 
ad cisternam, et ecce non erat 
Joseph in cisterna, et scidit vesti- 
menta sua. 

30. Et reversus est ad fratres 
suos, et dixit, Puer non est, et ego 
quo, ego quo ibo? 

31. Et tulerunt tunicam Joseph, 
et jugulaverunt hircum caprarum, 
et tinxerunt tunicam in sanguine. 

32. Et miserunt tunicam multi- 
colorem, et deferri fecerunt ad pa- 
trem suum, et dixerunt, Hanc in- 
venimus, agnosce nunc utrum tunica 
filii tui sit, annon. 

33. Et agnovit eam, et dixit, Tu- 
nica filii mei est: bestia mala devo- 
ravit eum, rapiendo raptus est Io- 
seph. ; 

34. Et scidit Iahacob vestimenta 
sua, et posuit saccum in lumbis 
suis, et luxit super filio suo diebus 
multis. a 

35. Et surrexerunt omnes filii 
ejus, et omnes filize ejus, ut consola- 
rentur eum, sed noluit consolationem 


R 
























> 
‘us 


258 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXVII. 


he said, For I will go down into the admittere: et dixit, Certe descendam 
ve unto my son mourning. Thus ad filiummeum lugens ad sepulcrum: 

is father wept for him. et luxit eum pater ejus. 
36. And the Midianites sold him 36. Madianitz autem vendiderunt 
into Egypt unto Potiphar, an officer eum in Aigypto Potiphar satrapze 
of Pharaoh’s, and captain of the Pharaonis, principi satellitum. . 


1. And Jacob dwelt. Moses confirms what he had before 
declared, that, by the departure of Esau, the land wa s 
left to holy Jacob as its sole possessor. Although in 
appearance he did not obtain a single clod; yet, contented 
with the bare sight of the land, he exercised his faith ; and 
Moses expressly compares him with his father, who had been 
a stranger in that land all his life. Therefore, though by 
the removal of his brother to another abode, Jacob was no 
little gainer ; yet it was the Lord’s will that this advantage 
should be hidden from his eyes, in order that he might de 
pend entirely upon the promise. q 

2. These are the generations of Jacob. By the word NY 
(toledoth) we are not so much to understand a genealogy, a 
a record of events, which appears more clearly from the con: 
text. For Moses having thus commenced, does not enume 
rate sons and grandsons, but explains the cause of the env; 
of Joseph’s brethren, who formed a wicked conspiracy 
against him, and sold him as a slave: as if he had saic¢ 
‘Having briefly summed up the genealogy of Esau, I no 
revert to the series of my history, as to what happened t 
the family of Jacob.”* Moreover, Moses being about to spea! 

1 The second verse is rendered by Professor Bush in a manner differer 
from that of any other commentator whom the Editor has had the oppo 
tunity of consulting. His view of the passage is, at least, worthy of cons 
deration. “The correct translation,” he says, “ is doubtless the following 
‘Joseph, being seventeen years old, was tending his brethren among tl 
flocks, and he a (mere) lad, (even) the sons of Bilhah, &c.’ The mentio 
of his youth is brought in parenthetically, as something peculiarly worth 
of notice; while the clause, ‘ the sons of Bilhah, &c.,’ is designed to lim 
and specify the term ‘brethren’ going before.” This interpretation 1 
proceeds to vindicate by reference to passages of similar constructior 
which we have not room to quote. The point which it would establish i 
that Jacob assigned to his boy, of seventeen years of age, the superintend 
ence or oversight of the sons of Bilhah among the flocks; so that he wa 
rather an overlooker of the shepherds than of the sheep. This would sho’ 
more clearly the propriety of Joseph’s conduct, in carrying an ill report of — 
his brethren to their father ; and would also account for the hostility th 


| 


















CHAP. XXXVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 259 


of the abominable wickedness of Jacob’s sons, begins with 
the statement, that Joseph was dear beyond the rest to his 
peetber, because he had begotten him in his old age: and as 
a token of tender love, had clothed him with a coat woven 
of many colours. But it was not surprising that the boy 
should be a great favourite with his aged father, for so it is 
wont to happen: and no just ground is here given for envy ; 
seeing that sons of a more robust age, by the dictate of nature, 
“might well concede such a point. Moses, however, states this 
_as the cause of odium, that the mind of his father was more 
‘inclined to him than to the rest. The brethren conceive en- 
“mity against the boy, whom they see to be more tenderly loved 
_by their father, as having been born in his old age.’ If they 
‘did not choose to join in this love to their brother, why did 
“they not excuse it in their father? Hence, then, we perceive 
their malignant and perverse disposition. But, that a many- 
‘coloured coat and similar trifles inflamed them to devise a 
scheme of slaughter, is a proof of their detestable eruelty. 
“Moses also says that their hatred increased, because Joseph 
conveyed the evil speeches of his brethren to their father. 
Some expound the word evil as meaning some intolerable 
erime ; but others more correctly suppose, that it was a com- 
‘plaint of the boy that his brothers vexed him with their 
“Teproaches ; for, what follows in Moses, I take to have been 
added in explanation, that we may know the cause for which 
e had been treated so ill and with such hostility. It may 
‘be asked, why Moses here accuses only the sons of Bilhah 
and Zilpah, when, afterwards, he does not exempt the sons 
‘of Leah from the same charge? One, indeed, of her sons, 
Reuben, was milder than any of the rest ; next to him was 
Judah, who was his uterine brother. But what is to be said 
‘of Simeon? what of Levi? Certainly since they were older, 
it is probable that they were leaders in the affair. The sus- 
Picion may, however, be entertained, that because these were 


7 


felt towards him. But it may be doubted whether this interpretation can 
_stand.— Ed. 

_ 1 “Son of his old age.” The Chaldee renders it, “a wise son :” as if he 
Were a man in intellect, while a boy in years. This would avoid a diffi- 
culty ; for Benjamin was far more properly the son of Jacob’s old age than 
Joseph,— Ed. 





































el Re ar Rat 
Ad 5 - - _ 1 wa 
" 


260 COMMENTARY UPON — CHAP. ‘Xx 
the sons of concubines and not of true wives, their “oan 
would be more quickly moved with envy ; as if their servile 
extraction, on the mother’s side, subjected them to conk 
tempt. 
6. And Joseph dreamed a dream. ‘Moses haiti stated 
what were the first seeds of this enmity, now ascends higher, 
and shows that Joseph had been elected, by the wonderful 
purpose of God, to great things ; that this had been declared 
to him in a dream; and that, therefore, the hatred of his 
brethren broke forth into madness. God, however, revealed 
in dreams what he would do, that afterwards it might be 
known that nothing had happened fortuitously: but that 
what had been fixed by a celestial decree, was at length, in its 
proper time, carried forward through circuitous windings to 
its completion. It had been predicted to Abraham that his 
seed should be wanderers from the land of Canaan. In order, 
then, that Jacob might pass over into Egypt, this method was 
divinely appointed; namely, that Joseph, being president over 
Egypt in a time of famine, might bring his father thither with 
his whole family, and supply them with food. Now, from the 
facts first related, no one could have conjectured such a result. 
The sons of Jacob conspire to put the very person to death, 
without whom they cannot be preserved ; yea, he who was 
ordained to be the minister of salvation to them, is thrown 
into a well, and with difficulty rescued from the jaws of death. 
Driven about by various misfortunes, he seems to be an alier 
from his father’s house. Afterwards, he is cast into prison 
as into another sepulchre, where, for a long time, he lan 
guishes. Nothing, therefore, was less probable than that th 
family of Jacob should be preserved by his means, when he- 
was cut off from it, and carried far away, and not even reckons. 
ed among the living. Nor did any hope of his liberatio. 
remain, especially from the time in which he was neglectei 
by the chief butler ; but being condemned to perpetual ime 
prisonment, he was left there to rot. God, however, by suc 
complicated methods, accomplishes what he had purpose 
Wherefore, in this history, we have not only a most beautift 
example of Divine Providence, but also two other poin 
are added especially worthy of notice: first, that the Lod 



















a XXXVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 261 
rforms his work by wonderful and unusual modes; and, 
001 Seay, that he brings forth the salvation of his Church, 
5 “from magnificent splendour, but from death and the 
grave. Besides, in the person of Joseph, a lively image of 
Christ is presented, as will more fully appear from the con- 
text. But since these subjects will be often repeated, let us 
pollow the thread of Moses’ discourse. God, of his mere 
race, conferred peculiar honour on the boy, who was the last 
put one among twelve, in giving him the priority among his 
ethren. For, by what merit or virtue shall we say that 
I e Drtiained the lordship over his brethren? Afterwards 
: ie seemed, indeed, to acquire this by his own great benefi- 
ence : but from the dream we learn, that it was the free 
gift of God, which in no way depended upon Joseph’s bene- 
ficence. Rather, he was ordained to be chief, by the mere 
good pleasure of God, in order that he might show kindness 
to his brethren. Now, since the Lord was, at that time, wont 
to reveal his secrets by two methods—by visions and by 
dreams—one of these kinds is here noted. For no doubt 
Joseph had often dreamed in the common manner: but Moses 
shows that a dream was now divinely sent to him, which 
might have the force and weight of an oracle. We know that 
dreams are often produced by our daily thoughts: sometimes 
_ they are indications of an unhealthy state of the body: but 
_ whenever God intends to make known his counsel by dreams, 
he engraves on them certain marks, which distinguish them 
fe from passing and frivolous imaginations, in order that their 
mnaed and authority may stand firm. Thus Joseph, be- 
ing certainly persuaded that he had not been deluded by an 
Becspty spectre, fearlessly announced his dream as a celestial 
“oracle. Now, although the dominion is promised to him 
q nder a rural symbol, it is one which does not seem suitable 
Mor instruction to the sons of Jacob ; for we know that they 
+ herdsmen, not ploughmen. Since they had no harvest 
a which they could gather in, it seems hardly congruous that 
omage should be paid to his sheaf. But perhaps God de- 
_ signedly chose this similitude, to show that this prophecy was 
not founded upon the present fortunes of J oseph, and that 
- the material of his dominion would not consist in those things 


‘ 
{ 
| 
,) ’ 
a, 
7 
, 
Y 





262 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXVII. 


which were at hand, but that it should be a future benefit, the 
cause of which was to be sought for elsewhere than at home. — 

8. Shalt thow indeed reign over us? Here it is plainly 
shown to us that the paternal favour of God towards the 
elect, is like a fan to excite against them the enmity of the 
world. When the sons of Jacob heard that they were fight-_ 
ing in vain against God, their unjust hatred ought, by such — 
means, to have been corrected. For it was as if God, setting” 
himself in the midst, would repress their fury by these words, — 
“ Your impious conspiring will be fruitless ; for although you — 
boast, I have constituted as your chief, the man whose ruin — 
your wicked envy hurries you to seek.” Perhaps, also, by 
this consolatory dream, he intended to alleviate the trouble ~ 
of the holy youth. Yet their obstinacy caused it to be the © 
more increased. Let us then learn not to be grieved if, at 
any time, the shining of the grace of God upon us should 
cause us to be envied. Thesons of Jacob, however, were but 
too acute interpreters of the dream: yet they deride it as a _ 
fable, because it was repugnant to their wishes. Thus it_ 
often happens that they who are ill-disposed, quickly perceive — 
what is the will of God: but, because they feel no reverence, 
they despise it. To this contumacy, however, succeeds a~ 
stupor which destroys their former quick-sightedness. 

9. And he dreamed yet another dream. The scope of this” 
dream is the same. The only difference is, that God, to in-— 
spire greater confidence in the oracle, presents him with a 
figure from heaven. The brethren of Joseph had despised 
what was said concerning the sheaves; the Lord now calls _ 
upon them to look towards heaven, where his august Majesty 
shines forth. It may, however, be asked, how it can be re=_ 
conciled with fact, that his mother, who was now dead, could~ 
come and bow down to him. The interpretation of certain” 
Hebrews, who refer it to Bilhah, is frigid, and the sensé~ 
appears plain without such subterfuges: for the sun and 
moon designate the head of the family on each side: thus, 
in this figure, Joseph sees himself reverenced by the whole 
house of his father. A 

10. And his father rebuked him. If Jacob suspected that 
the dream originated in vain ambition, he rightly rebuked 


















 OHAP. XXXVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 263 


_ hisson ; but if he knew that God was the author of the dream 
he ought not to have expostulated with him. But that Fe 
_ did know it, may be hence inferred, because he is afterwards 
_ said seriously to have considered it. For Moses, making a dis- 
tinction between him and his sons, says that they breathed 
_ nothing but the wirus of envy ; while he revolved in his own 
_ mind what this might mean ; which could not have happened, 
unless he had been affected with reverence. But seeing that 
a certain religious impression on the subject rested on his 
_ mind, how was it that he rebuked his son? This truly was 
_ not giving honour to God and to his word. For it ought to 
have occurred to the mind of Jacob that, although Joseph 
was under his authority, he yet sustained a prophetic char- 
acter. It is probable, when he saw his sons so malevolent, 
that he wished to meet the danger by feigning what he did 
not feel: for he was not offended at the dream, but he was 
unwilling to exasperate the minds of those who, on account 
of their pride, would not bear to be in subjection. Therefore 
Ido not doubt that he feignedly reproved his son, from a 
desire to appease contention. Nevertheless, this method of 
pretending to be adverse to the truth, when we are endea- 
_ youring to appease the anger of those who rage against it, 
_ is by no means approved by God. He ought rather ingenu- 
_ ously to have exhorted his sons not to “ kick against the 
_ pricks.” Or at least he should have used this moderate 
address, “ If this is a common dream, let it be treated with 
_ ridicule rather than with anger ; but if it has proceeded from 
God, it is wicked to speak against it.” It is even possible that 
the unsuitableness of the dream had struck the mind of the 
oldman. For we know how difficult it is entirely to throw off 
all sense of superiority. Certainly, though Jacob declines 
slightly from the right course, yet his piety appears to be of 
no common order; because his reverence for the oracle so 
easily prevailed over every other feeling.’ But the most 
wicked obstinacy betrays itself in his sons, seeing they break 
out into greater enmity. For though they despise the dream, 
yet they are not made angry about nothing. Gladly would 
they have had their brother as a laughing-stock ; but a cer- 
tain secret sense of the Deity constrains them, so that, with 


~~ F 


= 


264 COMMENTARY UPON 


























or against their will, they are compelled to feel that ee 
something authentic in the dream. Meanwhile, a bli 
ferocity impels them to an unintentional resistance again : 
God. Therefore, that we may be held in obedience to God, ~ 
let us learn to bring down our high spirits; because the be. - 
ginning of docility is for men to submit to be brought into 
order. This obstinacy in the sons of Jacob was most cen- 
surable, because they not only rejected the oracle of God 
through their hatred of subjection, but were hostile to his | 
messenger and herald. How much less excusable, then, will 
be our hardness, if we do not meekly submit our necks to 
the yoke of God; since the doctrine of humility, which sub- 
dues and even mortifies us, is not only more clearly revealed , 
but also confirmed by the precious blood of Christ? If, 
however, we see many refractory persons at this day, who 
refuse to embrace the gospel, and who perversely rise up 
against it, let us not be disturbed as by some new thing, 
seeing that the whole human race is infected with the disease 
of pride; for by the gospel all the glory of the flesh is re- 
duced to nothing; rather let us know that all remain obsti- 
nate, except those who are rendered meek by the soba ne 
influence of the Spirit. 
12. And his brethren went. Before Moses treats of th ‘ 
horrible design of fratricide, he describes the journey of 
Joseph, and amplifies, by many circumstances, the atrocity 
of the crime. Their brother approaches them in the dis- 
charge of a duty, to make a fraternal inquiry after their 
state. He comes by the command of his father; and obeys 
it without reluctance, as appears from his answer. He 
searches them out anxiously ; ; and though they had changed 
their place, he spares neither labour nor trouble till he finds 
them. Therefore their cruelty was something more than mad- 
ness, seeing they did not shrink with horror from contrivi ie -? 
the death of a brother so pious and humane. We nows 
that Moses does not relate, without a purpose, that a man met 
Joseph in his wanderings, and told him that his brethrer 
had departed to Dothan. For the greater was his iligonae 
in his indefatigable pursuit, so much the less excusable were 
they by whom such an unworthy recompense was repaid. 























_ CHAP. XXXVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 265 
18. And when they saw him afar off. Were again Moses, 
so far from sparing the fame of his own family by adulation, 
brands its chiefs with a mark of eternal infamy, and exposes 
them to the hatred and execration of all nations. If, at any 
_ time, among heathens, a brother murdered his brother, such 
impiety was treated with the utmost severity in tragedies, 
that it might not pass into an example for imitation. But 
in profane history no such thing is found, as that nine 
brethren should conspire together for the destruction of an 
innocent youth, and, like wild beasts, should pounce upon 
him with bloody hands. Therefore a horrible, and even 
diabolical fury, took possession of the sons of Jacob, when, 
haying cast aside the sense of nature, they were thus pre- 
pared cruelly to rage against their own blood. 

_ But, in addition to this wickedness, Moses condemns their 
‘impious contempt of God, Behold this master of dreams. 
_ For why do they insult the unhappy youth, except because 
he had been called by the celestial oracle to an unexpected 
dignity? Besides, in this manner, they themselves proclaim 
their own baseness more publicly than any one could do, 
who should purposely undertake severely to chastise them. 
‘They confess that the cause why they persecuted their 
_ brother was his having dreamed; as if truly this was an 
‘inexpiable offence ; but if they are indignant at his dreams, 
_ why do they not rather wage war with God? For Joseph 
_ deemed it necessary to receive, as a precious deposit, what 
had been divinely revealed unto him. But because they 
did not dare directly to assail God, they wrap themselves in 
clouds, that, losing sight of God, they may vent their fury 
“arsine their brother. If such blindness seized upon the 
patriarchs, what shall become of the reprobates, whom obsti- 
nate malice drives along, so that they do not hesitate to resist 
_ God even to the last? And we see that they willingly dis- 
turb and excite themselves, as often as’they are offended 
_ with the threatenings and chastisements of God, and rise up 
against his ministers for the sake of taking vengeance. The 
_ same thing, indeed, would at times happen to us all, unless 
God should put on his bridle to render us submissive. With 
_ respect to Joseph, the special favour of God was manifested 




























266 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXVII. _ 


to him, and he was raised to the highest dignity ; but only 
in a dream, which is ridiculed by the wicked scorn of his — 
brethren. To this is also added a conspiracy, so that he 
narrowly escaped death. Thus the promise of God, which — 
had exalted him to honour, almost plunges him into the — 
grave. We, also, who have received the gratuitous adoption 
of God amidst many sorrows, experience the same thing. | 
For, from the time that Christ gathers us into his flock, God — 
permits us to be cast down in various ways, so that we seem — 
nearer hell than heaven. Therefore, let the example of 
Joseph be fixed in our minds, that we be not disquieted 
when many crosses spring forth to us from the root of 
God’s favour. For I have before showed, and the thing 
itself clearly testifies, that in Joseph was adumbrated, what — 
was afterwards more fully exhibited in Christ, the Head of 
the Church, in order that each member may form itself to 
the imitation of his example. : 
20. And cast him into some pit. Before they perpetrate 
the murder, they seek a pretext whereby they may conceal — 
their crime from men. Meanwhile, it never enters into their 
mind, that what is hidden from men cannot escape the eyes © 
of God. But so stupid is hypocrisy, that while it flees from 
the disgrace of the world, it is careless about the judgment 
of God. But it is a disease deeply rooted in the human — 
mind, to put some specious colour on every extreme act of 
iniquity. For although an inward judge convicts the guilty, 
they yet confirm themselves in impudence, that their dieg 
grace may not appear unto others. 
And we shall see what will become of his dreams. As if 
the truth of God could be subverted by the death of one 
man, they boast that they shall have attained their wish 
whan they have killed their brother; namely, that his 
dreams will come to nothing. This is not, indeed, their 
avowed purpose, but turbulent envy drives them headlong 
to fight against God. But whatever they design in thus con- 
tending with God in the dark, their attempts will, at length, 
prove vain. For God will always find a way through the 
most profound abyss, to the accomplishment of what he has 
decreed. If, then, unbelievers provoke us by their reproaches, 





-@HAP, XXXVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 267 


and proudly boast that our faith will profit us nothing; let 
not their insolence discourage or weaken us, but let us con- 
fidently proceed. 

21. And Reuben heard it. It may be well to observe, 
while others were hastening to shed his blood, by whose 
eare Joseph was preserved. Reuben doubtless, in one affair, 
was the most wicked of them all, when he defiled his father’s 
couch ; and that unbridled lust, involving other vices, was 
the sign of a depraved nature: now suddenly, he alone, hav- 
ing a-regard to piety, and being mindful of fraternal duty, 
dissolves the impious conspiracy. It is uncertain whether he 
was now seeking the means of making some compensation, 
for the sake of which he might be restored to his father’s 
favour. Moses declares that it was his intention to restore 
the boy in safety to his father: whence the conjecture which 
I have stated is probable, that he thought the life of his 
brother would be a sufficient price by which he might recon- 
cile his father’s mind to himself. However this may be, yet 
the humanity which he showed in attempting to liberate his 
brother, is a proof that he was not abandoned to every kind 
of wickedness. And perhaps God, by this testimony of his 
penitence, designed in some degree to lessen his former dis- 
grace. Whence we are taught that the characters of men are 
not to be estimated by a single act, however atrocious, so as 
to cause us to despair of their salvation. 

22. Cast him into this pit. The pious fallacy to which 
Reuben descended, sufficiently proves with what vehemence 


the rage of his brethren was burning. For he neither dares 


openly to oppose them, nor to dissuade them from their 
crime ; because he saw that no reasons would avail to soften 
them. Nor does it extenuate their cruelty, that they consent 
to his proposal, as if they were disposed to clemency ; for if 
either one course or the other were necessary, it would have 
been better for him immediately to die by their hands, than 
to perish by slow hunger in the pit, which is the most cruel 
kind of punishment. Their gross hypocrisy is rather to be 
noticed ; because they think that they shall be free from 
crime, if only they do not stain their hands with their bro- 
ther’s blood. As if, indeed, it made any difference, whether 


268 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXVI. 


they ran their brother through with a sword, or put him to — 
death by suffocation. For the Lord, when: he accuses the — 
Jews by Isaiah, of having hands full of blood, does not mean 
that they were assassins, but he calls them bloody, because — 
they did not spare their suffering brethren. Therefore, the - 
sons of Jacob are nothing better, in casting their brother — 
alive under ground, that, as one buried, he might in vain — 
contend with death, and perish after protracted torments ; — 
and in choosing a pit in the desert, from which no mortal — 
could hear his dying ery, though his sighing would ascend — 
even to heaven. It wasa barbarous thought, that they should — 
not touch his life, if they did not embrue their hands in his — 
blood ; since it was a kind of death, not less violent, which | 
they wished to inflict by hunger. Reuben, however, accom- 
modating his language to their brutal conceptions, deemed — 
it sufficient to repress, by any kind of artifice, their impetu- | 
osity for the present. ‘a 
23. They stripped Joseph out of his coat.’ We see that 
these men are full of fictions and lies. They carelessly strip — 
their brother ; they feel no dread at casting him with their 
own hands into the pit, where hunger worse than ten swords — 
might consume him ; because they hope their crime will be 
concealed ; and in taking home his clothes, no suspicion of — 
his murder would be excited ; because, truly, their father 
would believe that he had been torn by a wild beast. Thus 
Satan infatuates wicked minds, so that they entangle them-— 
selves by frivolous evasions. Conscience is indeed the foun-— 
tain of modesty; but Satan so soothes by his allurements — 
those whom he has entangled in his snares, that conscience 
itself, which ought to have cited them as guilty before the bar | 
of God, only hardens them the more. For, having found out 


* The coat of many colours was supposed by some to be the garment. 


belonging of right to the first-born; consequently, Reuben would be en- — q 


titled to it, till he forfeited it by his misconduct. Jacob, therefore, is un- 
derstood to have transferred this coat, together with the rank of primo-— 
geniture, from Reuben to the eldest son of Rachel, his most beloved wife, 
If this were so, it would make the conduct of Reuben, on this occasion, still 
more generous than it appears on the ordinary supposition, There is, — 
however, this objection to such an interpretation, that Jacob is said to haye — 


a it for Joseph, (see ver. 3,) and not merely to have given it to him.— — 





 -. 





CHAP. XXXVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 269 


 subterfuges, they break forth far more audaciously into sin, 
as if they might commit with impunity whatever escapes the 
eyes of men. Surely it is a reprobate sense, a spirit of frenzy 
and of stupor, which is withheld from any daring attempt, 
only by a fear of the shame of men; while the fear of divine 


‘ judgment i is trodden under foot. And although all are not 
- carried thus far, yet the fault of paying more honour to men 


| than to God, is too common. The repetition of the word 
_ coat in the sentence of Moses is emphatical, showing that 
_ this mark of the father’s love could not mollify their minds. 
_. 25. And they sat down to eat bread. This was an astonish- 
_ ing barbarity, that they could quietly feast, while, in inten- 
_ tion, they were guilty of their brother’s death: for, had there 
_ been one drop of humanity in their souls, they would at least 
have felt some inward compunctions; yea, commonly, the 
_ very worst men are afraid after the commission of a crime. 
_ Since the patriarchs fell into such a state of insensibility, 
let us learn, from their example, to fear lest, by the righteous 


_ anger of God, the same lethargy should seize upon our senses. 


Meanwhile, it is proper to consider the admirable progress of 
God’s counsel. Joseph had already passed through a double 
- death: and now, as if by a third death, he is, beyond all ex- 
pectation, rescued from the grave. For what was it less than 


_ death, to be sold as a slave to foreigners? Indeed his con- 
_ dition was rendered worse by the change ; because Reuben, 


secretly drawing him out of the pit, would have brought him 
back to his father: whereas now he is dragged to a distant 
part of the earth, without hope of return. But this was a 
secret turn, by which God had determined to raise him on 
high. And at length, he shows by the event, how much 
better it was that Joseph should be led far away from his own 
family, than that he should remain in safety at home. 
Moreover, the speech of Judah, by which he persuades his 
brethren to sell Joseph, has somewhat more reason. For he 
ingenuously confesses that they would be guilty of homicide, 
if they suffered him to perish in the pit. What gain shall 
we make, he says, if his blood be covered; for our hands 
will nevertheless be polluted with blood. By this time their 
fury was in some degree abated, so that they listened to 



















270 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXXVII. 


more humane counsel ; for though it was outrageous perfidy © 
to sell their brother to strangers; yet it was something to — 
send him away alive, that, at least, he might be nourished — 
asaslave. We see, therefore, that the diabolical flame of 
madness, with which they had all burned, was abating, when 
they acknowledged that they could profit nothing by hiding 
their crime from the eyes of men ; because homicide must of 
necessity come into view before God. For at first, they — 
absolved themselves from guilt, as if no Judge sat in heaven. — 
But now the sense of nature, which the cruelty of hatred had _ 
before benumbed, begins to exert its power. And certainly, — 
even in the reprobate, who seem entirely to have cast off hu- — 
manity, time shows that some residue of it remains. When ~ 
wicked and violent affections rage, their tumultuous fervour 
hinders nature from acting its part. But no minds are so 
stupid, that a consideration of their own wickedness will not 
sometimes fill them with remorse: for, in order that men — 
may come inexcusable to the judgment-seat of God, it is — 
necessary that they should first be condemned by themselves. — 
They who are capable of cure, and whom the Lord leads to — 
repentance, differ from the reprobates in this, that whilethe ~ 
latter obstinately conceal the knowledge of their crimes, the — 
former gradually return from the indulgence of sin, to obey — 
the voice of reason. Moreover, what Judah here declares 
concerning his brother, the Lord, by the prophet, extends to ~ 
the whole human race. Whenever, therefore, depraved lust — 
impels to unjust violence, or any other injury, let us remem- ~ 
ber this sacred bond by which the whole of society is bound 
together, in order that it may restrain us from evil doings. 
For man cannot injure man, but he becomes an enemy to his 
own flesh, and violates and perverts the whole order of nature. 

28. Then there passed by Midianites. Some think that ~ 
Joseph was twice sold in the same place. For it is certain, 
since Midian was the son of Abraham and Keturah, that 
his sons were distinct from the sons of Ishmael: and Moses 
has not thoughtlessly put down these different names.’ 


' Perhaps, however, the passage may be better explained by supposing 7 
the caravan which was passing, to be made up of Ishmaelites and Midianites. 
he Ishmaelites might form the larger and more conspicuous part of the — 


5 


=a 

i's? 

joa 
. 


» 


CHAP, XXXVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 271 


But I thus interpret the passage: that Joseph was ex- 
posed for sale to any one who chose, and seeing the pur- 
chase of him was declined by the Midianites, he was sold 
to the Ishmaelites. Moreover, though they might justly 
suspect the sellers of having stolen him, yet the desire of 
gain prevents them from making inquiry. We may also 
add, what is probable, that, on the journey, they inquired who 
Joseph was. But they did not set such a value on their 
common origin as to prevent them from eagerly making gain. 
This passage, however, teaches us how far the sons of Abra- 
ham, after the flesh, were preferred to the elect offspring, in 
which, nevertheless, the hope of the future Church was in- 
cluded. We see that, of the two sons of Abraham, a posterity 
so great was propagated, that from both proceeded merchants 
in various places: while that part of his seed which the Lord 
had chosen to himself was yet small. But so the children of 
this world, like premature fruit, quickly arrive at the greatest 
wealth and at the summit of happiness ; whereas the Church, 
slowly creeping through the greatest difficulties, scarcely at- 
tains, during a long period, to the condition of mediocrity. 
30. And he returned. We may hence gather that Reuben, 


- under pretence of some other business, stole away from his 


brethren, that, unknown to them all, he might restore his 
brother, drawn out of the pit, to his father; and that there- 


fore he was absent at the time when Joseph was sold. And 


there is no wonder that he was anticipated, when he had 
taken his course in a different direction from theirs, intending 
to reach the pit by a circuitous path. But now at length 
Reuben having lost all hope, unfolds to his brethren the in- 
tention which before he dared not confess, lest the boy should 
be immediately murdered. 

31. And they took Joseph’s coat. They now return to 
their first scheme. In order that their father may have no 
suspicion of their crime, they send the bloody coat, from 
which he might conjecture that Joseph had been torn by 
some wild beast. Although Moses alludes to this briefly, I 
yet think that they rather sent some of their servants, who 


company, and thus give the name to the whole; but the actual purchasers 
of Joseph might be the Midianitish merchants among them.—£d. 





. : = i 
. br ay 
272 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. xxv 


were not accessary to the crime, than any of their number, — 
For he says soon afterwards, that his sons and daughters — 
came to offer some consolation to him in his grief And — 
although in the words they use, there lurks some appear- 
ance of insult, it seems to me more probable that they gave — 
this command to avert suspicion from themselves. Forthey — 
feign themselves to be of confused mind, as is usual in affairs 
of perplexity. Yet whatever they intend, their wickedness — 
drives them to this point, that they inflict a deadly wound ~ 
upon the mind of their father. This is the profit which — 
hypocrites gain by their disguises, that in wishing to escape — 
the consequences of one fault, they add sin to sin. With — 
respect to Jacob, it is a wonder that after he had been tried — 
in so many ways, and always come forth a conqueror, he 
should now sink under grief. Certainly it was very absurd — 
that the death of his son should occasion him greater sorrow _ 
than the incestuous pollution of his wife, the slaughter of | 
the Shechemites, and the defilement of his daughter. Where — 
was that invincible strength, by which he had even prevailed — 
over the angel? Where the many lessons of patience with — 
which God had exercised him, in order that he might never — 
fail? This disposition to mourn, teaches us that no one is 
endued with such heroic virtues, as to be exempt from that — 
infirmity of the flesh, which betrays itself sometimes even — 
in little things ; whence also it happens, that they who have — 
long been accustomed to the cross, and who like veteran sol- — 
diers ought bravely to bear up against every kind of attack, — 
fall like young recruits in some slight skirmish. Who then ~ 
among us may not fear for himself, when we see holy Jacob — 
faint, after having given so many proofs of patience ? 
35. And all his sons and daughters rose wp. The burden — 
of his grief is more clearly expressed by the circumstance _ 
that all his sons and daughters meet together to comfort him. 
For by the term “ rose up,” is implied a common delibera- — 
tion, they having agreed to come together, because necessity 
urged them. But hence it appears how vast is the innate — 
dissimulation of men. The sons of Jacob assume a charac- — 
ter by no means suitable to them ; and perform an office of F 
piety, from which their minds are most alien. If they had — ‘: 


























CHAP, XXXVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 273 


he d respect unto God, they would have acknowledged their 
feat, and though no remedy might have been found for their 
vu, yet repentance would have brought forth some fruit; but 
now they are satisfied with a vanity as empty as the wind. 
By this example we are taught how carefully we ought to 
avoid dissimulation, which continually implicates men in 
new snares. 
| But he refused to be comforted. It may be asked, whe- 
ther Jacob had entirely cast off the virtue of patience : for 
so much the language seems to mean. Besides, he sins more 
grievously, because he, knowingly and voluntarily, indulges in 
grief: for this is as if he would purposely augment his sor- 
row, which is to rebel against God. But I suppose his re- 
fusal to be restricted to that alleviation of grief which man 
might offer. For nothing is more unreasonable than that a 
holy man, who, all his life had borne the yoke of God with 
such meekness of disposition, should now, like an unbroken 
horse, bite his bridle; in order that, by nourishing his grief, 
he might confirm himself in unsubdued impetuosity. I 
therefore do not doubt that he was willing now to submit 
himself unto the Lord, though he rejects human consola- 
tions. He seems also angrily to chide his sons, whose envy 
and malevolence towards Joseph he knew, as if he would 
upbraid them by declaring that he esteemed this one son 
“more than all the rest: since he rather desires to be with 
him, dead in the grave, than to enjoy the society of ten 
& living sons whom he had yet remaining ; for I except little 
“Benjamin. I do not, however, here excuse that excess of 
a grief which I have lately condemned. And certainly he 
proves himself to be overwhelmed with sadness, in speak- 
hg of the grave, as if the sons of God did not pass 
through death to a better life. And hence we learn the 
- Dlindness of immoderate grief, which almost quenches the 
Fight of faith in the saints ; so much the more diligent, then, 
ought we to be in our toaGiue to restrain it. J Job greatly 
_ excelled in piety ; yet we see, after he had been oppressed 
a by the magnitude of his grief, in what a profane manner he 
“mixes men with beasts in death. If the angelic minds of 
holy men were thus darkened by sadness, ee much deeper 
VOL. II. 8 





























274 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXXVII._- 
gloom will rest upon us, unless God, by the shining of his 
word and Spirit, should scatter it, and we also, with suita~ - 
ble anxiety, meet the temptation, before it overwhelms us? 
The principal mitigation of sorrow is the consolation of the. 
future life ; to which whosoever applies himself, need not fear, 
lest he should be absorbed by excess of grief. Now though 
the immoderate sorrow of Jacob is not to be approved ; yet the 
special design of Moses was, to set a mark of infamy on that 
iron hardness which cruelly reigned in the hearts of his sons. 
They saw that, if their father should miserably perish, con-— 
sumed with grief, they would be the cause of it; in short, 
they saw that he.was already dying through their wickedness. 
If they are not able to heal the wound, why, at least, ee 4 
they not attempt to alleviate his pain? Therefore they are_ 
exceedingly cruel, seeing that they have not sufficient carat of | 
their father’s life, to cause them to drop a single word in miti- 
gation of his sorrow, when it was in their power to do so. — 
36. And the Midianites sold him into Egypt. It was a 
sad spectacle, that Joseph should be thus driven from one 
hand to another. For it added no small indignity to his 
former suffering, that he is set to saleas a slave. The Lord, 
however, ceased not to care for him. He even suffered him 
to be transferred from hand to hand, in order that, at length,” 
it might indeed appear, that he had come, by celestial guid= 
ance, to that very dominion which had been promised him in” 
his dreams. Potiphar is called a eunuch, not because he was” 
one really; but because, among the Orientals, it was usual to” 
denote the satraps and princes of the court by that name, 
The Hebrews are not agreed respecting the dignity which 
Moses ascribes to him; for some explain it as the “ chief of) 
the slaughterers,’* whom the Greek interpreters follow. But 
I rather agree with others, who say that he was “ the prefect 
of the soldiers ;” not that he had the command of the whole 
army, but becatise he had the royal troops under his hand 1 
and authority: such are now the captains of the guard, 1 


' The term applies primarily to butchers, who slaughter anil fo or 
food; then to persons who slaughter animals for sacrifice ; and then to é: G 


ecutioners who put men to the slaughter under the authority of the mo- 
narch or the state.— Hd, " 


Po Sie 





























IAP, XXXVIII. 


inth chapter. 


CHAPTER 


1, AND it came to pass at that time, 
at Judah went down from his bre- 
ren, and turned in to a certain 
jullamite, whose name was Hirah. 
2. And Judah saw there a daugh- 
r of a certain Canaanite, whose 
ame was Shuah; and he took her, 
d went in unto her. 

3. And she conceived, and bare a 
m; and he called his name Er. 

4. And she conceived again, and 
ire a son; and she called his name 


5. And she yet again conceived, 
id bare a son; and called his name 
helah: and he was at Chezib when 
ie bare him. 

6. And Judah took a wife for Er 
is first-born, whose name was T'a- 


7. And Er, Judah’s first-born, was 
icked in the sight of the Lord; and 
ie Lord slew him. 

8. And Judah said unto Onan, Go 
junto thy brother’s wife, and marry 
er, and raise up seed to thy brother. 


9. And Onan knew that the seed 
ould not be his: and it came to 
ass, when he went in unto his bro- 
er’s wife, that he spilled it on the 
ound, lest that he should give seed 
0 his brother. 

10. And the thing which he did 
spleased the Lord; wherefore he 
lew him also. 

11. Then said Judah to Tamar 
Tis daughter-in-law, Remain a widow 


enius’ Levicon.—Ed. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


275 


u join with it another office which the prefects of the 
ison exercise. For this may be gathered from the thirty- 


XXXVI. 


1. Fuit autem tempore illo de- 
scendit Jehudah a fratribus suis, et 
declinavit ad virum Hadullamitem, 
et nomen ejus Hirah. 

2. Et vidit ibi Jehudah filiam viri 
Chenaanaei: et nomen ejus Suah: 
qui accepit eam, et ingressus est ad 
eam. 

3. Que concepit, et peperit filium, 
et vocavit nomen ejus Her. 

4. Et concepit adhue, et peperit 
filium, et vocavit nomen ejus Onan. 


5. Et addidit adhue, et peperit 
filium, et vocavit nomen ejus Selah: 
erat autem in Chezib, quando hunc 
ipsa peperit. 

6. Et accepit Jehudah uxorem ipst 
Her primogenito suo, et nomen ejus 
Thamar. 

7. Verum erat Her primogenitus 
Jehudah malus in oeulis Jehove, 
ideo interemit eum Jehova. 

8. Et dixit Jehudah ad Onan, In- 
gredere ad uxorem fratris tui, et 
affinitatem contrahe cum ea, et sus- 
cita semen fratri tuo. 

9. Et cognovit Onan, quod non 
sibi futurum esset semen: et erat 
quando ingrediebatur ad uxorem 
fratris sui, corrumpebat semen super 
terram, ne poneret semen fratri suo. 


10. Displicuit autem in oculis Je- 
hovee quod fecit, ideoque mori fecit 
etiam eum. 

11. Et dixit Jehudah ad Thamar 
nurum suam, Mane vidua in domo 


7 See ver. 20. The words rendered « prefects of the prison,” are pre- 
fecti hospitii—and in the French, Prevosts de ’hostel—perhaps, prefects of 
the town-house, or town-hall, would have been more correct. ; 
‘Sion in the original, D‘NAYATW, sav-hatabachim, means the captain of the 
ecutioners ; that is, of the king’s body guard, whose office it was to in- 
capital punishments; as in the Turkish court at present.—Sve Ge- 


The expres- 


276 


at thy father’s house, till Shelah my 
son be grown: for he said, Lest per- 
adventure he die also, as his brethren 
did. And Tamar went and dwelt 
in her father’s house. 

12. And, in process of time, the 
daughter of Shuah, Judah’s wife, 
died: and Judah was comforted, and 
went up unto his sheep-shearers to 
Timnath, he and his friend Hirah 
the Adullamite. 

' 13. And it was told Tamar, say- 
ing, Behold, thy father-in-law goeth 
up to Timnath to shear his sheep. 


14, And she put her widow’s gar- 
ments off from her, and covered her 
with a vail, and wrapped herself, and 
sat in an open place, which is by the 
way to Timnath: for she saw that 
Shelah was grown, and she was not 
given unto him to wife. 

15. When Judah saw her, he 

thought her to be an harlot; because 
she had covered her face. 

16. And he turned unto her by the 
way, and said, Go to, I pray thee, let 
me come in unto thee; (for he knew 


not that she was his daughter-in-law.) 


And she said, What wilt thou give me, 
that thou mayest come in unto me? 

17. And he said, I will send thee 
a kid from the flock. And she said, 
Wilt thou give me a pledge till thou 
send it ? 

18. And he said, What pledge shall 
I give thee? And she said, Thy signet, 
and thy bracelets, and thy staff that 
is in thine hand: and he gave it her, 
and came in unto her; and she con- 
ceived by him. 

19, And she arose, and went away, 
and laid by her vail from her, and 
put on the garments of her widow- 
hood. 

20. And Judah sent the kid by the 
hand of his friend the Adullamite, to 
receive jis pledge from the woman’s 
hand; but he found her not. 

21. Then he asked the men of that 
place, saying, Where is the harlot 
that was openly by the way-side? 
And they said, There was no harlot 
in this place. 


COMMENTARY UPON 























CHAP. XXXVITI. 


patris tui, donee creseat Selah filius: 
meus: dicebat enim, Ne forte mori-. 
atur etiam ipse, sicut et fratres ejus, 
et abiit Thamar, et mansit in domo _ 
patris sul. { 
12. Et multiplicati sunt dies, et 
mortua est filia Suah uxor Jehudah: 
et consolatus est se Jehudah, et as- 
cendit ad tonsores ovium suarum, 
ipse, et Hirah amicus ejus, Hadulla- 
mita in Thimnath. \ = 
13. Et nuntiatum fuit, ipsi Tha- 
mar, dicendo, Ecce, socer tuus as- 
cendit in Thimnath ad tondendum 
oves suas. 7 
14. Tune removit vestes viduita- 
tis sue a se, et operuit se velamine, 
et celavit se, mansitque in ostio He 4 
naim, quod erat juxta viam Thim- ; 
nath: viderat enim quod creverat 
Selah, ipsa vero non fuerat data ei 
in uxorem. E 
15. Et vidit eam Jehudah, et pu 
tavit eam esse meretricem: operue- 
rat enim faciem suam. . 
16. Et declinavit ad eam e yia 
et dixit, Age queso, ingrediar ad te 
(non enim noverat quod nurus s iy 
esset). Illa dixit, Quid dabis mihi, 
si ingrediaris ad me? 4 





4 


17. Et ait, Ego mittam hed mn 
caprarum de pecudibus. Et dixit, 
Num dabis pignus donee miseris? 


18. Et dixit, Quod pignus vis ut) 
dem tibi? Ht dixit, Sigillum tuum, 
et pallium tuum, et virgam tuam, 
quee est in manu tua. Et dedit eiz 
et ingressus est ad eam, et concepit) 
ex eo. 

19. Illa surrexit, et abiit, et re- 
movit velamen suum a se, et induit 
se vestibus viduitatis sue. 


20. Et misit Jehudah heedum cai Ds 
rarum per manum amici sui Hadule 
lamitee, ut caperet pignus e mant 
mulieris; qui non invenit eam. | 

21. Et interrogavit viros loci illius, 
dicendo, Ubi est meretrix illa in He- 
naim juxta viam? Et dixerunt, Non 
fuit hic meretrix. : 


$ 


- 








































AP, XXXVIII. 


22. And he returned to Judah, and 
d 41 cannot find her; and also the 
en of the place said, that there was 
0 harlot in this place. 
23. And Judah said, Let her take 
it to her, lest we be shamed : behold, 
sent this kid, and thou hast not 
and her. 
Rr And it came to pass, about 
e months after, that it was told 
udah, saying, Tamar thy daughter- 
nlaw hath played the harlot; and 
so, behold, she is with child by 
i oredom. And Judah said, Bring 
er forth, and let her be burnt. 
25. When she was brought forth, 
e sent to her father-in-law, saying, 
By the man whose these are am I 

af th child: and she said, Discern, I 

ray thee, whose are these, the sig- 
et, and bracelets, and staff. 
: 26. And Judah acknowledged them, 
and said, She hath been more right- 
mis than I: because that I gave her 
lot to Shelah my son: and he knew 
her again no more. 

_27. And it came to pass, in the 
me of her travail, that, behold, twins 
‘were in her womb. 
| 28. And it came to pass, when she 
fravailed, that the one put out his 
hand ; and the midwife took and 
ound upon his hand a scarlet thread, 
saying, This came out first. 

29. And it came to pass, as he drew 
pek his hand, that, behold, his bro- 
er came out; and she said, How 
ist thou broken forth? this breach 
e upon thee: therefore his name was 
ed Pharez. 

30. And afterward came out his 
br other, that had the scarlet thread 
pon his hand; and his name was 
called Zarah. 


ed 





THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


277 


22. Reversus est ergo ad Jehudah, 
et dixit, Non inveni eam: et etiam 
viri illius loci dixerunt, Non fuit hic 
meretrix. 

23. Et dixit Jehudah, Capiat sibi, 
ne forte simus in probrum: ecce, 
misi hoedum hune, et tu non inve- 
nisti eam. 

24. Et fuit, circiter post tres men- 
ses, nuntiatum fuit ipsi Jehudah, 
dicendo, Fornicata est Thamar nurus 
tua, et etiam ecce, est gravida ex 
fornicationibus. Et dixit Jehudah, 
Educite eam, et comburatur. 


25. Ipsa, quum educeretur, misit 
ad socerum suum, dicendo, De viro 
cujus hee sunt, sum gravida. Kt 
dixit, Agnosce quaso, cujus sint si- 
gillum, et pallium, et virga isthzec. 


26. Et agnovit Jehudah, et dixit, 
Justior me est: idcirco enim hcec 
fecit, quod non dedi eam Selah filio 
meo. Verum non addidit adhue 
cognoscere eam. 

27. Et fuit, in tempore quo par- 
turiebat ipsa, ecce, gemini erant in 
utero ejus. 

28. Fuit autem, ea pariente, unus 
dedit manum, et accepit obstetrix, 
et ligavit ad manum ejus coccinum, 
dicendo, Iste egressus est prior. 


29. Et fuit, quum retraheret ma- 
num suam, ecce, egressus est frater 
ejus, et dixit, Cur rupisti super te 
interstitium? et vocavit nomen ejus 
Peres. 


30. Et postea egressus est frater 
ejus, ad cujus manum erat coccinum : 
et vocavit nomen ejus Zerah. 


1. And it came to pass at that time, that Judah. Before 
1 oses proceeds i in relating the history of Joseph, he inserts 
the genealogy of Judah, to which he devotes more labour, 
because the Redeemer was thence to derive his origin; for 
the continuous history of that tribe, from which salvation 
was to be sought, could not remain unknown, without loss. 

nd yet its glorious nobility is not here celebrated, but the 

























278 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. = x 
greatest disgrace of the family is exposed. What i 
related, so far from inflating the minds of the sons of J 
ought rather to cover them with shame. Now althous 
first sight, the dignity of Christ seems to be somewhat : 
hed: by such dishonour: yet since here also is seen t 
“emptying” of which St. Paul speaks,” it rather redou 
to his glory, than, in the least degree, detracts from it. - i 
we wrong Christ, unless we deem him alone sufficient to b 
out any ignominy arising from the misconduct of his proge 
tors, which offer to unbelievers occasion of offence. Second 
we know that the riches of God’s grace shines chiefly i in th 
that Christ clothed himself in our flesh, with the design 
making himself of no reputation. lastly, it was fitti 
that the race from which he sprang should be chan u 
by reproaches, that we, being content with him alone, m : 
seek nothing besides him; yea, that we might not 
earthly splendour in him, seeing that carnal ambitio ; 
always too much inclined to such a course. These two thi n. 
then, we may notice; first, that peculiar honour was git 
to the tribe of J dake which had been divinely eleotedia as t 
source whence the salvation of the world should flow; a 
secondly, that the narration of Moses is by no means hono 
able to the persons of whom he speaks; so that the Je 
have no right to arrogate anything to themselves or to th 
fathers. Meanwhile, ‘let us remember that Christ derives 
glory from his ancestors; and even, that he himself he 18 & 
glory in the flesh, but that his chief and most illustri¢ 
triumph was on the cross. Moreover, that we may not 
offended at the stains with which his ancestry was defil 
let us know that, by his infinite purity, they were all cleans 
just as the sun, by absorbing whatever impurities are in | 
earth and air, purges the world. 
2, And Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Cana il J 
I am not satisfied with the interpretation which some gi 
of “ merchant” to the word Canaanite. For Moses charg 
Judah with perverse lust, because he took a wife out of f 2 
nation with which the children of Abraham were divin 


oh 


' Phil. ii. 7. But made himself of no reputation,” literally, * emp 
himself, iavedy ixtvwos.”— Kd. j. 


pf i Sri 






















CE HAP, XXXVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 279 


c mmanded to be at verpebual strife. For neither he nor 
his other brethren were ignorant that they sojourned in the 
te land of Canaan, under the stipulation, that afterwards their 
enemies were to be cut off and destroyed, in order that they 
might possess the promised dominion over it. Moses, there- 
fore, Justly regards it‘as a fault, that Judah should entangle 
himself in a forbidden alliance; and the Lord, at length, 
cursed the offspring thus aneruing to Judah, that the cinbe 
| and head of the tribe of Judah might not be born, nor Christ 
a] “himself descend, from this connexion. This also ought to be 
numbered among the exercises of Jacob’s patience, that a 
he wicked grandson was born to him through Judah, of whose 
sin he was not ignorant. Moses says, that the youth was 
sut off by the vengeance of God. The same thing is not 
said of others whom a sudden death has swept away in the 
Blower of their age. I doubt not, therefore, that the wicked- 
‘ness, of which death was the immediate punishment, was 
extraordinary, and known to all men. And although this 
f rial was in itself severe to the holy patriarch ; yet nothing 
| | tormented his mind more than the thought, that he could 
sarcely hope for the promise of God to be so ratified that 
Ee * inheritance of grace should remain in the possession of 
wicked and abandoned men. It is true that a large family 
4 children is regarded as a source of human happiness, But 
this was the peculiar condition of the holy patriarch, that, 
Bhough God had promised him an elect and blessed seed, he 
how sees an accursed progeny increase and shoot forth toge- 
ther with his offspring, which might destroy the pe reatie 
“grace. It is said, that Hr was wicked in the sight of the 
| Lord, (verse 7.) Notwithstanding, his iniquity was not hid- 
den from men. Moses, however, means that he was not 
“merely infected with common vices, but rather was so addict- 
ed to crimes, that he was intolerable in the sight of God. 
 %. And the Lord slew him. We know that long life is 
reckoned among the gifts of God; and justly: for since it 1s. 
_ by no means a despicable honour that we are created after 
_ the image of God, the longer any one lives in the world, 
and daily experiences God’s care over him, it is certain that 
he is the more bountifully dealt with by the Lord... Even 




























280 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXX’ es 
amidst the many miseries with which life is filled, t 
divine goodness still shines forth, that.God invites us t 
himself, and exercises us in the knowledge of himself; whil ile 
at the same time he adorns us with such dignity, that h 
subjects to our authority whatever is in the world. W. 
fore it is no wonder that God, as an act of Leinsaal 
prolongs the life of man. Whence it follows, that when t 
wicked are taken away by a premature death, a onan i 
for their wickedness is inflicted upon them: for it is as if 
the Lord should pronounce judgment from heaven, that they 
are unworthy to be sustained by the earth, unworthy to 
enjoy the common light of heaven. Let us therefore learn, 
as long as God keeps us in the world, to meditate on his 
benefits, to the end that every one may the more cheerful 
endeavour to give praise to God for the life received from 
him. And although, at the present day also, sudden deez 
is to be reckoned among the scourges of God; since ha 
doctrine is always true, “ Bloody and deceitful men shal] 
not live out half their days,” (Ps. lv. 23 ;) yet God executed 
this judgment more fully under the law, when the know 
ledge of a future life was comparatively obscure ; for now, 
since the resurrection is clearly manifested to us in Ch ; 
it is not right that death should be so greatly dreadec 
And this difference between us and the ancient people o 0 
God is elsewhere noted. Nevertheless, it can never be laid 
down as a general rule, that they who had a long life were 
thereby proved to be pleasing and acceptable to the Lord 
whereas God has sometimes lengthened the life of reprobaay 
in aggravation of their punishment. We know that Cait 
survived his brother Abel many centuries. But as God doe 
not always, and to all persons, cause his temporal benefit: 
manifestly to flow in a perpetual and equable course; s¢ 
neither, on the other hand, does he always execute tempora 
punishments by the same rule. It is enough that, as fai 
as the present life is concerned, certain examples of punish 
ments and rewards are set before us. Moreover, as the 
miseries of the present life, which spring from the corrup- 
tion of nature, do not extinguish the first and special g 
of God ; so, on the other hand, death, which is in itself the 















| CHAP. XXXVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 281 


eurse of God, is so far from doing any injury, that it tends, 
- by a supernatural remedy, to the salvation of the elect. 
Especially now, from the time that the first-fruits of the re- 
 surrection in Christ have been offered, the condition of those 
_ who are quickly taken out of life is in no way deteriorated ; 
because Christ himself is gain both for life and death. But 
' the vengeance of God was so clear and remarkable in the 
- death of Er, that the earth might plainly appear to have 
been purged as from its filthiness. 

8. Go in unto thy brother's wife. Although no law had 
hitherto been prescribed concerning brother’s marriages, 
| that the surviving brother should raise up seed to one who 
/ was dead; it is, nevertheless, not wonderful that, by the 
_ mere instinct of nature, men should have been inclined to 
this course. For since each man is born for the preserva- 
_ tion of the whole race, if any one dies without children, 


_ therefore an act of humanity to acquire some name for the 
dead, from which it might appear that they had lived. Now, 
_ the only reason why the children born to the surviving brother, 
‘should be reckoned to him who had died, was, that there 
' might be no dry branch in the family; and in this manner 
_ they took away the reproach of barrenness. Besides, since 
_ the woman is given as a help to the man, when any woman 
married into a family, she was, in a certain sense, given up 
to the name of that family. According to this reasoning, 
Tamar was not altogether free, but’ was held under an 
obligation to the house of Judah, to procreate some seed. 
Now, though this does not proceed from any rule of piety, 
yet the Lord had impressed it upon the hearts of man as a 

duty of humanity; as he afterwards commanded it to the 
_ Jews in their polity. Hence we infer the malignity of Onan, 
who envied his brother this honour, and would not allow 
him, when dead, to obtain the title of father ; and this re- 
*dounds to the dishonour of the whole family. We see that 
many grant their own sons to their friends for adoption: it 
was, therefore, an outrageous act of barbarity to deny to his 
own brother what is given even to strangers... .. 


1 A line or two is here omitted, as well as the comment on the tenth 
verse.— Ed. 


























: - “a4 
282 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXXVIII. — 


1l. Then said Judah to Tamar. Moses intimates that — 
Tamar was not at liberty to marry into another family, so — 
long as Judah wished to retain her under his own authority. — 
It is possible that she voluntarily submitted herself to the 
will of her father-in-law, when she might have refused: but — 
the language seems to mean, that it was according to a received | 
practice, that Tamar should not pass over to another family, — 
except at the will of her father-in-law, as long as there was a ~ 
successor who might raise up seed by her. However thismay — 
be, Judah acted very unjustly in keeping one bound, whom ~ 
he intended to defraud. For truly there was no cause why ~ 
he should be unwilling to allow her to depart free from his — 
house, unless he dreaded the charge of inconstancy. But — 
he should not have allowed this ambitious sense of shame to — 
render him perfidious and cruel to his-daughter-in-law. Be- — 
sides, this injury sprung from a wrong judgment: because, 
without considering the causes of the death of his sons, he — 
falsely and unjustly transfers the blame to an innocent — 
woman. He believes the marriage with Tamar to have been — 
an unhappy one; why therefore does he not, for his own sake, 
permit her to seek a husband elsewhere? But in this also 
he does wrong, that whereas the cause of his sons’ destruc- 
tion was their own wickedness, he judges unfavourably of 
Tamar herself, to whom no evil could be imputed. Let us ~ 
then learn from this example, whenever anything adverse © 
happens to us, not to transfer the blame to another, nor to ~ 
gather from all quarters doubtful suspicions, but to shake off 
our own sins. We must also beware lest a foolish shame 
should so prevail over us, that while we endeavour to pre- 
serve our reputation uninjured among men, we should not be 
equally careful to maintain a good conscience before God. 

13. And it was told Tamar. Moses relates how Tamar ~ 
avenged herself for the injury done her. She did not at first ~ 
perceive the fraud, but discovered it after a long course of 
time. When Shelah had grown up, finding herself deceived,” 
she turned her thoughts to revenge. Ani it is not to be 
doubted that she had long meditated, and, as it were, hateh- 
ed this design. For the message respecting Judah’s depar- 
ture was not brought to her accidentally ; but, because she 


Le: 
oS 
Ps 
e 
4 
ers 
ih " 
ae 
= 
a 
a 
= 
br 
i. 
eel 
rad 
ro 
> 
= 
= 
ce 
iu, 
va 
5 
? 


i 
. iy 
3 
* 


+ 





- QOHAP. XXXVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 283 


was intent upon her purpose, she had set spies who should 
bring her an account of all his doings. Now, although she 
formed a plan which was base, and unworthy of a modest 


- woman, yet this circumstance is some alleviation of her 


crime, that she did not desire a connexion with Judah, except 
while in a state of celibacy. In the meantime, she is hurried, 
by a blind error of mind, into another crime, not less detesta- 
ble than adultery. For, by adultery, conjugal fidelity would 
have been violated ; but, by this incestuous intercourse, the 
whole dignity of nature is subverted. This ought carefully 
to be observed, that they who are injured should not hastily 
rush to unlawful remedies. It was not lust which impelled 
Tamar to prostitute herself. She grieved, indeed, that she 
had been forbidden to marry, that she might remain bar- 
ren at home: but she had no other purpose than to re- 
proach her father-in-law with the fraud by which he had 
deceived her: at the same time, we see that she committed 
an atrocious crime. This is wont to happen, even in good | 
causes, when any one indulges his carnal affections more 
than is right. What Moses alludes to respecting garments 
of widowhood, pertains to the law of modesty. For elegant 
clothing which may attract the eyes of men, does not become 
widows. And therefore, Paul concedes more to wives than to 
them ; as having husbands whom they should wish to please. 

14. And sat in an open place.’ Interpreters expound 
this passage variously. Literally, it is “ in the door of foun- 
tains, or of eyes.” Some suppose there was a fountain which 


branched into two streams; others think that a broad place 
~ is indicated, in which the eyes may look around in all direc- 


tions. But a third exposition is more worthy of reception ; 
namely, that by this expression is meant a way which is 
forked and divided into two; because then, as it were, 
a door is opened before the eyes, that they which are really 
in one way may diverge in two directions. Probably it 
was a place whence Tamar might be seen, to which some 
by-way was near, where Judah might turn, so that he 
should not be guilty of fornication, in a public way, under 


|. Mansitque in ostio Henaim, “ in the door of eyes, or Enajim.”—Mar- 
gin of English Version.—Ed. 


- 2 - 4 
= i 
er 
ye | 
254 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXVIIL. ta . 1 


the eyes of all. When it is said she veiled her face, 4 
we hence infer that the license of fornication was not soun- 
bridled as that which, at this day, prevails in many places. 
For she dressed herself after the manner of harlots, that 
Judah might suspect nothing. And the Lord has caused 
this sense of shame to remain engraven on the hearts of those 
who live wickedly, that they may be witnesses to themselves 
of their own vileness. For if men could wash out the stains — 
from their sins, we know that they would do so most wil- 
lingly. Whence it follows, that while they flee from the _ 
light, they are affected with horror against their will, that 
their conscience may anticipate the judgment of God. By 
degrees, indeed, the greater part have so far exceeded all 
measure in stupor and impudence, that they are less careful 
to hide their faults ; yet God has never suffered the sense of 
nature to be so entirely extinguished, by the brutal intem- 
perance of those who desire to sin with impunity, but that 
_ their own obscenity shall compel even the most wicked to 
be ashamed.’ In short, the veil of Tamar shows that forni- 
cation was not only a base and filthy thing in the sight of 
God and the angels ; but that it has always been condemned, 
even by those who have practised it. 

15. When Judah saw her. . It was a great disgrace to Ju- 
dah that he hastily desired intercourse with an unknown 
woman. He was now old; and therefore age alone, even in 
a lascivious man, ought to have restrained the fervour of in- 
temperance. He sees the woman at a distance, and it is not 
possible that he should have been captivated by her beauty.” 

Hence we gather, that the fear of God, or a regard to 
justice and prosperity, cannot have flourished greatly in the 
heart of one who thus eagerly breaks forth to the indulgence 
of his passions. He is therefore set before us as an example, 
that we may learn how easily the lust of the flesh would 
break forth, unless the Lord should restrain it; and thus, 
conscious of our infirmity, let us desire from the Lord, a spirit 

’ The following sentence is omitted in the translation. “ Putida igitur 
fuit Cynici illius protervia, qui in flagitio deprehensus, sine rubore jactavit 
se plantare hominem.” 


* The original here adds, “ Pruritus tamen non secus in eo accenditur 
quam in equo, qui ad equarum odorem adhinnit.” 








‘OWAP. XXXVIIL. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 285 


of continence and moderation. But lest the same security 
should steal over us, which caused Judah to precipitate him- _ 
‘self into fornication ; let us mark, that the dishonour which 
Judah sustained in consequence of his incest, was a punish- 
ment divinely inflicted upon him. Who then will indulge in 
a crime which he sees, by this dreadful kind of vengeance, 
to be so very hateful to God ? 

16. What wilt thow gwe me, &c. Tamar did not wish to 
make a gain by the prostitution of her person, but to have 
a certain pledge, in order that she might boast of the re- 
venge taken for the injury she had received: and indeed . 
there is no doubt that God blinded Judah, as he deserved ; 
for how did it happen that he did not know the voice of his 

daughter-in-law, with which he had been long familiar? 
_ Besides, if a pledge must be given for the promised kid, 
what folly to deliver up his ring toa harlot? I pass over the 
_ absurdity of his giving a double pledge. It appears, there- 
fore, that he was then bereft of all judgment ; and for no 
other cause are these things written by Moses, than to teach 
_us that his miserable mind was darkened by the just judg- 
ment of God, because, by heaping sin upon sin, he had 
quenched the light of the Spirit. 

20. And Judah sent the kid. He sends by the hand of a 
friend, that he may not reveal his ignominy to a stranger. 
This is also the reason why he does not dare to complain of 
the lost pledges, lest he should expose himself to ridicule. 
_ For Ido not approve the sense given, by some, to the words, 

| Let her take it to her, lest we be shamed, as if Judah would 
_ excuse himself, as having fulfilled the promise he had given. 
Another meaning is far more suitable ; namely, that Judah 
would rather lose the ring, than, by spreading the matter 
further, give occasion to the speeches of the vulgar; be- 
cause lighter is the loss of money than of character. He 
might also fear being exposed to ridicule for having been 
so credulous. But he was chiefly afraid of the disgrace aris- 
ing from his fornication. Here we see that men who are 
not governed by the Spirit of God are always more solicitous 
about the opinion of the world than about the judgment of” 
God. For why, when the lust of the flesh excited him, did 


*. x 7 “af a — 
oh ‘ , 
io ah Cramer " AL vy 
i ‘ we ‘ : 
sa a 


286 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXXVIIL. 


it not come into his mind, “ Behold now I shall become vile 
in the sight of God and of angels ?” Why,-at least, after his 
lust has cooled, does he not blush at the secret knowledge 
of his sin? But he is secure, if only he can protect himself 
from public infamy. This passage, however, teaches, what — 
I have said before, that fornication is condemned by the 
common sense of men, lest any one should seek to excuse 
himself on the ground of ignorance. | a 

24. And it came to pass about three months after. Tamar — 
might sooner have exposed the crime; but she waited till 
- she should be demanded for capital punishment ; for then 
she would have stronger ground for expostulation. The 
reason why Judah subjects his daughter-in-law to a punish- 
ment so severe, was, that he deemed her guilty of adultery : 
for what the Lord afterwards confirmed by his law, appears 
then to have prevailed by custom among men, that a maid, 
from the time of her espousals, should be strictly faithful to 
her husband. Tamar had married into the family of Judah ; 
she was then espoused to his third son. It was not there- 
fore simple and common fornication which was the question 
for judgment ; but the crime of adultery, which Judah prose- 
cuted in his own right, because he had been injured in the 
person of his son. Now this kind of punishment is a proof 
that adultery has been greatly abhorred in all ages. The law 
of God commands adulterers to be stoned. Before punish- ~ 
ment was sanctioned by a written law, the adulterous woman 
was, by the consent of all, committed to the flames. This 
seems to have been done by a divine instinct, that, under the 
direction and authority of nature, the sanctity of marriage 
might be fortified, as by a firm guard: and although man is | 
not the lord of his own body, but there is a mutual obliga- 
tion between himself and his wife, yet husbands who have ~ 
had illicit intercourse with unmarried women have not been — 
subject to capital punishment ; because that punishment was 
awarded to women, not only on account of their immodesty, 
but also, of the disgrace which the woman brings upon her ~ 
husband, and of the confusion caused by the clandestine ad- 


mixture of seeds. For what else will remain safe in human ~ 


society, if license be given to bring in by stealth the off- 


















OHAP, XXXVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 287 


s pring of a stranger? to steal a name which may be given to 
_ spurious offspring ? and to transfer to them property taken 
away from the lawful heirs? It is no wonder, then, that 
_ formerly the fidelity of marriage was so sternly asserted on 
this point. How much more vile, and how much less ex- 
cusable, is our negligence at this day, which cherishes adul- 
teries, by allowing them to pass with impunity. Capital 
‘punishment, indeed, is deemed too severe for the measure of 
the offence. Why then do we punish lighter faults with greater 
rigour? Truly, the world was beguiled by the wiles of Satan, 
when it suffered the law, engraven on all by nature, to be- 
_ come obsolete. Meanwhile, a pretext has been found for this 
| gross madness, in that Christ dismissed the adulteress in 
safety, (John viii. 11,) as if, truly, he had undertaken to inflict 
punishment upon thieves, homicides, liars, and sorcerers. 
In vain, therefore, is a rule sought to be established by an 
_act of Christ, who purposely abstained from the office of an 
_ earthly judge. It may however be asked, since Judah, who 
thus boldly usurps the right of the sword, was a private per- 
_ son, and even a stranger in the land; whence had he this 
| great liberty to be the arbiter of life and death? I answer, 
_ that the words ought not to be taken as if he would com- 
_ mand, on his own authority, his daughter-in-law to be put 
_ to death, or as if executioners were ready at his nod; but 
_ because the offence was verified and made known, he, as her 
accuser, freely pronounces concerning the punishment, as if 
_ the sentence had already been passed by the judges. Indeed 
' Ido not doubt that assemblies were then wont to be held, 
in which judgments were passed; and therefore I simply 
} explain, that Judah commanded Tamar to be brought for- 
ward in public; in order that, the cause being tried, she 
_ might be punished according to custom. But the specifica- 
_ tion of the punishment is to this effect, that the case is one 
which does not admit of dispute ; because Tamar is convicted 
_ of the crime before she is cited to judgment. 
26. And Judah acknowledged them. The open reproach of 
Tamar proceeded from the desire of revenge. She does not 
seek an interview with her father-in-law, for the purpose of 
appeasing his mind; but, with a deliberate contempt of 


288 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXVIII ; 










death, she demands him as the companion of her doom. That 
Judah immediately acknowledges his fault, is a proof of his 
honesty; for we see with how many fallacies nearly all are 
wont to cover their sins, until they are dragged to the light, | 
and all means of denying their guilt have failed. Here, | 
though no one is present who could extort a confession, by | 
force or threats, Judah voluntarily stoops to make one, and» 
takes the greater share of the blame to himself. Yet, see- 
ing that, in confessing his fault, he is now silent respecting — : 
punishment ; we hence infer, that they who are rigid in cen- — 
suring others, are much more pliant in forgiving themselves. — 
In this, therefore, we ought to imitate him; that, without rack — 
or torture, truth should so far prevail aids us, that we should | ‘ 
not be ashamed to confess, before the whole world, those sins — 
with which God charges us. But we must avoid his par-— 
tiality; lest, while we are harsh towards others, we should — 
spare ourselves. This narrative also teaches us the import- — 
ance of not condemning any one unheard ; not only because 
it is better that the innocent should be banked than that | 
a guilty person should perish, but also, because a defence 
brings many things to light, which sometimes render a change 
in the form of judgment necessary, : 
She hath been more righteous than I. The expression is— 
not strictly proper; for he does not simply approve of Ta- — 
mar’s conduct ; but speaks comparatively, as if he would say, ~ 
that he had been, unjustly and without cause, angry. against ~ 
a woman, by whom he himself might rather haye been ac- ~ 
cused. Moreover, by the result, it appears how tardily the 
world proceeds in exacting punishment for crimes, where no ~ 
private person stands forward to avenge his own injury. An’ 
atrocious and horrible crime had been committed; as long 
as Judah thought himself aggrieved, he pressed on with 
vehemence, and the door of judgment was opened. But now,” 
when the accusation is withdrawn, both escape; though cer-~ 
tainly it was the duty of all to rise up against them. Moses 
however intimates that Judah was sincerely penitent; be 
cause “ he knew” his daughter-in-law “again no more.” 
He also confirms what I have said before, that by natu 
men are imbued with a great horror of such a crime. For” 


ie 


la yo ae Tet, pics sary —J 


























P. XXXIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 289 
vhence did it arise, that he abstained from intercourse with 
lamar, unless he judged naturally, that it was infamous for 
, father-in-law to be connected with his daughter-in-law ? 
Whoever attempts to destroy the distinction which nature 
ictates, between what is base and what is honourable, en- 
ages, like the giants, in open war with God. 

27. Behold twins were in her womb. Although both Judah 
obtained pardon for his error, and Tamar for her wicked 
sontrivance ; yet the Lord, in order to humble them, caused a 
prodigy to take place in the birth. Something similar had 
before happened in the case of Jacob and Esau, but for a 
lifferent reason: as we know that prodigies sometimes por- 
“tend good, sometimes evil. Here, however, there is no doubt 
| that the twins, in their very birth, bring with them marks 
of their parents’ infamy. For it was both profitable to them- 
elves that the memory of their shame should be renewed, 
and it served as a public example, that such a crime should 
be branded with eternal disgrace. There is an ambiguity in 
‘the meaning of the midwife’s words. Some suppose the 
“breaking forth” to apply to the membrane of the womb,} 
‘which is broken when the foetus comes forth. Others more 
correctly suppose, that the midwife wondered how Pharez, 
hi ving broken through the barrier interposed, should have 
come out first ; for his brother, who had preceded him, was, 
as an intervening wall, opposed to him. To some the expres- 
Sion appears to be an imprecation; as if it had been said, 
* Let the blame of the rupture be upon thee.” But Moses, 
so far as I can judge, intends to point out nothing more, 
than that a prodigy took place at the birth, 

ie 


1 
c CHAPTER XXXIX. 
_ 1. Ann Joseph was brought down 1. Joseph autem ductus est in 
to Egypt; and Potiphar, an officer igyptum, et emit eum Potiphar 
of Pharaoh, captain of the guard, an princeps Pharaonis, princeps satelli- 
Egyptian, bought him of the hands tum, vir Zigyptius, e manu Ismaeli- 
ofthe Ishmeelites, whichhad brought tarum, qui deduxerant eum illue. 
him down thither. 
_ 1 Secundinis,’—secundina is the membrane which incloses the foetus 
during the period of gestation ; and which, being rent at the protrusion of 
the child, comes away as part of the after-birth. The whole is called 
secundine in English, and in French “ arriere faix.”—Ed. 

VOL, II. T 





290 


2. And the Lord was with Joseph, 
and he was a prosperous man; and 
he was in the house of his master the 
Egyptian. 

3. And his master saw that the 
Lord was with him, and that the 
Lord made all that he did to prosper 
in his hand. Nie 

4. And Joseph found grace in his 
sight, and he served him: and he 
made him overseer over his house, 
and all that he had he put into his 
hand. 

5. And it came to pass, from the 
time that he had made him overseer 
in his house, and over all that he had, 
that the Lord blessed the Egyptian’s 
house for Joseph’s sake; and the 
blessing of the Lord was upon all 
that he had in the house, and in the 
field. 

6. And he left all that he had in 
Joseph’s hand; and he knew not 
ought he had, save the bread which 
he did eat: and Joseph was a goodly 
person, and well-favoured. 

7. And it came to pass after these 
things, that his master’s wife cast 
her eyes upon Joseph ; and she said, 
Lie with me. 

8. But he refused; and said unto 
his master’s wife, Behold, my master 
wotteth not what is with me in the 
house, and he hath committed all 
that he hath to my hand: 

9. There is none greater in this 
house than I; neither hath he kept 
back anything from me but thee, 
because thou art his wife: how then 
can I do this great wickedness, and 
sin against God ? 

10. And it came to pass, as she 
spake to Joseph day by day, that he 
hearkened not unto her, to lie by 
her, or to be with her, 

11. And it came to pass about this 
time, that Joseph went into the house 
todo his business; and there was none 
of the men of the house there within. 

12. And she caught him by his 
garment, saying, Lie with me: and 
he left his garment in her hand, and 
fled, and got him out. 


COMMENTARY UPON — 


























eras 
ita.) Soe 
S 1 Anes ba. m4 


1 
toa 
, 


—. 
a i —~ « 
- 1." 


CHAP. . 


2. Et. fuit Iehova cum Jo 4 
itaque fuit vir prospere bie uit. 
que in domo domini sui Algyptii. 


3. Et vidit dominus ejus, quo: 
Iehova esset cum eo: et omnia qué 
ipse faciebat, Iehova prosieniaa 
manu ejus. = 

4, Kit invenit Joseph gratiam in. 
oculis ejus, et ministrabat ei: et 
preeposuit eum domui sue: et omni 
quee erant ei, dedit in manum ejus, — 
a 

5. Fuit autem ex eo tempore, 
quo preposuit eum domui sue, et 
omnibus que ae ei, benedixi A 
Tehova domui gyptii ter 
Joseph: et fuit hone fiche it 
omnibus, quee erant ei in domo et in 
agro. Vaal 


6. Reliquit ergo omnia sua in 
manu Joseph, et non cognovit cut 
eo quicquam, nisi panem quem ips 
comedebat: erat autem Joseph pul- 
cher forma, et pulcher aspectu. 

7. Et fuit, post heee levavit uxor 
domini ejus, oculos suos super Joseph, 
et dixit, Concumbe mecum. x 


8. Et renuit, et dixit ad uxorem. 
domini sui, Ecce, dominus meus non 
cognovit mecum, quid sit in domo: 
et omnia que erant ei, dedit in ma- 
num meam. 4 

9. Non est major me in domo hae; 
et non prohibuit a me quicquam: 
nisi te, eo quod tu sis wxor ejus: et 
quomodo faciam malum grande hoe, 
ut peccem contra Deum ? % 


10. Et fuit, quum loqueretur ipsa) 
ad Joseph quotidie, nec ei morem) 
gereret, ut cum ea concumberet, et 
ut esset cum ea, 

11. Fuit inquam, secundum dienn 
hance ingressus est domum, ut facere 
opus suum: et non erat quisquan 
ex viris domus illic in domo: 

12. Tune apprehendit eum pe 
vestimentum ejus, dicendo, Concum= 
bemecum. Ergo reliquit vestimer 
tum suum in manu ejus, et fugi 
egressusque est foras. 









































a XXXIX. 


. And it came to pass, when she 
EP ahat he had left his garment in 
hand, and was fled forth, 

. That she called unto the men 
peg and spake unto them, 
n Race he hath brought in an 
v unto us to mock us; he came 
to me to lie with me, and I cried 
th a a loud voice : 

15. And it came to pass, when he 
ard that [lifted up my voice and 
d, that he left his garment with 
Pend fied, and got him out. 


16. And she laid up his garment 
y her, until his lord came home. 


17. And she spake unto him ac- 
. ding to these words, saying, The 
[ebrew servant, which thou hast 
rought unto us, came in unto me 
9 mock me: 

18. And it came to pass, as I 
ted up my voice and cried, that he 
his garment with me, ‘and fled 


it 
19. And it came to pass, when his 
ster heard the words of his wife, 
yhi rich she spake unto him, saying, 
er this manner did thy servant 
0 me; that his wrath was kindled. 
20. And J oseph’s master took 
im, and put him into the prison, a 
lace where the king’s prisoners were 
ound: and he was there in the 
21. But the Lord was with Joseph, 
nd showed him mercy, and gave him 
favour in the sight of the keeper of 
: son. 

p22. And the keeper of the prison 
ommitted to Joseph’s hand all the 
‘prisoners that were in the prison; 
and whatsoever they did there, he 

s the doer of it. 

ca 23. The keeper of ‘the. prison 
‘looked not to any thing. that was 
under his hand; because the Lord 
se with him, ‘and that which -he 
id, l, the Lord made it to prosper. 


x 


Se we a) 
" ae aa ; 
‘ 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS, 


i. And Joseph was brought down. 
‘i ‘connecting it with the remaining part of the history, Moses 


291 


13. Et fuit, quum vidisset ipsa, 
quod reliquisset vestimentum suum 
in manu sua, et fugisset foras: 

14. Vocavit viros domus sue, et 
dixit ad e0s, dicendo, Videte, addux- 
it nobis virum Hebreeum, ut illuderet 
nobis: ingressus est ad me ut con- 
cumberet mecum, et clamavi voce 
magna. 

15. Et fuit, quum audisset ipse, 
quod elevassem vocem meam et cla- 
massem, reliquit vestimentum suum 
apud me, et fugit, egressusque est 
foras. 

16. Retinuit autem vestimentum 
ejus apud se, donee veniret dominus 
ejus ad domum suam, 

17. Et loquuta est ad eum.secun- 
dum verba ista, dicendo, Ingressus 
est ad me servus Hebreeus, ut illude- 
ret mihi. 


18. Et fuit, quum elevassem vo- 
cem meam, et clamassem, reliquit 
vestimentum suum apud me, et fugit 
foras. 

19. Fuit autem, quum audisset 
dominus ejus verba uxoris sue, quee 
loquuta est ad eum, dicendo, Secun- 
dum hee fecit mihi servus tuus: 
iratus est furor ejus. 

20. Et accepit dominus ipsius 
Joseph eum, et posuit eum in domo 
carceris, in loco in quo vincti regis 
vinciebantur, fuitque illic in domo 
carceris. 

21. Fuit vero Iehova cum Joseph, 
et inelinavit ad eum misericordiam, 
et dedit gratiam ejus in oculis prin- 
cipis domus carceris. 

22. Et dedit princeps domus car- 
ceris in manu Joseph omnes vinctos, 
qui erant in domo carceris: et om- 
nia quee faciebant illic, ipse faciebat. 


23. Neque princeps domus car- 
ceris videbat quicquam ew tis que 
erant in manu ejus, eo quod Iehova 
erat cum eo: et quod ipse faciebat, 
Iehova secundabat. 


For the purpose of 


7 
aa 






























292 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXI X 


repeats what he had briefly touched upon, that Joseph had 
been sold to Potiphar the Egyptian: he then subjoins that 
God was with Joseph, so that he prospered in all things. 
For although it often happens that all things proceed with 
wicked men according to their wish, whom God neverthe. 
less does not bless with his favour; still the sentiment i 
true and the expression of it proper, that it is never well 
with men, except so far as the Lord shows himself to be 
gracious to them. For he vouchsafes his blessing, for a time, 
even to reprobates, with whom he is justly angry, in order 
that he may gently invite and even allure them to repent- 
ance; and may render them more inexcusable, if they re 
main obstinate ; meanwhile, he curses their felicity. There-) 
fore, while they think they have reached the height o 
fortune, their prosperity, in which they delighted them 
selves, is turned into ruin. Now whensoever God deprives 
men of his blessing, whether they be strangers or of his own 
household, they must necessarily decline ; because no goo¢ 
flows except from Him as the fountain. The world indee¢ 
forms for itself a goddess of fortune, who whirls round they 
affairs of men; or each man adores his own industry; bw 
Scripture draws us away from this depraved imagination, ant 
declares that adversity is a sign of God’s absence, but pros 
perity, a sign of his presence. However, there is not the leas 
doubt that the peculiar and extraordinary favour of God ap 
peared*towards Joseph, so that he was plainly known to bi 
blessed by God. Moses immediately afterwards adds, the 
Joseph was in the house of his master, to teach us that h 
was not at once elevated to an honourable condition. Ther 
was nothing more desirable than liberty ; but he is reckone 
among the slaves, and lives precariously, holding his li 
itself subject to the will of his master. Let us then leart 
even amidst our sufferings, to perceive the grace of God 
and let it suffice us, when anything severe is to be endured 
to have our cup mingled with some portion of sweetness, le 
we should be ungrateful to God, who, in this manner, de 
clares that he is present with us. 

3. And his master saw. Here that which has been latel 
alluded to more clearly appears, that the grace of God show n 






















CHAP, XXXIX, THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 293 


forth in Joseph, in no common or usual manner; since it 
became thus manifest to a man who was a heathen, and, in 
‘this respect, blind. How much more base is our ingratitude, 
if we do not refer all our prosperous events to God as their 
author; seeing that Scripture often teaches us, that nothing 
proceeding from men, whether counsels, or labours, or any 
‘means which they can devise, will profit them, except so far 
‘as God gives his blessing. And whereas Potiphar, on this 
‘account, conceived so much greater regard for Joseph, as 
to set him over his house; we hence gather, that heathens 
“may be so affected by religion, as to be constrained to ascribe 
“glory to God. However, his ingratitude again betrays itself, 
‘when he despises that God whose gifts he estimates so 
highly in the person of Joseph. He ought at least to have 
‘inquired who that God was, that he might conform himself 
'to the worship due to him: but he deems it enough, inso- 
much as he thinks it will be for his private advantage, to 
8 cknowledge that Joseph was divinely directed, in order that 
he may use his labour with greater profit. 
_ The Lord made all that he did to prosper in his hand. 
‘This was a wonderful method of procedure, that the entire 
Plessing by which the Lord was pleased to testify his paternal 
love towards Joseph, should turn to the gain of the Egyptians. 
For since Joseph neither sowed nor reaped for himself, he 
was not at all enriched by his labour. But in this way it 
“was brought about that a proud man, who otherwise might 
have abused him as a vile and sordid slave, should treat him 
humanely ‘and liberally. And the Lord often soothes the 
wicked by such favours, lest when they have suffered any in- 
jury, they should turn the fury of their indignation against 
the pious. We here see how abundantly the grace of God 
‘is poured out upon the faithful, since a portion of his kind- 
ness flows from them even to the reprobate. We are also 
taught what an advantage it is to receive the elect children 
‘of God to our hospitality, or to join ourselves to those whom 
the divine fayour thus accompanies, that it may diffuse its 
fragrance to those who are near them. But since it would not 
“greatly profit us to be saturated with those temporal benefits 
of God, which suffocate and ruin the reprobate; we ought 





294 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXX 































to centre all our wishes on this one point, that God r 
propitious tous. Far better was it for Joseph that Poti 
wealth should be increased for his sake ; than it was for Po. 
tiphar to make great gain by Joseph. il 

6. And he left all that he had." Joseph reaped this - fru i 
of the divine love and kindness towards him, that he w 
cheered by some alleviation of his servitude, at least, for 4 
short time. But a new temptation soon assailed him. — For 
the favour which he had obtained was not only annihilated, 
but became the cause and origin of a harsher fortune. Jo 0 
~ seph was governor over the whole house of Potiphar. Bron 
that post of honour he is hurried into prison, in order t 
he may be soon brought forth to the punishment of dent h 
What then could enter into his mind, but that he was fo1 
saken and abandoned by God, and was continually exposec 
to new dangers? He might even imagine that God had de 
clared himself his enemy. This history, therefore, teaches u 
that the pious have need of peculiar discernment to enable 
them, with the eyes of faith, to consider those benefits of Goc 
by which he mitigates the severity of their crosses. For wher 
he scems to stretch out his hand to them, for the sake of bring: 
ing them assistance, the light which had shone forth ofter 
vanishes in a moment, and denser darkness follows in its place 
But here it is evident, that the Lord, though he often plung 
his own people into the waves of adversity, yet does not de : 
ceive them ; seeing that, by sometimes moderating their s 
ferings, he reatite them time to breathe. So Joseph, thougl 
fallen from his office as governor of the house, was yet neve’ 
deserted ; nor had that relaxation of his sufferings proved in 
vain, by which his mind was raised, not to pride, but to th 

1 « Potiphar placed Joseph over his house and over all his substance 
and the Lord blessed him for the sake of Joseph, in all which he had, it 
the house and in the field. Joseph had also, after his exaltation, a ma 
who was over his house. A peculiar and characteristic Egyptian trai 
‘ Among the objects of tillage and husbandry,’ says Rosellini, * which ar 
pourtray ed on the Egyptian tombs, we often see asteward who takes accou 
and makes a registry of the harvest, before it is deposited in the ston 
house.’”—Hengstenberg’s Egypt and the Books of Moses, p. 24. Sue 
inciderital testimony to the truth of the sacred narrative, is invaluable, es 
pecially at a time when men, wise above what is written, are endeavo 


ing to bring the sacred volume into contempt, by casting a doubt upon the 
veracity of Moses.—d. : 















‘CHAP. XXXIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 295 
patient endurance of a new cross. And truly for this end, 
_ God meets with us in our difficulties, that then, with collected 
strength, as men refreshed, we may be the better prepared 
- for other conflicts. 
And Joseph was a goodly person, and well-favoured. 
Whereas elegance of form was the occasion of great calamity 
to holy Joseph, let us learn not greatly to desire those graces 
of person which may conciliate the favour of the world ; but 
rather let each be content with his own lot. We see to how 
‘many dangers they are exposed, who excel in beauty ; for 
it is very difficult for such to restrain themselves from. all 
lascivious desires, Although in Joseph religion so prevailed 
| that he abhorred all impurity ; yet Satan contrived a means 
_ of destruction for him, from another quarter, just as he is 
_ accustomed to turn the gifts of God into snares whereby to 
catch souls. Wherefore we must earnestly ask of God, that 
_ amid so many dangers, he would govern us by his Spirit, and 
_ preserve those gifts with which he has adorned us, pure from 
' every stain. When it is said that Potiphar’s wife “cast her 
| eyes upon Joseph,” the Holy Spirit, by this form of speech, ad- 
~ monishes all women, that if they have chastity in their heart, 
| they must guard it by modesty of demeanour. For, on this 
| account also, they bear a veil upon their heads, that they may 
| restrain themselves from every sinful allurement : not that it 
"is wrong fora woman to look at men; but Moses here describes 
" an impure and dissolute look. She had often before looked 
. upon Joseph without sin: but now, for the first time, she casts 
her eyes upon him, and contemplates his beauty more boldly 
4 and wantonly than became a modest woman. ‘Thus we see 
) _ that the eyes were as torches to inflame the heart to lust. By 
which example we are taught that nothing is more easy, than 
for all our senses to infect our minds with depraved desires, 
unless we are very earnestly on our guard. For Satan never 
_ ceases diligently to suggest those things which may incite us 
| tosin. The senses both readily embrace the occasion of sin 
_ which is presented to them, and also eagerly and quickly 
" convey it to the mind. Wherefore let every one endeavour 
j sedulously to govern his eyes, and his ears, and the other 
' members of his body, unless he wishes to open so many doors 





296 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXIX. 


to Satan, into the innermost affections of his heart: and | 
especially as the sense of the eyes is the most tender, no © 
common care must be used in putting them under restraint. — 
7. Lie with me Moses only briefly touches upon the ~ 
chief points, and the sum of the things he relates. For there | 
is no doubt that this impure woman endeavoured, by various 
arts, to allure the pious youth, and that she insinuated her- 
self by indirect blandishments, before she broke forth to such 
a shameless kind of license. But Moses, omitting other | 
things, shows that she had been pushed so far by base lust, 
as not to shrink from openly soliciting a connection with — 
Joseph. Now as this filthiness is a signal proof that car- 
nal lust acts from blind and furious impulses; so, in the 
person of Joseph, an admirable example of fidelity and | 
continence is set before us. His fidelity and integrity ap- — 
pear in this, that he acknowledges himself to be the more 
strictly bound, the greater the power with which he is en- 
trusted. Ingenuous and courageous men have this property, 
that the more is confided to them, the less they can bear to 
deceive: but it is a rare virtue for those who have the power 
of doing injury to cultivate honesty gratuitously. Wherefore 
Joseph is not undeservedly commended by Moses, for re- 
garding the authority with which he was invested by his — 
master, as a bridle to restrain him from transgressing the 
bounds of duty. Besides, he gives also a proof of his grati- 
tude, in bringing forward the benefits received from his mas- 
ter, as a reason why he should not subject him to any dis- 
grace. And truly hence arises at this day such confusion 
everywhere, that men are half brutal, because this sacred 
bond of mutual society is broken. All, indeed, confess, that — 


" “ How great the corruption of manners with reference to the marriage 
relation was among the Egyptians, appears from Herodotus, whose account — 
Larcher has compared with the one under consideration. The wife of one of 
the oldest kings was untrue to him. It was long before a woman could be 
found who was faithful to her husband; and when one was, at last, found, the — 
king took her without hesitation to himself. From such a state of morals 
the Biblical narrative can easily be conceived to be natural. The evidence 
of the monuments is also not very favourable to the Egyptian women. Thus — 
they are represented as addicted to excess in drinking wine, as even be- — 
coming so much intoxicated, as to be unable to stand or walk alone, or to 
carry their liquor discreetly.”—Lgypt and the Books of Moses, p. 25.—Ed, 












re ere es Ta 


eae ae 





CHAP. XXXIX, THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 297 


if they have received any benefit from another, they are 
_ under obligation to him: one even reproaches another for 
his ingratitude; but there are few who sincerely follow the 
example of Joseph. Lest, however, he should seem to be 


restrained only by a regard to man, he also declares that the 
act would be offensive to God. And, indeed, nothing is 


more powerful to overcome temptation than the fear of God. 
But he designedly commends the generosity of his master, 
in order that the wicked woman may desist from her aban- 


doned purpose. To the same point is the objection which 


_ he mentions, Neither hath he kept anything back from me 
but thee, because thou art his wife. Why does he say this, 


except that, by recalling the religious obligation of marriage, 
he may wound the corrupt mind of the woman, and may 


_ cure her of her insane passion? Therefore he not only 


strenuously strives to liberate himself from her wicked al- 


- lurements ; but, lest her lusts should prove indomitable, he 
_ proposes to her the best remedy. And we may know that 
_ the sanctity of marriage is here commended to us in the 
| history of Joseph, whereby the Lord would declare himself to 


be the maintainer of matrimonial fidelity, so that none who 
violate another’s bed should escape his vengeance. For he is 
a surety between the man and his wife, and requires mutual 
chastity from each. Whence it follows that, besides the in- 


jury inflicted upon man, God himself is grievously wronged. 


10. As she spake to Joseph day by day. The constancy 
of Joseph is commended ; from which it appears that a real 


fear of God reigned in his mind. Whence it came to pass 
_ that he not only repelled one attack, but stood forth, to the 
last, the conqueror of all temptations. We know how easy 
it is to fall when Satan tempts us through another: because 
_ we seem exempt from blame, if he who induces us to com- 
mit the crime, bears a part of it.' Holy Joseph, therefore, 


1 Scimus quam lubricus sit lapsus, dum aliunde nobis flabella suscitat 
Satan: quia videmur culpa exempti, si ejus partem sustinet qui nos ad 


_ flagitium inducit. The French translation is, Nous savons combien il est 
_ aisé de tomber, quand Satan nous suscite des soufflets d’ailleurs: car il 


nous semble que nous sommes exempts de la faute, si celuy qui nous a 


_induit 4 mal en soustient une partie. The sentiment of the passage seems 


loosely expressed, and certainly required some limitation. The old Eng- 
lish translator omits it, as he does many others, entirely.—Ed. 


an 


> ae 


298 COMMENTARY UPON 


































the ‘Spirit, seeing that he stood invincible to ine t, 
against all the allurements of the impious woman. So 
much the more detestable is the wickedness of her, aoe 
neither corrected by time, nor restrained by many ee 
When she sees a stranger, and one who had been sold wed: 
slave, so discreet and so faithful to his master, when she i 
also sacredly admonished by him not to provoke the angel 
of God, how indomitable is that lust which gives no place t 
shame. Now, because we here see into what evils persons 
will rush, when regard to propriety is extinguished by carnal 
intemperance, we must entreat the Lord that he will not 
suffer the light of his Spirit to be quenched within us. 

11. And it came to pass about this time. That is, in the 
process of time, seeing she will not desist from soliciting holy 
Joseph, it happens at length, that she adds force to blan- 
dishments. Now, Moses here describes the erisis' of the 
combat. Joseph had already exhibited a noble and memor 
able example of constancy; because, as a youth, so ofter 
tempted, through a constant succession of many days, he 
had preserved the even tenor of his way; and at that age, 
to which pardon is wont to be granted, if it break forth into 
intemperance, he was more moderate than almost any old 
man. But now when the woman openly raves, and her love 
is turned into fury, the more arduous the contest has be- 
come, the more worthy of praise is his magnanimity, which 
remains inflexible against this assault. Joseph saw that he 
must incur the danger of losing both his character and his 
life : she: chose to ‘sacrifige thie character, and was prepa od 
to relinquish life itself, rather than to be guilty of such 
wickedness before God. Seeing the Spirit of God proposes | 
to us such an example in a,youth, what excuse does he 
leave for men and women of mature age, if they voluntarily 
precipitate themselves into crime, or ‘fall into it by a light 
temptation? To this, therefore, we must bend all our efforts, 
that regard for God alone, may prevail to subdue all carnal 
affections, and even that we may more highly value a good 
and upright conscience than the plaudits of the whole world, 
' Epitasis, Greek ixiraois, the point in a play wherein the plot thickens. —Zd. 


CHAP. XXXIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 299 


For no one will prove that he heartily loves virtue, but he 
who, being content with God as his only witness, does not 
_ hesitate to submit to any disgrace, rather than decline from 


_ the path of duty. And truly, since even among heathens 


such proverbs as these are current, “that conscience is a 
thousand witnesses,” and that it is “a most beautiful theatre,” 
we should be greatly ashamed of our stupor, unless the tri- 
bunal of God stands so conspicuously in our view, as to cast 
all the perverse judgments of the world into the shade. 
Therefore, away with those vain pretexts, “ I wish to avoid 
offence,” “ I am afraid lest men should interpret amiss what 
I have done aright ;’ because God does not regard himself 
as being duly honoured, unless we, ceasing to be anxious 
about our own reputation, follow wheresoever he alone calls 
us; not that he wishes us simply to be indifferent to our 
own reputation, but because it is an indignity, as well as an 

absurdity, that he should not be preferred to men. Let, 
: then, the faithful, as much as in them lies, endeavour to 
edify their neighbours by the example of an upright life ; 
and for this end, let them prudently guard against every 
mark of evil; but if it be necessary to endure the infamy of 
the world, let them through this temptation also, proceed 
in the direction of their divine vocation. 

He hath brought in an Hebrew unto us. Here we see 
what desperation can effect. For the wicked woman breaks 


forth from love into fury. Whence it clearly appears what 








brutal impulses lust brings with it, when its reins are loosen- 
ed. Certainly when Satan has once gained the dominion 
over miserable men, he never ceases to hurry them hither 
_ and thither, until he drives them headlong by the spirit of 
_ giddiness and madness. We see, also, how he hardens to 
obstinacy the reprobate, whom he holds fast bound under 
his power. God, indeed, often inspires the wicked with 
terror, so that they commit their crimes with trembling. 
And it is possible that the signs of a guilty conscience 
appeared in the countenance and in the words of this impure 
_ woman: nevertheless, Satan confirms her in that degree of 

hardness, that she boldly adopts the design to ruin the holy 
youth; and, at the moment, contrives the fraud by which 






























300 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XXXIX. _ 


she may oppress him, though innocent, just as if she had — 
long meditated, at leisure, on his destruction. She had be- 
fore sought secrecy, that no witness might be present; now 
she calls her domestics, that, by this kind of prejudging of — 
the case, she may condemn the youth before her husband. — 
Besides, she involves her husband in the accusation, that 
she may compel him, by a sense of shame, to punish the guilt- 
less. ‘It is by thy fault, (she says,) that this stranger has 
been mocking me.” What other course does she leave open to 
her husband, than that he should hasten, with closed eyes, to 
avenge her, for the sake of purging himself from this charge? _ 
Therefore, though all wicked persons are fearful, yet they — 
contract such hardness from their stupor, that no fear hin- 
ders them from rushing obstinately forward into every 
abyss of iniquity, and insolently trampling upon the good 
and simple. And we must observe this trial of the holy — 
man, in order that we may take care to be clothed with 
that spirit of fortitude, which not even the iron-hardness of 
the wicked shall be able to break. Even this other trial 
was not a light one, that he receives so unworthy a reward 
of his humanity. He had covered the disgrace of the woman 
in silence, in order that she might have had opportunity to 
repent, if she had been curable; he now sees that, by his — 
modesty, he has brought himself into danger of death. We — 
learn, by his not sinking under the trial, that it was his sin- 
cere determination to yield himself freely to the service of God. 
And we must do the same, in order that the ingratitude of — 
men may, by no means, cause us to swerve from our duty. 
19. When his master heard the words of his wife. Seeing 
that a colour so probable was given to the transaction, there 
is no wonder that jealousy, the motions of which are exceed- — 
ingly vehement and ardent, should so far have prevailed with — 
Potiphar, as to cause him to credit the calumnies of his wife. 
Yet the levity with which he instantly thrust a servant, whom 
he had found prudent and honest, into prison, without ex- 
amining the cause, cannot be excused. He ought certainly to 
have been less under the influence of his wife. And, there- 
fore, he received the just reward of his too easy folly, by 
cherishing with honour, a harlot in the place of a wife, and 





 OHAP. XXXIX, THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 301 


by almost performing the office of a pander. This example 
_ is useful to all; yet husbands especially are taught that they 
must use prudence, lest they should be carried rashly hither 
_ and thither, at the will of their wives. And, truly, since we 
everywhere see that they who are too obsequious to their 
wives are held up to ridicule; let us know that the folly of 
these men is condemned by the just judgment of God, so 
that we may learn to pray for the spirit of gravity and mo- 
deration. There is no doubt that Moses expressly condemns 
the rashness of Potiphar, in becoming inflamed against Jo- 
seph, as soon as he had heard his wife, and in giving the reins 
to his indignation, just as if the guilt of Joseph had been 
proved ; for thus all equity is excluded, no just defence is al- 
lowed, and finally, the true and accurate investigation of the 
cause is utterly rejected. But it may be asked, How could 
‘the jealousy of Potiphar be excited, since Moses before has 
said that he was an eunuch? The salution of the question 
is easy ; they were accustomed to be called eunuchs in the 
East, not only who were so really, but who were satraps and 
nobles. Wherefore, this name is of the same force as if Moses 
had said that he was one of the chief men of the court.” 

20. And put him into the prison. Though Moses does not 
state with what degree of severity Joseph was afflicted at the 
beginning of his imprisonment, yet we readily gather that he 
was not allowed any liberty, but was thrust into some obscure 
dungeon. The authority of Potiphar was paramount; he 
had the keeper of the prison under his power, and at his dis- 
posal. What clemency could be hoped for from a man who 
was jealous and carried away with the vehemence of his 
anger? There is no doubt that what is related of Joseph in 

1 See the comment on chap. xxxvii. 36. 

2 To the whole of this account the sceptical writers of the continent 
imagine that they have found an insuperable objection. Zwch remarks, 
‘The narrator abandons the representation of a distinguished Egyptian, 
in whose house the women live separately,” &c. .“ The error,” observes 
Hengstenberg, “ however, lies here, not on the side of the author, but on 
that of his critics. They are guilty of inadvertently transferring that 
which universally prevails in the Kast to Egypt, which the author avoids, 
and thereby exhibits his knowledge of the condition of the Egyptians. 
According to the monuments, the women in Egypt lived under far less re- 


straint than in the East, or even in G'reece.”—Egypt and the Books of 
Moses, p. 26.—Ed. 





302 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XXXIX, | 


Psalm ey. 18, “ His feet were made fast in fetters, and the 4 


iron entered into his soul,” had been handed down by tradi- 
tion from the fathers. What a reward of innocence! for, 


\_- 


y 
} 


‘ 


according to the flesh, he might ascribe whatever he was — 


suffering to his integrity. Truly, in this temptation he must 
have mourned in great perplexity and anxiety before God. 
And though Moses does not record his prayers, yet, since it 
is certain that he was not crushed beneath the cross, and 
did not murmur against it, it is also probable that he was 
reposing on the hope of Divine help. And to flee unto God 
is the only stay which can support us in our afflictions, the 
only armour which renders us invincible. 


21. But the Lord was with Joseph. It appears, from the — 
testimony of the Psalmist just cited, that Joseph’s extreme — 
sufferings were not immediately alleviated. The Lord pur- — 
posely suffered him to be reduced to extremity, that he — 
might bring him back as from the grave. We know that as — 


the light of the sun is most clearly seen when we are look- 
ing from a dark place; so, in the darkness of our miseries, 


the grace of God shines more brightly wheu, beyond ex- — 


pectation, he succours us. Moreover, Moses says, the Lord 
was with Joseph, because he extended this grace or mercy 


towards him; whence we may learn, that God, even when — 
he delivers us from unjust violence, or when he assists us in — 


a good cause, is yet induced to do so by his own goodness. 
For since we are unworthy that he should grant us his help, 
the cause of its communication must be in himself; seeing 


that he is merciful. Certainly if merits, which should lay God — 
under obligation, are to be sought for in-men, they would have — 


been found in Joseph ; yet Moses declares that he was assisted 


by the gratuitous favour of God. This, however, is no ob- — 
stacle to his having received the reward of his piety, which — 
is perfectly consistent with the gratuitous kindness of God. — 


The manner of exercising this kindness is also added; namely, 
that the Lord gave him favour with the keeper of the prison. 
There is, indeed, no doubt that. Joseph was acceptable to 


q 


the keeper for many reasons: for even virtue conciliates — 


favour to itself; and Moses has before shown that the holy 
man was amiable in many ways; but because it often hap- 


ag 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 303 















pens that the children of God are treated with as great 
inhumanity as if they were the worst of all men, Moses ex- 


disposed to equity, had been divinely inclined to it. There- 
fore, that the keeper of the prison, having laid aside his 
cruelty, acted with kindness and gentleness, was a change 
which proceeded from God, who governs the hearts of men 
according to his own will. But it is a wonder that the 
keeper of the prison did not fear lest he should incur the 
displeasure of Potiphar: and even that Potiphar himself, who 
without difficulty could have interfered, should yet have suf- 
fered a man whom he mortally hated to be thus kindly and 
liberally treated. It may be answered with truth, that his 
_eruelty had been divinely restrained: but it is also probable 
that he had suspected, and at length, been made acquainted 
with the subtle scheme of his wife. Although, however, he 
might be appeased towards holy Joseph, he was unwilling to 
acquit him to his own dishonour. Meanwhile the remarkable 
integrity of Joseph manifests itself in this, that when he is 
made the guard of the prison, and has the free administra- 
tion of it, he nevertheless does not attempt to escape, but 
_ waits for the proper season of his liberation. 


CHAPTER XL. 


1. Anpit came to pass after these 
_ things, that the butler of the king of 
_ Egypt and his baker had offended 
_ their lord the king of Egypt. 

_ 2, AndPharaoh was wroth against 






+— 


1. Fuit autem, posthee peccave- 
runt pincerna regis Aigypti, et pistor 
contra dominum suum regem Ai- 


gypti. 
2. Itaque iratus est Pharao con- 


a 


ttt a at 


two of his officers, against the chief 

_ of the butlers, and against the chief 
of the bakers. 

_ 3. And he put them in ward in 
_ the house of the captain of the guard, 

into the prison, the place where Jo- 


_ seph was bound. 


_ 4. And the captain of the guard 
charged Joseph with them, and he 


_ served them ; and they continued a 


_ season in ward. 
: 5. And they dreamed a dream 


both of them, each man his dream in 





tra utrumque satrapam suum, contra 
principem pincernarum et contra 
principem pistorum. 

3. Et posuit illos in custodia do- 
mus principis satellitum, in domo 
carceris, in loco in quo Joseph vine- 
tus erat. 

4. Et preposuit princeps satelli- 
tum ipsum Joseph eis, et ministrabat 
eis: fuerunt autem per annum in 
custodia. 

5. Porro somniaverunt somnium 
uterque ipsorum, quisque somnium 


504 


one night, each man according to 

the interpretation of his dream, the 

butler and the baker of the king of 

Egypt, which were bound in the 
rison, 

6. And Joseph came in unto them 
in the morning, and looked upon 
them, and, behold, they were sad. 

7. And he asked Pharaoh’s offi- 
cers, that were with him in the ward 
of his lord’s house, saying, Where- 
fore look ye so sadly to-day? 

8. And they said unto him, We 
have dreamed a dream, and there is 
no interpreter of it. And Joseph 
said unto them, Do not interpreta- 
tions belong to God? tell me them, I 
pray you. 

9. And the chief butler told his 


dream to Joseph, and said to him, In 


my dream, behold, a vine was before 
me; 

10. And in the vine were three 
branches: and it was as though it 
budded, and her blossoms shot forth ; 
and the clusters thereof brought 
forth ripe grapes : 

11. And Pharaoh’s cup was in my 
hand: and I took the grapes, and 
pressed them into Pharaoh’s cup, and 
I gave the cup into Pharaoh’s hand. 


12. And Joseph said unto him, 
This is the interpretation of it : The 
three branches are three days. 

13. Yet within three days shall 
Pharaoh lift up thine head, and re- 
store thee unto thy place; and thou 
shalt deliver Pharaoh’s cup into his 
hand, after the former manner when 
thou wast his butler. 

14. But think on me when it shall 
be well with thee, and shew kindness, 
I pray thee, unto me; and make 
mention of me unto Pharaoh, and 
bring me out of this house : 

15. For indeed I was stolen away 
out of the land of the Hebrews; and 
here also have I done nothing that 
they should put me into the dungeon. 

16. When the chief baker saw 
that the interpretation was good, he 
said unto Joseph, I also was in my 
dream, and, behold, Z had three 
white baskets on my head. 


COMMENTARY UPON 





» a 


OHAP, XL. 


suum nocte eadem: singuli secun- 
dum interpretationem somnii sui, 
pincerna et pistor qui fuerant regi 
Aigypti, qui erant vincti in domo 
carceris. . 

6. Et venit ad eos Joseph mane, 
et vidit eos, et ecce, erant tristitia 
affecti. 

7. Tune interrogavit principes 
Pharaonis, qui erant secum in custo- 
dia domus domini sui, dicendo, Cur 
facies vestrz sunt afflictee hodie ? 

8. Et dixerunt ad eum, Somnium 
somniavimus, et qui interpretetur 
illud, non est. Et dixitad eos Joseph, 
Nonne Dei sunt interpretationes? 
narrate quzeso mihi. 


9. Et narravit princeps pincerna- 
rum somnium suum ipsi Joseph, et 
dixit ei, Me somniante, ecce, vitis 
erat coram me. 

10. Et in vite erant tres rami, et 
dum floreret, ascendit flos ejus, et 
maturuerunt botri ejus in uvas. 


11. Et calix Pharaonis erat in 
manu mea, et accipiebam uvas, et 
exprimebam eas in calicem Pharao- 
nis, et dabam calicem in manu Pha- 
raonis. 

12. Et dixit ei Joseph, Hee est in- 
terpretatio ejus, Tres rami, tres dies 
sunt. 

13. In fine trium dierum elevabit 
Pharao caput tuum, et redire faciet 
te ad locum tuum, et dabis calicem 
Pharaoni in manu ejus secundum 
consuetudinem primam, quando eras 
pincerna ejus. 

14. Sed memento mihi tecum, 
quum bene fuerit tibi: et fac queso 
mecum misericordiam, et mentionem 
mei fac Pharaoni, et educere fac me 
e domo hae: 

15. Quia furto auferendo, furto 
ablatus sum e terra Hebreeorum: et 
etiam hic non feci quicquam, ut po- 
nerent me in carcerem. 

16. Et vidit princeps pistorum, 
quod bene interpretatus esset, et 
dixit ad Joseph, Etiam me somni- 
ante, ecce, tria canistra alba super 
caput meum. 






























ere was of all manner of bake- 
neats for Pharaoh; and the birds 
| i at them out of the basket upon 
“18. And Joseph answered and 
id, This is the interpretation there- 
wf: The three baskets are three days. 
19. Yet within three days shall 
*haraoh lift up thy head from off 
hee, and shall hang thee on a tree; 
and the birds shall eat thy flesh from 
»ff ff th ee. 
_ 20. And it came to pass the third 
lay, which was Pharaoh’s birth- 
day, that he made a feast unto all 
his servants: and he lifted up the 
ead of the chief butler and.of the 
thief baker among his servants. 
Lei. And he restored the chief but- 
r unto his butlership again ; and he 
save the cup into Pharaoh’s hand: 
1 22. But he hanged the chief ba- 
el er, as Joseph had interpreted to 
| 23. Yet did not the chief butler 
ee ber Joseph, but forgat him. 


sustain him with his strength. 


most intricate paths. 


mens eee ee 


— 
— » 
apy 


VOL, II. 





THE BOOK OF GENESIS, 


a And in the uppermost basket ~ 


305 


17. Et in canistro superiori erat 
ex omni cibo Pharaonis, opere pisto- 
rio: et aves comedebant illud e ca- 
nistro, quod erat super caput meum. 


18. Et respondit Joseph, et dixit, 
Hee est interpretatio ejus, Tria ca- 
nistra, tres dies sunt. 

19. In fine trium dierum auferet 
Pharao caput tuum a te, et suspen- 
det te in ligno, et comedent aves 
carnem tuam a te. 


20. Et fuit in die tertia, die qua 
natus fuerat Pharao, fecit convivium 
omnibus Servis suis, et elevavit caput 
principis pincernarum et caput prin- 
cipis pistorum in medio servorum 
suorum. 

21. Ac redire fecit principem pin- 
cernarum ad propinationem suam, 
et dedit calicem in manu Pharaoni: 

22. Principem autem pistorum 
suspendit,, quemadmodum interpre- 
tatus fuerat eis Joseph. 

23. Et non est recordatus prin- 
ceps pincernarum ipsius Joseph, sed 
oblitus est ejus. 


1. And i came to pass after these things. We have already 
seen, that when Joseph was in bonds, God cared for him. 
For whence arose the relaxation afforded him, but from 
the divine fayour? Therefore, God, before he opened the door 
for his servant’s deliverance, entered into the very prison to 


But a far more illustrious be- 


hefit follows ; for he is not only liberated from prison, but 
xalted to the highest degree of honour. 
the providence of God led the holy man through wonderful and 
The butler and baker of the king are 
east into the prison; Joseph expounds to them their dreams, 
“Restoration to his office having been promised to the butler, 
some light of hope beams upon the holy captive ; for the 
4 utler agreed, after he should have returned to his post, to 
. secome the advocate for Joseph’s pardon. 
hope was speedily cut off, when the butler failed to speak a 
word to the king on behalf of the miserable captive. 

seph, therefore, seemed to himself to be buried in perpetual 


In the meantime, 


But, again, that 
Jo- 


U 





























“1 ,; ? haa 
a 7 as Be ats 
a | 

os i 


306 - COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XI XL 


oblivion, until the Lord again suddenly rekindles the ligh 
which had been smothered, and almost extinguished. Thus | 
when he might have delivered the holy man directly from | 
prison, he shone to lead him around by circuitous paths, the 
better to prove his patience, and to manifest, by the mod 2 
of his deliverance, that he has wonderful methods of work- 
ing, hidden from our view. He does this that we may lea: 
not to measure, by our own sense, the salvation which he ne 
promised us ; but that we may suffer ourselves to be turnec 
hither or skither by his hand, until he shall have performe d 
his work. By the butler and the baker we are not to under- | 
stand any common person of each rank, but those who pre 
sided over the rest; for, soon afterwards, they are called 
eunuchs or nobles. Ridiculous is the fiction of the trifle 
Gerundensis, who, according to his manner, asserts that they 
were made eunuchs for the sake of infamy, because Pha vol ! 
had been enraged against them. They were, in short, tw 
of the chief men of the court. Moses now more clearly de 
clares that the prison was under the authority of Potiphar 
Whence we learn what I have before said, that his ang f 
had been mitigated, since without his consent, the jailo 
could not have acted with such clemency towards Joseph 
Even Moses ascribes such a measure of humanity to Potiphai 
that he committed the butler and baker to the charge ¢ 
Joseph. Unless, perhaps, a new successor had been the 
appointed in Potiphies place; which, however, is easily r 
futed from the context, because a little afterwards Mose 
says that the master of Joseph was the captain of the guaré 
(ver. 3.) When Moses says they were kept in prison @ se 
son, some understand by the word, a whole year ; but in m 
judgment they are mistaken; it rather denotes a long bu 
uncertain time, as appears from other places. ; 
5. And they dreamed a dream. What I have befor 
alluded to respecting dreams must be recalled to memory 
namely, that many frivolous things are presented to us, whic 
pass away and are forgotten ;' some, however, have the fo: ‘ 


* Calvin’s words are: “ Que transeunt per portam corneam.”—Vi 
Virgil. Aineid. VI, in finem. This is an obviously mistaken alas 
arising probably from a lapse of memory in Calvin, or in the transer 

























SHAP. XL. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 307 


and significance of prophecy. Of this kind were these two 
| dreams, by which God made known the hidden result of a 
future matter. For unless the mark of a celestial oracle had 
been engrayen upon them, the butler and the baker would 
f bot a have been in such consternation of mind. I acknowledge, 
indeed, that men are sometimes vehemently agitated by vain 
and rashly conceived dreams ; yet their terror and anxiety 
gradually subsides ; but God baal fixed an arrow in the minds 
of the butler and the baker, which would not suffer them to 
i3 S ‘Test 5 and by this means, each was rendered more attentive 
to the interpretation of his dream. Moses, therefore, expressly 
Mi eclaves that it was a presage of something certain. 
, 6. And Joseph came in unto them in the morning. As I 
_haye lately said, we ought here to behold, with the eyes of 
¥ faith, the wonderful providence of God. For, although the 
butler and baker are certainly informed of their own fate ; 
yet this was not done so much out of regard to them, as in 
favour of Joseph ; whom God designed, by this method, to 
“make known to the king. Therefore, by a secret instinct he 
-had rendered them sad and astonished, as if he would lead 
them by the hand to his servant Joseph. It is, however, to 
be observed, that by a new inspiration of the Spirit, the gift 
f prophecy, which he had not before possessed, was imparted 
’ him in the prison. When he had previously dreamed 
himself, he remained, for a while, in suspense and doubt re- 
‘specting the divine revelation ; but now he is a certain in- 
-terpreter to others. And though, when he was inquiring 
anto the cause of their sadness, he perhaps did not think of 
dreams ; yet, from the next verse it appears that he was con- 
‘scious to himself of having received the gift of the Spirit ; 
‘and, in this confidence, he exhorts them to relate the dreams, 
‘of which he was about to be the interpreter. Do not interpre- 
‘tations (he says) belong to God ? Certainly he does not arro- 
‘gantly transfer to himself what he acknowledges to be pe- 
‘culiar to God ; but according to the means which his vocation 








A 
‘of his works. He should have said “portam eburnam.” The ancient 
-mythologists distinguished true dreams from false, by representing the 
former as passing through the “horny gate,” (porta curses.) the latter 
through the “ivory gate,” (porta eburna.)—Ld. 

















308 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XL. 


supplied, he offers them his service. This must be noted, ta 
order that no one may undesignedly usurp more to himself | 
than he knows that God has granted him. For, on this | 
account, Paul so diligently teaches that the gifts of the 
Spirit are variously distributed, (1 Cor. xii. 4,) and that God | 
has assigned to each a certain post, in order that no one may 
act ambitiously, or intrude himself into another’s office ; but 
rather that each should keep himself within the bounds of | 
his own calling. Unless this degree of moderation shall — 
prevail, all things will necessarily be thrown into confusion; 
because the truth of God will be distorted by the foolish | 
temerity of many ; peace and concord will be disturbed, and, — 
in short, no good order will be maintained. Let us learn, | 
therefore, that Joseph confidently promised an interpretation _ 
of the dreams, because he knew that he was furnished and 
adorned with this gift by God. The same remark applies to | 
his interrogation respecting the dreams. For he does not 
~ attempt to proceed beyond what his own power authorized © 
him to do: he does not, therefore, divine what they had 
dreamed, but confesses it was hidden from him. The me-— 
thod pursued by Daniel was different, for he was enabled, by 
a direct revelation, to state and interpret the dream which 

had entirely escaped the memory of the king of Babylon. 
(Dan. ii. 28.) He, therefore, relying upon a larger measure — 

of the Spirit, does not’ hesitate te profess that he can both 
divine and interpret dreams. But Joseph, to whom the half 
only of these gifts was imparted, keeps himself within legi-— 
timate bounds. Besides, he not only guards himself against 
presumption; but, by declaring that whatever he has received 
is from God, he ingénuously testifies that he has nothing from 
himself. He does not, therefore, boast of his own quickness or 
clear-sightedness, but wishes only to be known as the servant 
of God. Let those who excel, follow this rule; lest, by ascrib- 
ing too much to themselves, (which commonly happens,) the 
obscure the grace of God. Moreover, this vanity is to be re- 
strained, not only that God alone may be glorified, and ma 
not be robbed of his right ; but that prophets, and teachers, and 
all others who are indued with heavenly grace, may humbly 
submit themselves to the direction of the Spirit. What 








CH AP. XL. 






















THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 309 


Moses says is also to be observed, that Joseph was concerned 
ut the sadness of those who were with him in prison. For 
thus men become softened by their own afflictions, so that 
they do not despise others who are in misery; and, in this 
way, common sufferings generate sympathy. Wherefore it 
is not wonderful that God should exercise us with various 
sorrows ; since nothing is more becoming than humanity to- 
wards our brethren, who, being weighed down with trials, lie 
under contempt. This humanity, however, must be learned 
by experience ; because our innate ferocity is more and more 
inflated by prosperity. 

_ 12. The three branches are three days. Joseph does not 
here offer what he thought to be probable, like some ambi- 
guous conjecturer ; but asserts, by the revelation of the 
Spirit, the meaning of the dream. For why does he say, that 
by the three branches, three days rather than years are 
signified, unless because the Spirit of God had suggested it ? 
Joseph, therefore, proceeds, by a special impulse above na- 
ture, to expound the dream; and by immediately commend- 
“ing himself to the butler, as if he was already restored, shows 
| ] how certain and indubitable was the truth of his interpreta- 
“tion: as if he had said, “ Be convinced that what thou hast 
heard of me has come from God.” Where also he shows how 
honourably he thinks of the oracles of God, seeing that he 
pronounces concerning the future effect with as much confi- 
dence as if it had already taken place. But it may be deemed 
absurd, that Joseph asks for a reward of his prophecy. I 
answer, that he did not speak as one who would set the gift 
of God to sale: but it came into his mind, that a method of 
‘deliverance was now set before him by God, which it was not 
awful for him to reject. Indeed, I do not doubt that a hope 
¢ better fortune had been divinely imparted to him. For 
‘God, who, even from his childhood, had twice promised him 
Boominion, did not leave him, amidst so many straits, entirely 
destitute of all consolation. N ow this opportunity of seeking 
“deliverance was offered to him by none but God. Wherefore, 
‘it is not surprising that J oseph should thus make use of it. 
- respect to the expression, Lift wp thine head ; it signi- 
fies to raise any one from a low and contemptible condition; 


310 COMMENTARY UPON 





























to one of somereputation. Therefore, “ Pharaoh will lift up 
thine head,” means, he will bring thee forth from the dark- 
ness of the prison, or he will raise thee who art fallen, and 
restore thee to thy former rank. For I take the word to mean n 
simply place or rank, and not basis.’ 

14. Show kindness I pray thee unto me.” Although the 
expression “show kindness” is used among the Hebrews to 
describe the common exercise of humanity; there is yet no 
doubt that Joseph spoke simply as his own sad and afflicte 
condition suggested, for the purpose of inclining the mind 
of the butler to procure him help. He insists, however, 
chiefly on this, that he had been thrust into prison for no 
crime, in order that the butler might not refuse his assistance — 
toan innocent man. For although they who are most wicked 
find patrons; yet commendation elicited by importunity, | 
which rescues a wicked man from deserved punishment, is in 
itself an odious and infamous thing. It is, however, probable 
that Joseph explained his whole cause, so that he fully con 
vinced the butler of his i mage be 

16. When the chief baker saw.? He does not care resp 
ing the skill and fidelity of Joseph as an interpreter; bu 
because Joseph had brought good and useful tidings to his 
companion, he also desires an interpretation, which he hope: 
will prove according to hismind. So, many, with ardour and 
alacrity, desire the word of God, not because they simply wish 
to be governed by the Lord, and to know what is right, bw 
because they dream of mere enjoyment. When, however, thi 


1 Pro loco et ordine simpliciter accipio, non autem pro basi. The pas 
sage needs explanation. ‘The word JW", rendered “thy head,” migh 
be rendered “ thy nail,” and some writers have supposed that it should | Db 
so translated in this place. The reason given for such a rendering @ 
from a supposed custom among eastern monarchs of having a large whit 
tablet, on which the name of each officer of state was inscribed, and ¢ 
nail was placed in a hole opposite the name. When the officer offended 
the nail was removed from its place, that is, from its basis or foundation n 
and the man’s distinction and character were lost.—Junius in Poli & 
nopsin.—Ed. 4 

2 Fac queso mecum misericordiam. 

* «The chief baker, in his dream, carries the wicker baskets with variou 
choice baker’s commodities on his head. Similar woven baskets, flat an 
open, for carrying grapes and other fruits, are found represented on 
monuments. The art of baking was carried to a high degree of perfe 
among the Egyptians.” —Lgypt and the Books of Moses, p. 27.—Ed. 


















CHAP. XL. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 3ll 


doctrine does not correspond with their wishes, they depart 
“sorrowful and wounded. Now, although the explanation of 
the dream was about to prove unpleasant and severe ; yet 
poseph, by declaring, without ambiguity, what had ue re- 
aled unto him, executed with fidelity the office divinely 
| Bommitted to him. This freedom must be maintained by 
: prophets and teachers, that they may not hesitate, by their 
teaching, to inflict a wound on those whom God has sentenced 
to death. All love to be flattered. Hence the majority of 
“téachers, in desiring to yield to the corrupt wishes of the 
world, adulterate the word of God. Wherefore, no one is a 
as incere minister of God’s word, but he, who despising reproach, 
and being ready, as often as it may be necessary, to attack 
_ various offences, will frame his method of teaching according 
tothe command of God. J oseph would, indeed, have pre- 
ferred to augur well concerning both ; but since it is not in 
his power to give a prosperous fortimné to any one, nothing 
| remains for him but frankly to pronounce whatever he has 
received from the Lord. So, formerly, although the people 
chose for themselves prophets who would promise them 
abundance of wine and oil and corn, while they exclaimed 
loudly against the holy prophets, because they let fall no- 
thing but threatenings, (for these complaints are related in 
Micah ,) yet it was the duty of the servants of the Lord, who 
f Thad been sent to denounce vengeance, to proceed with severity, 
although they brought upon themselves hatred and danger. 

i 19. Pharaoh shall loft up thy head from off thee. This 
phrase (in the original) 1 is ambiguous without some addition ; 
and may be taken in a good or a bad sense ; just as we say, 
“With regard to any one,” or “ With respect to him ;” here 
the expression is added “from thee.” Yet there seems to 
be an allusion of this kind, as if Joseph had said, “ Pharaoh 
will lift up thy head, that he may take it off.’ Now, when 
“Moses relates, that that Joseph had predicted happened to 
both of them, he proves by this sign that Joseph was a true 
prophet of God, as it is written in Jeremiah. (xxviii. 9.) For 
that the prophets sometimes threatened punishments, which 
God abstained from inflicting, was done for this reason, be- 
"cause to such prophecies a condition was annexed. But when 





LA @ “ere ieor « 4 & + 





CHAP. ‘xr 


































312 COMMENTARY UPON © 


the Lord speaks positively by hin servants, it is necesse | 
that whatever he predicts should be confirmed by the ee 
Therefore, Moses expressly commends in Joseph, his confi- 
dence in the heavenly oracle. With regard to what Moses 
records, that Pharaoh celebrated his birth-day by a great q 
feast, we know that this custom has always been in use, not | 
only among kings, but also among plebeianmen. Nor is the | 
custom to be condemned, if only men would keep the right | 
end in view; namely, that of giving thanks unto God by 
whom they were created and brought up, and whom they 
have found, in innumerable ways, to be a beneficent Father. 7 
But such is the depravity of the world, that it greatly dis- 7 
torts those things which formerly were honestly instituted ~ 
by their fathers, into contrary corruptions. Thus, by a vicious | 
practice, it has become common for nearly all to abandon 
themselves to luxury and wantonness on their birth-day. In 
short, they keep up the memory of God, as the Author of 
their life, in such a manner as if it were their set purpose to 
forget Him. 

23. Yet did not the chief butler remember. This was the 
most severe trial of Joseph’s patience, as we have before in- 
timated. For since he had obtained an advocate who, with- 
out trouble, was able to extricate him from prison, especially 
as the opportunity of doing so had been granted to him by 
God, he felt a certain assurance of deliverance, and ear- 
nestly waited for it every hour. But when he had remained 
to the end of the second year in suspense, not only did this 
hope vanish, but greater despair than ever rested upon his 
mind. Therefore, we are all taught, in his person, that no- 
thing is more improper, than to prescribe the time in which | 
God shall help us; since he purposely, for a long season, 
keeps his own péople 3 in anxious suspense, that, by this very 
experiment, they may truly know what it is to trust in Him. 
Besides, in this manner he designed openly to claim for him- 
self the glory of Joseph’s liberation. For, if liberty had been” 
granted to him through the entreaty of the butler, it would 
have been generally believed that this benefit was from man 
and not from God. Moreover, when Moses says, that the 
butler was forgetful of Joseph, let it be so understood, that 


_ well-favoured and fat kine. 
_ Pharaoh awoke. 





CHAP, XLI. 


1. Anp it came to pass at the 
end of two full years, that Pharaoh 
_ dreamed; and, behold, he stood by 
the river. 

2. And, behold, there came up 
out of the river seven well-favoured 
_ kine, and fat-fieshed; and they fed 

in a meadow. 
_ 8. And, behold, seven other kine 
- came up after them out of the river, 


 ill-favoured, and lean-fleshed; and 


stood by the other kine upon the 
_ brink of the river. 

_ 4, And the ill-favoured and lean- 
_ fleshed kine did eat up the seven 
So 


5. And he slept, and dreamed the 
second time: and, behold, seven ears 
of corn came up upon one stalk, 
rank and good. 

6. And, behold, seven thin ears, 
and blasted with the east wind, 
sprung up after them. 

7. And the seven thin ears de- 
youred the seven rank and full ears. 
And Pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it 
was a dream. 

8. And it came to pass in the 
morning, that his spirit was troubled ; 
and he sent and called for all the 
magicians of Egypt, and all the wise 
men thereof: and Pharaoh told them 
his dreams; but there was none 
that could interpret them unto Pha- 
- raoh. 

9. Then spake the chief butler 
unto Pharaoh, saying, I do remem- 
_ ber my faults this day. 


10. Pharaoh was wroth with his 
servants, and put me in ward in the 





THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


313 


he did not dare to make any mention of him, lest he should 
be subjected to reproach, or should be troublesome to the king 
himself, For it is common with courtiers perfidiously to 
betray the innocent, and to deliver them to be slain, rather 
_ than to offend those of whom they themselves are afraid. 


CHAPTER XLI. 


1. Verum fuit in fine duorum 
annorum dierum, Pharao somniavit, 
et ecce, stabat juxta flumen. 


2. Eece autem e flumine ascende- 
bant septem vaccee pulchree aspectu, 
et pingues carne, et pascebant in 
carecto. 

3. Et ecce, septem vacce alice 
ascendebant post eas e flumine, tur- 
pes aspectu, et tenues carne, et sta- 
bant juxta vaccas, Sa erant juxta 
ripam fluminis. 

4. Et comederunt vacce turpes 
aspectu, et tenues carne, septem vac- 
cas pulchras aspectu et pingues: et 
expergefactus est Pharao. 

5. Deinde dormivit, et somniavit 
secundo, et ecce, septem spicee ascen- 
debant in culmo uno pingues et pul- 
chree. 

6. Et ecce, septem spice tenues, 
et arefacte Euro, oriebantur post 
eas. 

7. Et deglutiverunt spice tenues, 
septem spicas pingues et plenas: et 
expergefactus est Pharao, et ecce 
somnium. 

8. Et fuit, mane consternatus est 
spiritus ejus: misit igitur, et vocavit 
omnes magos Algypti, et omnes 
sapientes ejus, et narravit Pharao 
eis somnium suum, et non erat ex 
eis qui interpretaretur ipsi Pha- 
raonl. 


9. Et loquutus est princeps pin- 
cernarum ad Pharaonem, dicendo, 
Peccata mea ego reduco in memo- 
riam hodie. 

10. Pharao iratus est contra ser- 
vos suos, et posuit me in custodiam 


314 


captain of the guard’s house, both 
me and the chief baker : 

11. And we dreamed a dream in 
one night, I and he: we dreamed 
each man according to the interpre- 
tation of his dream. 

12. And there was there with us 
a young man, an Hebrew, servant to 
the captain of the guard; and. we 
told him, and he interpreted to us 
our dreams: to each man according 
to his dream he did interpret. 

13. And it came to pass, as he in- 
terpreted to us, so it was; me he 
restored unto mine office, and him 
he hanged. 

14. Then Pharaoh sent and called 
Joseph, and they brought him has- 
tily out of the dungeon: and he 
shaved himself, and changed _ his 
raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh. 

15. And Pharaoh said unto Jo- 
seph, I have dreamed a dream, and 
there is none that can interpret it: 
and I have heard say of thee, that 
thou canst understand a dream to 
interpret it. 

16. And Joseph answered Pharaoh, 
saying, Jt is not in me: God shall 
give Pharaoh an answer of peace. 

17. And Pharaoh said unto Jo- 
seph, In my dream, behold, I stood 
upon the bank of the river : 

18. And, behold, there came up 
out of the river seven kine, fat- 
fleshed, and well-favoured ; and they 
fed in a meadow. 

19. And, behold, seven other kine 
came up after them, poor, and very 
ill-favoured, and lean-fleshed, such 
as I never saw in all the land of 
Egypt for badness :° 

20. And the lean and the ill-fa- 
voured kine did eat up the first 
seven fat kine. 

21. And when they had eaten 
them up, it could not be known that 
they had eaten them ; but they were 
still ill-favoured, as at the beginning. 
So I awoke. 

22. And I saw in my dream, and, 
behold, seven ears came up in one 
stalk, full and good : 

23. And, behold, seven ears, with- 


COMMENTARY UPON 





domus principis satellitum, me et 
principem pistorum. 

11. Et somniavyimus somnium 
nocte eadem, ego et ipse: uterque 
secundum interpretationem somnii 
sui somniavimus. 

12. Ibi autem erat nobiscum puer — 
Hebreeus, servus principis satellitum, 
et narravimus ei, et interpretatus 
est nobis somnia nostra, utrique 
secundum somnium suum interpre- 
tatus est. : 

13. Et fuit, quemadmodum inter- 
pretatus est nobis, sic fuit: me re- 
dire fecit ad locum meum, et ipsum 
suspendit. 

14, Tune misit Pharao, et arces- 
sivit Joseph, et celeriter eduxerunt 
eum e carcere,-et totondit se, et mu-— 
tavit vestes suas, et venit ad Phara- 
onem. 

15. Et dixit Pharao ad Joseph, 
Somnium somniayi, et qui illud in- 
terpretetur non est: ego autem 
audivi de te dici, quod audias som- 
nium ad interpretandum illud. 


16. Et respondit Joseph ad Pha- 
raonem, dicendo, Prater me, Deus 
respondebit in pacem Pharaonis. 

17. Tune loquutus est Pharao ad 
Joseph, Me somniante ecce, stabam 
juxta ripam fluminis, | 

18. Et ecce, e flumine ascendebant © 
septem vacc pingues carne, et pul- 
chree forma, et pascebant in carecto. 


ity 
af 


19. Ecce vero septem vacce ali 
ascendebant post eas tenues, et tur- 


-pes forma valde, et tenues carne: 


non vidi similes illis in tota terra 
Aigypti in turpitudine. 

20. Et comederunt vaccse tenues 
et turpes, septem vaccas priores 
pingues. | 

21.Et venerunt ad interiora earum, 
et non est cognitum quod venissent — 
ad interiora earum: et aspectus 
earum turpis, quemadmodum in 
principio: et expergefactus sum. 

22. Vidi preeterea dum somniarem, — 
et ecce, septem spice ascendebant in 
culmo uno plene et pulchree. } 

23. Et eece item septem spice 






CHAP. XII. 


ered, thin, and blasted with the east 
wind, sprung up after them: 
_ .24, And the thin ears devoured 
_the seven good ears. And I told 
_ this unto the magicians; but there 
was none that could declare 7¢ to me. 
_. 25. AndJosephsaid unto Pharaoh, 
_ The dream of Pharaoh is one: God 
hath shewed Pharaoh what he is 
— about to do. 
_ 26. The seven good kine ave seven 
years; and the seven good ears are 
_ seven years: the dream is one. 
_ 27. And the seven thin and ill- 
_ favoured kine that came up after 
_ them, wre seven years: and the seven 
_ empty ears, blasted with the east 
wind, shall be seven years of famine. 
28. This is the thing which I have 
_ spoken unto Pharaoh: What God is 
_ about to do he sheweth unto Pha- 


_ 29. Behold,there come seven years 
| of great plenty throughout the 
land of Egypt: 
' 30. And there shall arise after 
| them seven years of famine ; and all 
_ the plenty shall be forgotten in the 
_ land of Egypt; and the famine shall 
consume the land: 
81. And the plenty shall not be 
_ known in the land by reason of that 
_ famine following ; for it shall be very 
grievous. 

32. And for that the dream was 
doubled unto Pharaoh twice; 7 is 
because the thing is established by 
_ God, and God will shortly bring it 

to pass. 

_ 33. Now therefore let Pharaoh 
look out a man discreet and wise, 
_ and set him over the land of Egypt. 
_ 84. Let Pharaoh do this, and let 
him appoint officers over the land, 
and take up the fifth part of the 
land of Egypt in the seven plenteous 
years. 

35. And let them gather all the 
food of those good years that come, 
and lay up corn under the hand of 
Pharaoh, and let them keep food in 
the cities. 

36. And that food shall be for 
store to the land against the seven 


= oe aT 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


315 


parvee et tenues, percusse Euro 
germinabant post eas. 

24. Et deglutiverunt spice tenues, 
septem spicas pulchras. Et dixi ad 
magos, et non fuit qui indicaret mihi. 


25. Et dixit Joseph ad Pharao- 
nem, Somnium Pharaonis unum est: 
que Deus facit, indicavit Pharaoni. 


26. Septem vacce pulchree, septem 
anni sunt, et septem spice pulchre, 
septem anni sunt: somniumidemest. 

27. Et septem vacce vacue et 
turpes, ascendentes post eas, septem 
anni sunt: et septem spice vacuse 
arefacte Euro, erunt septem anni 
famis. 

28. Hoc est verbum quod loquutus 
sum ad Pharaonem, quod Deus facit, 
videre fecit Pharaonem. 


29. Ecce, septem anni veniunt 
abundantize magne in omni terra 
Aigypti. 

30. Et surgent septem anni famis 
post eos: et erit in oblivione omnis 
abundantia in terra Aigypti, et con- 
sumet fames terram. 


31. Nee cognoscetur abundantia 
in terra, propter famem ipsam se- 
quentem, quia gravis erit valde. 


32. Propterea vero iteratum est 
somnium ipsi Pharaoni duabus vici- 
bus, quia firma est res a Deo, et 
festinat Deus facere eam. 

33. Nunc igitur provideat Pharao 
virum prudentem, et sapientem, et 
constituat illum super terram i- 
gypi. ; 

34. Faciat Pharao, et preficiat 
preefectos super terram, et quintam 
partem sumat a terra Algypti in 
septem annis abundantie. 


35. Et congregent totam anno- 
nam horum annorum bonorum qui 
venient, congregent, inquam, fru- 
mentum sub manu Pharaonis, cibum 
in urbibus, et servent. 

36. Et erit cibus in depositum pro 
terra, pro septem annis famis qui 


316 


years of famine, which shall be in 
the land of Egypt; that the land 
not through the famine. 

37. And the thing was a in the 
eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of 

his servants. 

38. And Pharaoh said unto his 
servants, Can we find such a one as 
this is, a man in whom the Spirit of 
God is? 

39. And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, 
Forasmuch as God hath shewed thee 
all this, there is none so discreet and 
wise as thou art: 

40. Thou shalt be over my house, 


and according unto thy word shall. 


all my people be ruled: only in the 
throne will I be greater than thou. 

41.And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, 
See, I have set use over all the 
land of Egypt. 

42. And Pharaoh tobk off his ring 
from his hand, and put it upon Jo- 
seph’s hand, and arrayed him in 
vestures of fine linen, and put a gold 
chain about his neck: 

43. And he made him to ride in 
the second chariot which he had; 
and they cried before him, Bow the 
knee: and he made him ruler over 
all the land of Egypt. 

44. And Pharaoh said unto Jo- 
seph, I am Pharaoh, and without 
thee shall no man lift up his hand 
or foot in all the land of Egypt. 

45. And Pharaoh called Joseph’s 
name Zaphnath-paaneah; and he 
gave him to wife Asenath, the daugh- 
ter of Poti-pherah priest of On. 
And Joseph went out over all the 
land of Egypt. 


46. And Joseph was thirty years 
old when he stood before Pharaoh 
king of Egypt. And Joseph went 
out from the presence of Pharaoh, 
and went throughout all the land of 
Bey Pt. 

. And in the seven plenteous 
years the earth brought forth by 
andfuls. 

48. And he gathered up all the 
food of the seven years, which were 
in the land of Egypt, and laid up 


COMMENTARY UPON 








erunt in terra Aigypti: ita non pe 
cidetur terra propter famem. = 


37. Placuit sermo in oculis Pha- 
raonis, et in oculis omnium servorum 
ejus. ; 

38. Et dixit Pharao ad servos 
suos, Num inveniemus talem es 
in quo Spiritus Dei? | 


39. Dixit ergo Pharao ad Joan; 
Postquam cognoscere fecit Deus te* 
totum hoe, non est intelligens et sa- 
piens sicut tu. 

40. Tu eris super domum meam, 
et ad os tuum osculabitur omnis po- 
pulus meus: tantum solio major ero 
te. 


41. Itaque dixit Pharaoad Joseph, 
Vide, posui te super totam terram — 
Aigypti. 

42. Et removit Pharao annulum 
suum e manu sua, posuitque illum 
in manu Joseph: et indui fecit eum 
vestibus byssinis, et posuit iis ee 
aureum in collo ejus. 

43. Et equitare fecit eum in curru 
secundi, qui erat apud se, clama- 
bantque ante eum, Abrech, (id est, 
pater tener,) et constituit eum super — 
universam terram Aigypti. 

44. Dixit ergo Pharao ad Joseph, — 
Ego Pharao, et sine te non levabit — 
quisquam manum suam et pedem — 
suum in tota terra Aigypti. 

45. Et vocavit Pharao nomen — 
J oseph, Saphenath-Paneah, (id est, — 
vir cut abscondita revelata sunt, vel, . 
absconditorum expositor,) et dedit ei 
Asenath filiam Poti-pherah principis — 
On in uxorem, et egressus est Jo- — 

: 





tie 


—————— ee 


seph super terram Aigypti. 

46. Joseph vero erat vir triginta | 
annorum, quando stetit coram Pha- — 
raone rege Aigypti: et egressus est — 
Joseph a facie Pharaonis, et tran-— 
sivit per totam terram Aigypti. 


47. Et protulit terra septem annis — 
saturitatis ad collectiones. 


48. Et congregavit de universis 
cibis septem annorum, qui fuerunt 
in terra Aigypti, et posuit cibum in 











the food in the cities: the food of 
the field, which was round about 
every city, laid he up in the same. 
49. And Joseph gathered corn as 
the sand of the sea, very much, until 
he left numbering: for i¢ was with- 
out number. 
- 60. And unto Joseph were born 
_ two sons before the years of famine 
came, which Asenath, the daughter 
of Poti-pherah priest of On, bare 
— unto him. 
- 51. And Joseph called the name 
of the first-born Manasseh: For 
_ God, said he, hath made me forget 
all my toil, and all my father’s house. 
_ 62. And the name of the second 
- ealled he Ephraim: For God hath 
| caused me to be fruitful in the land 
_ of my affliction. 
_ 53. And the seven years of plen- 
_ teousness that was in the land of 
_ Egypt were ended. 
54. And the seven years of dearth 
_ began to come, according as Joseph 
had said: and the dearth was in all 
lands ; but in all the land of Egypt 
_ there was bread. 
55. And when all the land of 
Egypt was famished, the people 
ried to Pharaoh for bread: and 
_ Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians, 
Go unto Joseph; what he saith to 
you, do. 
56. And the famine was over all 
_ the face of the earth. And Joseph 
_ opened all the storehouses, and sold 
_ unto the Egyptians; and the famine 
-waxed sore in the land of Egypt. 
? 57. And all countries came into 
_ Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn; 
_ because that the famine was so sore 
in all lands. 


a 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


1 In fine duorum annorum dierum. : 
dream, we are first struck with the use of the word INN, (Achu,) Nile grass, 

an Egyptian word for anEgyptianthing.” A note on this passage adds, “Our 
translators have inaccurately rendered it meadow, (ver. 2,) the aquatic 
plants of the Nile, particularly those of the litws kind, were so valuable in 
Egypt, that they were reaped in as regular a harvest as the flax and corn.” 
_ The writer proceeds, “ In the next place, the seven poor and the seven fat 
kine attract our attention. . The symbol of the cow is very peculiar and 


317 
urbibus: cibum agri civitatis, qui 
erat in circuitu ejus, posuit in medio 
ejus. 

49. Congregavit itaque Joseph 
frumentum, tanquam eo ee 
multum valde, adeo ut cessaverit 
numerari, quia non erat numerus. 

50. Porro ipsi Joseph nati sunt 
duo filii antequam veniret annus 
famis, quos peperit ei Asenath filia 
Poti-pherah principis On. 


51. Et vocavit Joseph nomen 
primogeniti, Menasseh: quia dizit, 
Oblivisci fecit me Deus omnis labo- 
ris mei, et omnis domus patris mei. 

52. Nomen autem secundi voca- 
vit Ephraim: quia diwxit, Crescere 
fecit me Deus in terra afflictionis 
mee. 

53. Et finiti sunt septem anni 
saturitatis, que fuit in terra Al- 
gypti. 

54. Inceperunt vero septem anni 
famis venire, quemadmodum dixerat 
Joseph, fuitque fames in omnibus 
terris: at in tota terra Agypti erat 
panis. 

55. Postea esuriit tota terra 
/Egypti, et clamavit populus ad 
Pharaonem pro pane: et dixit Pha- 
rao omnibus Aigyptiis, Ite ad Joseph, 
quod dixerit vobis, facietis. 


56. Et fames erat in omni super- 
ficie terre : et aperuit Joseph omnia 
horrea, in quibus erant frumenta, 
et vendidit Augyptiis: et invaluit 
fames in terra Aigypti. 

57. Et omnes habitatores terree 
venerunt in AXgyptum, ut emerent 
a Joseph: quia invaluerat fames in 
omni terra. 


“1. At the end of two full years." What anxiety oppressed 


“In the account of Pharaoh’s 





318 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLL 
the mind of the holy man during this time, each of us may 
conjecture from his own feeling ; for we are so tender and 
effeminate, that we can scarcely bear to be put off for a short 
time. The Lord exercised his servant not only by a delay of 
long continuance, but also by another kind of temptation, 
because he took all human grounds of hope away from him : 
therefore Moses puts “years of days” for complete and full 
years. That we may better understand the invincible nature of 
his fortitude, we must also notice that winding course of divine 
providence, of which I have spoken, and by which Joseph was 
led about, till he rose into notice with the king. In the king’s 
dream, this is worthy to be observed in the first place, that God 
sometimes deigns to present his oracles even to unbelieving 
and profane men. It was certainly a singular honour to be 
instructed concerning an event yet fourteen years future: 
for truly the will of God was manifested to Pharaoh, just as 
if he had been taught by the word, except that the inter- 
pretation of it was to be sought elsewhere. And although 
God designs his word especially for the Church, yet it ought 
not to be deemed absurd that he sometimes admits even 
aliens into his school, though for an inferior end. The doc- 
trine which leads to the hope of eternal life belongs to the 
Church ; while the children of this world are only taught, 
incidentally, concerning the state of the present life. If 
we observe this distinction, we shall not wonder that some 
oracles are common to profane and heathen men, though 
the Church possesses the spiritual doctrine of life, as the 
treasure of its own inheritance. That another dream suc- 
ceeded to the former, arose from two causes ;‘for God both 
designed to rouse the mind of Pharaoh to more diligent 
inquiry, and to add more light to a vision which was .ob- 
scure. In short, he follows the same course in this dream 
which he does in his daily method of procedure; for he 
repeats a second time what he has before delivered, and 


exclusively Egyptian. .... It is scarcely conceivable that a foreign i in- 
ventor should have confined himself so closely to the peculiar Egyptian 
symbols. The circumstance that the kine come up out of the Nile, the 
fat and also the lean, has reference to the fact that Egypt owes all its 
fertility to this stream, and that famine succeeds as soon as it fails.”— 
Egypt and the Books of Moses, p. 28.—Ed, 


a. 








HAP. XLI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 319 


sometimes inculcates still more frequently, not only that 
_ the doctrine may penetrate more deeply into men’s hearts, 
- and thus affect them the more ; but also that he may render 
it more familiar to their minds. That by the second dream 
God designed to illustrate more fully what was obscure in 
the first, appears from this, that the figure used was more 
appropriate to the subject revealed. At first, Pharaoh saw 
fat cows devoured by lean ones. This did not so clearly pre- 
figure the seven years abundance, and as many years of 
want in corn and other seeds, as the vision of the ears of 
corn did: for the similitude, in the latter case, better agrees 
with the thing represented. 
8. In the morning his spirit was troubled. A sting was 
left in Pharaoh’s heart, that he might know that he had to 
_ deal with God; for this anxiety was as an inward seal of 
_ the Spirit of God, to give authenticity to the dream ; although 
_ Pharaoh deserved to be deprived of the advantage of this 
_ revelation, when he resorted to magicians and soothsayers, 
| who were wont to turn the truth of God into a lie.’ He was 
_ convinced by a secret impulse that the dream sent by God 
' portended something important ; but he seeks out imposters, 
_ who would darken, by their fallacies, the light which was 
_ divinely kindled ; and it is the folly of the human mind to 
_ gather to itself leaders and teachers of error. No doubt he 
_ believed them to be true prophets; but because he volun- 
_ tarily closes his eyes, and hastens into the snare, his false 
_ opinion forms no sufficient excuse for him ; otherwise men, 
_ by merely shutting their eyes, might have some plausible 
pretext for mocking God with impunity: and we see that 
_ many seek protection for themselves in that gross ignorance 


_ . 1 Pharaoh calls ‘all the magicians of Egypt, and all the wise men. 
_ thereof, that they might interpret the dream by which he is troubled. . . . . 
_ Now, we find in Egyptian antiquity an order of persons, to whom this is 
entirely appropriate, which is here ascribed to the magicians. The priests 
had a double office, the practical worship of the gods, and the pursuit of 
. that which in Egypt was accounted as wisdom. ‘The first belonged to the 
so-called prophets, the second to the holy scribes. These last were the 
_ learned men of the nation; as in the Pentateuch they are called wise men, 
_ so the classical writers named them sages... . - The interpretation of 
_ dreams and also divination belonged to the order of the holy seribes.”— 
Egypt and the Books of Moses, p. 29.—Ed. 





320 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLT. 


in which they knowingly and purposely involve themselves. 
Pharaoh, therefore, as far as he was able, deprived himself 
of the benefit of the prophecy, by seeking for magicians as 
the interpreters of it. So we see it daily happens that many 
lose hold of the truth, because they either bring a cloud over 
themselves by their own indolence, or too eagerly catch at 
false and spurious inventions. But because the Lord would, 
at that time, succour the kingdom of Egypt, he drew Pharaoh 
back, as by main force, from his error. 

There was none that could interpret. By this remedy God 
provided that the dream should not fail. We know what an 
inflated and impudent race of men these soothsayers were, 
and how extravagantly they boasted. How did it then happen 
that they gave the king no answer, seeing they might have 
trifled in any way whatever with a credulous man, who wil- 
lingly suffered himself to be deluded? Therefore, that he 
might desist from inquiry, he is not allowed to find what he 
had expected in his magicians: and the Lord so strikes 
dumb the wicked workers of deceit, that they cannot even 
find a specious explanation of the dreams. Moreover, by this 
method, the anxiety of the king is sharpened ; because he 
considers that what has escaped the sagacity of the magicians 
must be something very serious. and secret. By which ex- 
ample we are taught, that the Lord provides the best for us, 
when he removes the incitements of error from those of us 
who wish to be deceived ; and we must regard it as a singular 
favour, when either false prophets are silenced, or their fa- 
tuity is, in any manner, discovered to us. As for the rest, 
the king might hence easily gather how frivolous and nuga- 
tory was the profession of wisdom, in which the Egyptians 
gloried above all others; for they boasted that they were 
possessed of the science of divination which ascended above 
the very heavens. But now, as far as they are concerned, 
the king is without counsel, and, being disappointed of his 
hope, is filled with anguish ; nevertheless he does not so 
awake as to shake off his superstition. Thus we see 
that men, though admonished, remain still in their torpor. 
Whence we plainly perceive how inexcusable is the obsti- 
nacy of the world, which does not desist from following 




























HAP. XLI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 321 
1ose delusions‘which are openly condemned as foolishness 

om heaven. 
9. Then spake the chief butler. Although the Lord took 
ity on Egypt, yet he did it not for the sake of the king, 
- of the country, but that Joseph might, at length, be 
rought out of prison; and further, that, in the time of 
amine, food might be supplied to the Church: for although 
he produce was stored with no design beyond that-of pro- 
iding for the kingdom of Egypt; yet God chiefly cared for 
is Church, which he esteemed more highly than ten worlds. 
‘herefore the butler, who had resolved to be silent respect- 
ng Joseph, is constrained to speak for the liberation of the 
oly man; In saying, J do remember my faults this day, 
le is understood by some as confessing the fault of ingrati- 
ude, because he had not kept the promise he had given. 
sut the meaning is different ; for he could not speak con- 
erning his imprisonment, without interposing a preface of 
his kind, through fear, lest suspicion should enter into the 
nind of the king, that his servant thought himself injured ; 
or, should take offence, as if the butler had not been sen- 
sible of the benefit conferred upon him. We know how sensi- 
ive are the minds of kings; and the courtier had found this 
but by long experience: therefore he begins by acknowledg- 
ing that he had been justly cast into prison. Whence it fol- 
lows that he was indebted to the clemency of the king for 
restoration to his former state. 

14, Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph. We see in the 
derson of a proud king, as in a glass, what necessity can 
fect. They whose circumstances are happy and prosperous 
vill scarcely condescend to hear those whom they esteem 
rue prophets, still less will they listen to strangers. Where- 
fore it was necessary that the obstinacy of Pharaoh should 
be first subdued, in order that he might send for Joseph, 

and accept him as his master and instructor. The same kind 
of preparation is also necessary even for the elect ; because 
hey never become docile until the pride of the flesh is laid 
low. Whenever, therefore, we are cast into grievous troubles, 

Which keep us in perplexity and anxiety, let us know that 
God, in this manner, is accomplishing his design of render- 
VOL. II. * 





























$32 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XL 
ing us obedient to himself. When Moses relates that Joseph 
before he came into the presence of the king, changed hi 
garments, we may hence conjecture that his clothing wa: 
mean. To the same point, what is added respecting hi 
“ shaving himself,” ought, in my opinion, to be referred: fo: 
since Egypt was a nation of effeminate delicacy, it is pre 
bable that they, being studious of neatness and elegance 
rather nourished their hair than otherwise. But as Josepl 
put off his squalid raiment, so, that he might have no remain 
ing cause of shame, he is shaved. Let us know, then, tha 
the servant of God lay in filth even to the day of his de- 
liverance. . . 

15. And Pharaoh said unto Joseph. We see that Pharaoh 
offers himself as a disciple to Joseph, being persuaded, by 
the statement of the butler, that he is a prophet of God. 
This is, indeed, a constrained humility; but it is expressly 
recorded, in order that, when the opportunity of learning 
is afforded us, we may not refuse reverently to honour the 
gifts of the Spirit. Now, though Joseph, in referring Pha- 
raoh to God, seems to deny that he himself is about to in- 
terpret the dream, yet his answer bears on a different point 
for, because he knew that he was conversing with a heather 
addicted to superstitions, he wishes, above all things, 
ascribe to God the glory due to him; as if he had said, 
I am able to do nothing in this matter, nor will I offe1 
anything as from myself; but God alone shall be the in- 
terpreter of his own secret.*® Should any one object, that 


1 This conjecture of Calvin’s is erroneous. “ Herodotus mentions i 
among the distinguishing peculiarities of the Egyptians, that they com- 
monly were shaved, but in mourning they allowed the beard to grow. The 
sculptures also agree with this representation. ‘¢ So particular,’ says W7l- 
kinson, * were they on this point, that to have neglected it was a subjeet 
of reproach and ridicule; and whenever they intended to convey the idea 
of a man of low condition, or a slovenly person, the artists represented him 
with a beard.’”—Egypt and the Books of Moses, p. 30.—Ed. 

* In the Amsterdam edition, it is “facultas dicendi,” but in Hengsten- 
berg’s it is “ facultas discendi ;” and as the French version has it “ le moyer 
d’apprendre,” there can be no doubt that the later Latin edition is right. 
—Ed. il 

* The foree of Joseph’s language is remarkable: “ Without me, God 
will answer to the peace of Pharaoh.” Te thus entirely renounces, in a 
single word, all the personal honour which the heathen monarch was dis- 





















SHAP. XLI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. | 323 


whenever God uses the agency of men, their office ought to 
be referred to in connection with his command: that indeed 
T acknowledge, but yet so that the whole glory may remain 
é vith God; according to the saying of St. Paul, “ Neither is 
he that planteth anything, neither he that watereth.” (1 Cor. 
iii. 7.) Moreover, Joseph not only desires to embue the mind 
of Pharaoh with some relish for piety, but, by ascribing the 
gift of interpreting dreams to God alone, confesses that he is 
destitute of it, until he obtains it from God. Wherefore, let 
us also learn, from the example of holy Joseph, to honour 
the grace of God even among unbelievers; and if they shut 
the door against the entire and full doctrine of piety; we 
‘must, at least, endeavour to instil some drops of it into their 
minds. Let us also reflect on this, that nothing is less toler- 
able than for men to arrogate to themselves anything as their 
‘own ; for this is the first: step of wisdom, to ascribe nothing 
to Surselves ; but modestly to confess, that whatever in us 
is worthy of praise, flows only from the fountain of God’s 
grace. It is especially worthy of notice, that as the Spirit 
of understanding is given to any one from heaven, he will 
become a proper and faithful interpreter of God. 
16. God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace. Joseph 
added this from the kindly feeling of his heart; for he did 
not yet comprehend what the nature of the oradlé would be. 
Therefore he could not, in his character as a prophet, pro- 
Mise a successful and desirable issue; but, as it was his 
duty sincerely to deliver what he veceived from the Lord, 
however sad and severe it might prove; so, on the other 
hand, this liberty presented no obstacle to his wishing a joy- 
ful issue to the king. Therefore, what is here said to the 
king concerning peace, is a prayer rather than a prophecy. 
17. In my dream. This whole narration does not need 
to be explained, for Pharaoh only repeats what we have be- 
‘fore considered, with the addition, that the lean cows, having 
“devoured the fat ones, were Mandorad nothing better. Where- 
‘by God designed to testify, that the dearth would be so 
‘great, that the people, instead of being nourished by the 


"posed to pay him, that God alone may have the glory due unto his name. 
—Kd. 

























CHAP. XLI. 
| 


824 COMMENTAKY UPON 


abundance of food gathered together, would be famished, : 
and drag on a miserable existence.’ Joseph, in answering 
that the two dreams were one, simply means, that one and. 
the same thing was showed unto Pharaoh by two figures. Ba 
before he introduces his interpretation, he maintains that this 
is not a merely vanishing dream, but a divine oracle: for un- 
less the vision had proceeded from God, it would have bee i 
foolish to inquire anxiously what it portended. Pharaoh, 
therefore, does not here labour in vain in inquiring into the 
counsel of God. The form of speaking, however, requires to. 
be noticed; because Joseph does not barely say that God 
will declare beforehand what may happen from some other 
quarter, but what he himself is about to do. We hence infer, 
that God does not indolently contemplate the fortuitous issue 
of things, as most philosophers vainly talk ; but that he de- 
termines, at his own will, what shall happen. Wherefore, in 
predicting events, he does not give a response from the tables 
of fate, as the poets feign concerning their Apollo, whom 
they regard as a prophet of events which are not in his own 
power, but declares that whatever shall happen will be his 
own work. So Isaiah, that he may ascribe to God alone the 
glory due to him, attributes to him; both the revealing of 
things future, and the government of all his events, by his 
own authority. (Is. xlv. 7.) For he cries aloud that God is 
neither deceived, nor deceives, like the idols; and he declares 
that God alone is the author of good and evil; understanding 
by evil, adversity. Wherefore, unless we would cast God down 
from his throne, we must leave to him his power of action, 
as well as his foreknowledge. And this passage is the more 
worthy of observation ; because, in all ages, many foolish 
persons have endeavoured to rob God of half his glory, and 
now (as I have said) the same figment pleases many philo- 
sophers ; because they think it absurd to ascribe to God what- 
ever is done in the world: as if truly the Scripture had in 
vain declared, that his “judgments are a great deep.” (Ps. 
xxxvi. 7.) But while they would subject the works of God 
to the judgment of their own brain, having rejected his word, 
they prefer giving credit to Plato respecting celestial mys- 
teries. “That God,” they say, “has foreknowledge of all 

































HAP, XLIL THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 325 


shings, does not involve the necessity of their occurrence :” 
s if, indeed, we asserted, that bare prescience was the cause 
of things, instead of maintaining the connection established 
by Moses, that God foreknows things that are future, be- 
eause he had determined to do them; but they ignorantly 
and perversely separate the providence of God from his eter- 
nal counsel, and his continual operation. Above all things, 
it is right to be fully persuaded that, whenever the earth 
is barren, whether frost, or drought, or hail, or any other 
thing, may be the cause of it, the whole result is directed by 
the counsel of God. 

_ 382. And for that the dream was Roubted. Joseph does 
‘not mean to say, that what God may have declared but once, 
is mutable: but hewould prevent Pharaoh’s confidence respect- 
ing the event revealed, from being shaken. For since God pro- 
nounces nothing but from his own fixed and steadfast pur- 
‘pose, it is enough that he should have spoken once. But 
‘our dulness and inconstancy cause him to repeat the same 
‘thing the more frequently, in order that what he has cer- 
tainly decreed, may be fixed in our hearts; otherwise, as 
our disposition is variable, so, what we have once heard from 
his mouth, is tossed up and down by us, until it entirely 
escapes our memory. Moreover, Joseph not only commemo- 
ates the stability of the heavenly decree, but also declares 
‘that what God has determined to do, is near at hand, lest 
Pharaoh himself should slumber in the confident expectation 
‘of longer delay. For though we confess that the judgments 
‘of God are always hanging over our heads, yet unless we 
ja stimulated by the thought of their speedy approach, we 
are but slightly affected with anxiety and fear respecting 
them. 

— 33. Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a man. Joseph 
does more than he had been asked to do; for he 1s not. 
“merely the interpreter of the dream; but, as fulfilling the 
“office of a prophet, he adds instruction and counsel. For 
'we know that the true and lawful prophets of God do not 
b t arely predict what will happen in future; but propose re- 
4 medies for impending evils. Therefore Joseph, after he 
oped uttered a prophecy-of the changes which would take 
































326 COMMENTARY UPON 


place in fourteen years, now teaches what ought to be done ; | 
and exhorts Pharaoh to be vigilant in the discharge of his 
duty. And one of the marks by which God always distin- | 
guished his own prophets from false prognosticators, was 
to endue them with the power of teaching and exhorting, — 
that they might not uselessly predict future events. Let us 
grant that the predictions of Apollo, and of all the magicians 
were true, and were not entangled with ambiguous expres- 
sions ; yet whither did they tend, but either to drive men 
headlong in perverse confidence, or to plunge them i 
despair? A very different method of prophesying 
divinely prescribed, which would form men to. piety, wou id 
lead them to repentance, and would excite them to praye 
when oppressed with fear. Moreover, because the ocphal : 
of which mention is here made, was published only for th 
temporal advantage of this fleeting life, Joseph proceeds ne 
further than to show the king for what purpose the dream 
had been sent to him; as if he had said, “ Be not sorry or 
account of this revelation; accept this advantage from it 
that thou mayest succour the poverty of thy kingdom 
However, there is no doubt that God guided his tongue, ix 
order that Pharaoh might entrust him with this office. Foi 
he does not craftily insinuate himself into the king’s fayour 
nor abuse the gift of revelation to his private gain: but, 
what had been divinely ordained was brought to its prope: 
issue without his knowledge; namely, that the famishing 
house of Jacob should find unexpected sustenance, ! 
35. Under the hand of Pharaoh. Whereas prosperity s¢ 
intoxicates men, that the greater part make no provision for > 
themselves against the future, but absorb the present abut 
dance by intemperance; Joseph advises the king to take caré 
that the country may have its produce laid up in store. Bes 
sides, the common people would also form themselves to” 
habits of frugality, when they understood that this great 
quantity of corn was not collected in vain by the king, but 
that a remedy was hereby sought for some unwonted calamity 
In short, because luxury generally prevails in prosperiiay 
and wastes the blessings of God, the bridle of authority we 
necessary. This is the reason why Joseph directed that 

































HAP. XLI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 827 
ers should be established under the power of the king, 
2 d that corn should be gathered into them. He concludes 
t length: that the dream was useful, although at first sight, 
it would seem sad and inauspicious: because, immediately 
fter the wound had been shown, the means of cure were 
sugested. | 

- 88. Can we find such a one as this? We see that neces- 
ity is an excellent teacher. If prefects or judges are to be 
sreated, some one is advanced to the honour because he is a 
favourite, without consideration of his desert; whence it 
jappens that they who are most unworthy frequently creep 
ato office. And although we see political order disturbed 
aL d mankind involved in many inconveniences, because they 
who are least suitable, rashly push themselves, by wicked 
contrivances, into affairs for which they are not able tomanage; 
nevertheless, ambition triumphs, and subverts equity. But 
Necessity extorts a sober judgment. Pharaoh says nothing 
but what is naturally engraven on the hearts of all men, that 
honours ought to be conferred on none but competent persons, 
and such as God has furnished with the necessary qualifica- 
tions. Experience, however, abundantly teaches, that this 
law of nature slips from the memory, whenever men are free 
to offend against it with impunity. Therefore the pride of 
Pharaoh was wisely so subdued, that he, setting aside ambi- 
tion, preferred a foreigner just brought out of prison, to all 
his courtiers, because he excelled them in virtue. The same 
“necessity restrained the nobles of the kingdom, so that they 
‘did not each contend, according to their custom, to’ obtain 
‘the priority of rank for themselves. And although it was 
but a compulsory modesty, inasmuch as they were ashamed 
to resist the public good; yet there is no doubt, that God 
Saspired them with fear, so that, by the common consent 
of all, Joseph was made president of the whole kingdom. It 
is also to be observed that Pharaoh, though he had been in- 
“fatuated by his soothsayers, nevertheless honours the gifts 
of the Spirit in Joseph: because God, indeed, never suffers 
“man to beeome so brutalized, as not to feel his power, even 
in their darkness. And therefore whatever impious defee- 
‘tion may hurry them away, there still abides with them a 


: 
; 


3828 COMMENTARY UPON 




























remaining sense of Deity. Meanwhile, that knowledge is of | 
little worth, which does not correct a man’s former madness ; © 
for he despises the God whom with his mouth he proclaims: 
and has no conception of any other than I know not what | 
confused divinity. This kind of knowledge often enlightens | 
profane men, yet not so as to cause them to repent. Where-~ 
by we are admonished to regard any particular principle © 
as of small value, till solid piety springs from it and 
flourishes. 
40. Thow shalt be over my house. Not only is Joseph 
made governor of Egypt, but is adorned also with the in-~ 
signia of royalty, that all may reverence him, and may obey 
his command. The royal signet is put upon his finger for 
the confirmation of decrees. He is clothed in robes of fine’ 
linen, which were then a luxury, and were not to be had at 
any common price. He is placed in the most honourable 
chariot.’ It may, however, be asked, whether it was lawful 
for the holy man to appear with so great pomp? I answer, 
although such splendour can scarcely ever be free from 
blame, and therefore frugality in external ornaments is 
best ; yet all kind of splendour in kings and other princes of 
the world is not to be condemned, provided they neither too 
earnestly desire it, nor make an ostentatious display of it. 
Moderation is, indeed, always to be cultivated ; but since it 
was not in Joseph’s power to prescribe the mode of investi- 
ture, and the royal authority would not have been granted to 
him without the accustomed pomp of state, he was at liberty — 
to accept more than seemed in itself desirable. Ifthe option 
be given to the servants of God, nothing is safer for them, than 
to cut off whatever they can of outward splendour. And where 


1 Of the marks of distinction conferred by Pharaoh upon Joseph, men- 
tioned in verses 42 and 43 of this chapter; the first is the signet-ring 
which was common to the nations of the East as well as to Egypt. The ~ 
next is the “ vesture of fine linen,” or byssus, which was a peculiarly 
Egyptian token of honour. The third is the gold chain, or the necklace ~ 
of gold, “ of which the Egyptian monuments afford abundant explana- 
tion.” Modern objectors to the Mosaic account pretend that all the orna- 
ments here mentioned belong to a later date. But such remarks, as Heng- 
stenberg observes, “ have interest only as they show how far the inyesti- 
gations of the rationalists, in reference to the Pentateuch, fall short of the 
present advanced state of knowledge respecting Egyptian antiquity.” —Zd. 











pero Cr - “= =e 


CHAP. XLI. . THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 329 


it is necessary for them to accommodate themselves to pub- 


_ lie custom, they must beware of all ostentation and vanity. 
_ With respect to the explanation of the words; whereas we 
_ render them, “ At thy mouth all the people shall kiss,”* others 


prefer to read, “shall be armed ;” others, “shall be fed at thy 
will or commandment ;” but as the proper signification of the 
verb Pe) (nashak) is to kiss, I do not see why interpreters 
should twist it to another sense. Yet I do not think that 
here any special token of reverence is intended; but the 
phrase rather seems to be metaphorical, to the effect that 
the people should cordially receive and obediently embrace 
whatever might proceed from the mouth of Joseph: as if 
Pharaoh had said, “ Whatever he may command, it is my 
will that the people shall receive with one consent, as if all 
should kiss him.” “The second chariot,’ is read by the 
Hebrews in construction, for the chariot of the viceroy, who 
holds the second place from the king. The sense, however, 
is clear, that Joseph has the precedence of all the nobles of 
Egypt. 

There are various opinions about the meaning of the 
word “TAN, (abraik.) They who explain it by “ tender 
father,” because Joseph, being yet in tender years, was en- 
dowed with the prudence and gravity of old age, seem to me 
to bring something from afar to correspond with their own 
fancy. They who render it “ the father of the king,” asif the 
word were compounded of the Hebrew noun AN, (ab,) and the 
Arabic 1), (rak,) have little more colour for their interpreta- 
tion. If, indeed, the word be Hebrew, the meaning prefer- 
red by others, “ Bow the knee,” seems to me more probable. 
But because I rather suppose that Egyptian terms are refer- 
red to by Moses, both in this place and shortly afterwards, I 
advise the readers not to distort them in vain. And truly 
those interpreters are ridiculously subtle, who suppose that 
a Hebrew name was given him by an Egyptian king, which 
they render either “the Redeemer of the world,” or “the Ex- 


1 Osculabitur totus populus ad os tuum. The English version Is, “ Ac- 
cording unto thy word shall all my people be ruled: which is a free 
translation, bearing, according to Calvin’s explanation, the true sense of 
the original. The margin of our Bible gives “ be armed,” or, “* kiss,’ in- 
stead of the words “ be ruled.”—£d. 





330 COMMENTARY UPON 


pounder of mysteries.”* I prefer following the Greek inter- 
preters, who, by leaving both words untouched, sufficiently 
prove that they thought them to be of a foreign language. 
That the father-in-law of Joseph was, as is commonly be- 
lieved, a priest, is what I cannot refute, though I can scarcely 
be induced to believe it. Therefore, since 1)3 (cohen) sig- 
nifies a prince as well as a priest, it seems to me probable 
that he was one of the nobles of the court, who might also 
be the satrap or prefect of the city of On.” fin 

46. And Joseph was thirty years old. For two reasons 
Moses records the age at which Joseph was advanced to the 
government of the kingdom. First, because it is seldom that 
old men give themselves up to be governed by the young: 
whence it may be inferred that it was by the singular pro- 
vidence of God that Joseph governed without being envied, — 
and that reverence and majesty were given him beyond his © 
years. For if there was danger lest Timothy’s youth should 
render him contemptible, Joseph would have been equally — 
exposed to contempt, unless authority had been divinely — 
procured for him. And although he could not have obtained 
this authority by his own industry, yet it is probable that 
the extraordinary virtues with which God had endowed him, 


1 This is the rendering given of the name Zaphnath-paneah by Jerome, 
and by the Chaldee Paraphrast respectively. The reader may consult 
Rivetus in his Exercitation clviii., Gesenius’s Lexicon, and the Commen- 
taries of Bush and Dr. A. Clarke.—Ed. 

* That the word j7\3 (cohen) generally signifies priest, is not to be dis- 
puted. Gesenius earnestly contends that this is its invariable meaning; — 
but to establish his point, he is obliged to regard some as priests who were — 
not of the tribe of Levi. This seems conclusive against him; for there is 
no room for doubt that none were, or could be, priests who sprang from any — 
other tribe. Yet so much, perhaps, ought to be conceded to the primary — 
meaning of the word, that it should be translated priest, wherever the sense 
of the passage does not require another interpretation. Such a rule would — 
determine its meaning in this passage. The following remarks of Heng- — 
stenberg deserve attention. “ According to chapter xli. 45, Pharaoh gives 
to Joseph, Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera, the priest of On, in mar- 
riage. This name (which means he who belongs to the sun) is very com- 
mon on the Egyptian monuments, and is especially appropriate for the 
Priest of On, or Heliopolis (the city of the sun). Since Pharaoh evidently — 
intended, by this act, to establish the power bestowed on Joseph upon a — 
firm basis, it is implied in this account; first, that Egyptian High Priests 
occupied a very important position; and, secondly, that among them the — 
High Priest of On was the most distinguished. Both these points are 
confirmed by history.”—See Egypt and the Books of Moses, p. 32.—£d. 





wT Ts an 
e 


_ CHAP. XLI. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. sel 


availed not a little to increase and confirm it. A second 


reason for noting his age is, that the reader may reflect on 
the long duration of the sufferings with which he had been, 
in various ways, afflicted. And however humane his treat- 
ment might have been; still, thirteen years of exile, which 
had prevented his return to his father’s house, not merely by 


: the bond of servitude, but also by imprisonment, would prove 


a most grievous trial. Therefore, it was only after he 


had been proved by long endurance, that he was advanced 


to a better state. Moses then subjoins, that he discharg- 
ed his duties with diligence and with most punctual fide- 
lity; for the circuit taken by him, which is here men- 
tioned, was a proof of no common industry. He might, in- 
deed, have appointed messengers, on whose shoulders he 
could have laid the greater part of the labour and trouble ; 
but because he knew himself to be divinely called to the 
work, as one who had to render.an account to the divine 
tribunal, he refused no part of the burden. And Moses, in 
a few words, praises his incredible prudence, in having quick- 
ly found out the best method of preserving the corn. For 
it was an arduous task to erect storehouses in every city, 
which should contain thé entire produce of one year, and a 
fifth part more.’ This arrangement was also not less a proof 
of sagacity, in providing that the inhabitants of any given 
region should not have to seek food at a distance. Imme- 
diately afterwards his integrity is mentioned, which was 
equally deserving of praise; because in the immense accu- 
mulation which was made, he abstained from all self-indul- 
gence, just as if some humble office only, had been assigned 
to him. But it is to the praise of both these virtues that, 
after he has collected immense heaps, he remits nothing of 
his wonted diligence, until he has accomplished all the duties 
of the office which he had undertaken. The ancient proverb 


1 « The labours of Joseph in building storehouses are placed vividly be- 
fore us in the paintings upon the monuments, which show how common 
the storehouse was in ancient Egypt. In a tomb at Elethya, a man 1s re- 
presented whose business it evidently was to take account of the number 
of bushels which another man, “acting under him, measures, . . . Then fol- 
lows the transportation of the grain. From the measurer, others take it 
and carry it into the storehouses.”—Egypt and the Books of Moses, p. 36. 





332 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLI. 


says, “ Satiety produces disgust,” and in the same manner 
abundance is commonly the mother of idleness. Whence, 
therefore, is it, that the diligence of Joseph holds on its even 
course, and does not become remiss at the sight of present 
abundance, except because he prudently considers, that, how- 
eyer great the plenty might be, seven years of famine would 
swallow it all up? He manifested also his fidelity, and his 
extraordinary care for the public safety, in this, that he did 
not become weary by the assiduous labour of seven years, 
nor did he ever rest till he had made provision for the seven 
years which still remained. 

50. And unto Joseph were born two sons. Although the 
names which Joseph gave his sons in consequence of the 
issue of his affairs, breathe somewhat of piety, because in them 
he celebrates the kindness of God: yet the oblivion of his 
father’s house, which, he says, had been brought upon him, 
can scarcely be altogether excused. It was a pious and holy 
motive to gratitude, that God had caused him to “ forget” 
all his former miseries; but no honour ought to have been 
so highly valued, as to displace from his mind the desire and 
the remembrance of his father’s house. Granted that he is 
Viceroy of Egypt, yet his condition is unhappy, as long as he 
is an exile from the Church. Some, in order to exculpate 
the holy man, explain the passage as meaning that he so 
rejoiced in the present favour of God, as to make him after- 
wards forgetful of the injuries inflicted upon him by his bre- 
thren ; but this (in my judgment) is far too forced. And 
truly, we must not anxiously labour to excuse the sin of 
Joseph ; but rather, I think, we are admonished how greatly 
we ought to be on our guard against the attractions of the 
world, lest our minds should be unduly gratified by them, 
Behold Joseph, although he purely worships God, is yet so 


captivated by the sweetness of honour, and has his mind so: 


clouded, that he becomes indifferent to his father’s house, 
and pleases himself in Egypt. But this was almost to wan- 
der from the fold of God. It was, indeed, a becoming 
modesty, that from a desire of proclaiming the Divine good- 
ness towards him, he was not ashamed to perpetuate a me- 
morial of his depressed condition in the names of his sons. 


i A i cm i a i i 





cnt 


ee ee 


CHAP. XLI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 333 


They who are raised on high, from an obscure and ignoble 
position, desire to extinguish the knowledge of their origin, 
because they deem it disgraceful to themselves. Joseph, 
however, regarded the commendation of Divine grace more 
highly than an ostentatious future nobility. 

53. And the seven years....were ended. Already the 
former unwonted fertility, which showed Joséph to have 
been a true prophet, had procured for him a name and re- 
putation ; and in this way the Egyptians had been restrained 
from raising any tumult against him. Nevertheless, it is 
wonderful that a people so proud should have borne, in the 
time of prosperity, the rule of a foreigner. But the famine 
which followed proved a more sharp and severe curb for the 
subjugation of their lofty and ferocious spirits, in order that 
they might be brought into subjection to authority. When, 
however, Moses says that there was corn in all the land of 
Egypt, while the neighbouring regions were suffering from 
hunger, he seems*to intimate that wheat had also been laid 
up by private persons. And, indeed, (as we have said else- 
where,) it was impossible but the rumour of the approaching 
famine would be spread abroad, and would everywhere in- 
fuse fears and solicitude, so that each person would make 
some provision for himself. Nevertheless, however provident 
each might be, what they had preserved would, in a short 
time, be consumed. Whence it appeared with what skill and 
prudence Joseph had perceived from the beginning, that 
Egypt would not be safe, unless provisions were publicly 
gathered together under the hand of the king. 

55. Go unto Joseph. It is by no means unusual for kings, 
while their subjects are oppressed by extreme sufferings, to 
give themselves up to pleasures. But Moses here means 
something else ; for Pharaoh does not exonerate himself from 
the trouble of distributing corn, because he wishes to enjoy a 
repose free from all inconvenience ; but because he has such 
confidence in holy Joseph, that he willingly leaves all things 
to him, and does not allow him to be disturbed in the dis- 
charge of the office which he had undertaken. 


334 


CHAPTER XLII. 


1. Now when Jacob saw that 
there was corn in Egypt, Jacob said 
unto his sons, Why do ye look one 
upon another ? 

2. And he said, Behold, I have 
heard that there is corn in Egypt: 
get you down thither, and buy for 
us from thence; that we may live, 
and not die. 

3. And Joseph’s ten brethren 
went down to buy corn in Egypt. 


4. But Benjamin, Joseph’s_ bro- 
ther, Jacob sent not with his bre- 
thren: for he said, Lest peradven- 
ture mischief befall him. 

5. And the sons of Israel came to 
buy corn among those that came: 
for the famine was in the land of 
Canaan. 

6. And Joseph was the governor 
over the land, and he it was that 
sold to all the people of the land: 
and Joseph’s brethren came, and 
bowed down themselves before him 
with their faces to the earth. 

7. And Joseph saw his brethren, 
and he knew them, but made him- 
self strange unto them, and spake 
roughly unto them; and he said un- 
to them, Whence come ye? And they 
said, From the land of Canaan to 
buy food. 

8. And Joseph knew his brethren, 
but they knew not him. 

9. And Joseph remembered the 
dreams which he dreamed of them, 
and said unto them, Ye are spies; 
to see the nakedness of the land ye 
are come. 

10. And they said unto him, Nay, 
my lord; but to buy food are thy 
servants come. 

11. We are all one man’s sons: 
we are true men, thy servants are 
no spies. 

12. And he said unto them, Nay, 
but to see the nakedness of the land 
ye are come. 

13. And they said, Thy servants 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP, XLII. 


‘ 


1. Quum autem videret Jahacob 

qe esset frumentum in AXgypto, 

ixit Jahacob filiis suis, Utquid aspi- 
citis vos ? 


2. Et dixit, Eece, audivi quod est — 


frumentum in Aigypto: descendite 
illue, et emite nobis inde, et vivemus, 
nec moriemur. 


3. Descenderunt ergo fratres Jo- 
seph decem, ut emerent frumentum 
in gypto. 

4. (Nam Benjamin fratrem Jo- 
seph non misit Jahacob cum fratri- 
bus suis: quia dixit, Ne forte acci- 
dat ei mors.) 

5. Et venerunt filii Israel, ut eme- 
rentin medio venientium ; erat enim 
fames in terra Chenaan. 


6. Joseph autem erat dominus 
super terram: ipse vendebat toti po- 
pulo terree: venerunt, inquam, fra- 
tres Joseph, et incurvaverunt se ei 
in faciem super terram. 


7. Et vidit Joseph fratres suos, et 
agnovit eos, et alienum se ostendit 
eis: locutusque est cum eis dura, et 
dixit eis, Unde venistis? Et dixe- 
runt, De terra Chenaan ad emendum 
cibum. 


_ 8. Agnovit Joseph fratres suos: 
ipsi autem non agnoverunt eum, 

9. Et recordatus est Joseph som- 
niorum, que somniaverat de eis, 
dixitque, Exploratores estis, ad vi- 
dendum nuditatem terre venistis. 


10. Et dixerunt ad eum, Nequa- 
quam, domine mi: sed servi tui ve- 
nerunt ad emendum cibum. 

11. Omnes nos filii ejusdem viri 
sumus: veraces sumus, non sunt 
servi tui exploratores. 

12. Et dixit illis, Nequaquam: 
sed nuditatem terre venistis ad vi- 
dendum. 

13. Et dixerunt, Duodecim servi 





| 
: 








el te ey Oe ee ee ~~ 


CHAP. XLII. 


are twelve brethren, the sons of one 
man in the land of Canaan; and, 
behold, the youngest 7s this day with 
our father, and one is not. 

14, And Joseph said unto them, 
That is it that I spake unto you, 
saying, Ye are spies. 

15. Hereby ye shall be proved: 
By the life of Pharaoh ye shall not 
go forth hence, except your youngest 
brother come hither. 

16. Send one of you, and let him 
fetch your brother, and ye shall be 
kept in prison, that your words may 
be proved, whether there be any truth 
in you: or else, by the life of Pha- 
raoh, surely ye are spies. 

17. And he put them all together 
into ward three days. 

18. And Joseph said unto them 
the third day, This do, and live; for 
I fear God. 

19. If ye be true men, let one of 
your brethren be bound in the house 
of your prison: go ye, carry corn for 
the famine of your houses: 


20. But bring your youngest bro- 
ther unto me; so shall your words be 
verified, and ye shall not die. And 
they did so. 


21. And they said one to another, 
We are verily guilty concerning our 
brother, in that we saw the anguish 
of his soul, when he besought us, and 
we would not hear; therefore is this 
distress come upon us. 

22. And Reuben answered them, 
saying, Spake I not unto you, say- 
ing, Do not sin against the child? 


and ye would not hear; therefore, 


behold, also his blood is required. 

23. And they knew not that Jo- 
seph understood them; for he spake 
unto them by an interpreter. 

24. And he turned himself about 
from them, and wept; and returned 
to them again, and communed with 
them, and took from them Simeon, 
and bound him before their eyes. 

25. Then Joseph commanded to 
fill their sacks with corn, and to re- 
store every man’s money into his 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


835 


tui fratres sumus, filii viri ejusdem 
in terra Chenaan: et ecce, minimus 
est cum patre nostro hodie, et unus 
non est. 

14. Tune dixit ad eos Joseph, Hoe 
est quod locutus sum ad vos, dicen- 
do, Exploratores estis. 

15. In hoe probabimini: per vi- 
tam Pharaonis, si egressi fueritis 
hine, nisi quum venerit frater vester 
minimus hue, 

16. Mittite ex vobis unum, et ac- 
cipiat fratrem vestrum, vos autem 
vineti eritis, et probabuntur verba 
vestra, an veritas sit penes vos: sin 
minus, per vitam Pharaonis certe 
exploratores estis. 

17. Et congregavit eos in custo- 
diam tribus diebus. 

18. Dixit autem eis Joseph die 
tertio, Hoc facite, et vivetis: Deum 
ego timeo. 

19. Si veraces estis, frater vester 
unus ligetur in domo custodize ves- 
tree: vos autem ite, auferte alimen- 
tum ad abigendam famem e domibus 
vestris. 

20. Tune fratrem vestrum mini- 
mum adducetis ad me, et vera cog- 
noscentur (Heb. verificabuntur) ver- 
ba vestra, et non moriemini: et 
fecerunt ita. 

21. Dicebat autem alter alteri, 
Vere deliquimus contra fratrem nos- 
trum: quia vidimus angustiam ani- 
mee ejus dum deprecaretur nos, et 
non audivimus: idcirco venit super 
nos angustia heee. 

22. Et respondit Reuben ad eos, 
dicendo, Nonne dixi vobis, dicendo, 
Ne peccetis in puerum, et non audis- 
tis? et etiam sanguls ejus, ecce, re- 
quiritur. 

23. Ipsi autem ignorabant, quod 
audiret Joseph: quia interpres erat 
inter eos. 

24. Et vertit se ab eis, et flevit : 
postea reversus est ad eos, loquutus- 
que est eis: et accepit ab eis Sim- 
hon, ligavitque eum 1n oculis eorum. 


25. Tune precepit Joseph, et im- 
pleverunt vasa eorum frumento: 
proecepit etiam ut restituerent ar- 


336 


sack, and to give them provision for 
the way: and thus did he unto 
them. 

26. And they laded their asses 
with the corn, and departed thence. 

27. And as one of them opened 
his sack, to give his ass provender 
in the inn, he espied his money ; for, 
behold, it was in his sack’s mouth. 

28. And he said unto his bre- 
thren, My money is restored; and, 
lo, it is even in my sack: and their 
heart failed them, and they were 
afraid, saying one to another, What 
is this that God hath done unto us? 

29. And they came unto Jacob 
their father unto the land of Canaan, 
and told him all that befell unto 
them; saying, 

30. The man, who is the lord of 
the land, spake roughly to us, and 
took us for spies of the country. 

31. And we said unto him, We 
are true men; we are no spies. 


32. We be twelve brethren, sons 
of our father: one is not, and the 
youngest ¢s this day with our father 
in the land of Canaan. 

33. And the man, the lord of the 
- country, said unto us, Hereby shall 
I know that ye are true men; leave 
one of your brethren here with me, 
and take food for the famine of your 
households, and be gone; 

34. And bring your youngest 
brother unto me: then shall I know 
that ye are no spies, but that ye are 
true men: so will I deliver you your 
brother, and ye shall traffick in the 
land, 

35. And it came to pass, as they 
emptied their sacks, that, behold, 
every man’s bundle of money was in 
his sack: and when both they and 
their father saw the bundles of 
money, they were afraid. 

36. And Jacob their father said 
unto them, Me have ye bereaved of 
my children: Joseph is not, and Si- 
meon is not, and ye will take Benja- 
min away. All these things are 
against me, 

37. And Reuben spake unto his 


COMMENTARY UPON 





OHAP. XLII. 


gentum eorum, uniuscujusque in 
sacco suo, et.darent eis escam ad 
iter : et fecit eis sic. : 
26. Et tulerunt frumentum suum 
super asinos suos, et abierunt inde. 
27. Aperuit autem unus saccum 
suum, ut daret pabulum asino suo, 


in hospitio : et vidit pecuniam suam, 


et eece, erat in ore sacci sul. 

28. Et dixit fratribus suis, Red- 
dita est pecunia mea, et etiam ecce, 
est in sacco meo. Et egressum est 
cor eorum, et obstupuerunt alter ad 
alterum, dicendo, Utquid hoe fecit 
Deus nobis? . 

29. Et venerunt ad Jahacob pa- 
trem suum in terram Chenaan, et 
annuntiaverunt ei omnia que acci- 
derant eis, dicendo, 

30. Loquutus est vir dominus ter- 
ree nobiscum dura, et constituit nos 
tanquam exploratores terre. . 

31. Nos vero diximus ad eum, 
Veraces sumus, non sumus explora. 
tores. 

32. Duodecim sumus fratres filii 
patris nostri: unus non est, et mini- 
mus hodie est cum patre nostro in 
terra Chenaan. 

33. Tune dixit nobis vir dominus 
terre, In hoe cognosecam quod yera- 
ces estis, Fratrem vestrum unum 
relinquite mecum, et ad expellendam 
famem domorum vestrarum capite, 
et ite: 

34. Et adducite fratrem vestrum 
minimum ad me, tune cognosecam 
quod non estis exploratores, sed 
veraces : fratrem yvestrum dabo vo- 
bis, et in terra negotiabimini. 

35. Porro fuit, ipsis evacuantibus 
SACCOS SUOS, ecce, UNiuscUjusque liga- 
tura pecunize sue erat in sacco suo : 
et viderunt ligaturas pecuniarum 
suarum, ipsi, et pater eorum, et 
timuerunt. 


36. Et dixit ad eos Jahacob pater 
eorum, Me orbastis, Joseph non est, 
et Simhon non est, et Benjamin 
capietis : adversum me sunt omnia 
heee. 


37. Tune dixit Reuben ad pa- 








HAP, XLII. 


ather, saying, Slay my two sons, if 
bring him not to thee: deliver him 
nto my hand, and I will bring him 
to thee again. 

38. And he said, My son shall not 
0 down with you; for his brother 
dead, and he is left alone: if mis- 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


337 


trem suum, dicendo, Duos filios meos 
mori facias, nisi reduxero eum ad 
te: da eum in manum meam, et 
ego reducam eum ad te, 

38. Et dixit, Non descendet filius 
meus vobiscum, quia frater ejus mor- 
tuus est, et ipse solus remansit: et 


























chief befall him by the way in the 
’ ye go, then shall ye bring 
Jown my gray hairs with sorrow to 
the grave. 

— 1. Now when Jacob saw. Moses begins, in this chapter, 
to treat of the occasidn which drew Jacob with his whole fa- 
mily into Egypt ; and thus leaves it to us to consider by what 
hidden and unexpected methods God may perform whatever 
he has decreed. Though, therefore, the providence of God is 
in itself a labyrinth ; yet when we connect the issue of things 
with their beginnings, that admirable method of operation 
shines clearly in our view, which is not generally acknow- 
ledged, only because it is far removed from our observation. 
Also our own indolence hinders us from perceiving God, with 
the eyes of faith, as holding the government of the world ; 
because we either imagine fortune to be the mistress of events, 
or else, adhering to near and natural causes, we weave them 
together, and spread them as veils before our eyes. Whereas, 
therefore, scarcely any more illustrious representation of Di- 
vine Providence is to be found than this history furnishes ; 
let pious readers carefully exercise themselves in meditation 
upon it, in order that they may acknowledge those things 
which, in appearance, are fortuitous, to be directed by the 
hand of God. t 
Why do ye look one upon another? Men are said to look 
one upon another, when each is waiting for the other, and, 
for want of counsel, no one dares to attempt anything. Jacob, 
therefore, censures this inactivity of his sons, because none 
‘of them endeavours to provide for the present necessity. 
Moses also says that they went into Egypt at the command’ » 
of their father, and even without Benjamin; by which he 
‘intimates that filial reverence at that time was great; be- 
“cause envy of their brother did not prevent them from leay- 
ing their wives and children, and undertaking a long journey. 
He also adds, that they came in the midst of a great crowd 
VOL. II. x 


accidet ei mors in via per quam ibi- 
tis : et descendere facietis canitiem 
meam cum meerore ad sepulcrum. 





Pet > pvt vive Wars ro 



























338 COMMENTARY UPON — CHAP, XIII, 


of people; which enhances the fame of Joseph ; who, while 
supplying food for all Egypt, and dispensing it by measure, 
till the end of the drought, could also afford assistance t to 
neighbouring nations. 

6. And Joseph was the governor’ over the land. Moses 
connects the honour of Joseph with his fidelity and diligence. 
For although he was possessed of supreme authority, he 
nevertheless submitted to every possible laborious service, 
just as if he had been a hired servant. From which example 
we must learn, that as any one excels in honour, he is bound 
to be the more fully occupied in business ; but that they who 
desire to combine leisure with dignity, utterly pervert the 
sacred order of God. Let it be, moreover, understood, that 
the corn was sold by Joseph, not as if he measured it out 
with his own hands, or himself received the money for it, 
seeing that it was set to sale in many parts of the kingdom, 
and he could scarcely have attended to one single store- 
house: but that the whole of the stores were under his power 

7. He made himself strange unto them. It may be asked 
for what purpose Joseph thus tormented his brethren with ™ 
threats and with terror. For if he was actuated by a sense of 
the injury received from them, he cannot be acquitted of the 
desire of revenge. It is, however, probable, that he was im- 
pelled neither by anger nor a thirst of vengeance, but that 
he was induced by two just causes to act as he did. For he 
both desired to regain his brother Benjamin, and wished to 
ascertaim,—as if by putting them to the torture,—what was 
in their mind, whether they repented or not; and, in short, 
what had been their course of life since he had seen them 
last. For, had he made himself known at the first inter- 
view, it was to be feared lest they, keeping their father out 
of sight, and wishing to cast a vail over the detestable 
wickedness which they had committed, should only inerease 
it by a new crime. There lurked, also, a not unreasonable. 
suspicion concerning his brother Benjamin, lest they should 
attempt something perfidious and cruel against him. It 


1 own (Hashalit) “ Of the Hebrew Shallet and Shilton, is mada 1 
Arabie the name Sultan, a title whereby the chief rulers of Be! and 
sabylon are still called.”—Ainsworth.—Ed. 


v 





























HAP, XLII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 329 


vas therefore important that they should be more thoroughly 
ifted ; so that Joseph, being fully informed of the state 
f his father’s house, might take his measures according to 
ircumstances ; and also, that previous to pardon, some 
junishment might be inflicted which would lead them more 
arefully to reflect upon the atrocity of their crime. For 
yhereas he afterwards showed himself to be placable and 
umane ; this did not arise from the fact, that his anger 
being assuaged, he became, by degrees, inclined to com- 
passion ; but rather, as Moses elsewhere subjoins, that he 
jought retirement, because he could “no longer refrain him- 
elf;” herein intimating at the same time, that Joseph had for- 
| cibly repressed his tears so long as he retained a severe aspect; 
md, therefore, that he had felt throughout the same affection 
of pity towards them. And it appears that a special impulse 
noved him to this whole course of action. For it was no 
common thing, that Joseph, beholding so many authors of 
his calamities, was neither angry nor changed in his man- 
“ner, nor broke out into reproaches ; but was composed both 
in his countenance and his speech, as if he had long medi- 
‘tated at leisure, respecting the course he would pursue. But 
“it may be inquired again, whether his dissimulation, which 
was joined with a falsehood, is not to be blamed; for we 
ik now how pleasing integrity is to God, and how strictly he 


rohibits his own people from deceit and falsehoods. Whe- 


ther God governed his servant by some special movement, 
to depart without fault, from the common rule of action, I 
know not; seeing that the faithful may sometimes piously 
do things which cannot lawfully be drawn into a precedent. 
Of this, however, in considering the acts of the holy fathers, 
“we must always beware ; lest they should lead us away from 
that law which the Lord prescribes to all in common. By 
‘the general command of God, we must all cultivate sincerity. 
‘That Joseph feigned something different from the truth, 
affords no pretext to excuse us if we. attempt anything of 
‘the same kind. For, though a liberty granted by privilege 
‘would be pardoned, yet if any one, relying on a private ex- 
“ample, does not scruple to subvert the law of God, so as to 
‘give himself license to do what is therein forbidden, he shall 


; 
4 


| 
; 
: 


i 
i 



























340 COMMENTARY UPON | OHAP. XLIT 
justly suffer the punishment of his audacity. And yet I do 
not think that we ought to be very anxious to excuse Joseph : 
because it is probable that he suffered something from human 
infirmity, which God forgave him ; for by Divine merey alone 
could that dissimulation, which ts itself was not without 
fault, escape condemnation. 

9. And Joseph remembered the dreams. When the boy 
Joseph had spoken of receiving obeisance, the absurdity o: 
the thing impelled his brethren wickedly to devise his death, 
Now, although they bow down to him without knowing 
him, there is yet nothing better for them. Indeed, their 
only means of safety, is to prostrate themselves at his 
feet, and to be received by him as suppliants. Meanwhile. 
their conspiracy, by which they attempted to subvert the 
celestial decree, lest they should have to bear the yoke, was 
rendered fruitless. So the Lord forcibly restrains the ob- 
stinate, just as wild and refractory horses are wont to be 
more severely treated, the more they kick and are restive. 
Wherefore, there is nothing better than meekly to compose 
the mind to gentleness, that each may take his own lot cor 
tentedly, though it be not very splendid. It may, however, 
seem absurd, that Joseph should, at this time, have recalled 
his dream to mind, as if it had been forgotten through the 
lapse of years ; which, indeed, could not be, unless he had lost 
sight of the promises of God. I answer, nothing is here re 
corded but what frequently happens to ourselves: for although 
the word of God may be dwelling in our hearts, yet it does not 
continually occur to us, but rather 3 is sometimes so smothere¢ 
that it may seem to be extinct, especially when faith is op- 
pressed by the darkness of affliction. Besides, it is nothing 
wonderful, if a long series of evils should have buried, in a 
kind of oblivion, his dreams which indicated prosperity. Goé 
had exalted him, by these dreams, to the hope of great and 
distinguished authority. He is, however, cast into a well 
not unlike a grave. He is taken hence to be sold as a slave; 
he is carried to a distant land; and, as if slavery would 
not prove sufliciently severe, he is shut up in prison, And 
though his misery is in some degree mitigated, when he is 


i 


released from his iron fetters, yet there was little, if any, pro: 





























= 


HAP. XLII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 4d | 


pect of deliverance. I do not, however, think that the hope 
ntertained by him was entirely destroyed, but that a cloud 
passed over it, which deprived him of the light of comfort. 
\ different kind of temptation followed ; because nothing is 
nore common than for great and unexpected felicity to in- 
oxicate its possessors. And thus it happened, as we have re- 
sently read, that a forgetfulness of his father’s house stole 
»ver the mind of the holy man. He was not, therefore, so 
mindful of his dreams as he ought to have been. Another 
sxcuse may probably be alleged; that he, at the moment, 
compared his dreams with the event. And truly it was no 
common virtue to apply what was passing, thus immediately 
‘for the confirmation of the Divine oracle. For we readily 
derceive, that those dreams which so quickly recur to the 
memory, had not been obliterated through length of time. So 
the disciples remembered the words of the Lord after he had 
risen from the dead ; because, by the sight of the fact predict- 
ed, their knowledge became more clear; whereas, before, 
I othing but transient sparks of it had shined in their hearts. 
| 15. By the life of Pharaoh. From this formula of swear- 
“ing a new question is raised; for that which is commanded 
in the law, that we should swear only by the name of God, 
‘had already been engraven on the hearts of the pious; since 
F ature dictates that this honour is to be given to God alone, 
‘that men should defer to his judgment, and should make 
him the supreme arbiter and vindicator of faith and truth. 
If we should say that this was not simply an oath, but a 
kind of obtestation, the holy man will be, in some degree, 
excusable. He who swears by God wishes him to interpose 
“in order to inflict punishment on perjury. They who swear 
by their life or by their hand, deposit, as it were, what they 
“deem most valuable, as a pledge of their faithfulness. By 
“this method the majesty of God is not transferred to mortal 
“man ; because it is a very different thing to cite him as wit- 
_ hess who has the right of taking vengeance, and to assert 
by something most dear to us, that what we say is true. So 
Moses, when he calls heaven and earth to witness, does not 
ascribe deity to them, and thus fabricate a new idol; but, in 
- order that higher authority may be given to the law, he de- 





342 COMMENTARY UPON _ CHAP. XLIT. 


celares that there is no part of the world which will not ery 
out before the tribunal of God, against the ingratitude of the 
people, if they reject the doctrine of salvation. Notwith- 
standing, there is, I confess, in this form of swearing which 
Joseph uses, something deserving of censure; for it was ¢ 
profane adulation, among the Eeyptians, to swear by the life 
of the king. Just as the Romans swore by the genius off 
their prince, after they had been reduced to such bondage 
that they made their Cesars equal to gods. Certainly this 
mode of swearing is abhorrent to true piety. Whence it may 
be perceived that nothing is more difficult to the holy ser- 
vants of God than to keep themselves so pure, while con- 
versant with the filth of the world, as to contract no spots 
of defilement from it. Joseph, indeed, was never so infected 
with the corruptions of the court, but that he remained a 
pure worshipper of God: nevertheless we see, that in accom- 
modating himself to this depraved custom of speaking, he 
had received some stain. His repetition of the expression 
shows, that when any one has once become accustomed to 
evil, he becomes exceedingly prone to sin again and again. 
We observe, that they who have once rashly assumed th 
license of swearing, pour forth an oath every third word, even 
when speaking of the most frivolous things. So much the 
greater caution ought we to use, lest any such indulgence 
should harden us in this wicked custom. 

17. And he put them altogether into ward. Here, not by 
words only, as. before, but by the act itself, Joseph shows 
himself severe towards his brethren, when he shuts them all 
up in prison, as if about to bring them to punishment: and 
during three days torments them with fear. We said a little 
while ago, that from this fact no rule for acting severely and 
rigidly is to be drawn ;, because it is doubtful whether he 
acted rightly or otherwise. Again, it is to be feared lest) 
they who plead his example should be far removed from his 
mildness, and that they should prove to be rather his apes 
than his true imitators. Meanwhile, it plainly appears wha 
he was aiming at; for he does not mitigate their punish- 
ment, as if at the end of three days he was appeased ; but 
he renders them more anxious about the redemption of their 














































IAP. XLII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 343 
rother, whom he retains as a hostage. Lest, however, im- 
‘moderate fear should deter them from returning, he promises 
9 act with good faith towards them: and to convince them 
‘of that, he declares that he fears God, which expression is 
vorthy of observation. Doubtless he speaks from the inward 
ecling of his heart, when he declares that he will deal well 
ind truly with them, because he fears God. Therefore the 
commencement and the fountain of that good and honest 
conscience, whereby we cultivate fidelity and justice towards 
men, is the fear of God. There appears indeed some probity 
in the despisers of God ; but it soon goes off in smoke, un- 
less the depraved affections of the flesh are restrained as with 
aap bridle, by the thought that God is to be feared, because he 
will be the Judge of the world. For whoever does not think 
that he must render an account, will never so cultivate in- 
tegrity as to refrain from pursuing what he supposes will be 
useful to himself. Wherefore, if we wish to be free from 
| perfidy, craft, cruelty, and all wicked desire of doing injury, 
we must labour earnestly that religion may flourish among 
For whenever we act with want of sincerity or humanity 
towards each other, impiety openly betrays itself. For what- 
' ever there is of rectitude or justice in the world, Joseph com- 
ha . Bed in this short sentence, when he said, that he feared 
God. 

3 21. And they said one to another. This is a remarkable 
; passage, showing that the sons of Jacob, when reduced to 
the greatest straits, recall to memory a fratricide committed 
thirteen years previously. Before affliction pressed upon 
them, they were in a state of torpor. Moses relates that, 
even lately, they had spoken without agitation of J oseph’s 
death, as if conscious to themselves of no evil. But now 
pies are compelled (so to speak) to enter into their own con- 
_ sciences. We see then, how in adversity, God searches and 
_ tries men; and how, while dissipating all their flattering il- 
_Tusions he not only pierces their minds with secret fear, but 
eeeoris a confession which they would gladly avoid. And 
~ this kind of examination is very necessary for us. Wonderful 
i; is the hypocrisy of men in covering their evils; and if im- 
Bppenity be allowed, their negligence will be increased two- 





= — | 2 — a wr ae | ae | - 
_ So a 
7 d ’ - - | c _ ¥ 

























344 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLU 


fold. Wherefore no remedy remains, except that they who | 
give themselves up to slumber when the Lord deals gently: 
with them, should be awakened by afflictions and punish-— 
ments. Joseph therefore produced some good effect, when 
he extorted from his brethren the acknowledgment of their 
sin, in which they had securely. pleased themselves. And” 
the Lord had compassion on them, in taking away the) 
covering with which they had been too long deceived. In 7 
the same manner, while he daily chastises us by the hand of — 
man, he draws us, as guilty, to his tribunal. Nevertheless 
it would profit but little to be tried by adversity, unless he 
inwardly touched the heart ; for we see how few reflect on 
their sins, although admonished by most severe punishments; 

certainly no one comes to this state of mind but with reluct- 

ance. Wherefore, there is no doubt that God, in order to 
lead the sons of Jacob to repentance, impelled them, as we 
by the secret instinct of his Spirit as by outward chastise- 
ment, to become sensible of that sin which had been too long 
concealed. Let the reader also observe, that the sons of 
Jacob did not only fix their minds on something which was 
close at hand, but considered that divine pifbisbsnaele were 
inflicted in various ways upon sinners, And doubtless, in 
order to apprehend the divine judgments, we must extend 
our views afar. Sometimes indeed God, by inflicting present 
punishment on sinners, holds them up for observation as on a 
theatre; but often, as if aiming at another object, he takes ven- 
geance on our sins unexpectedly, and from an unseen quarter. 
If the sons of Jacob had merely looked for some present cause 
of their sufferings, they could have done nothing but loudly 
complain that they had been injured; and at length despair 
would have followed. But while considering how far and 
wide the providence of God extends, looking beyond the oc- 
casion immediately before their eyes, they ascend to a remote 
cause. It is, however, doubtful, whether they say that they 
shall be held guilty on account of their brother, or for thei i 
brother’s sake, or that they will themselves confess that they 
have sinned: for the Hebrew noun, DSU, (ashavmum,) is” 
ambiguous, because it sometimes refers to the crime com- 
mitted, and sometimes to the punishment, as in Latin, 










CHAP. XLII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. B45 


_ praculum signifies both the crime and the expiation. On 
_ the whole, it is of little consequence which meaning is pre- 
_ ferred, for they acknowledge their sin either in its guilt or 
its punishment. But the latter sense appears to me the 
- more simple and genuine, that they are deservedly punished 
because they had been so cruel to their brother. 
In that we saw the anguish of his soul. They acknow- 
ledge that it is by the just judgment of God, that they ob- 
_ tained nothing by their suppliant entreaties, because they 
_ themselves had acted so cruelly towards their brother. Christ 
_ had not yet uttered the sentence, “ With what measure ye 
_ mete, it shall be measured unto you again,” (Matt. vii. 2,) 
_ but it was a dictate of nature, that they who had been cruel to 
others, were unworthy of commiseration. The more heed ought 
_ we to take, that we prove not deaf to so many threatenings of 
| Seripture. Dreadful is that denunciation, “ Whoso stoppeth 
his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, and 
"shall not be heard.” (Prov. xxi. 13.) Therefore while we 
have time, let us learn to exercise humanity, to sympathize 
- with the miserable, and to stretch out our hand for the sake 
of giving assistance. But if at any time it happens that we are 
_ treated roughly by men, and our prayers are proudly rejected ; 
_ then, at least, let the question oceur to us, whether we our- 
_ selves have in anything acted unkindly towards others ; for 
F although it were better to be wise beforehand; it is, neverthe- 
less, some advantage, whenever others proudly despise us, 
to reflect whether they with whom we have had to deal, have 
not experienced similar hardships from us. “ Our brother,” 
they say, “ entreated us when he was in the last extremity: 
we rejected his prayers: therefore it is by divine retribution 
that we can obtain nothing.” By these words they bear 
_ witness that the hearts of men are so under Divine govern- 
ment, that they can be inclined to equity, or hardened in 
inflexible rigour. Moreover, their cruelty was hateful to 
God, because, since his goodness is diffused through heaven 
and earth, and his beneficence is extended not only to men, 
- but even to brute animals, nothing is more contrary to his 
nature, than that we should cruelly reject those who implore 
our protection. 


TAHT PALE OS 


a thw “at PS 





346 - COMMENTARY UPON OHAP, XLII, 


22. And Reuben answered them. Because he had attempted | 
to deliver Joseph out of the hands of his brethren, in order — 
to restore him in safety to his father, he magnifies their — 


fault, in not having, at that time, listened to any prudent | 
counsel: and I understand his words as conveying a re- | 
proof for their too late repentance. Whereas Joseph was | 
not yet satisfied with this confession, but retained Simeon | 


in bonds,’ and dismissed the rest in suspense and perplexity, 
this was not done from malevolence, but because he was not — 
certain about the safety of his brother Benjamin, and the | 
state of his father’s house. For he might justly fear lest, — 
when they found that their wicked contrivance of putting 


their brother to death, was discovered, they might again ~ 


attempt some horrible crime, as desperate men are wont to — 
do; or, at least, might desert their father, and flee to some — 
other country. Nevertheless the act of Joseph is not to be © 
drawn into a precedent: because it is not always right to be — 
thus austere. We ought also to beware lest the offender be — 
swallowed up by grief, if we are not mild, and disposed to for- — 
giveness. Therefore we must seek the spirit of discretion — 
from heaven, which shall so govern us that we may do no- — 
thing by rash impetuosity, or immoderate severity. This, — 
indeed, is to be remembered, that under the stern countenance 
of Joseph was concealed not only a mild and placid disposi- — 
tion, but the most tender affection. 
27. And as one of them opened his sack. With what inten- — 
tion Joseph had commanded the price paid for the corn to be 
secretly deposited in the sacks of his brethren, may easily be — 
conjectured ; for he feared lest his father being already im- — 
poverished, would not be able again to buy provisions. The 
brethren, having found their money, knew not where to — 
seek the cause ; except that, being terrified, they perceived — 
that the hand of God was against them. That they were — 
greatly astonished appears from their not voluntarily return- 


Ainsworth says of Simeon, “ He seemeth by this, to have been the — 
chief procurer of Joseph's trouble. He was by nature bold and fierce, as 
his fact against the Shechemites doth manifest.” If so, this act of Joseph 
would appear to him, and perhaps to the rest of the brethren, as a special 
Divine retribution for his cruelty towards Joseph.—d. 





TAP, XLIT. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. — 347 


ing to Joseph, in order to prove their own innocence: for 
the remedy of the evil was at hand, if they had not been 
_ utterly blinded. Wherefore we must ask God to supply us, 
_ in doubtful and troubled affairs, not only with fortitude, but 
_ also with prudence. We see also how little can be effected 
_ even by a great multitude, unless the Lord preside among 
_ them. The sons of Jacob ought mutually to have exhorted 
_ each other, and to have consulted together what was necessary 
_ tobe done: but there is an end to all deliberation ; no solace 


_ nor remedy is suggested. Even while each sees the rest agi- 





_ tated, they mutually increase each other’s trepidation. There- 
_ fore, the society and countenance of men will profit us nothing, 
_ unless the Lord strengthen us from heaven. 

28. What ts this that God hath done unto us? They do not 
_ expostulate with God, as if they thought this danger had 
- come upon them without cause: but, perceiving that God 
' was angry with them in many ways, they deplore their 
_ wretchedness. But why do they not rather turn their 
thoughts to Joseph? For the suspicion was natural, that 
this had been done by fraud, because he wished to lay new 
snares for them. How does it happen, then, that losing 
sight of man, they set God as an avenger directly before 
them? ‘Truly, because this single thought possessed their 
minds, that a just reward, and such as their sins deserved, 
would be given them ; and, from that time, they referred 
whatever evils happened to the same cause. Before (as we 
have said) they were asleep: but from the time that they 
began to be affected by the lively fear of God’s Judgment, 
his providence always presented itself to their view. So 
_ David, when, by the inward suggestion of the Spirit, he has 
learned that the rod with which he was chastised had been 
sent from heaven, is not distracted or perplexed, though he sees 
plainly that the evils have proceeded from another quarter ; 
but prays to God to heal the wounds which He had made. 
It is no common act of prudence, and is at the same time 
profitable, whenever any adversity overtakes us, to accustom 
ourselves to the consideration of the judgments of God. We 
see how unbelievers, while they imagine their misfortunes to 
_ be accidental, or while they are bent on accusing their enemies, 


348 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XLIL 


only exasperate their grief by fretting and raging, and thus 
cause the anger of God to burn the more against them. But | 


he who, in his affliction, exercises himself in reflecting on q 
his own sins, and sets God before him as his Judge, will | 


humble himself in the divine presence, and will compose 
his mind to patience by the hope of pardon. Let us, how- | 
ever, remember that the providence of God is not truly ac- — 
knowledged, except in connection with his justice. For, though 
the men by whose hand he chastises us are often unjust, 
yet, in an incomprehensible manner, he executes his judg- 
ments through them, against which judgments it is not lawful 
for us either to reply or to murmur. For sometimes even 
the reprobate, though they acknowledge themselves to be 
stricken by the hand of God, yet do not cease to complain 
against him, as Moses teaches us by the example of Cain. 
I do not, however, understand that this complaint was made 
by the sons of Jacob, for the purpose of charging God with 
tyrannical violence ; but because they, being overcome with 
fear, inferred from this double punishment that God was 
highly displeased with them. . 

29. And they came unto Jacob their father. Here is a 
long repetition of the former history, but it is not superfluous; 
because Moses wished to show how anxiously they made 
their excuse to their father for having left Simeon in chains, 
and how strenuously they pleaded with him, that, for the 
sake of obtaining Simeon’s liberty, he should allow them to 
take their brother Benjamin: for this was greatly to the 
purpose. We know what a sharp dart is hunger: and yet, 
though the only method of relieving their want was to fetch 
corn out of Egypt, Jacob would rather that he and his family 
should perish, than allow Benjamin to accompany the rest. 
What can he mean by thus peremptorily refusing what his 
sons were compelled by necessity to ask, except to show that 
he was suspicious of them? This also more clearly appears 
from his own words, when he imputes his bereavement to 
them. For, though their declaration, that Joseph had been 
torn by a wild beast, had some colour of probability, there 
still remained in the heart of the holy patriarch a secret 
wound, arising from suspicion ; because he was fully aware of 





 OHAP. XLII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. : 349 


their fierce and cruel hatred of the innocent youth. Moreover, 
- it is useful for us to know this; for it appears hence how 
miserable was the condition of the holy man, whose mind, 


_ during thirteen successive years, had been tortured with dire 





anxiety. Besides, his very silence added greatly to his 
_ torment, because he was compelled to conceal the grief he 
- felt. But the chief burden of the evil was the temptation 
_ which oppressed him, that the promise of God might prove 
- illusory and vain. For he had no hope except from the pro- 
mised seed ; but he seemed to be bringing up devils at home, 
from whom a blessing was no more to be expected than life 
_ from death. He thought Joseph to be dead, Benjamin alone 
remained to him uncorrupted: how could the salvation of 
the world proceed from such a vicious offspring? He must, 
therefore, have been endowed with great constancy, seeing 
he did not cease to rely upon God ; and being certainly per- 
suaded that he cherished in his house the Church, of which 
scarcely any appearance was left, he bore with his sons till 
they should repent. Let the faithful now apply this example 
to themselves, lest their minds should give way at the hor- 
rible devastation which is almost everywhere perceived. 

35. As they emptied their sacks. Here, again, it appears 
how greatly they had been alarmed in their journey, seeing 
that each had not at least examined his sack, after money 
had been found in one. But these things are written to 
show that, as soon as men are smitten with fear, they have 
no particle of wisdom and of soundness of mind, until God 
tranquillizes them. Moreover, Joseph did not act with suffi- 
cient consideration, in that he occasioned very great grief to 
his father, whose poverty he really intended to relieve. 
Whence we learn that even the most prudent are not always 
so careful, but that something may flow from their acts which 
they do not wish. 

36. Me have ye bereaved. Jacob does not, indeed, openly 
accuse his sons of the crime of their brother’s murder ; yet 
he is angry as if, two of his sons being already taken away, 
they were hastening to destroy the third. For he says that 
all these evils were falling on himself alone ; because he does 
not think that they were affected as they ought to be, nor 


350 COMMENTARY UPON 





shared his grief with him, but were carelessly making light 
of the destruction of their brethren, as if they had no interest — 
in their lives. It seems, however, exceedingly barbarousthat — 
Reuben should offer his two sons to his father to be slain, if — 
he did not bring Benjamin back. Jacob might, indeed, slay 
his own grandchildren: what comfort, then, could he take — 
in acting cruelly to his own bowels? But this is what I be- — 
fore alluded to, that they were suspected of having dealt per- — 
fidiously towards Joseph ; for which reason Reuben deemed 
it necessary to assuage his father’s fear, by such a vehement 
protestation; and to give this pledge, that he and his brethren 
were designing nothing wicked against Benjamin. 

38. My son shall not go down with you. Again we see, as 
in a lively picture, with what sorrow holy Jacob had been 
oppressed. He sees his whole family famishing: he would — 
rather be torn away from life than from his son: whence we ga- 
ther that he was not iron-hearted: but his patience is the more 
deserving of praise, because he contended with the infirmity 
of the flesh, and did not sink under it. And although Moses 
does not give a rhetorical amplification to his language, we 
nevertheless easily perceive that he was overcome with ex- 
cessive grief, when he thus complained to his sons, “ You are 
too cruel to your father, in taking away from me athird son, — 
after I have been plundered of first one and then another.” 


CHAPTER XLIILI. 


1. AnD the famine was sore in the 1. Porro fames gravis erat in 


land. 

2. And it came to pass, when they 
had eaten up the corn which they 
had brought out of Egypt, their fa- 
ther said unto them, Go again, buy 
us a little food. 

3. And Judah spake unto him, 
saying, The man did solemnly pro- 
test unto us, saying, Ye shall not see 
my face, except your brother be with 


you. 

4. If thou wilt send our brother 
with us, we will go down and buy 
thee food : 


terra. 

2. Itaque quum finissent edere 
alimentum, quod attulerant ex 
Aigypto, dixit ad eos pater eorum, 
Revertimini, emite nobis pusillum 
cibi. 

3. Et dixit ad eum Jehudah, di- 
cendo, Contestando contestatus est 
nos vir, dicendo, Non videbitis fa- 
ciem meam, nisi fuerit frater vester 
vobiseum. 

4. Si miseris fratrem nostrum no- 
biseum, descendemus, et ememus tibi 
cibum, 







OHAP. XLITII. 


5. But if thou wilt not send him, 
we will not go down: for the man 
said unto us, Ye shall not see my 
face, except your brother be with 
~ you. 
6. And Israel said, Wherefore 
dealt ye so ill with me, as to tell the 
man whether ye had yet a brother? 
_ 7. And they said, The man asked 
us straitly of our state, and of our 
_kindred, saying, Zs your father yet 
alive ? have ye another brother ? and 
we told him according to the tenor 
of these words, Could we certainly 
know that he would say, Bring your 
brother down ? 

8. And Judah said unto Israel 
| his father, Send the lad with me, 
and we will arise and go; that we 
may live, and not die, both we, and 
_ thou, and also our little ones. 

9. I will be surety for him; of my 
hand shalt thou require him: if 1 
bring him not unto thee, and set him 
_ before thee, then let me bear the 
| blame for ever: 

10. For except we had lingered, 
_ surely now we had returned this se- 
- cond time. 

11. And their father Israel said 
~ unto them, If it must be so now, do 
_ this; Take of the best fruits in the 
| land in your vessels, and carry down 
_ the man a present, a little balm, and 
alittle honey, spices and myrrh, nuts 
and almonds. 

12. And take double money in 
your hand: and the money that was 
brought again in the mouth of your 
sacks, carry 7¢ again in your hand; 
peradventure it was an oversight. 

13. Take also your brother, and 
arise, go again unto the man: 

_ 14. And God Almighty give you 
_ mercy before the man, that he may 


= 


POTS NAL TI? 


_ Benjamin. If I be bereaved of my 
children, I am bereaved. 

i 15. And the men took that pre- 
sent, and they took double money in 
_ their hand, and Benjamin; and rose 
up, and went down to Egypt, and 
stood before Joseph. 

16. And when Joseph saw Ben- 





THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


& send away your other brother, and _ 


351 


5. Quod si non miseris, non de- 
scendemus : vir enim ille dixit nobis, 
Non videbitis faciem meam, nisi 
fuerit frater vester vobiscum. 


6. At dixit Israel, Utquid male- 
fecistis mihi, ut nuntiaretis viro, 
quod adhuce frater esset vobis. 

7. Et dixerunt, Interrogando in- 
terrogavit vir ille de nobis et cogna- 
tione nostra, dicendo, Num adhue 
pater vester vivit? num est vobis 
frater? et nuntiavimus ei secundum 
verba ista: numquid sciendo scie- 
bamus, quod dicturus esset, Descen- 
dere faciatis fratrem vestrum ? 

8. Et dixit Jehudah ad Israel pa- 
trem suum, Mitte puerum mecum, 
et surgemus, et proficiscemur, et vi- 
vemus, et non moriemur etiam nos, 
etiam tu, etiam parvuli nostri. 

9. Ergo fidejubeo pro illo, de manu 
mea requiras eum: nisi reduxero eum 
ad te, et statuero eum ante te, poence 
obnoxius ero tibi omnibus diebus. 


10. Quia nisi tardavissemus, certe 
nunc reversi fuissemus jam bis. 


11. Et dixit illis Israel pater 
eorum, Si ita nunc oportet, hoc fa- 
cite: tollite de optimis fructibus terree 
in vasis vestris, et deferte ad virum 
munus, pusillum resine et pusillum 
mellis, aromata, et stacten, pineas, 
et amygdalas. 

12. Et pecuniam duplicem capite 
in manibus vestris: et pecuniam re- 
positam in ore saccorum vestrorum 
reponetis in manu vestra, si forte 
error esset. 

13. Et fratrem vestrum capite, et 
surgite, revertemini ad virum. 

14. Deus autem omnipotens det 
yobis misericordias ante virum, et di- 
mittat vobis fratrem vestrum alium, 
et Benjamin : et ego quemadmodum 
orbatus sum, orbatus sum. 

15. Et ceperunt viri munus hoe, 
et duplicem pecuniam ceperunt in 
manu sua, et Benjamin: et surrex- 
erunt, et descenderunt in Aigyptum, 
et steterunt coram Joseph. 

16. Et vidit Joseph cum eis Ben- 


352 


jamin with them, he said to the ruler 
of his house, Bring these men home, 
and slay, and make ready: for these 
men shall dine with me at noon. 

17. And the man did as Joseph 
bade: and the man brought the 
men into Joseph’s house. 

18. And the men were afraid, be- 
cause they were brought into Jo- 
seph’s house ; and they said, Because 
of the money that was returned in 
our sacks at the first time are we 
brought in; that he may seek occa- 
sion against us, and fall upon us, 
and take us for bond-men, and our 
asses. 

19. And they came near to the 
steward of Joseph’s house, and they 
communed with him at the door of 
the house, 

20. And said, O sir, we came in- 
deed down at the first time to buy 
food: 

21. And it came to pass, when we 
came to the inn, that we opened our 
sacks, and, behold, every man’s money 
was in the mouth of his sack, our 
money in full weight; and we have 
brought it again in our hand. 

22. And other money have we 
brought down in our hands to buy 
food: we cannot tell who put our 
money in our sacks. 

23. And he said, Peace be to you, 
fear not ; your God, and the God of 
your father, hath given you treasure 
in your sacks: I had your money, 
And he brought Simeon out unto 
them. 

24. And the man brought the men 
into Joseph’s house, and gave them 
water, and they washed their feet ; 
and he gave their asses provender. 

25. And they made ready the 
present against Joseph came at 
noon: for they heard that they 
should eat bread there. 

26. And when Joseph came home, 
they brought him the present which 
was in their hand into the house, 
and bowed themselves to him to the 
earth. 

27. And he asked them of their 
welfare, and said, Zs your father 


COMMENTARY UPON 





CHAP. XLIIL : 


jamin, et dixit preefecto domus suse, — 
Addue viros in domum, et macta, et 
prepara: quia mecum comedent 
viri in meridie. . 

17. Et fecit vir, quemadmodum 
dixit Joseph: et venire fecit vir ho- _ 
mines in domum Joseph. 

18. Et timuerunt viri, quod ad- 
ducti essent in domum Joseph, et 
dixerunt, Propter pecuniam, que 
reddita est in saccis nostris in prin- 
cipio, sumus adducti, ut volvat se 
contra nos, et jactet se super nos, et 
capiat nos in servos, et asinos nos- 
tros. 


19. Et accesserunt ad virum, qui 
erat super domum Joseph, et loquuti 
sunt ad eum in ostio domus : 


20. Et dixerunt, Queesumus, do- 
mine mi: descendendo descendimus 
in principio ad emendum escam. 

21. Et fuit quum venissemus ad — 
hospitium, et aperuissemus saccos 
nostros, ecce, pecunia uniuscujusque 
erat in ore sacci sui: pecunia nostra 
secundum pondus suum: et retuli- 
mus eam in manu nostra. 

22. Et pecuniam aliam detulimus 
in manu nostra ad emendum escam: 
nescimus, quis posuerit pecuniam 
nostram in saccis nostris. 

23. Et dixit, Pax vobis, ne timea- 
tis, Deus vester, et Deus patris ves- 
tri dedit vobis thesaurum in saccis 
vestris, pecunia vestra venit ad me: 
et adduxit ad eos Simhon. 


24. Et venire fecit vir ille homi- 
nes in domum Joseph: et dedit 
aquam, et laverunt pedes suos, et 
dedit pabulum asinis eorum. 

25. Paraverunt autem munus, 
dum veniret Joseph in meridie: 
audierunt enim, quod ibi comesturi 
essent panem. 

26. Et venit Joseph ad domum, 
et attulerunt ei munus, quod erat in 
manu eorum, in domum: et incur- 
vaverunt se ei super terram. 


27. Et interrogavit eos de pros- 
peritate, et dixit, Num sanus est 



























1 AP. XLII. 


ll, the old man of whom ye spake ? 
he yet alive? 

28. And they answered, Thy ser- 
mt our father is in good health, he 
yet alive: and they bowed down 
eir heads, and made obeisance. 
29. And he lifted up his eyes, 
id saw his brother Benjamin, his 
other’s son, and said, Zs this your 
unger brother, of whom ye spake 
tome? And he said, God be gra- 
ous unto thee, my son. 

30. And Joseph made haste; for 
is bowels did yearn upon his bro- 
: and he sought where to weep; 
id he entered into his chamber, 
id wept there. 

31. And he washed his face, and 
ant out, and refrained himself, and 
id, Set on bread. 

82. And they set on for him by 
mself, and for them by themselves, 
id for the Egyptians, which did eat 
ith him, by themselves: because 
e Egyptians might not eat bread 
ith the Hebrews; for that is an 
jomination unto the Egyptians. 


st-born according to his birth- 
tht, and the youngest according to 
syouth: and the men marvelled 
le at another. ; 

34. And he took and sent messes 
ito them from before him: but 
anjamin’s mess was five times so 
uel as any of theirs. And they 
rank, and were merry with him. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


83. And they sat before him, the . 


353 


pater vester senex, quem dixeratis ? 
Num adhuc vivit ? 

28. Et dixerunt, Prospere est 
servo tuo patri nostro, adhuc vivit: 
et prociderunt, et incurvaverunt se. 


29. Et levavit oculos suos, et vidit 
Benjamin fratrem suum, filium ma- 
tris sue, et dixit, Num iste est frater 
vester minimus, quem dixeratis mihi? 
Et dixit, Deus misereatur tui, fili 
mi. 

30. Et festinavit Joseph, quia in- 
caluerant miserationes ejus super 
fratrem suum, et quesivit ut fleret: 
ingressus est itaque cubiculum, et 
flevit ibi. 

31. Et lavit faciem suam, et egres- 
sus est, et vim fecit sibi, et dixit, 
Apponite panem. 

32. Et apposuerunt ei seorsum, 
illisque seorsum: et Aigyptiis, qui 
comedebant cum eo, seorsum: non 
enim poterant AXgyptii comedere 
cum Hebreis panem: quia abomi- 
natio erat Aigyptiis. 


33. Et sederunt coram eo primo- 
genitus secundum primogenituram 
suam, et parvus juxta parvitatem 
suam: et admirati sunt virl unus- 
quisque ad proximum suum. — 

34. Et accepit partes a facie sua 
ad illos, et multiplicavit partem Ben- 
jamin plus quam partes omnium il- 
lorum, quinque partibus #et biberunt, 
et inebriaverunt se cum eo. 


1. And the famine was sore in the land. In this chapter 
‘Ws recorded the second journey of the sons of Jacob into 
‘Egypt, when the former supply of provision had been ex- 
Tiausted. It may, however, here be asked, how Jacob could 
ave supported his family, even for a few days, with so small 
quantity of corn: for, suppose it to be granted that several 
sses were conducted by each of the brethren, what was this 
} sustain three hundred persons?’ For, since Abraham 
id a much larger number of servants, and mention has been 
ade above of the servants of Isaac; it is incredible that 













1 Dr. A. Clarke supposes the asses to have amounted to several scores, 
not hundreds. The latter supposition seems improbable.—Ed. 


VOL. 11. % 


354 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XLIIE. 


Jacob was so entirely destitute, as to have no servants left. 
If we say, that he, being a stranger, had been compelled to 
sell them all, it is but an uncertain guess. It seems tc 
me more probable that they lived on acorns, herbs, and roots. 
For we know that the orientals, especially when any neces: 
sity urges, are content with slender and dry food, and we 
shall see presently, that, in this scarcity of wheat, there wa 
a supply of other food. I suppose, therefore, that no mor¢ 
corn had been bought than would suffice to furnish a fruga 
and restricted measure of food for Jacob himself, and for his 
children and grandchildren: and that the food of the servants 
was otherwise provided for. There is, indeed, no doubt that 
the whole region had been compelled to resort to acorns, and 
fruits of this kind, for food for the servants, and that wheaten 
bread was a luxury belonging to the rich. This was, indeed 
a severe trial, that holy Jacob, of whom God had engaged te 
take care, should almost perish, with his family, through 
hunger, and that the land of which he was constituted the 
lord, in order that he might there happily enjoy the ab 
dance of all things, should even deny him bread as a stranger 
For he might seriously doubt what was the meaning of the 
remarkable promise, “Iam God Almighty, grow and mul- 
tiply: I will bless thee.” It is profitable for us to kno 
these conflicts of the holy fathers, that, fighting with the 
same arms with which they conquered, we also may stant 
invinciblé, although God should withhold present help. 1 

3. And Judah spake unto him, saying. Judah seems t 
feign something, for the purpose of extorting from his father 
what he knew he would not freely grant ; but it is probable 
that many discourses had been held on both sides, whieh 
Moses, according to his custom, has not related. And sine 
Joseph so ardently desired the sight of his brother Benjamin, 
it is not surprising that he should have laboured, in every” 
possible way, to obtain it. It may also have happened that 
he had caused some notification or legal summons to be served, 
by which his brother was cited to make his appearance, as im 
judicial causes. This however deserves to be noticed, that 
Moses relates the long disputation which Jacob had with his 
sons, in order that we may know with what difficulty he 




































HAP, XLII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 300 


L owed his son Benjamin to be torn away from him. For, 
though hunger was pressing, he nevertheless contended for 
retaining him, just as if he were striving for the salvation of 
his whole peniity: Whence, again, we may conjecture, that 
he suspected his sons of a wicked conspiracy ; and on this ac- 
count Judah offers himself as a surety. For he does not pro- 
mise anything respecting the event, but only, for the sake of 
clearing himself and his brethren, he takes Benjamin under 
his care, with this condition, that if any injury should be done 
to Benjamin, he would bear the punishment and the blame. 
Hrom the example of Jacob let us learn patient endurance, 
should the Lord often compel us, by pressure of circumstances, 
to do many things contrary to the inclination of our own 
minds ; for Jacob sends away his son, as if he were deliver- 
ing him over unto death. 

11. Yake of the best fruits... Though the fruits which 
Moses enumerates were, for the most part, not very precious, 
because the condition of holy Jacob was not such that he 
‘could send any royal present ; yet, according to his slender 
ability, he wished to appease Joseph. Besides we know that 
fruits are not always estimated according to their cost. And 
now, having commanded his sons to do what he thought ne- 
eeseary, he has recourse to prayer, that God would gine them 
favour with the governor of Egypt. We must attend to both 
these points whenever we are perplexed in any business ; 
for we must not omit any of those things which are sapedient, 
‘or which may seem to be of use; and yet we must place our 
reliance upon God. For the tranquillity of faith has no affi- 
nity with indolence: but he who expects a prosperous issue 
of his affairs from the Lord, will, at the same time, look closely 
‘to the means which are in his power, and will apply them to 
present use. Meanwhile, let the faithful observe this mode- 
ation, that when they have tried all means, they still ascribe 
nothing to their own industry. At the same time, let them 
be certainly convinced that all their endeavours will be in vain, 
‘unless the Lord bless them. It is to be observed, also, in the 
form of his supplication, that Jacob regards the hearts of men 


| 7 Literally, «Fruits of the song;” alluding to the songs which were 
‘sung over the ingathering of harvest.—£d. 


in 


356 - GOMMENTARY UPON 





as subject to the will of God. When we have to deal with 
men, we too often neglect to look unto the Lord, because we 

- do not sufficiently acknowledge him as the secret Governor of 
their hearts. But to whatever extent unruly men may be 
earried away by violence, it is yet certain that their passions 
are turned by God in whatever direction he pleases, so that he 
can mitigate their ferocity as often as he sees good ; or can 
permit those to become cruel, who before were disposed to 
mildness. So Jacob, although his sons had found an austere 
severity in Joseph, yet trusts that his heart will be so in the 
hand of God, that it shall be suddenly moulded to humanity. 
Therefore, as we must hope in the Lord, when men deal un- 
justly with us, and must pray that they may be changed for 
the better; so, on the other hand, we must remember that, 
when they act with severity towards us, it is not done with 
out the counsel of God. 

14. If I be bereaved. Jacob may seem here to be hard] 
consistent with himself; for, if the prayer which Moses has 
just related, was the aac of faith, he ought to have beer 
more calm ; and, at least, to have given occasion to the mani- 
festation of the grace of God. But he appears to cut him- 
self off from every ground of confidence, when he supposes: 
that nothing is left for him but bereavement. It is like the: 
speech of a man in despair, “I shall remain bereaved as I 
am.” As if truly he had prayed in vain; or had feignedly 
professed that the remedy was in the hand of God. If, how 
ever, we observe to whom his speech was directed, the solu- 
tion is easy. It is by no means doubtful that he stood firmly 
on the promise which had been given to him, and therefore 
he would hope for some fruit of his prayers ; yet he wished 
deeply to affect his sons, in order that they might take greater 
care of their brother. For, it was in no common manner that 
Benjamin was intrusted to their protection, when they saw) 
their father altogether overcome and almost lifeless with: 
grief, until he should receive his son again in safety. Inter- 
preters, however, expound these words variously. Some think 
that he complained, because now he was about to be entirely 
bereaved. To others, the meaning seems to be, that nothing © 
worse could happen ; since he had lost Joseph, whom he had 








































[AP, XLIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 357 


eferred to all the rest. Others are disposed to mark a double 
reavement, as if he had said, “I have lost two sons, and 
ow a third follows them.” But what, if we should thus in- 
rpret the words, “I see what is my condition ; Iam a most 
etched old man; my house, which lately was filled with 
ople, I find almost deserted.” So that, in general terms, 
@ is deploring the loss of all his sons, and is not speaking 
a part only. Moreover, it was his design to inspire his 
ns with a degree of solicitude which should cause them 
y attend to their duty with greater fidelity and diligence. 
16. And he said to the ruler of his house. Here we per- 
ve the fraternal disposition of Joseph ; though it is uncer- 
in whether he was perfectly reconciled, as I will shortly 
Ow, in its proper place. If, however, remembering the in- 
ry, he loved his brethren less than before, he was still far 
om having vindictive feelings towards them. But because 
was something suspicious that foreigners and men of 
moble rank should be received in a friendly manner, like 
own guests, to a banquet, by the chief governor of the 
ingdom, the sons of Jacob would conceive a new fear ; name- 
, that he wished to cast them all into chains ; and that. their 
oney had been craftily concealed in their sacks, in order 
lat it might prove the occasion of accusation against them. 
is however probable, that the crime which they had com- 
itted against Joseph, occurred to their minds, and that this 
fear had proceeded from a guilty conscience. For, unless the 
idement of God had tormented them, there was no cause why 
ey should apprehend such an act of perfidy. It may seem 
surd, that unknown men should be received to a feast by a 


1 There is, however, another interpretation of the passage which is 
Worthy of attention. In our version, the words are, “ If Iam bereaved 
my children, I am bereaved ;” but the expression, of my children, 1s 
tin the original. The close translation is simply, “If I be bereaved, I 
ibereaved.” And this may be the language of entire resignation to the 
lof God. Jacob had had a severe struggle in his mind, before he could 
fe up his beloved Benjamin: but having at length succeeded, he seems 
w freely to surrender himself and his family to the divine will. “ifT 
Dereaved, I am bereaved.” I know the worst, and I am prepared to 
tet it. Ainsworth says, “ A like phrase is in Esther iv. 16, ¢ If I perish, 
erish’ Both of them seem to be a committing of themselves, and of 
@ event of their actions, unto God in faith; which, if it fell out otherwise 
mm they wished, they would patiently bear.”—Ld. 



























358 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XLU 


prince of the highest dignity. But why not rather incline 1 
a different conjecture ; namely, that the governor of Egyy 
has done this for the purpose of exhibiting to his friends fl 
new and unwonted spectacle of eleven brethren sitting 
one table? It will, indeed, sometimes happen that simil: 
anxiety to that felt by Joseph’s.brethren, may invade ey 
the best of men; but I would rather ascribe it to the jud 
ment of God, that the sons of Jacob, whose conscience aceuss 
them of having inhumanly treated their brother, suspecte 
that they would be dealt with in the same manner. Hoy 
ever, they take an early opportunity of vindicating ther 
selves, before inquiry is made respecting the theft. No 
freely to declare that the money had been found in the 
sacks, and that they had brought it from home to repay 
immediately, was a strong mark of their innocence. Moreove 
they do this in the very porch of the house, because the 
suspected that, as soon as they entered, the question wou 
be put to them. ; 

25. Peace be to you. Because miby, (shalom,) among tl 
Hebrews, signifies not only peace, but any prosperous ar 
desirable condition, as well as any joyful event, this ps 
sage may be expounded in two ways: either that the rul 
of Joseph’s house commands them to be of a peaceful a1 
secure mind ; or that he pronounces it to be well and hap 
with them. The sum of his answer, however, amounts 
this, that there was no reason for fear, because their aftai 
were in a prosperous state. And since, after the manner 
men, it was not possible that, they should have paid the m 
ney for the corn which was found in their sacks, he aserib 
this to the favour of God. For though true religion was thi 
almost extinct in the world, God nevertheless caused sor 
knowledge of his goodness always to remain in the hearts 
men, which should render them responsible. Hence it h 
happened that, following nature as their guide, unbelieve 
have called every peculiarly excellent gift Divine. Moreove 
because corruption was so prevalent, that each nation deem 
it lawful to worship different gods, the ruler of Joseph’s how 
distinguishes the God worshipped by the sons of Jacob fro 
Egyptian idols. The conjecture, however, is probable, tha 





CHAP. XLIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 359 


this man had been imbued with some sense of religion. We 
_know how great was the arrogance of that nation, and that it 
supposed the whole world besides, to be deceived in the wor- 
ship of gods. Therefore, unless he had learned something 
better, he never would have assigned so great an honour to any 
other gods than those of his own country. Moreover, he does 
not ascribe the miracle to the God of the land of Canaan, 
but to the peculiar God of their father. I, therefore, do not 
doubt that Joseph, though not permitted openly to correct 
anything in the received superstitions, endeavoured, at least 
in his own house, to establish the true worship of the one 
God, and always held fast the covenant, concerning which, as 
a boy, he had heard his father speak. This is the more to 
be observed, because the holy man could not swerve, even in 
the least degree, from the common practice, without incur- 
ring the odium of a nation so proud. Therefore, the excel- 
lency of Joseph is commended in the person of his steward ; 
because without fear of public envy, he gives honour, within 
his own walls, to the true God. If any one should ask, whence 
he knew that Jacob was a worshipper of the true God; the 
answer is ready ; that Joseph, notwithstanding his assumed 
severity, had commanded that Simeon sheuld be gently treat- 
ed in prison. Though he had been left as a hostage, yet, if 
he had been regarded asa spy, the keeper of the prison would 
have dealt more harshly with him. There must, therefore, 
have been some command given respecting the humane or 
moderate treatment of him. Whence the probable conjecture 
is elicited, that Joseph had explained the affair to his 
steward, who was admitted to his secret counsels. 

25. Against Joseph came at noon-day. It is doubtful 
whether this was the ordinary hour of dining among the 
Egyptians, or whether Joseph, on that day, sat down earlier 
than he was accustomed to do, on account of his guests. It 
is, however, most likely that the usual custom of dining 
was observed. Although, among the people of the East, 
there might be a different manner of living, dinners were 
in use, not only among the Egyptians, but also in Judea, 
and in other neighbouring regions. Yet it is probable that 
this was to them, also, in the place of a supper, both because 


360 ~ COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XLIII. 



























they would sit long at table, and our quick method of eating 
would not have been tolerable to people in those heated 
climes; especially when they received guests with greater | 
luxury than usual, as it will presently appear, was done at 
this time. The washing of the feet, (as we have seen before,) 
was a part of hospitality, and intended to relieve weariness ; 
because, in those parts, the feet might easily become inflamed 
whenever they journeyed on foot. It was also more honour- 
able, according to ancient custom, that a portion of food 
should be sent to each from Joseph, rather than that it 
should be distributed by the cook. But because these things 
are trivial, and are not conducive to piety, I only slightly 
touch upon them ; and would even omit them entirely, except 
that, to remove a scruple from the minds of the unskilful, is 
sometimes useful, if it be but done sparingly and with brevity. 

32. Because the Egyptians might not eat, &ec.' Moses 
says they might not eat with the Hebrews, because they 
abhorred it, as being unlawful. For seeing that their reli- 
gion forbade it, they were so bound, that they could not do 
what they did not dare todo. This passage teaches us how 
great was the pride of that nation; for, whence did it arise 
that they so utterly detested the Hebrews, unless because 
they thought themselves alone to be pure and holy in the 
world, and acceptable to God? God, indeed, commands his 
worshippers to abstain from all the pollutions of the Gentiles, 
But it behoves any one who separates himself from others, 
to be himself pure and upright. Therefore superstitious 
persons vainly attempt to claim this privilege for them- 
selves, secing they carry their impurity within, and are 
destitute of sincerity. Superstition, also, is affected with 


1 « At the entertainment to which Joseph invited his brethren, they oll 
apart from the Egyptians, while Joseph was again separated from both 
The author [Moses] shows the reason of this in the remark, * Because the 3 
Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews, for that is an abomination 
to the E eyptians.’ Herodotus also remarks, that the Egyptians abstained 
from all familiar intercourse with foreigners, since these were unclean to 
them, especially because they slew and ate the animals which were sacred ~ 
among the Egyptians. The circumstance that Joseph eats separately 
from the other Egyptians is strictly in accordance with the great difference ~ 
of rank, and the spirit of caste, which prevailed among the Egyptians.”— 
Egypt and the Books of Moses, p. 39.—E£d. . 
































CHAP. XLIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 361 


another disease ; namely, that it is full of pride, so that it 
despises all men, under the pretext that they are vicious. It 
is asked, however, whether the Egyptians were separated 
from Joseph, because they regarded him as polluted: for 
_ this the words of Moses seem to intimate. If this interpreta- 
tion is received, then they esteemed their false religion so 
highly, that they did not scruple to load their governor 
with reproaches. I rather conjecture, that Joseph sat apart 
from them, for the sake of honour; since it would be ab- 
surd that they, who disdained to sit at the same table with 
him, should be invited as his guests. Therefore it is pro- 
bable that this distinct order was made by Joseph himself, 
that he might maintain his own dignity; and yet that the 
sons of Jacob were not mixed with the Egyptians, because 
the former were an abomination to the latter. For though 
the origin of Joseph was known, yet he had so passed over 
to the Egyptians, that he had become as one of their body. 
For which reason, also, the king had given him a name, 
when he adorned him with the insignia of his office as chief 
governor. Now, when we see that the church of God was, 
at that time, so proudly despised by profane men, we need 
not wonder that we also, at the present day, are subjected 
to similar reproach. Meanwhile, we must endeavour to keep 
ourselves pure from the filth of the world, for the Lord’s 
sake; and yet this desire must be so attempered, that we 
may be alienated from the vices, rather than from the persons 
_-of men. For on this account does God sanctify his children, 
that they may beware of the vices of the unbelievers among 
_ whom they are conversant ; and nevertheless may allure, as 
_ many as are curable, to a participation of their piety. Two 
; things are here to be attended to ; first, that we may be fully 
eee of the genuineness of our faith; secondly, that 
our excessive and fruitless fastidiousness may not entirely 
alienate many from the Lord, who otherwise might have 
been won. For we are not expressly commanded so to 
abhor the wicked, as not eat with them ; but to avoid such 
“association as may subject us to the same yoke. Besides, 
this passage confirms what I have before said, that the He- 
brews had derived their name, not from their passing over 


362 | COMMENTARY UPON OHAP. XLIIT. 


the river, (as some falsely imagine,) but from their ancestor 
Heber. Nor was the fame of a single small and distantly 
situated family, sufficiently celebrated in Egypt, to become 
the cause of public dissension. 

33. The first-born according to his birthright. Although 
of the sons of Jacob four were born of bond-women ; yet, 
since they were the elder, they had precedence of their 
younger brethren, who had descended from free-born mothers; 
whence it appears that they had been accustomed by their 
father to keep this order. What, then, some one may say, 
becomes of the declaration, “‘ the son of the bond-woman 
shall not be heir with the son of the free-woman?”’ Truly, 
I think, since Ishmael was rejected, by the divine oracle 
proceeding from the mouth of Sarah, as Esau was afterwards, 
Jacob was fully taught that he had as many heirs as he had 
sons. Hence arose that equality which caused each to keep 
his place, first, middle, or last, according to his age. But 
the design of Moses was to show, that although Benjamin 
was the youngest, yet he was preferred to all the rest in 
honour; because Joseph could not refrain from giving him 
the principal token of his love. It was, indeed, his inten- 
tion to remain unknown ; but affection so far prevails, that, 
beyond the purpose of his mind, he suddenly breaks out into — 
a declaration of his affection. From the concluding portion 
of the chapter we gather, what I recently intimated, that 
the feast was unusually luxurious, and that they were re- 
ceived to it, in a liberal and joyful manner, beyond the 
daily custom. For the word DW, (shakar,) they “ were 
merry,’ signifies, either that they were not always accus- 
tomed to drink wine, or that there was more than ordinary 
indulgence at the sumptuous tables spread for them. Here, 
however, no intemperance is implied, (so that drunkards may 
not plead the example of the holy fathers as a pretext for 
their crime,) but an honourable and moderate liberality. I 
acknowledge, indeed, that the word has a double meaning, 

' « Tt appears that the brothers of Joseph sat before him at the table, 
while, according to patriarchal practice, they were accustomed to recline. 
It appears from the sculptures, that the Egyptians also were in the habit. 


of sitting at table, although they had couches.”—Lgypt and the Books of 
Moses, p. 39.—Ed. 











CHAP. XLIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS 363 


and is often taken in an ill sense ; as in chap. ix., ver, 21, and 
tn similar places: but in the present instance the design of 
Moses is clear. Should any one object, that a frugal use of 
food and drink is simply that which suffices for the nourish- 
ing of the body :_ I answer, although food is properly for the 
supply of our necessities, yet the legitimate use of it may 
proceed further. For it is not in vain, that our food has sa- 
your as well as vital nutriment ; but thus our heavenly Father 
sweetly delights us with his delicacies. And his benignity 
is not in vain commended in Psalm civ. 15, where he is 
said to create “wine that maketh glad the heart of man.” 
Nevertheless, the more kindly he indulges us, the more 
solicitously ought we to restrict ourselves to a frugal use of 
his gifts. For we know how unbridled are the appetites of 
the flesh. Whence it happens that, in abundance, it is al- 
most always lascivious, and in penury, impatient. We must, 
however, adhere to St. Paul’s method, that we know how to 
abound and to suffer need; that is, we must take great care 
if we have unusual plenty, that it does not hurry us into 
luxury ; and, on the other hand, we must see to it, that we 
bear poverty with an equal mind. Some one, perhaps, will 
say, that the flesh is more than sufficiently ingenious in 
giving a specious colour to its excesses ; and, therefore, no- 
thing more should be allowed to it than necessity demands. 
And, truly, I confess, we must diligently attend to what 
Paul prescribes, (Rom. xiii. 14,) “ Make not provision for 
the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof.” But because it greatly 
concerns all pious people to receive their food from the hand 
of God, with quiet consciences, it is necessary for them to 
know to what extent the use of food and wine is lawful. 


* CHAPTER XLIV. 


1. AND he commanded the steward 1. Et precepit prefecte domus 
of his house, saying, Fill the men’s sue, dicendo, Imple saccos virorum 
sacks with food, as much as they can esca, quantum potuerint ferre, et 
carry, and put every man’s money in pone pecuniam untuscujusque 1 ore 
his sack’s mouth. saccl sul, 

2. And put my cup, the silver cup, 2. Et scyphum meum, scyphum 
in the sack’s mouth of the youngest, argenteum, pone in ore saccl junloris, 


364 


and his corn-money. And he did 
according to the word that Joseph 
had spoken. 

3. As soon as the morning was 
light, the men were sent away, they 
and their asses. 

4. And when they were gone out 
of the city, and not yet far off, Jo- 
seph said unto his steward, Up, fol- 
low after the men; and when thou 
dost overtake them, say unto them, 
Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for 

ood ? 

5. Is not this it in which my lord 
drinketh, and whereby indeed he 
divineth? Ye have done evil in so 
doing. 

6. And he overtook them, and he 
spake unto them these same words. 

7. And they said unto him, Where- 
fore saith my lord these words? God 
forbid that thy servants should do 
according to this thing. 

8. Behold, the money which we 
found in our sacks’ mouth we brought 
again unto thee out of the land of 
Canaan: how then should we steal 
out of thy lord’s house silver or gold? 

9. With whomsoeyver of thy ser- 
vants it be found, both let him die, and 
we also will be my lord’s bondmen. 

10. And he said, Now also lez it 
be according unto your words: he 
with whom it is found shall be my 
servant; and ye shall be blameless, 

11. Then they speedily took down 
every man his sack to the ground, 
and opened every man his sack. 


12. And he searched, and began 
at the eldest, and left at the young- 
est; and the cup was-found in Ben- 
jamin’s sack. 

13. Then they rent their clothes, 
and laded every man his ass, and re- 
turned to the city. 

14. And Judah and his brethren 

came to Joseph’s house; for he was 
yet there; and they fell before him 
on the ground. 

15. And Joseph said unto them, 
What deed is this that ye have done? 
wot ye not that such a man as I can 
certainly divine? 


COMMENTARY UPON 


et pecuniam alimenti ejus: et fecit 
secundum verbum Joseph, qu ( lo- 
quutus fuerat. ih 

3. Mane illuxit, et viri dimissi 
sunt, ipsi et asini eorum. 


4. Ipsi egressi erant urbem, ‘nee 
longe abierant, quum Joseph dixit 
priefecto domus sux, Surge, perse- 
quere viros, et apprehende eos, et . 
dices eis, Utquid reddidistis a 
pro bono? a 

5. Nonne hie est, in quo bibit 
dominus meus: et ipse augurando 
auguratur in eo? male fecistis quod 


_fecistis, 


6. Et apprehendit eos, et loquu- 
tus est ad eos verba ista. 

7. Et dixerunt ad eum, U uid 
loquitur dominus meus secundum 
verba ista? absit a servis tuis, ut 
faciant secundum verbum hoe. 

8. Ecce: pecuniam, quam inye- 
nimus in ore saccorum nostrorum, 
retulimus ad te e terra Chenaan: et 
quomodo furati essemus e domo do- 
mini tui argentum vel aurum. 

9. Is penes quem inventus fuerit 
e servis tuis, moriatur : et etiam nos 
erimus domino meo servi. | 

10. Et dixit, Etiam nune secun- 
dum verba vestra ita sit: is penes 
quem inventus fuerit, erit mihi ser- 
vus, et vos eritis innocentes. 

11. Et festinaverunt, et deposue- 
runt unusquisquesaccum suum super 
terram: et aperuerunt singuli sac- 
cum suum. 

12. Scrutatus est autem: a maxi- 
mo incepit, et in minimo finivit: et 
inventus est scyphus in saeco Ben- 
jamin. 

13. Et sciderunt vestimenta sua, 
et oneravit unusquisque asinum 
suum, et reversi sunt in urbem. 

14. Veneruntque Jehudah et fra- 
tres ejus ad domum Joseph, et erat 
adhue ipse ibi: et prostraverunt se 
coram eo super terram. 

15. Et dixit ad eos Joseph, Quod 
facinus est hoe quod fecistis ? nonne 
nostis quod augurando auguratur 
vir, qui est sicut ego? 








% 


4 
7 


CHAP. XLIV. 


16. And Judah said, What shall 
_ we say unto my lord? what shall we 


? or how shall we clear our- 
selves? God hath found out the ini- 
quity of thy servants: behold, we 
are my lord’s servants, both we, and 


_ he also with whom the cup is found. 


- 17. And he said, God forbid that 


- Ishould do so: but the man in whose 


hand the cup is found, he shall be 
my servant; and as for you, get you 
up in peace unto your father. 

18. Then Judah came near unto 


him, and said, Oh my lord, let thy 


servant, I pray thee, speak a word 
in my lord’s ears, and let not thine 
anger burn against thy servant: for 
thou art even as Pharaoh. 
19. My lord asked his servants, 
saying, Have ye a father, or a bro- 
er 


_ 20. And we said unto my lord, We 
have a father, an old man, and a 
child of his old age, a little one; and 
his brother is dead, and he alone is 
left of his mother, and his father 
loveth him. 
_ 21. And thou saidst unto thy ser- 
vants, Bring him down unto me, that 
I may set mine eyes upon him. 

22. And we said unto my lord, 
The lad cannot leave his father: for 
if he should leave his father, his 


father would die. 


23. And thou saidst unto thy ser- 
vants, Except your youngest brother 
come down with you, ye shall see my 
face no more. 

24. And it came to pass, when 
we came up unto thy servant my 


_ father, we told him the words of my 


lord. 

25. And our father said, Go again, 
and buy us a little food. 

26. And we said, We cannot go 
down: if our youngest brother be 
with us, then will we go down: for 
we may not see the man’s face, ex- 
cept our youngest brother be with us. 


27. And thy servant my father 
said unto us, Ye know that my wife 


bare me two sons: 





28. And the one went out from 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


365 


16. Respondit Jehudah, Quid di- 
cemus domino meo? quid loquemur, 
et in quo justificabimus nos? Deus 
invenit iniquitatem seryorum tuo- 
rum: ecce, sumus servi domini mei, 
etiam nos, etiam ille in cujus manu 
inventus est scyphus. 

17. Ile autem dixit, Absit a me 
ut faciam hoc: vir in cujus manu 
inventus est scyphus, ipse erit mihi 
servus: et vos ascendite in ‘pace ad 
patrem vestrum. 

18. Et accessit ad eum Jehudah, 
et dixit, Queeso, domine mi: loqua- 
tur queso servus tuus verbum in 
auribus domini mei, et ne irascatur 
furor tuus in servum tuum: quia tu 
sicut Pharao. 

19. Dominus meus interrogavit 
servos suos, dicendo, Numquid est 
vobis pater vel frater ? 

20. Et diximus domino meo, Est 
nobis pater senex, et puer senectu- 
tum parvus, frater autem ejus mor- 
tuus est: et remansit ipse tantum 
matri sue, itaque pater ejus diligit 
eum. 

21. Et dixisti servis tuis, Descen- 
dere facite eum ad me, et ponam 
oculum meum super eum. 

22. Respondimus vero domino 
meo, Non potest puer relinquere 
patrem suum, et si reliquerit patrem 
suum, morietur. 

23. Tu autem dixisti servis tuis, 
Nisi descendat frater vester minimus 
vobiscum, ne addatis ut videatis 
faciem meam. 

24. Fuit igitur, quando ascen- 
dimus ad servum tuum patrem 
meum, et narravimus ei verba do- 
mini mei, r 5 

25. Dixit pater noster, Reverti- 
mini, emite nobis pusillum escee. 

26. Et diximus, non possumus de- 
scendere: si fuerit frater noster mi- 
nimus nobiscum, descendemus: quia 
non possumus videre faciem viri 
illius, fratre nostro minimo non exis- 
tente nobiscum. 

27. Tune dixit servus tuus pater 
meus nobis, Vos nostis quod duos 
peperit mihi uxor mea, 

28. Egressus est unus a me, et 


366 


me, and I said, Surely he is torn in 
pieces; and I saw him not since: 

29. And if ye take this also from 
me, and mischief befall him, ye shall 
bring down my gray hairs with sor- 
row to the grave. 

30. Now therefore, when I come 

to thy servant my father, and the 
lad be not with us; seeing that his 
life is bound up in ‘the lad’s life ; ; 

31. It shall come to pass, when he 
seeth that the lad is not with us, that 
he will die: and thy servants shall 
bring down the gray hairs of thy ser- 
vant our father with sorrow to the 
grave. 

32. For thy servant became surety 
for the lad unto my father, saying, 
If I bring him not unto thee, then 

I shall bear the blame to my jathet 
ra ever. 

33. Now therefore, I pray thee, 
let thy servant abide instead of the 
lad a bondman to my lord; and let 
the lad go up with his brethren. 

34. For how shall I go up to my 
father, and the lad be not with me? 
lest peradventure I see the evil that 
shall come on my father. 


1, And he commanded the steward of his house. 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP, XLIV. 


dixi, Certe rapiendo raptus est: et 
non vidi eum hactenus. 

29. Et capietis etiam hunc a ide 
mea, et accidet ei mors, descendere- 
que facietis canitiem meam in malo 
ad sepulcrum. 

30. Nune ergo quum venero ad 
servum tuum patrem meum, et puer 
non fuerit nobiscum, (et anima ejus 
ligata est cum anima ma): 

31. Erit sane, quum viderit ipse 
quod non sit puer, morietur, et de- 
scendere facient servi tui canitiem 
servi tui patris nostri cum dolore ad 
sepulcrum. 


32. Servus enim tuus fidejussit pro 
puero patri meo, dicendo, Si non re- 
duxero eum ad te, obnoxius ero poe- 
ne patri meo omnibus diebus. 


33. Et nunc maneat queso servus 
tuus pro puero servus domino meo, 
puer autem ascendat cum fratribus 
suis. 

34. Quomodo enim ascendam ad 
patrem meum, si puer non fuerit 
mecum? ne forte videam malum 
quod inveniet patrem meum. 


Here 





Moses relates how skilfully Joseph had contrived to try the 
dispositions of his brethren. We have said elsewhere that, 
whereas God has commanded us to cultivate simplicity, we 
are not to take this, and similar examples, as affording license 
to turn aside to indirect and crafty arts. For it may have 
been that Joseph was impelled by a special influence of the 
Spirit to this course. 
mon kind, for inquiring very strictly in what manner his 
brethren were affected. Charity is not suspicious. Why, 
then, does he so distrust his brethren ; and why cannot he 
suppose that they have anything good, unless he shall first 
have subjected them to the most rigid examination? Truly, 
since he had found them to be exceedingly cruel and per- 
fidious, it is but an excusable suspicion, if he does not believe 
them to be changed for the better, until he has obtained a 
thorough perception and conviction of their penitence. But 
since, in this respect, it is a rare and very difficult virtue to 


He had also a reason, of no com-’ 





rea ti 





a 


— _ 
“ 








CHAP. XLIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 367 


observe a proper medium, we must beware of imitating the 
example of Joseph, in an austere course of acting, unless 
we have laid all vindictive feelings aside, and are pure and 
free from all enmity. For love, when it is pure, and ex- 
empt from all turbid influence, will best decide how far it 
is right to proceed. It may, however, be asked, “If the 
sons of Jacob had been easily induced to betray the safety 
of Benjamin, what would Joseph himself have done?” We 
may readily conjecture, that he examined their fidelity, in 
order that, if he should find them dishonest, he might re- 
tain Benjamin, and drive them with shame from his presence. 
But, by pursuing this method, his father would have been 
deserted, and the Church of God ruined. And certainly, it 
is not without hazard to himself that he thus terrifies them: 
because he could scarcely have avoided the necessity of de- 
nouncing some more grievous and severe punishment against 
them, if they had again relapsed. It was, therefore, due to 
the special favour of God, that they proved themselves dif- 
ferent from what he had feared. In the meantime, the 
advantage of his examination was twofold; first, because 
the clearly ascertained integrity of his brethren rendered his 
mind more placable towards them ; and secondly, because it 
lightened, at least in some degree, the former infamy, which 
they had contracted by their wickedness. 

2. And put my cup, the silver cup. It may seem won- 
derful that, considering his great opulence, Joseph had not 
rather -drunk out of a golden cup. Doubtless, either the 
moderation of that age was still greater than has since pre- 
vailed, and the splendour of it less sumptuous; or else this 
conduct must be attributed to the moderation of the man, 
who, in the midst of universal license, yet was contented 
with a plain and decent, rather than with a magnificent 
style of living. Unless, perhaps, on account of the excel- 
lence of the workmanship, the silver was more valuable than 
gold: as it is manifest from secular history, that. the work- 
manship has often been more expensive than the material 
itself. It is, however, probable, that Joseph was sparing in 
domestic splendour, for the sake of avoiding envy. For un- 
less he had been prudently on his guard, a contention would 


oe eee 


368 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLIV. 


have arisen between him and the courtiers, resulting from a 
spirit of emulation. Moreover, he commands the cup to be 
enclosed in Benjamin’s sack, in order that he might claim him 
as hisown, when convicted of the theft, and might send the 
rest away: however, he accuses all alike, as if he knew not 


who among them had committed the crime. And first, he | 


reproves their ingratitude, because, when they had been so 








kindly received, they made the worst possible return ; next, — 


he contends that the crime was inexpiable, because they had 
stolen what was most valuable to him; namely, the cup in 
which he was accustomed both to drink and to divine. And 
he does this through his steward, whom he had not trained 
to acts of tyranny and violence. Whence I infer, that the 
steward was not altogether ignorant of his master’s design. 
5. Whereby, indeed, he divineth. This clause is variously 
expounded. For some take it as if Joseph pretended that 
he consulted soothsayers in order to find out the thief. 
Others translate it, “by which he hath tried you, or 
searched you out;” others, that the stolen cup had given 
Joseph an unfavourable omen. The genuine sense seems 
to me to be this: that he had used the cup for divinations 
and for magical arts; which, however, we have said, he 
feigned, for the sake of aggravating the charge brought 
against them. But the question arises, how does Joseph allow 
himself to resort to such an expedient? For besides that it 
was sinful for him to profess augury; he vainly and unwor- 
thily trangfers to imaginary deities the honour due only to 
divine grace. On a former occasion, he had declared that he 


1 « Jamblichus, in his book on Egyptian mysteries, mentions the prac- 


tice of divining by cups. That this superstition, as well as many others, 


has continued even to modern times, is shown by a remarkable passage in 
Norden’s Travels. When the author, with his companions, had arrived 
at Dorri, the most remote extremity of Egypt, or rather in Nubia, where 
they were able to deliver themselves from a perilous condition, only through 
great presence of mind, they sent one of their company to a malicious and 
powerful Arab, to threaten him. He answered them, ‘ I know what sort 
of people you are, I have consulted my cup, and found in it, that you 
are from a people of whom one of our prophets has said, There will come 
Franks under every kind of pretence to spy out the land. They will 
bring with them a great multitude of their countrymen, to conquer the 
country and to destroy all the people.’”—Lygypt and the Books of Moses, 
p. 40.—Ed. 








7 


~ han 


























CHAP. XLIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. . 369 


was unable to interpret dreams, except so far as God should 
suggest the truth to him ; now he obscures this entire ascrip- 
tion of praise to divine grace ; and what is worse, by boast- 
ing that he is a magician rather than proclaiming himself a, 
prophet of God, he impiously profanes the gift of the Holy 
Spirit. Doubtless, in this dissimulation, it is not to be 
denied, that he sinned grievously. Yet I think that, at the 
first, he had endeavoured, by all means in his power, to give 
unto God his due honour; and it was not his fault that the 
whole kingdom of Egypt was ignorant of the fact that he 
excelled in skill, not by magical arts, but by a celestial gift. 
But.since the Egyptians were accustomed to the illusions of 
| the magicians, this ancient error so prevailed, that they be- 
| lieved Joseph to be one of them; and I do not doubt that 
this rumour was spread abroad among the people, although 
contrary to his desire and intention. Now Joseph, in feign- 
ing himself to be a stranger to his brethren, combines 
many falsehoods in one, and takes advantage of the prevail- 
/ing vulgar opinion that he used auguries. Whence we 
' gather, that when any one swerves from the right line, he 
is prone to fall into various sins. Wherefore, being warned 
by this example, let us learn to allow ourselves in nothing 
except what we know is approved by God. But especially 
“must we avoid all dissimulation; which either produces or 
confirms mischievous impostures. Besides, we are warned, 
that it is not sufficient for any one to oppose a prevailing 
vice for a time; unless he add constancy of resistance, even 
though the evil may become excessive. For he discharges 
his duty very defectively, who, having once testified that he 
is displeased with what is evil, afterwards, by“his silence or 
“connivance, gives it a kind of assent. 
7. And they said unto him. The sons of Jacob boldly 
excuse themselves, because a good conscience gives them 
“confidence. They also argue from the greater to the less: 
for they contend, that their having voluntarily brought back 
‘the money, which they might with impunity have applied to 
heir own use, was such a proof of their honesty, as to make 
: it incredible that they should have been so blinded by a 
‘little gain, as to bring upon themselves the greatest disgrace, 
» VOL. 11. 2A 






























370 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLIV.. 


together with immediate danger of their lives. They, there- 
fore, declared themselves ready to submit to any punishment, 
if they were found guilty of the theft. When the cup was. 
discovered in Benjamin’s sack, Moses does not relate any of. 
their complaints ; but only declares, that they testified the 
most bitter grief by rending their garments. I do not doubt. 
that they were struck dumb by the unexpected result; for 
they were confounded, not only by the magnitude of their 
grief, but by perceiving themselves to be obnoxious to punish- 
ment, for that of which their conscience did not accuse them. 
Therefore, when they come into the presence of Joseph, they 
confess the injury, not because they acknowledge that the 
crime has been committed by them, but because excuse’ 
would be of no avail; as if they would say, “ It is of no 
use to deny a thing which is manifest in itself.’ In this 
sense, they say that their iniquity has been found out by 
God ; because, although they had some secret suspicion of 
fraud, thinking that this had been a contrivance for the. 
purpose of bringing an unjust charge against them, they 
choose rather to trace the cause of their punishment to the 
secret judgment of God." Some interpreters believe that 
they here confessed their crime committed against Joseph ; 
but that opinion is easily refuted, because they constantly 
affirm that he had been torn by a wild beast, or had perished” 
by some accident. Therefore, the more simple meaning is” 
that which I have adduced ; that although the truth of the” 
fact is not apparent, yet they are punished by God as guilt; 
persons. They do not, however, speak hypocritically ; b 
being troubled and astonished in their perplexed affairs, thers 
is nothing left for them but the consciousness that this pun 
ishment is inflicted by the secret judgment of God. And 
wish that they who, when smitten by the rod of God, do not 
immediately perceive the cause, would adopt the same course; 
and when they find that men are unjustly incensed against” 
them, would recall to mind the secret judgments of God, by 
which it becomes us to be humbled. Moreover, whereas Judah 
speaks in the name of them all, we may hence infer, that he- 
had already obtained precedence among his brethren. And 

1 See verse 16. e 


























SHAP. XLIV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 371 


Moses exhibits him as their head and chief, when he expressly 
states that he and the rest came. For though the dignity 
D primogeniture had not yet been conferred upon him, by 
the solemn judgment of his father, yet it was intended for 
im. Certainly, in taking the post of speaker for the rest, 
is authority appears in his language. Again, it is neces- 
sary to recall to memory, in reference to the language of 
Joseph, what I have before said, that although at first he 
had endeavoured to ascribe the glory to God, he now sins in 
pretending that he is a soothsayer or diviner. Some, to ex- 
tenuate the fault, say that the allusion is, not to the art of 
augury, but to his skill in judging; there is, however, no 
need to resort to forced expositions for the sake of excusing 
he man; for he speaks according to the common under- 
anding of the multitude, and thus foolishly countenances 
the received opinion. 

_ 16. Behold, we are my lord’s servants. They had before 
called themselves servants through modesty ; now they con- 
sign themselves over to him as slaves. But in the case of 
Benjamin they plead for a mitigation of the severity of the 
punishment ; and this isa kind of entreaty, that he might 
“not be capitally punished, as they had agreed to, at the first.’ 
_ 17. God forbid that I should do so.” If Joseph intended to 
retain Benjamin alone, and to dismiss the others, he would 
have done his utmost, to rend the Church of God by the 
worst possible dissension. But I have previously shown 
(what may also be elicited from the context) that his design 
was nothing else than to pierce their hearts more deeply. 
He must have anticipated great mischief, if he had per- 
‘ceived that they did not care for their brother: but the 


Lord provided against this danger, by causing the earnest 


ae re 


1 On the whole of this verse, Dr. A. Clarke remarks, “ No words can 
ore strongly mark confusion and perturbation of mind. They no doubt 
all thought that Benjamin had actually stolen the cup.” He also thinks 
it probable that this very cup had been used by Benjamin at the dinner. 
Ed. 
_ 2 God forbid” is an expression frequently used by our translators, 
both in the Old and New Testament, where the name of God does not 
occur in the original. The term here used has the same meaning as Absit 
in Latin, and M% yévure in Greek. Literally this passage would read, 
“Far be it from me to do so.” See also verse 7.— Ld. 



























372 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLV, 


apology of Judah not only to soften his mind, but even to 
draw forth tears and weeping in profusion. 

18. Let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word. Judah, 
_suppliantly asks that leave may be given him to speak, be 
cause his narrative was about to be prolix. And where 
nobles are offended, and take it angrily, if any address 
them with too great familiarity, Judah begins by declaring 
that he is not ignorant of the great honour which Joseph’ 
had received in Egypt, for the purpose of showing that he 
was becoming bold, not through impertinence, but through 
necessity. Afterwards he recites in what manner he and 
his brethren had departed from their father. There are two 
principal heads of his discourse ; first, that they should be 
the means of bringing a sorrow upon their father which 
would prove fatal; and secondly, that he had bound himsell 
individually, by covenant, to bring the youth back. With 
respect to the grief of his father, it is a sign of no common 
filial piety, that he wished himself to be put in Benjamin’s” 
place, and to undergo perpetual exile and servitude, rather 
than convey to the miserable old man tidings which woulc 
be the cause of his destruction. He proves his sincerity by 
offering himself as a surety, in order that he may liberate 
his brother. Because NOM (chatah) among the Hebrews, 
sometimes signifies to be in fault, and sometimes to be unde 
penalty ; some translate the passage, “I shall have sinne¢ 
against my father ;” or, “Ishall be accused of sin ;” whil 
others render it, “ I shall be deemed guilty, because he v wil 
complain of having been deceived by my promise.” The 
latter sense is the more appropriate, because, truly, he woul 
not escape disgrace and censure from his father, as having 
cruelly betrayed a youth committed to his care. | 


CHAPTER XLY. 


1. TueEn Joseph could not refrain 1. Tune non potuit Joseph s 
himself before all them that stood comprimere coram omnibus, qui 
by him; and he cried, Cause every stabant juxta se, et clamayit, 
man to go outfromme, Andthere Educite omnem virum a me: 
stood no man with him, while Joseph non stetit quisquam cum eo, quan=_ 


CHAP, XLY. 







0 ade himself known unto his bre- 


Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh 


And Joseph said unto his bre- 
thren, I am Joseph: doth my father 
yet live? And his brethren could 
not answer him; for they were 
troubled at his presence. 
4, And Joseph said unto his bre- 
thren, Come near to me, I pray you. 
And they came near. And he said, 
Iam Joseph your brother, whom ye 
‘sold into Egypt. 
5. Now therefore be not grieved 
| nor angry with yourselves that ye 
| sold me hither; for God did send 
me before you to preserve life. 

6. For these two years hath the 
famine been in the land: and yet 
there are five years, in the which 
there shall neither be earing nor har- 
vest. 

7. And God sent me before you 
to preserve you a posterity in the 
earth, and to save your lives by a 
_ great deliverance. 

8. So now, tt was not you that 
- sent me hither, but God: and he 
_ hath made me a father to Pharaoh, 
and lord of all his house, and a 
ruler throughout all the land of 


pt. 

9. Haste ye, and go up to my fa- 
_ ther, and say unto him, Thus saith 
__ thy son Joseph, God hath made me 
_ lord of all Egypt ; come down unto 
_ me, tarry not: 

10. And thou shalt dwell in the 
land of Goshen, and thou shalt be 
near unto me, thou, and thy children, 
and thy children’s children, and thy 
flocks, and thy herds, and all that 
thou hast : 

‘11. And there will I nourish thee, 
_ for yet there are five years of fa- 
mine, lest thou, and thy household, 
and all that thou hast; come to po- 
= verty. 
12. And, behold, your eyes see, 
and the eyes of my brother Benja- 
min, that i¢ is my mouth that speak- 
eth unto you. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


aren. 
. And he wept aloud: and the 


373 


do patefecit se Joseph fratribus 
suis. 

2. Et emisit vocem suam cum 
fletu: et audierunt Aigyptii, audi- 
vit et domus Pharaonis. 

3. Dixit autem Joseph fratribus 
suis, Ego sum Joseph, num adhuc 
vivit pater meus? et non potuerunt 
fratres ejus respondere ei: quia ter- 
riti erant a facie ejus. 

4. Et dixit Joseph fratribus suis, 
Accedite queeso ad me. Et accesse- 
runt. Ht dixit, Ego sum Joseph 
frater vester, quem vendidistis in 
Aigyptum. 

5. Et nune ne dolore afficiamini, 
et ne sit ira in oculis vestris quod 
vendideritis me huc: nam propter 
vitam misit me Deus ante vos. 

6. Jam enim duo anni famis fue- 
runt in medio terre, et adhue quin- 
que anni sunt, in quibus non erit 
aratio et messis. 


7. Et misit me Deus ante vos, ut 
ponam vobis reliquias in terra: et ut 
vivificem vos evasione magna. 


8. Nune itaque non vos misistis 
me huc, sed Deus: et posuit me in 
patrem Pharaoni, et in dominum 
toti domui ejus, et dominatorem in 
tota terra Aigypti. 


9. Festinate, et ascendite ad pa- 
trem meum, et dicite ei, Sic dicit 
filius tuus Joseph, Posuit me Deus 
in dominum toti Aigypto, descende 
ad me, ne stes. 

10. Et habitabis in terra Gosen, 
et eris propinguus mihi, tu et filii 
tui, et filii filiorum tuorum, et pe- 
cudes tuze, et boves tui, et omnia 
quee sunt tibi. 


11. Et alam te ibi, quia adhue 
quinque anni famis sunt: ne forte 
inopia vel egestate conficiaris tu et 
domus tua, et omne quod est tibi. 


12. Et ecce, oculi vestri vident et 
oculi fratris mei Benjamin, quod os 
meum Joquitur ad vos. 


374 


13. And ye shall tell my father 
of all my glory in Egypt, and of all 
that ye have seen; and ye shall 
haste and bring down my father 
hither. 

14. And he fell upon his brother 
Benjamin’s neck, and wept; and 
Benjamin wept upon his neck. 

15. Moreover, he kissed all his 
brethren, and wept upon them: and 
after that his brethren talked with 
him. ? 
16. And the fame thereof was 
heard in Pharaoh’s house, saying, 
Joseph’s brethren are come. And 
it pleased Pharaoh well, and his ser- 
vants. 

17. And Pharaoh said unto Jo- 
seph, Say unto thy brethren, This do 
ye; lade your beasts, and go, get 
you unto the land of Canaan ; 

18. And take your father, and 
your households, and come unto me: 
and I will give you the good of the 
land of Egypt, and.ye shall eat the 
fat of the land. 

19. Now thou art commanded, 
this do ye; Take you waggons out 
of the land of Egypt for your little 
ones, and for your wives, and bring 
your father, and come. 

20. Also regard not your stuff: 
for the good of all the land of Egypt 
is yours. 

21. And the children of Israel 
did so, and Joseph gave them wag- 
gons, according to the commandment 
of Pharaoh, and gave them provision 
for the way. 

22. To all of them he gave each 
man changes of raiment; but to 
Benjamin he gave three hundred 
pieces of silver, and five changes of 
raiment. ; 

23. And to his father he sent af- 
ter this manner: ten asses laden 
with the good things of Egypt, and 
ten she-asses laden with corn and 
bread and meat for his father by the 
way. 

24. So he sent his brethren away, 
and they departed: and he said unto 
them, See that ye fall not out by the 
way. 


COMMENTARY UPON 


13. Nuntiate autem patri meo 
omnem gloriam meam in Aigypto, 
et omnia que vidistis: et festinate, 
et descendere facite patrem meum 
hue. 

14. Et jactavit se super collum 
Benjamin fratris sui, et flevit: Ben- 
jamin quoque flevit super collum ejus. 

15. Et osculatus est omnes fratres 
suos, et flevit super eos, et postea 
loquuti sunt fratres ejus cum eo. 


16. Et vox audita est in domo 
Pharaonis; dicendo, Venerunt fratres 
Joseph, et placuit in oculis Pharao- 
nis, et in oculis servorum ejus. 


17. Et dixit Pharao ad Joseph, 


Dic fratribus tuis, Hoe facite, one- 


rate jumenta vestra, et ite, ingredi- 
mini terram Chenaan. 
18. Et capite patrem vestrum, et 






CHAP, XLV. 





familias vestras, et venite ad me: et — 
dabo vobis bonum terre Aigypti, et — 


comedetis pinguedinem terre. 


19. Et tu jussus es, Hoe facite, — 


capite vobis de terra Aigypti currus 
pro parvulis vestris, et pro uxoribus 
vestris: et tollite patrem vestrum, 
et venite. 

20. Et oculus vester ne parcat su- 
pellectili vestree: quia bonum omnis 
terree Aigypti vestrum erit. 

21. Fecerunt ergo sic filii Israel, 
et dedit eis Joseph currus juxta ser- 


monem Pharaonis, et dedit eis escam — 


pro itinere. 


22, Omnibus ipsis dedit unicuique — 


mutatorias vestes, et ipsi Benjamin 


dedit trecentos argenteos, et quin-— 


que mutatorias vestes. 


23. Patri autem suo misit seeun-— 


dum hoe, decem asinos ferentes de 


bono Aigypti, et decem asinas feren- — 


tes frumentum, et panem, et escam 
patri suo pro itinere. 


24. Et dimisit fratres suos, et : 


abierunt, et dixit ad eos, Ne tumul- 
tuemini in via. 


Ee 


CHAP. XLY. 
















25. And they went up out of 
Egypt, and came into the land of 
Canaan unto Jacob their father, 
_ 26. And told him, saying, Joseph 
_is yet alive, and he is governor over 
all the landof Egypt. And Jacob’s 
fainted, for he believed them 
‘not. 
27. And they told-him all the 
words of Joseph, which he had said 
unto them: and when he saw the 
_ waggons, which Joseph had sent to 
carry him, the spirit of Jacob their 
_ father revived. 
28. And Israel said, Jt is enough ; 
Joseph my son is yet alive: I will go 
_ and see him before I die. 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


375 


25. At ascenderunt ex Agypto, 
et venerunt in terram Chenaan, ad 
Jahacob patrem suum. 

26. Et nuntiaverunt ei, dicendo, 
Adhue Joseph vivit: et quod ipse 
dominaretur in omni terra Augypti: 
et dissolutum est cor ejus, quia non 
credebat eis. 

27. Et retulerunt ei omnia verba 
Joseph, quee loquutus fuerat ad eos: 
et vidit currus, quos miserat Joseph 
ut ferrent eum, et revixit spiritus. 
Jahacob patris eorum. 


28. Et dixit Israel, Sufficit, adhuc 
Joseph filius meus vivit : ibo, et vide- 
bo eum, antequam moriar. 


1. Then Joseph could not refrain himself. Moses relates 


‘in this chapter the manner in which Joseph made himself 
known to his brethren. In the first place, he declares, that 
_ Joseph had done violence to his feelings, as long as he pre- 
sented to them an austere and harsh countenance. At length 
_ the strong fraternal affection, which he had suppressed during 
_ the time that he was breathing severe threatenings, poured 
itself forth with more abundant force: whence it appears 
that nothing severe or cruel had before been harboured in 
‘his mind. And whereas it thus bursts forth in tears, this 
softness or tenderness is more deserving of praise than if he 
had maintained an equable temper. Therefore the stoics 
speak foolishly when they say, that it is an heroic virtue 
“not to be touched with compassion. Had Joseph stood in- 
flexible, who would not have pronounced him to be a stupid, 
or iron-hearted man? But now, by the vehemence of his 
feelings, he manifests a noble magnanimity, as well as a 
divine moderation ; because he was so superior both to anger 
_and to hatred, that he ardently loved those who had wickedly 
conspired to effect his ruin, though they had received no 










1 The division of chapters in this place is singularly unhappy. It inter- 
_rupts one of the most touching scenes recorded in the sacred volume, just 
in the middle. It separates the irresistible appeal of Judah to the feelings 
of Joseph from its immediate and happy effect. In the Hebrew Bible, the 
section commences with Judah’s address, and no break is made where this 
chapter commences ; so that the whole is given as one continuous narrative. 





376 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XLV. 





injury from him. He commands all men to depart, not be- 
cause he was ashamed of his kindred, (for he does not after- 
wards dissemble the fact that they were his brethren, and 
‘he freely permits the report of it to be carried to the king’s 
palace,) but because he is considerate for their feelings, that 
he might not make known their detestable crime to many > 
witnesses. And it was not the smallest part of his clemency, — 
to desire that their disgrace should be wholly buried in 
oblivion. We see, therefore, that witnesses were removed, | 
for no other reason than that he might more freely comfort 
his brethren ; for he not only spared them, by not exposing 
their crime; but when shut up alone with them, he abstained 
from all bitterness of language, and gladly administered to 
them friendly consolation. | 

3. Iam Joseph. Although he had given them the clearest 
token of his mildness and his love, yet, when he told them 
his name, they were terrified, as if he had thundered against 
them: for while they revolve in their minds what they 
have deserved, the power of Joseph seems so formidable to 
them, that they anticipate nothing for themselves but death. 
When, however, he sees them overcome with fear, he utters 
no reproach, but only labours to calm their perturbation. 
Nay, he continues gently to soothe them, until he has ren- 
dered them composed and cheerful. By this example we 
are taught to take heed lest sadness should overwhelm those 
who are truly and seriously humbled under a sense of shame. 
So long as the offender is deaf to reproofs, or securely flatters 
himself, or wickedly and obstinately repels admonitions, or 
excuses himself by hypocrisy, greater severity is to be used 
towards him. But rigour should have its bounds, and as soon 
as the offender lies prostrate, and trembles under the sense 
of his sin, let that moderation immediately follow which may 
raise him who is cast down, by the hope of pardon. There- 
fore, in order that our severity may be rightly and duly at- 
tempered, we must cultivate this inward affection of Joseph, 
which will show itself at the proper time. 

4. Come near to me, I pray you. This is more efficacious 
than any mere words, that he kindly invites them to his em- 
brace. Yet he also tries to remove their care and fear by 


— - -_ 





eet 


DP EG Pi 


a eal 


CHAP. XLV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 377 


the most courteous language he can use. He so attempers 
his speech, indeed, that he mildly accuses, and again consoles 
them ; nevertheless, the consolation greatly predominates, 


because he sees that they are on the point of desperation, 


unless he affords them timely relief. Moreover, in relating 
that he had been sold, he does not renew the memory of their 
guilt, with the intention of expostulating with them ; but only 
because it is always profitable that the sense of sin should 
remain, provided that immoderate terror does not absorb the 


unhappy man, after he has acknowledged his fault. And 


whereas the brethren of Joseph were more than sufficiently 


_ terrified, he insists the more fully on the second part of his 


purpose ; namely, that he may heal the wound. This is the 
reason why he repeats, that God had sent him for their pre- 
servation ; that by the counsel of God himself he had been 
sent beforehand into Egypt to preserve them alive ; and that, 
in short, he had not been sent into Egypt by them, but had 
been led thither by the hand of God.’ 

8. So now, tt was not you that sent me hither. This is a 
remarkable passage, in which we are taught that the right 
course of events is never so disturbed by the depravity and 
wickedness of men, but that God can direct them to a good 
end. We are also-instructed in what manner and for what 
purpose we must consider the providence of God. When 
men of inquisitive minds dispute concerning it, they not only 
mingle and pervert all things without regard to the end de- 
signed, but invent every absurdity in their power, in order 
to sully the justice of God. And this rashness causes some 
pious and moderate men to wish this portion of doctrine to 
be concealed from view ; for as soon as it is publicly declared 
that God holds the government of the whole world, and that 
nothing is done but by his will and authority, they who 
think with little reverence of the mysteries of God, break 


1 Only two years of the famine had now elapsed, and there were yet five 
years in which there should be “ neither earing nor harvest,” so that this 


was indeed but the commencement of the grievous suffering to which 


Jacob’s family would have been exposed, but for the extraordinary interpo- 


_ sition of Divine providence in their favour. The word earing is an obso- 


lete Saxon term by which our translators have rendered the Hebrew word 
wn, (charish,) which means ploughing, or preparing the ground for seed. 





378 ‘COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLV. 


forth into various questions, not only frivolous but injurious. — 
But, as this profane intemperance of mind is to be restrained, — 
so a just measure is to be observed on the other hand, lest 
we should encourage a gross ignorance of those things which 
are not only made plain in the word of God, but are exceed, 
ingly useful to be known. Good men are ashamed to con- 
fess, that what men undertake cannot be accomplished ex- 
cept by the. will of God ; fearing lest unbridled tongues should 
ery out immediately, either that God is the author of sin, or 
that wicked men are not to be accused of crime, seeing they 
fulfil the counsel of God. But although this sacrilegious fury 
cannot be effectually rebutted, it may suffice that we hold it 
in detestation. Meanwhile, it is right to maintain, what is 
declared by the clear testimonies of Scripture, that whatever — 
men may contrive, yet, amidst all their tumult, God from 
heaven overrules their counsels and attempts ; and, in short, 
does, by their hands, what he has himself decreed. Good men, 
who fear to expose the justice of God to the calumnies of the 
impious, resort to this distinction, that God wills some things, 
but permits others to be done. As if, truly, any degree of 
liberty of action, were he to cease from governing, would be 
left to men. If he had only permitted Joseph to be carried 
into Egypt, he had not ordained him to be the minister of 
deliverance to his father Jacob and his sons ; which he is now 
expressly declared to have done. Away, then, with that vain 
figment, that, by the permission of God only, and not by his 
counsel or will, those evils are committed which he afterwards 
turns to a good account. I speak of evils with respect to 
men, who propose nothing else to themselves but to act per- — 
versely. And as the vice dwells in them, so ought the whole — 
blame also to be laid upon them. But God works wonder- — 
fully through their means, in order that, from their impurity, 
he may bring forth his perfect righteousness. This method 
of acting is secret, and far above our understanding. 'There- 
fore it is not wonderful that the licentiousness of our flesh 
should rise against it. But so much the more diligently 
must we be on our guard, that we do not attempt to re- 
duce this lofty standard to the measure of our own little- 
ness. Let this sentiment remain fixed with us, that while 


OMAP. XLV. | THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 379 


the lust of men exults, and intemperately hurries them 

hither and thither, God is the ruler, and, by his secret rein, 
directs their motions whithersoever he pleases At the same 
_ time, however, it must also be maintained, that God acts so 
far distinctly from them, that no vice can attach itself to his 
providence, and that his decrees have no affinity with the 
_erimes of men. Of which mode of procedure a most illus- 
trious example is placed before our eyes in this history. 
_ Joseph was sold by his brethren ;. for what reason, but be- 
_ cause they wished, by any means whatever, to ruin and an- 
_ nihilate him? The same work is ascribed to God, but for a 
_ very different end; namely, that in a time of famine the 


| family of Jacob might have an unexpected supply of food. 


Therefore he willed that Joseph should be as one dead, for 
a short time, in order that he might suddenly bring him forth 
from the grave, as the preserver of life. Whence it appears, 
that although he seems, at the commencement, to do the 
same thing as the wicked ; yet there is a wide distance be- 
tween their wickedness hid his admirable judgment. Let 
_ us now examine the words of Joseph. For the consolation 


of his brethren he seems to draw the veil of oblivion over 





their fault. But we know that men are not exempt from 
_ guilt, although God may, beyond expectation, bring what 
_ they wickedly attempt, to a good and happy issue. For 
_ what advantage was it to Judas that the redemption of the 
_ world proceeded from his wicked treachery? Joseph, how- 
_ ever, though he withdraws, in some degree, the minds of his 
_ brethren from a consideration of their own guilt, until they 
_ ean breathe again after their immoderate terror, neither traces 
- their fault to God as its cause, nor really absolves them from 
_ it; as we shall see more clearly in the last chapter. And 
doubtless, it must be maintained, that the deeds of men are 
not to be estimated according to the event, but according to 
the measure in which they may have failed in their duty, or 
may have attempted something contrary to the Divine com- 
mand, and may have gone beyond the bounds of their calling. 
Some one, for instance, has neglected his wife or children, and 
has not diligently attended to their necessities ; and though 
they do not die, unless God wills it, yet the inhumanity of 


380 © COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLV. 





— 


the father, who wickedly deserted them when he ought to | 
have relieved them, is not screened or excused by this pre-— 


text. Therefore, they whose consciences accuse them of evil, 


derive no advantage from the pretence that the providence — 


of God exonerates them from blame. But on the other hand, 
whenever the Lord interposes to prevent the evil of those whe 


desire to injure us, and not that only, but turns even their 


wicked designs to our good; he subdues, by this method, 
our carnal affections, and renders us more just and placablal 
Thus we see that Joseph was a skilful interpreter of the pro- 
vidence of God, when he borrowed from it an argument for 
granting forgiveness to his brethren. The magnitude of the 
crime committed against him might so have incensed him 


as to cause him to burn with the desire of revenge: but 
when he reflects that their wickedness had been overruled — 
by the wonderful and unwonted goodness of God, forgetting — 


the injury received, he kindly embraces the men whose dis- 


honour God had covered with his grace. And truly charity 
is ingenious in hiding the faults of brethren, and therefore - 
she freely applies to this use anything which may tend to ap- — 


pease anger, and to set enmities at rest. Joseph also is carried 
forward to another view of the case; namely, that he had 


been divinely chosen to help his brethren. Whence it hap- 


pens, that he not only remits their offence, but that, from 


an earnest desire to discharge the duty enjoined upon him, 


he delivers them from fear and anxiety as well as from want. — 


This is the reason why he asserts that he was ordained to 


“ put for them a remnant,”* that is, to preserve a remaining — 


seed, or rather to preserve them alive, and that by an excel- 
lent and wonderful deliverance. In saying that he is a 
father to Pharaoh, he is not carried away with empty boast- 
ing as vain men are wont to be; nor does he make an osten- 
tatious display of his wealth ; but he proves, frem an event so 
great and incredible, that he had not obtained the post he 
occupied by accident, nor by human means; but rather 
that, by the wonderful counsel of God, a lofty throne had 


1 Ver. 7. Ut ponam vobis reliquias in terra. To preserve you a pos- 
terity,” (or, as in the margin,) “ to put for you a remnant” in the earth.— 
English translation.—Ed, 





“pats Seb Rett at 


CHAP. XLV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 381 


been raised for him, from which he might succour his father 
and his whole family. 

9. Thus saith thy son Joseph. In giving this command 
he shows that he spoke of his power in order to inspire Ric 
father with stronger confidence. We know how dilatory old 
men are; and, besides, it was difficult to tear holy Jacob 
away from the inheritance which was divinely promised to 
him. Therefore Joseph, having pointed out the necessity 
for the step, declares what a desirable relief the Lord had 
offered. It may, however, be asked, why the oracle did not 
occur to their minds, concerning which they had been in- 
structed by their fathers, namely, that they should be strang- 
ers and servants in a strange land. (Gen. xv. 13.) For it 
seems that Joseph here promises nothing but mere pleasures, 
as if no future adversity was to be apprehended. But though 
nothing is expressly declared on this point by Moses, yet I 
am induced, by a probable conjecture, to believe that Jacob 
was not forgetful of the oracle. For, unless he had been re- 
tained by some celestial chain, he never could have remained 
in Egypt after the expiration of the time of scarcity. For 
by remaining there voluntarily, he would have appeared to 
cast away the hope of the inheritance promised him by God. 
Seeing, then, that he does not provide for his return into the 
land of Canaan, but only commands his corpse to be carried 
thither ; nor yet exhorts his sons to a speedy return, but suf- 


fers them to settle in Egypt ; he does this, not from indolence, 


or because he is allured by the attractions of Egypt, or has 
become weary of the land of Canaan ; but because he is pre- 
paring himself and his offspring to bear that tyranny, con- 
cerning which he had been forewarned by his father Isaac. 


‘Therefore he regards it as an advantage that, at his first 


coming, he is hospitably received ; but, in the meantime, he 
revolves in his mind what had been spoken to Abraham. 

16. And the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh's house. 
What Moses now relates, was prior in the order of events. 
For before Joseph sent for his father, the report of the com- 
ing of his brethren had reached the palace. And Joseph 
would not have promised so confidently a home to his bre- 
thren in Egypt, except by the king’s permission. What, 


382 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLV. 


therefore, Moses had before briefly alluded to, he now more | 
fully explains; namely, that the king, with a ready and 
cheerful mind, declared his high esteem for Joseph, in freely 
offering to his father and brethren, the most fertile part of — 
Egypt for their dwelling. And from another statement of 
Moses it appears that, as long as he lived, the Israelites were 
treated with clemency and kindness._ For, in the first chapter 
of Exodus, and the eighth verse, the commencement of the | 
tyranny and cruelty is said to have been made by his suc- | 
cessor, to whom Joseph was unknown. 

22. And to all of them he gave each man changes of rai- — 
ment. That he furnishes his brethren with supplies for 
their journey is not wonderful: but to what purpose was it 
that he loaded them with money and garments, seeing they 
would so soon return? JI, indeed, do not doubt that he did 
it on account of his father and the wives of his brethren, 
in order that they might have less reluctance to leave 
the land of Canaan.. For he knew that his message would 
searcely be believed, unless some manifest tokens of its 
truth were presented. It might also be, that he not only 
endeavoured .to allure those who were absent, but that he 
also wished to testify, more and more, his love towards his 
brethren. But the former consideration has more weight 
with me, because he took greater care in furnishing Benja- 
min than the rest. Jerome has translated the expression, 
“ changes of raiment,” by “two robes,’ and other inter- 
preters, following him, expound it as meaning “ different 
kinds of garments.” I know not whether this be solid. I 
rather suppose they were elegant garments, such as were used 
at nuptials and on festal days; for I think that constant 
custom was silently opposed to this variety of dress. 

24, See that ye fall not out by the way. Some explain the 
passage as meaning, that Joseph asks his brethren to be of 
tranquil mind, and not to disturb themselves with needless 
fear ; he rather exhorts them, however, to mutual peace. 
For, since the word 119, (ragaz,) sometimes signifies to 
tremble or be afraid, and sometimes, to make a tumult, the 
latter sense is the more appropriate: for we know that the — 
children of God are not only easily appeased, if any one has 








- Se 








CHAP. XLV. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 383 


injured them, but that they also desire others should live 
together in concord. Joseph was pacified towards his bre- 
thren ; but at the same time he admonishes them not to stir 
up any strife among themselves. For there was reason to 
fear lest each, in attempting to excuse himself, should try 
to lay the blame on others, and thus contention would arise. 
We ought to imitate this kindness of Joseph; that we may 
prevent, as much as possible, quarrels and strifes of words ; 
for Christ requires of his disciples, not only that they should 
be lovers of peace, but also that they should be peace-makers. 
Wherefore, it is our duty to remove, in time, all matter and 
occasion of strife. Besides, we must know, that what J oseph 
taught his brethren, is the command of the Spirit of God to 
us all ; namely, that we should not be angry with each other. 
And because it generally happens that, in faults common to 
different parties, one maliciously accuses another ; let each 
of us learn to acknowledge and confess his own fault, lest 
altercations should end in combats. 

26. And Jacob’s heart fainted. We know that some per- 
sons have fainted with sudden and unexpected joy. There- 
fore, certain interpreters suppose that the heart of Jacob 
was, in a sense, suffocated, as if seized by a kind of ecstatic 
stupor. But Moses assigns a different cause; namely, that 
not having confidence in his sons, he was agitated between 
hope and fear. And we know, that they who are held in 
suspense, by hearing some incredible message, are struck 
with torpor, as if they were lifeless. It was not, therefore, a 
simple affection of joy, but a certain mingled perturbation 
which shook the mind of Jacob. Therefore, Moses shortly 
after says, that his spirit revived ; when he, having returned 
to himself, and being composed in mind, believed that which 
he had heard to be true. And he shows that his love towards 
Joseph had not languished through length of time, inasmuch 
as he set no-value upon his own life, except so far as it would 
permit him to enjoy a sight of Joseph. He had before as- 
signed to himself continual sorrow, even to the grave ; but 
now he declares that he shall have a joyful death. 


384 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. XLVI. 


CHAPTER XLVI. 


1. Anp Israel took his journey 
with all that he had, and came to 
Beer-sheba, and offered sacrifices un- 
to the God of his father Isaac. 

2. And God spake unto Israel in 
the visions of the night, and said, 
Jacob, Jacob. And he said, Here 
am I. 

3. And he said, I am God, the 
God of thy father : fear not to go 
down into Egypt; for I will there 
make of thee a great nation. 

4. I will go down with thee into 
Egypt; and I will also ert bring 
thee up again : and Joseph shall put 
his hand upon thine eyes. 


5. And Jacob rose up from Beer- 
sheba: and the sons of Israel car- 
ried Jacob their father, and their 
little ones, and their wives, in the 
waggons which Pharaoh had sent to 
carry him. 

6. And they took their cattle, and 
their goods, which they had gotten 
in the land of Canaan, and came into 
Egypt, Jacob, and all his seed with 
him: 

7. His sons, and his sons’ sons with 
him, his daughters, and his sons’ 
daughters, and all his seed, brought 
he with him into Egypt. 

8. And these are the names of 
the children of Israel which came 
into Egypt, Jacob and his sons: Reu- 
ben, Jacob’s first-born. 

9. And the sons of Reuben; Ha- 
noch, and Phallu, and Hezron, and 
Carmi. 

10. And the sons of Simeon; Je- 
muel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Ja- 
chin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son 
of a Canaanitish woman. 

11. And the sons of Levi; Ger- 
shon, Kohath, and Merari. 

12. And the sons of Judah; Er, 
and Onan, and Shelah, and Pharez, 
and Zarah: but Er and Onan died 
in the land of Canaan. And the sons 
of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul. 


1. Itaque profectus est Israel, et 
qusecunque habebat, et venit in Beer- 


sebah, et sacrificavit sacrificia Deo 
patris sui Ishac. 

2. Et dixit Deus ad Israel in visi- 
onibus noctis, dixit inquam, Jahacob, 
Jahacob. Tle respondit, Ecce, ad- 
sum. 

3. Et dixit, Ego sum Deus, Deus 
patris tui: ne timeas descendere in 
4Egyptum : quia in gentem magnam 
ponam te ibi. 

4. Ego descendam tecum in Ai- 
gyptum, et ego ascendere etiam te 
faciam ascendendo: Joseph quoque 
ponet manum suam super oculos 
tuos. 


5. Postea surrexit Jahacob de © 


Beersebah, et sustulerunt filii Israel 
Jahacob patrem suum, et paryulos 
suos, et uxores super currus, quos 
miserat Pharao ad ferendum eum. 


6. Et ceperunt pecudes suas, et 
substantiam quam acquisierant in 
terra Chenaan : veneruntque in At- 
gyptum Jahacob, et omne semen 
ejus cum ipso: 

7. Filii ejus, et filii filiorum ejus 
cum eo, filiz ejus, et filiz filiorum 
ejus: et omne semen suum deduxit 
secum in Aigyptum. 

8. Hee sunt autem nomina filio- 
rum Israel, qui ingressi sunt in At- 
gyptum, J ahacob et filii ejus: primo- 
genitus Jahacob, Reuben. 


9. Et filii Reuben, Hanoch, et — 


Phallu, et Hesron, et Charmi. 


10. Filii vero Simhon, Jemuel, et — 
Jamin, et Ohad, et Jachin, et Sohar, — 


et Saul filius Chenaanitidis. 


11. Filii Levi, Gerson, Cehath, 
et Merari. 


12. Filii Jehudah, Her, et Onam, — 


et Selah, et Peres, et Zerah: et mor- 


tuus est Her et Onam in terra Che-_ 
Fuerunt autem filii Peres, © 


naan, 
Hesron, et Hamul. 








































CHAP, XLVI. 


13. And the sons of Issachar ; 
Tola, and Phuvah, and Job, and 
_ Shimron. 

14. And the sons of Zebulun ; Se- 
red, and Elon, and Jahleel. 

15. These be the sons of Leah, 
which she bare unto Jacob in Padan- 
aram, with his daughter Dinah: all 
the souls of his sons and his daughters 
were thirty and three. 

16. And the sons of Gad ; Ziphion, 
and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri, 
and Arodi, and Areli. 

17. And the sons of Asher; Jim- 
nah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and Be- 
riah, and Serah their sister. And 
the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Mal- 
| ehiel. 

18. These are the sons of Zilpah, 
whom Laban gave to Leah his daugh- 
ter; and these she bare unto Jacob, 
even sixteen souls. 

19. The sons of Rachel, Jacob’s 
wife’; Joseph, and Benjamin. 

20. And unto Joseph, in the land 
of Egypt, were born Manasseh and 
Ephraim, which Asenath, the daugh- 
ter of Poti-pherah priest of On, bare 
unto him. 

| 21. And the sons of Benjamin 
_ were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, 
Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, 
_ Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard. 

_ 22. These are the sons of Rachel, 
which were born to Jacob: all the 
souls were fourteen. 

_ 23. Andthesonsof Dan; Hushim. 

24. And the sons of Naphtali; 
Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and 
Shiilem. 

25. These are the sons of Bilhah, 
_ which Laban gave unto Rachel his 
daughter; and she bare these unto 
| Jacob : all the souls were seven. 
26. All the souls that came with 
jacob into Egypt, which came out 
} of his loins, besides Jacob’s sons’ 
Wives, all the souls were threescore 
} 
; _ 27. And the sons of Joseph, which 
| were born him in Egypt, were two 
| souls: all the souls of the house of 
_ Jacob, which came into Egypt, were 
 threescore and ten. 
VOL. II. 


. 
7 
f 
i 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


385 


13. Et filii Issachar, Tholah, et 
Puvah, et Job, et Simron, 


14, Filii vero Zebulon, Sered, et 
Elon, et Jahleel. 

15. Isti sunt filii Leah, quos pepe- 
rit ipsi Jahacob in Padan Aram, et 
Dinah filiam ejus: omnes anime 
filiorum ejus, et filiarum ejus fuerunt 
triginta et tres. 

16. Filii autem Gad, Siphion et 
Hagghi, Suni et Esbon, Heri et 
Arodi, et Areli. 

17. Et fili Aser, Imnah, et Isvah, 
et Isvi, et Berihah, et Serah soror 
eorum. Filii vero Berihah, Heber 
et Malchiel. 


_ 18. Isti sunt filii Zilpah, quam 
dedit Laban Leah filize suse, et pepe- 
rit istos ipsi Jahacob, sedecim ani- 
mas. 

19. Filii Rachel uxoris Jahacob, 
Joseph et Benjamin. 

20. Nati sunt autem ipsi Joseph 
in terra Algypti, quos peperit ei Ase- 
nath filia Poti-pherah principis On, 
Menasseh et Ephraim. ; 


21. Filii vero Benjamin, fuerunt 
Belah, et Becher, et Asbel, Gera et 
Naaman, Ehi et Ros, Muppim, et 
Huppim, et Arde. . 

22. Isti sunt filii Rachel qui nati 
sunt ipsi Jahacob: omnes anime, 
quatuordecim. 

23. Et filii Dan, Hussim. 

24, Filii Nephthali, Jahseel, et 
Guni, et Jeser, et Sillem. 


25. Istisunt filii Bilhah, quam de- 
dit Laban Rachel filie suze, et pe- 
perit istos ipsi Jahacob: omnes ani- 
mee septem. 

26. Omnes anime, que venerunt 
cum Jahacob in Aigyptum, que 
egressee sunt de femore ejus, preter 
uxores filiorum-Jahacob, omnes, In- 
quam, anime fuerunt sexaginta et 


sex. 
27. Et filii Joseph, qui nati sunt 
ei in Agypto, anime due. Omnes 
anime domus Jahacob, que ingres- 
see sunt in Aigyptum, fuerunt sep- 
tuaginta. 
238 


386 


28. And he sent Judah before him 
unto Joseph, to direct his face unto 
Goshen ; and they came into the land 
of Goshen. 

29. And Joseph made ready his 
chariot, and went up to meet Israel 
his father, to Goshen, and presented 
himself unto him; and he fell on his 
neck, and wept on his neck a good 
while. 

30. And Israel said unto Joseph, 
Now let me die, since I have seen 
yi! face, because thou art yet alive. 

31. And Joseph said unto his bre- 
thren, and unto his father’s house, 
I will go up, and shew Pharaoh, and 
say unto him, My brethren, and my 
father’s house, which were in the 
land of Canaan, are come unto me: 

32. And the men are shepherds, 
for their trade hath been to feed cat- 
tle; and they have brought their 
flocks, and their herds, and all that 
they have. 

33. And it shall come to pass, 
when Pharaoh shall call you, and 
shall say, What ts your occupa- 
tion ? 

34. That ye shall say, Thy ser- 
vants’ trade hath been about cattle 
from our youth even until now, both 
we and also our fathers ; that ye may 
dwell in the land of Goshen: for 
every shepherd is an abomination 
unto the Egyptians. 


1. And Israel took his jowrney. Because the holy man is 


COMMENTARY UPON 























CHAP, XLVI. 


Porro Jehudah misit ante s 

a 7 oseph ad preparandum locum 
ante se in Gosen, et venerunt in ter- 
ram Gosen. 
29. Et ligavit Joseph currum 
suum, et ascendit in oecursum Isra¢ 
patris sui in Gosen: et conspectus 
est ei, et jactavit se ad collum ejus 
flevitque super collum ejus adhue. 


30. Et dixit Israel ad Joseph, 
Moriar hac vice, postquam vidi 
ciem tuam: adhue enim tu vivis. 
31. Et dixit Joseph fratribus s is, 

et domui patris sui, Ascendam, et 
nuntiabo Pharaoni: et dicam ei. 
Fratres mei, et domus patris mei, qui 
erant in terram Chenaan, venerunt 
ad me. : 
32. Atque viri pastores pecu- 
dum sunt, quia viri pecuarii sunt: 
pecudes eorum, et boves eorum, € et 
omnia que erant eis, adduxerunt. — 


33. Erit ergo quum vocaverit vos 
Pharao, et dixerit, Quod est opus 
vestrum ? 


34. Dicetis, Viri pecuarii fuerun 
servi tui a pueritia nostra et usqui 
nunc, etiam nos, etiam patres nos i 
ut habitetis in terra Gosen, qui 
abominatio /Zgyptiis est omnis pas 
tor pecudum. ; 


compelled to leave the land of Canaan and to go elsewhere 
he offers, on his departure, a sacrifice to the Lord, for th 
purpose of testifying that the covenant which God had mad 
with his fathers was confirmed and ratified to himself. For 
though he was accustomed to exercise himself in the extel 
nal worship of God, there was yet a special reason for thi 
sacrifice. And, doubtless, he had then peculiar need 
support, lest his faith should fail: for he was about -to bi 
deprived of the inheritance promised to him, and of the sigh 
of that land which was the type and the pledge of the hea 
venly country. Might it not come into his mind that he hae 
hitherto been deluded with a vain hope? Therefore, by re 













CHAP. XLVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 387 


newing the memory of the divine covenant, he applies a suit- 
able remedy against falling from the faith. For this reason, 
he offers a sacrifice on ghey very boundaries of that land, as I 
have just said ; that we might know it to be something more 
than usual. hed he presents this worship to the God of 
his fathers, to testify that, although he is departing from 
that land, into which Abraham had been called; yet he 
does not re cut himself off from the God in whose wor- 
ship he had been educated. It was truly a remarkable proof 
of constancy, that when cast out by famine into another 
region, so that he might not even be permitted to sojourn 
in the land of which he was the lawful lord; he yet retains, 
deeply impressed on his mind, the hope of his hidden right. 
It was not without subjecting himself to odium that he dif- 
fered openly from other nations, by worshipping the God of 
his fathers, But what profit was there in having a religion 
different from all others? Seeing, then, that he does not re- 
pent of having worshipped the God of his fathers, and that 
he now also perseveres in fear and reverence towards Him ; 
we hence infer how deeply he was rooted in true piety. By 
offering a sacrifice, he both increases his own strength, and 
makes profession of his faith ; because, although piety is not 
bound to external symbols, yet he will not neglect those helps, 
the use of which he has found to be, by no means, superfluous. 
2. And God spake unto Israel. In this manner, God 
proves that the sacrifice of Jacob was acceptable to him, and 
again stretches out his hand to ratify anew his covenant. 
The yision by night availed for the purpose of giving greater 
dignity to the oracle. Jacob indeed, inasmuch as he was 
docile and ready to yield obedience to God, did not need 
to be impelled by force and terror; yet, because he was a 
man encompassed with flesh, it was profitable for him that 
he should be affected as with the glory of a present God, in 
order that the word might penetrate more effectually into 
his heart. It is, however, proper to recall to memory what I 
have said before, that the word was joined with it ; because 
a silent vision would have profited little or nothing. We 
know that superstition eagerly snatches at mere spectres ; 
by which means it presents God in a form of its own. But 


































388 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XLVI. 


since no living image of God can exist without the word, 
whenever God has appeared to his servants, he has also 
spoken to them. Wherefore, in all outward signs, let us be 
ever attentive to his voice, if we would not be deluded by. 
the wiles of Satan. But if those visions, in which the majesty 
of God shines, require to be animated by the word, then they 
who obtrude signs, invented at the will of men, upon the 
Church, exhibit nothing else than the empty pomps of a 
profane theatre. Just as in the Papacy, those things which. 
are called sacraments, are lifeless phantoms which draw away 
deluded souls from the true God. Let this mutual connexion, 
then, be observed, that the vision which gives greater dignity 
to the word, precedes it; and that the word follows imme- 
diately, as if it were the soul of the vision. And there is 
no question that this was an appearance of the visible glory 
of God, which did not leave Jacob in suspense and hesitation; 
but which, by removing his doubt, firmly sustained him, so 
that he confidently ae es the oracle. 

3. Jacob, Jacob. The design of the repetition was to 
render him more attentive. For, by thus familiarly address 
ing him, God more gently insinuates himself into his nindl 
as, in the Scripture, he kindly allures us, that he may pre- 
pare us to become his disciples. The docility of the holy 
man appears hence, that as soon as he is persuaded that Goe 
speaks, he replies that he is ready to receive with reverence 
whatever may be spoken, to follow wheresoever he may be 
called, and to undertake whatever may be commanded. A 
terwards, a promise is added, by which God confirms and 
revives the faith of his servant. Whereas, the descent int 
Egypt was to him a sad event, he is bidden to be of good and 
cheerful mind; inasmuch as the Lord would always be his 
keeper, and after having increased him there to a great na 
tion, would bring him back again to the place, whence hey 
now compelled him to depart. And, indeed, Jacob’s chief 
consolation turned on this point; that he should not perpe 
tually wander up and down as an exile, but should, at length, 
enjoy the expected inheritance. For, since the possession 
of the land of Canaan was the token of the Divine fayour, of 
spiritual blessings, and of eternal felicity ; if holy Jacob we 3 
























HAP. XLVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 389 
es 

efrauded of this, it would have availed him little or nothing 
0 have riches, and all kinds of wealth and power heaped 
pon him, in Egypt. The return promised him is not, how- 
aver, to be understood of his own person, but refers to his 
posterity. Now, as Jacob, relying on the promise, is com- 
manded boldly to go down into Egypt; so it is the duty of 
all the pious, after his example, to derive such strength from 
the grace of God, that they may gird themselves to obey his 
sommands. .The title by which God here distinguishes 
himself, is attached to the former oracles which Jacob had 
Teceived by tradition from his fathers. For why does he 
not rather call himself the Creator of heaven and earth, 
' than the God of Isaac or of Abraham, except for this rea- 
son, that the dominion over the land of Canaan depends 
on the previous covenant, which he now ratifies anew? At 
the same time also, he encourages his servant by examples 
drawn from his own family, lest he should cease to proceed 
with constancy in his calling. For, when he had seen that 
his father Isaac, and had heard that his grandfather Abra- 
" ham, though long surrounded by great troubles, never gave 
‘way to any temptations, it ill became him to be overcome 
_ by weariness in the same course; especially since, in the 
- act of dying, they handed their lamp to their posterity, and 
_ took diligent care to leave the light of their faith to sur- 
‘vive them in their family. In short, Jacob is taught that 
he must not seek, in crooked and diverse paths, that God 
_ whom he had learned, from his childhood, to regard as the 
Ruler of the family of Abraham ; provided it did not de- 
generate from his piety. Moreover, we have elsewhere stated 
how far, in this respect, the authority of the Fathers ought 
to prevail. For it was not the design of God, either that 
_ Jacob should subject himself to men, or should approve, 
_ without discrimination, whatever was handed down from his 
 ancestors,—seeing that he so often condemns in the Jews, a 
foolish imitation of their fathers,—but his design was.to keep 
_ Jacob in the true knowledge of himself. 

4. And Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes. This 








_ Clause was added for the sake of showing greater indulgence. 
 Forthough Jacob, in desiring that, when he died, his eyes 


4 
: 
¢ 
- 































390 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLVI. 
e 


should be closed by the hand of Joseph, showed that some 
infirmity of the flesh was involved in the wish; yet God is 
willing to comply with it, for the sake of moderating the 
grief of a fresh banishment. Moreover, we know that the 
custom of closing the eyes was of the greatest antiquity ; and 
that this office was discharged by one most closely connected 
with the deceased either by blood or affection. a 

5. And Jacob rose up. By using the words “ rose up,” 
Moses seems to denote that Jacob received new vigour from 
the vision. For although the former promises were not for- 
gotten, yet the addition of the recent memorial came most 
opportunely, in order that he, bearing the land of Canaan in 
his heart, might endure his absence from it with equani- 
mity. When it is said that he took with him all that he had 
acquired, or possessed in the land of Canaan, it is probable 
that his servants and handmaids came together with his 
cattle." But, on his departure, no mention is made of them: 
nay, a little afterwards, when Moses enumerates the separate 
heads of each tribe, he says that only seventy souls came 
with him. Should any one say that Jacob had been com- 
pelled to liberate his slaves, on account of the famine, or that 
he lost them through some misfortune to us unknown, the con- 
jecture is unsatisfactory ; for it is most incredible that he, who 
had been an industrious master of a family, and had abounded 
in the earthly blessings of God, should have become so en- 
tirely destitute, that not even one little servant remained to 
him. It is more probable that, when the children of Israel 


1 « A remarkable parallel to the description of the arrival of Jacob’s fa- 
mily in Egypt, is furnished by a scene in a tomb at Beni Hassan, repre- 
senting strangers who arrive in Egypt. They carry their goods with them 
upon asses. ‘The first figure is an Egyptian scribe, who presents an ac- 
count of their arrival to a person in a sitting posture, one of the princip 
officers of the reigning Pharaoh—(compare the phrase, princes of Pha- 
raoh, ver. 15.) The next, likewise an Egyptian, ushers them into his 
presence, and two of the strangers advance, bringing presents, the wild 
goat and the gazelle, probably as productions of their country. Four men 
with bows and clubs follow, leading an ass, on which are two children in’ 
panniers, accompanied by a boy and four women. Last, another ass laden 
and two men, one of whom carries a bow and club, and the other a lyre, 
on which be plays with the plectrum. All the men have beards, contrary 
to the custom of the Egyptians,” &e.—Egypt and the Books of Moses, p. 
40. It is supposed by some that this sculpture was intended to represent 
the arrival of Jacob and his family, recorded in this chapter.—Zd. 











TAP. XLVI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 391 


were themselves employed in servile works, they were then 
deprived of their servants in Egypt; or, at least, a sufficient 
number was not left them, to inspire them with confidence 
in any enterprise. And although, in the account of their 
deliverance, Moses is silent respecting their servants, yet it 
may be easily gathered from other passages, that they did 
not depart without servants. 
8. These are the names of the children of Israel. He re- 
counts the sons and grandsons of Jacob, till he arrives at 
their full number. The statement that there were but 
seventy souls, while Stephen (Acts vii. 14) adds five more, 
is made, I doubt not, by an error of the transcribers. For the 
solution of Augustine is weak, that Stephen, by a prolepsis, 
enumerates also three who afterwards were born in Egypt ; 
for he must then have formed a far longer catalogue. 
Again, this interpretation is repugnant to the design of the 
Holy Spirit, as we shall hereafter see: because the subject 
here treated of, is not respecting the number of children 
Jacob left behind him at his death, but respecting the num- 
ber of his family on the day when he went down into Egypt. 
| He is said to have brought with him, or to have found there, 
seventy souls born unto him, in order that the comparison of 
_ this very small number, with that immense multitude which 
_ the Lord afterwards led forth, might the more fully illustrate 
_ Hiswonderful benediction. But that the error is to be imputed 
_ to the transcribers, is hence apparent, that with the Greek in- 
_terpreters, it has crept only into one passage, while, elsewhere, 
| they agree with the Hebrew reckoning. And it was easy 
when numerals were signified by marks, for one passage to be 
" corrupted. I suspect also that this happened from the fol- 
lowing cause, that those who had to deal with the Scripture 
were generally ignorant of the Hebrew language; so that, 
conceiving the passage in the Acts to be vitiated, they rashly 
changed the true number. If any one, however, chooses 
rather to suppose that Luke in this instance accommodated 
himself to the rude and illiterate, who were accustomed to 
the Greek version, I do not contend with them.’ In the 


49 Various methods have been resorted to, for the purpose of accounting 
for the difference of numbers given in this chapter and in Acts vil. 14. 
It is true that Luke, after the Septuagint, says there were seventy-five 










392 COMMENTARY UPON © CHAP. XLVI. 


words of Moses there is, indeed, no ambiguity, nor is there 
any reason why so small a matter, in which there is no ab- 
surdity, should give us any trouble; for it is not wonderful, 
that, in this mode of notation, one letter should have been 
put in the place of another. It is more to the purpose, to ex- 
amine wherefore this small number of persons is recorded 
by Moses. For, the more improbable it appears, that seventy _ 
men, in no lengthened space of time, should have grown to 
such a multitude; so much the more clearly does the grace 
of God shine forth. And this is also the reason why he so 
frequently mentions this number. For it was, by no means, 
according to human apprehension, a likely method of propa- 
gating the Church, that Abraham should live childless even 
to old age; that, after the death of Isaac, Jacob alone 
should remain; that he, being increased with a moderate 
family, should be shut up in a corner of Egypt, and that 
there an incredible number of people should spring up from — 
this dry fountain." When Moses declares that Shaul, one of 
the sons of Simeon, was born of a Canaanitish woman, while 
he does not even mention the mothers of the other sons, his 
intention, I doubt not, is to fix a mark of dishonour on his 
race. For the holy Fathers were on their guard, not to mix 
in marriage with that nation, from which they were sepa- 
rated by the decree of heaven. When Moses, having put 
down the names of Leah’s sons, says there were thirty-three 
souls, whereas he has only mentioned thirty-two; I under- 
stand that Jacob himself is to be reckoned the first in order. — 
The statement that he had so many sons or daughters by — 
Leah does not oppose this conclusion. For although, strictly — 
speaking, his discourse is concerning sons, yet he commences — 


souls, whereas the Hebrew mentions only seventy. The reading of the 
Septuagint is, “ The sons of Joseph, who were with him in Egypt, were — 
nine souls; all the souls of the house of Jacob which came with Jacob into 
Egypt, were seventy-five souls.” Add then nine to the sixty-six, mentioned 
in verse 26, and the number is made up. There is, however, some diffi- 
culty to make out the nine.—See Patrick, Poole, Bush, &c. in loc.—Ed. 
1 From the date of God’s promise of a holy seed to Abraham, unto the 
birth of Isaac was twenty-five years. Isaac lived sixty years before Jacob — 
was born. Jacob had nearly reached the age of eighty at the time of his 
marriage. So that about two hundred and forty years elapsed before more 
than two persons were born of a family which was to be as the stars of hea- 
ven, and as the sand on the sea-shore, for multitude!—See Bush in loc.—Hd. 


CHAP, XLYI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS, 393 


with the head of the family. I reject the interpretation of 
the Hebrews, who suppose Jochebed the mother of Moses to 
be included, as being overstrained. A question suggests 
itself concerning the daughters, whether there were more 
than two. If Dinah alone were named, it might be said 
that express mention was made of her, because of the 
notorious fact which had happened to her. But since Moses 
_ enumerates another female in the progeny of Aser, I rather 
conjecture that these had remained unmarried, or single ; 
for no mention is made of those who were wives. 
+28. And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph. Because 
Goshen’ had been selected by Joseph as the abode of his 
father and his brethren, Jacob now desires, that, on his 
coming, he may find the place prepared for him: for the ex- 
_ pression which Moses uses, implies, not that he requires a 
_ house to be built and furnished for him, but only that he 
may be permitted there to pitch his tent without molesta- 


' tion. For it was necessary that some unoccupied place 


should be assigned him; lest, by taking possession of the 
pastures or fields of the inhabitants, he might give them an 
occasion for exciting a tumult. 

In the meeting of Jacob with his son Joseph, Moses de- 
scribes their vehement feeling of joy, to show that the holy 
Fathers were not destitute of natural affection. It must, how- 


1 Though Moses does not describe in express terms the position of the 
land of Goshen; yet the incidental allusions contained in the narrative, 
are sufficient to fix its locality; and the fact that those allusions are such 
as could only be made by a writer conversant with its peculiarities, affords 
decisive evidence of the veracity of Moses as a writer of history. . 

1. The land of Goshen appears as the eastern border-land of Egypt; 
for on this side Jacob’s family entered, see ver. 28. 

2. It appears as lying near the chief city of Egypt, (see xlv. 10.) What 
that city was, may be inferred from Numbers xiii. 22, which points to Zoan 
or Tanis. This implies, that Zoan was one of the oldest cities of Egypt, 
and that it held the first rank. God is said to have performed his “ won- 
ders in the field of Zoan,” (Ps. lxxviii. 12, 43,) alluding to the plagues of 
Egypt. 

"3. The land of Goshen is described as pasture land, and, 

4. As one of the most fruitful regions of Egypt. ; 

« All these circumstances harmonize, and the different points, discrepant 
as they may seem, find their application, when we fix upon the land of 
Goshen as the region east of the Tanitic arm of the Nile, as far as the 
isthmus of Suez, or the border of the Arabian desert.” —See Egypt and the 
Books of Moses, pp. 43-45.—L£d. 





394 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLVI. 


ever, be remembered that, although the affections spring from 
good principles, yet they always contract some evil, from the - 
corrupt propensity of the flesh ; and have chiefly this fault, 
that they always exceed their bounds: whence it follows, 
that they do not = to be eradicated, but to be kept wits 
due bounds. : 
31. I will go wp and show Pharaoh. After Joseph had 
gone forth to meet his father for the purpose of doing him 
honour, he also provides what will be useful for him. On 
this account, he advises Jacob to declare that he and all his 
family were keepers of cattle, to the end that he might ob- 
tain, from the king, a dwelling-place for them, in the land of — 
Goshen. Now although his moderation deserves commenda- — 
tion on the ground, that he usurps no authority to himself, 
but that, as one of the common people, he waits the pleasure — 
of the king: he yet may be thought craftily to have devised 
a pretext, by which he might circumvent the king. We see — 
what he desired. Seeing that the land of Goshen was fer- — 
tile, and celebrated for its rich pastures ; this advantage so 
allured his mind, that he wished to fix his father there: 
but then, keoping out of Pharaoh’s sight the richness of the 
land, he puts forth another reason; namely, that Jacob with — 
his sons, were men held in abomination, and that, there- 
fore, he was seeking a place of seclusion, in which they might 
dwell apart from the Egyptians. It is not, however, very 
difficult to untie this knot. The fertility of the land of 
Goshen was so fully known to the king, that no room was 
left for fraud or cunning, (though kings are often too pro- 
fuse, and foolishly waste much, because they know not what 
they grant,) yea, Pharaoh, of his own accord, had offered 
them, unsolicited, the best and choicest place in the kingdom. 
Therefore this bounty of his was not elicited from him by — 
stratagem ; because he was free to form his own judgment — 
respecting what he would give. And truly Joseph, in order 
that he might act modestly, felt it necessary to seek a habi- 
tation in Goshen, on this pretext. For it would have been ~ 
absurd, or at least inconsiderate, for men who were obscure — 
and strangers, to desire an abode in the best and most con- — 
venient place for themselves, as if they possessed a right to 








- CHAP. XLVILI. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


395 
choose for themselves. Joseph, therefore, having regard to his 
own modesty and that of his father, adduces another cause, 
which was yet atrue one. For seeing that the Egyptians held 
the occupation of shepherds in abhorrence,’ he explains to 
the king that this would be a suitable retreat for his brethren. 
_ Herein was no dissimulation, because, in no other place, was 
a quiet habitation accessible to them. Nevertheless, though 
it was hard for the holy Fathers to be thus opprobriously re- 
_ jected, and, as it were, to be loathed by a whole nation ; yet 
this ignominy with which they were branded, was most pro- 
fitable to themselves. For, had they been mingled with the 
Egyptians, they might have been scattered far and wide ; but 
now, seeing that they are objects ofdetestation, and are thought 
unworthy to be admitted to common society, they learn, in 
this state of separation from others, to cherish-more fervently 
mutual union between themselves ; and thus the body of the 
Church, which God had set apart from the whole world, is 
not dispersed. So the Lord often permits us to be despised 
or rejected by the world, that being liberated and cleansed 
from its pollution, we may cultivate holiness. Finally, he 
does not suffer us to be bound by chains to the earth, in order 
that we may be borne upward to heaven. 


CHAPTER XLVII. 








1. THEN Joseph came and told 
Pharaoh, and said, My father, and 
my brethren, and their flocks, and 
their herds, and all that they have, 
are come out of the land of Canaan ; 
and, behold, they are in the land of 
Goshen. 

2. And he took some of his bre- 
thren, even five men, and presented 
them unto Pharaoh. 

3. And Pharaoh said unto his 


1. Et venit Joseph, et nuntiavit 
Pharaoni, et dixit, Pater meus, et 
fratres mei, et pecudes eorum, et 
boves eorum, et omnia que erant eis, 
venerunt e terra Chenaan: et ecce, 
sunt in terra Gosen. 


2. Et de extremis fratribus suis 
cepit quinque viros, et statuit eos 
ante Pharaonem. 

3. Tunc dixit Pharao ad fratres 


1 « The monuments even now furnish abundant evidence of this hatred 


of the Egyptians to shepherds. 
vie with each other in caricaturing 


The artists of Upper and Lower Egypt 
them. In proportion as the cultiva- 


tion of the land was the more unconditionally the foundation of the 
Egyptian state, the idea of coarseness and barbarism was united with the 
idea of a shepherd among the Egyptians.” Egypt and the Books of Moses, 


p. 42.—Ed. 


396 


brethren, What is your occupation ? 
And they said unto Pharaoh, Thy 
servants are shepherds, both we, and 
also our fathers. 

4. They said, moreover, unto 
Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the land 
are we come; for thy servants have 
no pasture for their flocks ; for the 
famine is sore in the land of Ca- 
naan; now therefore, we pray thee, 
let thy servants dwell in the land of 
Goshen. 

5. And Pharaoh spake unto Jo- 
seph, saying, Thy father and thy 
brethren are come unto thee: 

6. The land of Egypt is before 
thee: in the best of the land make 
thy father and brethren to dwell; in 
the land of Goshen let them dwell: 
and if thou knowest any men of ac- 
tivity among them, then make them 
rulers over my cattle. 

7. And Joseph brought in Jacob 
his father, and set him before Pha- 
raoh: and Jacob blessed Pharaoh. 


8. And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, 
How old art thou? 

9. And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, 
The days of the years of my pil- 
grimage are an hundred and thirty 
years: few and evil have the days of 
the years of my life been, and have 
not attained unto the days of the 
years of the life of my fathers in the 
days of their pilgrimage. 

10. And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, 
and went out from before Pharaoh. 


11. And Joseph placed his father 
and his brethren, and gave them a 
possession in the land of Egypt, in 
the best of the land,in theland of Ra- 
meses, as Pharaoh had commanded. 

12. And Joseph nourished his fa- 
ther, and his brethren, and all his 
father’s household, with bread, ac- 
cording to their families. 

13. And there was no bread in all 
the land: for the famine was very 
sore, so that the land of Egypt, and 
all the Jand of Canaan, fainted by 
reason of the famine. 

14. And Joseph gathered up all 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP, XLVII. 


ejus, Que sunt opera vestra? Et 
dixerunt ad Pharaonem, Pastores 
ovium sunt servi tui, etiam nos, etiam 
patres nostri. 

4. Et dixerunt ad Pharaonem, Ut 
peregrinaremur in hac terra, veni- 
mus, quia non est pascuum pecudi- 
bus, que sunt servis tuis: gravis 
enim fames est in terra Chenaan: 
nune igitur habitent queso servi tui» 
in terra Gosen. 


5. Et dixit Pharao ad Joseph, 
dicendo, Pater tuus et fratres tui 
venerunt ad te. 

6. Terra Aigypticoram te est, in 
optimo terree hujus habitare fac pa- 
trem tuum, et fratres tuos, habitent 
in terra Gosen. Et si cognoveris 
quod sint inter eos viri robusti, pones 
eos preefectos pecorum super ea que 
sunt,mihi. 

7. Postea adduxit Joseph ipsum 
Jahacob patrem suum, et statuit 
eum coram Pharaone, et salutavit 
Jahacob ipsum Pharaonem. 

8. Et dixit Pharao ad Jahacob, 
Quot sunt dies annorum vite tus ? 

9. Et dixit Jahacob ad Pharao- 


nem, Dies annorum peregrinationum 


mearum sunt triginta et centum an- 
ni: pauci et mali fuerunt dies anno- 
rum vite mes, et non attigerunt 
dies annorum vite patrum meorum 
in diebus peregrinationum suarum. 


10. Et salutavit Jahacob ipsum 
Pharaonem, et egressus est a facie 
Pharaonis. 

11. Et habitare fecit Joseph pa- 
trem suum et fratres suos, et dedit 
eis possessionem in terra Adgypti, in 
optimo terre, in terra Rahameses, 
quemadmodum preeceperat Pharao. 

12. Et aluit Joseph patrem suum, 
et fratres suos, et omnem domum 
patris sui pane, usque ad os parvuli. 


13. At panis non erat in omni 
terra: gravis enim fames erat valde, 
et elanguit terra ASgypti et terra 
Chenaan propter famem. 


14. Et collegit Joseph omnem pe- 





CHAP. XLVII. 





the money that was found in the land 
of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, 
for the corn which they bought: and 


_ Joseph brought the money into Pha- 


raoh’s house. 

15. And when money failed in the 
land of Egypt, and in the land of 
Canaan, all the Egyptians came unto 
Joseph, and said, Give us bread: for 
why should we die in thy presence? 
for the money faileth. 

16. And Joseph said, Give your 
cattle; and I will give you for your 
cattle, if money fail. 

17. And they brought their cattle 
unto Joseph: and Joseph gave them 
bread in exchange for horses, and for 
the flocks, and for the cattle of the 
herds, and for the asses; and he fed 
them with bread for all their cattle 
for that year. 

18. When that year was ended, 
they came unto him the second year, 
and said unto him, We will not hide 
it from my lord, how that our money 
is spent ; my lord also hath our herds 
of cattle: there is not ought left in 
the sight of my lord, but our bodies 
and our lands: 

19. Wherefore shall we die before 
thine eyes, both we and our land? 
buy us and our land for bread, and 
we and our land will be servants 
unto Pharaoh; and give us seed, 
that we may live, and not die, that 
the land be not desolate. 

20: And Joseph bought all the 
land of Egypt for Pharaoh ; for the 
Egyptians sold every man his field, 
because the famine prevailed over 
them: so the land became Pha- 
raoh’s. 

21. And as for the people, he re- 

moved them to cities from one end 
of the borders of Egypt even to the 
other end thereof. 
' 22. Only the land of the priests 
bought he not: for the priests had 
a portion assigned them of Pharaoh, 
and did eat their portion which Pha- 
raoh gave them; wherefore they sold 
not their lands. 

23. Then Joseph said unto the 
people, Behold, I have bought you 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


397 


cuniam, que inventa est in terra 
Chenaan pro alimento quod ipsi 
emebant ; et intulit Joseph pecuniam 
in domum Pharaonis. 


15. Et consumpta est pecunia e 
terra Aigypti, et e terra Chenaan: 
et venit omnis Aigyptus ad Joseph, 
dicendo, Da nobis panem: et utquid 
moriemur coram te? defecit enim 
pecunia. 

16. Tune dixit Joseph, Date pe- 
ceudes vestras, et dabo vobis pro pe- 
cudibus vestris, si defecit pecunia. 

17. Et adduxerunt pecudes suas 
ad Joseph, et dedit eis Joseph panem 
pro equis, et pro grege pecudum, et 
pro armento boum, et pro asinis: et 
sustentavit eos pane pro omnibus 
gregibus illorum anno ipso. 


18. Finitus vero est annus ipse, 
et venerunt ad eum anno secundo, et 
dixerunt ei, Non abscondemus a do- 
mino meo, quod integra pecunia, et 
grex jumentorum apud dominum 
meum: non remansit coram domino 
meo preeterquam corpus nostrum, et 
terra nostra. 

19. Utquid moriemur in oculis 
tuis, etiam nos, etiam terra nostra ? 
eme nos, et terram nostram pro pa- 
ne, et vivemus nos et terra nostra ° 
servi Pharaonis: da semen, et vive- 
mus, et non moriemur, et terra non 
desolabitur. 

20. Et emit Joseph omnem terram 
Aigypti pro Pharaone: vendiderunt 
enim Algyptii unusquisque agrum 
suum, quia invaluerat super eos fa- 
mes: et fuit terra ipsi Pharaoni. 


21. Et populum transire fecit ad 
urbes ab extremitate termini Augyp- 
ti usque ad extremitatem ejus. 


22. Tantummodo terram sacer- 
dotum non emit, quia pars sacerdo- 
tibus erat a Pharaone, et comedebant 
partem suam, quam dederat eis Pha- 
rao: idcireo non vendiderunt terram 
suam. 

23. Tune dixit Joseph ad popu- 
lum, Ecce, emi vos hodie, et terram 


398 


this day, and your land, for Pharaoh : 
lo, here is seed for you, and ye shall 
sow the land. 

24. And it shall come to pass, in 
the increase, that ye shall give the 
fifth part unto Pharaoh; and four 

parts shall be your own, for seed of 
the field, and for your food, and for 
them of your households, and for food 
for your little ones. 

25. And they said, Thou hast 
saved our lives: let us find grace in 
the sight of my lord, and we will be 
Pharaoh’s servants. 

26. And Joseph made it a law over 
the land of Egypt unto this day, that 
Pharaoh should have the fifth part ; 
except the land of the priests only, 
which became not Pharaoh’s. 

27. And Israel dwelt in the land 
of Egypt, in the country of Goshen ; 
and they had possessions therein, 
and grew, and multiplied exceed- 
ingly. 

28. And Jacob lived in the land 
' of Egypt seventeen years: so the 
whole age of Jacob was an hundred 
forty and seven years. 


29. And the time drew nigh that 
Israel must die: and he called his 
son Joseph, and said unto him, If 
now I have found grace in thy sight, 
put, I pray thee, thy hand under | my 
thigh, and deal kindly and truly with 
me: bury me not, I pray thes, in 
Egypt : 

30. But I willlie with my Sitlnell: ; 
and thou shalt carry me out of Egypt, 
and bury me in their burying-place. 
And he said, I will do as thou hast 
said. 

31. And he said, Swear unto me. 
And he sware unto him. And Israel 
bowed himself upon the bed’s head. 


1. Then Joseph came. 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. XLVII. 


vestram Pharaoni: ecce, vobis se- — 
men, et seretis terram. 


24. Et erit, e frugibus dabitis 
quintam partem Pharaoni, et qua- 
tuor partes erunt vobis pro semine 
agri, et pro cibo vestro, et eorum qui 
sunt in domibus vestris, et ad co- 
medendum pro parvulis vestris. 


25. Et dixerunt, Vivificasti nos: 
inveniamus gratiam in oculis domini 
mei, et erimus servi Pharaonis. 


26. Et posuit illud Joseph in sta- 
tutum usque ad diem hane super 
terram Aigypti Pharaoni pro quinta 
parte: terra tamen sacerdotum dun- 
taxat non fuit Pharaoni. 

27. Et habitavit Israel in terra 
ZEgypti, in terra Gosen: et statio- 
nem habuerunt in ea, et creverunt, 
et multiplicati sunt valde. 


28. Et vixit Jahacob in terra 
Aiigypti septendecim annos: et fue- 
runt dies Jahacob anni vite ejus, 
septem anni et quadraginta et cen- 
tum anni. 

29. Appropinquaverunt autem 
dies Israel ut moreretur, et vocavit 
filium suum Joseph, et dixit ei, Si 
queeso inveni gratiam in oculis tuis, 
pone queso manum tuam sub femo- 
re meo, et facies mecum misericor- 
diam et veritatem, Ne queso sepe- 
lias me in Augypto. 

30. Et dormiam cum patribus 
meis ; et tolles me ex Aigypto, et se- 
pelies me in sepulero eorum. Et 
dixit, Ego faciam secundum verbum 
tuum. 

31. Et dixit, Jura mihi et juravit 
ei, et incurvavit se Israel ad caput 
lecti. 


Joseph indirectly intimates to the 


king, his desire to obtain a habitation for his brethren in 


the land of Goshen. 


Yet this modesty was (as we have 


said) free from cunning. For Pharaoh both immediately 


recognises his wish, 


and liberally grants it to him; 


de- 


elaring beforehand that the land of Goshen was most 








‘CHAP. XLVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 399 


excellent. Whence we gather, that what he gave, he gave 
in the exercise of his own judgment, not in ignorance; and 
that he was not unacquainted with the wish of Joseph, who 
yet did not dare to ask for what was the best. Joseph 
may be easily excused for having commanded his father, 
with the greater part of his brethren, to remain in that re- 
gion. For neither was it possible for them to bring their 
_eattle along with them, nor yet to leave their cattle in order 
_to come and salute the king; until some settled abode was 
assigned them, where, having pitched their tents, they might 
arrange their affairs. For it would have shown a want of 
_ respect, to take possession of a place, as if it had been eranted 
to them ; when they had not yet received the permission of 
the king. They, therefore, remain in that district, in a state 
of suspense, until, having ascertained the will of the king, 
_ they may, with greater certainty, fix their abode there. That 
Joseph “ brought five from the extreme limits of his bre- 
thren,”’ is commonly thus explained, that they who were of 
least stature were brought into the presence of the king: 
because it was to be feared lest he might take the stronger 
into his army. But since the Hebrew word M¥) signifies 
the two extremities, the beginning and the end; I think 
they were chosen from the first and the last, in order that 
the king, by looking at them might form his judgment con- 
cerning the age of the whole. 

3. Thy servants are shepherds. This confession was hu- 
miliating to the sons of Jacob, and especially to Joseph him- 
self, whose high, and almost regal dignity, was thus marked 
with a spot of disgrace: for among the Egyptians (as we 
have said) this kind of life was disgraceful and infamous. 
Why, then, did not Joseph adopt the course, which he might 
easily have done, of describing his brethren as persons en- 
gaged in agriculture, or any other honest and creditable 


1 Quod Joseph quingue ex fratrum extremitate adduait. In the text 
Calvin has it, “ Et de extremis fratribus suis cepit quinque viros.” The 
English version renders the passage, “ some of his brethren.” Other in- 
terpreters, a “definite part.” Gesenius, however, translates the term 
Myppd, “ from the whole ;” which perhaps gives the best sense. “ And he 
took from the whole number of his brethren, five men, and presented them 


unto Pharaoh.”—£d. 





400 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XLVIT. 


method of living? They were not so addicted to the feeding - 
of cattle as to be altogether ignorant of agriculture, or ineap- 
able of accustoming themselves to other modes of gaining a 
livelihood : and although they would not immediately have — 
found it productive, we see how ready the liberality of the 
king was to help them. Indeed it would not have been dif- _ 
ficult for them to become invested with offices at court. How 
then does it happen that Joseph, knowingly and purposely, 
exposes his brethren to an ignominy, which must bring 
dishonour also on himself, except because he was not very 
anxious to escape from worldly contempt? To live in splen- — 
dour among the Egyptians would have had, at first, a plau- 
sible appearance; but his family would have been placed in 
a dangerous position. Now, however, their mean and con-— 
temptible mode of life proves a wall of separation between 
them and the Egyptians: yea, Joseph seems purposely to la- _ 
bour to cast off, in a moment, the nobility he had acquired, that — 
his own posteritymight not be swallowed up in the population — 
of Egypt, but might rather merge in the body of his ancestral 
family. If, however, this consideration did not enter their 
minds, there is no doubt that the Lord directed their tongues, 
so as to prevent the noxious admixture, and to keep the body 
of the Church pure and distinct. This passage also teaches 
us, how much better it is to possess a remote corner in the 
courts of the Lord, than to dwell in the midst of palaces, be- 
yond the precincts of the Church. Therefore, let us not think — 
it grievous to secure a sacred union with the sons of God, by — 
enduring the contempt and reproaches of the world ; even as — 
Joseph preferred this union to all the luxuries of Egypt. But — 
if any one thinks that he cannot otherwise serve God in pu- 
rity, than by rendering himself disgusting to the world; away — 
with all this folly! The design of God was this, to keep 
the sons of Jacob in a degraded position, until he should re- — 
store them to the land of Canaan: for the purpose, then, of 
preserving themselves in unity till the promised deliverance — 
should take place, they did not conceal the fact that they 
were shepherds. We must beware, therefore, lest the desire 
of empty honour should elate us: whereas the Lord reveals 
no other way of salvation, than that of bringing us under 


























CHAP. XLVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 401 


discipline. Wherefore let us willingly be without honour 
for a time, that, hereafter, angels may receive us to ‘ 
participation of their eternal glory. By this example also, 
they who are brought up in humble employments, are 
taught that they have no need to be ashamed of their lot. 
It ought to be enough, and more than enough, for them, 
that the mode of living which they pursue is lawful, and 
acceptable to God. The remaining confession of the bre- 
thren (verse 4) was not unattended with a sense of shame; 
in which they say, that they had come to sojourn there, com- 
pelled by hunger ; but hence arose advantage not to be de- 
| spised. For as they came down few, and perishing with 
| hunger, and so branded with infamy that scarcely any one 
would deign to speak with them; the glory of God after- 
| wards shone so much the more illustriously out of this dark-. 
ness, when, in the third century from that time, he wonder- 
fully led them forth, a mighty nation. 
_ 5. And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph. It is to be ascribed 
to the favour of God that Pharaoh was not offended when 
| they desired that a separate dwelling-place might be granted 
| to them ; for we know that nothing is more indignantly borne 
by kings, than that their favours should be rejected. Pha- 
_raoh offers them a perpetual home, but they rather wish to 
depart from him. Should any one ascribe this to modesty, 
on the ground that it would have been proud to ask for the 
‘right of citizenship, in order that they might enjoy the same 
“prvleg as natives; the suggestion is indeed plausible. It 
_ is, however, fallacious, for in asking to be admitted as guests 
and strangers, they took timely precaution that Pharaoh 
should not hold them bound in the chains of servitude. 
The passage of Sophocles is known :— 








+ e Se \ 4 > / 
: Os tis d€ Tpos TUpavVOY EuTropEvETat, 
nr xX > 4 / 
Keivov ati S00Xos, Kav ehevOepos pong. 


1 The passage does not occur in any of the tragedies of Sophocles extant ; 
but it is found among the fragments of lost plays, selected from different 
authors of antiquity by whom they had been quoted. The words here in- 
- troduced are taken from Plutarch’s Life of Pompey. It may be observed, 
that the word séeavvs is not necessarily to be understood in a bad sense. 

It sometimes merely means a king; but the idea of arbitrary power, whe- 


VOL. II. 20 


} 


cn My 
pie 3 



























4.02 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XLVI 


« Who refuge seeks within a tyrant’s door, 
When once he enters there, is free no more.’ 
Fans ter Plutarch. 


It was therefore of importance to the sons of Jacob to de. 
clare, in limine, on what condition they wished to live in 
Egypt. And so much the more inexcusable was the cruelty 
exercised towards them, when, in violation of this compact, 
they were most severely oppressed, and were denied that 
opportunity of departure, for which they had stipulated. 
Isaiah indeed says that the king of Egypt had some pre- 
text for his conduct, because the sons of Jacob had volun- 
tarily placed themselves under his authority, (Is. li. 4;) but 
he is speaking comparatively, in order that he may the more 
grievously accuse the Assyrians, who had invaded the pos- 
terity of Jacob, when they were quiet in their own country, 
and expelled them thence by unjust violence. Therefore 
the law of hospitality was wickedly violated when the Is 
raelites were oppressed as slaves, and when the return into 
their own country, for which they had silently covenanted, was 
denied them; though they had professed that they had come 
thither as guests; for fidelity and humanity ought to have 
been exercised towards them, by the king, when once they 
were received under his protection. It appears, therefore, 
that the children of Israel so guarded themselves, as in the 
presence of God, that they had just ground of complaint 
against the: Egyptians. But seeing that the pledge given 
them by the king proved of no advantage to them according 
to the flesh ; let the faithful learn, from their example, 4 
train themselves to patience. For it commonly happens, that 
he who enters the court of a tyrant, is under the necessity 
of laying down his liberty at the door. 

6. The land of Egypt. This is recorded not only to show 
that Jacobywas courteously received, but also, that nothing” 
was given him by Joseph but at the command of the king, 
For the greater was his power, the more strictly was he 
bound to take care, lest, being liberal with the king’s pro- 
perty, he might defraud both him and his people. And TI 
ther well or ill used, is always involved in it. For the passage itself, s 


“ Sophoclis Tragedice Septem.” Tom. ii. Fragmenta, p. 95. Ouonl : 
1826.—-Ed. = 



























CHAP, XLVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 403 


would that this moderation so prevailed among the nobles 
of the world, that they would conduct themselves, in their 
private affairs, no otherwise than if they were plebeians: but 
now, they seem to themselves to have no power, unless they 
may prove it by their license to sin. And although Joseph, 
y the king’s permission, places his family amidst the best 
pastures; yet he does not avail himself of the other portion 
of the royal beneficence, to make his brethren keepers of the 
king’s cattle; not only because this privilege would have ex- 
cited the envy of many against them, but because he was 
unwilling to be entangled in such a snare. 
7. And Joseph brought in Jacob his father. Although 
' Moses relates, in a continuous narrative, that Jacob was 
brought to the king, yet I do not doubt that some time had 
mtervened ; at least, till he had obtained a place wherein 
he might dwell; and where he might leave his family more 
safely, and with a more tranquil mind; and also, where he 
might refresh himself, for a little while, after the fatigue of 
"his journey. And whereas he is said to have blessed Pha- 
“raoh, by this term Moses does not mean a common and pro- 
‘fane salutation, but the pious and holy prayer of a servant 
'of God. For the children of this world salute kings and 
princes for the sake of honour, but, by no means, raise their 
th oughts to God. Jacob acts otherwise; for he adjoins to 
‘civil reverence that pious affection which causes him to com- 
mend the safety of the king to God. And Jeremiah pre- 
scribes this rule to the Jews, that they should pray for the 
peace of Babylon as long as they were to live in exile ; be- 
! ‘cause in the peace of that land and empire their own peace 
would be involved. (Jer. xxix. 7.) If this duty was enjoined 
on miserable captives, forcibly deprived of their liberty, and 
‘torn from their own country ; how much more did Jacob owe 
“it toa king so humane and beneficent? But of whatever cha- 
racter theymay be who rule over us, we are commanded to offer 
‘up public prayers for them. (1 Tim. ii. 1.) Therefore the same 
subjection to authority is required severally from each of us. 
8. How old art thow? This familiar question proves that 
Jacob was received courteously and without ceremony. But 
the answer is of far greater moment, in which J acob declares 


ep Ses 





404 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XLVII. 





























that the time of his pilgrimage was a hundred and thirty 
years. For the Apostle, in his epistle to the Hebrews, 
(xi. 13-16,) gathers hence the memorable doctrine, that God 
was not ashamed to be called the God of the patriarchs, 
because they had confessed themselves to be strangers and 
pilgrims on the earth. Of one man only this is mentioned ; 
but because he had been instructed by his forefathers, and 
had handed down the same instruction to his son, the Apostle 
honours them all with the same eulogy. Therefore, as they 
were not ashamed to wander during the whole course of their 
life, and to be opprobriously called foreigners and strangers 
wherever they came ; so God vouchsafed to them the incom- 
parable dignity, that they should be heirs of heaven. But 
(as it has been said before) no persons ever had a more pe 
culiar and hereditary possession in the world, than the holy 
fathers had in the land of Canaan. The Lord is said to have 
cast his line, in order that he might assign to each nation its 
bounds: but an eternal possession, through a continual sue- 
cession of ages, was never promised to any nation, as it was 
to the posterity of Abraham. In what spirit, then, ought 
we to dwell in a world, where no certain repose, or fixed abode 
is promised us? Moreover, this is described by Paul as the 
common condition of all pious persons under the reign of 
Christ, that they should “have no certain dwelling-place; 
(1 Cor. iv. 11;) not that all should be alike cast out as exiles, 
but because the Lord calls all his people, as by the sound of the 
trumpet, to be wanderers, lest they should become fixed in 
their nests on earth. Therefore, whether any one remains 
in his own country, or is compelled continually to change his 
place, let him diligently exercise himself in the meditation 
that he is sojourning, for a short time, upon earth, till, haying 
completed his course, he shall depart to the heavenly country 

9. Few and evil have the days of the years of my life been 
Jacob may here seem to complain that he had lived but a 
little while, and that, in this short space of time, he had en 
dured many and grievous afflictions. Why does he not rathe 
recount the great and manifold favours of God which forme¢ 
an abundant compensation for every kind of evil? Besides, 
his complaint respecting the shortness of life seems unworthy 


«4 























CHAP. XLVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 405 


of him ; for why did he not deem a whole century and a 
third part of another sufficient for him? But if any one will 
rightly weigh his words, he rather expresses his own grati- 
tude, in celebrating the goodness of God towards his fathers. 
For he does not so much deplore his own decrepitude, as he 
extols the vigour divinely afforded to his fathers. Certainly 
it was no new and unwonted thing to see a man, at his age, 
broken down and failing, and already near to the grave. 
Wherefore, this comparison (as I have said) was only intended 
to ascribe glory to God, whose blessing towards Abraham and 
Isaac had been greater than to himself. But he does not com- 
| pare himself with his fathers in sufferings, as if they had been 
_ treated with greater indulgence; for we know that they had 
been tried to the utmost with all kinds of temptations: he 
merely states that he had not attained their age ; as if he had 
‘said, “ I,indeed, have arrived at those years which, by others, is 
deemed a mature old age, and which complete the proper term 
of life ; but the Lord so prolonged the life of my fathers, that 
' they far exceeded this limit.” He makes mention of evil 
' days, in order to show that he was not so much broken down 
| and consumed by years, as by labours and troubles; as if he 
had said, “ My senses might yet have flourished in their 
' vigour, if my strength had not been exhausted by continual 
labours, by excessive cares, and by most grievous sufferings.” 
We now see that nothing was less in the mind of the holy 
man than to expostulate with God. Yet it may seem ab- 
surd that he speaks of his life as being shorter than that of 
hisfathers. For, whence does he conjecture that so little time 
~ should still remain for him, as to prevent him from attaining 
_ their age? Should any one answer, that he formed this con- 
_ jecture from the weakness of his body, which was half dead ; 
~ the solution will not prove satisfactory. For Isaac had dim- 
ness of sight and trembling limbs thirty years before his death. 

But it is not absurd to suppose that Jacob was every moment 
” giving himself over to death, as if the sepulchre were before 
his eyes. He was, however, uncertain what length of time was 
decreed for him in the secret counsel of God. Wherefore, 
_ being unconcerned about the remainder of his life, he speaks 
¥ just as if he were about to die on the next day. 





a 


406 COMMENTARY UPON OHAP. XLVIL. 


12. And Joseph nourished his father, &c., according t 
their families. Some explain the expression, “ the mouth 
of the little one,” as if Joseph nourished his father and his 
whole family, in the manner in which food is conveyed to 
the mouths of children. These interpreters regard the form 
of speech as emphatical, because, during the famine, Jacob 
and his family had no more anxiety about the providing of 
food than children, who cannot even stretch out their hand to 
receive it. Others translate it “ youth,” but I know not with 
what meaning.” Others take it, simply, according to the 
proportion and number of the little children. To me the , 
genuine sense seems to be that he fed all, from the greates 
to the least. Therefore, there was sufficient bread for the 
whole family of Jacob, because, by the care of Joseph, provi 
sion was made to supply nourishment even to the little ones. 
In this manner Moses commemorates both the clemency of 
God, and the piety of Joseph; for it was an instance of un- 
common attention, that these hungry husbandmen, who had 
not a grain of corn, were entirely fed at his expense. 

13. And all the land of Canaan fainted. It was a memor- 
able judgment of God, that the most fertile regions, wit | 
were accustomed to supply provisions for distant and trans 
marine nations, were reduced to such poverty that they we : 
almost consumed. The word sab, (lahah,) which Moses 
uses, is explained in two ways. Some say that they were 
driven to madness on account of the famine; others, that 
they were so destitute of food that they fainted ; but which- 
ever method of interpretation be approved, we see that they 
who had been accustomed to supply others with food, were 
themselves famishing. Therefore it is not for those who 
cultivate fertile lands to trust in their abundance; rather 
let them acknowledge that a large supply of provision 
does not so much spring from the bowels of the earth, as y 
distils, or rather flows down from heaven, by the secret bles 
ing of God. For there is no luxuriance so great, that tf 8 
not soon exchanged for barrenness, when God sprinkles it with 







* Usque ad os parvuli. Eyen to the mouth of the little one. "ON °D?, 
(Lephi chataph.) s 


* Alii vertunt pubem ; sed nescio quo sensu. 


CHAP. XLVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 407 


salt instead of rain. Meanwhile, it is right to turn our eyes 
' to that special kindness of God by which he nourishes his 
own people in the midst of famine, as it is said in the thirty- 
seventh Psalm and the nineteenth verse. If, however, God 
is pleased to try us with famine, we must pray that he 
would prepare us to endure hunger with a meek and equal 
- mind, lest we should rage, like fierce, and even ravenous wild 
beasts. And although it is possible that grievous commo- 
tions were raised during the protracted scarcity, (as it is said 
in the old proverb that the belly has no ears,) yet the more 
simple sense of the passage seems to me to be, that the 
Egyptians and Canaanites had sunk under the famine, and 


' were lying prostrate, as if at the point of death. Moreover, 
_ Moses pursues the history of the famine, with the intention 


_ of showing that the prediction of Joseph was verified by the 
- event; and that, by his skill and industry, the greatest dan- 
gers were so well and dexterously provided against, that 
_ Egypt ought justly to acknowledge him as the author of its 


- deliverance. 


14. And Joseph gathered up all the money. Moses first 
declares that the Egyptian king had acted well and wisely, 


- in committing the work of providing corn to the sole care 
_ and authority of Joseph. He then commends the sincere 


' and faithful administration of Joseph himself. We know 
__ how few persons can touch the money of kings without de- 
filing themselves by peculation. Amid such vast heaps of 
money, the opportunity of plundering was not less than the 
difficulty of self-restraint. But Moses says, that whatever 
money Joseph collected, he brought into the house of the 
king. It was a rare and unparalleled integrity, to keep the 
hands pure amidst such heaps of gold. And he would not 
have been able to conduct himself with such moderation, 
unless his divine calling had proved as a bridle to hold him 


in; for they who are restrained from thefts and rapaciousness 





by worldly motives alone, would immediately put forth their 
hand to the prey, unless they feared the eyes and the judg- 
ments of men. But inasmuch as Joseph might have sinned 
without a witness of his fault; it follows that the true fear 
of God flourished in his breast. Plausible and well coloured 


408 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLVII. 


pretexts, in excuse of the theft, would doubtless present them- 
selves. “ When you are serving a tyrant, why may it not be 
lawful for you to apply some part of the gain to your own 


advantage?” So much the more does it appear that he was — 


fortified by downright honesty ; since he repelled all temp- 
tations, lest he should desire fraudulently to enrich himself 
at the expense of another. 

15. And when money facled. Moses does not mean that 
all the money in Egypt had been brought into the royal 
treasury ; for there were many of the nobles of the court free 
from the effects of the famine; but the simple meaning of 
the expression is that nearly all had been exhausted; that 
now the common people had not money enough to buy corn ; 
and that, at length, extreme necessity had driven the Egyp- 
tians to the second remedy of which he is about to speak. 


Moreover, although, like persons driven to desperation, — 


they might seem arrogantly to rise up against Joseph ; 


yet the context shows that nothing was farther from their — 


minds than to terrify, by their boldness, the man whose 
compassion they suppliantly implore. Wherefore the ques- 
tion, Why should we die in thy presence? has no other signi- 
fication than that they felt themselves ruined, unless his cle- 


mency should afford them relief. But it may be asked how ~ 
the Canaanites supported their lives. There is indeed no — 


doubt that a grievous pestilence, the attendant on famine, 
would carry off many, unless they received assistance from 
other regions, or were miserably fed on herbs and roots. And 


perhaps the barrenness was not there so great, but that they 


might gather half, or a third part of their food, from the 
fields, | 

16. Give your cattle. It was a miserable spectacle, and 
one which might have softened hearts of iron, to see rich 


farmers, who previously had kept provision stored in their — 
granaries for others, now begging food. Therefore, Joseph ~ 
might be deemed cruel, because he does not give bread gra- — 


tuitously to those who are poor and exhausted, but robs them 
of all their cattle, sheep, and asses. Seeing, however, that 
Joseph is transacting the business of another, I dare not 
charge his strictness with cruelty. If, during the seven 





at. 









' 


: 
|: 


ee ee 


oe - 


CHAP. XLVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 4.09 


fruitful years, he had extorted corn by force from an unwil- 
ling people, he would now have acted tyrannically in seizing 
their flocks and herds. But seeing that they had been at 
liberty to lay up, in their private stores, what they had sold 
to the king, they now pay the just penalty of their negli- 
gence. Joseph also perceived that they were deprived of their 


_ possessions by a divine interposition, in order that the king 


alone might be enriched by the spoils of all. Besides, since 


: it was lawful for him to offer corn for sale, it was also lawful 


for him to exchange it for cattle. Truly, the corn belonged 
to the king; why then should he not_demand a price from 
the purchasers? But they were poor, and therefore it was 
but just to suecour them in their want. Were this rule to 
prevail, the greater part of sales would be unlawful. For no 
one freely parts with what he possesses. Wherefore, if his 


- yaluation of the cattle was fair, I do not see what was de- 


serving of reprehension in the conduct of Joseph; especially 


__ as he was not dealing with his own property, but had been 


appointed prefect over the corn, with this condition, that he 


should acquire gain, not for himself, but for the king. If 


any one should object that he ought at least to have exhort- 
ed the king to content himself with the abundant pecuniary 
wealth which he had obtained; I answer, that Moses relates, 
by the way, but a few things out of many. Any one, there- 
fore, may easily conjecture, that a business of such great 
consequence, was not transacted by Joseph, without the cog- 
nizance and judgment of the king. But what, if it appeared 
to the king’s counsellors, an equitable arrangement, that the 
farmers should receive, in return for their cattle, food for the 


_ whole year? Lastly, seeing that we stand or fall by the 


judgment of God alone, it is not for us to condemn what his 
law has left undecided. 

18. They came to him the second year. Moses does not 
reckon the second year from the date of the famine, but 
from the time when the money had failed. But since they 
knew, from the oracle, that the termination of the dearth 
was drawing near, they desired not only that corn should 
be given them for food, but also for seed. Whence it ap- 
pears that they had become wise too late, and had neglected 


- a a 


410 | COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLVIL. 


the useful admonition of God, at the time when they ought 
to have made provision for the future. “Moreover, when — 
they declare that their money and cattle had failed, they do 
it, not for the purpose of expostulating with Joseph, as if 
they had been unjustly deprived of these things by him; 
but for the purpose of showing that the only thing remain- — 
ing for them was to purchase food and seed at the price of 
their lands, and that they could not otherwise be preserved, — 
unless Joseph would enter into this compact. For it would 
have been the part of impudence to offer no price or com- 
pensation. They begin by saying, that they had nothing at 
hand, and that, therefore, their lives would be lost, unless — 
Joseph were willing to buy their lands; and in order to 
excite his compassion, they ask again, why he would suffer 
them to die, and their very land to perish? For this is the 
death of the earth, when the cultivation of it is neglected, 
and when, being reduced to a desert, it can bring forth no- 
thing more. 

20. And Joseph bought all the land. Any one might — 
suppose it to be‘the height of cruel and inexplicable avarice, — 
that Joseph should take away from the miserable husband- 
men, the very fields, by the produce of which they nourished 
the kingdom, But I have before showed, that unless every 
kind of purchase is to be condemned, there is no reason — 
why Joseph should be blamed. If any one should say that — 
he abused their penury ; this alone would suffice for his ex-- 
cuse, that no wiles of his, no cireumyention, no force, no 
threats, had reduced the Egyptians to this necessity. He © 
transacted the king’s business with equal fidelity and indus- 
try ; and fulfilled the duties of his office, without resorting 
to violent edicts. When the famine became urgent, it was 
lawful to expose wheat to sale, as well to the rich as to the — 
poor: afterwards it was not less lawful to buy the cattle ; 
and now, at last, why should it not be lawful to acquire the — 
land for the king, at a just price? To this may be added, 
that he extorted nothing, but entered into treaty with them, 
at their own request. I confess, indeed, that it is not right to 
take whatever may be offered without discrimination: for if 
severe necessity presses, then he who wishes, by all means, 











CHAP, XLVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 411 


to escape it, will submit to hard conditions. Therefore, 
when any one thus invites us, to defraud him, we are not, by 
his necessities, rendered excusable. But I do not defend 
Joseph, on this sole ground, that the Egyptians voluntarily . 
offered him their lands, as men who were ready to purchase 
life, at any price ; but I say, this ought also to be considered, 
that he acted with equity, even though he left them nothing. 
The terms would have been more severe, if they themselves 
had been consigned to perpetual slavery ; but he now con- 
cedes to.them personal liberty, and only covenants for their 
fields, which, perhaps, the greater part of the people had 
bought from the poor. If he had stripped of their clothing 
those whom he was feeding with corn, this would have been 
to put them indirectly and slowly to death. For what dif- 
ference does it make, whether I compel a man to die by 
hunger or by cold? But Joseph so succours the Egyptians, 
that in future they should be free, and_should be able to 
obtain a moderate subsistence by their labour. For though 
they might have to change their abode, yet they are all made 
stewards of the king: and Joseph restores to them, not 
only the lands, but the implements which he had bought. 
Whence it appears that he had used what clemency he was 
able, in order to relieve them. Meanwhile, let those who 
are too intent on wealth beware lest they should falsely 
employ Joseph’s example as a pretext: because it is certain 
that all contracts, which are not formed according to the 
rule of charity, are vicious in the sight of God ; and that we 
ought, according to that equity which is inwardly dictated 
to us by a secret instinct of nature, so to act towards others, 
as we wish to be dealt with ourselves. 

21. And as for the people, he removed them to cities. This 
removal was, indeed, severe; but if we reflect how much 
better it was to depart to another place, in order that 
they might be free cultivators of the land, than to be at- 
tached to the soil, and employed as slaves in servile work ; 
no one will deny that this was a tolerable, and even a 
humane exercise of authority. Had each person cultivated 
his field, as he had been accustomed to do, the exaction of 
tribute would have seemed to be grievous. Joseph, there- 


412 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XLVIT. 


fore, contrived a middle course, which might mitigate the 
new and unwonted burden, by assigning new lands to each, 
with a tribute attached to them. The passage may, however, 
be differently expounded ; namely, that Joseph caused all the 
farmers to go to the cities to receive the provisions, and to 
settle their public accounts. If this sense is approved, the 
fact that Egypt was divided into provinces, afterwards called 
nomes, (vosot,) may probably hence have received its origin. 
This removing from place to place would, however, have been 
alike injurious to the king and to the people at large, because 
they would not be able to make their skill and practice ap- 
plicable to new situations. Yet, since the matter is not of 
great moment, and the signification of the word is ambi- 
guous, I leave the question undecided. 

22. Only the land of the priests. The priests were ex- 
empted from the common law, because the king granted 
them a maintenance. It is, indeed, doubtful, whether this 
was a supply for their present necessity, or whether he was 
accustomed to nourish them at his own expense. But see- 
ing that Moses makes mention of their lands, I rather 
incline to the conjecture, that, whereas they had before 
been rich, and this dearth had deprived them of their in- 
come, the king conferred this privilege upon them; and 
hence it arose that their lands remained unto them free.’ 
The ancient historians, however, injudiciously invent many 
fables concerning the state of that land. I know not whether 
the statement that the farmers, content with small wages, 
sow and reap for the king and the priests, is to be traced 
to this regulation of Joseph or not. But, passing by 
these things, it is more to the purpose to observe, what 


' The following passage from Sir J. G. Wilkinson’s Manners and 
Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, will be read with interest. The 
priests “ enjoyed important privileges, which extended to their whole 
family. They were exempt from taxes; they consumed no part of their 
own income in any of their necessary expenses; and they had one of the 
three portions into which the land of Egypt was divided, free from all 
duties. They were provided for, from the public stores, out of which they 
received a stated allowance of corn, and all the other necessaries of life ; 
and we find that when Pharaoh, by the advice of Joseph, took all the 
land of the Egyptians in lieu of corn, the priests were not obliged to make 
the same sacrifice of their landed property, nor was the tax of the fifth 
part entailed upon it, as on that of other people.”—Vol. i. p. 262.—Hd. 











CHAP. XLVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 413 


Moses wished distinctly to testify ; namely, that a heathen 
_ king paid particular attention to Divine worship, in support- 
ing the priests gratuitously, for the purpose of sparing their 
lands and their property. Truly this is placed before our 
eyes, as a mirror, in which we may discern that a sentiment 
of piety which they cannot wholly efface, is implanted in 
the minds of men. It was the part of foolish, as well as of 
wicked superstition, that Pharaoh nourished such priests as 
these, who infatuated the people by their impostures: yet 
this was, in itself, a design worthy of commendation, that 
he did not suffer the worship of God to fall into decay ; 
which, in a short time, must have happened, if the priests 
had perished in the famine. Whence we infer how sedu- 
lously we ought to be on our guard, that we undertake no- 
thing with an indiscreet zeal ; because nothing is more easy, 
in so great a corruption of human nature, than for religion 
to degenerate into frivolous trifles. Nevertheless, because 
this inconsiderate devotion (as it may be called) flowed from 
a right principle, what should be the conduct of our princes, 
who desire to be deemed Christians? If Pharaoh was so 
solicitous about his priests, that he nourished them to his — 
own destruction, and that of his whole kingdom, in order 
that he might not be guilty of impiety against false gods ; 
what sacrilege is it, in Christian princes, that the lawful 
and sincere ministers of holy things should be neglected, 
whose work they know to be approved by God, and salu- 
tary to themselves? But it may be asked, whether it was 
lawful for holy Joseph to undertake this office, for by so 
doing, he employed his labour in cherishing impious super- 
stitions? But though I can readily grant that in such great, 
and arduous, and manifold offices of trust, it was easy for 
him to slide into various faults; yet I dare not absolutely 
condemn this act; nor can J, however, deny that he may 
have erred, in not resisting these superstitions with sufficient 
boldness. But since he was required by no law, to destroy 
the priests by hunger, and was not altogether allowed to 
dispense the king’s corn at his own pleasure ; if the king 
wished that food should be gratuitously supplied to the 
priests, he was no more at liberty to deny it to them than 


4.1 4 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLVII. - 


to the nobles at court. Therefore, though he did not wil- 
lingly take charge of such dependents, yet when the king 
imposed the duty upon him, he could not refuse it, though 
he knew them to be unworthy to be fed on the dirt of oxen. 

23. Then Joseph said unto the people. Here Moses de- 
scribes the singular humanity of Joseph, which, as it then 
repressed all complaints, so, at this time, it justly dispels 
and refutes the calumnies with which he is assailed. The 
men, who were entirely destitute, and, in a sense, exiles, he 
reinstates in their possessions, on the most equitable cofdi- 
tion, that they should pay a fifth part of the produce to the 
king. It is well known that formerly, in various places, 
kings have demanded by law the payment of tenths; but 
that, in the time of war, they doubled this tax. Therefore, 
what injury, can we say, was done to the Egyptians, when 
Joseph burdened the land, bought for the king, with a fifth 
part of its income; especially seeing that country is so 
much richer than others, that with less labour than else- 
where, it brings forth fruit for the maintenance of its culti- 
vators? Should any one object that the king would haye 
acted more frankly had he taken the fifth part of the land ; 
the answer is obvious, that this was useful not only as an 
example, but also, for the purpose of quieting the people, 
by shutting the mouths of the captious. And certainly 
this indirect method, by which Joseph introduced the tax 
of a fifth part, had no other object than that of inducing 
the Egyptians to cultivate their lands with more alacrity, 
when they were convinced that, by such a compact, they 
were treated with clemency. And to this effect was their 
confession, which is recorded by Moses, expressed. For, 
first, they acknowledge that they owe their lives to him; 
secondly, they do not refuse to be the servants of the king. 
Whence we gather, that the holy man so conducted himself 
between the two parties, as greatly to enrich the king, with- 
out oppressing the people by tyranny. And I wish that all 
governors would practise this moderation, that they would 
only so far study the advantage of kings, as could be done 
without injury to the people. There is a celebrated saying 
of Tiberius Ceesar, which savoured little of tyranny, though 





—— on —" 








a eee _.! 





_ CHAP. XLVIL. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 415 


he appears to have been a sanguinary and insatiable tyrant, 
that it is the part of a shepherd to shear the flock, but not 
to tear off the skin. At this day, however, kings do not be- 
lieve that they rule freely, unless they not only flay their 
subjects, but entirely devour them. For they do not gener- 
ally invest any with authority, except those who are sworn 
to the practice of slaughter. So much the more does the 
clemency of Joseph deserve praise, who so administered the 
_. affairs of Egypt, as to render the immense gains of the king 
compatible with a tolerable condition of the people. 
_ 27. And Israel dwelt in the land. Moses does not mean 
_ that Jacob and his sons were proprietors of that land which 
Pharaoh had granted them as a dwelling-place, in the same 
manner in which the other parts of Egypt were given to the 
inhabitants for a perpetual possession: but that they dwelt 
there commodiously for a time, and thus were in possession by 
favour, provided they continued to be peaceable. Hence the 
cause that they so greatly increased, in a very short space of 
time. Therefore, what is here related by Moses belongs to 
the history of the following period ; and he now returns to the 
proper thread of his narrative, in which he purposed to show 
how God protected his Church from many deaths; and not 
that only, but wonderfully exalted it by his own secret power. 
28. And Jacob lived. It was no common source of temp- 
tation to the holy old man, to be an exile from the land of 
Canaan, for so many years. Be it so, that on account of the 
famine, he was compelled to go to Egypt ; why could he not 
return when the fifth year was passed? For he did not 
stupidly lie there in a state of torpor, but he remained quiet, 
because free egress was not allowed him. Wherefore, also, 
in this respect, God did not lightly exercise his patience. 
For, however sweet might be the delights of Egypt, yet he 
was more than miserable to be deprived of the sight of that 
land which was the lively figure of his celestial country. 
With the men of this world, indeed, earthly advantage 
would have prevailed: but such was the piety of the holy 
man, that the profit of the flesh weighed nothing against the 
loss of spiritual good. But he was more deeply wounded, 
when he saw his death approaching: because, not only was 


416 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLVII. 


he himself deprived.of the inheritance promised to him, but _ 


he was leaving his sons, of doubtful, or at least of feeble, 


faith, buried in Egypt as in a sepulchre. Moreover, his ex- 


ample is proposed to us, that our minds may not languish or 
become enfeebled by the weariness of a protracted warfare : 
yea, the more Satan attempts to depress them to the earth, 
the more fervently let them look and soar towards heaven. 
29. And he called his son Joseph. Hence we infer, not 
only the anxiety of Jacob, but his invincible magnanimity. 
It is a proof of great courage, that none of the wealth or the 
pleasures of Egypt could so allure him, as to prevent him 
from sighing for the land of Canaan, in which he had always 
passed a painful and laborious life. But the constaney of 
his faith appeared still more excellent, when he, command- 
ing his dead body to be carried back to Canaan, encouraged 
his sons to hope for deliverance. Thus it happened that he, 
being dead, animated those who were alive and remained, as 
with the sound of a trumpet. For, to what purpose was this 
great care respecting his sepulture, except that the promise 
of God might be confirmed to his posterity? Therefore, 
though his faith was tossed as upon the waves, yet it was 
so far from suffering shipwreck, that it conducted others into 
the haven. Moreover, he demands an oath from his son 
Joseph, not so much on account of distrust, as to show that 
a matter of the greatest consequence was in hand. Certainly 
he would not, by lightly swearing, profane the name of God: 
but the more sacred and solemn the promise was, the more 
ought all his sons to remember, that it was of great import- 
ance that his body should be carried to the sepulchre of his 
fathers. It is also probable that he prudently thought of 
alleviating any enmity which might be excited against his 
son Joseph. For he knew that this choice of his sepulchre 
would be, by no means, gratifying to the Egyptians ; seeing 
it seemed like casting a reproach on their whole kingdom. 
This stranger, forsooth, as if he could find no fit place for his 
body in this splendid and noble country, wishes to be buried 
in the land of Canaan. Therefore, in order that Joseph 
might more freely dare to ask, and might more easily obtain, 
this favour from the king, Jacob binds him by an oath, And 











CHAP, XLVII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 417 






























certainly Joseph afterwards makes use of this pretext, to 
avoid giving offence. This also was the reason why he re- 
quired Joseph to do for him that last office, which was a 
duty devolving on the brothers in common ; for such a fayour 
would scarcely have been granted to the rest ; and they would 
not have ventured on the act, unless permission had been ob- 
tained. But, as strangers and mean men, they had neither 
favour nor authority. Besides, it was especially necessary for 
Joseph to be on his guard, lest becoming ensnared by the 
allurements of Egypt, he should gradually forsake his own 
kindred. It must, however, be known, that the solemnity of 
an oath was designedly interposed by Jacob, to show that he 
did not, in vain, desire for himself, a sepulchre in the land , 
where he had met with an unfavourable reception ; where he 
had endured many sufferings; and from which, at length, 
being expelled by hunger, he had become an exile. As to his 
commanding the hand to be put under his thigh, we have 
explained what this symbol means in chapter xxiv. ver. 2. 
30. But I will lie with my fathers.’ It appears from this 
passage, that the word “sleep,” whenever it is put for “die,” 
does not refer to the soul, but to the body. For, what did it 
concern him, to be buried with his fathers in the double 
- eave,” unless to testify that he was associated with them after 
death? And by what bond were he and they joined together, 
except this, that not even death itself could extinguish the 
_ power of their faith ; which would seem to utter this voice 
_ from the same sepulchre, “Now also we have a common in- 
heritance.” 
31. And Israel bowed himself wpon the bed’s head. By 
_ this expression, Moses again affirms that Jacob esteemed it 
_ asingular kindness, that his son should have promised to do 
_ what he had required respecting his burial. For he exerts 
his weak body. as much as he is able, in order to give thanks 
_ unto God, as if he had obtained something most desirable. 
He is said to have worshipped towards the head of his bed: 
_ because, seeing he was quite unable to rise from the bed on 
which he lay, he yet composed himself with a solemn air 


1 Dormiam, “I will sleep.” Le 
4 The caye of Machpelah, See above, on Gen. xxl. 9.—Ed. 


VOL. IL. 2D 


418 


in the attitude of one who was praying. The same is record- 
ed of David (1 Kings i. 47) when, having obtained his last 
wish, he celebrates the grace of God. The Greeks have 
translated it, “at the top of his staff:” which the Apostle 
has followed in the Epistle to the Hebrews, (xi. 21.) And 
though the interpreters seem to have been deceived by the 
similitude of words ; because, with the Hebrews, M0" signi- - 
fies “bed,” MWD, “a staff;’ yet the Apostle allows himself 
to cite the passage as it was then commonly used, lest he 
might offend unskilful readers, without necessity.’ More- 
over, they who expound the words to mean that Jacob wor- 
shipped the sceptre of his son, absurdly trifle. The exposi- 
tion of others, that he bowed his head, leaning on the top of | 
his staff, is, to say the least, tolerable. 
no ambiguity in the words of Moses, let it suffice to keep in 


COMMENTARY UPON 














But since there is 


memory what I have said, that, by this ceremony, he open ‘a 


manifested the greatness of his joy. 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 


1. AnD it came to pass after these 
things, that one told Joseph, Behold, 
thy father is sick: and he took with 
him his two sons, Manasseh and 
Ephraim. 

2. And one told Jacob, and said, 
Behold, thy son Joseph cometh unto 
thee: and Israel strengthened him- 
self, and sat upon the bed. 

3. And Jacob said unto Joseph, 


* The reasoning of Calvin, besides being in every respect unsatisfact 
is founded on a misquotation of the original. 
down the words from memory, or else his transcriber has made the mistake ~ 
for him. The only difference between the words rendered “a bed” and a_ 
“ staff” lies in the Masoretic punctuation ; of which, it is well known, the 
authority is disputed. Perhaps one of the strongest arguments on the side 
of those opposed to the points, is derived from this passage and the Apostle’s — 
If the word is not pointed, then it may mean either 
a bed or a staff; if, on the other hand, the present points are of equal 
authority with the text, the Apostle has quoted it wrong. The latter sup- 
It seems to follow, then, that the original - 
was either not pointed, or the copy used by St. Paul was pointed differently — 
from the present text, or he knew that the points were not to be relied upon, 
for giving the precise meaning of the Holy Spirit in the word.—£d. 


interpretation of it. 


position is not to be endured. 

















1. Et fuit post hee dictum fuit 
ipsi Joseph, Ecce, pater tuus egro- 
tat: tuncaccepit duos filios suos se- 
cum, Menasseh et Ephraim, 


2. Et nuntiavit ipsi Jahacob, et 
dixit, Ecce, filius tuus Joseph venit 
ad te. Et roboravit se Israel, et 
sedit super lectum. | 

3. Et dixit Jahacob ipsi Joseph, — 


He appears to have ae 





- CHAP, XLVITI. 


God Almighty appeared unto me at 
Luz in the land of Canaan, and 
blessed me, 

4. And said unto me, Behold, I 
will make thee fruitful, and multiply 
thee, and I will make of thee a mul- 
titude of people; and will give this 
land to thy seed after thee for an 
everlasting possession. 

5. And now thy two sons, Ephraim 
and Manasseh, which were born unto 
thee in the land of Egypt, before I 
came unto thee into Egypt, ave mine; 
as Reuben and Simeon, they shall be 
mine. 

6. And thy issue, which thou be- 
gettest after them, shall be thine, 
and shall be ealled after the name of 
their brethren in their inheritance. 

7. And as for me, when I came 
from Padan, Rachel died by me in 
the land of Canaan in the way, when 
yet there was but a little way to come 
unto Ephrath: and I buried her 
there in the way of Ephrath; the 
same is Beth-lehem. 

8. And Israel beheld Joseph’s 
sons, and said, Who are these ? 

9. And Joseph said unto his father, 
They are my sons, whom God hath 
given me in this place. And he said, 
Bring them, I pray thee, unto me, 
and I will bless them. 

10. Now the eyes of Israel were 
dim for age, so that he could not see. 
And he brought them near unto 
him; and he kissed them, and em- 
braced them. 

11. And Israel said unto Joseph, 
I had not thought to see thy face; 
and, lo, God hath shewed me also 
thy seed. 

12. And Joseph brought them out 
from between his knees, and he bow- 
ed himself with his face to the earth. 

13. And Joseph took them both, 
Ephraim in his right hand toward 
Israel’s left hand, and Manasseh in 
his left hand toward Israel’s right 
hand, and brought them near unto 
him. 

14. And Israel stretched out his 
right hand, and laid it upon Ephraim’s 
head, who was the younger, and his 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


419 


Deus omnipotens apparuit mihi in 
Luz in terra Chenaan, et benedixit 
mihi. 

4. Et dixit ad me, Ecce, ego 
crescere facio te, et multiplicabo te, 
et ponam te in ceetum populorum, et 
dabo terram hance semini tuo post te 
in hereditatem perpetuam. 


5. Et nune duo filii tui, qui nati 
sunt tibi in terra Algypti, antequam 
venirem ad te in Algyptum, mei 
sunt, Ephraim et Menasseh, sicut 
Reuben et Simhon erunt mei. 


6. Verum liberi tui, quos genera- 
bis post eos, tui erunt: secundum 
nomen fratrum suorum vocabuntur 
in hereditate sua. 

7. Porro me veniente e Padan, 
mortua est mihi Rachel in terra 
Chenaan in via, quum adhue esset 
milliare terree ad veniendum in E- 
phrath: et sepelivi eam in via 
Ephrath, ipsa est Bethlehem. 


8. Et vidit Israel filios Joseph, et 
dixit, Cujus sunt isti? 

9. Et dixit Joseph patri suo, Filii 
mei sunt quos dedit mihi Deus hie. 
Et dixit, Duc eos queso ad me, et 
benedicam eis. 


10. (Oculi enim Israel graves erant 
propter senectutem, nec poterat vi- 
dere) et accedere fecit eos ad illum, 
et osculatus est eos, et amplexatus 
est eos. 

11. Et dixit Israel ad Joseph, 
Videre faciem tuam non putabam, et 
ecce, videre fecit me Deus etiam se- 
men tuum. 

12. Eduxit itaque Joseph eos a 
genibus suis, et incurvavit se in fa- 
ciem suam super terram. 

13. Et tulit Joseph ambos ipsos, 
Ephraim ad dexteram suam, a sinis- 
tra Israel, et Menasseh ad sinistram 
suam, a dextra Israel: accedere in- 
quam fecit ad eum. 


14. Et extendit Israel dexteram 
suam, et posuit super caput Ephra- 
im, qui erat minor: et sinistram 


420 


left hand upon Manasseh’s head, 
guiding his hands wittingly ; for Ma- 
nasseh was the first-born. 

15. And he blessed Joseph, and 
said, God, before whom my fathers 
Abraham and Isaac did walk, the 
God which fed me all my life long 
unto this day, 

16. The Angel which redeemed 
me from all evil, bless the lads ; and 
let my name be named on them, and 
the name of my fathers Abraham 
and Isaac ; and let them grow into a 
multitude in the midst of the earth. 

17. And when Joseph saw that 
his father laid his right hand upon 
the head of Ephraim, it displeased 
him: and he held up his father’s 
hand, to remove it from Ephraim’s 
head unto Manasseh’s head. 


1s. And Joseph said unto his 
father, Not so, my father: for this 
is the first-born ; put thy right hand 
upon his head. 

19. And his father refused, and 
said, I know it, my son, I know it: 
he also shall become a people, and 
he also shall be great; but truly his 
younger brother shall be greater 
than he, and his seed shall become a 
multitude of nations. 

20. And he blessed them that 
day, saying, In thee shall Israel bless, 
saying, God make thee as Ephraim, 
and as Manasseh. And he set Ephra- 
im before Manasseh. 

21. And Israel said unto Joseph, 
Behold, I die ; but God shall be with 
you, and bring you again unto the 
land of your fathers. 

22. Moreover, I have given to thee 
one portion above thy brethren, 
which I took out of the hand of the 
Amorite with my sword and with 
my bow. 


1. After these things. 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP. XLVIIT. 


suam super caput Menasseh: con-— 
sulto dirigens manus suas, quum 
Menasseh esset primogenitus, 

15. Et benedixit ipsi Joseph, et 
dixit, Deus, in cujus conspectu ambu- — 
laverunt patres mei Abraham et 
Ishac, Deus qui pascit me ab eetate 
mea usque ad diem hance, 

16. Angelus qui redemit me ab 
omni malo, benedicat pueris: et voce- 
tur in eis nomen meum, et nomen 
patrum meorum Abraham et Ishac, 
et instar piscium sint in multitu- 
dinem in medio terre. 

17. Vidit autem Joseph, quod 
poneret pater suus manum dexteram — 
suam super caput Ephraim, et dis- 
plicuit in oculis ejus, et sustentavit 
manum patris sui, ut removeret eam 
a capite Ephraim, super caput Me- 
nasseh. 

18. Et dixit Joseph patri suo, Non 
sic, pater mi: quia iste est primo- 
genitus, pone dexteram tuam super — 
caput ejus. 

19. Verum renuit pater ejus, et 
dixit, Novi, fili mi, novi, etiam ipse 
erit in populum, et etiam ipse cres- — 
cet: et tamen frater ejus minor cres- 
cet magis quam ipse, et semen ejus 
erit plenitudo Gentium. 


20. Et benedixit eis in die ipsa, 
dicendo, In te benedicet Israel, di- 
cendo, Ponat te Deus sicut Ephraim 
et Menasseh: et posuit Ephraim ante 
Menasseh. 

21. Et dixit Israel ad Joseph, 
Ecce, ego morior: et erit Deus vobis- — 
cum, et redire faciet vos ad terram 
patrum vestrorum. 

22. Ego autem dedi tibi partem 
unam super fratres tuos, quam cepi 
e manu Emorei gladio meo, et arcu — 
meo. 


Moses now passes to the last act of 


Jacob’s life, which, as we shall see, was especially worthy of 


remembrance. 


For, since he knew that he was invested — 


by God with no common character, in being made the father 
of the fathers of the Church, he fulfilled, in the immediate 








CHAP. XLVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 421 


_ prospect of death, the prophetic office, respecting the future 
state of the Church, which had been enjoined upon him. 
_ Private persons arrange their domestic affairs by their last 
4 wills; but very different was the method pursued by this 
holy man, with whom God had established his covenant, 
with this annexed condition, that the succession of grace 
_ should flow down to his posterity. But before I enter fully 
_- on the consideration of this subject, these two things are to 
be observed, to which Moses briefly alludes: first, that Jo- 
seph, being informed of his father’s sickness, immediately 
went to see him; and, secondly, that Jacob, having heard 
of his arrival, attempted to raise his feeble and trembling 
body, for the sake of doing him honour. Certainly, the rea- 
son why Joseph was so desirous of seeing his father, and so 
prompt to discharge all the other duties of filial piety, was, 
that he regarded it as a greater privilege to be a son of Jacob, 
than to preside over a hundred kingdoms. For, in bringing 
his sons with him, he acted as if he would emancipate them 
from the country in which they had been born, and restore 
them to their own stock. For they could not be reckoned 
among the progeny of Abraham, without rendering them- 
selves detested by the Egyptians. Nevertheless, Joseph pre- 
fers that reproach for them, to every kind of wealth and 
glory, if they may but become one with the sacred body of 
the Church. His father, however, rising before him, pays 
him becoming honour, for the kindness received at his hand. 
Meanwhile, by so doing, he fulfils his part in the prediction, 
which before had inflamed his sons with rage; lest his con- 
stituting Ephraim and Manasseh the heads of two tribes, 
should seem grievous and offensive to his sons. 

8. And Jacob said unto Joseph. The design of the holy 
man was to withdraw his son from the wealth and honours 
of Egypt, and to reunite him to the holy race, from which he 
had been, for alittle while, separated. Moreover, he neither 
proudly boasts of his own excellence, nor of his present riches, 
nor of his power, for the sake of inducing his son to comply 
with his wishes ; but simply sets before him the covenant of 
God. So also it is right, that the grace of adoption, as soon 
as it is offered to us, should, by filling our thoughts, extinguish 





422 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLVIIT. | 


our desire for everything splendid and costly in the world. 
This passage is, doubtless, remarkable. Joseph was possessed 
of the most exalted dignity ; he foresees that the most excellent 


nobility would pass, through the memory of his name, to his — 


posterity: he is able to leave them an ample patrimony: nor 
would it be difficult so to advance them in royal favour, that 


they might obtain rank among the nobles of the kingdom. — 
Too many examples show how easy it is not only to be — 


caught, but altogether fascinated, by such allurements. Yea, 
the greater part know, by their own experience, that, as soon 


as the least ray of hope beams upon us, from the world, we 


are torn away from the Lord, and alienated from the pursuit 
of the heavenly life. Ifa very few drops thus inebriate our 
flesh, how dangerous is it to drink from the full bowl? But 
to all the riches and honours of Egypt, Jacob opposes the 
vision in which God had adopted himself and his race, as his 


own people. Whenever, therefore, Satan shall try to entangle — 


us with the allurements of the world, that he may draw us 
away from heaven, let us remember for what end we are 
called ; in order that, in comparison with the inestimable 
treasure of eternal life, all that the flesh would otherwise 
prefer, may become loathsome. For, if holy Joseph formerly 
held an obscure vision in such esteem, that, for this sole 
object, forgetting Egypt, he gladly passed over to the de- 
spised flock of the Church ; how shameful, at this day, is 
our folly, how vile our stupor, how detestable our ingratitude, 
if, at least, we are not equally affected, when our heavenly 
Father, having opened the gate of his kingdom, with unut- 
terable sweetness invites us to himself? At the same time, 
however, we must observe, that holy Jacob does not obtrude 
vain imaginations, for the purpose of alluring his son; but 
places before him the sure promise of God, on which he may 
safely rely. Whence we are taught, that our faith is not 
rightly founded on anything except the sole word of God; 
and also, that this is a sufficiently firm support of faith, to 
prevent it from ever being shaken or overthrown by any 
devices whatever. Wherefore, whenever Satan attempts to 
draw us hither and thither by his enticements, let us learn 
to turn our minds to the word of God, and so firmly to rely 





ee ——— — ——————————_ = _--.. ~~ -* 


CHAP. XLVIIT. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 428 


upon its hidden blessings, that, with a lofty spirit, we may spurn 
those things which the flesh now sees and touches. Jacob 
says that God appeared to him in the land of Canaan, in or- 
der that Joseph, aspiring after that land, might become alien- 
ated in the affection of his heart from the kingdom of Egypt. 
And blessed me. In this place the word “ blessed” does 
not signify the present effect or manifestation of a happy 
life, in the way in which the Lord is sometimes said to bless 
his people, when he indeed declares, by the favour with 
which he follows them, that he openly makes them happy, 
_ because they are received under his protection. But Jacob 
regards himself as blessed, because he, having embraced the 
grace promised to him, does not doubt of its effect. And, 
therefore, I take what immediately follows; namely, I will 
make thee fruitful, &e., as explanatory of what precedes. 

Now the Lord promised that he would cause an assembly of 
nations to descend from him: because thirteen tribes, of 
which the whole body of the nation consisted, were, in a 
sense, so many nations. But since this was nothing more 
than a prelude to that greatness which should afterwards 
follow, when God, having scattered seed over the whole 
world, should gather together a church for himself, out of all 
_ nations ; we may, while we recognise the accomplishment of — 
the benediction under the old dispensation, yet allow that it 
refers to something greater. When therefore the people in- 
creased to so great a multitude, and thirteen populous tribes 
flowed from the twelve patriarchs, Jacob began already to 
grow to an assembly of nations. But from the time that the 
spiritual Israel was diffused through all quarters of the world, 
and various nations were congregated into one Church, this 
multiplication tended towards its completion. Wherefore, it 
is no wonder that holy Jacob should so highly estimate this 
most distinguished mark of divine favour, though, indeed, 
it was deeply hidden from carnal perception. But inasmuch 
as the Lord had held him long in suspense, profane men have 
said, that the old man was in his dotage. Few indeed are 
to be found, in this age, like Joseph, who disregarding the 
enjoyment of pleasures which are at hand, yield entire sub- 
mi ssion to the plain declaration of God’s word. But as Jacob, - 









424 . COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLVIII. 


relying in confidence on invisible grace, had overcome every 
kind of temptation : so now his son, and the true heir of his 


faith, regards with reverence the oracles of the Lord; esteem- 


ing more highly the promise which he was persuaded had 
come down from heaven, though it was in the form of a 
dream, than all the riches of Egypt which he enjoyed. 


For an everlasting possession. We have elsewhere shown — 


the meaning of this expression: namely, that the Israelites 
should be perpetual heirs of the land until the coming of 


Christ, by which the world was renewed. The Hebrew word — 


pow (olam) is by some taken merely for a long time, by 
others for eternity: but seeing that Christ prolongs, to the 
end of time, the grace which was previously shadowed forth 
to the patriarchs; the phrase, im my judgment, refers to 
eternity. For that portion of land was promised to the 
ancient people of God, until the renovation introduced by 
Christ : and now, ever since the Lord has assigned the whole 
world to his people, a fuller fruition of the inheritance be- 
longs to us. 


5. And now thy two sons. Jacob confers on his son the — 


special privilege, that he, being one, should constitute two 
chiefs ; that is, that his two sons should succeed to an equal 
right with their uncles, as if they had been heirs in the first 
degree. But what is this! that a decrepid old man assigns 
to his grandchildren, as a royal patrimony, a sixth part of 
the land in which he had wandered as a stranger, and from 
which now again he is an exile! Who would not have said 
that he was dealing in fables? It is a common proverb, 
that no one can give what he has not. What, therefore, did 
it profit Joseph to be constituted, by an imaginary title, lord 
of that land, in which the donor of it was scarcely permitted 
to drink the very water he had dug for with great labour, and 
from which, at length, famine expelled him? But it hence 
appears with what firm faith the holy fathers relied upon the 





word of the Lord, seeing they chose rather to depend upon | 


his lips, than to possess a fixed habitation in the land. Jacob 
is dying an exile in Egypt; and meanwhile, calls away the 
governor of Egypt from his dignity into exile, that he may 
be well and happy. Joseph, because he acknowledges his 





CHAP. XLVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 425 


_ father as a prophet of God, who utters no inventions of his 


own, esteems as highly the dominion offered to him, which 
has never yet become apparent, as if it were already in his 
possession. Moreover, that Jacob commands the other sons 
of Joseph, (if there should be any,) to be reckoned in the 
families of these two brothers, is as if he directed them to 
be adopted by the two whom he adopts to himself. 

7. And as for me, when I came from Padan. He men- 
tions the death and burial of his wife Rachel, in order that 
the name of his mother might prove a stimulus to the mind 
of Joseph. For since all the sons of Jacob had sprung from 
Syria, it was not a little to the purpose, that they should be 
thoroughly acquainted with the history which we have be- 
fore considered ; namely, that their father, returning into 
the land of Canaan, by the command and under the protec- 
tion of God, brought his wives with him. For if it was not 
grievous to women, to leave their father, and to journey into 
a distant land, their example ought to be no slight induce- 
ment to their sons to bid farewell to Egypt; and at the 
command of the same God, strenuously prepare themselves 
for taking possession of the land of Canaan. 

8. And Israel beheld Joseph’s sons. I have no doubt that 
he had inquired concerning the youths, before he called 
them his heirs. But in the narration of Moses there is a 
hysteron proteron. Andinthe answer of Joseph we observe, 
what we have elsewhere alluded to, that the fruit of the 
womb is not born by chance, but is to be reckoned among the 
precious gifts of God. This confession indeed finds a ready 
utterance from the tongues of all; but there are few who 
heartily acknowledge that their seed has been given them by 
God. And hence a large proportion of man’s offspring be- 
comes continually more and more degenerate: because the 
ingratitude of the world renders it unable to perceive the 
effect of the blessings of God. We must now briefly consider 
the design of Moses: which was to show that a solemn symbol 
was interposed, by which the adoption might be ratified. 
Jacob puts his hands upon his grandsons; for what end? 
Truly to prove that he gave them a place among his sons: 
and thus constitutes Joseph who was one, into two chiefs. For 






426 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XLVIII. 


this was not his wish as a private person ; according to the 
manner in which fathers and grandfathers are wont to pray 
for prosperity to their descendents: but a divine authority 
suggested it, as was afterwards proved by the event. There- 
fore he commands them to be brought near to him, that he 
might confer on them a new honour, as if he had been ap- 


pointed the dispenser of it by the Lord; and Joseph, on the 


other hand, begins with adoration, giving thanks to God. 
12. And Joseph brought them out. Moses explains more 
fully what he had touched upon in a single word. Joseph 
brings forth his sons from his own lap to his father’s knees, 
not only for the sake of honour, but that he may present 
them to receive a blessing from the prophet of God; for 
he was certainly persuaded, that holy Jacob did not desire 
to embrace his grandsons after the common manner of men ; 
but inasmuch as he was the interpreter of God, he wished to 
impart to them the blessing deposited with himself. And 
although, in.dividing the land of Canaan, he assigned them 
equal portions with his sons, yet the imposition of his hands 
had respect to something higher; namely, that they should 
be two of the patriarchs of the Church, and should hold an 
honourable pre-eminence in the spiritual kingdom of God. 
14. And Israel stretched out his right hand. Seeing his 
eyes were dim with age, so that he could not, by looking, 
discern which was the elder, he yet intentionally placed his 
hands across. And therefore Moses says that he guided his 
hands wittingly, because he did not rashly put them forth, 
nor transfer them from one youth to the other for the sake 
of feeling them: but using judgment, he purposely directed 
his right hand to Ephraim who was the younger: but placed 
his left hand on the first-born. Whence we gather that the 
Holy Spirit was the director of this act, who irradiated the 
mind of the holy man, and caused him to see more correctly, 


than those who were the most clear-sighted, into the nature ~ 


of this symbolical act. I shall avoid saying more, because 
we shall be able to inquire into it from other passages. 

15. God before whom. Although Jacob knew that a dis- 
pensation of the grace of God was committed to him, in order 
that he might effectually bless his grandchildren; yet he arro- 


————— er 








CHAP. XLVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 427 


“gates nothing to himself, but suppliantly resorts to prayer, 


lest he should, in the least degree, detract from the glory of 


God. For as he was the legitimate administrator of the 


blessing, so it behoved him to acknowledge God as its sole 
Author. And hence a common rule is to be deduced for all 
_ the ministers and pastors of the Church. For though they 


are not only called witnesses of celestial grace, but are also 


, entrusted with the dispensation of spiritual gifts ; yet when 


_ they are compared with God, they are nothing; because he 


alone contains all things within himself. Wherefore let them 


learn willingly to keep their own place, lest they should ob- 
_ secure the name of God. And truly, since the Lord, by no 


means, appoints his ministers, with the intention of derogating 


_ from his own power; therefore, mortal man cannot, without 


sacrilege, desire to seem anything separate from God. In the 
words of Jacob we must note, first, that he invokes God, in 
whose sight his fathers Abraham and Isaac had walked: for 


_ since the blessing depended upon the covenant entered into 


oh EEL NS 


with them, it was necessary that their faith should be an in- 
tervening link between them and their descendants. God 
had chosen them and their posterity for a people unto him- 
self: but the promise was efficacious for this reason, because, 
being apprehended by faith, it had taken a lively root. And 
thus it came to pass, that they transmitted the right of suc- 
cession to Jacob himself. We nowsee that he does not bring 
forward, in vain, or unseasonably, that faith of the fathers, 
without which he would not have been a legitimate successor 
of grace, by the covenant of God: not that Abraham and 
Isaac had acquired so great an honour for themselves, and 
their posterity; or were, in themselves, so excellent ; but 
because the Lord seals and sanctions by faith, those benefits 
which he promises us, so that they shall not fail. 

The God which fed me. Jacob now descends to his own 
feclings, and states that from his youth the had constantly 
experienced, in various ways, the divine favour towards him. 
He had before made the knowledge of God received through 
his word, and the faith of his fathers, the basis of the bless- 
ing he pronounces ; he now adds another confirmation from 
experience itself; as if he would say, that he was not pro- 


428 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLVIII. 


nouncing a blessing which consisted in an empty sound of © 
words, but one of which he had himself enjoyed the fruit, all — 


his life long. Now though God causes his sun to shine indis- 
criminately on the good and evil, and feeds unbelievers as 


well as believers: yet because he affords, only to the latter, | 
the peculiar sense of his paternal love in the use of his gifts, — 


Jacob rightly uses this as a reason for the confirmation of his 
faith, that he had always been protected by the help of God. 
Unbelievers are fed, even to the full, by the liberality of God: 
but they gorge themselves, like swine, which, while acorns are 


falling for them from the trees, yet have their snouts fixed to 
the earth. But in God’s benefits this is the principal thing, 
that they are pledges or tokens of his paternal love towards — 


us. Jacob, therefore, from the sense of piety, with which the 
children of God are endued, rightly adduces, as proof of the 
promised grace, whatever good things God had bestowed upon 
him; as if he would say, that he himself was a decisive ex- 
ample to show how truly and faithfully the Lord had engaged 
by covenant to be a father to the children of Abraham. Let 
us also learn hence, carefully to consider and meditate upon 
whatever benefits we receive from the hand of God, that they 
may prove so many supports for the confirmation of our faith. 
The best method of seeking God is to begin at his word ; after 
this, (if I may so speak,) experimental knowledge is added. 
Now whereas, in this place, the singular gratitude of the holy 
man is conspicuous; yet this circumstance adds to his honour, 
that, while involved in manifold sufferings, by which he was 
almost borne down, he celebrates the continual goodness of 
God. For although, by the rare and wonderful power of 
God, he had been, in an extraordinary manner, delivered 
from many dangers; yet it was a mark of an exalted and 
courageous mind, to be able to surmount so many and so 
great obstacles, to fly on the wings of faith to the goodness 
of God, and instead of being overwhelmed by a mass of eyils, 
to perceive the same goodness in the thickest darkness. 






ee 





16. The Angel which redeemed me. He so joins the Angel — 
to God as to make him his equal. Truly he offers him — 


divine worship, and asks the same things from him as from 
God. If this be understood indifferently of any angel what- 























OHAP. XLVIIT. THE BOOK OF GENESIS, 429 


ever, the sentence is absurd. Nay, rather, as Jacob himself 
sustains the name and character of God, in blessing his son! 
he is superior, in this respect, to the angels. Wherefore it is 
_ necessary that Christ should be here meant, who does not 
| Wear in vain the title of Angel, because he had become the 
perpetual Mediator. And Paul testifies that he was the 
Leader and Guide of the journey of his ancient people. 
(1 Cor. x. 4.) He had not yet indeed been sent by the Fa- 
ther, to approach more nearly to us by taking our flesh, but 
_ because he was always the bond of connection between God 
' and man, and because God formally manifested himself in 
_ no other way than through him, he is: properly called the 
' Angel. To which may be added, that the faith of the fa- 
| thers was always fixed on his future mission. He was there- 
| fore the Angel, because even then he poured forth his rays, 
| that the saints might approach God, through him, as Media- 
_ tor. For there was always so wide a distance between God 
_ and men, that, without a mediator, there could,be no commt- 
nication. Nevertheless though Christ appeared in the form 
of an angel, we must remember what the Apostle says to 
the Hebrews, (ii. 16,) that “ he took not on him the nature 
_ of angels,” so as to become one of them, in the manner in 
which he truly became man ; for even when angels put on 
human bodies, they did not, on that account, become men. 
_ Now since we are taught, in these words, that the peculiar 
office of Christ is to defend us and to deliver us from all evil, 
let us take heed not to bury this grace in impious oblivion: 
yea, seeing that now it is more clearly exhibited to us, than 
formerly to the saints under the law, since Christ openly de- 
clares that the faithful are eommitted to his care, that not 
one of them might perish, (John xvii. 12,) so much the more 
ought it to flourish in our hearts, both that it may be highly 
celebrated by us with suitable praise, and that it may stir us 
up to seek this guardianship of our best Protector. And this 
is exceedingly necessary for us; for if we reflect how many 
dangers surround us, that we scarcely pass a day without 
being delivered from a thousand deaths; whence does this 


: 
a 
§ 
i 
4 
\ 
3 


1 In benedicendo filio. It appears that though the singular number is 
used, yet reference is made to the two grandsons of Jacob.—£d. 


430 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLVITI. 


arise, except from that care which is taken of us, by the Son 
of God, who has received us under his protection, from the 
hand of his Father. : 

And let my name be named on them. This is a mark of 
the adoption before mentioned: for he puts his name upon 
them, that they may obtain a place among the patriarchs. 
Indeed the Hebrew phrase signifies nothing else than to be 
reckoned among the family of Jacob. Thus the name of the 
husband is said to be called upon the wife, (Is. iv. 1,) be- 
cause the wife borrows the name from the head to which she 
is subject. So much the more ridiculous is the ignorance of 
the Papists, who would prove hence that the dead are to be 
invoked in prayers. Jacob, say they, desired after his death 
to be invoked by his posterity. What! that being prayed to, 
he might bring them succour; and not—according to the — 
plain intention of the speaker—that Ephraim and Manasseh ~ 
might be added to the society of the patriarchs, to constitute — 
two tribes of the holy people! Moreover it is wonderful, that 
the Papists, having under this pretext framed for themselves 
innumerable patrons, should have passed over Abraham, — 
Isaac, and Jacob, as unworthy of the office. But the Lord, by 
this brutish stupor, has avenged their impious profanation of 
his name. What Jacob adds in the next clause, namely, that — 
they should grow into a multitude,’ refers also to the same 
promise. The sum amounts to this, that the Lord would 
complete in them, what he had promised to the patriarchs. _ 

17. And when Joseph saw. Because by crossing his arms, | 
Jacob had so placed his hands as to put his left hand upon 
the head of the first-born, Joseph wished to correct this pro- — 
ceeding, as if it had been a mistake. He thought that the — 
error arose from dimness of vision ; but his father followed — 
the Spirit of God as his secret guide, in order that he might — 
transfer the title of honour, which nature had conferred upon | 





1 435°, (yedegu,) Ainsworth translates the passage, “ let them increase 
like fish into a multitude.” The Hebrew word for fish is from the above . 
root, because of their prolific property ; and consequently the use of such — 
a term naturally suggests the notion of an extraordinary increase. Thus — 
the Chaldee paraphrase adds, “ like the fishes of the sea.” Hence, in the 
time of Moses there were 85,200 men of war descended from Joseph, a 
greater number than from any other of Jacob’s sons. See Ainsworth.—Ed, 





CHAP, XLVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. : 431 


the elder to the younger. For, as he did not rashly assume to 
himself the office of conveying the blessing ; so was it not 

lawful for him to attempt anything according to his own will. 
_ And at length it was evident by the event, that whatever he 
had done had been dictated to him from heaven. Whereas 
Joseph took it amiss, that Manasseh, who by the right of na- 
ture was first, should be cast down to the second place, this 
feeling arose from faith and from holy reverence for the pro- 
_ phetic office. For he would easily have borne to see him 
_ make a mistake in the order of embracing the youths ; if he 


_ had not known that his father, as a minister of divine grace, 


_ so far from acting a futile part, was but pronouncing on earth 
_ what God would ratify in heaven. Yet he errs in binding the 


_ grace of God to the accustomed order of nature: as if the 





Lord did not often purposely change the law of nature, to 
teach us that what he freely confers upon us, is entirely the 
_ result of his own will. If God were rendering to every one 
his due, a certain rule might properly be applied to the dis- 
tribution of his favours ; but since he owes no one anything, 
_ he is free to confer gifts at his own pleasure. More especially, 
lest any one should glory in the flesh, he designedly illus- 
_ trates his own free mercy, in choosing those who had no 
| worthiness of their own. What shall we say was the cause, 
_ why he raised Ephraim above his own brother, to whom, ac- 
- cording to usage, he was inferior? If any one should suppose 
that Ephraim had some hidden seed of excellence, he not only 
vainly trifles, but impiously perverts the counsel of God. 
For since God derives from himself and from his own liberal- 
_ ity, the cause, why he prefers one of the two to the other: 
_ he confers the honour upon the younger, for the purpose of 
showing that he is bound by no claims of human merit ; but 
that he distributes his gifts freely, as it seems good unto 
him. And while this liberty of God is extended to every 
kind of good, it yet shines the most clearly in the first adop- 
tion, whereby he predestinates to himself, those whom he sees 
fit, out of the ruined mass. Wherefore, be it our part to 
leave to God his whole power untouched, and if at any time, 
our carnal sense rebels, let us know that none are more truly 
wise than they who are willing to account themselves blind, 


432 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLVIIL. 


when contemplating the wonderful dealings of God, in order 
that they may trace the cause of any difference he makes, to 
himself alone. We have seen above, that the eyes of Jacob 
were dim: but in crossing his arms, with apparent negligence, 
in order to comply with God’s purpose of election, he is more 
clear-sighted than his son Joseph, who, according to the sense 
of the flesh, inquires with too much acuteness. They who 


insanely imagine that this judgment was formed from a view — 


of their works, sufficiently declare, by this one thing, that 
they do not hold the first rudiments of faith. For either the 
adoption common both to Manasseh and to Ephraim, was a 
free gift, or a reward of debt. Concerning this second sup- 
position all ambiguity is removed, by many ‘passages of 


Scripture, in which the Lord makes known his goodness, in — 
having freely loved and chosen his people. Now no one is so 


ignorant, as not to perceive that the first place is not assigned 
to one or the other, according to merit ; but is given gra- 
tuitously, since it so pleases the Lord. With regard to the 
posture of the hands, the subtlety of certain persons, who 
conjecture that the mystery of the cross was included in it, 
is absurd ; for the Lord intended nothing more than that 
the crossing of the right hand and the left should indicate a 
change in the accustomed order of nature. 

19. He also shall become a people. Jacob does not dis- 
pute which of the youths shall be the more worthy; but only 
pronounces what God had decreed with himself, concerning 
each, and, what would take place after a long succession of 
time. He seeks, therefore, no causes elsewhere ; but contents 
himself with this one statement, that Ephraim will be more 
greatly multiplied than Manasseh. And truly our dignity is 
hidden in the counsel of God alone, until, by his vocation, he 
makes it manifest what he wills to do with us. Meanwhile, 
sinful emulation is forbidden, when he commands Manasseh 
to be contented with his lot. They are therefore altogether 
insane, who hew out dry and perforated cisterns, in seeking 
causes of divine adoption ; whereas, everywhere, the Scripture 
defines in one word, that they are called to salvation whom 
God has chosen, (Rom. viii. 29,) and that the primary source of 
election is his free good pleasure. The form of the benediction, 








a 


























‘CHAP. XLVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 433 


which is shortly afterwards related, more fully confirms what 
_ I have alluded to, that the grace of God towards both is 
commended, in order that Manassch, considering that more 
was given to him than he deserved, might not envy his bro- 
ther. Moreover, this blessing pronounced on Ephraim and 
Manasseh is not to be taken in the same sense as the former, 
in which it is said, In thy seed shall all nations be blessed : 
but the simple meaning is, that the grace of God should be 
so conspicuous towards the two sons of Joseph, as to furnish 
the people of Israel with a form by which to express their 
good wishes. 
21. And Israel said unto Joseph. Jacob repeats what he 
had said. And truly all his sons, and especially Joseph and 
his sons, required something more than one simple confirma- 
tion, in order that they might not fix their abode in Egypt, 
but might dwell, in their minds, in the land of Canaan. He 
mentions his own death, for the purpose of teaching them 
that the eternal truth of God by no means depended on the 
life of men: as if he had said, my life, seeing it is short and 
fading, passes away; but the promise of God, which has no 
limit, will flourish when I also am dead. No vision had 
appeared unto his sons, but God had ordained the holy old 
" man as the intermediate sponsor of hiscovenant. He there- 
_ fore sedulously fulfils the office enjoined upon hin, taking 
| timely precaution that their faith should not be shaken by 
his death. So when the Lord delivers his word to the world 
by mortal men, although they die, having finished their 
course of life according to the flesh ; yet the voice of God is 
not extinguished with them, but quickens us even at the pre- 
sent day. Therefore Peter writes, that he will endeavour, that 
after his decease, the Church may be mindful of the doc- 
trine committed unto him. (2 Pet. i. 15.) 
Unto the land of your fathers. It is not without reason 
that he claims for himself and his fathers, the dominion 
over that land in which they had always wandered as stran- 
gers; for whereas it might seem that the promise of God 
had failed, he excites his sons to a good hope, and pronounces, 
with a courageous spirit, that land to be his own, in which, 
at length, he scarcely obtained a sepulchre, and that only by 

VoL. II. 24 


434 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLVIITI. 


fayour. Whence then was this great confidence, except that 
he would accustom his sons, by his example, to have faith in 

the word of God? Now this doctrine is also common to us; 
because we never rely with sufficient firmness on the word of 
God, so long as we are led by our own feelings. Nay, until 

our faith rises to lay hold on those things which are removed | 
afar off, we know not what it is to set our seal to the word of 

God. 

22. I have given to thee one portion. In order to increase 
the confidence of his son Joseph, Jacob here assigns him a 
portion beyond his proper lot. Some expound the passage 
otherwise ; as if he called him a double heir in his two sons, 
thus honouring him with one portion more than the rest. 
But there is no doubt that he means a certain territory. 
And John, (chap. iv. 5,) removes all controversy ; for, speak- 
ing of the field adjoining Sychar, which before was called 
Shechem, says, it was that which Jacob gave to his son 
Joseph. And, in the last chapter of Joshua, (ver. 32,) it is 
said to have come into the possession of the sons of Joseph. 
But in the word DIY, (shechem,) which among the Hebrews 
signifies a part, allusion is made to the proper name of the 
place. But here a question arises; how can_he say that he 
had obtained the field by his sword and by his bow, which 
he had purchased with money, as is stated before, (chap. 
xxxili. 19,) and is again recorded in the above mentioned 
chapter of Joshua ? Seeing, however, that only a small portion 
of the field, where he might pitch his tents, was bought, I do 
not doubt that here he comprised a much greater space. — 
For we may easily calculate, from the price, how small a por- 
tion of land he possessed, before the destruction of the city. 
He gives, therefore, now to his son Joseph, not only the place 
of his tent, which had cost a hundred pieces of silver, but 
the field which had been the common of the city of Sychar. 
But it remains to inquire how he may be said to have obtained 
it by his sword, whereas the inhabitants had been wickedly 
and cruelly slain by Simeon and Levi. How then could it be 
acquired by the right of conquest, from those against whom — 
war had been unjustly brought; or rather, against whom, — 
without any war, the most cruel perfidy. had been practised ? 

















CHAP. XLVIII. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


4.35 
_ Jerome resorts to allegory, saying that the field was obtained 
_ by money, which is called strength, or justice. Others sup- 
_ pose a prolepsis, as if Jacob was speaking of a future acqui- 
‘sition of the land: a meaning which, though I do not reject, 
seems yet somewhat forced. I rather incline to this inter- 
' pretation : first, that he wished to testify that he had taken 
nothing by means of his two sons Simeon and Levi; who, 
_ having raged like robbers, were not lawful conquerors, and 
had never obtained a single foot of land, after the perpetra- 
| tion of the slaughter. For, so far were they from gaining 
' anything, that they compelled their father to fly ; nor would 
_ escape have been possible, unless they had been delivered 
_ by miracle. When, however, Jacob strips them of their 
; empty title, he transfers the right of victory to himself, as 
| being divinely granted to him. For though he always held 
_ their wickedness in abhorrence, and will show his detesta- 
- tion of it in the next chapter; yet, because they had armed 
his whole household, they fought as under his auspices. 
_ Gladly would he have preserved the citizens of Shechem, a 
_ design which he was not able to accomplish ; yet he appropri- 
ates to himself the land left empty and deserted by their 
_ destruction, because, for his sake, God had spared the mur- 
~ derers.' 


CHAPTER XLIX. 


1. Anp Jacob called unto his sons, 


_ and said, Gather yourselves together, 


that I may tell you that which shall 
befall you in the last days. 
2. Gather yourselves together, and 


hear, ye sons of Jacob; and hearken 
_ unto Israel your father. 


1. Postea vocavit Jahacob filios 
suos, et dixit, Congregate vos, et an- 
nuntiabo vobis quod eventurum est 
yobis in novissimo dierum. 

2. Congregate vos, et audite filil 
Jahacob, audite inquam Israel pa- 
trem vestrum.. 


1 Perhaps this interpretation of a confessedly obseure passage, will be 


deemed rather ingenious than solid. 


It is supposed by many, that Jacob 


refers to some transaction of which no record is preserved. He may, like 


Abraham, on some occasion, have armed his household to recover from the 
hands of the Amorites the field of Shechem, which he had previously pur- 
chased. But the whole must be left in hopeless obscurity. Ainsworth 
thinks that Jacob is speaking proleptically, and representing the future 
eonduct of his children under Joshua, whose sword and bow he here calls 
his own. But this seems far-fetched. The Chaldee interpretation, that 
the sword and bow are figuratively used for prayer and supplication, 1s still 
more improbable.— Ed. 





436 


he Reuben, thou art my first- 
eae and the beginning of my 
stooge the excellency of dignity, 
and the excellency of power: 

4. Unstable as water, thou shalt 
not excel; because thou wentest up 
to thy father’s bed; then defiledst 
thou i¢: he went up to my couch. 

5. Simeon and Levi are brethren ; 
instruments of cruelty are in their 

habitations. 
~ 6. O my soul, come not thou into 
their secret; unto their assembly, 
mine honour, be not thou united! 
for in their anger they slew a man, 
and in their self-will they digged 
down a wall. 

7. Cursed be their anger, for it 
was fierce; and their wrath, for it 
was cruel: I will divide them in 
Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. 

8. Judah, thou art he whom thy 
brethren shall praise: thy hand 
shall be in the neck of thine enemies ; 
thy father’s children shall bow down 
before thee. 

9. Judah is a lion’s whelp: from 
the prey, my son, thou art gone up: 
he stooped down, he couched as a 
lion, and as an old lion; who shall 
rouse him up ? 

10. The sceptre shall not depart 
from Judah, nor a lawgiver from 
between his feet, until Shiloh come ; 
and unto him shall the gathering of 
the people be: 

11. Binding his fole unto the vine, 
and his ass’s colt unto the choice 
vine; he washed his garments in 
wine, and his clothes in the blood of 
grapes : 

12. His eyes shall be red with 
wine, and his teeth white with milk. 

13. Zebulun shall dwell at the 
haven of the sea; and he shall be 
for an haven of ships: and his bor- 
der shall be unto Zidon. 

14. Issachar is a strong ass couch- 
ing down between two burdens: 

15. And he saw that rest was 
good, and the land that it was pleas- 
ant ; and bowed his shoulder to bear, 
and became a servant unto tribute. 


COMMENTARY UPON 






























CHAP. XLIX, 


3. Reuben primogenitus meus, t 
fortitudo mea, et principium robe ia 
mei: excellentia itatis et excel- 
Jentia roboris. i 

4. Velocitas fuit tibi instar aque 
non excelles: quia ascendisti cub a 
patris tui, tune polluisti stratu 
meum, evanuit. is 

5. Simhon et Levi fratres, arma 
iniquitatis in habitationibus eorum. 


6. In secretum eorum non veniat 
anima mea, in coetu eorum non uni- 
aris lingua mea: quia in furore s 
occiderunt virum, et voluntate s 
eradicaverunt murum. 


7. Maledictus furor eorum, quia 
robustus, et ira eorum, quia dea 
est: dividam eos in Jahacob et dis : 
pergam eos in Israel. 

8. Jehudah es tu, inlaid 
fratres tui: manus tua erit in cervice 
inimicorum tuorum, ineurvabunt s 
tibi filii patris tui. 


_ 

9. Ut catulus leonis J ehudah : e 
preeda, fili mi, ascendisti: incurvavit 
se, cubuit sieut leo, sicut leo major, 
quis suscitabit eum ? 


10. Non recedet sceptrum ex Je- 
hudah, et Legislator e medio pedum 
ejus, donec veniat Messias: et ei erit 
aggregatio populorum, 


11. Ligans ad vitem pullum suum, 
et ad ramum filium asin suse: lavis 
in vino vestimentum suum, et in s 
guine uvarum operimentum suum. 


i 


_ 


12. Rubicundus oculis a vino, et 
candidus dentibus a lacte. 7 
13. Zebulon in portu marium he 
bitabit, et erit in portum navium, € 
terminus ejus usque ad Sidon. 


14. Issachar wt asinus OSSeUs, CU- 
bans inter duas sarcinas. 

15. Et vidit requiem, quod esset 
bonum: et terram quod ‘esset pul- 
chra, et inclinavit humerum suum 
ad portandum, et fuit tributo ser- 
viens. | 
















CHAP. XLIX. 


_ 16. Dan shall judge his people, 
s one of the tribes of Israel. 
_ 17. Dan shall be a serpent by the 
_ way, an adder in the path, that biteth 
the horse heels, so that his rider shall 
fall backward. 
18. I have waited for thy salva- 
tion, O Lord. 
_ 19. Gad, a troop shall overcome 
him: but he shall overcome at the 


; | 20. Out of Asher bis bread shall 
be fat, and he shall yield royal dain- 
ties 


21. Naphtali is a hind let loose: 
| he giveth goodly words. 

| 22. Joseph is a fruitful bough, 
| even a fruitful bough by a well, whose 
branches run over the wall. 

23. The archers have sorely 

ieved him, and Shot at him, and 
hated him: 

24. But his bow abode in strength, 
and the arms of his hands were made 
_ strong by the hands of the mighty 
_ God of Jacob: (from thence is the 
_ Shepherd, the stone of Israel :) 

_. 25. Even by the God of thy fa- 
id ther, who shall help thee; and by 
_ the Almighty, who shall bless thee 
with blessings of heaven above, bless- 
ings of the deep that lieth under, 
blessings of the breasts, and of the 
_ womb: 
__ 26. The blessings of thy father 
| have prevailed above the blessings 
of thy progenitors unto the utmost 
bound of the everlasting hills: they 
shall be on the head of Joseph, 
_ and on the crown of the head of 
him that was. separate from his 
_ brethren. 
_ 27. Benjamin shall ravin as a 
wolf: in the morning he shall devour 
_ the prey, and at night he shall divide 
_ the spoil. 
28. All these are the twelve tribes 
_ of Israel: and this is it that their 
_ father spake unto them, and blessed 
_ them; every one according to his 
_ blessing he blessed them. 
b 29. And he charged them, and 
_ said unto them, I am to be gathered 
unto my people: bury me with my 


' 





THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


437 


_ 16. Dan judicabit populum suum 
sicut unus e tribubus Israel. — 

_17. Evit Dan ut serpens juxta 
viam, ut cerastes juxta semitam, 
mordens caleaneos equi, et cecidit 
equitans retrorsum. 

18. Salutem tuam exspectavi Je- 
hova, 

19. Gad, exercitus succidet eum, 
et ipse succidet ad extremum. 


20. Aser, erit pinguis panis ejus, 
et ipse dabit delicias regis. 


21. Naphthali wt cerva dimissa, 
dans eloquia pulchritudinis. 

22. Ut arbor fructificans Joseph, 
ut ramus crescens juxta fontem, rami 
incedent super murum. 

23. Et amaritudine affecerunt 
eum, et jaculati sunt, et odio habue- 
runt eum sagittaril. 

24. Et mansit in fortitudine arcus 
ejus, et roboraverunt se brachia ma- 
nuum ejus a manibus potentis Ja- 
hacob, inde pastor lapidis Israel. 


25. A Deo patris tui, et adjuvabit 
te: et ab Omnipotente, et benedicet 
tibi benedictionibus cceli sursum, 
benedictionibus abyssi cubantis de- 
orsum, benedictionibus uberum et 
vulvyee. 


26. Benedictiones patris tui for- 
tiores fuerunt benedictionibus geni- 
torum meorum, usque ad terminum 
collium perpetuorum erunt super 
caput Joseph, et super verticem Na- 
zareei inter fratres suos. 


27. Benjamin wt lupus rapiet, 
mane comedet predam, et vesperl 
dividet spolia. 


28. Omnes ist tribus Israel duo- | 
decim. Et hoe est quod loquutus 
est eis pater eorum, et benedixit eis, 
unicuique secundum benedictionem 
suam, benedixit eis. 

29. Et preecepit eis, et dixit ad 
eos, Ego congregor ad populum 
meum: sepelite me cum patribus 


438 


fathers in the cave that is in the 
field of Ephron the Hittite, 

30. In the cave that is in the 
field of Machpelah, which is before 
Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which 
Abraham bought with the field of 
Ephron the Hittite, for a possession 
of. a burying-place. 

31. There they buried Abraham 
and Sarah his wife; there they bu- 
ried Isaac and Rebekah his wife; 
and there I buried Leah. 

32. The purchase of the field, and 
of the cave that is therein, was from 
the children of Heth. 

33. And when Jacob had made 
an end of commanding his sons, he 
gathered up his feet into the bed, 
and yielded up the ghost, and was 
gathered unto his people. 


1. And Jacob called. In the former chapter, the blessing 


COMMENTARY UPON 













CHAP. XLIX, 


meis in spelunca, que est in agro 
Hephron Hittzi. 

30. In spelunca, que est in agro 
duplici, que est ante Mamre: in 
terra Chenaan, quam emit Abraham 
cum agro ab Hephron Hitteo in 
possessionem sepuleri. 


31. Ibi sepelierunt Abraham et 
Sarah uxorem ejus: ibi sepelierunt 
Ishac et Ribeah uxorem ejus, et ibi 
sepelivi Leah. 

32. Emptio agri et speluncee, que 
est in eo, fuit a filiis Heth. 


33. Et finem fecit Iahacob pree- 
cipiendi filiis suis: et collegit pedes 
suos in lecto et obiit, et aggregatus 
est ad populos suos. 1 
















on Ephraim and Manasseh was related, because, before Jacob 
should treat of the state of the whole nation about to spring” 
from him, it was right that these two grandsons should be 
inserted into the body of his sons. Now, as if carried above 
the heavens, he announces, not in the character of a man, 
but as from the mouth of God, what shall be the condition 
of them all, for a long time to come. And it will be proper 
first to remark, that as he had then thirteen sons, he sets 
before his view, in each of their persons, the same number: 
of nations or tribes: in which act the admirable lustre of 
his faith is conspicuous. For since he had often heard from» 
the Lord, that his seed should be increased to a multitude 
of people, this oracle is to him like a sublime mirror, in 
which he may perceive things deeply hidden from human 
sense. Moreover, this is not a simple confession of faith, by 
which Jacob testifies that he hopes for whatever had been 
promised him by the Lord; but he rises superior to men, as 
the interpreter and ambassador of God, to regulate the future 
state of the Church. Now, since some interpreters perceived 
this prophecy to be noble and magnificent, they have thought . 
that it would not be adorned with its proper dignity, unless 
they should extract from it certain new mysteries. Thus it has 
happened, that in striving earnestly to elicit profound alle- 





a 
’ 


CHAP. XLIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 439 


-gories, they have departed from the genuine sense of the 
words, and have corrupted, by their own inventions, what 
is here delivered for the solid edification of the pious. 
But lest we should depreciate the literal sense, as if it did 
not contain speculations sufficiently profound, let us mark 
the design of the Holy Spirit. In the first place, the sons 
of Jacob are informed beforehand, of their future fortune, 
that they may know themselves to be objects of the special 
care of God ; and that, although the whole world is governed 
by his providence, they, notwithstanding, are preferred to 
other nations, as members of his own household. It seems 
apparently a mean and contemptible thing, that a region 
productive of vines, which should yield abundance of choice 
wine, and one rich in pastures, which should supply milk, is 
promised to the tribe of Judah. But if any one will con- 
sider that the Lord is hereby giving an illustrious proof 


of his own election, in descending, like the father of a 


family, to the care of food, and also showing, in minute 
things, that he is united by the sacred bond of a covenant 
to the children of Abraham, he will look for no deeper mys- 


_ tery. In the second place; the hope of the promised inherit- 


ance is again renewed unto them. And, therefore, Jacob, 
as if he would put them in possession of the land by his 


~ own hand, expounds familiarly, and as in an affair actually 


present, what kind of habitation should belong to each of 
them. Can the confirmation of a matter so serious, appear 
contemptible to sane and prudent readers? It is, how- 
ever, the principal design of Jacob more correctly to point 


_ out from whence a king should arise among them, who 


should bring them complete felicity. And in this manner 
he explains what had been promised obscurely, concerning 
the blessed seed. In these things there is so great weight, 
that the simple treating of them, if only we were skilful in- 
terpreters, ought justly to transport us with admiration. 
But (omitting all things else) an advantage of no ¢ommon . 
kind consists in this single point, that the mouth of impure 
and profane men, who freely detract from the eredibility of 
Moses, is shut, so that they no longer dare to contend that 
he did not speak by a celestial impulse. Let us imagine 


440 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLIX. 


that Moses does not relate what Jacob had before prophe- 
sied, but speaks in his own person; whence, then, could he 
divine what did not happen till many ages afterwards? 
Such, for instance, is the prophecy concerning the kingdom 
of David. And there is no doubt that God commanded the 
land to be divided by lot, lest any suspicion should arise 
that Joshua had divided it among the tribes, by compact, 
and as he had been instructed by his master. After the 
Israelites had obtained possession of the land, the division © 
of it was not made by the will of men. Whence was it that 
a dwelling near the sea-shore was given to the tribe of 
Zebulun ; a fruitful plain to the tribe of Asher; and to the 
others, by lot, what is here recorded ; except that the Lord 
would ratify his oracles by the result, and would show openly, 
that nothing then occurred which he had not, a long time 
before, declared should take place? I now return to the 
words of Moses, in which holy Jacob is introduced, relating 
what he had been taught by the Holy Spirit concerning 
events still very remote. But some, with canine rage,demand,! - 
Whence did Moses derive his knowledge of a conversation, 
held in an obscure hut, two hundred years before his time ? I 
ask in return, before I give an answer, Whence had he his 
knowledge of the places in the land of Canaan, which he as- 

signs, like a skilful surveyor, to each tribe? If this was a 
knowledge derived from heaven, (which must be granted,) 
why will these impious babblers deny that the things which 
Jacob had predicted, were divinely revealed to Moses? Besides, 
among many other things which the holy fathers had handed 
down by tradition, this prediction might then be generally 
known. Whence was it that the people, when tyrannically 
oppressed, implored the assistance of God as their deliverer ? 
Whence was it, that at the simple hearing of a promise for- 
merly given, they raised their minds to a good hope, unless — 
that some remembrance of the divine adoption still flourished 
among them? If there was a general acquaintance with the — 
covenant of the Lord among the people; what impudence — 
will it be to deny that the heavenly servants of God more 
accurately investigated whatever was important to be known 

? Sed oblatrant quidam protervi canes. 



















CHAP. XLIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 44] 


respecting the promised inheritance? For the Lord did not 
utter oracles by the mouth of Jacob which, after his death, 
a sudden oblivion should destroy ; as if he had breathed, I 
know not what sounds, into the air. But rather he delivered 
instruction common to many ages ; that his posterity might 
know from what source their redemption, as well as the 
hereditary title of the land, flowed down to them. We know 
how tardily, and even timidly, Moses undertook the province 
assigned him, when he was called to deliver his own people: 
because he was aware that he should have to deal with an 
intractable and perverse nation. It was, therefore, neces- 
sary, that he should come prepared with certain credentials 
which might give proof of his vocation. And, hence, he 
put forth these predictions, as public documents from the 
sacred archives of God, that no one might suppose him to 
have intruded rashly into his office. - 
Gather yourselves together. Jacob begins with inviting 
their attention. For he gravely enters on his subject, and 
claims for himself the authority of a prophet, in order to 
teach his sons that he is by no means making a private tes- 
tamentary disposition of his domestic affairs ; but that he is 
expressing in words, those oracles which are deposited with 
him, until the event shall follow in due time. For he does 
not command them simply to listen to his wishes, but gathers 
them into an assembly by a solemn rite, that they may 
hear what shall occur to them in the succession of time. 
Moreover, I do not doubt, that he places this future period 
of which he speaks, in opposition to their exile in Egypt, 
that, when their minds were in suspense, they might look 
forward to that promised state. Now, from the above re- 
1 The reader will observe, that the entire structure of these predictions 
is poetical. The prophecies of the Old Testament are generally delivered 
in this form ; and God has thus chosen the most natural method of con- 
veying prophetic intelligence, through the medium of that elevated strain 
of diction, which suggests itself to imaginative minds, which is peculiarly 
fitted to deal with sublime and invisible realities, and which best serves to 
stir up animated feelings, and to fix important truths in the memory of 
the reader. ‘They who wish to examine more minutely the poetical char- 
acter of the chapter, are referred to Dr. Adam Clarke’s Commentary, 
and to Caunter’s Poetry of the Pentateuch. A few observations, m pass- 


ing, will be made in the notes to such passages as derive elucidation 
from their poetical structure.— Ed. 


- 


442 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLIX. 


marks, it may be easily inferred, that, in this prophecy is 
comprised the whole period from the departure out of Egypt 


to the reign of Christ: not that Jacob enumerates every — 


event, but that, in the summary of things on which he 
briefly touches, he arranges a settled order and course, until 
Christ should appear. 

3. Reuben, thou art my first-born. He begins with the 
first-born, not for the sake of honour, to confirm him in his 
rank ; but that he may the more completely cover him with 
shame, and humble him by just reproaches. For Reuben is 
here cast down from his primogeniture ; because he had pol- 
luted his father’s bed by incestuous intercourse with his 
mother-in-law. The meaning of his words is this: “ Thou, 
indeed, by nature the first-born, oughtest to have excelled, 
seeing thou art my strength, and the beginning of my manly 
vigour; but since thou hast flowed away like water, there is 
no more any ground for arrogating anything to thyself. 
For, from the day of thy incest, that dignity which thou re- 
ceivedst on thy birth-day, from thy mother’s womb, is gone 
and vanished away. The noun ps, some translate seed, 
others grief; and turn the passage thus: “ Thou, my 
strength, and the beginning of my grief or seed.” They 
who prefer the word grief, assign as a reason, that children 
bring care and anxiety to their parents. But if this were 
the true meaning, there would rather have been an anti- 
thesis between strength‘and sorrow. Since, however, Jacob 
is reciting, in continuity, the declaration of the dignity 
which belongs to the first-born, I doubt not that he here 
mentions the beginning of his manhood. For as men, in a 
certain sense, live again in their children, the first-borp is 
properly called the “ beginning of strength.” To the same 
point belongs what immediately follows, that he had been 
the excellency of dignity and of strength, until he had de- 
servedly deprived himself of both, For Jacob places before 
the eyes of his son Reuben his former honour, because it 
was for his profit to be made thoroughly conscious whence 
he had fallen. So Paul says, that he set before the Corin- 
thians the sins by which they were defiled, in order to make 
them ashamed. (1 Cor. vi.5.) For whereas we are disposed 








Oe 





| A Naat aR iy Oy nnn 


CIIAP. XLIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 443 


to flatter ourselves in our vices, scarcely any one of us is 
brought back to a sane mind, after he has fallen, unless he 
is touched with a sense of his vilenéss. Moreover, nothing 
is better adapted to wound us, than when a comparison is 
made between those favours which God bestows upon us, 
and the punishments we bring upon ourselves by our own 
fault. After Adam had been stripped of all good things, God 
reproaches him sharply, and not without ridicule, “ Behold 
Adam is as one of us.” What end is this designed to answer, 
except that Adam, reflecting with himself how far he is 
changed from that man, who had lately been created accord- 
ing to the image of God, and had been endowed with so many 
excellent gifts, might be confounded and fall prostrate, de- 
ploring his present misery? We see, then, that reproofs are 
necessary for us, in order that we may be touched to the 
quick by the anger of the Lord. For so it happens, not 
only that we become displeased with the sins of which we are 
now bearing the punishment, but also, that we take greater 
eare diligently to guard those gifts of God which dwell 
within us, lest they perish through our negligence. They 
who refer the “ excellency of dignity” to the priesthood, and 
the “ excellency of power” to the kingly office, are, in my 
judgment, too subtle interpreters. I take the more simple 
meaning of the passage to be; that if Reuben had stood 
firmly in his own rank, the chief place of all excellency would 
have belonged to him. 

4. Unstable as water. He shows that the honour which 
had not a good conscience for its keeper, was not firm but 
evanescent ; and thus he rejects Reuben from the primo- 
geniture. He declares the cause, lest Reuben should com- 
plain that he was punished when innocent: for it was also 
of great consequence, in this affair, that he should be con- 
vinced of his fault, lest his punishment should not be at- 
tended with profit. We now see Jacob, having laid carnal 
affection aside, executing the office of a prophet with vigour 
and magnanimity. For this judgment is not to be ascribed 
to anger, as if the father desired to take private vengeance 
of his son: but it proceeded from the Spirit of God ; be- 
cause Jacob kept fully in mind the burden imposed upon 


44.4 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLIX. 


him. The word nby (alach) at the close of the sentence 
signifies to depart, or to be blown away like the ascending 
smoke, which is dispersed.’ Therefore the sense is, that the 
excellency of Reuben, from the time that he had defiled his 
father’s bed, had flowed away and become extinct. For to 
expound the expression concerning the bed, to mean that it 
ceased to be Jacob’s conjugal bed, because Bilhah had been 
divorced, is too frigid. 

5. Simeon and Levi are brethren. He condemns the mas- 
sacre of the city of Shechem by his two sons Simeon and 
Levi, and denounces the punishment of so great a crime. 
Whence we learn how hateful cruelty is to God, seeing that 
the blood of man is ‘precious in his sight. For it is as if he 
would cite to his own tribunal those two men, and would de- 
mand vengeance on them, when they thought they had 
already escaped. It may, however, be asked, whether par- 
don had not been granted to them long ago; and if God had 
already forgiven them, why ‘does he recall them again to 
punishment? I answer, it was both privately useful to 
themselves, and was also necessary as an example, that this 
slaughter should not remain unpunished, although they 
might have obtained previous forgiveness. For we have 
seen before, when they were admonished by their father, 
how far they were from that sorrow which is the commence- 
ment of true repentance ; and it may be believed that after- 
_ wards they became stupified more and more, with a kind of 
brutish torpor, in their wickedness; or at least, that they 

1 The literal translation of Calvin’s version is, “ Thy velocity was like 
that of water, thou shalt not excel: because thou wentest up into thy fa- 
ther’s couch, then thou pollutedst my bed, he has vanished.” ‘This gives the 
patriarch’s expression a different turn from that supposed by our transla- 
tors; who understand the last word in the sentence to be a repetition of 
what had been said before, only putting it in the third person, as expres- 
sive of indignation; as if he had turned round from Reuben to his other 
children and said—“ Yes, I declare he went up into my bed!” Another 
view is given in the margin of our Bible, “ My couch is gone;” which 
means that, by this defilement, the marriage bond was broken. To this 
version Calvin objects at the close of the paragraph. But both these con- 
structions seem forced. Calvin’s appears the most natural. He repre- 
sents Reuben as having lost all, by his criminal conduct. Honour, excel- 
lence, priority, virtue, and consequently character and influence, had all 


gone wp as the dew from the face of the earth, and had vanished away. 
—Ed. 








a ee 


——————————— ee — =» 





f 
{ 
% 
# 
J 
BLS 


CHAP. XLIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. — 44d 


had not been seriously affected with bitter grief for their 


sin. It was also to be feared lest their posterity might be- 
come addicted to the same brutality, unless divinely im- 
pressed with horror at the deed. Therefore the Lord, partly 
for the purpose of humbling them, partly for that of making 
them an example to all ages, inflicted on them the punish- 


* ment of perpetual ignominy. Moreover, by thus acting, he 


did not retain the punishment while remitting the guilt, as 
the Papists foolishly dream: but though truly and perfectly 
appeased, he administered a correction suitable for future 
times. The Papists imagine that sins are only half remitted 
by God ; because he is not willing to absolve sinners gratui- 
tously. But Scripture speaks far otherwise. It teaches us 
that God does not exact punishments which shall compen- 
sate for offences ; but such as shall purge hearts from hypo- 
erisy, and shall invite the elect—the allurements of the 
world being gradually shaken off—to repentance, shall stir 
them up to vigilant solicitude, and shall keep them under 
restraint by the bridle of fear and reverence. Whence it 
follows that nothing is more preposterous, than that the 
punishments which we have deserved, should be redeemed by 
satisfactions, as if God, after the manner of men, would have 
what was owing paid to him; nay, rather there is the best 
possible agreement between the gratuitous remission of 
punishments and those chastenings of the rod, which rather 
prevent future evils, than follow such as have been already 


committed. 


To return to Simeon and Levi. How is it that God, by 
inflicting a punishment which had been long deferred, 
should drag them back as guilty fugitives to judgment ; un- 
less because impunity would have been hurtful to them? 
And yet he fulfils the office of a physician rather than of a 
judge, who refuses to spare, because he intends to heal ; and 
who not only heals two who are sick, but, by an antidote, anti- 
cipates the diseases of others, in order that they may beware 
of cruelty. This also is highly worthy to be remembered, 
that Moses, in publishing the infamy of his own people, acts 
as the herald of God: and not only does he proclaim a dis- 
grace common to the whole nation, but brands with infamy, 


44.6 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLIX. 


the special tribe from which he sprung. Whence it plainly 
appears, that he paid no respect to his own flesh and blood ; 
nor was he to be induced, by favour or hatred, to give a 
false colour to anything, or to decline from historical fidelity : 
but, as a chosen minister and witness of the Lord, he was 
mindful of his calling, which was that he should declare the 
truth of God sincerely and confidently. A comparison is 
here made not only between the sons of Jacob personally ; 
but also between the tribes which descended from them. 
This certainly was a specially opportune occasion for Moses 
to defend the nobility of his own people. But so far is he 
from heaping encomiums upon them, that he frankly stamps 
the progenitor of his own tribe with an everlasting dishonour, 
which should redound to his whole family. Those Lucianist 
dogs, who carp at the doctrine of Moses, pretend that he was 

a vain man who wished to acquire for himself the command 
over the rude common people. But had this been his pro- | 
ject, why did he not also make provision for his own family ? 
Those sons whom ambition would have persuaded him to 
endeavour to place in the highest rank, he puts aside from 
the honour of the priesthood, and consigns them to a lowly 
and common service. Who does not see that these impious 
calumnies have been anticipated by a divine counsel rather 
than by merely human prudence, and that the heirs of this 
great and extraordinary man were deprived of honour, forthis _ 
reason, that no sinister suspicion might adhere to him? But 
to say nothing of his children and grandchildren, we may 
perceive that, by censuring his whole tribe in the person of 
Levi, he acted not as a man, but as an angel speaking under 
the impulse of the Holy Spirit, and free from all carnal affee- 
tion. Moreover, in the former clause, he announces the-crime: 
afterwards, he subjoins the punishment. The crime is, that 
the arms of violence are in their tabernacles ; and therefore 
he declares, both by his tongue and in his heart, that he holds 
their counsel in abhorrence,’ because, in their desire of re- 
venge, they cut offa city with its inhabitants. Respecting the 
meaning of the words commentators differ. For some take the 








Gem 


— 


‘If this interpretation were admitted, the passage would read thus: 
“ Simeon and Levi are brethren, instruments of cruelty are their swords.” 








na : 
oF 


oy 
= 


ed ee a ee 


on 


CHAP. XLIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 4A7 


word 13/9 (makroth) to mean swords ; as if Jacob had said, 
that their swords had been wickedly polluted with innocent 
blood. But they think more correctly, who translate the 
word habitations; as if he had said, that unjust violence 
dwelt among them, because they had been so sanguinary. I 


do not doubt that the word 23 (chabod) is put for the 


tongue, as in other places ;’ and thus the sense is clear, that 
Jacob, from his heart, so detests the crime perpetrated by 
his sons, that his tongue shall not give any assent to it 
whatever. Which he does, for this end, that they may begin 
to be dissatisfied with themselves, and that all others may 
learn to abhor perfidy combined with cruelty. Fury, beyond 
doubt, signifies a perverse and blind impulse of anger :? and 
lust is opposed to rational moderation ;? because they are 
governed by no law. Interpreters also differ respecting the 
meaning of the word i (shor).* Some translate it “ bul- 
lock,” and think that the Shechemites are allegorically de- 
noted by it, seeing they were sufficiently robust and powerful 
to defend their lives, had not Simeon and Levi enervated 
them by fraud and perfidy. But a different exposition is far 
preferable, namely, that they “ overturned a wall.” For 
Jacob magnifies the atrociousness of their crime, from the 
fact, that they did not even spare budldings in their rage. 


1 In ccetu eorum non uniaris lingua mea. This is Calvin’s version; and 
it may perhaps be vindicated by the use made of the word 723 in other 
passages, where the tongue is metaphorically called the glory of man. 
Yet the passage plainly admits of another and perhaps a more simple sig- 
nification.—Ed. 

2 Quia in furore sua, &c. Because in their fury they, killed a man.—Ed. 

3 Libido is not the word used in Calvin’s version, though his commen- 
tary proceeds on that supposition. His'words are “ voluntate sua eradi- 
caverunt murum.” In their will, or pleasure, they uprooted a wall.—Ed. 

4 The marginal reading of our Bible for “ they digged down a wall,” is 
« they houghed oxen.” Some translators who think that the word ought 
to be rendered “ ox,” and not “ wall,” regard the word o# as a metapho- 
rical term for a brave and powerful man. Thus Herder, in Caunter’s 
Poetry of the Pentateuch, gives the following version :— 

« My heart was not joined in their company, 
When in angér they slew a hero, 
2 And in revenge destroyed a noble ox.” 

Dr. A. Clarke suggests an alteration in the word, which gives the pas- 

sage another sense : 
« In their anger they slew a man, 
And in their pleasure they murdered a prince.” —Ed. 


448 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XLIX. — 


7. Cursed be their anger. What I have said must be kept — 


in mind ; namely, that we are divinely admonished by the 
mouth of the holy prophet, to keep at a distance from all 
wicked counsels. Jacob pronounces a woe upon their fury. 
Why is this, unless that others may learn to put a restraint 
upon themselves, and to be on their guard against such 
cruelty? However, (as I have already observed,) it will 


not suffice to preserve our hands pure, unless we are far re- 


moved from all association with crime. For though it may 
not always be in our power to repress unjust violence; yet 
that concealment of it is culpable, which approaches to the 
appearance of consent. Here even the ties of kindred, and 
whatever else would bias a sound judgment, must be dis- 
missed from the mind: since we see a holy father, at the 
command of God, so severely thundering against his own 
sons. He pronounces the anger of Simeon and Leyi to be 
so much the more hateful, because, in its commencement, it 
was violent, and even to the end, it was implacable. 

I will divide them in Jacob. It may seem a strange 
method of proceeding, that Jacob, while designating his sons 
patriarchs of the Church, and calling them heirs of the 


divine covenant, should pronounce a malediction upon them 


instead of a blessing. Nevertheless it was necessary for him 
to begin with the chastisement, which should’ prepare the 
way for the manifestation of God’s grace, as will be made to 
appear at the close of the chapter: but God mitigates the 
punishment, by giving them an honourable name in the 
Church, and leaving them their right unimpaired: yea, his 
incredible goodness unexpectedly shone forth, when that 
which was the punishment of Levi, became changed into the 
reward of the priesthood. The dispersion of the Levitical 
tribe had its origin in the crime of their father, lest he 


should congratulate himself on account of his perverse and — 


lawless spirit of revenge. But God, who in the beginning 
had produced light out of darkness, found another reason 
why the Levites should be dispersed abroad among the 
people,—a reason not only free from disgrace, but highly 
honourable,—namely, that no corner of the land might be 
destitute of competent instructors. Lastly, he constituted 

















CHAP. XLIX,. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 449 


them overseers and governors, in his name, over every part of 
the land, as if he would scatter everywhere the seed of eter- 
nal salvation, or would send forth ministers of his erace. 
Whence we conclude, how much better it was for Levi to be 
chastised at the time, for his own good, than to be left to 
perish, in consequence of present impunity in sin. And it is 
not to be deemed strange, that, when the land was distri- 
buted, and cities were given to the Levites, far apart from 
each other, this reason was suppressed,’ and one entirely dif- 
ferent was adduced ; namely, that the Lord was their inherit- 
ance. For this, as I have lately said, is one of the miracles 
of God..to bring light out of darkness. Had Levi been sen- 
tenced to distant exile, he would have been most worthy of 
the punishment: but now, God in a measure spares him, by 
assigning him a wandering life in his paternal inheritance. 
Afterwards, the mark of infamy being removed, God sends 
his posterity into different parts, under the title of a distin- 
guished embassy. In Simeon there remained a certain, 
though obscure trace of the curse: because a distinct terri- 
tory did not fall to his sons by lot ; but they were mixed with 
the tribe of Judah, as is stated in Joshua xix.1. Afterwards 
they went to Mount Seir, having expelled the Amalekites 
and taken possession of their land, as it is written, 1 Chron. 
iv. 40-43. Here, also, we perceive the manly fortitude of 
holy Jacob’s breast, who, though a decrepit old man and an 
_ exile, lying on his private and lowly couch, nevertheless as- 

_ signs provinces to his sons, as from the lofty throne of a 
great king. He also does this in his own right, knowing 
that the covenant of God was deposited with him, by which 
he had been called the heir and lord of the land: and at the 
same time he claims for himself authority as sustaining the 
character of a prophet of God. For it greatly concerns us, 
when the word of God sounds in our ears, to apprehend by 
faith the thing proclaimed, as if his ministers had been 
commanded to carry into effect what they pronounce. There- 
fore it was said to Jeremiah, “‘ See I have this day set 


1 As being no longer applicable to the case, because it was purely per- 
sonal and belonged to Levi, only as an individual, and not to his descend- 
ents.—Ed. 


r) 
VOL. Ii. aF 






450 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XLIX. 


thee over the nations and over the kingdoms, to root out, 
and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, and to 
build, and to plant.” (Jer. i. 10.) And the prophets are 
generally commanded to set their faces against the countries 
which they threaten, as if they were furnished with a large 
army to make the attack. 

8. Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise. In 
the word praise there is an allusion to the name of Judah ; 
for so he had been called by his mother, because his birth had 
given occasion for praising God. The father adduces a new 
etymology, because his name shall be so celebrated and illus- 
trious among his brethren, that he should be honoured by 
them all equally with the first-born." The double portion, 


indeed, which he recently assigned to his son Joseph, de- 


pended on the right of primogeniture: but because the king- 
dom was transferred to the tribe of Judah, Jacob properly 
pronounces that his name should be held worthy of praise. 
For the honour of Joseph was temporary ; but here a stable 
and durable kingdom is treated of, which should be under 
the authority of the sons of Judah. Hence we gather, that 
when God would institute a perfect state of government 
among his people, the monarchical form was chosen by him. 
And whereas the appointment of a king under the law, was 
partly to be attributed to the will of man, and partly to 
the divine decree; this combination of human with divine 
agency must be referred to the commencement of the 
monarchy, which was inauspicious, because the people had 
tumultuously desired a king to be given them, before the 
proper time had arrived. Hence their unseemly haste was 
the cause why the kingdom was not immediately set up in 
the tribe of Judah, but was brought forth, as an abortive 
offspring, in the person of Saul. Yet at length, by the 
favour and in the legitimate order of God, the pre-emi- 
nence of the tribe of Judah was established in the person 
of David. 

Thy hand shall be in the neck of thine enemies. In these 


_' The original privilege of the birthright, taken from Reuben, was 
divided between Joseph and Judah; Joseph receiving the double portion 
belonging to the eldest son; Judah the regal distinction.—Zd. 


- 





_ OHWAP. XLIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 451 


words he shows that Judah should not be free from enemies : 
but although many would give him trouble, and would en- 
deavour to deprive him of his right, Jacob promises him 
victory ; not that the sons of David should always prevail 
» against their enemies, (for their ingratitude interfered with 
the constant and equable course of the grace of God,) but 
in this respect, at least, Judah had the superiority, that 
in his tribe stood the royal throne which God approved, and 
which was founded on his word. For though the kingdom 
of Israel was more flourishing in wealth and in number of 
inhabitants, yet because it was spurious, it was not the object 
of God’s favour : nor indeed was it right, that, by its tinselled 
splendour, it should eclipse the glory of the Divine election 
which was engraven upon the tribe of Judah. In David, 
therefore, the force and effect of this prophecy plainly ap- 
peared ; then again in Solomon; afterwards, although the 
kingdom was mutilated, yet was it wonderfully preserved by 
the hand of God ; otherwise, in a short space, it would have 
perished a hundred times. Thus it came to pass, that the 
children of Judah imposed their yoke upon their enemies. 
Whereas defection carried away ten tribes, which would not 
bow their knees to the sons of David; the legitimate go- 
vernment was in this way disturbed, and lawless confusion 
introduced ; yet nothing could violate the decree of God, 
by which the right to govern remained with the tribe of 
Judah. 

9. Judah is a lion’s whelp. This similitude confirms the 
preceding sentence, that Judah would be formidable to his 
enemies. Yet Jacob seems to allude to that diminution 
which took place, when the greater part of the people re- 
volted to Jeroboam. For then the king of Judah began to 
be like a sleeping lion, for he did not shake his mane to dif- 
fuse his terror far and wide, but, as it were, laid him down in 
his den. Yet a certain secret power of God lay hidden under 
that torpor, and they who most desired his destruction, and 
who were most able to do him injury, did not dare to dis- 
turb him. Therefore, after Jacob has transferred the supreme 
authority over his brethren to Judah alone ; he now adds, 
by way of correction, that, though his power should happen 









452 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XLIX. 


to be diminished, he would nevertheless remain terrible to 
his enemies, like a lion who lies down in his lair.’ . 
10. The sceptre shall not depart. Though this passage is 
obscure, it would not have been very difficult to elicit its 
genuine sense, if the Jews, with their accustomed malignity, 
had not endeavoured to envelop it in clouds. It is certain 
that the Messiah, who was to spring from the tribe of Judah, 
is here promised. But whereas they ought willingly to run 
to embrace him, they purposely catch at every possible sub- 
terfuge, by which they may lead themselves and others far 
astray in tortuous by-paths. It is no wonder, then, if the 
spirit of bitterness and obstinacy, and the lust of contention 
have so blinded them, that, in the clearest light, they should 
have perpetually stumbled. Christians, also, with a pious 
diligence to set forth the glory of Christ, have, nevertheless, 
betrayed some excess of fervour. For while they lay too 
much stress on certain words, they produce no other effect 
than that of giving an occasion of ridicule to the Jews, 
whom it is necessary to surround with firm and powerful 
barriers, from which they shall be unable to escape. Admo- 
nished, therefore, by such examples, let us seek, without con- 
tention, the true meaning of the passage. In the first place, 
we must keep in mind the true design of the Holy Spirit, 
which, hitherto, has not been sufficiently considered or ex- 
pounded with sufficient distinctness. After he has invested 
the tribe of Judah with supreme authority, he immediately 
declares that God would show his care for the people, by 
preserving the state of the kingdom, till the promised 
felicity should attain its highest point. For the dignity of 
Judah is so maintained as to show that its proposed end 
was the common salvation of the whole people. The bless- 


! Bishop Lowth’s translation is this :— 
* Judah is a lion’s whelp. 

From the prey, my son, thou art gone up— 

He stoopeth down, he coucheth as a lion, 

And as a lioness; who shall rouse him ?” 
It is to be observed that three different words are here used in the original 
to express the metaphor, which illustrates the character of the tribe of 
Judah. First, 114, (gur,) the,lion’s cub; secondly, 78, (aryah,) the full- 
grown lion; and, thirdly, 8°22, (/abi,) the old lioness. These different 
terms are supposed to represent the tribe of Judah in its earliest period, in 
the age of David, and in subsequent times. 





CHAP. XLIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 453 


ing promised to the seed of Abraham (as we have before 
seen) could not be firm, unless it flowed from one head. 
Jacob now testifies the same thing, namely, that a King 
should come, under whom that promised happiness should 
be complete in all its parts. Even the Jews will not deny, 
that while a lower blessing rested on the tribe of Judah, the 
hope of a better and more excellent condition was herein held 
forth. They also freely grant another point, that the Mes- 
siah is the sole Author of full and solid happiness and glory. 
_ We now add a third point, which we may also do, without 
__ any cpposition from them ; namely, that the kingdom which 
___ began from David, was a kind of prelude, and shadowy re- 
presentation of that greater grace which was delayed, and 
held in suspense, until the advent of the Messiah. They have 
indeed no relish for a spiritual kingdom ; and therefore they 
rather imagine for themselves wealth and power, and pro- 
pose to themselves sweet repose and earthly pleasures, than 
righteousness, and newness of life, with free forgiveness of 
sins. They acknowledge, nevertheless, that the felicity which 
was to be expected under the Messiah, was adumbrated by 
their ancient kingdom. I now return to the words of Jacob. 

Until Shiloh come, he says, the sceptre, or the dominion, 
shall remain in Judah. We must first see what the word 
my upsy (shiloh) signifies. Because Jerome interprets it, 
“ He who is to be sent,” some think that the place has been 
fraudulently corrupted, by the letter ™ substituted for the 
letter M; which objection, though not firm, is plausible. 
That which some of the Jews suppose, namely, that it 
denotes the place (Shiloh) where the ark of the covenant 
had been long deposited, because, a little before the com- 
mencement of David’s reign, it had been laid waste, is 
entirely destitute of reason. For Jacob does not here pre- 
dict the time when David was to be appointed-king ; but 
declares that the kingdom should be established in his 
family, until God should fulfil what he had promised con- 
cerning the special benediction of the seed of Abraham. Be- 
sides the form of speech, “until Shiloh come,” for “until Shiloh 
come to an end,” would be harsh and constrained. Far more 
correctly and consistently do other interpreters take this ex- 





454 COMMENTARY UPON OHAP. XLIX, 


pression to mean “ his son,” for among the Hebrews a son is 
called Spy, (shil.) They say also that 5 is put in the place of 
the relative}; and the greater part assent to this signification.’ 


But again, the Jews dissent entirely from the meaning of ' 


the patriarch, by referring this to David. For (as I have 
just hinted) the origin of the kingdom in David is not here 
promised, but its absolute perfection in the Messiah. And 
truly an absurdity so gross, does not require a lengthened 
refutation. For what can this mean, that the kingdom 
should not come to an end in the tribe of Judah, till it 
should have been erected? Certainly the word depart means 





nothing else than to cease. Further, Jacob points to a con-~ 


tinued series, when he says the scribe” shall not depart from 
between his feet. For it behoves a king so to be placed 
upon his throne that a lawgiver may sit between his feet. 
A kingdom is therefore described to us, which after it has 
been constituted, will not cease to exist till a more perfect 
state shall succeed ; or, which comes to the same point; 
Jacob honours the future kingdom of David with this title, 
because it was to be the token and pledge of that happy 
glory which had been before ordained for the race of 
Abraham. In short, the kingdom which he transfers to 
the tribe of Judah, he declares shall be no common king- 
dom, because from it, at length, shall proceed the fulness of 
the promised benediction. But here the Jews haughtily 
object, that the event convicts us of error. For it appears 
that the kingdom by no means endured until the coming of 
Christ ; but rather that the sceptre was broken, from the time 


1 Calvin seems to assent to this interpretation, which is by no means 


generally accepted. Gesenius renders 12, tranqwillity—* until tran- 
quillity shall come ;” but the more approved rendering is “ the Peaceable 
One,” or “ the Pacifier.” He who made peace for us, by the sacrifice of 
Himself.—Ed. 

* Scribam recessurum negat ex pedibus. But in the text, Calvin uses 
the word Legislator ; the French version translates it Legislatew; and 
the English translation is lawgiver. It is evident that Calvin had a 
reason for using the term Scribe; for the original PpMtd, (mechokaik,) ra- 
ther means a scribe or lawyer, than a /awgiver ; and rather describes one 
who aids in the administration of laws, than one who framesthem. In 
this sense, he supposes, and probably with truth, that the term is here ap- 
plied. The expression “ from between his feet,” has been the subject of 
much criticism ; but pee no view of it is so satisfactory as that main- 
tained by Calvin.—£d. 


CHAP. XLIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS, 455 


that the people were carried into captivity. But if they give 
credit to the prophecies, I wish, before I solve their objec- 
tion, that they would tell me in what manner Jacob here 
assigns the kingdom to his son Judah. For we know, that 
when it had scarcely become his fixed possession, it was 
suddenly rent asunder, and nearly its whole power was pos- 
sessed by the tribe of Ephraim. Has God, according to these 
men, here promised, by the mouth of Jacob, some evanescent 
kingdom? If they reply, the sceptre was not then broken, 
though Rehoboam was deprived of a great part of his people ; 
they can by no means escape by this cavil; because the 
authority of Judah is expressly extended over all the tribes, 
by these words, “ Thy mother’s sons shall bow their knee 
before thee.” They bring, therefore, nothing against us, which 
we cannot immediately, in turn, retort upon themselves, 

Yet I confess the question is not yet solved ; but I wished 
to premise this, in order that the Jews, laying aside their 
disposition to calumniate, may learn calmly to examine the 
matter itself, with us. Christians are commonly wont to 
connect perpetual government with the tribe of Judah, in 
the following manner. When the people returned from 
banishment, they say, that, in the place of the royal sceptre, 
was the government which lasted to the time of the Macca- 
bees. That afterwards, a third mode of government suc- 
ceeded, because the chief power of judging rested with the 
Seventy, who, it appears by history, were chosen out of the 
regal race. Now, so far was this authority of the royal race 
from having fallen into decay, that Herod, having been cited 
before it, with difficulty escaped capital punishment, because 
he contumaciously withdrew from it. Our commentators, 
therefore, conclude that, although the royal majesty did not 
shine brightly from David until Christ, yet some pre-emi- 
nence remained in the tribe of Judah, and thus the oracle 
was fulfilled. Although these things are true, still more 
skill must be used in rightly discussing this passage. And, 
in the first place, it must be kept in mind, that the tribe of 
Judah was already constituted chief among the rest, as pre- 
eminent in dignity, though it had not yet obtained the 
dominion. And, truly, Moses elsewhere testifies, that supre- 





456 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLIX. 


macy was voluntarily conceded to it by the remaining tribes, 
from the time that the people were redeemed out of Egypt. 
In the second place, we must remember, that a more illustrious 
example of this dignity was set forth in that kingdom which 
God had commenced in David. And although defection 
followed soon after, so that but a small portion of authority 
remained in the tribe of Judah; yet the right divinely con- 
ferred upon it, could by no means be taken away. There- 
fore, at the time when the kingdom of Israel was replenished 
with abundant opulence, and was swelling with lofty pride, 
it was said, that the lamp of the Lord was lighted in Jeru- 
salem. Let us proceed further: when Ezekiel predicts the 
destruction of the kingdom, (chap. xxi. 26,) he clearly shows 
how the sceptre was to be preserved by the Lord, until it 
should come into the hands of Christ: “‘ Remove the diadem, 
and take off the crown; this shall not be the same: I will 
overturn, overturn, overturn it, until he come whose right it 
is.” It may seem at first sight that the prophecy of Jacob 
had failed when the tribe of Judah was stripped of its 
royal ornament. But we conclude hence, that God was not 
bound always to exhibit the visible glory of the kingdom on 
high. Otherwise, those other promises which predict the 
restoration of the throne, which was cast down and broken, 
were false. Behold the days come in which I will “ raise 
up the tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up the 
breaches thereof, and I will raise up his ruins.” (Amos 
ix. 11.) It would be absurd, however, to cite more passages, 
seeing this doctrine occurs frequently in the prophets. 
Whence we infer, that the kingdom was not so confirmed as 
always to shine with equal brightness ; but that, though, for 
a time, it might lie fallen and defaced, it should afterwards 
recover its lost splendour. The prophets, indeed, seem to 
make the return from the Babylonian exile the termination 
of that ruin; but since they predict the restoration. of the 
kingdom no otherwise than they do that of the temple and the 
priesthood, it is necessary that the whole period, from that 
liberation to the advent of Christ, should be comprehended. 
The crown, therefore, was cast down, not for one day only, 
or from one single head, but for a long time, and in various 











CHAP. XLIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 457 
methods, until God placed it on Christ, his own lawful king. 
And truly Isaiah describes the origin of Christ, as being 
very remote from all regal splendour: “ There shall come 
forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall 
grow out of his roots.” (Isaiah xi. 1.) Why does he men- 
tion Jesse rather than David, except because Messiah was 
about to proceed from the rustic hut of a private man, 
rather than from a splendid palace? Why from a tree cut 
down, having nothing left but the root and the trunk, ex- 
cept because the majesty of the kingdom was to be almost 
trodden under foot till the manifestation of Christ? IZf any 
one object, that the words of Jacob seem to have a dif- 
ferent signification; I answer, that whatever God has 
promised at any time concerning the external condition of 
the Church, was so to be restricted, that, in the mean time, 
he might execute his judgments in punishing men, and 
might try the faith of his own people. It was, indeed, no 
light trial, that the tribe of Judah, in its third successor to 
the throne, should be deprived of the greater portion of the 
kingdom. Even a still more severe trial followed, when the 
sons of the king were put to death in the sight of their 
father, when he, with his eyes thrust out, was dragged to 
Babylon, and the whole royal family was at length given 
over to slavery and captivity. But this was the most griev- 
ous trial of all; that when the people returned to their own 
land, they could in no way perceive the accomplishment of 
their hope, but were compelled to he in sorrowful dejection. 
Nevertheless, even then, the saints, contemplating, with the 
eyes of faith, the sceptre hidden under the earth, did not 
fail, or become broken in spirit, so as to desist from their 
course. I shall, perhaps, seem to grant too much to the 
Jews, because I do not assign what they call a real domi- 
nion, in uninterrupted succession, to the tribe of Judah. 
For our interpreters, to prove that the Jews are still kept 
bound by a foolish expectation of the Messiah, insist on 
this point, that the dominion of which Jacob had prophesied, 
ceased from the time of Herod; as if, indeed, they had not 
been tributaries five hundred years previously ; as if, also, 
the dignity of the royal race had not been extinct as long 


458 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLIX. 


as the tyranny of Antiochus prevailed; as if, lastly, the 
Asmonean race had not usurped to itself both the rank and 
power of princes, until the Jews became subject to the Ro- 
mans. And that is not a sufficient solution which is proposed ; 
namely, that either the regal dominion, or some lower kind 
of government, are disjunctively promised ; and that from 
the time when the kingdom was destroyed, the scribes re- 
mained in authority. For I, in order to mark the distinction 
between a lawful government and tyranny, acknowledge that 
counsellors were joined with the king, who should administer 
public affairs rightly and in order. Whereas some of the 
Jews explain, that the right of government was given to the 
tribe of Judah, because it was unlawful for it to be trans- 
ferred elsewhere, but that it was not necessary that the 
glory of the crown once given should be perpetuated, I deem 
it right to subscribe in part to this opinion. I say, in part, 
because the Jews gain nothing by this cavil, who, in order 
to support their fiction of a Messiah yet to come, postpone 
that subversion of the regal dignity which, in fact, long ago 
occurred.’ For we must keep in memory what I have said 
before, that while Jacob wished to sustain the minds of his 
descendents until the coming of the Messiah; lest they 
should faint through the weariness of long delay, he set 
before them an example in their temporal kingdom: as if 
he had said, that there was no reason why the Israelites, 
when the kingdom of David fell, should allow their hope to 
waver ; seeing that no other change should follow, which 
could answer to the blessing promised by God, until the 
Redeemer should appear. That the nation was grievously 
harassed, and was under servile oppression some years be- 
fore the coming of Christ happened, through the wonderful 


1 Quia nihil hoe eavilla proficiunt Judi, ad figmentum venturi sui — 
Messie trahentes vetustum regni excidium. Literally translated, the 
sense of the passage would not be obvious to the English reader. It is 
hoped that the true meaning of the passage is givenabove. ‘The original, 
however, is given, that the learned reader may form his own judgment. 
It is well known that modern Jews regard their present depression as a 
proof that the Messiah has not yet come, and therefore they draw out 
(trahentes) or postpone the execution of God’s threatened judgments, 
which we regard as having taken place under Titus and the Romans, to a 
period still future. This seems to be Calvin’s meaning.—Zd. 











CHAP. XLIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 459 


counsel of God, in order that they might be urged by con- 


tinual chastisements to-wish for redemption. Meanwhile, it 
was necessary that some collective body of the nation should 
remain, in which the promise might receive its fulfilment. 
But now, when, through nearly fifteen centuries, they have 
been scattered and banished from their country, having no 
polity, by what pretext can they fancy, from the prophecy 
of Jacob, that a Redeemer will come to them? ‘Truly, as I 
would not willingly glory over their calamity; so, unless 
they, being subdued by it, open their eyes, I freely pronounce 
that they are worthy to perish a thousand times without 
remedy. It was also a most suitable method for retaining 
them in the faith, that the Lord would have the sons of 
Jacob turn their eyes upon one particular tribe, that they 
might not seek salvation elsewhere; and that no vague 
imagination might mislead them. For which end, also, the 
election of this family is celebrated, when: it is frequently 
compared with, and preferred to Ephraim and the rest, in 
the Psalms. To us, also, it is not less useful, for the con- 
firmation of our faith, to know that Christ had been not 
only promised, but that his origin had been pointed out, as 
with a finger, two thousand years before he ‘appeared.’ 

And unto him shall the gathering of the people be. Here 
truly he declares that Christ should be a king, not over one 
people only, but that under his authority various nations 
shall be gathered, that they might coalesce together. I know, 
indeed, that the word rendered “ gathering” is differently 
expounded by different commentators ; but they who derive 
it from the root 1p, to make it signify the weakening of 
the people, rashly and absurdly misapply what is said of the 


1 On this passage, which has given so much trouble to commentators, 
and which Calvin has considered at such length, it may be observed, that the 
term rendered sceptre means also rod, and sometimes is translated tribe; 
perhaps because each of the twelve tribes had its rod laid up in the taber- 
nacle and temple. Hence it may be inferred that the expression, “ The 
sceptre shall not depart from Judah,” means that Judah alone should 
continue in its integrity, as a tribe, till the coming of the Messiah. This 
renders it unnecessary to attempt any proof of the retention of regal 
power and authority in the tribe. See Ainsworth and Bush in loc. The 
reader may also refer to an elaborate investigation of the subject in Rivetus, 
Exercitations 178 and 179.—£d. 


460 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLIX. 


saving dominion of Christ, to the sanguinary pride with 


which they puffed up. If the word obedience is preferred, (as 
it is by others,) the sense will remain the same with that 
which I have followed. For this is the mode in which the 
gathering together will be effected; namely, that they who 
before were carried away to different objects of pursuit, will 
consent together in obedience to one common Head. Now, 
although Jacob had previously called the tribes about to 
spring from him by the name of peoples, for the sake of 
amplification, yet this gathering is of still wider extent. For, 
whereas he had included the whole body of the nation by their 
families, when he spoke of the ordinary dominion of Judah, he 
now extends the boundaries of a new king: as if he would 
say, ‘‘ There shall be kings of the tribe of Judah, who shall 
be pre-eminent among their brethren, and to whom the sons 
of the same mother shall bow down: but at length He shall 
follow m succession, who shall subject other peoples unto 
himself.” But this, we know, is fulfilled in Christ ; to whom 
was promised the inheritance of the world ; under whose yoke 
the nations are brought ; and at whose will they, who before 
were scattered, are gathered together. Moreover, a memor- 
able- testimony is here borne to the vocation of the Gentiles, 
because they were to be introduced into the joint participation 
of the covenant, in order that they might become one people 
with the natural descendents of Abraham, under one Head. 
11. Binding his fole unto the vine, and his ass’s colt, &e. 
He now speaks. of the situation of the territory which fell 
by lot to the sons of Judah ; and intimates, that so great 
would be the abundance of vines there, that they would 
everywhere present themselves as readily as brambles, or 
unfruitful shrubs, in other places. For since asses are wont 
to be bound to the hedges, he here reduces vines to this con- 
temptible use. The hyperbolical forms of speech which 
follow are to be applied to the same purpose ; namely, that 
Judah shall wash his garments in wine, and his eyes be red 
therewith. He means that the abundance of wine shall be 
so great, that it may be poured out to wash with, like water, 
at no great expense ; but that, by constant copious drinking, 
the eyes would contract redness. But it seems by no means 








——————————« ———_— - ~~ 








arte Lae, Te 


ee 


CHAP, XLIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 461 


proper, that a profuse intemperance or extravagance should 
be accounted a blessing. I answer, although fertility and 
affluence are here described, still the abuse of them is not 
sanctioned. If the Lord deals very bountifully with us, yet 
he frequently prescribes the rule of using his gifts with 
purity and frugality, lest they should stimulate the incon- 
tinence of the flesh. But in this place Jacob, omitting to 
state what is lawful, extols that abundance which would 
suffice for luxury, and even for vicious and perverse excesses, 
unless the sons of Judah should voluntarily use self-govern- 
ment. I abstain from those allegories which to some appear 
plausible ; because, as I said at the beginning of the chapter, 
I do not choose to sport with such great mysteries of God. 
To these lofty speculators the partition of the land which 
God prescribed, for the purpose of accrediting his servant 
Moses, seems a mean and abject thing. But unless our 
ingratitude has attained a senseless stupor, we ought to be 
wholly transported with admiration at the thought, that 
Moses, who had never seen the land of Canaan, should treat 
of its separate parts as correctly as he could have done, of a 
few acres cultivated by his own hand. Now, supposing he 
had heard a general report of the existence of vines in the 
land; yet he could not have assigned to Judah abundant 
vineyards, nor could he have assigned to him rich pastures, 
by saying that his teeth should be white with drinking milk, 
unless he had been guided by the Spirit. 

13. Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea. Although 
this blessing contains nothing rare or precious, (as neither do 
some of those which follow,) yet we ought to deem this fact 
as sufficiently worthy of notice, that it was just as if God was 
stretching out his hand from heaven, for the deliverance of the 
children of Israel, and for the purpose of distributing to each 
his own dwelling-place. Before mention is made of the lot 
itself, a maritime region is given to the tribe of Zebulun, 
which it obtained by lot two hundred years afterwards. And 


» we know of how great importance that hereditary gift was, 


which, like an earnest, rendered the adoption of the ancient 
people secure. Therefore, by this prophecy, not only one 
tribe, but the whole people, ought to have been encouraged 


462 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLIX. 


to lay hold, with alacrity, of the offered blessing which was 
certainly in store for them. But it is said that the portion 
of Zebulun should not only be on the sea-shore, but should 
also have havens; for Jacob joins its boundary with the 
country of Zidon ; in which tract, we know, there were com- 
modious and noble havens. For God, by this prophecy, would 
not only excite the sons of Zebulun more strenuously to 
prepare themselves to enter upon the land; but would also 
assure them, when they obtained possession of the desired 
portion, that it was the home which had been distinctly pro- 
posed and ordained for them by the will of God. 

14. Issachar. Here mention is partly made of the inherit- 
ance, and an indication is partly given of the future condi- 
tion of this tribe. Although he is called a bony ass on account 
of his strength,’ which would enable him to endure labours, 
especially such as were rustic, yet at the same time his sloth 
is indicated : for it is added a little afterwards, that he should 
be of servile disposition. Wherefore the meaning is, that the 
sons of Issachar, though possessed of strength, were yet quiet 
rather than courageous, and were as ready to bear the burden 
of servitude as mules are to submit their backs to the pack- 
saddle and the load. The reason given is, that, being content 
with their fertile and pleasant country, they do not refuse to 
pay tribute to their neighbours, provided they may enjoy 
repose. And although this submissiveness is not publicly 
mentioned either to their praise or their condemnation, it 
is yet probable that their indolence is censured, because their 
want of energy hindered them from remaining in possession 
of that liberty which had been divinely granted unto them. 

16. Dan shall judge his people. In the word judge there 
is an allusion to his name: for since, among the Hebrews, {)7 
signifies to judge, Rachel, when she returned thanks to God, 
gave this name to the son born to her by her handmaid, as 
if God had been the vindicator of her cause and right. 
Jacob now gives a new turn to the meaning of the name; 
namely, that the sons of Dan shall have no mean part in the 
government of the people. For the Jews foolishly restrict 
it to Samson, because he alone presided over the whole 

 Asinus osseus. 








ee 





CHAP. XLIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 463 


people, whereas the language rather applies to the perpetual 
condition of the tribe. Jacob therefore means, that though 
Dan was born from a concubine, he shall still be one of the 
judges of Israel: because not only shall his offspring possess 
a share of the government and command, in the common 
polity, so that this tribe may constitute one head ; but it 
shall be appointed the bearer of a standard to lead the fourth 
division of the camp of Israel." In the second place, his 
subtle disposition is described. For Jacob compares this 
people to serpents, who rise out of their lurking-places, by 
stealth, against the unwary whom they wish to injure. The 
sense then is, that he shall not be so courageous as earnestly 
and boldly to engage in open conflict ; but that he will fight 
with cunning, and will make use of snares. Yet, in the 
meantime, he shows that he will be superior to his enemies, 
whom he does not dare to approach with collected forces, just 
as serpents who, by their secret bite, cast down the horse 
and his rider. In this place also no judgment is expressly 
passed, whether this subtlety of Dan is to be deemed worthy 
of praise or of censure: but conjecture rather inclines us to 
place it among his faults, or at least his disadvantages, that 
instead of opposing himself in open conflict with his ene- 
mies, he will fight them only with secret frauds.” 

18. I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord. It may be 
asked, in the first place, what occasion induced the holy man 
to break the connection of his discourse, and suddenly to 
burst forth in this expression ; for whereas he had recently 
predicted the coming of the Messiah, the mention of salva- 
tion would have been more appropriate in that place. I 
think, indeed, that when he perceived, as from a lofty watch- 

1 See Numbers ii., where the order of the tribes in their encampment is 
given. Judah had the standard for the three tribes on the east, Reuben for 
the three tribes on the south, Ephraim for the three tribes on the west, and 
Dan for the remaining three tribes on the north of the tabernacle.—Ed. 

* The word }1D*DY, (sheppiphon,) translated “ adder,” occurs only in this 
place. It is supposed by Bochart to be the cerastes, “a serpent so called,” 
says Calmet, “ because it has horns on its forehead.” Dr. A. Clarke gives 
this translation :— 

* Dan shall be a serpent on the way, 
A cerastes upon the track, 


Biting the heels of the horse, 
And his rider shall fall backwards.”—£d. 





464 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, XLIX. 


tower, the condition of his offspring continually exposed to 
various changes, and even to be tossed by storms which 
would almost overwhelm them, he was moved with solicitude 
_and fear; for he had not so put off all paternal affection, as 
to be entirely without care for those who were of his own 
blood. He, therefore, foreseeing many troubles, many dan- 
gers, many assaults, and even many slaughters, which threat- 
ened his seed with as many destructions, could not but con- 
dole with them, and, as a man, be troubled at the sight. But 
in order that he might rise against every kind of temptation 
with victorious constancy of mind, he commits himself unto 
the Lord, who had promised that he would be the guardian 
of his people. Unless this circumstance be observed, I do 
not see why Jacob exclaims here, rather than at the begin- 
ning or the end of his discourse, that he waited for the sal- 


vation of the Lord. But when this sad confusion of things 


presented itself to him, which was not only sufficiently violent 
to shake his faith, but was more than sufficiently burdensome 
entirely to overwhelm his mind, his best remedy was to oppose 
to it this shield. I doubt not also, that he would advise his 
sons to rise with him to the exercise of the same confidence. 
Moreover, because he could not be the author of his own sal- 
vation, it was necessary for him to repose upon the promise 
of God. In the same manner, also, must we, at this day, 
hope for the salvation of the Church: for although it seems 
to be tossed on a turbulent sea, and almost sunk in the 
waves, and though still greater storms are to be feared in 
future ; yet amidst manifold destructions, salvation is to be 
hoped for, in that deliverance which the Lord has promised. 
It is even possible that Jacob, foreseeing by the Spirit, how 
great would be the ingratitude, perfidy, and wickedness of 
his posterity, by which the grace of God might be smothered, 
was contending against these temptations. But although he 
expected salvation not for himself alone, but for all his pos- 
terity, this, however, deserves to be specially noted, that he ex- 
hibits the life-giving covenant of God to many generations, so 
as to prove his own confidence that, after his death, God would 
be faithful to his promise. Whence also it follows, that, with 
his last breath, and as if in the midst of death, he laid hold on 





: 
‘ 

. 
A | 


\ 









CHAP. XLIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 465 


eternal life. But if he, amidst obscure shadows, relying on 


_ a redemption seen afar off, boldly went forth to meet death ; 


what ought we to do, on whom the clear day has shined ; or 
what excuse remains for us, if our minds fail amidst similar 
agitations ?7 

19. Gad, a troop. Jacob also makes allusion to the name 
of Gad. He had been so called, because Jacob had obtained 


_ a numerous offspring by his mother Leah. His father now 


admonishes him, that though his name implied a multitude, 
he should yet have to do with a great number of enemies, 
by whom, for a time, he would be oppressed: and he pre- 


_ dicts this event, not that his posterity might confide in their 


own strength, and become proud; but that they might prepare 
themselves to endure the suffering by which the Lord in- 
tended, and now decreed to humble them. Yet, as he here 
exhorts them to patient endurance, so he presently raises 
and animates them by the superadded consolation, that, at 
length, they should emerge from oppression, and should tri- 
umph over those enemies by whom they had been vanquished 
and routed; but this only at the last. Moreover, this pro- 
pheey may be applied to the whole Church, which is assailed 
not for one day only, but is perpetually crushed by fresh 
attacks, until at length God shall exalt it to honour. 

20. Out of Asher. The inheritance of Asher is but just 
alluded to, which he declares shall be fruitful in the best 
and finest wheat, so that it shall need no foreign supply of 
food, having abundance at home. By royal dainties, he means 
such as are exquisite. Should any one object, that it is no 
great thing to be fed with nutritious and pleasant bread; I 
answer; we must consider the end designed; namely, that they 


1 Jewish commentators suppose the patriarch’s exclamation to have 
been suggested in this place, by a prospective view of the temporal deliver- 
ances wrought for Israel, by warriors of the tribe of Dan. So the Chaldee 
Paraphrast represents him as saying, “I look not for the salvation of 
Gideon, because it is a temporal salvation ; nor for the salvation of Samp- 
son the son of Manoah, because it is transitory; but I look for the redemp- 
tion of Christ the Son of David, who is to come to call to himself the 
children, whose salvation my soul desireth.” See Bush and Dr. A. Clarke. 
Yet there is something affecting in the thought, that the exclamation might 
be a sudden burst of holy desire for the immediate fruition of the glory 
which the dying patriarch now saw so near at hand,— £d. 


VOL. IL. 24. 


466 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLIX, 


might hereby know that they were fed by the paternal care 
of God. R 1 . 

21. Naphtali. Some think that in the tribe of Naphtali 
fleetness is commended; I rather approve another meaning, 
namely, that it will guard and defend itself by eloquence and 
suavity of words, rather than by force of arms. It is, however, — 
no despicable virtue to soothe ferocious minds, and to ap- 
pease excited anger, by bland and gentle discourse; or if any 
offence has been stirred up, to allay it by a similar artifice. — 
He therefore assigns this praise to the sons of Naphtali, that 
they shall rather study to fortify themselves by humanity, 
by sweet words, and by the arts of peace, than by the de-— 
fence of arms. He comparcs them to a hind let loose, which 
having been taken in hunting, is not put to death, but is” 
rather cherished with delicacies.’ 

22. Joseph is a fruitful bough. Others translate it, “a 
son of honour,” and both are suitable; but I rather incline 
to the former sense, because it seems to me that it refers to 
the name Joseph, by which addition or increase is signified ; 
although I have no objection to the similitude taken from a 
tree, which, being planted near a fountain, draws from the — 
watered earth the moisture and sap by which it grows the | 
faster. The sum of the figure is, that he is born to grow 
like a tree situated near a fountain, so that, by its beauty — 
and lofty stature, it may surmount the obstacles around it. | 
For I do not interpret the words which follow to mean that 
there will be an assemblage of virgins upon the walls, whom 

1 As the word mbox, rendered hind, sometimes means a tree, it is sup- — 
posed by some, that it should be so translated here. Bochart suggests this 
translation :— 

“ Naphtali is a spreading oak, 
Producing beautiful branches.” 
Dr. A. Clarke strenuously defends this version, and says, “ perhaps no — 
man who understands the genius of the Hebrew language will attempt to 
dispute its propriety.” Yet perhaps the received translation is not to be — 
so easily disposed of. It may be granted that Bochart’s figure is more 
beautiful; but it will be difficult to show that his translation is equally 
literal and correct. Caunter suggests another rendering :— . 
“ Naphtali is a deer roaming at liberty, 
He shooteth forth noble branches,’”’—or antlers. —Zd. 
* « Filium decoris.” The original is M75 33, (Ben porath,) literally, 


“ the son of fruitfulness.” The name of Joseph’s son, Ephraim, is derived 
from this word,—£d, 








CHAP. XLIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. : 467 


the sight of the tree shall have attracted ; but, by a continued 
metaphor, I suppose the tender and smaller branches to be 
called daughters.’ And they are said “to run over the wall” 
when they spread themselves far and wide. Besides, Jacob’s 
_ discourse does not relate simply to the whole tribe, nor is it 
a mere prophecy of future times; but the personal history 
of Joseph is blended with that of his descendents. Thus 
some things are peculiar to himself, and others belong to the 

two tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh. So when Joseph is 
said to have been “ grieved,” this is wont to be referred 
especially to himself. And whereas Jacob has compared him 
to a tree; so he calls both his brethren and Potiphar, with 
his wife, “ archers.” Afterwards, however, he changes the 
_ figure by making Joseph himself like a strenuous archer, 
whose bow abides in strength, and whose arms are not re- 
laxed, nor have lost, in any degree, their vigour; by which 
expressions he predicts the invincible fortitude of Joseph, 
because he has yielded to no blows however hard and severe. 
At the same time we are taught that he stood, not by the 
power of his own arm, but as being strengthened by the hand 
of God, whom he distinguishes by the peculiar title of “ the 
mighty God of Jacob,” because he designed his power to be 
chiefly conspicuous, and to shine most brightly in the Church. 
Meanwhile, he declares that the help by which Joseph was 
_ assisted, arose from hence, that God had chosen that family 
for himself. For the holy fathers were extremely solicitous 
that the gratuitous covenant of God should be remembered 
by themselves and by their children, whenever any benefit 
was granted unto them. And truly it is a mark of shame- 
ful negligence, not to inquire from what fountain we drink 
water. In the mean time he tacitly censures the impious and 
ungodly fury of his ten sons; because, by attempting the 
murder of their brother, they, like the giants, had carried on 


1 133, (Banoth,) literally, “ the daughters went over the wall.” But 
Calvin, with our translators, wisely interprets the expression as a poetical 
one, meaning the branches, (which, are the daughters of the tree,) accord- 
ing to a very usual phraseology of the Hebrew Scriptures.— Ed. 

2 Archers, literally, “ Lords of the arrows.” 

* The archers shot at him with poisoned arrows, 
They have pursued him with hatred.” ( 
Waterland in Caunter’s Poetry of the Pentateuch, vol. i., p. 223.—Ed. 


468 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLIX. 


war against God. He also admonishes them for the future, © 


that they should rather choose to be protected by the guar- 
dianship of God, than to make him their enemy, seeing that 


he is alike willing to give help to all. And hence arises’ 


a consideration consolatory to all the pious, when they hear 
that the power of God resides in the midst of the Church, if 


they do but glory in him alone; as the Psalm teaches, — 


«“ Some trust in chariots, and some in horses; but we will 
invoke the name of the Lord our God.” (Psal. xx. 7.) The 
sons of Jacob, therefore, must take care lest they, by con- 
fiding in their own strength, precipitate themselves into 


ruin; but must rather bear themselves nobly and trium- | 


phantly in the Lord. 
What follows admits of various interpretations. Some 
translate it, “ From thence is the shepherd, the stone of 


Israel ;” as if Jacob would say, that Joseph had been the 


nourisher and rock, or stay of his house. Others read, “the 
shepherd of the stone,’ in the genitive case, which I approve, 
except that they mistake the sense, by taking “ stone” to 


mean family. I refer it to God, who assigned the office of — 


shepherd to his servant Joseph, in the manner in which any 
one uses the service of a hireling to feed his flock. For 
whence did it arise that he nourished his own people, except 
that he was the dispenser of the Divine beneficence ? More- 
over, under this type, the image of Christ is depicted to us, 
who, before he should come forth as the conqueror of death 
and the author of life, was set as a mark of contradiction, 
(Heb. xii. 3,) against whom all cast their darts ; as now also, 
after his example, the Church also must be transfixed with 
many arrows, that she may be kept by the wonderful help 
of God. Moreover, lest the brethren should maliciously 
envy Joseph, Jacob sets his victory in an amiable point of 
view to them, by saying that he had been liberated in order 
that he might become their nourisher or shepherd. 

25. Even by the God of thy father. Again, he more fully 
affirms that Joseph had been delivered from death, and ex- 
alted to such great dignity, not by his own industry, but by 
the favour of God: and there is not the least doubt that he 
commends to all the pious, the mere goodness of God, lest 





4 


. 


{ 













Nt et 
eared Sere 





ik eee ae a 


CHAP. XLIX.- THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 469 


they should arrogate anything to themselves, whether they 
may have escaped from dangers, or whether they may have 
risen to any rank of honour. By the God of thy father. In 
designating God by this title, he again traces whatever good 
Joseph has received, to the covenant, and to the fountain 
of gratuitous adoption ; as if he had said, ‘“ Whereas thou 
hast proved the paternal care of God in helping thee, I de- 
sire that thou wouldst ascribe this to the covenant which 


_ God has made with me.” Meanwhile, (as we have said be- 


fore,) he separates from all fictitious idols the God whom 
he transmits to his descendents to worship. 

_After he has declared, that Joseph should be blessed in 
every way, both as it respects his own life, and the number 
and preservation of his posterity ; he affirms that the effect 
of this benediction is near and almost present, by saying, that 
he blessed Joseph more efficaciously than he himself had been 
blessed by his fathers. For although, from the beginning, 
God had been true to his promises, yet he frequently post- 


_ poned the effect of them, as if he had been feeding Abraham, 


Isaac, and Jacob with nothing but words. For, to what ex- 
tent were the patriarchs multiplied in Egypt? Where was 
that immense seed which should equal the sands of the sea 


_ shore and the stars of heaven? Therefore, not without reason, 


Jacob declares that the full time had arrived in which the 
result of his benediction, which had lain concealed, should 
emerge as from the deep. Now, this comparison ought to 
inspire us with much greater alacrity at the present time ; for 
the abundant riches of the grace of God which have flowed 
to us in Christ, exceeds a hundredfold, any blessings which 
Joseph received and felt. 

What is added respecting the utmost bound of the everlast- 
ing hills, some wish to refer to distance of place, some to 
perpetuity of time. Both senses suit very well; either that 
the felicity of Joseph should diffuse itself far and wide to 


_ the farthest mountains of the world; or that it should endure 


as long as the everlasting hills, which are the firmest por- 
tions of the earth, shall stand. The more certain and genuine 
sense, however, is to be gathered from the other passage, 


_ where Moses repeats this benediction ; namely, that the fer- 


470 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLIX. 


tility of the land would extend to the tops of the mountains; 
and these mountains are called perpetual, because they are 
most celebrated. He also declares that this blessing should 
be upon his head, lest Joseph might think that his good 
wishes were scattered to the winds; for by this word he in- 
tends to show, if I may so speak, that the blessing was sub- 
stantial. At length he calls Joseph "3, (nazir,) among his. 
brethren, either because he was their crown, on account of — 
the common glory which redounds from him to them all, or 
because, on account of the dignity by which he excels, he 
was separated from them all.'| It may be understood in both 
senses. Yet we must know that this excellency was tem- — 
poral, because Joseph, together with the others, was required 
to take his proper place, and to submit himself to the sceptre 
of Judah. 

27. Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf. Some of the Jews — 
think the Benjamites are here condemned ; because, when 
they had suffered lusts to prevail, like lawless robbers, among — 
them, they were at length cut down and almost destroyed 
by a terrible slaughter, for having defiled the Levite’s wife. — 
Others regard it as an honourable encomium, by which Saul, 
or Mordecai was adorned, who were both of the tribe of Ben- 
jamin. The interpreters of our own age most inaptly apply 
it to the apostle Paul, who was changed from a wolf into a 
preacher of the Gospel. Nothing seems to me more probable 
than that the disposition and habits of the whole tribe is — 
here delineated ; namely, that they would live by plunder. — 
In the morning they would seize and devour the prey, in the 
evening they would divide the spoil; by which words he de- 
scribes their diligence in plundering. 

28. All these are the twelve tribes of Israel. Moses would 
teach us by these words, that his predictions did not apply 
only to the sons of Jacob, but extended to their whole race. 
We have, indeed, shown already, with sufficient clearness, 

1 “ The blessings of thy father have prevailed over the blessings of the 

eternal mountains, 
And the desirable things of the everlasting hills. 
These shall be on the head of Joseph, 


And on his crown who was separated from his brethren.” 
Dr. A, Clarke. 











CHAP. XLIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 471 


that the expressions relate not to their persons only; but 
this verse was to be added, in order that the readers might 
more clearly perceive the celestial majesty of the Spirit. Jacob 
- beholds his twelve sons. Let us grant that, at that time, the 
number of his offspring, down to his great grandchildren, had 
increased a hundredfold. He does not, however, merely de- 
clare what is to be the condition of six hundred or a thou- 
sand men, but subjects regions and nations to his sentence ; 
nor does he put himself rashly forward, since it is found 

afterwards, by the event, that God had certainly made known 
_ to him, what he had himself decreed to execute. Moreover, 
seeing that Jacob beheld, with the eyes of faith, things which 
were not only very remote, but altogether hidden from human 
sense ; woe be unto our depravity, if we shut our eyes against 
the very accomplishment of the prediction in which the truth 
conspicuously appears. 

But it may seem little consonant to reason, that Jacob is 
said to have blessed his posterity. For, in deposing Reuben 
from the primogeniture, he pronounced nothing joyous or 
prosperous respecting him; he also declared his abhorrence 
of Simeon and Leyi. It cannot be alleged that there is an 
antiphrasis in the word of benediction, as if it were used in 
a sense contrary to what is usual ; because it plainly appears 
to be applied by Moses in a good, and not an evil sense. I 
therefore reconcile these things with each other thus; that 
the temporal punishments with which Jacob mildly and 
paternally corrected his sons, would not subvert the covenant 
of grace on which the benediction was founded ; but rather, 
by obliterating their stains, would restore them to the ori- 
ginal degree of honour from which they had fallen, so that, 
at least, they should be patriarchs among the people of God. 
And the Lord daily proves, in his own people, that the 
punishments he lays upon them, although they occasion 
shame and disgrace, are so far from opposing their happiness, 
that they rather promote it. Unless they were purified in 
this manner, it were to be feared lest they should become 
more and more hardened in their vices, and lest the hidden 
virus should produce corruption, which at length would pene- 
trate to the vitals. We see how freely the flesh indulges it- 


472° COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. XLIX. 


self, even when God rouses us by the tokens of his anger. 


What then do we suppose would take place if he should al- — 


ways connive at transgression? But when we, after having 
been reproved for our sins, repent, this result not only absorbs 
the curse which was felt at the beginning, but also proves 
that the Lord blesses us more by punishing us, than he would 


have done by sparing us. Hence it follows, that diseases, — 


poverty, famine, nakedness, and even death itself, so far as 
they promote our salvation, may deservedly be reckoned 
blessings, as if their very nature were changed; just as the 
letting of blood may be not less conducive to health than 
food. When it is added at the close, every one according to 
his blessing, Moses again affirms, that Jacob not only implored 
a blessing on his sons, from a paternal desire for their wel- 
fare, but that he pronounced what God had put into his 
mouth ; because at length the event proved that the prophe- 
cies were efficacious. : 

29. And he charged them. We have seen before, that 
Jacob especially commanded his son Joseph to take care 
that his body should be buried in the land of Canaan. 
Moses now repeats that the same command was given to all 
his sons, in order that they might go to that country with 
one consent; and might mutually assist each other in per- 
forming this office. We have stated elsewhere why he made 
such a point of conscience of his sepulture; which we must 
always remember, lest the example of the holy man should 
be drawn injudiciously into a precedent for superstition. 
Truly he did not wish to be carried into the land of Canaan, 
as if he would be the nearer heaven for being buried there: 
but that, being dead, he might claim possession of a land 
which he had held during his life, only by a precarious 
tenure. Not that any advantage would hence accrue to him 
privately, seeing he had already fulfilled his course; but be- 
cause it was profitable that the memory of the promise 
should be renewed, by this symbol, among his surviving 
sons, in order that they might aspire to it. Meanwhile, we 
gather that his mind did not cleave to the-earth ; because, 
unless he had been an heir of heaven, he would never have 
hoped that God, for the sake of one who was dead, would 




















CHAP. XLIX. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 473 


prove so bountiful towards his children. Now, to give the 
greater weight to his command, Jacob declares that this 
thing had not come first into his own mind, but that he had 
been thus taught by his forefathers. ‘“ Abraham,” he says, 
“bought that sepulchre for himself and his family: hither- 
to, we have sacredly kept the law delivered to us by him. 
You must therefore take care not to violate it, in order that 
after my death also, some token of the favour of God may 
continue with us.” 

33. He gathered up his feet. The expression is not super- 
fluous: because Moses wished thereby to describe the placid 


. death of the holy man: as if he had said, that the aged 
saint gave directions respecting the disposal of his body, as — 


easily as healthy and vigorous men are wont to compose 
themselves to sleep. And truly a wonderful vigour and pre- 
sence of mind was necessary for him, when, while death was 
in his countenance, he thus courageously fulfilled the pro- 
phetic office enjoined upon him. And it is not to be doubted 
that such efficacy of the Holy Spirit manifested itself in him, 
as served to produce, in his sons, confidence in, and reverence 
for his prophecies. At the same time, however, it is proper 
to observe, that it is the effect of a good conscience, to be 
able to depart out of the world without terror. For since 
death is by nature formidable, wonderful torments agitate 
the wicked, when they perceive that they are summoned to 
the tribunal of God. Moreover, in order that a good con- 
science may lead us peacefully and quietly to the grave, it 
is necessary to rely upon the resurrection of Christ ; for we 
then go willingly to God, when we have confidence respect- 
ing a better life. We shall not deem it grievous to leave 
this failing tabernacle, when we reflect on the everlasting 
abode which is prepared for us. 


CHAPTER L. 


1. Anp Joseph fell upon his fa- 1. Et jactavit se Joseph super 
ther’s face, and wept upon him, and faciem patris sui, et flevit super eum, 
kissed him. et osculatus est eum. ; 

2. And Joseph commanded his 2. Et precepit Joseph servis suis 
servants the physicians to embalm medicis, ut aromatibus condirent 


4.74 


his father: and the physicians em- 
balmed Israel. 

3. And forty days were fulfilled 
for him; for so are fulfilled the days 
of those which are embalmed: and 
the Egyptians mourned for him 
threescore and ten days. 

4. And when the days of his 
mourning were past, Joseph spake 
unto the house of Pharaoh, saying, 
If now I have found grace in your 
eyes, speak, I pray you, in the ears 
of Pharaoh, saying, 

5. My father made me swear, say- 
ing, Lo, I die: in my grave which I 
have digged for me in the land of 
Canaan, there shalt thou bury me. 
Now therefore let me go up, I pray 
thee, and bury my father, and I will 
come again. 

6. And Pharaoh said, Go up and 
bury thy father, according as he 
made thee swear. 

7. And Joseph went up to bury 
his father: and with him went up 
all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders 
of his house, and all the elders of the 
land of Egypt, 

8. And all the house of Joseph, 
and his brethren, and his father’s 
house: only their little ones, and 
their flocks, and their herds, they 
left in the land of Goshen. 

9. And there went up with him 
both chariots and horsemen: and it 
was a very great company. 

10. And they came to the thresh- 
ing-floor of Atad, which is beyond 
Jordan; and therethey mourned with 
a great and very sore lamentation : 
and he made a mourning for his 
father seven days. 

11. And when the inhabitants of 
the land, the Canaanites, saw the 
mourning in the floor of Atad, they 
said, This is a grievous mourning to 
the Egyptians: wherefore the name 
of it was called Abel-mizraim, which 
is beyond Jordan. 

12. And his sons did unto him ac- 
cording as he commanded them: 

13. For his sons carried him into 
the land of Canaan, and buried him 
in the cave of the field of Machpelah, 


COMMENTARY UPON 


CHAP, L. 


patrem suum, et aromatibus condi- 
verunt medici ipsum Israel. 

3. Completi autem sunt ei qua- 
draginta dies: sic enim complentur 
dies eorwm qui condiuntur aromati- 
bus: et fleverunt eum Aigyptii sep- 
tuaginta diebus. 

4, Transierunt itaque dies luctus 
ejus: et loquutus est Joseph ad do- 
mum Pharaonis dicendo, Si queso 
inveni gratiam in oculis vestris, lo- 
quimini queeso in auribus Pharaonis, 
dicendo, 

5. Pater meus adjuravit me, di- 
cendo, Eece, ego morior: in sepulero 
meo, quod fodi mihi in terra Che- 
naan, sepelies me: nunc igitur as- 
cendam, obsecro, et sepeliam patrem 
meum, et revertar. 


6. Et dixit Pharao, Ascende, et 
sepeli patrem tuum, quemadmodum 
adjuravit te. 

7. Ascendit ergo Joseph ut sepe- 
liret patrem suum: ascenderuntque 
cum eo omnes servi Pharaonis seni- 
ores domus ejus, et omnes seniores 
terre Aigypti, 

8. Et omnis domus Joseph, et 
fratres ejus, et domus patris ejus: 
tantummodo parvulos suos, et pe- 
cudes suas, et boves suos reliquerent 
in terra Gosen. 

9. Et ascenderunt cum eo etiam 
currus, etiam equites: et fuit turma 
gravis valde. 

10. Porro venerunt usque ad 
aream Atad, que est trans Jor- 
danem: et planxerunt ibi planctu 
magno et gravi valde: et fecit patri 
suo luctum septem diebus. 


11. Et viderunt habitatores. ter- 
re Chenaanzi luctum.in area Atad, 
et dixerunt, Luctus gravis est iste 
Akgyptiis : 
men ejus Abel-Misraim, (id est luctus 
Agyptiorum,) qui est trans Jorda- 
nem. 

12. Fecerunt ergo filii ejus ei sic, 
quemadmodum preeceperat eis. 

13. Quia tulerunt eum filii ejus 
in terra Chenaan, sepelieruntque 
eum in spelunea agri duplici, quam 





ideirco voecatum fuit no- | 





Eee 


a a Ni i i i ie i 








CHAP. L. 


which Abraham bought with the field, 
for a possession of a burying-place of 
Ephron the Hittite, before Mamre. 
14. And Joseph returned into 
Egypt, he, and his brethren, and all 
that went up with him to bury his 
father, after he had buried his father. 


15. And when Joseph’s brethren 
saw that their father was dead, they 
said, Joseph will peradventure hate 
us, and will certainly requite us all 
the evil which we did unto him. 

16. And they sent a messenger 
unto Joseph, saying, Thy father did 
command before he died, saying, 

17. So shall ye say unto Joseph, 
Forgive, I pray thee now, the tres- 
pass of thy brethren, and their sin; 
for they did unto thee evil: and now, 
we pray thee, forgive the trespass of 
the servants of the God of thy father. 
And Joseph wept when they spake 
unto him. 

18. And his brethren also went and 
fell down before his face; and they 
said, Behold, we be thy servants. 

19. And Joseph said unto them, 
Fear not; for am I in the place of 
God? 

20. But as for you, ye thought evil 
against me; but God meant it unto 
good, to bring to pass, as it is this 
day, to save much people alive. 


21. Now therefore fear ye not: I 
will nourish you, and your little ones. 
And he comforted them, and spake 
kindly unto them. | 

22. And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, 
he and his father’s house: and Jo- 
seph lived.an hundred and ten years. 

23. And Joseph saw Ephraim’s 
children of the third generation : the 
children also of Machir, the son of 
Manasseh, were brought up upon Jo- 
seph’s knees. 

24, And Joseph said unto his bre- 
thren, I die: and God will surely 
visit you, and bring you out of this 
land unto the land which he sware 
to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob. 

25. And Joseph took an oath of 
the children of Israel, saying, God 


THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


475 


emit Abraham cum agro in posses- 
slonem sepulecri, ab Hephron Hittzo, 
ante Mamre. 

14. Et reversus est Joseph in 
figyptum, ipse et fratres ejus, et 
omnes qui ascenderant cum eo ad 
sepeliendum patrem ejus, postquam 
sepelivit patrem suum. 

15. Videntes autem fratres Jo- 
seph, quod mortuus esset pater eo- 
rum, dixerunt, Fortasse odio habebit 
nos Joseph, et reddendo reddet nobis 
omne malum, quo affecimus eum. 

16. Propterea mandarunt ad Jo- 
seph, dicendo, Pater tuus precepit, 
antequam moreretur, dicendo, 

17. Sic dicetis Joseph, Obsecro, 
parce nune sceleri fratrum tuorum, 
et peccato eorum: quia malum in- 
tulerunt tibi, nunc igitur parce quzeso 
sceleri servorum Dei patris tui. Fle- 
vit autem Joseph, dum illi loqueren- 
tur cum eo. 


18. Nam profecti sunt etiam fra- 
tres ejus, et prostraverunt se coram 
eo, et dixerunt, Eece, sumustibi servi. 

19. Et dixit ad eos Joseph, Ne 
timeatis: numquid enim loco Dei 
sum ? 

20. Vos quidem cogitastis adver- 
sum me malum: Deus autem cogi- 
tavit illud in bonum, ut faceret se- 
cundum diem hane, ut vivificaret po- 
pulum multum. 

21. Nunc itaque ne timeatis, ego 
alam vos, et parvulos vestros. Et 
consolatus est eos, et loquutus est 
ad cor eorum. 

22. Et habitavit Joseph in Aigyp- 
to, ipse et domus patris ejus: et 
vixit Joseph centum et decem annos. 

23. Et vidit Joseph ipsi Ephraim 
filios tertiee generationis: etiam filii 
Machir filii Menasseh educati sunt 
super genua Joseph. 


24, Et dixit Joseph fratribus suis, 
Ego morior, et Deus visitando visi- 
tabit vos, et ascendere faciet vos e 
terra hac ad terram, quam jurayit 
Abraham, Ishac et Jahacob. 

25. Et adjuravit Joseph filios Is- 
rael, dicendo, Visitando visitabit 


476 COMMENTARY UPON - CHAP. L. 


will surely visit you, and ye shall Deus vos, et tolletis ossa mea 
carry up my bones from hence. hine. = 

26. So Joseph died, being an hun- 26. Itaque mortuus est Joseph 
dred and ten years old: and they em- _filius centum et decem annorum: et 
balmed him, and he was put in a aromatibus condierunt eum, et po- 
coffin in Egypt. situs est in arca in Algypto. 


1. And Joseph fell upon his father’s face. In this chapter, 
what happened after the death of Jacob, is briefly related. 
Moses, however, states that Jacob’s death was honoured with 
a double mourning—natural (so to speak) and ceremonial. 
That Joseph falls upon his father’s face and sheds tears, flows 
from true and pure affection; that the Egyptians mourn for 
him seventy days, since it is done for the sake of honour, 
and in compliance with custom, is more from ostentation and 
vain pomp, than from true grief: and yet the dead are 
generally mourned over in this manner, that the last debt 
due to them may be discharged. Whence also the proverb 
has originated, that the mourning of the heir is laughter 
under a mask. And although sometimes minds are pene- 
trated with real grief; yet something is added to it, by the 
affectation of making a show of pious sorrow, so that they 
indulge largely in tears in the presence of others, who would 
weep more sparingly if there were no witnesses of their grief. 
Hence those friends who meet together, under the pretext 
of administering consolation, often pursue a course so dif- 
ferent, that they call forth more abundant weeping. And 
although the ceremony of mourning over the dead arose 
from a good principle ; namely, that the living should me- 
ditate on the curse entailed by sin upon the human race, 
yet it has always been tarnished by many evils ; because it 
has been neither directed to its true end, nor regulated by 
due moderation. With respect to the genuine grief which 
is not unnaturally excited, but which breaks forth from the 
depth of our hearts, it is not, in itself, to be censured, if it 
be kept within due bounds. For Joseph is not here reproved 
because he manifests his grief by weeping; but his filial 
piety is rather commended. We have, however, need of the 
rein, and of self-government, lest, through intemperate grief, 
we are hurried, by a blind impulse, to murmur against God : 





ee Te 


CHAP. L. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 477 


for excessive grief always precipitates us into rebellion. More- 
over, the mitigation of sorrow is chiefly to be sought for, in 
the hope of a future life, according to the doctrine of Paul. 
2. And Joseph commanded his servants. Although for- 
merly more labour was expended on funerals, and that even 
without superstition, than has been deemed right subse- 


quently to the proof given of the resurrection exhibited by 


Christ :* yet we know that among the Egyptians there was 
greater expense and pomp than among the Jews. Even the 
ancient historians record this among the most memorable 
customs of that nation. Indeed it is not to be doubted (as 
we have said elsewhere) that the sacred rite of burial de- 
scended from the holy fathers, to be a kind of mirror of the 
future resurrection: but as hypocrites are always more dili- 
gent in the performance of ceremonies, than they are, who 
possess the solid substance of things ; it happens that they 
who have declined from the true faith, assume a far more 
ostentatious appearance than the faithful, to whom pertain 
the truth and the right use of the symbol. If we compare 
the Jews with ourselves, those shadowy ceremonies, in which 
God required them to be occupied, would, at this time, ap- 
pear intolerable; though compared with those of other 
nations, they were moderate and easily to be borne. But 
the heathen scarcely knew why they incurred so much labour 
and expense. Hence we infer how empty and trivial a mat- 
ter it is, to attend only to external signs, when the pure 
doctrine which exhibits their true origin and their legitimate 
end, does not flourish. It is an act of piety to bury the dead. 
To embalm corpses with aromatic spices, was, in former times, 
no fault; inasmuch as it was done asa public symbol of future 
incorruption. For it is not possible but that the sight of a 
dead man should grievously affect us ; as if one common end, 
without distinction, awaited both us and the beasts that perish. 
At this day the resurrection of Christ is a sufficient support 
for us against yielding to this temptation. But the an- 


1 Que depuis que Jesus Christ nous a baillé claire demonstrance de la 
resurrection des morts—than since the time that Jesus Christ has given 
us a clear demonstration of the resurrection of the dead.—Prench Trans- 


lution. 


478 ‘COMMENTARY UPON OHAP. L. 


cients, on whom the full light of day had not yet shone, 
were aided by figures: they, however, whose_minds were not 
raised to the hope of a better life, did nothing else than trifle, 
and foolishly imitate the holy fathers. Finally, where faith 
has not so breathed its odour, as to make men know that 
something remains for them after death, all embalming will 
be vapid. Yea, if death is to them the eternal destruction 
of the body, it would be an impious profanation of a sacred 
and useful ceremony, to attempt to place what had perished 
under such costly custody. It is probable that Joseph, in 
conforming himself to the Egyptians, whose superfluous care 
was not free from absurdity; acted rather from fear than 
from judgment, or from approval of their method. Perhaps 
he improperly imitated the Egyptians, lest the condition of 
his father might be worse than that of other men. But it 
would have been better, had he confined himself to the fru- 
gal practice of his fathers. Nevertheless though he might 
be excusable, the same practice is not now lawful for ws. 
For unless we wish to subvert the glory of Christ, we must 
cultivate greater sobriety. 

3. And forty days were fulfilled for him. We have shown 
already that Moses is speaking of a ceremonial mourning ; 
and therefore he does not prescribe it as a law, or produce it 
as an example which it is right for us to follow. For, by the 
laws, certain days were appointed, in order that time might 
be given for the moderating of grief in some degree; yet 
something also was conceded to ambition. Another rule, 
however, for restraining grief is given to us by the Lord. 
And Joseph stooped, more than he ought, to the perverted 
manners of the Egyptians ; for the world affects to believe 
that whatever is customary is lawful ; so that what generally 
prevails, carries along everything it meets, like a violent 
inundation. ‘The seventy days which Moses sets apart to 
solemn mourning, Herodotus, in his second book, assigns to 
the embalming. But Diodorus writes that the seasoning of 
the body was completed in thirty days. Both authors dili- 
gently describe the method of embalming. And though I 
will not deny that, in the course of time, the skill and in- 
dustry in practising this art increased, yet it appears to me 














CHAP. L. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 479 


probable that this method of proceeding was handed down 
from the fathers." 

4, Joseph spake unto the house of Pharaoh. <A brief nar- 
ration is here inserted of the permission obtained for Jo- 
seph, that, with the goodwill and leave of the king, he might 
convey his father’s remains to the sepulchre of “the double 
cave.” Now, though he himself enjoyed no common degree 
of favour, he yet makes use of the courtiers as his interces- 
sors. Why did he act thus, unless on the ground that the 
affair was in itself odious to the people? For nothing (as 
we have said before) was less tolerable to the Egyptians, than 
that their land, of the sanctity of which they made their espe- 
cial boast, should be despised. Therefore Joseph, in order to 
transfer the offence from himself to another, pleads necessity : 
as if he would say, that the burying of his father was not 
left to his own choice, because Jacob had laid him under 
obligation as to the mode of doing it, by the imposition of an 
oath. Wherefore, we see that he was oppressed by servile 
fear, so that he did not dare frankly and boldly to profess 
his own faith ; since he is compelled to act a part, in order 
to transfer to the deceased whatever odium might attend 
the transaction. Now, whereas a more simple and upright 
confession of faith is required of the sons of God, let none 
of us seek refuge under such pretexts: but rather let us 
learn to ask of the Lord the spirit of fortitude and con- 
stancy which shall direct us to bear our testimony to true 
religion. Yet if men allow us the free profession of religion, 
let us give thanks for it. Now, seeing that Joseph did not 
dare to move his foot, except by permission of the king, we 
infer hence, that he was bound by his splendid fortune, as 
by golden fetters. And truly, such is the condition of all 
who are advanced to honour and favour in royal courts; so 
that there is nothing better for men of sane mind, than to be 
content with a private condition. Joseph also mitigates the 
offence which he feared he was giving, by another circum- 


1 It would appear that the mourning for Jacob was a kind of royal 
mourning. “On the death of every Egyptian king, a general mourning 
was instituted throughout the country for seventy-two days.”—Manners 
and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, by Sir J. G. Wilkinson, vol. i. 
p. 255.—Ld. 





480 COMMENTARY UPON ; CHAP. L. 


stance, when he says, that the desire to be buried in the 
land of Canaan was not one which had recently entered into 
his father’s mind, because he had dug his grave there long 
before ; whence it follows that he had not been induced to 
do so by any disgust taken against the land of Egypt. 

5. And Pharaoh said. We have seen that Joseph adopts 
a middle course. For he was not willing utterly to fail in 
' his duty; yet, by catching at a pretext founded on the com- 
mand of his father, he did not conduct himself with sufficient 
firmness. It is possible that Pharaoh was inclined, by the 
modesty of his manner, more easily to assent to his requests. 
Yet this cowardice is not, on that account, so sanctioned that 
the sons of God are at liberty to indulge themselves in it: 
for if they intrepidly follow where duty calls, the Lord will 
give the issue which is desired, beyond all expectation. For, 
although, humanly speaking, Joseph’s bland submission suc- 
ceeded prosperously, it is nevertheless certain that the proud 
mind of the king was influenced by God to concede thus 
benignantly what had been desired. It is also to be obsery- 
ed, what great respect for an oath prevailed among blind 
unbelievers. For, though Pharaoh himself had not sworn, 
he still deemed it unlawful for him to violate, by his own 
authority, the pledge given by another. But at this day, re- 
verence for God has become so far extinct, that men commonly 
regard it as a mere trifle to deceive, on one side or another, 
under the name of God. But such unbridled license, which 
even Pharaoh himself denounces, shall not escape the judg- 
ment of God with impunity. 

7. And Joseph went up. Moses gives a full account of 
the burial. What he relates concerning the renewed mourn- 
ing of Joseph and his brethren, as well as of the Egyp- 
tians, ought by no means to be established as a rule among 
ourselves. For we know, that since our flesh has no self- 
government, men commonly exceed bounds both in sorrow- 
ing and in rejoicing. The tumultuous clamour, which the 
inhabitants of the place admired, cannot be excused. And 
although Joseph had a right end in view, when he fixed the 
mourning to last through seven successive days, yet this 
excess was not free from blame. Nevertheless, it was not 











CHAP. L. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 481 


without reason that the Lord caused this funeral to be thus 
honourably celebrated : for it was of great consequence that a 
kind of sublime trophy should be raised, which might trans- 
mit to posterity the memory of Jacob’s faith. If he had been 
buried privately, and in a common manner, his fame would 
soon haye been extinguished ; but now, unless men wilfully 
blind themselves, they have continually before their eyes a 
noble example, which may cherish the hope of the promised 
inheritance: they perceive, as it were, the standard of that 
deliverance erected, which shall take place in the fulness of 
time. Wherefore, we are not here to consider the honour of 
the deceased so much as the benefit of the living. Even the 
Egyptians, not knowing what they do, bear a torch before the 
Israelites, to teach them to keep the course of their divine 
calling: the Canaanites do the same, when they distinguish 


_the place by a new name; for hence it came to pass that the 


knowledge of the covenant of the Lord flourished afresh.’ 
14. And Joseph returned. Although Joseph and the rest 
had left so many pledges in Egypt, that it would be neces- - 
sary for them to return; it is yet probable that they were 
rather drawn back thither by the oracle of God. For God 
never permitted them to choose an abode at their own will ; 
but as he had before led Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in their 
journeyings, so he held their sons shut up in the land of 
Goshen, as within barriers. And there is no doubt that the 
holy fathers left that oracle which we have in the fifteenth 
chapter and the thirteenth verse, to their sons, to be kept in 
faithful custody as a precious treasure.” They return, there- 
fore, into Egypt, not only because they were compelled by 
present necessity, but because it was not lawful for them to 
* Calvin, in his criticism on Joseph’s conduct with reference to his fa- 
ther’s funeral, seems to bear hard upon the motives of the patriarch. As 
there is nothing in Joseph’s previous history which is derogatory either to 
his moral courage or his integrity, it is scarcely justifiable to impute a 
want of firmness and of straightforwardness to him on this occasion. Is 
not the concluding portion of Calvin’s remarks a sufficient answer to all 
that has gone before? And may we not conclude, that the whole of the 


cireumstances of Jacob’s funeral were divinely ordered to perpetuate his 
memory ?—Ed. 

2 « And he said unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a 
stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall 
afflict them four hundred years.” 


VOL. Il. 2H 





482 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. I, 


shake off with the hand, the yoke which God had put upon 
their necks. But if the Lord does not hold_all men bound by | 
voluntary obedience to himself, he nevertheless holds their — 
minds by his secret rein, that they may not withdraw them- | 
selves from his government ; nor can we form any other con- | 
jecture than that they were restrained by his fear, so that — 
even when admonished of the tyrannical oppression which — 
was coming upon them, they did not attempt to make their | 
escape. We know that their disposition was not so mild as — 
to prevent them from rebelling against lighter burdens. — 
Wherefore, on this point, a special sense of religious obliga- — 
tion subdued them, so that they prepared. themselves quietly — 
and silently to endure the hardest servitude. 
15. And when Joseph's brethren saw that their father was 
dead. Moses here relates, that the sons of Jacob, after the 
death of their father, were apprehensive lest Joseph should — 
take vengeance for the injury they had done him. And | 
whence this fear, but because they form their judgment of — 
him according to their own disposition? That they had found — 
him so placable they do not attribute to true piety towards — 
God, nor do they account it a special gift of the Spirit: but — 
rather, they imagine that, out of respect to his father alone, 
he had hitherto been so far restrained, as barely to postpone 
his revenge. But, by such perverse judgment, they do a great 
injury to one who, by the liberality of his treatment, had borne 
them witness that his mind was free from all hatred and ma- 
levolence. Part of the injurious surmise reflected even upon 
God, whose special grace had shone forth in the moderation 
of Joseph. Hence, however, we gather, that guilty consciences 
are so disturbed by blind and unreasonable fears, that they 
stumble in broad day-light. Joseph had absolved his bre- 
thren from the crime they had committed against him ; but 
they are so agitated by guilty compunctions, that they vo- 
luntarily become their own tormentors. And they have not 
themselves to thank, that they did not bring down upon 
themselves the very punishment which had been remitted ; 
because the mind of Joseph might well have been wounded 
by their distrust. For, what could they mean by still ma- 
lignantly suspecting him to whose compassion they had again 








CHEAP. L. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 483 


and again owed their lives? Yet I do not doubt, that long 
ago they had repented of their wickedness ; but, perhaps, 
because they had not yet been sufficiently purified, the Lord 
suffered them to be tortured with anxiety and trouble: first, 
to make them a proof to others, that an evil conscience 


is its own tormentor, and, then, to humble them under a re- 


newed sense of their own guilt ; for, when they regard them- 
selves as obnoxious to their brother’s judgment, they cannot 
forget, unless they are worse than senseless, the celestial 
tribunal of God. What Solomon says, we see daily fulfilled, 
that “the wicked flee when no man pursueth;” (Prov. xxviii. 
1;) but, in this way, God compels the fugitives to give up 
their account. They would desire, in their supine torpor, to 
deceive both God and men; and they bring upon their 
minds, as far as they are able, the callousness of obstinacy : 
in the mean time, whether they will or no, they are made to 
tremble at the sound of a falling leaf, lest their carnal secu- 
rity should obliterate their sense of the judgment of God. 
(Ley. xxvi. 36.) Nothing is more desirable than a tran- 
quil mind. While God deprives the wicked of this singular 
benefit, which is desired by all, he invites us to cultivate in- 
tegrity. But especially, seeing that the patriarchs, who were 
already affected with penitence for their wickedness, are yet 
thus severely awakened, a long time afterwards, let none of 
us yield to self-indulgence ; but let each diligently examine 
himself, lest hypocrisy should inwardly cherish the secret 
stings of the wrath of God; and may that happy peace, 
which ean find no place in a double heart, shine within our 
thoroughly purified breasts. For this due reward of their 
neglect remains for all those who do not draw nigh to God 
sincerely and with all their heart, that they are compelled 
to stand before the judgment-seat of mortal man. Where- 
fore, there is no other method which can free us from dis- 
quietude, but that of returning into favour with God. Who- 
soever shall despise this remedy, shall be afraid not only of 
man, but also of a shadow, or a breath of wind. 

16. And they sent a messenger. Because they are asham- 
ed themselves to speak, they engage messengers of peace, in 
whom Joseph might have greater confidence. But here also 


484 . COMMENTARY UPON - CHAP. I. 


we perceive that they who have an accusing conscience are 
destitute of counsel and of reason. For if Jacob had been 
solicitous on this point, why did he not effect reconciliation 
between the son who was so obedient unto himself, and his | 
brethren? Besides, for what reason should they attempt to 
do that through mediators, which they could do so much 
better in their own persons? The Lord, therefore, suffers 
them to act like children ; that we, being instructed by their 
example, may look for no advantage from the use of frivo- 
lous inventions. But it may be asked, where the sons of 
Jacob found men to whom they could venture to commit 
such a message ; for it was no light thing to make known 
their execrable crime to strangers? And it would have been 
folly to subject themselves to this infamy among the Egyp- 
tians. The most probable conjecture is, that some domestic 
witnesses were chosen from the number of their own servants; — 
for though Moses makes no mention of such, when he relates — 
that Jacob departed into Egypt ; yet that some were brought 
with him, may easily be gathered from certain consider- 
ations. 

17. Forgive, I pray thee now. They do not dissemble the 
fact that they had grievously sinned ; and they are so far 
from extenuating their fault, that they freely heap up 
words in charging themselves with guilt. They do not, 
therefore, ask that pardon should be granted them as if the 
offence were light: but they place in opposition to the atro- 
city of their crime, first, the authority of their father, and 
then the sacred name of God. Their confession would have 
been worthy of commendation, had they proceeded directly, 
and without tortuous contrivances, to appease their brother. 
Now, since they have drawn from the fountain of piety the 
instruction that it is right for sin to be remitted to the ser- 
vants of God ; we may receive it as a common exhortation, 
that if we have been injured by the members of the Church, 
we must not be too rigid and immoveable in pardoning the 
offence. This humanity indeed is generally enjoined upon 
us towards all men: but when the bond of religion is super- 
added, we are harder than iron, if we are not inclined to the 
exercise of compassion. And we must observe, that they 





CHAP. L. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 485 


expressly mention the God of Jacob: because the peculiar 
faith and worship by which they were distinguished from the 
rest of the nations, ought to unite them with each other in a 
closer bond: as if God, who had adopted that family, stood 
forth in the midst of them as engaged to produce recon- 
ciliation. 

And Joseph wept when they spake unto him. It cannot be 
ascertained with certainty from the words of Moses, whether 
the brethren of Joseph were’ present, and were speaking, at 
the time he wept. Some interpreters imagine that a part 
was here acted designedly ; so that when the mind of Joseph 
had been sounded by others, the brethren, soon afterwards, 
came in, during the discourse. I rather incline toa different 
_ Opinion ; namely, that, when he knew, from the messengers, 
that their minds were tormented, and they were troubling 
themselves in vain, he was moved with sympathy towards 
them. Then, having sent for them, he set them free from all 
care and fear; and their speech, when they themselves were 
deprecating his anger, drew forth his tears. Moreover, by 
thus affectionately weeping over the sorrow and anxiety of 
his brethren, he affords us a remarkable example of compas- 
sion. But if we have an arduous conflict with the impetu- 
osity of an angry temper, or the obstinacy of a disposition 
to hatred, we must pray to the Lord for a spirit of meekness, 
the force of which manifests itself not less effectually, at 
this day, in the members of Christ, than formerly in Joseph. 

19. Am I in the place of God ? Some think that, in these 
words, he was rejecting the honour paid him: as if he would 
say, that it was unjustly offered to him, because it was due 
to God alone. But this interpretation is destitute of proba- 
bility, since he often permitted himself to be addressed in 
this manner, and knew that the minds of his brethren were 
utterly averse to transfer the worship of God to mortal man. 
And I equally disapprove another meaning given to the pas- 
sage, which makes Joseph refuse to exact punishment, be- 
cause he is not God: for he does not restrain himself from 
retaliating the injury, in the hope that God will prove his 
avenger. Others adduce a third signification ; namely, that 
the whole affair was conducted by the counsel of God, and: 


486 COMMENTARY UPON OHAP. L. 


not by his own: which though I do not entirely reject, be- 
cause it approaches the truth, yet I do not embrace the in- 
terpretation as true. For the word MMM (achat) sometimes 
signifies instead of, sometimes it means subjection. There- 
fore if the note of interrogation were not in the way, it might 
well be rendered, “ Because I am wnder God ;” and then the 
sense would be, “ Fear not, for Iam under God;’ so that 
Joseph would teach them, that because he is subject to the 
authority of God, it is not his business to lead the way, but 
to follow. But, whereas 7, the note of interrogation, is pre- 
fixed to the word, it cannot be otherwise expounded than to 
mean that it would be wrong for him, a mortal man, to pre- 
sume to thwart the counsel of God. But as to the sum of the 
matter, there is no ambiguity. For seeing that Joseph con- 
siders the design of divine providence, he restrains his feel- 
ings as with a bridle, lest they should carry him to excess. 
He was indeed of a mild aud humane disposition ; but nothing » 
is better or more suitable to assuage his anger, than to sub- 
mit himself to be governed by God. When, therefore, the 
desire of revenge urges us, let all our feelings be subjected 
to the same authority. Moreover, since he desires his brethren 
to be tranquil and secure, from the consideration, that he, 
ascribing due honour to God, willingly submits to obey the 
Divine command ; let us learn, hence, that it is most to our 
advantage to deal with men of moderation, who set God be- 
fore them as their leader, and who not only submit to his will, 
but also cheerfully obey him. For if any one is impotently 
carried away by the lust of the flesh, we must fear a thousand 
deaths from him, unless God should forcibly break his fury. 
Now as it is the one remedy for assuaging our anger, to ac- 
knowledge what we ourselves are, and what right God has 
over us; so, on the other hand, when this thought has taken 
full possession of our minds, there is no ardour, however furi- 
ous, which it will not suffice to mitigate. 

20. Ye thought evil against me. Joseph well considers (as 
we have said) the providence of God ; so that he imposes it 
on himself as a compulsory law, not only to grant pardon, 
but also to exercise beneficence. And although we have 
treated at large on this subject, in the forty-fifth chapter, 











CNAP. L. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 487 


yet it will be useful also to repeat something on it now. 
In the first place, we must notice this difference in his lan- 
guage: for whereas, in the former passage, Joseph, desiring 
to soothe the grief, and to alleviate the fear of his brethren, 
would cover their wickedness by every means which ingenuity 
could suggest ; he now corrects them a little more openly 
and freely ; perhaps because he is offended with their disin- 
genuousness. Yet he holds to the same principle as before. 
Seeing that, by the secret counsel of God, he was led into 
Egypt, for the purpose of preserving the life of his brethren, 


_ he must devote himself to this object, lest he should resist 


God. He says, in fact, by his action, “ Since God has de- 
posited your life with me, I should be engaged in war against 
him, if I were not to be the faithful dispenser of the grace 
which he had committed to my hands.’ Meanwhile, he 
skilfully distinguishes between the wicked counsels of men, 
and the admirable justice of God, by so ascribing the govern- 
ment of all things to God, as to preserve the divine admini- 
stration free from contracting any stain from the vices of men. 
The selling of Joseph was a crime detestable for its cruelty 


and perfidy ; yet he was not sold except by the decree of 


heaven. For neither did God merely remain at rest, and by 
conniving for a time, let loose the reins of human malice, in 
order that afterwards he might make use of this occasion ; 
but, at his own will, he appointed the order of acting which 
he intended to be fixed and certain. Thus we may say with 
truth and propriety, that Joseph was sold by the wicked 
consent of his brethren, and by the secret providence of God. 
Yet it was not a work common to both, in such a sense 
that God sanctioned anything connected with or relating to 
their wicked cupidity : because while they are contriving the 
destruction of their brother, God is effecting their deliver- 
ance from on high. Whence also we conclude, that there are 
various methods of governing the world. This truly must be 
generally agreed, that nothing is done without his will; be- 
cause he both governs the counsels of men, and sways their 
wills and turns their efforts at his pleasure, and regulates 
all events: but if men undertake anything right and just, 
he so actuates and moves them inwardly by his Spirit, that 






488 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP. L.. 


whatever is good in them, may justly be said to be received 
from him: but if Satan’ and ungodly men rage, he acts by 
their hands in such an inexpressible manner, that the wicked- 
ness of the deed belongs to them, and the blame of it is im- 
puted to them. For they are not induced to sin, as the 
faithful are to act aright, by the impulse of the Spirit, but 
they are the authors of their own evil, and follow Satan as 
their leader. Thus we see that the justice of God shines 
brightly in the midst of the darkness of our iniquity. For 
as God is never without a just cause for his actions, so men 
are held in the chains of guilt by their own perverse will. 
When we hear that God frustrates the wicked expectations, 
and the injurious desires of men, we derive hence no com- 
mon consolation. Let the impious busy themselves as they 
please, let them rage, let them mingle heaven and earth ; 
yet they shall gain nothing by their ardour; and not only 
shall their impetuosity prove ineffectual, but shall be turned 
to an issue the reverse of that which they intended, so that 
they shall promote our salvation, though they do it reluct- 
antly. So that whatever poison Satan produces, God turns 
it into medicine for his elect. And although in this place 
God is said to have “ meant it unto good,” because contrary 
to expectation, he had educed a joyful issue out of beginnings 
fraught with death: yet, with perfect rectitude and justice, 
he turns the food of reprobates into poison, their light into 
darkness, their table into a snare, and, in short, their life 
into death. If human minds cannot reach these depths, let 
them rather suppliantly adore the mysteries they do not 
comprehend, than, as vessels of clay, proudly exalt them- 
selves against their Maker. 

To save much people alive. Joseph renders his office sub- 
servient to the design of God’s providence ; and this sobriety 
is always to be cultivated, that every one may behold, by faith, 
God from on high holding the helm of the government of 
the world, and may keep himself within the bounds of his 
vocation ; and even, being admonished by the secret judg- 
ments of God, may descend into himself, and exhort himself 
to the discharge of his duty: and if the reason of this does 
not immediately appear, we must still take care that we do 





(EE ———eeEEeEEEeEE—E————E—E—= 








CHAP. L. THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 489 


not fly in confused and erratic circuits, as fanatical men are 
wont to do. What Joseph says respecting his being divinely 
chosen “to save much people alive,’ some extend to the 
Egyptians. Without condemning such an extension, I would 
rather restrict the application of the words to the family of 
Jacob ; for Joseph amplifies the goodness of God by this cir- 
cumstance, that the seed of the Church would be rescued 
from destruction by his labour. And truly, from these few 
men, whose seed would otherwise have been extinct before 
their descendents had been multiplied, that vast multitude 
sprang into being, which God soon afterwards raised up. 

21. I will nourish you. It was a token of a solid and not 
a feigned reconciliation, not only to abstain from malice and 
injury, but also to “overcome evil with good,” as Paul 
teaches, (Rom. xii. 21:) and truly, he who fails in his duty, 
when he possesses the power of giving help, and when the 
occasion demands his assistance, shows, by this very course, 
that he is not forgetful of injury. This requires to be the 
more diligently observed, because, commonly, the greater 
part weakly conclude that they forgive offences if they do 
not retaliate them.; as if indeed we were not taking revenge 
when we withdraw our hands from giving help. You would 
assist your brother if you thought him worthy: he implores 
your aid in necessity ; you desert him because he has done 
you some unkindness ; what hinders you from helping him 
but hatred? Therefore, we shall then only prove our minds 
to be free from malevolence, when we follow with kindness 
those enemies by whom we have been ill treated. Joseph is 
said to have spoken “to the heart of his brethren,” because, 
by addressing them with suavity and kindness, he removed 
all their scruples; as we have before seen, that Shechem 
spoke to the heart of Dinah, when he attempted to console 
her with allurements, in order that, forgetting the dishonour 


~ he had done her, she might consent to marry him. 


22. And Joseph dwelt in Egypt. It is not without reason 
that Moses relates how long Joseph lived, because the length 
of the time shows the more clearly his unfailing constancy : 
for although he is raised to great honour and power among 
the Egyptians, he still is closely united with his father’s 


490 COMMENTARY UPON CHAP, L. 


house. Hence it is easy to conjecture, that he gradually 
took his leave of the treasures of the court, because he 
thought there was nothing better for him to do than to hold 
them in contempt, lest earthly dignity should separate him 
from the kingdom of God. He had before spurned all the 
allurements which might have occupied his mind in Egypt: 
he now counts it necessary to proceed further, that, laying 
aside his honour, he may descend to an ignoble condition, and 
wean his own sons from the hope of succeeding to his worldly 
rank. We know how anxiously others labour, both that they 


themselves may not be reduced in circumstances, and that 


they may leave their fortune entire to their posterity: but 
Joseph, during sixty years, employed all his efforts to bring 
himself and his children into a state of submission, lest his 


earthly greatness should alienate them from the little flock — 


of the Lord. In short, he imitated the serpents, who cast 
off their exuvie, that, being stripped of their old age, they 
may gather new strength. He sees the children of his own 
grandchildren ; why does not his solicitude to provide for 
them increase, as his children increase? Yet he has so 
little regard for worldly rank or opulence, that he would 
rather see them devoted to a pastoral life, and be despised 
by the Egyptians, if only they might be reckoned in the 
family of Israel. Besides, in a numerous offspring during 
his own life, the Lord afforded him some taste of his bene- 
diction, from which he might conceive the hope of future 
deliverance: for, among so many temptations, it was neces- 
sary for him to be encouraged and sustained, lest he should 
sink under them. 

24. And Joseph said unto his brethren. It is uncertain 
whether Joseph died the first or the last of the brethren, or 
whether a part of them survived him. Here indeed Moses 
includes, under the name of brethren, not only those who 
were really so, but other relations. I think, however, that 
certain of the chiefs of each family were called at his com- 
mand, from whom the whole of the people might receive in- 
formation: and although it is probable that the other pa- 
triarchs also gave the same command respecting themselves, 
since the bones of them all were, in like manner, conveyed 


be 











CHAP. L THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 491 


into the land of Canaan; yet special mention is made of 
Joseph alone, for two reasons. First, since the eyes of them 
all were fixed upon him, on account of his high authority, it 
was his duty to lead their way, and cautiously to beware lest 
the splendour of his dignity should cast a stumblingblock 
before any of them. Secondly, it was of great consequence, 
as an example, that it should be known to all the people, 
that he who held the second place in the kingdom of Egypt, 
regardless of so great an honour, was contented with his own 
condition, which was only that of the heir of a bare promise. 

I die, This expression has the force of a command to 
his brethren to be of good courage after his death, because 
the truth of God is immortal; for he does not wish them to 
_ depend upon his life or that of another man, so as to cause 
them to prescribe a limit to the power of God ; but he would 
have them patiently to rest till the suitable time should. 
arrive. But whence had he this great certainty, that he 
should be a witness and a surety of future redemption, ex- 
cept from his having been so taught by his father? For we 
do not read that God had appeared unto him, or that an 
oracle had been brought to him by an angel from heaven ; 
but because he was certainly persuaded that Jacob was a 
divinely appointed teacher and prophet, who should transmit 
to his sons the covenant of salvation deposited with him ; 
Joseph relies upon his testimony not less securely than if 
some vision-had been presented to him, or he had seen angels 
descending to him from heaven: for unless the hearing of 
the word is sufficient for our faith, we deserve not that 
God, whom we then defraud of his honour, should conde- 
scend to deal with us: not that faith relies on human author- 
ity, but because it hears God speaking through the mouth 
of men, and by their external voice is drawn upwards; 
for what God pronounces through men, he seals on our 
hearts by his Spirit. Thus faith is built on no other foun- 
dation than God himself; and yet the preaching of men 
is not wanting in its claim of authority and reverence. 
This restraint is put upon the rash curiosity of those men, 
who, eagerly desiring visions, despise the ordinary ministry 
of the Church; as if it were absurd that God, who for- 


492 COMMENTARY UPON THE BOOK OF GENESIS. CHAP. L. 


merly showed himself to the fathers out of heaven, should 
send forth his voice out of the earth. But if they would 
reflect how gloriously he once descended to us in the person 
of his only-begotten Son, they would not so importunately 
desire that heaven should daily be opened unto them. But, 
not to insist upon these things; when the brethren saw that 
Joseph,—who in this respect was inferior to his fathers, as 
having been partaker of no oracle,—had been imbued by 
them with the doctrine of piety, so that he contended with 
a faith similar to theirs ; they would at once be most ungrate- 
ful and malignant, if they rejected the participation of his 
grace. 

25. God will surely visit you. By these words he intimates 
that they would be buried as in oblivion, so long as they re- 
mained in Egypt: and truly that exile was as if God had 
turned his back on them for a season. Nevertheless, Joseph 
does not cease to fix the eyes of his mind on God; as it is 
written in the Prophet, “I will wait upon the Lord that 
hideth his face from the house of Jacob.” (Is. viii. 17.) This 
passage also clearly teaches what was the design of this 
anxious choice of his sepulchre, namely, that it might be a 
seal of redemption: for after he has asserted that God was 
faithful, and would, in his own time, grant what he had pro- 
mised, he immediately adjures his brethren to carry away 
his bones. These were useful relics, the sight of which 
plainly signified that, by the death of men, the eternal cove- 
nant in which Joseph commands his posterity safely to rest, 
had by no means become extinct ; for he deems it sufficient 
to adduce the oath of God, to remove all their doubts re- 
specting their deliverance. 


END OF THE COMMENTARIES ON THE FIRST BOOK OF MOSES 
CALLED GENESIS. 








——— SS a 


INDEX 


OF HEBREW WORDS EXPLAINED. 


N Vol. Page 
Vol. Page n i. 425 
2N ii, 329 ii, 142 
IN iL 58 m2 i. 133 
OaN «i. 461 D3. ii. 193 
MIN i, 425 YD i. 518 
DIN ii. 195 N12 i. 70,107 
JUIN ii. 329 ypl ii, 22 
DIN i. 128 pws i, 243 
* i. 72,109, Wn. i. 161 
401 . : 
N ii. 442 f 
WN i. 83,337 Ja, He 140 
DNS ii. 102 1. 346 
INN ii. 317 WA i. 452 
MON ii. 446 D3 ha io 
bs \e 442 
ii. 172, 239 7 
i. 71,72,107, ‘WT ii. 146 
pr 108,531 ONT ii. 146 
ii. 239 wT i. 241 
nos i. 352 “I i, 251 
IS i 204 S 
eres He ban i. 191 
DYN i. 337 jt 1, 161 
ON i. 140 WNT 1, 185 
MN ii. 452 OPT i. 118 
DOWN ii. 344 ov i. 160 
WN i..107 Dip" 1. 268 
Saga a mbpspn i. 582 
Oyen i. 135 
5 mn ii, 19 
il 
Nii. 145 DHowint nu. 338 
222 «i. 332 ’ 
S32 i. 145 Dn i. 245 
mona i. 91 Gann i. 376 
m2 i. 73 my i. 133 
3 ii. 153 NY i. 279 
S53 i, 332 wr i. 279 


ns | 


yar 


mn 
mn 
NON 
mon 


r 
Vol. Page 
i. 135, 164 
ii. 134 
i. 193 


mn 


i, 181 
i. 576 
ll. 372 
1. 202 
il. 406 
i. 385 
i. 553 
ii. 377 
i. 405 


li. 149 

ii. 102, 254 
ii, 49 

i. 308 
1. 174 
i. 297 
Lee 
i. 438 
i. 566 
i. 566 
n. 127 
i. 170 


ii. 330 


INDEX OF HEBREW WORDS EXPLAINED. 


Vol Page 
i, 485 
i. 130 
i. 186 


li. 452 
ii. 406 
i. 185 
i. 151 
ii. 120 
ii. 153 


y2 


pr-bp) {i 244 
ll. 


wD? 
Mn-wE? 
Nw? 
pw) 


N75 
D'“DID 


AS 
~ 


nea 
Ste pee ES pate ete ete eg Ee te ee pee 


Vol. Page 
yng { 


1. 168 
li. 151 
i. 210 


39 
112 

88 
200, 211 
. 329 


iil. 444 


Pete et ete ee ete pel pte 
. . ‘ . . « . 
— 
jon) 
— 


= el te eae i — hd fas Ww 
bo 
oO 
—_ 


i. 566 
i. 436 


ws 
7 
mm 
yds 
nam 
nm 
Am 
pn 
7" 
won 
ypr 


nv 
yay 


wy 
mw 
aw 
mw 
pw 
my 
Suwy 
now 
mow 
pow 
wy 
oby 
oy 
spy 
naw 


nay 
ppy 


mw { 


yw 
papa wy 


wn 


pwn 
mE wn 
yawn 


Vol. Page 
li. 310 
i. 186 
li. 382 
ii. 127 
li. 68 
i. 160 
i. 74 
i. 385 
ii. 329 
i, 91 
i. 79 


uv 


i. 200 
1. 556 
ii. 134 


i. 442, 443 


ii. 28 


ii. 200, 447 


1. 168 
i. 402 
i. 110 
ii. 454 
li. 454 
ii, 453 
il. 434 
li. 362 
li. 358 
li. 212 
ii. 49 
i. 168 
i. 168 


i. 
li. 463 


i. 402 
i. 459 
ii. 200 


i. 88,91 


li. 275 
n 








INDEX 


OF PASSAGES OF HOLY SCRIPTURE QUOTED OR REFERRED TO IN THE 
COMMENTARY AND NOTES ON THE BOOK OF GENESIS. 


GENESIS. 


Chap. Ver. Vol. 
1 28 i, 182 
iv. 7 @. 178 
vy. lgi 94 

¥ 103 

244 

244 

235 

235 

15 

342 


Page 


BE: pate fete fate fete sve 


Xxii. 


xxiii. 9 ii. 
xXxiv....2. ii. 
Cees i 


<xvi. ...8 i. 
XXix. 


XXXiil. 
XXXiv. 
REBVi cies « i 
XXXVii. ii 
xlv. 
xvii. 
xlix. 


EXODUS. 
iii. 138-16 i. 110 
vi. 8 i. 109 

xii 40 i. 
xxxii 20 ii 


LEVITICUS. 


vii. 18 i. 405 
xvii. 4 i. 405 
xviii. 25 i, 488 
xxvi. 1 i. 118 

86 ii. 483 


NUMBERS. 


vi. 23 i, 391 
24 ii. 82 


Chap. Ver. Vol. Page 
xi, 6 i, 399 
414 


ii, 112 
22 ii. 898 
12 ii. 88 
10 i. 418 


Xxii. 


DEUTERONOMY. 


13 ii. 76 
i. 849 
Be 2 
. 74 
i. 416 


xiii. 
Xv. 
ee eee 
Xxil. i. 
oe, eee See 


JUDGES. 
xiii. 18 ii. 201 


1 SAMUEL. 


44 i. 395 
22 i. 198 

350 
i. 194 


xiv. 
xy. 


>) Say 


2 SAMUEL. 


19 i. 405 
16 i. 505 


Xix. 
Xxiv. 


1 KINGS. 
i. 47 ii. 418 
2 KINGS. 
xii 15 1.405 
Xvill. 4 ii. 236 
xix. 85 i. 505 
1 CHRONICLES. 


i. 32 ii 33 
iv. 4-43 ii, 449 


= 


82 


JOB. 

Chap. Ver. Vol. Page 
xxi. 13 ii. 
Xxxvlii., 8 i. 
PSALMS. 
¥.2 FAOLPRL 
siv;') > $9.4 
evil!) 6k 
xix. (Lak 
gett She 
xxxili. 65 i. 
6 oi 
a: 
xxxiv. 7 ii 
14 ii. 
16 ak 
sxxuce. 753. 
xxxvii. 6 = ii. 
ey b4:-* 3. 
23 4i 
hy 6) 4 
19 i. 
av, 026-4 
Ixviii. ©138 1. 
Ixxviii. 12, 48 ii. 
Ixxxvili. 49 i. 
#0. 11-4 
cii. 28° ii 
oe ae * 
Sst: 
4 246 
15 ii 
29 i. 
80) sk 
Sh: <a, 
ev. 12-15 i. 
14 AG, 
18 ii 
evi. 81 i 
ex. 4 i. 
exiii. 9 ii. 
xvi. AAT. 
exvi. 12 i. 
exxi. 28 ii. 
exxvii 2 i. 
i 


CXXXil. 
Cxxxviil. 38 
CXxxix. 7 


Chap. Ver. Vol. Page 
14 i. 456 
i. 53% 
i, 161 
exlviii, 4 1 80 
PROVERBS. 


> a ee Yah 

tsi | 2 
12°) i7. 
13 
30 

xxvii. 1 


CANTICLES. 
iwi 1 
vii. 13 ii. 
ISAIAH. 
Le 

g6' i 
sale 


+ de bee 
ete BE: ee ee ee eee 4 > : ° . 
. . Hy ° . . . . . . - . 


ly. 6 il 


JEREMIAH, 


i. 10 ii. 450 
ii. 10, 11 ii, 225 


496 


Chap. Ver. Vol. Page 
Vic22 & 
a ae 
Ruiz. > | F 
xxxiv. 18 
XXxvili, 9 
xlix. 82 
lii. 28 


EZEKIEL. 


xvi. 48,49 i, 491 
49 i. 874 

497 

i. 107 
ii. 456 
Xxiii. ii. 95 
XXvVii. i. 122 
xxviii, 14,17 i. 187 


Xx. 
XXi. 


DANIEL. 

ii. 28 ii. 308 

ix. 21 ii, 19 
AMOS. 

aa A 

vi. 2 i 818 

ix. 11 ii. 456 


JONAH. 


iii, 4 i. 526 


MICAH. 


li, 15 i, 97 


ZECHARIAH, 


ii, 13 i, 258 


MALACHI. 


i. 8 ii. 98 
187 
ii, 183 
97 
137 


MATTHEW. 


i. 210 
ii. 845 
i. 448 


ii, 14 
15 i. 


<i 
Ei < 
ro 
bo & 
<tee 


i. 488 
i. 222 
i. 186 
i. 507 


as 

_ 

&> 
ie ee ete 


i. 140 . 


INDEX OF PASSAGES OF SCRIPTURE. 


LUKE. 


Pe | oe 
x0n. 26°’ i 


Sa i 
xxiv. “D2e i. 


i, 479 © 


iv. 8 


ii, 863 
i. 292 


85 


Chap. Ver. Vol. Page 
28 i. 99 


xiv. 
i. 447 


xy: 8 i 
“Wi 20 +ipiwy 


1 CORINTHIANS. 


rs 
ee 
pee pee ee BS ES ee as 


2 CORINTHIANS. 


i, 20 i, 568 
eke ini Se 
Ve SOT ney aS 


GALATIANS. 


i. 448 
i, 848 

415 
i. 186 
i, 541 
i, 543 


EPHESIANS, 


li. 8 i. 155 

6 i. 68 
i. 449 
i. 448 
23 i. 94 
i. 528 
i, 431 


PHILIPPIANS. 
ii, 38 ii, 141 
7 ii, 278 


COLOSSIANS, 


i. 5 i, 258 
ii, 11 i, 466 
iii, 10 i, 94 


Tes See 
———s 


1 TIMOTHY. 


Chap. Ver. Vol. 
FS i 198 
in 1" aeeee- 

14 i. 152 

& £202 


iv. 


2 TIMOTHY. 
ii, 12 i, 410 


HEBREWS. 


_ 1 PETER. 
i. 12, 13 ii. 
ii, 6 i. 


iii, 21 i, 
2 PETER. 
i, 15 ii, 483 

20,21 i. 171 
iii, 6 i. 286 
REVELATION, 


xxi. +2 °Eo Tae 








Se ee ee eee ee ee SS eee ele 


ee 


PS 


GENERAL INDEX. 


A 


ABEL, was probably Cain’s twin brother, 
i. 189,191; his profession a keeper 
of sheep, 192; respect which God 
had to him and to his sacrifice, 
194-196; is murdered by Cain, 204, 
205. ‘ 

Abimelech, king of Gerar, in the time 
of Abraham, takes Sarah, Abra- 
ham’s wife, to his house, i. 522 ; is 
warned by God in a dream not to 
injure her, 523 ; asserts his inno- 
cence, 524 ; is compassionated by 
God, 525; is commanded to re- 
store Sarah to Abraham, 525, 526; 
obeys the command, 527 ; his kind- 
ness to Abraham, 532 ; Abraham’s 
prayer in his behalf, 533 ; covenant 
between him and Abraham, 551- 
556. 

Abimelech, king of the Philistines in 
the time of Isaac, reproves Isaac 
for having given out that Rebekah 
was his sister, ii. 58, 61, 62; de- 
nounces capital punishment against 
such as should injure Isaac, 63, 65, 
66, 72; desires to enter into cove- 
nant with Isaac, 72-75 ; the cove- 
nant between them, 76. 

Abram, or Abraham, son of Terah, 
means of determining the period be- 
tween the deluge and the calling of, 
i. 332; his calling to be accounted 
the renovation of the Church, 333; 
his father and grandfather apos- 
tates from the true worship of God, 
333, 334; was not his father’s el- 
dest son, 335; his wife Sarah’s 
sterility, 338; leaves his native soil 
and proceeds to Canaan in obedi- 
ence to the command of God, 338, 
340-346 ; was, previous to this, 
plunged in idolatry, 343, 387; the 
divine promises made to him, 346- 
349, 410, 4)1, 414-420, 444-459, 
571, 572 ; the strength of his faith, 


wes. Ti, 


346, 350, 352, 353, 357, 358, 376, 
386, 411, 412, 459, 460, 464, 547, 
560, 561, 563, 564, 567, 568; builds 
an altar to God in token of his gra- 
titude, 353, 356, 368, 377; his faith 
directed to the blood of Christ, 355; 
his continual wanderings, 356, 357; 
goes down to Egypt, 358; per- 
suades his wife to use dissimulation, 
859; his sin in this, 360, 362, 365; 
his departure from Egypt, 367; 


his wealth, ib. ; strife between his 


herdsmen and those of Lot, 370, 
3715; his endeavours to restore 
peace, 371, 372 ; is treated unjustly 
by Lot, 372, 373; this loss made up 
to him by God, 374, 375; rescues 
Lot from the four kings, 383 ; en- 
tered into covenants of friendship 
with the princes of Canaan, 384 ; 
is called an Hebrew from his an- 
cestor Eber, ib. ; undertakes war 
by the direction of God’s Spirit, 
383-386; is entertained and blessed 
by Melchizedek, 386, 387, 391, 392; 
gives tithes to Melchizedek, 392; 
his freedom from avarice, 394, 395; 
his complaint of being childless, 
401, 402; his faith of having a nu- 
merous seed strengthened by the 
sight of the stars, 403, 404; was 
justified by faith alone, 404-406 ; 
the time when he was thus justified, 
408, 409; offers sacrifice at the 
command of God, 412, 413; is pro- 
mised a placid and quiet death, 418; 
the nations enumerated whose land 
was to be given to his offspring, 
421; is prevailed upon by Sarah to 
take Hagar as a concubine, 424 ; 
long believed Ishmael to be the 
promised seed, 442; his name 
changed from Abram to Abraham, 
447; the covenant made with him 
a spiritual one, 450 ; is promised a 
legitimate seed by Sarah, 459 ; his 
prayer in behalf of Ishmael, 461; 


21 


498 


ii. 98 ; circumcises himself and his 
family,i.464; angels appear to him, 
and his hospitality towards them, 
469-471; is forewarned of the de- 
struction of Sodom and Gomor- 
rah, 478-480, 483; his intercession 
in behalf of Sodom, 486-491; wit- 
nesses the destruction of Sodom 
and the other cities of the plain, 
515, 516; leaves the neighbourhood 
of these cities, 520; an additional 
instance of his infirmity, 52], 530; 
why he did not become a father 
till advanced in age, 537; cireum- 
cises Isaac, 539; his age at the 
birth of Isaac, ib. ; ejects Ishmael 
and his mother from his family, 
541, 545, 547, 548; the thought of 
this painful to him, 544; his house 
a lively image of the Church, 545; 
is commanded for the trial of his 
faith to slay his son [saae with his 
own hand, 559-566; prepares to 
obey the divine command, 567, 568; 
is prevented from slaying Isaac, 
and his piety approved, 569, 570; 
his wife’s death, 575, 576 ; his grief 
for her, 578 ; his desire to have a 
family burying-place in Canaan, 
579; purchases for this purpose 
the cave of Machpelah, 581, 584; 
why he would not allow his son to 
marry a Canaanitish woman, ii. 12; 
whether he was married to Ke- 
turah during the lifetime of Sarah, 
32-35; his sons by Keturah, 35; 
constitutes Isaac his sole heir, ib. ; 
his incomparable patience, 36 ; his 
death, 36, 37, 60. 

Abraham, children of, twofold, i, 545 ; 
ii. 573. 

Abundance, the mother of idleness, ii. 
332 

Accusations, unjust, ii, 173. 

Adam, was well instructed as to his 
origin and the creation of the 
world, i. 58; was created in the 
image of God, 91-96, 227, 228; 
contrast between him and Christ, 
112 ; the positive law imposed upon 
him, 125, 126 ; inducements he had 
to obey this law, 126 ; the kind of 
deaththreatened tohis disobedience, 
ib. ; woman necessary to him even 
in innocency, 130,131; gave names 
to every living creature, 131; how 
he knew that Eve was formed from 
his side, 134, 185; did not. fall ex- 
cept by the permission and ordina- 
tion of God, 143, 144; is prevailed 


GENERAL INDEX. 


upon by the woman to eat the for- 
bidden fruit, 151, 152 ; in what his 
first sin consisted, 152-154 ; his de- 
fection the ruin of all his posterity, 
154 ; whether the souls of men are 
propagated by descent from him, 
156 ; the time of the fall, ib. ; his 
sense of shame after it, 158, 159; 
his attempts at self-defence, 163, 
164; sentence pronounced upon 
him, 172-180; his death dates im- 
mediately from his transgression, 
179 ; ironical reproof addressed by 
God to him, 182; is debarred from 
the fruit of the tree of life, 183; is 
driven from the garden of Eden, 
184; his return to the garden of 
Eden prevented by angels, 185; his 
family in various ways corrupt them- 
selves, 223; he himself, his wife, and 
others of his children, true wor- 
shippers of God, 224; transmitted 
his fallen nature to his children, 
228; his age at his death, 231. 
See Eve. Man. Satan. Serpent. 

Adoration, falling on the face the an- 
cient rite of, i. 445. 

Adoration, put for the civil respect 
shewn to men, i. 581. 

Adoption, degrees of, i. 447-449; is 
founded in the good pleasure of 
God alone, ii. 49. 

Adultery, its criminality and hateful- 
ness in the sight of God, i. 525, 528; 
ii. 63, 296, 297; why Christ did 
not punish it, 287; the adulteress 
burnt to death in the Patriarchal 
ages, 286 ; why the adulterer was 
less severely punished, ib. 

Affections, human, in what sense as- 
cribed to God, i. 247, 249. 

Afflictions, are to be traced to sin, i. 
178; ii, 282; utility of, i. 4383 ii. 
162, 195, 321, 344; are sent by 
God, 196 ; their power in awaken- 
ing the conscience, 343, 357, 358, 
370; our duty under them to aceus- 
tom ourselves to the consideration 
of God’s judgments, 347, 349 ; are 
common to the good and the bad, 
383. 

Africans, the, Ham, the progenitor of, 
i. 313. 

Age, commonly signifies antiquity, i. 
245; is put for a long period of 
time, 375. 

Alexander the Great, i. 121. 

Allegories not to be too much indulged 
in interpreting the Scriptures, i. 
257, 279, 545, ii. 438, 439, 461. 





Rai te i 


in 





a 








— 


GENERAL INDEX, 


Allurements of the world to be guarded 
against, ii. 332. 

Ambition, its baneful effects, i. 319, 
380; ii. 141; prompted men to build 
the Tower of Babel, i. 323, 327, 
328 ; is the mother of all conten- 
tions, 372. 

Ambrose quoted, i. 578 ; ii. 91. 

Amorites, the, God’s longsuffering to- 
wards, i. 418, 419. 

Anabaptists, their error in denying 
that God’s covenant includes in- 
fants, i. 297, 298. 

Anagogy, meaning of, i. 168. 

Anah, the first who produced mules, 
ii. 254. 

Angels, ridiculous opinion of the Jewish 
writers as to God’s holding commu- 
nication with them and the earth 
when about to create man, i. 92 ; 
are confirmed, 158 ; appointed to 
prevent Adam from re-entering the 
garden of Eden after his expulsion, 
185; why called cherubim, 186; 
that sometimes ascribed*to them 
which belongs peculiarly to God, 
432, 475; three of them appear to 
Abraham, 468-471; on appearing 
to the fathers bodies were given 
them for a time, 472, 478; were 
called “men” from the form they 
assumed, 478; are ministers of 
God’s wrath as well as of his grace, 
504, 505; are not to be prayed to 
or worshipped, ii. 25 ; are ministers 
to the faithful, 113, 185, 186; Christ 
the head of, 113. 

Angelical perfection erroneously placed 
in poverty, i. 367. 

Anger, its blindness, i. 427 ; lengths to 
which it will hurry men, 428 ; ii. 
228. 

Anger, Holy, ii. 141. 

Anger of God proceeds with a slow 
step to avenge itself, i. 419. 

Animals, were created on the sixth day 
of the creation, i. 90; the skins of, 
the first clothing of our first pa- 
rents, 181, 182 ; why they perished 
in the deluge, 250 ; distinction be- 
tween clean and unclean, in the 
days of Noah, 266, 282; some re- 
mains of man’s original dominion 
over them survived the fall, 290 ,; 
the promise of this dominion re- 
newed to Noah, ib. ; grant of them 
for food to man, 291, 292 ; the eat- 
ing of their blood forbidden, 293 ; 
the unclean not to be eaten by the 
Jews, ib, 


99 


Antediluvian world, the, God’s long- 
suffering towards, i, 240, 241, 243, 
247 ; universality and inveteracy of 
the wickedness of, 247, 248, 253, 
255. See Giants. 

boy peated pea the, their error, i, 

4 


Antiphrasis, a rhetorical figure, ii, 471. 

Apocrypha quoted, i. 78. 

Apostasy of mankind, early and ex- 
tensive, after the deluge, ii. 166- 
170, 237. 

Ararat, the mount on which the ark 
rested, i. 278. 

Arians referred to, i. 71, 95. 

Aristotle maintained the eternity of 
the world, i. xlix ; quoted, 318 ; 
dwells on second causes, and over- 
looks God, 512, 582. 

Ark, the, in which Noah and his fa- 
mily were preserved from the de- 
luge, its structure, i, 255, 256; was 
more than sufficient to contain all 
the creatures God commanded Noah 
to take into it, 257 ; was an image 
of the Church, 257, 273; the num- 
ber of animals to be taken into it, 
266, 269; was made secure from 
the deluge not by human artifice, 
but by divine miracle, 272 ; raven 
sent forth by Noah, i. 279. See 
Noah, ~ 

Ark, eavil of Porphyry in reference to 
the, refuted, i. 257. 

Armenia, mountains of, their great 
height, i. 278. 

Arrian quoted, i. 121. 

Arts, the invention of, i, 217, 218. 

Asher, future condition of the tribe of, 
predicted by Jacob on his death- 
bed, ii. 465. 

Asiatics, Shem was their progenitor, 
i. 313. 

Astrology condemned, i. 84. 

Astronomy, imperfect state of, in Cal- 
vin’s time, i. 86; is to be studied, 
ib.; was first cultivated among the 
heathen, 218. 

Asphaltites, the lake, or the Dead Sea, 
i. 38). 

Assyrians, the, Chaldea founded by, i. 
370. 

Athenians, the, i. xlix. 

Augustine quoted, i. 61, 93, 117, 152, 
156, 204, 256, 257, 266, 368, 455, 
541, 570; ii. 34, 241, 391. ; 

Authority of God should regulate us in 
every thing, i. 350, 351. 

Avarice, its blindness, i. 372, 373; the 
root of all evil, ii. 163. 


500 


B 


Baset the seat of Nimrod’s empire, i. 
317, 318. 

Babel, the building of the tower of, i. 
323 ; wherein consisted the crimi- 
nality of, 323, 324, 327, 328 ; the 
period from the deluge to, 324 ; 
grief with which it would affect 
Noah, 325; confusion of tongues 
at, 325, 326, 329-331; brick used 
in, 326 ; meaning of the term Ba- 
bel, 332. 

Balaam, his wicked device for seducing 
the Israelites to defection, i. 240. 

Baptism, Noah’s deliverance from the 
universal deluge, a figure of, i. 273; 
is now substituted for cireumci- 
sion, 456 ; is not to be despised, 
458; not necessary to salvation, 
ib. ; sin of parents in its neglect, 
ib.; is a mark of separation from 
the profane, ii. 223. 

Barnes, Rev. Albert, of Philadelphia, 
his testimony in favour of our au- 
thorized version of the Scriptures, 
Pe ah 

Bdellium, i. 124. 

Beauty, personal, is the gift of God, 
i. 861, 522; dangers to which it 
exposes one, li. 295. 

Beer-sheba, origin of the name, i. 556. 

Beginning of strength, the, why first- 
born so called, ii. 442. 

Believers, true, are the legitimate 
sons of Abraham, ii. 45. See Peo- 
ple of God. 

Benefits, temporal, bestowed upon 
God’s people and upon unbelievers 
in a different way, li. 428. 

Benjamin, son of Jacob by Rachel, 
his birth, ii. 244, 338, 346, 348; is 
greatly beloved by his father, 350 ; 
is with difficulty allowed by his 
father to go down to Egypt, 355 ; 
Joseph’s affection for him, 362, 368 ; 
future disposition and habits of the 
tribe of, predicted by Jacob on his 
death-bed, 470. 

Bernard quoted, i. 157. 

Berosus quoted, i. 324, 

Bethel, ii. 120, 233. 

Bethuel, father of Rebekah, ii. 26, 169. 

Bible, the, Tyndale’s version of, i. xvii; 
the Geneva version of, its author, 
XVI. 

Bilhah, the maid-servant of Rachel, 
ii. 142. 

Birds and fishes, were created on the 
fifth day of the creation, i. 88, 


GENERAL INDEX. 


Birthday, the celebration of it com- 
mon, ii, 312. 

Birthright. See Primogeniture. 

Bless, what it is to do so, i. 90, 105, 
347. : 

Blessing an ancient custom, ii. 82 ; 
whence the custom arose, 182. 
Blessing the people, a duty of the Le- 

Vitical priests, i. 391 ; ii. 199. 
Blessing, God’s, its efficacy, i. 289, 
300, 3815 ii. 106, 150; is the or- 
dinary attendant on good faith aud 
equity, 154 ; is put for his promise, 
240. 
Blessings, earthly, mingled with trou- . 
bles, ii. 65. : 
Blood, the eating of, for a time forbid- 
den, i. 293. 
Bowing towards the ground, a token 
of reverence common among orien- . 
tal nations, i, 470. 
Bricks, employed in building the tower 
of Babel, i. 326. 
Brides, an ancient custom in the East : 
. 








to givé them veiled to their hus- 
bands, ii. 29. 

Briers and thorns, their production a 
consequence of sin of man, i. 104, 

Burial of the dead, religiously observ- 
ed in all ages and among all people, 
i. 578, 579; is a symbol of the fu- 
ture resurrection, li. 245, 477. See 
Dead. Funeral. 


C 


Catn, was probably Abel’s twin brother, 
i. 189 ; Eve’s words on his birth, 
190, 191; his life in appearance 
well regulated, 192; why he and 
his offering were not accepted of 
God, 196; how he came to know 
that his offering was rejected and 
Abel’s accepted, 196, 197; his 
wrath thereby excited against Abel, 
197, 198; is reprimanded by God, 
198,199, 201 ; disguises his hatred 
of Abel under the colour of frater- 
nal regard, 204; his malignant 
feelings break forth in accusation 
against his brother, and he murders 
him, 204, 205; is summoned to 
God’s tribunal, 205, 206; is con- 
victed, 206-208; judgment pro- 
nounced upon him, 208-211 ; com- 
plains of being too severely punish- 
ed, 212 ; his dread of violence from 
men, 2]3 5; a mark set on him by 
God to keep others from doing him 
violence, 214, 222 ; what is meant 





_- 





GENERAL INDEX. 


by his departing from the presence 
of the Lord, 214 ; all his children 
not named by Moses, 215 ; builds 
a city, and his motives for doing so, 
216. 

Calendar, Jewish, i. 264, 286. 

Calling upon the name ‘of God. See 
Invoking the name of Ged. 

Calvin, comparison between him and 
Luther as reformers and commen- 
tators, i. viii; his impartiality as an 
interpreter of Scripture, ix ; ani- 
madversions on Bishop Horsley’s 
opinion of him as an expositor of 
the Prophecies, xi, xii; the Latin 
version of Leo Juda, the basis of 
his version of the Scriptures, xv ; 
assists Robert Peter Olivetan in 
the publication of the first French 
Protestant Bible, xvi; order in 
which his commentaries succeeded 
each other, xviii; medals of Cal- 
vin, xxiii ; he denounces the schis- 
matics of his own day, lii; why he 
avoided prolixity in his commen- 
taries on the books of Moses, liii ; 
incorrect views of the planetary 
system in his time of which he 
partook, 61, 173 ; his references to 
the Reformation, 224 ; and to the 
corruptions of his own time, i. 334, 
376, 530, 547 ; ii. 29, 127, 128, 209, 
219, 361, 464. 

Camarina, a city of Sicily, ii. 110. 

Canaan, son of Ham, i. 301 ; why the 
judgment of God was pronounced 
on him for the sin of his father, i. 
305-307. 

Canaan, the land of, promised to Abra- 
ham and his seed, i. 346; Abraham 
enters into covenant with the prin- 
ces of, 384 ; was a mirror or pledge 
to the fathers of the heavenly in- 
heritance, 448 ; ii. 91,92, 115, 386 ; 
famine in, 353, 408 ; was not divid- 
ed among the Israelites by the 


~ will of man, 440. 


Canaanites, the, were doomed to de- 
struction on account of their wick- 
edness, i. 345, 352, 353; their cru- 
elty and pride, 356 ; their idolatry, 
369, 377; the patriarchs on their 
guard not to form marriages with, 
li. 392. 

Canonists, the, 584. 

Carnal counsels, are cursed by God, i. 
517. 

Carnal security, to be guarded against, 
ii, 234. 

Cato quoted, i. liv. 


501 


Cause, the first, independent of second 
causes, 1. 82, 83. 

Causes, second, our proneness to con- 
Sg of them as necessary to God, 
i. 82. 

Celibacy condemned, i. 128 ; ii. 121. 

Celebrity of name gained by crimes, 
evils of, i. 246. 

Chaldea founded by the Assyrians, i. 
320 ; its fertility, 357. 

Chaldean paraphrast quoted, i. 147, 
238, 278. 

Charity does not forbid the exercise 
of caution as to unknown persons, 
i. 362 ; is ingenious in hiding the 
faults of brethren, ii. 380. 

Charran in Mesopotamia, i. 339. 

Chastisements, God’s, i. 178. 

Chastity, to be religicusly cultivated, 
ii. 220. 

Chedorlaomer, i. 381. 

Cherubim, why angels are so called, 
i. 186; why God is said to sit be- 
tween the cherubim which over- 
shadowed the ark of the covenant, 
ib. 

Childbirth, pains of, traceable to the 
first transgression of Eve, i. 171. 

Children, of Abraham, twofold, i, 545; 
ii.. 573 ; ought to be subject to their 
parents in contracting marriage, 1. 
551, ii. 14, 219; are not the off- 
spring of chance, 141; are the gift 
of God, 135, 141, 208; are bonds 
to unite their parents, 148. See 
Parents. 

Christ, contrast between him and 
Adam, i. 112; is God, 75, 475; was 
typified by Melchizedek, 388, 389 ; 
his priesthood, 389; is an eternal 
king, ib.; was present in all the 
ancient oracles, 433 ; was the end 
of the Levitical law, 456; often 
appeared under a human form to 
the fathers in company with angels, 
470, 472, 475, 495; ii. 165, 429 ; 
is the head of angels, 113 5 was 
symbolized by Jacob’s vision of the 
ladder, 113 ; all nations to be bless- 
ed in him, 116 ; is the living image 
of God, 202; was typified by Jo- 
seph, 261, 266; sprang from the 
tribe of Judah, 277 ; derived no 
glory from that descent, 278 ; why 
he did not punish adultery, 287 ; 
the name “ angel” applied to him, 
429; his peculiar office to deliver 
his people from ‘all evil, 429; his 
coming announced by Jacob on his 
death-bed under the name Shiloh, 


502 


452-459 ; opposition to be made to 
him predicted, 468. 

Chronological difficulties, i. 243, 244, 

Chrysostom, incorrectly refers the im- 
age of God in which man was 
created, to the dominion with which 
man was invested over the inferior 
creation, i. 94. 

Church, her seed however small pre- 
served from the creation to the de- 
luge, i. 227 ; her enemies exposed 
to God’s vengeance, 416 ; her state 
shadowed forth in the ejection of 
Ishmael and his mother from the 
family of Abraham, 54], 545; two 
kinds of persons born in her, 546; 
the true church to be distinguished 
from the hypocritical, 547; small 
in her beginnings, ii. 40, 41 ; pre- 
served in the person of one man, 
110; is an object of derision to the 
wicked, 209; disgraceful examples 
often steal into her, 246 ; privilege 
of having a place in her, 400 ; her 
salvation to be hoped for in her 
lowest condition, 464, 468; is con- 
stantly assailed by enemies, 465. 

Chus, put for Ethiopia, i. 124. 

Circumcision, a solemn memorial of 
God’s adoption of the family of 
Abraham, i. 451; reasons why it 
was enjoined, 453 ; why called “a 
seal of the righteousness of faith,” 
454; why to be performed on the 
eighth day after the birth of the man- 
child, 454, 456 ; was to be perform- 
ed on the servants or slaves of the 
Jews, 455 ; was abolished by the 
coming of Christ, 456; baptism 
substituted in its place, ib.; the 
doom of the uncireuincised, 457, 
458. 

Cities, were originated by Cain, i. 216; 
why fortified, ib. 

Clothing of our first parents, was at 
first the skins of slain beasts, i. 181; 
why they were so clothed, 182. 

Command of God, is to be obeyed even 
when the reason of it is not appa- 
rent, i. 147. 

Compassion, not to be touched’ with, 
held by the Stoies to be a heroic 
virtue, ii, 375. 

Concord to be cultivated, i. 348, 372 ; 
ii. 130, 382. See Peace. 

Concubine, to whom the term was ap- 
plied among the Hebrews, ii. 35. 

Confession of sin, to be made from the 
heart, i. 288, 477. 

Confession, Popish, ii. 101. 


GENERAL INDEX. 


Conflict of God with his people, ii. 196, 
197. 

Confusion of tongues at Babel, i, 325 
326, 329-331. 

Conscience, power of, i, 201, 206, 525 ; 
ii. 52, 75, 174, 178, 299, 343, 357, 
358, 369, 370 ; the approbation of, 
more to be valued than the plaudits 
of the whole world, ii. 298, 299, 

Conscience, a good, is called a brazen 
wall, i. 211; the fear of God the 
fountain of, ii. 343; a peaceful 
death the effect of, 473. 

Conscience, a guilty, is a cruel execu- 
tioner, i. 202 ; its seeret compune- 
tions the voice of God, 205, 206 ; 
is disturbed by unreasonable fears, 
ii. 482, 483. 

Consecration by oil, an ancient custom, 
ii. 119. 

Contention, warned against, i. 370-372, 
428; ambition the mother of, 372; 
ii. 174, 189; our duty to endeavour 
to prevent, 383. 

Contracts, are to be equitably formed, 
ii, 411, 

Convivial feasts, not forbidden, i. 542. 

Copernicus, his discoveries respecting 
the planetary system, i. 61. 

Corruption of human nature in conse- 
quence of Adain’s fall, i. 154, 248, 
284 ; its transmission from Adam, 
156. See Adam. 

Counsels, carnal, cursed by God, i. 517. 

Covenant, God’s, error of the Anabap- 
tists in denying that it includes in- 
fants, i. 297, 298; is eternal, i. 450. 

Covenant between Isaac and Abime- 
lech, ii. 76. 

Covenants, were anciently confirmed 
by sacrifices, i, 413; and by rais- 
ing a heap of stones, ii. 179 ; were 
engraven in brass or sculptured in 
stone, i. 451. 

Crates, the Theban, i. 368. 

Create, meaning of the word, i. 89. 

Creation of the world, the memory of 
it obliterated shortly after the 
building of Babel and the disper- 
sion of mankind, i, xlviii; the facts 
connected with it known by the 
tradition of the fathers before 
Moses committed them to writing, 
58, 59 ; the credibility of his nar- 
rative of it confirmed, 58; the cavil 
why so short a space of time has 
elapsed since the creation of the 
world refuted, 61; the agency of 
the Holy Spirit in creating the 
world, 73; the error that God ere- 











—— OT ee ee 





GENERAL INDEX, | 


ated the world in a moment re- 
futed, 78, 103; the history of the 
creation the book of the unlearned, 


80; philosophical accuracy of lan- - 


guage not studied by Moses in his 
history of it, 85-87; was distributed 
over six days for our sake, 92; 
after its completion the work ap- 
proved of God, 100. 

Crime and fault, great difference be- 
tween, i. 524. 

Crimes, celebrity of name gained by, 
evils of, i. 246. ; 
Cross, the, to be borne patiently, ii. 

102. 

Cruelty, its hatefulness to God, ii. 444, 

Cupidity condemned, ii. 509. 

Cups, divining by, prevalent among the 
Egyptians, ii. 368. 

Curse pronounced on the serpent, i. 
166-168; and on Adam, after his 
apostasy, 172-180; and on the earth 
for his sin, 173, 174. 

Curtius, Quintus quoted, i. 123. 


D 


Dan, character and future condition of 
the tribe of, predicted by Jacob on 
his death-bed, ii. 462, 463. 

Day of salvation to be improved with- 
out delay, ii. 95. 

Dead, the, mourning for, if duly mode- 
rated, lawful, i. 578; closing their 
eyes an ancient custom, ii. 390; 
principle in which the embalming 
of them originated, 477. See Burial. 

Dead Sea, or the lake Asphaltites, i. 
381 


D’Albret, Jeanne, Queen of Navarre, 
Calvin’s encomium on her as a 
friend of the Reformation, i. xlvi, 
xvii. 

Death, the effect of sin, i. 127, 179, 
180; is fitted to correct the pride 
of man, 328; peace in, the great 
distinction between the reprobate 
and the children of God, 417; is 
not the destruction of the whole 
man, ii. 38; peace in, the effect of 
a good conscience, 473, 

Deborah, Rebekah’s nurse, her great 
age and death, ii. 239. 

Decrees of God, in vain for men to 
strive to defeat them, ii. 90 ; have 
no affinity with the crimes of men, 
379...” 

Deluge, the, reasons unknown to us 
why the Spirit of God has left so 
imperfect an account of the state 


503 


of the world between it and the 
creation, i. 227; was caused by the 
wickedness of man, 240, 247, 253, 
255; the divine forbearance pre- 
viously long exercised toward man- 
kind, 241, 247, 249; why it involved 
the inferior animals in destruction, 
250; its approach foretold to Noah, 
254; probably commencedin spring, 
264,280; was brought on gradually, 
270, 271; is not to be ascribed to 
chance, 272, 273, 278 ; Noah’s de- 
liverance from it a figure of bap- 
tism, 273; its waters abated by 
the instrumentality of the winds, 
277, 278; is never again to be 
repeated, 283; complete restora- 
tion of the world subsequent to it, 
286 ; fabulous account of it by the 
heathen poets, 313; rapid multi- 
plication of mankind after it, 314, 
380, 381. 

Depravity of man, is total and univer- 
sal, i. 248, 284, 285 ; manifested in 
the early and rapid corruption of 
the descendents of Shem, 333, 334. 
See Corruption of human nature. 

Devils, their enmity against God, i. 
212; are his executioners, 505. 

Diligence commended, ii. 24, 338. 

Dinah, probably the only daughter of 
Jacob, ii. 148, 170 ; her vain euri- 
osity, 218; her chastity violated by 
Shechem, 218 ; is desired by She- 
chem in marriage, 219, 393. 

Dinners in use among the Egyptians, 
ii, 359. 

Dionysius impiously boasted that the 
gods favour the sacrilegious, i. 222. 

Dissimulation, to be guarded against, 
li. 273, 369. 

Distinction between the godly and un- 
godly, i. 411, 417, 418; ii. 347, 348. 

Distinction between the true and hypo- 
critical Church, i. 547. 

Distinctions of rank advantageous, i. 
246. 

Divining by cups, prevalent among the 
Egyptians, ii. 368. 

Divoree, not to be rashly allowed, i. 
136 ; more tolerable than poly- 
gamy, ii. 133. 

Dominion, the lust of, prevalent among 
men in all ages, i, 380. 

Dove, sent forth by Noah from the 
ark after the water of the deluge 
began to abate, i. 279. 

Dreams, a means by which God was 
wont to reveal his secrets, i. 414, 
526 ; ii. 112, 261, 306, 307, 387. 


504 


Drunkenness, its criminality, i. 301; 
drunkenness of Noah, ib.; and of 
Lot, 518 ; its punishment, ib. 

Dulia and Latria of Papists, i. 582. 


E 


Earrtn, the, its germinating principle 
derived from God, i. 82, 83; is 
cursed for the sin of man, 173, 174, 
283. 

Earth, the, put for its inhabitants, i. 
253 


Eastern customs, the knowledge of, 
important for illustrating the Serip- 
tures, ii. 22. 

Eber, a descendent of Shem, his off- 
spring chosen to be God’s peculiar 
people, i. 320; the Hebrews de- 
rive their name from, 320, 384; 
ii. 361. 

Eden, where situated, i. 115, 119-122, 
185. See Angels.’ Paradise. 

Edomites. See Jdumeans. 

Egypt, seven years of famine in, ii. 
323-326, 408 ; probable origin of 
its division into provinces, 412 ; its 
priests enjoyed important privi- 
leges, ib. 

Egyptians, the, boasted of an antiquity 
far before the Mosaic date of the 
creation, i, xlix; maintained a 
vigorous commerce with other na- 
tions from the most ancient times, 
316; were proud and cruel, 365 ; 
the vengeance God would inflict on 
them for oppressing the Israelites 
revealed to Abraham, 416; cor- 
ruption of the marriage relation 
prevalent among, ii. 296; their 
women under less restraint than 
those of the East or of Greece, 
301; their insignia of supreme au- 
thority, 328 ; dinners in use among, 
359 ; were forbidden by their reli- 
gion to eat with foreigners, 360 ; 
were in the habit of sitting at 
table, 362; practised divining by 
cups, 368; were accustomed to 
the illusions of magicians, 369 ; 
their abhorrence of the occupation 
of shepherds, 395, 399; violated 
the law of hospitality in oppressing 
the Israelites, 402; their custom of 
mourning for the dead, 476, 479; 
expense and pomp of their fune- 
rals, 477. 

Egyptian antiquities, confirm the au- 
thority of the Pentateuch, i. 360 ; 


GENERAL INDEX. 


ii. 310, 318, 319, 322, 328, 330, 
331, 360, 362, 368, 390, 395, 479. 


Egyptian ladies, their personal ap-— 


pearance, i. 360; origin of the 
custom of their being veiled, 362. 

Egyptian magicians, ii. 319, 369. 

Elect, the, are renewed by the Spirit 
of God, ii. 52. 

Election, distinguishes the true from 
the bastard children of Abraham, 
i. 447, 448; national and indivi- 
dual, ii. 45-47; is to be traced to 
the sovereignty of God, 48 ; is the 
origin of holiness, ib, ; did not ori- 
ginate in the foreseen good works 
of the elected, 51, 93; is immutable, 
49, 84, 246. 

Elohim, the plural of the noun for God, 
whether anargument for a plurality 
of persons in the Godhead, i, 71; 
Dr. Hengstenberg’s explanation of 
the word, 72, 108, 110. 

Embalming the dead, principle in 
which it originated, ii. 477, 478. 

Enoch, his singular piety, i. 230, 253 ; 
was taken out of the world in an 
unusual way, 231; his age when 
thus removed, ib.; his transla- 
tion an example of immortality for 
the encouragement of the godly, 
231, 232. 

Envy, to be guarded against, ii. 141. 

Ephraim, son of Joseph, is blessed by 
Jacob, ii. 426, 430-432 ; character 
and condition of the tribe of, predict- 
ed by Jacob on his death-bed, 467. 

Ephron, Abraham purchases a sepul- 
chre from, i. 583. 

Equity, God’s blessing the ordinary 
attendant on, ii. 154, 

Er, the son of Judah, his wickedness, 
ii. 279; is prematurely cut off by 
God, 280. 

Erasmus, his services to the Reforma- 
tion, i. vi. 

Esau, struggle between him and his 
brother Jacob in their mother’s 
womb, ii. 42 ; covenant of salvation 
did not belong to his posterity, 44 ; 
his birth, and reason of the name 
given him, 483; was addicted to 
hunting in his youth, 49 ; is pre- 
ferred by his father to Jacob, 49, 
50, 77, 83, 84, 90; was arepresen- 
tation of the reprobate, 52; sells 
his birthright, 53, 54 ; his marriage 
with strangers, 77; is deprived of 
his father’s blessing, 93; his dis- 
tress on that account, 94, 95 ; felt 
no genuine penitence, 96, 97, 108, 








—— ee 


we 





a NR 


GENERAL INDEX. 


109; is blessed by his father, 
98, 99 ; becomes an exile from the 
kingdom of God, 98, 99 ; purposes 
to murder Jacob, 100; attempts re- 
conciliation with his father, but not 
careful about pleasing God, 108 ; 
marries a third wife, 109 ; his im- 
pious and ferocious character, 187 ; 
meets Jacob with unexpected be- 
nevolence and kindness, 207 ; in- 
terview between him and Jacob, 
208; his descendents, 252. See 
Judas. 

Eternity of the world maintained by 
Aristotle, i. xlix. 

Eucherius held the tree of life to be a 
figure of Christ, i. 117. 


* Eunuch, a term applied to satraps and 


princes of the courts of oriental 
kings, ii. 274, 301, 306. 

Euphrates, the, i. 118, 119, 121, 122. 

Europeans, Japheth, the progenitor of, 
i. 313. 

Eve, her formation, i. 128, 129, 131, 
132, 1355; objection against the 
manner of her formation answered, 
133 ; is tempted and overcome by 
Satan, 146-151; prevails on Adam 
to eat the forbidden fruit, 151, 152; 
in what her first sin consisted, 
152-154; her sense of shame after 
her fall, 158, 159 ; her attempt at 
self-defence before God, 164, 165; 
sentence pronounced upon her, 171 ; 
her name given her by Adam, 181, 
was a true worshipper of God, 224. 
See ddam. Cain, Abel. 

Events, future, not now revealed by 
God, ii. 43. 

Evils, sin the cause of all, i. 177. 

Example of the saints not to be imi- 
tated, unless agreeable to the word 
of God, i. 253, 412 ; ii. 21, 71, 120, 
134, 339, 389. 

Examples, evil, the worst contagion, i. 
230, 252. 

Eye, the, an inlet to sin, ii. 295. 

Kyes of the dead, closing them an an- 
cient custom, ii. 390. 


F 


Fasies, Jewish, i. 337, 495, 540, 570, 
576. 

Face of God, what is meant by one’s 
being hidden from, i. 212. 

Fair complexion, anciently deemed a 
recommendation in Egypt, i. 360. 

Faith, our knowledge that the worlds 
were created by the word of God 


505 


to be traced to, i. 63; how it pro- 
duces purity, 195; is an active 
principle, 258, 346, 353; is sup- 
ported by external symbols, 298, 
412, 451; ii. 387 ; should remain 
unshaken, amidst the greatest out- 
ward distresses, i. 358, 376 3 ii. 
107 ; in what sense it justifies, i. 
407 ; good men not justified first 
by faith and afterwards by works, 
408, 409 ; cannot be disjoined from 
a pure conscience, 445; its only 
foundation the word of God, 446 ; 
ii. 422; springs from election, i. 
449 ; its property to take encour- 
agement for the future from the 
experience of the past, 5103 se- 
cures victory over temptations, 
562 ; is often mixed with anxious 
care, ii. 20 ; distinguishes the spi- 
ritual from the carnal seed of Abra- 
ham, 45; is not exempt from all 
fear, 189. 

Faith of Abraham. See Abraham. 

Faith of Isaac. See Isaac, 

Faith of Lot. See Lot. 

Faith of Noah. See Woah. 

Faithful, the, are justified by faith 
alone, like Abraham, i. 407; are 
liable to be assailed on every side, 
414 ; their prayers are heard by 
God, 434, 516, 526; ii. 19, 42; 
are useful to others, 106; are the 
true Israelites, 242. See People of 
God. 

Faithfulness of God, i. 538 ; ii. 23. 

Fall of man. See Adam. Eve. Satan. 
Serpent. 

Falling on the face, the ancient rite of 
adoration, i. 445. 

Falsehood, God’s truth not to be aided 
by, ii. 88. 

Fathers, the patriarchal, were animat- 
ed by the hope of a better life, i. 
576; are not to be imitated in oppo- 
sition to the law of God, 253, 412 ; 
ii. 21, 71, 120, 134, 339, 389. 

Fault and crime, great difference be- 
tween, i. 524. 

Faults of good men, the, why many 
studiously pry into, i. 303. 

Fear, the fruit of iniquity, i. 216. 

Fear of God, may, from the corruption 
of our nature, degenerate into a 
fault, i. 476; is not inconsistent with 
faith, 481, 482; ii. 117, 1185 the 
want of it leads to all kinds of wick- 
edness and cruelty, i. 529; ii. 180 ; 
actuates all the pious, 177; is the 
source of integrity, 343. 


506 


Feasts, convivial, not forbidden, i. 542. 

Feet, washing of the, a custom in the 
East, i. 471. 

Felicity, God the source of, to his peo- 
ple, i. 400. 

First-born, why called “ the beginning 
of strength,” ii. 442; advantages 
of primogeniture, ii. 53, 208, 248. 

Fishes and birds, created on the fifth 
day of the creation, i. 88. 

Flatterers of kings, i. 362. 

Flesh, a name applied by God to man 
asa mark of ignominy, i. 242 ; and 
also without any mark of censure, 
253; “all flesh,” a name given to 
animals of every kind, 259. 

Forbearance of God, i. 329, 374, 418, 
419, 484, 485, 526. 

Forgiveness, duty of, ii. 376, 484, 489; 
men more ready to forgive them- 
selves than others, 288. 

Fortune, the Deluge not to be ascribed 
to, i. 272, 273, 278. 

Fratricide, abhorrence of the criine of, 
among the heathen, ii. 265. 

Fraud of Laban. See Laban. 

French Protestant Bible, the first, 
Calvin’s share in it, i. xvi. 

Frugality commended, i. 491. 

Funerals, pride displayed in, i. 328; 
were conducted with greater ex- 
pense and pomp among the Egyp- 
tians than among the Jews, ii. 477. 
See Burial. 

Future events, not now revealed by 
God, ii. 43. 

Future life, a, known to the patriarchs, 
ii. 38, 91, 92, 115, 417, 477; con- 
solation of, the chief mitigation of 
sorrow, 274. 


G 


Gap, son of Jacob, his birth, ii. 145; 
future condition of the tribe of, pre- 
dicted by Jacob on his death-bed, 
465. 

Ganges, the river, incorrectly supposed 
to be Pison, i. 119, 123. 

Garden of Eden. See den. 

Genesis, the great object of the book 
of, i. 64, 65. 

Geneva version of the Bible, its author, 
i, xvii. 

Gentiles, their calling to the faith of the 
gospel predicted, i. 309, 446, 447, 
449, 450; ii. 460. 

Gerundensis, ii. 306. 

Giants, the antediluvian, why so called, 
i. 244; were proud and ferocious 


GENERAL INDEX. 


tyrants, 246; were the first nobi- 
lity, ib.; fables invented by the 
heathen poets concerning, 246, 324. 

Gihon, incorrectly thought by many to 
be the Nile, i. 119, 124. 

God, curious inquiries into his essence 
condemned, i. 60; nature of his 
rest on the seventh day after the 
creation of the world, 103 ; works 
constantly in the government of the 
world, 103; is not the author of 
evil, 142, 144 ; his care of his own 
people, 208, 276, 400, 416, 430, 
517, 523, 550; ii. 26, 61, 136, 150, 
171, 208, 233 ; what is implied in 
one’s being hidden from his face, 
i. 212; human affections ascribed 
to him, 247, 249; has no need of 
new counsel, after the manner of 
men, 250, 478; uses the language 
of irony, 330: his authority should 
regulate us in everything, 350, 351; 
is the source of his people’s felicity, 
400; allows them to question him, 
411; two ways in which he looks 
down upon men for the purpose of 
helping them, 433; what is meant 
by living before him, 461 ; stretches 
forth his hand to save his people at 
the critical moment, 502; different 
ways in which he is said to be pre- 
sent with men, 551 ; in what sense 
he is said to tempt men, 561 ; ii. 
196 ; sometimes speedily answers 
prayer and sometimes delays the 
answer, ii. 19, 80; how the name 
“man” is applied to him, 197 ; 
what is meant by seeing him face 
to face, 202; he restrains the cruel- 
ty of the wicked, 207 ; sense in 
which ascending and descending 
are ascribed to him, 242; distine- 
tion between. his willing and per- 
mitting certain things condemned, 
578, 487; makes use of the wick- 
edness of men for accomplishing 
his purposes, 379, 488; his sove- 
reignty in distributing his gifts, 
431. See Faithfulness of God. 
forbearance of God. Grace of God. 
Judge of the World, Power of God. 
Providence of God. Truth of God. 

Godly and ungodly, distinction between 
them, i. 411,417, 418 ; ii. 347, 348. 

Gomorrah, wickedness of its inha- 
bitants, i. 483, 484, 491; is de- 
stroyed by fire and brimstone from 
heaven, 512; why infants were 
involved in that destruction, 513. 
See Sodom. 












oe 





| 








ss taal 


GENERAL INDEX. 


Good, the. See People of God. 

Goshen, position of the land of, ii. 393, 
394, 398, 

Gospel, impediments to the preaching 
of it through the whole world, i. 
465; is to be offered indiscriminate- 
ly to all, 503; the preaching of it 
called “the kingdom of heaven,” 
ii. 118; the pride of man opposed 
to it, 264. 

Government of God. See Providence 

_ of God, 

Government, civil, is not to be violated, 
i, 43). 

Government, monarchical, chosen by 
God for his ancient people as the 
most perfect form, ii. 450. 

Grace of God, is not bound to the ac- 
customed order of nature, i. 431; is 
what makes one man excel another, 
ii, 52. 

Grass, the earth on the third day of 
the creation commanded to bring 
it forth, i. 82. 

Gratitude to God. See Thanksgiving. 

Gratitude to man, duty of, i. 386, 393. 

Greek interpreters or Septuagint. See 
Septuagint. 

Greek translations of the Pentateuch, 
were procured by Ptolemy, king of 
Egypt, i. xlviii. 

Gregory I., Pope, argument by which 
he defends statues and pictures in 
churches, i. 80. 

Grief at the wickedness of men, in what 
sense it is ascribed to God, i. 249. 

Grief, immoderate, on the death of 
friends to be restrained, ii. 273; if 
duly moderated is not to be censur- 
ed, 476 ; the consolation of a future 
life the chief mitigation of, 274. 


H 


Hagar, Sarah’s handmaid, i. 425, 426; 
begins to hold her mistress in con- 
tempt, 427; is met in the wilder- 
ness in her flight from the house of 
her mistress by an angel, 439 ; is 
reproved by him for her flight, 432; 
is encouraged by him, 432-434 ; 
betakes herself to prayer, 435 ; 
her previous character, 435, 438 ; 
her penitential spirit, 437, 438 ; is 
ejected with her son Ishmael from 
the family of Abraham, 541, 547, 
548; her distress after her ejection, 
549; is met by an angel, 550; ii. 36. 

Ham, the youngest son of Noah, i. 
235 ; mocks his father, 301 ; his 


507 


wicked character, 302; why the 
judgment of God for his mock- 
ery of his father is pronounced on 
his son Canaan and not on himself, 
305-307 ; was the progenitor of the 
Africans, 313. 

Hamor, the father of Shechem, endea- 
vours to obtain Dinah, Jacob’s 
daughter, for his son in marriage, 
ii, 222 ; perfidy and cruelty of Ja- 
cob’s sons towards, 222-228. 

Haran, son of Terah, and brother of 
Abraham, his death, i, 337. 

Harp and organ invented by Jubal, i. 
218, 

Harvest and seed time secured so long 
as the earth endures, i. 286; songs 
sung at the ingathering of harvest, 
ii. 355, 

Havila, the land of, i. 123. 

Head, to lift up one’s head, what it 
denotes, ii. 309 ; to lift up the head 
from off one, its meaning, 311. 

Heart, integrity of, proceeds from God, 
li, 343. 

Hearts of men are in the hand of God, 
ii. 73, 207, 237, 345, 355. 

Heathen, the, were the first cultivators 
of astronomy and medicine, i, 218. 

Heathen philosophers, their ignorance 
of the creation and origin of the 
world and of the human race, i. 
xlviii, xlix. 

Heathen poets, their fables concerning 
the antediluvian giants, i. 246, 324; 
their fabulous account of the de- 
luge, 313 ; and of the rapid multi- 
plication of men after it, 381, 513. 

Heathen sacrifices, their origin, i. 193. 

Heavens and earth, God exhibited in, 
i, 59; our eyes not sufficiently clear- 
sighted to discern what they repre- 
sent, 62; the knowledge to be 
thence derived not sufficient for 
salvation, ib. 

Hebrews, the, derived their name from 
Eber, a descendent of Shem, i. 320; 
ii. 361; the Egyptians forbidden 
by their religion to eat with, ii. 360. 
See Israelites. Jews. 

Hebrew Doctors. See Jewish Writers. 

Hebrew language has no neuter gen- 
der, i. 533. 

Hebrew points, i. 189 ; ii. 418. 

Hebron, was anciently called Kirjath- 
arba, i. 576. 

Hengstenberg, Dr., his explanation of 
the word Elohim, i. 72, 108, 110. 

Henry IV. of France, Calvin’s Com- 
mentary on Genesis dedicated to 


508 


him when a boy, i. xlv ; Calvin’s 
advices to him, liii, liv. 

Herbs and trees, why created before 
the sun and moon, i. 82. 

Hiddekel, a name applied to the Tigris, 
i. 118, 121-123. 

History, advantages of the study of, 
i. 480 


Historians, heathen, are fabulous in 
treating of a remote antiquity, i. 
xlix. 

Holy life, a, is inseparable from true 
faith, i. 445. . 

Homicide, frivolous distinction of, into 
four kinds by the Jews, i. 249. 

Honour due to parents, i. 302 ; ii. 14, 
264. 

Honours to be conferred only on the 
deserving, ii. 327. 

Horace quoted, i. 177, 327. 

Hospitality, is practised by Abraham, 
i. 468 ; the duty of, 469; Lot dis- 
tinguished for, 495, 496, 498 ; the 
oppression of the Israelites in 
Egypt a violation of the law of, 
ii. 402. 

Human nature, corruption of, the con- 
sequence of Adam’s fall, i. 154, 
248, 284; its transmission from 
Adam, 156. See Adam. 

Human race, why God willed that they 
should proceed from one source, 
1 9%, 

Humanity commended and enjoined, 
i, 294, 348, 428, 469 ; ii. 128, 345 ; 
humanity of Reuben, ii. 267. 

Husbands, duty of wives to obey their, 
i. 474,533; brides in the East given 
veiled to their, ii. 29 ; are not to be 
too obsequious to their wives, 301. 

Hypocrisy, God’s hatred of, i. 196 ; is 
to be guarded against, 443; ii. 
143; is deeply rooted in the human 
mind, 224, 266, 343 ; hypocrisy of 
Jacob’s sons, 267, 

Hypocrites, nothing sincere in their 
religious worship, i. 196, 197 ; their 
pretended friendship to be dreaded, 
204; distinguished from the ge- 
nuine worshippers of God, 354; 
always seek excuses, 476 ; mingle 
in the Church with the people of 
God, and despise them, 546, 547 ; 
ii. 48; a lively picture of them ex- 
hibited in Esau, ii. !00, 109 ; never 
truly repent, 109; ascribe their 
prosperity to God’s favour for them, 
143, 1725; heap false complaints 
upon the good, 172; disguise one 
sin by another, 272. 


GENERAL INDEX. 


Hypotyposis, a rhetorical figure, its 
meaning, i. 330. 


I 


IpLeNEss condemned, i. 125; ii. 238, 
332. 

Idolatry, propensity of the human mind 
to, ii. 169, 170, 358 ; madness of, 
173, 174, 234, 235. ° 

Idumeans, the, are descended from 
Abraham, i. 446 ; were cut off from 
the body of the Church, ii. 44, $8, 
99 ; Isaae’s prediction concerning, 
99, 253, 254. 

Image of God in which man was cre- 
ated, Augustine’s refined specula- 
tions concerning, i. 93 ; is errone- 
ously referred by Anthropomor- 
phites to the human body, 94 ; in 
what it consists, 94, 95 ; image of 
God and likeness of God phrases of 
synonymous import, 93, 94; why 
Paul denies the woman to be the 
image of God, 96; Christ the living 
image of God, ii. 202. 

Images, popish, worship of, ii. 174. 

Immortality, not to be sought on earth, 
i. 327. / 

Impatience, to be guarded against, i. 
427 


Impunity of the wicked is sometimes 
an occasion of alluring even the 
good to sin, i, 254. 

Incest, is abhorrent to nature, ii. 246, 
288. 

Infants, error of the Anabaptists in 
denying that God’s covenant is 
common to, i. 297, 298; cruel su- 
perstition of consigning them to 
perdition when a sudden death 
has prevented their being baptized, 
458; why involved in the destrue- 
tion of Sodom and Gomorrah, 513; 
unnatural for mothers not to nurse 
their own, 540. 

Ingratitude, entered into the first sin 
of Adam and Eve, i. 153 ; is to be 
guarded against, 438, 521, 549 ; ii. 
26, 54, 74, 201. 


Inheritance, or felicity, reward put for, — 


i. 400. 

Iniquity, fear, the fruit of, i. 216. 

Injuries, duty in reference to, ii. 172, 
177, 489. 

Insects, noxious, are to be traced to 
the sin of man, i. 104. 

Integrity of heart particularly required 
by God, i. 443; integrity of life pro- 
ceeds from tlie fear of God, ii. 343. 








UTE 


— 


GENERAL INDEX. 509 


Invoking the name of God, often put 
for the whole of divine worship, i. 
223, 354, 368, 377, 557 ; ii. 71. 

Iphigenia, painter’s representation of 
the sacrifice of, ii. 246. 

Trony, used by God in reproving Adam, 
i, 182; and in speaking of the 
builders of the tower of Babel, 330. 

Isaac, the divine promise concerning, 
i. 462, 468; his birth, 537, 538; is 
cireumcised, 539; is openly con- 
temned when an infant by Ishmael, 
542 ; the Mediator promised in his 
person, 565 ; voluntarily surrenders 
himself when his father, for the 
trial of his faith, is commanded by 
God to slay him with his own hand, 
569; his father prevented from 
slaying him, 569, 570; his vener- 
ation for his father, ii. 14; his 
father’s servant providentially di- 
rected to Rebekah, in choosing a 
wife for him, 20-23; Rebekah’s 

_ parents are induced to give her to 
him in marriage, 24, 25 ; his piety, 
28; is met by Rebekah, 29; is 
married to her, ib.; his bitter grief 
on the death of his mother, ib.; is 
constituted by his father his sole 
heir, 35; had no children long 
after his marriage, 41; the con- 
stancy of his faith, 41, 42 ; loves 
Esau more than Jacob, 49, 50, 77, 
83, 84, 90; is forbidden to go to 
Egypt, 59 ; is commanded to settle 
in the promised land, ib.; is incited 
by God to follow his father’s ex- 
ample, 60; inferior to his father in 
patience, 62; his dissimulation in 
giving out to the men of Gerar that 
Rebekah was only his sister, 60, 
61; is reproved for this by King 
Abimelech, 58, 61, 62; his prosper- 
ity, 64, 66 ; is envied by the Phil- 
istines, 65 ; the wrongs he suffered 
in Gerar, 67 ; his patience and com- 
posure, 68 ; removes to Beer-sheba, 
ib.; is favoured with a vision, 69 ; 
builds an altar, 71; compact be- 
tween him and Abimelech, 72-76; 
his old age, 83; is led by Jacob’s 
artifice to pronounce on him the 
blessing of primogeniture, 84, 88, 
89; did so by a secret providence, 
90, 91 ; is afterwards convinced of 
this, 94, 96 ; his blessing on Esau, 
98, 99 ; pronounces anew the be- 
nediction on Jacob, 105, 106; his 
death, 247, 248. 

Ishmael, son of Abraham, i. 433; the 


warlike and formidable character of 
himself and his descendents, 434, 
435 ; was long believed by his fa- 
ther to be the promised seed, 442; 
his father’s prayer in his behalf, 
461; is commanded by God to 
be circumcised, 462; his father’s 
prayer for him heard, 462, 463; ii. 
98 ; his open contempt for his in- 
fant brother Isaac, i. 542 ; the im- 
piety involved in this, 543; is 
ejected with his mother from his 
father’s house, 541, 547, 548; his 
distress after his ejection, 549 ; his 
earthly prosperity connected with 
his relationship to Abraham, 551 ; 
was subject to his mother in con- 
tracting marriage, ib. ; celebrates 
with Isaac the obsequies of his de- 
ceased father, ii. 38; his sons, 39 ; 
his degeneracy and that of his de- 
scendents, 109. 

Ishmaelites, boundaries of their coun- 
try, 1. 124. 

Israel. See Jacob. 

Israelites, their long captivity and sla- 
very revealed to Abraham, i. 414; 
their adoption by God, 448 ; ii. 45- 
47 ; were not all his regenerated 
children, i. 449; circumcision a so- 
lemn memorial of their adoption, 
451, 453; their servants or slaves 
were to be circumcised, 455 ; their 
oppression in Egypt a violation of 
the laws of hospitality, ii. 402 ; the 
land of Canaan not divided among 
them by the will of man, 440 ; their 
future coidition predicted by Jacob 
on his deathbed, 420-472. See He- 
brews. Jews. 

Issachar, future condition of the tribe 
of, predicted by Jacob on his death- 
bed, ii. 462. 


J 


JABAL, a descendent of Cain, was the 
inventor of tents, i. 217,218. . 

Jabbok, the brook so called, ii. 195. 

Jacob, struggle between him and his 
brother Esau in their mother’s 
womb, li. 42; his being preferred 
by God to Esau the effect of sove- 
reign grace, 44, 45, 51, 933 his 
birth, and reason of the name given 
him, 48; his mild disposition in 
his youth, 49; is less beloved by 
his father than Esau, 49 ; is more 
beloved by his mother than Esau, 
50 ; obtains from Esau the birth- 
right for a mess of pottage, 53, 54; 


510 


surreptitiously obtains his father’s 
blessing, 84, 86, 87, 88 ; his death 
resolved on by Esau, 100 ; is forced 
_in consequence to become a wan- 
derer from his father’s house, 101, 
102; has pronounced on him anew, 
previous to his departure, the bless- 
ing by his father, 105, 106 ; trial 
of his faith, 108 ; the arduousness 
of his journey, 111; his vision of 
the ladder, 112, 114-116 ; how he 
was the fountain of blessedness to 
all nations, 116; extols the good- 
ness of God, 117 ; erects a stone as 
a memorial of gratitude for the vi- 
sion, 118; his vows to God, 120- 
123; pours a libation on the stone 
he had erected, 123; arrives in 
Mesopotamia at the house of his 
uncle Laban, 127; informs his 
uncle of his circumstances, 128 ; 
employs himself in honest labours, 
129 ; is hardly dealt with by his 
uncle, 130, 150, 151, 154, 165, 176; 
his affection for Rachel, his uncle’s 
daughter, 131; is deceived by La- 
ban, and marries Leah, 132; also 
marries Rachel, 134; fails in kind- 
ness to Leah, 135; his polygamy 
puvished by domestic strife, 140, 
147; is hurried by Rachel into a 
third marriage, 142; desires to 
leave Laban and return to his pa- 
rents, 149; his treaty with Laban, 
by which he was to receive the 
spotted offspring of the sheep and 
goats, 152; his device for making 
the sheep and goats bring forth a 
spotted offspring, 155, 156; is 
treated inhumanely by Laban’s 
sons, 162, 163; returns to his own 
country under the special guidance 
of God, 163; his wives consent to 
go with him, 164, 165, 167, 168; 
dream in which an angel of the 
Lord appeared to him, 165; is 
pursued by Laban, who accuses 
him of robbery, 171-173 ; his de- 
fence, 174-178 ; his placable char- 
acter, 179; covenant between him 
and Laban, 178-180; his alarm at 


GENERAL INDEX. 


198, 199 ; his name changed fronr 
Jacob to Israel, 200, 240; his re- 
verence towards his brother, 206 ; 
is met by Esau with unexpected 
kindness, 207, 211; interview be- 
tween the two brothers, 208, 210; 
his suspicion of Esau, 211] ; erects an 
altar, 213 ; his grief on hearing of 
the violation of his daughter Dinah’s 
chastity, 220 ; the perfidy and cruel- 
ty of his sons to the Shechemites, 
222-228; expostulates with them, 
228 ; is commanded by God to go 
up to Bethel, 233; purifies hishouse 
from idols, ib.; his infirmity in 
burying the idols under an oak and 
not rather destroying them, 236 ; 
builds an altar at Bethel, 237; his 
numerous trials, 243; losés Rachel 
by death, 244; his grief for Joseph, 
when sold by his brethren, 272,273; 
his ten sons go down to Egypt to 
buy corn, 337, 346; his suspicion of 
his sons, 348 ; their second journey 
into Egypt, 353; allows with diffi- 
culty his son Benjamin to go down 
with them, 355-357; his feelings on 
hearing that Joseph was alive and 
governor of Egypt, 383; his deep 
rooted piety, 387 ; hisvision in which 
God ratifies his former covenant 
with. him, 387-389; goes down to 
Egypt with his family, 390; Goshen 
selected as an abode for him and 
his sons by Joseph, 393, 394, 398; 
his descendants providentially kept 


from intermarrying with the Egyp- . 


tians, 395, 400; condition on which 
his sons wished to live in Egypt, 
402; is introduced to Pharaoh by 
Joseph, 403; binds Joseph by an 
oath to bury him in Canaan, 416, 
417; his address to his sons on his 
death-bed, and his predictions con- 
cerning the future fortunes of their 
families, 420-472; charges his sons 
to bury him in Canaan, 472; his 
placid death, 473; mourning for 
him by his sons and the Egyptians, 
476; is buried in Canaan, 480; his 
funeral honourably celebrated, 481. 


the prospect of meeting his brother Japheth, the eldest ~™,of Noah, i. 235, 


Esau, 185, 205; the means he 
adopts for appeasing his brother, 
188; betakes himself to prayer, 
190; acknowledges his own want 


320 ; his filial piet) ‘and modesty, 
302, 303; the benediction his father 
pronounces on him, 308; was the 
progenitor of the Europeans, 313. 


of merit, 191,192; his rich present Jehovah, a name of God, place where 


to his brother, 194 ; wrestles with 
God, who appeared to him in the 


it first occurs in Scripture, and its 
meaning, i, 109. 


form of a man, 195-197; prevails, Jerome, i. 113; his petulant reproaches 








ae 


eS 








GENERAL INDEX. 511 


against the married state, 128 ; 
quoted, 131, 160, 200, 245,278, 280, 
294, 317, 388, 437, 473, 485, 566, 
5838, 584; ii, 19, 22, 435, 453. 


Jerusalem was anciently called Salem, 


i. 388. 


Jews, the, began the day with the 


evening, i. 77; divide their year 
into six parts, 286; their forming 
one church with the Gentiles pre- 
dicted, 309, 446, 447; their error 
in holding circumcision to be still 
in force, 456; their foolish gloria- 
tion in the origin of their nation, 
ii. 50, 146, 226; their superstition, 
203. See Hebrews. Israelites. 


Jewish Calendar, i. 264, 286. 
Jewish Writers, their ridiculous opi- 


nion respecting God’s holding com- 
munication with the earth and an- 
gels at the creation of man, i. 92, 

07; imagine Abel’s sacrifice was 
onsumed by fire from heaven, 196, 


‘200, 213; their fable respecting 


Lamech, 219, 228; and concerning 
Abraham, 337, 349, 436; and con- 
cerning the angels who appeared 
to Lot, 495; and concerning Sarah’s 
giving milk, 540; and concerning 
the ram which appeared on Mount 
Moriah when Abraham was about 
to sacrifice his son, 570; and con- 
cerning Sarah’s beauty in her old 
age, 576; their frivolous distinction 
of four kinds of homicide, 294. 


Job, his unbecoming language under 


the pressure of affliction, ii. 273. 


Joseph, son of Jacob by Rachel, his 


birth, ii. 149; is wickedly conspir- 
ed against by his brethren, 258; 
the cause of this his father’s par- 
tiality for him, 259; his future emi- 
nence revealed to him in dreams, 
260-262, 340; was a type of Christ, 
261,266; his brethren’s envy and 
hatred of him increased by their 
knowledge of his dreams, 262, 263; 
his death cruelly contrived by them, 
264-266; his murder prevented by 
the humanity of Reuben, 267, 268; 
is sold by them to a company of 
Midianites, 270,271; his brethren’s 
false report to his father that he 
had been torn in pieces by wild. 
beasts, 271-273; is sold by the Mi- 
dianites to Potiphar, the Egyptian, 
274; gains the favour of Potiphar, 
293; is placed by Potiphar over his 
house and over all his substance, 
294; was distinguished for the graces 


of his person, 295; is tempted by 
the wife of Potiphar, 296; his fide- 
lity and integrity, 296-298; is false- 
ly accused by her, 300; is cast into 
prison by Rotiphar, 300, 301; con- 
ciliates the goodwill of the keeper 
of the prison, 302, 303; interprets 
the dream of Pharaoh’s chief butler, 
and chief baker, 307-310; is forgot- 
ten by the chief butler after his re- 
storation to office, 312; interprets 
Pharaoh’s dreams, 324, 325; is 
made governor of Egypt, 328; and 
has the precedence of all its nobles, 
329; his marriage to the daughter 
of the Prefect of the city On, 330; 
his labours in erecting storehouses, 
331; his ten brethren come down 
to Egypt to buy corn, 337; his ap- 
parent harshness towards them, 
338; his swearing by the life of 
Pharaoh censurable, 341,342; shuts 
his brethren up in prison, 342; en- 
deavoured to establish the worship 
of the true God in his own family, 
359; his affection for Benjamin, 
362; entertains his brethren, 359- 
362; was sparing in domestic splen- 
dour, 367; his dissimulation towards 
his brethren, 368, 369; makes him- 
self known to them, 375, 376; bor- 
rows from the providence of God 
an argument for exercising forgive- 
ness towards them, 380, 382; se- 
lects Goshen as an abode for them 
and his father, 393, 394, 398; his 
faithful administration, 407, 410; 
his singular humanity, 414; his fa- 
ther binds him by an oath to bury 
him in Canaan, 416, 417; his faith, 
422; his two sons Ephraim and Ma- 
nasseh are blessed by Jacob, 426, 
430-432; his grief on his father’s 
death, 476; buries his father in Ca- 
naan, 480; his affection for his bre- 
thren, 485, 486, 488; his death-bed 
scene, li. 490-492, 

Josephus quoted, 1. 278, 583. 

Jovinian, Jerome’s book against, i. 128. 

Jubal, a descendent of Cain, the inven- 
tor of the harp and organ, i. 218. 

Judas, character of his repentance, i. 
211. See Hsau. 

Judah, son of Jacob, his sin in mar- 
rying a Canaanitish woman, ii. 278, 
279; his perfidy and cruelty to 
Tamar, his daughter-in-law, 282- 
286; his incest with her, 283, his 
purpose of bringing her to punish- 
ment, 286, 287; acknowledges his 


512 


sin, 288; undertakes to his father 
to secure the safety of Benjamin in 
going down to Egypt, 355; his pre- 
cedence among his brethren, 370- 
372; the blessing prgnounced on his 
descendents by Jacob on his death- 
bed, 450; the Messiah to spring 
from the tribe of, 452. , 

Judge of the world, God proved to be 
so by his punishing the wicked, i. 


479 ; as such he always does right, © 


489, 

Judgment, A future, proof of, from the 
instances of the punishment of sin 
in the present state, i. 210. 

Judgments of God, design of the re- 
cord of, their infliction of, in Scrip- 
ture, i. 482; often involve the right- 
eous with the wicked, 487, 488; are 
often delayed, 484. 

Justice between man and man to be 
cultivated, ii. 62, 129. 

Justin quoted, i. 316. 

Juvenal quoted, i. 202, 328. 


K 


Keturau, whether Abraham took her 
to wife during the lifetime of Sarah, 
ii. 32, 35, 36. 

Kimchi, David, quoted, i. 147. 

Kindness to relations, duty of, ii. 128 ; 
and to all men, 128, 135. 

Kingdom of heaven, the preaching of 
the Gospel so called, ii. 118. 

King, the term put for the superior 
magistrates of towns, i. 381. 

Kings, corruption of the courts of, i. 
362; flatterers of, 362; moderation 
enjoined upon, 364; were forbidden 
by the Levitical law to intrude into 
the priestly office, 388, 415; splen- 
dour not to be altogether condemn- 
ed in, ii. 328. 

Kirjath-arba, the ancient name of He- 
bron, i. 576. 

Kiss, the friendly, abuse of, ii. 128. 


L 


LaBAN, the Syrian, the brother of Re- 
bekah, ii. 40, 111, 127,128; his injus- 
tice to Jacob, 129, 130, 132,133,150, 
151,154,165,176; betrothes Rachel 
to Jacob and then fraudulently sub- 
stitutes Leah in her place, 132; 
inhumanity of his sons to Jacob, 
162, 163; his idolatry, 169, 173, 
174, 181, 182; pursues Jacob, 172; 
is mollified towards him, 177, 178; 
covenant between them, 178-180. 


GENERAL INDEX. 


Labour, wearisome and exhausting, the 
fruit of Adam’s apostasy, i. 175, 
176; manual, not enjoined on all 
men, i. 175, 

Lactantius quoted, i. 243. 

Ladder seen by Jacob in his dream, a 
representation of Christ as Medi- 
ator, ii. 113. 

Lamech, a descendent of Cain, the first 
who was guilty of polygamy, i. 217; 
his sanguinary and obdurate char- 
acter, 219, 220, 222. 

Languages. See T'ongues. 

Latria and Dulia of the Papists, i. 582. 

Law of God, the, in what sense it is the 


minister of death, i. 126; what is. 


denoted by the life or power of, 162; 
is a perfect rule, 252; the second 
table of, sometimes put for the whole 
of our duty, 482. 

Lawsuits, whence they arise, ii. 130. 

Leah, daughter of Laban, ii. 131; be- 
comes the wife of Jacob by the 
fraud of her father, 132; her chil- 
dren, 136; her pious feeling mani- 
fested in the names she gave them, 
ib.; gives her maid-servant to Ja- 
cob, 144; her son Reuben brings 
mandrakes out of the field to her, 
146; contention between her and 
her sister Rachel, 147, 148; is will- 
ing to leave her father’s house and 
to accompany Jacob to his own 
country, 167, 168; was a holy wo- 
man, 244, 

Leo Juda, his Latin version of the 
Hebrew Scriptures, tie basis of 
Calvin’s version, i. xv. 

Levi, son of Jacob, his cruelty to the 
Shechemites, ii. 226,229; his cruelty 
denounced by Jacob on his death- 
bed, 444, 448; origin of the disper- 
sion of the tribe of, among the other 
tribes of Israel, 448. 

Levitical economy, use of the sym- 
bols of, i. 186; was abolished by the 
coming of Christ, 456. 

Levitical priesthood subordinate to the 
priesthood of Christ, i, 393. 

Life, human, reason why God accounts 
it so sacred, i. 295; long life the gift 
of God, ii, 280; yet no evidence of 
his favour, ib.; integrity of, pro- 
ceeds from fear of God, 343. 

Lifting the hand put for swearing, i. 
394, 

Lifting up one’s head, what it denotes, 
ii, 309; lifting the head from off 
one, its meaning, 311. 

Light, its creation, i. 76. 





* ates i a Mi i —— 








ee ee 


GENERAL INDEX. 


* Likeness of God,” and “grace of God,” 
phrasesof synonymous import, i. 93, 


Living before God, what it implies, i. 
461. 


Lot, accompanies Abraham, his uncle, 
to Canaan, i. 350; strife between his 
herdsmen and those of Abraham, 
870-372; his avarice, and injustice 
to Abraham, 372, 373; what he suf- 
fered by separating from Abraham, 
375; istaken prisoner by four kings, 
383; is rescued by Abraham, ib.; 
two angels appear to him, 495; his 
hospitality towards them, 495, 496, 
498; risks his life for their defence, 
499; his sin in offering his daugh- 
ters to be polluted, 499,500; is in- 
formed by the angels of their mis- 
sion to destroy Sodom, 503, 504; 
invites his sons-in-law to join him 
in leaving Sodom, and they despise 
his warning, 505; his tardiness in 
leaving Sodom 506; is hastened out 
of it with apparent violence by the 
angels, 507; is forbidden in his 
escape to look behind him, 508 ; 
defects in his faith, 508-510; he 
prays for the preservation of Zoar, 
510,511; his wife transformed intoa 
statue of salt, 513 ; the sin for which 
she was thus punished, 514, 515; 
his deliverance from the ruin of 
Sodom was for Abraham’s sake, 
516; he departs from Zoar, 517; 
his intemperance and judicial in- 
fatuation, 518. 

Love to our neighbour, duty of, ii. 135. 

Lucan quoted, i. 339. 

Lucianists, the, ii. 226, 446. 

Lust, God’s abhorrence of, ii. 227. 

Luther, his qualifications as a reformer, 
i. vii; comparison between him and 
Calvin as commentators, viii; quot- 
ed, 241, 334, 335, 375. 

Luz, ii. 120. 

Lying, its hatefulness in the sight of 
God, ii. 212. 


M 


Macupetan, the cave of, purchased by 
Abraham for a burying-ground, i. 
583; ii. 417. 

Magicians of Egypt, ii. 319, 369. 

Magistrates. See Rulers. 

Man, created on the sixth day, i. 90; 
consultation of God when about to 
create him, 91; this intended to 
commend to us the dignity of our 


VOL. I. 


513 


nature, 92 ; is invested with author- 
ity over the inferior living crea- 
tures, 96, 98; created male and 
female, 97; date of the permission 
of animal food to, 99; his humble ori- 
gin, 111; his dignity, ib.; three gra- 
dations to be noted in his creation, 
‘112; was created for useful employ- 
ment, 125; was formed to be a so- 
cial being, 128, 213; woman creat- 
ed for his good, 128-130; his duty 
to the woman, 130; ferocity of the 
brute animals against him a con- 
sequence of the fall, 152; why not 
created without a possibility of 
sinning, 158; his total and universal 
depravity, 154, 248, 284. See 
Adam. Mankind. 

Man, a name applied to God, ii. 197. 

Manasseh, son of Joseph, is blessed by 
Jacob, ii. 426, 430-432; future char- 
acter and condition of the tribe of, 
predicted by Jacob on his death- 
bed, 467. 

Mandrakes, ii. 146. 

Manes, the founder of Manichzism, 
his fundamental error, i. 143. 

Manichzism, does injustice to God by 
demanding a cause superior to his 
will, i. 61; its heresy of the exist- 
ence of two principles, i. 143, 144; 
and that the soul of man is a por- 
tion of the Divine Spirit, 241. 

Mankind, their universal wickedness 
the cause of the deluge, i. 240; their 
rapid multiplication after the de- 
luge, 314, 380, 381. 

Manoah, ii. 201. 

Marriage, original institution of, i. 98, — 
134, 136; was designed for the good ~ 
of man, 128-131; twofold artifice of 
Satan in attempting the defamation 
of, 134; ought to be formed between 
one man and one woman only, 136, 
137; the degeneracy that resulted 
from the descendants of Seth mar- 
rying the daughters of Cain, 237- 
240; the law of, sanctioned anew 
after the deluge, 289; sacredness 
of, 228, 523, 528; ii. 11, 29, 63, 181, 
297; children ought to be subject 
to their parents in contracting it, 
i. 551; ii. 14; religious observances 
connected with it in the patriarchal 
age, 132; not the custom then to 
give the younger daughters in mar- 
riage before the elder, 132. 

Married state, temperance to be used 
in, i. 239; inconvenieuces of, 428. 

Marry, how the Latin verb nubo, “ to 


2k 


5it 


marry,” came to have that signifi- 
cation, ii. 29. 

Mass, the Popish, sacrifice of, not sup- 
ported by Melchizedek’s offering 
bread and wine to Abraham, i. 390, 
391. 

Masters, their duty to their servants, 
i. 431. 

Means are not to be neglected, ii. 355. 

Medals of Calvin, i. xxiii. 

Mediator between God and man, an 
office which always belonged exclu- 
sively to Christ, ii. 495. 

Medicine was first cultivated among 
the heathen, i. 218. 

Melchizedek, is preferred to Abraham, 
i. 386; entertains Abraham and his 
servants, 386, 387; was not Shem, 
345, 387; was a king and priest, 
387; mystery of his origin, 388; was 
a figure of Christ, ib.; his present- 
ing bread and wine to Abraham no 
argument for the Popish mass, 390, 
391; blesses Abraham, 391; and 
receives tithes from him, 3927 

Merit, man destitute of all, i. 265, 479, 
572; ii. 51, 191, 221, 302. 

Mind, tranquillity of, how best secured, 
ii, 483. 

Ministers of the Gospel, that is some- 
times aseribed to them which be- 
longs only to God, i. 267; do not 
speak in the exereise of their office 
as private men, li. 94,427; are to de- 
nounce the vengeance of God, 311. 

Miracles not unreasonable, i. 514. 

Miseries of men, the, God said to listen 
to, i. 433, 434. 

Moderation to be observed in adorning 
the person, ii, 21, 328; and in feast- 
ing, 362, 363, 461. 

Monarchy, the form of government 
chosen by God for his ancient people 
as the most perfect, ii. 450. 

Money in use in the time of Jacob, ii. 
213. 

Moon, the, made on the fourth day of 
the creation, i. 83; a twofold advan- 
tage from the course of the sun and 
moon, 84, 85. 

Moriah, the mount on which Abraham 
was commanded to sacrifice his son 
Isaac, i. 565; reason of its name, 
566. 

Moses writes popularly and not philo- 
sophieally, i. 120, 256, 381; his 


slaying the Egyptian, 383; in what * 


sense he is said tou have seen God 
face to face, ii. 201; his impartial- 
ity in branding with infamy even 


GENERAL INDEX. 


the tribe from which he sprung, 


445,446. | 

Moses, the books of, Ptolemy, king of 
Egypt, procured translations of 
them into Greek, i, xlviii. 

Mothers, unnatural for them not to 
nurse their own children, i. 540. 
Mountains of Armenia, their great 

height, i. 278. 
Mourning for the dead, lawful if duly 


moderated, i. 578; ceremony of, | 


good principle from which it arose, 
and its abuse, ii. 476. See Burial. 
funeral, 

Mules were first produced by Anah, 
ii. 254. 
Multitude, the, not to be heedlessly 
followed, i. 230, 252, 273, 501. 
Munster, Sebastian, his Latin version 
of the Hebrew Scriptures, i. xv. 
Murder, forbidden, i. 294; God the 
avenger of, 294, 295; reason why 
he is determined to avenge it, 295; 
ii, 1038. 

Murderers and robbers, their remorse 
of conscience, i. 210, 211, 

Music adapted to the services of reli- 
gion, i. 218. 


Musical instruments, the invention of, 


i, 218. 


N 


NaKEDNEss, a sense of shame of, whence 
it originated, i, 137, 303. 

Name of God, the, is not to be profaned, 
ii. 143,222. See Invoking the name 
of God. 

Naphtali, the tribe of, its future char- 
acter and condition predicted’ by 
Jacob on his death-bed, ii. 466. 

Nations, first settlement of, after the 
confusion of tongues at the build- 
ing of the Tower of Babel, i. 313, 
315. 

Natural philosophy, defective state of, 
in Calvin’s time, i. 86. 

Navarre, Jeanne d’Albret, Queen of, 
Calvin’s encomium on her as a 
friend of the Reformfation, i. xlvi, 
xl vii. 

Nearchus quoted, i. 121. 

Nebatheans, the, i. 124, 

Neighbour, love to our, duty of, ii. 135. 

Nile, the, Gihon incorrectly thought by 


many to be, i. 119, 124; value of 


the aquatic plants of, ii. 317. 

Nimrod, his eminence, ambition, and 
tyranny, i, 316-319,326; Babel, the 
seat of his empire, 317. 








, iw Se 


GENERAL INDEX. 


Noah, his birth and reason of the name 
given him, i. 233, 234; the time 
when he was warned of the general 
deluge, 235; his children, 235, 300; 
his upright character, 251; his vir- 
tue the more remarkable from the 
corruption of the age in which he 
lived, 252; is admonished by God 
of the coming deluge, 254; is com- 
manded to build an ark and-pro- 
mised miraculous preservation, 254, 
258, 267; his faith in the promise, 
254; obstacles to the building of the 
ark over which his faith triumphed, 
259-261; his faith confirmed by 
repeated oracles, 264; why his right- 

_ ' eousness is assigned as the eause 
of his being preserved, 265; hisobe- 
dience, 268; his deliverance from 
the deluge a figure of baptism, 273; 
his supposed feelings when floating 
for months on the waters of the de- 
luge, 276; sends forth a raven from 
the ark, 279; afterwards sends forth 
a dove, ib.; goes forth from the 
ark, at the divine command, 280; 
builds an altar unto the Lord, and 
offers sacrifices, 281, 282; his sacri- 
fices are accepted, 282; dominion 
over the inferior animals promised 
to him, 290; grant to him and his 
posterity of the inferior animals for 
food, 291; this only a restoration 
of the original grant, 291,292; God’s 
covenant with him giving security 
against a second deluge, 296-299; 
he renews the culture of the fields, 
300; his drunkenness, 300, 301; is 
mocked by his son Ham, 301; is 
treated with filial piety and modesty 
by his sons Shem and Japheth, 303; 
pronounces the judgment of God 
upon Ham’s sin, 304-307; blesses 
Shem, 308; and Japheth, 308; pre- 
dicts the union of Jews and Gentiles 
into one Church, 309; the rapid in- 
crease of his descendants and their 
corruption previous to his death, 
310; his grief at the building of the 
Tower of Babel, 325, 334. 

Nobility, origin of; i. 244; the Jews 
boast in vain of the nobility of their 
origin, ii. 226. 

Nod, land of, origin of the name, i. 215. 

Nose jewels used for ornamenting the 
person in the patriarchal ages, ii. 
22 


Novatians, their error in cutting off the 
lapsed from the hope of pardon, ii. 
247. 


515 


Nubo, the Latin verb for “to marry,” 
how it came to have this significa- 
tion, ii. 29, 

Nurses, to whom the name was applied’ 
in ancient times, ii, 27. 


O 


OaruH, an, force and nature of, i. 394 ; 
ii, 3415 elliptical forms of making 
oath among the Hebrews, i. 395, 
553; may be demanded in a lawful 
cause, 394, 554; ii, 13, 76, 1803. is- 
not to be rashly made, i. 395; ii. 13, 
76, 341.. 

Obedience to God’s law, its value in the 
sight of God, i. 163, 193, 350; ought 
to be universal, 262; is the off- 
spring of faith, 346; is commended, 
351, 445, 506, 527, 539, 548, 562, 
li. 25, 60, 233; our tardiness in 
yielding it, i. 506. 

Obedience to magistrates, duty of, i. 
431. 

Obedience to parents, duty of, ii. 264. 

Obstinacy in sin, is too common, i. 206, 
241, 323, 496, 502; ii. 100; often 
increases, the nearer God’s judg- 
ments approach, i. 505. 

Offspring, a special gift of God, ii. 135, 
141, 208. 

Oil, consecration by, an ancienteustom,, 
ii. 119 

Old age, hope of the virtuous in, i. 417, 
418; ii. 37. 

Olivetan, Robert Peter, publishes with. 
the assistance of Calvin, the first. 
French Protestant Bible, i. xvi. 

On, the name of a city, ii. 330. 

Onan, his wickedness, ii. 28]. 

Onyx-stone, the, i. 124. 

Gracles, God manifested himself to the. 
fathers through, i. 198, 205; some 
of them ‘common to profane and 
heathen men, ii. 318. 

Organ and harp invented by Jubal, 
i, 218. 

Orientals, the, bowing towards the 
ground a token of reverence among, 
i. 470; their custom of washing the 
feet, 471; were immoderate in the 
use of ceremonies, 582 ; ii. 29, 206 5, 
were addicted to polygamy, 133; in 
cases of scarcity were content with. 
slender food, 354. 

Origen, his allegories, i. 114, 256, 257, 
545. 

Origin of the human race, disgraceful 
ignorance prevalent in the heathen. 
world respecting, i. xlviii. 


516 


Original sin, why denied by Pelagius, 
i. 154; pervades the whole soul, 155, 
162, 284. 

Ornaments, external, moderation to be 
observed in, i. 182; ii. 21, 328. 
Over-curiosity and captiousness to be 

guarded against, i. 306, 314. 
Ovid quoted, i. 381,.513. 


P 


Parists, claim the title of the Church, 
i. 1; though divided among them- 
selves combine against the Gospel, 
lii; their foolish clamour about fol- 
lowing the fathers, 253, 273; their 
doctrine of transubstantiation, 298, 
391; their attempts to cover the 
abominations of their clergy, 303; 
their inventions in the worship of 
God, 355, 446; their sacrifice of the 
mass not supported from Melchi- 
zedek’s offering bread and wine to 
Abraham, 390, 391; have virtually 
abolished the sacraments, 452; their 
disputes concerning God’s absolute 
power, 476; how they stigmatized 
the Reformers, 501; their praying 
to the dead, 526; their seven sacra- 
ments, 539; ii. 388; their glory- 
ing in their long succession, i. 547; 
maintain the merit of good works, 
572; their dulia and latria, 582; 
their traffic in sepulchres, 584; ii. 
430; hold that the efficacy of the 
sacraments depends on him who 
consecrates them; ii. 89, 101, 118; 
their confession, 101; pollution of 
their temples, 118; their confused 
farago of vows, 121; their celibacy, 
121, 134; their worship of images, 
174; their superstitions, 235, 238; 
their absurd doctrine as to God’s 
retaining the punishment while re- 
mitting the guilt of sin, 445. 

Paradise, in which our first parents 
were originally placed, i. 113; the 
most fertile and pleasant part of the 
earth, 114; its situation, 115, 119- 
122; was richly replenished with 
every kind of fruitful trees, 115, 

Parents, our first, their apostasy the 
ruin of the whole human race, i. 
154; the skins of slain animals 
their first clothing, 181; why they 
were so clothed, 182. See Adam. 
Eve. 

Parents, impious contempt of, abomin- 
able in the sight of God, i. 304; 
when God punishes their sins in 


GENERAL INDEX. 


their children, 305, 306; honour 
due to, 302; ii. 14,264; are to trans- 
mit the knowledge of God’s works 
to their children, i. 481; and to in- 
struct them in the fear of God, 483; 
ii. 110; have ground to expect the 
grace of God to their children, i. 
517; honour God has conferred on, 
ii. 146; are to purge their families 
from every stain of evil, 170; their 
sin in the excessive indulgence of 
their children, 223; duty of obe- 
dience to, 264. See Children. 

Patience, duty of exercising, i. 432, 
520; ii. 42, 67, 144, 161, 177; the 
cross to be borne with, ii. 102. 

Patriarchs, antediluvian, their long 
lives, i. 229; deplored the miserable 
condition of mankind through 
Adam’s fall, and the increasing 
wickedness of the world, 233. 

Patriarchs, postdiluvian, were not men 
of savage manners and iron hardness 
of heart, ii, 30; were severely tried, 
58; the land of Canaan a mirror 
and pledge to them of the heavenly 
inheritance, 91, 92; their faith in 
God’s promise in the midst of their 
wanderings, 107; their imperfect 
knowledge of God, 201; were in 
the habit of reclining at table, 362; 
their faith always fixed on the com- 
ing of Christ, 429. 

Patriarchal age, simplicity of, ii. 22, 
127; chastity of, 62, 128, 131. 
Peace, our just rights in some degree 
to be sacrificed for the sake of, i. 
372, 373; the great blessing of 434; 
suits for to be kindly met, ii. 75, 

179. See Concord. 

Pelagius, denied original sin, i. 154; 
maintained that sin proceeded from 
Adam by imitation, 155. 

Peniel, ii. 201. 

Pentateuch, the, Ptolemy king of 
Egypt procured translations of, into 
Greek, i. xlviii; authenticity of, 
confirmed by Egyptian antiquities. 
See Lyyptian Antiquities. 

People of God, the, never want ene- 
mies, i, 348; efficacy of the prayers 
of, 434, 516, 526; God’s almighty 
power a ground of confidence to, 
443; are often involved in the same 
divine judgments with the wicked, 
487, 488; imperfection of the faith 
of, 500; ii. 206; are delivered by 
God at the critical moment, i. 502, 
524; are in danger of disregarding 
the divine threatenings, 507; their 





a oe 





GENERAL INDEX. 517 


preciousness in the sight of God, 
523; are tried according to the 
measure of their faith, 564; have 
no reason for languishing when 
their outward man is perishing, ii. 
37; may lawfully complain of their 
enemies, 73; are not always go- 
verned in their actions by the Spirit 
of God, 85; are for the most part 
despised by the world, 136; in what 
sense God wrestles with them, 196 ; 
their deliverance delayed for the 
trial of their faith, 312; are strang- 
ers and pilgrims in this world, 404 ; 
difference in the way in which tem- 
poral benefits are bestowed on them 
and on unbelievers, 428; are puri- 
fied by the divine chastisements, 
471, 472. See Faithful. 

Perfection, angelical, erroneously plac- 
ed in poverty, i. 367. 

Pharaoh, king of Egypt when Abraham 
sojourned in that country, i. 362- 

365. 

Pharaoh, king of Egypt in Joseph’s 
time, casts his chief butler and chief 
baker into prison, ii. 305; restores 
the chief butler to his office, 310; 
beheads the chief baker, 311; cele- 
brates his birth-day, 312; his 
dreams, 318, 319; and their inter- 
pretation by Joseph, 824, 325 ; 
makes Joseph governor of Egypt, 
328 ; gratuitously maintains the 
Egyptian priests during the famine, 
1i.412. , 

Philistines, the, their cruelty, ii. 65. 

Philosophers condemned, who in study- 

* ing the works of creation are for- 
getful of the Creator, i. 60. See 
Heathen philosophers. 

Piety, how its genuineness is proved, 
i. 482; a sense of, implanted in the 
minds of men, ii. 413. 

Pious, the. See People of God. 

Pison, the, incorrectly thought by many 
to be the Ganges, i. 119, 123. 

Plato, character of his writings, i. xlix; 
ascribes reason and intelligence to 
the stars, 87; defends the sacred- 
ness of the marriage tie, 128, 388 ; 
his remarks on the hope of the vir- 
tuous in old age, 417; ii. 37, 324. 

Pliny quoted, i. 121-123. 

Plurality of persons in the Godhead, 
proved from the Mosaic aecount of 
the creation of man, i. 92, 183; far- 
ther proof of, 331; is not proved 
from the history of the destruction 
of Sodom and Gomorrah, 513, 531. 


Poets, heathen. See Heathen poets. 

Polygamy condemned, i. 97; inconsist- 
ent with the original divine insti- 
tution of marriage, 136, 137, 424, 
573; ii. 33, 142; was introduced 
by Lamech, a descendant of Cain, 
i. 217; began at an early period to 
prevail in every direction, ii. 77, 
181, 252. 

Pomponius Mela quoted, i. 121. 

Poor, the, admonished, i. 369. 

Pope, the, i. 307; his barbarity in im- 
posing celibacy on the clergy, i. 551; 
ii. 14, 219. 

Popish religion, its character, i. 446. 
See Papists. 

Porphyry, his cavil in reference to the 
ark refuted, i, 257. 

Posterity of Adam. See Adam. Cor- 
ruption of Human nature. Man. 
Mankind, 

Potiphar, an officer of the court of Pha- 
raoh, king of Egypt, buys Joseph 
from the Midianites, ii. 274; his 
favour for him, 293; places him 
over his house and over all his sub- 
stance, 294; his wife tempts Joseph, 
296-298; and falsely accuses him, 
300; he casts Joseph into prison, 
300, 301; his anger towards Joseph 
is mitigated, 306. 

Poverty, angelical perfection errone- 
ously placed in, i. 367; does not 
want its advantages, il. 65. 

Power of God, the, is not to be esti- 
mated by human reason, i. 475 ; by 
doubting the divine promises, we 
sinfully detract from, 476 ; is not 
limited because he is unable to de- 
stroy the reprobate without saving 
the elect, 511. 

Prayer, ought to be regulated by the 
will of God, i. 509; ii. 17, 190, 191; 
its answer sometimes speedily 
granted, and at other times de- 
layed, ii. 19, 20 ; manner in which 
it ought to be performed, 17, 190, 
191; encouragement to persever- 
ance in, 42; ought to be aecom- 
panied with the use of means, 193; 
is the armour which renders us in- 
vincible in affliction, 302. 

Prayers of the faithful, are heard by 
God, i. 434, 516, 526; ii. 19, 42; are 
useful to others, ii. 106. 

Pride, betrayed itself in the first sin 
of Adam and Eve, i. 153; is with 
difficulty corrected, 328 ; its punish- 
ment, 548; is natural to the human 
heart, ii. 144; is the companion of 


518 


unbelief, 173; is opposed to the 
Gospel, 264. 

Pride of the Egyptians, ii. 360, 361. 

Pride of the Sodomites, i. 501. 

Priesthood, Levitical, subordinate to 
the priesthood of Christ, i, 303. 

Priests, Egyptian, were gratuitously 
maintained by Pharaoh during the 
famine, ii. 412. 

Priests, Levitical, were to bless the 
people, i. 391; ii. 199. 

Primogeniture, or birthright, advan- 
tages of, ii. 53, 208, 248. 

Profession of religion. See Religion. 

Prolepsis, a rhetorical figure, its mean- 
ing, i. 344, 356, 553; ii, 180, 187, 
212, 391, 435. 

Promises of God, the faith of his people 
established by their being repeated, 
i. 265; by doubting: them we sin- 
fully detract from God’s power, 
476; the fulfilment of them some- 
times long deferred, ii. 116. 

Prophecies of Scripture, are nearly 
all written in verse, i. 3055. ii 
44), 

Prophets, the ancient, excited hatred 
by uttering the divine threaten- 
ings, ii. 311; the true distinguished 
from the false, 326. 

Prosperity, is to be ascribed to God, 
ii. 74, 151, 193, 211, 293; intoxi- 
cates men, ii. 326, 341. 


Proud, the, fight against God, i. 327,. 


328, 331. See Pride. 

Providence of God, is to be reposed 
on when God seems to be most 
forgetful of us, i, 276; human affairs 
under, 436; success in our affairs 
to be aseribed to, ii. 23, 112, 127; 
ils secret influence keeps men from 
destroying each other, 208; watches 
for the salvation of the righteous 
when it most seems to sleep, 232 ; 
Joseph’s history a beautiful ex- 
ample of, 260, 307, 330, 378-380; 
is inseparable from God’s eternal 
counsel, 325 ; admirable method of 
the operation of, 337, 376. 

Ptolemy, king of Egypt, proeured the 
translation of the books of Moses 
into Greek, i. xlviii. 

Punishment, a dread of, not true re- 
pentance, i. 211; its inefficaey to 
bring the wicked tu true repent- 
ance, ii. 98; while remitting the 
guilt of sin, God does not retain the 
punishment, 445, 

Purity, how it is the effect of faith, i. 
195. : 


GENERAL INDEX. 


R 


Rassins, Jewish, referred to, i. 85, 130. 

Race, a, resemblance of human life to, 
i. 402. 

Rachel, daughter of Laban, ii. 127; 
is greatly beloved by Jacob, 131, 
205; becomes his wife, 134; envies 
her sister Leah, 141; hurries Jacob 


into a third marriage, 142; her ~ 


pride, 144; contention between her 
and her sister Leah, 140, 147, 148; 
birth of her son Joseph, 149; is 
willing to leave her father’s house, 
and accompany Jacob to his own 
country, 167, 168; carries off her 
father’s household gods, 169 ; her 
superstition, 170; manner in which 
she concealed her theft, 175; her 
death, 244; her burial, 245, 425, 
462. 

Rain, is in the hand of God, i. 80, 111, 
512. . 

Rainbow, the, existed before the de- 
luge, i. 299; was consecrated into 
a sign or pledge giving security 
against a second deluge, 290. 

Rank, distinctions of, advantageous, 
i. 246. 

Raven sent forth by Noah from the 
ark, i. 279. 

Rebekah, is providentially selected by 
Abraham’s servant as a wife for 
Isaac, ii. 20-23; her parents are in- 
duced to give her to Isaac in mar- 
riage, 24, 25; her departure from 
her father’s house, 27; she meets 
Isaac, 29; is married to him, ib. ; 
her sterility during the first twenty 
years of her married state, 40; asks 
counsel of God, 43; loves Jacob 
more than Esau, 50; her sinful 
stratagem to procure for Jacob his 


father’s blessing, 84, 85, 87; her 


trial from Esau’s purpose to mur- 
der Jacob, 101-1038. 

Reclining at table, a patriarchal cus- 
tom, ii. 362. 

Reformation. See Calvin. Erasmus, 

Religion, a, is not to be rashly changed, 
ii. 225. 

Religion, Popish, its character, i. 446. 
See Papists. 

Religion, au external profession of, re- 


quisite, i. 354; ii. 71, 213, 214, 2385. 


a sense of religion is engraven on 
the hearts of all men, 358, 

Remission of the fault and of the pun- 
ishment, a distinction unfounded, 
i. 178. 


GENERAL INDEX, 


Repentance, true, is not a dread of 
punishment, 211; a sign of, 532 ; 
never too late in this world, ii. 95; 
inefficacy of punishment to bring 
the wicked to, 98; men seldom 
drawn to it except by the fear of 
punishment, 229, 236. ; 

Repentance of the reprobate, its char- 
acter, i. 211; ii. 95. See Zsau. 
Judas. © 

Repentance, in what sense it is ascribed 
to God, i. 248, 526. 

Reprobate, the, represented in the 
person of Esau, ii. 52. See Wicked. 

Reproofs, necessity of, ii. 443. 

Rest of God on the seventh day after 
the creation, i. 103. 

Resurrection, burial the symbol or 
mirror of, ii. 245, 477. 

Reuben, son of Jacob and Leah, his 
birth, ii. 1355; brings mandrakes 
out of the field to his mother, 146; 
his incest with Bilhah, his father’s 

wife, 245; his humanity towards 
Joseph, 267, 350; is deprived of 
the rights of primogeniture by his 
father on his death-bed, 442, 443. 

Revenge forbidden, i. 416 ; ii. 73, 155, 
486. 

Reward put for inheritance or felicity, 
ii. 400. 

Reward of works, is a free gift of God, 
and not merited, i. 265, 572; ii. 
302. 

Rich, the, are admonished, i. 369; are 
prone to oppress others, ii. 66. 
Riches, do not render it impossible for 
men to cultivate religion, i. 367 ; 
disadvantages of, 369 ; ii. 28, 65, 

194, 

Rising up put for deliberating, ii. 
272; and for receiving new vigour, 
390. 

Robbers and murderers, their remorse 
of conscience, i. 210, 211. 

Rulers, subjection to, not to be rashly 
shaken off, i. 382, 431; are not to 
govern proudly and tyrannically, 
414,431; our duty to them when 
unduly severe, 432. 


8 


SapBaTH, original institution of, i. 105; 
the precept in the decalogue re- 
specting it peculiar to the Jews, 
106, 456; in what sense it was abro- 
gated by the coming of Christ, 107. 

Sabellius, his error on the doctrine of 
the Trinity, i. 71. 


519 


~ 


Sacrifices, their divine institution, i. 
192-194, 281,291; ii. 71, 213, 214; 
whence the heathen derived the 
custom of offering them, i. 193; 
the right of washing before them 
common among all nations, 194; 
were intended to teach that there 
is no access to God but through a 
Mediator, 28], 355; mode in which 
covenants were ratified by sacri- 
fices, 413. 

Sacrament, what it is, i. 451. 

Sacraments, the end and use of, i. 298, 
452; are not to be severed from 
God’s word, 298 ; ii. 180 ; are life- 
less phantoms in the Papacy, i. 
4523 ii. 114, 388; seven sacra- 
ments of the Papists, i. 539. 

Said, put for decreed, i, 250. 

Saints in heaven confirmed, i. 158. 

Salem, the ancient name of Jerusalem, 
i. 388 ; another city of that name, 
ii, 212. 

Salvation, day of, to be improved with- 
out delay, ii. 95. 

Sarai, the wife of Abraham, her steril- 
ity, i. 3375 is persuaded by her 
husband to use dissimulation, 359 ; 
her beauty, 360-362,522 ; her chas- 
tity preserved by the guardianship 
of God, 363, 864; her criminal 
method for obtaining offspring by 
her husband, 422, 423, 425, 426 ; 
is held in contempt by Hagar, her 
handmaid, 427; her anger thereby 
excited, 227, 428, 430 ; seed is pro- 
mised to Abraham by her, 459; 
her name changed from Sarai to 
Sarah, ib.; her unbelief, 474, 475 ; 
her falsehood, 476 ; is reproved by 
the angel, 477; was Abraham’s 
sister in the second degree, 530; 
why she did not become a mother 
till at an advanced age, 537 ; her 
joy on the birth of Isaac, 539, 540 ; 
urges Abraham to eject Ishmael 
and his mother from the family, 
541.5 was governed in this by a 
secret impulse of the Spirit, 543 ; 
her death, 575-577; Abraham’s 
grief for her, 578. 

Satan, made use of the serpent in se- 
ducing our first parents, i. 140, 145, 
165; why his name is omitted in 
the Mosaic account of their fall, 
141; was not created evil and 
wicked, 142 ; his craft in seducing 
Adam not direetly but through the 
person of his wife, 145 ; what im- 
pelled him to plot the destruction 


of the human family, 146; his arti- 
fice in tempting the woman, 146- 
151; overcomes her, 151; sentence 
pronounced on him, 168-171 ; has 
set himself from the beginning to 
corrupt the worship of God, 223; 
is an ingenious contriver of false- 
hoods, 246, 569; is a wonderful 
adept at deceiving, 401 ; his wiles 
to be guarded against, 425 ; is God’s 
executioner, 504; is the ape of 
God, ii. 69 ; in what way he tempts, 
‘i. 169; ii. 191, 192, 196, 246, 295. 

Satiety produces ferocity, ii. 66, and 
disgust, 332. 

Saturn, the planet, reference to, 86, 87. 

Schismaties denounced, i. lii. 

Scriptures, the, are not to be tortured 
to an allegorical sense, i. 257, 279, 
545 ; ii. 438, 439, 461. 

Scripture, the prophecies of, are near- 
ly all written in verse, i. 305 ; ii. 
441, 

Security of the wicked, i. 505; ii. &4, 
111; carnal, to be guarded against, 
ii. 234. f 

Seed of the woman, means her pos- 
terity generally, i. 170. 

Seed of Abraham, meaning of the 
words, i. 171. 

Seed-time and harvest secured as long 
as the earth endures, i. 28. 

Seeking God, best method of, ii. 428. 

Self-love blinds usin judging of what 
is right, ii, 129, 178, 224. 

_Self-renunciation enjoined, ii. 351. 

Semiramis, i. 121; is said to have 
founded Babylon, i. 318. 

Senses, the, inlets to sin, ii. 295. 

Septuagint, the, greatly neglected by 
the heathen, i. xlviii; quoted, 131, 
136, 160, 199, 242, 279, 498 ; ii. 
339, 391, 418. 

Sepulchre purchased by Abraham, i. 
583; ii. 417. 

Serpent, made use of by Satan for 
seducing our first parents, i. 140, 
145 ; how it is called subtle, 140; 
is to be understood literally and 
not allegorically, 142; is said to 
have done what Satan did by its 
instrumentality, 166; the sentence 
pronounced upon it, 166-168. 

Servants, male and female, termed 
“ souls,” i, 351 ; their duty when 
harshly treated by their imasters, 
431. 

Servetus, maintained that Christ was 
the son of God, only as to his hu- 
man nature, i. 75. 


GENERAL INDEX. 


Seth, his birth and the piety of him- 
self and his family, i. 223, 224 ; 
the offspring of Adam traced only 
in the Mosaic narrative through 
the line of Seth, because the Church 
was confined to his family, 227, 
228, 234 ; was born, like others of 
Adam’s children, in sin, 228, 229 ; 
the corruption of his descendants by 
intermarrying with the daughters 
of Cain, 237-240, 245; why his 
descendants are called “ the sons 
of God,” 238, 239. 

Seven, the number, (designates in Serip- 
ture a multitude, i. 222. 

Shechem, or Sichem, i. 352; ii. 212, 
434, 


Shechem, violates the chastity of 
Dinah, Jacob’s daughter, ii, 218 ; 
desires to obtain her in marriage, 
219, 222; perfidy and cruelty of 
the sons of Jacob towards, 222-228. 

Shechemites, the, their idolatry, ii. 214; 
facility with which they submit to 
be circumcised, 225; the perfidy 
and cruelty of Jacob’s sons towards, 
222-228, 447. 

Shekel of the sanctuary, its value, i. 
583. 

Shem, the second son of Noah, i. 235; 
his filial piety and modesty, 302, 
303; blessing pronounced on him 
by his father, 308; was the pro- 
genitor of the Asiatics, 313 ; the 
Mosaic history principally relates 
to his race, 314; the benediction 
pronounced on him did not descend 
to all his offspring indiscriminately, 
but only to the sons of Eber, 320 ; 
a great part of his posterity apos- 
tatized from the true worship of 
God, 333. 

Shepherds, the occupation of, held in 
abomination by the Egyptians, ii. 
395, 399. 

Shield, God ascribes to himself the 
office and property of, i. 400. 

Shiloh, meaning and reference of the 
term, ii. 453. 

Sichem. See Shechem. 

Siddim, battle fought in the vale of, i, 
381. 

Signs, their use, i. 298, 458 ; are not 
to be severed from God’s word, 
298 ; 420,451; ii. 388; the faithful 
ascend from them to heaven, 215. 

Simeon, son of Jacob, his cruelty to 
the Shechemites, ii. 226, 229; is 
retained in prison by his brother 
Joseph, 346, 348, 359 ; his cruelty 











————————————— —————<«<«_- —_— 


ial 


GENERAL INDEX. 


denounced by his father on his 
death-bed, 444, 448. 

Sin, the cause of death, i. 180; we are 
‘not compelled to its commission, 


561; confession of, to be made from | 


the heart, ii. 288, 477; its existence 
not only permitted but ordained by 
God, 378; and yet he is not the 
author of it, 379, 487, 488. See 
Affliction. ; 

Sister, a term of wide signification 
among the Hebrews, i. 530. 

Slavery, its origin, i. 351, 431, 455. 

Sobriety of mind recommended, i. 151, 
412 ; ii. 114. 

Socrates referred to, i. lii. 

Sodom, fertility of the plain of, i. 373; 
wickedness of its inhabitants, 373, 
374, 483, 484, 491, 496-501; their 
ingratitude, 394; their cruelty, 
499; their pride, 501; it did not 
perish by chance, 480; its approach- 
ing destruction revealed to Abra- 
ham, 479, 486-491; and to Lot, 
503, 504 ; is destroyed by fire and 
brimstone from heaven, 512; why 
infants were involved in its destrue- 
tion, 513 ; God’s design in record- 

‘ing its destruction, 482. See Go- 
morrah. 

Son of God, the, all things created by, 
i. 74,75 ; Christ, according to Ser- 
vetus, only the son of God as to his 
human nature, 75. 

Songs sung at the ingathering of the 
harvest, ii. 355. 

Sons of God, why Seth’s descendants 
are so designated, i. 238, 239; a 
twofold class of, exist in the Church, 
449, 

Sophocles quoted, ii. 401. 

Souls put for male and female servants, 
i, 351, 

Souls of men, whether they are propa- 
gated by descent, i. 156. 

Sovereignty of God in distributing his 
gifts, 11.431. See Hlection. 

Speaking to the heart put for address- 
ing courteously, ii. 249. 


Speculations, erratic, to be avoided in | 


interpreting the Scriptures, i. 198. 

Spirit of God, the, his agency in the 
creation of the world, i. 73; his 
grace necessary for the mortifica- 
tion of sin, 204. 

Splendour in kings and princes not to 
be altogether condemned, ii. 328. 

Stapulensis, Jacobus Faber, translator 
of the first printed French version 
of the Scriptures, i. xvi. 


VOL, II, 


521 


Stars, the, made to shine by night on 
the fourth day of the creation, i. 83; 
reason and intelligence ascribed to 
them by Plato, 87. 

Steuchus, Augustinus, quoted, i. 70. 

Stoics, their opinion that it is a heroic 
virtue not to be touched with com- 
passion, condemned, ii. 375. 

Stones, covenants anciently confirmed 
by raising a heap of, ii. 179. - 

Strabo quoted, i. 121. 

Subjection to magistrates, not to be 
rashly shaken off, i. 382 ; is enjoin- 
ed, ii. 403. 

Subterfuges to Which sinners resort, i. 
164. 

Succoth, two cities of this name, ii. 212. 

Sun, the, why herbs and trees were 
created before, i. 82, 83; advan- 
tages derived from the course of 
the sun and moon, 84, 85. 

Superstition, is natural to the human 
mind, ii. 170 ; infatuates men, 175; 
confounds things sacred and pro- 
fane, 181; is pertinacious and re- 
bellious, 236; pride of, 361. 

Suspicion, is sometimes excusable, ii. 
366. - 

Swearing, form of, by lifting the hand, 
i. 394; and by putting the hand 
under the thigh of the imposer of 
the oath, ii. 12, 417. 

Sychar, formerly called Shechem, ii. 
434. 

Symbols of the Levitical economy, 
their design, i. 186. 

Sympathy produced by common suf- 
ferings, ii. 309. 


T 


TABLE, reclining at, a patriarchal cus- 
tom, ii. 362. 

Tamar, the wife of Er, the son of Ju- 
dah, ii. 281; is treated perfidiously 
and cruelly by Judah, 282-286 ; is 
guilty of incest with him, 283; gives 
birth to twins, 289. 

Temperance to be exercised in the 
conjugal state, i, 239 ; and in eat- 
ing and drinking, 491, 542. 

Temples, Popish, their pollution, ii. 
118. ; 


Temporal judgments were more com- 
monly inflicted under the former 
than under the present dispensa- 
tion, ii. 280. 

Tempting, in what sense applied to 
God, i. 561; ii. 196. 

‘'emptations, faith secures the victory 


ZL 


522 


over, i. 562; are not to be rushed 
into, ii. 59. 

Ten, the number, put for many, ii. 165. 

Terah, the father of Abraham, leaves 
his native soil and proceeds to Ca- 
naan in company with his son, i. 
338, 340-346. 

Terror of God which the reprobates 
have, ii. 118, 177. 

Tertullian quoted, i. 293. 

Thanksgiving commended, i. 281, 308, 
353, 556, 571; ii. 23, 26, 68, 118, 
135, 186, 201, 243, 332. 

* That,” in Scripture, oftener denotes 
the consequence than the cause, i. 
483. 

Thorns and briers, their production 
from the earth, a consequence of 
the sin of man, i. 104. 

Threatenings of God, the, are intended 
for the elect as well as for the re- 
probate, i: 254; are despised by 
the latter, 505; are sometimes dis- 
regarded by the faithful, 507; de- 
sign of, 526. 

Tiberius Ceesar, a celebrated saying of, 
ii, 414, 

Tigris, the, is called Hiddekel, i. 118, 
121-123. 

Tithes, were given by Abraham to 
Melchizedek, i. 392; right of the 
tribe of Levi to, under the law, 
393 ; Jacob vows them to God, ii. 
124 ; were exacted by kings in va- 
rious places, 414, 

Tongues, confusion of, at the building 
of the Tower of Babel, i. 325, 326, 
329-33). 

Tranquillity of mind, how best secured, 
ii. 483. 

Translation of Enoch, i. 231, 232. 

Transubstantiation, i. 391. 

Tree of knowledge of good and evil, 
why so called, and why forbidden 
to our first parents, i. 118, 125, 126; 
inducements they had to obedience, 
127. 

Tree of life, its sacramental character, 
i. 116; was held by Augustine and 
Eucherius to be a figure of Christ, 
117 ; supposed by some to have 
had the power of perpetuating the 
life of the body, ib. ; our first pa- 
rents after the fall debarred from 
the fruit of, 183. 

Trees and herbs, why created before 
the sun and moon, i. 82. 

Trent, Council of, ii. 109. 

Tribes of Israel. See under each 
name, 


GENERAL INDEX. 


Trinity, the, error of Sabellius on the’ 


doctrine of, i. 71. See Plurality 
of persons in the Godhead. 
Troubles mixed with the blessings of 
this earthly life, ii. 65. 
True Church of God, distinction be- 
tween it and hypocritical church, 
i, 547. 
Truth of God is not to be aided by 
falsehood, ii. 88. 
Tyrants, on submission to the author- 
ity of, i. 382. :. 
Tyndale’s version of the Bible, i. xvii. 
Tyre, the king of, compared to a chief 
angel, i. 187. 


Unse.ier, the root of the first sin of 
Adam and Eve, i. 152, 153; is 
sometimes borne with and some- 
times severely punished by God, 
477; pride the companion of, ii. 173. 

Uncircumcised. See Circumcision. 

Ur of the Chaldeans, origin of the 
name, i. 337. 


v 


VeIts, origin of the Egyptian ladies 
wearing, i. 862; brides in the East 
given veiled to their husbands, ii. 
29. . 

Vengeance of God, is to be denounced 
by the ministers of the Gospel, ii. 
311. 

Verse, the prophecies of Seripture 
nearly all written in, i. 305; ii. 441. 

Vision, one of the ways in which God 
manifested himself to the prophets, 
i. 399, 526; ii. 69, 70, 112, 166, 
240, 387; a special mark of the 
divine glory stamped on the vision, 
i. 401 ; ii. 69. 

Vowing is not to be indiscriminately 
condemned, ii. 121; the abominable 
vows of Papists, ib. 

Vulgate quoted, i. 135, 136, 147, 168, 
164, 170, 173, 279, 284, 381. 


W 


Wa kine with God, what it means, i. 
230, 253. 

Walking before God, its meaning, i. 
443 ; ii, 426. 

Washing before sacrifices common 
among all nations, i. 194. 

Washing of feet a custom in the East, 
i, 471, 








- 


GENERAL INDEX. 


Way of the Lord, what it denotes, i. 
482. 

Wealth. See Riches. 

Wealthy, the. See Rich. 

Whittingham, William, brother-in-law 
to Calvin, was the author of the 
Geneva version of the Bible, i. xvii. 

Wicked, the, character of their repent- 
ance, i. 21]; ii. 95, 108,109; make 
the offences of others a pretext for 
indulgence in sin, i. 302; their 
trouble in death, 418 ; their obsti- 
nacy in sin, 552 ; ii. 299; despise 
God’s threatenings, i. 505; their 
security, ib.; ii. 54, 111; are forget- 
ful of God, 101; are not able alto- 
gether to despise his grace, 108 ; 
their terror of God, 118, 177; judge 
of others by their own dispositions, 
179; their cruelty restrained by 
God, 207; often do good to the 
faithful contrary to their intention, 
253; are devoted to destruction, 
305. See Reprobate. 

Wickedness of man is not excused be~- 
cause God may overrule it for good, 
ii. 379. 

Will of God, why manifested to us, i. 
481; nothing done without it, ii. 

« 378, 487. 

Winds, the, are governed by God, i. 
277. 

Wine, introduction of its use, i. 300; 
may be used in moderation, ii. 362, 
363. 

Wisdom, first step of, to ascribe no- 
thing to ourselves, ii. 323. 

Wives, their duty to obey their hus- 
bands, i. 474, 533; ii. 300, 301. 
Woman, a contraction for womb-man, 

i, 135. 

Woman, the, why denied by Paul to be 
the image of God, i. 96; was cre- 
ated to be the help-meet of man, 
128, 129; was necessary to man 
even ina state of innocency, 130, 
131; her subjection to her husband, 
172; effects of Eve’s first trans- 
gression upon her, ib. 

Woman, seed of the, meaning of, i. 171. 

Women, rarely mentioned in Scripture 
genealogies, i. 573; ii. 148. 

Word, or promise of God, to be trusted 


523 


in, 267, 276 ; is better than exter- 
nal signs, 299; is conjoined with 
symbols, 421, 451; ought not to be 
separated from his power, 476 ; 
tranquillizes the mind, ii. 70; is 
sometimes forgotten in affliction, 
340; faith founded upon, 422. 

Word of God, or the Scriptures, the 
most certain rule of our life, i. 539; 
ii. 87, 134 ; ought not to be adul- 
terated, 311. See Scriptures, 

Works, good, what is necessary to 
their being so, i. 194, 195, 409; do 
not justify, 265, 407, 572; the 
grace of Christ alone gives them 
worth, 266 ; the rewards of them 
are the rewards of grace, 265, 572; 
ii. 302. 

World, the, its eternity maintained by 
Aristotle, i. xlix; not eternal, 70, 
109 ; the error that God created it 
in a moment refuted, 78, 103: why 
God took the space of six days in 
creating it, 78; its continual pre- 
servation to be ascribed to him, 
103,104 ; the physical disorders in 
it the fruit of sin, 104,177. See 
Creation, &e. 

World, the allurements of, to be guard- 
ed against, ii, 332. 

Worldly advantages are not to be suf- 
fered to draw us aside from the 
path of duty, ii. 112. 

Worship of God, faith necessary in 
order to its being acceptable, i, 282; 
use of, ii. 71; early and extensive 
apostasy of mankind from it after 
the deluge, 166-170, 237. 

Worshippers of God, the true, distin- 
guished from hypocrites, i, 344. 


Y 


Year, the, began, according to the 
Jewish calendar, in March, i. 264 ; 
was divided by the Jews into six 
parts, 286. 


Z 


ZEAL, preposterous, ii. 87. 

Zebulon, character of the tribe of, pre- 
dicted by Jacob on his death-bed,, 
ii, 461. 


THE END. 


EDINBURGH: T.CONSTABLE, PRINTER TO HER MAJESTY. 








Balt ra, Ge BT Ss vey | 
is ok esa th Vinee: Tay os a 
ee. Ve eet reine One 5 a * tpaat taal h 
PEA TER vray be gli nye 4 Bh Kip a ' se tae si ik bay 
% A k "adap {fg anes P a OS, eve Bit ve f 
' ~<ad ant Liver “eis ee +8 +, ae LON. Wi <a hs ving He: as 
eh Mh miacher ei nielaice inher, NG Dade rag 

& ~ ee me, Rug, 0 













“iS 4 bl ‘ 















ie 


si apnea iL ears i hk 
ie 4 “ERS baie bpeatrtaoit age (fees! us nha 
SAV i Ay he wie ds hey Bn duck oy He rs ley aeee: by 3h 
a ae beara mies ey "3 At “ghliouey fas) Bae a =~ 
i : i indies caus ote psi be regk DiePant ste > I Tying ve ie bi 
hy ib Or a hy fa ez a hh) 5 gta it “ile en “ web Azi ‘gies 


a My, : 2s te iat S ne 4’ atm eh ry We P ‘ : “aha : “ae | =, * Mi 3s 

ae . fay eg) eae ae ae 1 cle yaw’ 

oe Wide hed i aks 7%: Mpa raat pho Ph ae sitive oetigt “sas 
a - See, — 7 ; 


- . 
Vie ‘ Paes kod titer _ 





s 


a. 







a : ak ey eT Pe PG 
A, ; 8 is wands nike vi. t Ae te. rm ar oe ae | ah 
, + 7 + 
7 re Ory 4 - 
a 9 q ? 
Perey) 3 "HGF Le al Sil s)) eG] » nal aia el 
- = . 
hh wot, ; i ee 4 bi PART YL Maite 5 
- - 
Sa =>. ng 
& x = Ye 
5 
( whys in 
‘ + 
Pian) 
. ' 
’ e i 
. 
7 ’ 
. 
7 * 4 . 
y cus : ies oye 
bate + : poem itinw ie 
I “2G 1 Heels ae Y 
erie adi oan 
7m f 
. 3 . : 
=~ © 
: ; ad 
) 
Ps ai” ma 
>. = 
hw 











DEC 4 2 1993 


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 





UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 

















. 7 - ~ 
- e - 
¢ “ - = a i + >52 
- ‘ 7 : 7 
= : - a : 
: 2 ic 2 t- + 
a 7 eos 7 
t he “5 3 * 
. ts - = = Z . ne 7 J ve at 
* + 
- 
: 
, 
r : 
- y 
. 
. ue 
a 7 7 
‘s s 
‘ 
2 . on 
: P ; 
7 +e ° , ‘ 
. 
‘ : i: 
7 _ eu 
‘ - / ‘ 
7 < “4. 7 - ‘ e 
* * f ’ 
vag OSS 7 . 
. ; 
bs ‘ ‘ 
7 - Pm : 7 - ‘ 
. wt at - te 
; ‘ 
An ‘ oe is 
7 . 
: < . i. 
» 4 5 ry 
4s hon . - 
. ae . at - ar. : ; - 7 s 
. > ‘ Fy 
. . : 
. : : ; ‘ 
-- " a ‘ 
a a 
: ; 
* . , 
—s* > - ¥ oe . 
ar as 4 , : 
7 ’ - + mia vr 
be . ’ * oo ° 
: I ao . shy leo a : ¢ 
SW : ores ; v4 : : ' WA Wnt . : ; oar : : + he A RPBAT ENE Tee OY 
so ’ . ear ‘ ar ? , : ; rae 
. “ od < . . ° : . ares . re ° On - § : 
t Lees ae a bicarets fe ranks : t vise ee ae haw 3 LLY ; 4 Fats rennae 
d yer t Pe nat ‘ . ev ‘ ‘ ; ' sal ier i. les 








